Nuclear icroenvironments in Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment The nuclear architecture plays an important role in the temporal and spatial control of complex functional processes within the nucleus. Alterations in nuclear structures are characteristic of cancer cells and the mechanisms underlying these perturbations may directly contribute to tumor development and progression. In this review, we will highlight aspects of the nuclear microenvironment that are perturbed during tumorigenesis and discuss how a greater understanding of the role of nuclear structure in the control of gene expression can provide new options for cancer diagnosis and treatment. J. Cell. Biochem.  CONCLUSIONS Much of the current experimental evidence seems to suggest a model of nuclear organization in which nuclear architecture is generated by self organization [ Misteli, 2007 ]. In this model, the activation of a gene at a particular location in the nucleus causes the remodeling of chromatin, the recruitment of transcription factors and the activation of other genes in close spatial proximity. The precise organization of nuclear components suggests that the appropriate structures and factors must be present in the correct spatial location and at the right time for proper gene expression. This suggests that modulation of nuclear architecture has an important role in regulating gene expression and that the structural perturbations observed in cancer play an important role in mechanisms of tumor development and progression. More detailed analysis of the complexities of nuclear organization and gene expression will require new experimental approaches that preserve the architecture of cellular components. Advances in the field of imaging and microscopy will yield new insights into the nuclear organization of gene regulatory machinery and identify new options for cancer detection and treatment. The development of nuclear-structure based assays for cancer diagnosis will allow potential chemotherapeutic drugs to be chosen according to whether or not they can reverse tumor-specific nuclear changes back to a normal cellular phenotype. FISH is currently used in the diagnosis of many hematologic malignancies. Applying FISH to solid tumor samples allows for gene-expression profiling of individual tumor cells within intact tissue samples while preserving tissue heterogeneity. This technique would allow pathologists to combine traditional nuclear morphology-based diagnosis with molecular analysis of the transcriptional status of key genes. Further, a large number of cells could be evaluated in a high-throughput manner making FISH an important molecular tool for the detection of tumor cells with unique phenotypes such as sensitivity or resistance to a particular treatment or metastatic potential. FISH for nascent mRNA can be combined with immunofluorescence to correlate gene expression profiles with markers of cellular proliferation or apoptosis. By further analyzing the cancer-induced nuclear changes in tumor samples and the effects of treatments on nuclear function, we can gain new insight into the link between nuclear structure and the regulation of gene expression in cancer. The application of new molecular techniques to cancer diagnosis and treatment is expected to yield many insights into targeted therapies for solid tumors, which are now largely treated by non-selective killing of all rapidly proliferating cells. 