Atrophy progression in semantic dementia with asymmetric temporal involvement: A tensor-based morphometry study We performed a longitudinal anatomical study to map the progression of gray matter atrophy in anatomically defined predominantly left (LTLV) and right (RTLV) temporal lobe variants of semantic dementia (SD). T1-weighted MRI scans were obtained at presentation and one-year follow-up from 13 LTLV, 6 RTLV, and 25 control subjects. Tensor-based morphometry (TBM) in SPM2 was applied to derive a voxel-wise estimation of regional tissue loss over time from the deformation field required to warp the follow-up scan to the presentation scan in each subject. When compared to controls, both LTLV and RTLV showed significant progression of gray matter atrophy not only within the temporal lobe most affected at presentation, but also in the controlateral temporal regions ( p < 0.05 FWE corrected). In LTLV, significant progression of volume loss also involved the ventromedial frontal and the left anterior insular regions. These results identified the anatomic substrates of the previously reported clinical evolution of LTLV and RTLV into a unique ‘merged’ clinical syndrome characterized by semantic and behavioral deficits and bilateral temporal atrophy.  1. Introduction Semantic dementia (SD) is the variant of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) characterized by progressive loss of conceptual knowledge (semantic memory) and anterior temporal lobe atrophy ( Hodges et al., 1992 ; Neary et al., 1998 ). Asymmetrical hemispheric involvement is common in SD, with patients most often showing greater left than right temporal atrophy ( Chan et al., 2001a , b ; Galton et al., 2001 ; Gorno-Tempini et al., 2004a , b ; Mummery et al., 2000 ; Rosen et al., 2002 ). The clinical syndrome associated with this pattern of predominantly left temporal involvement (‘left temporal lobe variant’, LTLV) corresponds to the classic description of SD, and is characterized by progressive naming, word comprehension and object recognition deficits ( Hodges et al., 1992 ; Neary et al., 1998 ). On the other hand, when atrophy is greater in the right temporal lobe (‘right temporal lobe variant’, RTLV), patients often present with a different clinical syndrome where behavioral disturbances, such as personality changes, loss of empathy and compulsions, are prominent ( Edwards-Lee et al., 1997 ; Gorno-Tempini et al., 2004a , b ; Miller et al., 1993 ; Perry et al., 2001 ). Language deficits are less evident in RTLV at presentation, and semantic memory impairment is often limited to the categories of people, smells, or food ( Evans et al., 1995 ; Gainotti et al., 2003 ; Gorno-Tempini et al., 2004a , b ; Joubert et al., 2006 ; Thompson et al., 2004 ). Later in the course of the disease, RTLV and LTLV become more difficult to distinguish. Seeley et al. (2005) performed a retrospective analysis of the clinical evolution of SD patients presenting with asymmetrical temporal atrophy. The study showed that, within three years of onset, the RTLV and LTLV clinical syndromes began to overlap. Specifically, whilst presenting symptoms progressed, LTLV patients also developed a behavioral syndrome, while RTLV cases also showed a more generalized semantic and language impairment. The anatomical basis of this progressive clinical merging of RTLV and LTLV has not yet been investigated. Objective and automated mapping of tissue loss over time can be achieved using specifically designed neuroimaging MRI techniques, such as tensor-based morphometry (TBM) ( Leow et al., 2006 ). In TBM volume changes are inferred from the non-linear deformation field required to warp two serial MRI scans. This technique has proven useful for tracking progression of atrophy in various neurodegenerative diseases ( Chan et al., 2001a , b ; Fox et al., 2000 , 2001 , 1999 ; Fox and Freeborough, 1997 ; Freeborough et al., 1996 ; Kipps et al., 2005 ; Leow et al., 2006 ; Studholme et al., 2001 ). A TBM-like approach has been applied to serial scans of classic SD patients and has shown progression of atrophy in the temporal lobes ( Cardenas and Studholme, 2004 ; Whitwell et al., 2004 ), but longitudinal neuroimaging studies of patients with predominant right or left temporal atrophy are still lacking. The aim of this longitudinal neuroimaging study was to identify patterns of regional atrophy progression in LTLV and RTLV in the first year following diagnosis. TBM, as implemented in the Statistical Parametric Mapping software (SPM2), was used to obtain and compare maps of gray matter contraction over time in LTLV and RTLV patients and controls. Based on previous clinical evidence, we hypothesize that, as disease progresses, atrophy changes will include the temporal lobe least affected at presentation and the ventromedial frontal regions.  2. Methods 2.1. Subjects MR images were obtained at presentation (Time 1) and at one-year follow-up (Time 2) from 19 right-handed SD patients (mean age 62.1 ± 6.0 years, 12 males, 7 females) and 25 healthy controls (mean age 64.8 ± 6.9 years, 9 males, 16 females). All patients were evaluated at UCSF Memory and Aging Center by a team of clinicians with expertise in neurodegenerative diseases, including a behavioral neurologist, a neuropsychologist, a nurse, and a psychiatrist. Only cases for which a consensus diagnosis of SD ( Neary et al., 1998 ) or normal cognition was reached were included in the study. Results from an automated volumetric analysis of the temporal lobes were used to designate subjects as LTLV or RTLV at Time 1. All subjects or their caregivers provided written informed consent. The study was approved by the UCSF committee on human research. 2.2. Image acquisition Presentation and one-year follow-up MRI scans were obtained on a 1.5 Tesla Magneton VISION system (Siemens Inc., Iselin, NJ) equipped with a standard quadrature head coil. Structural MRI sequences included: (1) two-dimensional, fast low-angle shot (FLASH) MRI along three orthogonal directions; 3 mm thick slices with 15 slices in each direction to obtain scout views of the brain for positioning MRI slices; (2) a double spin echo sequence (TR/[TE]1/TE2 = 5000/20/80 ms) to obtain proton density and T2-weighted MRI; 51 contiguous axial slices (3 mm) covering the entire brain and angulate -10° from the anterior commissure (AC)- posterior commissure (PC) line; 1.0mm×1.25mm in-plane resolution; (3) volumetric magnetization prepared rapid gradient echo (MPRAGE)sequence (TR/TE/inversion time [TI] = 10/4/300 ms, flip angle = 15°) to obtain a T1-weighted image of the entire brain. The images were acquired with a coronal slice plane with in-plane pixel size of 1.0mm×1.0mm and slice thickness of 1.5 mm, with a matrix size of 256×192. 2.3. LTLV and RTLV group classification 2.3.1. Temporal lobe volume measurement methodology Cross-sectional left and right temporal lobe volumes were calculated from the scan at presentation, in order to classify patients as LTLV and RTLV, and at one-year follow-up. Volumes were generated using the BRAINS2 software ( Magnotta et al., 2002 ), which allows automated volume measurement of the major lobes based on their location within the standardized grid of Talairach and Tournoux. Processing of images included reorientation of each T1 weighted image to make the anterior-posterior axis parallel with the anterior commissure-posterior commissure (AC-PC) line, and identification of outer boundaries of the brain in order to warp the Talairach grid onto the brain. The T2 and proton density weighted images were then realigned to the T1 weighted image using an automated image registration program ( Woods et al., 1992 ). A mask delineating brain versus non-brain tissue was created by first segmenting the brain into gray matter, white matter, and CSF compartments using the three coregistered images and a discriminant analysis method ( Harris et al., 1999 ), and then generating the mask using an artificial neural network. Temporal volumes were calculated from all brain tissue (gray plus white matter) falling within the portions of the Talairach grid corresponding to temporal lobe ( Woods et al., 1992 ). The volumes reported here were normalized to correct for differences in overall head size using total intracranial volume (gray matter, plus white matter plus CSF) derived from segmented images. 2.3.2. LTLV and RTLV patient sample Temporal volumes for each patient were compared to controls, and Z scores were created individually for left and right temporal lobe. Z scores represented how many standard deviations each patient's temporal volumes were below the mean of the control group. They were calculated by subtracting the mean of temporal lobe volumes in the control group from each patient's temporal volume and then dividing the difference by the control group standard deviation. Patients were then classified as LTLV or RTLV at Time 1 based on which temporal lobe had greater negative Z scores. Thus, 13 SD patients were classified as LTLV (mean age 62.0 ± 6.3 years, nine males, four females) and six as RTLV (mean age 62.5 ± 5.7 years, three males, three females) (see Table 1 ). This is consistent with previous studies showing that LTLV is roughly three times more prevalent than RTLV ( Seeley et al., 2005 ; Thompson et al., 2003 ). There was no significant difference between LTLV and RTLV for age, education, sex, and interval between MRI scans ( Table 1 ). Although the mean time from disease onset to the presentation scan was longer in RTLV than in LTLV (RTLV: 5.7 ± 3.7 years, LTLV: 3.2 ± 1.1), the statistical comparison only showed a trend towards significance ( T = -1.6, p = 0.17). Six patients included in this study have been previously described by Seeley et al. (2005) . Despite the different tracing methodologies adopted by the two studies, patients were consistently classified as RTLV ( n = 3) and LTLV ( n = 3). RTLV showed greater atrophy than LTLV in both the most ( Z score of right temporal lobe in RTLV versus left in LTLV) and the least ( Z score of left temporal lobe in RTLV versus right in LTLV) damaged temporal lobes. Each patient showed a difference between temporal lobe Z scores of at least 1.5 standard deviations at presentation. Both left and right temporal lobe volumes decreased over one year from diagnosis in the two variants of SD. 2.4. LTLV and RTLV neuropsychological assessment Functional and neuropsychological screening was performed for diagnostic purposes both at the time of presentation (Time 1) and one-year follow-up (Time 2) in LTLV and RTLV patients, and at Time 1 in healthy aging controls. Clinical dementia rating (CDR) ( Morris, 1993 ), mini mental state examination (MMSE) ( Folstein et al., 1975 ) and neuropsychiatric inventory (NPI) ( Srikanth et al., 2005 ) assessed general functional level and behavior. Standard tests evaluated language, working memory, visuospatial and executive functions. Two-sample t -tests were used to assess cross-sectional neuropsychological differences between patients and controls and between RTLV and LTLV at Time 1 and Time 2. Paired sample t -tests were used to assess longitudinal changes between Time 1 and Time 2 within each patient group. Statistical analyses of neuropsychological data were performed using SAS statistical package (release 9.1, 2002, SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC). 2.5. Whole-brain cross-sectional neuroimaging analysis at Time 1: voxel-based morphometry VBM was applied to detect regional gray matter (GM) atrophy at Time 1 in LTLV and RTLV compared to controls across the whole brain. The VBM analysis included two steps: spatial preprocessing (normalization, segmentation, Jacobian modulation and smoothing) and statistical analysis. Both steps were implemented in the SPM2 software package (Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, London; http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm ) running on Matlab 6.5.1 (MathWorks, Natick, MA). MRI images were pre-processed using an optimized method for spatial normalization of gray matter, including creation of a study-specific template and a priori images ( Good et al., 2001 ). Gray matter voxel values were multiplied by the Jacobian determinants derived from the spatial normalization step (Jacobian modulation) to preserve the initial volumes. Modulated gray matter images were then spatially smoothed with a 12 mm FWHM isotropic Gaussian kernel. The 12 mm kernel has been shown to minimize the risk of false positive findings ( Salmond et al., 2002 ). A ‘condition and covariates’ model was used and sex, age, and total intracranial volume at the Time 1 were entered into the statistical model as confounding variables. Gray matter volume differences between patients and controls were assessed using the general linear model ( Friston et al., 1995a ), and the significance of each effect was determined using the theory of Gaussian fields ( Friston et al., 1995b ). Specific contrasts were performed comparing gray matter volumes in the LTLV and RTLV groups versus controls. A level of significance of p < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons (SPM family wise error—FWE) was adopted. 2.6. Whole-brain longitudinal neuroimaging analysis: tensor-based morphometry A whole-brain TBM analysis was used to map progression of regional gray matter (GM) atrophy over time in LTLV and RTLV compared to controls. Both spatial pre-processing and statistical analysis were implemented in SPM2. Details regarding TBM image pre-processing are described in previous studies ( Brambati et al., 2007 ; Kipps et al., 2005 )( Fig. 1 ). We applied a bias correction to the follow-up T1-weighted scan previously coregistered with the presentation image. A high-dimensional deformation field was then used to warp the corrected late image to match the early one within subject ( Ashburner et al., 2000 ). The amount of volume change was quantified by taking the determinant of the gradient of deformation at a single-voxel level (Jacobian determinants). The following formula was applied to the segmented gray matter image obtained from the first scan ( Ashburner and Friston, 2003 ) and the Jacobian determinant map: (Jacobian value - 1) × GM. The resulting product image represented a measure of the gray matter specific volume change between the first and the second scan. Study-specific template and a priori images were created by averaging each subject's early and late normalized images. The normalization parameters were estimated by matching the customized gray matter template with the segmented gray matter image from the first scan. The normalization parameters were then applied to the product image ( Ashburner and Friston, 1999 ). Normalized images were smoothed using a 12 mm isotropic Gaussian kernel. Finally, smoothed images were multiplied by an inclusive binary mask identifying only gray matter tissue. Main pre-processing steps are summarized in Fig. 1 . Normalized, smoothed maps of gray matter contraction over time for each subject were entered into the statistical analysis. A ‘condition and covariates’ model was used and sex, age, and total intracranial volume at the Time 2 were entered into the statistical model as confounding variables. Specific contrasts were performed comparing gray matter contraction in the LTLV and RTLV groups versus controls. A level of significance of p < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons (SPM family wise error—FWE) was adopted.  2.1. Subjects MR images were obtained at presentation (Time 1) and at one-year follow-up (Time 2) from 19 right-handed SD patients (mean age 62.1 ± 6.0 years, 12 males, 7 females) and 25 healthy controls (mean age 64.8 ± 6.9 years, 9 males, 16 females). All patients were evaluated at UCSF Memory and Aging Center by a team of clinicians with expertise in neurodegenerative diseases, including a behavioral neurologist, a neuropsychologist, a nurse, and a psychiatrist. Only cases for which a consensus diagnosis of SD ( Neary et al., 1998 ) or normal cognition was reached were included in the study. Results from an automated volumetric analysis of the temporal lobes were used to designate subjects as LTLV or RTLV at Time 1. All subjects or their caregivers provided written informed consent. The study was approved by the UCSF committee on human research.  2.2. Image acquisition Presentation and one-year follow-up MRI scans were obtained on a 1.5 Tesla Magneton VISION system (Siemens Inc., Iselin, NJ) equipped with a standard quadrature head coil. Structural MRI sequences included: (1) two-dimensional, fast low-angle shot (FLASH) MRI along three orthogonal directions; 3 mm thick slices with 15 slices in each direction to obtain scout views of the brain for positioning MRI slices; (2) a double spin echo sequence (TR/[TE]1/TE2 = 5000/20/80 ms) to obtain proton density and T2-weighted MRI; 51 contiguous axial slices (3 mm) covering the entire brain and angulate -10° from the anterior commissure (AC)- posterior commissure (PC) line; 1.0mm×1.25mm in-plane resolution; (3) volumetric magnetization prepared rapid gradient echo (MPRAGE)sequence (TR/TE/inversion time [TI] = 10/4/300 ms, flip angle = 15°) to obtain a T1-weighted image of the entire brain. The images were acquired with a coronal slice plane with in-plane pixel size of 1.0mm×1.0mm and slice thickness of 1.5 mm, with a matrix size of 256×192.  2.3. LTLV and RTLV group classification 2.3.1. Temporal lobe volume measurement methodology Cross-sectional left and right temporal lobe volumes were calculated from the scan at presentation, in order to classify patients as LTLV and RTLV, and at one-year follow-up. Volumes were generated using the BRAINS2 software ( Magnotta et al., 2002 ), which allows automated volume measurement of the major lobes based on their location within the standardized grid of Talairach and Tournoux. Processing of images included reorientation of each T1 weighted image to make the anterior-posterior axis parallel with the anterior commissure-posterior commissure (AC-PC) line, and identification of outer boundaries of the brain in order to warp the Talairach grid onto the brain. The T2 and proton density weighted images were then realigned to the T1 weighted image using an automated image registration program ( Woods et al., 1992 ). A mask delineating brain versus non-brain tissue was created by first segmenting the brain into gray matter, white matter, and CSF compartments using the three coregistered images and a discriminant analysis method ( Harris et al., 1999 ), and then generating the mask using an artificial neural network. Temporal volumes were calculated from all brain tissue (gray plus white matter) falling within the portions of the Talairach grid corresponding to temporal lobe ( Woods et al., 1992 ). The volumes reported here were normalized to correct for differences in overall head size using total intracranial volume (gray matter, plus white matter plus CSF) derived from segmented images. 2.3.2. LTLV and RTLV patient sample Temporal volumes for each patient were compared to controls, and Z scores were created individually for left and right temporal lobe. Z scores represented how many standard deviations each patient's temporal volumes were below the mean of the control group. They were calculated by subtracting the mean of temporal lobe volumes in the control group from each patient's temporal volume and then dividing the difference by the control group standard deviation. Patients were then classified as LTLV or RTLV at Time 1 based on which temporal lobe had greater negative Z scores. Thus, 13 SD patients were classified as LTLV (mean age 62.0 ± 6.3 years, nine males, four females) and six as RTLV (mean age 62.5 ± 5.7 years, three males, three females) (see Table 1 ). This is consistent with previous studies showing that LTLV is roughly three times more prevalent than RTLV ( Seeley et al., 2005 ; Thompson et al., 2003 ). There was no significant difference between LTLV and RTLV for age, education, sex, and interval between MRI scans ( Table 1 ). Although the mean time from disease onset to the presentation scan was longer in RTLV than in LTLV (RTLV: 5.7 ± 3.7 years, LTLV: 3.2 ± 1.1), the statistical comparison only showed a trend towards significance ( T = -1.6, p = 0.17). Six patients included in this study have been previously described by Seeley et al. (2005) . Despite the different tracing methodologies adopted by the two studies, patients were consistently classified as RTLV ( n = 3) and LTLV ( n = 3). RTLV showed greater atrophy than LTLV in both the most ( Z score of right temporal lobe in RTLV versus left in LTLV) and the least ( Z score of left temporal lobe in RTLV versus right in LTLV) damaged temporal lobes. Each patient showed a difference between temporal lobe Z scores of at least 1.5 standard deviations at presentation. Both left and right temporal lobe volumes decreased over one year from diagnosis in the two variants of SD.  2.3.1. Temporal lobe volume measurement methodology Cross-sectional left and right temporal lobe volumes were calculated from the scan at presentation, in order to classify patients as LTLV and RTLV, and at one-year follow-up. Volumes were generated using the BRAINS2 software ( Magnotta et al., 2002 ), which allows automated volume measurement of the major lobes based on their location within the standardized grid of Talairach and Tournoux. Processing of images included reorientation of each T1 weighted image to make the anterior-posterior axis parallel with the anterior commissure-posterior commissure (AC-PC) line, and identification of outer boundaries of the brain in order to warp the Talairach grid onto the brain. The T2 and proton density weighted images were then realigned to the T1 weighted image using an automated image registration program ( Woods et al., 1992 ). A mask delineating brain versus non-brain tissue was created by first segmenting the brain into gray matter, white matter, and CSF compartments using the three coregistered images and a discriminant analysis method ( Harris et al., 1999 ), and then generating the mask using an artificial neural network. Temporal volumes were calculated from all brain tissue (gray plus white matter) falling within the portions of the Talairach grid corresponding to temporal lobe ( Woods et al., 1992 ). The volumes reported here were normalized to correct for differences in overall head size using total intracranial volume (gray matter, plus white matter plus CSF) derived from segmented images.  2.3.2. LTLV and RTLV patient sample Temporal volumes for each patient were compared to controls, and Z scores were created individually for left and right temporal lobe. Z scores represented how many standard deviations each patient's temporal volumes were below the mean of the control group. They were calculated by subtracting the mean of temporal lobe volumes in the control group from each patient's temporal volume and then dividing the difference by the control group standard deviation. Patients were then classified as LTLV or RTLV at Time 1 based on which temporal lobe had greater negative Z scores. Thus, 13 SD patients were classified as LTLV (mean age 62.0 ± 6.3 years, nine males, four females) and six as RTLV (mean age 62.5 ± 5.7 years, three males, three females) (see Table 1 ). This is consistent with previous studies showing that LTLV is roughly three times more prevalent than RTLV ( Seeley et al., 2005 ; Thompson et al., 2003 ). There was no significant difference between LTLV and RTLV for age, education, sex, and interval between MRI scans ( Table 1 ). Although the mean time from disease onset to the presentation scan was longer in RTLV than in LTLV (RTLV: 5.7 ± 3.7 years, LTLV: 3.2 ± 1.1), the statistical comparison only showed a trend towards significance ( T = -1.6, p = 0.17). Six patients included in this study have been previously described by Seeley et al. (2005) . Despite the different tracing methodologies adopted by the two studies, patients were consistently classified as RTLV ( n = 3) and LTLV ( n = 3). RTLV showed greater atrophy than LTLV in both the most ( Z score of right temporal lobe in RTLV versus left in LTLV) and the least ( Z score of left temporal lobe in RTLV versus right in LTLV) damaged temporal lobes. Each patient showed a difference between temporal lobe Z scores of at least 1.5 standard deviations at presentation. Both left and right temporal lobe volumes decreased over one year from diagnosis in the two variants of SD.  2.4. LTLV and RTLV neuropsychological assessment Functional and neuropsychological screening was performed for diagnostic purposes both at the time of presentation (Time 1) and one-year follow-up (Time 2) in LTLV and RTLV patients, and at Time 1 in healthy aging controls. Clinical dementia rating (CDR) ( Morris, 1993 ), mini mental state examination (MMSE) ( Folstein et al., 1975 ) and neuropsychiatric inventory (NPI) ( Srikanth et al., 2005 ) assessed general functional level and behavior. Standard tests evaluated language, working memory, visuospatial and executive functions. Two-sample t -tests were used to assess cross-sectional neuropsychological differences between patients and controls and between RTLV and LTLV at Time 1 and Time 2. Paired sample t -tests were used to assess longitudinal changes between Time 1 and Time 2 within each patient group. Statistical analyses of neuropsychological data were performed using SAS statistical package (release 9.1, 2002, SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC).  2.5. Whole-brain cross-sectional neuroimaging analysis at Time 1: voxel-based morphometry VBM was applied to detect regional gray matter (GM) atrophy at Time 1 in LTLV and RTLV compared to controls across the whole brain. The VBM analysis included two steps: spatial preprocessing (normalization, segmentation, Jacobian modulation and smoothing) and statistical analysis. Both steps were implemented in the SPM2 software package (Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, London; http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm ) running on Matlab 6.5.1 (MathWorks, Natick, MA). MRI images were pre-processed using an optimized method for spatial normalization of gray matter, including creation of a study-specific template and a priori images ( Good et al., 2001 ). Gray matter voxel values were multiplied by the Jacobian determinants derived from the spatial normalization step (Jacobian modulation) to preserve the initial volumes. Modulated gray matter images were then spatially smoothed with a 12 mm FWHM isotropic Gaussian kernel. The 12 mm kernel has been shown to minimize the risk of false positive findings ( Salmond et al., 2002 ). A ‘condition and covariates’ model was used and sex, age, and total intracranial volume at the Time 1 were entered into the statistical model as confounding variables. Gray matter volume differences between patients and controls were assessed using the general linear model ( Friston et al., 1995a ), and the significance of each effect was determined using the theory of Gaussian fields ( Friston et al., 1995b ). Specific contrasts were performed comparing gray matter volumes in the LTLV and RTLV groups versus controls. A level of significance of p < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons (SPM family wise error—FWE) was adopted.  2.6. Whole-brain longitudinal neuroimaging analysis: tensor-based morphometry A whole-brain TBM analysis was used to map progression of regional gray matter (GM) atrophy over time in LTLV and RTLV compared to controls. Both spatial pre-processing and statistical analysis were implemented in SPM2. Details regarding TBM image pre-processing are described in previous studies ( Brambati et al., 2007 ; Kipps et al., 2005 )( Fig. 1 ). We applied a bias correction to the follow-up T1-weighted scan previously coregistered with the presentation image. A high-dimensional deformation field was then used to warp the corrected late image to match the early one within subject ( Ashburner et al., 2000 ). The amount of volume change was quantified by taking the determinant of the gradient of deformation at a single-voxel level (Jacobian determinants). The following formula was applied to the segmented gray matter image obtained from the first scan ( Ashburner and Friston, 2003 ) and the Jacobian determinant map: (Jacobian value - 1) × GM. The resulting product image represented a measure of the gray matter specific volume change between the first and the second scan. Study-specific template and a priori images were created by averaging each subject's early and late normalized images. The normalization parameters were estimated by matching the customized gray matter template with the segmented gray matter image from the first scan. The normalization parameters were then applied to the product image ( Ashburner and Friston, 1999 ). Normalized images were smoothed using a 12 mm isotropic Gaussian kernel. Finally, smoothed images were multiplied by an inclusive binary mask identifying only gray matter tissue. Main pre-processing steps are summarized in Fig. 1 . Normalized, smoothed maps of gray matter contraction over time for each subject were entered into the statistical analysis. A ‘condition and covariates’ model was used and sex, age, and total intracranial volume at the Time 2 were entered into the statistical model as confounding variables. Specific contrasts were performed comparing gray matter contraction in the LTLV and RTLV groups versus controls. A level of significance of p < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons (SPM family wise error—FWE) was adopted.  3. Results 3.1. LTLV and RTLV neuropsychological performance At presentation, LTLV and RTLV patients showed comparable CDR and MMSE scores suggesting borderline functional status (see Table 1 ). Consistently with SD diagnosis, when compared to normal controls, both LTLV and RTLV showed deficits in language (phonemic and category fluency, and naming test) and behavior (Neuropsychiatric Inventory), in the context of fairly intact visuospatial (Modified Rey-Osterrieth Copy), working memory (Digit Backward) and executive (Modified Trials) abilities. LTLV revealed impaired comprehension of spoken single words as well (Auditory Word Recognition subtest of the Western Aphasia Battery). When the scores of the two patients' groups at Time 1 were compared, no significant differences were observed in neuropsychological tests, but RTLV revealed greater behavioral symptoms. Longitudinal analyses showed that semantic fluency significantly decreased in both LTLV and RTLV. Naming, single word comprehension and digit backward scores worsened in both RTLV and LTLV, but the result reached significance only in the larger LTLV group. Behavioral symptoms, as measure by the NPI, increased in RTLV. 3.2. Whole-brain voxel-based morphometry results: pattern of gray matter atrophy at Time 1 3.2.1. LTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T2">Table 2</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F2">Fig. 2A</xref>) In LTLV patients at presentation, extensive gray matter volume loss was observed within the left temporal lobe, confirming the lobar volume measurements. Gray matter atrophy was mainly found in the anterior portion of the left temporal lobe, including the pole (BA 38), the middle (BA 21), inferior (20) and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri. GM loss extended to the medial portion of the left temporal lobe, including the hippocampus/amygdala. Less extensive gray matter atrophy was also observed in controlateral temporal regions, including the right inferior temporal (BA 20), fusiform (BA 20/37) and parahippocampal (BA 36) gyri, and the hippocampus/amygdala. Outside the temporal lobes, tissue loss was observed in the left insula and caudate. 3.2.2. RTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T2">Table 2</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F2">Fig. 2B</xref>) In RTLV patients at presentation, extensive gray matter volume loss was observed within the right temporal lobe, confirming the lobar volume measurements. Specifically, GM atrophy involved the right temporal pole (BA 38), the superior (BA 22), middle (BA 21) and inferior (BA 20) temporal and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri. GM loss extended to the medial portion of the left temporal lobe, including the parahippocampal gyrus (BA 36), hippocampus/amygdala. Gray matter atrophy was also observed in controlateral temporal regions, including the inferior temporal (BA 20) and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri and in the hippocampus/amygdala. Outside the temporal lobes, GM atrophy was observed within the right insula. 3.3. Whole-brain tensor-based morphometry results: gray matter atrophy progression 3.3.1. LTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T3">Table 3</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F3">Fig. 3</xref>) In LTLV, over one year from initial diagnosis, significant gray matter contraction was found in the temporal lobe that was most affected at presentation (left), and also in the least affected (right). Specifically, within the left temporal lobe, significant gray matter (GM) contraction was observed in the temporal pole (BA 38), extending posteriorly in the fusiform (BA 20/37) and lingual (BA 37) gyri. Within the right temporal lobe, the side least affected at clinical presentation in LTLV, significant volume loss was found in the temporal pole (BA 38), in the middle (BA 21) and inferior (BA 20) temporal gyri and, more posteriorly, in the fusiform gyrus (BA 20/37). In the medial portion of the temporal lobes, progressive GM contraction was observed bilaterally in the amygdala/hippocampus regions. Outside of the temporal lobes, significant gray matter contractions were also found in the left anterior insula, bilateral ventromedial frontal cortex (BA 25/11), caudate and the right thalamus. 3.3.2. RTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T3">Table 3</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F3">Fig. 3B</xref>) In RTLV, over one year from initial diagnosis, significant gray matter contraction was observed in the temporal lobe that was most affected at presentation (right), and also in the least affected (left). Specifically, within the right temporal lobe, more affected at presentation, progressive atrophy over time was observed in the superior (BA 22) and middle temporal (BA 21) gyri. Within the left temporal lobe, the side least affected at clinical presentation, significant volume loss was found in the temporal pole (BA 38), in the inferior temporal (BA 20) and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri. In the left medial temporal lobe, progressive GM contraction was observed in the amygdala/hippocampus regions. Outside of the temporal lobes, no region showed progression of atrophy in the RTLV group at a corrected level of significance. A trend of longitudinal change was observed in the right amygdala/hippocampus ( x = 20, y = -15, z = -24, Z score = 3.1; p < 0.001 uncorrected) and bilaterally in the insula ( x =-43, y =-18, z =5, Z score = 3.7; x = 33, y = 18, z =0, Z score = 3.4; p < 0.001 uncorrected) and ventromedial frontal cortex ( x =-10, y = 14, z =-14, Z score = 4.8; x =8, y = 16, z = -12, Z score=4.5 p < 0.001 uncorrected). 3.3.3. Correlation analysis between changes in temporal lobe atrophy and cognitive scores A correlation analysis was performed to test the hypothesis that the worsening of semantic and behavioral symptoms was associated with the progression of gray matter atrophy in the left and right temporal pole, respectively. Measures of semantic and behavioral deficit progression were derived by subtracting Time 1 from Time 2 scores in single word comprehension (Auditory Word Recognition subtest of the WAB), picture naming (Boston Naming Test—BNT) and from the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) scale. Values of gray matter atrophy progression were extracted from the left and in the right temporal poles anatomically defined using the AAL brain atlas ( Tzourio-Mazoyer et al., 2002 ) implemented in the WFU Pickatlas software ( Maldjian et al., 2004 ; Maldjian et al., 2003 ). The results showed that worsening of single word comprehension deficits significantly correlated with atrophy progression in the left ( R = 0.69, p < 0.05), but not in the right ( R =-0.17, p = 0.65) temporal pole. GM atrophy progression in either temporal pole did not reveal significant correlation with worsening of naming abilities or behavioral symptoms.  3. Results 3.1. LTLV and RTLV neuropsychological performance At presentation, LTLV and RTLV patients showed comparable CDR and MMSE scores suggesting borderline functional status (see Table 1 ). Consistently with SD diagnosis, when compared to normal controls, both LTLV and RTLV showed deficits in language (phonemic and category fluency, and naming test) and behavior (Neuropsychiatric Inventory), in the context of fairly intact visuospatial (Modified Rey-Osterrieth Copy), working memory (Digit Backward) and executive (Modified Trials) abilities. LTLV revealed impaired comprehension of spoken single words as well (Auditory Word Recognition subtest of the Western Aphasia Battery). When the scores of the two patients' groups at Time 1 were compared, no significant differences were observed in neuropsychological tests, but RTLV revealed greater behavioral symptoms. Longitudinal analyses showed that semantic fluency significantly decreased in both LTLV and RTLV. Naming, single word comprehension and digit backward scores worsened in both RTLV and LTLV, but the result reached significance only in the larger LTLV group. Behavioral symptoms, as measure by the NPI, increased in RTLV. 3.2. Whole-brain voxel-based morphometry results: pattern of gray matter atrophy at Time 1 3.2.1. LTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T2">Table 2</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F2">Fig. 2A</xref>) In LTLV patients at presentation, extensive gray matter volume loss was observed within the left temporal lobe, confirming the lobar volume measurements. Gray matter atrophy was mainly found in the anterior portion of the left temporal lobe, including the pole (BA 38), the middle (BA 21), inferior (20) and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri. GM loss extended to the medial portion of the left temporal lobe, including the hippocampus/amygdala. Less extensive gray matter atrophy was also observed in controlateral temporal regions, including the right inferior temporal (BA 20), fusiform (BA 20/37) and parahippocampal (BA 36) gyri, and the hippocampus/amygdala. Outside the temporal lobes, tissue loss was observed in the left insula and caudate. 3.2.2. RTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T2">Table 2</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F2">Fig. 2B</xref>) In RTLV patients at presentation, extensive gray matter volume loss was observed within the right temporal lobe, confirming the lobar volume measurements. Specifically, GM atrophy involved the right temporal pole (BA 38), the superior (BA 22), middle (BA 21) and inferior (BA 20) temporal and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri. GM loss extended to the medial portion of the left temporal lobe, including the parahippocampal gyrus (BA 36), hippocampus/amygdala. Gray matter atrophy was also observed in controlateral temporal regions, including the inferior temporal (BA 20) and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri and in the hippocampus/amygdala. Outside the temporal lobes, GM atrophy was observed within the right insula. 3.3. Whole-brain tensor-based morphometry results: gray matter atrophy progression 3.3.1. LTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T3">Table 3</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F3">Fig. 3</xref>) In LTLV, over one year from initial diagnosis, significant gray matter contraction was found in the temporal lobe that was most affected at presentation (left), and also in the least affected (right). Specifically, within the left temporal lobe, significant gray matter (GM) contraction was observed in the temporal pole (BA 38), extending posteriorly in the fusiform (BA 20/37) and lingual (BA 37) gyri. Within the right temporal lobe, the side least affected at clinical presentation in LTLV, significant volume loss was found in the temporal pole (BA 38), in the middle (BA 21) and inferior (BA 20) temporal gyri and, more posteriorly, in the fusiform gyrus (BA 20/37). In the medial portion of the temporal lobes, progressive GM contraction was observed bilaterally in the amygdala/hippocampus regions. Outside of the temporal lobes, significant gray matter contractions were also found in the left anterior insula, bilateral ventromedial frontal cortex (BA 25/11), caudate and the right thalamus. 3.3.2. RTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T3">Table 3</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F3">Fig. 3B</xref>) In RTLV, over one year from initial diagnosis, significant gray matter contraction was observed in the temporal lobe that was most affected at presentation (right), and also in the least affected (left). Specifically, within the right temporal lobe, more affected at presentation, progressive atrophy over time was observed in the superior (BA 22) and middle temporal (BA 21) gyri. Within the left temporal lobe, the side least affected at clinical presentation, significant volume loss was found in the temporal pole (BA 38), in the inferior temporal (BA 20) and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri. In the left medial temporal lobe, progressive GM contraction was observed in the amygdala/hippocampus regions. Outside of the temporal lobes, no region showed progression of atrophy in the RTLV group at a corrected level of significance. A trend of longitudinal change was observed in the right amygdala/hippocampus ( x = 20, y = -15, z = -24, Z score = 3.1; p < 0.001 uncorrected) and bilaterally in the insula ( x =-43, y =-18, z =5, Z score = 3.7; x = 33, y = 18, z =0, Z score = 3.4; p < 0.001 uncorrected) and ventromedial frontal cortex ( x =-10, y = 14, z =-14, Z score = 4.8; x =8, y = 16, z = -12, Z score=4.5 p < 0.001 uncorrected). 3.3.3. Correlation analysis between changes in temporal lobe atrophy and cognitive scores A correlation analysis was performed to test the hypothesis that the worsening of semantic and behavioral symptoms was associated with the progression of gray matter atrophy in the left and right temporal pole, respectively. Measures of semantic and behavioral deficit progression were derived by subtracting Time 1 from Time 2 scores in single word comprehension (Auditory Word Recognition subtest of the WAB), picture naming (Boston Naming Test—BNT) and from the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) scale. Values of gray matter atrophy progression were extracted from the left and in the right temporal poles anatomically defined using the AAL brain atlas ( Tzourio-Mazoyer et al., 2002 ) implemented in the WFU Pickatlas software ( Maldjian et al., 2004 ; Maldjian et al., 2003 ). The results showed that worsening of single word comprehension deficits significantly correlated with atrophy progression in the left ( R = 0.69, p < 0.05), but not in the right ( R =-0.17, p = 0.65) temporal pole. GM atrophy progression in either temporal pole did not reveal significant correlation with worsening of naming abilities or behavioral symptoms.  3.1. LTLV and RTLV neuropsychological performance At presentation, LTLV and RTLV patients showed comparable CDR and MMSE scores suggesting borderline functional status (see Table 1 ). Consistently with SD diagnosis, when compared to normal controls, both LTLV and RTLV showed deficits in language (phonemic and category fluency, and naming test) and behavior (Neuropsychiatric Inventory), in the context of fairly intact visuospatial (Modified Rey-Osterrieth Copy), working memory (Digit Backward) and executive (Modified Trials) abilities. LTLV revealed impaired comprehension of spoken single words as well (Auditory Word Recognition subtest of the Western Aphasia Battery). When the scores of the two patients' groups at Time 1 were compared, no significant differences were observed in neuropsychological tests, but RTLV revealed greater behavioral symptoms. Longitudinal analyses showed that semantic fluency significantly decreased in both LTLV and RTLV. Naming, single word comprehension and digit backward scores worsened in both RTLV and LTLV, but the result reached significance only in the larger LTLV group. Behavioral symptoms, as measure by the NPI, increased in RTLV.  3.1. LTLV and RTLV neuropsychological performance At presentation, LTLV and RTLV patients showed comparable CDR and MMSE scores suggesting borderline functional status (see Table 1 ). Consistently with SD diagnosis, when compared to normal controls, both LTLV and RTLV showed deficits in language (phonemic and category fluency, and naming test) and behavior (Neuropsychiatric Inventory), in the context of fairly intact visuospatial (Modified Rey-Osterrieth Copy), working memory (Digit Backward) and executive (Modified Trials) abilities. LTLV revealed impaired comprehension of spoken single words as well (Auditory Word Recognition subtest of the Western Aphasia Battery). When the scores of the two patients' groups at Time 1 were compared, no significant differences were observed in neuropsychological tests, but RTLV revealed greater behavioral symptoms. Longitudinal analyses showed that semantic fluency significantly decreased in both LTLV and RTLV. Naming, single word comprehension and digit backward scores worsened in both RTLV and LTLV, but the result reached significance only in the larger LTLV group. Behavioral symptoms, as measure by the NPI, increased in RTLV.  3.2. Whole-brain voxel-based morphometry results: pattern of gray matter atrophy at Time 1 3.2.1. LTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T2">Table 2</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F2">Fig. 2A</xref>) In LTLV patients at presentation, extensive gray matter volume loss was observed within the left temporal lobe, confirming the lobar volume measurements. Gray matter atrophy was mainly found in the anterior portion of the left temporal lobe, including the pole (BA 38), the middle (BA 21), inferior (20) and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri. GM loss extended to the medial portion of the left temporal lobe, including the hippocampus/amygdala. Less extensive gray matter atrophy was also observed in controlateral temporal regions, including the right inferior temporal (BA 20), fusiform (BA 20/37) and parahippocampal (BA 36) gyri, and the hippocampus/amygdala. Outside the temporal lobes, tissue loss was observed in the left insula and caudate. 3.2.2. RTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T2">Table 2</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F2">Fig. 2B</xref>) In RTLV patients at presentation, extensive gray matter volume loss was observed within the right temporal lobe, confirming the lobar volume measurements. Specifically, GM atrophy involved the right temporal pole (BA 38), the superior (BA 22), middle (BA 21) and inferior (BA 20) temporal and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri. GM loss extended to the medial portion of the left temporal lobe, including the parahippocampal gyrus (BA 36), hippocampus/amygdala. Gray matter atrophy was also observed in controlateral temporal regions, including the inferior temporal (BA 20) and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri and in the hippocampus/amygdala. Outside the temporal lobes, GM atrophy was observed within the right insula.  3.2. Whole-brain voxel-based morphometry results: pattern of gray matter atrophy at Time 1 3.2.1. LTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T2">Table 2</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F2">Fig. 2A</xref>) In LTLV patients at presentation, extensive gray matter volume loss was observed within the left temporal lobe, confirming the lobar volume measurements. Gray matter atrophy was mainly found in the anterior portion of the left temporal lobe, including the pole (BA 38), the middle (BA 21), inferior (20) and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri. GM loss extended to the medial portion of the left temporal lobe, including the hippocampus/amygdala. Less extensive gray matter atrophy was also observed in controlateral temporal regions, including the right inferior temporal (BA 20), fusiform (BA 20/37) and parahippocampal (BA 36) gyri, and the hippocampus/amygdala. Outside the temporal lobes, tissue loss was observed in the left insula and caudate. 3.2.2. RTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T2">Table 2</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F2">Fig. 2B</xref>) In RTLV patients at presentation, extensive gray matter volume loss was observed within the right temporal lobe, confirming the lobar volume measurements. Specifically, GM atrophy involved the right temporal pole (BA 38), the superior (BA 22), middle (BA 21) and inferior (BA 20) temporal and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri. GM loss extended to the medial portion of the left temporal lobe, including the parahippocampal gyrus (BA 36), hippocampus/amygdala. Gray matter atrophy was also observed in controlateral temporal regions, including the inferior temporal (BA 20) and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri and in the hippocampus/amygdala. Outside the temporal lobes, GM atrophy was observed within the right insula.  3.2.1. LTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T2">Table 2</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F2">Fig. 2A</xref>) In LTLV patients at presentation, extensive gray matter volume loss was observed within the left temporal lobe, confirming the lobar volume measurements. Gray matter atrophy was mainly found in the anterior portion of the left temporal lobe, including the pole (BA 38), the middle (BA 21), inferior (20) and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri. GM loss extended to the medial portion of the left temporal lobe, including the hippocampus/amygdala. Less extensive gray matter atrophy was also observed in controlateral temporal regions, including the right inferior temporal (BA 20), fusiform (BA 20/37) and parahippocampal (BA 36) gyri, and the hippocampus/amygdala. Outside the temporal lobes, tissue loss was observed in the left insula and caudate.  3.2.1. LTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T2">Table 2</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F2">Fig. 2A</xref>) In LTLV patients at presentation, extensive gray matter volume loss was observed within the left temporal lobe, confirming the lobar volume measurements. Gray matter atrophy was mainly found in the anterior portion of the left temporal lobe, including the pole (BA 38), the middle (BA 21), inferior (20) and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri. GM loss extended to the medial portion of the left temporal lobe, including the hippocampus/amygdala. Less extensive gray matter atrophy was also observed in controlateral temporal regions, including the right inferior temporal (BA 20), fusiform (BA 20/37) and parahippocampal (BA 36) gyri, and the hippocampus/amygdala. Outside the temporal lobes, tissue loss was observed in the left insula and caudate.  3.2.2. RTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T2">Table 2</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F2">Fig. 2B</xref>) In RTLV patients at presentation, extensive gray matter volume loss was observed within the right temporal lobe, confirming the lobar volume measurements. Specifically, GM atrophy involved the right temporal pole (BA 38), the superior (BA 22), middle (BA 21) and inferior (BA 20) temporal and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri. GM loss extended to the medial portion of the left temporal lobe, including the parahippocampal gyrus (BA 36), hippocampus/amygdala. Gray matter atrophy was also observed in controlateral temporal regions, including the inferior temporal (BA 20) and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri and in the hippocampus/amygdala. Outside the temporal lobes, GM atrophy was observed within the right insula.  3.2.2. RTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T2">Table 2</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F2">Fig. 2B</xref>) In RTLV patients at presentation, extensive gray matter volume loss was observed within the right temporal lobe, confirming the lobar volume measurements. Specifically, GM atrophy involved the right temporal pole (BA 38), the superior (BA 22), middle (BA 21) and inferior (BA 20) temporal and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri. GM loss extended to the medial portion of the left temporal lobe, including the parahippocampal gyrus (BA 36), hippocampus/amygdala. Gray matter atrophy was also observed in controlateral temporal regions, including the inferior temporal (BA 20) and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri and in the hippocampus/amygdala. Outside the temporal lobes, GM atrophy was observed within the right insula.  3.3. Whole-brain tensor-based morphometry results: gray matter atrophy progression 3.3.1. LTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T3">Table 3</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F3">Fig. 3</xref>) In LTLV, over one year from initial diagnosis, significant gray matter contraction was found in the temporal lobe that was most affected at presentation (left), and also in the least affected (right). Specifically, within the left temporal lobe, significant gray matter (GM) contraction was observed in the temporal pole (BA 38), extending posteriorly in the fusiform (BA 20/37) and lingual (BA 37) gyri. Within the right temporal lobe, the side least affected at clinical presentation in LTLV, significant volume loss was found in the temporal pole (BA 38), in the middle (BA 21) and inferior (BA 20) temporal gyri and, more posteriorly, in the fusiform gyrus (BA 20/37). In the medial portion of the temporal lobes, progressive GM contraction was observed bilaterally in the amygdala/hippocampus regions. Outside of the temporal lobes, significant gray matter contractions were also found in the left anterior insula, bilateral ventromedial frontal cortex (BA 25/11), caudate and the right thalamus. 3.3.2. RTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T3">Table 3</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F3">Fig. 3B</xref>) In RTLV, over one year from initial diagnosis, significant gray matter contraction was observed in the temporal lobe that was most affected at presentation (right), and also in the least affected (left). Specifically, within the right temporal lobe, more affected at presentation, progressive atrophy over time was observed in the superior (BA 22) and middle temporal (BA 21) gyri. Within the left temporal lobe, the side least affected at clinical presentation, significant volume loss was found in the temporal pole (BA 38), in the inferior temporal (BA 20) and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri. In the left medial temporal lobe, progressive GM contraction was observed in the amygdala/hippocampus regions. Outside of the temporal lobes, no region showed progression of atrophy in the RTLV group at a corrected level of significance. A trend of longitudinal change was observed in the right amygdala/hippocampus ( x = 20, y = -15, z = -24, Z score = 3.1; p < 0.001 uncorrected) and bilaterally in the insula ( x =-43, y =-18, z =5, Z score = 3.7; x = 33, y = 18, z =0, Z score = 3.4; p < 0.001 uncorrected) and ventromedial frontal cortex ( x =-10, y = 14, z =-14, Z score = 4.8; x =8, y = 16, z = -12, Z score=4.5 p < 0.001 uncorrected). 3.3.3. Correlation analysis between changes in temporal lobe atrophy and cognitive scores A correlation analysis was performed to test the hypothesis that the worsening of semantic and behavioral symptoms was associated with the progression of gray matter atrophy in the left and right temporal pole, respectively. Measures of semantic and behavioral deficit progression were derived by subtracting Time 1 from Time 2 scores in single word comprehension (Auditory Word Recognition subtest of the WAB), picture naming (Boston Naming Test—BNT) and from the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) scale. Values of gray matter atrophy progression were extracted from the left and in the right temporal poles anatomically defined using the AAL brain atlas ( Tzourio-Mazoyer et al., 2002 ) implemented in the WFU Pickatlas software ( Maldjian et al., 2004 ; Maldjian et al., 2003 ). The results showed that worsening of single word comprehension deficits significantly correlated with atrophy progression in the left ( R = 0.69, p < 0.05), but not in the right ( R =-0.17, p = 0.65) temporal pole. GM atrophy progression in either temporal pole did not reveal significant correlation with worsening of naming abilities or behavioral symptoms.  3.3. Whole-brain tensor-based morphometry results: gray matter atrophy progression 3.3.1. LTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T3">Table 3</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F3">Fig. 3</xref>) In LTLV, over one year from initial diagnosis, significant gray matter contraction was found in the temporal lobe that was most affected at presentation (left), and also in the least affected (right). Specifically, within the left temporal lobe, significant gray matter (GM) contraction was observed in the temporal pole (BA 38), extending posteriorly in the fusiform (BA 20/37) and lingual (BA 37) gyri. Within the right temporal lobe, the side least affected at clinical presentation in LTLV, significant volume loss was found in the temporal pole (BA 38), in the middle (BA 21) and inferior (BA 20) temporal gyri and, more posteriorly, in the fusiform gyrus (BA 20/37). In the medial portion of the temporal lobes, progressive GM contraction was observed bilaterally in the amygdala/hippocampus regions. Outside of the temporal lobes, significant gray matter contractions were also found in the left anterior insula, bilateral ventromedial frontal cortex (BA 25/11), caudate and the right thalamus. 3.3.2. RTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T3">Table 3</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F3">Fig. 3B</xref>) In RTLV, over one year from initial diagnosis, significant gray matter contraction was observed in the temporal lobe that was most affected at presentation (right), and also in the least affected (left). Specifically, within the right temporal lobe, more affected at presentation, progressive atrophy over time was observed in the superior (BA 22) and middle temporal (BA 21) gyri. Within the left temporal lobe, the side least affected at clinical presentation, significant volume loss was found in the temporal pole (BA 38), in the inferior temporal (BA 20) and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri. In the left medial temporal lobe, progressive GM contraction was observed in the amygdala/hippocampus regions. Outside of the temporal lobes, no region showed progression of atrophy in the RTLV group at a corrected level of significance. A trend of longitudinal change was observed in the right amygdala/hippocampus ( x = 20, y = -15, z = -24, Z score = 3.1; p < 0.001 uncorrected) and bilaterally in the insula ( x =-43, y =-18, z =5, Z score = 3.7; x = 33, y = 18, z =0, Z score = 3.4; p < 0.001 uncorrected) and ventromedial frontal cortex ( x =-10, y = 14, z =-14, Z score = 4.8; x =8, y = 16, z = -12, Z score=4.5 p < 0.001 uncorrected). 3.3.3. Correlation analysis between changes in temporal lobe atrophy and cognitive scores A correlation analysis was performed to test the hypothesis that the worsening of semantic and behavioral symptoms was associated with the progression of gray matter atrophy in the left and right temporal pole, respectively. Measures of semantic and behavioral deficit progression were derived by subtracting Time 1 from Time 2 scores in single word comprehension (Auditory Word Recognition subtest of the WAB), picture naming (Boston Naming Test—BNT) and from the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) scale. Values of gray matter atrophy progression were extracted from the left and in the right temporal poles anatomically defined using the AAL brain atlas ( Tzourio-Mazoyer et al., 2002 ) implemented in the WFU Pickatlas software ( Maldjian et al., 2004 ; Maldjian et al., 2003 ). The results showed that worsening of single word comprehension deficits significantly correlated with atrophy progression in the left ( R = 0.69, p < 0.05), but not in the right ( R =-0.17, p = 0.65) temporal pole. GM atrophy progression in either temporal pole did not reveal significant correlation with worsening of naming abilities or behavioral symptoms.  3.3.1. LTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T3">Table 3</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F3">Fig. 3</xref>) In LTLV, over one year from initial diagnosis, significant gray matter contraction was found in the temporal lobe that was most affected at presentation (left), and also in the least affected (right). Specifically, within the left temporal lobe, significant gray matter (GM) contraction was observed in the temporal pole (BA 38), extending posteriorly in the fusiform (BA 20/37) and lingual (BA 37) gyri. Within the right temporal lobe, the side least affected at clinical presentation in LTLV, significant volume loss was found in the temporal pole (BA 38), in the middle (BA 21) and inferior (BA 20) temporal gyri and, more posteriorly, in the fusiform gyrus (BA 20/37). In the medial portion of the temporal lobes, progressive GM contraction was observed bilaterally in the amygdala/hippocampus regions. Outside of the temporal lobes, significant gray matter contractions were also found in the left anterior insula, bilateral ventromedial frontal cortex (BA 25/11), caudate and the right thalamus.  3.3.1. LTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T3">Table 3</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F3">Fig. 3</xref>) In LTLV, over one year from initial diagnosis, significant gray matter contraction was found in the temporal lobe that was most affected at presentation (left), and also in the least affected (right). Specifically, within the left temporal lobe, significant gray matter (GM) contraction was observed in the temporal pole (BA 38), extending posteriorly in the fusiform (BA 20/37) and lingual (BA 37) gyri. Within the right temporal lobe, the side least affected at clinical presentation in LTLV, significant volume loss was found in the temporal pole (BA 38), in the middle (BA 21) and inferior (BA 20) temporal gyri and, more posteriorly, in the fusiform gyrus (BA 20/37). In the medial portion of the temporal lobes, progressive GM contraction was observed bilaterally in the amygdala/hippocampus regions. Outside of the temporal lobes, significant gray matter contractions were also found in the left anterior insula, bilateral ventromedial frontal cortex (BA 25/11), caudate and the right thalamus.  3.3.2. RTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T3">Table 3</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F3">Fig. 3B</xref>) In RTLV, over one year from initial diagnosis, significant gray matter contraction was observed in the temporal lobe that was most affected at presentation (right), and also in the least affected (left). Specifically, within the right temporal lobe, more affected at presentation, progressive atrophy over time was observed in the superior (BA 22) and middle temporal (BA 21) gyri. Within the left temporal lobe, the side least affected at clinical presentation, significant volume loss was found in the temporal pole (BA 38), in the inferior temporal (BA 20) and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri. In the left medial temporal lobe, progressive GM contraction was observed in the amygdala/hippocampus regions. Outside of the temporal lobes, no region showed progression of atrophy in the RTLV group at a corrected level of significance. A trend of longitudinal change was observed in the right amygdala/hippocampus ( x = 20, y = -15, z = -24, Z score = 3.1; p < 0.001 uncorrected) and bilaterally in the insula ( x =-43, y =-18, z =5, Z score = 3.7; x = 33, y = 18, z =0, Z score = 3.4; p < 0.001 uncorrected) and ventromedial frontal cortex ( x =-10, y = 14, z =-14, Z score = 4.8; x =8, y = 16, z = -12, Z score=4.5 p < 0.001 uncorrected).  3.3.2. RTLV versus controls (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T3">Table 3</xref> and <xref ref-type="fig" rid="F3">Fig. 3B</xref>) In RTLV, over one year from initial diagnosis, significant gray matter contraction was observed in the temporal lobe that was most affected at presentation (right), and also in the least affected (left). Specifically, within the right temporal lobe, more affected at presentation, progressive atrophy over time was observed in the superior (BA 22) and middle temporal (BA 21) gyri. Within the left temporal lobe, the side least affected at clinical presentation, significant volume loss was found in the temporal pole (BA 38), in the inferior temporal (BA 20) and fusiform (BA 20/37) gyri. In the left medial temporal lobe, progressive GM contraction was observed in the amygdala/hippocampus regions. Outside of the temporal lobes, no region showed progression of atrophy in the RTLV group at a corrected level of significance. A trend of longitudinal change was observed in the right amygdala/hippocampus ( x = 20, y = -15, z = -24, Z score = 3.1; p < 0.001 uncorrected) and bilaterally in the insula ( x =-43, y =-18, z =5, Z score = 3.7; x = 33, y = 18, z =0, Z score = 3.4; p < 0.001 uncorrected) and ventromedial frontal cortex ( x =-10, y = 14, z =-14, Z score = 4.8; x =8, y = 16, z = -12, Z score=4.5 p < 0.001 uncorrected).  3.3.3. Correlation analysis between changes in temporal lobe atrophy and cognitive scores A correlation analysis was performed to test the hypothesis that the worsening of semantic and behavioral symptoms was associated with the progression of gray matter atrophy in the left and right temporal pole, respectively. Measures of semantic and behavioral deficit progression were derived by subtracting Time 1 from Time 2 scores in single word comprehension (Auditory Word Recognition subtest of the WAB), picture naming (Boston Naming Test—BNT) and from the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) scale. Values of gray matter atrophy progression were extracted from the left and in the right temporal poles anatomically defined using the AAL brain atlas ( Tzourio-Mazoyer et al., 2002 ) implemented in the WFU Pickatlas software ( Maldjian et al., 2004 ; Maldjian et al., 2003 ). The results showed that worsening of single word comprehension deficits significantly correlated with atrophy progression in the left ( R = 0.69, p < 0.05), but not in the right ( R =-0.17, p = 0.65) temporal pole. GM atrophy progression in either temporal pole did not reveal significant correlation with worsening of naming abilities or behavioral symptoms.  3.3.3. Correlation analysis between changes in temporal lobe atrophy and cognitive scores A correlation analysis was performed to test the hypothesis that the worsening of semantic and behavioral symptoms was associated with the progression of gray matter atrophy in the left and right temporal pole, respectively. Measures of semantic and behavioral deficit progression were derived by subtracting Time 1 from Time 2 scores in single word comprehension (Auditory Word Recognition subtest of the WAB), picture naming (Boston Naming Test—BNT) and from the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) scale. Values of gray matter atrophy progression were extracted from the left and in the right temporal poles anatomically defined using the AAL brain atlas ( Tzourio-Mazoyer et al., 2002 ) implemented in the WFU Pickatlas software ( Maldjian et al., 2004 ; Maldjian et al., 2003 ). The results showed that worsening of single word comprehension deficits significantly correlated with atrophy progression in the left ( R = 0.69, p < 0.05), but not in the right ( R =-0.17, p = 0.65) temporal pole. GM atrophy progression in either temporal pole did not reveal significant correlation with worsening of naming abilities or behavioral symptoms.  4. Discussion We used tensor-based morphometry to map the progression of gray matter atrophy in patients with anatomically defined left (LTLV) or right (RTLV) temporal lobe variants of semantic dementia (SD) over a one-year period from initial diagnosis. In both variants, results showed gray matter contraction in the temporal lobe most affected at presentation, but also significant changes in the least affected side. This finding provides the anatomical substrate of the clinical overlap between the two syndromes as disease progresses ( Seeley et al., 2005 ). A correlation analysis showed that changes in word-comprehension abilities correlated with the progression of gray matter atrophy in the left temporal pole. The progressive loss of semantic memory typical of SD has been associated with predominantly left-sided temporal lobe degeneration (LTLV). Anomia and word comprehension deficits are usually the earliest and most severe clinical symptoms of a semantic memory breakdown ( Seeley et al., 2005 ). The early clinical features of predominantly right temporal atrophy (RTLV) are more controversial. The term “semantic dementia” might not even apply in some early RTLV cases in which the predominant symptoms are behavioral abnormalities and face recognition deficits, in the context of relatively spared language abilities ( Edwards-Lee et al., 1997 ; Evans et al., 1995 ; Gainotti et al., 2003 ; Gorno-Tempini et al., 2004a , b ; Joubert et al., 2006 ; Joubert et al., 2003 ; Miller et al., 1993 ; Perry et al., 2001 ; Thompson et al., 2004 ). RTLV patients at this early stage rarely present at neurology specialty clinics. In these cases, the diagnosis of a neurodegenerative disease is often made later, when behavioral abnormalities become noticeable to caregivers and when language symptoms typical of left temporal degeneration also appear. At this stage of the disease, patients are often non-testable and non-compliant to examination, possibly explaining the rare reports of RTLV cases in the neurological literature. Conversely, LTLV patients are commonly diagnosed earlier, as the presenting language symptoms are soon noticed by patients and caregivers. However, as time passes, LTLV develop behavioral symptoms similar to those of RTLV, such as emotional detachment with loss of empathy. It has been proposed that the emergence of language symptoms in RTLV and of behavioral disturbances in LTLV may result from spreading of gray matter atrophy to the controlateral hemisphere ( Seeley et al., 2005 ). Our results support this hypothesis by showing progression of atrophy in the controlateral hemisphere in both LTLV and RTLV. Furthermore, our correlation analysis showed that changes in single word comprehension abilities correlated with progression of gray matter atrophy in the left but not right temporal pole. This result confirms previous evidence from a cross-sectional VBM study that correlated object-based semantic abilities with atrophy in the left temporal pole ( Mummery et al., 2000 ). The surprising lack of correlation between loss of naming abilities and progression of atrophy in the temporal poles, previously reported by Avants et al. (2005) , can probably be ascribed to the fact that naming scores were already at floor at Time 1 (see Table 1 ). Our analysis showed that the worsening of behavioral symptoms, as assessed by the NPI, did not correlate with temporal pole volume loss over time. This finding could be explained by the fact that the NPI does not specifically assess the behavior abnormalities typically associated with RTLV and right temporal lobe function, such as loss empathy and personality changes ( Rankin et al., 2006 ; Seeley et al., 2005 ). Further studies, involving larger groups of patients and including objective measures of behavioral deficits typical of RTLV are necessary to identify the specific role of the right temporal poles in SD progression. Progression of atrophy in LTLV also involved regions of the ventromedial frontal cortex, amygdalae/hippocampi region and left insula, which belong to a distributed network for control of emotional behavior ( Ongur and Price, 2000 ). Accordingly, progressive atrophy in these areas could be associated with emergence of deficits in social functioning and feeding behavior manifested by LTLV in later stages of the disease ( Seeley et al., 2005 ; Woolley, in press ). In both variants, the progression of atrophy relatively spares parietal, occipital and dorsal frontal brain regions in SD. This may explain the fairly intact visuospatial ( Edwards-Lee et al., 1997 ) and working memory functions ( Waltz et al., 1999 ) previously reported in SD and also observed in our sample (see Table 1 ). TBM is a recently introduced technique that was successful at identifying patterns of atrophy progression typical of various neurodegenerative disorders ( Brambati et al., 2007 ; Chan et al., 2001a , b ; Fox et al., 2000 , 2001 , 1999 ; Fox and Freeborough, 1997 ; Freeborough et al., 1996 ; Kipps et al., 2005 ; Leow et al., 2006 ; Studholme et al., 2001 ), including classic SD ( Cardenas and Studholme, 2004 ; Whitwell et al., 2004 ). Here, we showed that the automated, whole-brain TBM technique as implemented in SPM, could detect differential patterns of longitudinal gray matter atrophy in two variants of the same disease. These results suggest that this technique is useful tool in tracking of disease progression in neurodegenerative diseases.  4. Discussion We used tensor-based morphometry to map the progression of gray matter atrophy in patients with anatomically defined left (LTLV) or right (RTLV) temporal lobe variants of semantic dementia (SD) over a one-year period from initial diagnosis. In both variants, results showed gray matter contraction in the temporal lobe most affected at presentation, but also significant changes in the least affected side. This finding provides the anatomical substrate of the clinical overlap between the two syndromes as disease progresses ( Seeley et al., 2005 ). A correlation analysis showed that changes in word-comprehension abilities correlated with the progression of gray matter atrophy in the left temporal pole. The progressive loss of semantic memory typical of SD has been associated with predominantly left-sided temporal lobe degeneration (LTLV). Anomia and word comprehension deficits are usually the earliest and most severe clinical symptoms of a semantic memory breakdown ( Seeley et al., 2005 ). The early clinical features of predominantly right temporal atrophy (RTLV) are more controversial. The term “semantic dementia” might not even apply in some early RTLV cases in which the predominant symptoms are behavioral abnormalities and face recognition deficits, in the context of relatively spared language abilities ( Edwards-Lee et al., 1997 ; Evans et al., 1995 ; Gainotti et al., 2003 ; Gorno-Tempini et al., 2004a , b ; Joubert et al., 2006 ; Joubert et al., 2003 ; Miller et al., 1993 ; Perry et al., 2001 ; Thompson et al., 2004 ). RTLV patients at this early stage rarely present at neurology specialty clinics. In these cases, the diagnosis of a neurodegenerative disease is often made later, when behavioral abnormalities become noticeable to caregivers and when language symptoms typical of left temporal degeneration also appear. At this stage of the disease, patients are often non-testable and non-compliant to examination, possibly explaining the rare reports of RTLV cases in the neurological literature. Conversely, LTLV patients are commonly diagnosed earlier, as the presenting language symptoms are soon noticed by patients and caregivers. However, as time passes, LTLV develop behavioral symptoms similar to those of RTLV, such as emotional detachment with loss of empathy. It has been proposed that the emergence of language symptoms in RTLV and of behavioral disturbances in LTLV may result from spreading of gray matter atrophy to the controlateral hemisphere ( Seeley et al., 2005 ). Our results support this hypothesis by showing progression of atrophy in the controlateral hemisphere in both LTLV and RTLV. Furthermore, our correlation analysis showed that changes in single word comprehension abilities correlated with progression of gray matter atrophy in the left but not right temporal pole. This result confirms previous evidence from a cross-sectional VBM study that correlated object-based semantic abilities with atrophy in the left temporal pole ( Mummery et al., 2000 ). The surprising lack of correlation between loss of naming abilities and progression of atrophy in the temporal poles, previously reported by Avants et al. (2005) , can probably be ascribed to the fact that naming scores were already at floor at Time 1 (see Table 1 ). Our analysis showed that the worsening of behavioral symptoms, as assessed by the NPI, did not correlate with temporal pole volume loss over time. This finding could be explained by the fact that the NPI does not specifically assess the behavior abnormalities typically associated with RTLV and right temporal lobe function, such as loss empathy and personality changes ( Rankin et al., 2006 ; Seeley et al., 2005 ). Further studies, involving larger groups of patients and including objective measures of behavioral deficits typical of RTLV are necessary to identify the specific role of the right temporal poles in SD progression. Progression of atrophy in LTLV also involved regions of the ventromedial frontal cortex, amygdalae/hippocampi region and left insula, which belong to a distributed network for control of emotional behavior ( Ongur and Price, 2000 ). Accordingly, progressive atrophy in these areas could be associated with emergence of deficits in social functioning and feeding behavior manifested by LTLV in later stages of the disease ( Seeley et al., 2005 ; Woolley, in press ). In both variants, the progression of atrophy relatively spares parietal, occipital and dorsal frontal brain regions in SD. This may explain the fairly intact visuospatial ( Edwards-Lee et al., 1997 ) and working memory functions ( Waltz et al., 1999 ) previously reported in SD and also observed in our sample (see Table 1 ). TBM is a recently introduced technique that was successful at identifying patterns of atrophy progression typical of various neurodegenerative disorders ( Brambati et al., 2007 ; Chan et al., 2001a , b ; Fox et al., 2000 , 2001 , 1999 ; Fox and Freeborough, 1997 ; Freeborough et al., 1996 ; Kipps et al., 2005 ; Leow et al., 2006 ; Studholme et al., 2001 ), including classic SD ( Cardenas and Studholme, 2004 ; Whitwell et al., 2004 ). Here, we showed that the automated, whole-brain TBM technique as implemented in SPM, could detect differential patterns of longitudinal gray matter atrophy in two variants of the same disease. These results suggest that this technique is useful tool in tracking of disease progression in neurodegenerative diseases.  Figures and Tables Fig. 1 Example of main TBM pre-processing steps in a LTLV patient. (A) Presentation scan; (B) 1-year follow-up scan coregistered with the presentation scan; (C) Jacobian determinant map representing voxels of tissue expansion (voxel Jacobian value greater than 1) or contraction (voxel Jacobian value less than 1) from follow-up to presentation scan. Jacobian determinants were estimated by warping together the images A and B; (D) image representing gray matter volume changes between scans A and B. It was obtained by multiplying gray matter segment of the presentation scan with (Jacobian minus 1) values; (E) image D after normalization and smoothing process. Fig. 2 Whole-brain VBM analysis showing patterns of temporal gray matter atrophy in LTLV (A) and RTLV (B) patients compared with controls. Statistical maps are displayed on sections of the study-specific template used for normalization. The threshold for display is p < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons (SPM family-wise error—FWE). For display purpose, the result maps were multiplied by a binary inclusive mask derived by the GM a priori image. Fig. 3 Whole-brain TBM analysis showing patterns of GM atrophy progression in LTLV patients versus controls (A) and RTLV patients versus controls (B) over 1 year after diagnosis. Statistical maps are displayed on sections of the study-specific template used for normalization. The threshold for display is p < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons (SPM family-wise error—FWE). Table 1 Temporal volume Z scores, demographics and neuropsychological screening in LTLV and RTLV at Time 1 and Time 2 and in normal controls (NC) at Time 1 LTLV RTLV NC Time 1 Time 2 Time 1 Time 2 Time 1 Temporal volume Z scores Left temporal volume Z score -4.2 (1.5) -5.2 (1.4) -2.6 (1.1) § -3.6 (0.7) § - Right temporal volume Z score -1.7(1.7) -3.0 (2.2) -7.0 (1.6) § -8.2 (1.3) § - Demographics Age 62.0 (6.3) 63.1 (6.3) 62.5 (5.8) 63.5 (5.8) 64.8 (6.9) Education 16.6 (2.7) - 14.5 (6.1) - 17.0 (1.8) Sex (M/F) 9/4 - 3/3 - 9/16 Years between disease onset and Time 1 scan 3.2 (1.1) - 5.7 (3.7) - - Months between MRI scans 12.0 (2.6) - 12.4 (2.9) - 11.3 (2.1) Functional and cognitive status MMSE 22.0 (6.9) ° 21.2 (7.0) ° 27.0 (2.6) 21.8 (3.4) ° 29.6 (0.8) CDR total 0.4 (0.3) ° 0.5 (0.0) ° 0.5 (0.0) ° 1.0 (0.0) ° 0.0 (0.2) CDR box scores 1.9 (1.6) ° 3.3 (3.2) ° 3.0 (1.5) ° 6.5 (0.5) ° § 0.1 (0.4) Boston naming test (max =15) 3.9 (3.5) ° 1.7 (1.8) ° 5.0 (4.0) ° 2.0 (1.0) ° 14.7 (0.7) WAB auditory word recognition (max = 60) 47.8 (13.8) ° 36.2 (20.9) ° 58.0 (2.0) 52.0 (6.2) ° 60.0 (0.0) D-word verbal fluency (# words/min) 6.5 (4.5) ° 5.1 (3.8) ° 7.6 (1.8) ° 5.2 (2.9) ° 17.2 (5.7) Animal fluency (# words/min) 5.9 (2.8) ° 4.3 (2.2) ° 7.0 (4.9) ° 4.0 (2.9) ° 23.3 (5.8) Modified Rey-Osterrieth Copy (max = 17) 16.4 (0.9) 16.5 (0.7) 15.2 (1.5) 15.6 (1.5) 16.1 (1.1) Modified trails (# correct items) 12.6 (4.0) 12.8 (3.8) 14.0 (0.0) 10.8 (6.6) 14.0 (0.0) Digit backward 4.8 (1.0) 4.4 (0.9) ° 5.8 (0.5) § 5.3 (1.5) 5.7 (1.2) NPI Scale-Total Score 12.7 (5.0) * 18.0 (6.0) * 20.3 (2.5) * § 50.3 (7.7) * § - Scores are reported as mean raw score (standard deviation). Means and standard deviations were obtained only from patients evaluated at both time points. Cross-sectional analyses Abbreviations: MMSE: mini mental state examination; CDR: clinical dementia rating; NPI: neuropsychiatric inventory; WAB: western aphasia battery. ° p < 0.05 vs. NC (two-sample t -test) § p < 0.05 vs. LTLV at the same time point (two-sample t -test) * impaired performance according to current norms (scores in NC not available). Longitudinal analyses: bold and italics: p < 0.05 in Time 1 vs. Time 2 (paired t -test). Table 2 Voxel-based morphometry results Brain regions atrophic at Time 1 (brodmann area) LTLV (left temporal lobe variant) RTLV (right temporal lobe variant) x y z Z score x y z Z score Left temporal lobe Temporal pole (38) -39 16 -28 6.5 - -46 12 -15 5.7 - Middle temporal gyrus (21) -48 -13 -13 5.6 - -55 3 -31 5.3 - Inferior temporal gyrus (20) -44 -32 -24 7.4 -45 -31 -22 5.5 -57 -2 -32 5.3 - Fusiform gyrus (20/37) -34 -15 -36 7.7 -32 -16 -37 6.8 Amygdala/hippocampus -27 -16 -20 7.8 -23 -12 -16 6.1 -21 -9 -13 7.7 - Right temporal lobe Temporal pole (38) - 46 7 -21 5.7 Superior temporal gyrus (22) - 46 2 -19 5.7 Middle temporal gyrus (21) - 49 -22 -12 6.1 - 54 -24 -27 5.6 Inferior temporal gyrus (20) 44 -13 -43 5.3 48 12 -41 6.4 - 47 -17 -12 5.9 - 55 -26 -24 5.4 Fusiform gyrus (20/37) 39 -17 -28 5.1 38 -18 -23 7.2 - 35 -3 -40 5.9 Parahippocampal gyrus (36) 29 -11 -27 5 27 -26 -28 7.4 Amygdala/hippocampus 26 -12 -17 5.2 20 -10 -13 7.4 Basal ganglia Caudate L -8 13 8 5.1 - Insula L -33 -9 18 5.9 - R - 35 1 15 5.5 Regions showing gray matter atrophy at presentation in patients with anatomically defined left (LTLV) and right (RTLV) temporal lobe variant of SD compared to controls at a threshold of p < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons (SPM family-wise error-FWE). Table 3 Tensor-based morphometry results Brain regions that show progression of atrophy (brodmann area) LTLV (left temporal lobe variant) RTLV (right temporal lobe variant) x y z Z score x y z Z score Left temporal lobe Temporal pole (38) -34 6 -27 6.5 -32 5 -27 7.2 Inferior temporal gyrus (20) - -56 -10 -28 6.3 - -45 -41 -23 6.2 Fusiform gyrus (20/37) -33 -38 -24 6.4 -38 -37 -25 6.2 - -29 -43 -15 5.7 Lingual gyrus (37) -17 -44 -1 6.0 - Amygdala/hippocampus -30 -1 -14 5.9 -29 -2 -16 6.4 -19 -43 -2 6.7 Right temporal lobe Temporal pole (38) 32 21 -35 5.7 - 55 6 -13 5.3 - Superior temporal gyrus (22) - 58 -10 -1 5.0 Middle temporal gyrus (21) 57 -4 -24 5.3 - - 61 -30 -14 6.0 Inferior temporal gyrus (20) 40 0 -37 6.5 - Fusiform gyrus (20/37) 25 -27 -26 5.3 - Amygdala/hippocampus 19 -4 -22 6.2 - 32 4 -32 6.1 - Medial frontal lobe Ventromedial frontal cortex (25/11) L -8 16 -13 6.2 - R 8 16 -12 5.2 - Basal ganglia Caudate L -17 14 6 6.3 - R 19 13 9 6.0 - Thalamus R 15 -8 8 5.6 - Anterior insula L -27 13 -14 5.6 - Regions showing progressive gray matter contraction in patients with anatomically defined left (LTLV) and right (RTLV) temporal lobe variant of SD compared to controls at a threshold of p < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons (SPM family-wise error-FWE).  Figures and Tables Fig. 1 Example of main TBM pre-processing steps in a LTLV patient. (A) Presentation scan; (B) 1-year follow-up scan coregistered with the presentation scan; (C) Jacobian determinant map representing voxels of tissue expansion (voxel Jacobian value greater than 1) or contraction (voxel Jacobian value less than 1) from follow-up to presentation scan. Jacobian determinants were estimated by warping together the images A and B; (D) image representing gray matter volume changes between scans A and B. It was obtained by multiplying gray matter segment of the presentation scan with (Jacobian minus 1) values; (E) image D after normalization and smoothing process. Fig. 2 Whole-brain VBM analysis showing patterns of temporal gray matter atrophy in LTLV (A) and RTLV (B) patients compared with controls. Statistical maps are displayed on sections of the study-specific template used for normalization. The threshold for display is p < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons (SPM family-wise error—FWE). For display purpose, the result maps were multiplied by a binary inclusive mask derived by the GM a priori image. Fig. 3 Whole-brain TBM analysis showing patterns of GM atrophy progression in LTLV patients versus controls (A) and RTLV patients versus controls (B) over 1 year after diagnosis. Statistical maps are displayed on sections of the study-specific template used for normalization. The threshold for display is p < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons (SPM family-wise error—FWE). Table 1 Temporal volume Z scores, demographics and neuropsychological screening in LTLV and RTLV at Time 1 and Time 2 and in normal controls (NC) at Time 1 LTLV RTLV NC Time 1 Time 2 Time 1 Time 2 Time 1 Temporal volume Z scores Left temporal volume Z score -4.2 (1.5) -5.2 (1.4) -2.6 (1.1) § -3.6 (0.7) § - Right temporal volume Z score -1.7(1.7) -3.0 (2.2) -7.0 (1.6) § -8.2 (1.3) § - Demographics Age 62.0 (6.3) 63.1 (6.3) 62.5 (5.8) 63.5 (5.8) 64.8 (6.9) Education 16.6 (2.7) - 14.5 (6.1) - 17.0 (1.8) Sex (M/F) 9/4 - 3/3 - 9/16 Years between disease onset and Time 1 scan 3.2 (1.1) - 5.7 (3.7) - - Months between MRI scans 12.0 (2.6) - 12.4 (2.9) - 11.3 (2.1) Functional and cognitive status MMSE 22.0 (6.9) ° 21.2 (7.0) ° 27.0 (2.6) 21.8 (3.4) ° 29.6 (0.8) CDR total 0.4 (0.3) ° 0.5 (0.0) ° 0.5 (0.0) ° 1.0 (0.0) ° 0.0 (0.2) CDR box scores 1.9 (1.6) ° 3.3 (3.2) ° 3.0 (1.5) ° 6.5 (0.5) ° § 0.1 (0.4) Boston naming test (max =15) 3.9 (3.5) ° 1.7 (1.8) ° 5.0 (4.0) ° 2.0 (1.0) ° 14.7 (0.7) WAB auditory word recognition (max = 60) 47.8 (13.8) ° 36.2 (20.9) ° 58.0 (2.0) 52.0 (6.2) ° 60.0 (0.0) D-word verbal fluency (# words/min) 6.5 (4.5) ° 5.1 (3.8) ° 7.6 (1.8) ° 5.2 (2.9) ° 17.2 (5.7) Animal fluency (# words/min) 5.9 (2.8) ° 4.3 (2.2) ° 7.0 (4.9) ° 4.0 (2.9) ° 23.3 (5.8) Modified Rey-Osterrieth Copy (max = 17) 16.4 (0.9) 16.5 (0.7) 15.2 (1.5) 15.6 (1.5) 16.1 (1.1) Modified trails (# correct items) 12.6 (4.0) 12.8 (3.8) 14.0 (0.0) 10.8 (6.6) 14.0 (0.0) Digit backward 4.8 (1.0) 4.4 (0.9) ° 5.8 (0.5) § 5.3 (1.5) 5.7 (1.2) NPI Scale-Total Score 12.7 (5.0) * 18.0 (6.0) * 20.3 (2.5) * § 50.3 (7.7) * § - Scores are reported as mean raw score (standard deviation). Means and standard deviations were obtained only from patients evaluated at both time points. Cross-sectional analyses Abbreviations: MMSE: mini mental state examination; CDR: clinical dementia rating; NPI: neuropsychiatric inventory; WAB: western aphasia battery. ° p < 0.05 vs. NC (two-sample t -test) § p < 0.05 vs. LTLV at the same time point (two-sample t -test) * impaired performance according to current norms (scores in NC not available). Longitudinal analyses: bold and italics: p < 0.05 in Time 1 vs. Time 2 (paired t -test). Table 2 Voxel-based morphometry results Brain regions atrophic at Time 1 (brodmann area) LTLV (left temporal lobe variant) RTLV (right temporal lobe variant) x y z Z score x y z Z score Left temporal lobe Temporal pole (38) -39 16 -28 6.5 - -46 12 -15 5.7 - Middle temporal gyrus (21) -48 -13 -13 5.6 - -55 3 -31 5.3 - Inferior temporal gyrus (20) -44 -32 -24 7.4 -45 -31 -22 5.5 -57 -2 -32 5.3 - Fusiform gyrus (20/37) -34 -15 -36 7.7 -32 -16 -37 6.8 Amygdala/hippocampus -27 -16 -20 7.8 -23 -12 -16 6.1 -21 -9 -13 7.7 - Right temporal lobe Temporal pole (38) - 46 7 -21 5.7 Superior temporal gyrus (22) - 46 2 -19 5.7 Middle temporal gyrus (21) - 49 -22 -12 6.1 - 54 -24 -27 5.6 Inferior temporal gyrus (20) 44 -13 -43 5.3 48 12 -41 6.4 - 47 -17 -12 5.9 - 55 -26 -24 5.4 Fusiform gyrus (20/37) 39 -17 -28 5.1 38 -18 -23 7.2 - 35 -3 -40 5.9 Parahippocampal gyrus (36) 29 -11 -27 5 27 -26 -28 7.4 Amygdala/hippocampus 26 -12 -17 5.2 20 -10 -13 7.4 Basal ganglia Caudate L -8 13 8 5.1 - Insula L -33 -9 18 5.9 - R - 35 1 15 5.5 Regions showing gray matter atrophy at presentation in patients with anatomically defined left (LTLV) and right (RTLV) temporal lobe variant of SD compared to controls at a threshold of p < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons (SPM family-wise error-FWE). Table 3 Tensor-based morphometry results Brain regions that show progression of atrophy (brodmann area) LTLV (left temporal lobe variant) RTLV (right temporal lobe variant) x y z Z score x y z Z score Left temporal lobe Temporal pole (38) -34 6 -27 6.5 -32 5 -27 7.2 Inferior temporal gyrus (20) - -56 -10 -28 6.3 - -45 -41 -23 6.2 Fusiform gyrus (20/37) -33 -38 -24 6.4 -38 -37 -25 6.2 - -29 -43 -15 5.7 Lingual gyrus (37) -17 -44 -1 6.0 - Amygdala/hippocampus -30 -1 -14 5.9 -29 -2 -16 6.4 -19 -43 -2 6.7 Right temporal lobe Temporal pole (38) 32 21 -35 5.7 - 55 6 -13 5.3 - Superior temporal gyrus (22) - 58 -10 -1 5.0 Middle temporal gyrus (21) 57 -4 -24 5.3 - - 61 -30 -14 6.0 Inferior temporal gyrus (20) 40 0 -37 6.5 - Fusiform gyrus (20/37) 25 -27 -26 5.3 - Amygdala/hippocampus 19 -4 -22 6.2 - 32 4 -32 6.1 - Medial frontal lobe Ventromedial frontal cortex (25/11) L -8 16 -13 6.2 - R 8 16 -12 5.2 - Basal ganglia Caudate L -17 14 6 6.3 - R 19 13 9 6.0 - Thalamus R 15 -8 8 5.6 - Anterior insula L -27 13 -14 5.6 - Regions showing progressive gray matter contraction in patients with anatomically defined left (LTLV) and right (RTLV) temporal lobe variant of SD compared to controls at a threshold of p < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons (SPM family-wise error-FWE). 