Aquaporins and cell migration Aquaporin (AQP) water channels are expressed primarily in cell plasma membranes. In this paper, we review recent evidence that AQPs facilitate cell migration. AQP-dependent cell migration has been found in a variety of cell types in vitro and in mice in vivo. AQP1 deletion reduces endothelial cell migration, limiting tumor angiogenesis and growth. AQP4 deletion slows the migration of reactive astrocytes, impairing glial scarring after brain stab injury. AQP1-expressing tumor cells have enhanced metastatic potential and local infiltration. Impaired cell migration has also been seen in AQP1-deficient proximal tubule epithelial cells, and AQP3-deficient corneal epithelial cells, enterocytes, and skin keratinocytes. The mechanisms by which AQPs enhance cell migration are under investigation. We propose that, as a consequence of actin polymerization/depolymerization and transmembrane ionic fluxes, the cytoplasm adjacent to the leading edge of migrating cells undergoes rapid changes in osmolality. AQPs could thus facilitate osmotic water flow across the plasma membrane in cell protrusions that form during migration. AQP-dependent cell migration has potentially broad implications in angiogenesis, tumor metastasis, wound healing, glial scarring, and other events requiring rapid, directed cell movement. AQP inhibitors may thus have therapeutic potential in modulating these events, such as slowing tumor growth and spread, and reducing glial scarring after injury to allow neuronal regeneration.  Conclusions A growing body of evidence suggests that AQPs facilitate cell migration. Despite the involvement of AQP1 in endothelial cell migration and AQP4 in astrocyte migration, AQP1- and AQP4-null mice develop normally, indicating that AQPs are not an absolute requirement for cell migration. Rather, AQPs are conducive to migration by facilitating the rapid cell volume changes and augmenting cell propulsion as discussed above. Even in the absence of AQPs, water still crosses the cell membrane through the lipid bilayer, albeit more slowly than through AQP pores, so that cell migration still occurs at a lower speed. For example, we found recently that retinal angiogenesis in a neonatal hyperoxia model is AQP1-independent [ 29 ], indicating that AQPs are not essential for cell migration. The emerging roles of water movement in cell migration are not only important in our mechanistic understanding of the migration process, but may also have a wide range of therapeutic implications including augmentation of wound healing (AQP3 activator), reduction of glial scarring and glioma infiltration (AQP4 inhibitor), and reduction of tumor growth (AQP1 inhibitor). Currently, non-toxic AQP-modulating drugs are not available, but their search is the subject of considerable interest. 