Redox Signals in Wound Healing Physical trauma represents one of the most primitive challenges that threatened survival. Healing a problem wound requires a multi-faceted comprehensive approach. First and foremost, the wound environment will have to be made receptive to therapies. Second, the appropriate therapeutic regimen needs to be identified and provided while managing systemic limitations that could secondarily limit the healing response. Unfortunately, most current solutions seem to aim at designing therapeutic regimen with little or no consideration of the specific details of the wound environment and systemic limitations. One factor that is centrally important in making the wound environment receptive is correction of wound hypoxia. Recent work have identified that oxygen is not only required to disinfect wounds and fuel healing but that oxygen-dependent redox-sensitive signaling processes represent an integral component of the healing cascade. Over a decade ago, it was proposed that in biological systems oxidants are not necessarily always the triggers for oxidative damage and that oxidants such as H2O2 could actually serve as signaling messengers and drive several aspects of cellular signaling. Today, that concept is much more developed and mature. Evidence supporting the role of oxidants such as H2O2 as signaling messenger is compelling. A complete understanding of the continuum between the classical and emergent roles of oxygen requires a thorough consideration of current concepts in redox biology. The objective of this review is to describe our current understanding of how redox-sensitive processes may drive dermal tissue repair.  Conclusion In sum, numerous aspects of wound healing are subject to redox control. Thus, development of a thorough understanding of how endogenous ROS generated in wound related cells may influence the healing process becomes critically important. Such an understanding could result in novel redox-based strategies to treat wounds. Current results with growth factor therapy of wounds do not meet expectations. Many of these growth factors, like PDGF, rely on ROS for functioning. Thus, redox-based strategies may serve as effective adjuncts to jump-start healing of a chronic wound. Hypoxia being a characteristic feature of most problem wounds, it is reasonable to assume that correction of wound p O2 may facilitate generation of endogenous ROS by NADPH oxidases in wound related phagocytic and non-phagocytic cells. Therapeutic modalities relying on up-regulating ROS generation in the wound microenvironment will have to be dealt with caution. While a window of opportunity seems to exist under conditions of low concentrations of ROS, high levels of ROS clearly have the potential to complicate regeneration and remodeling of nascent tissue.  Figure Figure 1 Overview of the major redox-sensitive events in cutaneous wound healing See text for details. 