The Role of Viral and Bacterial Pathogens in Gastrointestinal Cancer The association of Helicobacter pylori ( H. pylori ) with gastric cancer is thus far the best understood model to comprehend the causal relationship between a microbial pathogen and cancer in the human gastrointestinal tract. Besides H. pylori , a variety of other pathogens are now being recognized as potential carcinogens in different settings of human cancer. In this context, viral causes of human cancers are central to the issue since these account for 10–20% of cancers worldwide. In the case of H. pylori and gastric cancer, as well as the human papillomavirus and anal cancer, the causal relationship between the infectious agent and the related cancer in the gastrointestinal tract has been clearly confirmed by epidemiological and experimental studies. Similarly, Epstein–Barr virus and the oncogenic JC virus are being suggested as possible causative agents for cancers in the upper and lower gastrointestinal tract. This review discusses various viral and microbial pathogens and their oncogenic properties in the evolution of gastrointestinal carcinogenesis and summarizes the available experimental data make a convincing agreement favoring the associations between infectious agents and specific human cancers.  Conclusion Research over the last 20 years has shown that viruses and bacterial pathogens are either definitive causative agents or play at least a major role in the etiology of many gastrointestinal cancers ( Table 2 ). Improved abilities to detect and analyze microbial gene products will make it ever more likely to implicate novel microbial pathogens in human cancers in the future. In particular, the era of AIDS and the increased number of organ transplantations will highlight the role of immunosuppression in carcinogenesis, leading to an increasing appreciation of virus related cancers, much in the way Kaposi sarcoma has been elucidated. On the other hand, life style changes and the introduction of new, powerful biological therapeutic agents may relate new viruses and bacteria to human cancers. The increasing number of studies indicating that viruses might represent a key factor in cancer development and progression open new perspectives on how to tackle each disease and, more importantly, to prevent or treat them. However, the immense challenge for the future research on pathogens and their role in gastrointestinal cancers will be to translate all the in vitro findings into in vivo results. The in vivo proof is critical and will allow us to test new potential drugs or to develop effective vaccines against viral and bacterial pathogens. However, while this has been achieved with the model of H. pylori and gastric cancer, it still represents a big challenge for viral-associated gastrointestinal cancers, in particular for the lack of viable animal models. The example of cervical cancer and the effective vaccination against HPV has proven that the incidence of a life threatening cancer can be reduced by tackling a viral pathogen ( Koutsky et al., 2002 ). The fact that H. pylori eradication has the potential to reduce the risk of gastric cancer development, is an indication of how basic research can be translated into medical practice, and this has major implications for the future directions of public health ( Roderick et al., 2003 ; Ford et al., 2005 ; Malfertheiner et al., 2005 ; Fry et al., 2007 ). Thus, the future challenge will be to clearly demonstrate a causative role of viral pathogens in gastrointestinal cancers and eventually to design appropriate vaccines and antiviral agents.  Tables TABLE 1 Human genetic polymorphisms, associated with an increased of gastric cancer development Genetic polymorphism Studied population Finding References Angiotensinogen gene 20 (AGT) GC (n =135), GU (n =148), ?DU (n =113) Carriage of the AGT 20 allele is associated ?with increased GC risk, especially intestinal type GC Sugimoto et al. (2007) Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) 248 GC, 1,523 patients with ?precancerous lesions Elevated risk of GC, in association with ?COX-2 genotypes withhigh levels of COX-2 expression Liu et al. (2006) Human leukocyte antigen ?(HLA) DQ DR GC (n =130) HLA DQ allele is associated with decreased ?risk of H. pylori infection, HLA DR allele expression ?is a risk factor for GC Magnusson et al. (2001) IL-1 gene cluster GC (n =366) IL-1 gene cluster polymorphisms are associated ?with enhanced IL-1? production, which leads to ?an increased risk of both hypochlorhydria and GC El-Omar et al. (2000) IL-8 Non-cardia GC (n =212), (GU) ?(n =153), (DU) (n =130), ?gastritis (n = 195) IL-8 polymorphism carrier are at higher risk for GC, ?GU and progression of gastric atrophy Ohyauchi et al. (2005) Matrix metalloproteinase ?7 (MMP7) GC (n =79) Genotype distribution of MMP-7 is associated ?with H. pylori and tumor-related survival of patients Kubben et al. (2006) NOD-like receptor 2 H. pylori associated low-grade ?lymphoma (n = 83) Polymorphism in NOD2 gene increases risk of ?gastric lymphoma Rosenstiel et al. (2006) TNF-alpha Chronic gastritis (n = 221), ?GC (n = 287) Carriers of the TNF-alpha-308* A allele are ?at increased risk of GC; high-risk genotypes ?at 3 loci are at increased risk for chronic ?atrophic gastritis and GC Machado et al. (2003) Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) 149 relatives of GC patients ?with premalignant gastric ?changes, 2 independent ?Caucasian population ?(312 non-cardia GC, ?184 non-cardia GC, 123 cardia GC) Carrier of TLR-4 polymorphisms have ?an increased risk of non-cardia GC and its ?precursor lesions (no association was ?observed for cardia GC) Hold et al. (2007) GC, gastric cancer; GU, gastric ulcer; DU, duodenal ulcer. TABLE 2 Viruses and microbes in gastrointestinal cancers Localization Microbial pathogen Evidence Comment Esophageal cancer HPV (++) Frequent detection of HPV-16,-18, but lack of in-vivo data JCV (+) Detection of T-Ag in cancer tissues, but so far only one report EBV (?) Low or no detection of EBV Gastric cancer H. pylori (+++) Confirmed evidence by epidemiological, experimental studies and few clinical trials EBV (++) Strong evidence for a subset of gastric cancer, but no expression of several EBV oncogenes JCV (+) Detection of T-Ag in cancer tissues with high viral copy numbers, but so far only two reports Colon cancer JCV (++) T-Ag expression in about 50% of colon cancer specimens Anal cancer HPV (+++) HPV DNA in 70–100% of anal cancer; mainly HPV-16, ?18 ? no evidence; + weak evidence; ++ strong evidence; +++ confirmed evidence. 