?-Arrestins specifically constrain ?2-adrenergic receptor signaling and function in airway smooth muscle Chronic use of inhaled beta-agonists by asthmatics is associated with a loss of bronchoprotective effect and deterioration of asthma control. Beta-agonist-promoted desensitization of airway smooth muscle beta-2-adrenergic receptors, mediated by G protein-coupled receptor kinases and arrestins, is presumed to underlie these effects, but such a mechanism has never been demonstrated. Using in vitro , ex vivo , and in vivo murine models, we demonstrate that beta-arrestin-2 gene ablation augments beta-agonist-mediated airway smooth muscle relaxation, while augmenting beta-agonist-stimulated cyclic adenosine monophosphate production. In cultures of human airway smooth muscle, small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of arrestins also augments beta-agonist-stimulated cyclic adenosine monophosphate production. Interestingly, signaling and function mediated by m2/m3 muscarinic acetylcholine receptors or prostaglandin E2 receptors were not affected by either beta-arrestin-2 knockout or arrestin knockdown. Thus, arrestins are selective regulators of beta-2-adrenergic receptor signaling and function in airway smooth muscle. These results and our previous findings, which demonstrate a role for arrestins in the development of allergic inflammation in the lung, identify arrestins as potentially important therapeutic targets for obstructive airway diseases.—Deshpande, D. A., Theriot, B. S., Penn, R. B., Walker, J. K. L. ?-Arrestins specifically constrain ?2-adrenergic receptor signaling and function in airway smooth muscle.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Generation of ?arr-2-knockout (?arr-2-KO) mice ?arr-2-KO mice were generated as described previously ( 11 ) and backcrossed for six generations onto the C57BL/6 background. ?arr-2-KO and wild-type (WT) sibling pairs aged 10–16 wk were used for in vivo measurement of lung function, ex vivo measurement of tracheal contraction, and isolation of ASM cells under protocols approved by the Animal Care and Use Committees at Duke University and Wake Forest University Health Sciences. ?arr-2 gene ablation was confirmed by triplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Immunoblotting Mouse lung was pulverized in liquid nitrogen and solubilized in radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer. Tissue lysates were buffered with Laemmli solution and sonicated, and equal amounts of total protein (as measured by a DC protein assay read at 750 nm; Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) were loaded and separated on 10% Tris-glycine polyacryl-amide gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes for immunoblotting. ?-Arrestins were detected with the polyclonal Ab A2CT (generous gift from Robert J. Lefkowitz, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA). A2CT preferentially recognizes ?arr-2 over ?arr-1. Chemiluminescent detection was performed with horseradish peroxidase-coupled secondary Ab (Amersham Biosciences, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) and SuperSignal West Femto reagent (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). Chemiluminescence was quantified by a charge-coupled device camera (Syngene, Frederick, MD, USA ); representative images are shown as inverted grayscale. For immunoblots of lysates from cultured human ASM cells, blots were probed with Arr178 antibody (generous gift from Jeffrey L. Benovic, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA) and an IRDye 800 secondary antibody (Rockland Immunochemicals, Gilbertsville, PA, USA) conjugated with an infrared fluorophore. Bands were visualized and signals (infrared emission) quantified directly using the Odyssey Infrared Imaging System (Li-Cor, Lincoln, NE, USA), as described previously ( 12 ). Mouse lung and ASM membrane preparation To prepare ASM membranes, tracheae and bronchi were dissected free of loose connective tissue and lung parenchyma, and the epithelium was denuded. The tissue was placed in ice-cold buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, and 5 mM EDTA, pH 8.0) containing protease inhibitors and homogenized using a Polytron tissue homogenizer (Brinkmann Instruments, Inc., Westbury, NY) at setting 8 for 3 × 10 s periods. The resulting homogenate was spun at 250 g for 10 min at 4°C, the low-speed pellet was discarded, and the supernatant was centrifuged at 18,000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C. The pellet was resuspended in binding buffer (75 mM Tris-HCl, 2 mM EDTA, 12.5 mM MgCl2) at a concentration of 0.5 to 1.0 mg protein/ml (protein concentration was determined by the method of Bradford, using bovine serum albumin as the standard). Membranes from peripheral lung were similarly prepared after dissecting away major airways and blood vessels. ?-AR radioligand binding ?-AR radioligand binding studies were performed in fresh lung and ASM membranes by use of the nonselective ?-AR antagonist [125I]-labeled cyanopindolol (125I-CYP), as described previously ( 13 ). Maximal binding (Bmax) was measured by use of a saturating amount of 125I-CYP on 20 ?g of membrane protein, incubating 40 min at 37°C. Inclusion of 25 ?M propranolol defined nonspecific binding. Assays were stopped by dilution with 5 ml of ice-cold binding buffer and rapid filtration over glass fiber filters, followed by four 5-ml washes, before counting in a gamma counter. Total binding represented <10% of 125I-CYP counts added. Specific binding, which was calculated as the difference between triplicate averages of total and nonspecific counts bound to the filters, comprised on average 64% and 96% of total binding for ASM and lung, respectively. Lung function measurements Contractile and relaxation responsiveness of airways to methacholine and albuterol were determined as described previously ( 14 ). Briefly, mice were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of pentobarbital sodium (60 mg/kg) diluted 50% with saline, then surgically prepared with a tracheal cannula and a jugular vein catheter. Mice were paralyzed with pancuronium bromide (0.25 mg/kg) and ventilated with 100% oxygen at a constant volume of 6–8 ml/kg and a frequency of 165 breaths/min. These ventilator settings resulted in an average resting peak tracheal pressure of 6.5 ± 0.1 cm H2O and have been previously shown to provide normal arterial blood gases. Airway pressure was measured at a side port of the tracheal cannula connected to a Validyne differential pressure transducer (Validyne Engineering, Northridge, CA, USA). The time-integrated change in peak tracheal pressure, or airway pressure time index (APTI) ( 15 , 16 ), was calculated for a 60 s period from the point at which tracheal pressure began to increase in response to methacholine (MCh). Anesthetized and paralyzed mice were intravenously administered 50 ?g/kg MCh as a contractile priming dose. This was followed by two consecutive intravenous administrations of 100 ?g/kg MCh alone and administration of a combined preparation of either 100 ?g/kg MCh and 30 ?g/kg albuterol or 100 ?g/kg MCh and 5 ?g/kg prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). Each drug administration was separated by a 5-min interval. The response to MCh in the presence of albuterol or PGE2 was reduced compared to the contractile response to MCh alone, and the percent change was calculated and used to determine the net decrease in the MCh-induced airway response. <italic>Ex vivo</italic> ASM tension development Murine tracheae excised after euthanasia by CO2 inhalation were cleaned of surrounding connective tissue and mounted into a multiwire myograph chamber in Krebs-Henseleit solution (pH 7.40 –7.45) maintained at 37°C with 5% CO2 and 95% O2, with frequent changing of the solution. The chambers were mounted onto the Myo-Interface (model 610 M) and connected to the transducer and PowerLab (ADInstruments, Colorado Springs, CO, USA) for data transferring and recording. Chart5 software for Windows (ADInstruments) was used to collect and analyze the data. A basal tension of 0.5 g was set, and the tracheal rings were stimulated with 10 ?M MCh for 5 min. The rings were washed, and preload was reset to 0.5 g for 30 min. After stabilization, the tracheal rings were stimulated with 10 ?M MCh and allowed to contract for 10 min. Stimulation of the rings with 10 ?M MCh produces ~80% maximum tension in the rings, as determined previously ( 15 ). Subsequently, the precontracted rings were stimulated with increasing concentrations of isoproterenol (ISO) or PGE2 for 5 min and tension was recorded. In a select set of experiments, the precontracted rings were stimulated with 10 ?M forskolin (FSK). In another set of experiments, the rings were contracted with 60 mM KCl for 5 min and subsequently stimulated with 1 ?M MCh for 5 min. The net contractile responses were determined by subtracting the basal tension from that of the peak tension on agonist stimulation, and the change in the tension was normalized to the wet weight of the tracheal ring segment. Relaxation responses were calculated as percentage change in MCh-induced tension on stimulation with different concentrations of relaxant agents. Generation of murine and human ASM cultures Human ASM cell cultures were generated from tissue obtained at autopsy, as described previously ( 13 ), and cultures in passages 5–7 were examined. For generation of murine ASM cultures, tracheae harvested from 5 mice were cleaned of surrounding tissues and pooled to isolate ASM cells using the above procedure for human ASM cultures with minor modifications, as described recently ( 17 ). ASM cells were characterized by immunostaining using anti-?-actin and anti-smooth muscle myosin heavy-chain antibodies. Small interfering (si)RNA-mediated knockdown of ?-arrestins in ASM siRNA oligos were designed based on human ?arr-1/2 nucleotide sequence (sense, 5? ACC UGC GCC UUC CGC UAU GTT 3? antisense, 5? CAU AGC GGA AGG CGC AGG UTT 3?), as described previously ( 18 ). Control (scrambled) or ?arr-1/2 siRNA oligos were annealed at 37°C for 1 h, and 5 ?g of the annealed oligo mixtures was used to transfect HASM cells by electroporation (Amaxa Biosystems, Gaithersburg, MD, USA), as described previously ( 13 ). Twenty-four hours after transfection, the cells were replated for subsequent assessment of ?arr-1/2 protein expression by immunoblot analysis. Measurement of intracellular cAMP accumulation, phosphoinositide hydrolysis For analyses of regulation of intracellular cAMP accumulation, murine or human ASM cells plated in 24-well plates were grown to near confluence and serum starved for 24 h. The cells were stimulated with various concentrations of ISO, PGE2, or FSK in phosphate-buffered saline containing 300 ?M ascorbic acid and 1 mM RO-20–1724 (phosphodiesterase inhibitor) at 37°C for 0–10 min. cAMP was extracted and quantified by RIA using 125I-cAMP and anti-cAMP antibody, as described previously ( 13 ). All conditions were assayed in triplicate wells and duplicate RIA tubes. Analysis of agonist-stimulated phosphoinositide (PI) hydrolysis in murine ASM cultures was performed as described previously ( 17 ). Cells were plated and serum starved as above and loaded with 2 ?Ci/ml myo-[3H]inositol for 18 h. After washing with phosphate-buffered saline, the cells were incubated with DMEM containing 5 mM LiCl for 10 min, then stimulated with vehicle or the muscarinic receptor agonist carbachol (CCh; 10 ?M) for 30 min. Reactions were quenched with 20 mM formic acid, and inositol and phosphoinositide (PI) fractions were separated by anion exchange chromatography. PI production was calculated by dividing PI fraction by total (PI + inositol) inositol fraction, and the data were reported as fold basal (agonist-stimulated/vehicle). PI hydrolysis was not examined in human ASM cells due to the rapid loss of m3 mAChRs that occurs with culture ( 19 ). Statistical analysis Data analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism (San Diego, CA, USA), and data are expressed as means ± se . Group comparisons were performed using 2-way ANOVA or Student's t test where appropriate, with a value of P < 0.05 sufficient to reject the null hypothesis.  Generation of ?arr-2-knockout (?arr-2-KO) mice ?arr-2-KO mice were generated as described previously ( 11 ) and backcrossed for six generations onto the C57BL/6 background. ?arr-2-KO and wild-type (WT) sibling pairs aged 10–16 wk were used for in vivo measurement of lung function, ex vivo measurement of tracheal contraction, and isolation of ASM cells under protocols approved by the Animal Care and Use Committees at Duke University and Wake Forest University Health Sciences. ?arr-2 gene ablation was confirmed by triplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR).  Immunoblotting Mouse lung was pulverized in liquid nitrogen and solubilized in radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer. Tissue lysates were buffered with Laemmli solution and sonicated, and equal amounts of total protein (as measured by a DC protein assay read at 750 nm; Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) were loaded and separated on 10% Tris-glycine polyacryl-amide gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes for immunoblotting. ?-Arrestins were detected with the polyclonal Ab A2CT (generous gift from Robert J. Lefkowitz, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA). A2CT preferentially recognizes ?arr-2 over ?arr-1. Chemiluminescent detection was performed with horseradish peroxidase-coupled secondary Ab (Amersham Biosciences, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) and SuperSignal West Femto reagent (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). Chemiluminescence was quantified by a charge-coupled device camera (Syngene, Frederick, MD, USA ); representative images are shown as inverted grayscale. For immunoblots of lysates from cultured human ASM cells, blots were probed with Arr178 antibody (generous gift from Jeffrey L. Benovic, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA) and an IRDye 800 secondary antibody (Rockland Immunochemicals, Gilbertsville, PA, USA) conjugated with an infrared fluorophore. Bands were visualized and signals (infrared emission) quantified directly using the Odyssey Infrared Imaging System (Li-Cor, Lincoln, NE, USA), as described previously ( 12 ).  Mouse lung and ASM membrane preparation To prepare ASM membranes, tracheae and bronchi were dissected free of loose connective tissue and lung parenchyma, and the epithelium was denuded. The tissue was placed in ice-cold buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, and 5 mM EDTA, pH 8.0) containing protease inhibitors and homogenized using a Polytron tissue homogenizer (Brinkmann Instruments, Inc., Westbury, NY) at setting 8 for 3 × 10 s periods. The resulting homogenate was spun at 250 g for 10 min at 4°C, the low-speed pellet was discarded, and the supernatant was centrifuged at 18,000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C. The pellet was resuspended in binding buffer (75 mM Tris-HCl, 2 mM EDTA, 12.5 mM MgCl2) at a concentration of 0.5 to 1.0 mg protein/ml (protein concentration was determined by the method of Bradford, using bovine serum albumin as the standard). Membranes from peripheral lung were similarly prepared after dissecting away major airways and blood vessels.  ?-AR radioligand binding ?-AR radioligand binding studies were performed in fresh lung and ASM membranes by use of the nonselective ?-AR antagonist [125I]-labeled cyanopindolol (125I-CYP), as described previously ( 13 ). Maximal binding (Bmax) was measured by use of a saturating amount of 125I-CYP on 20 ?g of membrane protein, incubating 40 min at 37°C. Inclusion of 25 ?M propranolol defined nonspecific binding. Assays were stopped by dilution with 5 ml of ice-cold binding buffer and rapid filtration over glass fiber filters, followed by four 5-ml washes, before counting in a gamma counter. Total binding represented <10% of 125I-CYP counts added. Specific binding, which was calculated as the difference between triplicate averages of total and nonspecific counts bound to the filters, comprised on average 64% and 96% of total binding for ASM and lung, respectively.  Lung function measurements Contractile and relaxation responsiveness of airways to methacholine and albuterol were determined as described previously ( 14 ). Briefly, mice were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of pentobarbital sodium (60 mg/kg) diluted 50% with saline, then surgically prepared with a tracheal cannula and a jugular vein catheter. Mice were paralyzed with pancuronium bromide (0.25 mg/kg) and ventilated with 100% oxygen at a constant volume of 6–8 ml/kg and a frequency of 165 breaths/min. These ventilator settings resulted in an average resting peak tracheal pressure of 6.5 ± 0.1 cm H2O and have been previously shown to provide normal arterial blood gases. Airway pressure was measured at a side port of the tracheal cannula connected to a Validyne differential pressure transducer (Validyne Engineering, Northridge, CA, USA). The time-integrated change in peak tracheal pressure, or airway pressure time index (APTI) ( 15 , 16 ), was calculated for a 60 s period from the point at which tracheal pressure began to increase in response to methacholine (MCh). Anesthetized and paralyzed mice were intravenously administered 50 ?g/kg MCh as a contractile priming dose. This was followed by two consecutive intravenous administrations of 100 ?g/kg MCh alone and administration of a combined preparation of either 100 ?g/kg MCh and 30 ?g/kg albuterol or 100 ?g/kg MCh and 5 ?g/kg prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). Each drug administration was separated by a 5-min interval. The response to MCh in the presence of albuterol or PGE2 was reduced compared to the contractile response to MCh alone, and the percent change was calculated and used to determine the net decrease in the MCh-induced airway response.  <italic>Ex vivo</italic> ASM tension development Murine tracheae excised after euthanasia by CO2 inhalation were cleaned of surrounding connective tissue and mounted into a multiwire myograph chamber in Krebs-Henseleit solution (pH 7.40 –7.45) maintained at 37°C with 5% CO2 and 95% O2, with frequent changing of the solution. The chambers were mounted onto the Myo-Interface (model 610 M) and connected to the transducer and PowerLab (ADInstruments, Colorado Springs, CO, USA) for data transferring and recording. Chart5 software for Windows (ADInstruments) was used to collect and analyze the data. A basal tension of 0.5 g was set, and the tracheal rings were stimulated with 10 ?M MCh for 5 min. The rings were washed, and preload was reset to 0.5 g for 30 min. After stabilization, the tracheal rings were stimulated with 10 ?M MCh and allowed to contract for 10 min. Stimulation of the rings with 10 ?M MCh produces ~80% maximum tension in the rings, as determined previously ( 15 ). Subsequently, the precontracted rings were stimulated with increasing concentrations of isoproterenol (ISO) or PGE2 for 5 min and tension was recorded. In a select set of experiments, the precontracted rings were stimulated with 10 ?M forskolin (FSK). In another set of experiments, the rings were contracted with 60 mM KCl for 5 min and subsequently stimulated with 1 ?M MCh for 5 min. The net contractile responses were determined by subtracting the basal tension from that of the peak tension on agonist stimulation, and the change in the tension was normalized to the wet weight of the tracheal ring segment. Relaxation responses were calculated as percentage change in MCh-induced tension on stimulation with different concentrations of relaxant agents.  Generation of murine and human ASM cultures Human ASM cell cultures were generated from tissue obtained at autopsy, as described previously ( 13 ), and cultures in passages 5–7 were examined. For generation of murine ASM cultures, tracheae harvested from 5 mice were cleaned of surrounding tissues and pooled to isolate ASM cells using the above procedure for human ASM cultures with minor modifications, as described recently ( 17 ). ASM cells were characterized by immunostaining using anti-?-actin and anti-smooth muscle myosin heavy-chain antibodies.  Small interfering (si)RNA-mediated knockdown of ?-arrestins in ASM siRNA oligos were designed based on human ?arr-1/2 nucleotide sequence (sense, 5? ACC UGC GCC UUC CGC UAU GTT 3? antisense, 5? CAU AGC GGA AGG CGC AGG UTT 3?), as described previously ( 18 ). Control (scrambled) or ?arr-1/2 siRNA oligos were annealed at 37°C for 1 h, and 5 ?g of the annealed oligo mixtures was used to transfect HASM cells by electroporation (Amaxa Biosystems, Gaithersburg, MD, USA), as described previously ( 13 ). Twenty-four hours after transfection, the cells were replated for subsequent assessment of ?arr-1/2 protein expression by immunoblot analysis.  Measurement of intracellular cAMP accumulation, phosphoinositide hydrolysis For analyses of regulation of intracellular cAMP accumulation, murine or human ASM cells plated in 24-well plates were grown to near confluence and serum starved for 24 h. The cells were stimulated with various concentrations of ISO, PGE2, or FSK in phosphate-buffered saline containing 300 ?M ascorbic acid and 1 mM RO-20–1724 (phosphodiesterase inhibitor) at 37°C for 0–10 min. cAMP was extracted and quantified by RIA using 125I-cAMP and anti-cAMP antibody, as described previously ( 13 ). All conditions were assayed in triplicate wells and duplicate RIA tubes. Analysis of agonist-stimulated phosphoinositide (PI) hydrolysis in murine ASM cultures was performed as described previously ( 17 ). Cells were plated and serum starved as above and loaded with 2 ?Ci/ml myo-[3H]inositol for 18 h. After washing with phosphate-buffered saline, the cells were incubated with DMEM containing 5 mM LiCl for 10 min, then stimulated with vehicle or the muscarinic receptor agonist carbachol (CCh; 10 ?M) for 30 min. Reactions were quenched with 20 mM formic acid, and inositol and phosphoinositide (PI) fractions were separated by anion exchange chromatography. PI production was calculated by dividing PI fraction by total (PI + inositol) inositol fraction, and the data were reported as fold basal (agonist-stimulated/vehicle). PI hydrolysis was not examined in human ASM cells due to the rapid loss of m3 mAChRs that occurs with culture ( 19 ).  Statistical analysis Data analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism (San Diego, CA, USA), and data are expressed as means ± se . Group comparisons were performed using 2-way ANOVA or Student's t test where appropriate, with a value of P < 0.05 sufficient to reject the null hypothesis.  RESULTS Arrestin knockout and knockdown in ASM cells enhances ?-AR signaling To assess arrestin-dependent regulation of ?-AR signaling in ASM cells, ASM cultures derived from ?arr-2-KO mice tracheae and human ASM cultures derived from multiple donors were generated. As shown in Fig. 1 A , ?arr-1 and ?arr-2 are both expressed in WT mouse lung, whereas ?arr-2-KO mice lack the faster migrating (~46.3 kDa predicted and 55 kDa observed, ?arr-2) band in immunoblots. Relative to that observed for ASM cultures derived from WT mice, cAMP accumulation in ?arr-2-KO ASM cultures in response to ISO stimulation was significantly greater at all concentrations ?10 nM tested ( Fig. 1 B , C ). FSK-stimulated cAMP accumulation was unaffected by ?arr-2 knockout, suggesting differences in ISO-stimulated cAMP accumulation were a result of regulation of the ?2AR locus. Conversely, PGE2 stimulated a low level of cAMP accumulation that was similar in both WT and ?arr-2-KO ASM cultures (data not shown), and ?arr-2 knockout also failed to affect phosphoinositide hydrolysis stimulated by mAChR activation ( Fig. 1 D ). To determine whether ?2AR signaling was similarly regulated by arrestins in human ASM, five distinct cultures derived from five different donor tracheae were transfected with siRNA oligonucleotides targeting ?arr-1 and -2. Immunoblot analysis of culture lysates harvested 96 h after transfection reveals significant knockdown of arrestin expression relative to that in control cells transfected with control oligos ( Fig. 2 A ). ?arr-1 expression is readily detected in human ASM cultures and is significantly reduced (73±2%, n =5) by siRNA-mediated knockdown. ?arr-2 expression is either absent or at the limit of detection in human ASM cultures; a faint, faster migrating band (relative to the ?arr-1 band) is suggested in some blots but is not consistently recognized whether blots are probed with Arr178 Ab or more ?arr-2-selective antibodies (not shown). cAMP accumulation stimulated by submaximal concentrations of beta-agonist was not significantly affected by arrestin knockdown (not shown) but that stimulated by 1 ?M ISO was significantly increased ( Fig. 2 B ). Conversely, PGE2-stimulated cAMP accumulation in human ASM cultures was slightly inhibited by arrestin knockdown, and FSK-stimulated cAMP accumulation was unaffected ( Fig. 2 B ). Arrestin knockout augments relaxant effect of beta-agonist on contracted ASM <italic>ex vivo</italic> and <italic>in vivo</italic> To assess arrestin-dependent regulation of ?2AR-mediated function in ASM, regulation of ASM contraction in excised tracheal rings was characterized. Tension generation stimulated by MCh was similar in rings from WT and ?arr-2-KO mice, as was KCl-mediated contraction ( Fig. 3 A ). However, ISO-mediated relaxation of MCh-induced contraction was significantly greater in rings from ?arr-2-KO mice compared to that in WT rings ( Fig. 3 B ). Conversely, PGE2- and FSK-mediated relaxation was not significantly different between groups. Regulation of ?2AR function in vivo was characterized by assessing albuterol-mediated changes in MCh-stimulated airway responsiveness. MCh challenge increased airway responsiveness (APTI) to a similar degree in both WT and ?arr-2-KO mice (52.1±5.5 vs . 48.4±3.0 cm H2O × s in WT and ?arr-2-KO groups, respectively). Albuterol (30 ?g/kg) treatment significantly inhibited MCh-induced increases in airway responsiveness for both WT and ?arr-2-KO mice. However, this reduction was significantly greater in ?arr-2-KO mice compared to that in WT controls ( Fig. 4 ). Conversely, PGE2 treatment significantly reduced MCh-induced airway responsiveness, but ?arr-2 knockout did not alter this effect. Arrestin knockout does not alter lung or ASM ?-AR density We examined total ?-AR density ( Table 1 ). The maximum concentration of ?-AR binding sites (Bmax) to tracheal smooth muscle membranes was not different between WT and ?arr-2-KO mice (80.3±25.2 and 88.9±13.8 fmol/mg protein, respectively). Similarly, WT and ?arr-2-KO mice expressed similar levels of ?-AR in whole lung membranes (444±56 and 471±38 fmol/mg protein, respectively).  RESULTS Arrestin knockout and knockdown in ASM cells enhances ?-AR signaling To assess arrestin-dependent regulation of ?-AR signaling in ASM cells, ASM cultures derived from ?arr-2-KO mice tracheae and human ASM cultures derived from multiple donors were generated. As shown in Fig. 1 A , ?arr-1 and ?arr-2 are both expressed in WT mouse lung, whereas ?arr-2-KO mice lack the faster migrating (~46.3 kDa predicted and 55 kDa observed, ?arr-2) band in immunoblots. Relative to that observed for ASM cultures derived from WT mice, cAMP accumulation in ?arr-2-KO ASM cultures in response to ISO stimulation was significantly greater at all concentrations ?10 nM tested ( Fig. 1 B , C ). FSK-stimulated cAMP accumulation was unaffected by ?arr-2 knockout, suggesting differences in ISO-stimulated cAMP accumulation were a result of regulation of the ?2AR locus. Conversely, PGE2 stimulated a low level of cAMP accumulation that was similar in both WT and ?arr-2-KO ASM cultures (data not shown), and ?arr-2 knockout also failed to affect phosphoinositide hydrolysis stimulated by mAChR activation ( Fig. 1 D ). To determine whether ?2AR signaling was similarly regulated by arrestins in human ASM, five distinct cultures derived from five different donor tracheae were transfected with siRNA oligonucleotides targeting ?arr-1 and -2. Immunoblot analysis of culture lysates harvested 96 h after transfection reveals significant knockdown of arrestin expression relative to that in control cells transfected with control oligos ( Fig. 2 A ). ?arr-1 expression is readily detected in human ASM cultures and is significantly reduced (73±2%, n =5) by siRNA-mediated knockdown. ?arr-2 expression is either absent or at the limit of detection in human ASM cultures; a faint, faster migrating band (relative to the ?arr-1 band) is suggested in some blots but is not consistently recognized whether blots are probed with Arr178 Ab or more ?arr-2-selective antibodies (not shown). cAMP accumulation stimulated by submaximal concentrations of beta-agonist was not significantly affected by arrestin knockdown (not shown) but that stimulated by 1 ?M ISO was significantly increased ( Fig. 2 B ). Conversely, PGE2-stimulated cAMP accumulation in human ASM cultures was slightly inhibited by arrestin knockdown, and FSK-stimulated cAMP accumulation was unaffected ( Fig. 2 B ). Arrestin knockout augments relaxant effect of beta-agonist on contracted ASM <italic>ex vivo</italic> and <italic>in vivo</italic> To assess arrestin-dependent regulation of ?2AR-mediated function in ASM, regulation of ASM contraction in excised tracheal rings was characterized. Tension generation stimulated by MCh was similar in rings from WT and ?arr-2-KO mice, as was KCl-mediated contraction ( Fig. 3 A ). However, ISO-mediated relaxation of MCh-induced contraction was significantly greater in rings from ?arr-2-KO mice compared to that in WT rings ( Fig. 3 B ). Conversely, PGE2- and FSK-mediated relaxation was not significantly different between groups. Regulation of ?2AR function in vivo was characterized by assessing albuterol-mediated changes in MCh-stimulated airway responsiveness. MCh challenge increased airway responsiveness (APTI) to a similar degree in both WT and ?arr-2-KO mice (52.1±5.5 vs . 48.4±3.0 cm H2O × s in WT and ?arr-2-KO groups, respectively). Albuterol (30 ?g/kg) treatment significantly inhibited MCh-induced increases in airway responsiveness for both WT and ?arr-2-KO mice. However, this reduction was significantly greater in ?arr-2-KO mice compared to that in WT controls ( Fig. 4 ). Conversely, PGE2 treatment significantly reduced MCh-induced airway responsiveness, but ?arr-2 knockout did not alter this effect. Arrestin knockout does not alter lung or ASM ?-AR density We examined total ?-AR density ( Table 1 ). The maximum concentration of ?-AR binding sites (Bmax) to tracheal smooth muscle membranes was not different between WT and ?arr-2-KO mice (80.3±25.2 and 88.9±13.8 fmol/mg protein, respectively). Similarly, WT and ?arr-2-KO mice expressed similar levels of ?-AR in whole lung membranes (444±56 and 471±38 fmol/mg protein, respectively).  Arrestin knockout and knockdown in ASM cells enhances ?-AR signaling To assess arrestin-dependent regulation of ?-AR signaling in ASM cells, ASM cultures derived from ?arr-2-KO mice tracheae and human ASM cultures derived from multiple donors were generated. As shown in Fig. 1 A , ?arr-1 and ?arr-2 are both expressed in WT mouse lung, whereas ?arr-2-KO mice lack the faster migrating (~46.3 kDa predicted and 55 kDa observed, ?arr-2) band in immunoblots. Relative to that observed for ASM cultures derived from WT mice, cAMP accumulation in ?arr-2-KO ASM cultures in response to ISO stimulation was significantly greater at all concentrations ?10 nM tested ( Fig. 1 B , C ). FSK-stimulated cAMP accumulation was unaffected by ?arr-2 knockout, suggesting differences in ISO-stimulated cAMP accumulation were a result of regulation of the ?2AR locus. Conversely, PGE2 stimulated a low level of cAMP accumulation that was similar in both WT and ?arr-2-KO ASM cultures (data not shown), and ?arr-2 knockout also failed to affect phosphoinositide hydrolysis stimulated by mAChR activation ( Fig. 1 D ). To determine whether ?2AR signaling was similarly regulated by arrestins in human ASM, five distinct cultures derived from five different donor tracheae were transfected with siRNA oligonucleotides targeting ?arr-1 and -2. Immunoblot analysis of culture lysates harvested 96 h after transfection reveals significant knockdown of arrestin expression relative to that in control cells transfected with control oligos ( Fig. 2 A ). ?arr-1 expression is readily detected in human ASM cultures and is significantly reduced (73±2%, n =5) by siRNA-mediated knockdown. ?arr-2 expression is either absent or at the limit of detection in human ASM cultures; a faint, faster migrating band (relative to the ?arr-1 band) is suggested in some blots but is not consistently recognized whether blots are probed with Arr178 Ab or more ?arr-2-selective antibodies (not shown). cAMP accumulation stimulated by submaximal concentrations of beta-agonist was not significantly affected by arrestin knockdown (not shown) but that stimulated by 1 ?M ISO was significantly increased ( Fig. 2 B ). Conversely, PGE2-stimulated cAMP accumulation in human ASM cultures was slightly inhibited by arrestin knockdown, and FSK-stimulated cAMP accumulation was unaffected ( Fig. 2 B ).  Arrestin knockout and knockdown in ASM cells enhances ?-AR signaling To assess arrestin-dependent regulation of ?-AR signaling in ASM cells, ASM cultures derived from ?arr-2-KO mice tracheae and human ASM cultures derived from multiple donors were generated. As shown in Fig. 1 A , ?arr-1 and ?arr-2 are both expressed in WT mouse lung, whereas ?arr-2-KO mice lack the faster migrating (~46.3 kDa predicted and 55 kDa observed, ?arr-2) band in immunoblots. Relative to that observed for ASM cultures derived from WT mice, cAMP accumulation in ?arr-2-KO ASM cultures in response to ISO stimulation was significantly greater at all concentrations ?10 nM tested ( Fig. 1 B , C ). FSK-stimulated cAMP accumulation was unaffected by ?arr-2 knockout, suggesting differences in ISO-stimulated cAMP accumulation were a result of regulation of the ?2AR locus. Conversely, PGE2 stimulated a low level of cAMP accumulation that was similar in both WT and ?arr-2-KO ASM cultures (data not shown), and ?arr-2 knockout also failed to affect phosphoinositide hydrolysis stimulated by mAChR activation ( Fig. 1 D ). To determine whether ?2AR signaling was similarly regulated by arrestins in human ASM, five distinct cultures derived from five different donor tracheae were transfected with siRNA oligonucleotides targeting ?arr-1 and -2. Immunoblot analysis of culture lysates harvested 96 h after transfection reveals significant knockdown of arrestin expression relative to that in control cells transfected with control oligos ( Fig. 2 A ). ?arr-1 expression is readily detected in human ASM cultures and is significantly reduced (73±2%, n =5) by siRNA-mediated knockdown. ?arr-2 expression is either absent or at the limit of detection in human ASM cultures; a faint, faster migrating band (relative to the ?arr-1 band) is suggested in some blots but is not consistently recognized whether blots are probed with Arr178 Ab or more ?arr-2-selective antibodies (not shown). cAMP accumulation stimulated by submaximal concentrations of beta-agonist was not significantly affected by arrestin knockdown (not shown) but that stimulated by 1 ?M ISO was significantly increased ( Fig. 2 B ). Conversely, PGE2-stimulated cAMP accumulation in human ASM cultures was slightly inhibited by arrestin knockdown, and FSK-stimulated cAMP accumulation was unaffected ( Fig. 2 B ).  Arrestin knockout augments relaxant effect of beta-agonist on contracted ASM <italic>ex vivo</italic> and <italic>in vivo</italic> To assess arrestin-dependent regulation of ?2AR-mediated function in ASM, regulation of ASM contraction in excised tracheal rings was characterized. Tension generation stimulated by MCh was similar in rings from WT and ?arr-2-KO mice, as was KCl-mediated contraction ( Fig. 3 A ). However, ISO-mediated relaxation of MCh-induced contraction was significantly greater in rings from ?arr-2-KO mice compared to that in WT rings ( Fig. 3 B ). Conversely, PGE2- and FSK-mediated relaxation was not significantly different between groups. Regulation of ?2AR function in vivo was characterized by assessing albuterol-mediated changes in MCh-stimulated airway responsiveness. MCh challenge increased airway responsiveness (APTI) to a similar degree in both WT and ?arr-2-KO mice (52.1±5.5 vs . 48.4±3.0 cm H2O × s in WT and ?arr-2-KO groups, respectively). Albuterol (30 ?g/kg) treatment significantly inhibited MCh-induced increases in airway responsiveness for both WT and ?arr-2-KO mice. However, this reduction was significantly greater in ?arr-2-KO mice compared to that in WT controls ( Fig. 4 ). Conversely, PGE2 treatment significantly reduced MCh-induced airway responsiveness, but ?arr-2 knockout did not alter this effect.  Arrestin knockout augments relaxant effect of beta-agonist on contracted ASM <italic>ex vivo</italic> and <italic>in vivo</italic> To assess arrestin-dependent regulation of ?2AR-mediated function in ASM, regulation of ASM contraction in excised tracheal rings was characterized. Tension generation stimulated by MCh was similar in rings from WT and ?arr-2-KO mice, as was KCl-mediated contraction ( Fig. 3 A ). However, ISO-mediated relaxation of MCh-induced contraction was significantly greater in rings from ?arr-2-KO mice compared to that in WT rings ( Fig. 3 B ). Conversely, PGE2- and FSK-mediated relaxation was not significantly different between groups. Regulation of ?2AR function in vivo was characterized by assessing albuterol-mediated changes in MCh-stimulated airway responsiveness. MCh challenge increased airway responsiveness (APTI) to a similar degree in both WT and ?arr-2-KO mice (52.1±5.5 vs . 48.4±3.0 cm H2O × s in WT and ?arr-2-KO groups, respectively). Albuterol (30 ?g/kg) treatment significantly inhibited MCh-induced increases in airway responsiveness for both WT and ?arr-2-KO mice. However, this reduction was significantly greater in ?arr-2-KO mice compared to that in WT controls ( Fig. 4 ). Conversely, PGE2 treatment significantly reduced MCh-induced airway responsiveness, but ?arr-2 knockout did not alter this effect.  Arrestin knockout does not alter lung or ASM ?-AR density We examined total ?-AR density ( Table 1 ). The maximum concentration of ?-AR binding sites (Bmax) to tracheal smooth muscle membranes was not different between WT and ?arr-2-KO mice (80.3±25.2 and 88.9±13.8 fmol/mg protein, respectively). Similarly, WT and ?arr-2-KO mice expressed similar levels of ?-AR in whole lung membranes (444±56 and 471±38 fmol/mg protein, respectively).  Arrestin knockout does not alter lung or ASM ?-AR density We examined total ?-AR density ( Table 1 ). The maximum concentration of ?-AR binding sites (Bmax) to tracheal smooth muscle membranes was not different between WT and ?arr-2-KO mice (80.3±25.2 and 88.9±13.8 fmol/mg protein, respectively). Similarly, WT and ?arr-2-KO mice expressed similar levels of ?-AR in whole lung membranes (444±56 and 471±38 fmol/mg protein, respectively).  DISCUSSION This study is the first to demonstrate the efficacy and selectivity of arrestins in regulating GPCR function in ASM. In both in vivo and ex vivo murine models of ASM contractile regulation, ?arr-2 is shown to constrain beta-agonist-mediated (?2AR-dependent) antagonism of ASM contraction, while not affecting antagonism mediated by PGE2 (EP2/4R-dependent) or the contrac-tile effect of methacholine (m3 mAChR-dependent). These in vivo and ex vivo data are consistent with in vitro cell data, which demonstrate increased ?-agonist-mediated cAMP accumulation in cells lacking ?arr-2. Taken together, these data demonstrate that the classic desensitization of ?2AR signaling involving ?-arrestins is functionally relevant with respect to bronchorelaxation in the whole animal. The “arresting” function of ?-arrestin was first demonstrated for the ?2AR by Benovic et al . ( 20 ). The canonical ?2AR signaling pathway involves agonist-induced G?s activation, stimulation of adenylyl cyclase (AC), cAMP accumulation, and PKA activation. In the case of ASM, PKA phosphorylates several target proteins to promote ASM relaxation (reviewed in ref. 1 ). This pathway is desensitized by ?-arrestin binding to the agonist-activated, GRK-phosphorylated receptor, which sterically interdicts further receptor-G?s coupling ( 21 ). In the present study, we measured cAMP accumulation as an indicator of receptor-G?s–AC signaling. Using primary murine ASM cultures, we demonstrate that isoproterenol-, but not PGE2- or forskolin-induced cAMP accumulation is increased in cells lacking ?arr-2 relative to WT cells. Similar results were obtained in human ASM cells (which express predominantly ?arr-1) when ?arr-1 and ?arr-2 levels were knocked down by transfection of siRNA. Because forskolin raises cAMP levels in ASM through receptor-independent activation of AC ( 22 ), the lack of effect of arrestin knockout or knockdown of forskolin-stimulated cAMP accumulation suggests ?-arrestins regulate signaling at the receptor locus. The lack of effect on PGE2-mediated signaling and function further suggests that neither G?s nor the EP2 receptor (EP2R) is regulated by ?-arrestins in ASM. These results, demonstrating the lack of effect of arrestin knockout/knockdown on PGE2 effects on ASM, are in agreement with our previous in vitro data that has demonstrated that the EP2R is the functionally dominant EP receptor expressed in ASM and that ?-arrestins do not translocate to activated EP2R, arrest EP2R-G?s signaling, or promote EP2R internalization ( 9 ). Thus, the EP2R is an example of one GPCR whose signaling and internalization are not regulated by ?-arrestins, presumably a consequence of the EP2R being a poor substrate for GRKs. Our finding that MCh-induced airway responsiveness and ASM contraction ex vivo were not affected by ?arr-2 knockout identifies the m3 mAChR (the principal effector of ASM contraction mediated by mAChR agonists in the mouse; ref. 23 ) as an additional GPCR whose function is not regulated by arrestins. Consistent with these data, we also failed to observe differences in MCh-mediated phosphoinositide hydrolysis between cultures of ASM from ?arr-2-KO and WT mice. Although these are the first data assessing arrestin-dependent regulation of endogenously expressed m3 mAChR, previous studies have demonstrated that although GRKs can phosphorylate purified, reconstituted m3 mAChR ( 24 ), agonist-induced internalization of overexpressed m3 mAChRs in human embryonic kidney cells is not affected by overexpressed or dominant-negative arrestins ( 25 ). The aforementioned actions of ?-arrestins occur within seconds to minutes of agonist-receptor binding and demonstrate a physiological mechanism by which ?2AR-mediated relaxation of ASM is innately limited. Steric inhibition of ?2AR-G?s coupling by ?-arrestins, relieved by ?-arrestin knockout or knockdown, is known to mediate rapid ?2AR desensitization. In numerous cell-based studies, a more delayed ?-arrestin-mediated regulation of the ?2AR is known to occur as a result of the dependence of receptor internalization on ?-arrestin function ( 6 ). ?-arrestin acts as an adaptor protein that links the ?2AR to clathrin-mediated internalization. Once internalized, ?2ARs are directed to acidic endosomes, where they are dephosphorylated and recycled as competent receptors to the cell membrane or directed to lysosomes where they are degraded and thus, down-regulated ( 8 , 26 ). ?-arrestin regulation of internalization and/or receptor recycling did not likely contribute to the beta-agonist effects observed in this study, since experiments assessing cAMP accumulation and airway contractile responsiveness were of short duration. Moreover, the similarity in lung and ASM ?-AR density between WT and ?arr-2-KO mice suggests that chronic up-regulation of ?-ARs does not account for the effect of arrestins on beta-agonist regulation of airway responsiveness. Future studies examining the effects of chronic beta-agonist treatment should help elucidate the role of arrestin-dependent ?2AR trafficking in modulating the ?2AR function in ASM. The ability of arrestin knockout or knockdown to augment signaling and functional consequences of ?2AR activation occurs against a backdrop of other regulatory mechanisms also capable of desensitizing ?2AR signaling. GRKs have been shown sufficient to mediate agonist-induced ?2AR desensitization ( 21 , 27 ), and PKA-mediated phosphorylation of the ?2AR ( 28 ) has also been shown to be an important feedback regulator of the ?2AR in many cell types. Because these mechanisms are known to be active in ASM ( ref. 13 and unpublished results), our findings suggest that they cannot fully compensate for a loss of arrestins and suggest a clear physiological role for arrestins in ASM. The observation that knockout of ?arr-2 in the mouse is sufficient to augment ?2AR-mediated signaling and function in ASM is consistent with the findings of Oakley et al . ( 29 ), which demonstrate that the ?2AR binds to ?arr-2 more readily and to a greater extent than it does ?arr-1. That ?arr-1 is unable to fully compensate for a loss of ?arr-2 suggests that these differences in binding kinetics and affinity are of physiological relevance. However, in human ASM cell cultures, which express ?arr-1 but have at most extremely low levels of ?arr-2, knockdown of ?arr-1/2 was able to significantly augment ?2AR signaling. This finding suggests that ?arr-1-dependent regulation of the ?2AR is also of physiological consequence in ASM. Because knockout of both ?arr-1 and ?arr-2 is lethal (reviewed in ref. 30 ), we are unable to judge the relative importance of each arrestin on our experimental outcomes. Nevertheless, our findings point to ?-arrestins as important regulators of ASM function and implicate agonist-specific (homologous) desensitization of ASM ?2ARs as important in airway physiology, and possibly, airway disease. Although the significance of endogenous catecholamines on ASM contraction is unclear, most asthmatics control their symptoms through the use of inhaled beta-agonists. Both short- and long-acting ?-agonists are prescribed with caution as it is generally accepted that their chronic use is associated with a loss of bronchoprotection and a loss of asthma control associated with increased risk of exacerbations and death ( 31 – 35 ). The mechanisms underlying worsening of asthma severity with chronic use of beta-agonists have not been clearly established; however, agonist-specific desensitization of the ASM ?2AR is a prime and logical candidate. Not only would GRK- and arrestin-mediated desensitization of the ?2AR be expected to occur as a consequence of chronic inhaled beta-agonist treatment, a recent study by Mak et al . ( 36 ) suggests that the homologous desensitization mechanism per se may be upregulated by the allergic inflammation of the airway. Given our current findings that demonstrate the relevance of arrestins in regulating ASM function and airway physiology, the dots appear to be connected to suggest that relief of ?2AR desensitization by targeting arrestins has therapeutic potential. Drug delivery strategies that target arrestin expression or function could serve as a means of improving the efficacy of inhaled beta-agonist in bronchodilation, minimize lung inflammatory cell influx and its pathogenic effect ( 10 ), and thereby possibly thwart the loss of asthma control that occurs in the subset of asthmatics managed with chronic beta-agonists.  DISCUSSION This study is the first to demonstrate the efficacy and selectivity of arrestins in regulating GPCR function in ASM. In both in vivo and ex vivo murine models of ASM contractile regulation, ?arr-2 is shown to constrain beta-agonist-mediated (?2AR-dependent) antagonism of ASM contraction, while not affecting antagonism mediated by PGE2 (EP2/4R-dependent) or the contrac-tile effect of methacholine (m3 mAChR-dependent). These in vivo and ex vivo data are consistent with in vitro cell data, which demonstrate increased ?-agonist-mediated cAMP accumulation in cells lacking ?arr-2. Taken together, these data demonstrate that the classic desensitization of ?2AR signaling involving ?-arrestins is functionally relevant with respect to bronchorelaxation in the whole animal. The “arresting” function of ?-arrestin was first demonstrated for the ?2AR by Benovic et al . ( 20 ). The canonical ?2AR signaling pathway involves agonist-induced G?s activation, stimulation of adenylyl cyclase (AC), cAMP accumulation, and PKA activation. In the case of ASM, PKA phosphorylates several target proteins to promote ASM relaxation (reviewed in ref. 1 ). This pathway is desensitized by ?-arrestin binding to the agonist-activated, GRK-phosphorylated receptor, which sterically interdicts further receptor-G?s coupling ( 21 ). In the present study, we measured cAMP accumulation as an indicator of receptor-G?s–AC signaling. Using primary murine ASM cultures, we demonstrate that isoproterenol-, but not PGE2- or forskolin-induced cAMP accumulation is increased in cells lacking ?arr-2 relative to WT cells. Similar results were obtained in human ASM cells (which express predominantly ?arr-1) when ?arr-1 and ?arr-2 levels were knocked down by transfection of siRNA. Because forskolin raises cAMP levels in ASM through receptor-independent activation of AC ( 22 ), the lack of effect of arrestin knockout or knockdown of forskolin-stimulated cAMP accumulation suggests ?-arrestins regulate signaling at the receptor locus. The lack of effect on PGE2-mediated signaling and function further suggests that neither G?s nor the EP2 receptor (EP2R) is regulated by ?-arrestins in ASM. These results, demonstrating the lack of effect of arrestin knockout/knockdown on PGE2 effects on ASM, are in agreement with our previous in vitro data that has demonstrated that the EP2R is the functionally dominant EP receptor expressed in ASM and that ?-arrestins do not translocate to activated EP2R, arrest EP2R-G?s signaling, or promote EP2R internalization ( 9 ). Thus, the EP2R is an example of one GPCR whose signaling and internalization are not regulated by ?-arrestins, presumably a consequence of the EP2R being a poor substrate for GRKs. Our finding that MCh-induced airway responsiveness and ASM contraction ex vivo were not affected by ?arr-2 knockout identifies the m3 mAChR (the principal effector of ASM contraction mediated by mAChR agonists in the mouse; ref. 23 ) as an additional GPCR whose function is not regulated by arrestins. Consistent with these data, we also failed to observe differences in MCh-mediated phosphoinositide hydrolysis between cultures of ASM from ?arr-2-KO and WT mice. Although these are the first data assessing arrestin-dependent regulation of endogenously expressed m3 mAChR, previous studies have demonstrated that although GRKs can phosphorylate purified, reconstituted m3 mAChR ( 24 ), agonist-induced internalization of overexpressed m3 mAChRs in human embryonic kidney cells is not affected by overexpressed or dominant-negative arrestins ( 25 ). The aforementioned actions of ?-arrestins occur within seconds to minutes of agonist-receptor binding and demonstrate a physiological mechanism by which ?2AR-mediated relaxation of ASM is innately limited. Steric inhibition of ?2AR-G?s coupling by ?-arrestins, relieved by ?-arrestin knockout or knockdown, is known to mediate rapid ?2AR desensitization. In numerous cell-based studies, a more delayed ?-arrestin-mediated regulation of the ?2AR is known to occur as a result of the dependence of receptor internalization on ?-arrestin function ( 6 ). ?-arrestin acts as an adaptor protein that links the ?2AR to clathrin-mediated internalization. Once internalized, ?2ARs are directed to acidic endosomes, where they are dephosphorylated and recycled as competent receptors to the cell membrane or directed to lysosomes where they are degraded and thus, down-regulated ( 8 , 26 ). ?-arrestin regulation of internalization and/or receptor recycling did not likely contribute to the beta-agonist effects observed in this study, since experiments assessing cAMP accumulation and airway contractile responsiveness were of short duration. Moreover, the similarity in lung and ASM ?-AR density between WT and ?arr-2-KO mice suggests that chronic up-regulation of ?-ARs does not account for the effect of arrestins on beta-agonist regulation of airway responsiveness. Future studies examining the effects of chronic beta-agonist treatment should help elucidate the role of arrestin-dependent ?2AR trafficking in modulating the ?2AR function in ASM. The ability of arrestin knockout or knockdown to augment signaling and functional consequences of ?2AR activation occurs against a backdrop of other regulatory mechanisms also capable of desensitizing ?2AR signaling. GRKs have been shown sufficient to mediate agonist-induced ?2AR desensitization ( 21 , 27 ), and PKA-mediated phosphorylation of the ?2AR ( 28 ) has also been shown to be an important feedback regulator of the ?2AR in many cell types. Because these mechanisms are known to be active in ASM ( ref. 13 and unpublished results), our findings suggest that they cannot fully compensate for a loss of arrestins and suggest a clear physiological role for arrestins in ASM. The observation that knockout of ?arr-2 in the mouse is sufficient to augment ?2AR-mediated signaling and function in ASM is consistent with the findings of Oakley et al . ( 29 ), which demonstrate that the ?2AR binds to ?arr-2 more readily and to a greater extent than it does ?arr-1. That ?arr-1 is unable to fully compensate for a loss of ?arr-2 suggests that these differences in binding kinetics and affinity are of physiological relevance. However, in human ASM cell cultures, which express ?arr-1 but have at most extremely low levels of ?arr-2, knockdown of ?arr-1/2 was able to significantly augment ?2AR signaling. This finding suggests that ?arr-1-dependent regulation of the ?2AR is also of physiological consequence in ASM. Because knockout of both ?arr-1 and ?arr-2 is lethal (reviewed in ref. 30 ), we are unable to judge the relative importance of each arrestin on our experimental outcomes. Nevertheless, our findings point to ?-arrestins as important regulators of ASM function and implicate agonist-specific (homologous) desensitization of ASM ?2ARs as important in airway physiology, and possibly, airway disease. Although the significance of endogenous catecholamines on ASM contraction is unclear, most asthmatics control their symptoms through the use of inhaled beta-agonists. Both short- and long-acting ?-agonists are prescribed with caution as it is generally accepted that their chronic use is associated with a loss of bronchoprotection and a loss of asthma control associated with increased risk of exacerbations and death ( 31 – 35 ). The mechanisms underlying worsening of asthma severity with chronic use of beta-agonists have not been clearly established; however, agonist-specific desensitization of the ASM ?2AR is a prime and logical candidate. Not only would GRK- and arrestin-mediated desensitization of the ?2AR be expected to occur as a consequence of chronic inhaled beta-agonist treatment, a recent study by Mak et al . ( 36 ) suggests that the homologous desensitization mechanism per se may be upregulated by the allergic inflammation of the airway. Given our current findings that demonstrate the relevance of arrestins in regulating ASM function and airway physiology, the dots appear to be connected to suggest that relief of ?2AR desensitization by targeting arrestins has therapeutic potential. Drug delivery strategies that target arrestin expression or function could serve as a means of improving the efficacy of inhaled beta-agonist in bronchodilation, minimize lung inflammatory cell influx and its pathogenic effect ( 10 ), and thereby possibly thwart the loss of asthma control that occurs in the subset of asthmatics managed with chronic beta-agonists. 