The Shifting Subtypes of ADHD: Classification depends on how symptom reports are combined Research on the correlates of ADHD subtypes has yielded inconsistent findings, perhaps because the procedures used to define subtypes vary across studies. We examined this possibility by investigating whether the ADHD subtype distribution in a community sample was sensitive to different methods for combining informant data. We conducted a study to screen all children in grades 1–5 (N=7847) in a North Carolina County for ADHD. Teachers completed a DSM-IV behavior rating scale and parents completed a structured telephone interview. We found substantial differences in the distribution of ADHD subtypes depending on whether one or both sources were used to define the subtypes. When parent and teacher data were combined, the procedures used substantially influenced subtype distribution. We conclude the ADHD subtype distribution is sensitive to how symptom information is combined and that standardization of the subtyping process is required to advance our understanding of the correlates of different ADHD subtypes.  Methods Population In 1998 and 1999, we screened children in grades 1–5 who were enrolled in one of 17 public elementary schools in Johnston County, North Carolina for ADHD. During this time period, Johnston County was predominantly rural, but rapidly growing and becoming more suburban; the population grew 50% between 1990 and 2000. The county was about 16% African American, 8% Hispanic and the median household income in 1999 was about $41,000 ( U.S. Census Bureau, 2000 ). We screened children for ADHD in two phases. In Phase 1, we sent parents a letter of support from the superintendent of schools, a consent letter, and a brief form about past diagnosis of ADHD and medication treatment in their child. We also asked teachers to complete a DSM-IV behavior rating scale on each participant. In Phase 2, we interviewed parents of potential ADHD cases (defined below) using a structured telephone interview. Instruments Teacher report of ADHD symptoms We developed the NIEHS Teacher Rating Scale (NTRS). This instrument had wording similar or identical to most other DSM-IV scales but used response categories of “Never, Hardly ever, Some of the time, and Often.” We made “Often” the most severe category, to make the scale more compatible with the ADHD module of the Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children (DISC), Version 4, which we used to interview parents ( Shaffer, Fisher, Lucas, Dulcan, & Schwab-Stone, 2000 ). We considered a symptom positive if it was rated “Often”. The scale had good psychometric properties, comparable to those of other DSM-IV rating scales ( Rowland, Umbach, Bohlig, Stallone, & Sandler, 2007 ). The internal consistency of the NTRS for inattentive and hyperactive-impulsive items was 0.97 (Cronbach’s ?) for an ADHD symptom severity score (four-point scale) and 0.94 when we dichotomized symptoms as often/not often. The test-retest reliability of the NTRS (Pearson correlation coefficient of symptom severity scores) was 0.94 for the Inattentive subscale and 0.90 for the Hyperactive/Impulsive subscale (mean time between ratings was 4 weeks, range 2 weeks-13 weeks). We assessed convergent validity by asking the teacher who completed the NTRS to complete a CAP rating scale or a Conners rating scale on the same child. The two subscales of the CAP scale, “inattention” and “hyperactive/impulsive,” were highly correlated (0.90, 0.89) with the NTRS’s similarly named subscales. The Conners’ ADHD index had a correlation of 0.91 with the NTRS ADHD Combined subscale and the Conner’s Hyperactivity Scale had a correlation of 0.89 with the NTRS Hyperactive/impulsive subscale. Confirmatory factor analyses strongly support the construct validity of the NTRS ( Rowland et al., 2007 ). Parent report of ADHD symptoms We administered a modified ADHD module of the DISC to parents or guardians by telephone. We modified the DISC by not asking parents about their child’s symptoms at school because we collected this information directly from the child’s teacher. Some data suggest parent ratings of their child’s behavior at school correlates better with their ratings of the child’s behavior at home than with teacher reports ( Mitsis et al., 2000 ). Teacher report of impairment We assessed school impairment with a modified Vanderbilt AD/HD Diagnostic Teacher Rating Scale ( Wolraich, Feurer, Hannah, Baumgaertel, & Pinnock, 1998 ). The Vanderbilt scale asks a teacher to rate a child’s school performance as problematic, average, or above average using a 5 point Likert scale. We modified this procedure to ask whether a “child had a problem in any of the following areas” and if so, to rate the severity of the problem as “mild, moderate, or severe.” We asked about academic performance in four subjects; reading, arithmetic, writing, and spelling instead of “reading, mathematics, or written expression” on the original scale and asked about “relationships with other children at school, relationships with teachers and other adults at school, disruptive classroom behavior, self esteem, assignment completion, and organizational skills” instead of “relationships with peers, following directions/rules, disrupting class, assignment completion, and organizational skills” on the original scale. Children were considered impaired at school if the teacher rated them “below grade level” in an academic subject or if they had moderate or severe problems in any of the other impairment areas. Parent report of impairment Impairment at home was assessed with the DISC questions about relationships with family and peers. These questions ask whether the child’s problems caused the parent to get annoyed or upset, made it difficult for them to do things as a family or for the child to spend time with friends, made it difficult for the child to complete homework, or made the child feel “bad or very bad”. Moderate impairment was defined as having a problem “some of the time ”, or if the child felt “bad”. Severe impairment was defined as having a problem “a lot of the time” or if the child felt “very bad.”  Population In 1998 and 1999, we screened children in grades 1–5 who were enrolled in one of 17 public elementary schools in Johnston County, North Carolina for ADHD. During this time period, Johnston County was predominantly rural, but rapidly growing and becoming more suburban; the population grew 50% between 1990 and 2000. The county was about 16% African American, 8% Hispanic and the median household income in 1999 was about $41,000 ( U.S. Census Bureau, 2000 ). We screened children for ADHD in two phases. In Phase 1, we sent parents a letter of support from the superintendent of schools, a consent letter, and a brief form about past diagnosis of ADHD and medication treatment in their child. We also asked teachers to complete a DSM-IV behavior rating scale on each participant. In Phase 2, we interviewed parents of potential ADHD cases (defined below) using a structured telephone interview.  Instruments Teacher report of ADHD symptoms We developed the NIEHS Teacher Rating Scale (NTRS). This instrument had wording similar or identical to most other DSM-IV scales but used response categories of “Never, Hardly ever, Some of the time, and Often.” We made “Often” the most severe category, to make the scale more compatible with the ADHD module of the Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children (DISC), Version 4, which we used to interview parents ( Shaffer, Fisher, Lucas, Dulcan, & Schwab-Stone, 2000 ). We considered a symptom positive if it was rated “Often”. The scale had good psychometric properties, comparable to those of other DSM-IV rating scales ( Rowland, Umbach, Bohlig, Stallone, & Sandler, 2007 ). The internal consistency of the NTRS for inattentive and hyperactive-impulsive items was 0.97 (Cronbach’s ?) for an ADHD symptom severity score (four-point scale) and 0.94 when we dichotomized symptoms as often/not often. The test-retest reliability of the NTRS (Pearson correlation coefficient of symptom severity scores) was 0.94 for the Inattentive subscale and 0.90 for the Hyperactive/Impulsive subscale (mean time between ratings was 4 weeks, range 2 weeks-13 weeks). We assessed convergent validity by asking the teacher who completed the NTRS to complete a CAP rating scale or a Conners rating scale on the same child. The two subscales of the CAP scale, “inattention” and “hyperactive/impulsive,” were highly correlated (0.90, 0.89) with the NTRS’s similarly named subscales. The Conners’ ADHD index had a correlation of 0.91 with the NTRS ADHD Combined subscale and the Conner’s Hyperactivity Scale had a correlation of 0.89 with the NTRS Hyperactive/impulsive subscale. Confirmatory factor analyses strongly support the construct validity of the NTRS ( Rowland et al., 2007 ). Parent report of ADHD symptoms We administered a modified ADHD module of the DISC to parents or guardians by telephone. We modified the DISC by not asking parents about their child’s symptoms at school because we collected this information directly from the child’s teacher. Some data suggest parent ratings of their child’s behavior at school correlates better with their ratings of the child’s behavior at home than with teacher reports ( Mitsis et al., 2000 ). Teacher report of impairment We assessed school impairment with a modified Vanderbilt AD/HD Diagnostic Teacher Rating Scale ( Wolraich, Feurer, Hannah, Baumgaertel, & Pinnock, 1998 ). The Vanderbilt scale asks a teacher to rate a child’s school performance as problematic, average, or above average using a 5 point Likert scale. We modified this procedure to ask whether a “child had a problem in any of the following areas” and if so, to rate the severity of the problem as “mild, moderate, or severe.” We asked about academic performance in four subjects; reading, arithmetic, writing, and spelling instead of “reading, mathematics, or written expression” on the original scale and asked about “relationships with other children at school, relationships with teachers and other adults at school, disruptive classroom behavior, self esteem, assignment completion, and organizational skills” instead of “relationships with peers, following directions/rules, disrupting class, assignment completion, and organizational skills” on the original scale. Children were considered impaired at school if the teacher rated them “below grade level” in an academic subject or if they had moderate or severe problems in any of the other impairment areas. Parent report of impairment Impairment at home was assessed with the DISC questions about relationships with family and peers. These questions ask whether the child’s problems caused the parent to get annoyed or upset, made it difficult for them to do things as a family or for the child to spend time with friends, made it difficult for the child to complete homework, or made the child feel “bad or very bad”. Moderate impairment was defined as having a problem “some of the time ”, or if the child felt “bad”. Severe impairment was defined as having a problem “a lot of the time” or if the child felt “very bad.”  Teacher report of ADHD symptoms We developed the NIEHS Teacher Rating Scale (NTRS). This instrument had wording similar or identical to most other DSM-IV scales but used response categories of “Never, Hardly ever, Some of the time, and Often.” We made “Often” the most severe category, to make the scale more compatible with the ADHD module of the Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children (DISC), Version 4, which we used to interview parents ( Shaffer, Fisher, Lucas, Dulcan, & Schwab-Stone, 2000 ). We considered a symptom positive if it was rated “Often”. The scale had good psychometric properties, comparable to those of other DSM-IV rating scales ( Rowland, Umbach, Bohlig, Stallone, & Sandler, 2007 ). The internal consistency of the NTRS for inattentive and hyperactive-impulsive items was 0.97 (Cronbach’s ?) for an ADHD symptom severity score (four-point scale) and 0.94 when we dichotomized symptoms as often/not often. The test-retest reliability of the NTRS (Pearson correlation coefficient of symptom severity scores) was 0.94 for the Inattentive subscale and 0.90 for the Hyperactive/Impulsive subscale (mean time between ratings was 4 weeks, range 2 weeks-13 weeks). We assessed convergent validity by asking the teacher who completed the NTRS to complete a CAP rating scale or a Conners rating scale on the same child. The two subscales of the CAP scale, “inattention” and “hyperactive/impulsive,” were highly correlated (0.90, 0.89) with the NTRS’s similarly named subscales. The Conners’ ADHD index had a correlation of 0.91 with the NTRS ADHD Combined subscale and the Conner’s Hyperactivity Scale had a correlation of 0.89 with the NTRS Hyperactive/impulsive subscale. Confirmatory factor analyses strongly support the construct validity of the NTRS ( Rowland et al., 2007 ).  Parent report of ADHD symptoms We administered a modified ADHD module of the DISC to parents or guardians by telephone. We modified the DISC by not asking parents about their child’s symptoms at school because we collected this information directly from the child’s teacher. Some data suggest parent ratings of their child’s behavior at school correlates better with their ratings of the child’s behavior at home than with teacher reports ( Mitsis et al., 2000 ).  Teacher report of impairment We assessed school impairment with a modified Vanderbilt AD/HD Diagnostic Teacher Rating Scale ( Wolraich, Feurer, Hannah, Baumgaertel, & Pinnock, 1998 ). The Vanderbilt scale asks a teacher to rate a child’s school performance as problematic, average, or above average using a 5 point Likert scale. We modified this procedure to ask whether a “child had a problem in any of the following areas” and if so, to rate the severity of the problem as “mild, moderate, or severe.” We asked about academic performance in four subjects; reading, arithmetic, writing, and spelling instead of “reading, mathematics, or written expression” on the original scale and asked about “relationships with other children at school, relationships with teachers and other adults at school, disruptive classroom behavior, self esteem, assignment completion, and organizational skills” instead of “relationships with peers, following directions/rules, disrupting class, assignment completion, and organizational skills” on the original scale. Children were considered impaired at school if the teacher rated them “below grade level” in an academic subject or if they had moderate or severe problems in any of the other impairment areas.  Parent report of impairment Impairment at home was assessed with the DISC questions about relationships with family and peers. These questions ask whether the child’s problems caused the parent to get annoyed or upset, made it difficult for them to do things as a family or for the child to spend time with friends, made it difficult for the child to complete homework, or made the child feel “bad or very bad”. Moderate impairment was defined as having a problem “some of the time ”, or if the child felt “bad”. Severe impairment was defined as having a problem “a lot of the time” or if the child felt “very bad.”  Sampling The study protocol was approved by the NIEHS IRB. There were 7,847 children in grades 1–5. We excluded children with severe developmental disabilities in self-contained classrooms (N=146), and children with special education designations for autism, mental handicap (IQ<70) or severe health disabilities (such as traumatic head injury or childhood cancer) (N=114). Children with learning disabilities or behavioral problems were included regardless of classroom placement. Seven thousand five hundred eighty seven children were initially targeted but one child died and we had to exclude children who subsequently left the school system before contact was initiated (N=254). Thus, 7,332 children were eligible for screening after exclusions. ( Figure 1 ) Parents or guardians of 6,139 of the 7,332 eligible children (84%) gave written permission to have their child’s teacher complete the screening questionnaire. The consent form included a question about whether the child had ever been diagnosed with ADHD and whether he or she was taking medication to treat ADHD. Teachers completed screening forms (NTRS) on 6,072 of the 6,139 (99.9%) children whose parents gave permission for an overall Phase 1 completion rate of 83% (6,072/7,332). Four hundred eleven children were excluded from the subsequent telephone interview because they had a severe medical disability, had been in class too briefly (<9 weeks), or had parents with low English proficiency. Therefore, 5,661 children were eligible for the Phase 2 parent telephone interview. If parents reported a child was taking medication to treat ADHD, the child was considered a potential case. A child not taking ADHD medication was considered a potential case if the teacher indicated that the child often exhibited at least 3 of 9 DSM-IV hyperactive/impulsive symptoms or at least 3 of 9 inattentive symptoms, and was impaired in either behavior or academic performance at school. In Phase 2, we interviewed the parents or guardians of two groups, a random sample of all eligible children (N=706) and a group of all remaining potential cases who were not in the random sample (N=1,246). The purpose of the random sample was to create a group that was representative of the whole population and was not enriched for cases. We used computer generated random numbers to select a random sub-sample from all eligible students who had parental consent. This sample yielded 169 potential ADHD cases and 537 who were not potential cases. Budget constraints prevented us from interviewing parents of all 1,246 potential ADHD cases not in the random sample, so we selected 913 of them at random (using a similar process) for parental interview. Therefore, there were 1,619 parents/guardians eligible for the interview (706 from the random sample and 913 other potential cases). 1,160/1,619 parents/guardians completed telephone interviews (72%)( Figure 1 ). Assignment of ADHD Types Children were assigned an ADHD Type using a two-step procedure; (1) we decided if each child met criteria as an ADHD Case and (2) for children who were classified as cases we assigned one of three subtypes (ADHD-C, ADHD-PI, or ADHD-PH). In Step 1, if a child met case criteria for either inattentive symptoms or hyperactive-impulsive symptoms (or both), he or she was declared a case. Moderate or severe impairment from these symptoms in each setting was also required for all case definitions. For this paper, we adopted the following notation to summarize inattentive and hyperactive/impulsive symptom counts by informants. The numbers of symptoms required to meet criteria are denoted by N1- N2- N3 where N1 is the number of symptoms endorsed by one informant; N2 is the number of symptoms endorsed by a second informant; and N3 is the number of unduplicated symptoms. To determine the number of unduplicated symptoms, symptoms that are reported by both informants are only counted once. For example, if a parent reported 4 inattentive symptoms and a teacher reported 3 of the same inattentive symptoms, that would count as 4 unduplicated symptoms, not as 7. However, if 2 of the 3 symptoms reported by the teacher were different from the symptoms reported by the parent, there would be 6 unduplicated symptoms. The DSM-IV ADHD-Criteria require six or more inattentive symptoms or six or more hyperactive-impulsive symptoms, so we required at least 6 unduplicated symptoms (N3 = 6) for all case definitions. As noted above, there are two types of procedures for combining informant data, AND rules and OR rules. The main difference between the two methods is that OR rules combine symptoms from both informants but do not impose specific requirements on each informant. That is, they only use N3, the number of unduplicated symptoms. AND rules also combine symptoms but, in addition, include informant-specific requirements. They use N1, N2, and N3. We will use X/Y to denote whether AND or OR rules were used to combine symptoms in Step 1 (case determination) and in Step 2 (subtype determination), respectively. For example the notation AND/OR means that the AND rule was used for case determination and the OR rule was used to determine the subtype. An OR rule was used in the DSM-IV ADHD field trials ( Lahey et al., 1994 ) and subsequently by others ( Mitsis et al., 2000 ). AND rules also have been used by several investigators to define cases ( Mill et al., 2006 ; Mota & Schachar, 2000 ; Schachar et al., 2007 ; Weiler et al., 1999 ). The difference between AND rules and OR rules has important implications for subtyping as illustrated in the following example comparing subtype determination under a 6-4-6 AND/AND rule and a 6-4-6 AND/OR rule. Suppose that the parent of an elementary school girl reported 6 inattentive symptoms and 4 hyperactive-impulsive symptoms; her teacher reported 7 inattentive symptoms and 2 hyperactive-impulsive symptoms; and after combining parent and teacher reports, there were 7 unduplicated inattentive symptoms and 6 unduplicated hyperactive-impulsive symptoms. The symptom counts for this child are 6-7-7 for inattentive symptoms and 4-2-6 for hyperactive-impulsive symptoms. These symptom counts meet 6-4-6 AND case criteria for inattentive symptoms, but not for hyperactive-impulsive symptoms. Consequently, the girl would be classified as a case in Step 1. If an AND rule was used to determine subtype in Step 2 (6-4-6 AND/AND), the girl would be classified as ADHD-PI since she meets the AND criteria for inattentive symptoms but does not meet the AND criteria for hyperactive-impulsive symptoms. In contrast, if the subtype was based on OR criteria (6-4-6 AND/OR), she would be classified as ADHD-C since she meets OR criteria for both types of symptoms. As shown in this example, it is possible for a child who is classified as ADHD-C by the less restrictive OR rule to be classified as ADHD-PI or ADHD-PH when the more restrictive AND rule is used. A child who is classified as ADHD-C by the AND rule will always be classified as ADHD-C by the OR rule. Data Analysis Our goal was to explore how sensitive the subtype distribution was to changes in the methods used to combine symptoms across informants. We first examined the subtype distribution using symptom-reports from only one informant (either teacher or parent). Cases had to have at least 6 inattentive or 6 hyperactive-impulsive symptoms. Because an AND rule or an OR rule could be used at either step, there are four possible combinations – OR/OR, OR/AND, AND/OR, and AND/AND. However, one combination OR/AND, while theoretically possible, probably would never be used because if one uses a lenient definition for defining cases and a restrictive definition for defining subtype, this creates a group of cases who do not meet the restrictive criteria and cannot be subtyped. We therefore evaluated the impact of the other three rule combinations on the ADHD subtype distribution. Most of these case-definitions were taken from published reports but a few combinations we had not seen were included for illustration purposes. Finally we looked within each AND/OR and AND/AND combination to see whether the subtype distribution differed by symptom threshold used. Some analyses could only be done in a random sample of study participants, not the whole population. A chi-square test was used to test subtype distributions for teacher ratings in the random sample compared to those who were not in the random sample in order to evaluate the validity of this approach. The binomial distribution was used to calculate 95% confidence limits for percentages changing from ADHD-C to ADHD-PI or to ADHD-PH when the subtype rule was changed from OR to AND.  Assignment of ADHD Types Children were assigned an ADHD Type using a two-step procedure; (1) we decided if each child met criteria as an ADHD Case and (2) for children who were classified as cases we assigned one of three subtypes (ADHD-C, ADHD-PI, or ADHD-PH). In Step 1, if a child met case criteria for either inattentive symptoms or hyperactive-impulsive symptoms (or both), he or she was declared a case. Moderate or severe impairment from these symptoms in each setting was also required for all case definitions. For this paper, we adopted the following notation to summarize inattentive and hyperactive/impulsive symptom counts by informants. The numbers of symptoms required to meet criteria are denoted by N1- N2- N3 where N1 is the number of symptoms endorsed by one informant; N2 is the number of symptoms endorsed by a second informant; and N3 is the number of unduplicated symptoms. To determine the number of unduplicated symptoms, symptoms that are reported by both informants are only counted once. For example, if a parent reported 4 inattentive symptoms and a teacher reported 3 of the same inattentive symptoms, that would count as 4 unduplicated symptoms, not as 7. However, if 2 of the 3 symptoms reported by the teacher were different from the symptoms reported by the parent, there would be 6 unduplicated symptoms. The DSM-IV ADHD-Criteria require six or more inattentive symptoms or six or more hyperactive-impulsive symptoms, so we required at least 6 unduplicated symptoms (N3 = 6) for all case definitions. As noted above, there are two types of procedures for combining informant data, AND rules and OR rules. The main difference between the two methods is that OR rules combine symptoms from both informants but do not impose specific requirements on each informant. That is, they only use N3, the number of unduplicated symptoms. AND rules also combine symptoms but, in addition, include informant-specific requirements. They use N1, N2, and N3. We will use X/Y to denote whether AND or OR rules were used to combine symptoms in Step 1 (case determination) and in Step 2 (subtype determination), respectively. For example the notation AND/OR means that the AND rule was used for case determination and the OR rule was used to determine the subtype. An OR rule was used in the DSM-IV ADHD field trials ( Lahey et al., 1994 ) and subsequently by others ( Mitsis et al., 2000 ). AND rules also have been used by several investigators to define cases ( Mill et al., 2006 ; Mota & Schachar, 2000 ; Schachar et al., 2007 ; Weiler et al., 1999 ). The difference between AND rules and OR rules has important implications for subtyping as illustrated in the following example comparing subtype determination under a 6-4-6 AND/AND rule and a 6-4-6 AND/OR rule. Suppose that the parent of an elementary school girl reported 6 inattentive symptoms and 4 hyperactive-impulsive symptoms; her teacher reported 7 inattentive symptoms and 2 hyperactive-impulsive symptoms; and after combining parent and teacher reports, there were 7 unduplicated inattentive symptoms and 6 unduplicated hyperactive-impulsive symptoms. The symptom counts for this child are 6-7-7 for inattentive symptoms and 4-2-6 for hyperactive-impulsive symptoms. These symptom counts meet 6-4-6 AND case criteria for inattentive symptoms, but not for hyperactive-impulsive symptoms. Consequently, the girl would be classified as a case in Step 1. If an AND rule was used to determine subtype in Step 2 (6-4-6 AND/AND), the girl would be classified as ADHD-PI since she meets the AND criteria for inattentive symptoms but does not meet the AND criteria for hyperactive-impulsive symptoms. In contrast, if the subtype was based on OR criteria (6-4-6 AND/OR), she would be classified as ADHD-C since she meets OR criteria for both types of symptoms. As shown in this example, it is possible for a child who is classified as ADHD-C by the less restrictive OR rule to be classified as ADHD-PI or ADHD-PH when the more restrictive AND rule is used. A child who is classified as ADHD-C by the AND rule will always be classified as ADHD-C by the OR rule.  Data Analysis Our goal was to explore how sensitive the subtype distribution was to changes in the methods used to combine symptoms across informants. We first examined the subtype distribution using symptom-reports from only one informant (either teacher or parent). Cases had to have at least 6 inattentive or 6 hyperactive-impulsive symptoms. Because an AND rule or an OR rule could be used at either step, there are four possible combinations – OR/OR, OR/AND, AND/OR, and AND/AND. However, one combination OR/AND, while theoretically possible, probably would never be used because if one uses a lenient definition for defining cases and a restrictive definition for defining subtype, this creates a group of cases who do not meet the restrictive criteria and cannot be subtyped. We therefore evaluated the impact of the other three rule combinations on the ADHD subtype distribution. Most of these case-definitions were taken from published reports but a few combinations we had not seen were included for illustration purposes. Finally we looked within each AND/OR and AND/AND combination to see whether the subtype distribution differed by symptom threshold used. Some analyses could only be done in a random sample of study participants, not the whole population. A chi-square test was used to test subtype distributions for teacher ratings in the random sample compared to those who were not in the random sample in order to evaluate the validity of this approach. The binomial distribution was used to calculate 95% confidence limits for percentages changing from ADHD-C to ADHD-PI or to ADHD-PH when the subtype rule was changed from OR to AND.  Results Table 2 presents the demographic composition of the potential case pool in our population. Almost three quarters of the potential cases were male, and about a third were non-white. About two thirds were in grades 1–3. Table 3 shows the distribution of the three subtypes (ADHD-C, ADHD-PI, and ADHD-PH) in our data using different rules for combining symptom reports from parents and teachers to assign case status and subtype. When we only used teacher data ( Table 3 , line A1), ADHD-PI occurred most often, which replicated the pattern we observed in the literature. Almost 60% of the cases were ADHD-PI. Because we used a two-step sampling procedure that required at least 3 inattentive or 3 hyperactive-impulsive symptoms at school for children who were not in the random sample and who were not taking medication we could only examine the distribution of ADHD Types using parent data in the random sample (among 82 cases from the 509 participants) ( Figure 1 ). Using parent data from the random sample, ADHD-C and ADHD-PI occurred in about equal proportions (Line A2). This pattern was different from what we found in the teacher-only data and did not replicate the pattern we observed in the literature for parent-only studies ( Table 1 ). We also checked the subtype distribution for teacher data using only the random sample. There were 50 cases with 24% classified as ADHD-C; 64% classified as ADHD-PI; and 12% classified as ADHD-PH. This distribution was not significantly different from the distribution of the 299 cases who were not included in the random sample (p=0.56). 10 Using the OR rule to assign case status and to assign subtypes (as was done in the DSM-IV field trials) created almost an equal distribution of ADHD-C and ADHD-PI and a relatively large proportion of ADHD-PH (14%) (line B1, Table 3 ). This subtype distribution, like the parent-only distribution, had to be based on the random sample which is why the number of cases is only 100. We initially used a 3-3-6 AND rule to assign case status and an OR rule to assign subtype (3-3-6 AND/OR). Using this approach (line C1) ADHD-C predominated (66%), ADHD-PI occurred in almost a third of the cases, and ADHD-PH became rare. If, for exactly the same cases, we used an AND rule to define case status and an AND rule to define subtype (3-3-6 AND/AND), the distribution shifted, ADHD-PI predominated (53%), ADHD-C became less common (36%) and ADHD-PH increased to 10% (line D1). Table 4 rearranges some information in Table 3 to show the subtype shifts between AND/OR and AND/AND procedures for three different case definitions. Under a 3-3-6 case definition, 36% (100/275) (95% CI: 31% to 42%) of the 275 children who were classified as ADHD-C when subtyped by OR were reclassified as ADHD-PI when subtyped by AND ( Table 4 ). An additional 8% (23/275) (95% CI: 5% to 12%) who were classified as ADHD-C under the OR subtype rule were re-classified as ADHD-PH under the AND subtype rule. Similarly, when we used a 6-4-6 AND rule for case determination and an OR rule for subtype determination (6-4-6 AND/OR), there was a preponderance of ADHD-C (72%) with lower percentages of ADHD-PI (26%) and ADHD-PH (2%) ( Table 3 , Line C2). Under a 6-4-6 AND/AND rule, the subtype distribution shifted toward ADHD-PI (59%) with an increase in the percentage of ADHD-PH (13%) and a decrease in the percentage of ADHD-C (29%) (Line D2). This shift occurs because 46% (109/239) (95% CI: 39% to 52%) of those who were classified as ADHD-C by the OR criterion were classified as ADHD-PI by the AND criterion, and 14% of the ADHD-C cases (34/239) (95% CI: 10% to 19%) changed to ADHD-PH when the subtype rule was changed from OR to AND ( Table 4 ). Under a 6-6-6 AND/OR definition, ADHD-C predominated (75%) with lower frequencies for ADHD-PI (22%) and ADHD-PH (2%) ( Table 3 , Line C3). When the subtype rule was changed from OR to AND, the frequency for ADHD-C decreased substantially (21%) and the frequencies for ADHD-PI (62%) and ADHD-PH (17%) increased (Line D3). This shift occurred because 53% of the ADHD-C cases (84/159) (95% CI: 45% to 61%) changed to ADHD-PI and 19% of ADHD-C (30/159) (95% CI: 13% to 26%) changed to ADHD-PH ( Table 4 ). In sum, a substantial percentage (45% (95 CI: 39% to 51%) for 3-3-6, 60% (53%–66%) for 6-4-6, and 72% (64% to 79%) for 6-6-6) of those who are classified as ADHD-C by OR rules become ADHD-PI or ADHD-PH when AND rules are applied during the subtyping step ( Table 4 ). The subtyping rules are deterministic. Logically only some changes are possible because AND rules are more stringent than OR rules. Participants who are classified as ADHD-C under AND/OR rules can be ADHD-C, ADHD-PI, or ADHD-PH under AND/AND. Participants who are classified as ADHD-PI or ADHD-PH under AND/OR rules will remain the same subtype under AND/AND rules ( Table 4 ). When we looked at different symptom cutoffs within each AND/OR combination, the subtype distributions were relatively constant ( Table 3 , lines C1–C3 and lines D1–D3). This result suggests that how AND and OR rules are used is more important in shaping the subtype distribution than the symptom threshold used to define ADHD cases.  Results Table 2 presents the demographic composition of the potential case pool in our population. Almost three quarters of the potential cases were male, and about a third were non-white. About two thirds were in grades 1–3. Table 3 shows the distribution of the three subtypes (ADHD-C, ADHD-PI, and ADHD-PH) in our data using different rules for combining symptom reports from parents and teachers to assign case status and subtype. When we only used teacher data ( Table 3 , line A1), ADHD-PI occurred most often, which replicated the pattern we observed in the literature. Almost 60% of the cases were ADHD-PI. Because we used a two-step sampling procedure that required at least 3 inattentive or 3 hyperactive-impulsive symptoms at school for children who were not in the random sample and who were not taking medication we could only examine the distribution of ADHD Types using parent data in the random sample (among 82 cases from the 509 participants) ( Figure 1 ). Using parent data from the random sample, ADHD-C and ADHD-PI occurred in about equal proportions (Line A2). This pattern was different from what we found in the teacher-only data and did not replicate the pattern we observed in the literature for parent-only studies ( Table 1 ). We also checked the subtype distribution for teacher data using only the random sample. There were 50 cases with 24% classified as ADHD-C; 64% classified as ADHD-PI; and 12% classified as ADHD-PH. This distribution was not significantly different from the distribution of the 299 cases who were not included in the random sample (p=0.56). 10 Using the OR rule to assign case status and to assign subtypes (as was done in the DSM-IV field trials) created almost an equal distribution of ADHD-C and ADHD-PI and a relatively large proportion of ADHD-PH (14%) (line B1, Table 3 ). This subtype distribution, like the parent-only distribution, had to be based on the random sample which is why the number of cases is only 100. We initially used a 3-3-6 AND rule to assign case status and an OR rule to assign subtype (3-3-6 AND/OR). Using this approach (line C1) ADHD-C predominated (66%), ADHD-PI occurred in almost a third of the cases, and ADHD-PH became rare. If, for exactly the same cases, we used an AND rule to define case status and an AND rule to define subtype (3-3-6 AND/AND), the distribution shifted, ADHD-PI predominated (53%), ADHD-C became less common (36%) and ADHD-PH increased to 10% (line D1). Table 4 rearranges some information in Table 3 to show the subtype shifts between AND/OR and AND/AND procedures for three different case definitions. Under a 3-3-6 case definition, 36% (100/275) (95% CI: 31% to 42%) of the 275 children who were classified as ADHD-C when subtyped by OR were reclassified as ADHD-PI when subtyped by AND ( Table 4 ). An additional 8% (23/275) (95% CI: 5% to 12%) who were classified as ADHD-C under the OR subtype rule were re-classified as ADHD-PH under the AND subtype rule. Similarly, when we used a 6-4-6 AND rule for case determination and an OR rule for subtype determination (6-4-6 AND/OR), there was a preponderance of ADHD-C (72%) with lower percentages of ADHD-PI (26%) and ADHD-PH (2%) ( Table 3 , Line C2). Under a 6-4-6 AND/AND rule, the subtype distribution shifted toward ADHD-PI (59%) with an increase in the percentage of ADHD-PH (13%) and a decrease in the percentage of ADHD-C (29%) (Line D2). This shift occurs because 46% (109/239) (95% CI: 39% to 52%) of those who were classified as ADHD-C by the OR criterion were classified as ADHD-PI by the AND criterion, and 14% of the ADHD-C cases (34/239) (95% CI: 10% to 19%) changed to ADHD-PH when the subtype rule was changed from OR to AND ( Table 4 ). Under a 6-6-6 AND/OR definition, ADHD-C predominated (75%) with lower frequencies for ADHD-PI (22%) and ADHD-PH (2%) ( Table 3 , Line C3). When the subtype rule was changed from OR to AND, the frequency for ADHD-C decreased substantially (21%) and the frequencies for ADHD-PI (62%) and ADHD-PH (17%) increased (Line D3). This shift occurred because 53% of the ADHD-C cases (84/159) (95% CI: 45% to 61%) changed to ADHD-PI and 19% of ADHD-C (30/159) (95% CI: 13% to 26%) changed to ADHD-PH ( Table 4 ). In sum, a substantial percentage (45% (95 CI: 39% to 51%) for 3-3-6, 60% (53%–66%) for 6-4-6, and 72% (64% to 79%) for 6-6-6) of those who are classified as ADHD-C by OR rules become ADHD-PI or ADHD-PH when AND rules are applied during the subtyping step ( Table 4 ). The subtyping rules are deterministic. Logically only some changes are possible because AND rules are more stringent than OR rules. Participants who are classified as ADHD-C under AND/OR rules can be ADHD-C, ADHD-PI, or ADHD-PH under AND/AND. Participants who are classified as ADHD-PI or ADHD-PH under AND/OR rules will remain the same subtype under AND/AND rules ( Table 4 ). When we looked at different symptom cutoffs within each AND/OR combination, the subtype distributions were relatively constant ( Table 3 , lines C1–C3 and lines D1–D3). This result suggests that how AND and OR rules are used is more important in shaping the subtype distribution than the symptom threshold used to define ADHD cases.  Discussion In a seminal paper, Mitis et al ( Mitsis et al., 2000 ) reported that using reports from one informant to assign ADHD subtypes yielded a different subtype distribution than when both parent and teacher data were utilized. To our knowledge this finding in a clinical sample has not previously been demonstrated in a population-based sample, although epidemiologists studying ADHD are well aware that prevalence estimates can shift markedly depending on the case definition of ADHD ( Boyle et al., 1996 ; Cohen, Riccio, & Gonzalez, 1994 ; Lambert, Sandoval, & Sassone, 1978 ). In this community-based epidemiologic study, we estimated the distribution of the three ADHD subtypes under various scenarios. We found that the relative distribution of the three Types shifted – sometimes dramatically - depending on how informant information was used and combined. The subtype distribution shifted markedly depending on how AND or OR rules were paired to define cases and subtype. In contrast, within a set of rules, increasing the number of symptoms required to become a case had less impact on the distribution. The subtype distribution when the teacher was the only informant was closer to the AND/AND rules for two informants than to the AND/OR rules. Our results are consistent with two previous studies that reported differences in the distribution of the subtypes based on the rules used to define the Types. Weiler et al. suggested that the prevalence of the ADHD Types might differ depending on how parent or teacher data were used ( Weiler et al., 1999 ). Mitsis et al demonstrated in a clinic sample of 74 children that the distribution of the ADHD Types depended on whether informant symptom reports were combined ( Mitsis et al., 2000 ). They noted that “compared with diagnoses based on reports from a single informant, combining information across informants greatly increased the rate of ADHD-C, while substantially diminishing the rate of non-diagnosis. Furthermore, when parent and teacher reports are combined…ADHD-I (PI) and ADHD-H (PH) become relatively rare.” Interpreting the subtype literature is presently difficult because the methods sections of many papers do not distinguish whether an OR or an AND method was used to define cases or to assign subtypes. The methods that authors have used to define cases and to assign subtypes need to become more explicit if we are going to make progress understanding the ADHD subtypes. It is widely appreciated that subtle changes in case definition can have a major impact on prevalence estimates ( Boyle et al., 1996 ; Cohen et al., 1994 ; Lambert et al., 1978 ). It seems less widely appreciated that the methods used to combine symptom reports by different informants can influence the subtype distribution. Our results suggest that there may be problems with current estimates of the ADHD subtype distribution. Many published reports are limited by reliance on only one informant. Because DSM-IV stipulates that symptoms causing impairment must be present in two or more settings, studies that only used one informant and did not include information about symptoms and impairment in different settings should receive less credence than studies that followed the DSM-IV criteria more closely by using multiple informants to provide information about the child’s behavior in those settings. In addition, because our results suggest that how symptoms are combined is crucial in understanding the subtype distribution, calculating the distribution based only on teacher reports or only on parent reports may be misleading. To understand the true ADHD subtype distribution, as well as the important correlates and outcomes associated with the different subtypes, we need more studies that integrate information from both parents and teachers and which are explicit about the methods used to combine informant information. Because referral patterns make clinic populations subject to complex biases ( Goodman et al., 1997 ), more population-based studies are needed. The ADHD field trials relied on a clinic sample ( Lahey et al., 1994 ); it is not clear how the sampling strategy that they used may have influenced the subtype distribution that they observed. In addition to generating more reliable estimates of the distribution of the three subtypes, standardizing the methods used to assign subtypes would have other benefits because a major source of variability between studies would have been eliminated. The ADHD literature has not been able to identify a consistent set of neuropsychological or genetic correlates for the three subtypes. Standardizing the methods used to assign subtypes will reduce some of the variability between studies and may reveal important differences and new insights.  Discussion In a seminal paper, Mitis et al ( Mitsis et al., 2000 ) reported that using reports from one informant to assign ADHD subtypes yielded a different subtype distribution than when both parent and teacher data were utilized. To our knowledge this finding in a clinical sample has not previously been demonstrated in a population-based sample, although epidemiologists studying ADHD are well aware that prevalence estimates can shift markedly depending on the case definition of ADHD ( Boyle et al., 1996 ; Cohen, Riccio, & Gonzalez, 1994 ; Lambert, Sandoval, & Sassone, 1978 ). In this community-based epidemiologic study, we estimated the distribution of the three ADHD subtypes under various scenarios. We found that the relative distribution of the three Types shifted – sometimes dramatically - depending on how informant information was used and combined. The subtype distribution shifted markedly depending on how AND or OR rules were paired to define cases and subtype. In contrast, within a set of rules, increasing the number of symptoms required to become a case had less impact on the distribution. The subtype distribution when the teacher was the only informant was closer to the AND/AND rules for two informants than to the AND/OR rules. Our results are consistent with two previous studies that reported differences in the distribution of the subtypes based on the rules used to define the Types. Weiler et al. suggested that the prevalence of the ADHD Types might differ depending on how parent or teacher data were used ( Weiler et al., 1999 ). Mitsis et al demonstrated in a clinic sample of 74 children that the distribution of the ADHD Types depended on whether informant symptom reports were combined ( Mitsis et al., 2000 ). They noted that “compared with diagnoses based on reports from a single informant, combining information across informants greatly increased the rate of ADHD-C, while substantially diminishing the rate of non-diagnosis. Furthermore, when parent and teacher reports are combined…ADHD-I (PI) and ADHD-H (PH) become relatively rare.” Interpreting the subtype literature is presently difficult because the methods sections of many papers do not distinguish whether an OR or an AND method was used to define cases or to assign subtypes. The methods that authors have used to define cases and to assign subtypes need to become more explicit if we are going to make progress understanding the ADHD subtypes. It is widely appreciated that subtle changes in case definition can have a major impact on prevalence estimates ( Boyle et al., 1996 ; Cohen et al., 1994 ; Lambert et al., 1978 ). It seems less widely appreciated that the methods used to combine symptom reports by different informants can influence the subtype distribution. Our results suggest that there may be problems with current estimates of the ADHD subtype distribution. Many published reports are limited by reliance on only one informant. Because DSM-IV stipulates that symptoms causing impairment must be present in two or more settings, studies that only used one informant and did not include information about symptoms and impairment in different settings should receive less credence than studies that followed the DSM-IV criteria more closely by using multiple informants to provide information about the child’s behavior in those settings. In addition, because our results suggest that how symptoms are combined is crucial in understanding the subtype distribution, calculating the distribution based only on teacher reports or only on parent reports may be misleading. To understand the true ADHD subtype distribution, as well as the important correlates and outcomes associated with the different subtypes, we need more studies that integrate information from both parents and teachers and which are explicit about the methods used to combine informant information. Because referral patterns make clinic populations subject to complex biases ( Goodman et al., 1997 ), more population-based studies are needed. The ADHD field trials relied on a clinic sample ( Lahey et al., 1994 ); it is not clear how the sampling strategy that they used may have influenced the subtype distribution that they observed. In addition to generating more reliable estimates of the distribution of the three subtypes, standardizing the methods used to assign subtypes would have other benefits because a major source of variability between studies would have been eliminated. The ADHD literature has not been able to identify a consistent set of neuropsychological or genetic correlates for the three subtypes. Standardizing the methods used to assign subtypes will reduce some of the variability between studies and may reveal important differences and new insights.  Limitations We collected data about hyperactive-impulsive and inattentive symptoms among elementary school students in one North Carolina County. It is not clear how well the results of this study would apply to other U.S. populations. In our population, a substantial proportion of ADHD-C under OR rules became ADHD-PI or ADHD-PH under AND rules. We think that this general pattern is likely to be repeated in any other populations being studied because OR rules are less stringent than AND rules. Replication in other populations, however, would verify whether the magnitude of change we observed occurs in most other situations. For this reason, we hope other investigators will try to replicate these findings in other samples. It is also important to recognize that we examined a series of epidemiologic case definitions of ADHD in this study. Although all case definitions required at least 6 hyperactive-impulsive symptoms or at least 6 inattentive symptoms and evidence of impairment from these symptoms, these epidemiologic case definitions are not identical to a clinical diagnosis of ADHD. For example, we did not interview the children in our study, apply the age-at-onset criteria or rule out other competing conditions. Although we do not believe that the basic findings of this study would change if a complete diagnostic workup were used to identify cases instead of our epidemiologic methods, this would be important to confirm in subsequent research.  Limitations We collected data about hyperactive-impulsive and inattentive symptoms among elementary school students in one North Carolina County. It is not clear how well the results of this study would apply to other U.S. populations. In our population, a substantial proportion of ADHD-C under OR rules became ADHD-PI or ADHD-PH under AND rules. We think that this general pattern is likely to be repeated in any other populations being studied because OR rules are less stringent than AND rules. Replication in other populations, however, would verify whether the magnitude of change we observed occurs in most other situations. For this reason, we hope other investigators will try to replicate these findings in other samples. It is also important to recognize that we examined a series of epidemiologic case definitions of ADHD in this study. Although all case definitions required at least 6 hyperactive-impulsive symptoms or at least 6 inattentive symptoms and evidence of impairment from these symptoms, these epidemiologic case definitions are not identical to a clinical diagnosis of ADHD. For example, we did not interview the children in our study, apply the age-at-onset criteria or rule out other competing conditions. Although we do not believe that the basic findings of this study would change if a complete diagnostic workup were used to identify cases instead of our epidemiologic methods, this would be important to confirm in subsequent research.  Conclusion Of the different combinations of approaches used to define ADHD cases and subtypes, no method is inherently “correct”. Although the “OR” method was used in the DSM-IV field trials and is the simplest rule for combining informant information in epidemiologic studies, many researchers prefer more restrictive AND rules that require some concordance in observer’s reports. Among study populations that receive the most careful screening, several levels of screening procedures are typical, that is participants must meet criteria on multiple measures ( Hinshaw, 2002 ; Hinshaw et al., 1997 ; Stawicki et al., 2006 ). How does this selection process influence the subtype distributions of these studies? Do the participants in these study populations more closely resemble epidemiologic samples that have been screened by the AND Method, the OR method, or neither? Given the wide fluctuations in the subtype distribution that are possible when the rules are vague, it would be desirable to standardize procedures for assigning ADHD subtypes or, at least, to urge authors to make their methods for combining informant reports explicit. Otherwise, it is difficult to compare results across studies. In the meantime, the subtype literature should be read with caution; in particular, studies that used OR rules to define case status and subtype should not be compared to studies that used AND rules to determine case status and subtype. Which of the approaches to combining symptoms is best is not clear, although the implications are important. Additional research is needed to determine which subtype distribution and methods for creating it seems to best fit the underlying biologic (genetic, neuropsychological, etiologic and treatment) models of the subtypes. In the DSM-IV field trials, Lahey et al wrote that “Taken together, these findings suggest that the DSM-IV types of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder are distinct in a number of ways, but tests are needed in future studies of possible differences in etiology, clinical course, and response to treatment among the three types” ( Lahey et al., 1994 ). Thirteen years later, this picture has not changed much. We propose that methodologic differences in how research groups combined informant reports may have muddied the waters and contributed to the slow progress in differentiating the subtypes in their etiology, clinical course, and response to treatment. In the meantime, we suggest that the DSM-V workgroups address the variability in the ADHD subtypes by proposing more explicit and detailed guidelines about how symptom and impairment information from different informants should be combined. Standardized criteria for assigning ADHD subtypes would have important implications for treatment, research, and prevention. 