Effect of Transforming Viruses on Molecular Mechanisms Associated With Cancer Viruses have been linked to approximately 20% of all human tumors worldwide. These transforming viruses encode viral oncoproteins that interact with cellular proteins to enhance viral replication. The transcriptional and post-transcriptional effects of these viral oncoproteins ultimately result in cellular transformation. Historically, viral research has been vital to the discovery of oncogenes and tumor suppressors with more current research aiding in unraveling some mechanisms of carcinogenesis. Interestingly, since transforming viruses affect some of the same pathways that are dysregulated in human cancers, their study enhances our understanding of the multistep process of tumorigenesis. This review will examine the cellular mechanisms targeted by oncogenic human viruses and the processes by which these effects contribute to transformation. In particular, we will focus on three transforming viruses, human T-cell leukemia virus type-I, hepatitis B virus and human papillomavirus. These viruses all encode specific oncogenes that promote cell cycle progression, inhibit DNA damage checkpoint responses and prevent programmed cell death in an effort to promote viral propagation. While the transforming properties of these viruses are probably unintended consequences of replication strategies, they provide excellent systems in which to study cancer development.  Conclusion This review has focused on the molecular mechanisms of transformation associated with three human oncogenic viruses. While we have focused on specific aspects of viral transformation mechanisms, it should be noted that in some cases these viruses can exert dual effects on some of the pathways described. Although there is extensive information on the cellular effects of viral oncoproteins, we have tried to briefly compare and contrast the transforming properties of HTLV-1, HBV, and HPV. Similar to the mutational process of cancer induction, these viruses affect cellular processes required for cell cycle progression, DNA damage response and cell death. We have highlighted some of the major effects that these viral oncogenes exert on these pathways in an effort to promote viral replication and survival. While the transcriptional and cell cycle effects of these viruses are well studied, there are still black holes in our understanding of how oncogenic viruses influence the cell. Of particular importance is the inhibition of DNA damage signaling pathways by these viral oncoproteins. With the recent suggestion that DNA repair pathways have a tumor suppressor effect in response to oncogene activation, and the fact that defects in these pathways quickly lead to the accumulation of mutations, it is of great interest to understand how viral oncoproteins influence cellular responses to environmental damage and cellular stress. Further research into cellular factors targeted by viral oncoproteins and their effects on viral replication could provide new insight into the multiple functions of cellular proteins and provide a better understanding of why viruses have evolved to target these cellular functions. 