Impact of Body Mass Index on Biochemical Recurrence Rates After Radical Prostatectomy: An Analysis Utilizing Propensity Score Matching OBJECTIVES To investigate the significance of body mass index (BMI) as an independent predictor of biochemical recurrence in men treated with surgery for clinically localized adenocarcinoma of the prostate. METHODS A total of 1877 obese patients who underwent radical prostatectomy were matched to overweight and normal-weight patients in a 1:1 ratio on the basis of propensity scores. This resulted in an overall study population of 5631 men. Clinicopathologic characteristics and biochemical recurrence outcomes after surgery were compared between the three BMI cohorts. RESULTS Normal-weight patients exhibited lower-grade disease compared with overweight and obese patients ( P = 0.021). Lower BMI was also significantly associated with lower rates of positive surgical margins ( P <0.001) and extraprostatic extension ( P <0.001). Body mass index was not associated with lymph node involvement ( P = 0.226) or seminal vesicle invasion ( P = 0.142). Body mass index, age, biopsy Gleason score, preoperative prostate-specific antigen level, and clinical tumor stage were independent predictors of biochemical recurrence ( P <0.001). CONCLUSIONS Propensity score– based matched analyses indicate that higher BMI is associated with adverse pathologic findings and is a strong independent predictor of biochemical recurrence after radical prostatectomy. These results support the hypothesis that inherent differences may exist in the biological properties of prostate cancer in obese men compared with normal-weight men. Therefore, BMI is an important criterion to consider during subsequent decision making and counseling of patients with prostate cancer.  MATERIAL AND METHODS Between 1984 and 2006, more than 14,800 men underwent RP for clinically localized adenocarcinoma of the prostate at our institution. Information regarding BMI was available for 12,804 patients. Patients treated with neoadjuvant hormonal therapy (n = 196), clinical stage T1a or T1b disease (n = 173), and incomplete preoperative information including preoperative PSA level (n = 381), clinical stage (n = 32), biopsy Gleason score (n = 29), and race (n = 38) were excluded. This resulted in a population of 11,790 patients, who were then stratified according to BMI as normal weight (BMI less than 25 kg/m2, n = 3365), overweight (BMI 25 to 29.9 kg/m2, n = 6548), and obese (BMI 30 or more kg/m2, n = 1877). Patients in the normal-weight and overweight cohorts were matched 1:1 to the cohort of obese patients on the basis of propensity scores. Therefore, a total of 5631 men formed the overall study population. A subset (n = 2796) of the 14,800 patients has been previously analyzed but not in a matched fashion. 14 Data for our study were obtained and analyzed according to an approved institutional review board protocol. Propensity scores were used to match members of the three BMI cohorts according to a range of characteristics, as previously described. 19 , 20 Propensity scores were calculated for each patient using multivariable logistic regression according to the following covariates: age, preoperative PSA level, year of surgery, biopsy Gleason score, and clinical tumor stage. This method is an approach to control for imbalances in confounding factors among discrete study cohorts. Continuous and categoric factors are combined to yield a propensity score for each individual in the study population, then individuals in each of the different study cohorts are matched to those in the reference cohort on the basis of their calculated propensity scores. The greatest advantage of implementing this method of matching is that variables are weighted by their relative importance rather than being assigned equal weights. Furthermore, it has been shown that cohort means and standard deviations related to covariates used for matching are equivalent when composite propensity scores are matched. Matching was performed with a computer application implemented in SPSS by Painter to select for the most similar propensity scores across each of the different BMI strata in a 1:1 ratio with respect to the reference group of patients who were obese. We compared the clinical and pathologic characteristics of the three BMI cohorts using chi-square test for categoric and one-way analysis of variance for continuous variables. Patient age, preoperative PSA values, and year of surgery were evaluated as continuous variables. Clinical stage, biopsy, and prostatectomy Gleason score (6 or less, 7, 8 to 10), and race (white or black) were considered categoric variables. Pathologic stage was treated as a single variable categorized into organ-confined status, extraprostatic extension, and seminal vesicle and lymph node involvement, with each category mutually exclusive. The time to PSA recurrence was compared among groups by a Cox proportional hazards model with forward stepwise selection. The actuarial risk of PSA recurrence was calculated with the Kaplan-Meier method and compared across the three BMI cohorts with the log-rank test. All statistical analyses were performed with SPSS 13.0 (SPSS, Chicago, Ill).  RESULTS Clinical and pathologic characteristics of the three matched study cohorts are shown in Table 1 . Overall mean follow-up (± standard deviation) was 4.5 ± 3.8 years for the entire cohort of patients. Mean follow-up was 4.7 ± 3.9, 4.6 ± 3.8, and 4.3 ± 3.7 years for normal-weight, overweight, and obese patients, respectively. There were no statistically significant differences with respect to the variables used for propensity score matching, including patient age at the time of surgery ( P = 0.988), preoperative PSA level ( P = 0.204), median year of surgery ( P = 0.830), biopsy Gleason score ( P = 0.765), and clinical tumor stage ( P = 0.880). These results indicate that the three different BMI patient cohorts were well matched with respect to established preoperative variables. Examination of postoperative variables, including prostatectomy Gleason score, demonstrated significant differences across BMI cohorts. Normal-weight patients exhibited higher rates of lower-grade disease ( P = 0.021) compared with overweight and obese patients. Lower BMI was also significantly associated with lower rates of positive surgical margins ( P <0.001). Higher BMI was statistically associated with worse pathologic stage ( P <0.001). Furthermore, normal-weight patients demonstrated significantly lower prostate specimen weight after RP than overweight and obese patients ( P <0.001). Table 2 demonstrates the association of preoperative variables with biochemical recurrence. In univariate proportional hazards analysis, BMI ( P <0.001), patient age ( P <0.001), race ( P = 0.001), biopsy Gleason score ( P <0.001), preoperative PSA level ( P <0.001), clinical stage ( P <0.001), and year of surgery ( P <0.001) were all predictive of biochemical recurrence after RP. In multivariable analysis, only BMI cohort ( P <0.001), age ( P <0.001), biopsy Gleason score ( P <0.001), preoperative PSA level ( P <0.001), and clinical tumor stage ( P <0.001) remained predictive of biochemical recurrence after surgery. Kaplan-Meier analysis demonstrated overall 5- and 10-year biochemical recurrence-free survival rates of 87% and 77%, respectively, for all patients included in this study (data not shown). In stratified analyses, normal-weight, overweight, and obese patients had 5- and 10-year biochemical recurrence-free survival rates of 90% and 82%, 84% and 77%, and 78% and 63%, respectively ( Fig. 1 ). Time to biochemical recurrence after surgery differed significantly across the three BMI cohorts (log-rank P value <0.001). Table 3 depicts univariate and multivariable proportional hazards analyses predicting biochemical recurrence for preoperative and postoperative characteristics combined. Univariate analyses showed significant associations between prostatectomy Gleason sum ( P <0.001), pathologic stage ( P <0.001), and positive surgical margin status ( P <0.001) with postoperative biochemical recurrence. In multivariable analyses, BMI cohort ( P = 0.001), preoperative PSA level ( P <0.001), year of surgery ( P = 0.007), prostatectomy Gleason sum ( P <0.001), pathologic stage ( P <0.001), and surgical margin status ( P <0.001) remained independent predictors of biochemical recurrence.  RESULTS Clinical and pathologic characteristics of the three matched study cohorts are shown in Table 1 . Overall mean follow-up (± standard deviation) was 4.5 ± 3.8 years for the entire cohort of patients. Mean follow-up was 4.7 ± 3.9, 4.6 ± 3.8, and 4.3 ± 3.7 years for normal-weight, overweight, and obese patients, respectively. There were no statistically significant differences with respect to the variables used for propensity score matching, including patient age at the time of surgery ( P = 0.988), preoperative PSA level ( P = 0.204), median year of surgery ( P = 0.830), biopsy Gleason score ( P = 0.765), and clinical tumor stage ( P = 0.880). These results indicate that the three different BMI patient cohorts were well matched with respect to established preoperative variables. Examination of postoperative variables, including prostatectomy Gleason score, demonstrated significant differences across BMI cohorts. Normal-weight patients exhibited higher rates of lower-grade disease ( P = 0.021) compared with overweight and obese patients. Lower BMI was also significantly associated with lower rates of positive surgical margins ( P <0.001). Higher BMI was statistically associated with worse pathologic stage ( P <0.001). Furthermore, normal-weight patients demonstrated significantly lower prostate specimen weight after RP than overweight and obese patients ( P <0.001). Table 2 demonstrates the association of preoperative variables with biochemical recurrence. In univariate proportional hazards analysis, BMI ( P <0.001), patient age ( P <0.001), race ( P = 0.001), biopsy Gleason score ( P <0.001), preoperative PSA level ( P <0.001), clinical stage ( P <0.001), and year of surgery ( P <0.001) were all predictive of biochemical recurrence after RP. In multivariable analysis, only BMI cohort ( P <0.001), age ( P <0.001), biopsy Gleason score ( P <0.001), preoperative PSA level ( P <0.001), and clinical tumor stage ( P <0.001) remained predictive of biochemical recurrence after surgery. Kaplan-Meier analysis demonstrated overall 5- and 10-year biochemical recurrence-free survival rates of 87% and 77%, respectively, for all patients included in this study (data not shown). In stratified analyses, normal-weight, overweight, and obese patients had 5- and 10-year biochemical recurrence-free survival rates of 90% and 82%, 84% and 77%, and 78% and 63%, respectively ( Fig. 1 ). Time to biochemical recurrence after surgery differed significantly across the three BMI cohorts (log-rank P value <0.001). Table 3 depicts univariate and multivariable proportional hazards analyses predicting biochemical recurrence for preoperative and postoperative characteristics combined. Univariate analyses showed significant associations between prostatectomy Gleason sum ( P <0.001), pathologic stage ( P <0.001), and positive surgical margin status ( P <0.001) with postoperative biochemical recurrence. In multivariable analyses, BMI cohort ( P = 0.001), preoperative PSA level ( P <0.001), year of surgery ( P = 0.007), prostatectomy Gleason sum ( P <0.001), pathologic stage ( P <0.001), and surgical margin status ( P <0.001) remained independent predictors of biochemical recurrence.  COMMENT It is widely accepted that there has been a dramatic stage migration among men with prostate cancer since PSA screening was introduced in the late 1980s. 21 An increasing number of men are now being diagnosed at a younger age with more favorable clinicopathologic characteristics, which makes it necessary to control for these variables by using either multivariable regression, matching, or a combination thereof. By matching patients for preoperative variables, including age, clinical stage, PSA level, biopsy Gleason score, and year of surgery, the effect of BMI on pathologic features after RP can be evaluated in more detail. We have demonstrated that overweight and obese patients are significantly more likely to exhibit adverse pathologic features and consequently worse biochemical recurrence rates after RP compared with normal-weight patients. To our knowledge, we have examined the largest cohort of patients thus far (n = 5631), investigating the relationship between BMI and biochemical recurrence using propensity score matching for control of other prognostic factors. Our data support the hypothesis that BMI is a strong independent predictor of biochemical recurrence after RP, with obese patients having worse outcomes. Basset et al. 22 showed that BMI was an independent predictor of biochemical recurrence in multivariable Cox regression analysis. This is in agreement with our findings; however, when BMI was stratified into six categories, no overall P value was reported. Furthermore, they did not adjust for pathologic variables in their analysis and focused more on preoperative data and comorbidities. A previous study by Freedland et al. 23 showed that with the exception of positive surgical margins, the association between obesity and adverse outcomes was strongest among men treated in the last 10 years. In an earlier study using the Shared Equal Access Regional Cancer Hospital (SEARCH) Database, obesity was found to be related to year of surgery and race. 13 An association between obesity and higher-grade tumors and a trend between obesity and increased risk of positive surgical margins as well as higher biochemical failure rates was also observed. This is consistent with our findings of a higher percentage of high-grade tumors, higher rates of extraprostatic extension, and higher rates of positive surgical margins in obese patients. The hazard ratios (HRs) for biochemical recurrence of overweight (HR = 0.90) and mildly obese patients (HR = 1.19) did not differ significantly from the HR for normal-weight patients. Freedland et al. found the biggest difference between normal-weight and moderately and severely obese patients (HR = 1.99). In the present study we did not differentiate between obese and severely obese patients. After adjusting for surgeon in the multivariable Cox regression analysis, overweight was no longer an independent predictor of biochemical recurrence (data not shown). However, overall BMI and obesity remained independent predictors of worse biochemical recurrence outcomes. One limitation that may affect our study is selection bias, because we did not include potential comorbidities in our analyses. Obese patients are more likely to have comorbidities (eg, diabetes, hypertension, and vascular disease) that may influence biochemical recurrence rates. There are a number of hypotheses to explain the association between obesity, higher risk of high-grade prostate cancer, and prostate cancer progression. Alterations in hormone levels, such as estrogen, testosterone, insulin, insulin-like growth factor I, leptin, and adiponectin, or lifestyle factors have been reported to influence disease stage, grade, and biochemical recurrence rates in obese patients. 24 , 25 However, it is challenging to investigate BMI as an independent factor, because it is frequently associated with conditions (eg, smoking, high-fat diet, and diabetes) that are known to negatively impact cancer outcomes. 21 , 22 Another limitation of our study is that we did not include these important confounding factors in our analyses. Information regarding lifestyle factors or serum samples to investigate hormonal levels was not available.  CONCLUSIONS We used propensity score matching to investigate the association between BMI and clinicopathologic outcomes after RP in a large cohort of patients. Elevated BMI was associated with statistically significant higher Gleason grade, higher rates of extraprostatic extension, and higher rates of positive surgical margins. Increased BMI was also a strong independent predictor of biochemical recurrence after radical prostatectomy. Therefore, BMI is an important criterion to consider during clinical decision making and counseling patients for management of prostate cancer. 