Colchicine-associated Ring Mitosis in Liver Biopsy and Their Clinical Implications Colchicine is an alkaloid with antimitotic activity used to treat a variety of medical conditions. Colchicine toxicity can result in multiorgan failure and death. In recent years, the histopathologic features of colchicine toxicity in various organs that is, gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, salivary glands, muscle, and skin have been described. However, the histopathologic manifestations of colchicine in the liver have not been reported. We present the case of a 54-year-old man with transfusion acquired chronic hepatitis C and longstanding gout managed with colchicine. A liver biopsy performed showed changes consistent with chronic hepatitis C along with many scattered mitoses arrested in metaphase in the hepatocytes that have been referred to as “ring” mitoses. The current liver biopsy was compared with the biopsy from 7 years ago, which appeared similar, however, ring mitoses were absent. Ring mitosis have been associated with colchicine-mediated tissue injury in various other sites, and their presence is felt to represent colchicine-induced liver injury in this case.  DISCUSSION At a cellular level, colchicine is an antimitotic agent that inhibits mitosis by preventing the polymerization of tubulin, 11 , 12 a constituent microtubule protein, thereby disturbing those processes dependent on microtubule function such as cell motility, intracellular movement, cell polarity, and mitosis. 13 This results in a failure of spindle formation, thus, preventing normal chromosomal movement and replication. Consequently, the toxicities of colchicine are most apparent in tissues with a high mitotic rate such as hair follicles, bone marrow, and gastrointestinal epithelium. The histopathologic features of colchicine toxicity in biopsies from the gastrointestinal tract have recently been described, with epithelial pseudostratification, loss of cellular polarity, and increased number of ring mitotic figures. 14 The most obvious changes occur in the gastric antrum and duodenum with relative sparing of the fundic and body mucosa. 14 Ki-67 staining reveals widening of the proliferative region of the gut mucosa. Other studies have also described increased mitotic figures in the bone marrow, lymph nodes, endometrium, bladder, and renal tubular epithelium. 14 , 15 Autopsy studies of colchicine-toxic patients describe arrested mitosis in lymph nodes, spleen, colon, small intestine, esophagus, kidney, urinary tract, and respiratory tract. 15 – 20 In 1936, these arrested mitoses were dubbed colchicine figures, 21 a term which was widely used in the literature. 21 – 24 The pathogenesis of epithelial injury as a result of colchicine seems to be caused by a loss of cellular renewal. 25 Atrophy of proliferative epithelium is hypothesized to be owing to extensive mitotic arrest. On the other hand, sometimes as the effects of colchicine wear off, a duration of intense compensatory proliferation leads to the hyperplasia of epithelial tissues. The histologic features of increased mitotic figures and loss of polarity along with epithelial pseudostratification may mimic epithelial dysplasia. The lack of nuclear hyperchromasia or atypia and general preservation of architecture helps to distinguish colchicine toxicity from genuine dysplasia. The differential diagnosis to be kept in mind while looking for apoptosis associated with colchicine are chronic nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug use, viral infections, and graft versus host disease. 4 In our case, one could ask if the patient has colchicine toxicity or the findings merely represent a histologic marker of use of this drug, and a conclusive proof is lacking. Inability to withdraw the medication makes it difficult to conclude that liver enzyme abnormalities are due to colchicine and not merely chronic hepatitis C. However, owing to strong evidence that similar changes in other organs and tissues represent colchicine toxicity, we believe these histologic changes to represent colchicine hepatotoxicity. Increasing loose stools also supports this interpretation. It is also recognized that although many patients are on colchicine, finding ring mitosis is not a common finding in tissue biopsies in practice. It is also likely that as the cell proliferation increases in various tissues in patients taking colchicine, the chances of finding cells arrested in metaphase with ring mitosis also increases, and in some cases the cell proliferation may be stimulated by drug injury. Increased number of cells arrested in metaphase mitoses owing to colchicine during tissue regeneration may contribute to drug toxicity or accentuate tissue injury owing to other disorders, for example, chronic hepatitis C in this case. Pathologists should carefully look for this finding in liver biopsies of patients on colchicine as the findings could be subtle. Clearly, more studies are needed to elucidate the clinical significance of “ring mitoses” in this setting. In summary, distinct morphologic features such as arrested metaphase mitoses (ring mitoses) and apoptosis may be seen in liver biopsy in patients taking colchicine and possibly indicate hepatotoxicity of the drug. Because treatment options available today are largely supportive and toxicity could be fatal, early recognition of the histomorphologic features of colchicine toxicity are important in the management of such patients.  DISCUSSION At a cellular level, colchicine is an antimitotic agent that inhibits mitosis by preventing the polymerization of tubulin, 11 , 12 a constituent microtubule protein, thereby disturbing those processes dependent on microtubule function such as cell motility, intracellular movement, cell polarity, and mitosis. 13 This results in a failure of spindle formation, thus, preventing normal chromosomal movement and replication. Consequently, the toxicities of colchicine are most apparent in tissues with a high mitotic rate such as hair follicles, bone marrow, and gastrointestinal epithelium. The histopathologic features of colchicine toxicity in biopsies from the gastrointestinal tract have recently been described, with epithelial pseudostratification, loss of cellular polarity, and increased number of ring mitotic figures. 14 The most obvious changes occur in the gastric antrum and duodenum with relative sparing of the fundic and body mucosa. 14 Ki-67 staining reveals widening of the proliferative region of the gut mucosa. Other studies have also described increased mitotic figures in the bone marrow, lymph nodes, endometrium, bladder, and renal tubular epithelium. 14 , 15 Autopsy studies of colchicine-toxic patients describe arrested mitosis in lymph nodes, spleen, colon, small intestine, esophagus, kidney, urinary tract, and respiratory tract. 15 – 20 In 1936, these arrested mitoses were dubbed colchicine figures, 21 a term which was widely used in the literature. 21 – 24 The pathogenesis of epithelial injury as a result of colchicine seems to be caused by a loss of cellular renewal. 25 Atrophy of proliferative epithelium is hypothesized to be owing to extensive mitotic arrest. On the other hand, sometimes as the effects of colchicine wear off, a duration of intense compensatory proliferation leads to the hyperplasia of epithelial tissues. The histologic features of increased mitotic figures and loss of polarity along with epithelial pseudostratification may mimic epithelial dysplasia. The lack of nuclear hyperchromasia or atypia and general preservation of architecture helps to distinguish colchicine toxicity from genuine dysplasia. The differential diagnosis to be kept in mind while looking for apoptosis associated with colchicine are chronic nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug use, viral infections, and graft versus host disease. 4 In our case, one could ask if the patient has colchicine toxicity or the findings merely represent a histologic marker of use of this drug, and a conclusive proof is lacking. Inability to withdraw the medication makes it difficult to conclude that liver enzyme abnormalities are due to colchicine and not merely chronic hepatitis C. However, owing to strong evidence that similar changes in other organs and tissues represent colchicine toxicity, we believe these histologic changes to represent colchicine hepatotoxicity. Increasing loose stools also supports this interpretation. It is also recognized that although many patients are on colchicine, finding ring mitosis is not a common finding in tissue biopsies in practice. It is also likely that as the cell proliferation increases in various tissues in patients taking colchicine, the chances of finding cells arrested in metaphase with ring mitosis also increases, and in some cases the cell proliferation may be stimulated by drug injury. Increased number of cells arrested in metaphase mitoses owing to colchicine during tissue regeneration may contribute to drug toxicity or accentuate tissue injury owing to other disorders, for example, chronic hepatitis C in this case. Pathologists should carefully look for this finding in liver biopsies of patients on colchicine as the findings could be subtle. Clearly, more studies are needed to elucidate the clinical significance of “ring mitoses” in this setting. In summary, distinct morphologic features such as arrested metaphase mitoses (ring mitoses) and apoptosis may be seen in liver biopsy in patients taking colchicine and possibly indicate hepatotoxicity of the drug. Because treatment options available today are largely supportive and toxicity could be fatal, early recognition of the histomorphologic features of colchicine toxicity are important in the management of such patients. 