BEHAB/brevican requires ADAMTS-mediated proteolytic cleavage to promote glioma invasion Malignant gliomas are the most common and deadly primary brain tumors, due to their infiltrative invasion of the normal neural tissue that makes them virtually impossible to completely eliminate. We have previously identified and characterized the proteoglycan BEHAB/brevican in gliomas and have demonstrated that upregulation and cleavage of this CNS-specific molecule promote glioma invasion. Here, we have further investigated if the proteolytic processing of BEHAB/brevican by metalloproteases of the ADAMTS family is a necessary step in mediating its pro-invasive effect in glioma. By generating a site-specific (396SRG398 ? NVY) mutant form resistant to ADAMTS cleavage, we have shown that the predominant proteolytic processing of BEHAB/brevican by glioma cells occurs only at this site. More importantly, “uncleavable” BEHAB/brevican is unable to enhance glioma cell invasion in vitro and tumor progression in vivo . In addition, our results suggest that the full-length protein and its cleavage products may act independently because the mutant form does not exert a dominant negative effect on normal BEHAB/brevican expression or cleavage. These results illustrate how the regulated processing of major components of the neural extracellular matrix has important functional implications in glioma progression. In addition, our findings underscore the relevance of the ADAMTS family of metalloproteases as attractive targets for novel pharmacological approaches in glioma therapy.  Materials and Methods Cells and antibodies The rat CNS-1 glioma cell line was grown at 5% CO2 in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 ?g/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad CA) [ 40 ]. These cells express and cleave B/b when grown as intracranial grafts but have no production of B/b in culture, likely due to the absence of CNS-specific inducing factors [ 33 ]. Three rabbit polyclonal anti-B/b antibodies were employed in this study: B6, against the chondroitin sulfate-attachment region (aa506–529) of rat B/b; B5, against the NH2 terminus (AA 60–73) of rat B/b; and B50, against the neoepitope QEAVESE (AA 389–395) that is exposed in the NH2-terminal fragment of B/b after cleavage by ADAMTS proteases (see Figure 1A ). These antibodies have been extensively characterized for the detection of rat and human B/b [ 38 , 39 ]. Site-directed mutagenesis Full-length rat B/b cDNA (nucleotides 60–2780 of the 3077bp full-length clone) [ 41 ] was subcloned between the BamH1-Not1 sites of the eukaryotic expression vector pCDNA3.1 (Invitrogen). The cDNA was subsequently mutated using the Quikchange site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) following the manufacturer instructions. Mutation primer 5?-GTG GAG AGC GAG AAC GTT TAC GCG ATC TAC TCC-3? (nucleotides 1230–1268 of the full-length clone) and its complementary primer were used to change the sequence 392VESE SRG AIYS402 to VESE NVY AIYS. Incorporation of the appropriate mutation was confirmed by the detection of a restriction product for the mutated sequence AACGTT (enzyme Acl-1) and by automated DNA sequencing. Cell culture and transfection CNS-1 cells were transfected employing LipofectAMINE 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer protocols. Control transfections were usually performed with the original pCDNA3.1 vector. Alternatively, control cells were stably transfected with a pBOB1.5 vector carrying the cDNA for green fluorescent protein (GFP), to facilitate their detection within the neural parenchyma. Control cells transfected with either of these vectors were undistinguishable regarding proliferation rate and invasive behavior in vitro and in vivo . For biochemical experiments, transfected cells were routinely changed to serum-free OptiMEM-I culture medium (Invitrogen) 24 hours after transfection, followed by medium collection 12 to 16 hours later. For the creation of stably transfected cells, 800 ?g/ml Geneticin (G418, Invitrogen) were added to the culture medium 24 hours after transfection. Stable pools of cells expressing B/b constructs or GFP were derived by maintaining cells in Geneticin-supplemented medium for 21 days. After selection, stably transfected cells were maintained in culture medium containing 200 ?g/ml Geneticin. Growth rate, cell proliferation and cell death Cells were cultured in 96-well plates at an initial density of 2,000 cells/well in 200 ?l of culture medium containing 2% fetal bovine serum. 100 ?l of medium were removed daily for cell death assessment (see below) and 25 ?l of 2 mg/ml MTT (3,-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) in DPBS were added to the remaining medium and cells to measure cell growth. Cells were incubated with MTT for 3 hours at 37 °C, followed by addition of 100 ?l of 40 mM hydrochloric acid in isopropanol to solubilize the resulting formazan product. Solubilization in the wells was allowed to proceed for 2 hours at 37 °C, followed by measuring of absorbance at 550 nm in a microplate reader. To quantify the daily proportion of cell death, 100 ?l of cell-free medium from each well were processed using the Cytotoxicity Detection kit (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, the amount of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) released to the medium was quantified by measuring the absorbance at 450 nm of an LDH-dependent redox product, and the proportion of cell death was calculated as the ratio of released to total LDH. Total LDH was measured each day in additional wells by solubilization of the cells with 1% v/v Triton X-100. All absorbance measurements for cell growth and death were performed in quadruplicate for each day and cell line. To quantify the proportion of effectively proliferating cells in vitro , cells were plated at an initial density of 3,000 cells/well in 48-well plates and 72 hours later fixed with cold acetone. Fixed and permeabilized cells were processed for fluorescence immunocytochemistry using an anti-Ki-67 antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, Santa Cruz, CA), and counterstained with 4?,6-diamino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). Ki-67 positive cells and total cell number were manually quantified in six random fields for each cell line, and the proliferative index was calculated as the averaged ratio of Ki-67 positive to total cells. Ki-67 staining in tumor-tissue sections yielded results essentially identical to those observed in vitro , with an undistinguishable and strikingly high proportion of Ki-67 positive cells in tumors formed by all cell lines (not shown). Brain slice invasion assay Brain slice organotypic cultures were essentially performed as described in the literature [ 42 ], with minor modifications. Briefly, postnatal day 1 CD-1 mice (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA) were decapitated on ice and their brains were removed into ice-cold HBSS containing 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 ?g/ml streptomycin and 250 ng/ml ampothericin. The meninges were quickly removed and the brains were cut coronally into 300 ?m slices using a McIlwain tissue chopper (Brinkmann Instruments. Westbury, NY). Brain slices were dissociated in HBSS and placed on a polytetrafluoroethylene membrane (0.4 ?m-pore size Millicell-CM, Millipore), suspended inside a 35mm culture dish over 1 ml of the following slice culture medium: 60% Neurobasal-A:25% HBSS:15% DMEM (containing 25 mM HEPES), supplemented with B27 supplement (Invitrogen), G5 supplement (Invitrogen), 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 ?g/ml streptomycin. Tissue slices were incubated at 37 °C in a humid incubator at 5% CO2 and the slice culture medium was changed every other day. CNS-1 cells carrying B/b constructs or pcDNA3.1 were transfected with the vector pDsRed2 (Beckton Dickinson Biosciences, Palo Alto, CA) carrying the cDNA for red fluorescent protein and plated at 1.105 cells/ml in dishes containing a 2 mm-thick layer of 1% sterile agarose, to form spherical aggregates. After 48 hours, the tumor cell aggregates were individually transferred onto the brain slices using a pulled glass capillary pipette. Fluorescent images were obtained with an inverted Nikon TE-200 microscope fitted with long working-distance objectives and a Spot II CCD camera. Images were captured at 24 hour intervals using equal exposure conditions. Total cross-sectional area occupied by the dispersed cells was quantified with ImageJ software (v1.37, National Institutes of Health), by a researcher blinded to the experimental conditions. Animal studies All studies involving animals were approved by the institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Female Lewis rats (Charles River Laboratories) were anesthetized with 75 mg/kg ketamine and 5 mg/kg xylazine and positioned in a David Kopf stereotactic instrument with the incisor bar set at 3.0 mm below the interaural line. Stably transfected CNS-1 cells at 70–80% confluence were harvested by mild trypsinization, washed once in Dullbecco’s PBS and suspended at 5.104 cells/?l in sterile PBS supplemented with 1 ?g/ml MgCl2, 1 ?g/ml CaCl2 and 0.1 % w/v glucose. Intrathalamic injections were made with a 10 ?l Hamilton syringe, fitted with a 26G beveled needle, into the right thalamus at the coordinates 2.8 mm posterior to bregma, 2.2 mm lateral to the midline, and 5.0 mm ventral to the dura. A total volume of 3 ?l of the cell suspension was injected over the course of 3 minutes and the needle was left in place for an additional minute before being slowly withdrawn. For studies of survival, cells were applied in the same conditions but at a concentration of 1.105 cells/?l. Injected animals were inspected twice daily and those that were not able to right themselves within 15 seconds of being placed on their side were considered to have reached the survival endpoint and were sacrificed. The day of sacrifice was recorded as the last day of survival. Histology and estimation of tumor volume Tumor-bearing animals were deeply anesthetized with halothane and transcardially perfused with 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, followed by ice-cold 4% phosphate-buffered paraformaldehyde. Brains were dissected, post-fixed, cryoprotected and completely sectioned coronally at 40 ?m in a cryostat. Every fifth section was stained with 0.1% w/v cresyl violet and analyzed by microscopy to identify the tumor mass and clusters of tumor cells. Using ImageJ, the perimeters of the tumor mass and tumor cell clusters in each stained section were manually drawn by a researcher blinded to the experimental conditions. The software then calculated the total tumor area (in mm2) for each section and integrated the total volume using Cavalieri’s estimator of morphometric volume: Vol= (d * ?Ai) ? t * Amax, where d=distance between sections that were analyzed, ?Ai= sum of the areas of all sections, t= section thickness, and Amax= maximum value of A [ 43 ]. Individual CNS-1 cells that migrated away from the tumor clusters were not included in the quantification, but were routinely detected in the control tumors by GFP fluorescence, remarking the invasive nature of this glioma model. Electrophoresis and Western blotting Samples of cell-free, serum-free conditioned culture medium were immediately treated with protease inhibitors ( Complete , Roche Applied Science) to prevent further B/b cleavage, followed by concentration in centrifugal concentrators (Amicon Ultra, Millipore) with a Mw cutoff of 30 kDa. Samples of CNS-1-derived tumor tissue were subjected to isotonic subcellular fractionation as previously described [ 39 ] and the final soluble fraction was prepared for protein electrophoresis. All samples, containing 10 ?g of total protein, were electrophoresed on reducing 7% SDS-polyacrylamide gels and analyzed by Western blotting with anti-B/b antibodies. Statistical Analysis All data in the figures were expressed as (mean ± standard deviation) values. Statistical analysis of slice invasion data was performed by two-way ANOVA for repeated measures, followed by post-hoc Bonferroni’s test. Comparison of tumor volumes was performed by one-way ANOVA and post-hoc Tukey’s test. Survival curves (Kaplan-Meier plots) were compared by a logrank test with a two-tailed P value.  Cells and antibodies The rat CNS-1 glioma cell line was grown at 5% CO2 in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 ?g/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad CA) [ 40 ]. These cells express and cleave B/b when grown as intracranial grafts but have no production of B/b in culture, likely due to the absence of CNS-specific inducing factors [ 33 ]. Three rabbit polyclonal anti-B/b antibodies were employed in this study: B6, against the chondroitin sulfate-attachment region (aa506–529) of rat B/b; B5, against the NH2 terminus (AA 60–73) of rat B/b; and B50, against the neoepitope QEAVESE (AA 389–395) that is exposed in the NH2-terminal fragment of B/b after cleavage by ADAMTS proteases (see Figure 1A ). These antibodies have been extensively characterized for the detection of rat and human B/b [ 38 , 39 ].  Site-directed mutagenesis Full-length rat B/b cDNA (nucleotides 60–2780 of the 3077bp full-length clone) [ 41 ] was subcloned between the BamH1-Not1 sites of the eukaryotic expression vector pCDNA3.1 (Invitrogen). The cDNA was subsequently mutated using the Quikchange site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) following the manufacturer instructions. Mutation primer 5?-GTG GAG AGC GAG AAC GTT TAC GCG ATC TAC TCC-3? (nucleotides 1230–1268 of the full-length clone) and its complementary primer were used to change the sequence 392VESE SRG AIYS402 to VESE NVY AIYS. Incorporation of the appropriate mutation was confirmed by the detection of a restriction product for the mutated sequence AACGTT (enzyme Acl-1) and by automated DNA sequencing.  Cell culture and transfection CNS-1 cells were transfected employing LipofectAMINE 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer protocols. Control transfections were usually performed with the original pCDNA3.1 vector. Alternatively, control cells were stably transfected with a pBOB1.5 vector carrying the cDNA for green fluorescent protein (GFP), to facilitate their detection within the neural parenchyma. Control cells transfected with either of these vectors were undistinguishable regarding proliferation rate and invasive behavior in vitro and in vivo . For biochemical experiments, transfected cells were routinely changed to serum-free OptiMEM-I culture medium (Invitrogen) 24 hours after transfection, followed by medium collection 12 to 16 hours later. For the creation of stably transfected cells, 800 ?g/ml Geneticin (G418, Invitrogen) were added to the culture medium 24 hours after transfection. Stable pools of cells expressing B/b constructs or GFP were derived by maintaining cells in Geneticin-supplemented medium for 21 days. After selection, stably transfected cells were maintained in culture medium containing 200 ?g/ml Geneticin.  Growth rate, cell proliferation and cell death Cells were cultured in 96-well plates at an initial density of 2,000 cells/well in 200 ?l of culture medium containing 2% fetal bovine serum. 100 ?l of medium were removed daily for cell death assessment (see below) and 25 ?l of 2 mg/ml MTT (3,-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) in DPBS were added to the remaining medium and cells to measure cell growth. Cells were incubated with MTT for 3 hours at 37 °C, followed by addition of 100 ?l of 40 mM hydrochloric acid in isopropanol to solubilize the resulting formazan product. Solubilization in the wells was allowed to proceed for 2 hours at 37 °C, followed by measuring of absorbance at 550 nm in a microplate reader. To quantify the daily proportion of cell death, 100 ?l of cell-free medium from each well were processed using the Cytotoxicity Detection kit (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, the amount of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) released to the medium was quantified by measuring the absorbance at 450 nm of an LDH-dependent redox product, and the proportion of cell death was calculated as the ratio of released to total LDH. Total LDH was measured each day in additional wells by solubilization of the cells with 1% v/v Triton X-100. All absorbance measurements for cell growth and death were performed in quadruplicate for each day and cell line. To quantify the proportion of effectively proliferating cells in vitro , cells were plated at an initial density of 3,000 cells/well in 48-well plates and 72 hours later fixed with cold acetone. Fixed and permeabilized cells were processed for fluorescence immunocytochemistry using an anti-Ki-67 antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, Santa Cruz, CA), and counterstained with 4?,6-diamino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). Ki-67 positive cells and total cell number were manually quantified in six random fields for each cell line, and the proliferative index was calculated as the averaged ratio of Ki-67 positive to total cells. Ki-67 staining in tumor-tissue sections yielded results essentially identical to those observed in vitro , with an undistinguishable and strikingly high proportion of Ki-67 positive cells in tumors formed by all cell lines (not shown).  Brain slice invasion assay Brain slice organotypic cultures were essentially performed as described in the literature [ 42 ], with minor modifications. Briefly, postnatal day 1 CD-1 mice (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA) were decapitated on ice and their brains were removed into ice-cold HBSS containing 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 ?g/ml streptomycin and 250 ng/ml ampothericin. The meninges were quickly removed and the brains were cut coronally into 300 ?m slices using a McIlwain tissue chopper (Brinkmann Instruments. Westbury, NY). Brain slices were dissociated in HBSS and placed on a polytetrafluoroethylene membrane (0.4 ?m-pore size Millicell-CM, Millipore), suspended inside a 35mm culture dish over 1 ml of the following slice culture medium: 60% Neurobasal-A:25% HBSS:15% DMEM (containing 25 mM HEPES), supplemented with B27 supplement (Invitrogen), G5 supplement (Invitrogen), 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 ?g/ml streptomycin. Tissue slices were incubated at 37 °C in a humid incubator at 5% CO2 and the slice culture medium was changed every other day. CNS-1 cells carrying B/b constructs or pcDNA3.1 were transfected with the vector pDsRed2 (Beckton Dickinson Biosciences, Palo Alto, CA) carrying the cDNA for red fluorescent protein and plated at 1.105 cells/ml in dishes containing a 2 mm-thick layer of 1% sterile agarose, to form spherical aggregates. After 48 hours, the tumor cell aggregates were individually transferred onto the brain slices using a pulled glass capillary pipette. Fluorescent images were obtained with an inverted Nikon TE-200 microscope fitted with long working-distance objectives and a Spot II CCD camera. Images were captured at 24 hour intervals using equal exposure conditions. Total cross-sectional area occupied by the dispersed cells was quantified with ImageJ software (v1.37, National Institutes of Health), by a researcher blinded to the experimental conditions.  Animal studies All studies involving animals were approved by the institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Female Lewis rats (Charles River Laboratories) were anesthetized with 75 mg/kg ketamine and 5 mg/kg xylazine and positioned in a David Kopf stereotactic instrument with the incisor bar set at 3.0 mm below the interaural line. Stably transfected CNS-1 cells at 70–80% confluence were harvested by mild trypsinization, washed once in Dullbecco’s PBS and suspended at 5.104 cells/?l in sterile PBS supplemented with 1 ?g/ml MgCl2, 1 ?g/ml CaCl2 and 0.1 % w/v glucose. Intrathalamic injections were made with a 10 ?l Hamilton syringe, fitted with a 26G beveled needle, into the right thalamus at the coordinates 2.8 mm posterior to bregma, 2.2 mm lateral to the midline, and 5.0 mm ventral to the dura. A total volume of 3 ?l of the cell suspension was injected over the course of 3 minutes and the needle was left in place for an additional minute before being slowly withdrawn. For studies of survival, cells were applied in the same conditions but at a concentration of 1.105 cells/?l. Injected animals were inspected twice daily and those that were not able to right themselves within 15 seconds of being placed on their side were considered to have reached the survival endpoint and were sacrificed. The day of sacrifice was recorded as the last day of survival.  Histology and estimation of tumor volume Tumor-bearing animals were deeply anesthetized with halothane and transcardially perfused with 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, followed by ice-cold 4% phosphate-buffered paraformaldehyde. Brains were dissected, post-fixed, cryoprotected and completely sectioned coronally at 40 ?m in a cryostat. Every fifth section was stained with 0.1% w/v cresyl violet and analyzed by microscopy to identify the tumor mass and clusters of tumor cells. Using ImageJ, the perimeters of the tumor mass and tumor cell clusters in each stained section were manually drawn by a researcher blinded to the experimental conditions. The software then calculated the total tumor area (in mm2) for each section and integrated the total volume using Cavalieri’s estimator of morphometric volume: Vol= (d * ?Ai) ? t * Amax, where d=distance between sections that were analyzed, ?Ai= sum of the areas of all sections, t= section thickness, and Amax= maximum value of A [ 43 ]. Individual CNS-1 cells that migrated away from the tumor clusters were not included in the quantification, but were routinely detected in the control tumors by GFP fluorescence, remarking the invasive nature of this glioma model.  Electrophoresis and Western blotting Samples of cell-free, serum-free conditioned culture medium were immediately treated with protease inhibitors ( Complete , Roche Applied Science) to prevent further B/b cleavage, followed by concentration in centrifugal concentrators (Amicon Ultra, Millipore) with a Mw cutoff of 30 kDa. Samples of CNS-1-derived tumor tissue were subjected to isotonic subcellular fractionation as previously described [ 39 ] and the final soluble fraction was prepared for protein electrophoresis. All samples, containing 10 ?g of total protein, were electrophoresed on reducing 7% SDS-polyacrylamide gels and analyzed by Western blotting with anti-B/b antibodies.  Statistical Analysis All data in the figures were expressed as (mean ± standard deviation) values. Statistical analysis of slice invasion data was performed by two-way ANOVA for repeated measures, followed by post-hoc Bonferroni’s test. Comparison of tumor volumes was performed by one-way ANOVA and post-hoc Tukey’s test. Survival curves (Kaplan-Meier plots) were compared by a logrank test with a two-tailed P value.  Results Effect of the “NVY” mutation on B/b cleavage To test whether the specific proteolysis of B/b by ADAMTS proteases was a necessary step for the effects of this proteoglycan in gliomas, we engineered a mutant version of B/b resistant to ADAMTS-mediated cleavage ( Figure 1A ). The single ADAMTS cleavage site of B/b is located at the Glu-Ser position within the sequence 393ES E / S RG398 in rat and mouse B/b, and 398ES E / S RG403 in the human protein. Previous work on rat aggrecan, which has an ADAMTS cleavage site with a similar sequence (371EG E / A RG376), has shown that mutation of the three amino acids downstream of the cleavage site from ARG to NVY completely blocks aggrecan cleavage at this site [ 44 ]. Therefore, we examined the effect of a similar mutation, ES E / S RG to ES E / N VY , on B/b cleavage. CNS-1 rat glioma cells were transfected with the cDNAs of the full-length normal (B/b) or mutated (BNVY) B/b constructs and the resulting secreted proteins were analyzed by Western blotting ( Figure 1B ). Cells transfected with the normal B/b construct produced, as expected, the full-length, 150-kDa protein as well as a 50-kDa NH2-terminal fragment generated by ADAMTS activity [ 36 ]. In contrast, although a large amount of full-length protein was made by cells transfected with the BNVY construct, no ADAMTS cleavage product was detected using the antibody B50, which specifically detects the neo-epitope generated by cleavage at 395 E / S 396 ([ 36 ], figure 1A ). To further confirm that the mutated form of B/b was completely resistant to cleavage, samples were immunoprecipitated with antibody B50 to detect trace amounts of the NH2-terminal cleavage product. Even with this higher sensitivity assay, no reactive product was detected (not shown), indicating that the BNVY mutant was not cleaved at the 395 E / S 396 site in culture conditions. In addition, we probed the same samples with the antibody B5, which detects an epitope located in the NH2-terminus of B/b, to determine if BNVY was cleaved at any other site upstream or downstream of 395 E / S 396. The results ( Figure 1C ) showed that BNVY was not only resistant to cleavage at the ADAMTS site but that the mutation eliminated all major proteolytic processing of B/b in these glioma cells. Moreover, transient co-transfection of B/b with excess BNVY at DNA molar ratios up to 1:4 did not cause any reduction in the amount of N-terminal cleavage product detected with B50 ( Figure 1D ), indicating that BNVY was also unable to act as a dominant negative of B/b cleavage in cultured cells. Taken together, these results indicate that a) the 395 E / S 396 cleavage position is the predominant site of B/b proteolytic processing in glioma cells and b) the sequence immediately downstream of the cleavage site is a major consensus element for recognition by the ADAMTS enzymes that cleave B/b. Interestingly, the ability of the SRG ? NVY mutation seems to be somewhat unique in its effectiveness to produce complete inhibition of B/b cleavage at this site because other changes of this sequence were less successful to fully prevent proteolysis (RTM, unpublished observations). Effect of uncleavable B/b on tumor cell proliferation and dispersion in vitro Given the evident importance of cell growth and proliferation for tumor progression, we first compared the effect of the normal and mutated B/b constructs on cell growth, proliferation, and death rate prior to evaluating their effects on the invasive behavior of glioma cells. The growth rates of CNS-1 cells stably expressing B/b, BNVY, or GFP were analyzed over a 7-day period using the MTT-reduction assay, which yielded identical profiles for all the cell lines tested ( Figure 2A ). To verify that this result effectively reflected similar proliferation rates, we quantified the proportion of proliferating cells by Ki-67 staining and found them identical in vitro ( Figure 2B ). Finally, we tested the death rate in vitro by measuring the release of the enzyme LDH to the culture medium, and confirmed that all the cell lines also had similar death rates ( Figure 2C ). Thus, these results strongly suggested that any differences in tumor progression would likely reflect changes in the invasive rather than the proliferative ability of cells expressing B/b or BNVY. Indeed, we did not observe differences in the proliferative index of these cells against the controls in vivo (not shown). To determine the effect of blocking B/b cleavage on the invasive behavior of glioma cells, we first employed the brain slice assay to closely mimic glioma dispersion in vitro . In this experimental model, glioma cells that have formed tumor “spheroids” in culture detach from those aggregates when placed onto brain slices and migrate through living neural tissue that retains most of the brain cytoarchitecture, including its natural barriers to cell movement. Importantly, cells grown as spheroids were negative for endogenous B/b expression by western blotting and qRT-PCR, but were able to cleave transfected B/b (not shown). This indicated that the change of culture conditions from monolayer to spheroid culture likely did not affect the expression of B/b or the metalloproteases involved in B/b cleavage. Visual inspection of the tumor spheroids over 72h showed that individual cells effectively detached from the spheroids and infiltrated the surrounding parenchyma ( Figure 3A–C ). Analysis of the total cross-sectional area occupied by the tumor cells ( Figure 3D ) showed that as early as 48 hours, glioma spheroids expressing normal B/b already occupied a larger area than control spheroids (p<0.05). This area was ~50% larger than control by 72 hours post-seeding (p<0.001). In stark contrast, CNS-1 cells overexpressing the mutated BNVY showed significantly less dispersion than B/b-expressing cells, being essentially indistinguishable from control cells. Effect of uncleavable B/b on tumor progression in vivo To validate the results observed with B/b and BNVY in vitro , we further investigated the effects of these constructs in CNS-1 cells implanted intracranially. All CNS-1-derived tumors expressed B/b endogenously in vivo [ 33 ] and the expression of endogenous B/b was comparable to the levels of transfected B/b in these cells in vitro ( Figure 4A ). Thus, the increased expression of B/b in CNS-1:B/b and CNS-1:BNVY cells compared to CNS-1:GFP cells was likely within physiologically relevant limits, as well as comparable to the levels of B/b previously observed in human tumors [ 39 ]. Eight days after tumor implantation, animals were perfused and their brains processed for histology to analyze tumor infiltration in the surrounding tissue. In agreement with previous descriptions of this cell line [ 40 , 45 ], all CNS-1-derived gliomas were invasive and exhibited cell clusters detached from the tumor core ( Figure 4B,C ), as well as extensive infiltration of single cells within the brain parenchyma. CNS-1 cells stably overexpressing B/b produced larger, more diffuse and more infiltrative tumors than control CNS-1 cells (mean ± S.E.M. volumes: 9.12 ± 1.43 mm3 versus 3.85 ± 1.20 mm3; n=8, p<0.01; Figure 4D ). However, tumors produced by CNS-1 cells overexpressing BNVY (mean ± S.E.M. volume: 3.79 ± 1.39 mm3; n=8) did not differ in size from control tumors. As expected from these results on tumor burden, animals implanted with CNS-1 cells overexpressing B/b reached the survival endpoint significantly earlier than controls (median value 18.0 days versus 23.2 days; n=6, p<0.005; Figure 5 ). On the other hand, animals implanted with CNS-1 cells overexpressing BNVY survived as long as control animals (median value 23.6 days; n=6). While these differences in survival endpoint seem small, it is worth noting that by the time the first animal bearing a BNVY-tumor died, all the animals bearing B/b-expressing tumors were already dead, thus underscoring the increased lethality of cleavable versus non-cleavable B/b on tumor progression. More importantly, because we did not detect differences in cell proliferation, these results strongly suggest that the observed differences in tumor progression and animal survival were due to increased invasion of tumor cells overexpressing normal B/b, and they indicate that cleavage of the full-length protein was critical for its pro-invasive effect.  Results Effect of the “NVY” mutation on B/b cleavage To test whether the specific proteolysis of B/b by ADAMTS proteases was a necessary step for the effects of this proteoglycan in gliomas, we engineered a mutant version of B/b resistant to ADAMTS-mediated cleavage ( Figure 1A ). The single ADAMTS cleavage site of B/b is located at the Glu-Ser position within the sequence 393ES E / S RG398 in rat and mouse B/b, and 398ES E / S RG403 in the human protein. Previous work on rat aggrecan, which has an ADAMTS cleavage site with a similar sequence (371EG E / A RG376), has shown that mutation of the three amino acids downstream of the cleavage site from ARG to NVY completely blocks aggrecan cleavage at this site [ 44 ]. Therefore, we examined the effect of a similar mutation, ES E / S RG to ES E / N VY , on B/b cleavage. CNS-1 rat glioma cells were transfected with the cDNAs of the full-length normal (B/b) or mutated (BNVY) B/b constructs and the resulting secreted proteins were analyzed by Western blotting ( Figure 1B ). Cells transfected with the normal B/b construct produced, as expected, the full-length, 150-kDa protein as well as a 50-kDa NH2-terminal fragment generated by ADAMTS activity [ 36 ]. In contrast, although a large amount of full-length protein was made by cells transfected with the BNVY construct, no ADAMTS cleavage product was detected using the antibody B50, which specifically detects the neo-epitope generated by cleavage at 395 E / S 396 ([ 36 ], figure 1A ). To further confirm that the mutated form of B/b was completely resistant to cleavage, samples were immunoprecipitated with antibody B50 to detect trace amounts of the NH2-terminal cleavage product. Even with this higher sensitivity assay, no reactive product was detected (not shown), indicating that the BNVY mutant was not cleaved at the 395 E / S 396 site in culture conditions. In addition, we probed the same samples with the antibody B5, which detects an epitope located in the NH2-terminus of B/b, to determine if BNVY was cleaved at any other site upstream or downstream of 395 E / S 396. The results ( Figure 1C ) showed that BNVY was not only resistant to cleavage at the ADAMTS site but that the mutation eliminated all major proteolytic processing of B/b in these glioma cells. Moreover, transient co-transfection of B/b with excess BNVY at DNA molar ratios up to 1:4 did not cause any reduction in the amount of N-terminal cleavage product detected with B50 ( Figure 1D ), indicating that BNVY was also unable to act as a dominant negative of B/b cleavage in cultured cells. Taken together, these results indicate that a) the 395 E / S 396 cleavage position is the predominant site of B/b proteolytic processing in glioma cells and b) the sequence immediately downstream of the cleavage site is a major consensus element for recognition by the ADAMTS enzymes that cleave B/b. Interestingly, the ability of the SRG ? NVY mutation seems to be somewhat unique in its effectiveness to produce complete inhibition of B/b cleavage at this site because other changes of this sequence were less successful to fully prevent proteolysis (RTM, unpublished observations). Effect of uncleavable B/b on tumor cell proliferation and dispersion in vitro Given the evident importance of cell growth and proliferation for tumor progression, we first compared the effect of the normal and mutated B/b constructs on cell growth, proliferation, and death rate prior to evaluating their effects on the invasive behavior of glioma cells. The growth rates of CNS-1 cells stably expressing B/b, BNVY, or GFP were analyzed over a 7-day period using the MTT-reduction assay, which yielded identical profiles for all the cell lines tested ( Figure 2A ). To verify that this result effectively reflected similar proliferation rates, we quantified the proportion of proliferating cells by Ki-67 staining and found them identical in vitro ( Figure 2B ). Finally, we tested the death rate in vitro by measuring the release of the enzyme LDH to the culture medium, and confirmed that all the cell lines also had similar death rates ( Figure 2C ). Thus, these results strongly suggested that any differences in tumor progression would likely reflect changes in the invasive rather than the proliferative ability of cells expressing B/b or BNVY. Indeed, we did not observe differences in the proliferative index of these cells against the controls in vivo (not shown). To determine the effect of blocking B/b cleavage on the invasive behavior of glioma cells, we first employed the brain slice assay to closely mimic glioma dispersion in vitro . In this experimental model, glioma cells that have formed tumor “spheroids” in culture detach from those aggregates when placed onto brain slices and migrate through living neural tissue that retains most of the brain cytoarchitecture, including its natural barriers to cell movement. Importantly, cells grown as spheroids were negative for endogenous B/b expression by western blotting and qRT-PCR, but were able to cleave transfected B/b (not shown). This indicated that the change of culture conditions from monolayer to spheroid culture likely did not affect the expression of B/b or the metalloproteases involved in B/b cleavage. Visual inspection of the tumor spheroids over 72h showed that individual cells effectively detached from the spheroids and infiltrated the surrounding parenchyma ( Figure 3A–C ). Analysis of the total cross-sectional area occupied by the tumor cells ( Figure 3D ) showed that as early as 48 hours, glioma spheroids expressing normal B/b already occupied a larger area than control spheroids (p<0.05). This area was ~50% larger than control by 72 hours post-seeding (p<0.001). In stark contrast, CNS-1 cells overexpressing the mutated BNVY showed significantly less dispersion than B/b-expressing cells, being essentially indistinguishable from control cells. Effect of uncleavable B/b on tumor progression in vivo To validate the results observed with B/b and BNVY in vitro , we further investigated the effects of these constructs in CNS-1 cells implanted intracranially. All CNS-1-derived tumors expressed B/b endogenously in vivo [ 33 ] and the expression of endogenous B/b was comparable to the levels of transfected B/b in these cells in vitro ( Figure 4A ). Thus, the increased expression of B/b in CNS-1:B/b and CNS-1:BNVY cells compared to CNS-1:GFP cells was likely within physiologically relevant limits, as well as comparable to the levels of B/b previously observed in human tumors [ 39 ]. Eight days after tumor implantation, animals were perfused and their brains processed for histology to analyze tumor infiltration in the surrounding tissue. In agreement with previous descriptions of this cell line [ 40 , 45 ], all CNS-1-derived gliomas were invasive and exhibited cell clusters detached from the tumor core ( Figure 4B,C ), as well as extensive infiltration of single cells within the brain parenchyma. CNS-1 cells stably overexpressing B/b produced larger, more diffuse and more infiltrative tumors than control CNS-1 cells (mean ± S.E.M. volumes: 9.12 ± 1.43 mm3 versus 3.85 ± 1.20 mm3; n=8, p<0.01; Figure 4D ). However, tumors produced by CNS-1 cells overexpressing BNVY (mean ± S.E.M. volume: 3.79 ± 1.39 mm3; n=8) did not differ in size from control tumors. As expected from these results on tumor burden, animals implanted with CNS-1 cells overexpressing B/b reached the survival endpoint significantly earlier than controls (median value 18.0 days versus 23.2 days; n=6, p<0.005; Figure 5 ). On the other hand, animals implanted with CNS-1 cells overexpressing BNVY survived as long as control animals (median value 23.6 days; n=6). While these differences in survival endpoint seem small, it is worth noting that by the time the first animal bearing a BNVY-tumor died, all the animals bearing B/b-expressing tumors were already dead, thus underscoring the increased lethality of cleavable versus non-cleavable B/b on tumor progression. More importantly, because we did not detect differences in cell proliferation, these results strongly suggest that the observed differences in tumor progression and animal survival were due to increased invasion of tumor cells overexpressing normal B/b, and they indicate that cleavage of the full-length protein was critical for its pro-invasive effect.  Effect of the “NVY” mutation on B/b cleavage To test whether the specific proteolysis of B/b by ADAMTS proteases was a necessary step for the effects of this proteoglycan in gliomas, we engineered a mutant version of B/b resistant to ADAMTS-mediated cleavage ( Figure 1A ). The single ADAMTS cleavage site of B/b is located at the Glu-Ser position within the sequence 393ES E / S RG398 in rat and mouse B/b, and 398ES E / S RG403 in the human protein. Previous work on rat aggrecan, which has an ADAMTS cleavage site with a similar sequence (371EG E / A RG376), has shown that mutation of the three amino acids downstream of the cleavage site from ARG to NVY completely blocks aggrecan cleavage at this site [ 44 ]. Therefore, we examined the effect of a similar mutation, ES E / S RG to ES E / N VY , on B/b cleavage. CNS-1 rat glioma cells were transfected with the cDNAs of the full-length normal (B/b) or mutated (BNVY) B/b constructs and the resulting secreted proteins were analyzed by Western blotting ( Figure 1B ). Cells transfected with the normal B/b construct produced, as expected, the full-length, 150-kDa protein as well as a 50-kDa NH2-terminal fragment generated by ADAMTS activity [ 36 ]. In contrast, although a large amount of full-length protein was made by cells transfected with the BNVY construct, no ADAMTS cleavage product was detected using the antibody B50, which specifically detects the neo-epitope generated by cleavage at 395 E / S 396 ([ 36 ], figure 1A ). To further confirm that the mutated form of B/b was completely resistant to cleavage, samples were immunoprecipitated with antibody B50 to detect trace amounts of the NH2-terminal cleavage product. Even with this higher sensitivity assay, no reactive product was detected (not shown), indicating that the BNVY mutant was not cleaved at the 395 E / S 396 site in culture conditions. In addition, we probed the same samples with the antibody B5, which detects an epitope located in the NH2-terminus of B/b, to determine if BNVY was cleaved at any other site upstream or downstream of 395 E / S 396. The results ( Figure 1C ) showed that BNVY was not only resistant to cleavage at the ADAMTS site but that the mutation eliminated all major proteolytic processing of B/b in these glioma cells. Moreover, transient co-transfection of B/b with excess BNVY at DNA molar ratios up to 1:4 did not cause any reduction in the amount of N-terminal cleavage product detected with B50 ( Figure 1D ), indicating that BNVY was also unable to act as a dominant negative of B/b cleavage in cultured cells. Taken together, these results indicate that a) the 395 E / S 396 cleavage position is the predominant site of B/b proteolytic processing in glioma cells and b) the sequence immediately downstream of the cleavage site is a major consensus element for recognition by the ADAMTS enzymes that cleave B/b. Interestingly, the ability of the SRG ? NVY mutation seems to be somewhat unique in its effectiveness to produce complete inhibition of B/b cleavage at this site because other changes of this sequence were less successful to fully prevent proteolysis (RTM, unpublished observations).  Effect of the “NVY” mutation on B/b cleavage To test whether the specific proteolysis of B/b by ADAMTS proteases was a necessary step for the effects of this proteoglycan in gliomas, we engineered a mutant version of B/b resistant to ADAMTS-mediated cleavage ( Figure 1A ). The single ADAMTS cleavage site of B/b is located at the Glu-Ser position within the sequence 393ES E / S RG398 in rat and mouse B/b, and 398ES E / S RG403 in the human protein. Previous work on rat aggrecan, which has an ADAMTS cleavage site with a similar sequence (371EG E / A RG376), has shown that mutation of the three amino acids downstream of the cleavage site from ARG to NVY completely blocks aggrecan cleavage at this site [ 44 ]. Therefore, we examined the effect of a similar mutation, ES E / S RG to ES E / N VY , on B/b cleavage. CNS-1 rat glioma cells were transfected with the cDNAs of the full-length normal (B/b) or mutated (BNVY) B/b constructs and the resulting secreted proteins were analyzed by Western blotting ( Figure 1B ). Cells transfected with the normal B/b construct produced, as expected, the full-length, 150-kDa protein as well as a 50-kDa NH2-terminal fragment generated by ADAMTS activity [ 36 ]. In contrast, although a large amount of full-length protein was made by cells transfected with the BNVY construct, no ADAMTS cleavage product was detected using the antibody B50, which specifically detects the neo-epitope generated by cleavage at 395 E / S 396 ([ 36 ], figure 1A ). To further confirm that the mutated form of B/b was completely resistant to cleavage, samples were immunoprecipitated with antibody B50 to detect trace amounts of the NH2-terminal cleavage product. Even with this higher sensitivity assay, no reactive product was detected (not shown), indicating that the BNVY mutant was not cleaved at the 395 E / S 396 site in culture conditions. In addition, we probed the same samples with the antibody B5, which detects an epitope located in the NH2-terminus of B/b, to determine if BNVY was cleaved at any other site upstream or downstream of 395 E / S 396. The results ( Figure 1C ) showed that BNVY was not only resistant to cleavage at the ADAMTS site but that the mutation eliminated all major proteolytic processing of B/b in these glioma cells. Moreover, transient co-transfection of B/b with excess BNVY at DNA molar ratios up to 1:4 did not cause any reduction in the amount of N-terminal cleavage product detected with B50 ( Figure 1D ), indicating that BNVY was also unable to act as a dominant negative of B/b cleavage in cultured cells. Taken together, these results indicate that a) the 395 E / S 396 cleavage position is the predominant site of B/b proteolytic processing in glioma cells and b) the sequence immediately downstream of the cleavage site is a major consensus element for recognition by the ADAMTS enzymes that cleave B/b. Interestingly, the ability of the SRG ? NVY mutation seems to be somewhat unique in its effectiveness to produce complete inhibition of B/b cleavage at this site because other changes of this sequence were less successful to fully prevent proteolysis (RTM, unpublished observations).  Effect of uncleavable B/b on tumor cell proliferation and dispersion in vitro Given the evident importance of cell growth and proliferation for tumor progression, we first compared the effect of the normal and mutated B/b constructs on cell growth, proliferation, and death rate prior to evaluating their effects on the invasive behavior of glioma cells. The growth rates of CNS-1 cells stably expressing B/b, BNVY, or GFP were analyzed over a 7-day period using the MTT-reduction assay, which yielded identical profiles for all the cell lines tested ( Figure 2A ). To verify that this result effectively reflected similar proliferation rates, we quantified the proportion of proliferating cells by Ki-67 staining and found them identical in vitro ( Figure 2B ). Finally, we tested the death rate in vitro by measuring the release of the enzyme LDH to the culture medium, and confirmed that all the cell lines also had similar death rates ( Figure 2C ). Thus, these results strongly suggested that any differences in tumor progression would likely reflect changes in the invasive rather than the proliferative ability of cells expressing B/b or BNVY. Indeed, we did not observe differences in the proliferative index of these cells against the controls in vivo (not shown). To determine the effect of blocking B/b cleavage on the invasive behavior of glioma cells, we first employed the brain slice assay to closely mimic glioma dispersion in vitro . In this experimental model, glioma cells that have formed tumor “spheroids” in culture detach from those aggregates when placed onto brain slices and migrate through living neural tissue that retains most of the brain cytoarchitecture, including its natural barriers to cell movement. Importantly, cells grown as spheroids were negative for endogenous B/b expression by western blotting and qRT-PCR, but were able to cleave transfected B/b (not shown). This indicated that the change of culture conditions from monolayer to spheroid culture likely did not affect the expression of B/b or the metalloproteases involved in B/b cleavage. Visual inspection of the tumor spheroids over 72h showed that individual cells effectively detached from the spheroids and infiltrated the surrounding parenchyma ( Figure 3A–C ). Analysis of the total cross-sectional area occupied by the tumor cells ( Figure 3D ) showed that as early as 48 hours, glioma spheroids expressing normal B/b already occupied a larger area than control spheroids (p<0.05). This area was ~50% larger than control by 72 hours post-seeding (p<0.001). In stark contrast, CNS-1 cells overexpressing the mutated BNVY showed significantly less dispersion than B/b-expressing cells, being essentially indistinguishable from control cells.  Effect of uncleavable B/b on tumor cell proliferation and dispersion in vitro Given the evident importance of cell growth and proliferation for tumor progression, we first compared the effect of the normal and mutated B/b constructs on cell growth, proliferation, and death rate prior to evaluating their effects on the invasive behavior of glioma cells. The growth rates of CNS-1 cells stably expressing B/b, BNVY, or GFP were analyzed over a 7-day period using the MTT-reduction assay, which yielded identical profiles for all the cell lines tested ( Figure 2A ). To verify that this result effectively reflected similar proliferation rates, we quantified the proportion of proliferating cells by Ki-67 staining and found them identical in vitro ( Figure 2B ). Finally, we tested the death rate in vitro by measuring the release of the enzyme LDH to the culture medium, and confirmed that all the cell lines also had similar death rates ( Figure 2C ). Thus, these results strongly suggested that any differences in tumor progression would likely reflect changes in the invasive rather than the proliferative ability of cells expressing B/b or BNVY. Indeed, we did not observe differences in the proliferative index of these cells against the controls in vivo (not shown). To determine the effect of blocking B/b cleavage on the invasive behavior of glioma cells, we first employed the brain slice assay to closely mimic glioma dispersion in vitro . In this experimental model, glioma cells that have formed tumor “spheroids” in culture detach from those aggregates when placed onto brain slices and migrate through living neural tissue that retains most of the brain cytoarchitecture, including its natural barriers to cell movement. Importantly, cells grown as spheroids were negative for endogenous B/b expression by western blotting and qRT-PCR, but were able to cleave transfected B/b (not shown). This indicated that the change of culture conditions from monolayer to spheroid culture likely did not affect the expression of B/b or the metalloproteases involved in B/b cleavage. Visual inspection of the tumor spheroids over 72h showed that individual cells effectively detached from the spheroids and infiltrated the surrounding parenchyma ( Figure 3A–C ). Analysis of the total cross-sectional area occupied by the tumor cells ( Figure 3D ) showed that as early as 48 hours, glioma spheroids expressing normal B/b already occupied a larger area than control spheroids (p<0.05). This area was ~50% larger than control by 72 hours post-seeding (p<0.001). In stark contrast, CNS-1 cells overexpressing the mutated BNVY showed significantly less dispersion than B/b-expressing cells, being essentially indistinguishable from control cells.  Effect of uncleavable B/b on tumor progression in vivo To validate the results observed with B/b and BNVY in vitro , we further investigated the effects of these constructs in CNS-1 cells implanted intracranially. All CNS-1-derived tumors expressed B/b endogenously in vivo [ 33 ] and the expression of endogenous B/b was comparable to the levels of transfected B/b in these cells in vitro ( Figure 4A ). Thus, the increased expression of B/b in CNS-1:B/b and CNS-1:BNVY cells compared to CNS-1:GFP cells was likely within physiologically relevant limits, as well as comparable to the levels of B/b previously observed in human tumors [ 39 ]. Eight days after tumor implantation, animals were perfused and their brains processed for histology to analyze tumor infiltration in the surrounding tissue. In agreement with previous descriptions of this cell line [ 40 , 45 ], all CNS-1-derived gliomas were invasive and exhibited cell clusters detached from the tumor core ( Figure 4B,C ), as well as extensive infiltration of single cells within the brain parenchyma. CNS-1 cells stably overexpressing B/b produced larger, more diffuse and more infiltrative tumors than control CNS-1 cells (mean ± S.E.M. volumes: 9.12 ± 1.43 mm3 versus 3.85 ± 1.20 mm3; n=8, p<0.01; Figure 4D ). However, tumors produced by CNS-1 cells overexpressing BNVY (mean ± S.E.M. volume: 3.79 ± 1.39 mm3; n=8) did not differ in size from control tumors. As expected from these results on tumor burden, animals implanted with CNS-1 cells overexpressing B/b reached the survival endpoint significantly earlier than controls (median value 18.0 days versus 23.2 days; n=6, p<0.005; Figure 5 ). On the other hand, animals implanted with CNS-1 cells overexpressing BNVY survived as long as control animals (median value 23.6 days; n=6). While these differences in survival endpoint seem small, it is worth noting that by the time the first animal bearing a BNVY-tumor died, all the animals bearing B/b-expressing tumors were already dead, thus underscoring the increased lethality of cleavable versus non-cleavable B/b on tumor progression. More importantly, because we did not detect differences in cell proliferation, these results strongly suggest that the observed differences in tumor progression and animal survival were due to increased invasion of tumor cells overexpressing normal B/b, and they indicate that cleavage of the full-length protein was critical for its pro-invasive effect.  Effect of uncleavable B/b on tumor progression in vivo To validate the results observed with B/b and BNVY in vitro , we further investigated the effects of these constructs in CNS-1 cells implanted intracranially. All CNS-1-derived tumors expressed B/b endogenously in vivo [ 33 ] and the expression of endogenous B/b was comparable to the levels of transfected B/b in these cells in vitro ( Figure 4A ). Thus, the increased expression of B/b in CNS-1:B/b and CNS-1:BNVY cells compared to CNS-1:GFP cells was likely within physiologically relevant limits, as well as comparable to the levels of B/b previously observed in human tumors [ 39 ]. Eight days after tumor implantation, animals were perfused and their brains processed for histology to analyze tumor infiltration in the surrounding tissue. In agreement with previous descriptions of this cell line [ 40 , 45 ], all CNS-1-derived gliomas were invasive and exhibited cell clusters detached from the tumor core ( Figure 4B,C ), as well as extensive infiltration of single cells within the brain parenchyma. CNS-1 cells stably overexpressing B/b produced larger, more diffuse and more infiltrative tumors than control CNS-1 cells (mean ± S.E.M. volumes: 9.12 ± 1.43 mm3 versus 3.85 ± 1.20 mm3; n=8, p<0.01; Figure 4D ). However, tumors produced by CNS-1 cells overexpressing BNVY (mean ± S.E.M. volume: 3.79 ± 1.39 mm3; n=8) did not differ in size from control tumors. As expected from these results on tumor burden, animals implanted with CNS-1 cells overexpressing B/b reached the survival endpoint significantly earlier than controls (median value 18.0 days versus 23.2 days; n=6, p<0.005; Figure 5 ). On the other hand, animals implanted with CNS-1 cells overexpressing BNVY survived as long as control animals (median value 23.6 days; n=6). While these differences in survival endpoint seem small, it is worth noting that by the time the first animal bearing a BNVY-tumor died, all the animals bearing B/b-expressing tumors were already dead, thus underscoring the increased lethality of cleavable versus non-cleavable B/b on tumor progression. More importantly, because we did not detect differences in cell proliferation, these results strongly suggest that the observed differences in tumor progression and animal survival were due to increased invasion of tumor cells overexpressing normal B/b, and they indicate that cleavage of the full-length protein was critical for its pro-invasive effect.  Discussion B/b, one of the most abundant proteoglycans in the adult neural ECM, exhibits several features that make it a relevant target for brain tumor therapeutics, including CNS-specific expression, consistent upregulation in gliomas [ 46 , 47 ], enhancing effect on glioma invasion [ 35 ], correlation with decreased patient survival [ 48 ], and the presence of a glioma-specific, cell surface-associated B/b isoform [ 39 ]. The molecular mechanisms by which B/b promote glioma progression are mostly unknown, but current evidence suggests that they likely affect cell adhesion and motility on specific substrates (MSV and RTM, manuscript in preparation). It is important, therefore, to understand the key events that turn B/b, a major inhibitory component of the neural matrix, into a pro-invasive component of the glioma matrix. Previous work from our laboratories has shown that the rat gliosarcoma cell line 9L, characterized in vivo as a poorly invasive brain tumor [ 40 ], does not express B/b endogenously [ 33 ] and, when transfected with the full-length protein, is also unable to cleave it at the ADAMTS site [ 34 ]. Moreover, both control and B/b-overexpressing 9L cells exhibit the same non-infiltrative behavior when grown as intracranial grafts and produce tumors that do not differ in size [ 34 ]. However, transfection of 9L cells with constructs corresponding to the NH2-terminal cleavage fragment of B/b allows them to disperse through neural tissue, both in vivo [ 34 ] and in organotypic brain slices (MSV and RTM, unpublished results). This phenotypic change of 9L cells after transfection with the NH2-terminal fragment of B/b makes them behave similarly to CNS-1 cells, which express and cleave B/b endogenously when grafted into the brain and exhibit the infiltrative behavior typical of high-grade astrocytomas [ 33 ]. Although these results have shown that cleavage of B/b is sufficient to increase the invasiveness of glioma cells, they have not determined whether this cleavage is necessary for the pro-invasive effect of B/b and whether this pro-invasive effect is achieved by a competition between the B/b cleavage products and the full-length protein. Here we have analyzed these hypotheses and demonstrated that 1) cleavage of B/b at the ADAMTS site is the predominant proteolytic processing of this protein in glioma cells, 2) cleavage of B/b is a critical step for its pro-invasive role in gliomas, and 3) there is likely no competition between the B/b cleavage products and the full-length protein to promote glioma invasion. First, while B/b has been shown to be a substrate for several types of MMPs under specific conditions in vitro [ 37 , 49 ], our results show that cleavage of B/b in glioma cells in culture occurs almost exclusively at the ADAMTS cleavage site. These results are in agreement with our previous observations in vivo and in several cell lines [ 34 , 36 , 38 , 39 ], and indicate that cleavage of B/b by proteases other than ADAMTS, while possible, may not contribute appreciably to glioma invasion. Second, we have shown here that overexpression of normal B/b versus its uncleavable form, BNVY, does not affect the proliferation or death rate of transfected CNS-1 glioma cells, but causes marked differences in their invasive behavior. Importantly, these differences were very consistent between our in vitro and in vivo models, suggesting that the organotypic slice invasion assays accurately reproduce the exposure of glioma cells to an organized neural matrix. Our results strongly suggest that CNS-1 cells overexpressing B/b disperse more and produce more cell clusters in the brain parenchyma, resulting in more diffuse tumors that spread over a larger volume and cause a faster deadly outcome. In marked contrast, BNVY-overexpressing cells do not differ from control cells regarding tumor dispersion in vitro , tumor infiltration in vivo or total tumor volume, even though they produce significant amounts of full-length B/b. Taken together, these results indicate that only B/b cleavage products, and not the full-length protein, have a pro-invasive role in gliomas. It is important to remark that intracranial grafts of CNS-1 cells express and cleave B/b endogenously ( Figure 4A ), as previously reported [ 33 , 38 ]. The absence of any inhibitory effects by BNVY on cell invasion indicates that this construct did not affect the expression or cleavage of endogenous B/b, a lack of effect that we verified by co-expression of B/b and BNVY in culture ( Figure 1D ). More importantly, these results suggest that full-length B/b and its cleavage products likely function through independent mechanisms. It is unlikely that the products generated by B/b cleavage simply out-compete the full-length protein for attachment sites in the matrix scaffold, otherwise overexpressed BNVY should have acted as a dominant negative of endogenous B/b in vivo . Because this effect was not observed, we hypothesize that the cleavage products of B/b may have unique molecular associations that are unaffected by the excess of full-length protein. This underscores the critical role of proteolytic cleavage for the pro-invasive role of B/b in gliomas. A large body of literature has illuminated the relevance of proteases and protease inhibitors in modulating the progression of malignant brain tumors (e.g. [ 12 , 17 , 50 ]). Of the several classes of proteases, members of the MMP family of metalloproteases have received the most attention for the particularly important roles they play in gliomas. The functions of MMPs, which include activation of growth factors, suppression of apoptosis in tumor cells, and release of pro-angiogenic factors, contribute to the formation of a microenvironment that promotes the early phases of growth and division of newly transformed cells [ 28 ]. The inhibition of MMP activity has been explored as a therapeutic avenue for the treatment of gliomas, mostly with disappointing results due to the lack of knowledge of the complex physiological roles of these enzymes [ 28 ]. Our present work suggests that cleavage mediated by another family of ECM metalloproteases, the ADAMTS, may also play critical roles in enhancing the progression of glial tumors. The identity of the specific ADAMTS proteases that cleave B/b at the ADAMTS site in vivo is still not fully defined. Current evidence strongly suggests ADAMTS-4 (aggrecanase-1) and ADAMTS-5 (aggrecanase-2) as the most likely candidates, which are also upregulated in gliomas [ 36 , 51 , 52 ]. These two proteases also cleave two other members of the lectican family, aggrecan [ 53 ] and versican [ 54 ], and have a restricted additional spectrum of ECM substrates [ 55 – 57 ]. Other members of the ADAMTS family have been shown or proposed to have aggrecanase activity (recently reviewed in [ 58 ]) but their expression in the CNS is low and there is currently no evidence for their role in B/b processing in gliomas [ 59 – 63 ]. In conclusion, the upregulation and pro-invasive effect of B/b and its processing enzymes in malignant gliomas make the ADAMTS proteases relevant therapeutic targets that exhibit certain advantages over MMPs, including a more restricted expression profile and narrower substrate specificity. Inhibition of ADAMTS activity may thus prove a useful therapeutic strategy for glioma management. Moreover, our present results show that the inhibition of cleavage of a single ADAMTS substrate such as B/b renders this ECM protein functionally inactive as a pro-invasive molecule in gliomas. Thus, inhibition of specific ADAMTS targets in gliomas could slow glioma invasion and may represent an important complementary avenue for the treatment of these tumors.  Discussion B/b, one of the most abundant proteoglycans in the adult neural ECM, exhibits several features that make it a relevant target for brain tumor therapeutics, including CNS-specific expression, consistent upregulation in gliomas [ 46 , 47 ], enhancing effect on glioma invasion [ 35 ], correlation with decreased patient survival [ 48 ], and the presence of a glioma-specific, cell surface-associated B/b isoform [ 39 ]. The molecular mechanisms by which B/b promote glioma progression are mostly unknown, but current evidence suggests that they likely affect cell adhesion and motility on specific substrates (MSV and RTM, manuscript in preparation). It is important, therefore, to understand the key events that turn B/b, a major inhibitory component of the neural matrix, into a pro-invasive component of the glioma matrix. Previous work from our laboratories has shown that the rat gliosarcoma cell line 9L, characterized in vivo as a poorly invasive brain tumor [ 40 ], does not express B/b endogenously [ 33 ] and, when transfected with the full-length protein, is also unable to cleave it at the ADAMTS site [ 34 ]. Moreover, both control and B/b-overexpressing 9L cells exhibit the same non-infiltrative behavior when grown as intracranial grafts and produce tumors that do not differ in size [ 34 ]. However, transfection of 9L cells with constructs corresponding to the NH2-terminal cleavage fragment of B/b allows them to disperse through neural tissue, both in vivo [ 34 ] and in organotypic brain slices (MSV and RTM, unpublished results). This phenotypic change of 9L cells after transfection with the NH2-terminal fragment of B/b makes them behave similarly to CNS-1 cells, which express and cleave B/b endogenously when grafted into the brain and exhibit the infiltrative behavior typical of high-grade astrocytomas [ 33 ]. Although these results have shown that cleavage of B/b is sufficient to increase the invasiveness of glioma cells, they have not determined whether this cleavage is necessary for the pro-invasive effect of B/b and whether this pro-invasive effect is achieved by a competition between the B/b cleavage products and the full-length protein. Here we have analyzed these hypotheses and demonstrated that 1) cleavage of B/b at the ADAMTS site is the predominant proteolytic processing of this protein in glioma cells, 2) cleavage of B/b is a critical step for its pro-invasive role in gliomas, and 3) there is likely no competition between the B/b cleavage products and the full-length protein to promote glioma invasion. First, while B/b has been shown to be a substrate for several types of MMPs under specific conditions in vitro [ 37 , 49 ], our results show that cleavage of B/b in glioma cells in culture occurs almost exclusively at the ADAMTS cleavage site. These results are in agreement with our previous observations in vivo and in several cell lines [ 34 , 36 , 38 , 39 ], and indicate that cleavage of B/b by proteases other than ADAMTS, while possible, may not contribute appreciably to glioma invasion. Second, we have shown here that overexpression of normal B/b versus its uncleavable form, BNVY, does not affect the proliferation or death rate of transfected CNS-1 glioma cells, but causes marked differences in their invasive behavior. Importantly, these differences were very consistent between our in vitro and in vivo models, suggesting that the organotypic slice invasion assays accurately reproduce the exposure of glioma cells to an organized neural matrix. Our results strongly suggest that CNS-1 cells overexpressing B/b disperse more and produce more cell clusters in the brain parenchyma, resulting in more diffuse tumors that spread over a larger volume and cause a faster deadly outcome. In marked contrast, BNVY-overexpressing cells do not differ from control cells regarding tumor dispersion in vitro , tumor infiltration in vivo or total tumor volume, even though they produce significant amounts of full-length B/b. Taken together, these results indicate that only B/b cleavage products, and not the full-length protein, have a pro-invasive role in gliomas. It is important to remark that intracranial grafts of CNS-1 cells express and cleave B/b endogenously ( Figure 4A ), as previously reported [ 33 , 38 ]. The absence of any inhibitory effects by BNVY on cell invasion indicates that this construct did not affect the expression or cleavage of endogenous B/b, a lack of effect that we verified by co-expression of B/b and BNVY in culture ( Figure 1D ). More importantly, these results suggest that full-length B/b and its cleavage products likely function through independent mechanisms. It is unlikely that the products generated by B/b cleavage simply out-compete the full-length protein for attachment sites in the matrix scaffold, otherwise overexpressed BNVY should have acted as a dominant negative of endogenous B/b in vivo . Because this effect was not observed, we hypothesize that the cleavage products of B/b may have unique molecular associations that are unaffected by the excess of full-length protein. This underscores the critical role of proteolytic cleavage for the pro-invasive role of B/b in gliomas. A large body of literature has illuminated the relevance of proteases and protease inhibitors in modulating the progression of malignant brain tumors (e.g. [ 12 , 17 , 50 ]). Of the several classes of proteases, members of the MMP family of metalloproteases have received the most attention for the particularly important roles they play in gliomas. The functions of MMPs, which include activation of growth factors, suppression of apoptosis in tumor cells, and release of pro-angiogenic factors, contribute to the formation of a microenvironment that promotes the early phases of growth and division of newly transformed cells [ 28 ]. The inhibition of MMP activity has been explored as a therapeutic avenue for the treatment of gliomas, mostly with disappointing results due to the lack of knowledge of the complex physiological roles of these enzymes [ 28 ]. Our present work suggests that cleavage mediated by another family of ECM metalloproteases, the ADAMTS, may also play critical roles in enhancing the progression of glial tumors. The identity of the specific ADAMTS proteases that cleave B/b at the ADAMTS site in vivo is still not fully defined. Current evidence strongly suggests ADAMTS-4 (aggrecanase-1) and ADAMTS-5 (aggrecanase-2) as the most likely candidates, which are also upregulated in gliomas [ 36 , 51 , 52 ]. These two proteases also cleave two other members of the lectican family, aggrecan [ 53 ] and versican [ 54 ], and have a restricted additional spectrum of ECM substrates [ 55 – 57 ]. Other members of the ADAMTS family have been shown or proposed to have aggrecanase activity (recently reviewed in [ 58 ]) but their expression in the CNS is low and there is currently no evidence for their role in B/b processing in gliomas [ 59 – 63 ]. In conclusion, the upregulation and pro-invasive effect of B/b and its processing enzymes in malignant gliomas make the ADAMTS proteases relevant therapeutic targets that exhibit certain advantages over MMPs, including a more restricted expression profile and narrower substrate specificity. Inhibition of ADAMTS activity may thus prove a useful therapeutic strategy for glioma management. Moreover, our present results show that the inhibition of cleavage of a single ADAMTS substrate such as B/b renders this ECM protein functionally inactive as a pro-invasive molecule in gliomas. Thus, inhibition of specific ADAMTS targets in gliomas could slow glioma invasion and may represent an important complementary avenue for the treatment of these tumors. 