Progressive silencing of p14ARF in oesophageal adenocarcinoma The frequency of oesophageal adenocarcinoma is increasing in Western countries for unknown reasons, and correlates with a corresponding increase in the premalignant condition, Barrett’s Oesophagus, which raises the risk of adenocarcinoma by some 40-125 fold. We have examined how disease progression correlates with changes in expression of the p14ARF (ARF) a tumour suppressor, a key regulator of the p53 tumor suppressor pathway that is silenced in some 30% of cancers overall, but for which a role in oesophageal cancer is unclear. We have used quantitative PCR, RT-PCR, methylation-specific PCR, and chromatin-immunoprecipitation to examine the regulation and function of ARF in oesophageal adenocarcinoma tissue specimens and cell lines. We find highly significant reductions (p<0.001) in ARF expression during disease progression from normal oesophageal epithelium to Barrett’s Oesophagus to adenocarcinoma, with 57/76 (75%) adenocarcinomas displaying undetectable levels of ARF expression. Retention of ARF expression in adenocarcinoma is a highly significant indicator of increased survival (p<0.001) and outperforms all clinical variables in a multivariate model. CpG methylation, as well as histone H3 methylation of lysines 9 and 27 contribute independently to ARF gene silencing in adenocarcinoma cell lines and can be reversed by 5-aza-2?-deoxycytidine. The results suggest that silencing of ARF is involved in the pathogenesis of oesophageal adenocarcinoma and show that either DNA or histone methylation can provide the primary mechanism for ARF gene silencing. Silencing of ARF could provide a useful marker for increased risk of progression and poor prognosis.  INTRODUCTION The incidence of oesophageal adenocarcinoma (AC), for which the 5 year survival rate is 13.6% [ 1 ], has increased in the United States and Western countries for poorly understood reasons over the past three decades. Early detection is critical to treatment success, and is based on endoscopic surveillance of dysplasia in the premalignant condition, Barrett’s oesophagus (BE), characterized by metaplastic columnar oesophageal epithelial cells. BE increases the risk of AC by some 40-125 fold [ 2 ], and provides an opportunity for early intervention. Several studies have identified genes or gene expression patterns that are characteristic of BE or AC [ 3 - 5 ], and several markers identify patients subsets at high risk for progression, including aneuploidy, p53 loss of heterozygosity, and p16INK4a (CDKN2A) abnormalities [ 6 - 8 ]. However, not all patients with these abnormalities progress, and there is therefore a need to identify additional indicators of risk. The p14ARF tumour suppressor (hereafter referred to as “ARF”, for Alternate Reading Frame) is estimated to be silenced in some 30% of cancers overall [ 9 ], making it one of the most frequently altered genes in human cancer, and a possible indicator of progression. ARF plays a well-established role in activating the p53 tumour suppressor pathway in response to oncogenic hyperproliferative signals [ 10 ], and in addition engages in less well understood p53-independent functions [ 11 - 14 ]. In AC, the specific role of ARF gene silencing has not been addressed, and CpG methylation of ARF, a common mechanism of tumour suppressor gene silencing in cancer [ 15 ], has been observed in tumour specimens with variable frequencies in different studies, up to about 30% [ 16 - 18 ]. The possibility that disease progression could involve quantitative changes in ARF expression levels, and the possible involvement of other silencing mechanisms such as histone modifications has not been examined. We have therefore used clinical specimens of normal oesophageal epithelium (NE), BE, and AC, and early passage cell lines derived from these tissue types, to examine possible changes in ARF expression during disease progression, as well as molecular mechanisms that may be involved.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell Culture Barrett’s and oesophageal cell lines that closely model the tissue of origin [ 19 - 21 ] and were at early passage (less than passage 20) were maintained at 37°C in 10% CO2 in DMEM supplemented with nonessential amino acids, pyruvate, L-glutamine, gentamicin, and 10% FBS, except for Gohtert, Gihtert, Chtert, and Het1A, for which 20% FBS was added. Table 1 lists the cell line characteristics and source. Tissue Specimens Twenty biopsies of normal squamous oesophagus (in patients without Barrett’s oesophagus) and 20 biopsies of Barrett’s oesophagus were collected from Addenbrooke’s Hospital in Cambridge (by R.C.F.) and University College Hospital in London, in collaboration with Dr. Laurence Lovat. Histological diagnosis was verified by pathological examination of paired biopsies taken for clinical purposes from the same endoscopic site. The 76 adenocarcinoma samples were pre-treatment biopsies obtained from Professor Hugh Barr at Gloucester NHS Trust and Professor Derek Alderson at Bristol Royal Infirmary. Patients were subsequently treated with esophagectomy. For all adenocarcinoma samples histology was confirmed on a frozen section taken from the research specimen by two independent pathologists (Professor Neil Shepherd and Professor Brian Warren for Gloucester samples and the reporting clinical pathologist in addition to Dr. Vicki Save for Bristol samples). All the samples were taken from the lower part of oesophagus, 2 cm above the oesophago-gastric junction, and were processed for research if epithelial cellularity was >80%. Ethics Committee approvals from each participating institution were obtained for these studies, and written informed consent was obtained from the participating patients. RT-PCR and PCR Total RNA or DNA prepared from cells or frozen tissue using Triozol Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to the protocol supplied by the manufacturer was subjected to RT-PCR or PCR, respectively, using primers chosen to amplify a gene fragment of about 300-600 bases. Primers were synthesized by Sigma Genosys, Woodlands, TX and are listed in Table 2 . The conditions used were as follows: 95°C (2 minutes), followed by 40 cycles of 95°C (30 seconds), 58°C (30 seconds), and 72°C (30 seconds). Methylation Specific PCR (MSP) CpG island methylation analysis was determined using bisulfite-treated genomic DNA following the instructions of EZ DNA methylation kit (Zymo research, Orange, CA). Primers specific for the methylated strand (M) and unmethylated strand (U) of the ARF promoter/exon1? were used, and were designed to include 5 CpG sites and 9 CpG sites in the M and U primers, respectively, in order to maximize specificity. Positive and negative controls were carried out using in vitro CpG methylated human sperm DNA with Sss I (CpG) methylase (New England Biolabs, Inc., Beverly, MA) or unmethylated sperm DNA, respectively. The primer sequences are listed in Table 2 , and conditions were as described for RT-PCR. Methylated sites within the PCR amplified regions were determined by sequencing the purified MSP products. Q-PCR and Q-MSP Real-time quantitative PCR (Q-PCR) was optimized by melt-curve analysis, and efficiency was calculated by serial dilutions. ARF-expressing BJ-1 cells and ARF-null TE7 cells were used as positive and negative controls, respectively. cDNA prepared from tissue or cellular RNA was diluted 1:10 and 5?L was amplified in a 20 ?L volume (in triplicate) containing 10 ?L of Sigma SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.2 ?mol/L final concentration of each primer, using a Rotor-Gene 3000 Real-time PCR cycler (Westburg Genomics, Netherlands), using conditions described for RT-PCR. Gene expression was measured relative to GAPDH (glyceraldehyde phosphate dehydrogenase) and was expressed as Relative Transcript Abundance = 1000 / 2( C T ARF – C T GAPDH), where C T = threshold cycle. The primers for ARF and GAPDH were the same as those described for RT-PCR and are listed in Table 2 , and conditions were as described for RT-PCR. Quantitative MSP (Q-MSP) analysis of bisulfite-treated DNA was performed similarly (in triplicate). The levels of unmethylated and methylated species were determined by a standard curve constructed by serial dilutions of unmethylated or Sss I-methylated human sperm DNA, respectively. Dilution experiments showed linearity of amplification down to a dilution of 1:104 for methylated DNA as well as for unmethylated DNA. The primers used were the same as for MSP and are listed in Table 2 , and PCR conditions were as described for RT-PCR. Bisulfite sequencing Two ?g genomic DNA was bisulfite-treated and used for PCR amplification of a 270 base pair region with universal primers listed in Table 2 , and conditions described for RT-PCR. The PCR product was gel-purified and sequenced using the same primers. Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) ChIP assays were performed following the chromatin immunoprecipitation protocol on the Upstate website ( www.upstate.com ). 2 ?g of anti-trimethyl-histone H3 (Lys-9) antibody (07-442, Upstate, USA) and anti-dimethyl-histone H3 (lys-9) antibody (ab7312, shared epitope with H3-lys-27, Abcam, UK) was used for each ChIP reaction. ARF sequences in the immunoprecipitates and starting material (input) were detected by PCR using ARF ChIP primers listed in Table 2 , and conditions described for RT-PCR. Statistical Analyses The significance of differences in ARF expression data in tissue specimens was determined by a Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test. Kaplan Meier survival curves were evaluated by a Log Rank (Mantel-Cox) test. For multivariate analysis a Cox regression model using a backward stepwise method was utilized. Fisher’s exact test was used to determine if the ARF expression status was associated with the N-Stage of the tumour.  Cell Culture Barrett’s and oesophageal cell lines that closely model the tissue of origin [ 19 - 21 ] and were at early passage (less than passage 20) were maintained at 37°C in 10% CO2 in DMEM supplemented with nonessential amino acids, pyruvate, L-glutamine, gentamicin, and 10% FBS, except for Gohtert, Gihtert, Chtert, and Het1A, for which 20% FBS was added. Table 1 lists the cell line characteristics and source.  Tissue Specimens Twenty biopsies of normal squamous oesophagus (in patients without Barrett’s oesophagus) and 20 biopsies of Barrett’s oesophagus were collected from Addenbrooke’s Hospital in Cambridge (by R.C.F.) and University College Hospital in London, in collaboration with Dr. Laurence Lovat. Histological diagnosis was verified by pathological examination of paired biopsies taken for clinical purposes from the same endoscopic site. The 76 adenocarcinoma samples were pre-treatment biopsies obtained from Professor Hugh Barr at Gloucester NHS Trust and Professor Derek Alderson at Bristol Royal Infirmary. Patients were subsequently treated with esophagectomy. For all adenocarcinoma samples histology was confirmed on a frozen section taken from the research specimen by two independent pathologists (Professor Neil Shepherd and Professor Brian Warren for Gloucester samples and the reporting clinical pathologist in addition to Dr. Vicki Save for Bristol samples). All the samples were taken from the lower part of oesophagus, 2 cm above the oesophago-gastric junction, and were processed for research if epithelial cellularity was >80%. Ethics Committee approvals from each participating institution were obtained for these studies, and written informed consent was obtained from the participating patients.  RT-PCR and PCR Total RNA or DNA prepared from cells or frozen tissue using Triozol Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to the protocol supplied by the manufacturer was subjected to RT-PCR or PCR, respectively, using primers chosen to amplify a gene fragment of about 300-600 bases. Primers were synthesized by Sigma Genosys, Woodlands, TX and are listed in Table 2 . The conditions used were as follows: 95°C (2 minutes), followed by 40 cycles of 95°C (30 seconds), 58°C (30 seconds), and 72°C (30 seconds).  Methylation Specific PCR (MSP) CpG island methylation analysis was determined using bisulfite-treated genomic DNA following the instructions of EZ DNA methylation kit (Zymo research, Orange, CA). Primers specific for the methylated strand (M) and unmethylated strand (U) of the ARF promoter/exon1? were used, and were designed to include 5 CpG sites and 9 CpG sites in the M and U primers, respectively, in order to maximize specificity. Positive and negative controls were carried out using in vitro CpG methylated human sperm DNA with Sss I (CpG) methylase (New England Biolabs, Inc., Beverly, MA) or unmethylated sperm DNA, respectively. The primer sequences are listed in Table 2 , and conditions were as described for RT-PCR. Methylated sites within the PCR amplified regions were determined by sequencing the purified MSP products.  Q-PCR and Q-MSP Real-time quantitative PCR (Q-PCR) was optimized by melt-curve analysis, and efficiency was calculated by serial dilutions. ARF-expressing BJ-1 cells and ARF-null TE7 cells were used as positive and negative controls, respectively. cDNA prepared from tissue or cellular RNA was diluted 1:10 and 5?L was amplified in a 20 ?L volume (in triplicate) containing 10 ?L of Sigma SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.2 ?mol/L final concentration of each primer, using a Rotor-Gene 3000 Real-time PCR cycler (Westburg Genomics, Netherlands), using conditions described for RT-PCR. Gene expression was measured relative to GAPDH (glyceraldehyde phosphate dehydrogenase) and was expressed as Relative Transcript Abundance = 1000 / 2( C T ARF – C T GAPDH), where C T = threshold cycle. The primers for ARF and GAPDH were the same as those described for RT-PCR and are listed in Table 2 , and conditions were as described for RT-PCR. Quantitative MSP (Q-MSP) analysis of bisulfite-treated DNA was performed similarly (in triplicate). The levels of unmethylated and methylated species were determined by a standard curve constructed by serial dilutions of unmethylated or Sss I-methylated human sperm DNA, respectively. Dilution experiments showed linearity of amplification down to a dilution of 1:104 for methylated DNA as well as for unmethylated DNA. The primers used were the same as for MSP and are listed in Table 2 , and PCR conditions were as described for RT-PCR.  Bisulfite sequencing Two ?g genomic DNA was bisulfite-treated and used for PCR amplification of a 270 base pair region with universal primers listed in Table 2 , and conditions described for RT-PCR. The PCR product was gel-purified and sequenced using the same primers.  Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) ChIP assays were performed following the chromatin immunoprecipitation protocol on the Upstate website ( www.upstate.com ). 2 ?g of anti-trimethyl-histone H3 (Lys-9) antibody (07-442, Upstate, USA) and anti-dimethyl-histone H3 (lys-9) antibody (ab7312, shared epitope with H3-lys-27, Abcam, UK) was used for each ChIP reaction. ARF sequences in the immunoprecipitates and starting material (input) were detected by PCR using ARF ChIP primers listed in Table 2 , and conditions described for RT-PCR.  Statistical Analyses The significance of differences in ARF expression data in tissue specimens was determined by a Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test. Kaplan Meier survival curves were evaluated by a Log Rank (Mantel-Cox) test. For multivariate analysis a Cox regression model using a backward stepwise method was utilized. Fisher’s exact test was used to determine if the ARF expression status was associated with the N-Stage of the tumour.  RESULTS ARF expression and gene status in clinical specimens ARF expression was examined by quantitative PCR (Q-PCR) in prospectively-collected clinical specimens of oesophageal tissue from individuals with a normal squamous oesophagus (20 specimens) and patients with non-dysplastic BE (20 specimens) or AC (76 specimens). We found highly significant decreases in ARF expression (p <0.001) with disease progression from normal oesophageal epithelium (NE), to non-dysplastic BE to AC ( Figure 1A ). Furthermore, 57 of 76 (75%) AC specimens had undetectable levels of ARF expression, while only 4 of 20 (20%) BE specimens and none of the NE specimens displayed undetectable levels of ARF expression. Table 3 summarizes the ARF expression analysis for the 47 AC specimens for which follow-up data was available. Correlation of ARF expression with clinical outcome Among the 76 AC patients whose tumours were analyzed for ARF expression in Figure 1A , clinical data relating to disease stage and survival were available for 47 patients ( Table 3 ). Only T-stage (Log rank Mantel-Cox test, ?2= 7.65, d.f.=2, p=0.022), and ARF expression (Log rank Mantel-Cox test, ?2= 21.69, d.f.=1, p<0.0001, see Figure 1B ) were prognostically significant on univariate analysis, though the N-Stage approached statistical significance (Log rank Mantel-Cox test, ?2= 3.72, d.f.=1, p=0.052). Retaining ARF expression significantly improved survival, and even low levels of ARF seemed to provide a barrier to tumourigenic progression. When entering differentiation, T-stage, N-stage and ARF expression status into a Cox regression model, only ARF expression remained outperforming all other clinical indicators (Hazard ratio 10.85, 95% confidence interval 3.24-36.37, p<0.0001, Table 4 . In addition significantly more N1 tumours had lost ARF expression compared with N0 tumours (81% [31/38] of N1 tumours versus 33.3% [3/9] of N0 tumours, Fisher’s exact test p=0.008). ARF expression and gene methylation status in NE, BE and AC cell lines We used carcinoma cell lines and immortalized cell lines of BE origin (Gohtert, Gihtert, Chtert), as well as an immortalized NE cell line (HET1A), to further investigate mechanisms leading to reduced ARF expression in BE and AC. Non-quantitative RT-PCR analyses ( Figure 2A , ARF) revealed loss of ARF expression in 3/6 carcinoma cell lines (SEG1, TE7, OC1), and retention of ARF expression in 3/3 BE cell lines, and in the NE cell line (HET1A). All GAPDH (glyceraldehyde phosphate dehydrogenase) controls were positive. Loss of ARF expression in SEG1, OC1 and TE7 did not occur by homozygous gene deletion, as PCR analysis of genomic DNA showed that ARF exon 1 ? and exon 2 sequences were present ( Figure 2A , exon 1ß, exon 2). To determine how CpG island methylation of the ARF gene correlates with silencing of ARF in AC and BE, we carried out a methylation-specific PCR analysis (MSP) on bisulfite-treated genomic DNA derived from these cell lines (the amplified region, which falls within the 5?-UTR (untranslated region) and exon 1ß, is indicated by arrows in Figure 2C ). We found that normal oesophageal epithelial cells (HET1A) displayed only the unmethylated band, while all of the BE and carcinoma cell lines displayed both methylated and unmethylated bands ( Figure 2A , M, U). We have also observed lack of methylation of ARF in an additional cell line, BJ-1, derived from immortalized normal fibroblasts (not shown), adding additional support to the likelihood that methylation of this region in cultured BE and carcinoma cell lines correlates with the disease process. Furthermore, a well-characterized colorectal carcinoma cell line, SW48 with methylated ARF [ 22 - 24 ] and no ARF expression ([ 25 ], and Huang, Y, unpublished), displayed only the M band (not shown), indicating that the presence of the M and U bands is not a universal feature of all cell lines. There are, nevertheless, several other published examples of monoallelic gene methylation. In particular, monoallelic methylation of the APC gene occurs in gastric mucosa associated with neoplastic lesions [ 26 ], and monoallelic methylation of the p16INK4a promoter in HCT116 colon cancer cells has been reported [ 27 ]. We ruled out cellular heterogeneity as a source of the methylated and unmethylated bands by showing that single cell-derived clones of the TE7 cell line (ARF?) were identical to the parental TE7 cell line with respect to ARF expression ( Figure 2B , ARF), and the presence of both methylated and unmethylated ARF bands following MSP analysis ( Figure 2B , M, U). A similar subcloning analysis (not shown) carried out on 5 subclones of the OC3 (ARF+) and OC1 (ARF?) cell lines confirmed that their respective subclones also resembled the parental line from which they were derived. The pattern of methylation observed in the parental lines therefore appears unlikely to represent a heterogeneous methylation pattern of ARF alleles within a mixed population of cells. Bisulfite treatment converts unmethylated but not methylated cytosine to uracil and therefore generates a different sequence on methylated and unmethylated DNA. To rule out heterogeneity of CpG methylation across the ARF sequence as a source of the M and U bands, we carried out a direct sequence analysis of the MSP products (M and U bands) from bisulfite treated genomic DNA of each of the 9 cell lines shown in Figure 2A , using the same methylation-specific primers as were used in Figure 2A . The results, shown schematically in Figure 2C , show that the M band corresponds to a sequence methylated at more than 90% of the available CpG sites, whereas the U band corresponds to a completely unmethylated sequence. A quantitative MSP analysis of bisulfite-treated genomic DNA using the MSP primers from Figure 2A , demonstrated that the two gene states are present in roughly equal amounts in all 9 cell lines, consistent with a diploid gene dosage for ARF in these cell lines ( Figure 2D ). To further confirm the presence of both methylated and unmethylated alleles of ARF in these cells, we carried out bisulfite sequencing of a 270 base pair region from minus 67 to plus 203 (relative to start of translation) of genomic DNA from OC3 cells using universal primers chosen so as to be complementary to 5? and 3? flanking regions without CpG sites. These primers were therefore insensitive to the methylation state of the amplified region and simultaneously amplified both methylated and unmethylated sequences with equal efficiency in one reaction. Figure 2D (right hand panel) shows the results for a portion of the amplified region from +56 to +97, which includes 4 CpG sites and 6 isolated Cs. Bisulfite treatment converted all 6 isolated Cs to U (T), indicating a high efficiency of conversion. In contrast, for each C present in a methylatable CpG sequence, bisulfite treatment gave rise to both a C and a U (T), as would be expected if only one of the two alleles were protected by methylation. Similar results were observed for the remainder of the sequence, and for Gihtert and SEG1 (not shown). Taken together, the results of the cell cloning analysis ( Figure 2B ), the direct sequence analysis of MSP products ( Figure 2C ), and the gene dosage analysis and bisulfite sequence analysis of genomic DNA ( Figure 2D ), are highly suggestive of a stable pattern of CpG methylation of a single ARF allele in individual cells of BE or carcinoma origin. Activation of ARF expression by 5-aza-2?-deoxycytidine To demonstrate a functional role for the observed CpG methylation of ARF, we carried out an experiment with the DNA demethylating agent, 5-aza-2?-deoxycytidine (5-aza-CdR), followed by RT-PCR in the 3 BE cell lines and the 6 carcinoma cell lines ( Figure 3A ). Treatment of cell lines with 1?M 5-aza-CdR for 24 hours, followed by culturing for an additional 48 hours, resulted in activation of ARF expression in the 3 carcinoma cell lines that had lacked ARF expression (SEG1, TE7, OC1, compare Figure 3A (ARF) and Figure 3A (ARF+aza)). GAPDH expression served as a control ( Figure 3A (GAPDH+aza)). This treatment also resulted in undetectable levels of CpG methylation of ARF in all 9 BE and carcinoma cell lines ( Figure 3A , M, U), evaluated by MSP. Furthermore, when Q-PCR was used to quantitate 5-aza-CdR-induced changes in ARF expression (relative to the GAPDH internal control) in the 3 BE cell lines (Go, Gi, Ch) and the 3 carcinoma cell lines that originally expressed ARF (OC3, FLO-1, OC33), we observed an approximate doubling of ARF expression levels ( Figure 3B ), as expected if CpG methylation were to silence only one of the ARF alleles. Taken together, these results suggest that methylation silences the ARF allele on which it occurs, but do not explain how the unmethylated alleles are silenced in SEG1, TE7, and OC1 cells. Correlation of Histone H3 methylation with complete silencing of ARF Histone H3 di and trimethylation on lysine 9 (K9), and di and trimethylation on lysine 27 (K27) have been implicated as important epigenetic mechanisms of gene silencing in cancer [ 28 , 29 ]. We therefore carried out a Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis using an antibody specific for histone H3 trimethylated lysine 9 (H3-K9-Me3), or using an antibody with dual specificity for the dimethylated form of histone H3 lysine K9 (H3-K9-Me2) and the di and trimethylated forms of lysine 27 (H3-K27-Me), followed by PCR analysis of the associated ARF sequences, to investigate the presence of this modification on ARF alleles in the series of cell lines examined above. As shown in Figure 3C , the ARF gene was found to be associated with chromatin containing histone H3-K9-Me3, H3-K9-Me2, and H3-K27Me only in the 3 carcinoma cell lines, SEG1, TE7, and OC1 ( Figure 3C ), in which complete ARF gene silencing occurred. In all other cell lines, namely the three BE cell lines (Go, Gi, Ch), and three of the carcinoma cell lines (OC3, FLO-1, OC33) where partial silencing of ARF through CpG methylation was observed, there was no evidence for histone methylation ( Figure 3C ). Input ARF levels were the same in all cases ( Figure 3C , ARF input). Controls (no antibody) were negative in all cases (not shown). The results suggest that histone methylation-induced silencing of ARF could also predispose to malignant transformation and to disease progression in AC. Association of methylated Histone H3 with unmethylated ARF DNA To determine whether histone methylation occurs on both DNA methylated and DNA unmethylated alleles of ARF, we carried out a further MSP analysis of the DNA isolated from the histone-antibody immunoprecipitated material and treated with bisulfite. We found that the ARF allele associated with histone H3-K9-Me3, histone H3-K9-Me2 or with histone H3-K27-Me in SEG1, TE7, and OC1 cells is unmethylated at CpG sites ( Figure 3C , M, U). Nevertheless, treatment of SEG1, TE7, and OC1 cells with the DNA demethylating agent, 5-aza-CdR, resulted in a complete reversal of these methylated histone modifications, as revealed by ChIP analysis, even though that allele lacked CpG island methylation ( Figure 3D ), consistent with a previous report [ 29 , 30 ]. Input ARF levels were the same in all cases ( Figure 3D , ARF input+aza), and controls (no-antibody) were negative (not shown). The results indicate that CpG methylation and histone H3 methylation occur in a mutually exclusive manner on the ARF gene in adenocarcinoma cell lines, and that each can be independently reversed by 5-aza-CdR.  RESULTS ARF expression and gene status in clinical specimens ARF expression was examined by quantitative PCR (Q-PCR) in prospectively-collected clinical specimens of oesophageal tissue from individuals with a normal squamous oesophagus (20 specimens) and patients with non-dysplastic BE (20 specimens) or AC (76 specimens). We found highly significant decreases in ARF expression (p <0.001) with disease progression from normal oesophageal epithelium (NE), to non-dysplastic BE to AC ( Figure 1A ). Furthermore, 57 of 76 (75%) AC specimens had undetectable levels of ARF expression, while only 4 of 20 (20%) BE specimens and none of the NE specimens displayed undetectable levels of ARF expression. Table 3 summarizes the ARF expression analysis for the 47 AC specimens for which follow-up data was available. Correlation of ARF expression with clinical outcome Among the 76 AC patients whose tumours were analyzed for ARF expression in Figure 1A , clinical data relating to disease stage and survival were available for 47 patients ( Table 3 ). Only T-stage (Log rank Mantel-Cox test, ?2= 7.65, d.f.=2, p=0.022), and ARF expression (Log rank Mantel-Cox test, ?2= 21.69, d.f.=1, p<0.0001, see Figure 1B ) were prognostically significant on univariate analysis, though the N-Stage approached statistical significance (Log rank Mantel-Cox test, ?2= 3.72, d.f.=1, p=0.052). Retaining ARF expression significantly improved survival, and even low levels of ARF seemed to provide a barrier to tumourigenic progression. When entering differentiation, T-stage, N-stage and ARF expression status into a Cox regression model, only ARF expression remained outperforming all other clinical indicators (Hazard ratio 10.85, 95% confidence interval 3.24-36.37, p<0.0001, Table 4 . In addition significantly more N1 tumours had lost ARF expression compared with N0 tumours (81% [31/38] of N1 tumours versus 33.3% [3/9] of N0 tumours, Fisher’s exact test p=0.008). ARF expression and gene methylation status in NE, BE and AC cell lines We used carcinoma cell lines and immortalized cell lines of BE origin (Gohtert, Gihtert, Chtert), as well as an immortalized NE cell line (HET1A), to further investigate mechanisms leading to reduced ARF expression in BE and AC. Non-quantitative RT-PCR analyses ( Figure 2A , ARF) revealed loss of ARF expression in 3/6 carcinoma cell lines (SEG1, TE7, OC1), and retention of ARF expression in 3/3 BE cell lines, and in the NE cell line (HET1A). All GAPDH (glyceraldehyde phosphate dehydrogenase) controls were positive. Loss of ARF expression in SEG1, OC1 and TE7 did not occur by homozygous gene deletion, as PCR analysis of genomic DNA showed that ARF exon 1 ? and exon 2 sequences were present ( Figure 2A , exon 1ß, exon 2). To determine how CpG island methylation of the ARF gene correlates with silencing of ARF in AC and BE, we carried out a methylation-specific PCR analysis (MSP) on bisulfite-treated genomic DNA derived from these cell lines (the amplified region, which falls within the 5?-UTR (untranslated region) and exon 1ß, is indicated by arrows in Figure 2C ). We found that normal oesophageal epithelial cells (HET1A) displayed only the unmethylated band, while all of the BE and carcinoma cell lines displayed both methylated and unmethylated bands ( Figure 2A , M, U). We have also observed lack of methylation of ARF in an additional cell line, BJ-1, derived from immortalized normal fibroblasts (not shown), adding additional support to the likelihood that methylation of this region in cultured BE and carcinoma cell lines correlates with the disease process. Furthermore, a well-characterized colorectal carcinoma cell line, SW48 with methylated ARF [ 22 - 24 ] and no ARF expression ([ 25 ], and Huang, Y, unpublished), displayed only the M band (not shown), indicating that the presence of the M and U bands is not a universal feature of all cell lines. There are, nevertheless, several other published examples of monoallelic gene methylation. In particular, monoallelic methylation of the APC gene occurs in gastric mucosa associated with neoplastic lesions [ 26 ], and monoallelic methylation of the p16INK4a promoter in HCT116 colon cancer cells has been reported [ 27 ]. We ruled out cellular heterogeneity as a source of the methylated and unmethylated bands by showing that single cell-derived clones of the TE7 cell line (ARF?) were identical to the parental TE7 cell line with respect to ARF expression ( Figure 2B , ARF), and the presence of both methylated and unmethylated ARF bands following MSP analysis ( Figure 2B , M, U). A similar subcloning analysis (not shown) carried out on 5 subclones of the OC3 (ARF+) and OC1 (ARF?) cell lines confirmed that their respective subclones also resembled the parental line from which they were derived. The pattern of methylation observed in the parental lines therefore appears unlikely to represent a heterogeneous methylation pattern of ARF alleles within a mixed population of cells. Bisulfite treatment converts unmethylated but not methylated cytosine to uracil and therefore generates a different sequence on methylated and unmethylated DNA. To rule out heterogeneity of CpG methylation across the ARF sequence as a source of the M and U bands, we carried out a direct sequence analysis of the MSP products (M and U bands) from bisulfite treated genomic DNA of each of the 9 cell lines shown in Figure 2A , using the same methylation-specific primers as were used in Figure 2A . The results, shown schematically in Figure 2C , show that the M band corresponds to a sequence methylated at more than 90% of the available CpG sites, whereas the U band corresponds to a completely unmethylated sequence. A quantitative MSP analysis of bisulfite-treated genomic DNA using the MSP primers from Figure 2A , demonstrated that the two gene states are present in roughly equal amounts in all 9 cell lines, consistent with a diploid gene dosage for ARF in these cell lines ( Figure 2D ). To further confirm the presence of both methylated and unmethylated alleles of ARF in these cells, we carried out bisulfite sequencing of a 270 base pair region from minus 67 to plus 203 (relative to start of translation) of genomic DNA from OC3 cells using universal primers chosen so as to be complementary to 5? and 3? flanking regions without CpG sites. These primers were therefore insensitive to the methylation state of the amplified region and simultaneously amplified both methylated and unmethylated sequences with equal efficiency in one reaction. Figure 2D (right hand panel) shows the results for a portion of the amplified region from +56 to +97, which includes 4 CpG sites and 6 isolated Cs. Bisulfite treatment converted all 6 isolated Cs to U (T), indicating a high efficiency of conversion. In contrast, for each C present in a methylatable CpG sequence, bisulfite treatment gave rise to both a C and a U (T), as would be expected if only one of the two alleles were protected by methylation. Similar results were observed for the remainder of the sequence, and for Gihtert and SEG1 (not shown). Taken together, the results of the cell cloning analysis ( Figure 2B ), the direct sequence analysis of MSP products ( Figure 2C ), and the gene dosage analysis and bisulfite sequence analysis of genomic DNA ( Figure 2D ), are highly suggestive of a stable pattern of CpG methylation of a single ARF allele in individual cells of BE or carcinoma origin. Activation of ARF expression by 5-aza-2?-deoxycytidine To demonstrate a functional role for the observed CpG methylation of ARF, we carried out an experiment with the DNA demethylating agent, 5-aza-2?-deoxycytidine (5-aza-CdR), followed by RT-PCR in the 3 BE cell lines and the 6 carcinoma cell lines ( Figure 3A ). Treatment of cell lines with 1?M 5-aza-CdR for 24 hours, followed by culturing for an additional 48 hours, resulted in activation of ARF expression in the 3 carcinoma cell lines that had lacked ARF expression (SEG1, TE7, OC1, compare Figure 3A (ARF) and Figure 3A (ARF+aza)). GAPDH expression served as a control ( Figure 3A (GAPDH+aza)). This treatment also resulted in undetectable levels of CpG methylation of ARF in all 9 BE and carcinoma cell lines ( Figure 3A , M, U), evaluated by MSP. Furthermore, when Q-PCR was used to quantitate 5-aza-CdR-induced changes in ARF expression (relative to the GAPDH internal control) in the 3 BE cell lines (Go, Gi, Ch) and the 3 carcinoma cell lines that originally expressed ARF (OC3, FLO-1, OC33), we observed an approximate doubling of ARF expression levels ( Figure 3B ), as expected if CpG methylation were to silence only one of the ARF alleles. Taken together, these results suggest that methylation silences the ARF allele on which it occurs, but do not explain how the unmethylated alleles are silenced in SEG1, TE7, and OC1 cells. Correlation of Histone H3 methylation with complete silencing of ARF Histone H3 di and trimethylation on lysine 9 (K9), and di and trimethylation on lysine 27 (K27) have been implicated as important epigenetic mechanisms of gene silencing in cancer [ 28 , 29 ]. We therefore carried out a Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis using an antibody specific for histone H3 trimethylated lysine 9 (H3-K9-Me3), or using an antibody with dual specificity for the dimethylated form of histone H3 lysine K9 (H3-K9-Me2) and the di and trimethylated forms of lysine 27 (H3-K27-Me), followed by PCR analysis of the associated ARF sequences, to investigate the presence of this modification on ARF alleles in the series of cell lines examined above. As shown in Figure 3C , the ARF gene was found to be associated with chromatin containing histone H3-K9-Me3, H3-K9-Me2, and H3-K27Me only in the 3 carcinoma cell lines, SEG1, TE7, and OC1 ( Figure 3C ), in which complete ARF gene silencing occurred. In all other cell lines, namely the three BE cell lines (Go, Gi, Ch), and three of the carcinoma cell lines (OC3, FLO-1, OC33) where partial silencing of ARF through CpG methylation was observed, there was no evidence for histone methylation ( Figure 3C ). Input ARF levels were the same in all cases ( Figure 3C , ARF input). Controls (no antibody) were negative in all cases (not shown). The results suggest that histone methylation-induced silencing of ARF could also predispose to malignant transformation and to disease progression in AC. Association of methylated Histone H3 with unmethylated ARF DNA To determine whether histone methylation occurs on both DNA methylated and DNA unmethylated alleles of ARF, we carried out a further MSP analysis of the DNA isolated from the histone-antibody immunoprecipitated material and treated with bisulfite. We found that the ARF allele associated with histone H3-K9-Me3, histone H3-K9-Me2 or with histone H3-K27-Me in SEG1, TE7, and OC1 cells is unmethylated at CpG sites ( Figure 3C , M, U). Nevertheless, treatment of SEG1, TE7, and OC1 cells with the DNA demethylating agent, 5-aza-CdR, resulted in a complete reversal of these methylated histone modifications, as revealed by ChIP analysis, even though that allele lacked CpG island methylation ( Figure 3D ), consistent with a previous report [ 29 , 30 ]. Input ARF levels were the same in all cases ( Figure 3D , ARF input+aza), and controls (no-antibody) were negative (not shown). The results indicate that CpG methylation and histone H3 methylation occur in a mutually exclusive manner on the ARF gene in adenocarcinoma cell lines, and that each can be independently reversed by 5-aza-CdR.  ARF expression and gene status in clinical specimens ARF expression was examined by quantitative PCR (Q-PCR) in prospectively-collected clinical specimens of oesophageal tissue from individuals with a normal squamous oesophagus (20 specimens) and patients with non-dysplastic BE (20 specimens) or AC (76 specimens). We found highly significant decreases in ARF expression (p <0.001) with disease progression from normal oesophageal epithelium (NE), to non-dysplastic BE to AC ( Figure 1A ). Furthermore, 57 of 76 (75%) AC specimens had undetectable levels of ARF expression, while only 4 of 20 (20%) BE specimens and none of the NE specimens displayed undetectable levels of ARF expression. Table 3 summarizes the ARF expression analysis for the 47 AC specimens for which follow-up data was available.  ARF expression and gene status in clinical specimens ARF expression was examined by quantitative PCR (Q-PCR) in prospectively-collected clinical specimens of oesophageal tissue from individuals with a normal squamous oesophagus (20 specimens) and patients with non-dysplastic BE (20 specimens) or AC (76 specimens). We found highly significant decreases in ARF expression (p <0.001) with disease progression from normal oesophageal epithelium (NE), to non-dysplastic BE to AC ( Figure 1A ). Furthermore, 57 of 76 (75%) AC specimens had undetectable levels of ARF expression, while only 4 of 20 (20%) BE specimens and none of the NE specimens displayed undetectable levels of ARF expression. Table 3 summarizes the ARF expression analysis for the 47 AC specimens for which follow-up data was available.  Correlation of ARF expression with clinical outcome Among the 76 AC patients whose tumours were analyzed for ARF expression in Figure 1A , clinical data relating to disease stage and survival were available for 47 patients ( Table 3 ). Only T-stage (Log rank Mantel-Cox test, ?2= 7.65, d.f.=2, p=0.022), and ARF expression (Log rank Mantel-Cox test, ?2= 21.69, d.f.=1, p<0.0001, see Figure 1B ) were prognostically significant on univariate analysis, though the N-Stage approached statistical significance (Log rank Mantel-Cox test, ?2= 3.72, d.f.=1, p=0.052). Retaining ARF expression significantly improved survival, and even low levels of ARF seemed to provide a barrier to tumourigenic progression. When entering differentiation, T-stage, N-stage and ARF expression status into a Cox regression model, only ARF expression remained outperforming all other clinical indicators (Hazard ratio 10.85, 95% confidence interval 3.24-36.37, p<0.0001, Table 4 . In addition significantly more N1 tumours had lost ARF expression compared with N0 tumours (81% [31/38] of N1 tumours versus 33.3% [3/9] of N0 tumours, Fisher’s exact test p=0.008).  Correlation of ARF expression with clinical outcome Among the 76 AC patients whose tumours were analyzed for ARF expression in Figure 1A , clinical data relating to disease stage and survival were available for 47 patients ( Table 3 ). Only T-stage (Log rank Mantel-Cox test, ?2= 7.65, d.f.=2, p=0.022), and ARF expression (Log rank Mantel-Cox test, ?2= 21.69, d.f.=1, p<0.0001, see Figure 1B ) were prognostically significant on univariate analysis, though the N-Stage approached statistical significance (Log rank Mantel-Cox test, ?2= 3.72, d.f.=1, p=0.052). Retaining ARF expression significantly improved survival, and even low levels of ARF seemed to provide a barrier to tumourigenic progression. When entering differentiation, T-stage, N-stage and ARF expression status into a Cox regression model, only ARF expression remained outperforming all other clinical indicators (Hazard ratio 10.85, 95% confidence interval 3.24-36.37, p<0.0001, Table 4 . In addition significantly more N1 tumours had lost ARF expression compared with N0 tumours (81% [31/38] of N1 tumours versus 33.3% [3/9] of N0 tumours, Fisher’s exact test p=0.008).  ARF expression and gene methylation status in NE, BE and AC cell lines We used carcinoma cell lines and immortalized cell lines of BE origin (Gohtert, Gihtert, Chtert), as well as an immortalized NE cell line (HET1A), to further investigate mechanisms leading to reduced ARF expression in BE and AC. Non-quantitative RT-PCR analyses ( Figure 2A , ARF) revealed loss of ARF expression in 3/6 carcinoma cell lines (SEG1, TE7, OC1), and retention of ARF expression in 3/3 BE cell lines, and in the NE cell line (HET1A). All GAPDH (glyceraldehyde phosphate dehydrogenase) controls were positive. Loss of ARF expression in SEG1, OC1 and TE7 did not occur by homozygous gene deletion, as PCR analysis of genomic DNA showed that ARF exon 1 ? and exon 2 sequences were present ( Figure 2A , exon 1ß, exon 2). To determine how CpG island methylation of the ARF gene correlates with silencing of ARF in AC and BE, we carried out a methylation-specific PCR analysis (MSP) on bisulfite-treated genomic DNA derived from these cell lines (the amplified region, which falls within the 5?-UTR (untranslated region) and exon 1ß, is indicated by arrows in Figure 2C ). We found that normal oesophageal epithelial cells (HET1A) displayed only the unmethylated band, while all of the BE and carcinoma cell lines displayed both methylated and unmethylated bands ( Figure 2A , M, U). We have also observed lack of methylation of ARF in an additional cell line, BJ-1, derived from immortalized normal fibroblasts (not shown), adding additional support to the likelihood that methylation of this region in cultured BE and carcinoma cell lines correlates with the disease process. Furthermore, a well-characterized colorectal carcinoma cell line, SW48 with methylated ARF [ 22 - 24 ] and no ARF expression ([ 25 ], and Huang, Y, unpublished), displayed only the M band (not shown), indicating that the presence of the M and U bands is not a universal feature of all cell lines. There are, nevertheless, several other published examples of monoallelic gene methylation. In particular, monoallelic methylation of the APC gene occurs in gastric mucosa associated with neoplastic lesions [ 26 ], and monoallelic methylation of the p16INK4a promoter in HCT116 colon cancer cells has been reported [ 27 ]. We ruled out cellular heterogeneity as a source of the methylated and unmethylated bands by showing that single cell-derived clones of the TE7 cell line (ARF?) were identical to the parental TE7 cell line with respect to ARF expression ( Figure 2B , ARF), and the presence of both methylated and unmethylated ARF bands following MSP analysis ( Figure 2B , M, U). A similar subcloning analysis (not shown) carried out on 5 subclones of the OC3 (ARF+) and OC1 (ARF?) cell lines confirmed that their respective subclones also resembled the parental line from which they were derived. The pattern of methylation observed in the parental lines therefore appears unlikely to represent a heterogeneous methylation pattern of ARF alleles within a mixed population of cells. Bisulfite treatment converts unmethylated but not methylated cytosine to uracil and therefore generates a different sequence on methylated and unmethylated DNA. To rule out heterogeneity of CpG methylation across the ARF sequence as a source of the M and U bands, we carried out a direct sequence analysis of the MSP products (M and U bands) from bisulfite treated genomic DNA of each of the 9 cell lines shown in Figure 2A , using the same methylation-specific primers as were used in Figure 2A . The results, shown schematically in Figure 2C , show that the M band corresponds to a sequence methylated at more than 90% of the available CpG sites, whereas the U band corresponds to a completely unmethylated sequence. A quantitative MSP analysis of bisulfite-treated genomic DNA using the MSP primers from Figure 2A , demonstrated that the two gene states are present in roughly equal amounts in all 9 cell lines, consistent with a diploid gene dosage for ARF in these cell lines ( Figure 2D ). To further confirm the presence of both methylated and unmethylated alleles of ARF in these cells, we carried out bisulfite sequencing of a 270 base pair region from minus 67 to plus 203 (relative to start of translation) of genomic DNA from OC3 cells using universal primers chosen so as to be complementary to 5? and 3? flanking regions without CpG sites. These primers were therefore insensitive to the methylation state of the amplified region and simultaneously amplified both methylated and unmethylated sequences with equal efficiency in one reaction. Figure 2D (right hand panel) shows the results for a portion of the amplified region from +56 to +97, which includes 4 CpG sites and 6 isolated Cs. Bisulfite treatment converted all 6 isolated Cs to U (T), indicating a high efficiency of conversion. In contrast, for each C present in a methylatable CpG sequence, bisulfite treatment gave rise to both a C and a U (T), as would be expected if only one of the two alleles were protected by methylation. Similar results were observed for the remainder of the sequence, and for Gihtert and SEG1 (not shown). Taken together, the results of the cell cloning analysis ( Figure 2B ), the direct sequence analysis of MSP products ( Figure 2C ), and the gene dosage analysis and bisulfite sequence analysis of genomic DNA ( Figure 2D ), are highly suggestive of a stable pattern of CpG methylation of a single ARF allele in individual cells of BE or carcinoma origin.  ARF expression and gene methylation status in NE, BE and AC cell lines We used carcinoma cell lines and immortalized cell lines of BE origin (Gohtert, Gihtert, Chtert), as well as an immortalized NE cell line (HET1A), to further investigate mechanisms leading to reduced ARF expression in BE and AC. Non-quantitative RT-PCR analyses ( Figure 2A , ARF) revealed loss of ARF expression in 3/6 carcinoma cell lines (SEG1, TE7, OC1), and retention of ARF expression in 3/3 BE cell lines, and in the NE cell line (HET1A). All GAPDH (glyceraldehyde phosphate dehydrogenase) controls were positive. Loss of ARF expression in SEG1, OC1 and TE7 did not occur by homozygous gene deletion, as PCR analysis of genomic DNA showed that ARF exon 1 ? and exon 2 sequences were present ( Figure 2A , exon 1ß, exon 2). To determine how CpG island methylation of the ARF gene correlates with silencing of ARF in AC and BE, we carried out a methylation-specific PCR analysis (MSP) on bisulfite-treated genomic DNA derived from these cell lines (the amplified region, which falls within the 5?-UTR (untranslated region) and exon 1ß, is indicated by arrows in Figure 2C ). We found that normal oesophageal epithelial cells (HET1A) displayed only the unmethylated band, while all of the BE and carcinoma cell lines displayed both methylated and unmethylated bands ( Figure 2A , M, U). We have also observed lack of methylation of ARF in an additional cell line, BJ-1, derived from immortalized normal fibroblasts (not shown), adding additional support to the likelihood that methylation of this region in cultured BE and carcinoma cell lines correlates with the disease process. Furthermore, a well-characterized colorectal carcinoma cell line, SW48 with methylated ARF [ 22 - 24 ] and no ARF expression ([ 25 ], and Huang, Y, unpublished), displayed only the M band (not shown), indicating that the presence of the M and U bands is not a universal feature of all cell lines. There are, nevertheless, several other published examples of monoallelic gene methylation. In particular, monoallelic methylation of the APC gene occurs in gastric mucosa associated with neoplastic lesions [ 26 ], and monoallelic methylation of the p16INK4a promoter in HCT116 colon cancer cells has been reported [ 27 ]. We ruled out cellular heterogeneity as a source of the methylated and unmethylated bands by showing that single cell-derived clones of the TE7 cell line (ARF?) were identical to the parental TE7 cell line with respect to ARF expression ( Figure 2B , ARF), and the presence of both methylated and unmethylated ARF bands following MSP analysis ( Figure 2B , M, U). A similar subcloning analysis (not shown) carried out on 5 subclones of the OC3 (ARF+) and OC1 (ARF?) cell lines confirmed that their respective subclones also resembled the parental line from which they were derived. The pattern of methylation observed in the parental lines therefore appears unlikely to represent a heterogeneous methylation pattern of ARF alleles within a mixed population of cells. Bisulfite treatment converts unmethylated but not methylated cytosine to uracil and therefore generates a different sequence on methylated and unmethylated DNA. To rule out heterogeneity of CpG methylation across the ARF sequence as a source of the M and U bands, we carried out a direct sequence analysis of the MSP products (M and U bands) from bisulfite treated genomic DNA of each of the 9 cell lines shown in Figure 2A , using the same methylation-specific primers as were used in Figure 2A . The results, shown schematically in Figure 2C , show that the M band corresponds to a sequence methylated at more than 90% of the available CpG sites, whereas the U band corresponds to a completely unmethylated sequence. A quantitative MSP analysis of bisulfite-treated genomic DNA using the MSP primers from Figure 2A , demonstrated that the two gene states are present in roughly equal amounts in all 9 cell lines, consistent with a diploid gene dosage for ARF in these cell lines ( Figure 2D ). To further confirm the presence of both methylated and unmethylated alleles of ARF in these cells, we carried out bisulfite sequencing of a 270 base pair region from minus 67 to plus 203 (relative to start of translation) of genomic DNA from OC3 cells using universal primers chosen so as to be complementary to 5? and 3? flanking regions without CpG sites. These primers were therefore insensitive to the methylation state of the amplified region and simultaneously amplified both methylated and unmethylated sequences with equal efficiency in one reaction. Figure 2D (right hand panel) shows the results for a portion of the amplified region from +56 to +97, which includes 4 CpG sites and 6 isolated Cs. Bisulfite treatment converted all 6 isolated Cs to U (T), indicating a high efficiency of conversion. In contrast, for each C present in a methylatable CpG sequence, bisulfite treatment gave rise to both a C and a U (T), as would be expected if only one of the two alleles were protected by methylation. Similar results were observed for the remainder of the sequence, and for Gihtert and SEG1 (not shown). Taken together, the results of the cell cloning analysis ( Figure 2B ), the direct sequence analysis of MSP products ( Figure 2C ), and the gene dosage analysis and bisulfite sequence analysis of genomic DNA ( Figure 2D ), are highly suggestive of a stable pattern of CpG methylation of a single ARF allele in individual cells of BE or carcinoma origin.  Activation of ARF expression by 5-aza-2?-deoxycytidine To demonstrate a functional role for the observed CpG methylation of ARF, we carried out an experiment with the DNA demethylating agent, 5-aza-2?-deoxycytidine (5-aza-CdR), followed by RT-PCR in the 3 BE cell lines and the 6 carcinoma cell lines ( Figure 3A ). Treatment of cell lines with 1?M 5-aza-CdR for 24 hours, followed by culturing for an additional 48 hours, resulted in activation of ARF expression in the 3 carcinoma cell lines that had lacked ARF expression (SEG1, TE7, OC1, compare Figure 3A (ARF) and Figure 3A (ARF+aza)). GAPDH expression served as a control ( Figure 3A (GAPDH+aza)). This treatment also resulted in undetectable levels of CpG methylation of ARF in all 9 BE and carcinoma cell lines ( Figure 3A , M, U), evaluated by MSP. Furthermore, when Q-PCR was used to quantitate 5-aza-CdR-induced changes in ARF expression (relative to the GAPDH internal control) in the 3 BE cell lines (Go, Gi, Ch) and the 3 carcinoma cell lines that originally expressed ARF (OC3, FLO-1, OC33), we observed an approximate doubling of ARF expression levels ( Figure 3B ), as expected if CpG methylation were to silence only one of the ARF alleles. Taken together, these results suggest that methylation silences the ARF allele on which it occurs, but do not explain how the unmethylated alleles are silenced in SEG1, TE7, and OC1 cells.  Activation of ARF expression by 5-aza-2?-deoxycytidine To demonstrate a functional role for the observed CpG methylation of ARF, we carried out an experiment with the DNA demethylating agent, 5-aza-2?-deoxycytidine (5-aza-CdR), followed by RT-PCR in the 3 BE cell lines and the 6 carcinoma cell lines ( Figure 3A ). Treatment of cell lines with 1?M 5-aza-CdR for 24 hours, followed by culturing for an additional 48 hours, resulted in activation of ARF expression in the 3 carcinoma cell lines that had lacked ARF expression (SEG1, TE7, OC1, compare Figure 3A (ARF) and Figure 3A (ARF+aza)). GAPDH expression served as a control ( Figure 3A (GAPDH+aza)). This treatment also resulted in undetectable levels of CpG methylation of ARF in all 9 BE and carcinoma cell lines ( Figure 3A , M, U), evaluated by MSP. Furthermore, when Q-PCR was used to quantitate 5-aza-CdR-induced changes in ARF expression (relative to the GAPDH internal control) in the 3 BE cell lines (Go, Gi, Ch) and the 3 carcinoma cell lines that originally expressed ARF (OC3, FLO-1, OC33), we observed an approximate doubling of ARF expression levels ( Figure 3B ), as expected if CpG methylation were to silence only one of the ARF alleles. Taken together, these results suggest that methylation silences the ARF allele on which it occurs, but do not explain how the unmethylated alleles are silenced in SEG1, TE7, and OC1 cells.  Correlation of Histone H3 methylation with complete silencing of ARF Histone H3 di and trimethylation on lysine 9 (K9), and di and trimethylation on lysine 27 (K27) have been implicated as important epigenetic mechanisms of gene silencing in cancer [ 28 , 29 ]. We therefore carried out a Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis using an antibody specific for histone H3 trimethylated lysine 9 (H3-K9-Me3), or using an antibody with dual specificity for the dimethylated form of histone H3 lysine K9 (H3-K9-Me2) and the di and trimethylated forms of lysine 27 (H3-K27-Me), followed by PCR analysis of the associated ARF sequences, to investigate the presence of this modification on ARF alleles in the series of cell lines examined above. As shown in Figure 3C , the ARF gene was found to be associated with chromatin containing histone H3-K9-Me3, H3-K9-Me2, and H3-K27Me only in the 3 carcinoma cell lines, SEG1, TE7, and OC1 ( Figure 3C ), in which complete ARF gene silencing occurred. In all other cell lines, namely the three BE cell lines (Go, Gi, Ch), and three of the carcinoma cell lines (OC3, FLO-1, OC33) where partial silencing of ARF through CpG methylation was observed, there was no evidence for histone methylation ( Figure 3C ). Input ARF levels were the same in all cases ( Figure 3C , ARF input). Controls (no antibody) were negative in all cases (not shown). The results suggest that histone methylation-induced silencing of ARF could also predispose to malignant transformation and to disease progression in AC.  Correlation of Histone H3 methylation with complete silencing of ARF Histone H3 di and trimethylation on lysine 9 (K9), and di and trimethylation on lysine 27 (K27) have been implicated as important epigenetic mechanisms of gene silencing in cancer [ 28 , 29 ]. We therefore carried out a Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis using an antibody specific for histone H3 trimethylated lysine 9 (H3-K9-Me3), or using an antibody with dual specificity for the dimethylated form of histone H3 lysine K9 (H3-K9-Me2) and the di and trimethylated forms of lysine 27 (H3-K27-Me), followed by PCR analysis of the associated ARF sequences, to investigate the presence of this modification on ARF alleles in the series of cell lines examined above. As shown in Figure 3C , the ARF gene was found to be associated with chromatin containing histone H3-K9-Me3, H3-K9-Me2, and H3-K27Me only in the 3 carcinoma cell lines, SEG1, TE7, and OC1 ( Figure 3C ), in which complete ARF gene silencing occurred. In all other cell lines, namely the three BE cell lines (Go, Gi, Ch), and three of the carcinoma cell lines (OC3, FLO-1, OC33) where partial silencing of ARF through CpG methylation was observed, there was no evidence for histone methylation ( Figure 3C ). Input ARF levels were the same in all cases ( Figure 3C , ARF input). Controls (no antibody) were negative in all cases (not shown). The results suggest that histone methylation-induced silencing of ARF could also predispose to malignant transformation and to disease progression in AC.  Association of methylated Histone H3 with unmethylated ARF DNA To determine whether histone methylation occurs on both DNA methylated and DNA unmethylated alleles of ARF, we carried out a further MSP analysis of the DNA isolated from the histone-antibody immunoprecipitated material and treated with bisulfite. We found that the ARF allele associated with histone H3-K9-Me3, histone H3-K9-Me2 or with histone H3-K27-Me in SEG1, TE7, and OC1 cells is unmethylated at CpG sites ( Figure 3C , M, U). Nevertheless, treatment of SEG1, TE7, and OC1 cells with the DNA demethylating agent, 5-aza-CdR, resulted in a complete reversal of these methylated histone modifications, as revealed by ChIP analysis, even though that allele lacked CpG island methylation ( Figure 3D ), consistent with a previous report [ 29 , 30 ]. Input ARF levels were the same in all cases ( Figure 3D , ARF input+aza), and controls (no-antibody) were negative (not shown). The results indicate that CpG methylation and histone H3 methylation occur in a mutually exclusive manner on the ARF gene in adenocarcinoma cell lines, and that each can be independently reversed by 5-aza-CdR.  Association of methylated Histone H3 with unmethylated ARF DNA To determine whether histone methylation occurs on both DNA methylated and DNA unmethylated alleles of ARF, we carried out a further MSP analysis of the DNA isolated from the histone-antibody immunoprecipitated material and treated with bisulfite. We found that the ARF allele associated with histone H3-K9-Me3, histone H3-K9-Me2 or with histone H3-K27-Me in SEG1, TE7, and OC1 cells is unmethylated at CpG sites ( Figure 3C , M, U). Nevertheless, treatment of SEG1, TE7, and OC1 cells with the DNA demethylating agent, 5-aza-CdR, resulted in a complete reversal of these methylated histone modifications, as revealed by ChIP analysis, even though that allele lacked CpG island methylation ( Figure 3D ), consistent with a previous report [ 29 , 30 ]. Input ARF levels were the same in all cases ( Figure 3D , ARF input+aza), and controls (no-antibody) were negative (not shown). The results indicate that CpG methylation and histone H3 methylation occur in a mutually exclusive manner on the ARF gene in adenocarcinoma cell lines, and that each can be independently reversed by 5-aza-CdR.  DISCUSSION This study demonstrates that the transition from normal oesophageal epithelium to BE to AC correlates with a progressive decrease in ARF expression. Complete silencing of ARF was found in 75% in the AC specimens, and correlated with poor prognosis. In our dataset, univariate analysis revealed that ARF expression was prognostically significant and in fact outperformed all other clinical variables in a multivariate analysis. The results support an important role for ARF in suppressing oesophageal cancer, and suggest that loss of ARF expression could provide a useful prognostic indicator. Loss of p16INK4a expression (deletion, silencing, mutation) has been found in over 70% of BE patients [ 31 ], and because it shares its exon 2 region with ARF (reviewed in [ 32 ]), deletions or mutations in this region could, in principle, affect both genes, and obscure the respective roles of each gene in cancer. However, there are several reasons why abnormalities in the two genes may not correlate. First, the exon 2 region is read in an alternate reading frame for p16INK4a and ARF, so mutations in this region do not necessarily affect both proteins. Second, the first exon of ARF, which retains tumor suppressor activity [ 33 ], is expressed from a unique promoter, and it located some 20 kilobases upstream of the first exon of the p16INK4A gene, so deletion or methylation of one of the genes can occur without affecting the other, and this has been documented [ 34 - 36 ]. Our preliminary studies on a small sample set of BE specimens suggests that ARF and p16INK4a abnormalities arise independently of each other in premalignant lesions (Huang et al, unpublished observations), but a further full scale study is needed to confirm this. Loss of wild-type p53 expression occurs in some 50-70% patients with BE and AC, and correlates with increased aneuploidy [ 37 ], increased risk of progression [ 37 ], and with poor prognosis [ 38 ]. In our analysis of BE specimens, complete loss of ARF expression occurred in some 20% of BE specimens and 75% of AC specimens, indicating that its occurrence was frequent and likely to occur in many specimens simultaneously with mutation or deletion of p53. ARF plays a well-described role in the p53 pathway and in certain cancers [ 39 , 40 ], a reciprocal pattern of abnormalities has been observed for p53 and ARF, consistent with their action in a common pathway. However, the high frequency of both abnormalities in esophageal cancer suggests that the two abnormalities contribute independently to disease progression in this disease, and is consistent with published evidence of a p53-independent activity for ARF in mammalian cells [ 41 , 42 ]. CpG methylation is a common mechanism of tumour suppressor gene silencing in cancer [ 15 ], and CpG methylation of the first exon and proximal promoter of ARF is well documented in other cancers and cancer-derived cell lines [ 43 , 44 ]. Methylation of lysines 9 and 27 of the N-terminal domain of histone H3, is also a mark of silenced genes and aberrant methylation of these residues has been implicated in gene silencing in cancer [ 28 , 29 ]. CpG methylation can be associated with histone H3 methylation of K9 and K27, and epigenetic changes at the level of DNA and histone can cooperate in gene silencing [ 45 ]. However, long-range epigenetic silencing of gene expression due solely to histone methylation without DNA methylation has also been described [ 46 ]. Our results suggest that either DNA or histone H3 methylation can provide the primary mechanism of ARF gene silencing in oesophageal cancer, and that each appears to be sufficient to maintain stable silencing. The TE7 cell line we have used has recently been reported to be of squamous cell carcinoma origin [ 47 ], but was still considered to be a useful addition to our panel of lines to determine the mechanism of silencing, however. Consistent with an earlier study [ 29 ], we find that both DNA and histone methylations are reversible with 5-aza-CdR, and that this treatment reactivates ARF expression. These results provide additional rationale for the clinical application of demethylating agents such as 5-aza-cytidine or 5-aza-2?-deoxycytidine [ 48 ], or for specific histone demethylating approaches [ 28 ] to prevent tumourigenic transformation of premalignant lesions and possibly to reverse oesophageal malignancy.  DISCUSSION This study demonstrates that the transition from normal oesophageal epithelium to BE to AC correlates with a progressive decrease in ARF expression. Complete silencing of ARF was found in 75% in the AC specimens, and correlated with poor prognosis. In our dataset, univariate analysis revealed that ARF expression was prognostically significant and in fact outperformed all other clinical variables in a multivariate analysis. The results support an important role for ARF in suppressing oesophageal cancer, and suggest that loss of ARF expression could provide a useful prognostic indicator. Loss of p16INK4a expression (deletion, silencing, mutation) has been found in over 70% of BE patients [ 31 ], and because it shares its exon 2 region with ARF (reviewed in [ 32 ]), deletions or mutations in this region could, in principle, affect both genes, and obscure the respective roles of each gene in cancer. However, there are several reasons why abnormalities in the two genes may not correlate. First, the exon 2 region is read in an alternate reading frame for p16INK4a and ARF, so mutations in this region do not necessarily affect both proteins. Second, the first exon of ARF, which retains tumor suppressor activity [ 33 ], is expressed from a unique promoter, and it located some 20 kilobases upstream of the first exon of the p16INK4A gene, so deletion or methylation of one of the genes can occur without affecting the other, and this has been documented [ 34 - 36 ]. Our preliminary studies on a small sample set of BE specimens suggests that ARF and p16INK4a abnormalities arise independently of each other in premalignant lesions (Huang et al, unpublished observations), but a further full scale study is needed to confirm this. Loss of wild-type p53 expression occurs in some 50-70% patients with BE and AC, and correlates with increased aneuploidy [ 37 ], increased risk of progression [ 37 ], and with poor prognosis [ 38 ]. In our analysis of BE specimens, complete loss of ARF expression occurred in some 20% of BE specimens and 75% of AC specimens, indicating that its occurrence was frequent and likely to occur in many specimens simultaneously with mutation or deletion of p53. ARF plays a well-described role in the p53 pathway and in certain cancers [ 39 , 40 ], a reciprocal pattern of abnormalities has been observed for p53 and ARF, consistent with their action in a common pathway. However, the high frequency of both abnormalities in esophageal cancer suggests that the two abnormalities contribute independently to disease progression in this disease, and is consistent with published evidence of a p53-independent activity for ARF in mammalian cells [ 41 , 42 ]. CpG methylation is a common mechanism of tumour suppressor gene silencing in cancer [ 15 ], and CpG methylation of the first exon and proximal promoter of ARF is well documented in other cancers and cancer-derived cell lines [ 43 , 44 ]. Methylation of lysines 9 and 27 of the N-terminal domain of histone H3, is also a mark of silenced genes and aberrant methylation of these residues has been implicated in gene silencing in cancer [ 28 , 29 ]. CpG methylation can be associated with histone H3 methylation of K9 and K27, and epigenetic changes at the level of DNA and histone can cooperate in gene silencing [ 45 ]. However, long-range epigenetic silencing of gene expression due solely to histone methylation without DNA methylation has also been described [ 46 ]. Our results suggest that either DNA or histone H3 methylation can provide the primary mechanism of ARF gene silencing in oesophageal cancer, and that each appears to be sufficient to maintain stable silencing. The TE7 cell line we have used has recently been reported to be of squamous cell carcinoma origin [ 47 ], but was still considered to be a useful addition to our panel of lines to determine the mechanism of silencing, however. Consistent with an earlier study [ 29 ], we find that both DNA and histone methylations are reversible with 5-aza-CdR, and that this treatment reactivates ARF expression. These results provide additional rationale for the clinical application of demethylating agents such as 5-aza-cytidine or 5-aza-2?-deoxycytidine [ 48 ], or for specific histone demethylating approaches [ 28 ] to prevent tumourigenic transformation of premalignant lesions and possibly to reverse oesophageal malignancy. 