NASOPHARYNGEAL CARCINOMA—REVIEW OF THE MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF TUMORIGENESIS Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a head and neck cancer rare throughout most of the world but common in certain geographic areas, such as southern Asia. While environmental factors and genetic susceptibility play important roles in NPC pathogenesis, the Epstein–Barr virus in particular has been implicated in the molecular abnormalities leading to NPC. There is upregulation of cellular proliferation pathways such as the Akt pathway, mitogen-activated protein kinases, and the Wnt pathway. Cell adhesion is compromised due to abnormal E-cadherin and ?-catenin function. Aberrations in cell cycle are due to dysregulation of factors such as p16, cyclin D1, and cyclin E. Anti-apoptotic mechanisms are also upregulated. There are multiple abnormalities unique to NPC that are potential targets for novel treatments.  CONCLUSION The mechanism of NPC tumorigenesis is complex, involving the aberrations of a large variety of pathways and the alteration in expression of numerous proteins. Normal regulation of apoptosis, cell proliferation, and cell adhesion are dysregulated. The understanding of these mechanisms has greatly increased in the past decade, generating enough data to begin the development of prognostic factors and targeted treatments for NPC. Refining prognostic factors into clinically applicable assays may aid in the detection of NPC in asymptomatic patients, in addition to staging and monitoring disease. The search for molecularly based treatments for NPC has only just begun, and so much is yet to be discovered. Improved understanding of the unique molecular mechanisms behind NPC will hopefully lead to the development of targeted treatments against NPC that slow disease progression and improve survival.  Figures and Tables FIGURE 1 Overview of the molecular mechanisms involved in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) development. NPC development begins with the upregulation of pathways that promote cellular proliferation: Akt pathway, mitogen-activated protein kinases (JNK, ERK), Wnt pathway, and EGFR signaling. Subsequent increases of transcription factors such as NF-?B and ?-catenin lead to cellular proliferation via cell cycle dysregulation (high c-myc, cyclin D1, and cyclin E expression) and inhibition of tumor suppressors (p16, p27, and wild-type p53). In addition, cell adhesion abilities are compromised because of low E-cadherin levels and high expression of MMPs. Also, antiapoptotic mechanisms such as bcl-2, survivin, and telomerase are upregulated. , Stimulatory effect; , inhibitory effect; orange color indicates apoptosis regulators; light blue color indicates cell adhesion proteins; yellow color indicates cell cycle regulators; dark blue color indicates proliferative pathways; green color indicates transcription factors; purple color indicates tumor suppressors; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; ERK, extracellular signal related kinase; JNK, c-Jun N-terminal kinase; LMP1, latent membrane protein 1; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; NPC, nasopharyngeal carcinoma; PTEN, phosphatase and tensin homolog; PI3K, phosphoinositol-3-kinase; RASSF, Ras association domain family; WIF, Wnt inhibitory factor; WT p53, wild-type p53. [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at www.interscience.wiley.com .] FIGURE 2 Mechanisms of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latent proteins in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) development. NPC tumorigenesis depends on the activity of latent proteins LMP1 and 2 and EBNA 1 and 2. The majority of cancer development is propagated by LMP1, which is responsible for the activation of various molecular pathways (see Figure 1 ) and immune evasion. LMP1 is regulated positively by LMP2 and negatively by EBNA 2. The other functions of LMP2 include mediation of tumor cell survival and invasion. Finally, EBNA 1 is critical for viral DNA partitioning during replication. , Stimulatory effect; , inhibitory effect; LMP, latent membrane protein; EBNA, EBV-determined nuclear antigen. [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at www.interscience.wiley.com .] Table 1 Proteins overexpressed in NPC. Abnormal protein % NPC with overexpression Reference no. NF-?B 100 17 , 18 Survivin 100 18 Intranuclear ?-catenin 92 19 Wnt protein 93 20 hTERT 91 21 Telomerase 85 21 , 22 Bcl-2 75–86 18 , 23 , 24 C-myc 90 25 Cyclin D1 66 26 ERK 53 27 EGFR 49 23 Wild-type p53 95 24 Abbreviations: NF-?B, nuclear factor kappa B; hTERT, human telomerase reverse transcriptase; ERK, extracellular signal-regulated kinase; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor. Table 2 Proteins underexpressed in NPC. Abnormal protein % NPC with underexpression Reference no. WIF 75 18 RASSF2A 80 28 p27 68 29 p16 65–70 26 , 30 CHFR 61 31 C-myc 60 29 PTEN 48 32 E-cadherin 42 33 Abbreviations: WIF, Wnt inhibitory factor; RASSF2A, Ras association domain family 2A; CHFR, checkpoint with forkhead-associated and RING finger domains; PTEN, phosphatase and tensin homolog. 