A self-adjuvanting lipopeptide-based vaccine candidate for the treatment of hepatitis C virus infection ? Effective CD8+ T cell responses have been induced using totally synthetic self-adjuvanting lipopeptides containing the dipalmitoyl- S -glyceryl cysteine lipid moiety, which is a ligand for Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) on dendritic cells (DC). In this study, we evaluated the use of lipopeptide vaccine candidates containing HLA-A2-restricted epitopes for DC-based immunotherapy of HCV infection. Lipopeptides were able to induce specific CD8+ T cell responses in HLA-A2 transgenic mice and consistently activated human monocyte-derived DC from both healthy individuals and HCV infected patients. Lipopeptide-pulsed human DC were also found to secrete the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-12p70 and were able to activate antigen-specific IFN-? production by autologous CD8+ T cells obtained from a hepatitis C patient. These results show that DC from HCV patients can be matured and antigen loaded with TLR2-targeting lipopeptides for effective presentation of CD8+ T cell epitopes; the use of autologous lipopeptide-pulsed DC or direct lipopeptide vaccination may be successful approaches for the priming or boosting of anti-HCV CD8+ T cell responses to aid in the clearance of the virus in chronically infected individuals.  Introduction An estimated 200 million people worldwide are infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV) [ 1 ] and approximately 80% of these individuals fail to clear the virus and develop a persistent infection that can potentially progress to liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma [ 2 ]. With no vaccine presently available, the only current standard treatment for HCV infection is a combination of pegylated interferon-? and ribavirin which promotes sustained clearance of the virus in approximately 40% of those individuals infected with genotype 1 HCV and 60–70% of those individuals who are infected with genotypes 2 or 3 HCV [ 3 , 4 ]. There is strong evidence to indicate that cell-mediated immunity plays a major role in determining the outcome of disease. In general, recovery correlates with vigorous and sustained CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses against various HCV epitopes, whereas persistent infection is associated with the occurrence of much weaker responses to only a limited number of epitopes [ 5 – 9 ]. Reports of HCV lymphotropism and accumulating evidence of virus-induced cellular impairments, especially in the dendritic cell (DC) compartment [ 10 – 16 ], may be significant contributing factors to failure by the immune system to fully eliminate the virus. An inability of HCV-infected DC to mature would compromise their ability to efficiently present antigen for the priming of naïve T cell responses. This would have detrimental downstream effects on the expansion of CD8+ cytotoxic T cells and CD4+ T cell-mediated help for anti-viral anti-body production. The first studies to report an effect of HCV on DC noted that monocyte-derived (Mo) DC prepared from chronically infected patients were impaired in their ability to mature in response to TNF-? [ 10 ], secrete cytokines [ 11 ] and stimulate T cells [ 12 , 13 ]. Similar dysfunction has since been discovered in blood-derived plasmacytoid and myeloid DC subsets where their ability to secrete IFN-? and IL-12, respectively, is greatly diminished as is their capacity to induce T cells to produce IFN-? [ 14 – 16 ]. An excess production of IL-10 by infected DC has also been noted [ 17 ], which would not only skew the T cell response away from a Th1 and towards a Th2-type but may also induce immune tolerance against HCV antigens [ 18 ]. Although the mechanisms associated with these impairments have still not been elucidated, it does appear that virus-induced expression of the HCV core and E1 proteins in both human [ 19 ] and murine [ 20 ] DC can result in the suppression of their T cell-stimulatory capacities. The results of other studies have also shown that the presence of whole core or NS3 proteins in cultured DC is suffcient to inhibit their ability to stimulate T cells and decrease IL-12 secretion [ 21 ]. Effective T cell and antibody responses can be successfully induced through the use of self-adjuvanting lipopeptide vaccines containing the lipid dipalmitoyl- S -glyceryl cysteine (Pam2Cys) [ 22 – 24 ]. This lipid group is a synthetic version of the lipid that is found in MALP-2 (macrophage activating lipopeptide-2), which is derived from the membrane of Mycoplasma fermentans [ 25 ]. Lipopeptides containing Pam2Cys can induce the maturation of DC [ 23 , 24 , 26 – 28 ] by binding and signalling through Toll-like receptor-2 (TLR2) [ 24 , 26 , 27 ]. In light of the reported maturation defects in DC from HCV-infected individuals, Pam2Cys-based lipopeptide vaccine candidates, however, may have the potential to overcome such impairments to activate antigen-specific T cells. After toxicological evaluation [ 29 ], the Therapeutic Goods Administration of Australia recently granted clinical trail by exemption (CTX) approval for the Phase I/II testing of autologous Pam2Cys-lipopeptide-pulsed MoDCs for the treatment of chronic HCV infection and this is currently underway. As part of efforts to justify the use of lipopeptides for DC-based immunotherapy of HCV, we evaluated the ability of a lipopeptide vaccine candidate based on an HLA-A2-restricted CD8+ T cell epitope of HCV to elicit epitope-specific responses in HLA-A2kb transgenic mice and to induce the maturation of human MoDCs prepared from both HCV and non-HCV infected individuals. The ability of this lipopeptide to induce MoDCs to secrete the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-12 and to recall autologous HLA-A2-specific memory T cell responses was also investigated.  Materials and methods Peptides and lipopeptides The method used to synthesize, purify and characterise lipopeptides has been previously described in detail elsewhere [ 23 ]. Lipopeptides ( Fig. 1A ) consisted of a CD4+ T-helper epitope, linked to a CD8+ T cell epitope through an intervening lysine residue. From the ?-amino group of the lysine, two serine residues were attached as spacers followed by the Pam2Cys lipid moiety. The CD4+ T-helper epitope P25, with the sequence KLIPNASLIENCTKAEL, is derived from the fusion protein of the morbillivirus canine distemper virus [ 30 ]. The HLA-A2-restricted epitope, ALYDVVTKL, was used as a candidate HCV antigen and is derived from the NS5B protein 2594–2602. CD8+ T cell responses against this antigen have been detected in PBMC populations isolated from chronic patients [ 31 ] and in those who have successfully cleared infection [ 32 , 33 ]. A structurally similar lipopeptide containing the HLA-A2-restricted CD8+ T cell epitope from influenza A virus matrix protein 58–66, GILGFVFTL, was also assembled and used for assessing T cell responses. This non-HCV epitope was chosen because the majority of HLA-A2 individuals in the population have pre-existing T cells that can recognize this epitope as a consequence of natural infection [ 34 ]. In the case of lipopeptide vaccines used in HLA-A2kb transgenic mice, the CD4+ T cell epitope OT-II, derived from ovalbumin (323–339), ISQAVHAAHAEINEAGR, was used as it functions in C57BL/6J mouse strains [ 35 ]. Non-lipidated forms of each immunogen, comprising only the CD4+ and CD8+ epitopes linked by a lysine residue were also synthesized for comparative purposes and peptides representing individual CD8+ T cell epitopes were made for use in T cell assays. Analysis of peptides and lipopeptide preparations was performed using HPLC and mass spectrometry [ 23 , 24 , 28 ] to verify purity and fidelity of synthesis ( Fig. 1 ). Detection of IFN-?-secreting cells by ELISPOT HLA-A2kb transgenic mice (C57BL/6J-TgN(A2kbH2b)6Hsd mice) were originally obtained from the Animal Resource Centre, Canning Vale, Western Australia and bred in the animal facility of the Department of Microbiology and Immunology, the University of Melbourne, under specific pathogen free conditions. Groups of HLA-A2kb mice (three mice per group) were inoculated intranasally with 50 nmoles of lipopeptide or non-lipidated peptide. Each group received a total of two inoculations 2 weeks apart. Seven days following the second inoculation, spleens were removed and splenocytes restimulated in vitro for 5 days in the presence of 10 ?M of the relevant CD8+ T cell epitope peptide in RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (CSL, Parkville, Australia) 7.5 mM HEPES, 2 mM L-glutamine, 76 ?M 2-mercaptoethanol, 150 U/ml penicillin, 150 ?g/ml streptomycin, 150 ?M non-essential amino acids and 10 U/ml of recombinant interleukin 2 (Roche, Indianapolis, USA) in culture flasks at a concentration of 3 × 106 cells/ml. All media supplements were obtained from Gibco BRL, USA unless otherwise stated. On day 5, cells were washed and dispensed in 96-well plates (Pathtec, Hamburg, Germany) previously coated with 5 ?g/ml anti-IFN-? capture antibody (clone R4-6A2-BD Pharmingen, San Diego, USA) in the presence of irradiated autologous splenocytes that had been pulsed with or without 10 ?M of the appropriate CD8+ T cell epitope peptide for 18 h at 37 °C and in an atmosphere of 5% CO2. After washing with PBST (PBS containing 0.05% Tween 20), biotinylated anti-IFN-? detection antibody (1:500 dilution of antibody obtained from clone XMG1.2; Becton Dickinson, USA) was added and incubated for 2 h at room temperature in a humidified atmosphere. Plates were then washed and streptavidin–alkaline phosphatase (1:400; Becton Dickinson, USA) was added and incubated for a further 2 h. Spots representative of IFN-?-producing cells were developed by the addition of 1 mg/ml 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate in 2-amino-2-methyl-1-propanol buffer (Sigma–Aldrich, USA) for 30 min. Individual spots were counted with the help of an inverted microscope. Isolation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) All ethical considerations pertaining to the use of human blood samples obtained from the Australian Red Cross Blood Service and from the Royal Melbourne Hospital were approved by the University of Melbourne (HREC number 030234) and Melbourne Health (HREC number 2003.258) Human Research Ethics Committees before commencement of experiments. Blood samples were obtained either in the form of buffy coat preparations from blood donations provided to the Australian Red Cross Blood Bank or from volunteer HCV-infected patients who were recruited at the Victorian Infectious Diseases Service, Royal Melbourne Hospital. Blood samples from HCV-infected individuals were obtained from patients chronically infected with the following genotypes: 1a ( n = 2), 1b ( n = 1) and 3a ( n = 5). Isolation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) was done by dispensing 15 ml of blood into 50 ml tubes and then diluting with an equal volume of phosphate buffered saline (PBS). Ficoll Paque (15 ml) (Amersham Pharmacia, Sweden) was then gently underlaid and the samples centrifuged at 910 × g for 20 min with the centrifuge brake disabled. The interphase containing PBMC was collected and washed thoroughly three times in cold PBS using a centrifugal force of 550 × g for the first wash and 230 × g for subsequent washes. PBMC were stored frozen in liquid nitrogen in 90% FCS and 10% DMSO and thawed for experiments. Generation of monocyte-derived dendritic cells (MoDCs) PBMC were incubated with optimal amounts of anti-CD14 antibody-conjugated microbeads (Miltenyi Biotech, Germany) for 20 min at 4 °C. After washing twice with wash buffer (PBS containing 1% fetal calf serum (CSL, Parkville, Australia) and 5 mM EDTA), CD14+ monocytes were positively selected by use of a magnetic activated cell-sorting separator (Miltenyi Biotech, Germany). Purity of cells were determined by staining with mouse FITC-conjugated anti-human CD14 antibody (clone SP2/0, Cymbus Biotechnology, USA) and found to consistently contain >80% CD14+ cells. Immature MoDCs were then generated by culturing purified monocytes in RF-10 medium, which consists of RPMI-1640 (Gibco, USA) containing 10% fetal calf serum, 2 mM glutamine, 2 mM sodium pyruvate, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 ?g/ml streptomycin, 30 ?g/ml gentamicin and 0.1 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, supplemented with 250 U/ml GM-CSF (Chemicon, USA) and 50 U/ml IL-4 (Chemicon, USA) at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Half volume changes with fresh GM-CSF and IL-4-supplemented media were performed every 2 days and the cells were used after 5 days in culture. Maturation of MoDCs MoDCs were collected after 5 days in culture and the concentration was adjusted to 1 × 105 cells/ml before culturing in RF-10 medium supplemented with GM-CSF and IL-4 and containing either non-lipidated peptide (1 ?M) or lipopeptide (1 ?M) for an additional 48 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. As a positive control, MoDCs were incubated in the presence of lipopolysaccharide (LPS; 10 ?g/ml) derived from either E. coli (Difco, USA) or S. typhi (Sigma–Aldrich, USA). Cells were then collected and washed with PBS. Cell-surface expression levels of MHC Class II were determined by staining cells with FITC-conjugated antibodies recognizing HLA-DR (clone G46-6; Becton Dickinson, USA), CD83 (clone HB15e) or CD86 (clone 2331) for 1 h at 4 °C. An appropriate FITC-conjugated isotype-matched antibody (IgG2a; clone G155–178, Becton Dickinson, USA) was also used throughout experiments as a negative control. Cells were then washed with wash buffer and fixed in 1% paraformaldehyde before analysis by flow cytometry using a FACSCaliber (Becton Dickinson, USA). IL-12p70 detection assay A solid phase sandwich ELISA kit (OptEIA human IL-12p70 detection kit, Becton Dickinson, USA) was used according to the manufacturers instructions to detect the presence of IL-12p70 which is the bioactive form of IL-12 that was present in the culture supernatants. Expression of TLR-2 on monocytes upon differentiation into MoDCs The use of anti-CD14 antibody-conjugated microbeads for the isolation of monocytes was circumvented because cell staining for TLR2 requires the use of a secondary detection antibody. Instead, monocytes were obtained by culturing PBMCs (2 × 107 cells/ml) in RF-10 medium for 1.5 h at 37 °C 5% CO2. Supernatant containing non-adherent cells were aspirated and adherent cells removed by gentle pipetting with PBS containing 5 mM EDTA and 1% FCS. Adherent cells were then cultured in GM-CSF and IL-4 containing RF-10 medium (5 × 105 cells/ml) as described to generate immature MoDCs. On days 0, 2 and 5 of the culture, cells were stained with a murine antibody against TLR2 (Clone TL2.1; Imgenex, USA) for 30 min at 4 °C, washed and further incubated a FITC-conjugated goat anti-murine antibody (Dako Corporation, USA) for an additional 30 min at 4 °C before analysis by flow cytometry. In addition, CD14 expression on cells was verified by staining with a FITC-conjugated anti-CD14 antibody. For the intracellular staining of TLR2 on day 5, permeabilization and fixation of cells was achieved using CytoPerm/CytoFix solution as recommended by the manufacturer (Becton Dickinson, USA). Intracellular cytokine staining assay for IFN-? In order to determine the ability of lipopeptide-treated MoDCs to induce HLA-A2-specific responses, HLA-A2 individuals were identified by flow cytometry of isolated PBMC using a FITC-conjugated mouse anti-human HLA-A2 antibody (clone BB7.2, Becton Dickinson, USA). MoDCs were generated from two HLA-A2 patients with chronic HCV infection; subject 1 (genotype 1b) who had undergone 23 weeks of pegylated interferon-a and ribavirin treatment and subject 2 (genotype 3a) who had yet to receive any form of treatment for infection. MoDCs were incubated with medium only, lipopeptide (1 ?M) or non-lipidated peptide (1 ?M) for 48 h and then cultured with autologous PBMC at a ratio of 1:10 MoDC:PBMC in the presence of recombinant human IL-2 (10 U/ml; ProLeukin, Cetus Corporation, USA). After a minimum of 7 days in culture, intracellular cytokine staining was performed at various time points to detect the production of CD8+ T cell-derived IFN-?. PBMC (2 × 105) were restimulated for 6 h with 1 × 105 peptide-pulsed antigen presenting cells in the form of HLA-A2 transfected C1R lymphoblastoid cells that had been pulsed for 1 h with 1 ?M of peptide representing individual CD8+ T cell epitopes from either influenza matrix protein 58–66 or HCV NS5B protein 2594–2602. The C1R cells were previously cultured in the presence of Hygromycin B (300 ?g/ml; Invitrogen, USA)-supplemented RF-10 medium and their expression of HLA-A2 verified by flow cytometry before use. PBMCs that had been incubated with medium only were stimulated with phytohaemagglutinin (10 ?g/ml, PHA; Sigma–Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) on the day of the assay, as a positive control for IFN-? production. Brefeldin A (10 ?g/ml; Sigma, St. Louis, USA) was added to inhibit export of proteins from the Golgi apparatus after 2 of the 6 h incubation period. Cells were then stained with a PerCP-conjugated mouse anti-human CD8 antibody (clone SK1, Becton Dickinson, USA) for a period of 30 min at 4 °C before fixation in 1% paraformaldehyde for 20 min at room temperature. Staining of intracellular IFN-? was achieved by incubating cells overnight at 4 °C with a FITC-conjugated mouse anti-human IFN-? antibody (clone 25723.11, Becton Dickinson, USA) in PBS containing 0.3% saponin (Sigma–Aldrich, St. Louis, USA). Flow cytometric analysis was performed the next day and the percentage of IFN-? positive cells present in each triplicate sample was calculated from a total of 1 × 104 CD8+ T cells examined. Statistical analyses were performed using Prism (GraphPad Software, USA).  Peptides and lipopeptides The method used to synthesize, purify and characterise lipopeptides has been previously described in detail elsewhere [ 23 ]. Lipopeptides ( Fig. 1A ) consisted of a CD4+ T-helper epitope, linked to a CD8+ T cell epitope through an intervening lysine residue. From the ?-amino group of the lysine, two serine residues were attached as spacers followed by the Pam2Cys lipid moiety. The CD4+ T-helper epitope P25, with the sequence KLIPNASLIENCTKAEL, is derived from the fusion protein of the morbillivirus canine distemper virus [ 30 ]. The HLA-A2-restricted epitope, ALYDVVTKL, was used as a candidate HCV antigen and is derived from the NS5B protein 2594–2602. CD8+ T cell responses against this antigen have been detected in PBMC populations isolated from chronic patients [ 31 ] and in those who have successfully cleared infection [ 32 , 33 ]. A structurally similar lipopeptide containing the HLA-A2-restricted CD8+ T cell epitope from influenza A virus matrix protein 58–66, GILGFVFTL, was also assembled and used for assessing T cell responses. This non-HCV epitope was chosen because the majority of HLA-A2 individuals in the population have pre-existing T cells that can recognize this epitope as a consequence of natural infection [ 34 ]. In the case of lipopeptide vaccines used in HLA-A2kb transgenic mice, the CD4+ T cell epitope OT-II, derived from ovalbumin (323–339), ISQAVHAAHAEINEAGR, was used as it functions in C57BL/6J mouse strains [ 35 ]. Non-lipidated forms of each immunogen, comprising only the CD4+ and CD8+ epitopes linked by a lysine residue were also synthesized for comparative purposes and peptides representing individual CD8+ T cell epitopes were made for use in T cell assays. Analysis of peptides and lipopeptide preparations was performed using HPLC and mass spectrometry [ 23 , 24 , 28 ] to verify purity and fidelity of synthesis ( Fig. 1 ).  Detection of IFN-?-secreting cells by ELISPOT HLA-A2kb transgenic mice (C57BL/6J-TgN(A2kbH2b)6Hsd mice) were originally obtained from the Animal Resource Centre, Canning Vale, Western Australia and bred in the animal facility of the Department of Microbiology and Immunology, the University of Melbourne, under specific pathogen free conditions. Groups of HLA-A2kb mice (three mice per group) were inoculated intranasally with 50 nmoles of lipopeptide or non-lipidated peptide. Each group received a total of two inoculations 2 weeks apart. Seven days following the second inoculation, spleens were removed and splenocytes restimulated in vitro for 5 days in the presence of 10 ?M of the relevant CD8+ T cell epitope peptide in RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (CSL, Parkville, Australia) 7.5 mM HEPES, 2 mM L-glutamine, 76 ?M 2-mercaptoethanol, 150 U/ml penicillin, 150 ?g/ml streptomycin, 150 ?M non-essential amino acids and 10 U/ml of recombinant interleukin 2 (Roche, Indianapolis, USA) in culture flasks at a concentration of 3 × 106 cells/ml. All media supplements were obtained from Gibco BRL, USA unless otherwise stated. On day 5, cells were washed and dispensed in 96-well plates (Pathtec, Hamburg, Germany) previously coated with 5 ?g/ml anti-IFN-? capture antibody (clone R4-6A2-BD Pharmingen, San Diego, USA) in the presence of irradiated autologous splenocytes that had been pulsed with or without 10 ?M of the appropriate CD8+ T cell epitope peptide for 18 h at 37 °C and in an atmosphere of 5% CO2. After washing with PBST (PBS containing 0.05% Tween 20), biotinylated anti-IFN-? detection antibody (1:500 dilution of antibody obtained from clone XMG1.2; Becton Dickinson, USA) was added and incubated for 2 h at room temperature in a humidified atmosphere. Plates were then washed and streptavidin–alkaline phosphatase (1:400; Becton Dickinson, USA) was added and incubated for a further 2 h. Spots representative of IFN-?-producing cells were developed by the addition of 1 mg/ml 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate in 2-amino-2-methyl-1-propanol buffer (Sigma–Aldrich, USA) for 30 min. Individual spots were counted with the help of an inverted microscope.  Isolation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) All ethical considerations pertaining to the use of human blood samples obtained from the Australian Red Cross Blood Service and from the Royal Melbourne Hospital were approved by the University of Melbourne (HREC number 030234) and Melbourne Health (HREC number 2003.258) Human Research Ethics Committees before commencement of experiments. Blood samples were obtained either in the form of buffy coat preparations from blood donations provided to the Australian Red Cross Blood Bank or from volunteer HCV-infected patients who were recruited at the Victorian Infectious Diseases Service, Royal Melbourne Hospital. Blood samples from HCV-infected individuals were obtained from patients chronically infected with the following genotypes: 1a ( n = 2), 1b ( n = 1) and 3a ( n = 5). Isolation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) was done by dispensing 15 ml of blood into 50 ml tubes and then diluting with an equal volume of phosphate buffered saline (PBS). Ficoll Paque (15 ml) (Amersham Pharmacia, Sweden) was then gently underlaid and the samples centrifuged at 910 × g for 20 min with the centrifuge brake disabled. The interphase containing PBMC was collected and washed thoroughly three times in cold PBS using a centrifugal force of 550 × g for the first wash and 230 × g for subsequent washes. PBMC were stored frozen in liquid nitrogen in 90% FCS and 10% DMSO and thawed for experiments.  Generation of monocyte-derived dendritic cells (MoDCs) PBMC were incubated with optimal amounts of anti-CD14 antibody-conjugated microbeads (Miltenyi Biotech, Germany) for 20 min at 4 °C. After washing twice with wash buffer (PBS containing 1% fetal calf serum (CSL, Parkville, Australia) and 5 mM EDTA), CD14+ monocytes were positively selected by use of a magnetic activated cell-sorting separator (Miltenyi Biotech, Germany). Purity of cells were determined by staining with mouse FITC-conjugated anti-human CD14 antibody (clone SP2/0, Cymbus Biotechnology, USA) and found to consistently contain >80% CD14+ cells. Immature MoDCs were then generated by culturing purified monocytes in RF-10 medium, which consists of RPMI-1640 (Gibco, USA) containing 10% fetal calf serum, 2 mM glutamine, 2 mM sodium pyruvate, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 ?g/ml streptomycin, 30 ?g/ml gentamicin and 0.1 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, supplemented with 250 U/ml GM-CSF (Chemicon, USA) and 50 U/ml IL-4 (Chemicon, USA) at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Half volume changes with fresh GM-CSF and IL-4-supplemented media were performed every 2 days and the cells were used after 5 days in culture.  Maturation of MoDCs MoDCs were collected after 5 days in culture and the concentration was adjusted to 1 × 105 cells/ml before culturing in RF-10 medium supplemented with GM-CSF and IL-4 and containing either non-lipidated peptide (1 ?M) or lipopeptide (1 ?M) for an additional 48 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. As a positive control, MoDCs were incubated in the presence of lipopolysaccharide (LPS; 10 ?g/ml) derived from either E. coli (Difco, USA) or S. typhi (Sigma–Aldrich, USA). Cells were then collected and washed with PBS. Cell-surface expression levels of MHC Class II were determined by staining cells with FITC-conjugated antibodies recognizing HLA-DR (clone G46-6; Becton Dickinson, USA), CD83 (clone HB15e) or CD86 (clone 2331) for 1 h at 4 °C. An appropriate FITC-conjugated isotype-matched antibody (IgG2a; clone G155–178, Becton Dickinson, USA) was also used throughout experiments as a negative control. Cells were then washed with wash buffer and fixed in 1% paraformaldehyde before analysis by flow cytometry using a FACSCaliber (Becton Dickinson, USA).  IL-12p70 detection assay A solid phase sandwich ELISA kit (OptEIA human IL-12p70 detection kit, Becton Dickinson, USA) was used according to the manufacturers instructions to detect the presence of IL-12p70 which is the bioactive form of IL-12 that was present in the culture supernatants.  Expression of TLR-2 on monocytes upon differentiation into MoDCs The use of anti-CD14 antibody-conjugated microbeads for the isolation of monocytes was circumvented because cell staining for TLR2 requires the use of a secondary detection antibody. Instead, monocytes were obtained by culturing PBMCs (2 × 107 cells/ml) in RF-10 medium for 1.5 h at 37 °C 5% CO2. Supernatant containing non-adherent cells were aspirated and adherent cells removed by gentle pipetting with PBS containing 5 mM EDTA and 1% FCS. Adherent cells were then cultured in GM-CSF and IL-4 containing RF-10 medium (5 × 105 cells/ml) as described to generate immature MoDCs. On days 0, 2 and 5 of the culture, cells were stained with a murine antibody against TLR2 (Clone TL2.1; Imgenex, USA) for 30 min at 4 °C, washed and further incubated a FITC-conjugated goat anti-murine antibody (Dako Corporation, USA) for an additional 30 min at 4 °C before analysis by flow cytometry. In addition, CD14 expression on cells was verified by staining with a FITC-conjugated anti-CD14 antibody. For the intracellular staining of TLR2 on day 5, permeabilization and fixation of cells was achieved using CytoPerm/CytoFix solution as recommended by the manufacturer (Becton Dickinson, USA).  Intracellular cytokine staining assay for IFN-? In order to determine the ability of lipopeptide-treated MoDCs to induce HLA-A2-specific responses, HLA-A2 individuals were identified by flow cytometry of isolated PBMC using a FITC-conjugated mouse anti-human HLA-A2 antibody (clone BB7.2, Becton Dickinson, USA). MoDCs were generated from two HLA-A2 patients with chronic HCV infection; subject 1 (genotype 1b) who had undergone 23 weeks of pegylated interferon-a and ribavirin treatment and subject 2 (genotype 3a) who had yet to receive any form of treatment for infection. MoDCs were incubated with medium only, lipopeptide (1 ?M) or non-lipidated peptide (1 ?M) for 48 h and then cultured with autologous PBMC at a ratio of 1:10 MoDC:PBMC in the presence of recombinant human IL-2 (10 U/ml; ProLeukin, Cetus Corporation, USA). After a minimum of 7 days in culture, intracellular cytokine staining was performed at various time points to detect the production of CD8+ T cell-derived IFN-?. PBMC (2 × 105) were restimulated for 6 h with 1 × 105 peptide-pulsed antigen presenting cells in the form of HLA-A2 transfected C1R lymphoblastoid cells that had been pulsed for 1 h with 1 ?M of peptide representing individual CD8+ T cell epitopes from either influenza matrix protein 58–66 or HCV NS5B protein 2594–2602. The C1R cells were previously cultured in the presence of Hygromycin B (300 ?g/ml; Invitrogen, USA)-supplemented RF-10 medium and their expression of HLA-A2 verified by flow cytometry before use. PBMCs that had been incubated with medium only were stimulated with phytohaemagglutinin (10 ?g/ml, PHA; Sigma–Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) on the day of the assay, as a positive control for IFN-? production. Brefeldin A (10 ?g/ml; Sigma, St. Louis, USA) was added to inhibit export of proteins from the Golgi apparatus after 2 of the 6 h incubation period. Cells were then stained with a PerCP-conjugated mouse anti-human CD8 antibody (clone SK1, Becton Dickinson, USA) for a period of 30 min at 4 °C before fixation in 1% paraformaldehyde for 20 min at room temperature. Staining of intracellular IFN-? was achieved by incubating cells overnight at 4 °C with a FITC-conjugated mouse anti-human IFN-? antibody (clone 25723.11, Becton Dickinson, USA) in PBS containing 0.3% saponin (Sigma–Aldrich, St. Louis, USA). Flow cytometric analysis was performed the next day and the percentage of IFN-? positive cells present in each triplicate sample was calculated from a total of 1 × 104 CD8+ T cells examined. Statistical analyses were performed using Prism (GraphPad Software, USA).  Results Induction of CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell responses in HLA-A2 transgenic mice Branched lipopeptide-based vaccines have been previously found to be effective inducers of cell-mediated immunity in animals as demonstrated by the generation of influenza-specific CD8+ T cell-mediated viral-clearing responses [ 22 , 24 , 36 ] and by the induction of both prophylactic and therapeutic protection against tumor challenge [ 24 ]. To determine whether branched lipopeptides can elicit HLA-A2-specific responses, transgenic mice expressing these class I molecules were vaccinated with a lipopeptide bearing a murine CD4+ T-helper cell epitope from ovalbumin and an HLA-A2-restricted epitope corresponding to either influenza A virus matrix protein 58–66 or HCV NS5B protein 2594–2602. Control animals were inoculated with the corresponding non-lipidated peptide or PBS. An ELISPOT assay carried out 1 week later revealed significantly higher numbers of epitope-specific IFN-? producing CD8+ T cells in the spleens of lipopeptide-vaccinated mice than in naïve mice or those that received the non-lipidated peptide for both immunogens ( Fig. 2 ). These results indicate that Pam2Cys-based lipopeptides but not their non-lipidated counterparts have the ability to induce HLA-restricted effector CD8+ T cell responses. Maturation of human MoDCs The potent immunogenicity of Pam2Cys-based lipopeptides can be explained by their ability to activate DC [ 23 , 24 , 28 ]. In order to evaluate the potential use of lipopeptides for immunotherapy of HCV, it was important to determine whether a Pam2Cys-based lipopeptide could induce the maturation of DC from HCV-infected individuals. A protocol reported to generate immature MoDCs expressing low-levels of MHC Classes I and II, CD80, CD86 and the DC activation marker CD83 [ 28 ] was used to prepare DC from human blood samples. Surface expression levels of MHC Class II, CD86 and CD83 were then determined after exposing MoDCs from a non-HCV-infected individual to a lipopeptide containing the CD4+ T cell epitope P25 and the HCV core protein 132–140 CD8+ T cell epitope lipopeptide, a non-lipidated form of the lipopeptide, LPS or media alone ( Fig. 3 ). The percentages of cells that are mature were based on the high expression levels of these markers. Each of the treated and untreated MoDC preparations contained two distinct populations of cells based on low and high marker expression levels corresponding to immature and mature MoDCs respectively. It was found that around 40% of untreated MoDCs were already mature and treatment with the non-lipidated peptide did not significantly activate MoDCs. However, when the lipopeptide or LPS was used, the percentage of mature cells present in the culture increased by almost twofold indicating that the Pam2Cys lipid group has potent human MoDC activating properties. MoDCs from random, non-HCV-infected blood donors were then tested for their ability to mature in response to exposure to a lipopeptide composed of the P25 CD4+ T cell epitope and the NS5B 2594–2602 CD8+ T cell epitope. When assessed by upregulation of cell-surface-expressed MHC Class II molecules ( Fig. 4A ), on average approximately 33% of DC from a total of 11 individuals were found to have spontaneously matured after culture in the absence of any peptide or stimulant. A small increase in the number of mature DC resulted from exposure to the non-lipidated peptide. In contrast, exposure to the lipopeptide resulted in significantly higher percentages of mature DC, which were not significantly different (p ? 0.05) from the maturation levels obtained with LPS. The ability of the lipopeptide to mature MoDCs propagated from chronically infected HCV patients was then determined ( Fig. 4B ). In this cohort, exposure to the lipopeptide induced the maturation of approximately 77% of MoDCs, again not significantly different ( p ? 0.05) from LPS-induced maturation. Non-lipidated peptide showed no DC maturation above that of untreated cells. These results were similar to those obtained when MoDCs were propagated from healthy individuals indicating that Pam2Cys-containing lipopeptides are able to efficiently activate immature DC generated from monocytes of HCV-infected individuals without apparent observable impairment compared to those from healthy individuals. IL-12p70 secretion by lipopeptide-matured DC The pro-inflammatory Th1-type cytokine, IL-12, is an important cytokine for differentiating T cells into the Th-1 type lineage and can induce T cells to proliferate and produce IFN-?. The bioactive form of IL-12 (also known as IL-12p70) is a heterodimer formed by association of a 35 kDa light chain (p35) and a 40 kDa heavy chain (p40). In order to determine whether MoDCs matured by exposure to lipopeptide secrete IL-12p70, a sandwich ELISA was performed using the culture supernatants of cells exposed to the lipopeptide, LPS or medium alone ( Fig. 5 ). Irrespective of whether the MoDCs were derived from infected or healthy individuals, incubation with lipopeptide lead to an upregulation of IL-12p70 production. In all but one instance the levels of IL-12p70 produced in response to lipopeptide was at least as great or greater than that induced by LPS. TLR2 expression on monocytes upon differentiation into MoDCs It has been reported that mRNA for TLR-2 is upregulated in CD14+ monocytes from HCV-infected individuals [ 37 ] although it was unknown whether these elevated levels were maintained or otherwise modulated during cytokine-induced differentiation into immature DC in vitro . To examine this we used flow cytometric evaluation of anti-TLR2 antibody binding to monocytes at different times after culture in the presence of GMCSF and IL-4. It was found that monocytes from an uninfected individual and three HCV-infected patients expressed similar levels of TLR2 on their surface ( Fig. 6A and B ). Although these cells were not derived by positive selection for CD14, they did express CD14 on their surface (data not shown). Upon culture in GM-CSF- and IL-4-containing medium, cells from both uninfected and infected donors appeared to downregulate surface TLR-2 expression over a 5-day period. In the case of one HCV-infected patient, the cells initially showed increased TLR2 expression after 2 days in culture but the levels had dropped by the time the cells had differentiated into immature DC. At this stage, surface TLR2 could not be detected by these means in any of the populations but intracellular TLR2 staining revealed moderate levels in each case. Induction of IFN-? production by CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells in response to lipopeptide treated MoDCs In order to evaluate the potential of lipopeptide-matured DC from a chronically infected HCV patient to recall a CD8+ T cell response, MoDCs from an HCV-infected patient undergoing pegylated IFN-? and ribavirin treatment (genotype 1b) were activated with either a lipopeptide containing an HLA-A2-restricted epitope corresponding to either influenza A virus matrix protein 58–66 or HCV NS5B protein 2594–2602 and co-cultured with autologous PBMC as a source of CD8+ T cells. IFN-? production by CD8+ T cells was then determined by intracellular cytokine staining at different time points during a 21-day culture period. MoDCs treated with lipopeptide or non-lipidated peptide containing the influenza-derived epitope were found to stimulate matrix-specific IFN-?-secreting CD8+ T cell responses ( Fig. 7A ). Production of IFN-? was detected on day 7, peaked at day 11 and appeared to decrease over the next 7 days. At all time points examined, a higher level of IFN-? producing cells resulted from the use of lipopeptide-treated MoDCs compared to non-lipidated peptide-treated MoDCs. Almost no IFN-? production was detected in cultures containing only autologous PBMC or when untreated MoDCs were used. In co-cultures containing MoDCs treated with the HCV epitope-based lipopeptide or non-lipidated peptide ( Fig. 7B ), very few IFN-?+CD8+ T cells were detected on days 7 and 11. Higher NS5B-specific responses, however, were observed on day 14 and peaked at day 18 in cultures that were exposed to lipopeptide-treated MoDCs compared to those that contained unlipidated peptide-treated MoDCs or PBMCs alone. In a similar experiment using cells from an HCV-infected patient not receiving any form of treatment for infection (genotype 3a), very few influenza matrix protein-specific IFN-?+ CD8+ T cells were observed in all of the cultures on day 7 ( Fig. 7C ). By 11 days, 20% of the CD8+ T cells were found to secrete IFN-? in response to lipopeptide-treated MoDCs and these levels increased steadily to 30% over the 21-day culture period. At no time were IFN?+CD8+ T cells found in cultures containing PBMCs and non-lipidated peptide-pulsed MoDCs, PBMCs alone or PBMCs co-cultured with untreated MoDCs. Cultures containing MoDCs treated with either lipopeptide or non-lipidated peptide based on the NS5B-derived epitope showed virtually no NS5B-specific IFN-?+CD8+ T cells ( Fig. 7D ), indicating that this individual, despite having memory CD8+ T cells specific for influenza, had no pre-existing immunity to the NS5B epitope used in the immunogens. This is consistent with the observation that immunity against this epitope has only been reported in individuals infected with viral genotypes 1a and 1b [ 5 , 38 ] but not with any other genotype. A BLAST search of the epitope sequence in the HCV sequence database ( http://hcv.lanl.gov/content/hcv-db/BASIC BLAST/basic blast.html ), confirmed that this sequence is absent in genotype 3a strains. As such this lipopeptide acts as a control for non-specific activation of the cells in vitro in response to an irrelevant lipopeptide. Overall these results suggest that lipopeptide-pulsed MoDCs, unlike non-lipopeptide-pulsed MoDCs, are highly efficient at activating specific CD8+ T cells to secrete IFN? in response to the epitope in the immunogen.  Results Induction of CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell responses in HLA-A2 transgenic mice Branched lipopeptide-based vaccines have been previously found to be effective inducers of cell-mediated immunity in animals as demonstrated by the generation of influenza-specific CD8+ T cell-mediated viral-clearing responses [ 22 , 24 , 36 ] and by the induction of both prophylactic and therapeutic protection against tumor challenge [ 24 ]. To determine whether branched lipopeptides can elicit HLA-A2-specific responses, transgenic mice expressing these class I molecules were vaccinated with a lipopeptide bearing a murine CD4+ T-helper cell epitope from ovalbumin and an HLA-A2-restricted epitope corresponding to either influenza A virus matrix protein 58–66 or HCV NS5B protein 2594–2602. Control animals were inoculated with the corresponding non-lipidated peptide or PBS. An ELISPOT assay carried out 1 week later revealed significantly higher numbers of epitope-specific IFN-? producing CD8+ T cells in the spleens of lipopeptide-vaccinated mice than in naïve mice or those that received the non-lipidated peptide for both immunogens ( Fig. 2 ). These results indicate that Pam2Cys-based lipopeptides but not their non-lipidated counterparts have the ability to induce HLA-restricted effector CD8+ T cell responses. Maturation of human MoDCs The potent immunogenicity of Pam2Cys-based lipopeptides can be explained by their ability to activate DC [ 23 , 24 , 28 ]. In order to evaluate the potential use of lipopeptides for immunotherapy of HCV, it was important to determine whether a Pam2Cys-based lipopeptide could induce the maturation of DC from HCV-infected individuals. A protocol reported to generate immature MoDCs expressing low-levels of MHC Classes I and II, CD80, CD86 and the DC activation marker CD83 [ 28 ] was used to prepare DC from human blood samples. Surface expression levels of MHC Class II, CD86 and CD83 were then determined after exposing MoDCs from a non-HCV-infected individual to a lipopeptide containing the CD4+ T cell epitope P25 and the HCV core protein 132–140 CD8+ T cell epitope lipopeptide, a non-lipidated form of the lipopeptide, LPS or media alone ( Fig. 3 ). The percentages of cells that are mature were based on the high expression levels of these markers. Each of the treated and untreated MoDC preparations contained two distinct populations of cells based on low and high marker expression levels corresponding to immature and mature MoDCs respectively. It was found that around 40% of untreated MoDCs were already mature and treatment with the non-lipidated peptide did not significantly activate MoDCs. However, when the lipopeptide or LPS was used, the percentage of mature cells present in the culture increased by almost twofold indicating that the Pam2Cys lipid group has potent human MoDC activating properties. MoDCs from random, non-HCV-infected blood donors were then tested for their ability to mature in response to exposure to a lipopeptide composed of the P25 CD4+ T cell epitope and the NS5B 2594–2602 CD8+ T cell epitope. When assessed by upregulation of cell-surface-expressed MHC Class II molecules ( Fig. 4A ), on average approximately 33% of DC from a total of 11 individuals were found to have spontaneously matured after culture in the absence of any peptide or stimulant. A small increase in the number of mature DC resulted from exposure to the non-lipidated peptide. In contrast, exposure to the lipopeptide resulted in significantly higher percentages of mature DC, which were not significantly different (p ? 0.05) from the maturation levels obtained with LPS. The ability of the lipopeptide to mature MoDCs propagated from chronically infected HCV patients was then determined ( Fig. 4B ). In this cohort, exposure to the lipopeptide induced the maturation of approximately 77% of MoDCs, again not significantly different ( p ? 0.05) from LPS-induced maturation. Non-lipidated peptide showed no DC maturation above that of untreated cells. These results were similar to those obtained when MoDCs were propagated from healthy individuals indicating that Pam2Cys-containing lipopeptides are able to efficiently activate immature DC generated from monocytes of HCV-infected individuals without apparent observable impairment compared to those from healthy individuals. IL-12p70 secretion by lipopeptide-matured DC The pro-inflammatory Th1-type cytokine, IL-12, is an important cytokine for differentiating T cells into the Th-1 type lineage and can induce T cells to proliferate and produce IFN-?. The bioactive form of IL-12 (also known as IL-12p70) is a heterodimer formed by association of a 35 kDa light chain (p35) and a 40 kDa heavy chain (p40). In order to determine whether MoDCs matured by exposure to lipopeptide secrete IL-12p70, a sandwich ELISA was performed using the culture supernatants of cells exposed to the lipopeptide, LPS or medium alone ( Fig. 5 ). Irrespective of whether the MoDCs were derived from infected or healthy individuals, incubation with lipopeptide lead to an upregulation of IL-12p70 production. In all but one instance the levels of IL-12p70 produced in response to lipopeptide was at least as great or greater than that induced by LPS. TLR2 expression on monocytes upon differentiation into MoDCs It has been reported that mRNA for TLR-2 is upregulated in CD14+ monocytes from HCV-infected individuals [ 37 ] although it was unknown whether these elevated levels were maintained or otherwise modulated during cytokine-induced differentiation into immature DC in vitro . To examine this we used flow cytometric evaluation of anti-TLR2 antibody binding to monocytes at different times after culture in the presence of GMCSF and IL-4. It was found that monocytes from an uninfected individual and three HCV-infected patients expressed similar levels of TLR2 on their surface ( Fig. 6A and B ). Although these cells were not derived by positive selection for CD14, they did express CD14 on their surface (data not shown). Upon culture in GM-CSF- and IL-4-containing medium, cells from both uninfected and infected donors appeared to downregulate surface TLR-2 expression over a 5-day period. In the case of one HCV-infected patient, the cells initially showed increased TLR2 expression after 2 days in culture but the levels had dropped by the time the cells had differentiated into immature DC. At this stage, surface TLR2 could not be detected by these means in any of the populations but intracellular TLR2 staining revealed moderate levels in each case. Induction of IFN-? production by CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells in response to lipopeptide treated MoDCs In order to evaluate the potential of lipopeptide-matured DC from a chronically infected HCV patient to recall a CD8+ T cell response, MoDCs from an HCV-infected patient undergoing pegylated IFN-? and ribavirin treatment (genotype 1b) were activated with either a lipopeptide containing an HLA-A2-restricted epitope corresponding to either influenza A virus matrix protein 58–66 or HCV NS5B protein 2594–2602 and co-cultured with autologous PBMC as a source of CD8+ T cells. IFN-? production by CD8+ T cells was then determined by intracellular cytokine staining at different time points during a 21-day culture period. MoDCs treated with lipopeptide or non-lipidated peptide containing the influenza-derived epitope were found to stimulate matrix-specific IFN-?-secreting CD8+ T cell responses ( Fig. 7A ). Production of IFN-? was detected on day 7, peaked at day 11 and appeared to decrease over the next 7 days. At all time points examined, a higher level of IFN-? producing cells resulted from the use of lipopeptide-treated MoDCs compared to non-lipidated peptide-treated MoDCs. Almost no IFN-? production was detected in cultures containing only autologous PBMC or when untreated MoDCs were used. In co-cultures containing MoDCs treated with the HCV epitope-based lipopeptide or non-lipidated peptide ( Fig. 7B ), very few IFN-?+CD8+ T cells were detected on days 7 and 11. Higher NS5B-specific responses, however, were observed on day 14 and peaked at day 18 in cultures that were exposed to lipopeptide-treated MoDCs compared to those that contained unlipidated peptide-treated MoDCs or PBMCs alone. In a similar experiment using cells from an HCV-infected patient not receiving any form of treatment for infection (genotype 3a), very few influenza matrix protein-specific IFN-?+ CD8+ T cells were observed in all of the cultures on day 7 ( Fig. 7C ). By 11 days, 20% of the CD8+ T cells were found to secrete IFN-? in response to lipopeptide-treated MoDCs and these levels increased steadily to 30% over the 21-day culture period. At no time were IFN?+CD8+ T cells found in cultures containing PBMCs and non-lipidated peptide-pulsed MoDCs, PBMCs alone or PBMCs co-cultured with untreated MoDCs. Cultures containing MoDCs treated with either lipopeptide or non-lipidated peptide based on the NS5B-derived epitope showed virtually no NS5B-specific IFN-?+CD8+ T cells ( Fig. 7D ), indicating that this individual, despite having memory CD8+ T cells specific for influenza, had no pre-existing immunity to the NS5B epitope used in the immunogens. This is consistent with the observation that immunity against this epitope has only been reported in individuals infected with viral genotypes 1a and 1b [ 5 , 38 ] but not with any other genotype. A BLAST search of the epitope sequence in the HCV sequence database ( http://hcv.lanl.gov/content/hcv-db/BASIC BLAST/basic blast.html ), confirmed that this sequence is absent in genotype 3a strains. As such this lipopeptide acts as a control for non-specific activation of the cells in vitro in response to an irrelevant lipopeptide. Overall these results suggest that lipopeptide-pulsed MoDCs, unlike non-lipopeptide-pulsed MoDCs, are highly efficient at activating specific CD8+ T cells to secrete IFN? in response to the epitope in the immunogen.  Induction of CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell responses in HLA-A2 transgenic mice Branched lipopeptide-based vaccines have been previously found to be effective inducers of cell-mediated immunity in animals as demonstrated by the generation of influenza-specific CD8+ T cell-mediated viral-clearing responses [ 22 , 24 , 36 ] and by the induction of both prophylactic and therapeutic protection against tumor challenge [ 24 ]. To determine whether branched lipopeptides can elicit HLA-A2-specific responses, transgenic mice expressing these class I molecules were vaccinated with a lipopeptide bearing a murine CD4+ T-helper cell epitope from ovalbumin and an HLA-A2-restricted epitope corresponding to either influenza A virus matrix protein 58–66 or HCV NS5B protein 2594–2602. Control animals were inoculated with the corresponding non-lipidated peptide or PBS. An ELISPOT assay carried out 1 week later revealed significantly higher numbers of epitope-specific IFN-? producing CD8+ T cells in the spleens of lipopeptide-vaccinated mice than in naïve mice or those that received the non-lipidated peptide for both immunogens ( Fig. 2 ). These results indicate that Pam2Cys-based lipopeptides but not their non-lipidated counterparts have the ability to induce HLA-restricted effector CD8+ T cell responses.  Induction of CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell responses in HLA-A2 transgenic mice Branched lipopeptide-based vaccines have been previously found to be effective inducers of cell-mediated immunity in animals as demonstrated by the generation of influenza-specific CD8+ T cell-mediated viral-clearing responses [ 22 , 24 , 36 ] and by the induction of both prophylactic and therapeutic protection against tumor challenge [ 24 ]. To determine whether branched lipopeptides can elicit HLA-A2-specific responses, transgenic mice expressing these class I molecules were vaccinated with a lipopeptide bearing a murine CD4+ T-helper cell epitope from ovalbumin and an HLA-A2-restricted epitope corresponding to either influenza A virus matrix protein 58–66 or HCV NS5B protein 2594–2602. Control animals were inoculated with the corresponding non-lipidated peptide or PBS. An ELISPOT assay carried out 1 week later revealed significantly higher numbers of epitope-specific IFN-? producing CD8+ T cells in the spleens of lipopeptide-vaccinated mice than in naïve mice or those that received the non-lipidated peptide for both immunogens ( Fig. 2 ). These results indicate that Pam2Cys-based lipopeptides but not their non-lipidated counterparts have the ability to induce HLA-restricted effector CD8+ T cell responses.  Maturation of human MoDCs The potent immunogenicity of Pam2Cys-based lipopeptides can be explained by their ability to activate DC [ 23 , 24 , 28 ]. In order to evaluate the potential use of lipopeptides for immunotherapy of HCV, it was important to determine whether a Pam2Cys-based lipopeptide could induce the maturation of DC from HCV-infected individuals. A protocol reported to generate immature MoDCs expressing low-levels of MHC Classes I and II, CD80, CD86 and the DC activation marker CD83 [ 28 ] was used to prepare DC from human blood samples. Surface expression levels of MHC Class II, CD86 and CD83 were then determined after exposing MoDCs from a non-HCV-infected individual to a lipopeptide containing the CD4+ T cell epitope P25 and the HCV core protein 132–140 CD8+ T cell epitope lipopeptide, a non-lipidated form of the lipopeptide, LPS or media alone ( Fig. 3 ). The percentages of cells that are mature were based on the high expression levels of these markers. Each of the treated and untreated MoDC preparations contained two distinct populations of cells based on low and high marker expression levels corresponding to immature and mature MoDCs respectively. It was found that around 40% of untreated MoDCs were already mature and treatment with the non-lipidated peptide did not significantly activate MoDCs. However, when the lipopeptide or LPS was used, the percentage of mature cells present in the culture increased by almost twofold indicating that the Pam2Cys lipid group has potent human MoDC activating properties. MoDCs from random, non-HCV-infected blood donors were then tested for their ability to mature in response to exposure to a lipopeptide composed of the P25 CD4+ T cell epitope and the NS5B 2594–2602 CD8+ T cell epitope. When assessed by upregulation of cell-surface-expressed MHC Class II molecules ( Fig. 4A ), on average approximately 33% of DC from a total of 11 individuals were found to have spontaneously matured after culture in the absence of any peptide or stimulant. A small increase in the number of mature DC resulted from exposure to the non-lipidated peptide. In contrast, exposure to the lipopeptide resulted in significantly higher percentages of mature DC, which were not significantly different (p ? 0.05) from the maturation levels obtained with LPS. The ability of the lipopeptide to mature MoDCs propagated from chronically infected HCV patients was then determined ( Fig. 4B ). In this cohort, exposure to the lipopeptide induced the maturation of approximately 77% of MoDCs, again not significantly different ( p ? 0.05) from LPS-induced maturation. Non-lipidated peptide showed no DC maturation above that of untreated cells. These results were similar to those obtained when MoDCs were propagated from healthy individuals indicating that Pam2Cys-containing lipopeptides are able to efficiently activate immature DC generated from monocytes of HCV-infected individuals without apparent observable impairment compared to those from healthy individuals.  Maturation of human MoDCs The potent immunogenicity of Pam2Cys-based lipopeptides can be explained by their ability to activate DC [ 23 , 24 , 28 ]. In order to evaluate the potential use of lipopeptides for immunotherapy of HCV, it was important to determine whether a Pam2Cys-based lipopeptide could induce the maturation of DC from HCV-infected individuals. A protocol reported to generate immature MoDCs expressing low-levels of MHC Classes I and II, CD80, CD86 and the DC activation marker CD83 [ 28 ] was used to prepare DC from human blood samples. Surface expression levels of MHC Class II, CD86 and CD83 were then determined after exposing MoDCs from a non-HCV-infected individual to a lipopeptide containing the CD4+ T cell epitope P25 and the HCV core protein 132–140 CD8+ T cell epitope lipopeptide, a non-lipidated form of the lipopeptide, LPS or media alone ( Fig. 3 ). The percentages of cells that are mature were based on the high expression levels of these markers. Each of the treated and untreated MoDC preparations contained two distinct populations of cells based on low and high marker expression levels corresponding to immature and mature MoDCs respectively. It was found that around 40% of untreated MoDCs were already mature and treatment with the non-lipidated peptide did not significantly activate MoDCs. However, when the lipopeptide or LPS was used, the percentage of mature cells present in the culture increased by almost twofold indicating that the Pam2Cys lipid group has potent human MoDC activating properties. MoDCs from random, non-HCV-infected blood donors were then tested for their ability to mature in response to exposure to a lipopeptide composed of the P25 CD4+ T cell epitope and the NS5B 2594–2602 CD8+ T cell epitope. When assessed by upregulation of cell-surface-expressed MHC Class II molecules ( Fig. 4A ), on average approximately 33% of DC from a total of 11 individuals were found to have spontaneously matured after culture in the absence of any peptide or stimulant. A small increase in the number of mature DC resulted from exposure to the non-lipidated peptide. In contrast, exposure to the lipopeptide resulted in significantly higher percentages of mature DC, which were not significantly different (p ? 0.05) from the maturation levels obtained with LPS. The ability of the lipopeptide to mature MoDCs propagated from chronically infected HCV patients was then determined ( Fig. 4B ). In this cohort, exposure to the lipopeptide induced the maturation of approximately 77% of MoDCs, again not significantly different ( p ? 0.05) from LPS-induced maturation. Non-lipidated peptide showed no DC maturation above that of untreated cells. These results were similar to those obtained when MoDCs were propagated from healthy individuals indicating that Pam2Cys-containing lipopeptides are able to efficiently activate immature DC generated from monocytes of HCV-infected individuals without apparent observable impairment compared to those from healthy individuals.  IL-12p70 secretion by lipopeptide-matured DC The pro-inflammatory Th1-type cytokine, IL-12, is an important cytokine for differentiating T cells into the Th-1 type lineage and can induce T cells to proliferate and produce IFN-?. The bioactive form of IL-12 (also known as IL-12p70) is a heterodimer formed by association of a 35 kDa light chain (p35) and a 40 kDa heavy chain (p40). In order to determine whether MoDCs matured by exposure to lipopeptide secrete IL-12p70, a sandwich ELISA was performed using the culture supernatants of cells exposed to the lipopeptide, LPS or medium alone ( Fig. 5 ). Irrespective of whether the MoDCs were derived from infected or healthy individuals, incubation with lipopeptide lead to an upregulation of IL-12p70 production. In all but one instance the levels of IL-12p70 produced in response to lipopeptide was at least as great or greater than that induced by LPS.  IL-12p70 secretion by lipopeptide-matured DC The pro-inflammatory Th1-type cytokine, IL-12, is an important cytokine for differentiating T cells into the Th-1 type lineage and can induce T cells to proliferate and produce IFN-?. The bioactive form of IL-12 (also known as IL-12p70) is a heterodimer formed by association of a 35 kDa light chain (p35) and a 40 kDa heavy chain (p40). In order to determine whether MoDCs matured by exposure to lipopeptide secrete IL-12p70, a sandwich ELISA was performed using the culture supernatants of cells exposed to the lipopeptide, LPS or medium alone ( Fig. 5 ). Irrespective of whether the MoDCs were derived from infected or healthy individuals, incubation with lipopeptide lead to an upregulation of IL-12p70 production. In all but one instance the levels of IL-12p70 produced in response to lipopeptide was at least as great or greater than that induced by LPS.  TLR2 expression on monocytes upon differentiation into MoDCs It has been reported that mRNA for TLR-2 is upregulated in CD14+ monocytes from HCV-infected individuals [ 37 ] although it was unknown whether these elevated levels were maintained or otherwise modulated during cytokine-induced differentiation into immature DC in vitro . To examine this we used flow cytometric evaluation of anti-TLR2 antibody binding to monocytes at different times after culture in the presence of GMCSF and IL-4. It was found that monocytes from an uninfected individual and three HCV-infected patients expressed similar levels of TLR2 on their surface ( Fig. 6A and B ). Although these cells were not derived by positive selection for CD14, they did express CD14 on their surface (data not shown). Upon culture in GM-CSF- and IL-4-containing medium, cells from both uninfected and infected donors appeared to downregulate surface TLR-2 expression over a 5-day period. In the case of one HCV-infected patient, the cells initially showed increased TLR2 expression after 2 days in culture but the levels had dropped by the time the cells had differentiated into immature DC. At this stage, surface TLR2 could not be detected by these means in any of the populations but intracellular TLR2 staining revealed moderate levels in each case.  TLR2 expression on monocytes upon differentiation into MoDCs It has been reported that mRNA for TLR-2 is upregulated in CD14+ monocytes from HCV-infected individuals [ 37 ] although it was unknown whether these elevated levels were maintained or otherwise modulated during cytokine-induced differentiation into immature DC in vitro . To examine this we used flow cytometric evaluation of anti-TLR2 antibody binding to monocytes at different times after culture in the presence of GMCSF and IL-4. It was found that monocytes from an uninfected individual and three HCV-infected patients expressed similar levels of TLR2 on their surface ( Fig. 6A and B ). Although these cells were not derived by positive selection for CD14, they did express CD14 on their surface (data not shown). Upon culture in GM-CSF- and IL-4-containing medium, cells from both uninfected and infected donors appeared to downregulate surface TLR-2 expression over a 5-day period. In the case of one HCV-infected patient, the cells initially showed increased TLR2 expression after 2 days in culture but the levels had dropped by the time the cells had differentiated into immature DC. At this stage, surface TLR2 could not be detected by these means in any of the populations but intracellular TLR2 staining revealed moderate levels in each case.  Induction of IFN-? production by CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells in response to lipopeptide treated MoDCs In order to evaluate the potential of lipopeptide-matured DC from a chronically infected HCV patient to recall a CD8+ T cell response, MoDCs from an HCV-infected patient undergoing pegylated IFN-? and ribavirin treatment (genotype 1b) were activated with either a lipopeptide containing an HLA-A2-restricted epitope corresponding to either influenza A virus matrix protein 58–66 or HCV NS5B protein 2594–2602 and co-cultured with autologous PBMC as a source of CD8+ T cells. IFN-? production by CD8+ T cells was then determined by intracellular cytokine staining at different time points during a 21-day culture period. MoDCs treated with lipopeptide or non-lipidated peptide containing the influenza-derived epitope were found to stimulate matrix-specific IFN-?-secreting CD8+ T cell responses ( Fig. 7A ). Production of IFN-? was detected on day 7, peaked at day 11 and appeared to decrease over the next 7 days. At all time points examined, a higher level of IFN-? producing cells resulted from the use of lipopeptide-treated MoDCs compared to non-lipidated peptide-treated MoDCs. Almost no IFN-? production was detected in cultures containing only autologous PBMC or when untreated MoDCs were used. In co-cultures containing MoDCs treated with the HCV epitope-based lipopeptide or non-lipidated peptide ( Fig. 7B ), very few IFN-?+CD8+ T cells were detected on days 7 and 11. Higher NS5B-specific responses, however, were observed on day 14 and peaked at day 18 in cultures that were exposed to lipopeptide-treated MoDCs compared to those that contained unlipidated peptide-treated MoDCs or PBMCs alone. In a similar experiment using cells from an HCV-infected patient not receiving any form of treatment for infection (genotype 3a), very few influenza matrix protein-specific IFN-?+ CD8+ T cells were observed in all of the cultures on day 7 ( Fig. 7C ). By 11 days, 20% of the CD8+ T cells were found to secrete IFN-? in response to lipopeptide-treated MoDCs and these levels increased steadily to 30% over the 21-day culture period. At no time were IFN?+CD8+ T cells found in cultures containing PBMCs and non-lipidated peptide-pulsed MoDCs, PBMCs alone or PBMCs co-cultured with untreated MoDCs. Cultures containing MoDCs treated with either lipopeptide or non-lipidated peptide based on the NS5B-derived epitope showed virtually no NS5B-specific IFN-?+CD8+ T cells ( Fig. 7D ), indicating that this individual, despite having memory CD8+ T cells specific for influenza, had no pre-existing immunity to the NS5B epitope used in the immunogens. This is consistent with the observation that immunity against this epitope has only been reported in individuals infected with viral genotypes 1a and 1b [ 5 , 38 ] but not with any other genotype. A BLAST search of the epitope sequence in the HCV sequence database ( http://hcv.lanl.gov/content/hcv-db/BASIC BLAST/basic blast.html ), confirmed that this sequence is absent in genotype 3a strains. As such this lipopeptide acts as a control for non-specific activation of the cells in vitro in response to an irrelevant lipopeptide. Overall these results suggest that lipopeptide-pulsed MoDCs, unlike non-lipopeptide-pulsed MoDCs, are highly efficient at activating specific CD8+ T cells to secrete IFN? in response to the epitope in the immunogen.  Induction of IFN-? production by CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells in response to lipopeptide treated MoDCs In order to evaluate the potential of lipopeptide-matured DC from a chronically infected HCV patient to recall a CD8+ T cell response, MoDCs from an HCV-infected patient undergoing pegylated IFN-? and ribavirin treatment (genotype 1b) were activated with either a lipopeptide containing an HLA-A2-restricted epitope corresponding to either influenza A virus matrix protein 58–66 or HCV NS5B protein 2594–2602 and co-cultured with autologous PBMC as a source of CD8+ T cells. IFN-? production by CD8+ T cells was then determined by intracellular cytokine staining at different time points during a 21-day culture period. MoDCs treated with lipopeptide or non-lipidated peptide containing the influenza-derived epitope were found to stimulate matrix-specific IFN-?-secreting CD8+ T cell responses ( Fig. 7A ). Production of IFN-? was detected on day 7, peaked at day 11 and appeared to decrease over the next 7 days. At all time points examined, a higher level of IFN-? producing cells resulted from the use of lipopeptide-treated MoDCs compared to non-lipidated peptide-treated MoDCs. Almost no IFN-? production was detected in cultures containing only autologous PBMC or when untreated MoDCs were used. In co-cultures containing MoDCs treated with the HCV epitope-based lipopeptide or non-lipidated peptide ( Fig. 7B ), very few IFN-?+CD8+ T cells were detected on days 7 and 11. Higher NS5B-specific responses, however, were observed on day 14 and peaked at day 18 in cultures that were exposed to lipopeptide-treated MoDCs compared to those that contained unlipidated peptide-treated MoDCs or PBMCs alone. In a similar experiment using cells from an HCV-infected patient not receiving any form of treatment for infection (genotype 3a), very few influenza matrix protein-specific IFN-?+ CD8+ T cells were observed in all of the cultures on day 7 ( Fig. 7C ). By 11 days, 20% of the CD8+ T cells were found to secrete IFN-? in response to lipopeptide-treated MoDCs and these levels increased steadily to 30% over the 21-day culture period. At no time were IFN?+CD8+ T cells found in cultures containing PBMCs and non-lipidated peptide-pulsed MoDCs, PBMCs alone or PBMCs co-cultured with untreated MoDCs. Cultures containing MoDCs treated with either lipopeptide or non-lipidated peptide based on the NS5B-derived epitope showed virtually no NS5B-specific IFN-?+CD8+ T cells ( Fig. 7D ), indicating that this individual, despite having memory CD8+ T cells specific for influenza, had no pre-existing immunity to the NS5B epitope used in the immunogens. This is consistent with the observation that immunity against this epitope has only been reported in individuals infected with viral genotypes 1a and 1b [ 5 , 38 ] but not with any other genotype. A BLAST search of the epitope sequence in the HCV sequence database ( http://hcv.lanl.gov/content/hcv-db/BASIC BLAST/basic blast.html ), confirmed that this sequence is absent in genotype 3a strains. As such this lipopeptide acts as a control for non-specific activation of the cells in vitro in response to an irrelevant lipopeptide. Overall these results suggest that lipopeptide-pulsed MoDCs, unlike non-lipopeptide-pulsed MoDCs, are highly efficient at activating specific CD8+ T cells to secrete IFN? in response to the epitope in the immunogen.  Discussion Exploiting the capacity of DC to prime effective immune responses is a strategy currently being used in cancer immunotherapy where DC from patients, usually derived from monocytes differentiated in vitro into immature DC with GM-CSF and IL-4, are exposed to tumor antigens then reinfused back into the patient. Favourable clinical responses using this form of therapy are associated with the use of antigen-loaded DC that have been activated to mature by culture with a cocktail of cytokines including TNF-? [ 39 ]. Branched lipopeptides containing the lipid moiety Pam2Cys have been previously shown to be very effective inducers of both antibody and cell-mediated immune responses when used directly as vaccines and they can also induce the maturation of immature murine DC in vitro [ 22 – 24 , 26 , 27 , 36 ]. The degree of lipopeptide-mediated DC maturation and the strength of the subsequent immune response suggest that lipopeptides based on HCV epitopes could be very powerful for the treatment of HCV infection through DC-based immunotherapy. The objective of this study was to evaluate some of the properties of lipopeptides that would be necessary for their use in this context, in particular whether lipopeptides could promote the antigen loading and maturation of immature DC-derived in vitro from monocytes of HCV-infected patients. Success of these lipopeptide immunogens relies on their ability to stimulate DC through engagement of Pam2Cys with TLR2 [ 23 , 24 , 26 ]. There have been reports of abnormally high levels of mRNA for TLR2 in monocytes from infected patients [ 37 ], which may be an issue if HCV core and NS3 proteins trigger inflammatory pathways via TLR2 as has been proposed [ 40 ] although the phenomenon was not thought to be directly due to raised monocyte TLR2 levels. On the other hand, immature DC derived from monocytes from chronically infected individuals have been shown to express less TLR2 mRNA than do those derived from monocytes of healthy donors but can nevertheless respond to TLR2 ligation by maturation, cytokine secretion and T cell stimulation [ 41 ]. The results in the present study looking at TLR expression rather than mRNA production have shown that although monocyte TLR levels were similar in the uninfected and infected donors examined 2 days after the commencement of culture to induce differentiation into DC, the cells from one infected individual displayed high surface TLR2 compared to the other donors. However, once the cells had reached day 5 of culture all showed very similar TLR2 levels, the vast majority of which appeared to be intracellular. These data are consistent with the observations of others that the high levels of TLR2 and TLR4 on the surface of human blood monocytes decrease as these cells differentiate into immature DC [ 42 , 43 ]. In fact TLR2 and TLR4 are thought to be coordinately regulated in both monocytes and immature DC, perhaps reflecting their similar functions in recognition of bacterial products. It has been estimated by Visintin et al. [ 42 ] that immature DC express at most 150 TLR4 molecules per cell but this would nevertheless be sufficient for signalling by analogy with the closely related IL-1R, which shares homology with the TLRs in the cytoplasmic signalling domains, where 10 or fewer ligated receptors can induce a response [ 44 ]. The Pam2Cys-based lipopeptide was able to consistently mature the immature MoDCs derived from healthy as well as from chronically infected HCV patients despite the reports of HCV-mediated DC maturation defects with other stimuli including TNF-? [ 10 , 12 , 19 ]. Although it is not known whether the MoDCs used in this current study were virally infected let alone impaired, both LPS and lipopeptide induced similar maturation levels consistent with the data from Yakushijin et al. [ 41 ] suggesting that TLR2 and TLR4 pathways of DC activation are still functional in cells from infected patients. The successful use of lipopeptides for the maturation step has the advantage that TLR2 is an endocytic receptor [ 45 ], providing a very convenient method for delivering peptide antigens to DC concomitant with the maturation signal. In this study, the potential for lipopeptide-induced immune response induction through DC was investigated by evaluating the ability of lipopeptide-activated MoDCs to recall memory T cell responses in HLA-A2 individuals. Using influenza matrix protein epitope 55–66 as a model antigen, we found that lipopeptide-treated MoDCs derived from HCV-infected individuals were able to stimulate a higher proportion of T cells to produce IFN-? than their non-lipidated peptide-treated counterparts. Stimulation of HCV-specific memory CD8+ T cell responses were also seen in an individual infected with a virus of the genotype known to express the epitope used in the lipopeptide but not in an individual infected with a different genotype of HCV, highlighting the specificity of the recall response. The secretion of more IL-12p70 by lipopeptide-treated MoDCs than by non-lipidated peptide-treated MoDCs appears to correlate with DC ability to induce antigen-specific IFN-? production by T cells suggesting that lipopeptide treatment of MoDCs from HCV-infected individuals may also be able overcome any defects, if any, associated with the secretion of this particular cytokine [ 11 ]. Based on the results of this study, we therefore conclude that the use of lipopeptide immunogens may provide some benefit in terms of T cell activation and IFN-? production through TLR2-mediated triggering and loading of DC-derived de novo from CD14+ monocytes in vitro . This form of treatment, involving the use of lipopeptide pools containing different HCV-derived CD8+ T cell epitopes in order to provide a broad spectrum of coverage, has recently been granted clinical trial by exemption approval by the TGA for chronically infected individuals that have failed to respond to conventional treatment and is the first of its kind in Australia, setting a precedent for somatic cell immunotherapy of infectious disease.  Discussion Exploiting the capacity of DC to prime effective immune responses is a strategy currently being used in cancer immunotherapy where DC from patients, usually derived from monocytes differentiated in vitro into immature DC with GM-CSF and IL-4, are exposed to tumor antigens then reinfused back into the patient. Favourable clinical responses using this form of therapy are associated with the use of antigen-loaded DC that have been activated to mature by culture with a cocktail of cytokines including TNF-? [ 39 ]. Branched lipopeptides containing the lipid moiety Pam2Cys have been previously shown to be very effective inducers of both antibody and cell-mediated immune responses when used directly as vaccines and they can also induce the maturation of immature murine DC in vitro [ 22 – 24 , 26 , 27 , 36 ]. The degree of lipopeptide-mediated DC maturation and the strength of the subsequent immune response suggest that lipopeptides based on HCV epitopes could be very powerful for the treatment of HCV infection through DC-based immunotherapy. The objective of this study was to evaluate some of the properties of lipopeptides that would be necessary for their use in this context, in particular whether lipopeptides could promote the antigen loading and maturation of immature DC-derived in vitro from monocytes of HCV-infected patients. Success of these lipopeptide immunogens relies on their ability to stimulate DC through engagement of Pam2Cys with TLR2 [ 23 , 24 , 26 ]. There have been reports of abnormally high levels of mRNA for TLR2 in monocytes from infected patients [ 37 ], which may be an issue if HCV core and NS3 proteins trigger inflammatory pathways via TLR2 as has been proposed [ 40 ] although the phenomenon was not thought to be directly due to raised monocyte TLR2 levels. On the other hand, immature DC derived from monocytes from chronically infected individuals have been shown to express less TLR2 mRNA than do those derived from monocytes of healthy donors but can nevertheless respond to TLR2 ligation by maturation, cytokine secretion and T cell stimulation [ 41 ]. The results in the present study looking at TLR expression rather than mRNA production have shown that although monocyte TLR levels were similar in the uninfected and infected donors examined 2 days after the commencement of culture to induce differentiation into DC, the cells from one infected individual displayed high surface TLR2 compared to the other donors. However, once the cells had reached day 5 of culture all showed very similar TLR2 levels, the vast majority of which appeared to be intracellular. These data are consistent with the observations of others that the high levels of TLR2 and TLR4 on the surface of human blood monocytes decrease as these cells differentiate into immature DC [ 42 , 43 ]. In fact TLR2 and TLR4 are thought to be coordinately regulated in both monocytes and immature DC, perhaps reflecting their similar functions in recognition of bacterial products. It has been estimated by Visintin et al. [ 42 ] that immature DC express at most 150 TLR4 molecules per cell but this would nevertheless be sufficient for signalling by analogy with the closely related IL-1R, which shares homology with the TLRs in the cytoplasmic signalling domains, where 10 or fewer ligated receptors can induce a response [ 44 ]. The Pam2Cys-based lipopeptide was able to consistently mature the immature MoDCs derived from healthy as well as from chronically infected HCV patients despite the reports of HCV-mediated DC maturation defects with other stimuli including TNF-? [ 10 , 12 , 19 ]. Although it is not known whether the MoDCs used in this current study were virally infected let alone impaired, both LPS and lipopeptide induced similar maturation levels consistent with the data from Yakushijin et al. [ 41 ] suggesting that TLR2 and TLR4 pathways of DC activation are still functional in cells from infected patients. The successful use of lipopeptides for the maturation step has the advantage that TLR2 is an endocytic receptor [ 45 ], providing a very convenient method for delivering peptide antigens to DC concomitant with the maturation signal. In this study, the potential for lipopeptide-induced immune response induction through DC was investigated by evaluating the ability of lipopeptide-activated MoDCs to recall memory T cell responses in HLA-A2 individuals. Using influenza matrix protein epitope 55–66 as a model antigen, we found that lipopeptide-treated MoDCs derived from HCV-infected individuals were able to stimulate a higher proportion of T cells to produce IFN-? than their non-lipidated peptide-treated counterparts. Stimulation of HCV-specific memory CD8+ T cell responses were also seen in an individual infected with a virus of the genotype known to express the epitope used in the lipopeptide but not in an individual infected with a different genotype of HCV, highlighting the specificity of the recall response. The secretion of more IL-12p70 by lipopeptide-treated MoDCs than by non-lipidated peptide-treated MoDCs appears to correlate with DC ability to induce antigen-specific IFN-? production by T cells suggesting that lipopeptide treatment of MoDCs from HCV-infected individuals may also be able overcome any defects, if any, associated with the secretion of this particular cytokine [ 11 ]. Based on the results of this study, we therefore conclude that the use of lipopeptide immunogens may provide some benefit in terms of T cell activation and IFN-? production through TLR2-mediated triggering and loading of DC-derived de novo from CD14+ monocytes in vitro . This form of treatment, involving the use of lipopeptide pools containing different HCV-derived CD8+ T cell epitopes in order to provide a broad spectrum of coverage, has recently been granted clinical trial by exemption approval by the TGA for chronically infected individuals that have failed to respond to conventional treatment and is the first of its kind in Australia, setting a precedent for somatic cell immunotherapy of infectious disease. 