A comparison of the socio-economic determinants of growth retardation in South African and Filipino infants Objective To examine the association between household socio-economic status (SES) at birth and poor infant growth such as small for gestational age (SGA) and stunting across two different socio-cultural settings: South Africa and the Philippines. Design Data were from two longitudinal birth cohorts, the Birth to Twenty (Bt20) study in South Africa and the Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Survey (CLHNS) in the Philippines. Subjects Bt20 infants ( n 2293 total; reduced to 758 (SGA), 450 (stunting 1 year) and 401 (stunting 2 years)) and CLHNS infants ( n 2513 total; reduced to 2161 (SGA), 1820 (stunting 1 year) and 1710 (stunting 2 years)). Results CLHNS infants were significantly more likely to be born SGA (20·9 v . 11·7%) and be stunted at 1 year (32·6 v . 8·7%) and 2 years (48·9 v . 21·1%) compared with Bt20 infants. Logistic regression analyses showed that SES (index) was a significant predictor of stunting at 1 and 2 years of age in the CLHNS cohort. SES (index or individual variables) was not a significant predictor of SGA in either cohort, or of stunting in the Bt20 cohort. Maternal education, ownership of a television and toilet facilities were all independent predictors of stunting in the CLHNS cohort. Conclusions The social and economic milieu within the Philippines appears to place CLHNS infants at greater risk of being born SGA and being stunted compared with Bt20 infants. The present research highlights the importance of investigating the individual SES variables that predict infantile growth faltering, to identify the key areas for context-specific policy development and intervention.  Results Growth A summary of the key growth characteristics of the two cohorts is shown in Table 2 . Parity was significantly greater in CLHNS mothers than in Bt20 mothers ( P <0·001). More Bt20 mothers were primaparous compared with CLHNS mothers ( P <0·01). CLHNS infants had lower mean birth weight, despite having higher mean gestational age ( P <0·001 for both). In addition, significantly more CLHNS infants were born pre- and post-term compared with Bt20 infants ( P <0·01 for both). Significantly more CLHNS infants than Bt20 infants were born SGA ( P <0·01). At 1 year of age, CLHNS infants were nearly four times as likely to be stunted compared with Bt20 infants ( P <0·01). At 2 years of age, nearly half of the CLHNS infants were stunted compared with one-fifth of the Bt20 infants ( P <0·01). Socio-economic status Table 3 highlights the socio-economic differences between the two cohorts. At the time of the infant’s birth, fewer CLHNS families owned a television or a refrigerator and they were more likely to have shared access to toilet and water facilities ( P <0·01 for all). A significantly higher proportion of Bt20 mothers had completed high school compared with CLHNS mothers when they gave birth to their infants ( P <0·01). Table 4 shows the scoring factors and the summary statistics for the variables that were used to create a socio-economic index for each of the cohorts via PCA. The scoring factor is the weight allocated to each variable in the linear combination of variables that is created in the first principal component. The percentage of the variance that was explained by the first principal component was 41·4% for the Bt20 cohort and 47·5% for the CLHNS cohort. The eigenvalue for the first component of the Bt20 model was 2·07 compared with 2·38 for the CLHNS model. The results of the logistic regression analyses are shown in Tables 5 – 7 and are presented as odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals. Table 5 compares SGA infants with average-for-gestational-age infants for both cohorts. SES was a significant predictor of SGA in the CLHNS cohort ( P <0·05), but not in the Bt20 cohort in the baseline model. However, SES was not a significant predictor of SGA in either cohort when controlling for maternal height, parity and sex. The lack of significance was observed both when using individual variables and index measures of SES. Having a taller mother and not being the first-born child reduced the odds of being born SGA in both cohorts ( P <0·05 and P <0·01 respectively in Bt20; P <0·001 for both in CLHNS) and being female reduced the odds of being born SGA in the CLHNS cohort ( P <0·05). A lower level of SES, having a shorter mother, being male and being born parity two or higher were all independent risk factors for stunting at 1 year of age in the CLHNS cohort ( P <0·001 for all) ( Table 6 ). Only maternal height was a significant predictor of stunting at 1 year in the Bt20 cohort ( P <0·05). The models were re-run using individual SES variables rather than an SES index while controlling for maternal height, parity and gender. Not owning a television (OR = 1·69; 95% CI 1·20, 2·36; P <0·01), not having access to an indoor flush toilet (OR = 1·49; 95% CI 1·18, 1·87; P <0·01) and having a mother with less than high school education (OR = 1·42; 95% CI 1·08, 1·88; P <0·05) all significantly increased the odds of stunting at 1 year of age in the CLHNS cohort (results not shown). SES, when represented by an index or as individual variables, was not associated with stunting at 1 year in the Bt20 cohort. A lower level of SES, having a shorter mother and being the second or later-born child within a family were all independent risk factors for stunting at 2 years of age in the CLHNS cohort ( P <0·001 for all) ( Table 7 ). Only maternal height was a significant predictor of stunting at 2 years in the Bt20 cohort ( P <0·05). The models were re-run using individual SES variables rather than an SES index while controlling for maternal height, parity and gender. Not owning a television (OR = 1·72; 95% CI 1·27, 2·35; P <0·01), not having access to an indoor flush toilet (OR = 1·72; 95% CI 1·38, 2·15; P <0·001) and having a mother with less than high school education (OR = 2·04; 95% CI 1·56, 2·65; P <0·001) all significantly increased the odds of stunting at 2 years of age in the CLHNS cohort (results not shown). SES, when represented by an index or as individual variables, was not associated with stunting at 2 years in the Bt20 cohort. Sample size limitations The relatively smaller sample sizes available for analyses of SGA ( n 758) and stunting at 1 year ( n 450) and 2 years ( n 401) in the Bt20 cohort may have resulted in a lack of statistical power to detect significant SES predictors of growth faltering. To investigate this further, identically sized samples to those available from the Bt20 cohort were randomly selected from the CLHNS cohort and the logistic regression models re-run (data not shown). After re-analysing with these smaller sample sizes for the CLHNS cohort, the SES index remained a significant predictor of stunting at 1 and 2 years of age after controlling for maternal height, sex and parity. This suggests that sample size differences did not influence the different patterns of association observed between SES and stunting in the two cohorts. Another problem is that these reduced samples may not be socio-economically representative of the original Bt20 sample. South Africa experiences high levels of economic inequality and so these reduced sample sizes may decrease the range of socio-economic profiles within the cohort. Investigations of those Bt20 infants who were included in the analysis and those who were excluded showed significant differences in key demographic indicators and household SES (data not shown). Those included in the sample were significantly heavier at birth even though, on average, they had significantly shorter gestational periods and they had significantly fewer siblings. In addition, infants included in the analysis were significantly more likely to have access to sole toilet facilities and be the first-born child within the family. This suggests that the Bt20 sample included may have over-represented higher socio-economic groups, thus skewing the SES distribution, which could have influenced the significance of the SES predictors because of the lower variability in these measures compared with the original cohort.  Results Growth A summary of the key growth characteristics of the two cohorts is shown in Table 2 . Parity was significantly greater in CLHNS mothers than in Bt20 mothers ( P <0·001). More Bt20 mothers were primaparous compared with CLHNS mothers ( P <0·01). CLHNS infants had lower mean birth weight, despite having higher mean gestational age ( P <0·001 for both). In addition, significantly more CLHNS infants were born pre- and post-term compared with Bt20 infants ( P <0·01 for both). Significantly more CLHNS infants than Bt20 infants were born SGA ( P <0·01). At 1 year of age, CLHNS infants were nearly four times as likely to be stunted compared with Bt20 infants ( P <0·01). At 2 years of age, nearly half of the CLHNS infants were stunted compared with one-fifth of the Bt20 infants ( P <0·01). Socio-economic status Table 3 highlights the socio-economic differences between the two cohorts. At the time of the infant’s birth, fewer CLHNS families owned a television or a refrigerator and they were more likely to have shared access to toilet and water facilities ( P <0·01 for all). A significantly higher proportion of Bt20 mothers had completed high school compared with CLHNS mothers when they gave birth to their infants ( P <0·01). Table 4 shows the scoring factors and the summary statistics for the variables that were used to create a socio-economic index for each of the cohorts via PCA. The scoring factor is the weight allocated to each variable in the linear combination of variables that is created in the first principal component. The percentage of the variance that was explained by the first principal component was 41·4% for the Bt20 cohort and 47·5% for the CLHNS cohort. The eigenvalue for the first component of the Bt20 model was 2·07 compared with 2·38 for the CLHNS model. The results of the logistic regression analyses are shown in Tables 5 – 7 and are presented as odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals. Table 5 compares SGA infants with average-for-gestational-age infants for both cohorts. SES was a significant predictor of SGA in the CLHNS cohort ( P <0·05), but not in the Bt20 cohort in the baseline model. However, SES was not a significant predictor of SGA in either cohort when controlling for maternal height, parity and sex. The lack of significance was observed both when using individual variables and index measures of SES. Having a taller mother and not being the first-born child reduced the odds of being born SGA in both cohorts ( P <0·05 and P <0·01 respectively in Bt20; P <0·001 for both in CLHNS) and being female reduced the odds of being born SGA in the CLHNS cohort ( P <0·05). A lower level of SES, having a shorter mother, being male and being born parity two or higher were all independent risk factors for stunting at 1 year of age in the CLHNS cohort ( P <0·001 for all) ( Table 6 ). Only maternal height was a significant predictor of stunting at 1 year in the Bt20 cohort ( P <0·05). The models were re-run using individual SES variables rather than an SES index while controlling for maternal height, parity and gender. Not owning a television (OR = 1·69; 95% CI 1·20, 2·36; P <0·01), not having access to an indoor flush toilet (OR = 1·49; 95% CI 1·18, 1·87; P <0·01) and having a mother with less than high school education (OR = 1·42; 95% CI 1·08, 1·88; P <0·05) all significantly increased the odds of stunting at 1 year of age in the CLHNS cohort (results not shown). SES, when represented by an index or as individual variables, was not associated with stunting at 1 year in the Bt20 cohort. A lower level of SES, having a shorter mother and being the second or later-born child within a family were all independent risk factors for stunting at 2 years of age in the CLHNS cohort ( P <0·001 for all) ( Table 7 ). Only maternal height was a significant predictor of stunting at 2 years in the Bt20 cohort ( P <0·05). The models were re-run using individual SES variables rather than an SES index while controlling for maternal height, parity and gender. Not owning a television (OR = 1·72; 95% CI 1·27, 2·35; P <0·01), not having access to an indoor flush toilet (OR = 1·72; 95% CI 1·38, 2·15; P <0·001) and having a mother with less than high school education (OR = 2·04; 95% CI 1·56, 2·65; P <0·001) all significantly increased the odds of stunting at 2 years of age in the CLHNS cohort (results not shown). SES, when represented by an index or as individual variables, was not associated with stunting at 2 years in the Bt20 cohort. Sample size limitations The relatively smaller sample sizes available for analyses of SGA ( n 758) and stunting at 1 year ( n 450) and 2 years ( n 401) in the Bt20 cohort may have resulted in a lack of statistical power to detect significant SES predictors of growth faltering. To investigate this further, identically sized samples to those available from the Bt20 cohort were randomly selected from the CLHNS cohort and the logistic regression models re-run (data not shown). After re-analysing with these smaller sample sizes for the CLHNS cohort, the SES index remained a significant predictor of stunting at 1 and 2 years of age after controlling for maternal height, sex and parity. This suggests that sample size differences did not influence the different patterns of association observed between SES and stunting in the two cohorts. Another problem is that these reduced samples may not be socio-economically representative of the original Bt20 sample. South Africa experiences high levels of economic inequality and so these reduced sample sizes may decrease the range of socio-economic profiles within the cohort. Investigations of those Bt20 infants who were included in the analysis and those who were excluded showed significant differences in key demographic indicators and household SES (data not shown). Those included in the sample were significantly heavier at birth even though, on average, they had significantly shorter gestational periods and they had significantly fewer siblings. In addition, infants included in the analysis were significantly more likely to have access to sole toilet facilities and be the first-born child within the family. This suggests that the Bt20 sample included may have over-represented higher socio-economic groups, thus skewing the SES distribution, which could have influenced the significance of the SES predictors because of the lower variability in these measures compared with the original cohort.  Growth A summary of the key growth characteristics of the two cohorts is shown in Table 2 . Parity was significantly greater in CLHNS mothers than in Bt20 mothers ( P <0·001). More Bt20 mothers were primaparous compared with CLHNS mothers ( P <0·01). CLHNS infants had lower mean birth weight, despite having higher mean gestational age ( P <0·001 for both). In addition, significantly more CLHNS infants were born pre- and post-term compared with Bt20 infants ( P <0·01 for both). Significantly more CLHNS infants than Bt20 infants were born SGA ( P <0·01). At 1 year of age, CLHNS infants were nearly four times as likely to be stunted compared with Bt20 infants ( P <0·01). At 2 years of age, nearly half of the CLHNS infants were stunted compared with one-fifth of the Bt20 infants ( P <0·01).  Growth A summary of the key growth characteristics of the two cohorts is shown in Table 2 . Parity was significantly greater in CLHNS mothers than in Bt20 mothers ( P <0·001). More Bt20 mothers were primaparous compared with CLHNS mothers ( P <0·01). CLHNS infants had lower mean birth weight, despite having higher mean gestational age ( P <0·001 for both). In addition, significantly more CLHNS infants were born pre- and post-term compared with Bt20 infants ( P <0·01 for both). Significantly more CLHNS infants than Bt20 infants were born SGA ( P <0·01). At 1 year of age, CLHNS infants were nearly four times as likely to be stunted compared with Bt20 infants ( P <0·01). At 2 years of age, nearly half of the CLHNS infants were stunted compared with one-fifth of the Bt20 infants ( P <0·01).  Socio-economic status Table 3 highlights the socio-economic differences between the two cohorts. At the time of the infant’s birth, fewer CLHNS families owned a television or a refrigerator and they were more likely to have shared access to toilet and water facilities ( P <0·01 for all). A significantly higher proportion of Bt20 mothers had completed high school compared with CLHNS mothers when they gave birth to their infants ( P <0·01). Table 4 shows the scoring factors and the summary statistics for the variables that were used to create a socio-economic index for each of the cohorts via PCA. The scoring factor is the weight allocated to each variable in the linear combination of variables that is created in the first principal component. The percentage of the variance that was explained by the first principal component was 41·4% for the Bt20 cohort and 47·5% for the CLHNS cohort. The eigenvalue for the first component of the Bt20 model was 2·07 compared with 2·38 for the CLHNS model. The results of the logistic regression analyses are shown in Tables 5 – 7 and are presented as odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals. Table 5 compares SGA infants with average-for-gestational-age infants for both cohorts. SES was a significant predictor of SGA in the CLHNS cohort ( P <0·05), but not in the Bt20 cohort in the baseline model. However, SES was not a significant predictor of SGA in either cohort when controlling for maternal height, parity and sex. The lack of significance was observed both when using individual variables and index measures of SES. Having a taller mother and not being the first-born child reduced the odds of being born SGA in both cohorts ( P <0·05 and P <0·01 respectively in Bt20; P <0·001 for both in CLHNS) and being female reduced the odds of being born SGA in the CLHNS cohort ( P <0·05). A lower level of SES, having a shorter mother, being male and being born parity two or higher were all independent risk factors for stunting at 1 year of age in the CLHNS cohort ( P <0·001 for all) ( Table 6 ). Only maternal height was a significant predictor of stunting at 1 year in the Bt20 cohort ( P <0·05). The models were re-run using individual SES variables rather than an SES index while controlling for maternal height, parity and gender. Not owning a television (OR = 1·69; 95% CI 1·20, 2·36; P <0·01), not having access to an indoor flush toilet (OR = 1·49; 95% CI 1·18, 1·87; P <0·01) and having a mother with less than high school education (OR = 1·42; 95% CI 1·08, 1·88; P <0·05) all significantly increased the odds of stunting at 1 year of age in the CLHNS cohort (results not shown). SES, when represented by an index or as individual variables, was not associated with stunting at 1 year in the Bt20 cohort. A lower level of SES, having a shorter mother and being the second or later-born child within a family were all independent risk factors for stunting at 2 years of age in the CLHNS cohort ( P <0·001 for all) ( Table 7 ). Only maternal height was a significant predictor of stunting at 2 years in the Bt20 cohort ( P <0·05). The models were re-run using individual SES variables rather than an SES index while controlling for maternal height, parity and gender. Not owning a television (OR = 1·72; 95% CI 1·27, 2·35; P <0·01), not having access to an indoor flush toilet (OR = 1·72; 95% CI 1·38, 2·15; P <0·001) and having a mother with less than high school education (OR = 2·04; 95% CI 1·56, 2·65; P <0·001) all significantly increased the odds of stunting at 2 years of age in the CLHNS cohort (results not shown). SES, when represented by an index or as individual variables, was not associated with stunting at 2 years in the Bt20 cohort.  Socio-economic status Table 3 highlights the socio-economic differences between the two cohorts. At the time of the infant’s birth, fewer CLHNS families owned a television or a refrigerator and they were more likely to have shared access to toilet and water facilities ( P <0·01 for all). A significantly higher proportion of Bt20 mothers had completed high school compared with CLHNS mothers when they gave birth to their infants ( P <0·01). Table 4 shows the scoring factors and the summary statistics for the variables that were used to create a socio-economic index for each of the cohorts via PCA. The scoring factor is the weight allocated to each variable in the linear combination of variables that is created in the first principal component. The percentage of the variance that was explained by the first principal component was 41·4% for the Bt20 cohort and 47·5% for the CLHNS cohort. The eigenvalue for the first component of the Bt20 model was 2·07 compared with 2·38 for the CLHNS model. The results of the logistic regression analyses are shown in Tables 5 – 7 and are presented as odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals. Table 5 compares SGA infants with average-for-gestational-age infants for both cohorts. SES was a significant predictor of SGA in the CLHNS cohort ( P <0·05), but not in the Bt20 cohort in the baseline model. However, SES was not a significant predictor of SGA in either cohort when controlling for maternal height, parity and sex. The lack of significance was observed both when using individual variables and index measures of SES. Having a taller mother and not being the first-born child reduced the odds of being born SGA in both cohorts ( P <0·05 and P <0·01 respectively in Bt20; P <0·001 for both in CLHNS) and being female reduced the odds of being born SGA in the CLHNS cohort ( P <0·05). A lower level of SES, having a shorter mother, being male and being born parity two or higher were all independent risk factors for stunting at 1 year of age in the CLHNS cohort ( P <0·001 for all) ( Table 6 ). Only maternal height was a significant predictor of stunting at 1 year in the Bt20 cohort ( P <0·05). The models were re-run using individual SES variables rather than an SES index while controlling for maternal height, parity and gender. Not owning a television (OR = 1·69; 95% CI 1·20, 2·36; P <0·01), not having access to an indoor flush toilet (OR = 1·49; 95% CI 1·18, 1·87; P <0·01) and having a mother with less than high school education (OR = 1·42; 95% CI 1·08, 1·88; P <0·05) all significantly increased the odds of stunting at 1 year of age in the CLHNS cohort (results not shown). SES, when represented by an index or as individual variables, was not associated with stunting at 1 year in the Bt20 cohort. A lower level of SES, having a shorter mother and being the second or later-born child within a family were all independent risk factors for stunting at 2 years of age in the CLHNS cohort ( P <0·001 for all) ( Table 7 ). Only maternal height was a significant predictor of stunting at 2 years in the Bt20 cohort ( P <0·05). The models were re-run using individual SES variables rather than an SES index while controlling for maternal height, parity and gender. Not owning a television (OR = 1·72; 95% CI 1·27, 2·35; P <0·01), not having access to an indoor flush toilet (OR = 1·72; 95% CI 1·38, 2·15; P <0·001) and having a mother with less than high school education (OR = 2·04; 95% CI 1·56, 2·65; P <0·001) all significantly increased the odds of stunting at 2 years of age in the CLHNS cohort (results not shown). SES, when represented by an index or as individual variables, was not associated with stunting at 2 years in the Bt20 cohort.  Sample size limitations The relatively smaller sample sizes available for analyses of SGA ( n 758) and stunting at 1 year ( n 450) and 2 years ( n 401) in the Bt20 cohort may have resulted in a lack of statistical power to detect significant SES predictors of growth faltering. To investigate this further, identically sized samples to those available from the Bt20 cohort were randomly selected from the CLHNS cohort and the logistic regression models re-run (data not shown). After re-analysing with these smaller sample sizes for the CLHNS cohort, the SES index remained a significant predictor of stunting at 1 and 2 years of age after controlling for maternal height, sex and parity. This suggests that sample size differences did not influence the different patterns of association observed between SES and stunting in the two cohorts. Another problem is that these reduced samples may not be socio-economically representative of the original Bt20 sample. South Africa experiences high levels of economic inequality and so these reduced sample sizes may decrease the range of socio-economic profiles within the cohort. Investigations of those Bt20 infants who were included in the analysis and those who were excluded showed significant differences in key demographic indicators and household SES (data not shown). Those included in the sample were significantly heavier at birth even though, on average, they had significantly shorter gestational periods and they had significantly fewer siblings. In addition, infants included in the analysis were significantly more likely to have access to sole toilet facilities and be the first-born child within the family. This suggests that the Bt20 sample included may have over-represented higher socio-economic groups, thus skewing the SES distribution, which could have influenced the significance of the SES predictors because of the lower variability in these measures compared with the original cohort.  Sample size limitations The relatively smaller sample sizes available for analyses of SGA ( n 758) and stunting at 1 year ( n 450) and 2 years ( n 401) in the Bt20 cohort may have resulted in a lack of statistical power to detect significant SES predictors of growth faltering. To investigate this further, identically sized samples to those available from the Bt20 cohort were randomly selected from the CLHNS cohort and the logistic regression models re-run (data not shown). After re-analysing with these smaller sample sizes for the CLHNS cohort, the SES index remained a significant predictor of stunting at 1 and 2 years of age after controlling for maternal height, sex and parity. This suggests that sample size differences did not influence the different patterns of association observed between SES and stunting in the two cohorts. Another problem is that these reduced samples may not be socio-economically representative of the original Bt20 sample. South Africa experiences high levels of economic inequality and so these reduced sample sizes may decrease the range of socio-economic profiles within the cohort. Investigations of those Bt20 infants who were included in the analysis and those who were excluded showed significant differences in key demographic indicators and household SES (data not shown). Those included in the sample were significantly heavier at birth even though, on average, they had significantly shorter gestational periods and they had significantly fewer siblings. In addition, infants included in the analysis were significantly more likely to have access to sole toilet facilities and be the first-born child within the family. This suggests that the Bt20 sample included may have over-represented higher socio-economic groups, thus skewing the SES distribution, which could have influenced the significance of the SES predictors because of the lower variability in these measures compared with the original cohort.  Discussion The present study examined how proxy measures of household SES relate to poor infant growth outcomes within South Africa and the Philippines, both as an index and using individual SES variables. SGA and stunting were prevalent within both cohorts, with the highest levels being experienced in the Philippines. Our analyses reveal that several measures of household SES are important for the prediction of growth faltering at different time points both between and within the two cohorts. However, the larger number of significant SES predictors in the CLHNS cohort suggests that the socio-economic milieu experienced by CLHNS infants increases the risk of becoming and remaining stunted in infancy; when using maternal education, water and toilet facilities, and ownership of a television or refrigerator to determine SES. There was a significant difference between the two cohorts in the proportion of infants born SGA. Although a number of studies have shown an inverse relationship between the level of maternal education and the risk of delivering an SGA infant while controlling for maternal height( 33 - 35 ), this was not the case for either the South African or Filipino infants. While SES was a significant predictor of SGA in the CLHNS cohort, it became insignificant when maternal height, parity and sex were controlled for. This may reflect that maternal height is a function of SES and that maternal height is the pathway linking SES and infant growth. The finding that there were no or relatively few socio-economic predictors of SGA is consistent with other studies which have suggested that maternal factors such as age, smoking status and weight gain were more important determinants of poor birth outcomes than SES per se( 35 - 37 ). The nutritional status (i.e. height-for-age) of the infants within both cohorts deteriorated as the infants got older, resulting in more infants being stunted by 2 years compared with 1 year of age. This may reflect the progression from breast-feeding through the weaning process to solid foods. The introduction of solid or complementary foods increases the risk of infection, reduces breast milk production and thus increases the risk of malnutrition( 38 ). During the transition from infanthood to childhood, an infant becomes increasingly independent of their caregiver and starts to interact more with the environment through crawling and walking, making them at greater risk of entering a cycle of malnutrition and infection, especially in less hygienic environments( 39 ). The increasing prevalence of stunting in both cohorts highlights the adverse environments into which both groups of children were born, despite South Africa’s relatively better socio-economic status. Results of the present study show that SES had a greater influence on child growth in the Philippines compared with South Africa. A potential explanation for this is that the Filipino social and economic milieu may have increased the risk of children being stunted in the first years of life in contrast to South African children. Urbanized living within Cebu may result in a lower SES than a similar environment within Soweto; however, Soweto families would still be considered poor according to developed country standards. Differences in development may have been expressed in contrasting community urban environments at the time of the birth and in the early years of life for the children in the two cohorts. For instance, at ages 1 and 2 years, the CLHNS infants and toddlers who lived in families who did not have an indoor flush toilet were significantly more likely to be stunted, whereas toilet facilities did not show the same association for the South African children. We know that in the South African sample the majority of the facilities were flush raised toilets (78·6%), compared with a minority (46·0%) within the Filipino sample. Flush toilets present less risk for contamination and infectious diseases than pit latrines for young children( 40 ) and so may reduce the risk of malnutrition through a reduction in infectious disease prevalence. The more households and respective household members sharing these toilet facilities, the higher is the probability that a child is exposed to infection. In an environment where more families have access to flush toilets, it is likely that the number of families sharing other types of facilities will reduce and thus the risk of infection and consequential malnutrition risk is reduced. The proportion of South African households who owned consumer durables and who had access to indoor water facilities was higher than that observed in the Filipino sample. This suggests that fewer South African families within the cohort were living in extreme poverty, as measured using these proxy variables, potentially reducing the pressure on the infrastructure and services that supported these families compared with the Filipino families. In addition, this homogeneity or lack of variation in possession ownership within the South African cohort may have influenced the lack of association between SGA, stunting and SES. Other measures of SES that could have better distinguished the variation in SES between households which are commonly used in developed countries like the UK, such as employment, measures of over-crowding, car and household ownership( 41 ), may have shown an association with growth faltering. The current investigation used measures of household SES, both as an index and as individual variables, to predict poor infantile growth outcomes and the results suggest that the impact of these household variables is dependent on the context in which they were observed. SES, as defined by the measures within the present study, was not a significant predictor, either as an index or as individual variables, of being born SGA or of being stunted at 1 or 2 years of age in the Bt20 context. However, it is important to highlight that although the measures of SES used herein were not significant predictors of SGA and stunting in the Bt20 cohort, maternal height was protective of SGA and stunting; thus SES may indirectly (through a maternal height pathway) have an influence on infantile growth status in children from these cohorts. SES measured as an index and using individual variables was a significant predictor of these poor growth outcomes in the CLHNS cohort. While the use of an SES index provides a useful indication of the association and its direction, it loses sensitivity around the knowledge of which specific components of SES are important in the prediction of poor growth, from which there is potential to intervene and to develop policy. It should be noted that the measures employed within Cebu may have been a better reflection of conditions in this setting, as compared with the South African setting, and thus may have resulted in the higher number of significant SES predictors within the CLHNS cohort. Limitations The information regarding household SES was collected through questionnaires administered to the primary caregiver. These measures may have been slightly different between the two cohorts as the questionnaires were designed by different researchers, but both groups had similar research aims and objectives. Equally rigorous questionnaire design with particular attention to content validity makes it improbable that the differences observed between the two cohorts are directly attributable to differences in response from caregivers. The relatively smaller sample sizes available for the analyses of SGA ( n 758) and stunting at 1 year ( n 450) and 2 years ( n 401) within the Bt20 cohort could have resulted in a lack of statistical power to detect significant SES predictors of growth faltering. However, further investigations suggested that sample size differences did not influence the different patterns of association observed between SES and stunting in the two cohorts.  Discussion The present study examined how proxy measures of household SES relate to poor infant growth outcomes within South Africa and the Philippines, both as an index and using individual SES variables. SGA and stunting were prevalent within both cohorts, with the highest levels being experienced in the Philippines. Our analyses reveal that several measures of household SES are important for the prediction of growth faltering at different time points both between and within the two cohorts. However, the larger number of significant SES predictors in the CLHNS cohort suggests that the socio-economic milieu experienced by CLHNS infants increases the risk of becoming and remaining stunted in infancy; when using maternal education, water and toilet facilities, and ownership of a television or refrigerator to determine SES. There was a significant difference between the two cohorts in the proportion of infants born SGA. Although a number of studies have shown an inverse relationship between the level of maternal education and the risk of delivering an SGA infant while controlling for maternal height( 33 - 35 ), this was not the case for either the South African or Filipino infants. While SES was a significant predictor of SGA in the CLHNS cohort, it became insignificant when maternal height, parity and sex were controlled for. This may reflect that maternal height is a function of SES and that maternal height is the pathway linking SES and infant growth. The finding that there were no or relatively few socio-economic predictors of SGA is consistent with other studies which have suggested that maternal factors such as age, smoking status and weight gain were more important determinants of poor birth outcomes than SES per se( 35 - 37 ). The nutritional status (i.e. height-for-age) of the infants within both cohorts deteriorated as the infants got older, resulting in more infants being stunted by 2 years compared with 1 year of age. This may reflect the progression from breast-feeding through the weaning process to solid foods. The introduction of solid or complementary foods increases the risk of infection, reduces breast milk production and thus increases the risk of malnutrition( 38 ). During the transition from infanthood to childhood, an infant becomes increasingly independent of their caregiver and starts to interact more with the environment through crawling and walking, making them at greater risk of entering a cycle of malnutrition and infection, especially in less hygienic environments( 39 ). The increasing prevalence of stunting in both cohorts highlights the adverse environments into which both groups of children were born, despite South Africa’s relatively better socio-economic status. Results of the present study show that SES had a greater influence on child growth in the Philippines compared with South Africa. A potential explanation for this is that the Filipino social and economic milieu may have increased the risk of children being stunted in the first years of life in contrast to South African children. Urbanized living within Cebu may result in a lower SES than a similar environment within Soweto; however, Soweto families would still be considered poor according to developed country standards. Differences in development may have been expressed in contrasting community urban environments at the time of the birth and in the early years of life for the children in the two cohorts. For instance, at ages 1 and 2 years, the CLHNS infants and toddlers who lived in families who did not have an indoor flush toilet were significantly more likely to be stunted, whereas toilet facilities did not show the same association for the South African children. We know that in the South African sample the majority of the facilities were flush raised toilets (78·6%), compared with a minority (46·0%) within the Filipino sample. Flush toilets present less risk for contamination and infectious diseases than pit latrines for young children( 40 ) and so may reduce the risk of malnutrition through a reduction in infectious disease prevalence. The more households and respective household members sharing these toilet facilities, the higher is the probability that a child is exposed to infection. In an environment where more families have access to flush toilets, it is likely that the number of families sharing other types of facilities will reduce and thus the risk of infection and consequential malnutrition risk is reduced. The proportion of South African households who owned consumer durables and who had access to indoor water facilities was higher than that observed in the Filipino sample. This suggests that fewer South African families within the cohort were living in extreme poverty, as measured using these proxy variables, potentially reducing the pressure on the infrastructure and services that supported these families compared with the Filipino families. In addition, this homogeneity or lack of variation in possession ownership within the South African cohort may have influenced the lack of association between SGA, stunting and SES. Other measures of SES that could have better distinguished the variation in SES between households which are commonly used in developed countries like the UK, such as employment, measures of over-crowding, car and household ownership( 41 ), may have shown an association with growth faltering. The current investigation used measures of household SES, both as an index and as individual variables, to predict poor infantile growth outcomes and the results suggest that the impact of these household variables is dependent on the context in which they were observed. SES, as defined by the measures within the present study, was not a significant predictor, either as an index or as individual variables, of being born SGA or of being stunted at 1 or 2 years of age in the Bt20 context. However, it is important to highlight that although the measures of SES used herein were not significant predictors of SGA and stunting in the Bt20 cohort, maternal height was protective of SGA and stunting; thus SES may indirectly (through a maternal height pathway) have an influence on infantile growth status in children from these cohorts. SES measured as an index and using individual variables was a significant predictor of these poor growth outcomes in the CLHNS cohort. While the use of an SES index provides a useful indication of the association and its direction, it loses sensitivity around the knowledge of which specific components of SES are important in the prediction of poor growth, from which there is potential to intervene and to develop policy. It should be noted that the measures employed within Cebu may have been a better reflection of conditions in this setting, as compared with the South African setting, and thus may have resulted in the higher number of significant SES predictors within the CLHNS cohort. Limitations The information regarding household SES was collected through questionnaires administered to the primary caregiver. These measures may have been slightly different between the two cohorts as the questionnaires were designed by different researchers, but both groups had similar research aims and objectives. Equally rigorous questionnaire design with particular attention to content validity makes it improbable that the differences observed between the two cohorts are directly attributable to differences in response from caregivers. The relatively smaller sample sizes available for the analyses of SGA ( n 758) and stunting at 1 year ( n 450) and 2 years ( n 401) within the Bt20 cohort could have resulted in a lack of statistical power to detect significant SES predictors of growth faltering. However, further investigations suggested that sample size differences did not influence the different patterns of association observed between SES and stunting in the two cohorts.  Limitations The information regarding household SES was collected through questionnaires administered to the primary caregiver. These measures may have been slightly different between the two cohorts as the questionnaires were designed by different researchers, but both groups had similar research aims and objectives. Equally rigorous questionnaire design with particular attention to content validity makes it improbable that the differences observed between the two cohorts are directly attributable to differences in response from caregivers. The relatively smaller sample sizes available for the analyses of SGA ( n 758) and stunting at 1 year ( n 450) and 2 years ( n 401) within the Bt20 cohort could have resulted in a lack of statistical power to detect significant SES predictors of growth faltering. However, further investigations suggested that sample size differences did not influence the different patterns of association observed between SES and stunting in the two cohorts.  Limitations The information regarding household SES was collected through questionnaires administered to the primary caregiver. These measures may have been slightly different between the two cohorts as the questionnaires were designed by different researchers, but both groups had similar research aims and objectives. Equally rigorous questionnaire design with particular attention to content validity makes it improbable that the differences observed between the two cohorts are directly attributable to differences in response from caregivers. The relatively smaller sample sizes available for the analyses of SGA ( n 758) and stunting at 1 year ( n 450) and 2 years ( n 401) within the Bt20 cohort could have resulted in a lack of statistical power to detect significant SES predictors of growth faltering. However, further investigations suggested that sample size differences did not influence the different patterns of association observed between SES and stunting in the two cohorts.  Conclusion The present findings highlight that there are several key differences in the socio-economic determinants of being born SGA and being stunted at 1 and 2 years of age between South African and Filipino infants when using maternal education, water and toilet facilities, and ownership of a television and refrigerator as proxy measures of SES. There were no socio-economic predictors of poor growth outcomes in the Bt20 cohort, whereas there were several important predictors of poor growth in the CLHNS cohort: maternal education and sanitation facilities. This emphasizes the fact that the association between SES, SGA and stunting is context-specific. The identification of key individual household SES predictors of SGA and stunting within the Filipino context underscores the need to collect detailed SES data in health surveys. This is further confirmed by the lack of significance of SES predictors in the South African context, showing that these traditionally used measures of SES may not be as useful in transitioning economies such as South Africa. Thus, the collection of detailed household SES data in health surveys is important to aid policy development and to present an opportunity for potential context-specific interventions. However, as developing countries become more developed and urbanized, the choice of proxy measures for SES may need to be re-evaluated in health surveys in these regions. 