Memy I: a novel murine model for uterine leiomyoma using adenovirus-enhanced human fibroid explants in severe combined immune deficiency mice OBJECTIVE This study was undertaken to develop a representative murine model for human leiomyoma. STUDY DESIGN Human fibroid tumor tissues were cut into small pieces and treated with medium alone, adenoviral-?-galactosidase, adenoviral-vascular endothelial growth factor-A, adenoviral-cyclooxygenase-2, or both adenoviral-vascular endothelial growth factor-A and adenoviral- cyclooxygenase-2. Tissue pieces were inserted subcutaneously in the flank of each severe combined immunodeficient mouse. The developed lesion was measured twice per week. Xenograft tissues were harvested after 30 days and analyzed. RESULTS Tissue pieces transfected with both adenoviral-cyclooxygenase-2 and adenoviral-vascular endothelial growth factor-A continued to grow up to 30 days postimplantation. The number of proliferating and apoptotic cells, as well as the expression of smooth muscle actin, desmin, vimentin, estrogen receptors, and progesterone receptors was similar between retrieved grafts from that group and the original patient tissue. Furthermore, hematoxylin and eosin and Masson’s Trichrome stains confirmed this similarity. CONCLUSION Human uterine leiomyoma xenografts, pretreated with both adenoviral- cyclooxygenase-2 and adenoviral-vascular endothelial growth factor-A and implanted subcutaneously in severe combined immunodeficient mice, represent a novel model for human uterine leiomyoma.  Materials and Methods Recombinant adenovirus Adenoviral vectors, carrying the COX-2 gene under the cytomegalovirus promoter (Ad-COX-2), were a generous gift from Dr Chuan-Ming Hao (Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN). The Ad-VEGF-A, an adenoviral vector carrying the VEGF-A gene under the cytomegalovirus promoter, was purchased from Vector Biolabs (Philadelphia, PA). The adenovirus expressing a marker gene coding for bacterial ?-galactosidase (Ad-LacZ) was a kind gift from Dr SavioWoo(Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY) and was used as a control for viral transfection. Large-scale production of adenovirus vectors was performed as we have described previously 11 with a typical batch yield of 2 × 1010 plaque-forming units (PFU)/mL. Animals Forty 2-month-old female SCID mice (SCID/SCID CB17) were purchased from Harlan Sprague Dawley (Indianapolis, IN). Serum estrogen levels were maintained at the highest level by subcutaneous implantation of 1.7 mg, 60-day sustained-release 17?-estradiol pellets (Innovative Research of America, Sarasota, FL). The pellets were implanted 4 days before the tissue transplantation to allow steady-state tissue estrogen distribution. Animals were kept in microisolator cages and housed separately in a barrier facility with a well-controlled pathogen-free environment, with monitored ambient temperature and regulated cycles of light and darkness, and were fed ad libitum. All experiments involving laboratory animals were performed in accordance with the National Institutes of Health guidelines and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB), Galveston, TX. Tissue harvest, adenovirus transfection, and implantation Human leiomyoma tumor tissues were collected from a 44-year-old, gravida 3, para 3 (G3P3) African American female patient at the time of hysterectomy (due to multiple uterine fibroid lesions). The patient had not used any hormonal treatment for at least 3 months before surgery. The fibroid tissues used in this study were from a single, large, and intramural fundal location. We used tissue samples from the same lesion for all animals to avoid the introduction of variability because of differences in tumor viability, vascularity, cellularity, or other inherent fibroid features. The work was performed in accordance with National Institutes of Health guidelines on the use of human subjects and was approved by the Institutional Review Board of UTMB. Leiomyoma diagnosis was confirmed by the surgeon, based on gross morphologic assessment of the tumor, and by a pathologist on subsequent histologic analysis. Fibroid tissues were harvested aseptically, immediately submerged in tissue culture media, placed on ice, and transferred immediately to the laboratory. Tissue samples were cut into wedge-shaped pieces 3 mm in length and 2 mm in thickness at the broadest end. Wedges were randomly divided into 5 groups based on specific adenovirus transfection as shown in the Table . The number of cells per tumor was determined using a general rule of 3 × 108 cell/cm3 for leiomyoma tumors. 12 The calculated virus volume was added to the transfection media containing 1% Penstrep and 2% fetal bovine serum. The viral transfection was performed for 5 hours, fresh medium was added, and incubation continued for 12 hours. For transplantation, 40 SCID mice were divided equally into 5 groups and were then anesthetized with halothane. Small slits (3 mm) were made in the skin of the right flank of each animal, and 2 wedges of tissue were dipped in Matrigel and inserted subcutaneously, and the wounds were then closed with tissue glue. Mice were closely monitored after tissue implantation and the developed lesions were measured twice per week by using an electronic caliper. The tumor volume was determined from 3 diameters by using the ellipsoid formula: volume = R1 × R2 × R3 × 0.52. Tissue evaluation At 30 days postimplantation, all mice were killed and the experiment was concluded. Xenograft tissues were harvested and examined for gross evidence of vascularization and tissue morphology. The tissues were formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded, and subjected to hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) histologic evaluation. The histologic sections were graded semiquantitatively for cell density (cellularity), the absence or presence of mitosis per 10 high-power fields, and the degree of collagen changes. Proliferation was assessed by staining for the expression of the Ki67 protein by using MIB-1 monoclonal antibodies, 1:200 (Dako North America, Inc, Via Real Carpinteria, CA). Apoptosis was evaluated with the ApopTag Kit (Intergen, Purchase, NY) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The degree of apoptosis or proliferation was scored by counting the tunnel or Ki67 positive nuclei (brown), respectively, against the total number of the cells in 4 random high-power fields (total number: 2000 cells) for each tissue section (representing 1 animal). The percentage expressions were calculated, and 3 animals per group were included in these calculations. Data are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM) for all tested animals per group. Expression of the estrogen receptor(ER) and the progesterone receptor (PR) was evaluated with an anti-ER alpha antibody, 1:25 (Santa Cruz Biotech, Santa Cruz, CA) and aPRantibody 1:50(NeoMarkers, Fremont, CA). We also used immunohistochemistry to evaluate typical histologic features of leiomyoma, including antismooth muscle actin (undiluted; Gene Tex, Inc, San Antonio, TX), antismooth muscle Desmin 1:30 (Santa Cruz Biotech), and antismooth muscle vimentin 1:30 (Santa Cruz Biotech). The collagen content of the lesions was evaluated using Masson’s Trichrome staining. Statistical analysis The data are presented as mean ± SEM for all 8 animals from each of the 5 groups in the tumor size experiment and for 3 animals from each group for all other parameters. Group differences were analyzed by using a 1-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by a Tukey test as a post-ANOVA multiple comparison test; P < .05 was considered statistically significant.  Recombinant adenovirus Adenoviral vectors, carrying the COX-2 gene under the cytomegalovirus promoter (Ad-COX-2), were a generous gift from Dr Chuan-Ming Hao (Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN). The Ad-VEGF-A, an adenoviral vector carrying the VEGF-A gene under the cytomegalovirus promoter, was purchased from Vector Biolabs (Philadelphia, PA). The adenovirus expressing a marker gene coding for bacterial ?-galactosidase (Ad-LacZ) was a kind gift from Dr SavioWoo(Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY) and was used as a control for viral transfection. Large-scale production of adenovirus vectors was performed as we have described previously 11 with a typical batch yield of 2 × 1010 plaque-forming units (PFU)/mL.  Animals Forty 2-month-old female SCID mice (SCID/SCID CB17) were purchased from Harlan Sprague Dawley (Indianapolis, IN). Serum estrogen levels were maintained at the highest level by subcutaneous implantation of 1.7 mg, 60-day sustained-release 17?-estradiol pellets (Innovative Research of America, Sarasota, FL). The pellets were implanted 4 days before the tissue transplantation to allow steady-state tissue estrogen distribution. Animals were kept in microisolator cages and housed separately in a barrier facility with a well-controlled pathogen-free environment, with monitored ambient temperature and regulated cycles of light and darkness, and were fed ad libitum. All experiments involving laboratory animals were performed in accordance with the National Institutes of Health guidelines and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB), Galveston, TX.  Tissue harvest, adenovirus transfection, and implantation Human leiomyoma tumor tissues were collected from a 44-year-old, gravida 3, para 3 (G3P3) African American female patient at the time of hysterectomy (due to multiple uterine fibroid lesions). The patient had not used any hormonal treatment for at least 3 months before surgery. The fibroid tissues used in this study were from a single, large, and intramural fundal location. We used tissue samples from the same lesion for all animals to avoid the introduction of variability because of differences in tumor viability, vascularity, cellularity, or other inherent fibroid features. The work was performed in accordance with National Institutes of Health guidelines on the use of human subjects and was approved by the Institutional Review Board of UTMB. Leiomyoma diagnosis was confirmed by the surgeon, based on gross morphologic assessment of the tumor, and by a pathologist on subsequent histologic analysis. Fibroid tissues were harvested aseptically, immediately submerged in tissue culture media, placed on ice, and transferred immediately to the laboratory. Tissue samples were cut into wedge-shaped pieces 3 mm in length and 2 mm in thickness at the broadest end. Wedges were randomly divided into 5 groups based on specific adenovirus transfection as shown in the Table . The number of cells per tumor was determined using a general rule of 3 × 108 cell/cm3 for leiomyoma tumors. 12 The calculated virus volume was added to the transfection media containing 1% Penstrep and 2% fetal bovine serum. The viral transfection was performed for 5 hours, fresh medium was added, and incubation continued for 12 hours. For transplantation, 40 SCID mice were divided equally into 5 groups and were then anesthetized with halothane. Small slits (3 mm) were made in the skin of the right flank of each animal, and 2 wedges of tissue were dipped in Matrigel and inserted subcutaneously, and the wounds were then closed with tissue glue. Mice were closely monitored after tissue implantation and the developed lesions were measured twice per week by using an electronic caliper. The tumor volume was determined from 3 diameters by using the ellipsoid formula: volume = R1 × R2 × R3 × 0.52.  Tissue evaluation At 30 days postimplantation, all mice were killed and the experiment was concluded. Xenograft tissues were harvested and examined for gross evidence of vascularization and tissue morphology. The tissues were formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded, and subjected to hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) histologic evaluation. The histologic sections were graded semiquantitatively for cell density (cellularity), the absence or presence of mitosis per 10 high-power fields, and the degree of collagen changes. Proliferation was assessed by staining for the expression of the Ki67 protein by using MIB-1 monoclonal antibodies, 1:200 (Dako North America, Inc, Via Real Carpinteria, CA). Apoptosis was evaluated with the ApopTag Kit (Intergen, Purchase, NY) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The degree of apoptosis or proliferation was scored by counting the tunnel or Ki67 positive nuclei (brown), respectively, against the total number of the cells in 4 random high-power fields (total number: 2000 cells) for each tissue section (representing 1 animal). The percentage expressions were calculated, and 3 animals per group were included in these calculations. Data are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM) for all tested animals per group. Expression of the estrogen receptor(ER) and the progesterone receptor (PR) was evaluated with an anti-ER alpha antibody, 1:25 (Santa Cruz Biotech, Santa Cruz, CA) and aPRantibody 1:50(NeoMarkers, Fremont, CA). We also used immunohistochemistry to evaluate typical histologic features of leiomyoma, including antismooth muscle actin (undiluted; Gene Tex, Inc, San Antonio, TX), antismooth muscle Desmin 1:30 (Santa Cruz Biotech), and antismooth muscle vimentin 1:30 (Santa Cruz Biotech). The collagen content of the lesions was evaluated using Masson’s Trichrome staining.  Statistical analysis The data are presented as mean ± SEM for all 8 animals from each of the 5 groups in the tumor size experiment and for 3 animals from each group for all other parameters. Group differences were analyzed by using a 1-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by a Tukey test as a post-ANOVA multiple comparison test; P < .05 was considered statistically significant.  Results Uterine leiomyoma xenografts transfected with both Ad-VEGF-A and Ad-COX-2 continued to increase in size in vivo Human fibroid tissues were obtained from patients undergoing hysterectomy secondary to benign uterine leiomyomas. Tissues were cut into small wedges and then categorized into 5 groups according to specific viral transfection. Group 5, transfected with both Ad- VEGF-A and Ad-COX-2, remained engrafted and continued to grow for 1 full month after transplantation. All other groups showed abrupt and continuous time-dependant decreases in size, as shown in Figure 1 . The lesions in these groups (1–4) were barely visible by 2 weeks’ postimplantation and had practically vanished 4 weeks after implantation. At the time of harvest from the mouse host, 2–3 clearly visible subcutaneous vessels were connected to the xenograft tissues in group 5. COX-2/VEGF-A-enhanced xenografts retained typical histologic characteristics of leiomyoma in vivo We evaluated the ability of human uterine leiomyoma xenografts to retain various histologic and molecular characteristics after subcutaneous implantation in mice. We also assessed the effect of pretreatment with Ad-VEGF-A and Ad- COX-2, separately or in combination, on this process. As shown in Figure 2 , the histopathologic evaluation of the xenograft recovered from group 5 mice, pretreated with a combination of Ad- COX-2 and Ad-VEGF-A, exhibited similar histologic features to that of the freshly processed patient tissue specimens. TheH&Estaining analysis showed that both freshly processed patient specimens and recovered grafts from group 5 mice exhibited high cellular leiomyoma nodules composed of well-differentiated leiomyocytes that had formed bundles coursing in several directions ( Figure 2, D ). The leiomyoma cells had an abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm with oval or elongated nuclei that showed a dense nuclear chromatin pattern. Mitotic figures were rare, which is consistent with benign leiomyoma histopathology. A similar staining pattern was obtained from the original matched preimplantation control tissue ( Figure 2, A ). From the residual graft in Ad-LacZ–treated (group 2) and untreated grafts (group 1), we retrieved a small amount of tissue that we processed and used for various histologic tests. When stained with H&E, these small grafts demonstrated minimal cellularity and only some residual extracellular matrix ( Figure 2, B, C ). This is consistent with the sizing data in Figure 1 and suggests that these grafts did not vascularize and engraft successfully. Proliferation and apoptosis indices in engrafted tissues Immunohistochemical analysis with anti-Ki67 antibodies and ApopTag analysis revealed that the numbers of proliferating and apoptotic cells were similar among the original patient leiomyoma tissue and matched 1-month xenografts from group 5 (pretreated with Ad- COX-2 and Ad-VEGF-A) ( Figure 3, A, B ). In general, proliferation was slightly higher in the COX-2 and VEGF-A xenograft- treated group (11%) compared with the original tissue (8%) with no significant difference ( Figure 3, A, C ). Steroid receptors and smooth muscle markers are expressed by engrafted tissues Immunodetectable ER and PR protein levels were comparable between control leiomyoma tissues and matched Ad-COX-2/Ad-VEGF-A-enhanced xenografts, with respect to both the staining intensity and the staining pattern ( Figure 4, A,B ). These tissues were characterized further regarding the expression of several smooth muscle markers, including basal cell-specific, smooth muscle actin, desmin, and vimintin. The expression of alpha smooth muscle actin, smooth muscle desmin, and smooth muscle vimentin were all comparable among xenografts recovered from group 5 (enhanced with Ad- VEGF-A and Ad-COX-2) and matched original fresh leiomyoma tissue, when tested with human-specific antibodies ( Figure 5, A–C ). The cytoplasm of the leiomyoma cells was strongly labeled for smooth muscle alpha actin ( Figure 5, A ).A strong reaction to vimentin was observed in the connective tissue ( Figure 5, B ). Collagen production by engrafted human leiomyoma tissue As shown in Figure 6 , Masson’s Trichrome staining showed that the extracellular collagen content was largely similar in group 5 and matched fresh tissue. The human leiomyoma cells in group 5 presented a typical staining pattern and showed tumor cell bundles surrounded by moderate amounts of well-vascularizated connective tissue. Both the Ad-LacZ-treated and the media-treated control groups showed a dramatic loss of leiomyoma architecture manifested by a marked decreased in cellularity and the appearance of collagen degradation ( Figure 6 ).  Results Uterine leiomyoma xenografts transfected with both Ad-VEGF-A and Ad-COX-2 continued to increase in size in vivo Human fibroid tissues were obtained from patients undergoing hysterectomy secondary to benign uterine leiomyomas. Tissues were cut into small wedges and then categorized into 5 groups according to specific viral transfection. Group 5, transfected with both Ad- VEGF-A and Ad-COX-2, remained engrafted and continued to grow for 1 full month after transplantation. All other groups showed abrupt and continuous time-dependant decreases in size, as shown in Figure 1 . The lesions in these groups (1–4) were barely visible by 2 weeks’ postimplantation and had practically vanished 4 weeks after implantation. At the time of harvest from the mouse host, 2–3 clearly visible subcutaneous vessels were connected to the xenograft tissues in group 5. COX-2/VEGF-A-enhanced xenografts retained typical histologic characteristics of leiomyoma in vivo We evaluated the ability of human uterine leiomyoma xenografts to retain various histologic and molecular characteristics after subcutaneous implantation in mice. We also assessed the effect of pretreatment with Ad-VEGF-A and Ad- COX-2, separately or in combination, on this process. As shown in Figure 2 , the histopathologic evaluation of the xenograft recovered from group 5 mice, pretreated with a combination of Ad- COX-2 and Ad-VEGF-A, exhibited similar histologic features to that of the freshly processed patient tissue specimens. TheH&Estaining analysis showed that both freshly processed patient specimens and recovered grafts from group 5 mice exhibited high cellular leiomyoma nodules composed of well-differentiated leiomyocytes that had formed bundles coursing in several directions ( Figure 2, D ). The leiomyoma cells had an abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm with oval or elongated nuclei that showed a dense nuclear chromatin pattern. Mitotic figures were rare, which is consistent with benign leiomyoma histopathology. A similar staining pattern was obtained from the original matched preimplantation control tissue ( Figure 2, A ). From the residual graft in Ad-LacZ–treated (group 2) and untreated grafts (group 1), we retrieved a small amount of tissue that we processed and used for various histologic tests. When stained with H&E, these small grafts demonstrated minimal cellularity and only some residual extracellular matrix ( Figure 2, B, C ). This is consistent with the sizing data in Figure 1 and suggests that these grafts did not vascularize and engraft successfully. Proliferation and apoptosis indices in engrafted tissues Immunohistochemical analysis with anti-Ki67 antibodies and ApopTag analysis revealed that the numbers of proliferating and apoptotic cells were similar among the original patient leiomyoma tissue and matched 1-month xenografts from group 5 (pretreated with Ad- COX-2 and Ad-VEGF-A) ( Figure 3, A, B ). In general, proliferation was slightly higher in the COX-2 and VEGF-A xenograft- treated group (11%) compared with the original tissue (8%) with no significant difference ( Figure 3, A, C ). Steroid receptors and smooth muscle markers are expressed by engrafted tissues Immunodetectable ER and PR protein levels were comparable between control leiomyoma tissues and matched Ad-COX-2/Ad-VEGF-A-enhanced xenografts, with respect to both the staining intensity and the staining pattern ( Figure 4, A,B ). These tissues were characterized further regarding the expression of several smooth muscle markers, including basal cell-specific, smooth muscle actin, desmin, and vimintin. The expression of alpha smooth muscle actin, smooth muscle desmin, and smooth muscle vimentin were all comparable among xenografts recovered from group 5 (enhanced with Ad- VEGF-A and Ad-COX-2) and matched original fresh leiomyoma tissue, when tested with human-specific antibodies ( Figure 5, A–C ). The cytoplasm of the leiomyoma cells was strongly labeled for smooth muscle alpha actin ( Figure 5, A ).A strong reaction to vimentin was observed in the connective tissue ( Figure 5, B ). Collagen production by engrafted human leiomyoma tissue As shown in Figure 6 , Masson’s Trichrome staining showed that the extracellular collagen content was largely similar in group 5 and matched fresh tissue. The human leiomyoma cells in group 5 presented a typical staining pattern and showed tumor cell bundles surrounded by moderate amounts of well-vascularizated connective tissue. Both the Ad-LacZ-treated and the media-treated control groups showed a dramatic loss of leiomyoma architecture manifested by a marked decreased in cellularity and the appearance of collagen degradation ( Figure 6 ).  Uterine leiomyoma xenografts transfected with both Ad-VEGF-A and Ad-COX-2 continued to increase in size in vivo Human fibroid tissues were obtained from patients undergoing hysterectomy secondary to benign uterine leiomyomas. Tissues were cut into small wedges and then categorized into 5 groups according to specific viral transfection. Group 5, transfected with both Ad- VEGF-A and Ad-COX-2, remained engrafted and continued to grow for 1 full month after transplantation. All other groups showed abrupt and continuous time-dependant decreases in size, as shown in Figure 1 . The lesions in these groups (1–4) were barely visible by 2 weeks’ postimplantation and had practically vanished 4 weeks after implantation. At the time of harvest from the mouse host, 2–3 clearly visible subcutaneous vessels were connected to the xenograft tissues in group 5.  Uterine leiomyoma xenografts transfected with both Ad-VEGF-A and Ad-COX-2 continued to increase in size in vivo Human fibroid tissues were obtained from patients undergoing hysterectomy secondary to benign uterine leiomyomas. Tissues were cut into small wedges and then categorized into 5 groups according to specific viral transfection. Group 5, transfected with both Ad- VEGF-A and Ad-COX-2, remained engrafted and continued to grow for 1 full month after transplantation. All other groups showed abrupt and continuous time-dependant decreases in size, as shown in Figure 1 . The lesions in these groups (1–4) were barely visible by 2 weeks’ postimplantation and had practically vanished 4 weeks after implantation. At the time of harvest from the mouse host, 2–3 clearly visible subcutaneous vessels were connected to the xenograft tissues in group 5.  COX-2/VEGF-A-enhanced xenografts retained typical histologic characteristics of leiomyoma in vivo We evaluated the ability of human uterine leiomyoma xenografts to retain various histologic and molecular characteristics after subcutaneous implantation in mice. We also assessed the effect of pretreatment with Ad-VEGF-A and Ad- COX-2, separately or in combination, on this process. As shown in Figure 2 , the histopathologic evaluation of the xenograft recovered from group 5 mice, pretreated with a combination of Ad- COX-2 and Ad-VEGF-A, exhibited similar histologic features to that of the freshly processed patient tissue specimens. TheH&Estaining analysis showed that both freshly processed patient specimens and recovered grafts from group 5 mice exhibited high cellular leiomyoma nodules composed of well-differentiated leiomyocytes that had formed bundles coursing in several directions ( Figure 2, D ). The leiomyoma cells had an abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm with oval or elongated nuclei that showed a dense nuclear chromatin pattern. Mitotic figures were rare, which is consistent with benign leiomyoma histopathology. A similar staining pattern was obtained from the original matched preimplantation control tissue ( Figure 2, A ). From the residual graft in Ad-LacZ–treated (group 2) and untreated grafts (group 1), we retrieved a small amount of tissue that we processed and used for various histologic tests. When stained with H&E, these small grafts demonstrated minimal cellularity and only some residual extracellular matrix ( Figure 2, B, C ). This is consistent with the sizing data in Figure 1 and suggests that these grafts did not vascularize and engraft successfully.  COX-2/VEGF-A-enhanced xenografts retained typical histologic characteristics of leiomyoma in vivo We evaluated the ability of human uterine leiomyoma xenografts to retain various histologic and molecular characteristics after subcutaneous implantation in mice. We also assessed the effect of pretreatment with Ad-VEGF-A and Ad- COX-2, separately or in combination, on this process. As shown in Figure 2 , the histopathologic evaluation of the xenograft recovered from group 5 mice, pretreated with a combination of Ad- COX-2 and Ad-VEGF-A, exhibited similar histologic features to that of the freshly processed patient tissue specimens. TheH&Estaining analysis showed that both freshly processed patient specimens and recovered grafts from group 5 mice exhibited high cellular leiomyoma nodules composed of well-differentiated leiomyocytes that had formed bundles coursing in several directions ( Figure 2, D ). The leiomyoma cells had an abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm with oval or elongated nuclei that showed a dense nuclear chromatin pattern. Mitotic figures were rare, which is consistent with benign leiomyoma histopathology. A similar staining pattern was obtained from the original matched preimplantation control tissue ( Figure 2, A ). From the residual graft in Ad-LacZ–treated (group 2) and untreated grafts (group 1), we retrieved a small amount of tissue that we processed and used for various histologic tests. When stained with H&E, these small grafts demonstrated minimal cellularity and only some residual extracellular matrix ( Figure 2, B, C ). This is consistent with the sizing data in Figure 1 and suggests that these grafts did not vascularize and engraft successfully.  Proliferation and apoptosis indices in engrafted tissues Immunohistochemical analysis with anti-Ki67 antibodies and ApopTag analysis revealed that the numbers of proliferating and apoptotic cells were similar among the original patient leiomyoma tissue and matched 1-month xenografts from group 5 (pretreated with Ad- COX-2 and Ad-VEGF-A) ( Figure 3, A, B ). In general, proliferation was slightly higher in the COX-2 and VEGF-A xenograft- treated group (11%) compared with the original tissue (8%) with no significant difference ( Figure 3, A, C ).  Proliferation and apoptosis indices in engrafted tissues Immunohistochemical analysis with anti-Ki67 antibodies and ApopTag analysis revealed that the numbers of proliferating and apoptotic cells were similar among the original patient leiomyoma tissue and matched 1-month xenografts from group 5 (pretreated with Ad- COX-2 and Ad-VEGF-A) ( Figure 3, A, B ). In general, proliferation was slightly higher in the COX-2 and VEGF-A xenograft- treated group (11%) compared with the original tissue (8%) with no significant difference ( Figure 3, A, C ).  Steroid receptors and smooth muscle markers are expressed by engrafted tissues Immunodetectable ER and PR protein levels were comparable between control leiomyoma tissues and matched Ad-COX-2/Ad-VEGF-A-enhanced xenografts, with respect to both the staining intensity and the staining pattern ( Figure 4, A,B ). These tissues were characterized further regarding the expression of several smooth muscle markers, including basal cell-specific, smooth muscle actin, desmin, and vimintin. The expression of alpha smooth muscle actin, smooth muscle desmin, and smooth muscle vimentin were all comparable among xenografts recovered from group 5 (enhanced with Ad- VEGF-A and Ad-COX-2) and matched original fresh leiomyoma tissue, when tested with human-specific antibodies ( Figure 5, A–C ). The cytoplasm of the leiomyoma cells was strongly labeled for smooth muscle alpha actin ( Figure 5, A ).A strong reaction to vimentin was observed in the connective tissue ( Figure 5, B ).  Steroid receptors and smooth muscle markers are expressed by engrafted tissues Immunodetectable ER and PR protein levels were comparable between control leiomyoma tissues and matched Ad-COX-2/Ad-VEGF-A-enhanced xenografts, with respect to both the staining intensity and the staining pattern ( Figure 4, A,B ). These tissues were characterized further regarding the expression of several smooth muscle markers, including basal cell-specific, smooth muscle actin, desmin, and vimintin. The expression of alpha smooth muscle actin, smooth muscle desmin, and smooth muscle vimentin were all comparable among xenografts recovered from group 5 (enhanced with Ad- VEGF-A and Ad-COX-2) and matched original fresh leiomyoma tissue, when tested with human-specific antibodies ( Figure 5, A–C ). The cytoplasm of the leiomyoma cells was strongly labeled for smooth muscle alpha actin ( Figure 5, A ).A strong reaction to vimentin was observed in the connective tissue ( Figure 5, B ).  Collagen production by engrafted human leiomyoma tissue As shown in Figure 6 , Masson’s Trichrome staining showed that the extracellular collagen content was largely similar in group 5 and matched fresh tissue. The human leiomyoma cells in group 5 presented a typical staining pattern and showed tumor cell bundles surrounded by moderate amounts of well-vascularizated connective tissue. Both the Ad-LacZ-treated and the media-treated control groups showed a dramatic loss of leiomyoma architecture manifested by a marked decreased in cellularity and the appearance of collagen degradation ( Figure 6 ).  Collagen production by engrafted human leiomyoma tissue As shown in Figure 6 , Masson’s Trichrome staining showed that the extracellular collagen content was largely similar in group 5 and matched fresh tissue. The human leiomyoma cells in group 5 presented a typical staining pattern and showed tumor cell bundles surrounded by moderate amounts of well-vascularizated connective tissue. Both the Ad-LacZ-treated and the media-treated control groups showed a dramatic loss of leiomyoma architecture manifested by a marked decreased in cellularity and the appearance of collagen degradation ( Figure 6 ).  Comment The goal of this study was to generate a reliable human uterine leiomyoma model in mice by using human tissue. This model is useful for studying the biology of uterine fibroids and for testing novel experimental therapies. Our study suggests that human leiomyoma tissue could be made to engraft and survive for at least 1 month as subcutaneous xenografts in SCID mice after enhancement with both Ad-COX-2 and Ad-VEGF-A. The implanted tissues successfully maintained their volume throughout the experiment and showed modest growth. The engrafted human leiomyoma tissues clearly retained their key features regarding the tissue morphology, indices of apoptosis and proliferation, as well as the expression of various uterine leiomyoma key markers, eg, ER, PR, alpha smooth muscle actin, desmin, and vimentin. Interestingly, all parameters were similar, if not identical, when compared with the original freshly processed matched control leiomyoma lesions. The efficiency with which our short-term xenografts remain viable was rather impressive. We used the tissue cutting and processing procedure that was described by Presnell et al, 13 who hypothesized that local nutrients are able to enter the newly transplanted tissue wedges through simple diffusion at the tapered end, which facilitates survival until the development of neovascular connections with the host. We selected the SCID mouse model because it is devoid of specific immune responses that facilitate the engrafment of human tissues and prolong the Admediated gene expression. 10 It was obvious in the H&E-stained sections that the xenografts are not necrotic or fibrotic, and vascularization was evident because of the presence of small vessels and red blood cells ( Figure 2 ). Thus, our results confirmed that pretreatment with both Ad-COX-2 and Ad-VEGF-A provided a means of satisfactory tissue homeostasis with sustained proliferation and minimal apoptosis that were similar to the results of the matched control leiomyoma tissue. Ad-COX-2 and Ad-VEGF-A were chosen for the enhancement of leiomyoma tissue because of ample evidence derived from previous reports that link these 2 genes to tumorogenesis, as well as maintenance of tumor cell growth. Selective COX-2 inhibitors have been shown to have strong chemopreventative actions against colon carcinogenesis in rats, 13 wheras higher COX-2 levels have been observed in many human cancers, such as cancer of the lungs, breasts, colon, prostate, head, and neck 3 , 14 – 16 compared with their normal tissue. COX-2 was also found to sustain tumor growth by enhancing angiogenesis and conferring resistance to apoptosis through stimulation of Bcl2 expression, decreasing both E-cadherin and transforming growth factor B2 receptor expression, 17 as well as attenuating TNF-related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL)-induced apoptosis and transcriptional repression of death receptor-5. 18 Conversely, treatment of cancer cells with COX-2 inhibitors induced caspase-3 activity, which led to cancer cell apoptosis. 19 In addition, COX-2 enhanced cell proliferation by increasing the synthesis of PGE2 and thromboxane. 6 It is widely accepted that the establishment of nutrient blood vessels is fundamental to the growth of tumors. 8 Uterine leiomyomas have been associated with irregular vascular networks and angiogenic growth factors, including VEGF. 9 We anticipated that the overexpression of VEGF-A via adenovirus transfection could enhance the tumorogenicity of human leiomyoma tissue in SCID mice. VEGF is the most potent angiogenic factor known and may enhance the growth of fibroids by increasing their nutrient supply. 9 VEGF may also have an indirect effect by inducing the proliferation of endothelial cells, which produce a number of growth factors. 9 VEGF can also release the angiogenic factor, bFGF, from its storage in heparin sulfates of the extracellular matrix, which has a synergistic effect on angiogenesis. 20 The overexpression of VEGF has been shown to confer a growth advantage for many cells without leading to malignant transformation, eg, Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. 21 In another report, VEGF overexpression in low tumorigenic U251MG(glioma) cells promoted tumorogenicity and resulted in the formation of large hemorrhagic subcutaneous tumors and solid tumors in the brain. 22 Many reports indicate compelling evidence for a positive relationship between COX-2 and VEGF. COX-2 induces the production of VEGF through both the PGE2/PGE2 membrane receptor and the thromboxane A2-mediated effect and, which promote neovascularization and tumor angiogenesis. 23 This induction is blocked by the COX-2-specific inhibitor, NS-398. 24 VEGF increases COX-2 gene expression at both the messenger RNA and protein levels in cultured human vascular endothelial cells through the p38 MAPK and JNK signal pathways. 25 Furthermore, COX-2 is significantly related to VEGF production in glioma and colon cancer. 14 , 26 In addition, VEGF also increases thromboxane A2 synthesis. 27 Our data agreed with these reports and demonstrated that only xenografts enhanced with both Ad-COX-2 and Ad- VEGF exhibited a time-dependent increase in size subcutaneously in SCID mice ( Figure 1 ) and retained all the key features of leiomyoma ( Figures 2 – 6 ). This suggests a synergistic effect between the COX-2 and VEGF signaling pathway in uterine leiomyoma tissue. Some advantages of our novel model, developed as an advancement tool for uterine leiomyoma understanding and control, include the potential establishment of efficient in vivo xenograft cultures from human leiomyoma, low cost, and a preserved benign leiomyoma phenotype. Furthermore, it enables the possibility of generating mice that bear multiple xenografts derived from different patient samples, so that experiments can be conducted in a large scale of patient tissues by using only a few mice. Likewise, mice that contain multiple xenografts from the same specimen can be generated, which allows grafts to be sequentially harvested for analysis at multiple timepoints during an experiment. In conclusion, human uterine leiomyoma xenografts were successfully engrafted in SCID mice for 1 month after preimplantation treatment with both Ad-COX-2 and Ad-VEGF-A. The xenografts were well-vascularized and maintained fibroid tissue architecture, as well as the expression of key markers. This model represents a useful tool for in vivo study of human uterine fibroids. 