Noncoding RNAs Produced by Oncogenic Human Herpesviruses The two human herpesviruses that are causally associated with cancer are Epstein–Barr virus and Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV). Both are lymphocryptoviruses that establish latency in B lymphocytes and persist for the lifetime of the host. EBV and KSHV are both linked to a variety of lymphomas. EBV is also a causative agent or cofactor in epithelial malignancies such as nasopharyngeal carcinoma whereas Kaposi’s sarcoma is of endothelial cell origin. Both viruses encode a limited number of proteins during latent replication that are important for growth transformation and evasion of the immune system. In addition, they express noncoding RNAs during both latent and lytic infection. Many of these RNAs have been highly conserved during evolution and are expressed in a wide variety of clinical settings, suggesting their fundamental importance in the viral life cycle. The function of some of these RNAs such as the nuclear EBV EBER RNAs remains elusive although they are some of the most abundant transcripts produced by each virus. Both EBV and KSHV also have recently been shown to encode and express microRNAs. The study of these viral microRNAs is just beginning although several of their cellular and viral gene targets have been established. Viral microRNAs appear to be involved in both modulation of the immune response as well as oncogenesis. Because each target gene may have many microRNAs acting on its mRNA, and each microRNA may have more than one target, there are likely to be many new discoveries regarding the complex interactions of viral microRNAs and host cell genes.  Conclusion Viruses have long provided insights into cellular physiology as they serve as natural experiments that have taken place over millions of years of evolution. Viral strategies that manipulate cellular gene expression to enhance viral persistence, viral replication, and survival of infected cells have provided numerous clues to mechanisms of gene expression and their dysregulation during tumor development. The fact that viral noncoding RNAs have been highly conserved and are expressed in virtually every infected cell suggests that they perform essential roles in gammaherpesvirus biology. With the recent explosion in our knowledge of the mechanisms of microRNAs and other noncoding RNAs, many new discoveries about the complex relationship between transforming herpesviruses and oncogenesis are imminent. Because of the combinatorial nature of their effects, it is unlikely that gammaherpesvirus miRNAs will have only a few functions, but rather will be found to participate in many cellular processes, both as activators and repressors, in a manner similar to transcription factors. Given the evidence currently available, it is likely that viral microRNAs will become increasingly established as important in viral oncogenesis and in preventing elimination of the virus by the host immune response. If the hypothesis advanced in this mini-review is correct, many of the other highly conserved noncoding RNAs expressed by gammaherpesviruses such as EBERs will be shown to play an important role in modulating gene expression during the host cell stress response. Considering the complex array of possible interactions between noncoding RNAs and cellular genes, both virologists and cell biologists are likely to be productively occupied for a long time. 