Independent Effects of Genetic Variations in Mannose-Binding Lectin Influence the Course of HIV Disease: The Advantage of Heterozygosity for Coding Mutations Background The in vivo impact of mannose-binding lectin (MBL), a molecule involved in innate immunity, on the pathogenesis of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)–1 infection and AIDS is unknown. Methods A total of 1102 HIV-positive and 2213 HIV-negative adult subjects were screened for polymorphisms in the coding and promoter regions of MBL2 , the gene that encodes MBL. Results Variations in MBL2 did not influence the risk of acquiring HIV-1. Heterozygosity for coding mutations (O allele) and homozygosity for the ?221 promoter polymorphism (X allele) in MBL2 were associated with a delay in and an accelerated rate of disease progression, respectively. MBL2 variations influenced the rate of progression to AIDS-defining illnesses. In a multivariate model, the effects of MBL2 variations were independent of several parameters known to influence disease progression, including steady-state viral load, baseline CD4+ T cell counts, and delayed-type hypersensitivity skin test responses, an in vivo marker of cell-mediated immunity. The effects of MBL2 variations were most evident in those who possessed protective genotypes of CCR5 and a high copy number of CCL3L1 , the most potent HIV-suppressive CCR5 ligand. Conclusions MBL2 genotypes are independent determinants of HIV disease progression and heterozygosity for MBL2 coding mutations confer disease-retarding effects. MBL-dependent immune responses may play a role in the pathogenesis of HIV infection.  Introduction There is incontrovertible evidence demonstrating that the observed intersubject variability in the course of HIV-1 disease is attributable, in part, to polymorphisms in genes that influence adaptive immune responses (e.g., HLA ) and the entry of HIV-1 into cells [ 1 ]. For example, we found that polymorphisms in the HIV coreceptor, CCchemokine receptor 5 (CCR5), and the copy number of the gene encoding its potent HIV-suppressive ligand, CC chemokine ligand like-1 (CCL3L1) are major determinants of HIV-AIDS susceptibility [ 2 – 4 ]. Our recent studies suggest that variations in CCL3L1 and CCR5 that are categorized as low, moderate, and high CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk groups might affect the pathogenesis of HIV disease by influencing both parameters that are dependent on viral entry (e.g., viral load) and parameters that are independent of viral entry (e.g., cell-mediated immunity [CMI]) [ 5 ]. By contrast, much less is known about the role of the innate immune responses in the pathogenesis of HIV disease. To address this gap in knowledge, in this study we determined whether variations in the gene encoding mannose-binding lectin (MBL), a major component of the innate immune response [ 6 – 9 ], influence the risk of HIV acquisition and HIV disease progression rates. MBL is an evolutionarily conserved, circulating host-defense protein that acts as a broad-spectrum pattern-recognition molecule against a wide variety of infectious agents [ 7 ]. MBL mediates its effects by influencing complement activation [ 8 ], opsonization, and phagocytosis [ 9 – 11 ]. MBL2 contains polymorphisms in the coding and promoter region [ 12 ]. The wildtype coding allele is designated the “A allele,” whereas the other polymorphisms in the coding sequence (B, C, and D alleles) are collectively designated the “O allele” ( figure 1A and 1B ) [ 12 . The variations in the coding sequence affect the structural integrity of MBL, and are associated with a 2-fold to 100-fold reduction in circulating MBL levels [ 13 ]. Polymorphisms in the promoter region can also influence MBL levels. For example, the ?221C polymorphism in the MBL2 promoter (designated the “X allele”; figure 1A and 1B ) is associated with dramatically lower levels of the structurally intact MBL protein [ 13 ]. Thus, variations in MBL2 provide, in part, a genetic basis for the wide range of circulating MBL levels [ 13 , 14 ]. In several ethnic groups, there is a high prevalence of polymorphic alleles (e.g., B and C alleles) that result in low MBL levels, which suggests that a relative lack of MBL might be beneficial to the host under some circumstances [ 15 – 20 ]. This has led Garred et al. and others to hypothesize that these alleles might confer a selective advantage [ 15 – 20 ], such as an advantage against infection by intracellular pathogens [ 21 ]. An additional proposal is that the high frequencies of the MBL2 polymorphisms that are observed in tropical regions may serve to reduce the detrimental effects of excessive complement activation [ 15 , 22 , 23 ]. Interestingly, although there is an extensive literature demonstrating that variations in MBL2 might alter susceptibility to infectious and noninfectious diseases [ 7 , 12 , 24 ], only a single report has demonstrated a heterozygous advantage for possession of variations in the coding sequences [ 25 ]. It has been hypothesized that MBL deficiency might also play an important role in the context of coexisting immunodeficiency, such as that of HIV infection [ 26 ]. There is strong in vitro data linking MBL to the pathogenesis of HIV disease [ 26 ], and this is based on several observations, including: (1) purified MBL can bind to HIV-infected cell lines and directly inhibit HIV infection of lymphoblasts [ 27 ]; (2) MBL binds to and activates complement on gp120 [ 28 ]; (3)MBL binds to both CCR5-tropic and CXCR4-tropic primary HIV strains [ 29 ]; and (4) although HIV is relatively resistant to neutralization by MBL, the binding and opsonization of HIV by MBL may alter virus trafficking and viral-antigen presentation during HIV infection [ 30 ]. However, despite this extensive in vitro data linking MBL to the pathogenesis of HIV disease, an in vivo link is less clear because the results of genetic epidemiological studies that have investigated the association between variations in MBL2 and HIV-AIDS susceptibility have been inconclusive [ 14 , 26 , 31 , 32 ]. Many of these associations were either weak or contradictory and/or were derived mostly from cohorts that involved small sample sizes. In the present study, we capitalized on a large and well characterized cohort of HIV-1–positive (hereafter, “HIV+”) subjects of European and African descent to test the hypothesis that heterozygosity for polymorphisms in the coding region would result in delayed disease progression rates and possibly afford protection against specific AIDS-defining opportunistic infections. Given the phenotypic effects of the MBL2 promoter X allele on reduction of the levels of the structurally intact MBL protein, in our analyses we also examined the effects of this allele on HIV disease. This was important because most of the prior studies that have examined the HIV disease–influencing effects of variations in MBL2 have been restricted primarily to analyses of structural (coding) mutations, and thus have not accounted for the possible confounding effects of promoter polymorphisms that are in linkage disequilibrium with variations in the coding region [ 13 ]. Hence, we reasoned that accounting for this linkage pattern as well as distinguishing between the effects of polymorphisms that result in reduced levels of a structurally intact (promoter variants) versus an unstable protein (variants in coding sequence) might help to clarify the discordant findings regarding the role that variations in MBL2 play in HIV disease. Additionally, we determined whether MBL2 variants affected disease pathogenesis by impacting on the steady-state plasma viral load (VL), a strong predictor of disease progression [ 5 , 33 , 34 ], as well as delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) skin test reactivity, an in vivo marker of CMI [ 35 , 36 ] that correlates strongly with T cell function in vitro [ 37 , 38 ] and an independent prognosticator of HIV disease progression [ 5 , 37 , 39 , 40 ]. Finally, we assessed whether the disease-influencing effects of MBL2 variants differed on the basis of the genetic context conveyed by CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk groups.  Patients, Materials, and Methods Study population Adult patients with HIV-1 infection who participated in the US Air Force portion of the Tri-Service AIDS Clinical Consortium Natural History Study contributed samples for this study. Wilford Hall Medical Center (WHMC) is the referral hospital for all US Air Force personnel who develop infection with HIV-1. Extensively detailed descriptions of this cohort have been published elsewhere [ 3 , 5 ] and additional information is provided in the appendix (which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal). Genotyping of MBL2 polymorphisms Complete MBL2 genotyping information was available for 1102 HIV-infected subjects and 2213 subjects not infected with HIV. Genotyping methods are described in the appendix (which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal). CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk groups Methods for determining the copy number of the CCL3L1 and CCR5 genotypes as well as their categorization into low, moderate, and high CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk groups were as described elsewhere [ 2 , 3 , 5 ]. Delayed type hypersensitivity (DTH) skin test reactivity The protocols for conducting the DTH skin tests in the HIV+ WHMC cohort are as described elsewhere [ 5 , 37 , 39 ]. In brief, each patient, at enrollment and then prospectively, received the standard Mantoux type of intradermal skin test to the following antigens: mumps, Trichophyton, Candida, and tetanus toxoid. Additional details about this parameter and the reasons for using the best DTH response recorded during the course of disease are as described elsewhere [ 5 ] and in the appendix (which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal). Statistical analysis The statistical procedures used in this paper are described in the appendix (which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal).  Study population Adult patients with HIV-1 infection who participated in the US Air Force portion of the Tri-Service AIDS Clinical Consortium Natural History Study contributed samples for this study. Wilford Hall Medical Center (WHMC) is the referral hospital for all US Air Force personnel who develop infection with HIV-1. Extensively detailed descriptions of this cohort have been published elsewhere [ 3 , 5 ] and additional information is provided in the appendix (which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal).  Genotyping of MBL2 polymorphisms Complete MBL2 genotyping information was available for 1102 HIV-infected subjects and 2213 subjects not infected with HIV. Genotyping methods are described in the appendix (which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal).  CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk groups Methods for determining the copy number of the CCL3L1 and CCR5 genotypes as well as their categorization into low, moderate, and high CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk groups were as described elsewhere [ 2 , 3 , 5 ].  Delayed type hypersensitivity (DTH) skin test reactivity The protocols for conducting the DTH skin tests in the HIV+ WHMC cohort are as described elsewhere [ 5 , 37 , 39 ]. In brief, each patient, at enrollment and then prospectively, received the standard Mantoux type of intradermal skin test to the following antigens: mumps, Trichophyton, Candida, and tetanus toxoid. Additional details about this parameter and the reasons for using the best DTH response recorded during the course of disease are as described elsewhere [ 5 ] and in the appendix (which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal).  Statistical analysis The statistical procedures used in this paper are described in the appendix (which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal).  Results Frequency distribution of promoter and coding region alleles The distribution pattern of MBL2 alleles in the HIV+ WHMC cohort were consistent with those reported elsewhere [ 22 , 41 ]. The frequencies of the promoter alleles Y (wild type) and X (polymorphic) and the wild-type coding allele A were relatively similar in European American, African American, and Hispanic American subjects ( figure 1 A –1 C ). By contrast, the frequencies of the polymorphic coding alleles B and C differed significantly among subjects of African and European descent ( figure 1 C ). The polymorphic promoter X allele was in nearly complete linkage disequilibrium with the A allele ( figure 1 D ) (?2 = 71.39; P < .001). On the basis of this linkage pattern, 3 common haplotypes were identified, and in accord with the prevailing nomenclature for MBL2 haplotypes [ 13 ], they were designated the YA, YO, and XA haplotypes. The allele frequencies of the coding and noncoding polymorphisms in MBL2 among HIV+ subjects did not deviate significantly from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Advantage of heterozygosity for MBL2 coding variants Compared with homozygosity for the A allele (A/A genotype), heterozygosity for theAallele (i.e., A/O genotype) was associated with a significantly slower rate of disease progression ( figure 2A–2C ). Given the link between MBL deficiency and susceptibility to infectious diseases, we determined whether the A/O genotype afforded protection specifically against AIDS-defining opportunistic infections. In a stepwise logistic regression model, a reduced risk (odds) of developing of Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia and Mycobacterium avium complex was associated the possession of coding region heterozygosity ( figure 2D ). Additionally, the A/O genotype protected against a rapid rate of progression to P. jiroveci pneumonia and M. avium complex ( figure 2 E and 2 F ). To determine the influence of coding variations on risk of acquiring HIV, we compared the genotype frequencies of MBL2 polymorphisms in 1102 HIV-positive subjects and 2213 subjects not infected with HIV. Possession of the A/O genotype was associated with a trend for a 12% reduction in the risk of acquiring HIV (odds ratio [OR], 0.88 [95% CI, 0.76–1.03]; P = .110). Detrimental effects of the X/X promoter genotype on disease Compared to the Y/Y promoter genotype, possession of the X/X genotype was associated with a rapid rate of disease progression ( figure 2 G –2 I ). However, compared with the Y/Y genotype, possession of the X/X genotype was not associated with an increased risk of acquiring HIV (OR, 1.12 [95% CI, 0.77–1.64]; P = .544). Effects of MBL2 haplotype pairs Given the aforementioned results, we tested the following 2 hypotheses: (1) because both the A/A and X/X genotypes were each associated with disease-accelerating effects ( figure 2 A and 2 G ) and because the polymorphic promoter X allele is in nearly complete linkage with the wild-type coding A allele, the observed disease accelerating effects of the A/A and X/X genotypes are due mainly to the XA/XA haplotype pairs; and (2) based on the genotype phenotype relationships depicted in figure 2 A and 2 G , MBL2 haplotype pairs that contain the detrimental X/X genotype and the protective A/O genotype will be at the polar ends of the susceptibility spectrum for disease progression rates. To test these hypotheses, we stratified the cohort into 4 MBL2 genotypic groups ( figure 3 A ). The findings shown in figure 3 B support these 2 hypotheses. Thus, compared with possession of the A/O genotype (group 1, figure 3 A ), possession of the XA/XA genotype (group 4, figure 3 A ) was associated with a nearly 2-fold faster rate of disease progression ( figure 3 B ) Independent effects of MBL2 polymorphisms on HIV disease The magnitude of the initial CD4+ T cell loss, steady-state VL, and DTH skin test responses did not differ by MBL2 genotypic group ( figure 3 C –3 E ). Furthermore, among subjects with a high baseline CD4+ T cell count ( figure 3 F ), low steady-state VL ( figure 3 G ), and robust CMI as characterized by higher numbers of positive DTH skin test results ( figure 3 H ), the MBL2 genotypic groups remained predictors of variable rates of disease progression. Notably, as a general rule, the strength of the association between the MBL2 genotypes and the disease progression rates observed in the cohort overall ( figure 3B ) was similar or greater in those subjects with favorable laboratory profiles and DTH responses ( figure 3F–3H ). For example, in the cohort overall, the hazard for progression to death for the XA/XA genotype was 2.29 ( figure 3B ), whereas it was 4.39 (95% CI, 1.84–10.5), 4.64 (95% CI, 1.73–12.5), and 2.79 (95% CI, 1.33–5.85) for those with a CD4+ cell count ?700 cells/mm3, a VL <20,000 copies/mL, and ?3 positive DTH skin test results, respectively ( figure 3 F –3 H ). The aforementioned findings suggested that MBL2 polymorphisms might have independent disease-influencing effects. To assess this possibility further, we determined whether MBL2 genotypes were associated with independent disease-influencing effects after adjustment for parameters that have previously been shown to be independent determinants of disease progression, such as baseline and nadir CD4+ T cell count, steady-state VL, CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk groups, and DTH skin test reactivity [ 5 ]. Table 1 shows the results of a series of nested Cox proportional hazards models in which we adjusted either separately or in unison for these covariates. The findings indicated that the disease-accelerating effects associated with MBL2 genotypic group 4 (XA/XA) were independent of these parameters ( table 1 ; model 14) ( RH = 1.75 [95% CI, 1.00–3.06]; P = .052). Permissive <italic>CCL3L1-CCR5</italic> genetic environment for the effects of the XA/XA genotype However, it was not known whether the independent disease-influencing effects of MBL2 genotypes were distributed evenly across the low, moderate, and high CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk groups or were restricted to a specific CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic background. This was important to evaluate, as the identification of gene-gene interactions and gene modifiers is a principal challenge for the future understanding of the genetics of non-Mendelian diseases [ 42 , 43 ]. In a recent study, we found that membership in a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group ( figure 4A ) was associated with high baseline CD4+ T cell counts, low steady-state VL, better delayed-type hypersensitivity skin test responses, and slower rates of disease progression [ 3 , 5 ]. In the present study, we found that the disease-accelerating effects associated with the XA/XA genotype were evident in laboratory and delayed-type hypersensitivity profiles that we had previously found to be associated with a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group ( figure 3 F –3 H ). This raised the possibility that the disease-influencing effects of MBL2 genotypes might be restricted to subjects who were members of a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group. To test this possibility, we determined the effects of the MBL2 genotypic groups in patients from low, moderate, and high CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk groups ( figure 4 ). Among subjects from a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group, those who also possessed the MBL2 XA/XA genotype had a 5-fold higher risk of progressing rapidly to death, and this risk increased to 9-fold after adjusting for the baseline CD4+ T cell count and steady-state VL ( figure 4 B ). By contrast, a disease-accelerating effect for the MBL2 XA/XA genotype was not evident in subjects from a moderate or high CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group ( figure 4 B ). This suggested that evidence of the disease-influencing effects of MBL2 genotypes may be restricted to a particular CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic background (i.e., a low genetic risk group). Subjects in the WHMC cohort were followed up from the early stages of infection [ 5 ], and the data reported thus far were for all subjects, regardless of seroconversion status. However, the results were consistent even after adjusting for seroconversion status ( table A1 in the appendix , which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal). We next determined the association between the 4 MBL2 genotypic groups and the rate of progression to AIDS-defining opportunistic illnesses. However, considering the aforementioned results ( figure 4 ), the statistical analyses were restricted to subjects who were also members of a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group. In these analyses, the MBL2 genotypic group 1 (i.e., subjects heterozygous for A/O) served as the reference category ( RH = 1). Among the subjects who were members of a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group, when those with the A/O genotype were compared with subjects who had the other MBL2 genotypic groups, we found the following. First, the MBL2 genotypic groups 2 and 3 were associated with an increased risk of progressing rapidly to Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia and HIV-associated dementia, respectively ( table A2 in the appendix , which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal). Second, although the relative hazards for progression to specific AIDS-defining illnesses were higher for subjects with the XA/XA genotype (genotypic group 4), compared with those with all other genotypes, they were highest for progression to Kaposi sarcoma and lymphoma ( table A2 in the appendix , which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal).  Results Frequency distribution of promoter and coding region alleles The distribution pattern of MBL2 alleles in the HIV+ WHMC cohort were consistent with those reported elsewhere [ 22 , 41 ]. The frequencies of the promoter alleles Y (wild type) and X (polymorphic) and the wild-type coding allele A were relatively similar in European American, African American, and Hispanic American subjects ( figure 1 A –1 C ). By contrast, the frequencies of the polymorphic coding alleles B and C differed significantly among subjects of African and European descent ( figure 1 C ). The polymorphic promoter X allele was in nearly complete linkage disequilibrium with the A allele ( figure 1 D ) (?2 = 71.39; P < .001). On the basis of this linkage pattern, 3 common haplotypes were identified, and in accord with the prevailing nomenclature for MBL2 haplotypes [ 13 ], they were designated the YA, YO, and XA haplotypes. The allele frequencies of the coding and noncoding polymorphisms in MBL2 among HIV+ subjects did not deviate significantly from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Advantage of heterozygosity for MBL2 coding variants Compared with homozygosity for the A allele (A/A genotype), heterozygosity for theAallele (i.e., A/O genotype) was associated with a significantly slower rate of disease progression ( figure 2A–2C ). Given the link between MBL deficiency and susceptibility to infectious diseases, we determined whether the A/O genotype afforded protection specifically against AIDS-defining opportunistic infections. In a stepwise logistic regression model, a reduced risk (odds) of developing of Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia and Mycobacterium avium complex was associated the possession of coding region heterozygosity ( figure 2D ). Additionally, the A/O genotype protected against a rapid rate of progression to P. jiroveci pneumonia and M. avium complex ( figure 2 E and 2 F ). To determine the influence of coding variations on risk of acquiring HIV, we compared the genotype frequencies of MBL2 polymorphisms in 1102 HIV-positive subjects and 2213 subjects not infected with HIV. Possession of the A/O genotype was associated with a trend for a 12% reduction in the risk of acquiring HIV (odds ratio [OR], 0.88 [95% CI, 0.76–1.03]; P = .110). Detrimental effects of the X/X promoter genotype on disease Compared to the Y/Y promoter genotype, possession of the X/X genotype was associated with a rapid rate of disease progression ( figure 2 G –2 I ). However, compared with the Y/Y genotype, possession of the X/X genotype was not associated with an increased risk of acquiring HIV (OR, 1.12 [95% CI, 0.77–1.64]; P = .544). Effects of MBL2 haplotype pairs Given the aforementioned results, we tested the following 2 hypotheses: (1) because both the A/A and X/X genotypes were each associated with disease-accelerating effects ( figure 2 A and 2 G ) and because the polymorphic promoter X allele is in nearly complete linkage with the wild-type coding A allele, the observed disease accelerating effects of the A/A and X/X genotypes are due mainly to the XA/XA haplotype pairs; and (2) based on the genotype phenotype relationships depicted in figure 2 A and 2 G , MBL2 haplotype pairs that contain the detrimental X/X genotype and the protective A/O genotype will be at the polar ends of the susceptibility spectrum for disease progression rates. To test these hypotheses, we stratified the cohort into 4 MBL2 genotypic groups ( figure 3 A ). The findings shown in figure 3 B support these 2 hypotheses. Thus, compared with possession of the A/O genotype (group 1, figure 3 A ), possession of the XA/XA genotype (group 4, figure 3 A ) was associated with a nearly 2-fold faster rate of disease progression ( figure 3 B ) Independent effects of MBL2 polymorphisms on HIV disease The magnitude of the initial CD4+ T cell loss, steady-state VL, and DTH skin test responses did not differ by MBL2 genotypic group ( figure 3 C –3 E ). Furthermore, among subjects with a high baseline CD4+ T cell count ( figure 3 F ), low steady-state VL ( figure 3 G ), and robust CMI as characterized by higher numbers of positive DTH skin test results ( figure 3 H ), the MBL2 genotypic groups remained predictors of variable rates of disease progression. Notably, as a general rule, the strength of the association between the MBL2 genotypes and the disease progression rates observed in the cohort overall ( figure 3B ) was similar or greater in those subjects with favorable laboratory profiles and DTH responses ( figure 3F–3H ). For example, in the cohort overall, the hazard for progression to death for the XA/XA genotype was 2.29 ( figure 3B ), whereas it was 4.39 (95% CI, 1.84–10.5), 4.64 (95% CI, 1.73–12.5), and 2.79 (95% CI, 1.33–5.85) for those with a CD4+ cell count ?700 cells/mm3, a VL <20,000 copies/mL, and ?3 positive DTH skin test results, respectively ( figure 3 F –3 H ). The aforementioned findings suggested that MBL2 polymorphisms might have independent disease-influencing effects. To assess this possibility further, we determined whether MBL2 genotypes were associated with independent disease-influencing effects after adjustment for parameters that have previously been shown to be independent determinants of disease progression, such as baseline and nadir CD4+ T cell count, steady-state VL, CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk groups, and DTH skin test reactivity [ 5 ]. Table 1 shows the results of a series of nested Cox proportional hazards models in which we adjusted either separately or in unison for these covariates. The findings indicated that the disease-accelerating effects associated with MBL2 genotypic group 4 (XA/XA) were independent of these parameters ( table 1 ; model 14) ( RH = 1.75 [95% CI, 1.00–3.06]; P = .052). Permissive <italic>CCL3L1-CCR5</italic> genetic environment for the effects of the XA/XA genotype However, it was not known whether the independent disease-influencing effects of MBL2 genotypes were distributed evenly across the low, moderate, and high CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk groups or were restricted to a specific CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic background. This was important to evaluate, as the identification of gene-gene interactions and gene modifiers is a principal challenge for the future understanding of the genetics of non-Mendelian diseases [ 42 , 43 ]. In a recent study, we found that membership in a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group ( figure 4A ) was associated with high baseline CD4+ T cell counts, low steady-state VL, better delayed-type hypersensitivity skin test responses, and slower rates of disease progression [ 3 , 5 ]. In the present study, we found that the disease-accelerating effects associated with the XA/XA genotype were evident in laboratory and delayed-type hypersensitivity profiles that we had previously found to be associated with a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group ( figure 3 F –3 H ). This raised the possibility that the disease-influencing effects of MBL2 genotypes might be restricted to subjects who were members of a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group. To test this possibility, we determined the effects of the MBL2 genotypic groups in patients from low, moderate, and high CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk groups ( figure 4 ). Among subjects from a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group, those who also possessed the MBL2 XA/XA genotype had a 5-fold higher risk of progressing rapidly to death, and this risk increased to 9-fold after adjusting for the baseline CD4+ T cell count and steady-state VL ( figure 4 B ). By contrast, a disease-accelerating effect for the MBL2 XA/XA genotype was not evident in subjects from a moderate or high CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group ( figure 4 B ). This suggested that evidence of the disease-influencing effects of MBL2 genotypes may be restricted to a particular CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic background (i.e., a low genetic risk group). Subjects in the WHMC cohort were followed up from the early stages of infection [ 5 ], and the data reported thus far were for all subjects, regardless of seroconversion status. However, the results were consistent even after adjusting for seroconversion status ( table A1 in the appendix , which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal). We next determined the association between the 4 MBL2 genotypic groups and the rate of progression to AIDS-defining opportunistic illnesses. However, considering the aforementioned results ( figure 4 ), the statistical analyses were restricted to subjects who were also members of a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group. In these analyses, the MBL2 genotypic group 1 (i.e., subjects heterozygous for A/O) served as the reference category ( RH = 1). Among the subjects who were members of a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group, when those with the A/O genotype were compared with subjects who had the other MBL2 genotypic groups, we found the following. First, the MBL2 genotypic groups 2 and 3 were associated with an increased risk of progressing rapidly to Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia and HIV-associated dementia, respectively ( table A2 in the appendix , which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal). Second, although the relative hazards for progression to specific AIDS-defining illnesses were higher for subjects with the XA/XA genotype (genotypic group 4), compared with those with all other genotypes, they were highest for progression to Kaposi sarcoma and lymphoma ( table A2 in the appendix , which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal).  Frequency distribution of promoter and coding region alleles The distribution pattern of MBL2 alleles in the HIV+ WHMC cohort were consistent with those reported elsewhere [ 22 , 41 ]. The frequencies of the promoter alleles Y (wild type) and X (polymorphic) and the wild-type coding allele A were relatively similar in European American, African American, and Hispanic American subjects ( figure 1 A –1 C ). By contrast, the frequencies of the polymorphic coding alleles B and C differed significantly among subjects of African and European descent ( figure 1 C ). The polymorphic promoter X allele was in nearly complete linkage disequilibrium with the A allele ( figure 1 D ) (?2 = 71.39; P < .001). On the basis of this linkage pattern, 3 common haplotypes were identified, and in accord with the prevailing nomenclature for MBL2 haplotypes [ 13 ], they were designated the YA, YO, and XA haplotypes. The allele frequencies of the coding and noncoding polymorphisms in MBL2 among HIV+ subjects did not deviate significantly from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.  Frequency distribution of promoter and coding region alleles The distribution pattern of MBL2 alleles in the HIV+ WHMC cohort were consistent with those reported elsewhere [ 22 , 41 ]. The frequencies of the promoter alleles Y (wild type) and X (polymorphic) and the wild-type coding allele A were relatively similar in European American, African American, and Hispanic American subjects ( figure 1 A –1 C ). By contrast, the frequencies of the polymorphic coding alleles B and C differed significantly among subjects of African and European descent ( figure 1 C ). The polymorphic promoter X allele was in nearly complete linkage disequilibrium with the A allele ( figure 1 D ) (?2 = 71.39; P < .001). On the basis of this linkage pattern, 3 common haplotypes were identified, and in accord with the prevailing nomenclature for MBL2 haplotypes [ 13 ], they were designated the YA, YO, and XA haplotypes. The allele frequencies of the coding and noncoding polymorphisms in MBL2 among HIV+ subjects did not deviate significantly from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.  Advantage of heterozygosity for MBL2 coding variants Compared with homozygosity for the A allele (A/A genotype), heterozygosity for theAallele (i.e., A/O genotype) was associated with a significantly slower rate of disease progression ( figure 2A–2C ). Given the link between MBL deficiency and susceptibility to infectious diseases, we determined whether the A/O genotype afforded protection specifically against AIDS-defining opportunistic infections. In a stepwise logistic regression model, a reduced risk (odds) of developing of Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia and Mycobacterium avium complex was associated the possession of coding region heterozygosity ( figure 2D ). Additionally, the A/O genotype protected against a rapid rate of progression to P. jiroveci pneumonia and M. avium complex ( figure 2 E and 2 F ). To determine the influence of coding variations on risk of acquiring HIV, we compared the genotype frequencies of MBL2 polymorphisms in 1102 HIV-positive subjects and 2213 subjects not infected with HIV. Possession of the A/O genotype was associated with a trend for a 12% reduction in the risk of acquiring HIV (odds ratio [OR], 0.88 [95% CI, 0.76–1.03]; P = .110).  Advantage of heterozygosity for MBL2 coding variants Compared with homozygosity for the A allele (A/A genotype), heterozygosity for theAallele (i.e., A/O genotype) was associated with a significantly slower rate of disease progression ( figure 2A–2C ). Given the link between MBL deficiency and susceptibility to infectious diseases, we determined whether the A/O genotype afforded protection specifically against AIDS-defining opportunistic infections. In a stepwise logistic regression model, a reduced risk (odds) of developing of Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia and Mycobacterium avium complex was associated the possession of coding region heterozygosity ( figure 2D ). Additionally, the A/O genotype protected against a rapid rate of progression to P. jiroveci pneumonia and M. avium complex ( figure 2 E and 2 F ). To determine the influence of coding variations on risk of acquiring HIV, we compared the genotype frequencies of MBL2 polymorphisms in 1102 HIV-positive subjects and 2213 subjects not infected with HIV. Possession of the A/O genotype was associated with a trend for a 12% reduction in the risk of acquiring HIV (odds ratio [OR], 0.88 [95% CI, 0.76–1.03]; P = .110).  Detrimental effects of the X/X promoter genotype on disease Compared to the Y/Y promoter genotype, possession of the X/X genotype was associated with a rapid rate of disease progression ( figure 2 G –2 I ). However, compared with the Y/Y genotype, possession of the X/X genotype was not associated with an increased risk of acquiring HIV (OR, 1.12 [95% CI, 0.77–1.64]; P = .544).  Detrimental effects of the X/X promoter genotype on disease Compared to the Y/Y promoter genotype, possession of the X/X genotype was associated with a rapid rate of disease progression ( figure 2 G –2 I ). However, compared with the Y/Y genotype, possession of the X/X genotype was not associated with an increased risk of acquiring HIV (OR, 1.12 [95% CI, 0.77–1.64]; P = .544).  Effects of MBL2 haplotype pairs Given the aforementioned results, we tested the following 2 hypotheses: (1) because both the A/A and X/X genotypes were each associated with disease-accelerating effects ( figure 2 A and 2 G ) and because the polymorphic promoter X allele is in nearly complete linkage with the wild-type coding A allele, the observed disease accelerating effects of the A/A and X/X genotypes are due mainly to the XA/XA haplotype pairs; and (2) based on the genotype phenotype relationships depicted in figure 2 A and 2 G , MBL2 haplotype pairs that contain the detrimental X/X genotype and the protective A/O genotype will be at the polar ends of the susceptibility spectrum for disease progression rates. To test these hypotheses, we stratified the cohort into 4 MBL2 genotypic groups ( figure 3 A ). The findings shown in figure 3 B support these 2 hypotheses. Thus, compared with possession of the A/O genotype (group 1, figure 3 A ), possession of the XA/XA genotype (group 4, figure 3 A ) was associated with a nearly 2-fold faster rate of disease progression ( figure 3 B )  Effects of MBL2 haplotype pairs Given the aforementioned results, we tested the following 2 hypotheses: (1) because both the A/A and X/X genotypes were each associated with disease-accelerating effects ( figure 2 A and 2 G ) and because the polymorphic promoter X allele is in nearly complete linkage with the wild-type coding A allele, the observed disease accelerating effects of the A/A and X/X genotypes are due mainly to the XA/XA haplotype pairs; and (2) based on the genotype phenotype relationships depicted in figure 2 A and 2 G , MBL2 haplotype pairs that contain the detrimental X/X genotype and the protective A/O genotype will be at the polar ends of the susceptibility spectrum for disease progression rates. To test these hypotheses, we stratified the cohort into 4 MBL2 genotypic groups ( figure 3 A ). The findings shown in figure 3 B support these 2 hypotheses. Thus, compared with possession of the A/O genotype (group 1, figure 3 A ), possession of the XA/XA genotype (group 4, figure 3 A ) was associated with a nearly 2-fold faster rate of disease progression ( figure 3 B )  Independent effects of MBL2 polymorphisms on HIV disease The magnitude of the initial CD4+ T cell loss, steady-state VL, and DTH skin test responses did not differ by MBL2 genotypic group ( figure 3 C –3 E ). Furthermore, among subjects with a high baseline CD4+ T cell count ( figure 3 F ), low steady-state VL ( figure 3 G ), and robust CMI as characterized by higher numbers of positive DTH skin test results ( figure 3 H ), the MBL2 genotypic groups remained predictors of variable rates of disease progression. Notably, as a general rule, the strength of the association between the MBL2 genotypes and the disease progression rates observed in the cohort overall ( figure 3B ) was similar or greater in those subjects with favorable laboratory profiles and DTH responses ( figure 3F–3H ). For example, in the cohort overall, the hazard for progression to death for the XA/XA genotype was 2.29 ( figure 3B ), whereas it was 4.39 (95% CI, 1.84–10.5), 4.64 (95% CI, 1.73–12.5), and 2.79 (95% CI, 1.33–5.85) for those with a CD4+ cell count ?700 cells/mm3, a VL <20,000 copies/mL, and ?3 positive DTH skin test results, respectively ( figure 3 F –3 H ). The aforementioned findings suggested that MBL2 polymorphisms might have independent disease-influencing effects. To assess this possibility further, we determined whether MBL2 genotypes were associated with independent disease-influencing effects after adjustment for parameters that have previously been shown to be independent determinants of disease progression, such as baseline and nadir CD4+ T cell count, steady-state VL, CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk groups, and DTH skin test reactivity [ 5 ]. Table 1 shows the results of a series of nested Cox proportional hazards models in which we adjusted either separately or in unison for these covariates. The findings indicated that the disease-accelerating effects associated with MBL2 genotypic group 4 (XA/XA) were independent of these parameters ( table 1 ; model 14) ( RH = 1.75 [95% CI, 1.00–3.06]; P = .052).  Independent effects of MBL2 polymorphisms on HIV disease The magnitude of the initial CD4+ T cell loss, steady-state VL, and DTH skin test responses did not differ by MBL2 genotypic group ( figure 3 C –3 E ). Furthermore, among subjects with a high baseline CD4+ T cell count ( figure 3 F ), low steady-state VL ( figure 3 G ), and robust CMI as characterized by higher numbers of positive DTH skin test results ( figure 3 H ), the MBL2 genotypic groups remained predictors of variable rates of disease progression. Notably, as a general rule, the strength of the association between the MBL2 genotypes and the disease progression rates observed in the cohort overall ( figure 3B ) was similar or greater in those subjects with favorable laboratory profiles and DTH responses ( figure 3F–3H ). For example, in the cohort overall, the hazard for progression to death for the XA/XA genotype was 2.29 ( figure 3B ), whereas it was 4.39 (95% CI, 1.84–10.5), 4.64 (95% CI, 1.73–12.5), and 2.79 (95% CI, 1.33–5.85) for those with a CD4+ cell count ?700 cells/mm3, a VL <20,000 copies/mL, and ?3 positive DTH skin test results, respectively ( figure 3 F –3 H ). The aforementioned findings suggested that MBL2 polymorphisms might have independent disease-influencing effects. To assess this possibility further, we determined whether MBL2 genotypes were associated with independent disease-influencing effects after adjustment for parameters that have previously been shown to be independent determinants of disease progression, such as baseline and nadir CD4+ T cell count, steady-state VL, CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk groups, and DTH skin test reactivity [ 5 ]. Table 1 shows the results of a series of nested Cox proportional hazards models in which we adjusted either separately or in unison for these covariates. The findings indicated that the disease-accelerating effects associated with MBL2 genotypic group 4 (XA/XA) were independent of these parameters ( table 1 ; model 14) ( RH = 1.75 [95% CI, 1.00–3.06]; P = .052).  Permissive <italic>CCL3L1-CCR5</italic> genetic environment for the effects of the XA/XA genotype However, it was not known whether the independent disease-influencing effects of MBL2 genotypes were distributed evenly across the low, moderate, and high CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk groups or were restricted to a specific CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic background. This was important to evaluate, as the identification of gene-gene interactions and gene modifiers is a principal challenge for the future understanding of the genetics of non-Mendelian diseases [ 42 , 43 ]. In a recent study, we found that membership in a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group ( figure 4A ) was associated with high baseline CD4+ T cell counts, low steady-state VL, better delayed-type hypersensitivity skin test responses, and slower rates of disease progression [ 3 , 5 ]. In the present study, we found that the disease-accelerating effects associated with the XA/XA genotype were evident in laboratory and delayed-type hypersensitivity profiles that we had previously found to be associated with a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group ( figure 3 F –3 H ). This raised the possibility that the disease-influencing effects of MBL2 genotypes might be restricted to subjects who were members of a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group. To test this possibility, we determined the effects of the MBL2 genotypic groups in patients from low, moderate, and high CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk groups ( figure 4 ). Among subjects from a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group, those who also possessed the MBL2 XA/XA genotype had a 5-fold higher risk of progressing rapidly to death, and this risk increased to 9-fold after adjusting for the baseline CD4+ T cell count and steady-state VL ( figure 4 B ). By contrast, a disease-accelerating effect for the MBL2 XA/XA genotype was not evident in subjects from a moderate or high CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group ( figure 4 B ). This suggested that evidence of the disease-influencing effects of MBL2 genotypes may be restricted to a particular CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic background (i.e., a low genetic risk group). Subjects in the WHMC cohort were followed up from the early stages of infection [ 5 ], and the data reported thus far were for all subjects, regardless of seroconversion status. However, the results were consistent even after adjusting for seroconversion status ( table A1 in the appendix , which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal). We next determined the association between the 4 MBL2 genotypic groups and the rate of progression to AIDS-defining opportunistic illnesses. However, considering the aforementioned results ( figure 4 ), the statistical analyses were restricted to subjects who were also members of a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group. In these analyses, the MBL2 genotypic group 1 (i.e., subjects heterozygous for A/O) served as the reference category ( RH = 1). Among the subjects who were members of a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group, when those with the A/O genotype were compared with subjects who had the other MBL2 genotypic groups, we found the following. First, the MBL2 genotypic groups 2 and 3 were associated with an increased risk of progressing rapidly to Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia and HIV-associated dementia, respectively ( table A2 in the appendix , which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal). Second, although the relative hazards for progression to specific AIDS-defining illnesses were higher for subjects with the XA/XA genotype (genotypic group 4), compared with those with all other genotypes, they were highest for progression to Kaposi sarcoma and lymphoma ( table A2 in the appendix , which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal).  Permissive <italic>CCL3L1-CCR5</italic> genetic environment for the effects of the XA/XA genotype However, it was not known whether the independent disease-influencing effects of MBL2 genotypes were distributed evenly across the low, moderate, and high CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk groups or were restricted to a specific CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic background. This was important to evaluate, as the identification of gene-gene interactions and gene modifiers is a principal challenge for the future understanding of the genetics of non-Mendelian diseases [ 42 , 43 ]. In a recent study, we found that membership in a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group ( figure 4A ) was associated with high baseline CD4+ T cell counts, low steady-state VL, better delayed-type hypersensitivity skin test responses, and slower rates of disease progression [ 3 , 5 ]. In the present study, we found that the disease-accelerating effects associated with the XA/XA genotype were evident in laboratory and delayed-type hypersensitivity profiles that we had previously found to be associated with a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group ( figure 3 F –3 H ). This raised the possibility that the disease-influencing effects of MBL2 genotypes might be restricted to subjects who were members of a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group. To test this possibility, we determined the effects of the MBL2 genotypic groups in patients from low, moderate, and high CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk groups ( figure 4 ). Among subjects from a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group, those who also possessed the MBL2 XA/XA genotype had a 5-fold higher risk of progressing rapidly to death, and this risk increased to 9-fold after adjusting for the baseline CD4+ T cell count and steady-state VL ( figure 4 B ). By contrast, a disease-accelerating effect for the MBL2 XA/XA genotype was not evident in subjects from a moderate or high CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group ( figure 4 B ). This suggested that evidence of the disease-influencing effects of MBL2 genotypes may be restricted to a particular CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic background (i.e., a low genetic risk group). Subjects in the WHMC cohort were followed up from the early stages of infection [ 5 ], and the data reported thus far were for all subjects, regardless of seroconversion status. However, the results were consistent even after adjusting for seroconversion status ( table A1 in the appendix , which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal). We next determined the association between the 4 MBL2 genotypic groups and the rate of progression to AIDS-defining opportunistic illnesses. However, considering the aforementioned results ( figure 4 ), the statistical analyses were restricted to subjects who were also members of a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group. In these analyses, the MBL2 genotypic group 1 (i.e., subjects heterozygous for A/O) served as the reference category ( RH = 1). Among the subjects who were members of a low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group, when those with the A/O genotype were compared with subjects who had the other MBL2 genotypic groups, we found the following. First, the MBL2 genotypic groups 2 and 3 were associated with an increased risk of progressing rapidly to Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia and HIV-associated dementia, respectively ( table A2 in the appendix , which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal). Second, although the relative hazards for progression to specific AIDS-defining illnesses were higher for subjects with the XA/XA genotype (genotypic group 4), compared with those with all other genotypes, they were highest for progression to Kaposi sarcoma and lymphoma ( table A2 in the appendix , which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal).  Discussion In the present study, we found that in the context of HIV infection, heterozygosity for polymorphisms that alter the structural integrity of MBL (i.e., the A/O genotype) is associated with disease-retarding effects ( figure 2 A –2 C ), whereas homozygosity for the promoter X allele—which results in a structurally intact protein but markedly reduced levels of MBL—is associated with disease-accelerating effects ( figure 2 G –2 I ). These results indicate an important role for MBL2 in the pathogenesis of HIV disease and show that it is not only levels of MBL per se, but also the structural integrity of the MBL protein, that are critical determinants of the phenotypic outcomes associated with variations in MBL2 . These results also provide support for the hypothesis that heterozygosity for variations in the coding sequence of MBL might provide an advantage against infectious diseases [ 15 – 20 , 25 ]. The MBL2 genotype-phenotype associations detected offer novel insights into the mechanisms that might mediate HIV disease. We found that variations in MBL2 did not influence the classical determinants of HIV pathogenesis ( figure 3 C –3 E ) and that the effects of these variants on HIV disease were evident among those who had immunologic profiles (high CD4+ count and increased DTH reactivity), virologic profiles (low steady-state VL) and genetic profiles (low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group) that favored a slow rate of disease progression. These findings indicated that MBL2 genotypes might affect HIV pathogenesis by impacting on distinct pathways that contribute directly to the pathogenesis of specific AIDS-defining illnesses rather than influencing the level of viral replication or CMI as assessed by DTH skin test reactivity. This possibility was affirmed by the fact that the effects associated with MBL2 genotypes remained after adjusting for other established independent determinants of disease progression ( table 1 ). The findings shown in figure 4 illustrate 2 points. First, it is important to consider the role of gene-gene interactions in the phenotypic effects associated with genetic variants. Second, the use of only AIDS or death as an end point might mask the effects of genotypes on specific AIDS-defining illnesses. Illustrating the first point, the effects of the XA/XA genotype on the rate of progression to death were most prominent in subjects who belonged to the low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group. This indicated that specific CCL3L1-CCR5 genotypes provided a permissive genetic environment in which the variants of another gene system, such as MBL2 , can fully express their phenotypic effects. Illustrating the second point, even though membership in MBL2 genotypic group 2 or 3 did not influence the overall rate of HIV disease progression among subjects who belonged to the low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group, these genotypes were associated with more rapid rate of progression to specific AIDS-defining illnesses. The latter findings not only emphasize the range and complexity of the genotype-phenotype relationships but also the importance of accounting for the linkage pattern between polymorphisms in the promoter and coding regions of MBL2 . How might one explain these rather complex effects that MBL has on HIV-AIDS pathogenesis? Because MBL can act both by complement activation and direct opsonization, its net effect in HIV disease is likely to be the result of interplay between these 2 processes. We conjecture that the effect of reduced levels of structurally-impaired versus intact MBL on specific infectious versus noninfectious AIDS-defining illnesses might contribute to the genotype-phenotype relationships detected in this study (discussed in the “Supplementary Note” section of the appendix , which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal). Of interest, recent in vivo studies point to a role for MBL-dependent pathways in malignancy [ 44 – 46 ], and whether this underlies the association observed between the XA/XA genotype and lymphoma and Kaposi sarcoma will need validation in other large cohorts that involve subjects with these diseases. However, the failure to detect an association between MBL2 variations and viral load suggests that the direct effects of MBL on HIV replication might be minimal. Our results differ from those of previous studies that have also examined the association between variations in MBL2 and HIV disease progression [ 14 , 31 , 32 , 47 ]. There could be 2 reasons for this. First, these prior studies were limited by moderate or small sample sizes [ 14 , 31 , 32 , 47 ]. Second, these studies did not account for the confounding from promoter polymorphisms. One limitation of the present study is that we only used the polymorphism at the ?221 position in the promoter region (X allele). A polymorphism at position ?550 has also been previously studied [ 48 ]. However, with respect to these additional polymorphisms, the following points are important to note: the polymorphism at the ?221 position has a more dominant effect on the circulating levels of MBL [ 13 ], and it occurs only when there is a mutation at the ?550 position. The polymorphic allele at ?550 is designated the “L allele” [ 13 ], and these linkage patterns imply that the XA/XA genotype represents the LXA/LXA genotype. Consequently, the genotype-phenotype relationships associated with the XA/XA genotype studied here are also likely to capture the genotype-phenotype relationships associated with the LXA/LXA genotype. Taken together, our findings provide novel insights into the genetic basis for intersubject differences in the rate of HIV disease progression, because they illustrate the importance of the immune response arm that is linked to MBL during HIV pathogenesis. The findings indicate that variations in the gene that encodes MBL affect HIV pathogenesis without directly impacting previously validated determinants of disease progression, including the extent of viral replication, and their effects might be targeted to specific AIDS-defining illnesses.  Discussion In the present study, we found that in the context of HIV infection, heterozygosity for polymorphisms that alter the structural integrity of MBL (i.e., the A/O genotype) is associated with disease-retarding effects ( figure 2 A –2 C ), whereas homozygosity for the promoter X allele—which results in a structurally intact protein but markedly reduced levels of MBL—is associated with disease-accelerating effects ( figure 2 G –2 I ). These results indicate an important role for MBL2 in the pathogenesis of HIV disease and show that it is not only levels of MBL per se, but also the structural integrity of the MBL protein, that are critical determinants of the phenotypic outcomes associated with variations in MBL2 . These results also provide support for the hypothesis that heterozygosity for variations in the coding sequence of MBL might provide an advantage against infectious diseases [ 15 – 20 , 25 ]. The MBL2 genotype-phenotype associations detected offer novel insights into the mechanisms that might mediate HIV disease. We found that variations in MBL2 did not influence the classical determinants of HIV pathogenesis ( figure 3 C –3 E ) and that the effects of these variants on HIV disease were evident among those who had immunologic profiles (high CD4+ count and increased DTH reactivity), virologic profiles (low steady-state VL) and genetic profiles (low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group) that favored a slow rate of disease progression. These findings indicated that MBL2 genotypes might affect HIV pathogenesis by impacting on distinct pathways that contribute directly to the pathogenesis of specific AIDS-defining illnesses rather than influencing the level of viral replication or CMI as assessed by DTH skin test reactivity. This possibility was affirmed by the fact that the effects associated with MBL2 genotypes remained after adjusting for other established independent determinants of disease progression ( table 1 ). The findings shown in figure 4 illustrate 2 points. First, it is important to consider the role of gene-gene interactions in the phenotypic effects associated with genetic variants. Second, the use of only AIDS or death as an end point might mask the effects of genotypes on specific AIDS-defining illnesses. Illustrating the first point, the effects of the XA/XA genotype on the rate of progression to death were most prominent in subjects who belonged to the low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group. This indicated that specific CCL3L1-CCR5 genotypes provided a permissive genetic environment in which the variants of another gene system, such as MBL2 , can fully express their phenotypic effects. Illustrating the second point, even though membership in MBL2 genotypic group 2 or 3 did not influence the overall rate of HIV disease progression among subjects who belonged to the low CCL3L1-CCR5 genetic risk group, these genotypes were associated with more rapid rate of progression to specific AIDS-defining illnesses. The latter findings not only emphasize the range and complexity of the genotype-phenotype relationships but also the importance of accounting for the linkage pattern between polymorphisms in the promoter and coding regions of MBL2 . How might one explain these rather complex effects that MBL has on HIV-AIDS pathogenesis? Because MBL can act both by complement activation and direct opsonization, its net effect in HIV disease is likely to be the result of interplay between these 2 processes. We conjecture that the effect of reduced levels of structurally-impaired versus intact MBL on specific infectious versus noninfectious AIDS-defining illnesses might contribute to the genotype-phenotype relationships detected in this study (discussed in the “Supplementary Note” section of the appendix , which is available only in the electronic edition of the journal). Of interest, recent in vivo studies point to a role for MBL-dependent pathways in malignancy [ 44 – 46 ], and whether this underlies the association observed between the XA/XA genotype and lymphoma and Kaposi sarcoma will need validation in other large cohorts that involve subjects with these diseases. However, the failure to detect an association between MBL2 variations and viral load suggests that the direct effects of MBL on HIV replication might be minimal. Our results differ from those of previous studies that have also examined the association between variations in MBL2 and HIV disease progression [ 14 , 31 , 32 , 47 ]. There could be 2 reasons for this. First, these prior studies were limited by moderate or small sample sizes [ 14 , 31 , 32 , 47 ]. Second, these studies did not account for the confounding from promoter polymorphisms. One limitation of the present study is that we only used the polymorphism at the ?221 position in the promoter region (X allele). A polymorphism at position ?550 has also been previously studied [ 48 ]. However, with respect to these additional polymorphisms, the following points are important to note: the polymorphism at the ?221 position has a more dominant effect on the circulating levels of MBL [ 13 ], and it occurs only when there is a mutation at the ?550 position. The polymorphic allele at ?550 is designated the “L allele” [ 13 ], and these linkage patterns imply that the XA/XA genotype represents the LXA/LXA genotype. Consequently, the genotype-phenotype relationships associated with the XA/XA genotype studied here are also likely to capture the genotype-phenotype relationships associated with the LXA/LXA genotype. Taken together, our findings provide novel insights into the genetic basis for intersubject differences in the rate of HIV disease progression, because they illustrate the importance of the immune response arm that is linked to MBL during HIV pathogenesis. The findings indicate that variations in the gene that encodes MBL affect HIV pathogenesis without directly impacting previously validated determinants of disease progression, including the extent of viral replication, and their effects might be targeted to specific AIDS-defining illnesses.  Supplementary Material Appendix  Supplementary Material Appendix 