Plasticity and Injury in the Developing Brain The child’s brain is more malleable or plastic than that of adults and this accounts for the ability of children to learn new skills quickly or recovery from brain injuries. Several mechanisms contribute to this ability including overproduction and deletion of neurons and synapses, and activity-dependent stabilization of synapses. The molecular mechanisms for activity dependent synaptic plasticity are being discovered and this is leading to a better understanding of the pathogenesis of several disorders including neurofibromatosis, tuberous sclerosis, Fragile X syndrome and Rett syndrome. Many of the same pathways involved in synaptic plasticity, such as glutamate-mediated excitation, can also mediate brain injury when the brain is exposed to stress or energy failure such as hypoxia-ischemia. Recent evidence indicates that cell death pathways activated by injury differ between males and females. This new information about the molecular pathways involved in brain plasticity and injury are leading to insights that will provide better therapies for pediatric neurological disorders.  Conclusion A major difference between the nervous system in infants and children compared to adults is the capacity for greater plasticity in the developing brain. The molecular signaling pathways involved in brain plasticity are being discovered at an increasing rate, and it is clear that they are disrupted in some common pediatric disorders. These discoveries may lead to better treatments for currently untreatable disorders such as fragile X syndrome, neurofibromatosis and tuberous sclerosis. Brain damage in response to hypoxia-ischemia and other insults often involves overstimulation of these same plasticity mechanisms. Recent evidence indicates that cell death pathways are strongly influenced by genetic sex. A better understanding of molecular pathways involved in plasticity and injury will lead to progress in pediatric neurology.  Figures and Table Figure 1 Diagram of a neuronal dendrite and spine. Excitatory synapses that use glutamate form synapses on dendritic spins but inhibitory neurons form synapses on the body of the dendrite. Spines change shape in response to excitatory activity, mature spines are shorter than immature spines, which are receiving less excitatory input. PSD = postsynaptic density; BDNF= brain derived neurotrophic factor. Figure 2 Diagram of the three major types of excitatory neurotransmitter receptors for glutamate. NMDA receptors are activated when glutamate (glu) and glycine (gly) both occupy receptor sites and the membrane depolarizes, allowing magnesium (Mg++) to leave the channel. Relief of the magnesium block allows calcium and sodium to pass through the channel. Most fast excitatory activity in the brain is mediated by AMPA receptor channels, which flux mostly sodium, but channels lacking the GluR2 subunit also pass calcium. In contrast to NMDA and AMPA receptors, metabotropic glutamate receptors are not linked to ion channels but to G proteins and second messenger systems such as phosphoinositide turnover that regulate intracellular calcium levels and protein translation. Figure 3 Long term potentiation (LTP) is a form of synaptic plasticity that increases the strength of synapses, and it is a physiological correlate of memory. NMDA receptor activation is necessary for LTP, and it stimulates insertion of more AMPA receptors into the synaptic membrane. Activation of NMDA receptors also stimulates the production of brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) which also enhances insertion of NMDA receptors. Stimulation of mGluR5 receptors regulates protein translation and antagonizes LTP by stimulating trafficking of AMPA receptors away from the synapse into the cytoplasm. This increases long term depression (LTD). Figure 4 The gene for Fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP) is mutated in Fragile X syndrome. The normal function of FMRP is to antagonize the effects of stimulation of mGluR5 receptors which causes internalization of AMPA receptors and long term depression (LTD). A mutation in the gene for FMRP therefore leaves mGluR5 action unopposed, causing AMPA receptors to become internalized and depressing synaptic function. Figure 5 Glutamate excitotoxicity results from over-activity of glutamate ionotropic receptors. Injury to neurons is caused by over-stimulation of NMDA receptors which flood the cytoplasm with calcium. AMPA receptor stimulation is also necessary to depolarize the neuronal membrane, allowing NMDA channels to open. Damage to pre-oligodendrocytes in the premature brain is caused predominantly by activation of AMPA receptors which lack GluR2 subunits and are permeable to calcium at that stage in development. Figure 6 Cascade of events that follows a hypoxic-ischemic insult and over-stimulation of glutamate receptors in the brain. This cascade evolves over days to weeks and involves signaling to the mitochondria and nucleus. Very severe injury to the mitochondria leads to complete energy failure and destruction of cell membranes associated with necrosis. Milder insults activate apoptosis, which is much more prominent in infants than in adults. In addition to an extrinsic FAS death pathway (not shown), caspase-dependent and non-caspase dependent pathways activate apoptosis in the nucleus. Work in rodents indicates that these pathways are sexually dimorphic with males preferring the PARP-AIF non-caspase pathway more than females. This pathway is also more easily activated by glutamate receptor stimulation. In contrast, the cytochrome C- caspase 3 pathway is more active in females. ROS = reactive oxygen species; AIF = apoptosis inducing factor; CYTO-C = cytochrome C; PARP = Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase. Table 1 Potential Interventions for Neuroprotection Against Brain Injury Hypothermia NMDA, AMPA glutamate receptor antagonists Nitric Oxide Synthase Inhibitors Caspase Inhibitors Acetylcysteine PARP Inhibitors Erythropoietin Growth Factors (NGF, BDNF) Mitochondrial ATP-sensitive K+ Activators 