Mycobacterium tuberculosis lipoprotein-induced association of TLR2 with protein kinase C ? in lipid rafts contributes to reactive oxygen species-dependent inflammatory signalling in macrophages Summary Membrane lipid rafts are enriched in cholesterol and play an important role as signalling platforms. However, the roles of lipid rafts and associated signalling molecules in the innate immune responses to mycobacteria remain unknown. Here we show that stimulation with Mycobacterium tuberculosis 19 kDa lipoprotein, a TLR2/1 agonist, results in translocation of TLR2 to lipid rafts, coalescence of lipid rafts and production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) that drive pro-inflammatory responses. Disruption of lipid raft organization markedly reduced lipoprotein-induced ROS and inflammatory responses. Remarkably, the atypical protein kinase C (PKC) ? was specifically recruited into detergent-resistant membrane fractions and associated with TLR2. PKC? activity was critical for lipoprotein-dependent ROS generation, raft coalescence and the pro-inflammatory responses by macrophages. Moreover, lipid raft organization was required for 19 kDa mediated PKC? activation. These results demonstrate that TLR2 trafficking and raft coalescence play an essential role for the initiation of lipoprotein-induced innate immune responses via TLR2 and ROS signalling. In addition, PKC? targets to lipid rafts and may act as a critical adaptor molecule to regulate lipid raft dynamics during TLR2 signalling.  Introduction The innate immune system is the first line of host defence against mycobacteria, and many of its functions are mediated by phagocytes including macrophages and dendritic cells. Innate recognition of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) and its components involves pattern-recognition receptors, including the Toll-like receptors (TLRs) ( van Crevel et al ., 2002 ), which play an essential role in the induction of innate immune responses during mycobacterial infection. TLRs 2, 4 and 9 have been implicated in host interactions with Mtb ( Jo et al ., 2007 ). In particular, TLR2 appears to be critical for sensing mycobacteria and is classically recognized as a principal inducer of pro-inflammatory signals in Mtb infection through the production of tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-? ( Underhill et al ., 1999 ; Jo et al ., 2007 ). In addition, TLR2 stimulation with mycoplasmal lipoproteins or staphylococcal peptidoglycans enhances reactive oxygen species (ROS) accompanied with sustained phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), suggesting an indispensable role of ROS in TLR2 signalling pathways ( Into and Shibata, 2005 ). Our recent study has also shown that tuberculin purified protein derivative (PPD) activates TLR2-ROS signalling pathways responsible for the induction of pro-inflammatory responses during Mtb infection ( Yang et al ., 2008 ). Spatial concentration of the receptors for interaction with ligands and effectors on the membrane can allow rapid and efficient coupling of activated receptors to the intracellular signalling system ( Simons and Toomre, 2000 ). Lipid-rich microdomains (lipid rafts) of the cell membrane play a key role in lymphocyte activation by accumulating essential signalling molecules ( Dykstra et al ., 2003 ; Manes et al ., 2003 ), and lipid rafts are also required for innate immune responses ( Manes et al ., 2003 ). Previous studies show that TLR2 or TLR4 is recruited to membrane rafts following stimulation with ligands or bacteria ( Triantafilou et al ., 2002 ; Soong et al ., 2004 ). Membrane lipid rafts are enriched in cholesterol, which plays an important role in maintaining them in a liquid-ordered phase, and serve as signalling platforms ( Cherukuri et al ., 2001 ; Triantafilou et al ., 2002 ). A glycosyl-phospatidyl-inositol (GPI)-anchored protein, CD14, is found in lipid raft micro-domains ( Pfeiffer et al ., 2001 ). In addition, TLRs and integrins are recruited there upon activation with appropriate ligands ( Pfeiffer et al ., 2001 ; Triantafilou et al ., 2002 ). It was previously shown that cytokine induction by TLR2 agonist Porphyromonas gingivalis LPS or fimbriae required lipid raft function, suggesting that cellular activation by P. gingivalis LPS or fimbriae depends on functional lipid rafts ( Hajishengallis et al ., 2006 ). Recent findings demonstrate that raft membrane domains are involved in immunoreceptor signal transduction through raft-associated NADPH oxidase, resulting in ROS formation ( Wang et al ., 2007 ). However, the precise mechanisms remain unknown with regard to raft functions in TLR2 signalling and production of ROS during mycobacterial infection. Previous studies have documented that the mycobacterial TLR2-mediated pro-inflammatory signalling pathway is controlled by potent regulators that can operate either upstream or downstream activation of MAPKs ( Jo et al ., 2007 ). Among them, protein kinase C (PKC) activity seems to play a critical role. Indeed, atypical PKC? plays an essential role in the upstream regulation of ERK1/2 activation and TNF-? expression in response to Mtb in monocytes/macrophages, but virulent mycobacteria limits PKC? activities ( Yang et al ., 2007 ). PKC?, as a PKC?-interacting kinase, was found to colocalize in plasma membrane lipid raft microdomains of activated Jurkat cells, thus supporting a critical functional role of atypical PKC? downstream of the PKC? isotype in T-cell responses leading to nuclear factor (NF)-?B activation ( Gruber et al ., 2008 ). Even though atypical PKC? is involved in TLR2-dependent signalling in mycobacterial infection, its physiological significance in raft-associated ROS formation and associated signalling cascades is not yet clear. Mycobacterial 19 kDa lipoprotein, LpqH ( Rv3763 ), is a mycobacterial product that is recognized by TLR1/TLR2 to induce cell activation and mycobacterial killing ( Aliprantis et al ., 1999 ; Thoma et al ., 2001 ). Here we investigated the role of lipid rafts and associated signalling mechanisms in TLR2/ROS signalling using the 19 kDa lipoprotein. The recognition of 19 kDa lipoprotein by macrophages led to pronounced pro-inflammatory responses via TLR2/ROS. When stimulated, TLR2 was recruited to lipid rafts of lipoprotein-stimulated cells as demonstrated by its colocalization with ganglioside GM1. Disruption of lipid raft organization by pre-treatment with methyl-?-cyclodextrin (M?CD) significantly inhibited lipoprotein-induced ROS formation. Furthermore, the atypical PKC? was specifically recruited into detergent-resistant lipid raft fractions of plasma membrane, and associated with TLR2. Of importance, inhibition of PKC? was associated with significant attenuation in the raft coalescence, ROS generation and the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines by macrophages.  Experimental procedures Mice and cells Wild-type C57BL/6 mice were purchased from KOATECH (Pyungtek, Korea). Mice with a targeted deletion in the TLR2 gene and Nox2 gene were kindly provided by Dr S. Akira (Osaka University, Osaka, Japan) and Dr Y.S. Bae (Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Korea) respectively. C3H/HeJ and C3H/HeN mice were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME), and maintained under standard laboratory conditions on a 12 h light/dark cycle, with free access to food and water. All animal procedures were conducted in accordance with the guidelines of the institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, Chungnam National University. BMDMs were differentiated for 5–7 days in M-CSF-containing media, as described previously ( Yang et al ., 2007 ). Mouse macrophage cell line, RAW 264.7 (ATCC TIB-71) was maintained in complete medium [DMEM (Gibco-BRL) with 10% FBS (Gibco-BRL), sodium pyruvate, non-essential amino acids, penicillin G (100 IU ml?1) and streptomycin (100 ?g ml?1)]. Human monocytic cell line, THP-1 (ATCC TIB-202), was grown in RPMI 1640/glutamax supplemented with 10% FBS. The cells were treated with 20 nM PMA (Sigma-Aldrich) for 24 h to induce differentiation into macrophage-like cells and washed with PBS three times. Preparation of the 19 kDa lipoprotein and STF from Mtb The 19 kDa lipoprotein was purified from Mtb H37Ra as described previously ( Pai et al ., 2003 ) with modifications ( Gehring et al ., 2004 ). STF was prepared as previously described ( Jones et al ., 2001 ). Briefly, Mtb H37Rv (ATCC 27294) were grown in Middlebrook 7H9 medium supplemented with Tween 80, glycerol and OADC (Difco Laboratories, Detroit, MI, USA) at 37°C for 3 weeks. Bacteria were then removed by centrifugation, followed by filtration through a 0.22 ?m membrane (Millipore, Bedford, MA). This short-term culture filtrate was digested with 100 ?g ml?1 proteinase K (Sigma-Aldrich) for 18 h at 56°C, and then used as a source of crude STF ( Jones et al ., 2001 ). Reagents, Abs and constructs All reagents and chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich except those noted below which were obtained from the indicated suppliers: NAC, DPI, allopurinol, PKC?- and PKC??-specific inhibitory peptides (myristoylated PKC?? or PKC? pseudosubstrate peptides), and dihydroethidium (DHE), Calbiochem. Specific Abs against ERK1/2, phospho-(Thr202/Tyr204)-ERK1/2, p38, phospho-(Thr180/Tyr182)-p38 Abs are from Cell Signalling Technology. Anti-?-actin (I-19), anti-phospho-(Thr410)-PKC?, anti-TLR2 (H-175), anti-TLR4 (H-80), anti-p47phox (H-195), anti-caveolin-1 (H-97), anti-TNF Receptor Associated Factor (TRAF) 6 (H-274), anti-HA (12CA5) and anti-NF-?B p65(C-20) are from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Methyl-?-cyclodextrin, cholesterol and DMSO were from Sigma-Aldrich. Expression plasmids encoding PKC?-WT-HA and PKC?-DN-HA (K281M) in pMT-2 were a generous gift from Dr J.W. Sho (Inha University, Incheon, Korea). The integrity of the inserts was verified by DNA sequencing. Cells were transfected using Lipofectamine as indicated by the manufacturer (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA). ELISA, Western blot and co-immunoprecipitation assay Murine BMDMs were treated as indicated and processed for analysis by a sandwich ELISA and Western blot, as previously described ( Yang et al ., 2007 ). For sandwich ELISA, cell culture supernatants were analysed for cytokine content using Duoset Ab pairs (PharMingen) for detection of TNF-? and IL-6 ( Yang et al ., 2007 ). Assays were performed as recommended by the manufacturers. For Western analysis, Abs for phosphorylated and total ERK1/2, p38, PKC? were used at a 1:1000 dilution. Membranes were developed using a chemiluminescence assay (ECL; Amersham-Pharmacia, Freiburg, Germany) and subsequently exposed to chemiluminescence film (Amersham-Pharmacia). For co-immunoprecipitation, RAW 264.7 cells were transfected with expression vectors that encode HA-tagged PKC? (WT or DN). Transfected cells were treated with 19 kDa lipoprotein (500 ng ml?1) for times indicated and then lysed in a lysis buffer [20 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM ?-glycerophosphate, 1 mM NaF, 10% glycerol, 1 mM PMSF]. Lysates were immunoprecipitated using anti-HA Ab as described ( Yang et al ., 2007 ). Immunoprecipitants were subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis was performed using anti-mouse TLR2 or anti-mouse TLR4 Ab as described above. Colocalization studies with lipid raft BMDMs or RAW 264.7 cells in eight-well chamber slides were incubated with or without 19 kDa lipoprotein in the presence or absence of PKC? inhibitory peptides, PKC?? inhibitory peptides or DPI at 37°C for 45 min. Cells were then treated with 19 kDa lipoprotein for various periods. Cells were washed, fixed with 4% p -formaldehyde in PBS for 10 min at room temperature, permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 for 10 min at 25°C and blocked for 1 h with PBS containing 3% BSA. Cells were incubated for 3 h at room temperature with anti-rabbit TLR2 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and FITC-conjugated cholera toxin B subunit (a lipid raft marker specific for GM1; Sigma) (5 ?g ml?1) in PBS containing 3% BSA. After extensive washing with PBS containing 0.05% Tween 20, cells were treated with Rhodamine (TRITC)-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG in PBS containing 3% BSA for 1 h at room temperature. Localization of lipid raft and TLR2 was visualized by confocal microscopy (FV500, version 2.3; Carl Zeiss MicroImaging). Lipid raft microdomain isolation Microdomain rafts were prepared using a non-detergent extraction method as described previously ( Song et al ., 1996 ). RAW 264.7 cells were plated at a density of 1 × 107 per 10 cm dish and cultured up to 90% confluency. Ten dishes of cells were used for each preparation. As this experiment required bulk cultures and a large volume of TLR2 agonist, we used mycobacterial STF instead of the purified 19 kDa lipoprotein for stimulation of RAW 264.7 cells. After stimulation with STF, RAW 264.7 cells were lysed in ice-cold MBS buffer (25 mM MES, pH 6.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM Na3VO4 and protease inhibitors) containing 1% (v/v) Triton X-100. The lysates were homogenized and were adjusted to 4 ml of 40% sucrose by mixing with 2 ml of 80% sucrose and overlaid with 4 ml of 35% sucrose and 4 ml of 5% sucrose in MBS buffer. After centrifugation at 200 000 g for 18 h, samples were divided into 12 fractions. Equal volumes of the recovered fractions were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose for immunoblotting analysis. Lipid raft domains were recovered from the low-density fractions 3, 4 and 5. Transient transfection and luciferase assay Transient transfections were performed using Lipofectamine 2000 (InvitroGen) per the manufacturer’s instructions. The NF-?B reporter assay was performed as previously described ( Yang et al ., 2007 ). Luciferase activity was measured using the Luciferase Assay System (Promega). Immunofluorescence microscopy for NF-?B nuclear translocation Cells were fixed on coverslips in 4% (w/v) paraformaldehyde in PBS, followed by a 5 min permeabilization in 0.25% (v/v) Triton X-100 in PBS at 25°C. NF-?B p65 was detected by incubation with a 1:100 dilution of the primary Ab for 1 h at 25°C, washing, and incubation with 1:100 dilutions of rabbit immunoglobulin G-Alexa Fluor 488 (Molecular Probes) for 30 min. Nuclei were visualized by incubation with 20 ?g ml?1 propidium iodide (PI) for 10 min. Slides were examined with a laser-scanning confocal microscope (LSM510). Measurement of intracellular ROS Intracellular ROS levels were measured by DHE assays, as previously described ( Yang et al ., 2007 ). The cells were examined with a laser-scanning confocal microscope (FV500) and the mean relative fluorescence intensity for each group of cells was measured with a Carl Zeiss vision system (FV500) and then averaged for all groups. Statistical analysis For statistical analysis, data obtained from independent experiments are presented as the mean ± SD and they were analysed using a Student’s t -test with Bonferroni adjustment or ANOVA for multiple comparisons. Differences were considered significant for P < 0.05.  Mice and cells Wild-type C57BL/6 mice were purchased from KOATECH (Pyungtek, Korea). Mice with a targeted deletion in the TLR2 gene and Nox2 gene were kindly provided by Dr S. Akira (Osaka University, Osaka, Japan) and Dr Y.S. Bae (Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Korea) respectively. C3H/HeJ and C3H/HeN mice were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME), and maintained under standard laboratory conditions on a 12 h light/dark cycle, with free access to food and water. All animal procedures were conducted in accordance with the guidelines of the institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, Chungnam National University. BMDMs were differentiated for 5–7 days in M-CSF-containing media, as described previously ( Yang et al ., 2007 ). Mouse macrophage cell line, RAW 264.7 (ATCC TIB-71) was maintained in complete medium [DMEM (Gibco-BRL) with 10% FBS (Gibco-BRL), sodium pyruvate, non-essential amino acids, penicillin G (100 IU ml?1) and streptomycin (100 ?g ml?1)]. Human monocytic cell line, THP-1 (ATCC TIB-202), was grown in RPMI 1640/glutamax supplemented with 10% FBS. The cells were treated with 20 nM PMA (Sigma-Aldrich) for 24 h to induce differentiation into macrophage-like cells and washed with PBS three times.  Preparation of the 19 kDa lipoprotein and STF from Mtb The 19 kDa lipoprotein was purified from Mtb H37Ra as described previously ( Pai et al ., 2003 ) with modifications ( Gehring et al ., 2004 ). STF was prepared as previously described ( Jones et al ., 2001 ). Briefly, Mtb H37Rv (ATCC 27294) were grown in Middlebrook 7H9 medium supplemented with Tween 80, glycerol and OADC (Difco Laboratories, Detroit, MI, USA) at 37°C for 3 weeks. Bacteria were then removed by centrifugation, followed by filtration through a 0.22 ?m membrane (Millipore, Bedford, MA). This short-term culture filtrate was digested with 100 ?g ml?1 proteinase K (Sigma-Aldrich) for 18 h at 56°C, and then used as a source of crude STF ( Jones et al ., 2001 ).  Reagents, Abs and constructs All reagents and chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich except those noted below which were obtained from the indicated suppliers: NAC, DPI, allopurinol, PKC?- and PKC??-specific inhibitory peptides (myristoylated PKC?? or PKC? pseudosubstrate peptides), and dihydroethidium (DHE), Calbiochem. Specific Abs against ERK1/2, phospho-(Thr202/Tyr204)-ERK1/2, p38, phospho-(Thr180/Tyr182)-p38 Abs are from Cell Signalling Technology. Anti-?-actin (I-19), anti-phospho-(Thr410)-PKC?, anti-TLR2 (H-175), anti-TLR4 (H-80), anti-p47phox (H-195), anti-caveolin-1 (H-97), anti-TNF Receptor Associated Factor (TRAF) 6 (H-274), anti-HA (12CA5) and anti-NF-?B p65(C-20) are from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Methyl-?-cyclodextrin, cholesterol and DMSO were from Sigma-Aldrich. Expression plasmids encoding PKC?-WT-HA and PKC?-DN-HA (K281M) in pMT-2 were a generous gift from Dr J.W. Sho (Inha University, Incheon, Korea). The integrity of the inserts was verified by DNA sequencing. Cells were transfected using Lipofectamine as indicated by the manufacturer (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA).  ELISA, Western blot and co-immunoprecipitation assay Murine BMDMs were treated as indicated and processed for analysis by a sandwich ELISA and Western blot, as previously described ( Yang et al ., 2007 ). For sandwich ELISA, cell culture supernatants were analysed for cytokine content using Duoset Ab pairs (PharMingen) for detection of TNF-? and IL-6 ( Yang et al ., 2007 ). Assays were performed as recommended by the manufacturers. For Western analysis, Abs for phosphorylated and total ERK1/2, p38, PKC? were used at a 1:1000 dilution. Membranes were developed using a chemiluminescence assay (ECL; Amersham-Pharmacia, Freiburg, Germany) and subsequently exposed to chemiluminescence film (Amersham-Pharmacia). For co-immunoprecipitation, RAW 264.7 cells were transfected with expression vectors that encode HA-tagged PKC? (WT or DN). Transfected cells were treated with 19 kDa lipoprotein (500 ng ml?1) for times indicated and then lysed in a lysis buffer [20 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM ?-glycerophosphate, 1 mM NaF, 10% glycerol, 1 mM PMSF]. Lysates were immunoprecipitated using anti-HA Ab as described ( Yang et al ., 2007 ). Immunoprecipitants were subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis was performed using anti-mouse TLR2 or anti-mouse TLR4 Ab as described above.  Colocalization studies with lipid raft BMDMs or RAW 264.7 cells in eight-well chamber slides were incubated with or without 19 kDa lipoprotein in the presence or absence of PKC? inhibitory peptides, PKC?? inhibitory peptides or DPI at 37°C for 45 min. Cells were then treated with 19 kDa lipoprotein for various periods. Cells were washed, fixed with 4% p -formaldehyde in PBS for 10 min at room temperature, permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 for 10 min at 25°C and blocked for 1 h with PBS containing 3% BSA. Cells were incubated for 3 h at room temperature with anti-rabbit TLR2 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and FITC-conjugated cholera toxin B subunit (a lipid raft marker specific for GM1; Sigma) (5 ?g ml?1) in PBS containing 3% BSA. After extensive washing with PBS containing 0.05% Tween 20, cells were treated with Rhodamine (TRITC)-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG in PBS containing 3% BSA for 1 h at room temperature. Localization of lipid raft and TLR2 was visualized by confocal microscopy (FV500, version 2.3; Carl Zeiss MicroImaging).  Lipid raft microdomain isolation Microdomain rafts were prepared using a non-detergent extraction method as described previously ( Song et al ., 1996 ). RAW 264.7 cells were plated at a density of 1 × 107 per 10 cm dish and cultured up to 90% confluency. Ten dishes of cells were used for each preparation. As this experiment required bulk cultures and a large volume of TLR2 agonist, we used mycobacterial STF instead of the purified 19 kDa lipoprotein for stimulation of RAW 264.7 cells. After stimulation with STF, RAW 264.7 cells were lysed in ice-cold MBS buffer (25 mM MES, pH 6.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM Na3VO4 and protease inhibitors) containing 1% (v/v) Triton X-100. The lysates were homogenized and were adjusted to 4 ml of 40% sucrose by mixing with 2 ml of 80% sucrose and overlaid with 4 ml of 35% sucrose and 4 ml of 5% sucrose in MBS buffer. After centrifugation at 200 000 g for 18 h, samples were divided into 12 fractions. Equal volumes of the recovered fractions were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose for immunoblotting analysis. Lipid raft domains were recovered from the low-density fractions 3, 4 and 5.  Transient transfection and luciferase assay Transient transfections were performed using Lipofectamine 2000 (InvitroGen) per the manufacturer’s instructions. The NF-?B reporter assay was performed as previously described ( Yang et al ., 2007 ). Luciferase activity was measured using the Luciferase Assay System (Promega).  Immunofluorescence microscopy for NF-?B nuclear translocation Cells were fixed on coverslips in 4% (w/v) paraformaldehyde in PBS, followed by a 5 min permeabilization in 0.25% (v/v) Triton X-100 in PBS at 25°C. NF-?B p65 was detected by incubation with a 1:100 dilution of the primary Ab for 1 h at 25°C, washing, and incubation with 1:100 dilutions of rabbit immunoglobulin G-Alexa Fluor 488 (Molecular Probes) for 30 min. Nuclei were visualized by incubation with 20 ?g ml?1 propidium iodide (PI) for 10 min. Slides were examined with a laser-scanning confocal microscope (LSM510).  Measurement of intracellular ROS Intracellular ROS levels were measured by DHE assays, as previously described ( Yang et al ., 2007 ). The cells were examined with a laser-scanning confocal microscope (FV500) and the mean relative fluorescence intensity for each group of cells was measured with a Carl Zeiss vision system (FV500) and then averaged for all groups.  Statistical analysis For statistical analysis, data obtained from independent experiments are presented as the mean ± SD and they were analysed using a Student’s t -test with Bonferroni adjustment or ANOVA for multiple comparisons. Differences were considered significant for P < 0.05.  Figures Fig. 1 Mtb 19 kDa lipoprotein-induced ROS generation is dependent on the TLR2, but not TLR4, in macrophages. A. BMDMs from WT and either TLR2 KO or TLR4 KO mice were stimulated with 19 kDa lipoprotein (500 ng ml?1). Fluorescence intensities of BMDMs were measured by laser-scanning microscopy and analysed with the FV500 software system. Results are presented as the amount of ROS production at 30 min. Data are representative of three independent experiments with similar results. B and C. BMDMs were incubated for 45 min with NAC (10, 20, 30 mM), DPI (5, 10, 20 ?M) or allopurinol (10, 100, 1000 ?M), and then stimulated with 19 kDa lipoprotein (500 ng ml?1) for the indicated period. Scale bar, 50 ?m. (B) The supernatants were harvested at 18 h, and protein expression was measured by ELISA. Data represent the mean ± SD from three experiments. (C) MAPK activation was detected after 30 min of stimulation by probing cell lysates of BMDMs by Western blot for activated ERK1/2 and p38 using phospho-specific Abs. Data are representative of three independent experiments with similar results. Significant differences (*** P < 0.001). U, unstimulated; 19 kDa, 19 kDa lipoprotein-stimulated; Allo, allopurinol. Fig. 2 TLR2 colocalizes with lipid rafts after stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein. BMDMs from WT and Nox2 KO mice were stimulated with 19 kDa lipoprotein (500 ng ml?1). BMDMs from WT mice were incubated with 19 kDa lipoprotein in the absence or presence of DPI (20 ?M, for A). Cells were double-stained for ganglioside GM1 (green FITC fluorescence for cholera toxin B) and TLR2 (red TRITC fluorescence). Overlay images and DIC microscopy are shown in the bottom panels. Fluorescence intensities were measured by laser-scanning microscopy and with the FV500 software system. Scale bar, 10 ?m. Data are representative of six independent experiments with similar results. Fig. 3 Lipid rafts play an essential role in 19 kDa lipoprotein-induced ROS generation and pro-inflammatory cytokine production by BMDMs. Murine BMDMs were pre-incubated with methyl-?-cyclodextrin (M?CD; 5, 10, 20 mM) or the same concentration of M?CD with cholesterol, followed by stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein (500 ng ml?1). A. Fluorescence intensities of BMDMs were measured by laser-scanning microscopy and with the FV500 software system. Results are presented as the amount of ROS production at 30 min. Data are representative of four independent experiments with similar results. Scale bar, 50 ?m. B. The supernatants were harvested at 18 h, and protein expression was measured by ELISA. Data are the mean ± SD of three experiments. Significant differences (*** P < 0.001). U, unstimulated; 19 kDa, 19 kDa lipoprotein-stimulated; M?CD, methyl-?-cyclodextrin; Ch, cholesterol. Fig. 4 Atypical PKC? is recruited into lipid rafts and associates with TLR2. A. RAW 264.7 cells were stimulated with STF and lysed in ice-cold MBS containing 1% (v/v) Triton X-100. Lysates were homogenized, adjusted to 4 ml of 40% sucrose and overlaid with 4 ml of 35% sucrose and 4 ml of 5% sucrose in MBS buffer. After centrifugation at 200 000 g for 18 h, samples were fractionated into 12 subfractions. Equal volumes of the recovered fractions were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to PVDF for immunoblotting analysis. B. PKC? associates with TLR2 in macrophages stimulated with 19 kDa lipoprotein. RAW 264.7 cells were subjected to immunoprecipitation with anti-PKC? Ab. The total-cell lysates (input control for indicated Abs) and immunoprecipitated proteins were detected by immunoblotting with indicated Abs. C. RAW 264.7 cells transfected with PKC?-WT-HA or PKC?-DN-HA were stimulated with 19 kDa lipoprotein for 3 min. Cell lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation with anti-HA Ab and analysed by Western blot. Data are representative of three independent experiments with similar results. U, unstimulated; WB, Western blot; IP, immunoprecipitation. Fig. 5 Crucial role of PKC? for generation of ROS, and pro-inflammatory cytokines after stimulation of macrophages with 19 kDa lipoprotein. A. BMDMs were pre-incubated with PKC? inhibitory peptides (20 ?M) or the same concentration of PKC?? inhibitory peptides, followed by stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein (500 ng ml?1). Fluorescence intensities of BMDMs were assessed by laser-scanning microscopy and the FV500 software system. Results presented indicate the amount of ROS production at 30 min. Data are representative of three independent experiments with similar results. Scale bar, 50 ?m. B. BMDMs were pre-incubated with PKC?- or PKC??-specific inhibitory peptides (both, 5, 20, 40 ?M) for 45 min, followed by stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein (500 ng ml?1) for 18 h. Supernatants were harvested, and cytokine expression was measured by ELISA. Data are the mean ± SD of three experiments. Significant differences from the lipoprotein-stimulated values without inhibitors are indicated as *** P < 0.001. C. THP-1 cells were transfected with PKC?-WT or PKC?-DN, followed by stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein (500 ng ml?1) for 18 h. Supernatants were harvested, and cytokine expression was measured by ELISA. Data are the mean ± SD of three experiments. Inset: each total-cell lysates was assessed by immunoblotting to control for sample input and transfection rate. U, unstimulated; SC, solvent control; PKC? Inh, PKC? inhibitory peptides; PKC?? Inh, PKC?? inhibitory peptides. Fig. 6 PKC? activity is required for activation of MAPKs and NF-?B as well as nuclear translocation of NF-?B p65 in macrophages stimulated with the 19 kDa lipoprotein. A. BMDMs were pre-incubated with PKC?- or PKC??-specific inhibitory peptides (5, 20, 40 ?M) for 45 min, and then stimulated with 19 kDa lipoprotein (500 ng ml?1) for 30 min. MAPK activation was detected by probing lysates of stimulated or unstimulated BMDMs by Western blot for activated ERK1/2 and p38 using phospho-specific Abs. Data are representative of three independent experiments with similar results. B. RAW 264.7 cells were transiently transfected with pNF-?B-luc. At 24 h post transfection, the cells were incubated with PKC? or PKC??-specific inhibitory peptides (20 ?M, for both peptides) or a solvent control (SC) for 45 min, and then stimulated with 19 kDa lipoprotein (500 ng ml?1). The cells were then harvested, and luciferase activity was measured and corrected for differences in transfection efficiency based on ?-galactosidase activity. Luciferase activities shown are the mean ± SD of three independent experiments. Significant differences from the lipoprotein-stimulated values without inhibitors are indicated as *** P < 0.001. C. Murine BMDMs were treated with PKC?-specific inhibitory peptides (20 ?M), PKC??-specific inhibitory peptides (20 ?M) or a SC for 45 min. The cells were then stimulated with 19 kDa lipoprotein (500 ng ml?1). Cells were fixed, stained with anti-NF-?B p65 Ab and PI, and examined with a confocal microscope (model FV500) at 1200× magnification. Results are taken from at least three separate experiments. Scale bar, 10 ?m. U, unstimulated; SC, solvent control (0.1% DMSO); PKC? Inh, PKC? inhibitory peptides; PKC?? Inh, PKC?? inhibitory peptides. Fig. 7 Lipid rafts play a role in PKC? phosphorylation. A. Cells were double-labelled with anti-TLR2/TRITC-conjugated anti-rabbit and FITC-conjugated cholera toxin B (top). Overlay images and DIC microscopy are shown in the bottom panels. RAW 264.7 cells were pre-incubated with PKC? inhibitory peptides (20 ?M) or PKC?? inhibitory peptides (20 ?M) for 45 min, followed by stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein (500 ng ml?1) for 3 min. Fluorescence intensities of RAW 264.7 cells were measured by laser-scanning microscopy and with the FV500 software system. Scale bar, 10 ?m. Data are representative of three independent experiments with similar results. B. BMDMs were pre-incubated with ?-methyl-cyclodextrin (m?CD; 5, 10, 20 mM) or the same concentration of m?CD with cholesterol, followed by stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein (500 ng ml?1). PKC? phosphorylation was detected by probing cell lysates of stimulated or unstimulated BMDMs by Western blot for phospho-PKC?. Data are representative of three independent experiments with similar results. U, unstimulated; 19 kDa, 19 kDa lipoprotein-stimulated; PKC? Inh, PKC? inhibitory peptides; PKC?? Inh, PKC?? inhibitory peptides; m?CD, methyl-?-cyclodextrin; Ch, cholesterol.  Results 19 kDa lipoprotein from Mtb produces pro-inflammatory responses via TLR2 and ROS signalling The 19 kDa mycobacterial lipoprotein is an abundantly expressed cell wall-associated and secreted glycolipoprotein and serves as an important target of the innate immune response. Initially, 19 kDa lipoprotein was described as an important trigger for TLR2-dependent production of inter-leukin (IL)-12p40 ( Brightbill et al ., 1999 ). It was also reported that overexpression of 19 kDa lipoprotein increased IL-1?, IL-12p40 and TNF-? secretion ( Stewart et al ., 2005 ). To understand the role of lipid rafts and associated signalling molecules in TLR2/ROS signalling, we used 19 kDa lipoprotein from Mtb and investigated ROS production and pro-inflammatory responses by macrophages. Murine macrophages from wild-type (WT) mice responded to 19 kDa lipoprotein and produced large amounts of superoxide, while macrophages from TLR2 knockout (KO) mice did not respond to the lipoprotein ( Fig. 1A , top). In contrast, TLR4 deficiency did not affect lipoprotein-induced superoxide production ( Fig. 1A , bottom). These results indicate that lipoprotein-mediated ROS signalling is mediated by TLR2, but not TLR4. Stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein induced pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-? and IL-6 ( Fig. 1B ). Lipoprotein-induced production of these cytokines was significantly blocked in the presence of the antioxidant N -acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) and the NADPH oxidase (NOX) inhibitor diphenyleneiodium (DPI) ( Fig. 1B ). Western analysis was performed to investigate whether intracellular ROS formation plays a role in lipoprotein-induced MAPK activation in macrophages. Stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein induced activation of p38 MAPK and ERK1/2, and pre-treatment with NAC or a DPI significantly attenuated lipoprotein-induced p38 MAPK and ERK1/2 activation in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 1C ). In contrast, pre-treatment with allopurinol, a xanthine oxidase inhibitor, did not affect MAPK activation. These data suggest that lipoprotein-induced MAPK activation and pro-inflammatory cytokine release by macrophages are mediated by TLR2-induced ROS generation by NADPH oxidase. Mtb 19 kDa lipoprotein induces clustering of lipid rafts Lipid rafts are membrane microdomains that are enriched in cholesterol and glycosphingolipids. These lipid rafts have been implicated in diverse cellular processes such as membrane sorting and signal transduction ( Brown and London, 2000 ; Simons and Toomre, 2000 ). Roles of lipid rafts in immune responses have been studied ( Manes et al ., 2003 ), but the mechanisms by which lipid rafts influence innate immune responses to mycobacteria have not yet been investigated. To assess the lipid spatial and dynamic organization in macrophages stimulated with 19 kDa lipoprotein, we conducted confocal fluorescence microscopy with labelling of lipid rafts. The cholera toxin receptor, the ganglioside GM1, has been extensively used as a marker for glycolipid raft domains ( Harder et al ., 1998 ; Kenworthy and Edidin, 1998 ; Janes et al ., 1999 ). Macrophages were double-stained for ganglioside GM1 (green) and TLR2 (red). In the absence of exogenous TLR2 ligand, GM1 was distributed evenly in the plasma membrane ( Fig. 2A ). In contrast, when macrophages were incubated with 19 kDa lipoprotein, GM1 was clustered in patches on the plasma membrane, and TLR2 was colocalized with GM1 in these patches ( Fig. 2A ). Pre-treatment of macrophages with DPI or the use of NOX2-deficient macrophages abrogated lipoprotein-induced GM1 coalescence as well as TLR2 translocation to lipid rafts ( Fig. 2 ), indicating that 19 kDa lipoprotein triggers lipid raft coalescence in a ROS-dependent manner. Disruption of lipid raft clustering suppresses 19 kDa lipoprotein-mediated ROS formation and innate immune responses We next examined the precise role of lipid raft organization in lipoprotein-induced innate immune responses. As cholesterol is a major component of lipid rafts, we studied the role of lipid rafts in the lipoprotein-mediated ROS generation and the pro-inflammatory responses by depleting plasma membrane cholesterol with M?CD ( Triantafilou et al ., 2002 ). Disruption of lipid rafts caused a significant decrease in the amount of superoxide in macrophages stimulated with 19 kDa lipoprotein ( Fig. 3A ). M?CD treatment also led to a reduced amount of pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-? and IL-6 in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 3B ). External application of M?CD–cholesterol complex to macrophages rapidly attenuated the M?CD-mediated inhibitory effect on induction of superoxide and cytokines ( Fig. 3A and B ). These results suggest that intact lipid rafts are required for lipoprotein-mediated ROS generation and pro-inflammatory cytokine production. Atypical PKC? is recruited into the lipid rafts and associated with TLR2 PKC?, an atypical protein kinase C isozyme, has been shown to play a central role in LPS-induced activation of the ERK1/2 signalling pathways in macrophages ( Monick et al ., 2000 ). We recently demonstrated that PKC? plays an essential role in Mtb-induced ERK1/2 activation and subsequent TNF-? expression in monocytes/macrophages ( Yang et al ., 2007 ). In this study, to examine if PKC? is involved in lipid raft organization during TLR signalling, plasma membrane microdomains were isolated from RAW 264.7 cells and subjected to sucrose density gradient centrifugation. From the top of the gradient, each fraction was collected and analysed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting. Caveolin-1, a cholesterol-binding protein and lipid raft marker, was detected near the top of the sucrose gradient in fractions 3–5 ( Fig. 4A , left), which also contained TLR2, TLR4 and PKC?. These results show that PKC?, TLR2 and TLR4 are found in lipid rafts under basal (unstimulated) conditions. After stimulation of RAW 264.7 cells with the TLR2 agonist mycobacterial soluble tuberculosis factor (STF), caveolin-1 was still present in the same fractions (fraction 3–5), indicating that STF stimulation had no negative effect on raft structure. Remarkably, the signal for detection of TLR2 and PKC? was increased in lipid rafts after STF stimulation, but the detection of TLR4 was unaltered by STF stimulation ( Fig. 4A , right). Phosphorylated active PKC? was not present in lipid raft fractions under basal conditions but was detected in these fractions after stimulation with STF. These results imply that PKC? is actively recruited into lipid rafts together with TLR2 upon stimulation and may play a role as a mediator in initiating innate immune responses. We next examined whether TLR2 is associated with PKC? upon TLR2/19 kDa lipoprotein stimulation using an immunoprecipitation assay. When total-cell lysates from RAW 264.7 cells were immunoprecipitated with anti-PKC? antibody (Ab) and subjected to immunoblot analysis with anti-TLR2 or TLR4 Ab, TLR2 and PKC? were found to co-precipitate after stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein ( Fig. 4B ). Subsequently, RAW 264.7 cells were transfected with PKC?-WT-HA or -DN-HA (dominant-negative mutant), and each cell lysate was immunoprecipitated with anti-HA Ab. TLR2 co-precipitated with PKC?-WT after stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein, but PKC?-DN did not associate with TLR2 ( Fig. 4C ). We found that PKC? was associated specifically with TLR2, but not TLR4 ( Fig. 4B and C ). These results suggest that PKC? is recruited into lipid rafts where it associates with TLR2 during TLR2 signalling. PKC? is critical for TLR2-mediated ROS formation and innate immune signalling by macrophages To define the specific role of PKC? in 19 kDa lipoprotein-induced TLR2 signalling, we assessed the effects of PKC? on lipoprotein-induced ROS generation, pro-inflammatory cytokine production and MAPK activation. Lipoprotein stimulation caused ROS generation in murine macrophages; this effect was largely abrogated by application of PKC? inhibitory peptides ( Fig. 5A ), but not affected by PKC?? inhibitory peptides. PKC? inhibitory peptides also suppressed lipoprotein-mediated TNF-? and IL-6 production in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 5B ). In addition, we observed that THP-1 cells overexpressing PKC?-WT produced robust amounts of TNF-? and IL-6 while cells over-expressing PKC?-DN lost the ability to produce these cytokines ( Fig. 5C ). We next examined the effect of PKC? on the activation of MAPKs and NF-?B after 19 kDa lipoprotein stimulation. As shown in Fig. 6A , pre-treatment of bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) with PKC? inhibitory peptides prevented the phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and ERK1/2 in response to the 19 kDa lipoprotein. We also transiently transfected RAW 264.7 cells with the pNF-?B-Luc plasmid, which is a promoter construct containing multiple NF-?B binding sites driving a luciferase expression. To assess the specific involvement of PKC? in regulation of NF-?B binding activity, lipoprotein-treated cells were incubated in the absence or presence of PKC? inhibitory peptides. The lipoprotein stimulation markedly increased luciferase gene expression. Pre-incubation of cells with PKC? inhibitory peptides significantly inhibited NF-?B activation ( Fig. 6B ). Furthermore, the translocation of NF-?B into the nucleus was abolished upon pre-treatment with PKC? inhibitory peptides, whereas recruitment of p65 into the nucleus was unaffected by pre-treatment with PKC?? inhibitory peptides ( Fig. 6C ). Taken together, we conclude that PKC? activity is critical for the lipoprotein-dependent ROS generation, production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and signalling activation by macrophages. PKC? activity is essential for 19 kDa lipoprotein-mediated raft coalescence To further investigate the role of PKC? in the recruitment of TLR2 into the raft fraction and raft coalescence, RAW 264.7 cells were pre-incubated with PKC? inhibitory peptides or the same concentration of PKC?? inhibitory peptides and then stimulated with 19 kDa lipoprotein. The results show that the lipoprotein-induced TLR2 translocation to lipid rafts occurred normally in the presence of PKC? inhibitory peptides. Of interest, pre-treatment with PKC? inhibitory peptides resulted in a marked reduction of the clustering of lipid rafts induced by 19 kDa lipoprotein stimulation, whereas PKC?? inhibitory peptides had no significant effects on the ability of 19 kDa lipoprotein to induce raft coalescence ( Fig. 7A ). Lipid raft organization was also required for lipoprotein-mediated PKC? activation, as disruption of raft structure by the addition of M?CD prior to lipoprotein stimulation suppressed PKC? activities in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 7B ). Macrophages incubated with M?CD and cholesterol had levels of PKC? after lipoprotein stimulation that were similar to those seen in unstimulated macrophages. These results imply that PKC? activation and lipid raft organization were mutually dependent.  Results 19 kDa lipoprotein from Mtb produces pro-inflammatory responses via TLR2 and ROS signalling The 19 kDa mycobacterial lipoprotein is an abundantly expressed cell wall-associated and secreted glycolipoprotein and serves as an important target of the innate immune response. Initially, 19 kDa lipoprotein was described as an important trigger for TLR2-dependent production of inter-leukin (IL)-12p40 ( Brightbill et al ., 1999 ). It was also reported that overexpression of 19 kDa lipoprotein increased IL-1?, IL-12p40 and TNF-? secretion ( Stewart et al ., 2005 ). To understand the role of lipid rafts and associated signalling molecules in TLR2/ROS signalling, we used 19 kDa lipoprotein from Mtb and investigated ROS production and pro-inflammatory responses by macrophages. Murine macrophages from wild-type (WT) mice responded to 19 kDa lipoprotein and produced large amounts of superoxide, while macrophages from TLR2 knockout (KO) mice did not respond to the lipoprotein ( Fig. 1A , top). In contrast, TLR4 deficiency did not affect lipoprotein-induced superoxide production ( Fig. 1A , bottom). These results indicate that lipoprotein-mediated ROS signalling is mediated by TLR2, but not TLR4. Stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein induced pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-? and IL-6 ( Fig. 1B ). Lipoprotein-induced production of these cytokines was significantly blocked in the presence of the antioxidant N -acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) and the NADPH oxidase (NOX) inhibitor diphenyleneiodium (DPI) ( Fig. 1B ). Western analysis was performed to investigate whether intracellular ROS formation plays a role in lipoprotein-induced MAPK activation in macrophages. Stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein induced activation of p38 MAPK and ERK1/2, and pre-treatment with NAC or a DPI significantly attenuated lipoprotein-induced p38 MAPK and ERK1/2 activation in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 1C ). In contrast, pre-treatment with allopurinol, a xanthine oxidase inhibitor, did not affect MAPK activation. These data suggest that lipoprotein-induced MAPK activation and pro-inflammatory cytokine release by macrophages are mediated by TLR2-induced ROS generation by NADPH oxidase. Mtb 19 kDa lipoprotein induces clustering of lipid rafts Lipid rafts are membrane microdomains that are enriched in cholesterol and glycosphingolipids. These lipid rafts have been implicated in diverse cellular processes such as membrane sorting and signal transduction ( Brown and London, 2000 ; Simons and Toomre, 2000 ). Roles of lipid rafts in immune responses have been studied ( Manes et al ., 2003 ), but the mechanisms by which lipid rafts influence innate immune responses to mycobacteria have not yet been investigated. To assess the lipid spatial and dynamic organization in macrophages stimulated with 19 kDa lipoprotein, we conducted confocal fluorescence microscopy with labelling of lipid rafts. The cholera toxin receptor, the ganglioside GM1, has been extensively used as a marker for glycolipid raft domains ( Harder et al ., 1998 ; Kenworthy and Edidin, 1998 ; Janes et al ., 1999 ). Macrophages were double-stained for ganglioside GM1 (green) and TLR2 (red). In the absence of exogenous TLR2 ligand, GM1 was distributed evenly in the plasma membrane ( Fig. 2A ). In contrast, when macrophages were incubated with 19 kDa lipoprotein, GM1 was clustered in patches on the plasma membrane, and TLR2 was colocalized with GM1 in these patches ( Fig. 2A ). Pre-treatment of macrophages with DPI or the use of NOX2-deficient macrophages abrogated lipoprotein-induced GM1 coalescence as well as TLR2 translocation to lipid rafts ( Fig. 2 ), indicating that 19 kDa lipoprotein triggers lipid raft coalescence in a ROS-dependent manner. Disruption of lipid raft clustering suppresses 19 kDa lipoprotein-mediated ROS formation and innate immune responses We next examined the precise role of lipid raft organization in lipoprotein-induced innate immune responses. As cholesterol is a major component of lipid rafts, we studied the role of lipid rafts in the lipoprotein-mediated ROS generation and the pro-inflammatory responses by depleting plasma membrane cholesterol with M?CD ( Triantafilou et al ., 2002 ). Disruption of lipid rafts caused a significant decrease in the amount of superoxide in macrophages stimulated with 19 kDa lipoprotein ( Fig. 3A ). M?CD treatment also led to a reduced amount of pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-? and IL-6 in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 3B ). External application of M?CD–cholesterol complex to macrophages rapidly attenuated the M?CD-mediated inhibitory effect on induction of superoxide and cytokines ( Fig. 3A and B ). These results suggest that intact lipid rafts are required for lipoprotein-mediated ROS generation and pro-inflammatory cytokine production. Atypical PKC? is recruited into the lipid rafts and associated with TLR2 PKC?, an atypical protein kinase C isozyme, has been shown to play a central role in LPS-induced activation of the ERK1/2 signalling pathways in macrophages ( Monick et al ., 2000 ). We recently demonstrated that PKC? plays an essential role in Mtb-induced ERK1/2 activation and subsequent TNF-? expression in monocytes/macrophages ( Yang et al ., 2007 ). In this study, to examine if PKC? is involved in lipid raft organization during TLR signalling, plasma membrane microdomains were isolated from RAW 264.7 cells and subjected to sucrose density gradient centrifugation. From the top of the gradient, each fraction was collected and analysed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting. Caveolin-1, a cholesterol-binding protein and lipid raft marker, was detected near the top of the sucrose gradient in fractions 3–5 ( Fig. 4A , left), which also contained TLR2, TLR4 and PKC?. These results show that PKC?, TLR2 and TLR4 are found in lipid rafts under basal (unstimulated) conditions. After stimulation of RAW 264.7 cells with the TLR2 agonist mycobacterial soluble tuberculosis factor (STF), caveolin-1 was still present in the same fractions (fraction 3–5), indicating that STF stimulation had no negative effect on raft structure. Remarkably, the signal for detection of TLR2 and PKC? was increased in lipid rafts after STF stimulation, but the detection of TLR4 was unaltered by STF stimulation ( Fig. 4A , right). Phosphorylated active PKC? was not present in lipid raft fractions under basal conditions but was detected in these fractions after stimulation with STF. These results imply that PKC? is actively recruited into lipid rafts together with TLR2 upon stimulation and may play a role as a mediator in initiating innate immune responses. We next examined whether TLR2 is associated with PKC? upon TLR2/19 kDa lipoprotein stimulation using an immunoprecipitation assay. When total-cell lysates from RAW 264.7 cells were immunoprecipitated with anti-PKC? antibody (Ab) and subjected to immunoblot analysis with anti-TLR2 or TLR4 Ab, TLR2 and PKC? were found to co-precipitate after stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein ( Fig. 4B ). Subsequently, RAW 264.7 cells were transfected with PKC?-WT-HA or -DN-HA (dominant-negative mutant), and each cell lysate was immunoprecipitated with anti-HA Ab. TLR2 co-precipitated with PKC?-WT after stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein, but PKC?-DN did not associate with TLR2 ( Fig. 4C ). We found that PKC? was associated specifically with TLR2, but not TLR4 ( Fig. 4B and C ). These results suggest that PKC? is recruited into lipid rafts where it associates with TLR2 during TLR2 signalling. PKC? is critical for TLR2-mediated ROS formation and innate immune signalling by macrophages To define the specific role of PKC? in 19 kDa lipoprotein-induced TLR2 signalling, we assessed the effects of PKC? on lipoprotein-induced ROS generation, pro-inflammatory cytokine production and MAPK activation. Lipoprotein stimulation caused ROS generation in murine macrophages; this effect was largely abrogated by application of PKC? inhibitory peptides ( Fig. 5A ), but not affected by PKC?? inhibitory peptides. PKC? inhibitory peptides also suppressed lipoprotein-mediated TNF-? and IL-6 production in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 5B ). In addition, we observed that THP-1 cells overexpressing PKC?-WT produced robust amounts of TNF-? and IL-6 while cells over-expressing PKC?-DN lost the ability to produce these cytokines ( Fig. 5C ). We next examined the effect of PKC? on the activation of MAPKs and NF-?B after 19 kDa lipoprotein stimulation. As shown in Fig. 6A , pre-treatment of bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) with PKC? inhibitory peptides prevented the phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and ERK1/2 in response to the 19 kDa lipoprotein. We also transiently transfected RAW 264.7 cells with the pNF-?B-Luc plasmid, which is a promoter construct containing multiple NF-?B binding sites driving a luciferase expression. To assess the specific involvement of PKC? in regulation of NF-?B binding activity, lipoprotein-treated cells were incubated in the absence or presence of PKC? inhibitory peptides. The lipoprotein stimulation markedly increased luciferase gene expression. Pre-incubation of cells with PKC? inhibitory peptides significantly inhibited NF-?B activation ( Fig. 6B ). Furthermore, the translocation of NF-?B into the nucleus was abolished upon pre-treatment with PKC? inhibitory peptides, whereas recruitment of p65 into the nucleus was unaffected by pre-treatment with PKC?? inhibitory peptides ( Fig. 6C ). Taken together, we conclude that PKC? activity is critical for the lipoprotein-dependent ROS generation, production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and signalling activation by macrophages. PKC? activity is essential for 19 kDa lipoprotein-mediated raft coalescence To further investigate the role of PKC? in the recruitment of TLR2 into the raft fraction and raft coalescence, RAW 264.7 cells were pre-incubated with PKC? inhibitory peptides or the same concentration of PKC?? inhibitory peptides and then stimulated with 19 kDa lipoprotein. The results show that the lipoprotein-induced TLR2 translocation to lipid rafts occurred normally in the presence of PKC? inhibitory peptides. Of interest, pre-treatment with PKC? inhibitory peptides resulted in a marked reduction of the clustering of lipid rafts induced by 19 kDa lipoprotein stimulation, whereas PKC?? inhibitory peptides had no significant effects on the ability of 19 kDa lipoprotein to induce raft coalescence ( Fig. 7A ). Lipid raft organization was also required for lipoprotein-mediated PKC? activation, as disruption of raft structure by the addition of M?CD prior to lipoprotein stimulation suppressed PKC? activities in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 7B ). Macrophages incubated with M?CD and cholesterol had levels of PKC? after lipoprotein stimulation that were similar to those seen in unstimulated macrophages. These results imply that PKC? activation and lipid raft organization were mutually dependent.  19 kDa lipoprotein from Mtb produces pro-inflammatory responses via TLR2 and ROS signalling The 19 kDa mycobacterial lipoprotein is an abundantly expressed cell wall-associated and secreted glycolipoprotein and serves as an important target of the innate immune response. Initially, 19 kDa lipoprotein was described as an important trigger for TLR2-dependent production of inter-leukin (IL)-12p40 ( Brightbill et al ., 1999 ). It was also reported that overexpression of 19 kDa lipoprotein increased IL-1?, IL-12p40 and TNF-? secretion ( Stewart et al ., 2005 ). To understand the role of lipid rafts and associated signalling molecules in TLR2/ROS signalling, we used 19 kDa lipoprotein from Mtb and investigated ROS production and pro-inflammatory responses by macrophages. Murine macrophages from wild-type (WT) mice responded to 19 kDa lipoprotein and produced large amounts of superoxide, while macrophages from TLR2 knockout (KO) mice did not respond to the lipoprotein ( Fig. 1A , top). In contrast, TLR4 deficiency did not affect lipoprotein-induced superoxide production ( Fig. 1A , bottom). These results indicate that lipoprotein-mediated ROS signalling is mediated by TLR2, but not TLR4. Stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein induced pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-? and IL-6 ( Fig. 1B ). Lipoprotein-induced production of these cytokines was significantly blocked in the presence of the antioxidant N -acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) and the NADPH oxidase (NOX) inhibitor diphenyleneiodium (DPI) ( Fig. 1B ). Western analysis was performed to investigate whether intracellular ROS formation plays a role in lipoprotein-induced MAPK activation in macrophages. Stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein induced activation of p38 MAPK and ERK1/2, and pre-treatment with NAC or a DPI significantly attenuated lipoprotein-induced p38 MAPK and ERK1/2 activation in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 1C ). In contrast, pre-treatment with allopurinol, a xanthine oxidase inhibitor, did not affect MAPK activation. These data suggest that lipoprotein-induced MAPK activation and pro-inflammatory cytokine release by macrophages are mediated by TLR2-induced ROS generation by NADPH oxidase.  19 kDa lipoprotein from Mtb produces pro-inflammatory responses via TLR2 and ROS signalling The 19 kDa mycobacterial lipoprotein is an abundantly expressed cell wall-associated and secreted glycolipoprotein and serves as an important target of the innate immune response. Initially, 19 kDa lipoprotein was described as an important trigger for TLR2-dependent production of inter-leukin (IL)-12p40 ( Brightbill et al ., 1999 ). It was also reported that overexpression of 19 kDa lipoprotein increased IL-1?, IL-12p40 and TNF-? secretion ( Stewart et al ., 2005 ). To understand the role of lipid rafts and associated signalling molecules in TLR2/ROS signalling, we used 19 kDa lipoprotein from Mtb and investigated ROS production and pro-inflammatory responses by macrophages. Murine macrophages from wild-type (WT) mice responded to 19 kDa lipoprotein and produced large amounts of superoxide, while macrophages from TLR2 knockout (KO) mice did not respond to the lipoprotein ( Fig. 1A , top). In contrast, TLR4 deficiency did not affect lipoprotein-induced superoxide production ( Fig. 1A , bottom). These results indicate that lipoprotein-mediated ROS signalling is mediated by TLR2, but not TLR4. Stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein induced pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-? and IL-6 ( Fig. 1B ). Lipoprotein-induced production of these cytokines was significantly blocked in the presence of the antioxidant N -acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) and the NADPH oxidase (NOX) inhibitor diphenyleneiodium (DPI) ( Fig. 1B ). Western analysis was performed to investigate whether intracellular ROS formation plays a role in lipoprotein-induced MAPK activation in macrophages. Stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein induced activation of p38 MAPK and ERK1/2, and pre-treatment with NAC or a DPI significantly attenuated lipoprotein-induced p38 MAPK and ERK1/2 activation in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 1C ). In contrast, pre-treatment with allopurinol, a xanthine oxidase inhibitor, did not affect MAPK activation. These data suggest that lipoprotein-induced MAPK activation and pro-inflammatory cytokine release by macrophages are mediated by TLR2-induced ROS generation by NADPH oxidase.  Mtb 19 kDa lipoprotein induces clustering of lipid rafts Lipid rafts are membrane microdomains that are enriched in cholesterol and glycosphingolipids. These lipid rafts have been implicated in diverse cellular processes such as membrane sorting and signal transduction ( Brown and London, 2000 ; Simons and Toomre, 2000 ). Roles of lipid rafts in immune responses have been studied ( Manes et al ., 2003 ), but the mechanisms by which lipid rafts influence innate immune responses to mycobacteria have not yet been investigated. To assess the lipid spatial and dynamic organization in macrophages stimulated with 19 kDa lipoprotein, we conducted confocal fluorescence microscopy with labelling of lipid rafts. The cholera toxin receptor, the ganglioside GM1, has been extensively used as a marker for glycolipid raft domains ( Harder et al ., 1998 ; Kenworthy and Edidin, 1998 ; Janes et al ., 1999 ). Macrophages were double-stained for ganglioside GM1 (green) and TLR2 (red). In the absence of exogenous TLR2 ligand, GM1 was distributed evenly in the plasma membrane ( Fig. 2A ). In contrast, when macrophages were incubated with 19 kDa lipoprotein, GM1 was clustered in patches on the plasma membrane, and TLR2 was colocalized with GM1 in these patches ( Fig. 2A ). Pre-treatment of macrophages with DPI or the use of NOX2-deficient macrophages abrogated lipoprotein-induced GM1 coalescence as well as TLR2 translocation to lipid rafts ( Fig. 2 ), indicating that 19 kDa lipoprotein triggers lipid raft coalescence in a ROS-dependent manner.  Mtb 19 kDa lipoprotein induces clustering of lipid rafts Lipid rafts are membrane microdomains that are enriched in cholesterol and glycosphingolipids. These lipid rafts have been implicated in diverse cellular processes such as membrane sorting and signal transduction ( Brown and London, 2000 ; Simons and Toomre, 2000 ). Roles of lipid rafts in immune responses have been studied ( Manes et al ., 2003 ), but the mechanisms by which lipid rafts influence innate immune responses to mycobacteria have not yet been investigated. To assess the lipid spatial and dynamic organization in macrophages stimulated with 19 kDa lipoprotein, we conducted confocal fluorescence microscopy with labelling of lipid rafts. The cholera toxin receptor, the ganglioside GM1, has been extensively used as a marker for glycolipid raft domains ( Harder et al ., 1998 ; Kenworthy and Edidin, 1998 ; Janes et al ., 1999 ). Macrophages were double-stained for ganglioside GM1 (green) and TLR2 (red). In the absence of exogenous TLR2 ligand, GM1 was distributed evenly in the plasma membrane ( Fig. 2A ). In contrast, when macrophages were incubated with 19 kDa lipoprotein, GM1 was clustered in patches on the plasma membrane, and TLR2 was colocalized with GM1 in these patches ( Fig. 2A ). Pre-treatment of macrophages with DPI or the use of NOX2-deficient macrophages abrogated lipoprotein-induced GM1 coalescence as well as TLR2 translocation to lipid rafts ( Fig. 2 ), indicating that 19 kDa lipoprotein triggers lipid raft coalescence in a ROS-dependent manner.  Disruption of lipid raft clustering suppresses 19 kDa lipoprotein-mediated ROS formation and innate immune responses We next examined the precise role of lipid raft organization in lipoprotein-induced innate immune responses. As cholesterol is a major component of lipid rafts, we studied the role of lipid rafts in the lipoprotein-mediated ROS generation and the pro-inflammatory responses by depleting plasma membrane cholesterol with M?CD ( Triantafilou et al ., 2002 ). Disruption of lipid rafts caused a significant decrease in the amount of superoxide in macrophages stimulated with 19 kDa lipoprotein ( Fig. 3A ). M?CD treatment also led to a reduced amount of pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-? and IL-6 in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 3B ). External application of M?CD–cholesterol complex to macrophages rapidly attenuated the M?CD-mediated inhibitory effect on induction of superoxide and cytokines ( Fig. 3A and B ). These results suggest that intact lipid rafts are required for lipoprotein-mediated ROS generation and pro-inflammatory cytokine production.  Disruption of lipid raft clustering suppresses 19 kDa lipoprotein-mediated ROS formation and innate immune responses We next examined the precise role of lipid raft organization in lipoprotein-induced innate immune responses. As cholesterol is a major component of lipid rafts, we studied the role of lipid rafts in the lipoprotein-mediated ROS generation and the pro-inflammatory responses by depleting plasma membrane cholesterol with M?CD ( Triantafilou et al ., 2002 ). Disruption of lipid rafts caused a significant decrease in the amount of superoxide in macrophages stimulated with 19 kDa lipoprotein ( Fig. 3A ). M?CD treatment also led to a reduced amount of pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-? and IL-6 in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 3B ). External application of M?CD–cholesterol complex to macrophages rapidly attenuated the M?CD-mediated inhibitory effect on induction of superoxide and cytokines ( Fig. 3A and B ). These results suggest that intact lipid rafts are required for lipoprotein-mediated ROS generation and pro-inflammatory cytokine production.  Atypical PKC? is recruited into the lipid rafts and associated with TLR2 PKC?, an atypical protein kinase C isozyme, has been shown to play a central role in LPS-induced activation of the ERK1/2 signalling pathways in macrophages ( Monick et al ., 2000 ). We recently demonstrated that PKC? plays an essential role in Mtb-induced ERK1/2 activation and subsequent TNF-? expression in monocytes/macrophages ( Yang et al ., 2007 ). In this study, to examine if PKC? is involved in lipid raft organization during TLR signalling, plasma membrane microdomains were isolated from RAW 264.7 cells and subjected to sucrose density gradient centrifugation. From the top of the gradient, each fraction was collected and analysed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting. Caveolin-1, a cholesterol-binding protein and lipid raft marker, was detected near the top of the sucrose gradient in fractions 3–5 ( Fig. 4A , left), which also contained TLR2, TLR4 and PKC?. These results show that PKC?, TLR2 and TLR4 are found in lipid rafts under basal (unstimulated) conditions. After stimulation of RAW 264.7 cells with the TLR2 agonist mycobacterial soluble tuberculosis factor (STF), caveolin-1 was still present in the same fractions (fraction 3–5), indicating that STF stimulation had no negative effect on raft structure. Remarkably, the signal for detection of TLR2 and PKC? was increased in lipid rafts after STF stimulation, but the detection of TLR4 was unaltered by STF stimulation ( Fig. 4A , right). Phosphorylated active PKC? was not present in lipid raft fractions under basal conditions but was detected in these fractions after stimulation with STF. These results imply that PKC? is actively recruited into lipid rafts together with TLR2 upon stimulation and may play a role as a mediator in initiating innate immune responses. We next examined whether TLR2 is associated with PKC? upon TLR2/19 kDa lipoprotein stimulation using an immunoprecipitation assay. When total-cell lysates from RAW 264.7 cells were immunoprecipitated with anti-PKC? antibody (Ab) and subjected to immunoblot analysis with anti-TLR2 or TLR4 Ab, TLR2 and PKC? were found to co-precipitate after stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein ( Fig. 4B ). Subsequently, RAW 264.7 cells were transfected with PKC?-WT-HA or -DN-HA (dominant-negative mutant), and each cell lysate was immunoprecipitated with anti-HA Ab. TLR2 co-precipitated with PKC?-WT after stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein, but PKC?-DN did not associate with TLR2 ( Fig. 4C ). We found that PKC? was associated specifically with TLR2, but not TLR4 ( Fig. 4B and C ). These results suggest that PKC? is recruited into lipid rafts where it associates with TLR2 during TLR2 signalling.  Atypical PKC? is recruited into the lipid rafts and associated with TLR2 PKC?, an atypical protein kinase C isozyme, has been shown to play a central role in LPS-induced activation of the ERK1/2 signalling pathways in macrophages ( Monick et al ., 2000 ). We recently demonstrated that PKC? plays an essential role in Mtb-induced ERK1/2 activation and subsequent TNF-? expression in monocytes/macrophages ( Yang et al ., 2007 ). In this study, to examine if PKC? is involved in lipid raft organization during TLR signalling, plasma membrane microdomains were isolated from RAW 264.7 cells and subjected to sucrose density gradient centrifugation. From the top of the gradient, each fraction was collected and analysed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting. Caveolin-1, a cholesterol-binding protein and lipid raft marker, was detected near the top of the sucrose gradient in fractions 3–5 ( Fig. 4A , left), which also contained TLR2, TLR4 and PKC?. These results show that PKC?, TLR2 and TLR4 are found in lipid rafts under basal (unstimulated) conditions. After stimulation of RAW 264.7 cells with the TLR2 agonist mycobacterial soluble tuberculosis factor (STF), caveolin-1 was still present in the same fractions (fraction 3–5), indicating that STF stimulation had no negative effect on raft structure. Remarkably, the signal for detection of TLR2 and PKC? was increased in lipid rafts after STF stimulation, but the detection of TLR4 was unaltered by STF stimulation ( Fig. 4A , right). Phosphorylated active PKC? was not present in lipid raft fractions under basal conditions but was detected in these fractions after stimulation with STF. These results imply that PKC? is actively recruited into lipid rafts together with TLR2 upon stimulation and may play a role as a mediator in initiating innate immune responses. We next examined whether TLR2 is associated with PKC? upon TLR2/19 kDa lipoprotein stimulation using an immunoprecipitation assay. When total-cell lysates from RAW 264.7 cells were immunoprecipitated with anti-PKC? antibody (Ab) and subjected to immunoblot analysis with anti-TLR2 or TLR4 Ab, TLR2 and PKC? were found to co-precipitate after stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein ( Fig. 4B ). Subsequently, RAW 264.7 cells were transfected with PKC?-WT-HA or -DN-HA (dominant-negative mutant), and each cell lysate was immunoprecipitated with anti-HA Ab. TLR2 co-precipitated with PKC?-WT after stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein, but PKC?-DN did not associate with TLR2 ( Fig. 4C ). We found that PKC? was associated specifically with TLR2, but not TLR4 ( Fig. 4B and C ). These results suggest that PKC? is recruited into lipid rafts where it associates with TLR2 during TLR2 signalling.  PKC? is critical for TLR2-mediated ROS formation and innate immune signalling by macrophages To define the specific role of PKC? in 19 kDa lipoprotein-induced TLR2 signalling, we assessed the effects of PKC? on lipoprotein-induced ROS generation, pro-inflammatory cytokine production and MAPK activation. Lipoprotein stimulation caused ROS generation in murine macrophages; this effect was largely abrogated by application of PKC? inhibitory peptides ( Fig. 5A ), but not affected by PKC?? inhibitory peptides. PKC? inhibitory peptides also suppressed lipoprotein-mediated TNF-? and IL-6 production in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 5B ). In addition, we observed that THP-1 cells overexpressing PKC?-WT produced robust amounts of TNF-? and IL-6 while cells over-expressing PKC?-DN lost the ability to produce these cytokines ( Fig. 5C ). We next examined the effect of PKC? on the activation of MAPKs and NF-?B after 19 kDa lipoprotein stimulation. As shown in Fig. 6A , pre-treatment of bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) with PKC? inhibitory peptides prevented the phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and ERK1/2 in response to the 19 kDa lipoprotein. We also transiently transfected RAW 264.7 cells with the pNF-?B-Luc plasmid, which is a promoter construct containing multiple NF-?B binding sites driving a luciferase expression. To assess the specific involvement of PKC? in regulation of NF-?B binding activity, lipoprotein-treated cells were incubated in the absence or presence of PKC? inhibitory peptides. The lipoprotein stimulation markedly increased luciferase gene expression. Pre-incubation of cells with PKC? inhibitory peptides significantly inhibited NF-?B activation ( Fig. 6B ). Furthermore, the translocation of NF-?B into the nucleus was abolished upon pre-treatment with PKC? inhibitory peptides, whereas recruitment of p65 into the nucleus was unaffected by pre-treatment with PKC?? inhibitory peptides ( Fig. 6C ). Taken together, we conclude that PKC? activity is critical for the lipoprotein-dependent ROS generation, production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and signalling activation by macrophages.  PKC? is critical for TLR2-mediated ROS formation and innate immune signalling by macrophages To define the specific role of PKC? in 19 kDa lipoprotein-induced TLR2 signalling, we assessed the effects of PKC? on lipoprotein-induced ROS generation, pro-inflammatory cytokine production and MAPK activation. Lipoprotein stimulation caused ROS generation in murine macrophages; this effect was largely abrogated by application of PKC? inhibitory peptides ( Fig. 5A ), but not affected by PKC?? inhibitory peptides. PKC? inhibitory peptides also suppressed lipoprotein-mediated TNF-? and IL-6 production in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 5B ). In addition, we observed that THP-1 cells overexpressing PKC?-WT produced robust amounts of TNF-? and IL-6 while cells over-expressing PKC?-DN lost the ability to produce these cytokines ( Fig. 5C ). We next examined the effect of PKC? on the activation of MAPKs and NF-?B after 19 kDa lipoprotein stimulation. As shown in Fig. 6A , pre-treatment of bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) with PKC? inhibitory peptides prevented the phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and ERK1/2 in response to the 19 kDa lipoprotein. We also transiently transfected RAW 264.7 cells with the pNF-?B-Luc plasmid, which is a promoter construct containing multiple NF-?B binding sites driving a luciferase expression. To assess the specific involvement of PKC? in regulation of NF-?B binding activity, lipoprotein-treated cells were incubated in the absence or presence of PKC? inhibitory peptides. The lipoprotein stimulation markedly increased luciferase gene expression. Pre-incubation of cells with PKC? inhibitory peptides significantly inhibited NF-?B activation ( Fig. 6B ). Furthermore, the translocation of NF-?B into the nucleus was abolished upon pre-treatment with PKC? inhibitory peptides, whereas recruitment of p65 into the nucleus was unaffected by pre-treatment with PKC?? inhibitory peptides ( Fig. 6C ). Taken together, we conclude that PKC? activity is critical for the lipoprotein-dependent ROS generation, production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and signalling activation by macrophages.  PKC? activity is essential for 19 kDa lipoprotein-mediated raft coalescence To further investigate the role of PKC? in the recruitment of TLR2 into the raft fraction and raft coalescence, RAW 264.7 cells were pre-incubated with PKC? inhibitory peptides or the same concentration of PKC?? inhibitory peptides and then stimulated with 19 kDa lipoprotein. The results show that the lipoprotein-induced TLR2 translocation to lipid rafts occurred normally in the presence of PKC? inhibitory peptides. Of interest, pre-treatment with PKC? inhibitory peptides resulted in a marked reduction of the clustering of lipid rafts induced by 19 kDa lipoprotein stimulation, whereas PKC?? inhibitory peptides had no significant effects on the ability of 19 kDa lipoprotein to induce raft coalescence ( Fig. 7A ). Lipid raft organization was also required for lipoprotein-mediated PKC? activation, as disruption of raft structure by the addition of M?CD prior to lipoprotein stimulation suppressed PKC? activities in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 7B ). Macrophages incubated with M?CD and cholesterol had levels of PKC? after lipoprotein stimulation that were similar to those seen in unstimulated macrophages. These results imply that PKC? activation and lipid raft organization were mutually dependent.  PKC? activity is essential for 19 kDa lipoprotein-mediated raft coalescence To further investigate the role of PKC? in the recruitment of TLR2 into the raft fraction and raft coalescence, RAW 264.7 cells were pre-incubated with PKC? inhibitory peptides or the same concentration of PKC?? inhibitory peptides and then stimulated with 19 kDa lipoprotein. The results show that the lipoprotein-induced TLR2 translocation to lipid rafts occurred normally in the presence of PKC? inhibitory peptides. Of interest, pre-treatment with PKC? inhibitory peptides resulted in a marked reduction of the clustering of lipid rafts induced by 19 kDa lipoprotein stimulation, whereas PKC?? inhibitory peptides had no significant effects on the ability of 19 kDa lipoprotein to induce raft coalescence ( Fig. 7A ). Lipid raft organization was also required for lipoprotein-mediated PKC? activation, as disruption of raft structure by the addition of M?CD prior to lipoprotein stimulation suppressed PKC? activities in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 7B ). Macrophages incubated with M?CD and cholesterol had levels of PKC? after lipoprotein stimulation that were similar to those seen in unstimulated macrophages. These results imply that PKC? activation and lipid raft organization were mutually dependent.  Discussion The lipid-enriched microdomains, lipid rafts, are capable of forming platforms that play an important role in membrane protein sorting, construction of signalling complexes and cell signalling, such as redox signalling of death receptors in endothelial cells ( Touyz, 2006 ) and apoptotic signalling of lymphocytes and other cells ( Gulbins and Li, 2006 ). Membrane lipid rafts play key roles in T-cell and B-cell activation ( Pierce, 2002 ; Pizzo and Viola, 2003 ). Several studies have demonstrated that lipid rafts are required not only for adaptive immune responses, but also for innate immune responses ( Manes et al ., 2003 ). However, it remains elusive how lipid rafts function in TLR-dependent signalling and which elements are recruited into a raft domain upon stimulation with mycobacterial antigens, which are mainly TLR2 agonists. Exploration of the molecular machineries involved in raft biology will help us to understand the precise mechanisms by which lipid rafts contribute to TLR2-dependent innate immune responses during mycobacterial infection. To our knowledge, this is the first report that ROS-mediated lipid raft organization plays crucial roles in the initiation of TLR2/19 kDa lipoprotein-induced innate immune responses in macrophages. In addition, our data emphasize the role of raft-targeting PKC? that is critically required for lipid raft coalescence and TLR2/ROS-mediated inflammatory signalling activation. Reactive oxygen species have been shown to play an important role in broad range of physiological and pathological processes, including cell proliferation, inflammation and apoptosis ( Yodoi et al ., 2001 ; Martindale and Holbrook, 2002 ). Recently, the roles of intracellular ROS and related signalling pathways in diverse cellular functions have been extensively studied ( Wu et al ., 2007 ; Matsuzawa and Ichijo, 2008 ; Noguchi et al ., 2008 ). Accumulating evidence indicates that membrane lipid rafts and lipid platforms may represent important mechanisms by which redox signals are produced and transmitted in response to various agonists or stimuli ( Gulbins et al ., 2006 ). In this regard, it has been shown that ROS enhanced T-cell receptor-stimulated membrane raft formation, clustering and signal transduction, suggesting a function role of ROS in early T-cell activation through promotion of the assembly of T-cell activation complex in membrane rafts ( Lu et al ., 2007 ). In addition, a critical role of ROS has been suggested in LPS-mediated translocation of TLR4 and initiation of TLR4-dependent signalling responses ( Nakahira et al ., 2006 ). Studies are lacking, however, to clarify the roles of ROS in lipid raft biology in TLR-mediated innate immune responses to mycobacterial ligands. Our data are the first to reveal that the mycobacterial 19 kDa lipoprotein-mediated ROS formation promotes pro-inflammatory immune responses through TLR2 translocation into the membrane rafts and the raft coalescence. Although TLR2 was weakly found in lipid rafts under the basal conditions, we found that TLR2 was more actively recruited there upon stimulation. Disruption of raft integrity by M?CD inhibited 19 kDa lipoprotein-mediated ROS generation and production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, suggesting that raft integrity is critically involved in TLR2/ROS-mediated innate immune responses. It is perceived that rafts serve as the structure for the formation of TLR activation complexes. Previously, Triantafilou et al . (2002) reported that TLR4 is recruited to raft domains after LPS stimulation, and this clustering is crucial for LPS-induced cytokine production. The same group recently reported that LPS from atherosclerosis-associated bacteria such as Helicobacter pylori and P. gingivalis recruits TLR2 in lipid rafts and triggers TLR2-induced inflammatory responses in human vascular endothelial cells ( Triantafilou et al ., 2007 ). Other studies demonstrated that TNF-? induction by LPS or fimbriae of P. gingivalis depends on functional lipid rafts, indicating a crucial role of rafts domain in the innate immune responses ( Hajishengallis et al ., 2006 ). In addition, Liang et al . (2007) showed that the non-toxic pentameric B subunit [LT-IIb-B ( Yang et al ., 2007 )] of heat-labile enterotoxin of Escherichia coli displayed increased pro-inflammatory activity by inducing lipid raft recruitment of TLR2 and interacting with TLR2. Together with our previous results that TLR2 activation generates ROS in response to mycobacterial antigen stimulation ( Yang et al ., 2007 ), these data strongly suggest that the lipid raft-associated ROS generation downstream of TLR2 may be very important in the induction of innate immune responses to the 19 kDa lipoprotein or Mtb. For signal transduction, lipid rafts provide a compartment where proteins segregate for assembly of complexes containing signalling molecules and receptors ( Werlen and Palmer, 2002 ; Dykstra et al ., 2003 ). Despite the important role of membrane rafts in various cellular functions, the contributing molecules for membrane raft biophysical assembly are not well understood in the TLR signalling. The current study demonstrates that atypical PKC? is recruited into lipid rafts upon stimulation and physically associates with TLR2. By using sucrose-density gradient fractionation of membranes, we demonstrate that PKC? is translocated into and activated in the lipid raft fraction in response to the TLR2. These results focus attention on the related signalling molecules that must function in the lipid raft environment. Earlier studies to address the role of the atypical PKCs in cell function suggested that they are important intermediaries in the activation of the canonical NF-?B pathway ( Diaz-Meco et al ., 1994 ) and are also essential for the adequate activation of the NF-?B cascade both upstream and downstream the I?B kinase complex ( Leitges et al ., 2001 ; Moscat et al ., 2006 ). In our previous studies, PKC? is activated in monocytes/macrophages infected with Mtb and acts as an important upstream molecule for the Mtb-induced MEK1 activation by macrophages ( Yang et al ., 2007 ). Collectively, these studies indicate that PKC? is critically involved in the TLR2-mediated NF-?B and MAPK activation upon mycobacterial infection via raft organization and associated signalling cascades. It is noteworthy that PKC? activation and lipid raft are mutually dependent and are both involved in TLR2 signalling. Our data demonstrate a novel role for PKC? as its activation is crucially required for raft coalescence, albeit it did not affect TLR2 translocation into lipid rafts. Moreover, the lipid raft organization is also required for the PKC? activation in response to the TLR2/19 kDa lipoprotein stimulation. However, questions remain by which mechanisms PKC? is recruited into and activated in the lipid rafts after TLR2 engagement, and how lipid raft organization activates associated TLR2-dependent signalling as well as PKC? phosphorylation. An intriguing possibility is that cholesterol depletion from lipid rafts may disturb timely recruitment of certain signalling molecules that are required for the phosphorylation of PKC?, into lipid rafts, resulting in inactivation of PKC? and downstream signalling. In addition, Xie et al . have shown that PI3K-dependent activation of the 5?-AMP-activated kinase (AMPK) by peroxynitrite was accompanied by increased phosphorylation of PKC? and translocation of cytosolic PKC? into the membrane ( Xie et al ., 2006 ). These findings raised the possibility that the dynamic association between diverse intermediaries and PKC? enables them to concentrate in lipid rafts and facilitate TLR2-mediated innate immune responses during mycobacterial infection. Future studies should reveal the precise molecular mechanisms by which PKC? regulates the fine control of TLR2/ROS signalling in the context of lipid rafts organization. Interaction of TLRs with Mtb ligands initiates a signalling to activate inflammatory and antimicrobial innate immune responses ( Jo, 2008 ). Our studies provide a novel implication that TLR2/ROS-mediated changes in lipid raft organization play crucial roles in the initiation of mycobacterial 19 kDa lipoprotein-induced innate immune responses. On the other hand, TLR signalling may be subverted by bacteria to evade immune responses or dampened by host mechanisms to prevent potentially harmful excessive inflammation ( Jo, 2008 ). Other recent studies have indicated that Mtb or Mtb lipoproteins inhibit TLR2-dependent and -independent MHC class II expression ( Kincaid et al ., 2007 ), CIITA expression through TLR2-induced MAPK signalling ( Pennini et al ., 2006 ), as well as interferon-?-mediated killing of Mycobacterium bovis Bacillus Calmette-Guérin by murine macrophages ( Arko-Mensah et al ., 2007 ). Therefore, the impact of Mtb on TLR signalling may have both positive and negative effects on different aspects of the innate immune response. In summary, our data indicate that lipid rafts are critical for TLR2/ROS signalling. Stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein triggers TLR2 translocation to lipid rafts and raft coalescence, facilitating innate immune responses in a ROS-dependent manner. In that process, atypical PKC? is specifically recruited into lipid rafts and acts as an adaptor molecule that regulates lipid raft dynamics. Although further studies are needed to investigate other signalling molecules that have been implicated in mycobacteria-mediated immune responses, these data elucidate the essential role of the lipid raft organization for the lipoprotein-mediated inflammatory responses and the role of PKC? in TLR2-dependent ROS signalling activation.  Discussion The lipid-enriched microdomains, lipid rafts, are capable of forming platforms that play an important role in membrane protein sorting, construction of signalling complexes and cell signalling, such as redox signalling of death receptors in endothelial cells ( Touyz, 2006 ) and apoptotic signalling of lymphocytes and other cells ( Gulbins and Li, 2006 ). Membrane lipid rafts play key roles in T-cell and B-cell activation ( Pierce, 2002 ; Pizzo and Viola, 2003 ). Several studies have demonstrated that lipid rafts are required not only for adaptive immune responses, but also for innate immune responses ( Manes et al ., 2003 ). However, it remains elusive how lipid rafts function in TLR-dependent signalling and which elements are recruited into a raft domain upon stimulation with mycobacterial antigens, which are mainly TLR2 agonists. Exploration of the molecular machineries involved in raft biology will help us to understand the precise mechanisms by which lipid rafts contribute to TLR2-dependent innate immune responses during mycobacterial infection. To our knowledge, this is the first report that ROS-mediated lipid raft organization plays crucial roles in the initiation of TLR2/19 kDa lipoprotein-induced innate immune responses in macrophages. In addition, our data emphasize the role of raft-targeting PKC? that is critically required for lipid raft coalescence and TLR2/ROS-mediated inflammatory signalling activation. Reactive oxygen species have been shown to play an important role in broad range of physiological and pathological processes, including cell proliferation, inflammation and apoptosis ( Yodoi et al ., 2001 ; Martindale and Holbrook, 2002 ). Recently, the roles of intracellular ROS and related signalling pathways in diverse cellular functions have been extensively studied ( Wu et al ., 2007 ; Matsuzawa and Ichijo, 2008 ; Noguchi et al ., 2008 ). Accumulating evidence indicates that membrane lipid rafts and lipid platforms may represent important mechanisms by which redox signals are produced and transmitted in response to various agonists or stimuli ( Gulbins et al ., 2006 ). In this regard, it has been shown that ROS enhanced T-cell receptor-stimulated membrane raft formation, clustering and signal transduction, suggesting a function role of ROS in early T-cell activation through promotion of the assembly of T-cell activation complex in membrane rafts ( Lu et al ., 2007 ). In addition, a critical role of ROS has been suggested in LPS-mediated translocation of TLR4 and initiation of TLR4-dependent signalling responses ( Nakahira et al ., 2006 ). Studies are lacking, however, to clarify the roles of ROS in lipid raft biology in TLR-mediated innate immune responses to mycobacterial ligands. Our data are the first to reveal that the mycobacterial 19 kDa lipoprotein-mediated ROS formation promotes pro-inflammatory immune responses through TLR2 translocation into the membrane rafts and the raft coalescence. Although TLR2 was weakly found in lipid rafts under the basal conditions, we found that TLR2 was more actively recruited there upon stimulation. Disruption of raft integrity by M?CD inhibited 19 kDa lipoprotein-mediated ROS generation and production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, suggesting that raft integrity is critically involved in TLR2/ROS-mediated innate immune responses. It is perceived that rafts serve as the structure for the formation of TLR activation complexes. Previously, Triantafilou et al . (2002) reported that TLR4 is recruited to raft domains after LPS stimulation, and this clustering is crucial for LPS-induced cytokine production. The same group recently reported that LPS from atherosclerosis-associated bacteria such as Helicobacter pylori and P. gingivalis recruits TLR2 in lipid rafts and triggers TLR2-induced inflammatory responses in human vascular endothelial cells ( Triantafilou et al ., 2007 ). Other studies demonstrated that TNF-? induction by LPS or fimbriae of P. gingivalis depends on functional lipid rafts, indicating a crucial role of rafts domain in the innate immune responses ( Hajishengallis et al ., 2006 ). In addition, Liang et al . (2007) showed that the non-toxic pentameric B subunit [LT-IIb-B ( Yang et al ., 2007 )] of heat-labile enterotoxin of Escherichia coli displayed increased pro-inflammatory activity by inducing lipid raft recruitment of TLR2 and interacting with TLR2. Together with our previous results that TLR2 activation generates ROS in response to mycobacterial antigen stimulation ( Yang et al ., 2007 ), these data strongly suggest that the lipid raft-associated ROS generation downstream of TLR2 may be very important in the induction of innate immune responses to the 19 kDa lipoprotein or Mtb. For signal transduction, lipid rafts provide a compartment where proteins segregate for assembly of complexes containing signalling molecules and receptors ( Werlen and Palmer, 2002 ; Dykstra et al ., 2003 ). Despite the important role of membrane rafts in various cellular functions, the contributing molecules for membrane raft biophysical assembly are not well understood in the TLR signalling. The current study demonstrates that atypical PKC? is recruited into lipid rafts upon stimulation and physically associates with TLR2. By using sucrose-density gradient fractionation of membranes, we demonstrate that PKC? is translocated into and activated in the lipid raft fraction in response to the TLR2. These results focus attention on the related signalling molecules that must function in the lipid raft environment. Earlier studies to address the role of the atypical PKCs in cell function suggested that they are important intermediaries in the activation of the canonical NF-?B pathway ( Diaz-Meco et al ., 1994 ) and are also essential for the adequate activation of the NF-?B cascade both upstream and downstream the I?B kinase complex ( Leitges et al ., 2001 ; Moscat et al ., 2006 ). In our previous studies, PKC? is activated in monocytes/macrophages infected with Mtb and acts as an important upstream molecule for the Mtb-induced MEK1 activation by macrophages ( Yang et al ., 2007 ). Collectively, these studies indicate that PKC? is critically involved in the TLR2-mediated NF-?B and MAPK activation upon mycobacterial infection via raft organization and associated signalling cascades. It is noteworthy that PKC? activation and lipid raft are mutually dependent and are both involved in TLR2 signalling. Our data demonstrate a novel role for PKC? as its activation is crucially required for raft coalescence, albeit it did not affect TLR2 translocation into lipid rafts. Moreover, the lipid raft organization is also required for the PKC? activation in response to the TLR2/19 kDa lipoprotein stimulation. However, questions remain by which mechanisms PKC? is recruited into and activated in the lipid rafts after TLR2 engagement, and how lipid raft organization activates associated TLR2-dependent signalling as well as PKC? phosphorylation. An intriguing possibility is that cholesterol depletion from lipid rafts may disturb timely recruitment of certain signalling molecules that are required for the phosphorylation of PKC?, into lipid rafts, resulting in inactivation of PKC? and downstream signalling. In addition, Xie et al . have shown that PI3K-dependent activation of the 5?-AMP-activated kinase (AMPK) by peroxynitrite was accompanied by increased phosphorylation of PKC? and translocation of cytosolic PKC? into the membrane ( Xie et al ., 2006 ). These findings raised the possibility that the dynamic association between diverse intermediaries and PKC? enables them to concentrate in lipid rafts and facilitate TLR2-mediated innate immune responses during mycobacterial infection. Future studies should reveal the precise molecular mechanisms by which PKC? regulates the fine control of TLR2/ROS signalling in the context of lipid rafts organization. Interaction of TLRs with Mtb ligands initiates a signalling to activate inflammatory and antimicrobial innate immune responses ( Jo, 2008 ). Our studies provide a novel implication that TLR2/ROS-mediated changes in lipid raft organization play crucial roles in the initiation of mycobacterial 19 kDa lipoprotein-induced innate immune responses. On the other hand, TLR signalling may be subverted by bacteria to evade immune responses or dampened by host mechanisms to prevent potentially harmful excessive inflammation ( Jo, 2008 ). Other recent studies have indicated that Mtb or Mtb lipoproteins inhibit TLR2-dependent and -independent MHC class II expression ( Kincaid et al ., 2007 ), CIITA expression through TLR2-induced MAPK signalling ( Pennini et al ., 2006 ), as well as interferon-?-mediated killing of Mycobacterium bovis Bacillus Calmette-Guérin by murine macrophages ( Arko-Mensah et al ., 2007 ). Therefore, the impact of Mtb on TLR signalling may have both positive and negative effects on different aspects of the innate immune response. In summary, our data indicate that lipid rafts are critical for TLR2/ROS signalling. Stimulation with 19 kDa lipoprotein triggers TLR2 translocation to lipid rafts and raft coalescence, facilitating innate immune responses in a ROS-dependent manner. In that process, atypical PKC? is specifically recruited into lipid rafts and acts as an adaptor molecule that regulates lipid raft dynamics. Although further studies are needed to investigate other signalling molecules that have been implicated in mycobacteria-mediated immune responses, these data elucidate the essential role of the lipid raft organization for the lipoprotein-mediated inflammatory responses and the role of PKC? in TLR2-dependent ROS signalling activation. 