Individual Difference Variables and the Effects of Progressive Muscle Relaxation and Analgesic Imagery Interventions on Cancer Pain Clinicians in acute care settings are often called upon to manage cancer pain unrelieved by medications. Cognitive-behavioral strategies, such as relaxation and imagery, are recommended for cancer pain management; however, there appear to be individual differences in their effects. This pilot study examined variation in pain outcomes achieved with progressive muscle relaxation (PMR) and analgesic imagery interventions among hospitalized patients with cancer pain, and assessed the influence of four individual difference variables (cognitive ability, outcome expectancy, previous experience, and concurrent symptoms) on pain relief achieved with each intervention. A crossover design was used in which 40 hospitalized cancer patients received two trials of PMR, two trials of analgesic imagery, and two trials of a control condition. In comparing means between treatment and control conditions, both PMR and analgesic imagery produced greater improvements in pain intensity, pain-related distress, and perceived control over pain than the control condition. However, individual responder analysis revealed that only half of the participants achieved a clinically meaningful improvement in pain with each intervention. Patients who achieved a meaningful improvement in pain with analgesic imagery reported greater imaging ability, more positive outcome expectancy, and fewer concurrent symptoms than those who did not achieve a meaningful reduction in pain. Similar relationships were not significant for the PMR intervention. Investigators should continue efforts to identify factors that moderate the effects of cognitive-behavioral pain coping strategies so that clinicians can identify the most beneficial treatments for individual patients.  Introduction The prevalence of cancer pain is high in the inpatient setting. Up to 46% of hospitalized cancer patients experience moderate to severe pain ( 1 – 5 ), and nearly 51% experience episodes of breakthrough pain despite the use of analgesics ( 6 ). Although clinicians are available to help manage symptoms around the clock, quality improvement research indicates that pain management in the hospital setting remains “inadequate and ineffective” (7, p. 126). Cancer pain management guidelines recommend cognitive-behavioral coping strategies as adjuvants to analgesic medications ( 8 – 9 ). Clinicians often have a variety of such coping strategies in their repertoire including relaxation, distraction, imagery, and music interventions, among others. Cognitive-behavioral coping strategies may reduce pain by interrupting the transmission of pain signals, limiting the cognitive capacity to pay attention to pain, stimulating the release of endorphins, or by helping patients diminish pain-exacerbating thoughts ( 10 – 13 ). Relaxation and guided imagery are two cognitive-behavioral strategies that have shown promise in managing acute nonmalignant pain ( 14 – 15 ), as well as in controlling various cancer-related symptoms ( 16 – 17 ). In studies of acute cancer pain, investigators have demonstrated beneficial effects of relaxation and guided imagery for treatment-related pain (i.e., surgery, bone marrow transplant) ( 18 – 20 ) and disease-related pain in patients with various cancer diagnoses ( 21 – 24 ). Individual responses to these strategies vary, however, and a strategy that works for some patients may not work for others ( 24 – 25 ). Studies of cognitive-behavioral pain treatments typically report group mean pain scores, but individual improvements are rarely described. Witter et al. ( 26 ) recommended that individual responder analysis (i.e., determination of whether or not each study participant met desired endpoints) might better capture important results of clinical pain management trials than traditional evaluation of group means, and may help to identify subgroups of patients most likely to benefit from the intervention. Individual variability in response to cognitive-behavioral pain strategies may be explained, in part, by characteristics of study participants. Pain researchers have identified a number of demographic (age, gender), personality (extroversion, neuroticism) and psychological factors (expectancy, catastrophizing) that influence pain processing and subsequent experiences of chronic pain ( 27 – 29 ). Less attention has been paid to factors that influence responses to specific cognitive-behavioral coping strategies (e.g., relaxation or imagery), particularly for acute pain episodes. Kwekkeboom and colleagues ( 24 , 30 ) suggested that the effects of cognitive-behavioral pain coping strategies may be moderated by individual differences in cognitive ability, outcome expectancy, previous experience, and concurrent symptoms ( Figure 1 ). Cognitive ability, in this use, refers to one’s aptitude or capacity to engage in the activities of the strategy. For example, the cognitive ability to create and experience vivid mental images facilitates symptom relief with guided imagery ( 24 , 31 ). Outcome expectancy is one’s anticipated response to using the specific cognitive-behavioral strategy, which may be positive or negative based on past experience, and is thought to influence one’s commitment or focus in using the strategy ( 32 – 34 ). Finally, the experience of multiple concurrent symptoms when using the cognitive-behavioral strategy may compromise one’s focus or concentration and has been shown to negatively affect pain outcomes ( 24 ). Given the general recommendation to use cognitive-behavioral strategies in managing cancer pain, it is important not only to document whether or not specific strategies are effective, but also to determine if individual difference variables influence which strategies work for specific patients. Knowledge of such individual difference factors may provide a better rationale for selecting a specific cognitive-behavioral strategy when helping patients manage episodic flares in pain. This pilot study assessed variation in responses to PMR and analgesic imagery interventions among hospitalized patients with cancer pain, and examined the influence of selected individual difference variables (ability, outcome expectancy, previous experience, and concurrent symptoms) on pain relief achieved with each intervention. Responses were evaluated with respect to one primary pain outcome (change in pain intensity) and two secondary pain outcomes (change in pain-related distress and perceived control over pain). We hypothesized that: Comparison of group means would demonstrate better pain outcomes with the PMR and analgesic imagery interventions compared to a control condition. Individual responder analysis would demonstrate variation in response to PMR and analgesic imagery, with only some participants achieving a clinically meaningful improvement in pain outcomes with each intervention. Patients who achieved a clinically meaningful improvement in pain outcomes would report greater imaging or relaxation ability, more positive outcome expectancy, more positive previous experiences with the interventions, and fewer concurrent symptoms than persons who did not achieve a meaningful improvement in pain.  Methods Design and Participants Because our goal was to demonstrate differences in individual outcomes for specific treatments, we used a crossover design in which each participant received two trials of a control condition, two trials of PMR, and two trials of analgesic imagery. The study was conducted over a two-day period, with subjects receiving one control trial and two trials of PMR or imagery on each day ( Figure 2 ). Participants were blocked by average pain severity (2–4 versus 5–8), then randomized to the order of interventions. Pain intensity and pain-related distress were measured before and after each trial and perceived control over pain was measured after each trial. Participants included 40 patients with cancer-related pain hospitalized at a Midwest academic medical center. Criteria for participation were: age ? 18, average pain in the last 24 hours rated 2 to 8 on a 0–10 scale, and anticipated hospitalization for at least two days. Exclusion criteria were: pain that was post-operative or neuropathic in etiology, inability to read and understand English, and cognitive impairment that would prevent completion of study procedures. Nursing staff identified 161 potential participants; 112 agreed to talk with the research nurse. Of those, 44 did not meet eligibility criteria and 28 refused to participate for reasons related to time (12 - too busy, 2 - anticipating early discharge), physical condition (3 -too tired, 2 - too sick), or concerns about study procedures (4 - not interested, 3 - skeptical about intervention effectiveness, 1 - dislike of questionnaires, 1 - fear of exacerbating pain). Forty patients agreed to participate, signed consent forms and started baseline questionnaires. Participants’ demographic characteristics are described in Table 1 . Most were non-Hispanic Caucasians and about half (55%) were female. Participants ranged in age from 18 to 75 (mean=49, SD=16 years). Fifty-five percent had hematologic malignancies and 45% had solid tumors. Pain was most commonly somatic (62%) and treated using strong opioids with or without weak or non-opioids (75%). Instruments Demographic Questionnaire Patients provided demographic data including age, gender, race, ethnicity, and education. Cancer diagnosis, treatment, type of pain, and analgesic orders were obtained from the medical records. Individual Difference Variables Imaging Ability Imaging ability was measured with the Imaging Ability Questionnaire (IAQ) ( 35 ). The 32-item IAQ assesses the tendency to become engaged in fantasy and imaginative experiences and the ability to generate vivid mental images. Items were scored from 0 to 4 and summed with higher scores indicating better imaging ability. Internal consistency reliability (? = 0.93) test-retest reliability (r = 0.92), and construct validity of the IAQ have been previously demonstrated in healthy adults and persons with cancer ( 35 ). Internal consistency reliability in the current sample was ? = 0.92. Relaxation Ability The Relaxation Ability Questionnaire, adapted from the relaxation subscale of the Wisconsin Experience Questionnaire ( 36 ), was used to assess the participants’ perceptions of their ability to become relaxed. Nine statements regarding the process of becoming relaxed were rated using a 5-point scale. Mean score was calculated across items with higher scores indicating greater perceived relaxation ability. Internal consistency reliability in a sample of healthy adults was ? = 0.85–0.87 and test-retest reliability was r = 0.81 ( 37 ). In the current sample, internal consistency reliability was ? = 0.91. Outcome Expectancy The Outcome Expectancy Scale was used to assess anticipated outcomes of using guided imagery and relaxation interventions, that is, the specific expectation that guided imagery or relaxation could relieve the individual’s pain. Beliefs that one’s pain can be controlled with guided imagery and relaxation were assessed with 6 items for each strategy and rated on a 7-point scale. Means were calculated across the 6 items, with higher scores indicating more positive outcome expectancy. Internal consistency reliability (? = 0.75–0.89) and construct validity of the Outcome Expectancy Scale have been demonstrated in previous work with cancer patients and healthy adults (33, unpublished data). In the current sample, internal consistency reliability was ? = 0.90 for the guided imagery version and ? = 0.91 for the relaxation version. Previous Experience with the Interventions Previous experiences with relaxation and guided imagery were measured using five questions that assessed the quality of personal or vicarious experiences with each strategy. Items were answered “yes,” (+ 1) “no,” (?1) or “not sure” (0), and summed across items with higher scores indicating more positive previous experience. Internal consistency reliability in the current sample was ? = 0.85 for both the guided imagery and relaxation versions. Concurrent Symptoms The Edmonton Symptom Assessment System (ESAS) ( 38 ) was used to measure concurrent symptoms experienced while listening to control or cognitive-behavioral interventions. Severity of tiredness, nausea, depression, anxiety, drowsiness, lack of appetite, sense of well-being, shortness of breath, and other (fill-in-the-blank) symptoms were scored on a 0–10 numeric rating scale and a sum calculated across all items. Internal consistency reliability in this use ranged from ? = 0.62 to 0.81. Primary Pain Outcome Change in Pain Intensity Current pain intensity was measured using a 0 (no pain) to 10 (worst pain imaginable) numeric rating scale. Percent change in pain intensity was calculated from pre- to post-trial for each trial (control and interventions). Percentage change in pain scores have been shown to be less biased by pretreatment pain than absolute (raw) change scores ( 39 ) and correlate well with patient reports of perceived pain reduction ( 40 ). A reduction of ? 30% has been identified as a clinically meaningful change in pain ( 41 ). Secondary Pain Outcomes Change in Pain-Related Distress Participants were asked to rate their pain-related distress (i.e., How distressing is your pain right now?) using a 0 (no distress) to 10 (unbearable distress) numeric rating scale. Percent change in pain-related distress was calculated from pre-to post-trial for each trial (control and interventions). Perceived Control over Pain The Control subscale from the Survey of Pain Attitudes ( 42 ) was used to measure perceived control over pain. Five statements about personal control over pain were rated on a 5-point scale. Mean score was calculated across items with higher scores indicating greater perceived control over pain. Internal consistency reliability in the current sample ranged from ? = 0.77 to 0.90. Equipment and Interventions The control condition, guided imagery, and PMR interventions were recorded on CD using a male voice with no musical background. A portable CD player with large (3.5” x 2.75”) over-the-ear style headphones was used to play the recordings. Control Condition Information recordings were used to control for the effects of attention from the research nurse, use of the CD player and headphones, and the distraction of receiving a recorded message. The recording used on day one identified members of the health care team, explained patients’ rights, and described various hospital services (time=14:09). The recording used on day two described exercises and activities to maintain strength while hospitalized and identified issues in thinking ahead toward discharge (time=13:17). Progressive Muscle Relaxation Listeners were guided through instructions to tense and relax muscles in a series of 12 major muscle groups from head to feet (time=13:36). Instructions encouraged participants to focus on sensations associated with release of muscle tension and feelings of comfort. Patients were advised not to tense muscle groups that felt strained or that aggravated pain. Analgesic Imagery A glove anesthesia technique ( 43 – 44 ) was used in which listeners were first asked to scan their bodies to identify areas of pain and to imagine replacing pain with comforting sensations (e.g., heat or cold). Next they were asked to imagine soaking a hand in anesthetic fluid, feeling it go numb, and transferring the numbness to painful areas of the body (time=14:29). Procedure All study procedures were approved by the institution’s IRB and patients were recruited from June 2005 to September 2006. Staff nurses identified patients who met criteria. A research nurse met with willing patients, confirmed eligibility criteria, and explained study purposes and procedures. The research nurse provided a brief (2–3) sentence description of each intervention including how it was thought to impact pain. After written consent was obtained, participants completed measures of demographic variables, imaging ability, relaxation ability, outcome expectancy, previous experience, and baseline perceived control over pain. Subjects were then randomized to the order of interventions by selecting a pre-prepared randomization envelope from the appropriate pain strata (2–4 or 5–8). Control and intervention trials were conducted when current pain (“pain now”) was rated 2 to 8 on the 0–10 scale. Trials were delayed if patients had received an oral analgesic within the last 60 minutes or an IV analgesic within the last 30 minutes to prevent confounding the effect of the study intervention with any new onset of analgesic action. Patients on PCA pumps received their basal continuous infusions, but were asked to refrain from patient-initiated doses during the 15-minute trials. The first trial of each day was always the control trial to prevent any potential carry-over from the active treatments into the control condition. If pain persisted at the end of the control trial (rated 2 to 8), the research nurse continued with the first of two trials of the assigned day’s cognitive-behavioral strategy. Two trials of each cognitive-behavioral strategy were conducted per day to allow participants more than just one single assessment while also attempting to limit subject burden. The second trial was conducted at least one hour after the first trial. The following procedures were used for each control or intervention trial. First, the patient completed pre-trial ratings of pain intensity and pain-related distress. The patient was then given the appropriate CD loaded in a CD player. The research nurse helped the patient start the recording, then stepped out of the room and posted a “Do Not Disturb” sign on the patient’s door. The research nurse waited outside the door and re-entered at the end of the recording time to administer post-trial measures of pain intensity and pain-related distress, perceived control over pain, and concurrent symptoms. The CD player and CDs were taken out of the patient’s room between trials. Participants were reimbursed $30/day for their time and effort. Data Analyses For each outcome (change in pain intensity, change in pain-related distress, perceived control over pain), scores were averaged across the two control, PMR, or analgesic imagery trials. For example, change in pain intensity from the first PMR trial was averaged with change in pain intensity from the second PMR trial to form the score used in data analyses. In cases where participants completed only one trial, the score from that single trial was used in analyses. Summary statistics were used to describe the sample with respect to demographic characteristics, scores on individual difference variables, and pain outcomes. Nonparametric statistics (Wilcoxon Signed Rank and Mann-Whitney U) were used in comparing paired data and in making comparisons between treatment and control conditions and between treatment responders and non-responders. One-tailed tests were used for directional hypotheses. Because our intent was to demonstrate individual variation in responses to both PMR and analgesic imagery interventions, not to demonstrate that one intervention was more effective than the other, no statistical tests were carried out comparing PMR to analgesic imagery.  Design and Participants Because our goal was to demonstrate differences in individual outcomes for specific treatments, we used a crossover design in which each participant received two trials of a control condition, two trials of PMR, and two trials of analgesic imagery. The study was conducted over a two-day period, with subjects receiving one control trial and two trials of PMR or imagery on each day ( Figure 2 ). Participants were blocked by average pain severity (2–4 versus 5–8), then randomized to the order of interventions. Pain intensity and pain-related distress were measured before and after each trial and perceived control over pain was measured after each trial. Participants included 40 patients with cancer-related pain hospitalized at a Midwest academic medical center. Criteria for participation were: age ? 18, average pain in the last 24 hours rated 2 to 8 on a 0–10 scale, and anticipated hospitalization for at least two days. Exclusion criteria were: pain that was post-operative or neuropathic in etiology, inability to read and understand English, and cognitive impairment that would prevent completion of study procedures. Nursing staff identified 161 potential participants; 112 agreed to talk with the research nurse. Of those, 44 did not meet eligibility criteria and 28 refused to participate for reasons related to time (12 - too busy, 2 - anticipating early discharge), physical condition (3 -too tired, 2 - too sick), or concerns about study procedures (4 - not interested, 3 - skeptical about intervention effectiveness, 1 - dislike of questionnaires, 1 - fear of exacerbating pain). Forty patients agreed to participate, signed consent forms and started baseline questionnaires. Participants’ demographic characteristics are described in Table 1 . Most were non-Hispanic Caucasians and about half (55%) were female. Participants ranged in age from 18 to 75 (mean=49, SD=16 years). Fifty-five percent had hematologic malignancies and 45% had solid tumors. Pain was most commonly somatic (62%) and treated using strong opioids with or without weak or non-opioids (75%).  Instruments Demographic Questionnaire Patients provided demographic data including age, gender, race, ethnicity, and education. Cancer diagnosis, treatment, type of pain, and analgesic orders were obtained from the medical records. Individual Difference Variables Imaging Ability Imaging ability was measured with the Imaging Ability Questionnaire (IAQ) ( 35 ). The 32-item IAQ assesses the tendency to become engaged in fantasy and imaginative experiences and the ability to generate vivid mental images. Items were scored from 0 to 4 and summed with higher scores indicating better imaging ability. Internal consistency reliability (? = 0.93) test-retest reliability (r = 0.92), and construct validity of the IAQ have been previously demonstrated in healthy adults and persons with cancer ( 35 ). Internal consistency reliability in the current sample was ? = 0.92. Relaxation Ability The Relaxation Ability Questionnaire, adapted from the relaxation subscale of the Wisconsin Experience Questionnaire ( 36 ), was used to assess the participants’ perceptions of their ability to become relaxed. Nine statements regarding the process of becoming relaxed were rated using a 5-point scale. Mean score was calculated across items with higher scores indicating greater perceived relaxation ability. Internal consistency reliability in a sample of healthy adults was ? = 0.85–0.87 and test-retest reliability was r = 0.81 ( 37 ). In the current sample, internal consistency reliability was ? = 0.91. Outcome Expectancy The Outcome Expectancy Scale was used to assess anticipated outcomes of using guided imagery and relaxation interventions, that is, the specific expectation that guided imagery or relaxation could relieve the individual’s pain. Beliefs that one’s pain can be controlled with guided imagery and relaxation were assessed with 6 items for each strategy and rated on a 7-point scale. Means were calculated across the 6 items, with higher scores indicating more positive outcome expectancy. Internal consistency reliability (? = 0.75–0.89) and construct validity of the Outcome Expectancy Scale have been demonstrated in previous work with cancer patients and healthy adults (33, unpublished data). In the current sample, internal consistency reliability was ? = 0.90 for the guided imagery version and ? = 0.91 for the relaxation version. Previous Experience with the Interventions Previous experiences with relaxation and guided imagery were measured using five questions that assessed the quality of personal or vicarious experiences with each strategy. Items were answered “yes,” (+ 1) “no,” (?1) or “not sure” (0), and summed across items with higher scores indicating more positive previous experience. Internal consistency reliability in the current sample was ? = 0.85 for both the guided imagery and relaxation versions. Concurrent Symptoms The Edmonton Symptom Assessment System (ESAS) ( 38 ) was used to measure concurrent symptoms experienced while listening to control or cognitive-behavioral interventions. Severity of tiredness, nausea, depression, anxiety, drowsiness, lack of appetite, sense of well-being, shortness of breath, and other (fill-in-the-blank) symptoms were scored on a 0–10 numeric rating scale and a sum calculated across all items. Internal consistency reliability in this use ranged from ? = 0.62 to 0.81. Primary Pain Outcome Change in Pain Intensity Current pain intensity was measured using a 0 (no pain) to 10 (worst pain imaginable) numeric rating scale. Percent change in pain intensity was calculated from pre- to post-trial for each trial (control and interventions). Percentage change in pain scores have been shown to be less biased by pretreatment pain than absolute (raw) change scores ( 39 ) and correlate well with patient reports of perceived pain reduction ( 40 ). A reduction of ? 30% has been identified as a clinically meaningful change in pain ( 41 ). Secondary Pain Outcomes Change in Pain-Related Distress Participants were asked to rate their pain-related distress (i.e., How distressing is your pain right now?) using a 0 (no distress) to 10 (unbearable distress) numeric rating scale. Percent change in pain-related distress was calculated from pre-to post-trial for each trial (control and interventions). Perceived Control over Pain The Control subscale from the Survey of Pain Attitudes ( 42 ) was used to measure perceived control over pain. Five statements about personal control over pain were rated on a 5-point scale. Mean score was calculated across items with higher scores indicating greater perceived control over pain. Internal consistency reliability in the current sample ranged from ? = 0.77 to 0.90.  Demographic Questionnaire Patients provided demographic data including age, gender, race, ethnicity, and education. Cancer diagnosis, treatment, type of pain, and analgesic orders were obtained from the medical records.  Individual Difference Variables Imaging Ability Imaging ability was measured with the Imaging Ability Questionnaire (IAQ) ( 35 ). The 32-item IAQ assesses the tendency to become engaged in fantasy and imaginative experiences and the ability to generate vivid mental images. Items were scored from 0 to 4 and summed with higher scores indicating better imaging ability. Internal consistency reliability (? = 0.93) test-retest reliability (r = 0.92), and construct validity of the IAQ have been previously demonstrated in healthy adults and persons with cancer ( 35 ). Internal consistency reliability in the current sample was ? = 0.92. Relaxation Ability The Relaxation Ability Questionnaire, adapted from the relaxation subscale of the Wisconsin Experience Questionnaire ( 36 ), was used to assess the participants’ perceptions of their ability to become relaxed. Nine statements regarding the process of becoming relaxed were rated using a 5-point scale. Mean score was calculated across items with higher scores indicating greater perceived relaxation ability. Internal consistency reliability in a sample of healthy adults was ? = 0.85–0.87 and test-retest reliability was r = 0.81 ( 37 ). In the current sample, internal consistency reliability was ? = 0.91. Outcome Expectancy The Outcome Expectancy Scale was used to assess anticipated outcomes of using guided imagery and relaxation interventions, that is, the specific expectation that guided imagery or relaxation could relieve the individual’s pain. Beliefs that one’s pain can be controlled with guided imagery and relaxation were assessed with 6 items for each strategy and rated on a 7-point scale. Means were calculated across the 6 items, with higher scores indicating more positive outcome expectancy. Internal consistency reliability (? = 0.75–0.89) and construct validity of the Outcome Expectancy Scale have been demonstrated in previous work with cancer patients and healthy adults (33, unpublished data). In the current sample, internal consistency reliability was ? = 0.90 for the guided imagery version and ? = 0.91 for the relaxation version. Previous Experience with the Interventions Previous experiences with relaxation and guided imagery were measured using five questions that assessed the quality of personal or vicarious experiences with each strategy. Items were answered “yes,” (+ 1) “no,” (?1) or “not sure” (0), and summed across items with higher scores indicating more positive previous experience. Internal consistency reliability in the current sample was ? = 0.85 for both the guided imagery and relaxation versions. Concurrent Symptoms The Edmonton Symptom Assessment System (ESAS) ( 38 ) was used to measure concurrent symptoms experienced while listening to control or cognitive-behavioral interventions. Severity of tiredness, nausea, depression, anxiety, drowsiness, lack of appetite, sense of well-being, shortness of breath, and other (fill-in-the-blank) symptoms were scored on a 0–10 numeric rating scale and a sum calculated across all items. Internal consistency reliability in this use ranged from ? = 0.62 to 0.81.  Imaging Ability Imaging ability was measured with the Imaging Ability Questionnaire (IAQ) ( 35 ). The 32-item IAQ assesses the tendency to become engaged in fantasy and imaginative experiences and the ability to generate vivid mental images. Items were scored from 0 to 4 and summed with higher scores indicating better imaging ability. Internal consistency reliability (? = 0.93) test-retest reliability (r = 0.92), and construct validity of the IAQ have been previously demonstrated in healthy adults and persons with cancer ( 35 ). Internal consistency reliability in the current sample was ? = 0.92.  Relaxation Ability The Relaxation Ability Questionnaire, adapted from the relaxation subscale of the Wisconsin Experience Questionnaire ( 36 ), was used to assess the participants’ perceptions of their ability to become relaxed. Nine statements regarding the process of becoming relaxed were rated using a 5-point scale. Mean score was calculated across items with higher scores indicating greater perceived relaxation ability. Internal consistency reliability in a sample of healthy adults was ? = 0.85–0.87 and test-retest reliability was r = 0.81 ( 37 ). In the current sample, internal consistency reliability was ? = 0.91.  Outcome Expectancy The Outcome Expectancy Scale was used to assess anticipated outcomes of using guided imagery and relaxation interventions, that is, the specific expectation that guided imagery or relaxation could relieve the individual’s pain. Beliefs that one’s pain can be controlled with guided imagery and relaxation were assessed with 6 items for each strategy and rated on a 7-point scale. Means were calculated across the 6 items, with higher scores indicating more positive outcome expectancy. Internal consistency reliability (? = 0.75–0.89) and construct validity of the Outcome Expectancy Scale have been demonstrated in previous work with cancer patients and healthy adults (33, unpublished data). In the current sample, internal consistency reliability was ? = 0.90 for the guided imagery version and ? = 0.91 for the relaxation version.  Previous Experience with the Interventions Previous experiences with relaxation and guided imagery were measured using five questions that assessed the quality of personal or vicarious experiences with each strategy. Items were answered “yes,” (+ 1) “no,” (?1) or “not sure” (0), and summed across items with higher scores indicating more positive previous experience. Internal consistency reliability in the current sample was ? = 0.85 for both the guided imagery and relaxation versions.  Concurrent Symptoms The Edmonton Symptom Assessment System (ESAS) ( 38 ) was used to measure concurrent symptoms experienced while listening to control or cognitive-behavioral interventions. Severity of tiredness, nausea, depression, anxiety, drowsiness, lack of appetite, sense of well-being, shortness of breath, and other (fill-in-the-blank) symptoms were scored on a 0–10 numeric rating scale and a sum calculated across all items. Internal consistency reliability in this use ranged from ? = 0.62 to 0.81.  Primary Pain Outcome Change in Pain Intensity Current pain intensity was measured using a 0 (no pain) to 10 (worst pain imaginable) numeric rating scale. Percent change in pain intensity was calculated from pre- to post-trial for each trial (control and interventions). Percentage change in pain scores have been shown to be less biased by pretreatment pain than absolute (raw) change scores ( 39 ) and correlate well with patient reports of perceived pain reduction ( 40 ). A reduction of ? 30% has been identified as a clinically meaningful change in pain ( 41 ).  Change in Pain Intensity Current pain intensity was measured using a 0 (no pain) to 10 (worst pain imaginable) numeric rating scale. Percent change in pain intensity was calculated from pre- to post-trial for each trial (control and interventions). Percentage change in pain scores have been shown to be less biased by pretreatment pain than absolute (raw) change scores ( 39 ) and correlate well with patient reports of perceived pain reduction ( 40 ). A reduction of ? 30% has been identified as a clinically meaningful change in pain ( 41 ).  Secondary Pain Outcomes Change in Pain-Related Distress Participants were asked to rate their pain-related distress (i.e., How distressing is your pain right now?) using a 0 (no distress) to 10 (unbearable distress) numeric rating scale. Percent change in pain-related distress was calculated from pre-to post-trial for each trial (control and interventions). Perceived Control over Pain The Control subscale from the Survey of Pain Attitudes ( 42 ) was used to measure perceived control over pain. Five statements about personal control over pain were rated on a 5-point scale. Mean score was calculated across items with higher scores indicating greater perceived control over pain. Internal consistency reliability in the current sample ranged from ? = 0.77 to 0.90.  Change in Pain-Related Distress Participants were asked to rate their pain-related distress (i.e., How distressing is your pain right now?) using a 0 (no distress) to 10 (unbearable distress) numeric rating scale. Percent change in pain-related distress was calculated from pre-to post-trial for each trial (control and interventions).  Perceived Control over Pain The Control subscale from the Survey of Pain Attitudes ( 42 ) was used to measure perceived control over pain. Five statements about personal control over pain were rated on a 5-point scale. Mean score was calculated across items with higher scores indicating greater perceived control over pain. Internal consistency reliability in the current sample ranged from ? = 0.77 to 0.90.  Equipment and Interventions The control condition, guided imagery, and PMR interventions were recorded on CD using a male voice with no musical background. A portable CD player with large (3.5” x 2.75”) over-the-ear style headphones was used to play the recordings. Control Condition Information recordings were used to control for the effects of attention from the research nurse, use of the CD player and headphones, and the distraction of receiving a recorded message. The recording used on day one identified members of the health care team, explained patients’ rights, and described various hospital services (time=14:09). The recording used on day two described exercises and activities to maintain strength while hospitalized and identified issues in thinking ahead toward discharge (time=13:17). Progressive Muscle Relaxation Listeners were guided through instructions to tense and relax muscles in a series of 12 major muscle groups from head to feet (time=13:36). Instructions encouraged participants to focus on sensations associated with release of muscle tension and feelings of comfort. Patients were advised not to tense muscle groups that felt strained or that aggravated pain. Analgesic Imagery A glove anesthesia technique ( 43 – 44 ) was used in which listeners were first asked to scan their bodies to identify areas of pain and to imagine replacing pain with comforting sensations (e.g., heat or cold). Next they were asked to imagine soaking a hand in anesthetic fluid, feeling it go numb, and transferring the numbness to painful areas of the body (time=14:29).  Control Condition Information recordings were used to control for the effects of attention from the research nurse, use of the CD player and headphones, and the distraction of receiving a recorded message. The recording used on day one identified members of the health care team, explained patients’ rights, and described various hospital services (time=14:09). The recording used on day two described exercises and activities to maintain strength while hospitalized and identified issues in thinking ahead toward discharge (time=13:17).  Progressive Muscle Relaxation Listeners were guided through instructions to tense and relax muscles in a series of 12 major muscle groups from head to feet (time=13:36). Instructions encouraged participants to focus on sensations associated with release of muscle tension and feelings of comfort. Patients were advised not to tense muscle groups that felt strained or that aggravated pain.  Analgesic Imagery A glove anesthesia technique ( 43 – 44 ) was used in which listeners were first asked to scan their bodies to identify areas of pain and to imagine replacing pain with comforting sensations (e.g., heat or cold). Next they were asked to imagine soaking a hand in anesthetic fluid, feeling it go numb, and transferring the numbness to painful areas of the body (time=14:29).  Procedure All study procedures were approved by the institution’s IRB and patients were recruited from June 2005 to September 2006. Staff nurses identified patients who met criteria. A research nurse met with willing patients, confirmed eligibility criteria, and explained study purposes and procedures. The research nurse provided a brief (2–3) sentence description of each intervention including how it was thought to impact pain. After written consent was obtained, participants completed measures of demographic variables, imaging ability, relaxation ability, outcome expectancy, previous experience, and baseline perceived control over pain. Subjects were then randomized to the order of interventions by selecting a pre-prepared randomization envelope from the appropriate pain strata (2–4 or 5–8). Control and intervention trials were conducted when current pain (“pain now”) was rated 2 to 8 on the 0–10 scale. Trials were delayed if patients had received an oral analgesic within the last 60 minutes or an IV analgesic within the last 30 minutes to prevent confounding the effect of the study intervention with any new onset of analgesic action. Patients on PCA pumps received their basal continuous infusions, but were asked to refrain from patient-initiated doses during the 15-minute trials. The first trial of each day was always the control trial to prevent any potential carry-over from the active treatments into the control condition. If pain persisted at the end of the control trial (rated 2 to 8), the research nurse continued with the first of two trials of the assigned day’s cognitive-behavioral strategy. Two trials of each cognitive-behavioral strategy were conducted per day to allow participants more than just one single assessment while also attempting to limit subject burden. The second trial was conducted at least one hour after the first trial. The following procedures were used for each control or intervention trial. First, the patient completed pre-trial ratings of pain intensity and pain-related distress. The patient was then given the appropriate CD loaded in a CD player. The research nurse helped the patient start the recording, then stepped out of the room and posted a “Do Not Disturb” sign on the patient’s door. The research nurse waited outside the door and re-entered at the end of the recording time to administer post-trial measures of pain intensity and pain-related distress, perceived control over pain, and concurrent symptoms. The CD player and CDs were taken out of the patient’s room between trials. Participants were reimbursed $30/day for their time and effort.  Data Analyses For each outcome (change in pain intensity, change in pain-related distress, perceived control over pain), scores were averaged across the two control, PMR, or analgesic imagery trials. For example, change in pain intensity from the first PMR trial was averaged with change in pain intensity from the second PMR trial to form the score used in data analyses. In cases where participants completed only one trial, the score from that single trial was used in analyses. Summary statistics were used to describe the sample with respect to demographic characteristics, scores on individual difference variables, and pain outcomes. Nonparametric statistics (Wilcoxon Signed Rank and Mann-Whitney U) were used in comparing paired data and in making comparisons between treatment and control conditions and between treatment responders and non-responders. One-tailed tests were used for directional hypotheses. Because our intent was to demonstrate individual variation in responses to both PMR and analgesic imagery interventions, not to demonstrate that one intervention was more effective than the other, no statistical tests were carried out comparing PMR to analgesic imagery.  Hypothesis 2 – Individual Responder Analysis Participants were categorized as having a meaningful improvement in pain with each cognitive-behavioral treatment (i.e., responders) if they achieved ? 30% reduction in pain intensity and also reported improvement in either pain-related distress, perceived control over pain, or both. Thirteen of the 32 participants who provided PMR data (41%) had a meaningful improvement in pain. Sixteen of 31 participants who provided analgesic imagery data (52%) had a meaningful improvement in pain. Thirty participants provided data for both relaxation and analgesic imagery trials. Of those 30, eight obtained meaningful improvement in pain with both cognitive-behavioral strategies and thirteen reported meaningful improvement in pain with only one strategy (5 with PMR only, 8 with analgesic imagery only).  Hypothesis 3 – Influence of Individual Difference Variables Scores on the individual difference variables were compared between subjects who achieved a meaningful improvement in pain and those who did not ( Table 3 ). There were no significant differences in perceived relaxation ability, outcome expectancy for relaxation, previous experience with relaxation or concurrent symptoms between persons who experienced a meaningful improvement in pain with PMR and those who did not. With respect to analgesic imagery, persons who demonstrated a meaningful improvement in pain had greater imaging ability (Mann Whitney U = 71.00, P < 0.05), more positive outcome expectancy (Mann Whitney U = 69.5, P < 0.05), and fewer concurrent symptoms (Mann Whitney U = 76.00, P < 0.05) than persons who did not report a meaningful improvement in pain. Previous experiences with imagery interventions did not differ between groups.  Results Twenty-four participants were allocated to intervention Order 1 (PMR-Imagery) and sixteen were allocated to intervention Order 2 (Imagery-PMR). The number of persons assigned to each order was not equal because our randomization scheme was not set up in small blocks to balance group assignment throughout recruitment and we had lower than anticipated participation rate during the funding period. Among the 40 participants who started the study, eight did not receive any relaxation trials, and nine did not receive any guided imagery trials because they were too tired, too busy, felt too ill, were discharged earlier than anticipated, or their pain resolved. Thus data regarding PMR was available from 32 participants and data regarding guided imagery was available from 31 participants. Persons who completed no trials were older (Mean rank = 28.86, M = 60.57, SD = 9.61) than persons who completed trials (Mean rank = 18.73, M = 46.45, SD = 16.44), Mann-Whitney U = 57, n not completed = 7, n completed = 33, P < 0.05. A greater proportion of males (34%) completed no trials compared to females (5%), ?2( 1 ) = 5.68, P < 0.05. No other demographic or disease-related variables differed between persons who completed trials and those who did not. Carry-Over Effects Neither pre-trial pain intensity ratings nor pre-trial pain-related distress ratings differed significantly across trials, suggesting that any pain relieving effects of the previous control or treatment conditions had dissipated before starting the next trial. Repeated measures ANOVA found no significant period (day 1 vs. 2) by sequence (Order 1 vs. Order 2) interactions, suggesting that responses on day 2 were not affected by the treatments received on day 1. Hypothesis 1 – Comparison of Group Means (Treatment vs. Control) Pain outcomes achieved with the PMR and analgesic imagery interventions were compared to those obtained with the control condition from the same day using the Wilcoxon Signed Rank test. Greater change in pain intensity (Z = ?2.15, P < 0.05), greater change in pain-related distress (Z = ?1.82, P < 0.05), and greater perceived control over pain (Z = ?3.02, P <0.01) were reported with PMR compared to control. Similarly, greater change in pain intensity (Z = ?2.70, P < 0.01), greater change in pain-related distress (Z = ?2.11, P < 0.05), and greater perceived control over pain (Z = ?2.40, P < 0.01) were reported with analgesic imagery compared to control. Mean scores for these pain outcomes are reported in Table 2 . Hypothesis 2 – Individual Responder Analysis Participants were categorized as having a meaningful improvement in pain with each cognitive-behavioral treatment (i.e., responders) if they achieved ? 30% reduction in pain intensity and also reported improvement in either pain-related distress, perceived control over pain, or both. Thirteen of the 32 participants who provided PMR data (41%) had a meaningful improvement in pain. Sixteen of 31 participants who provided analgesic imagery data (52%) had a meaningful improvement in pain. Thirty participants provided data for both relaxation and analgesic imagery trials. Of those 30, eight obtained meaningful improvement in pain with both cognitive-behavioral strategies and thirteen reported meaningful improvement in pain with only one strategy (5 with PMR only, 8 with analgesic imagery only). Hypothesis 3 – Influence of Individual Difference Variables Scores on the individual difference variables were compared between subjects who achieved a meaningful improvement in pain and those who did not ( Table 3 ). There were no significant differences in perceived relaxation ability, outcome expectancy for relaxation, previous experience with relaxation or concurrent symptoms between persons who experienced a meaningful improvement in pain with PMR and those who did not. With respect to analgesic imagery, persons who demonstrated a meaningful improvement in pain had greater imaging ability (Mann Whitney U = 71.00, P < 0.05), more positive outcome expectancy (Mann Whitney U = 69.5, P < 0.05), and fewer concurrent symptoms (Mann Whitney U = 76.00, P < 0.05) than persons who did not report a meaningful improvement in pain. Previous experiences with imagery interventions did not differ between groups.  Results Twenty-four participants were allocated to intervention Order 1 (PMR-Imagery) and sixteen were allocated to intervention Order 2 (Imagery-PMR). The number of persons assigned to each order was not equal because our randomization scheme was not set up in small blocks to balance group assignment throughout recruitment and we had lower than anticipated participation rate during the funding period. Among the 40 participants who started the study, eight did not receive any relaxation trials, and nine did not receive any guided imagery trials because they were too tired, too busy, felt too ill, were discharged earlier than anticipated, or their pain resolved. Thus data regarding PMR was available from 32 participants and data regarding guided imagery was available from 31 participants. Persons who completed no trials were older (Mean rank = 28.86, M = 60.57, SD = 9.61) than persons who completed trials (Mean rank = 18.73, M = 46.45, SD = 16.44), Mann-Whitney U = 57, n not completed = 7, n completed = 33, P < 0.05. A greater proportion of males (34%) completed no trials compared to females (5%), ?2( 1 ) = 5.68, P < 0.05. No other demographic or disease-related variables differed between persons who completed trials and those who did not. Carry-Over Effects Neither pre-trial pain intensity ratings nor pre-trial pain-related distress ratings differed significantly across trials, suggesting that any pain relieving effects of the previous control or treatment conditions had dissipated before starting the next trial. Repeated measures ANOVA found no significant period (day 1 vs. 2) by sequence (Order 1 vs. Order 2) interactions, suggesting that responses on day 2 were not affected by the treatments received on day 1. Hypothesis 1 – Comparison of Group Means (Treatment vs. Control) Pain outcomes achieved with the PMR and analgesic imagery interventions were compared to those obtained with the control condition from the same day using the Wilcoxon Signed Rank test. Greater change in pain intensity (Z = ?2.15, P < 0.05), greater change in pain-related distress (Z = ?1.82, P < 0.05), and greater perceived control over pain (Z = ?3.02, P <0.01) were reported with PMR compared to control. Similarly, greater change in pain intensity (Z = ?2.70, P < 0.01), greater change in pain-related distress (Z = ?2.11, P < 0.05), and greater perceived control over pain (Z = ?2.40, P < 0.01) were reported with analgesic imagery compared to control. Mean scores for these pain outcomes are reported in Table 2 . Hypothesis 2 – Individual Responder Analysis Participants were categorized as having a meaningful improvement in pain with each cognitive-behavioral treatment (i.e., responders) if they achieved ? 30% reduction in pain intensity and also reported improvement in either pain-related distress, perceived control over pain, or both. Thirteen of the 32 participants who provided PMR data (41%) had a meaningful improvement in pain. Sixteen of 31 participants who provided analgesic imagery data (52%) had a meaningful improvement in pain. Thirty participants provided data for both relaxation and analgesic imagery trials. Of those 30, eight obtained meaningful improvement in pain with both cognitive-behavioral strategies and thirteen reported meaningful improvement in pain with only one strategy (5 with PMR only, 8 with analgesic imagery only). Hypothesis 3 – Influence of Individual Difference Variables Scores on the individual difference variables were compared between subjects who achieved a meaningful improvement in pain and those who did not ( Table 3 ). There were no significant differences in perceived relaxation ability, outcome expectancy for relaxation, previous experience with relaxation or concurrent symptoms between persons who experienced a meaningful improvement in pain with PMR and those who did not. With respect to analgesic imagery, persons who demonstrated a meaningful improvement in pain had greater imaging ability (Mann Whitney U = 71.00, P < 0.05), more positive outcome expectancy (Mann Whitney U = 69.5, P < 0.05), and fewer concurrent symptoms (Mann Whitney U = 76.00, P < 0.05) than persons who did not report a meaningful improvement in pain. Previous experiences with imagery interventions did not differ between groups.  Carry-Over Effects Neither pre-trial pain intensity ratings nor pre-trial pain-related distress ratings differed significantly across trials, suggesting that any pain relieving effects of the previous control or treatment conditions had dissipated before starting the next trial. Repeated measures ANOVA found no significant period (day 1 vs. 2) by sequence (Order 1 vs. Order 2) interactions, suggesting that responses on day 2 were not affected by the treatments received on day 1.  Carry-Over Effects Neither pre-trial pain intensity ratings nor pre-trial pain-related distress ratings differed significantly across trials, suggesting that any pain relieving effects of the previous control or treatment conditions had dissipated before starting the next trial. Repeated measures ANOVA found no significant period (day 1 vs. 2) by sequence (Order 1 vs. Order 2) interactions, suggesting that responses on day 2 were not affected by the treatments received on day 1.  Hypothesis 1 – Comparison of Group Means (Treatment vs. Control) Pain outcomes achieved with the PMR and analgesic imagery interventions were compared to those obtained with the control condition from the same day using the Wilcoxon Signed Rank test. Greater change in pain intensity (Z = ?2.15, P < 0.05), greater change in pain-related distress (Z = ?1.82, P < 0.05), and greater perceived control over pain (Z = ?3.02, P <0.01) were reported with PMR compared to control. Similarly, greater change in pain intensity (Z = ?2.70, P < 0.01), greater change in pain-related distress (Z = ?2.11, P < 0.05), and greater perceived control over pain (Z = ?2.40, P < 0.01) were reported with analgesic imagery compared to control. Mean scores for these pain outcomes are reported in Table 2 .  Hypothesis 1 – Comparison of Group Means (Treatment vs. Control) Pain outcomes achieved with the PMR and analgesic imagery interventions were compared to those obtained with the control condition from the same day using the Wilcoxon Signed Rank test. Greater change in pain intensity (Z = ?2.15, P < 0.05), greater change in pain-related distress (Z = ?1.82, P < 0.05), and greater perceived control over pain (Z = ?3.02, P <0.01) were reported with PMR compared to control. Similarly, greater change in pain intensity (Z = ?2.70, P < 0.01), greater change in pain-related distress (Z = ?2.11, P < 0.05), and greater perceived control over pain (Z = ?2.40, P < 0.01) were reported with analgesic imagery compared to control. Mean scores for these pain outcomes are reported in Table 2 .  Discussion The PMR and analgesic imagery interventions appeared to be helpful to some participants. Group means suggested that both cognitive-behavioral strategies were significantly more effective in improving pain outcomes than the control condition. These findings are consistent with those of other investigators who demonstrated beneficial effects of PMR and imagery interventions among hospitalized patients with cancer pain ( 22 – 24 ). After the intervention trials were completed, more than three-fourths of participants told us that they enjoyed using PMR and found it to be helpful. More than half reported that they enjoyed the analgesic imagery intervention and found it to be helpful (Kwekkeboom et al., in progress). As anticipated, there were considerable variations in the individual responses to PMR and analgesic imagery with only about half of the participants achieving a meaningful improvement in pain. The simple distraction of the control condition also produced varying results with seven of the 32 participants reporting meaningful improvement in pain. Reports of such variation in response to cognitive-behavioral strategies are limited. Donovan and Laack ( 25 ) reported that 31% of chronic pain outpatients were unable to achieve pain relief with relaxation and imagery interventions. Kwekkeboom et al. ( 24 ) reported that 10% of hospitalized patients with cancer pain experienced no change or an increase in pain after using a guided imagery intervention. It is possible that other investigators obtained similar results but did not report them as such, focusing only on group means. Responses to the analgesic imagery intervention, but not the PMR intervention, were related to proposed individual difference variables in this sample. Scores on imaging ability, outcome expectancy and concurrent symptoms differed significantly between persons who achieved a meaningful reduction in pain with guided imagery and those who did not. Persons with greater imaging ability may have been better able to create mental images of changing sensations and numbness compared to persons with lower imaging ability; while positive expectations for beneficial effects and fewer concurrent distressing symptoms may have allowed greater concentration and effort toward engaging in the imagery exercise. Our findings are consistent with previous research in which imaging ability predicted relief of cancer-related pain ( 24 ), general anxiety ( 31 ) and various other health outcomes ( 45 ). Patients’ expectations for response to treatment have also been previously shown to predict health outcomes ( 34 ). It’s unclear why the individual difference variables were not related to outcomes of PMR. Perceived relaxation ability scores fell near the low to mid-range (M = 1.73, SD = 0.82) of possible scores (0–4), suggesting some restriction in range. Perhaps participants answered the relaxation ability items based on their current feelings of relaxation or stress rather than their ease in becoming relaxed. An actual test of one’s physiologic response to relaxation instructions made prior to the PMR trials may have been a more accurate measure of relaxation “ability”, but would have introduced additional burden in this ill clinical population. Outcome expectations and previous experiences with relaxation interventions were generally positive and concurrent symptoms during PMR were only mild to moderate; yet less than 50% of subjects achieved a meaningful improvement in pain with PMR. Including a measure of physiologic or perceived relaxation after the intervention trials may have helped us to understand if PMR was ineffective for these individuals because PMR didn’t produce relaxation or because the pain was not responsive to relaxation. It is important to note that the interventions provided only short-term effects. Pain had returned to pre-intervention levels before the next trial started, sometimes within one hour. However, our goal was to treat the acute episodic pain that commonly occurs in hospitalized cancer patients. Pain in the inpatient setting is often intermittent, fluctuating with blood levels of analgesics, or flaring with periods of breakthrough pain. Brief relaxation and imagery interventions have been less successful in treating chronic cancer pain than lengthy programs of cognitive-behavioral therapy ( 46 – 47 ). We do not know if allowing more practice or repetitions with each intervention would have resulted in different outcomes, however, it may not be feasible for clinicians to provide extensive practice given the potentially diminished physical and mental reserves of this acutely ill population. Recruitment for this study proved challenging. Thirty percent of potential participants declined to speak with the research nurse. Furthermore, 41% of patients who met inclusion criteria declined participation. Most people who declined participation described concerns about their ability to meet the demands of the study (too busy) and lack of interest or skepticism about the interventions. One can understand that the busy pace of the inpatient setting would prohibit some patients from agreeing to take on more demands. It may also be that persons who were particularly ill felt too overwhelmed or not well enough to focus on learning the cognitive behavioral interventions. The IRB did not allow us to collect demographic or disease related data about non-participants, thus we do not know if those patients had more severe pain or advanced disease than persons who agreed to participate. It is unfortunate that those who were skeptical and uninterested did not participate, as their cognitive ability, outcome expectancy, and previous experience scores may have added greater variability to the results obtained. Investigators must consider methods to make research participation more desirable and meaningful for these individuals. Almost one-quarter of those who agreed to participate were unable to complete all study procedures, dropping out or missing a trial. Persons who did not complete included more males and were older than persons who did complete all trials. Previous research has shown greater interest in complementary therapies among women with cancer than among men ( 48 ). And older patients may have less energy and endurance for the study procedures. Our results should be interpreted in light of limitations. Tests related to individual difference variables were limited to simple comparisons between responders and non-responders. We had hoped to recruit a larger sample that would have allowed us to use multiple regression to simultaneously explore the roles of proposed individual difference variables while controlling for potential covariates, such as gender and education. Although having a control condition was a strength, the control was run as the first trial of each day to prevent carryover from the active interventions, and the timing may have introduced some bias. It is possible that the cognitive-behavioral interventions may not have been as effective if administered without the earlier control session. It will also be important in future research to compare the experimental treatments with the more realistic control condition of “treatment as usual”, as patients may independently use other strategies that are equally effective in controlling pain. Finally, it was not possible to blind participants to the intervention conditions, and some individuals may have provided the responses they thought were expected of them. Results of this study suggest that PMR and analgesic imagery interventions may be beneficial in treating acute or episodic pain for some patients. This pilot study, however, revealed a number of methodologic issues that need to be considered in future studies exploring individual difference variables. Given the difficulty recruiting participants and the frequent inability of participants to complete all study procedures, it may be easier to study the individual differences in a less ill patient population. This might allow inclusion of more practice sessions and also additional measures such as physiologic measures of relaxation ability and relaxation achieved with each intervention. Ability to recruit a larger sample would also allow randomization to groups that vary the order of both treatment and control conditions. Given the variability we observed in participants’ responses to each strategy, researchers need to continue efforts to understand individual difference variables that moderate effects of cognitive-behavioral strategies. Studies that simply compare group means, ignoring individual responses and potential moderating variables, will be plagued by underestimating actual effects or even failure to demonstrate significant effects when the interventions were, in fact, helpful to a particular subsample. Researchers and clinicians alike need to understand individual difference variables that moderate effects of cognitive-behavioral strategies if we are to adequately test their efficacy and identify appropriate treatments for patients with cancer pain.  Discussion The PMR and analgesic imagery interventions appeared to be helpful to some participants. Group means suggested that both cognitive-behavioral strategies were significantly more effective in improving pain outcomes than the control condition. These findings are consistent with those of other investigators who demonstrated beneficial effects of PMR and imagery interventions among hospitalized patients with cancer pain ( 22 – 24 ). After the intervention trials were completed, more than three-fourths of participants told us that they enjoyed using PMR and found it to be helpful. More than half reported that they enjoyed the analgesic imagery intervention and found it to be helpful (Kwekkeboom et al., in progress). As anticipated, there were considerable variations in the individual responses to PMR and analgesic imagery with only about half of the participants achieving a meaningful improvement in pain. The simple distraction of the control condition also produced varying results with seven of the 32 participants reporting meaningful improvement in pain. Reports of such variation in response to cognitive-behavioral strategies are limited. Donovan and Laack ( 25 ) reported that 31% of chronic pain outpatients were unable to achieve pain relief with relaxation and imagery interventions. Kwekkeboom et al. ( 24 ) reported that 10% of hospitalized patients with cancer pain experienced no change or an increase in pain after using a guided imagery intervention. It is possible that other investigators obtained similar results but did not report them as such, focusing only on group means. Responses to the analgesic imagery intervention, but not the PMR intervention, were related to proposed individual difference variables in this sample. Scores on imaging ability, outcome expectancy and concurrent symptoms differed significantly between persons who achieved a meaningful reduction in pain with guided imagery and those who did not. Persons with greater imaging ability may have been better able to create mental images of changing sensations and numbness compared to persons with lower imaging ability; while positive expectations for beneficial effects and fewer concurrent distressing symptoms may have allowed greater concentration and effort toward engaging in the imagery exercise. Our findings are consistent with previous research in which imaging ability predicted relief of cancer-related pain ( 24 ), general anxiety ( 31 ) and various other health outcomes ( 45 ). Patients’ expectations for response to treatment have also been previously shown to predict health outcomes ( 34 ). It’s unclear why the individual difference variables were not related to outcomes of PMR. Perceived relaxation ability scores fell near the low to mid-range (M = 1.73, SD = 0.82) of possible scores (0–4), suggesting some restriction in range. Perhaps participants answered the relaxation ability items based on their current feelings of relaxation or stress rather than their ease in becoming relaxed. An actual test of one’s physiologic response to relaxation instructions made prior to the PMR trials may have been a more accurate measure of relaxation “ability”, but would have introduced additional burden in this ill clinical population. Outcome expectations and previous experiences with relaxation interventions were generally positive and concurrent symptoms during PMR were only mild to moderate; yet less than 50% of subjects achieved a meaningful improvement in pain with PMR. Including a measure of physiologic or perceived relaxation after the intervention trials may have helped us to understand if PMR was ineffective for these individuals because PMR didn’t produce relaxation or because the pain was not responsive to relaxation. It is important to note that the interventions provided only short-term effects. Pain had returned to pre-intervention levels before the next trial started, sometimes within one hour. However, our goal was to treat the acute episodic pain that commonly occurs in hospitalized cancer patients. Pain in the inpatient setting is often intermittent, fluctuating with blood levels of analgesics, or flaring with periods of breakthrough pain. Brief relaxation and imagery interventions have been less successful in treating chronic cancer pain than lengthy programs of cognitive-behavioral therapy ( 46 – 47 ). We do not know if allowing more practice or repetitions with each intervention would have resulted in different outcomes, however, it may not be feasible for clinicians to provide extensive practice given the potentially diminished physical and mental reserves of this acutely ill population. Recruitment for this study proved challenging. Thirty percent of potential participants declined to speak with the research nurse. Furthermore, 41% of patients who met inclusion criteria declined participation. Most people who declined participation described concerns about their ability to meet the demands of the study (too busy) and lack of interest or skepticism about the interventions. One can understand that the busy pace of the inpatient setting would prohibit some patients from agreeing to take on more demands. It may also be that persons who were particularly ill felt too overwhelmed or not well enough to focus on learning the cognitive behavioral interventions. The IRB did not allow us to collect demographic or disease related data about non-participants, thus we do not know if those patients had more severe pain or advanced disease than persons who agreed to participate. It is unfortunate that those who were skeptical and uninterested did not participate, as their cognitive ability, outcome expectancy, and previous experience scores may have added greater variability to the results obtained. Investigators must consider methods to make research participation more desirable and meaningful for these individuals. Almost one-quarter of those who agreed to participate were unable to complete all study procedures, dropping out or missing a trial. Persons who did not complete included more males and were older than persons who did complete all trials. Previous research has shown greater interest in complementary therapies among women with cancer than among men ( 48 ). And older patients may have less energy and endurance for the study procedures. Our results should be interpreted in light of limitations. Tests related to individual difference variables were limited to simple comparisons between responders and non-responders. We had hoped to recruit a larger sample that would have allowed us to use multiple regression to simultaneously explore the roles of proposed individual difference variables while controlling for potential covariates, such as gender and education. Although having a control condition was a strength, the control was run as the first trial of each day to prevent carryover from the active interventions, and the timing may have introduced some bias. It is possible that the cognitive-behavioral interventions may not have been as effective if administered without the earlier control session. It will also be important in future research to compare the experimental treatments with the more realistic control condition of “treatment as usual”, as patients may independently use other strategies that are equally effective in controlling pain. Finally, it was not possible to blind participants to the intervention conditions, and some individuals may have provided the responses they thought were expected of them. Results of this study suggest that PMR and analgesic imagery interventions may be beneficial in treating acute or episodic pain for some patients. This pilot study, however, revealed a number of methodologic issues that need to be considered in future studies exploring individual difference variables. Given the difficulty recruiting participants and the frequent inability of participants to complete all study procedures, it may be easier to study the individual differences in a less ill patient population. This might allow inclusion of more practice sessions and also additional measures such as physiologic measures of relaxation ability and relaxation achieved with each intervention. Ability to recruit a larger sample would also allow randomization to groups that vary the order of both treatment and control conditions. Given the variability we observed in participants’ responses to each strategy, researchers need to continue efforts to understand individual difference variables that moderate effects of cognitive-behavioral strategies. Studies that simply compare group means, ignoring individual responses and potential moderating variables, will be plagued by underestimating actual effects or even failure to demonstrate significant effects when the interventions were, in fact, helpful to a particular subsample. Researchers and clinicians alike need to understand individual difference variables that moderate effects of cognitive-behavioral strategies if we are to adequately test their efficacy and identify appropriate treatments for patients with cancer pain.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Factors influencing effects of specific cognitive-behavioral pain coping strategies Figure 2 Study design schema. Table 1 Demographic Characteristics Order 1: PMR – Imagery Order 2: Imagery – PMR Total ( n = 24) ( n = 16) ( n =40) Characteristic Mean (SD) Mean (SD) Mean (SD) Age (years) 52.38 (13.77) 43.75 (18.76) 48.93 (16.29) Time since diagnosis (months) 21.36 (41.25) 13.70 (16.07) 18.26 (33.28) Characteristic n (%) n (%) n (%) Gender ?Male 9 (38) 9 (56) 18 (45) ?Female 15 (62) 7 (34) 22 (55) Ethnicity ?Hispanic/Latino 0 (0) 1 (6) 1 (3) ?Non-Hispanic/Latino 24 (100) 15 (94) 39 (97) Race ?Caucasian 24 (100) 16 (100) 40 (100) Education ?12th grade or less 5 (21) 4 (25) 9 (23) ?College 15 (62) 10 (62) 25 (62) ?Graduate school 4 (17) 2 (13) 6 (15) Diagnosis ?Hematologic cancer 12 (50) 10 (63) 22 (55) ?Solid tumor 12 (50) 6 (37) 18 (45) Pain Type ?Somatic 14 (58) 11 (69) 25 (62) ?Visceral 10 (42) 5 (31) 15 (38) Current Treatment ?None 9 (38) 5 (31) 14 (35) ?Chemotherapy 7 (29) 6 (38) 13 (32.5) ?Radiotherapy 3 (12) 2 (12) 5 (12.5) ?Combination/Other 5 (21) 3 (19) 8 (20) Current Analgesic Orders ?Non-opioid only 0 (0) 1 (6) 1 (3) ?Weak opioid ± non-opioid 5 (21) 1 (6) 6 (15) ?Strong opioid ± weak opioid ± non-opioid 18 (75) 13 (81) 31 (78) Some items do not sum to 100 due to missing data. No demographic characteristics differed by treatment order. Table 2 Mean (SD) Pain Outcomes with PMR and Guided Imagery Compared to Control Pain Outcome PMR Mean (SD) Control Mean (SD) Possible score range Percent change in pain intensity a 31 (32) 18 (27) ?100 – 100 Percent change in pain-related distress a 26 (61) 19 (38) ?100 – 100 Perceived control over pain b 2.37 (0.90) 1.98 (0.91) 0 – 4 Pain Outcome Guided Imagery Mean (SD) Control Mean (SD) Possible score range Percent change in pain intensity b 31 (36) 8 (34) ?100 – 100 Percent change in pain-related distress a 37 (43) 16 (40) ?100 – 100 Perceived control over pain b 2.51 (0.80) 2.26 (0.78) 0 – 4 Control scores are from the trial conducted on the same day as the specified cognitive-behavioral strategy. a P < 0.05, Wilcoxon Signed Rank test. b P < 0.01, Wilcoxon Signed Rank test. Table 3 Scores (Mean Rank, Mean, SD) on Individual Difference Variables Among Persons Who Achieved Meaningful Reduction in Pain and Those Who Did Not Meaningful Improvement No Meaningful Improvement Individual Difference Variable Mean Rank Mean (SD) Mean Rank Mean (SD) Observed Range Possible Range PMR (n=13) (n=19) ?Relaxation Ability 14.83 1.69 (0.80) 16.74 1.73 (0.89) 0 – 3.67 0 – 4 ?Outcome Expectancy for Relaxation 17.85 4.78 (0.77) 15.58 4.43 (0.91) 2 – 6 0 – 6 ?Previous Experience with Relaxation 16.25 1.92 (2.19) 15.84 1.74 (2.02) ?2 – 5 ?5 – 5 ?Concurrent Symptoms 17.12 21.85 (8.60) 16.08 21.03 (10.82) 6 – 40.50 0 – 90 Analgesic Imagery (n=16) (n=15) ?Imaging Ability a 19.06 76.88 (17.44) 12.73 63.40 (20.86) 27 – 108 0 – 128 ?Outcome Expectancy for Imagery a 19.16 4.60 (0.87) 12.63 3.77 (1.16) 1.67 – 6 0 – 6 ?Previous experience with Imagery 15.36 1.29 (2.13) 13.64 0.86 (1.61) ?1 – 5 ?5 – 5 ?Concurrent Symptoms a 13.25 17.75 (10.58) 18.93 25.03 (12.39) 0 – 41.50 0 – 90 Significant differences using Mann Whitney U test a P < 0.05.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Factors influencing effects of specific cognitive-behavioral pain coping strategies Figure 2 Study design schema. Table 1 Demographic Characteristics Order 1: PMR – Imagery Order 2: Imagery – PMR Total ( n = 24) ( n = 16) ( n =40) Characteristic Mean (SD) Mean (SD) Mean (SD) Age (years) 52.38 (13.77) 43.75 (18.76) 48.93 (16.29) Time since diagnosis (months) 21.36 (41.25) 13.70 (16.07) 18.26 (33.28) Characteristic n (%) n (%) n (%) Gender ?Male 9 (38) 9 (56) 18 (45) ?Female 15 (62) 7 (34) 22 (55) Ethnicity ?Hispanic/Latino 0 (0) 1 (6) 1 (3) ?Non-Hispanic/Latino 24 (100) 15 (94) 39 (97) Race ?Caucasian 24 (100) 16 (100) 40 (100) Education ?12th grade or less 5 (21) 4 (25) 9 (23) ?College 15 (62) 10 (62) 25 (62) ?Graduate school 4 (17) 2 (13) 6 (15) Diagnosis ?Hematologic cancer 12 (50) 10 (63) 22 (55) ?Solid tumor 12 (50) 6 (37) 18 (45) Pain Type ?Somatic 14 (58) 11 (69) 25 (62) ?Visceral 10 (42) 5 (31) 15 (38) Current Treatment ?None 9 (38) 5 (31) 14 (35) ?Chemotherapy 7 (29) 6 (38) 13 (32.5) ?Radiotherapy 3 (12) 2 (12) 5 (12.5) ?Combination/Other 5 (21) 3 (19) 8 (20) Current Analgesic Orders ?Non-opioid only 0 (0) 1 (6) 1 (3) ?Weak opioid ± non-opioid 5 (21) 1 (6) 6 (15) ?Strong opioid ± weak opioid ± non-opioid 18 (75) 13 (81) 31 (78) Some items do not sum to 100 due to missing data. No demographic characteristics differed by treatment order. Table 2 Mean (SD) Pain Outcomes with PMR and Guided Imagery Compared to Control Pain Outcome PMR Mean (SD) Control Mean (SD) Possible score range Percent change in pain intensity a 31 (32) 18 (27) ?100 – 100 Percent change in pain-related distress a 26 (61) 19 (38) ?100 – 100 Perceived control over pain b 2.37 (0.90) 1.98 (0.91) 0 – 4 Pain Outcome Guided Imagery Mean (SD) Control Mean (SD) Possible score range Percent change in pain intensity b 31 (36) 8 (34) ?100 – 100 Percent change in pain-related distress a 37 (43) 16 (40) ?100 – 100 Perceived control over pain b 2.51 (0.80) 2.26 (0.78) 0 – 4 Control scores are from the trial conducted on the same day as the specified cognitive-behavioral strategy. a P < 0.05, Wilcoxon Signed Rank test. b P < 0.01, Wilcoxon Signed Rank test. Table 3 Scores (Mean Rank, Mean, SD) on Individual Difference Variables Among Persons Who Achieved Meaningful Reduction in Pain and Those Who Did Not Meaningful Improvement No Meaningful Improvement Individual Difference Variable Mean Rank Mean (SD) Mean Rank Mean (SD) Observed Range Possible Range PMR (n=13) (n=19) ?Relaxation Ability 14.83 1.69 (0.80) 16.74 1.73 (0.89) 0 – 3.67 0 – 4 ?Outcome Expectancy for Relaxation 17.85 4.78 (0.77) 15.58 4.43 (0.91) 2 – 6 0 – 6 ?Previous Experience with Relaxation 16.25 1.92 (2.19) 15.84 1.74 (2.02) ?2 – 5 ?5 – 5 ?Concurrent Symptoms 17.12 21.85 (8.60) 16.08 21.03 (10.82) 6 – 40.50 0 – 90 Analgesic Imagery (n=16) (n=15) ?Imaging Ability a 19.06 76.88 (17.44) 12.73 63.40 (20.86) 27 – 108 0 – 128 ?Outcome Expectancy for Imagery a 19.16 4.60 (0.87) 12.63 3.77 (1.16) 1.67 – 6 0 – 6 ?Previous experience with Imagery 15.36 1.29 (2.13) 13.64 0.86 (1.61) ?1 – 5 ?5 – 5 ?Concurrent Symptoms a 13.25 17.75 (10.58) 18.93 25.03 (12.39) 0 – 41.50 0 – 90 Significant differences using Mann Whitney U test a P < 0.05. 