Imaging Hemodynamics Microvascular permeability is a pharmacologic indicator of tumor response to therapy, and it is expected that this biomarker will evolve into a clinical surrogate endpoint and be integrated into protocols for determining patient response to antiangiogenic or antivascular therapies. This review discusses the physiological context of vessel permeability in an imaging setting, how it is affected by active and passive transport mechanisms, and how it is described mathematically for both theoretical and complex dynamic microvessel membranes. Many research groups have established dynamic-enhanced imaging protocols for estimating this important parameter. This review discusses those imaging modalities, the advantages and disadvantages of each, and how they compare in terms of their ability to deliver information about therapy-associated changes in microvessel permeability in humans. Finally, this review discusses future directions and improvements needed in these areas.  2 Imaging the Tumor Microvasculature 2.1 Introduction: Survey of Methods Useful imaging systems have been developed to monitor angiogenesis and the microvasculature in vivo , including PET and SPECT, CT, Doppler ultrasound, optical imaging methods and DCE-MRI. The following table is a brief overview of the overall coverage, resolution and sensitivity associated with each imaging system. Each system has strengths and limitations in terms of their ability to measure microvascular hemodynamics, all of which will be reviewed in their respective sections. 2.2 Table: Comparison of Imaging Systems Modality Contrast Agent/Tracer Penetration Resolution Sensitivity PET H215O, C15O2,11C Whole Body 1–3 mm 10?11–10?12 mol/L SPECT IMP, 99mTc-Alb sesamibii Whole Body 0.5–5 mm 10?10–10?11 mol/L CT Iodinated Tracers Whole Body 0.05–0.8 mm Not well characterized Ultrasound Microbubbles 9 cm @ 7 MHz 0.1 mm Single bubbles MRI Gd-DTPA Whole Body 0.1–1.5 mm 10?3–10?5 mol/L Optical Imaging Fluorochromes <1 cm 0.2–1.0 ?m 10?9–10?12 mol/L 2.3 Measurement of Hemodynamics with Nuclear Medicine (PET/SPECT) Positron emission tomography is based on the approximate collinearity of two photons simultaneously emitted by the annihilation of a positron and electron. The resolution of PET is limited by uncertainties arising from the approximation of collinearity and annihilation position due to individual positron ranges [ 61 ]. Generally, PET measures of tumor perfusion have used (15O)-labeled radiotracers. An important study compared steady-state and dynamic methods for determining blood flow in 22 patients with liver metastases [ 62 ]. The steady-state method required inhalation of [15C]-O2 and the dynamic method required an intravenous bolus injection of [15O]-H2O. Although both methods produced similar quantification of blood flow, the correlation between methods was low. The dynamic method was superior in its ability to quantify blood flow in hepatic metastases. This method also delivered close correlations to angiographic data, demonstrating that the degree of vascularization, as determined by PET, can reliably differentiate between tumor grades. A requirement for quantification of perfusion using dynamic methods is an accurate determination of an arterial input function, which can be obtained noninvasively in a purely arterial region of interest, such as the aorta [ 63 , 64 ]. This also allows for determination of the volume of distribution parameter ( V d ), which is the proportion of exchanging water space between tissue compartment and vascular compartments. With these corrections, the coefficients of variation can be minimized. Using 15O-labeled carbon dioxide ([15O]-CO2), intra-patient coefficients of variation for measurement of flow and V d were 11% and 6%, respectively [ 65 ]. 2.3.1. Response to Antivascular Therapy One of the first randomized clinical trials to use 15O-labeled tracers measured vascular hemodynamics in a Phase I dose-escalation study of combrestatin A4 phosphate (CA4P), an antivascular therapy [ 66 ]. In 13 patients with a variety of solid tumors, significant reductions in perfusion were observed as measured by [15O]-H2O 30 minutes and 24 hours post-treatment. Significant reductions in blood volume could be measured by 15O-labeled carbon monoxide ([15O]-CO), which binds to hemoglobin and is thus intravascular. These also show similar reductions within 30 minutes of CA4P, yet these were followed by a vascular recovery 24 hours later. In a Phase II clinical trial, 12 patients with solid primary or metastatic renal tumors were evaluated with [15O]-H2O, and [15O]-CO in response to the antiangiogenic therapy, razoxane [ 67 ]. Perfusion and blood volume data were obtained from only six of the total enrolled patients. Although the mean post-treatment perfusion was lower than pre-treatment, these were not statistically significant. For this drug, there was virtually no change in blood volume pre- versus post-treatment. There was also no correlation found between pre-treatment perfusion and tumor size (as estimated by CT), nor was there a correlation found between perfusion and patient response or survival. Another study investigated the effects of SU5416, a small molecule inhibitor of the tyrosine kinase domain of the VEGF receptor, Flk-1, in renal cell carcinoma patients [ 68 ]. Following treatment, no patients had a clinical response, but 15 of 23 patients demonstrated stable disease. In patients with available data, perfusion (as determined by [15O]-H2O) and metabolism (as determined by 18FDG) decreased or minimally changed in patients with stable disease and increased in a patient with progressive disease. 2.3.2. Response to Cytotoxic Therapy PET-measured perfusion and blood volume changes following treatment with cytotoxic therapy were quantified in 19 patients bearing stage II or III breast tumors [ 69 ]. This study found no correlation between response to therapy and perfusion using [15O]-H2O, but found a positive correlation in total blood volume as measured by 11C-labeled carbon monoxide ([11C]-CO). Another study involved investigation of improved delivery of a cytotoxic therapy, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), using a vasopressor (nicotinamide) concomitant with carbogen inhalation. The hypothesis was that such a treatment would enhance the delivery of 5-fluorouracil by increasing tumor blood flow [ 70 ]. Patients with colorectal metastases were intravenously administered [15O]-H2O, imaged for 10 minutes, then given [18F]5-FU intravenously and imaged for another 90 minutes. Nicotinamide and carbogen were administered only on the second imaging session, concurrent with the second cycle of chemotherapy. Both tumor perfusion and delivery of 5-FU to the tumor were observed to increase significantly in response to nicotinamide/carbogen. Finally, an interesting study was designed to examine the relationship between hypoxia and perfusion in 11 patients with various brain tumors [ 71 ]. 18F-fluoromisonidazole (18F-FMISO) is a nitroimidazole derivative that is trapped by hypoxic cells and this was injected following measurement of [15O]-H2O distributions to evaluate perfusion. There was a positive correlation between tumor perfusion and 18F-FMISO tumor uptake within the first 5 minutes of the 18F-FMISO injection, probably reflecting delivery. At later time points, 18F-FMISO uptake occurred in areas that were not perfused (as measured by [15O]-H2O), suggesting that hypoxia developed in areas with poor perfusion. Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) is routinely used to measure perfusion in the clinic. Although it has lower sensitivity compared to PET, the spatial resolution is theoretically higher, as it is not dependent on positron annihilation [ 61 ]. Dynamic SPECT is an improvement to conventional SPECT, offering faster detector rotation, high-resolution, high-sensitivity dynamic and static collimators and filtered back-projection reconstruction. Dynamic SPECT can be used to measure cerebral blood vessel dynamics [ 72 ]. SPECT of N-isopropyl-p[123I]-iodoamphetamine (IMP) has been used to positively differentiate between blood flow in brain tumors and normal gray matter, indicating a disruption in tumor-associated vessel permeability [ 73 ]. The intravascular agents, Technetium-99m-labeled albumin (99mTc-HSA), has been used to measure permeability in patients with hepatic tumors, and perfusion was shown to increase compared to normal tissue following epinephrine infusion in 67% of the patients [ 74 ]. Another study demonstrated that hepatic arterial perfusion scintigraphy (HAPS) using 99mTc-HSA was useful in assessment of catheter placement and perfusion, changes in perfusion during chemotherapy and arteriovenous shunting to the lung [ 75 ]. Thallium-201 (201TlCl) chloride and 99mTc-diethylenetriaminepenta-acetic acid labeled HSA (99mTc-HSA-D) were used to assess tumor viability and tumor vascular permeability, respectively, in 17 patients. Within one month post-radiotherapy, both systems delivered values that were significantly reduced compared to pre-therapy values [ 76 ]. In another study, patients with various soft tissue and bone tumors were imaged using 99mTc labeled hexakis-2-methoxyisobutylisonitrile (99mTc-MIBI) [ 77 ]. The perfusion index was derived by dividing the peak count of the arterial phase by that of the contralateral tissue, and the MIBI-uptake ratio was derived by dividing the count density of the tumor by that of the contralateral tissue. Both the perfusion index and the MIBI-uptake ratio of benign lesions were significantly lower compared to malignant lesions. Setting a threshold cutoff for the perfusion index of 10.0, sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, PPV and NPV values of 40%, 100%, 71%, 100% and 64% respectively, were possible. This cutoff was not dependent on tumor size. Though many studies have used 99mTc-MIBI to evaluate tumor perfusion, they have primarily used planar scintigraphy to evaluate the perfusion characteristics. For example, patients with various cancers have been evaluated with 99mTc-hexamethylpropylenamineoxime (HMPAO), and a hypoxia-related tracer, iodoazomycin arabinoside (IAZA) labeled with 123I [ 78 ]. In general, an inverse correlation between perfusion and uptake of IAZA was observed in all tumor types except for glioblastoma multiforme. 2.3.3. Kinetic Modeling of PET/SPECT Data Radioisotope measurements of tracer distribution into tissues are well-characterized. The relationship between blood flow and tracer clearance was originally described by Fick in 1870. In 1978, Ohno et al. modified the Fick equations of tracer diffusion to describe the distribution of 14C-labeled-low molecular weight compounds [ 79 ]. In this formalism, the plasma concentration can be represented as a sum of decaying exponentials: Equation 6 C p ( t ) = ? i = 1 n A 1 e - m i t . When blood flow ( F ) is much more than the permeability surface area product ( PS ), transport across the capillary is independent of flow. If, in addition, the vascular fraction of the tracer can be assumed to be negligible, the tissue tracer uptake per unit gram of tissue can be expressed as: Equation 7 d C t d t = P S ( C P - C t v e ) , where C t is the tissue concentration, v e is the extracellular extravascular space per unit volume of tissue and C e=C t/v e . Ohno et al. did not include the tissue density ( ? ) in their equations, stating that brain specific gravity (a dimensionless quantity) was approximately 1.0. Accounting for tissue density and solving this differential equation leads to: Equation 8 C t ( t ) = P S ? ? i = 1 n A 1 m i - ( P S ? / v e ) e - ( P S ? / v e ) t - e - m i t , and early in the time course, when flow of tracer is unidirectionally moving out of blood into the tissue, Equation 9 P S = C t ? ? 0 t C p ( t ? ) d t ? . Essentially, tracer cleared by the tissue over time is a function of the perfusion of the tracer and the extraction of the tracer. 2.3.4. Table: Measurement of Hemodynamics with PET/SPECT Tracer System Parameter Measured Results Reference PET ([15O]-H2O, [15C]-CO2) Liver metastases Perfusion Comparing dynamic versus steady state methods, differentiation between tumor grades [ 62 ] PET ([15O]-H2O) Breast tumors Perfusion and distribution volume Evaluated non-invasive AIF measurement and obtained better estimations of distribution volume [ 63 ] PET ([15O]-H2O, 18FDG) NSCLC Perfusion and tumor localization Large interpatient variations, inaccurate estimation of perfusion [ 64 ] PET ([15O]-H2O, [15C]-CO) Solid tumors Perfusion and blood volume Phase I dose-escalation study, perfusion and blood volume decreases in response to CA4P [ 66 ] PET ([15O]-H2O, [15C]-CO) Solid/metastatic renal tumors Perfusion and blood volume Phase II study, insignificant decreases in perfusion and BV in response to razoxane [ 67 ] PET ([15O]-H2O) Renal tumors Perfusion and metabolism Perfusion decreases in patients with stable disease in response to SU5416 [ 68 ] PET ([15O]-H2O, [11C]-CO) Breast tumors Perfusion and blood volume No significant association between perfusion and response to treatment; insignificant increase in blood volume in non-responding tumors [ 69 ] PET ([15O]-H2O) Colorectal metastases Perfusion Enhanced delivery of 5-FU via carbogen and nicotinamide, significant increase in perfusion post-treatment [ 70 ] PET ([15O]-H2O, 18F-FMISO) Brain tumors Perfusion and hypoxia Early uptake correlations between perfusion and hypoxia, no late uptake correlations [ 71 ] SPECT (IMP) Brain tumors Perfusion Differentiation between perfusion of tumor and perfusion of normal tissue [ 73 ] SPECT (99mTc- HSA) Liver tumors Perfusion Increased perfusion in tumor following infusion of epinephrine [ 74 ] SPECT (201TICI, 99mTc-HSA-D) Brain metastases Permeability and viability Significant post-treatment reductions in permeability and viability [ 76 ] SPECT (99mTc- MIBI) Soft tissue and bone tumors Perfusion and MIBI uptake ratio Perfusion and MIBI uptake ratio lower in benign versus malignant tumors, achievable predictive value of these parameters [ 77 ] SPECT (99mTc- HMPAO, IAZA) SCLC, GM, brain metastases, prostate and head and neck tumors Perfusion and hypoxia Inverse correlation between perfusion and uptake of IAZA in all tumors but GM tumors [ 78 ] 2.4 Measurement of Hemodynamics with Computed Tomography In X-ray computed tomography (CT), tissue contrast is based on variable attenuation coefficients (Hounsfield units) of the object absorbing the X-rays [ 61 ]. Hemodynamic parameters may be extracted from dynamic changes in X-ray attenuation caused by the intravenous injection of a contrast agent. Perfusion CT data can deliver quantitative hemodynamic information, such as blood volume, blood flow, permeability surface-area product and mean transit time (MTT). An example includes diagnostic differentiation of rectal cancers from normal tissue based on elevated blood flow and attenuated MTT in the tumor and measurable post-treatment changes in blood flow and MTT [ 80 ]. Notably, it was even possible with this small data set to make general conclusions about the predictive value of this imaging system for patient response, as it appeared that a higher pre-therapy perfusion index and shorter MTT was associated with a poorer therapeutic outcome. In a larger study, 77 patients with primary oropharyngeal and oral carcinoma, questionable recurrent disease and suspected metastatic lymph nodes were evaluated with perfusion CT [ 81 ]. In this study, a deconvolution model with a 2 compartment analysis was applied for capillary permeability-surface area product (PS) measurements. Other parametric maps were obtained for blood flow, blood volume and MTT. All parameters except for MTT were significantly higher in tumors compared to normal tissue. MTT was significantly lower than that of normal tissue. Furthermore, the perfusion measurements sufficiently differentiated between primary and recurrent tumors. In head and neck squamous cell carcinomas, perfusion CT was able to reliably and significantly differentiate between tumor and normal tissue [ 82 ]. Parametric maps of blood flow, blood volume and permeability demonstrated significantly larger values compared to normal tissue and the mean transit time was significantly attenuated compared to normal tissue. In hepatic metastases, median values of arterial perfusion were greater in the metastatic tissue compared to adjacent normal tissue [ 83 ]. An advantage of CT is the excellent spatial resolution, allowing observation of microenvironmental heterogeneities. In just under half of the patients evaluated, peripheral perfusion of the tissue surrounding the tumor was higher than the ROI containing only tumor, suggesting that neovascularization is occurring well beyond the margin of the tumor. In some patients, low perfusion was observed in the center of the tumor. Notably, there were statistically significant correlations established between patient survival and perfusion of the metastatic lesions and adjacent liver tissue; i.e. a higher perfusion index was correlated to longer survival times (p<0.05, r = 0.69). In a separate study conducted on 21 patients with lymphoma, median perfusion values were higher in patients with active, high or intermediate lymphoma, and perfusion values below 0.2 ml/min/ml indicated inactive disease [ 84 ]. In this study, values of permeability did not produce information allowing for the differentiation between grades or lymphoma activity status. A small study was conducted to assess the reproducibility of CT measured hemodynamics within a Phase IB clinical trial of combrestatin A4 phosphate in 10 patients with inoperable non-small lung cell cancer (NSCLC) [ 85 ]. Parametric maps of permeability and blood volume were derived based on a Patlak analysis, and both parameters demonstrated good agreement between studies, with a CV of 9.49% and 26.31% for permeability and blood volume, respectively. In this study, an increase or decrease in tumor permeability over 8.3% would have been significant. Goh et. al. assessed intra- and inter-observer reproducibility for blood volume, blood flow, mean transit time and permeability from dynamic CT in patients with colorectal carcinoma [ 86 ]. The correlation coefficients for the inter-observer variability ranged from 0.8 to 0.89 for all perfusion parameters, and the intra-observer correlation coefficients ranged from 0.86 to 0.98, indicating excellent agreement in both cases. The same group also found that when imaging abdominal cancers, acquisition times under 45 minutes would result in significant degradation of permeability measurements but not blood flow, blood volume or meant transit time [ 87 ]. Dynamic CT has also been used to assess patient response to bevacizumab [ 88 ] and for a Phase I dose finding study of MEDI-522, a humanized anti-body to the ?v?3 integrin [ 89 ]. In this latter study, of all the measured parameters (blood flow, blood volume, permeability surface area product and MTT), only the MTT demonstrated a significant change with increasing dose of MEDI-522. 2.4.1. Kinetic Modeling of Perfusion CT Data A widely used model of perfusion CT kinetic parameters which also accounts for diffusive resistances and concentration gradients (i.e. a distributed parameter model) was described by Johnson et al. [ 90 ] and later modified for a solution with an adiabatic approximation by St. Lawrence et al. [ 91 ]. According to the model, a contrast agent enters the intravascular space and is described as having a concentration, Cb(x,t), which decreases from the arterial inflow of the capillary, Ca(t), to the venous outflow, Cv(t). Ce(t) represents the change in the contrast agent concentration in the extravascular, extracellular space over time, Ve represents the interstitial volume, Vb represents the blood volume, F represents the flow rate and PS represents the permeability-surface area product. The convective and diffusive transport of the contrast agent is represented by [ 80 ]: Equation 10 ? C b ( x , t ) ? t + F L V b · ? C b ( x , t ) ? x + P S V b [ C b ( x , t ) - C e ( t ) ] = 0 , and the evolution of the contrast agent concentration in the interstitial compartment is described by: Equation 11 V e d C e ( t ) d t = P S L ? 0 L [ C b ( x , t ) - C e ( t ) ] d x . Using these equations to model enhancement kinetics, four vascular parameters, vascular permeability, vascular blood volume, MTT and blood flow, can be estimated simultaneously [ 80 ]. 2.4.2. Table: Measurement of Hemodynamics with CT Tracer System Parameters Measured Results Reference Iopamidol (Isovue) Rectal tumors Perfusion and mean transit time Decreased perfusion and increased mean transit time post-treatment; high perfusion index and short MTT index poor response to therapy. [ 80 ] Iomeron (Iomeprol) Oropharyngeal and oral tumors Permeability, blood flow, volume and mean transit time All parameters elevated in tumors compared to normal tissue except for low mean transit times; differentiation between primary and recurrent tumors based on blood flow [ 81 ] Iodinated contrast agent Head and neck tumors Permeability, blood flow, blood volume and mean transit time All parameters were significantly different in tumors compared to normal tissue [ 82 ] Iopamidol (Isovue 300) Hepatic metastases Perfusion Perfusion elevated in metastases compared to contralateral tissue; significant correlation between survival and perfusion of metastasis (higher perfusion, increased survival) [ 83 ] Iopamidol (Isovue 300) Lymphoma Perfusion and permeability Perfusion correlated well with grade and activity but permeability did not reliably differentiate between grade or activity [ 84 ] Iobitridol (Xenetix 30) Non-small cell lung cancer Perfusion, permeability and blood volume Reproducibility of whole tumor perfusion both parameters was acceptable [ 85 ] Iopamidol (Niopam 340) Colorectal tumors Blood volume, blood flow, mean transit time and permeability Correlation coefficients for interobserver variability and intraobserver variability indicated excellent agreement in both cases [ 86 ] Iopamidol (Niopam 340) Colorectal tumors Perfusion Early changes in perfusion of tumors responding to bevacizumab demonstrated [ 88 ] Iodinated contrast agent Advanced solid tumors refractory to therapy Blood flow, blood volume, permeability and mean transit time Phase I dose-escalation study of MEDI-522; only mean transit time demonstrated significant changes post- treatment [ 89 ] 2.5 Measurement of Hemodynamics with Ultrasound Medical ultrasonography is based on the pulse-echo and back-scattered echo waveforms. A transducer which converts electric power to acoustic power is used to transmit short and relatively broadband pulses through the tissue, which are attenuated at tissue interfaces due to absorption and scattering. The pressure from the backscattered signal is collected by the same or a second phase-sensitive transducer, and the output voltage is a radiofrequency trace which is recorded as a function of the acoustical travel time in the tissue. Because the trace is an amplitude-modulated display of the backscattered waveform, it is referred to as an A-mode display or A-scan. The ultrasound image is created by converting the A-mode display into a brightness mode display along a vertical axis. The horizontal profile of waveform spikes is now converted into a vertical series of bright dots. Moving the transducer along the specimen will create a 2 dimensional image of bright dots in the same manner, hence the term B-mode display. The fundamental limit to resolution in ultrasonography is the frequency-dependent attenuation. Higher transducer frequencies offer better resolution but greater tissue attenuation. Thus, any improvement in lateral resolution implies a loss in depth of penetration. There are several different ultrasonic approaches designed specifically to measure blood flow including transit time, continuous-wave Doppler, pulsed and color Doppler and power Doppler flowmeters. Transit-time flowmeters operate under the phase-shift principle and utilize two transducers to measure blood flow velocity. However, the transit-time flowmeter is infrequently used for routine estimation of flow because invasive surgery is required to expose the vessel. Unlike transit-time flowmeter, the continuous-wave (CW) Doppler flowmeter requires particulate matter, such as blood cells, for scattering. In CW Doppler ultrasound, red blood cells are considered reflecting targets, and when those targets recede from a stationary sound source (transducer), the frequency of the received sound is shifted proportionally to their velocity relative to the transmitter and receiver [ 92 ]. The Doppler frequency shift is expressed as: Equation 12 f d = 2 f 0 u cos ? c , where f 0 is the source frequency, c is the velocity of sound, u is the target velocity and ? is the angle between acoustic transmission and the long axis of the blood vessel. Pulsed Doppler ultrasound is the most broadly applied ultrasound technique. In this, the delay between a brief transmitted wave and its reception is directly proportional to distance, so a complete plot of reflections across the blood vessel can plotted, generating a velocity profile based on Doppler shifts. The tradeoff for high resolution (short pulses) is a better signal-to-noise ratio (long pulses). Furthermore, since the pulse system is broadband, it is inherently more sensitive to electronic noise, resulting in low dynamic range and rendering it less capable of detecting small volumes of blood. Color Doppler is termed as such because pulse Doppler-derived velocity information is color mapped onto grayscale ultrasound images. The most common estimation of the velocities uses consecutive transmit pulses at fixed depths to find the phase difference between received echoes. Color Doppler has been successfully used to evaluate abnormal perfusion profiles in liver [ 93 ], ovarian [ 94 ], breast [ 47 , 48 ] and prostate carcinomas [ 46 ]. In a newer modification, called Power Doppler, color is encoded based on the integrated power of the Doppler signal rather than the mean Doppler frequency shift [ 95 ]. The advantages of power Doppler over color Doppler include a lower noise variance and ability to spectrally encode noise in order to differentiate it from information signal. Other advantages include angle independence and immunity to aliasing because the power remains the same as a function of phase shift, and depth-compensation [ 92 ]. Contrast-enhanced ultrasound has become increasingly popular for measuring perfusion. The first ultrasound contrast agent was reported in 1968 [ 96 ]. Since then, the explosion of microbubble research has made ultrasonography a useful contrast-enhanced clinical imaging utility. Microbubbles are comprised of an outer shell, generally composed of lipids, proteins, or polymers, and a gas inner core filled with air, perfluorocarbon, sulfur hexafluoride or nitrogen [ 97 ]. Microbubbles expand and contract due to pressure from the acoustical transmit pulse, and the primary mode of echogenicity is the impedance mismatch between the microbubble-blood interface, making them significantly more echogenic than normal tissue. However, there are many other manifestations of microbubble contrast including increased scattering cross-section, nonlinearities from increased acoustic pressure that give rise to unique harmonics, and transient, non-linear signal emission from bubble disruption (a.k.a. cavitation). Although it is not routine, contrast-enhanced ultrasound is used to measure hemodynamics in human tumors. In recurrent breast cancer patients, contrast agent uptake after RF ablation therapy has been used to successfully predict responders, indicating a strong ability to estimate tumor vascularity [ 98 ]. In solid breast tumors, contrast enhanced ultrasound has also been used to provide a measure of solid breast tumor vascularity as compared to histological analysis of vascularity [ 99 ]. Compared to conventional B-mode scanning and CT, contrast-enhanced ultrasound sensitively differentiated patients with metastatic liver lesions (~95%, compared to 50% and 59% for B-mode scanning and CT, respectively) [ 100 ]. Contrast-enhanced ultrasound is capable of differentiating between non-functional islet tumors (often misdiagnosed as ductal adenocarcinoma) from pancreatic carcinoma. The differential diagnosis criteria included age, size, margin, level of vascularity and enhancement timing [ 101 ]. A notable quantitative study conducted on untreatable hepatocellular carcinomas showed that post-treatment with thalidomide, the percent blood volume, average red blood cell velocity and the product of the two, perfusion, all decreased significantly following therapy, even in patients followed out to 2-years [ 102 ]. 2.5.1. Modeling of Perfusion Ultrasound Data Hertz was the first to provide the idea of estimating perfusion using continuous wave Doppler ultrasound [ 103 ], and this was closely followed by Dymling [ 104 ] with a mathematical estimation of perfusion based on the measured Doppler power spectrum. Perfusion was expressed as follows: Equation 13 P = Q c V s ? n c E { v c } , where Q c is total capillary flow, V s is the sample volume of tissue, n c is the number of capillaries per unit volume tissue and E { v c } is the average blood velocity in the capillaries. To establish the proportionality between perfusion and a Doppler-derived measurement, the assumption was made that red blood cells were the primary, isotropic scattering source: Equation 14 ? 0 ? f S ( f ) d f ? N 0 E { v c } . Such an expression relates the mean number of red blood cells in some volume of interest and their mean speed along the z-axis to the first moment of the Doppler power spectrum. This expression can be used to estimate velocity using any of the above ultrasound techniques, but the modern flow mapping techniques estimate perfusion by quantifying the density of colored pixels or number of visible vessels in a given region of interest relative to normal tissue. An interesting method to estimate perfusion was demonstrated in myocardium using contrast-enhanced ultrasound and selective high-power pulses to destroy microbubbles and observe the inflow of unaffected microbubbles during a continuous infusion. The so-called ‘refilling’ signal reflected the mean myocardial microbubble velocity. The asymptotic maximum was related to fractional vascular volume, and the product of the two parameters was related to perfusion [ 102 , 105 ]. This approach has yet to be used in cancers, although focused ultrasonic cavitation of microbubbles has been identified as a promising technique for imaging and delivery of therapies [ 106 , 107 , 108 , 109 ]. 2.5.2. Table: Measurement of Hemodynamics with Ultrasound Tracer System Parameter Measured Results Reference Sonovue® (microbubbles) Power Doppler US Percent intratumor contrast agent uptake Following RF ablation therapy, DUPC accurately estimated degree of vascularization in 80% of cases [ 98 ] Levovist® (microbubbles) CEUS Tumor vascularity Post-contrast vascularity correlated well with histological assessment of vascularity [ 99 ] Sonovue® (microbubbles) CEUS, conventional B-mode US, spiral CT Number of metastases CEUS outperformed conventional US and CT in its ability to accurately detect more metastatic lesions [ 100 ] Sonovue® (microbubbles) CEUS, color Doppler US Enhancement timing & pattern (related to vascularity) Accurate differentiation between nonfunctional islet tumors and pancreatic carcinoma [ 101 ] Sonovue® (microbubbles) CEUS Percent blood volume fraction, RBC velocity & perfusion Post-treatment changes in these parameters following treatment with thalidomide [ 102 ] 2.6 Measurement of Hemodynamics with Optical Imaging “Optical imaging” describes a broad range of techniques. Methods specifically designed for in vivo imaging include photo-luminescence ( fluorescence ) and chemi-luminescence (commonly referred to as bioluminescence ). An additional approach that may have clinical utility is diffuse optical (DOT) tomography. This method utilizes the diffusion equation to model propagation of light through tissue using the absorption and scattering coefficients. A major limitation of optical imaging is the depth of penetration because scattering and absorption increase as a function of tissue depth. Thus, capturing images from outside the body is difficult. However, sophisticated optical images can be obtained by detectors attached to endoscopes. The major advantages of optical imaging are its temporal, spatial and spectral resolution. Using reflected light and fluorescence light at a micrometer resolution (for example, confocal microscopy), cancerous cell morphology can be interrogated, and multispectral imaging with millimeter resolution can be used to interrogate general tissue morphology [ 110 ]. Optical imaging is capable of capturing real-time dynamics particularly with recent improvements in the quality of fast and highly sensitive cameras. The advancement of fluorescence microscopy in biomedical research is partly attributed to the development of methods to conjugate proteins to fluorochromes [ 111 , 112 ], and partly to improvements in thin film technology and opto-electronics, which increased the sensitivity and specificity of detection of emitted fluorescent light [ 113 ]. Most filters sets are not totally efficient in eliminating damaging and unwanted UV wavelengths, so fluorescence imaging can be damaging to tissues. The primary mechanisms of damage are phototoxicity (i.e. absorption of photons by exogenous and endogenous fluorochromes) and creation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). This can be mitigated somewhat by two-photon or near-IR imaging which uses longer wavelengths for excitation. A further advantage of NIR imaging is that the range of wavelengths (700–900 nm) maximizes depth of penetration while minimizing scatter and background autofluorescence [ 114 ]. Chemi-luminescence imaging is based on the catalysis of light emission from a substrate. The most common and fully developed reporter is the luciferase enzyme which oxidizes luciferin. Light emitted from this reaction is between 530–640 nm (broad-band) [ 115 ]. In general, optical imaging of vascular permeability has been limited to pre-clinical studies. However, there are currently more than 10 ongoing clinical trials that are using optical imaging to study human tumors [ 116 ]. Fluorescence/reflectance imaging and confocal microscopy are used to detect surgical resections of non-melanoma skin cancers; non-invasive, scanning two-photon fluorescence microscopy is being used to replace the skin biopsy; optical spectroscopy is being investigated as a potential use for intraoperative margin assessment during breast cancer lumpectomy; and transillumination breast spectroscopy is being developed as breast cancer risk predictor to replace and or augment mammographic parenchymal density. Diffuse optical tomography (DOT) is potentially useful for measuring hemodynamics. DOT propagates light through the tissue at multiple projections to yield a 3-dimensional tomographic image of deep tissue organs and, depending on the mathematical approach taken, maps of absorption, scattering, vascularization, oxygenation, and contrast agent uptake can be generated [ 117 ]. In a recent study that used DOT concurrently with dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI, the distribution of fluorescent indocyanine green (ICG) was compared to that of an MR-contrast agent, Gd-DTPA, and found that they were correlated [ 118 ]. The transillumination limitation of optical imaging can be overcome with a pre-clinical, in vivo chronic transparent chamber angiogenesis assay, the dorsal skinfold window chamber technique. Coupled with intravital fluorescence microscopy, this technique has provided tremendous insight into basic vessel physiology and is capable of providing quantitative measurements of blood flow, vascular volume, permeability, vessel density, gene expression and drug delivery in animals [ 119 ]. Tozer et al. has used the window chamber model and intravital fluorescence microscopy to show combretastatin A-4 3- O -phosphate and nitric oxide synthase effects on vascular permeability [ 120 ]. 2.6.1. Kinetic Modeling of Dynamic Optical Imaging Data A very comprehensive study using fluorescence video microscopy to measure vascular permeability was performed in the window chamber model [ 121 ]. The derivation of vascular permeability as measured optically begins with the assumption that the relationship between number of fluorochromes ( N(t) ) in the vascular and interstitial space and the average fluorescent intensity ( I(t) ) in the vascular and interstitial space is linear: Equation 15 I v ( t ) = k v · N v ( t ) A , Equation 16 I i ( t ) = k i · N i ( t ) A , where k v (vascular) and k i (interstitial) relate the number of fluorochromes in area A to the average light intensity in A . From Fick’s Law, the average permeability coefficient ( P ) is the ratio of the flux of tracer ( J s ) to the product of the vessel surface area and difference between the plasma concentration ( C p ) and the average interstitial concentration ( C i ): Equation 17 P = J s S · ( C p - C i ) . Assuming that the flux is approximately equal to the rate of accumulation of tracer in the interstitial space, and substituting C p and C i for parameters that account for vascular volume ( V v ), tube hematocrit ( H T ) and volume to surface area ratio ( ? ), the following equation is derived: Equation 18 I i ( t ) = ? · ? 0 t e - ? ( t - ? ) · I v ( ? ) d ? , which relates the constants ? and ? to permeability as follows: Equation 19 P = ? · [ ? · ( 1 - H T ) · ( k v k i ) ] . A complete description of the derivation is provided elsewhere [ 121 ]. 2.6.2. Table: Measurement of Hemodynamics with Optical Imaging Tracer System Parameter Measured Results Reference ICG (indocyanine green) DOT Tracer distribution Comparable distribution kinetics with Gd-DTPA (as measured by MRI) [ 118 ] 2.7 Measurement of Hemodynamics with Magnetic Resonance Imaging Dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE)-MRI has been used extensively to measure microvascular permeability in many human tumors, such as bone sarcomas [ 122 ], head-neck and prostate tumors [ 123 ], breast tumors [ 124 ], cerebral gliomas [ 125 ], and breast tumors [ 126 ]. DCE-MRI is a non-invasive, functional method to measure active changes in hemodynamic parameters occurring following treatment before macroscopic changes, such as decreases in tumor volume, become evident. Currently, there are at least 11 clinical trials in all four phases dedicated to the interrogation of tumors and tumor response to therapy using information derived from DCE-MRI [ 116 ]. DCE-MRI is used to experimentally characterize the tumor microvasculature by modeling the pharmacokinetics of injected contrast agents. These unique MRI contrast agents are chelated with Gadolinium and generate very large magnetic lattice fields in the immediate neighborhood of the complex, greatly shortening the T1 or longitudinal relaxation of water protons that approach the paramagnetic center. This lends to the unique contrast between tissues observed using this imaging approach. The efficiency with which a contrast medium can shorten T1 relaxation is determined by its inherent relaxivity. 2.7.1. Table: Measurement of Hemodynamics with DCE-MRI Tracer System Parameter Measured Results Reference GdDTPA (Magnevist) Bone sarcoma Permeability Associations found between expression of VEGF and increases in permeability [ 122 ] GdDTPA (Magnevist) Head & neck, prostate & brain neoplasms Rate of uptake, kep Demonstrated reproducibility of kep [ 123 ] GdDTPA (Magnevist) Breast tumors Permeability Significant change in permeability pre- and post- treatment [ 124 ] Gadodiamide (Gd- DTPA-BMA) Cerebral glioma Permeability Demonstrated reproducibility of permeability [ 125 ] GdDTPA (Magnevist) Breast tumors Exchange rates Significant differentiation between malignant and benign tissue [ 126 ] 2.7.2. MRI Contrast Media The challenges remaining in the development and application of MR contrast agents are 1) to find media that are most sensitive to microvascular permeability and; 2) to quantify the values obtained from images. Generally, DCE-MRI measurements using high molecular weight contrast agents (HMWCA) are more sensitive to the transendothelial capillary permeability, while DCE-MRI measurements using small molecular weight contrast agents (SMWCA) are more sensitive to flow. Although SMWCA are commonly used in the clinic, they rapidly extravasate in tumors and normal tissues with fenestrated or sinusoidal capillaries. Quantification of this rapid extravasation requires rapid image acquisition, at the expense of reduced spatial resolution. Furthermore, extravasation rates are flow-dominated, so SMWCA are insensitive to drug-induced changes in microvascular permeability. HMWCA do not extravasate rapidly, and measurements made using them are more sensitive to changes in microvascular permeability. Imaging performed using HMWCA can be at higher spatial resolution at the expense of temporal resolution, given the slow extravasation rates. Thus, there is an interest in developing intravascular compounds that demonstrate a large dynamic range and sensitivity to changes following interventional therapies in cancer [ 127 ]. To be clinically useful, these agents must be non-toxic and have high relaxivity, which will contribute to generation of data with high spatial and temporal resolution. Compounds under development are of a larger molecular weight, ranging from 30–100 kDa, offer a longer blood pool residence time and permit acquisition of steady state images for more than an hour. These high molecular weight contrast agents remain intravascular in all tissues except for leaky tumor vasculature [ 128 , 129 , 130 ]. 2.7.3. Kinetic Modeling of Dynamic-Contrast Enhanced MRI Data A major difference between DCE-MRI data and data from other techniques is the fact that DCE-MRI measures the effect of the contrast agent on water relaxation and not the contrast agent itself. DCE-MR imaging enables the acquisition of a signal enhancement versus time curve, and pharmacokinetic models have been devised for quantitative evaluation of such curves to extract values for the volume transfer constant ( K trans ) between the plasma compartment and the interstitial space and the fractional volume of the interstitial space ( v e ) [ 131 ]. The rate constant, k ep , is the ratio of the transfer constant to the extravascular extracellular fractional volume, v e : Equation 20 k e p = K trans / v e . This rate constant can be directly derived from the shape of the contrast agent concentration versus time curve, but access to K trans and v e require knowledge of absolute values of contrast agent concentration. In the early part of this review, tracer uptake in the tissue was expressed as the difference between the quantity of tracer delivered to the tissue from the arterial phase ( C a ) and the quantity removed by the venous phase ( C v ): Equation 21 d Q d t = F ( C a - C v ) . If the intrinsic permeability of the capillary is high, then transport of a solute across the capillary is dependent on blood flow rather than diffusion, and as such is flow-limited . Tofts et. al. have extended this interpretation to include flow per unit mass of tissue as opposed to total blood flow, and mass tissue concentration ( C t/? ) instead of volume tissue concentration ( C t ) [ 20 ]: Equation 22 d C t d t = F ? ( C a - C v ) . In this case, ? (g ml?1) is needed because F is now expressed in ml g?1 min?1. The partition coefficient, ? , relates the concentration of the tracer in the tissue to the concentration of the tracer in the blood: Equation 23 C t = ? C v . It then follows that: Equation 24 d C t d t = - F ? ( C t - ? ? C a ) . In a flow-limited regime, the venous plasma concentration C v/(1?Hct) can be assumed equal to the concentration in the extravascular extracellular space ( C e ). ? is derived in terms of v e , and the final model is expressed as: Equation 25 d C t d t = F ? ( 1 - Hct ) ( C p - C t / v e ) . This model is used in situations where capillary permeability to the contrast agent is very high (i.e. when small molecular weight contrast agents are used). The rate of uptake of the contrast agent into the tissue is related to the v e and the contrast agent concentrations in the tissue ( C t ) and the arterial blood plasma ( C p ). Importantly, the transfer constant, K trans , is a function of the perfusion of whole blood per unit mass of tissue ( F , ml g?1 min-1), the density of tissue ( ? , g ml-1) and the hematocrit ( Hct ) (i.e. K trans = F? (1? Hct )). In situations where capillary permeability to the contrast agent is very low (i.e. when high molecular weight contrast agents are used), K trans is a function of the permeability surface area product ( PS , ml min-1 g-1) of the capillary wall and ? , (i.e. K trans = PS? ), and the rate of uptake is related to the v e , C t and C p : Equation 26 d C t d t = P S ? ( C p - C t / v e ) . Finally, in situations where capillary permeability is intermediate, K trans is equal to the fractional reduction in capillary blood concentration during the passage of the contrast agent through the tissue, or the extraction ratio ( E ) and the hematocrit (i.e. K trans = EF? ), and the rate of uptake is related to the v e , C t , and C p : Equation 27 d C t d t = E F ? ( 1 - Hct ) ( C p - C t / v e ) . In summary, the contrast agent concentration kinetics are a function of the plasma concentration, K trans and v e , or K trans and k ep . This is expressed by a generalized form for each of the three previous models: Equation 28 d C t d t = K trans ( C p - C t / v e ) = K trans C p - k e p C t , which describes the change in the concentration of the contrast agent as a function of time in terms of K trans and v e . It is important to note here that each model (high, low or intermediate capillary permeability to contrast agent) ignore the contribution of intravascular contrast agent to tissue concentration, and therefore, limit the fitted model parameters to only K trans and v e . Contrast agents of different molecular weights will require the use of different models for permeability. Of the listed parameters, C p and C t are actually measured and K trans , k ep and v e are calculated from the fitted model equations.  2.1 Introduction: Survey of Methods Useful imaging systems have been developed to monitor angiogenesis and the microvasculature in vivo , including PET and SPECT, CT, Doppler ultrasound, optical imaging methods and DCE-MRI. The following table is a brief overview of the overall coverage, resolution and sensitivity associated with each imaging system. Each system has strengths and limitations in terms of their ability to measure microvascular hemodynamics, all of which will be reviewed in their respective sections.  2.2 Table: Comparison of Imaging Systems Modality Contrast Agent/Tracer Penetration Resolution Sensitivity PET H215O, C15O2,11C Whole Body 1–3 mm 10?11–10?12 mol/L SPECT IMP, 99mTc-Alb sesamibii Whole Body 0.5–5 mm 10?10–10?11 mol/L CT Iodinated Tracers Whole Body 0.05–0.8 mm Not well characterized Ultrasound Microbubbles 9 cm @ 7 MHz 0.1 mm Single bubbles MRI Gd-DTPA Whole Body 0.1–1.5 mm 10?3–10?5 mol/L Optical Imaging Fluorochromes <1 cm 0.2–1.0 ?m 10?9–10?12 mol/L  2.3 Measurement of Hemodynamics with Nuclear Medicine (PET/SPECT) Positron emission tomography is based on the approximate collinearity of two photons simultaneously emitted by the annihilation of a positron and electron. The resolution of PET is limited by uncertainties arising from the approximation of collinearity and annihilation position due to individual positron ranges [ 61 ]. Generally, PET measures of tumor perfusion have used (15O)-labeled radiotracers. An important study compared steady-state and dynamic methods for determining blood flow in 22 patients with liver metastases [ 62 ]. The steady-state method required inhalation of [15C]-O2 and the dynamic method required an intravenous bolus injection of [15O]-H2O. Although both methods produced similar quantification of blood flow, the correlation between methods was low. The dynamic method was superior in its ability to quantify blood flow in hepatic metastases. This method also delivered close correlations to angiographic data, demonstrating that the degree of vascularization, as determined by PET, can reliably differentiate between tumor grades. A requirement for quantification of perfusion using dynamic methods is an accurate determination of an arterial input function, which can be obtained noninvasively in a purely arterial region of interest, such as the aorta [ 63 , 64 ]. This also allows for determination of the volume of distribution parameter ( V d ), which is the proportion of exchanging water space between tissue compartment and vascular compartments. With these corrections, the coefficients of variation can be minimized. Using 15O-labeled carbon dioxide ([15O]-CO2), intra-patient coefficients of variation for measurement of flow and V d were 11% and 6%, respectively [ 65 ]. 2.3.1. Response to Antivascular Therapy One of the first randomized clinical trials to use 15O-labeled tracers measured vascular hemodynamics in a Phase I dose-escalation study of combrestatin A4 phosphate (CA4P), an antivascular therapy [ 66 ]. In 13 patients with a variety of solid tumors, significant reductions in perfusion were observed as measured by [15O]-H2O 30 minutes and 24 hours post-treatment. Significant reductions in blood volume could be measured by 15O-labeled carbon monoxide ([15O]-CO), which binds to hemoglobin and is thus intravascular. These also show similar reductions within 30 minutes of CA4P, yet these were followed by a vascular recovery 24 hours later. In a Phase II clinical trial, 12 patients with solid primary or metastatic renal tumors were evaluated with [15O]-H2O, and [15O]-CO in response to the antiangiogenic therapy, razoxane [ 67 ]. Perfusion and blood volume data were obtained from only six of the total enrolled patients. Although the mean post-treatment perfusion was lower than pre-treatment, these were not statistically significant. For this drug, there was virtually no change in blood volume pre- versus post-treatment. There was also no correlation found between pre-treatment perfusion and tumor size (as estimated by CT), nor was there a correlation found between perfusion and patient response or survival. Another study investigated the effects of SU5416, a small molecule inhibitor of the tyrosine kinase domain of the VEGF receptor, Flk-1, in renal cell carcinoma patients [ 68 ]. Following treatment, no patients had a clinical response, but 15 of 23 patients demonstrated stable disease. In patients with available data, perfusion (as determined by [15O]-H2O) and metabolism (as determined by 18FDG) decreased or minimally changed in patients with stable disease and increased in a patient with progressive disease. 2.3.2. Response to Cytotoxic Therapy PET-measured perfusion and blood volume changes following treatment with cytotoxic therapy were quantified in 19 patients bearing stage II or III breast tumors [ 69 ]. This study found no correlation between response to therapy and perfusion using [15O]-H2O, but found a positive correlation in total blood volume as measured by 11C-labeled carbon monoxide ([11C]-CO). Another study involved investigation of improved delivery of a cytotoxic therapy, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), using a vasopressor (nicotinamide) concomitant with carbogen inhalation. The hypothesis was that such a treatment would enhance the delivery of 5-fluorouracil by increasing tumor blood flow [ 70 ]. Patients with colorectal metastases were intravenously administered [15O]-H2O, imaged for 10 minutes, then given [18F]5-FU intravenously and imaged for another 90 minutes. Nicotinamide and carbogen were administered only on the second imaging session, concurrent with the second cycle of chemotherapy. Both tumor perfusion and delivery of 5-FU to the tumor were observed to increase significantly in response to nicotinamide/carbogen. Finally, an interesting study was designed to examine the relationship between hypoxia and perfusion in 11 patients with various brain tumors [ 71 ]. 18F-fluoromisonidazole (18F-FMISO) is a nitroimidazole derivative that is trapped by hypoxic cells and this was injected following measurement of [15O]-H2O distributions to evaluate perfusion. There was a positive correlation between tumor perfusion and 18F-FMISO tumor uptake within the first 5 minutes of the 18F-FMISO injection, probably reflecting delivery. At later time points, 18F-FMISO uptake occurred in areas that were not perfused (as measured by [15O]-H2O), suggesting that hypoxia developed in areas with poor perfusion. Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) is routinely used to measure perfusion in the clinic. Although it has lower sensitivity compared to PET, the spatial resolution is theoretically higher, as it is not dependent on positron annihilation [ 61 ]. Dynamic SPECT is an improvement to conventional SPECT, offering faster detector rotation, high-resolution, high-sensitivity dynamic and static collimators and filtered back-projection reconstruction. Dynamic SPECT can be used to measure cerebral blood vessel dynamics [ 72 ]. SPECT of N-isopropyl-p[123I]-iodoamphetamine (IMP) has been used to positively differentiate between blood flow in brain tumors and normal gray matter, indicating a disruption in tumor-associated vessel permeability [ 73 ]. The intravascular agents, Technetium-99m-labeled albumin (99mTc-HSA), has been used to measure permeability in patients with hepatic tumors, and perfusion was shown to increase compared to normal tissue following epinephrine infusion in 67% of the patients [ 74 ]. Another study demonstrated that hepatic arterial perfusion scintigraphy (HAPS) using 99mTc-HSA was useful in assessment of catheter placement and perfusion, changes in perfusion during chemotherapy and arteriovenous shunting to the lung [ 75 ]. Thallium-201 (201TlCl) chloride and 99mTc-diethylenetriaminepenta-acetic acid labeled HSA (99mTc-HSA-D) were used to assess tumor viability and tumor vascular permeability, respectively, in 17 patients. Within one month post-radiotherapy, both systems delivered values that were significantly reduced compared to pre-therapy values [ 76 ]. In another study, patients with various soft tissue and bone tumors were imaged using 99mTc labeled hexakis-2-methoxyisobutylisonitrile (99mTc-MIBI) [ 77 ]. The perfusion index was derived by dividing the peak count of the arterial phase by that of the contralateral tissue, and the MIBI-uptake ratio was derived by dividing the count density of the tumor by that of the contralateral tissue. Both the perfusion index and the MIBI-uptake ratio of benign lesions were significantly lower compared to malignant lesions. Setting a threshold cutoff for the perfusion index of 10.0, sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, PPV and NPV values of 40%, 100%, 71%, 100% and 64% respectively, were possible. This cutoff was not dependent on tumor size. Though many studies have used 99mTc-MIBI to evaluate tumor perfusion, they have primarily used planar scintigraphy to evaluate the perfusion characteristics. For example, patients with various cancers have been evaluated with 99mTc-hexamethylpropylenamineoxime (HMPAO), and a hypoxia-related tracer, iodoazomycin arabinoside (IAZA) labeled with 123I [ 78 ]. In general, an inverse correlation between perfusion and uptake of IAZA was observed in all tumor types except for glioblastoma multiforme. 2.3.3. Kinetic Modeling of PET/SPECT Data Radioisotope measurements of tracer distribution into tissues are well-characterized. The relationship between blood flow and tracer clearance was originally described by Fick in 1870. In 1978, Ohno et al. modified the Fick equations of tracer diffusion to describe the distribution of 14C-labeled-low molecular weight compounds [ 79 ]. In this formalism, the plasma concentration can be represented as a sum of decaying exponentials: Equation 6 C p ( t ) = ? i = 1 n A 1 e - m i t . When blood flow ( F ) is much more than the permeability surface area product ( PS ), transport across the capillary is independent of flow. If, in addition, the vascular fraction of the tracer can be assumed to be negligible, the tissue tracer uptake per unit gram of tissue can be expressed as: Equation 7 d C t d t = P S ( C P - C t v e ) , where C t is the tissue concentration, v e is the extracellular extravascular space per unit volume of tissue and C e=C t/v e . Ohno et al. did not include the tissue density ( ? ) in their equations, stating that brain specific gravity (a dimensionless quantity) was approximately 1.0. Accounting for tissue density and solving this differential equation leads to: Equation 8 C t ( t ) = P S ? ? i = 1 n A 1 m i - ( P S ? / v e ) e - ( P S ? / v e ) t - e - m i t , and early in the time course, when flow of tracer is unidirectionally moving out of blood into the tissue, Equation 9 P S = C t ? ? 0 t C p ( t ? ) d t ? . Essentially, tracer cleared by the tissue over time is a function of the perfusion of the tracer and the extraction of the tracer. 2.3.4. Table: Measurement of Hemodynamics with PET/SPECT Tracer System Parameter Measured Results Reference PET ([15O]-H2O, [15C]-CO2) Liver metastases Perfusion Comparing dynamic versus steady state methods, differentiation between tumor grades [ 62 ] PET ([15O]-H2O) Breast tumors Perfusion and distribution volume Evaluated non-invasive AIF measurement and obtained better estimations of distribution volume [ 63 ] PET ([15O]-H2O, 18FDG) NSCLC Perfusion and tumor localization Large interpatient variations, inaccurate estimation of perfusion [ 64 ] PET ([15O]-H2O, [15C]-CO) Solid tumors Perfusion and blood volume Phase I dose-escalation study, perfusion and blood volume decreases in response to CA4P [ 66 ] PET ([15O]-H2O, [15C]-CO) Solid/metastatic renal tumors Perfusion and blood volume Phase II study, insignificant decreases in perfusion and BV in response to razoxane [ 67 ] PET ([15O]-H2O) Renal tumors Perfusion and metabolism Perfusion decreases in patients with stable disease in response to SU5416 [ 68 ] PET ([15O]-H2O, [11C]-CO) Breast tumors Perfusion and blood volume No significant association between perfusion and response to treatment; insignificant increase in blood volume in non-responding tumors [ 69 ] PET ([15O]-H2O) Colorectal metastases Perfusion Enhanced delivery of 5-FU via carbogen and nicotinamide, significant increase in perfusion post-treatment [ 70 ] PET ([15O]-H2O, 18F-FMISO) Brain tumors Perfusion and hypoxia Early uptake correlations between perfusion and hypoxia, no late uptake correlations [ 71 ] SPECT (IMP) Brain tumors Perfusion Differentiation between perfusion of tumor and perfusion of normal tissue [ 73 ] SPECT (99mTc- HSA) Liver tumors Perfusion Increased perfusion in tumor following infusion of epinephrine [ 74 ] SPECT (201TICI, 99mTc-HSA-D) Brain metastases Permeability and viability Significant post-treatment reductions in permeability and viability [ 76 ] SPECT (99mTc- MIBI) Soft tissue and bone tumors Perfusion and MIBI uptake ratio Perfusion and MIBI uptake ratio lower in benign versus malignant tumors, achievable predictive value of these parameters [ 77 ] SPECT (99mTc- HMPAO, IAZA) SCLC, GM, brain metastases, prostate and head and neck tumors Perfusion and hypoxia Inverse correlation between perfusion and uptake of IAZA in all tumors but GM tumors [ 78 ]  2.3.1. Response to Antivascular Therapy One of the first randomized clinical trials to use 15O-labeled tracers measured vascular hemodynamics in a Phase I dose-escalation study of combrestatin A4 phosphate (CA4P), an antivascular therapy [ 66 ]. In 13 patients with a variety of solid tumors, significant reductions in perfusion were observed as measured by [15O]-H2O 30 minutes and 24 hours post-treatment. Significant reductions in blood volume could be measured by 15O-labeled carbon monoxide ([15O]-CO), which binds to hemoglobin and is thus intravascular. These also show similar reductions within 30 minutes of CA4P, yet these were followed by a vascular recovery 24 hours later. In a Phase II clinical trial, 12 patients with solid primary or metastatic renal tumors were evaluated with [15O]-H2O, and [15O]-CO in response to the antiangiogenic therapy, razoxane [ 67 ]. Perfusion and blood volume data were obtained from only six of the total enrolled patients. Although the mean post-treatment perfusion was lower than pre-treatment, these were not statistically significant. For this drug, there was virtually no change in blood volume pre- versus post-treatment. There was also no correlation found between pre-treatment perfusion and tumor size (as estimated by CT), nor was there a correlation found between perfusion and patient response or survival. Another study investigated the effects of SU5416, a small molecule inhibitor of the tyrosine kinase domain of the VEGF receptor, Flk-1, in renal cell carcinoma patients [ 68 ]. Following treatment, no patients had a clinical response, but 15 of 23 patients demonstrated stable disease. In patients with available data, perfusion (as determined by [15O]-H2O) and metabolism (as determined by 18FDG) decreased or minimally changed in patients with stable disease and increased in a patient with progressive disease.  2.3.2. Response to Cytotoxic Therapy PET-measured perfusion and blood volume changes following treatment with cytotoxic therapy were quantified in 19 patients bearing stage II or III breast tumors [ 69 ]. This study found no correlation between response to therapy and perfusion using [15O]-H2O, but found a positive correlation in total blood volume as measured by 11C-labeled carbon monoxide ([11C]-CO). Another study involved investigation of improved delivery of a cytotoxic therapy, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), using a vasopressor (nicotinamide) concomitant with carbogen inhalation. The hypothesis was that such a treatment would enhance the delivery of 5-fluorouracil by increasing tumor blood flow [ 70 ]. Patients with colorectal metastases were intravenously administered [15O]-H2O, imaged for 10 minutes, then given [18F]5-FU intravenously and imaged for another 90 minutes. Nicotinamide and carbogen were administered only on the second imaging session, concurrent with the second cycle of chemotherapy. Both tumor perfusion and delivery of 5-FU to the tumor were observed to increase significantly in response to nicotinamide/carbogen. Finally, an interesting study was designed to examine the relationship between hypoxia and perfusion in 11 patients with various brain tumors [ 71 ]. 18F-fluoromisonidazole (18F-FMISO) is a nitroimidazole derivative that is trapped by hypoxic cells and this was injected following measurement of [15O]-H2O distributions to evaluate perfusion. There was a positive correlation between tumor perfusion and 18F-FMISO tumor uptake within the first 5 minutes of the 18F-FMISO injection, probably reflecting delivery. At later time points, 18F-FMISO uptake occurred in areas that were not perfused (as measured by [15O]-H2O), suggesting that hypoxia developed in areas with poor perfusion. Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) is routinely used to measure perfusion in the clinic. Although it has lower sensitivity compared to PET, the spatial resolution is theoretically higher, as it is not dependent on positron annihilation [ 61 ]. Dynamic SPECT is an improvement to conventional SPECT, offering faster detector rotation, high-resolution, high-sensitivity dynamic and static collimators and filtered back-projection reconstruction. Dynamic SPECT can be used to measure cerebral blood vessel dynamics [ 72 ]. SPECT of N-isopropyl-p[123I]-iodoamphetamine (IMP) has been used to positively differentiate between blood flow in brain tumors and normal gray matter, indicating a disruption in tumor-associated vessel permeability [ 73 ]. The intravascular agents, Technetium-99m-labeled albumin (99mTc-HSA), has been used to measure permeability in patients with hepatic tumors, and perfusion was shown to increase compared to normal tissue following epinephrine infusion in 67% of the patients [ 74 ]. Another study demonstrated that hepatic arterial perfusion scintigraphy (HAPS) using 99mTc-HSA was useful in assessment of catheter placement and perfusion, changes in perfusion during chemotherapy and arteriovenous shunting to the lung [ 75 ]. Thallium-201 (201TlCl) chloride and 99mTc-diethylenetriaminepenta-acetic acid labeled HSA (99mTc-HSA-D) were used to assess tumor viability and tumor vascular permeability, respectively, in 17 patients. Within one month post-radiotherapy, both systems delivered values that were significantly reduced compared to pre-therapy values [ 76 ]. In another study, patients with various soft tissue and bone tumors were imaged using 99mTc labeled hexakis-2-methoxyisobutylisonitrile (99mTc-MIBI) [ 77 ]. The perfusion index was derived by dividing the peak count of the arterial phase by that of the contralateral tissue, and the MIBI-uptake ratio was derived by dividing the count density of the tumor by that of the contralateral tissue. Both the perfusion index and the MIBI-uptake ratio of benign lesions were significantly lower compared to malignant lesions. Setting a threshold cutoff for the perfusion index of 10.0, sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, PPV and NPV values of 40%, 100%, 71%, 100% and 64% respectively, were possible. This cutoff was not dependent on tumor size. Though many studies have used 99mTc-MIBI to evaluate tumor perfusion, they have primarily used planar scintigraphy to evaluate the perfusion characteristics. For example, patients with various cancers have been evaluated with 99mTc-hexamethylpropylenamineoxime (HMPAO), and a hypoxia-related tracer, iodoazomycin arabinoside (IAZA) labeled with 123I [ 78 ]. In general, an inverse correlation between perfusion and uptake of IAZA was observed in all tumor types except for glioblastoma multiforme.  2.3.3. Kinetic Modeling of PET/SPECT Data Radioisotope measurements of tracer distribution into tissues are well-characterized. The relationship between blood flow and tracer clearance was originally described by Fick in 1870. In 1978, Ohno et al. modified the Fick equations of tracer diffusion to describe the distribution of 14C-labeled-low molecular weight compounds [ 79 ]. In this formalism, the plasma concentration can be represented as a sum of decaying exponentials: Equation 6 C p ( t ) = ? i = 1 n A 1 e - m i t . When blood flow ( F ) is much more than the permeability surface area product ( PS ), transport across the capillary is independent of flow. If, in addition, the vascular fraction of the tracer can be assumed to be negligible, the tissue tracer uptake per unit gram of tissue can be expressed as: Equation 7 d C t d t = P S ( C P - C t v e ) , where C t is the tissue concentration, v e is the extracellular extravascular space per unit volume of tissue and C e=C t/v e . Ohno et al. did not include the tissue density ( ? ) in their equations, stating that brain specific gravity (a dimensionless quantity) was approximately 1.0. Accounting for tissue density and solving this differential equation leads to: Equation 8 C t ( t ) = P S ? ? i = 1 n A 1 m i - ( P S ? / v e ) e - ( P S ? / v e ) t - e - m i t , and early in the time course, when flow of tracer is unidirectionally moving out of blood into the tissue, Equation 9 P S = C t ? ? 0 t C p ( t ? ) d t ? . Essentially, tracer cleared by the tissue over time is a function of the perfusion of the tracer and the extraction of the tracer.  2.3.4. Table: Measurement of Hemodynamics with PET/SPECT Tracer System Parameter Measured Results Reference PET ([15O]-H2O, [15C]-CO2) Liver metastases Perfusion Comparing dynamic versus steady state methods, differentiation between tumor grades [ 62 ] PET ([15O]-H2O) Breast tumors Perfusion and distribution volume Evaluated non-invasive AIF measurement and obtained better estimations of distribution volume [ 63 ] PET ([15O]-H2O, 18FDG) NSCLC Perfusion and tumor localization Large interpatient variations, inaccurate estimation of perfusion [ 64 ] PET ([15O]-H2O, [15C]-CO) Solid tumors Perfusion and blood volume Phase I dose-escalation study, perfusion and blood volume decreases in response to CA4P [ 66 ] PET ([15O]-H2O, [15C]-CO) Solid/metastatic renal tumors Perfusion and blood volume Phase II study, insignificant decreases in perfusion and BV in response to razoxane [ 67 ] PET ([15O]-H2O) Renal tumors Perfusion and metabolism Perfusion decreases in patients with stable disease in response to SU5416 [ 68 ] PET ([15O]-H2O, [11C]-CO) Breast tumors Perfusion and blood volume No significant association between perfusion and response to treatment; insignificant increase in blood volume in non-responding tumors [ 69 ] PET ([15O]-H2O) Colorectal metastases Perfusion Enhanced delivery of 5-FU via carbogen and nicotinamide, significant increase in perfusion post-treatment [ 70 ] PET ([15O]-H2O, 18F-FMISO) Brain tumors Perfusion and hypoxia Early uptake correlations between perfusion and hypoxia, no late uptake correlations [ 71 ] SPECT (IMP) Brain tumors Perfusion Differentiation between perfusion of tumor and perfusion of normal tissue [ 73 ] SPECT (99mTc- HSA) Liver tumors Perfusion Increased perfusion in tumor following infusion of epinephrine [ 74 ] SPECT (201TICI, 99mTc-HSA-D) Brain metastases Permeability and viability Significant post-treatment reductions in permeability and viability [ 76 ] SPECT (99mTc- MIBI) Soft tissue and bone tumors Perfusion and MIBI uptake ratio Perfusion and MIBI uptake ratio lower in benign versus malignant tumors, achievable predictive value of these parameters [ 77 ] SPECT (99mTc- HMPAO, IAZA) SCLC, GM, brain metastases, prostate and head and neck tumors Perfusion and hypoxia Inverse correlation between perfusion and uptake of IAZA in all tumors but GM tumors [ 78 ]  2.4 Measurement of Hemodynamics with Computed Tomography In X-ray computed tomography (CT), tissue contrast is based on variable attenuation coefficients (Hounsfield units) of the object absorbing the X-rays [ 61 ]. Hemodynamic parameters may be extracted from dynamic changes in X-ray attenuation caused by the intravenous injection of a contrast agent. Perfusion CT data can deliver quantitative hemodynamic information, such as blood volume, blood flow, permeability surface-area product and mean transit time (MTT). An example includes diagnostic differentiation of rectal cancers from normal tissue based on elevated blood flow and attenuated MTT in the tumor and measurable post-treatment changes in blood flow and MTT [ 80 ]. Notably, it was even possible with this small data set to make general conclusions about the predictive value of this imaging system for patient response, as it appeared that a higher pre-therapy perfusion index and shorter MTT was associated with a poorer therapeutic outcome. In a larger study, 77 patients with primary oropharyngeal and oral carcinoma, questionable recurrent disease and suspected metastatic lymph nodes were evaluated with perfusion CT [ 81 ]. In this study, a deconvolution model with a 2 compartment analysis was applied for capillary permeability-surface area product (PS) measurements. Other parametric maps were obtained for blood flow, blood volume and MTT. All parameters except for MTT were significantly higher in tumors compared to normal tissue. MTT was significantly lower than that of normal tissue. Furthermore, the perfusion measurements sufficiently differentiated between primary and recurrent tumors. In head and neck squamous cell carcinomas, perfusion CT was able to reliably and significantly differentiate between tumor and normal tissue [ 82 ]. Parametric maps of blood flow, blood volume and permeability demonstrated significantly larger values compared to normal tissue and the mean transit time was significantly attenuated compared to normal tissue. In hepatic metastases, median values of arterial perfusion were greater in the metastatic tissue compared to adjacent normal tissue [ 83 ]. An advantage of CT is the excellent spatial resolution, allowing observation of microenvironmental heterogeneities. In just under half of the patients evaluated, peripheral perfusion of the tissue surrounding the tumor was higher than the ROI containing only tumor, suggesting that neovascularization is occurring well beyond the margin of the tumor. In some patients, low perfusion was observed in the center of the tumor. Notably, there were statistically significant correlations established between patient survival and perfusion of the metastatic lesions and adjacent liver tissue; i.e. a higher perfusion index was correlated to longer survival times (p<0.05, r = 0.69). In a separate study conducted on 21 patients with lymphoma, median perfusion values were higher in patients with active, high or intermediate lymphoma, and perfusion values below 0.2 ml/min/ml indicated inactive disease [ 84 ]. In this study, values of permeability did not produce information allowing for the differentiation between grades or lymphoma activity status. A small study was conducted to assess the reproducibility of CT measured hemodynamics within a Phase IB clinical trial of combrestatin A4 phosphate in 10 patients with inoperable non-small lung cell cancer (NSCLC) [ 85 ]. Parametric maps of permeability and blood volume were derived based on a Patlak analysis, and both parameters demonstrated good agreement between studies, with a CV of 9.49% and 26.31% for permeability and blood volume, respectively. In this study, an increase or decrease in tumor permeability over 8.3% would have been significant. Goh et. al. assessed intra- and inter-observer reproducibility for blood volume, blood flow, mean transit time and permeability from dynamic CT in patients with colorectal carcinoma [ 86 ]. The correlation coefficients for the inter-observer variability ranged from 0.8 to 0.89 for all perfusion parameters, and the intra-observer correlation coefficients ranged from 0.86 to 0.98, indicating excellent agreement in both cases. The same group also found that when imaging abdominal cancers, acquisition times under 45 minutes would result in significant degradation of permeability measurements but not blood flow, blood volume or meant transit time [ 87 ]. Dynamic CT has also been used to assess patient response to bevacizumab [ 88 ] and for a Phase I dose finding study of MEDI-522, a humanized anti-body to the ?v?3 integrin [ 89 ]. In this latter study, of all the measured parameters (blood flow, blood volume, permeability surface area product and MTT), only the MTT demonstrated a significant change with increasing dose of MEDI-522. 2.4.1. Kinetic Modeling of Perfusion CT Data A widely used model of perfusion CT kinetic parameters which also accounts for diffusive resistances and concentration gradients (i.e. a distributed parameter model) was described by Johnson et al. [ 90 ] and later modified for a solution with an adiabatic approximation by St. Lawrence et al. [ 91 ]. According to the model, a contrast agent enters the intravascular space and is described as having a concentration, Cb(x,t), which decreases from the arterial inflow of the capillary, Ca(t), to the venous outflow, Cv(t). Ce(t) represents the change in the contrast agent concentration in the extravascular, extracellular space over time, Ve represents the interstitial volume, Vb represents the blood volume, F represents the flow rate and PS represents the permeability-surface area product. The convective and diffusive transport of the contrast agent is represented by [ 80 ]: Equation 10 ? C b ( x , t ) ? t + F L V b · ? C b ( x , t ) ? x + P S V b [ C b ( x , t ) - C e ( t ) ] = 0 , and the evolution of the contrast agent concentration in the interstitial compartment is described by: Equation 11 V e d C e ( t ) d t = P S L ? 0 L [ C b ( x , t ) - C e ( t ) ] d x . Using these equations to model enhancement kinetics, four vascular parameters, vascular permeability, vascular blood volume, MTT and blood flow, can be estimated simultaneously [ 80 ]. 2.4.2. Table: Measurement of Hemodynamics with CT Tracer System Parameters Measured Results Reference Iopamidol (Isovue) Rectal tumors Perfusion and mean transit time Decreased perfusion and increased mean transit time post-treatment; high perfusion index and short MTT index poor response to therapy. [ 80 ] Iomeron (Iomeprol) Oropharyngeal and oral tumors Permeability, blood flow, volume and mean transit time All parameters elevated in tumors compared to normal tissue except for low mean transit times; differentiation between primary and recurrent tumors based on blood flow [ 81 ] Iodinated contrast agent Head and neck tumors Permeability, blood flow, blood volume and mean transit time All parameters were significantly different in tumors compared to normal tissue [ 82 ] Iopamidol (Isovue 300) Hepatic metastases Perfusion Perfusion elevated in metastases compared to contralateral tissue; significant correlation between survival and perfusion of metastasis (higher perfusion, increased survival) [ 83 ] Iopamidol (Isovue 300) Lymphoma Perfusion and permeability Perfusion correlated well with grade and activity but permeability did not reliably differentiate between grade or activity [ 84 ] Iobitridol (Xenetix 30) Non-small cell lung cancer Perfusion, permeability and blood volume Reproducibility of whole tumor perfusion both parameters was acceptable [ 85 ] Iopamidol (Niopam 340) Colorectal tumors Blood volume, blood flow, mean transit time and permeability Correlation coefficients for interobserver variability and intraobserver variability indicated excellent agreement in both cases [ 86 ] Iopamidol (Niopam 340) Colorectal tumors Perfusion Early changes in perfusion of tumors responding to bevacizumab demonstrated [ 88 ] Iodinated contrast agent Advanced solid tumors refractory to therapy Blood flow, blood volume, permeability and mean transit time Phase I dose-escalation study of MEDI-522; only mean transit time demonstrated significant changes post- treatment [ 89 ]  2.4.1. Kinetic Modeling of Perfusion CT Data A widely used model of perfusion CT kinetic parameters which also accounts for diffusive resistances and concentration gradients (i.e. a distributed parameter model) was described by Johnson et al. [ 90 ] and later modified for a solution with an adiabatic approximation by St. Lawrence et al. [ 91 ]. According to the model, a contrast agent enters the intravascular space and is described as having a concentration, Cb(x,t), which decreases from the arterial inflow of the capillary, Ca(t), to the venous outflow, Cv(t). Ce(t) represents the change in the contrast agent concentration in the extravascular, extracellular space over time, Ve represents the interstitial volume, Vb represents the blood volume, F represents the flow rate and PS represents the permeability-surface area product. The convective and diffusive transport of the contrast agent is represented by [ 80 ]: Equation 10 ? C b ( x , t ) ? t + F L V b · ? C b ( x , t ) ? x + P S V b [ C b ( x , t ) - C e ( t ) ] = 0 , and the evolution of the contrast agent concentration in the interstitial compartment is described by: Equation 11 V e d C e ( t ) d t = P S L ? 0 L [ C b ( x , t ) - C e ( t ) ] d x . Using these equations to model enhancement kinetics, four vascular parameters, vascular permeability, vascular blood volume, MTT and blood flow, can be estimated simultaneously [ 80 ].  2.4.2. Table: Measurement of Hemodynamics with CT Tracer System Parameters Measured Results Reference Iopamidol (Isovue) Rectal tumors Perfusion and mean transit time Decreased perfusion and increased mean transit time post-treatment; high perfusion index and short MTT index poor response to therapy. [ 80 ] Iomeron (Iomeprol) Oropharyngeal and oral tumors Permeability, blood flow, volume and mean transit time All parameters elevated in tumors compared to normal tissue except for low mean transit times; differentiation between primary and recurrent tumors based on blood flow [ 81 ] Iodinated contrast agent Head and neck tumors Permeability, blood flow, blood volume and mean transit time All parameters were significantly different in tumors compared to normal tissue [ 82 ] Iopamidol (Isovue 300) Hepatic metastases Perfusion Perfusion elevated in metastases compared to contralateral tissue; significant correlation between survival and perfusion of metastasis (higher perfusion, increased survival) [ 83 ] Iopamidol (Isovue 300) Lymphoma Perfusion and permeability Perfusion correlated well with grade and activity but permeability did not reliably differentiate between grade or activity [ 84 ] Iobitridol (Xenetix 30) Non-small cell lung cancer Perfusion, permeability and blood volume Reproducibility of whole tumor perfusion both parameters was acceptable [ 85 ] Iopamidol (Niopam 340) Colorectal tumors Blood volume, blood flow, mean transit time and permeability Correlation coefficients for interobserver variability and intraobserver variability indicated excellent agreement in both cases [ 86 ] Iopamidol (Niopam 340) Colorectal tumors Perfusion Early changes in perfusion of tumors responding to bevacizumab demonstrated [ 88 ] Iodinated contrast agent Advanced solid tumors refractory to therapy Blood flow, blood volume, permeability and mean transit time Phase I dose-escalation study of MEDI-522; only mean transit time demonstrated significant changes post- treatment [ 89 ]  2.5 Measurement of Hemodynamics with Ultrasound Medical ultrasonography is based on the pulse-echo and back-scattered echo waveforms. A transducer which converts electric power to acoustic power is used to transmit short and relatively broadband pulses through the tissue, which are attenuated at tissue interfaces due to absorption and scattering. The pressure from the backscattered signal is collected by the same or a second phase-sensitive transducer, and the output voltage is a radiofrequency trace which is recorded as a function of the acoustical travel time in the tissue. Because the trace is an amplitude-modulated display of the backscattered waveform, it is referred to as an A-mode display or A-scan. The ultrasound image is created by converting the A-mode display into a brightness mode display along a vertical axis. The horizontal profile of waveform spikes is now converted into a vertical series of bright dots. Moving the transducer along the specimen will create a 2 dimensional image of bright dots in the same manner, hence the term B-mode display. The fundamental limit to resolution in ultrasonography is the frequency-dependent attenuation. Higher transducer frequencies offer better resolution but greater tissue attenuation. Thus, any improvement in lateral resolution implies a loss in depth of penetration. There are several different ultrasonic approaches designed specifically to measure blood flow including transit time, continuous-wave Doppler, pulsed and color Doppler and power Doppler flowmeters. Transit-time flowmeters operate under the phase-shift principle and utilize two transducers to measure blood flow velocity. However, the transit-time flowmeter is infrequently used for routine estimation of flow because invasive surgery is required to expose the vessel. Unlike transit-time flowmeter, the continuous-wave (CW) Doppler flowmeter requires particulate matter, such as blood cells, for scattering. In CW Doppler ultrasound, red blood cells are considered reflecting targets, and when those targets recede from a stationary sound source (transducer), the frequency of the received sound is shifted proportionally to their velocity relative to the transmitter and receiver [ 92 ]. The Doppler frequency shift is expressed as: Equation 12 f d = 2 f 0 u cos ? c , where f 0 is the source frequency, c is the velocity of sound, u is the target velocity and ? is the angle between acoustic transmission and the long axis of the blood vessel. Pulsed Doppler ultrasound is the most broadly applied ultrasound technique. In this, the delay between a brief transmitted wave and its reception is directly proportional to distance, so a complete plot of reflections across the blood vessel can plotted, generating a velocity profile based on Doppler shifts. The tradeoff for high resolution (short pulses) is a better signal-to-noise ratio (long pulses). Furthermore, since the pulse system is broadband, it is inherently more sensitive to electronic noise, resulting in low dynamic range and rendering it less capable of detecting small volumes of blood. Color Doppler is termed as such because pulse Doppler-derived velocity information is color mapped onto grayscale ultrasound images. The most common estimation of the velocities uses consecutive transmit pulses at fixed depths to find the phase difference between received echoes. Color Doppler has been successfully used to evaluate abnormal perfusion profiles in liver [ 93 ], ovarian [ 94 ], breast [ 47 , 48 ] and prostate carcinomas [ 46 ]. In a newer modification, called Power Doppler, color is encoded based on the integrated power of the Doppler signal rather than the mean Doppler frequency shift [ 95 ]. The advantages of power Doppler over color Doppler include a lower noise variance and ability to spectrally encode noise in order to differentiate it from information signal. Other advantages include angle independence and immunity to aliasing because the power remains the same as a function of phase shift, and depth-compensation [ 92 ]. Contrast-enhanced ultrasound has become increasingly popular for measuring perfusion. The first ultrasound contrast agent was reported in 1968 [ 96 ]. Since then, the explosion of microbubble research has made ultrasonography a useful contrast-enhanced clinical imaging utility. Microbubbles are comprised of an outer shell, generally composed of lipids, proteins, or polymers, and a gas inner core filled with air, perfluorocarbon, sulfur hexafluoride or nitrogen [ 97 ]. Microbubbles expand and contract due to pressure from the acoustical transmit pulse, and the primary mode of echogenicity is the impedance mismatch between the microbubble-blood interface, making them significantly more echogenic than normal tissue. However, there are many other manifestations of microbubble contrast including increased scattering cross-section, nonlinearities from increased acoustic pressure that give rise to unique harmonics, and transient, non-linear signal emission from bubble disruption (a.k.a. cavitation). Although it is not routine, contrast-enhanced ultrasound is used to measure hemodynamics in human tumors. In recurrent breast cancer patients, contrast agent uptake after RF ablation therapy has been used to successfully predict responders, indicating a strong ability to estimate tumor vascularity [ 98 ]. In solid breast tumors, contrast enhanced ultrasound has also been used to provide a measure of solid breast tumor vascularity as compared to histological analysis of vascularity [ 99 ]. Compared to conventional B-mode scanning and CT, contrast-enhanced ultrasound sensitively differentiated patients with metastatic liver lesions (~95%, compared to 50% and 59% for B-mode scanning and CT, respectively) [ 100 ]. Contrast-enhanced ultrasound is capable of differentiating between non-functional islet tumors (often misdiagnosed as ductal adenocarcinoma) from pancreatic carcinoma. The differential diagnosis criteria included age, size, margin, level of vascularity and enhancement timing [ 101 ]. A notable quantitative study conducted on untreatable hepatocellular carcinomas showed that post-treatment with thalidomide, the percent blood volume, average red blood cell velocity and the product of the two, perfusion, all decreased significantly following therapy, even in patients followed out to 2-years [ 102 ]. 2.5.1. Modeling of Perfusion Ultrasound Data Hertz was the first to provide the idea of estimating perfusion using continuous wave Doppler ultrasound [ 103 ], and this was closely followed by Dymling [ 104 ] with a mathematical estimation of perfusion based on the measured Doppler power spectrum. Perfusion was expressed as follows: Equation 13 P = Q c V s ? n c E { v c } , where Q c is total capillary flow, V s is the sample volume of tissue, n c is the number of capillaries per unit volume tissue and E { v c } is the average blood velocity in the capillaries. To establish the proportionality between perfusion and a Doppler-derived measurement, the assumption was made that red blood cells were the primary, isotropic scattering source: Equation 14 ? 0 ? f S ( f ) d f ? N 0 E { v c } . Such an expression relates the mean number of red blood cells in some volume of interest and their mean speed along the z-axis to the first moment of the Doppler power spectrum. This expression can be used to estimate velocity using any of the above ultrasound techniques, but the modern flow mapping techniques estimate perfusion by quantifying the density of colored pixels or number of visible vessels in a given region of interest relative to normal tissue. An interesting method to estimate perfusion was demonstrated in myocardium using contrast-enhanced ultrasound and selective high-power pulses to destroy microbubbles and observe the inflow of unaffected microbubbles during a continuous infusion. The so-called ‘refilling’ signal reflected the mean myocardial microbubble velocity. The asymptotic maximum was related to fractional vascular volume, and the product of the two parameters was related to perfusion [ 102 , 105 ]. This approach has yet to be used in cancers, although focused ultrasonic cavitation of microbubbles has been identified as a promising technique for imaging and delivery of therapies [ 106 , 107 , 108 , 109 ]. 2.5.2. Table: Measurement of Hemodynamics with Ultrasound Tracer System Parameter Measured Results Reference Sonovue® (microbubbles) Power Doppler US Percent intratumor contrast agent uptake Following RF ablation therapy, DUPC accurately estimated degree of vascularization in 80% of cases [ 98 ] Levovist® (microbubbles) CEUS Tumor vascularity Post-contrast vascularity correlated well with histological assessment of vascularity [ 99 ] Sonovue® (microbubbles) CEUS, conventional B-mode US, spiral CT Number of metastases CEUS outperformed conventional US and CT in its ability to accurately detect more metastatic lesions [ 100 ] Sonovue® (microbubbles) CEUS, color Doppler US Enhancement timing & pattern (related to vascularity) Accurate differentiation between nonfunctional islet tumors and pancreatic carcinoma [ 101 ] Sonovue® (microbubbles) CEUS Percent blood volume fraction, RBC velocity & perfusion Post-treatment changes in these parameters following treatment with thalidomide [ 102 ]  2.5.1. Modeling of Perfusion Ultrasound Data Hertz was the first to provide the idea of estimating perfusion using continuous wave Doppler ultrasound [ 103 ], and this was closely followed by Dymling [ 104 ] with a mathematical estimation of perfusion based on the measured Doppler power spectrum. Perfusion was expressed as follows: Equation 13 P = Q c V s ? n c E { v c } , where Q c is total capillary flow, V s is the sample volume of tissue, n c is the number of capillaries per unit volume tissue and E { v c } is the average blood velocity in the capillaries. To establish the proportionality between perfusion and a Doppler-derived measurement, the assumption was made that red blood cells were the primary, isotropic scattering source: Equation 14 ? 0 ? f S ( f ) d f ? N 0 E { v c } . Such an expression relates the mean number of red blood cells in some volume of interest and their mean speed along the z-axis to the first moment of the Doppler power spectrum. This expression can be used to estimate velocity using any of the above ultrasound techniques, but the modern flow mapping techniques estimate perfusion by quantifying the density of colored pixels or number of visible vessels in a given region of interest relative to normal tissue. An interesting method to estimate perfusion was demonstrated in myocardium using contrast-enhanced ultrasound and selective high-power pulses to destroy microbubbles and observe the inflow of unaffected microbubbles during a continuous infusion. The so-called ‘refilling’ signal reflected the mean myocardial microbubble velocity. The asymptotic maximum was related to fractional vascular volume, and the product of the two parameters was related to perfusion [ 102 , 105 ]. This approach has yet to be used in cancers, although focused ultrasonic cavitation of microbubbles has been identified as a promising technique for imaging and delivery of therapies [ 106 , 107 , 108 , 109 ].  2.5.2. Table: Measurement of Hemodynamics with Ultrasound Tracer System Parameter Measured Results Reference Sonovue® (microbubbles) Power Doppler US Percent intratumor contrast agent uptake Following RF ablation therapy, DUPC accurately estimated degree of vascularization in 80% of cases [ 98 ] Levovist® (microbubbles) CEUS Tumor vascularity Post-contrast vascularity correlated well with histological assessment of vascularity [ 99 ] Sonovue® (microbubbles) CEUS, conventional B-mode US, spiral CT Number of metastases CEUS outperformed conventional US and CT in its ability to accurately detect more metastatic lesions [ 100 ] Sonovue® (microbubbles) CEUS, color Doppler US Enhancement timing & pattern (related to vascularity) Accurate differentiation between nonfunctional islet tumors and pancreatic carcinoma [ 101 ] Sonovue® (microbubbles) CEUS Percent blood volume fraction, RBC velocity & perfusion Post-treatment changes in these parameters following treatment with thalidomide [ 102 ]  2.6 Measurement of Hemodynamics with Optical Imaging “Optical imaging” describes a broad range of techniques. Methods specifically designed for in vivo imaging include photo-luminescence ( fluorescence ) and chemi-luminescence (commonly referred to as bioluminescence ). An additional approach that may have clinical utility is diffuse optical (DOT) tomography. This method utilizes the diffusion equation to model propagation of light through tissue using the absorption and scattering coefficients. A major limitation of optical imaging is the depth of penetration because scattering and absorption increase as a function of tissue depth. Thus, capturing images from outside the body is difficult. However, sophisticated optical images can be obtained by detectors attached to endoscopes. The major advantages of optical imaging are its temporal, spatial and spectral resolution. Using reflected light and fluorescence light at a micrometer resolution (for example, confocal microscopy), cancerous cell morphology can be interrogated, and multispectral imaging with millimeter resolution can be used to interrogate general tissue morphology [ 110 ]. Optical imaging is capable of capturing real-time dynamics particularly with recent improvements in the quality of fast and highly sensitive cameras. The advancement of fluorescence microscopy in biomedical research is partly attributed to the development of methods to conjugate proteins to fluorochromes [ 111 , 112 ], and partly to improvements in thin film technology and opto-electronics, which increased the sensitivity and specificity of detection of emitted fluorescent light [ 113 ]. Most filters sets are not totally efficient in eliminating damaging and unwanted UV wavelengths, so fluorescence imaging can be damaging to tissues. The primary mechanisms of damage are phototoxicity (i.e. absorption of photons by exogenous and endogenous fluorochromes) and creation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). This can be mitigated somewhat by two-photon or near-IR imaging which uses longer wavelengths for excitation. A further advantage of NIR imaging is that the range of wavelengths (700–900 nm) maximizes depth of penetration while minimizing scatter and background autofluorescence [ 114 ]. Chemi-luminescence imaging is based on the catalysis of light emission from a substrate. The most common and fully developed reporter is the luciferase enzyme which oxidizes luciferin. Light emitted from this reaction is between 530–640 nm (broad-band) [ 115 ]. In general, optical imaging of vascular permeability has been limited to pre-clinical studies. However, there are currently more than 10 ongoing clinical trials that are using optical imaging to study human tumors [ 116 ]. Fluorescence/reflectance imaging and confocal microscopy are used to detect surgical resections of non-melanoma skin cancers; non-invasive, scanning two-photon fluorescence microscopy is being used to replace the skin biopsy; optical spectroscopy is being investigated as a potential use for intraoperative margin assessment during breast cancer lumpectomy; and transillumination breast spectroscopy is being developed as breast cancer risk predictor to replace and or augment mammographic parenchymal density. Diffuse optical tomography (DOT) is potentially useful for measuring hemodynamics. DOT propagates light through the tissue at multiple projections to yield a 3-dimensional tomographic image of deep tissue organs and, depending on the mathematical approach taken, maps of absorption, scattering, vascularization, oxygenation, and contrast agent uptake can be generated [ 117 ]. In a recent study that used DOT concurrently with dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI, the distribution of fluorescent indocyanine green (ICG) was compared to that of an MR-contrast agent, Gd-DTPA, and found that they were correlated [ 118 ]. The transillumination limitation of optical imaging can be overcome with a pre-clinical, in vivo chronic transparent chamber angiogenesis assay, the dorsal skinfold window chamber technique. Coupled with intravital fluorescence microscopy, this technique has provided tremendous insight into basic vessel physiology and is capable of providing quantitative measurements of blood flow, vascular volume, permeability, vessel density, gene expression and drug delivery in animals [ 119 ]. Tozer et al. has used the window chamber model and intravital fluorescence microscopy to show combretastatin A-4 3- O -phosphate and nitric oxide synthase effects on vascular permeability [ 120 ]. 2.6.1. Kinetic Modeling of Dynamic Optical Imaging Data A very comprehensive study using fluorescence video microscopy to measure vascular permeability was performed in the window chamber model [ 121 ]. The derivation of vascular permeability as measured optically begins with the assumption that the relationship between number of fluorochromes ( N(t) ) in the vascular and interstitial space and the average fluorescent intensity ( I(t) ) in the vascular and interstitial space is linear: Equation 15 I v ( t ) = k v · N v ( t ) A , Equation 16 I i ( t ) = k i · N i ( t ) A , where k v (vascular) and k i (interstitial) relate the number of fluorochromes in area A to the average light intensity in A . From Fick’s Law, the average permeability coefficient ( P ) is the ratio of the flux of tracer ( J s ) to the product of the vessel surface area and difference between the plasma concentration ( C p ) and the average interstitial concentration ( C i ): Equation 17 P = J s S · ( C p - C i ) . Assuming that the flux is approximately equal to the rate of accumulation of tracer in the interstitial space, and substituting C p and C i for parameters that account for vascular volume ( V v ), tube hematocrit ( H T ) and volume to surface area ratio ( ? ), the following equation is derived: Equation 18 I i ( t ) = ? · ? 0 t e - ? ( t - ? ) · I v ( ? ) d ? , which relates the constants ? and ? to permeability as follows: Equation 19 P = ? · [ ? · ( 1 - H T ) · ( k v k i ) ] . A complete description of the derivation is provided elsewhere [ 121 ]. 2.6.2. Table: Measurement of Hemodynamics with Optical Imaging Tracer System Parameter Measured Results Reference ICG (indocyanine green) DOT Tracer distribution Comparable distribution kinetics with Gd-DTPA (as measured by MRI) [ 118 ]  2.6.1. Kinetic Modeling of Dynamic Optical Imaging Data A very comprehensive study using fluorescence video microscopy to measure vascular permeability was performed in the window chamber model [ 121 ]. The derivation of vascular permeability as measured optically begins with the assumption that the relationship between number of fluorochromes ( N(t) ) in the vascular and interstitial space and the average fluorescent intensity ( I(t) ) in the vascular and interstitial space is linear: Equation 15 I v ( t ) = k v · N v ( t ) A , Equation 16 I i ( t ) = k i · N i ( t ) A , where k v (vascular) and k i (interstitial) relate the number of fluorochromes in area A to the average light intensity in A . From Fick’s Law, the average permeability coefficient ( P ) is the ratio of the flux of tracer ( J s ) to the product of the vessel surface area and difference between the plasma concentration ( C p ) and the average interstitial concentration ( C i ): Equation 17 P = J s S · ( C p - C i ) . Assuming that the flux is approximately equal to the rate of accumulation of tracer in the interstitial space, and substituting C p and C i for parameters that account for vascular volume ( V v ), tube hematocrit ( H T ) and volume to surface area ratio ( ? ), the following equation is derived: Equation 18 I i ( t ) = ? · ? 0 t e - ? ( t - ? ) · I v ( ? ) d ? , which relates the constants ? and ? to permeability as follows: Equation 19 P = ? · [ ? · ( 1 - H T ) · ( k v k i ) ] . A complete description of the derivation is provided elsewhere [ 121 ].  2.6.2. Table: Measurement of Hemodynamics with Optical Imaging Tracer System Parameter Measured Results Reference ICG (indocyanine green) DOT Tracer distribution Comparable distribution kinetics with Gd-DTPA (as measured by MRI) [ 118 ]  2.7 Measurement of Hemodynamics with Magnetic Resonance Imaging Dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE)-MRI has been used extensively to measure microvascular permeability in many human tumors, such as bone sarcomas [ 122 ], head-neck and prostate tumors [ 123 ], breast tumors [ 124 ], cerebral gliomas [ 125 ], and breast tumors [ 126 ]. DCE-MRI is a non-invasive, functional method to measure active changes in hemodynamic parameters occurring following treatment before macroscopic changes, such as decreases in tumor volume, become evident. Currently, there are at least 11 clinical trials in all four phases dedicated to the interrogation of tumors and tumor response to therapy using information derived from DCE-MRI [ 116 ]. DCE-MRI is used to experimentally characterize the tumor microvasculature by modeling the pharmacokinetics of injected contrast agents. These unique MRI contrast agents are chelated with Gadolinium and generate very large magnetic lattice fields in the immediate neighborhood of the complex, greatly shortening the T1 or longitudinal relaxation of water protons that approach the paramagnetic center. This lends to the unique contrast between tissues observed using this imaging approach. The efficiency with which a contrast medium can shorten T1 relaxation is determined by its inherent relaxivity. 2.7.1. Table: Measurement of Hemodynamics with DCE-MRI Tracer System Parameter Measured Results Reference GdDTPA (Magnevist) Bone sarcoma Permeability Associations found between expression of VEGF and increases in permeability [ 122 ] GdDTPA (Magnevist) Head & neck, prostate & brain neoplasms Rate of uptake, kep Demonstrated reproducibility of kep [ 123 ] GdDTPA (Magnevist) Breast tumors Permeability Significant change in permeability pre- and post- treatment [ 124 ] Gadodiamide (Gd- DTPA-BMA) Cerebral glioma Permeability Demonstrated reproducibility of permeability [ 125 ] GdDTPA (Magnevist) Breast tumors Exchange rates Significant differentiation between malignant and benign tissue [ 126 ] 2.7.2. MRI Contrast Media The challenges remaining in the development and application of MR contrast agents are 1) to find media that are most sensitive to microvascular permeability and; 2) to quantify the values obtained from images. Generally, DCE-MRI measurements using high molecular weight contrast agents (HMWCA) are more sensitive to the transendothelial capillary permeability, while DCE-MRI measurements using small molecular weight contrast agents (SMWCA) are more sensitive to flow. Although SMWCA are commonly used in the clinic, they rapidly extravasate in tumors and normal tissues with fenestrated or sinusoidal capillaries. Quantification of this rapid extravasation requires rapid image acquisition, at the expense of reduced spatial resolution. Furthermore, extravasation rates are flow-dominated, so SMWCA are insensitive to drug-induced changes in microvascular permeability. HMWCA do not extravasate rapidly, and measurements made using them are more sensitive to changes in microvascular permeability. Imaging performed using HMWCA can be at higher spatial resolution at the expense of temporal resolution, given the slow extravasation rates. Thus, there is an interest in developing intravascular compounds that demonstrate a large dynamic range and sensitivity to changes following interventional therapies in cancer [ 127 ]. To be clinically useful, these agents must be non-toxic and have high relaxivity, which will contribute to generation of data with high spatial and temporal resolution. Compounds under development are of a larger molecular weight, ranging from 30–100 kDa, offer a longer blood pool residence time and permit acquisition of steady state images for more than an hour. These high molecular weight contrast agents remain intravascular in all tissues except for leaky tumor vasculature [ 128 , 129 , 130 ]. 2.7.3. Kinetic Modeling of Dynamic-Contrast Enhanced MRI Data A major difference between DCE-MRI data and data from other techniques is the fact that DCE-MRI measures the effect of the contrast agent on water relaxation and not the contrast agent itself. DCE-MR imaging enables the acquisition of a signal enhancement versus time curve, and pharmacokinetic models have been devised for quantitative evaluation of such curves to extract values for the volume transfer constant ( K trans ) between the plasma compartment and the interstitial space and the fractional volume of the interstitial space ( v e ) [ 131 ]. The rate constant, k ep , is the ratio of the transfer constant to the extravascular extracellular fractional volume, v e : Equation 20 k e p = K trans / v e . This rate constant can be directly derived from the shape of the contrast agent concentration versus time curve, but access to K trans and v e require knowledge of absolute values of contrast agent concentration. In the early part of this review, tracer uptake in the tissue was expressed as the difference between the quantity of tracer delivered to the tissue from the arterial phase ( C a ) and the quantity removed by the venous phase ( C v ): Equation 21 d Q d t = F ( C a - C v ) . If the intrinsic permeability of the capillary is high, then transport of a solute across the capillary is dependent on blood flow rather than diffusion, and as such is flow-limited . Tofts et. al. have extended this interpretation to include flow per unit mass of tissue as opposed to total blood flow, and mass tissue concentration ( C t/? ) instead of volume tissue concentration ( C t ) [ 20 ]: Equation 22 d C t d t = F ? ( C a - C v ) . In this case, ? (g ml?1) is needed because F is now expressed in ml g?1 min?1. The partition coefficient, ? , relates the concentration of the tracer in the tissue to the concentration of the tracer in the blood: Equation 23 C t = ? C v . It then follows that: Equation 24 d C t d t = - F ? ( C t - ? ? C a ) . In a flow-limited regime, the venous plasma concentration C v/(1?Hct) can be assumed equal to the concentration in the extravascular extracellular space ( C e ). ? is derived in terms of v e , and the final model is expressed as: Equation 25 d C t d t = F ? ( 1 - Hct ) ( C p - C t / v e ) . This model is used in situations where capillary permeability to the contrast agent is very high (i.e. when small molecular weight contrast agents are used). The rate of uptake of the contrast agent into the tissue is related to the v e and the contrast agent concentrations in the tissue ( C t ) and the arterial blood plasma ( C p ). Importantly, the transfer constant, K trans , is a function of the perfusion of whole blood per unit mass of tissue ( F , ml g?1 min-1), the density of tissue ( ? , g ml-1) and the hematocrit ( Hct ) (i.e. K trans = F? (1? Hct )). In situations where capillary permeability to the contrast agent is very low (i.e. when high molecular weight contrast agents are used), K trans is a function of the permeability surface area product ( PS , ml min-1 g-1) of the capillary wall and ? , (i.e. K trans = PS? ), and the rate of uptake is related to the v e , C t and C p : Equation 26 d C t d t = P S ? ( C p - C t / v e ) . Finally, in situations where capillary permeability is intermediate, K trans is equal to the fractional reduction in capillary blood concentration during the passage of the contrast agent through the tissue, or the extraction ratio ( E ) and the hematocrit (i.e. K trans = EF? ), and the rate of uptake is related to the v e , C t , and C p : Equation 27 d C t d t = E F ? ( 1 - Hct ) ( C p - C t / v e ) . In summary, the contrast agent concentration kinetics are a function of the plasma concentration, K trans and v e , or K trans and k ep . This is expressed by a generalized form for each of the three previous models: Equation 28 d C t d t = K trans ( C p - C t / v e ) = K trans C p - k e p C t , which describes the change in the concentration of the contrast agent as a function of time in terms of K trans and v e . It is important to note here that each model (high, low or intermediate capillary permeability to contrast agent) ignore the contribution of intravascular contrast agent to tissue concentration, and therefore, limit the fitted model parameters to only K trans and v e . Contrast agents of different molecular weights will require the use of different models for permeability. Of the listed parameters, C p and C t are actually measured and K trans , k ep and v e are calculated from the fitted model equations.  2.7.1. Table: Measurement of Hemodynamics with DCE-MRI Tracer System Parameter Measured Results Reference GdDTPA (Magnevist) Bone sarcoma Permeability Associations found between expression of VEGF and increases in permeability [ 122 ] GdDTPA (Magnevist) Head & neck, prostate & brain neoplasms Rate of uptake, kep Demonstrated reproducibility of kep [ 123 ] GdDTPA (Magnevist) Breast tumors Permeability Significant change in permeability pre- and post- treatment [ 124 ] Gadodiamide (Gd- DTPA-BMA) Cerebral glioma Permeability Demonstrated reproducibility of permeability [ 125 ] GdDTPA (Magnevist) Breast tumors Exchange rates Significant differentiation between malignant and benign tissue [ 126 ]  2.7.2. MRI Contrast Media The challenges remaining in the development and application of MR contrast agents are 1) to find media that are most sensitive to microvascular permeability and; 2) to quantify the values obtained from images. Generally, DCE-MRI measurements using high molecular weight contrast agents (HMWCA) are more sensitive to the transendothelial capillary permeability, while DCE-MRI measurements using small molecular weight contrast agents (SMWCA) are more sensitive to flow. Although SMWCA are commonly used in the clinic, they rapidly extravasate in tumors and normal tissues with fenestrated or sinusoidal capillaries. Quantification of this rapid extravasation requires rapid image acquisition, at the expense of reduced spatial resolution. Furthermore, extravasation rates are flow-dominated, so SMWCA are insensitive to drug-induced changes in microvascular permeability. HMWCA do not extravasate rapidly, and measurements made using them are more sensitive to changes in microvascular permeability. Imaging performed using HMWCA can be at higher spatial resolution at the expense of temporal resolution, given the slow extravasation rates. Thus, there is an interest in developing intravascular compounds that demonstrate a large dynamic range and sensitivity to changes following interventional therapies in cancer [ 127 ]. To be clinically useful, these agents must be non-toxic and have high relaxivity, which will contribute to generation of data with high spatial and temporal resolution. Compounds under development are of a larger molecular weight, ranging from 30–100 kDa, offer a longer blood pool residence time and permit acquisition of steady state images for more than an hour. These high molecular weight contrast agents remain intravascular in all tissues except for leaky tumor vasculature [ 128 , 129 , 130 ].  2.7.3. Kinetic Modeling of Dynamic-Contrast Enhanced MRI Data A major difference between DCE-MRI data and data from other techniques is the fact that DCE-MRI measures the effect of the contrast agent on water relaxation and not the contrast agent itself. DCE-MR imaging enables the acquisition of a signal enhancement versus time curve, and pharmacokinetic models have been devised for quantitative evaluation of such curves to extract values for the volume transfer constant ( K trans ) between the plasma compartment and the interstitial space and the fractional volume of the interstitial space ( v e ) [ 131 ]. The rate constant, k ep , is the ratio of the transfer constant to the extravascular extracellular fractional volume, v e : Equation 20 k e p = K trans / v e . This rate constant can be directly derived from the shape of the contrast agent concentration versus time curve, but access to K trans and v e require knowledge of absolute values of contrast agent concentration. In the early part of this review, tracer uptake in the tissue was expressed as the difference between the quantity of tracer delivered to the tissue from the arterial phase ( C a ) and the quantity removed by the venous phase ( C v ): Equation 21 d Q d t = F ( C a - C v ) . If the intrinsic permeability of the capillary is high, then transport of a solute across the capillary is dependent on blood flow rather than diffusion, and as such is flow-limited . Tofts et. al. have extended this interpretation to include flow per unit mass of tissue as opposed to total blood flow, and mass tissue concentration ( C t/? ) instead of volume tissue concentration ( C t ) [ 20 ]: Equation 22 d C t d t = F ? ( C a - C v ) . In this case, ? (g ml?1) is needed because F is now expressed in ml g?1 min?1. The partition coefficient, ? , relates the concentration of the tracer in the tissue to the concentration of the tracer in the blood: Equation 23 C t = ? C v . It then follows that: Equation 24 d C t d t = - F ? ( C t - ? ? C a ) . In a flow-limited regime, the venous plasma concentration C v/(1?Hct) can be assumed equal to the concentration in the extravascular extracellular space ( C e ). ? is derived in terms of v e , and the final model is expressed as: Equation 25 d C t d t = F ? ( 1 - Hct ) ( C p - C t / v e ) . This model is used in situations where capillary permeability to the contrast agent is very high (i.e. when small molecular weight contrast agents are used). The rate of uptake of the contrast agent into the tissue is related to the v e and the contrast agent concentrations in the tissue ( C t ) and the arterial blood plasma ( C p ). Importantly, the transfer constant, K trans , is a function of the perfusion of whole blood per unit mass of tissue ( F , ml g?1 min-1), the density of tissue ( ? , g ml-1) and the hematocrit ( Hct ) (i.e. K trans = F? (1? Hct )). In situations where capillary permeability to the contrast agent is very low (i.e. when high molecular weight contrast agents are used), K trans is a function of the permeability surface area product ( PS , ml min-1 g-1) of the capillary wall and ? , (i.e. K trans = PS? ), and the rate of uptake is related to the v e , C t and C p : Equation 26 d C t d t = P S ? ( C p - C t / v e ) . Finally, in situations where capillary permeability is intermediate, K trans is equal to the fractional reduction in capillary blood concentration during the passage of the contrast agent through the tissue, or the extraction ratio ( E ) and the hematocrit (i.e. K trans = EF? ), and the rate of uptake is related to the v e , C t , and C p : Equation 27 d C t d t = E F ? ( 1 - Hct ) ( C p - C t / v e ) . In summary, the contrast agent concentration kinetics are a function of the plasma concentration, K trans and v e , or K trans and k ep . This is expressed by a generalized form for each of the three previous models: Equation 28 d C t d t = K trans ( C p - C t / v e ) = K trans C p - k e p C t , which describes the change in the concentration of the contrast agent as a function of time in terms of K trans and v e . It is important to note here that each model (high, low or intermediate capillary permeability to contrast agent) ignore the contribution of intravascular contrast agent to tissue concentration, and therefore, limit the fitted model parameters to only K trans and v e . Contrast agents of different molecular weights will require the use of different models for permeability. Of the listed parameters, C p and C t are actually measured and K trans , k ep and v e are calculated from the fitted model equations.  3 Antiangiogenic & Antivascular Therapies 3.1 Antivascular vs. Antiangiogenic Therapies Antivascular therapies target an established vessel network. In general, they induce collapse of a mature vasculature, reduce perfusion, blood volume and vascular tortuosity [ 132 ]. Available antivascular therapies have been tabulated: Antivascular Agents Drug Target General Mechanism of Action Combretastatin A4 phosphate Tubulin Disrupts tubulin cytoskeleton, induces rapid vascular shutdown N -Acetylcolchinol- O -Phosphate (ZD6126) Tubulin Disrupts tubulin cytoskeleton, changes in cell morphology of proliferating endothelial cells 5,6-dimethylxanthenone-4-acetic acid (DMXAA) Host immune system Stimulation of host immune system, induction of vascular collapse Antiangiogenic therapies, on the other hand, target actively proliferating and newly forming vessel networks. Most antiangiogenic therapies are small molecule inhibitors of vascular growth factors that support the neovasculature. In general, antiangiogenic therapies reduce permeability, perfusion and blood volume. Antiangiogenic Agents Drug Target General Mechanism of Action AEE788 VEGFR-1 & -2, EGFR Dual inhibitor of EGFR and VEGFR Vandetanib (ZD6474) VEGFR-2, EGFR, FGFR-1, RET Dual inhibitor of EGFR and VEGFR Axitinib (AG-013736) VEGFR-1, -2 & -3, PDGFR-?, c-Kit Inhibits VEGFR autophosphorylation, inhibits endothelial cell proliferation and survival Sunitinib (SU11248) VEGFR-1, -2 & -3, PDGFR-?, c-Kit Inhibits endothelial cell proliferation and survival Recentin (AZD2171) VEGFR-1, -2 & -3, PDGFR-?, c-Kit Inhibits VEGF-induced angiogenesis in vivo Vatalanib (PTK787/ZK222584) VEGFR-1, -2 & -3, PDGFR-?, c-Kit Inhibits endothelial cell proliferation and survival Sorafenib (BAY 43-9006) VEGFR-2 & -3, Raf kinase, PDGFR-?, c- Inhibits tumor and endothelial cell proliferation and survival O-(chloro-acetyl-carbamoyl) (TNP-470/AGM-1470) Kit, RET EC growth Relatively specifically cytostatically inhibits endothelial cell growth (UI 8297716) PX-866 PI3-Kinase Inhibits PI-3-kinase pathway, cellular proliferation and survival LY294002 PI3-Kinase Inhibits PI-3-kinase pathway, cellular proliferation and survival Wortmannin PI3-Kinase Inhibits PI-3-kinase pathway, cellular proliferation and survival Bevacizumab (rhuMAb VEGF) VEGF Monoclonal antibody to VEGF Volociximab AAB1 targets AAB1, a component protein of ?5?1 HuMV833 VEGF recombinant humanized IgG4k monoclonal antibody targeting VEGF “VEGF-trap” (AVE 0005) VEGF Fusion of human IgG1 Fc to extracellular domains of VEGFR-1 and VEGFR-2; binds VEGF IMC-1121B (anti-VEGFR-2MAb) VEGF-R2 IgG antibody targeting VEGFR-2 Endostatin ?5?1, ?v?3 & ?v?5 Interferes with migration and proliferation of endothelial cell Tumstatin ?v?3 Inhibits EC protein synthesis Angiostatin Integrin ?v?3 Competitively binds to integrins, inhibiting interaction with matrix ligands, interfering w/cell attachment and adhesion Neovastat MMPs Inhibition of MMPs The table of antiangiogenic inhibitors above is a conglomeration of direct and indirect inhibitors. Indirect inhibitors of angiogenesis target tumor cell production of angiogenic growth factors and their receptors. This type of inhibitor is prone to development of resistance as there is a substantial opportunity for the cell to pursue alternative pathways of angiogenesis. Direct inhibitors of angiogenesis target tumor endothelial cells and inhibit endothelial cell proliferation, migration, tube formation and/or induce endothelial cell apoptosis [ 133 ]. Successful clinical trial design for conventional cytotoxic agents is based on the following concepts: 1) the agent is associated with a dose-dependent toxicity; 2) an upper limit for dose-escalation will be set by a dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) (e.g. anemia); 3) the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) has the highest probability of producing objective remission (shrinking the tumor) and improving palliation of symptoms and; 4) the agent, alone or in combination, is capable of prolonging survival. The standard paradigm for selecting the dose of chemotherapeutic agents, the MTD, is not appropriate for antiangiogenic drugs because a) as these are targeted therapies, the optimal dose may be much less than the tolerated dose, b) they are associated with low incidence of side-effects and; c) the DLT may not be biochemically related to the agent’s mechanism of action. Since antiangiogenic and antivascular therapies are cytostatic, measuring tumor volumes is impractical because tumor shrinkage or disease progression may not occur or could take weeks or months to be visible. Furthermore, heterogeneity in individual responses to cytostatic therapies would require large populations to obtain significance, leading to long and expensive clinical trials. Therefore, many potential antiangiogenic therapies have not lived up to the expectations of preclinical trials, in part because of the difficulties in designing clinical trials for antiangiogenic drugs. Thus, there is a need to establish sensitive and reliable biomarkers of early responses to antiangiogenic or antivascular drugs, for in vivo pharmacodynamics (i.e. action of a drug on its target). Drug action can then be compared to subsequent clinical responses to ascertain if it is effective. Because antiangiogenic or antivascular therapies are designed to affect the abnormal blood vessels recruited by tumors, changes in blood volume, blood flow, or other hemodynamic parameters may be promising biomarkers that allow for an in vivo assessment of the biological activity of these angiogenic modulators. 3.2 Table: Imaging Response to Antivascular vs. Antiangiogenic Therapies Methodological details about the imaging methods that have exploited these physiological parameters are described elsewhere in this review. However, the following table presents a list of pre-clinical studies and clinical trials that have used these modalities to evaluate the effects of several important antiangiogenic or antivascular therapies: Drug Imaging Study Reference CA4P PET- Perfusion [ 66 ] Razoxane PET - Perfusion and blood volume [ 67 ] SU5416 PET - Perfusion and metabolism [ 68 ] Bevacizumab CT - Perfusion [ 88 ] MEDI-522 CT - Blood flow, blood volume, PS, MTT [ 89 ] AZD2171 DCE-MRI – Decreases in Ktrans [ 134 , 135 ] SU11248 DCE-MRI – Decreases in Ktrans & fPV 24h post-treatment [ 136 ] AG-013736 DCE-MRI – Decreases in Ktrans 48h post-treatment [ 137 ] PTK787/ZK222584 DCE-MRI – Dose dependent reduction in Ktrans & AUC [ 138 , 139 ] AEE788 DCE-MRI – Decrease in area under enhancement curve [ 140 ] ZD6474 DCE-MRI – Dose dependent reduction in Ktrans [ 141 ] HuMV833 DCE-MRI – Decreases in Ktrans 48h post-treatment [ 142 ] Endostatin DCE-MRI – No consistent change in Ktrans or ve [ 143 ]  3.1 Antivascular vs. Antiangiogenic Therapies Antivascular therapies target an established vessel network. In general, they induce collapse of a mature vasculature, reduce perfusion, blood volume and vascular tortuosity [ 132 ]. Available antivascular therapies have been tabulated: Antivascular Agents Drug Target General Mechanism of Action Combretastatin A4 phosphate Tubulin Disrupts tubulin cytoskeleton, induces rapid vascular shutdown N -Acetylcolchinol- O -Phosphate (ZD6126) Tubulin Disrupts tubulin cytoskeleton, changes in cell morphology of proliferating endothelial cells 5,6-dimethylxanthenone-4-acetic acid (DMXAA) Host immune system Stimulation of host immune system, induction of vascular collapse Antiangiogenic therapies, on the other hand, target actively proliferating and newly forming vessel networks. Most antiangiogenic therapies are small molecule inhibitors of vascular growth factors that support the neovasculature. In general, antiangiogenic therapies reduce permeability, perfusion and blood volume. Antiangiogenic Agents Drug Target General Mechanism of Action AEE788 VEGFR-1 & -2, EGFR Dual inhibitor of EGFR and VEGFR Vandetanib (ZD6474) VEGFR-2, EGFR, FGFR-1, RET Dual inhibitor of EGFR and VEGFR Axitinib (AG-013736) VEGFR-1, -2 & -3, PDGFR-?, c-Kit Inhibits VEGFR autophosphorylation, inhibits endothelial cell proliferation and survival Sunitinib (SU11248) VEGFR-1, -2 & -3, PDGFR-?, c-Kit Inhibits endothelial cell proliferation and survival Recentin (AZD2171) VEGFR-1, -2 & -3, PDGFR-?, c-Kit Inhibits VEGF-induced angiogenesis in vivo Vatalanib (PTK787/ZK222584) VEGFR-1, -2 & -3, PDGFR-?, c-Kit Inhibits endothelial cell proliferation and survival Sorafenib (BAY 43-9006) VEGFR-2 & -3, Raf kinase, PDGFR-?, c- Inhibits tumor and endothelial cell proliferation and survival O-(chloro-acetyl-carbamoyl) (TNP-470/AGM-1470) Kit, RET EC growth Relatively specifically cytostatically inhibits endothelial cell growth (UI 8297716) PX-866 PI3-Kinase Inhibits PI-3-kinase pathway, cellular proliferation and survival LY294002 PI3-Kinase Inhibits PI-3-kinase pathway, cellular proliferation and survival Wortmannin PI3-Kinase Inhibits PI-3-kinase pathway, cellular proliferation and survival Bevacizumab (rhuMAb VEGF) VEGF Monoclonal antibody to VEGF Volociximab AAB1 targets AAB1, a component protein of ?5?1 HuMV833 VEGF recombinant humanized IgG4k monoclonal antibody targeting VEGF “VEGF-trap” (AVE 0005) VEGF Fusion of human IgG1 Fc to extracellular domains of VEGFR-1 and VEGFR-2; binds VEGF IMC-1121B (anti-VEGFR-2MAb) VEGF-R2 IgG antibody targeting VEGFR-2 Endostatin ?5?1, ?v?3 & ?v?5 Interferes with migration and proliferation of endothelial cell Tumstatin ?v?3 Inhibits EC protein synthesis Angiostatin Integrin ?v?3 Competitively binds to integrins, inhibiting interaction with matrix ligands, interfering w/cell attachment and adhesion Neovastat MMPs Inhibition of MMPs The table of antiangiogenic inhibitors above is a conglomeration of direct and indirect inhibitors. Indirect inhibitors of angiogenesis target tumor cell production of angiogenic growth factors and their receptors. This type of inhibitor is prone to development of resistance as there is a substantial opportunity for the cell to pursue alternative pathways of angiogenesis. Direct inhibitors of angiogenesis target tumor endothelial cells and inhibit endothelial cell proliferation, migration, tube formation and/or induce endothelial cell apoptosis [ 133 ]. Successful clinical trial design for conventional cytotoxic agents is based on the following concepts: 1) the agent is associated with a dose-dependent toxicity; 2) an upper limit for dose-escalation will be set by a dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) (e.g. anemia); 3) the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) has the highest probability of producing objective remission (shrinking the tumor) and improving palliation of symptoms and; 4) the agent, alone or in combination, is capable of prolonging survival. The standard paradigm for selecting the dose of chemotherapeutic agents, the MTD, is not appropriate for antiangiogenic drugs because a) as these are targeted therapies, the optimal dose may be much less than the tolerated dose, b) they are associated with low incidence of side-effects and; c) the DLT may not be biochemically related to the agent’s mechanism of action. Since antiangiogenic and antivascular therapies are cytostatic, measuring tumor volumes is impractical because tumor shrinkage or disease progression may not occur or could take weeks or months to be visible. Furthermore, heterogeneity in individual responses to cytostatic therapies would require large populations to obtain significance, leading to long and expensive clinical trials. Therefore, many potential antiangiogenic therapies have not lived up to the expectations of preclinical trials, in part because of the difficulties in designing clinical trials for antiangiogenic drugs. Thus, there is a need to establish sensitive and reliable biomarkers of early responses to antiangiogenic or antivascular drugs, for in vivo pharmacodynamics (i.e. action of a drug on its target). Drug action can then be compared to subsequent clinical responses to ascertain if it is effective. Because antiangiogenic or antivascular therapies are designed to affect the abnormal blood vessels recruited by tumors, changes in blood volume, blood flow, or other hemodynamic parameters may be promising biomarkers that allow for an in vivo assessment of the biological activity of these angiogenic modulators.  3.2 Table: Imaging Response to Antivascular vs. Antiangiogenic Therapies Methodological details about the imaging methods that have exploited these physiological parameters are described elsewhere in this review. However, the following table presents a list of pre-clinical studies and clinical trials that have used these modalities to evaluate the effects of several important antiangiogenic or antivascular therapies: Drug Imaging Study Reference CA4P PET- Perfusion [ 66 ] Razoxane PET - Perfusion and blood volume [ 67 ] SU5416 PET - Perfusion and metabolism [ 68 ] Bevacizumab CT - Perfusion [ 88 ] MEDI-522 CT - Blood flow, blood volume, PS, MTT [ 89 ] AZD2171 DCE-MRI – Decreases in Ktrans [ 134 , 135 ] SU11248 DCE-MRI – Decreases in Ktrans & fPV 24h post-treatment [ 136 ] AG-013736 DCE-MRI – Decreases in Ktrans 48h post-treatment [ 137 ] PTK787/ZK222584 DCE-MRI – Dose dependent reduction in Ktrans & AUC [ 138 , 139 ] AEE788 DCE-MRI – Decrease in area under enhancement curve [ 140 ] ZD6474 DCE-MRI – Dose dependent reduction in Ktrans [ 141 ] HuMV833 DCE-MRI – Decreases in Ktrans 48h post-treatment [ 142 ] Endostatin DCE-MRI – No consistent change in Ktrans or ve [ 143 ]  4 Remaining Questions: Endothelial Transport of Contrast Agents 4.1 Mechanisms Macromolecular Transport Thus far, we have discussed the mechanisms regulating ion and small molecule transport through passive mechanisms, though it was indicated that active transport mechanisms may be regulating transport as well. Indeed, the concept of the endothelium as a passive, simple barrier to blood constituents has long since been replaced with the idea of an endothelium that can sense, modulate and control macromolecular transport. This section will focus on the transport of macromolecules and the characteristics that determine capillary permeability to these macromolecules. The consensus among morphologists is that large molecules require a transcytotic event or active, transcellular shuttle mechanism to get from the luminal end to the abluminal end and vice versa. The first system proposed described the shuttling of plasmalemmal vesicles or caveolae across the endothelial cells between the luminal and abluminal ends [ 144 ]. An alternative form of transport is mediated by so-called “vesicular-vacuolar organelles” (VVO), which create transendothelial channels that span the luminal to the abluminal end [ 145 ]. Independent observation of a membrane-bound tubular system evidently used for transport sparked a debate as to whether or not all three systems were describing the same phenomena [ 146 ]. The regulation of transport naturally begins at the level of the luminal plasmalemma. As the forefront of the transport process, this luminal membrane interacts with all blood constituents and functions in sorting these molecules to the designated location. The luminal plasmalemmal surface is comprised of glycoconjugates (e.g. glycoproteins, glycolipids and proteoglycans), enzymes (e.g. lipoprotein lipase and angiotensin convertin enzymes) and receptors for specific plasma molecules (e.g. vasoactive amines, hormones, procoagulants, anticoagulants, carrier proteins and lipoproteins) [ 147 ]. This expression profile differs significantly from the abluminal surface of the plasmalemma, suggesting that the cell surface protein distribution of both interfaces is important for moving blood constituents either from the luminal compartment of the capillary to the interstitial compartment in the tissue or from the interstitial compartment to the lumen of the capillary [ 148 ]. Independent transport mechanisms mediate the trafficking of materials across the plasma membrane. The functional units of these mechanisms, including interendothelial junctions (paracellular transport), caveolae (transcytosis) and their transendothelial channels, and vesiculo-vacuolar organelles (VVO), are diagrammed in Figure 2 and discussed in greater detail below. 4.1.1. Paracellular Transport Paracellular transport can be described as transport through the interendothelial junctions between adjacent endothelial cells. This system limits transport to ions with radii less than 3 nm, such as urea, glucose and small ions. However, under certain conditions, these tightly regulated interendothelial junctions will transform to allow intercellular gaps to form, through which select macromolecules like plasma proteins can pass into the extravascular extracellular space [ 148 , 149 ]. This process is mediated by binding of VEGF and certain inflammatory mediators to their receptors. 4.1.2. Transcellular Transport Transcellular transport or transcytosis describes the process whereby molecules are translocated across the cell to the interstitial fluid. Transcytosis can occur via non-specific mechanisms (fluid phase and/or adsorptive) or specific mechanisms (receptor-mediated) [ 148 ]. The process of fluid phase transcytosis is described as endocytosis of the plasma by caveolae and the subsequent relocation of the contents to the abluminal surface where the vesicle is disencumbered. Adsorptive nonspecific transcytosis involves an electrostatic interaction between the vesicle and the molecule before the translocation event can occur. Specific transcytosis is entirely receptor-mediated. 4.1.2.1. Caveolae Caveolae are small vesicles (mean diameter ~70 nm) that are open to the endothelial cell membrane on either end—luminal or abluminal—via a thin neck of 10–40 nm in diameter, endowing them with the “flask-shape” distinction often referred to in the literature. The aperture between the endothelial cell membrane and the caveolae is sometimes enclosed by a thin diaphragm displaying a central knob and spoke-like features, which act as a size and ion filter [ 150 , 151 ]. These vesicles have been implicated in endocytotic and transcytotic transport mechanisms. The latter of the two will be described in more detail. A review on the endocytotic transport pathway can be found elsewhere [ 133 ]. Caveolae have a heavy lipid composition, particularly, sphingomyelin and cholesterol. The expression of caveolin-1 is also an integral part of the caveolar composition. This protein mediates protein-protein interaction with G-protein subunits, Ha-Ras, Src tyrosine kinases and eNOS [ 152 ]. 4.1.2.2. Transendothelial Channels The original postulation for transendothelial channels was not married to substantial evidence for their existence [ 151 ] until years later when it was evidenced more clearly [ 153 ]. These channels are created when a sequence of caveolae line up from one end of the plasma membrane to the other to form an open channel. It is presumed that these structures regulate function by providing a dynamic hydrophobic channel or pore. 4.1.2.3. Vacuolar Organelles Vesiculo-vacuolar organelles are clusters of vesicles that can arrange into continuous channels that span across the endothelial cell membrane, and in some cases, have been observed spanning to the lateral endothelial cell interface. It is not entirely clear whether they are morphologically distinct from transendothelial channels (AL Baldwin, personal communication). Nevertheless, they were originally described by Dvorak’s group [ 145 , 154 ] and have been reported elsewhere [ 155 , 156 , 157 ]. The size of these vesicles can range from 80–140 nm in diameter. They are clusters of smaller vesicles that are 1–2 ?m in the longest dimension. They are hypothesized to have some involvement in the transportation of large molecules because treatment of normal animals with a permeabilizing agent resulted in an increased extravasation of ferritin in normal venules by way of VVO structures [ 158 ]. VVO structures also contain diaphragms that separate the luminal and abluminal interfaces from the interior of the vesicle. The only aspect that seems to significantly deviate from a caveolin-like morphology is that the behavior of these vesicles is completely normal in caveolin-deficient mice, indicating that these structures do not require caveolin-1 for function [ 159 , 160 ].  4.1 Mechanisms Macromolecular Transport Thus far, we have discussed the mechanisms regulating ion and small molecule transport through passive mechanisms, though it was indicated that active transport mechanisms may be regulating transport as well. Indeed, the concept of the endothelium as a passive, simple barrier to blood constituents has long since been replaced with the idea of an endothelium that can sense, modulate and control macromolecular transport. This section will focus on the transport of macromolecules and the characteristics that determine capillary permeability to these macromolecules. The consensus among morphologists is that large molecules require a transcytotic event or active, transcellular shuttle mechanism to get from the luminal end to the abluminal end and vice versa. The first system proposed described the shuttling of plasmalemmal vesicles or caveolae across the endothelial cells between the luminal and abluminal ends [ 144 ]. An alternative form of transport is mediated by so-called “vesicular-vacuolar organelles” (VVO), which create transendothelial channels that span the luminal to the abluminal end [ 145 ]. Independent observation of a membrane-bound tubular system evidently used for transport sparked a debate as to whether or not all three systems were describing the same phenomena [ 146 ]. The regulation of transport naturally begins at the level of the luminal plasmalemma. As the forefront of the transport process, this luminal membrane interacts with all blood constituents and functions in sorting these molecules to the designated location. The luminal plasmalemmal surface is comprised of glycoconjugates (e.g. glycoproteins, glycolipids and proteoglycans), enzymes (e.g. lipoprotein lipase and angiotensin convertin enzymes) and receptors for specific plasma molecules (e.g. vasoactive amines, hormones, procoagulants, anticoagulants, carrier proteins and lipoproteins) [ 147 ]. This expression profile differs significantly from the abluminal surface of the plasmalemma, suggesting that the cell surface protein distribution of both interfaces is important for moving blood constituents either from the luminal compartment of the capillary to the interstitial compartment in the tissue or from the interstitial compartment to the lumen of the capillary [ 148 ]. Independent transport mechanisms mediate the trafficking of materials across the plasma membrane. The functional units of these mechanisms, including interendothelial junctions (paracellular transport), caveolae (transcytosis) and their transendothelial channels, and vesiculo-vacuolar organelles (VVO), are diagrammed in Figure 2 and discussed in greater detail below. 4.1.1. Paracellular Transport Paracellular transport can be described as transport through the interendothelial junctions between adjacent endothelial cells. This system limits transport to ions with radii less than 3 nm, such as urea, glucose and small ions. However, under certain conditions, these tightly regulated interendothelial junctions will transform to allow intercellular gaps to form, through which select macromolecules like plasma proteins can pass into the extravascular extracellular space [ 148 , 149 ]. This process is mediated by binding of VEGF and certain inflammatory mediators to their receptors. 4.1.2. Transcellular Transport Transcellular transport or transcytosis describes the process whereby molecules are translocated across the cell to the interstitial fluid. Transcytosis can occur via non-specific mechanisms (fluid phase and/or adsorptive) or specific mechanisms (receptor-mediated) [ 148 ]. The process of fluid phase transcytosis is described as endocytosis of the plasma by caveolae and the subsequent relocation of the contents to the abluminal surface where the vesicle is disencumbered. Adsorptive nonspecific transcytosis involves an electrostatic interaction between the vesicle and the molecule before the translocation event can occur. Specific transcytosis is entirely receptor-mediated. 4.1.2.1. Caveolae Caveolae are small vesicles (mean diameter ~70 nm) that are open to the endothelial cell membrane on either end—luminal or abluminal—via a thin neck of 10–40 nm in diameter, endowing them with the “flask-shape” distinction often referred to in the literature. The aperture between the endothelial cell membrane and the caveolae is sometimes enclosed by a thin diaphragm displaying a central knob and spoke-like features, which act as a size and ion filter [ 150 , 151 ]. These vesicles have been implicated in endocytotic and transcytotic transport mechanisms. The latter of the two will be described in more detail. A review on the endocytotic transport pathway can be found elsewhere [ 133 ]. Caveolae have a heavy lipid composition, particularly, sphingomyelin and cholesterol. The expression of caveolin-1 is also an integral part of the caveolar composition. This protein mediates protein-protein interaction with G-protein subunits, Ha-Ras, Src tyrosine kinases and eNOS [ 152 ]. 4.1.2.2. Transendothelial Channels The original postulation for transendothelial channels was not married to substantial evidence for their existence [ 151 ] until years later when it was evidenced more clearly [ 153 ]. These channels are created when a sequence of caveolae line up from one end of the plasma membrane to the other to form an open channel. It is presumed that these structures regulate function by providing a dynamic hydrophobic channel or pore. 4.1.2.3. Vacuolar Organelles Vesiculo-vacuolar organelles are clusters of vesicles that can arrange into continuous channels that span across the endothelial cell membrane, and in some cases, have been observed spanning to the lateral endothelial cell interface. It is not entirely clear whether they are morphologically distinct from transendothelial channels (AL Baldwin, personal communication). Nevertheless, they were originally described by Dvorak’s group [ 145 , 154 ] and have been reported elsewhere [ 155 , 156 , 157 ]. The size of these vesicles can range from 80–140 nm in diameter. They are clusters of smaller vesicles that are 1–2 ?m in the longest dimension. They are hypothesized to have some involvement in the transportation of large molecules because treatment of normal animals with a permeabilizing agent resulted in an increased extravasation of ferritin in normal venules by way of VVO structures [ 158 ]. VVO structures also contain diaphragms that separate the luminal and abluminal interfaces from the interior of the vesicle. The only aspect that seems to significantly deviate from a caveolin-like morphology is that the behavior of these vesicles is completely normal in caveolin-deficient mice, indicating that these structures do not require caveolin-1 for function [ 159 , 160 ].  4.1.1. Paracellular Transport Paracellular transport can be described as transport through the interendothelial junctions between adjacent endothelial cells. This system limits transport to ions with radii less than 3 nm, such as urea, glucose and small ions. However, under certain conditions, these tightly regulated interendothelial junctions will transform to allow intercellular gaps to form, through which select macromolecules like plasma proteins can pass into the extravascular extracellular space [ 148 , 149 ]. This process is mediated by binding of VEGF and certain inflammatory mediators to their receptors.  4.1.2. Transcellular Transport Transcellular transport or transcytosis describes the process whereby molecules are translocated across the cell to the interstitial fluid. Transcytosis can occur via non-specific mechanisms (fluid phase and/or adsorptive) or specific mechanisms (receptor-mediated) [ 148 ]. The process of fluid phase transcytosis is described as endocytosis of the plasma by caveolae and the subsequent relocation of the contents to the abluminal surface where the vesicle is disencumbered. Adsorptive nonspecific transcytosis involves an electrostatic interaction between the vesicle and the molecule before the translocation event can occur. Specific transcytosis is entirely receptor-mediated. 4.1.2.1. Caveolae Caveolae are small vesicles (mean diameter ~70 nm) that are open to the endothelial cell membrane on either end—luminal or abluminal—via a thin neck of 10–40 nm in diameter, endowing them with the “flask-shape” distinction often referred to in the literature. The aperture between the endothelial cell membrane and the caveolae is sometimes enclosed by a thin diaphragm displaying a central knob and spoke-like features, which act as a size and ion filter [ 150 , 151 ]. These vesicles have been implicated in endocytotic and transcytotic transport mechanisms. The latter of the two will be described in more detail. A review on the endocytotic transport pathway can be found elsewhere [ 133 ]. Caveolae have a heavy lipid composition, particularly, sphingomyelin and cholesterol. The expression of caveolin-1 is also an integral part of the caveolar composition. This protein mediates protein-protein interaction with G-protein subunits, Ha-Ras, Src tyrosine kinases and eNOS [ 152 ]. 4.1.2.2. Transendothelial Channels The original postulation for transendothelial channels was not married to substantial evidence for their existence [ 151 ] until years later when it was evidenced more clearly [ 153 ]. These channels are created when a sequence of caveolae line up from one end of the plasma membrane to the other to form an open channel. It is presumed that these structures regulate function by providing a dynamic hydrophobic channel or pore. 4.1.2.3. Vacuolar Organelles Vesiculo-vacuolar organelles are clusters of vesicles that can arrange into continuous channels that span across the endothelial cell membrane, and in some cases, have been observed spanning to the lateral endothelial cell interface. It is not entirely clear whether they are morphologically distinct from transendothelial channels (AL Baldwin, personal communication). Nevertheless, they were originally described by Dvorak’s group [ 145 , 154 ] and have been reported elsewhere [ 155 , 156 , 157 ]. The size of these vesicles can range from 80–140 nm in diameter. They are clusters of smaller vesicles that are 1–2 ?m in the longest dimension. They are hypothesized to have some involvement in the transportation of large molecules because treatment of normal animals with a permeabilizing agent resulted in an increased extravasation of ferritin in normal venules by way of VVO structures [ 158 ]. VVO structures also contain diaphragms that separate the luminal and abluminal interfaces from the interior of the vesicle. The only aspect that seems to significantly deviate from a caveolin-like morphology is that the behavior of these vesicles is completely normal in caveolin-deficient mice, indicating that these structures do not require caveolin-1 for function [ 159 , 160 ].  4.1.2.1. Caveolae Caveolae are small vesicles (mean diameter ~70 nm) that are open to the endothelial cell membrane on either end—luminal or abluminal—via a thin neck of 10–40 nm in diameter, endowing them with the “flask-shape” distinction often referred to in the literature. The aperture between the endothelial cell membrane and the caveolae is sometimes enclosed by a thin diaphragm displaying a central knob and spoke-like features, which act as a size and ion filter [ 150 , 151 ]. These vesicles have been implicated in endocytotic and transcytotic transport mechanisms. The latter of the two will be described in more detail. A review on the endocytotic transport pathway can be found elsewhere [ 133 ]. Caveolae have a heavy lipid composition, particularly, sphingomyelin and cholesterol. The expression of caveolin-1 is also an integral part of the caveolar composition. This protein mediates protein-protein interaction with G-protein subunits, Ha-Ras, Src tyrosine kinases and eNOS [ 152 ].  4.1.2.2. Transendothelial Channels The original postulation for transendothelial channels was not married to substantial evidence for their existence [ 151 ] until years later when it was evidenced more clearly [ 153 ]. These channels are created when a sequence of caveolae line up from one end of the plasma membrane to the other to form an open channel. It is presumed that these structures regulate function by providing a dynamic hydrophobic channel or pore.  4.1.2.3. Vacuolar Organelles Vesiculo-vacuolar organelles are clusters of vesicles that can arrange into continuous channels that span across the endothelial cell membrane, and in some cases, have been observed spanning to the lateral endothelial cell interface. It is not entirely clear whether they are morphologically distinct from transendothelial channels (AL Baldwin, personal communication). Nevertheless, they were originally described by Dvorak’s group [ 145 , 154 ] and have been reported elsewhere [ 155 , 156 , 157 ]. The size of these vesicles can range from 80–140 nm in diameter. They are clusters of smaller vesicles that are 1–2 ?m in the longest dimension. They are hypothesized to have some involvement in the transportation of large molecules because treatment of normal animals with a permeabilizing agent resulted in an increased extravasation of ferritin in normal venules by way of VVO structures [ 158 ]. VVO structures also contain diaphragms that separate the luminal and abluminal interfaces from the interior of the vesicle. The only aspect that seems to significantly deviate from a caveolin-like morphology is that the behavior of these vesicles is completely normal in caveolin-deficient mice, indicating that these structures do not require caveolin-1 for function [ 159 , 160 ].  5 Conclusions This review has described both the physical basis of microvascular permeability as well as the mathematical methods required for a clinically practical imaging approach to estimating this parameter. It has presented methods that the imaging community has developed to deliver an estimation of microvascular permeability in the attempt to establish reliable and sensitive measures of response to therapy in human tumors. It is anticipated that microvascular permeability will evolve into a clinically useful biomarker that can 1) aid in the “Go/No Go” decision making process in drug development; 2) become a useful tool in establishing a drug’s mechanism of action and; 3) ultimately transform into a surrogate endpoint for drug approval purposes. A logical initiation point for this review was to define vascular permeability and perfusion, diagram major vessel architecture and mammalian regulation of blood flow, and survey the various morphologies of capillaries and modes of transport, both passive and active. In order to associate microvascular permeability with angiogenesis, mechanisms of normal physiological and tumor angiogenesis were described canvassing the litany of in vitro and in vivo assays used to observe angiogenesis. These issues provided a reasonable segue into the current status of clinical imaging of perfusion, blood flow, permeability, distribution and vascular volumes using PET, SPECT, DCE-MRI, ultrasound and optical imaging, particularly in the context of their ability to estimate tumor response to antiangiogenic and antivascular therapies. There is no ‘silver bullet’ or best method for quantifying microvascular hemodynamics. No standard protocols for measuring microvascular hemodynamics exist and reproducibility is simply not adequate across image sites and different imaging centers. Perhaps a profile of hemodynamic data obtained by an array of imaging assays would lead to more reliable and robust indicators of therapy response than any one imaging modality could alone provide. Nevertheless, the contribution of each modality as an adjuvant to traditional tumor response indices is powerful and unrefuted. At the very least, researchers interested in progressing a particular technique alone or in combination with other imaging modalities will continue to find fellowship in this large community of hypothesis-generating studies. 