Rb/E2F4 and Smad2/3 Link Survivin to TGF-?-induced Apoptosis and Tumor Progression Survivin is a prosurvival protein overexpressed in many cancers through mechanisms that remain poorly explored, and is implicated in control of tumor progression and resistance to cancer chemotherapeutics. Here we report a critical role for survivin in the induction of apoptosis by TGF-?. We show that TGF-? rapidly downregulates survivin expression in prostate epithelial cells, through a unique mechanism of transcriptional suppression involving Smads 2 and 3, Rb/E2F4, and the cell cycle repressor elements CDE and CHR. This TGF-? response is triggered through a Smad2/3-dependent hypophosphorylation of Rb and the subsequent association of the Rb/E2F4 repressive complex to CDE/CHR elements in the proximal region of the survivin promoter. Viral mediated gene delivery experiments, involving overexpressing or silencing survivin, reveal critical roles of survivin in apoptosis induced by TGF-? alone or in cooperation with cancer therapeutic agents. We thus propose a novel TGF-?/Rb/survivin axis with a putative role in the functional switch of TGF-? from tumor suppressor to tumor promoter.  Introduction TGF-? is a multifunctional cytokine regulating diverse cellular processes such as growth, differentiation, migration, apoptosis and tumorigenesis ( Danielpour and Song, 2006 ; Roberts and Wakefield, 2003 ; Shi and Massague, 2003 ). TGF-? signals by first binding to the cell surface receptor T GF- ? r eceptor type II (T?RII), which then recruits T?RI to form a T?RII/T?RI tetrameric complex in which T?RII activates T?RI. T?RI then activates intracellular receptor-Smads (R-Smads), Smad2 and Smad3, promoting oligomerization either with themselves or with Smad4 ( Shi and Massague, 2003 ; ten Dijke and Hill, 2004 ). These Smads then translocate to the nucleus, where they control gene expression as transcription factors or coregulators ( Massague et al., 2005 ). A number of studies support that TGF-? functions as a tumor suppressor of the prostate ( Danielpour, 2005 ), consistent with its ability to arrest cell growth and/or induce apoptosis in normal tissues or differentiated tumors ( Hsing et al., 1996 ). Our laboratory has derived three spontaneously-immortalized cell lines (NRP-152, NRP-154, DP-153) from the preneoplastic prostate of the Lobund-Wistar rat ( Danielpour et al., 1994 ), all of which are exquisitely sensitive to the cytostatic effects of TGF-? ( Hsing et al., 1996 ). Retroviral transduction of dominant-negative T?RII in the above cells ablates the cytostatic effects of TGF-? and causes non-tumorigenic variants to undergo malignant transformation ( Song et al., 2003a ; Tang et al., 1999 ). We previously reported that TGF-? downregulates Bcl-xL expression in NRP-154 cells, and that the loss of this survival protein may be critical to TGF-?-mediated apoptosis ( Chipuk et al., 2001 ). In the current study, we identified survivin, a member of the mammalian i nhibitor of ap optosis (IAP), is also down-regulated by TGF-?. IAPs are a family of endogenous caspase inhibitors containing one or multiple b aculoviral I AP r epeat (BIR) domains serving as the interface for caspase binding and inhibition ( Liston et al ., 2003 ; Salvesen and Duckett, 2002 ). Survivin is a unique mammalian IAP with respect to a role in mitotic regulation ( Altieri, 2003b ). Survivin expression in normal cells is confined to the G2/M phase of the cell cycle and is indispensable for normal mitosis ( Altieri, 2003a ; Altieri, 2003b ). Such discrete cell-cycle dependent expression is disrupted in tumors with unclear mechanisms, related to substantial elevation of survivin expression in cancers. In prostate cancer, survivin expression has been shown to positively correlate with tumor stage or loss of T?RI and T?RII expression ( Kishi et al., 2004 ; Shariat et al., 2004 ). We found that an intact TGF-? signaling pathway transcriptionally downregulates survivin expression through a mechanism that is dependent on Smads 2 and 3, and two cell cycle repressor elements (within the survivin proximal promoter), namely a c ell cycle- d ependent e lement (CDE) and a c ell cycle genes h omology r egion (CHR) ( Lucibello et al., 1997 ). TGF-? causes hypophosphorylation of Rb mainly through a Smad3-dependent mechanism, leading to the recruitment of the Rb/E2F4 repressive complex to the CDE/CHR elements of the survivin promoter. Functional inactivation of Rb family proteins by oncoproteins selectively blocks down-regulation of the survivin promoter by TGF-?. Moreover, survivin silencing and overexpression experiments suggest a biological function of this TGF-?-dependent regulation, which is disrupted during tumor progression. Our model provides new mechanistic insights behind the overexpression of survivin in cancer and the development of resistance to chemotherapeutic agents.  Materials and Methods Reagents Sources were: ?-Caspase-3 active [AF-835], recombinant human TGF-?1, BMP-4, and Activin-AB (R&D systems); SB431542 (Tocris); DHT, Taxol, and ?-?-actin (Sigma); Etoposide (Calbiochem); ?-survivin [sc-10811], ?-cIAP1 [sc-7943], ?-cIAP2 [sc-7944], ?- Smad3 [sc-8332], ?-Smad4 [sc-7966], ?-p130 [sc-317], ?-p107 [sc-318], ?-E2F4 [sc-866] (Santa Cruz); ?-XIAP [#610762] (BD Pharmingen); ?-Smad2 (Transduction Laboratories); ?-P-Smad2 (Ser 465/467) [#3101], ?-P-Smad3 (Ser 423/425) [#9514], (Cell Signaling); ?- Rb, ?-P-Rb [Ser 807/811] (NEB). Cell Culture NRP-152, NRP-154 cell lines ( Danielpour et al., 1994 ) were maintained and treated with TGF-? as before ( Song et al., 2006 ; Wang et al., 2005 ). HEK293T, DU-145 and PC-3 were maintained in DMEM/F12 supplemented with 5% FBS. LNCaP and C4-2B cells were maintained and treated as described for LNCaP ( Chipuk et al., 2002 ). RWPE-1 cells ( Bello et al., 1997 ) were cultured in complete keratinocyte serum-free growth medium (Invitrogen). See footnote for the composition of GM2.1 and GM3 media. Western Blot Analysis Cell lysates were prepared and analyzed by Western blot as described previously ( Song et al., 2003b ) except for the inclusion of 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM ?-glycerophosphate (?–GP) and 2.5 mM Na4P2O7 to RIPA lysis buffer. RT-PCR Five µg of total RNA (purified by RNeasy, Qiagen) was reverse-transcribed with Superscript II (Invitrogen) using an oligo(dT)20 primer. One µl of this cDNA product was used to amplify rat survivin (Forward primer: 5’ GAGTGACATGCCACGGCTAA 3’. Reverse primer: 5’ CCAGGCATGGAAACATCAAG 3’). The positions of these primers were #458 and #765 for forward and reverse primers respectively, relative to rat survivin mRNA (AF276775). Luciferase Reporter Assay Cells were transfected with plasmid DNA (1 µg/well) in 12-well dishes, using 2.5 µg of polyethylenimine per µg DNA, as specified by ExGen500 (Fermentas). Cells plated overnight at 5 × 104 cells/well were transfected with 0.4 µg of survivin promoter vector, 20 ng of CMV-renilla, and 0.6 µg plasmid (empty vector, or an expression vector). Medium was replaced with GM3 3 h later, TGF-?1 or vehicle was added the next day, and dual luciferase assays (Promega) were done 24 h later with an LMax II luminometer (Molecular Devices).  Reagents Sources were: ?-Caspase-3 active [AF-835], recombinant human TGF-?1, BMP-4, and Activin-AB (R&D systems); SB431542 (Tocris); DHT, Taxol, and ?-?-actin (Sigma); Etoposide (Calbiochem); ?-survivin [sc-10811], ?-cIAP1 [sc-7943], ?-cIAP2 [sc-7944], ?- Smad3 [sc-8332], ?-Smad4 [sc-7966], ?-p130 [sc-317], ?-p107 [sc-318], ?-E2F4 [sc-866] (Santa Cruz); ?-XIAP [#610762] (BD Pharmingen); ?-Smad2 (Transduction Laboratories); ?-P-Smad2 (Ser 465/467) [#3101], ?-P-Smad3 (Ser 423/425) [#9514], (Cell Signaling); ?- Rb, ?-P-Rb [Ser 807/811] (NEB).  Cell Culture NRP-152, NRP-154 cell lines ( Danielpour et al., 1994 ) were maintained and treated with TGF-? as before ( Song et al., 2006 ; Wang et al., 2005 ). HEK293T, DU-145 and PC-3 were maintained in DMEM/F12 supplemented with 5% FBS. LNCaP and C4-2B cells were maintained and treated as described for LNCaP ( Chipuk et al., 2002 ). RWPE-1 cells ( Bello et al., 1997 ) were cultured in complete keratinocyte serum-free growth medium (Invitrogen). See footnote for the composition of GM2.1 and GM3 media.  Western Blot Analysis Cell lysates were prepared and analyzed by Western blot as described previously ( Song et al., 2003b ) except for the inclusion of 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM ?-glycerophosphate (?–GP) and 2.5 mM Na4P2O7 to RIPA lysis buffer.  RT-PCR Five µg of total RNA (purified by RNeasy, Qiagen) was reverse-transcribed with Superscript II (Invitrogen) using an oligo(dT)20 primer. One µl of this cDNA product was used to amplify rat survivin (Forward primer: 5’ GAGTGACATGCCACGGCTAA 3’. Reverse primer: 5’ CCAGGCATGGAAACATCAAG 3’). The positions of these primers were #458 and #765 for forward and reverse primers respectively, relative to rat survivin mRNA (AF276775).  Luciferase Reporter Assay Cells were transfected with plasmid DNA (1 µg/well) in 12-well dishes, using 2.5 µg of polyethylenimine per µg DNA, as specified by ExGen500 (Fermentas). Cells plated overnight at 5 × 104 cells/well were transfected with 0.4 µg of survivin promoter vector, 20 ng of CMV-renilla, and 0.6 µg plasmid (empty vector, or an expression vector). Medium was replaced with GM3 3 h later, TGF-?1 or vehicle was added the next day, and dual luciferase assays (Promega) were done 24 h later with an LMax II luminometer (Molecular Devices).  Supplementary Material 1  Figures Fig. 1 TGF-? downregulates survivin levels through a transcriptional mechanism (A) NRP-154 cells plated in GM3 medium were treated the next day with vehicle or 10 ng/ml of TGF-?1 or BMP-4 for the indicated time. P-Smad levels that are controls for the activation of downstream signals by these ligands were measured by Western blot analyses. Note that P-Smad3 antibody recognizes both P-Smad3 and P-Smad1, 5, 8 as indicated by the arrows. (B and C) NRP-154 cells were treated with TGF-?1 (10ng/ml) for the indicated time or with various doses of TGF-?1 for 16 h. Samples were subjected to Western blot (B) or RT-PCR (C). (D) NRP-154 cells were plated in GM2.1 medium and transfected with 0.4 µg of Suv-829 or empty luciferase vector (EV), 20 ng of CMV-driven renilla vector and 0.6 µg of pcDNA3. TGF-?1 (10 ng/ml) or vehicle was added 24 h after transfection, and cells were incubated for an additional 24 h before assay. Firefly luciferase values were normalized to renilla luciferase. Fig. 2 TGF-? type I receptor kinase activity is essential for the repression of survivin by TGF-? (A) Top: NRP-154 cells were treated in GM3 medium with 0.1% DMSO or 10 µM of SB431542 for 2h, followed by 30 min treatment with or without 10 ng/ml of TGF-?1. Bottom: NRP-154 cells were seeded at a density of 104 cells/ml/12-well plate in GM3 medium and treated with 0.1% DMSO or 10 µM of SB431542 24 h prior to TGF-?1 (10 ng/ml, 48 h). To determine cell number, cells detached with trypsinization were enumerated using a Coulter Counter (Coulter Electronics). (B) NRP-154 cells plated in GM3 medium were treated with 0.1% DMSO or 10 µM of SB431542 for 1h, followed by treatment with vehicle or 10 ng/ml of TGF-?1 for 24 h, and expression of survivin was analyzed by Western blot. (C) NRP-154 cells transfected with 0.4 µg of Suv-829 luciferase reporter construct were treated the same way as in (B), and then cells were harvested for luciferase assay. (D) NRP-154 cells were infected in GM3 with different doses (indicated as the dilution fold above the brackets) of stock adenoviruses expressing control (C) or HA-CA-ALK5 (A) for 5 h. Whole cell lysates were collected after an additional 29 h and analyzed by Western blot. Fig. 3 Smads are required for TGF-?-mediated suppression of survivin (A–C) NRP-154-tTR-sh-LacZ, sh-Smad2 (sh-S2), sh-Smad3 (sh-S3), or sh-Smad2+3 (sh-S2+3) cells were plated in GM2.1 medium containing 0.1 µg/ml of doxycycline to induce the expression of shRNAs. Two days later cells were plated in GM3 medium supplemented with doxycycline (0.1 µg/ml) and treated with 10 ng/ml of TGF-?1 or vehicle. Samples were collected before (A) or after 48 h (B) of TGF-? treatment or as indicated (C). Western blot analysis (A, C top), cell number assay (B), and RT-PCR (C bottom) were performed. Note that in (B), cell number was determined as in Fig. 2A and % cell survival after TGF-? treatment was calculated from three experiments. The bands in (C) were quantified with Quantity One software, and expressed as the relative quantity (Qty) of survivin to ?-actin. (D) NRP-154-tTR-sh-LacZ or sh-Smad2+3 cells were plated in GM2.1 medium containing doxycycline and transfected two days later with 0.4 µg of Suv-829 reporter plasmid. Luciferase assay was conducted after 24 h of treatment with TGF-?1 (10 ng/ml) or vehicle. Fig. 4 TGF-? represses survivin promoter within the region ?182/?4, and the CDE/CHR elements within this region are essential for this TGF-?’s effect (A) Left: Diagram of survivin promoter 5’-deletion constructs. Right: Individual promoter constructs (0.4 µg) were transfected into NRP-154 cells and treated with or without TGF-? (10 ng/ml) for 25 h. (B) Schematic representation of the nucleotide changes in survivin promoter mutants, which were generated with Suv-370 reporter plasmid. SBE2 and AP-2 sites are underlined, while CDE and CHR sites are boxed. All mutated nucleotides are indicated in inverted display. Note that CDE(m) disrupts both AP-2 and CDE sites. Although not shown here, SBE1(m) has the same nucleotide changes as SBE2(m). (C, D, E) Suv-370 wild type (WT) or mutant promoter reporter plasmid (0.4 µg) was transfected into NRP-154 cells and treated with 10 ng/ml of TGF-?1 or vehicle for 24 h. Suppression for each promoter construct was calculated as %Suppression = [(LV-LT)/LV] * 100% (L: average luciferase activity; V: vehicle; T: TGF-?). The luciferase activity of the first bar was arbitrarily set as 1. Note that data in (D) and (E) are from the same experiment, and the negative value of % suppression in (E) reflects enhancement. Fig. 5 TGF-? recruits Rb/E2F4 to survivin promoter containing the CDE/CHR elements to mediate the suppression of this promoter (A) Retroviral constructs expressing Rb-inactivating proteins, including D1/CDK (cyclin D1-cdk2 fusion protein), E7 (from HPV-18; E7?, a mutant form that does not bind Rb), T-ag (SV-40 Large T antigen) or their vector controls were individually transfected into NRP-154 cells together with Suv-370 promoter luciferase construct. (B) 150 µg of nuclear extracts from NRP-154 cells treated with vehicle or 10 ng/ml of TGF-?1 were incubated with biotinylated DNA (Suv-182 or SAC oligo) conjugated to streptavidin magnetic beads. DNA-bound protein complexes were resolved by SDS-PAGE and analyzed by Western blot. Input of nuclear proteins (10 µg) was also shown. (C) Similar DNAP experiment as in (B), except that wild-type (wt) or mutated SAC oligos were used. Mutation site(s) are as illustrated in Fig. 4B . SBE oligo was used as a control. In (B, C), p130 band is indicated by the arrow. (D) Phosphorylated and total levels of Rb after TGF-?1 treatment. (E) The samples used in Fig. 3C (top) were assayed for P-Rb and total Rb levels. Fig. 6 Cellular survivin levels control the sensitivity to TGF-? and chemotherapeutic drugs (A) NRP-154 cells plated in GM3 were infected overnight with 1/500 dilution of the stock control (CTL) or survivin (Suv) adenoviruses, and then treated with vehicle or TGF-?1 (1 ng/ml) for 48 h. Cells were analyzed for DNA content by propidium iodide staining and FACS. The percentage of cells with hypodiploid DNA content (Sub-G1) is indicated and plotted. (B, C) Capase-3 activation was monitored by Western blot analysis of cleaved form of caspase-3 (Casp-3, active). NRP-154 cells were infected in the same way as in (A) with control (Ad-CTL) or survivin (Ad-Suv) adenoviruses, and then treated with vehicle or 10 ng/ml TGF-? (B); Etoposide (50 µM), Taxol (5 nM) or 0.1% DMSO (C) for 40 h. The level of overexpressed survivin was also shown. (D) NRP-154 cells, after virus infection, were treated with Taxol (2 nM) and/or TGF-?1 (0.3 ng/ml) for 40 h and assayed for caspase-3 cleavage. (E) NRP-154 cells expressing doxycycline-inducible shRNA targeting LacZ (sh-LacZ) or survivin (sh-Suv) were plated in GM2.1 medium containing 0.1 µg/ml of doxycycline. Two days later cells were either harvested to assay for survivin protein silencing (top) or treated with vehicle, TGF-?1 (10 ng/ml), DMSO (0.1%), etoposide (25 µM), or taxol (2 nM) for 40 h to assay active caspase-3 by Western blot (bottom). Fig. 7 Regulation of survivin by TGF-? in prostate cells correlate with their malignancy (A) TGF-? time course in NRP-152 cells. (B) Human prostate cancer cell lines DU-145 and PC-3 plated in DMEM/F12 + 1% FBS medium, and rat prostate epithelial cell lines NRP-154 (tumorigenic) and NRP-152 (non-tumorigenic) plated in GM3 medium were treated with vehicle or 10 ng/ml of TGF-?1 for 24 h, and cell lysates were subjected to Western blot analysis. Lower exp: lower exposure. (C) Non-tumorigenic human prostate cell line RWPE-1 was treated with vehicle or 10 ng/ml of TGF-?1 for the indicated time. (D) LNCaP and C4-2B cells were plated in 1% DC-FBS+15 mM HEPES+DMEM/F12, infected with adenovirus expressing T?RII (1/200 dilution), and treated with 20 ng/ml of epidermal growth factor. Cells were then treated with or without 10 nM of DHT for 24 h, followed by the incubation with vehicle or 10 ng/ml of TGF-?1 for an additional 24 h. (E) A schematic model of survivin regulation by TGF-? and its implication in prostate cancer. TGF-? ligand-bound receptors activate Smads 2 and 3, which activate Rb (and/or Rb-like proteins) by inducing its hypophosphorylation. Activated Rb can then bind E2F4 to form a repressor complex on the survivin promoter through CDE/CHR elements. Smad3, which binds to SBE upstream of CDE/CHR in vitro , may also contribute to TGF-?-mediated survivin promoter suppression through interaction with E2F4. In normal cells, the TGF-?/survivin regulatory axis is usually intact to maintain survivin levels. However, this regulatory axis is often defective in malignant cancer cells, resulting in heightened levels of survivin and thus resistance to chemotherapeutics.  Results Downregulation of survivin by TGF-? We used Affymetrix expression microarrays to screen for TGF-? regulated genes related to apoptosis control and shown to be deregulated in prostate cancer. This analysis identified survivin as one such factor. Western blot analysis revealed that the levels of survivin but not cIAP1, cIAP2, XIAP were efficiently decreased by TGF-?1 in NRP-154 cells ( Fig. 1A ). Another common TGF-? superfamily member, BMP-4, which activates Smads 1, 5, 8, failed to suppress survivin expression ( Fig. 1A ). Treatment of NRP-154 cells with 10 ng/ml TGF-?1 for different lengths of time showed that the steady-state level of survivin was decreased by 12 h post-treatment and became undetectable by 16 h ( Fig. 1B , top), corresponding to a time before the induction of an apoptotic DNA ladder (? 20 h post TGF-?1 treatment in these cells ( Hsing et al., 1996 )) or the decrease in G2/M phase of the cell cycle (> 20 h post treatment, Supplemental Fig. 1 ). Dose-response analysis at 16 h of treatment gave a significant response with as low as 0.3 ng/ml of TGF-?1 ( Fig. 1B , bottom). These results suggest a physiological role of survivin in apoptosis induction by TGF-? in these cells. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR revealed that TGF-?1 also down-regulated survivin mRNA levels with kinetics similar to the loss of survivin protein ( Fig. 1C ). To determine whether such regulation occurs at the transcriptional level, we analyzed the effect of TGF-?1 on the activity of an 832 bp fragment of the survivin promoter (Suv-829) ( Supplemental Fig. 2 ) placed upstream of a luciferase reporter gene. We found that TGF-? repressed survivin promoter activity by approximately 80%, while it had no effect on the empty luciferase reporter vector ( Fig. 1D ). These data support that TGF-? downregulates survivin expression through a transcriptional mechanism. TGF-? type I receptor kinase activity is required for the suppression of survivin by TGF-? Seven type I receptors have been identified to relay signals from TGF-? superfamily members ( ten Dijke and Hill, 2004 ). They are also called ALKs ( A ctivin- L ike K inases). To test whether TGF-? represses survivin through its receptor kinase activity, we treated NRP-154 cells with SB431542 ( Inman et al., 2002 ), a kinase inhibitor specific for ALK 5 (used by TGF-?s) and ALK 4, 7 (used by activins). SB431542 effectively blocked activation of R-Smads and growth suppression/apoptosis by TGF-?1 ( Fig. 2A ); this drug also reversed the TGF-? downregulation of survivin protein ( Fig. 2B ) and promoter activity ( Fig. 2C ). Moreover, adenovirus-mediated expression of constitutively active ALK5 (CA-ALK5) also down-regulated survivin expression ( Fig. 2D ). Thus, these data support that TGF-? represses survivin expression through the kinase activity of ALK5. R-Smads are essential for mediating TGF-?’s effect on survivin loss Smads remain the best characterized direct targets of TGF-? receptors ( Massague et al ., 2005 ; Massague and Wotton, 2000 ). Beside R-Smads, ALK5 likely activates other signaling cascades such as MAPK pathways ( Derynck and Zhang, 2003 ). To determine whether the repression of survivin by TGF-? is Smad-dependent or -independent, we generated doxycyclin-inducible shRNA expression lentiviruses to stably silence Smads 2 and/or 3 in NRP-154 cells. As indicated in Fig. 3A , compared with the non-silencing control (sh-LacZ), sh-Smad2 or sh-Smad3 efficiently and specifically knocked down their respective proteins. Moreover, robust silencing of both Smads 2 and 3 was obtained with both shRNAs used together, and Smad4 levels remained unchanged with either or both shRNAs ( Fig. 3A ). We also examined the role of Smad2 and Smad3 in TGF-?-induced apoptosis. Assaying for changes in total cell number ( Fig 3B ) and for changes in sub-G1 by Flow Cytometry (data not shown) we demonstrated that Smad2 and Smad3 each are involved in the induction of apoptosis by TGF-?, although Smad3 plays a more prominent role. Western blotting ( Fig. 3C top), RT-PCR ( Fig. 3C bottom) and promoter activity ( Fig. 3D ) indicated that the suppression of survivin protein, mRNA and promoter activity by TGF-? were reversed when both Smads 2 and 3 were concomitantly silenced. Silencing either Smad alone partially reversed the downregulation of survivin by TGF-?, suggesting that each of these R-Smads contributes to the TGF-?-driven loss of survivin ( Fig. 3C ), similar to that of TGF-?-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 3B ). TGF-? represses survivin transcription by recruiting CDE/CHR-binding factor(s) To study the region of the survivin promoter targeted by TGF-?, we generated 5’ deletion constructs of this promoter ( Fig. 4A ) and assessed activity of each construct in NRP-154 cells treated with vehicle or TGF-?1, as before. These truncations gave varying basal promoter activity, with the shortest construct (Suv-182) giving the lowest activity. However, TGF-?1 suppressed the activity of each construct with a similar magnitude ( Fig. 4A right), suggesting that the most critical TGF-? responsive element(s) reside in Suv-182, i.e. the -182/-4 region of this promoter. Several cis-acting DNA elements within this region were predicted using different software (TFSearch, http://www.rwcp.or.jp/papia/ ( Heinemeyer et al., 1998 ); Genomatix MatInspector, http://www.genomatix.de/index.html ). These elements include: Two canonical Smad-binding elements (SBEs) ( Zawel et al., 1998 ); a AP-2 transcription factor binding site ( Hilger-Eversheim et al., 2000 ; Wajapeyee et al., 2006 ), with a CDE contained inside; and a contiguous CHR ( Supplemental Fig. 2 ). Except for the SBE1 site, the rest of the above-mentioned sites are all located within ?182/?4 region of the survivin promoter. Notably, CDE and CHR are cell-cycle repressor elements present in multiple cell cycle regulated genes, such as survivin, cyclin A and cdc25C, and have been shown to be required to maintain low expression levels of these genes in G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle ( Altieri, 2003a ; Altieri, 2003b ; Liu et al., 1997 ). To identify which cis-acting element(s) mediate the suppressive effect of TGF-? on the survivin promoter, we mutated these elements individually or in combination ( Fig. 4B ). Mutating the SBE2 site slightly diminished TGF-? suppression of survivin promoter, while mutating SBE1 had no effect ( Fig. 4C ). Since recombinant Smad3 binds to SBE2 in vitro ( Supplemental Fig. 3 ), the above data suggested that direct Smad3 binding to SBE2 has limited effect on this TGF-? response. Since CDE(m) also disrupts putative AP-2 binding motif, we generated a mutant that selectively affects AP-2 binding independent of CDE (called AP2 only(m)) to examine the significance of AP2 in the regulation of the survivin promoter by TGF-?. As shown in Fig. 4D , the basal activity and TGF-? responsiveness of the AP2 only(m) construct were similar to the wild type promoter, suggesting that AP-2 is not involved in the repression of survivin promoter activity by TGF-?. Therefore, we speculate that the effect observed with the CDE(m) construct mainly reflects CDE function. Both the CDE(m) and CHR(m) promoter constructs had higher basal activity than the wild-type construct. Mutating the CDE site reduced TGF-?’s inhibitory effect on this promoter construct by about half, whereas CHR(m) promoter was hardly affected by TGF-? ( Fig. 4D ). We conclude that TGF-? utilizes both CDE and CHR elements, although mostly the latter, to repress survivin promoter. That mutating either of these two elements reverses the TGF-?-suppression of survivin promoter suggest that TGF-? downregulates this promoter by modulating the association of some factor(s) to CDE and CHR (see below). Interestingly, when both CDE and CHR were mutated, basal survivin promoter activity increased dramatically ( Fig. 4E ). Moreover, this caused TGF-? to enhance the activity of this promoter instead of suppressing it ( Fig. 4E ). These data suggest that the recruitment status of the potential TGF-?-induced factor(s) could result in TGF-?’s opposing effect on survivin levels. Rb and E2F4 are recruited by TGF-? to survivin proximal promoter and are essential for TGF-? to repress this promoter activity Rb family proteins (Rb, p107 and p130) are critical to cell cycle control. When activated by hypophosphorylation, Rb can bind E2F transcription factors and downregulate the expression of genes involved in cell cycle progression ( Harbour and Dean, 2000 ; Jackson et al ., 2005 ; Knudsen et al ., 1999 ). Several earlier reports suggested that the Rb/E2F4 molecular complex binds to CDE/CHR elements within promoters of some genes, such as cdc2, and represses their transcription ( Le Cam et al., 1999 ; Taylor et al., 2001 ). To test whether Rb is involved in CDE/CHR-mediated repression of the survivin promoter by TGF-?, we overexpressed several proteins known to inactivate all Rb family proteins ( Jackson et al., 2005 ). These Rb-inactivating proteins included D1/CDK, which is a fusion protein of cyclin D1 and cdk2 (representing constitutively active cdk), E7 (oncoprotein from HPV-18), E7? (mutant form of E7 lacking the binding domain for Rb), and T-ag (SV-40 large T antigen). As shown in Fig. 5A , overexpression of D1/CDK, E7 or T-ag resulted in higher survivin basal promoter activity and completely reversed the repression of this promoter by TGF-?1. Rather interestingly, TGF-?1 actually enhanced survivin promoter activity in the presence of these proteins. Importantly, E7? failed to inhibit the repression of survivin promoter by TGF-?, suggesting that Rb inactivation is the main mechanism by which E7 oncoprotein reverses the downregulation of survivin promoter by TGF-? ( Fig. 5A ). To examine whether this effect of Rb inactivation occurs specially at the level of the survivin promoter rather than by simply blocking TGF-? receptor/Smad activation, in parallel we assessed effects of the Rb-inactivating proteins on 3TP-Luciferase (3TP-Lux, a PAI-1 promoter construct). 3TP-Lux is a classic TGF-?-induced promoter construct which depends on Smad-mediated transcription ( Wrana et al., 1992 ), thus serving as a good readout to test whether early TGF-? responses could be affected by these Rb-inactivating proteins. In the case for D1/CDK, 3TP-Lux induction by TGF-? was mostly retained (approximately 80%), indicating that D1/CDK does not significantly affect TGF-? early signals ( Supplemental Fig. 4 ). Although E7 and T-ag repressed TGF-?-induced 3TP-Lux by about 70%, interception of TGF-? early signals by these two proteins did not account for the total reversal of the TGF-? response observed on the survivin promoter ( Fig. 5A , Supplemental Fig. 4 ). Therefore, these data suggest that Rb (and/or p107, p130) is critical for the repression of survivin by TGF-?. Since active Rb family proteins typically form transcriptional repressor complexes with E2F4 on target gene promoters, we tested whether TGF-? recruits these proteins to the survivin promoter, using a biotinylated DNA pull-down assay (DNAP). The binding of nuclear proteins to either a 187 bp survivin proximal promoter (Suv-182, spanning -182/-4 region) or an internal 32 bp oligo DNA (SAC oligo, spanning ?50/?19 region) containing CDE/CHR was assessed. TGF-? induced binding of all Rb family proteins (Rb, p130 and p107) and E2F4 to both DNA fragments after 17 h of treatment ( Fig. 5B ), demonstrating that TGF-?-dependent recruitment of Rb, Rb-like and E2F proteins to this promoter temporally coincide with downregulation of survivin mRNA ( Fig. 1C ). Interestingly, both Smad3 and Smad4 bound to Suv-182, but only minimally to the SAC oligo, suggesting that Smad may also bind to sites outside the ?50/?19 survivin promoter region to mediate TGF-?’s effect. As a negative control, streptavidin beads alone did not capture these proteins from the nuclear extracts (data not shown). Our preliminary chromatin immunoprecipitation data support that TGF-? enhances the interaction of p107, p130 and E2F4 to this promoter region in intact cells (data not shown). To test whether CDE and CHR are critical for such binding we performed a DNAP experiment with wild type or CDE/CHR mutant (individually or in combination) SAC oligos. Another oligo containing three tandem repeats of the SBE consensus motif was also used as positive control for Smad binding and a negative control for the other binding proteins. As shown in Fig. 5C , TGF-? treatment consistently enhanced the binding of all three Rb family proteins and E2F4 to the wt SAC oligo, but not to the mutant oligos. Interestingly, while mutations in CDE or CHR essentially abolished all binding of p107, p130 and E2F4, each of the mutant oligos showed enhanced interaction with Rb over the wt oligo. The molecular basis and biological significance of the interaction of Rb to mutant CDE and CHR remain to be defined. Collectively, these data suggest that the integrity of CDE/CHR is critical for the recruitment of Rb family proteins and E2F4 to the survivin promoter by TGF-?. Since Rb family proteins need to be activated through hypophosphorylation to bind to gene promoter with E2F4, we next assessed whether TGF-? can activate Rb. As shown in Fig. 5D , TGF-? efficiently reduced Rb phosphorylation, starting as early as 6 h of treatment, at a time preceding survivin downregulation. Silencing Smad3 largely abolished hypophosphorylation of Rb by TGF-?; Smad2 also contributes to Rb activation by TGF-?, since silencing it alone or in combination with silencing Smad3 further reversed Rb hypophosphorylation by TGF-? ( Fig. 5E ), indicating that Smad3 is the major mediator of TGF-?-dependent Rb activation. Manipulating survivin levels in cells alters their sensitivity to apoptotic stimuli including TGF-? We next investigated whether survivin is involved in the regulation of apoptosis by TGF-?. Survivin was first efficiently overexpressed in NRP-154 cells by adenoviral transduction, and changes in apoptotic response to TGF-?1 were assessed by both analysis of % sub-G1 cells (by Flow Cytometry) and caspase-3 activation (by Western blot). Overexpression of survivin substantially decreased %sub-G1 cells following TGF-? treatment ( Fig. 6A ), and diminished the levels of caspase-3 activated by TGF-? ( Fig. 6B ), demonstrating that the loss of survivin initiated by TGF-? is required for TGF-? to efficiently induce apoptosis. We also treated the above transduced cells with etoposide or taxol, and observed an inhibition of taxol-mediated apoptosis by survivin overexpression ( Fig. 6C ). Separately, a dose of TGF-? (0.3 ng/ml) below the threshold for apoptosis but sufficient for survivin downregulation ( Fig. 1B bottom) significantly enhanced taxol-induced caspase-3 activation, and such potentiation was lost by survivin overexpression ( Fig. 6D ). This suggests that TGF-? may also lower the threshold for cellular responses to other apoptotic agents by reducing survivin levels. We next used an shRNA-lentiviral approach to study the biological function of endogenous survivin in NRP-154 cells. Knockdown of survivin expression enhanced the induction of apoptosis by either etoposide or taxol ( Fig. 6E ). The sensitivity of survivin-silenced cells to apoptosis by TGF-? was not detectably altered, consistent with TGF-?’s ability to drive efficient loss of survivin. Taken together, our results suggest that the downregulation of survivin expression by TGF-? is involved in apoptotic responses of not only TGF-? but also some chemotherapeutic agents. Cancer relevance of survivin regulation by TGF-? Considering the versatility of survivin to inhibit apoptosis by TGF-? and other agents such as taxol ( Fig. 6 ), and earlier reports correlating survivin levels to the progression of prostate cancer ( Kishi et al., 2004 ; Shariat et al., 2004 ) or the loss of T?RI and T?RII ( Shariat et al., 2004 ), we hypothesize that a defective TGF-?/survivin regulatory axis may be associated with tumor progression. An array of normal and tumor prostatic epithelial cells was used to test this hypothesis. Compared with the NRP-154 cell line ( Fig. 1B , top), which is tumorigenic, the NRP-152 non-tumorigenic rat prostate epithelial cell line ( Danielpour et al., 1994 ) manifested lower basal levels of survivin but similar temporal patterns of downregulation by TGF-? ( Fig. 7A, B ), associated with their exquisite sensitivity to TGF-?-induced apoptosis ( Hsing et al., 1996 ). DU-145 and PC-3 are highly malignant/androgen-independent human prostate cancer cell lines derived from brain and bone metastases, respectively. Both of them possess high levels of endogenous survivin, which was not suppressed by TGF-?1 ( Fig. 7B ) even up to 72 h treatment (data not shown). Conversely, TGF-? downregulated survivin levels in RWPE-1 ( Fig. 7C ), a nontumorigenic human prostate epithelial cell line ( Bello et al., 1997 ). We compared survivin levels in the context of tumor progression, using LNCaP cell line and its bone metastatic/androgen refractory variant, C4-2B, which express more survivin than LNCaP cells ( Fig. 7D ). To test the TGF-? response, we had to ectopically express T?RII in these cells as they lack this receptor. Downregulation of survivin by TGF-?1, which occurred efficiently in LNCaP cells only by enforced expression of T?RII, was abolished in C4-2B cells also expressing exogenous T?RII. Consistent with published results ( Zhang et al., 2005 ), stimulation of LNCaP cells with 5?-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) increased survivin levels. Interestingly, DHT treatment of these cells significantly prevented the loss of survivin by TGF-? ( Fig. 7D ), suggesting crosstalk between TGF-? and androgen on regulation of survivin expression. In summary, our data suggest that disregulation of TGF-? signaling in prostate cancer may contribute to disease progression and poor therapeutic responses by elevating survivin levels.  Results Downregulation of survivin by TGF-? We used Affymetrix expression microarrays to screen for TGF-? regulated genes related to apoptosis control and shown to be deregulated in prostate cancer. This analysis identified survivin as one such factor. Western blot analysis revealed that the levels of survivin but not cIAP1, cIAP2, XIAP were efficiently decreased by TGF-?1 in NRP-154 cells ( Fig. 1A ). Another common TGF-? superfamily member, BMP-4, which activates Smads 1, 5, 8, failed to suppress survivin expression ( Fig. 1A ). Treatment of NRP-154 cells with 10 ng/ml TGF-?1 for different lengths of time showed that the steady-state level of survivin was decreased by 12 h post-treatment and became undetectable by 16 h ( Fig. 1B , top), corresponding to a time before the induction of an apoptotic DNA ladder (? 20 h post TGF-?1 treatment in these cells ( Hsing et al., 1996 )) or the decrease in G2/M phase of the cell cycle (> 20 h post treatment, Supplemental Fig. 1 ). Dose-response analysis at 16 h of treatment gave a significant response with as low as 0.3 ng/ml of TGF-?1 ( Fig. 1B , bottom). These results suggest a physiological role of survivin in apoptosis induction by TGF-? in these cells. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR revealed that TGF-?1 also down-regulated survivin mRNA levels with kinetics similar to the loss of survivin protein ( Fig. 1C ). To determine whether such regulation occurs at the transcriptional level, we analyzed the effect of TGF-?1 on the activity of an 832 bp fragment of the survivin promoter (Suv-829) ( Supplemental Fig. 2 ) placed upstream of a luciferase reporter gene. We found that TGF-? repressed survivin promoter activity by approximately 80%, while it had no effect on the empty luciferase reporter vector ( Fig. 1D ). These data support that TGF-? downregulates survivin expression through a transcriptional mechanism. TGF-? type I receptor kinase activity is required for the suppression of survivin by TGF-? Seven type I receptors have been identified to relay signals from TGF-? superfamily members ( ten Dijke and Hill, 2004 ). They are also called ALKs ( A ctivin- L ike K inases). To test whether TGF-? represses survivin through its receptor kinase activity, we treated NRP-154 cells with SB431542 ( Inman et al., 2002 ), a kinase inhibitor specific for ALK 5 (used by TGF-?s) and ALK 4, 7 (used by activins). SB431542 effectively blocked activation of R-Smads and growth suppression/apoptosis by TGF-?1 ( Fig. 2A ); this drug also reversed the TGF-? downregulation of survivin protein ( Fig. 2B ) and promoter activity ( Fig. 2C ). Moreover, adenovirus-mediated expression of constitutively active ALK5 (CA-ALK5) also down-regulated survivin expression ( Fig. 2D ). Thus, these data support that TGF-? represses survivin expression through the kinase activity of ALK5. R-Smads are essential for mediating TGF-?’s effect on survivin loss Smads remain the best characterized direct targets of TGF-? receptors ( Massague et al ., 2005 ; Massague and Wotton, 2000 ). Beside R-Smads, ALK5 likely activates other signaling cascades such as MAPK pathways ( Derynck and Zhang, 2003 ). To determine whether the repression of survivin by TGF-? is Smad-dependent or -independent, we generated doxycyclin-inducible shRNA expression lentiviruses to stably silence Smads 2 and/or 3 in NRP-154 cells. As indicated in Fig. 3A , compared with the non-silencing control (sh-LacZ), sh-Smad2 or sh-Smad3 efficiently and specifically knocked down their respective proteins. Moreover, robust silencing of both Smads 2 and 3 was obtained with both shRNAs used together, and Smad4 levels remained unchanged with either or both shRNAs ( Fig. 3A ). We also examined the role of Smad2 and Smad3 in TGF-?-induced apoptosis. Assaying for changes in total cell number ( Fig 3B ) and for changes in sub-G1 by Flow Cytometry (data not shown) we demonstrated that Smad2 and Smad3 each are involved in the induction of apoptosis by TGF-?, although Smad3 plays a more prominent role. Western blotting ( Fig. 3C top), RT-PCR ( Fig. 3C bottom) and promoter activity ( Fig. 3D ) indicated that the suppression of survivin protein, mRNA and promoter activity by TGF-? were reversed when both Smads 2 and 3 were concomitantly silenced. Silencing either Smad alone partially reversed the downregulation of survivin by TGF-?, suggesting that each of these R-Smads contributes to the TGF-?-driven loss of survivin ( Fig. 3C ), similar to that of TGF-?-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 3B ). TGF-? represses survivin transcription by recruiting CDE/CHR-binding factor(s) To study the region of the survivin promoter targeted by TGF-?, we generated 5’ deletion constructs of this promoter ( Fig. 4A ) and assessed activity of each construct in NRP-154 cells treated with vehicle or TGF-?1, as before. These truncations gave varying basal promoter activity, with the shortest construct (Suv-182) giving the lowest activity. However, TGF-?1 suppressed the activity of each construct with a similar magnitude ( Fig. 4A right), suggesting that the most critical TGF-? responsive element(s) reside in Suv-182, i.e. the -182/-4 region of this promoter. Several cis-acting DNA elements within this region were predicted using different software (TFSearch, http://www.rwcp.or.jp/papia/ ( Heinemeyer et al., 1998 ); Genomatix MatInspector, http://www.genomatix.de/index.html ). These elements include: Two canonical Smad-binding elements (SBEs) ( Zawel et al., 1998 ); a AP-2 transcription factor binding site ( Hilger-Eversheim et al., 2000 ; Wajapeyee et al., 2006 ), with a CDE contained inside; and a contiguous CHR ( Supplemental Fig. 2 ). Except for the SBE1 site, the rest of the above-mentioned sites are all located within ?182/?4 region of the survivin promoter. Notably, CDE and CHR are cell-cycle repressor elements present in multiple cell cycle regulated genes, such as survivin, cyclin A and cdc25C, and have been shown to be required to maintain low expression levels of these genes in G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle ( Altieri, 2003a ; Altieri, 2003b ; Liu et al., 1997 ). To identify which cis-acting element(s) mediate the suppressive effect of TGF-? on the survivin promoter, we mutated these elements individually or in combination ( Fig. 4B ). Mutating the SBE2 site slightly diminished TGF-? suppression of survivin promoter, while mutating SBE1 had no effect ( Fig. 4C ). Since recombinant Smad3 binds to SBE2 in vitro ( Supplemental Fig. 3 ), the above data suggested that direct Smad3 binding to SBE2 has limited effect on this TGF-? response. Since CDE(m) also disrupts putative AP-2 binding motif, we generated a mutant that selectively affects AP-2 binding independent of CDE (called AP2 only(m)) to examine the significance of AP2 in the regulation of the survivin promoter by TGF-?. As shown in Fig. 4D , the basal activity and TGF-? responsiveness of the AP2 only(m) construct were similar to the wild type promoter, suggesting that AP-2 is not involved in the repression of survivin promoter activity by TGF-?. Therefore, we speculate that the effect observed with the CDE(m) construct mainly reflects CDE function. Both the CDE(m) and CHR(m) promoter constructs had higher basal activity than the wild-type construct. Mutating the CDE site reduced TGF-?’s inhibitory effect on this promoter construct by about half, whereas CHR(m) promoter was hardly affected by TGF-? ( Fig. 4D ). We conclude that TGF-? utilizes both CDE and CHR elements, although mostly the latter, to repress survivin promoter. That mutating either of these two elements reverses the TGF-?-suppression of survivin promoter suggest that TGF-? downregulates this promoter by modulating the association of some factor(s) to CDE and CHR (see below). Interestingly, when both CDE and CHR were mutated, basal survivin promoter activity increased dramatically ( Fig. 4E ). Moreover, this caused TGF-? to enhance the activity of this promoter instead of suppressing it ( Fig. 4E ). These data suggest that the recruitment status of the potential TGF-?-induced factor(s) could result in TGF-?’s opposing effect on survivin levels. Rb and E2F4 are recruited by TGF-? to survivin proximal promoter and are essential for TGF-? to repress this promoter activity Rb family proteins (Rb, p107 and p130) are critical to cell cycle control. When activated by hypophosphorylation, Rb can bind E2F transcription factors and downregulate the expression of genes involved in cell cycle progression ( Harbour and Dean, 2000 ; Jackson et al ., 2005 ; Knudsen et al ., 1999 ). Several earlier reports suggested that the Rb/E2F4 molecular complex binds to CDE/CHR elements within promoters of some genes, such as cdc2, and represses their transcription ( Le Cam et al., 1999 ; Taylor et al., 2001 ). To test whether Rb is involved in CDE/CHR-mediated repression of the survivin promoter by TGF-?, we overexpressed several proteins known to inactivate all Rb family proteins ( Jackson et al., 2005 ). These Rb-inactivating proteins included D1/CDK, which is a fusion protein of cyclin D1 and cdk2 (representing constitutively active cdk), E7 (oncoprotein from HPV-18), E7? (mutant form of E7 lacking the binding domain for Rb), and T-ag (SV-40 large T antigen). As shown in Fig. 5A , overexpression of D1/CDK, E7 or T-ag resulted in higher survivin basal promoter activity and completely reversed the repression of this promoter by TGF-?1. Rather interestingly, TGF-?1 actually enhanced survivin promoter activity in the presence of these proteins. Importantly, E7? failed to inhibit the repression of survivin promoter by TGF-?, suggesting that Rb inactivation is the main mechanism by which E7 oncoprotein reverses the downregulation of survivin promoter by TGF-? ( Fig. 5A ). To examine whether this effect of Rb inactivation occurs specially at the level of the survivin promoter rather than by simply blocking TGF-? receptor/Smad activation, in parallel we assessed effects of the Rb-inactivating proteins on 3TP-Luciferase (3TP-Lux, a PAI-1 promoter construct). 3TP-Lux is a classic TGF-?-induced promoter construct which depends on Smad-mediated transcription ( Wrana et al., 1992 ), thus serving as a good readout to test whether early TGF-? responses could be affected by these Rb-inactivating proteins. In the case for D1/CDK, 3TP-Lux induction by TGF-? was mostly retained (approximately 80%), indicating that D1/CDK does not significantly affect TGF-? early signals ( Supplemental Fig. 4 ). Although E7 and T-ag repressed TGF-?-induced 3TP-Lux by about 70%, interception of TGF-? early signals by these two proteins did not account for the total reversal of the TGF-? response observed on the survivin promoter ( Fig. 5A , Supplemental Fig. 4 ). Therefore, these data suggest that Rb (and/or p107, p130) is critical for the repression of survivin by TGF-?. Since active Rb family proteins typically form transcriptional repressor complexes with E2F4 on target gene promoters, we tested whether TGF-? recruits these proteins to the survivin promoter, using a biotinylated DNA pull-down assay (DNAP). The binding of nuclear proteins to either a 187 bp survivin proximal promoter (Suv-182, spanning -182/-4 region) or an internal 32 bp oligo DNA (SAC oligo, spanning ?50/?19 region) containing CDE/CHR was assessed. TGF-? induced binding of all Rb family proteins (Rb, p130 and p107) and E2F4 to both DNA fragments after 17 h of treatment ( Fig. 5B ), demonstrating that TGF-?-dependent recruitment of Rb, Rb-like and E2F proteins to this promoter temporally coincide with downregulation of survivin mRNA ( Fig. 1C ). Interestingly, both Smad3 and Smad4 bound to Suv-182, but only minimally to the SAC oligo, suggesting that Smad may also bind to sites outside the ?50/?19 survivin promoter region to mediate TGF-?’s effect. As a negative control, streptavidin beads alone did not capture these proteins from the nuclear extracts (data not shown). Our preliminary chromatin immunoprecipitation data support that TGF-? enhances the interaction of p107, p130 and E2F4 to this promoter region in intact cells (data not shown). To test whether CDE and CHR are critical for such binding we performed a DNAP experiment with wild type or CDE/CHR mutant (individually or in combination) SAC oligos. Another oligo containing three tandem repeats of the SBE consensus motif was also used as positive control for Smad binding and a negative control for the other binding proteins. As shown in Fig. 5C , TGF-? treatment consistently enhanced the binding of all three Rb family proteins and E2F4 to the wt SAC oligo, but not to the mutant oligos. Interestingly, while mutations in CDE or CHR essentially abolished all binding of p107, p130 and E2F4, each of the mutant oligos showed enhanced interaction with Rb over the wt oligo. The molecular basis and biological significance of the interaction of Rb to mutant CDE and CHR remain to be defined. Collectively, these data suggest that the integrity of CDE/CHR is critical for the recruitment of Rb family proteins and E2F4 to the survivin promoter by TGF-?. Since Rb family proteins need to be activated through hypophosphorylation to bind to gene promoter with E2F4, we next assessed whether TGF-? can activate Rb. As shown in Fig. 5D , TGF-? efficiently reduced Rb phosphorylation, starting as early as 6 h of treatment, at a time preceding survivin downregulation. Silencing Smad3 largely abolished hypophosphorylation of Rb by TGF-?; Smad2 also contributes to Rb activation by TGF-?, since silencing it alone or in combination with silencing Smad3 further reversed Rb hypophosphorylation by TGF-? ( Fig. 5E ), indicating that Smad3 is the major mediator of TGF-?-dependent Rb activation. Manipulating survivin levels in cells alters their sensitivity to apoptotic stimuli including TGF-? We next investigated whether survivin is involved in the regulation of apoptosis by TGF-?. Survivin was first efficiently overexpressed in NRP-154 cells by adenoviral transduction, and changes in apoptotic response to TGF-?1 were assessed by both analysis of % sub-G1 cells (by Flow Cytometry) and caspase-3 activation (by Western blot). Overexpression of survivin substantially decreased %sub-G1 cells following TGF-? treatment ( Fig. 6A ), and diminished the levels of caspase-3 activated by TGF-? ( Fig. 6B ), demonstrating that the loss of survivin initiated by TGF-? is required for TGF-? to efficiently induce apoptosis. We also treated the above transduced cells with etoposide or taxol, and observed an inhibition of taxol-mediated apoptosis by survivin overexpression ( Fig. 6C ). Separately, a dose of TGF-? (0.3 ng/ml) below the threshold for apoptosis but sufficient for survivin downregulation ( Fig. 1B bottom) significantly enhanced taxol-induced caspase-3 activation, and such potentiation was lost by survivin overexpression ( Fig. 6D ). This suggests that TGF-? may also lower the threshold for cellular responses to other apoptotic agents by reducing survivin levels. We next used an shRNA-lentiviral approach to study the biological function of endogenous survivin in NRP-154 cells. Knockdown of survivin expression enhanced the induction of apoptosis by either etoposide or taxol ( Fig. 6E ). The sensitivity of survivin-silenced cells to apoptosis by TGF-? was not detectably altered, consistent with TGF-?’s ability to drive efficient loss of survivin. Taken together, our results suggest that the downregulation of survivin expression by TGF-? is involved in apoptotic responses of not only TGF-? but also some chemotherapeutic agents. Cancer relevance of survivin regulation by TGF-? Considering the versatility of survivin to inhibit apoptosis by TGF-? and other agents such as taxol ( Fig. 6 ), and earlier reports correlating survivin levels to the progression of prostate cancer ( Kishi et al., 2004 ; Shariat et al., 2004 ) or the loss of T?RI and T?RII ( Shariat et al., 2004 ), we hypothesize that a defective TGF-?/survivin regulatory axis may be associated with tumor progression. An array of normal and tumor prostatic epithelial cells was used to test this hypothesis. Compared with the NRP-154 cell line ( Fig. 1B , top), which is tumorigenic, the NRP-152 non-tumorigenic rat prostate epithelial cell line ( Danielpour et al., 1994 ) manifested lower basal levels of survivin but similar temporal patterns of downregulation by TGF-? ( Fig. 7A, B ), associated with their exquisite sensitivity to TGF-?-induced apoptosis ( Hsing et al., 1996 ). DU-145 and PC-3 are highly malignant/androgen-independent human prostate cancer cell lines derived from brain and bone metastases, respectively. Both of them possess high levels of endogenous survivin, which was not suppressed by TGF-?1 ( Fig. 7B ) even up to 72 h treatment (data not shown). Conversely, TGF-? downregulated survivin levels in RWPE-1 ( Fig. 7C ), a nontumorigenic human prostate epithelial cell line ( Bello et al., 1997 ). We compared survivin levels in the context of tumor progression, using LNCaP cell line and its bone metastatic/androgen refractory variant, C4-2B, which express more survivin than LNCaP cells ( Fig. 7D ). To test the TGF-? response, we had to ectopically express T?RII in these cells as they lack this receptor. Downregulation of survivin by TGF-?1, which occurred efficiently in LNCaP cells only by enforced expression of T?RII, was abolished in C4-2B cells also expressing exogenous T?RII. Consistent with published results ( Zhang et al., 2005 ), stimulation of LNCaP cells with 5?-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) increased survivin levels. Interestingly, DHT treatment of these cells significantly prevented the loss of survivin by TGF-? ( Fig. 7D ), suggesting crosstalk between TGF-? and androgen on regulation of survivin expression. In summary, our data suggest that disregulation of TGF-? signaling in prostate cancer may contribute to disease progression and poor therapeutic responses by elevating survivin levels.  Downregulation of survivin by TGF-? We used Affymetrix expression microarrays to screen for TGF-? regulated genes related to apoptosis control and shown to be deregulated in prostate cancer. This analysis identified survivin as one such factor. Western blot analysis revealed that the levels of survivin but not cIAP1, cIAP2, XIAP were efficiently decreased by TGF-?1 in NRP-154 cells ( Fig. 1A ). Another common TGF-? superfamily member, BMP-4, which activates Smads 1, 5, 8, failed to suppress survivin expression ( Fig. 1A ). Treatment of NRP-154 cells with 10 ng/ml TGF-?1 for different lengths of time showed that the steady-state level of survivin was decreased by 12 h post-treatment and became undetectable by 16 h ( Fig. 1B , top), corresponding to a time before the induction of an apoptotic DNA ladder (? 20 h post TGF-?1 treatment in these cells ( Hsing et al., 1996 )) or the decrease in G2/M phase of the cell cycle (> 20 h post treatment, Supplemental Fig. 1 ). Dose-response analysis at 16 h of treatment gave a significant response with as low as 0.3 ng/ml of TGF-?1 ( Fig. 1B , bottom). These results suggest a physiological role of survivin in apoptosis induction by TGF-? in these cells. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR revealed that TGF-?1 also down-regulated survivin mRNA levels with kinetics similar to the loss of survivin protein ( Fig. 1C ). To determine whether such regulation occurs at the transcriptional level, we analyzed the effect of TGF-?1 on the activity of an 832 bp fragment of the survivin promoter (Suv-829) ( Supplemental Fig. 2 ) placed upstream of a luciferase reporter gene. We found that TGF-? repressed survivin promoter activity by approximately 80%, while it had no effect on the empty luciferase reporter vector ( Fig. 1D ). These data support that TGF-? downregulates survivin expression through a transcriptional mechanism.  Downregulation of survivin by TGF-? We used Affymetrix expression microarrays to screen for TGF-? regulated genes related to apoptosis control and shown to be deregulated in prostate cancer. This analysis identified survivin as one such factor. Western blot analysis revealed that the levels of survivin but not cIAP1, cIAP2, XIAP were efficiently decreased by TGF-?1 in NRP-154 cells ( Fig. 1A ). Another common TGF-? superfamily member, BMP-4, which activates Smads 1, 5, 8, failed to suppress survivin expression ( Fig. 1A ). Treatment of NRP-154 cells with 10 ng/ml TGF-?1 for different lengths of time showed that the steady-state level of survivin was decreased by 12 h post-treatment and became undetectable by 16 h ( Fig. 1B , top), corresponding to a time before the induction of an apoptotic DNA ladder (? 20 h post TGF-?1 treatment in these cells ( Hsing et al., 1996 )) or the decrease in G2/M phase of the cell cycle (> 20 h post treatment, Supplemental Fig. 1 ). Dose-response analysis at 16 h of treatment gave a significant response with as low as 0.3 ng/ml of TGF-?1 ( Fig. 1B , bottom). These results suggest a physiological role of survivin in apoptosis induction by TGF-? in these cells. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR revealed that TGF-?1 also down-regulated survivin mRNA levels with kinetics similar to the loss of survivin protein ( Fig. 1C ). To determine whether such regulation occurs at the transcriptional level, we analyzed the effect of TGF-?1 on the activity of an 832 bp fragment of the survivin promoter (Suv-829) ( Supplemental Fig. 2 ) placed upstream of a luciferase reporter gene. We found that TGF-? repressed survivin promoter activity by approximately 80%, while it had no effect on the empty luciferase reporter vector ( Fig. 1D ). These data support that TGF-? downregulates survivin expression through a transcriptional mechanism.  TGF-? type I receptor kinase activity is required for the suppression of survivin by TGF-? Seven type I receptors have been identified to relay signals from TGF-? superfamily members ( ten Dijke and Hill, 2004 ). They are also called ALKs ( A ctivin- L ike K inases). To test whether TGF-? represses survivin through its receptor kinase activity, we treated NRP-154 cells with SB431542 ( Inman et al., 2002 ), a kinase inhibitor specific for ALK 5 (used by TGF-?s) and ALK 4, 7 (used by activins). SB431542 effectively blocked activation of R-Smads and growth suppression/apoptosis by TGF-?1 ( Fig. 2A ); this drug also reversed the TGF-? downregulation of survivin protein ( Fig. 2B ) and promoter activity ( Fig. 2C ). Moreover, adenovirus-mediated expression of constitutively active ALK5 (CA-ALK5) also down-regulated survivin expression ( Fig. 2D ). Thus, these data support that TGF-? represses survivin expression through the kinase activity of ALK5.  TGF-? type I receptor kinase activity is required for the suppression of survivin by TGF-? Seven type I receptors have been identified to relay signals from TGF-? superfamily members ( ten Dijke and Hill, 2004 ). They are also called ALKs ( A ctivin- L ike K inases). To test whether TGF-? represses survivin through its receptor kinase activity, we treated NRP-154 cells with SB431542 ( Inman et al., 2002 ), a kinase inhibitor specific for ALK 5 (used by TGF-?s) and ALK 4, 7 (used by activins). SB431542 effectively blocked activation of R-Smads and growth suppression/apoptosis by TGF-?1 ( Fig. 2A ); this drug also reversed the TGF-? downregulation of survivin protein ( Fig. 2B ) and promoter activity ( Fig. 2C ). Moreover, adenovirus-mediated expression of constitutively active ALK5 (CA-ALK5) also down-regulated survivin expression ( Fig. 2D ). Thus, these data support that TGF-? represses survivin expression through the kinase activity of ALK5.  R-Smads are essential for mediating TGF-?’s effect on survivin loss Smads remain the best characterized direct targets of TGF-? receptors ( Massague et al ., 2005 ; Massague and Wotton, 2000 ). Beside R-Smads, ALK5 likely activates other signaling cascades such as MAPK pathways ( Derynck and Zhang, 2003 ). To determine whether the repression of survivin by TGF-? is Smad-dependent or -independent, we generated doxycyclin-inducible shRNA expression lentiviruses to stably silence Smads 2 and/or 3 in NRP-154 cells. As indicated in Fig. 3A , compared with the non-silencing control (sh-LacZ), sh-Smad2 or sh-Smad3 efficiently and specifically knocked down their respective proteins. Moreover, robust silencing of both Smads 2 and 3 was obtained with both shRNAs used together, and Smad4 levels remained unchanged with either or both shRNAs ( Fig. 3A ). We also examined the role of Smad2 and Smad3 in TGF-?-induced apoptosis. Assaying for changes in total cell number ( Fig 3B ) and for changes in sub-G1 by Flow Cytometry (data not shown) we demonstrated that Smad2 and Smad3 each are involved in the induction of apoptosis by TGF-?, although Smad3 plays a more prominent role. Western blotting ( Fig. 3C top), RT-PCR ( Fig. 3C bottom) and promoter activity ( Fig. 3D ) indicated that the suppression of survivin protein, mRNA and promoter activity by TGF-? were reversed when both Smads 2 and 3 were concomitantly silenced. Silencing either Smad alone partially reversed the downregulation of survivin by TGF-?, suggesting that each of these R-Smads contributes to the TGF-?-driven loss of survivin ( Fig. 3C ), similar to that of TGF-?-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 3B ).  R-Smads are essential for mediating TGF-?’s effect on survivin loss Smads remain the best characterized direct targets of TGF-? receptors ( Massague et al ., 2005 ; Massague and Wotton, 2000 ). Beside R-Smads, ALK5 likely activates other signaling cascades such as MAPK pathways ( Derynck and Zhang, 2003 ). To determine whether the repression of survivin by TGF-? is Smad-dependent or -independent, we generated doxycyclin-inducible shRNA expression lentiviruses to stably silence Smads 2 and/or 3 in NRP-154 cells. As indicated in Fig. 3A , compared with the non-silencing control (sh-LacZ), sh-Smad2 or sh-Smad3 efficiently and specifically knocked down their respective proteins. Moreover, robust silencing of both Smads 2 and 3 was obtained with both shRNAs used together, and Smad4 levels remained unchanged with either or both shRNAs ( Fig. 3A ). We also examined the role of Smad2 and Smad3 in TGF-?-induced apoptosis. Assaying for changes in total cell number ( Fig 3B ) and for changes in sub-G1 by Flow Cytometry (data not shown) we demonstrated that Smad2 and Smad3 each are involved in the induction of apoptosis by TGF-?, although Smad3 plays a more prominent role. Western blotting ( Fig. 3C top), RT-PCR ( Fig. 3C bottom) and promoter activity ( Fig. 3D ) indicated that the suppression of survivin protein, mRNA and promoter activity by TGF-? were reversed when both Smads 2 and 3 were concomitantly silenced. Silencing either Smad alone partially reversed the downregulation of survivin by TGF-?, suggesting that each of these R-Smads contributes to the TGF-?-driven loss of survivin ( Fig. 3C ), similar to that of TGF-?-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 3B ).  TGF-? represses survivin transcription by recruiting CDE/CHR-binding factor(s) To study the region of the survivin promoter targeted by TGF-?, we generated 5’ deletion constructs of this promoter ( Fig. 4A ) and assessed activity of each construct in NRP-154 cells treated with vehicle or TGF-?1, as before. These truncations gave varying basal promoter activity, with the shortest construct (Suv-182) giving the lowest activity. However, TGF-?1 suppressed the activity of each construct with a similar magnitude ( Fig. 4A right), suggesting that the most critical TGF-? responsive element(s) reside in Suv-182, i.e. the -182/-4 region of this promoter. Several cis-acting DNA elements within this region were predicted using different software (TFSearch, http://www.rwcp.or.jp/papia/ ( Heinemeyer et al., 1998 ); Genomatix MatInspector, http://www.genomatix.de/index.html ). These elements include: Two canonical Smad-binding elements (SBEs) ( Zawel et al., 1998 ); a AP-2 transcription factor binding site ( Hilger-Eversheim et al., 2000 ; Wajapeyee et al., 2006 ), with a CDE contained inside; and a contiguous CHR ( Supplemental Fig. 2 ). Except for the SBE1 site, the rest of the above-mentioned sites are all located within ?182/?4 region of the survivin promoter. Notably, CDE and CHR are cell-cycle repressor elements present in multiple cell cycle regulated genes, such as survivin, cyclin A and cdc25C, and have been shown to be required to maintain low expression levels of these genes in G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle ( Altieri, 2003a ; Altieri, 2003b ; Liu et al., 1997 ). To identify which cis-acting element(s) mediate the suppressive effect of TGF-? on the survivin promoter, we mutated these elements individually or in combination ( Fig. 4B ). Mutating the SBE2 site slightly diminished TGF-? suppression of survivin promoter, while mutating SBE1 had no effect ( Fig. 4C ). Since recombinant Smad3 binds to SBE2 in vitro ( Supplemental Fig. 3 ), the above data suggested that direct Smad3 binding to SBE2 has limited effect on this TGF-? response. Since CDE(m) also disrupts putative AP-2 binding motif, we generated a mutant that selectively affects AP-2 binding independent of CDE (called AP2 only(m)) to examine the significance of AP2 in the regulation of the survivin promoter by TGF-?. As shown in Fig. 4D , the basal activity and TGF-? responsiveness of the AP2 only(m) construct were similar to the wild type promoter, suggesting that AP-2 is not involved in the repression of survivin promoter activity by TGF-?. Therefore, we speculate that the effect observed with the CDE(m) construct mainly reflects CDE function. Both the CDE(m) and CHR(m) promoter constructs had higher basal activity than the wild-type construct. Mutating the CDE site reduced TGF-?’s inhibitory effect on this promoter construct by about half, whereas CHR(m) promoter was hardly affected by TGF-? ( Fig. 4D ). We conclude that TGF-? utilizes both CDE and CHR elements, although mostly the latter, to repress survivin promoter. That mutating either of these two elements reverses the TGF-?-suppression of survivin promoter suggest that TGF-? downregulates this promoter by modulating the association of some factor(s) to CDE and CHR (see below). Interestingly, when both CDE and CHR were mutated, basal survivin promoter activity increased dramatically ( Fig. 4E ). Moreover, this caused TGF-? to enhance the activity of this promoter instead of suppressing it ( Fig. 4E ). These data suggest that the recruitment status of the potential TGF-?-induced factor(s) could result in TGF-?’s opposing effect on survivin levels.  TGF-? represses survivin transcription by recruiting CDE/CHR-binding factor(s) To study the region of the survivin promoter targeted by TGF-?, we generated 5’ deletion constructs of this promoter ( Fig. 4A ) and assessed activity of each construct in NRP-154 cells treated with vehicle or TGF-?1, as before. These truncations gave varying basal promoter activity, with the shortest construct (Suv-182) giving the lowest activity. However, TGF-?1 suppressed the activity of each construct with a similar magnitude ( Fig. 4A right), suggesting that the most critical TGF-? responsive element(s) reside in Suv-182, i.e. the -182/-4 region of this promoter. Several cis-acting DNA elements within this region were predicted using different software (TFSearch, http://www.rwcp.or.jp/papia/ ( Heinemeyer et al., 1998 ); Genomatix MatInspector, http://www.genomatix.de/index.html ). These elements include: Two canonical Smad-binding elements (SBEs) ( Zawel et al., 1998 ); a AP-2 transcription factor binding site ( Hilger-Eversheim et al., 2000 ; Wajapeyee et al., 2006 ), with a CDE contained inside; and a contiguous CHR ( Supplemental Fig. 2 ). Except for the SBE1 site, the rest of the above-mentioned sites are all located within ?182/?4 region of the survivin promoter. Notably, CDE and CHR are cell-cycle repressor elements present in multiple cell cycle regulated genes, such as survivin, cyclin A and cdc25C, and have been shown to be required to maintain low expression levels of these genes in G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle ( Altieri, 2003a ; Altieri, 2003b ; Liu et al., 1997 ). To identify which cis-acting element(s) mediate the suppressive effect of TGF-? on the survivin promoter, we mutated these elements individually or in combination ( Fig. 4B ). Mutating the SBE2 site slightly diminished TGF-? suppression of survivin promoter, while mutating SBE1 had no effect ( Fig. 4C ). Since recombinant Smad3 binds to SBE2 in vitro ( Supplemental Fig. 3 ), the above data suggested that direct Smad3 binding to SBE2 has limited effect on this TGF-? response. Since CDE(m) also disrupts putative AP-2 binding motif, we generated a mutant that selectively affects AP-2 binding independent of CDE (called AP2 only(m)) to examine the significance of AP2 in the regulation of the survivin promoter by TGF-?. As shown in Fig. 4D , the basal activity and TGF-? responsiveness of the AP2 only(m) construct were similar to the wild type promoter, suggesting that AP-2 is not involved in the repression of survivin promoter activity by TGF-?. Therefore, we speculate that the effect observed with the CDE(m) construct mainly reflects CDE function. Both the CDE(m) and CHR(m) promoter constructs had higher basal activity than the wild-type construct. Mutating the CDE site reduced TGF-?’s inhibitory effect on this promoter construct by about half, whereas CHR(m) promoter was hardly affected by TGF-? ( Fig. 4D ). We conclude that TGF-? utilizes both CDE and CHR elements, although mostly the latter, to repress survivin promoter. That mutating either of these two elements reverses the TGF-?-suppression of survivin promoter suggest that TGF-? downregulates this promoter by modulating the association of some factor(s) to CDE and CHR (see below). Interestingly, when both CDE and CHR were mutated, basal survivin promoter activity increased dramatically ( Fig. 4E ). Moreover, this caused TGF-? to enhance the activity of this promoter instead of suppressing it ( Fig. 4E ). These data suggest that the recruitment status of the potential TGF-?-induced factor(s) could result in TGF-?’s opposing effect on survivin levels.  Rb and E2F4 are recruited by TGF-? to survivin proximal promoter and are essential for TGF-? to repress this promoter activity Rb family proteins (Rb, p107 and p130) are critical to cell cycle control. When activated by hypophosphorylation, Rb can bind E2F transcription factors and downregulate the expression of genes involved in cell cycle progression ( Harbour and Dean, 2000 ; Jackson et al ., 2005 ; Knudsen et al ., 1999 ). Several earlier reports suggested that the Rb/E2F4 molecular complex binds to CDE/CHR elements within promoters of some genes, such as cdc2, and represses their transcription ( Le Cam et al., 1999 ; Taylor et al., 2001 ). To test whether Rb is involved in CDE/CHR-mediated repression of the survivin promoter by TGF-?, we overexpressed several proteins known to inactivate all Rb family proteins ( Jackson et al., 2005 ). These Rb-inactivating proteins included D1/CDK, which is a fusion protein of cyclin D1 and cdk2 (representing constitutively active cdk), E7 (oncoprotein from HPV-18), E7? (mutant form of E7 lacking the binding domain for Rb), and T-ag (SV-40 large T antigen). As shown in Fig. 5A , overexpression of D1/CDK, E7 or T-ag resulted in higher survivin basal promoter activity and completely reversed the repression of this promoter by TGF-?1. Rather interestingly, TGF-?1 actually enhanced survivin promoter activity in the presence of these proteins. Importantly, E7? failed to inhibit the repression of survivin promoter by TGF-?, suggesting that Rb inactivation is the main mechanism by which E7 oncoprotein reverses the downregulation of survivin promoter by TGF-? ( Fig. 5A ). To examine whether this effect of Rb inactivation occurs specially at the level of the survivin promoter rather than by simply blocking TGF-? receptor/Smad activation, in parallel we assessed effects of the Rb-inactivating proteins on 3TP-Luciferase (3TP-Lux, a PAI-1 promoter construct). 3TP-Lux is a classic TGF-?-induced promoter construct which depends on Smad-mediated transcription ( Wrana et al., 1992 ), thus serving as a good readout to test whether early TGF-? responses could be affected by these Rb-inactivating proteins. In the case for D1/CDK, 3TP-Lux induction by TGF-? was mostly retained (approximately 80%), indicating that D1/CDK does not significantly affect TGF-? early signals ( Supplemental Fig. 4 ). Although E7 and T-ag repressed TGF-?-induced 3TP-Lux by about 70%, interception of TGF-? early signals by these two proteins did not account for the total reversal of the TGF-? response observed on the survivin promoter ( Fig. 5A , Supplemental Fig. 4 ). Therefore, these data suggest that Rb (and/or p107, p130) is critical for the repression of survivin by TGF-?. Since active Rb family proteins typically form transcriptional repressor complexes with E2F4 on target gene promoters, we tested whether TGF-? recruits these proteins to the survivin promoter, using a biotinylated DNA pull-down assay (DNAP). The binding of nuclear proteins to either a 187 bp survivin proximal promoter (Suv-182, spanning -182/-4 region) or an internal 32 bp oligo DNA (SAC oligo, spanning ?50/?19 region) containing CDE/CHR was assessed. TGF-? induced binding of all Rb family proteins (Rb, p130 and p107) and E2F4 to both DNA fragments after 17 h of treatment ( Fig. 5B ), demonstrating that TGF-?-dependent recruitment of Rb, Rb-like and E2F proteins to this promoter temporally coincide with downregulation of survivin mRNA ( Fig. 1C ). Interestingly, both Smad3 and Smad4 bound to Suv-182, but only minimally to the SAC oligo, suggesting that Smad may also bind to sites outside the ?50/?19 survivin promoter region to mediate TGF-?’s effect. As a negative control, streptavidin beads alone did not capture these proteins from the nuclear extracts (data not shown). Our preliminary chromatin immunoprecipitation data support that TGF-? enhances the interaction of p107, p130 and E2F4 to this promoter region in intact cells (data not shown). To test whether CDE and CHR are critical for such binding we performed a DNAP experiment with wild type or CDE/CHR mutant (individually or in combination) SAC oligos. Another oligo containing three tandem repeats of the SBE consensus motif was also used as positive control for Smad binding and a negative control for the other binding proteins. As shown in Fig. 5C , TGF-? treatment consistently enhanced the binding of all three Rb family proteins and E2F4 to the wt SAC oligo, but not to the mutant oligos. Interestingly, while mutations in CDE or CHR essentially abolished all binding of p107, p130 and E2F4, each of the mutant oligos showed enhanced interaction with Rb over the wt oligo. The molecular basis and biological significance of the interaction of Rb to mutant CDE and CHR remain to be defined. Collectively, these data suggest that the integrity of CDE/CHR is critical for the recruitment of Rb family proteins and E2F4 to the survivin promoter by TGF-?. Since Rb family proteins need to be activated through hypophosphorylation to bind to gene promoter with E2F4, we next assessed whether TGF-? can activate Rb. As shown in Fig. 5D , TGF-? efficiently reduced Rb phosphorylation, starting as early as 6 h of treatment, at a time preceding survivin downregulation. Silencing Smad3 largely abolished hypophosphorylation of Rb by TGF-?; Smad2 also contributes to Rb activation by TGF-?, since silencing it alone or in combination with silencing Smad3 further reversed Rb hypophosphorylation by TGF-? ( Fig. 5E ), indicating that Smad3 is the major mediator of TGF-?-dependent Rb activation.  Rb and E2F4 are recruited by TGF-? to survivin proximal promoter and are essential for TGF-? to repress this promoter activity Rb family proteins (Rb, p107 and p130) are critical to cell cycle control. When activated by hypophosphorylation, Rb can bind E2F transcription factors and downregulate the expression of genes involved in cell cycle progression ( Harbour and Dean, 2000 ; Jackson et al ., 2005 ; Knudsen et al ., 1999 ). Several earlier reports suggested that the Rb/E2F4 molecular complex binds to CDE/CHR elements within promoters of some genes, such as cdc2, and represses their transcription ( Le Cam et al., 1999 ; Taylor et al., 2001 ). To test whether Rb is involved in CDE/CHR-mediated repression of the survivin promoter by TGF-?, we overexpressed several proteins known to inactivate all Rb family proteins ( Jackson et al., 2005 ). These Rb-inactivating proteins included D1/CDK, which is a fusion protein of cyclin D1 and cdk2 (representing constitutively active cdk), E7 (oncoprotein from HPV-18), E7? (mutant form of E7 lacking the binding domain for Rb), and T-ag (SV-40 large T antigen). As shown in Fig. 5A , overexpression of D1/CDK, E7 or T-ag resulted in higher survivin basal promoter activity and completely reversed the repression of this promoter by TGF-?1. Rather interestingly, TGF-?1 actually enhanced survivin promoter activity in the presence of these proteins. Importantly, E7? failed to inhibit the repression of survivin promoter by TGF-?, suggesting that Rb inactivation is the main mechanism by which E7 oncoprotein reverses the downregulation of survivin promoter by TGF-? ( Fig. 5A ). To examine whether this effect of Rb inactivation occurs specially at the level of the survivin promoter rather than by simply blocking TGF-? receptor/Smad activation, in parallel we assessed effects of the Rb-inactivating proteins on 3TP-Luciferase (3TP-Lux, a PAI-1 promoter construct). 3TP-Lux is a classic TGF-?-induced promoter construct which depends on Smad-mediated transcription ( Wrana et al., 1992 ), thus serving as a good readout to test whether early TGF-? responses could be affected by these Rb-inactivating proteins. In the case for D1/CDK, 3TP-Lux induction by TGF-? was mostly retained (approximately 80%), indicating that D1/CDK does not significantly affect TGF-? early signals ( Supplemental Fig. 4 ). Although E7 and T-ag repressed TGF-?-induced 3TP-Lux by about 70%, interception of TGF-? early signals by these two proteins did not account for the total reversal of the TGF-? response observed on the survivin promoter ( Fig. 5A , Supplemental Fig. 4 ). Therefore, these data suggest that Rb (and/or p107, p130) is critical for the repression of survivin by TGF-?. Since active Rb family proteins typically form transcriptional repressor complexes with E2F4 on target gene promoters, we tested whether TGF-? recruits these proteins to the survivin promoter, using a biotinylated DNA pull-down assay (DNAP). The binding of nuclear proteins to either a 187 bp survivin proximal promoter (Suv-182, spanning -182/-4 region) or an internal 32 bp oligo DNA (SAC oligo, spanning ?50/?19 region) containing CDE/CHR was assessed. TGF-? induced binding of all Rb family proteins (Rb, p130 and p107) and E2F4 to both DNA fragments after 17 h of treatment ( Fig. 5B ), demonstrating that TGF-?-dependent recruitment of Rb, Rb-like and E2F proteins to this promoter temporally coincide with downregulation of survivin mRNA ( Fig. 1C ). Interestingly, both Smad3 and Smad4 bound to Suv-182, but only minimally to the SAC oligo, suggesting that Smad may also bind to sites outside the ?50/?19 survivin promoter region to mediate TGF-?’s effect. As a negative control, streptavidin beads alone did not capture these proteins from the nuclear extracts (data not shown). Our preliminary chromatin immunoprecipitation data support that TGF-? enhances the interaction of p107, p130 and E2F4 to this promoter region in intact cells (data not shown). To test whether CDE and CHR are critical for such binding we performed a DNAP experiment with wild type or CDE/CHR mutant (individually or in combination) SAC oligos. Another oligo containing three tandem repeats of the SBE consensus motif was also used as positive control for Smad binding and a negative control for the other binding proteins. As shown in Fig. 5C , TGF-? treatment consistently enhanced the binding of all three Rb family proteins and E2F4 to the wt SAC oligo, but not to the mutant oligos. Interestingly, while mutations in CDE or CHR essentially abolished all binding of p107, p130 and E2F4, each of the mutant oligos showed enhanced interaction with Rb over the wt oligo. The molecular basis and biological significance of the interaction of Rb to mutant CDE and CHR remain to be defined. Collectively, these data suggest that the integrity of CDE/CHR is critical for the recruitment of Rb family proteins and E2F4 to the survivin promoter by TGF-?. Since Rb family proteins need to be activated through hypophosphorylation to bind to gene promoter with E2F4, we next assessed whether TGF-? can activate Rb. As shown in Fig. 5D , TGF-? efficiently reduced Rb phosphorylation, starting as early as 6 h of treatment, at a time preceding survivin downregulation. Silencing Smad3 largely abolished hypophosphorylation of Rb by TGF-?; Smad2 also contributes to Rb activation by TGF-?, since silencing it alone or in combination with silencing Smad3 further reversed Rb hypophosphorylation by TGF-? ( Fig. 5E ), indicating that Smad3 is the major mediator of TGF-?-dependent Rb activation.  Manipulating survivin levels in cells alters their sensitivity to apoptotic stimuli including TGF-? We next investigated whether survivin is involved in the regulation of apoptosis by TGF-?. Survivin was first efficiently overexpressed in NRP-154 cells by adenoviral transduction, and changes in apoptotic response to TGF-?1 were assessed by both analysis of % sub-G1 cells (by Flow Cytometry) and caspase-3 activation (by Western blot). Overexpression of survivin substantially decreased %sub-G1 cells following TGF-? treatment ( Fig. 6A ), and diminished the levels of caspase-3 activated by TGF-? ( Fig. 6B ), demonstrating that the loss of survivin initiated by TGF-? is required for TGF-? to efficiently induce apoptosis. We also treated the above transduced cells with etoposide or taxol, and observed an inhibition of taxol-mediated apoptosis by survivin overexpression ( Fig. 6C ). Separately, a dose of TGF-? (0.3 ng/ml) below the threshold for apoptosis but sufficient for survivin downregulation ( Fig. 1B bottom) significantly enhanced taxol-induced caspase-3 activation, and such potentiation was lost by survivin overexpression ( Fig. 6D ). This suggests that TGF-? may also lower the threshold for cellular responses to other apoptotic agents by reducing survivin levels. We next used an shRNA-lentiviral approach to study the biological function of endogenous survivin in NRP-154 cells. Knockdown of survivin expression enhanced the induction of apoptosis by either etoposide or taxol ( Fig. 6E ). The sensitivity of survivin-silenced cells to apoptosis by TGF-? was not detectably altered, consistent with TGF-?’s ability to drive efficient loss of survivin. Taken together, our results suggest that the downregulation of survivin expression by TGF-? is involved in apoptotic responses of not only TGF-? but also some chemotherapeutic agents.  Manipulating survivin levels in cells alters their sensitivity to apoptotic stimuli including TGF-? We next investigated whether survivin is involved in the regulation of apoptosis by TGF-?. Survivin was first efficiently overexpressed in NRP-154 cells by adenoviral transduction, and changes in apoptotic response to TGF-?1 were assessed by both analysis of % sub-G1 cells (by Flow Cytometry) and caspase-3 activation (by Western blot). Overexpression of survivin substantially decreased %sub-G1 cells following TGF-? treatment ( Fig. 6A ), and diminished the levels of caspase-3 activated by TGF-? ( Fig. 6B ), demonstrating that the loss of survivin initiated by TGF-? is required for TGF-? to efficiently induce apoptosis. We also treated the above transduced cells with etoposide or taxol, and observed an inhibition of taxol-mediated apoptosis by survivin overexpression ( Fig. 6C ). Separately, a dose of TGF-? (0.3 ng/ml) below the threshold for apoptosis but sufficient for survivin downregulation ( Fig. 1B bottom) significantly enhanced taxol-induced caspase-3 activation, and such potentiation was lost by survivin overexpression ( Fig. 6D ). This suggests that TGF-? may also lower the threshold for cellular responses to other apoptotic agents by reducing survivin levels. We next used an shRNA-lentiviral approach to study the biological function of endogenous survivin in NRP-154 cells. Knockdown of survivin expression enhanced the induction of apoptosis by either etoposide or taxol ( Fig. 6E ). The sensitivity of survivin-silenced cells to apoptosis by TGF-? was not detectably altered, consistent with TGF-?’s ability to drive efficient loss of survivin. Taken together, our results suggest that the downregulation of survivin expression by TGF-? is involved in apoptotic responses of not only TGF-? but also some chemotherapeutic agents.  Cancer relevance of survivin regulation by TGF-? Considering the versatility of survivin to inhibit apoptosis by TGF-? and other agents such as taxol ( Fig. 6 ), and earlier reports correlating survivin levels to the progression of prostate cancer ( Kishi et al., 2004 ; Shariat et al., 2004 ) or the loss of T?RI and T?RII ( Shariat et al., 2004 ), we hypothesize that a defective TGF-?/survivin regulatory axis may be associated with tumor progression. An array of normal and tumor prostatic epithelial cells was used to test this hypothesis. Compared with the NRP-154 cell line ( Fig. 1B , top), which is tumorigenic, the NRP-152 non-tumorigenic rat prostate epithelial cell line ( Danielpour et al., 1994 ) manifested lower basal levels of survivin but similar temporal patterns of downregulation by TGF-? ( Fig. 7A, B ), associated with their exquisite sensitivity to TGF-?-induced apoptosis ( Hsing et al., 1996 ). DU-145 and PC-3 are highly malignant/androgen-independent human prostate cancer cell lines derived from brain and bone metastases, respectively. Both of them possess high levels of endogenous survivin, which was not suppressed by TGF-?1 ( Fig. 7B ) even up to 72 h treatment (data not shown). Conversely, TGF-? downregulated survivin levels in RWPE-1 ( Fig. 7C ), a nontumorigenic human prostate epithelial cell line ( Bello et al., 1997 ). We compared survivin levels in the context of tumor progression, using LNCaP cell line and its bone metastatic/androgen refractory variant, C4-2B, which express more survivin than LNCaP cells ( Fig. 7D ). To test the TGF-? response, we had to ectopically express T?RII in these cells as they lack this receptor. Downregulation of survivin by TGF-?1, which occurred efficiently in LNCaP cells only by enforced expression of T?RII, was abolished in C4-2B cells also expressing exogenous T?RII. Consistent with published results ( Zhang et al., 2005 ), stimulation of LNCaP cells with 5?-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) increased survivin levels. Interestingly, DHT treatment of these cells significantly prevented the loss of survivin by TGF-? ( Fig. 7D ), suggesting crosstalk between TGF-? and androgen on regulation of survivin expression. In summary, our data suggest that disregulation of TGF-? signaling in prostate cancer may contribute to disease progression and poor therapeutic responses by elevating survivin levels.  Cancer relevance of survivin regulation by TGF-? Considering the versatility of survivin to inhibit apoptosis by TGF-? and other agents such as taxol ( Fig. 6 ), and earlier reports correlating survivin levels to the progression of prostate cancer ( Kishi et al., 2004 ; Shariat et al., 2004 ) or the loss of T?RI and T?RII ( Shariat et al., 2004 ), we hypothesize that a defective TGF-?/survivin regulatory axis may be associated with tumor progression. An array of normal and tumor prostatic epithelial cells was used to test this hypothesis. Compared with the NRP-154 cell line ( Fig. 1B , top), which is tumorigenic, the NRP-152 non-tumorigenic rat prostate epithelial cell line ( Danielpour et al., 1994 ) manifested lower basal levels of survivin but similar temporal patterns of downregulation by TGF-? ( Fig. 7A, B ), associated with their exquisite sensitivity to TGF-?-induced apoptosis ( Hsing et al., 1996 ). DU-145 and PC-3 are highly malignant/androgen-independent human prostate cancer cell lines derived from brain and bone metastases, respectively. Both of them possess high levels of endogenous survivin, which was not suppressed by TGF-?1 ( Fig. 7B ) even up to 72 h treatment (data not shown). Conversely, TGF-? downregulated survivin levels in RWPE-1 ( Fig. 7C ), a nontumorigenic human prostate epithelial cell line ( Bello et al., 1997 ). We compared survivin levels in the context of tumor progression, using LNCaP cell line and its bone metastatic/androgen refractory variant, C4-2B, which express more survivin than LNCaP cells ( Fig. 7D ). To test the TGF-? response, we had to ectopically express T?RII in these cells as they lack this receptor. Downregulation of survivin by TGF-?1, which occurred efficiently in LNCaP cells only by enforced expression of T?RII, was abolished in C4-2B cells also expressing exogenous T?RII. Consistent with published results ( Zhang et al., 2005 ), stimulation of LNCaP cells with 5?-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) increased survivin levels. Interestingly, DHT treatment of these cells significantly prevented the loss of survivin by TGF-? ( Fig. 7D ), suggesting crosstalk between TGF-? and androgen on regulation of survivin expression. In summary, our data suggest that disregulation of TGF-? signaling in prostate cancer may contribute to disease progression and poor therapeutic responses by elevating survivin levels.  Discussion This is the first report of a functional union between survivin and TGF-?, with survivin transcriptionally downregulated by TGF-? in preneoplastic and differentiated prostate carcinoma cells but not in advanced prostate carcinoma cells. Moreover, we show that such downregulation is dependent on Smads 2 and 3, Rb (and/or Rb-like proteins) and the CDE/CHR promoter elements which bind the Rb/E2F4 repressor module following TGF-? stimulation. This is also the first demonstration that the ability of TGF-? to induce Rb hypophosphorylation is dependent mostly on Smad3. We propose that activation of Smads 2 and 3 promotes hypophosphorylation of Rb leading to association of Rb/E2F4 complex to the survivin promoter ( Fig. 7E ). Our model is supported by a recent study that showed Rb/E2F complexes bind to the human survivin promoter, controlling the G2/M cell cycle specific expression of survivin in normal cells. Defects in this mechanism may account for the elevated levels of survivin in cancers ( Jiang et al., 2004 ). We showed that Smad3 binds to the survivin proximal promoter upon TGF-? treatment, and the SBE2 site within this region is critical for the binding of recombinant Smad3 ( Supplemental Fig. 3 ). However, only a modest (yet statistically significant) loss in TGF-?-mediated suppression of SBE2(m)-survivin promoter was observed. One potential explanation is that Smad3 contributes to TGF-?-mediated survivin promoter suppression mainly by activating Rb, and the physical contact of Smad3 within this promoter may either occur at other sites or play a minimal role. To date there are only a small number of natural promoters whose repression by TGF-? have been characterized. One such example is the c-myc promoter, onto which TGF-? recruits a transcriptional inhibitory complex consisting of Smad3/Smad4/E2F4/p107 to a T GF-? i nhibitory e lement (TIE) ( Chen et al., 2002 ). However, the survivin promoter does not contain a TIE sequence. Instead, we show that the survivin promoter is repressed by TGF-? through the CDE and CHR elements, which represent a set of cis-acting elements not previously reported to be targeted by TGF-?. The CDE and CHR are structurally different from TIE described previously in the context of the c-myc promoter. Moreover, unlike the survivin promoter, regulation of the c-myc promoter by TGF-? requires the direct binding of Smads 3 and 4 to a unique r epressive SBE (RSBE) within the TIE of the c-myc promoter ( Frederick et al., 2004 ). Our EMSA data investigating the interaction of Smad3 to the proximal region of the survivin promoter demonstrated this interaction is restricted to a consensus SBE ( Supplemental Fig. 3 ). Although this SBE (SBE2) is not required for the repression of the survivin promoter by TGF-?, it is likely that association of Smad3 to SBE2 (and/or other sites) on the survivin promoter may enhance the repression of survivin by TGF-?. In contrast to the RSBE within the TIE of the c-myc promoter, which requires the interaction with Smad4, the proximal region of the survivin promoter was not controlled by Smad4 (overexpression of WT and dominant-negative Smad4; data not shown) and does not bind Smad4 ( Fig. 5B ) in the context of the interaction with E2F4, Rb, and Rb-like proteins. Thus, we propose a new model, whereby Smads 2 and 3 first activate Rb to promote the formation of the suppressive complex Rb/E2F4 on the CDE/CHR elements of the survivin promoter. The two Rb-like proteins, which also bind to the CDE/CHR elements, may function similar to Rb. Survivin has recently attracted wide interest as a unique IAP protein with dual roles in growth control, through enhancing mitosis and/or inhibiting apoptosis ( Altieri, 2003a ; Altieri, 2003b ). Survivin expression is exceptionally high in numerous types of tumors ( Altieri, 2003b ), and reported to aid in tumor maintenance and progression, mainly by conferring resistance to various apoptotic stimuli. Targeting the loss or inactivation of survivin in cancer cells often results in spontaneous apoptosis and/or enhanced apoptosis induced by chemotherapeutic agents ( Altieri, 2003a ). Notably, antagonizing survivin expression in DU-145 human prostate cancer cells by ribozyme increased their sensitivity to cisplatin-induced apoptosis ( Pennati et al., 2004 ). We also observed similar results in NRP-154 cells treated with taxol. Our data shows that downregulation of survivin expression by TGF-? is defective in malignant prostate cancer cells, consistent with the loss or inactivation of TGF-? signaling components, including TGF-? receptors and/or Smads ( Kishi et al., 2004 ; Shariat et al., 2004 ). Alternatively, defects in Rb, Rb-like proteins and/or their association with the survivin promoter may disable cancer cells from suppression of survivin by TGF-? even in the presence of an intact upstream TGF-? signaling system, as illustrated by viral oncoproteins that inactivate Rb family proteins. Rb is frequently lost or inactivated in human cancers, for example, 25% to 50% of prostatic adenocarcinomas have a defective Rb pathway ( Jarrard et al., 2002 ). Rb-depleted prostate cells fail to be growth arrested upon androgen deprivation ( Sharma et al., 2007 ), and survivin deregulation could be one of the major contributing factors based on our current study. Moreover, we show that mutations of both CDE and CHR elements in the survivin promoter actually invert the effect of TGF-? to one that enhanced this promoter activity, suggesting that defects in such regulation may promote the elevation of survivin by TGF-? and contribute to the oncogenic behavior of TGF-? during tumor progression. Thus, keeping survivin levels “in check” is likely to not only comprise one of TGF-?’s tumor suppressive functions but also prevent TGF-? from functioning as a tumor promoter. In conclusion, we have discovered a novel TGF-?/survivin axis that is disregulated in prostate cancer and has significant therapeutic potential.  Discussion This is the first report of a functional union between survivin and TGF-?, with survivin transcriptionally downregulated by TGF-? in preneoplastic and differentiated prostate carcinoma cells but not in advanced prostate carcinoma cells. Moreover, we show that such downregulation is dependent on Smads 2 and 3, Rb (and/or Rb-like proteins) and the CDE/CHR promoter elements which bind the Rb/E2F4 repressor module following TGF-? stimulation. This is also the first demonstration that the ability of TGF-? to induce Rb hypophosphorylation is dependent mostly on Smad3. We propose that activation of Smads 2 and 3 promotes hypophosphorylation of Rb leading to association of Rb/E2F4 complex to the survivin promoter ( Fig. 7E ). Our model is supported by a recent study that showed Rb/E2F complexes bind to the human survivin promoter, controlling the G2/M cell cycle specific expression of survivin in normal cells. Defects in this mechanism may account for the elevated levels of survivin in cancers ( Jiang et al., 2004 ). We showed that Smad3 binds to the survivin proximal promoter upon TGF-? treatment, and the SBE2 site within this region is critical for the binding of recombinant Smad3 ( Supplemental Fig. 3 ). However, only a modest (yet statistically significant) loss in TGF-?-mediated suppression of SBE2(m)-survivin promoter was observed. One potential explanation is that Smad3 contributes to TGF-?-mediated survivin promoter suppression mainly by activating Rb, and the physical contact of Smad3 within this promoter may either occur at other sites or play a minimal role. To date there are only a small number of natural promoters whose repression by TGF-? have been characterized. One such example is the c-myc promoter, onto which TGF-? recruits a transcriptional inhibitory complex consisting of Smad3/Smad4/E2F4/p107 to a T GF-? i nhibitory e lement (TIE) ( Chen et al., 2002 ). However, the survivin promoter does not contain a TIE sequence. Instead, we show that the survivin promoter is repressed by TGF-? through the CDE and CHR elements, which represent a set of cis-acting elements not previously reported to be targeted by TGF-?. The CDE and CHR are structurally different from TIE described previously in the context of the c-myc promoter. Moreover, unlike the survivin promoter, regulation of the c-myc promoter by TGF-? requires the direct binding of Smads 3 and 4 to a unique r epressive SBE (RSBE) within the TIE of the c-myc promoter ( Frederick et al., 2004 ). Our EMSA data investigating the interaction of Smad3 to the proximal region of the survivin promoter demonstrated this interaction is restricted to a consensus SBE ( Supplemental Fig. 3 ). Although this SBE (SBE2) is not required for the repression of the survivin promoter by TGF-?, it is likely that association of Smad3 to SBE2 (and/or other sites) on the survivin promoter may enhance the repression of survivin by TGF-?. In contrast to the RSBE within the TIE of the c-myc promoter, which requires the interaction with Smad4, the proximal region of the survivin promoter was not controlled by Smad4 (overexpression of WT and dominant-negative Smad4; data not shown) and does not bind Smad4 ( Fig. 5B ) in the context of the interaction with E2F4, Rb, and Rb-like proteins. Thus, we propose a new model, whereby Smads 2 and 3 first activate Rb to promote the formation of the suppressive complex Rb/E2F4 on the CDE/CHR elements of the survivin promoter. The two Rb-like proteins, which also bind to the CDE/CHR elements, may function similar to Rb. Survivin has recently attracted wide interest as a unique IAP protein with dual roles in growth control, through enhancing mitosis and/or inhibiting apoptosis ( Altieri, 2003a ; Altieri, 2003b ). Survivin expression is exceptionally high in numerous types of tumors ( Altieri, 2003b ), and reported to aid in tumor maintenance and progression, mainly by conferring resistance to various apoptotic stimuli. Targeting the loss or inactivation of survivin in cancer cells often results in spontaneous apoptosis and/or enhanced apoptosis induced by chemotherapeutic agents ( Altieri, 2003a ). Notably, antagonizing survivin expression in DU-145 human prostate cancer cells by ribozyme increased their sensitivity to cisplatin-induced apoptosis ( Pennati et al., 2004 ). We also observed similar results in NRP-154 cells treated with taxol. Our data shows that downregulation of survivin expression by TGF-? is defective in malignant prostate cancer cells, consistent with the loss or inactivation of TGF-? signaling components, including TGF-? receptors and/or Smads ( Kishi et al., 2004 ; Shariat et al., 2004 ). Alternatively, defects in Rb, Rb-like proteins and/or their association with the survivin promoter may disable cancer cells from suppression of survivin by TGF-? even in the presence of an intact upstream TGF-? signaling system, as illustrated by viral oncoproteins that inactivate Rb family proteins. Rb is frequently lost or inactivated in human cancers, for example, 25% to 50% of prostatic adenocarcinomas have a defective Rb pathway ( Jarrard et al., 2002 ). Rb-depleted prostate cells fail to be growth arrested upon androgen deprivation ( Sharma et al., 2007 ), and survivin deregulation could be one of the major contributing factors based on our current study. Moreover, we show that mutations of both CDE and CHR elements in the survivin promoter actually invert the effect of TGF-? to one that enhanced this promoter activity, suggesting that defects in such regulation may promote the elevation of survivin by TGF-? and contribute to the oncogenic behavior of TGF-? during tumor progression. Thus, keeping survivin levels “in check” is likely to not only comprise one of TGF-?’s tumor suppressive functions but also prevent TGF-? from functioning as a tumor promoter. In conclusion, we have discovered a novel TGF-?/survivin axis that is disregulated in prostate cancer and has significant therapeutic potential. 