Effects of respiration-averaged CT on PET/CT quantification and its potential impact on GTV delineation Purpose Patient respiratory motion can cause image artifacts in PET from PET/CT and change the quantification of PET for thoracic patients. In this study, respiration-averaged CT (ACT) was used to remove the artifacts, and the changes in standardized uptake value (SUV) and gross tumor volume (GTV) were quantified. Methods and Materials We incorporated the ACT acquisition in a PET/CT session for 216 lung patients generating two PET/CT data sets for each patient. The first data set (PETHCT/HCT) contained the clinical PET/CT in which PET was attenuation corrected with a helical CT (HCT). The second data set (PETACT/ACT) contained the PET/CT in which PET was corrected with ACT. We quantified the differences between the two data sets in image alignment, maximum SUV (SUVmax) and GTV contours. Results 68% of the patients demonstrated respiratory artifacts in the PETHCT and the artifact was removed or reduced in the corresponding PETACT for all patients. The impact of respiration artifact was the worst for lesions <50cm3 and located below the dome of the diaphragm. The mean SUVmax difference for lesions in this group was 21%. The mean GTV volume change, shifts in GTV centroid locations, and concordance index for these lesions were 154%, 2.4 mm, and 0.61, respectively. Conclusion This study benchmarked the differences between the PET data with and without the artifacts. It is important to pay attention to the potential existence of these artifacts during GTV contouring, as it may increase the uncertainties in the lesion volume and the centroid location.  INTRODUCTION A crucial step in radiation therapy is the ability to accurately delineate the gross tumor volume (GTV), and the quality of the image sets provided for this process can have a significant impact on the treatment plan. 1 , 2 The use of positron emission tomography (PET) images in treatment planning has been shown to have a significant effect on the patient management 3 – 7 ; it is beneficial in reducing observer variations due to the increased sensitivity and specificity when compared to using computed tomography (CT) images alone 4 , 8 , 9 . Prior to the commercial availability of a PET/CT dual modality scanner, PET data were acquired on a dedicated PET scanner. For treatment planning purposes, the disadvantage of acquiring PET data on a dedicated scanner is the difference in patient positioning between the PET and CT simulation scans. Incorporating information from dedicated PET scanners in treatment plans was often done by visual correlation with CT or using image registration software. This process, however, has been greatly improved since the availability of PET/CT dual modality scanners in 2001. On a PET/CT scanner, PET and CT data can be acquired during the same imaging session with the same patient positioning, and the images are therefore fused by hardware. This improvement has drawn even greater interest in using PET/CT images for tumor target delineation in treatment planning 10 – 13 In the thoracic region, however, PET from PET/CT is subjected to a unique respiratory-motion induced artifact which was not a major issue on a dedicated PET scanner. On a PET/CT scanner, PET data are acquired over minutes whereas helical CT (HCT) data are acquired over a fraction of a second. PET temporal resolution is an average of many respiratory cycles whereas HCT captures a single state of a respiratory cycle. This difference in temporal resolution can lead to a potential spatial misalignment between PET and HCT, introducing large uncertainty in PET quantification because PET quantification is achieved by using CT for attenuation correction. 14 – 19 Lesion uptake maybe biased by the spatial mismatch and therefore affect the GTV delineation. We demonstrated in the previous thoracic 20 and cardiac 21 , 22 studies that using respiration-averaged CT (ACT) for attenuation correction of PET from PET/CT can improve the registration of the CT and the PET data because the temporal resolution of PET and ACT are comparable. Similar results have been shown by other groups 23 , 24 . We have also further optimized ACT acquisition for clinical implementation 25 , and the ACT acquisition is available on the PET/CT scanners in our institution. The purpose of the current study is to provide the clinical evaluation of the effect of ACT on PET quantification with respect to GTV delineation. There are two steps in the evaluation: First, we assessed the efficiency and reliability of ACT in removing the breathing artifact in PET. Second, we assessed the impact of the respiratory artifact on GTV contouring by comparing the PET data set with artifacts to those with artifacts removed. Our metrics for evaluations are image alignment, maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax), and the threshold segmented GTVs. The result of this study benchmarks the physical differences between the PET data from a PET/CT data set with respiratory-induced misalignment and that without misalignment demonstrating a potential impact on the GTV delineation.  METHODS AND MATERIALS This study was conducted under the institutional protocol number DR07-0560. Patients with lung lesions were scanned with the clinical PET/CT protocol, i.e., HCT followed by PET data acquisition. ACT was acquired immediately following PET. PET emission data was then attenuation corrected using both free-breathing HCT and ACT to obtain PETHCT and PETACT, respectively. We first measured the magnitude of spatial misalignment for each patient on both PETHCT and PETACT using criteria described later in “Image alignment measurement”. Patient data sets were then divided into two groups: a misaligned group containing patients whose clinical PET/CT had misalignment, and a non-misaligned group corresponding to patients whose clinical PET/CT had no misalignment. Using the patient data sets from the misaligned group, we analyzed the changes in PET quantification due to respiration-induced artifact using (1) SUVmax measurement (most frequently used PET quantity) and (2) computer generated GTV. The changes in SUVmax and GTV were correlated with tumor size and tumor location. Patient data acquisition 229 Thoracic patients were scanned on three PET/CT scanners (DST/RX/DSTE, GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI). 13 patients were eliminated from the study due to reasons explained in the Results section. Each patient underwent a routine PET/CT session beginning with a HCT followed by a PET scan from skull to mid-thigh. ACT was acquired immediately after the PET scan with patients remaining in the same position. The HCT, PET and ACT data sets were all acquired under free breathing protocol, i.e., patients were not given any breathing instruction. The HCT scanning parameters were 120 kV, 300 mA with a pitch of 1.35:1, and gantry rotation of 0.5 s/revolution. The x-ray collimation was 8 ×1.25 mm on the 8-slice DST and 16 × 1.25 mm on the 16-slice RX and DSTE. For the PET scan, patients were injected with 550–740 MBq of 18F-FDG and scanned 1 h after injection. The PET data were acquired for 3 min per 15-cm bed location. ACT was acquired at 120 kV, collimation of 8×2.5 mm (2-cm coverage/couch position), gantry rotation speed of 0.5 s and cine duration of 5.9 s. Tube current was adjusted depending on the patient’s weight: 10 mA for < 70 kg, 15 mA for 70–100 kg, and 20 mA for > 100 kg. The same PET data were attenuation corrected with both HCT and ACT providing each patient with two PET/CT data sets: PETHCT/HCT (current clinical protocol) and PETACT/ACT. PETHCT was generated automatically on the PET/CT console. The details of post-processing of ACT for PET attenuation correction (to generate PETACT) are described in our previous work. 21 Note that PETACT was generated on the same PET/CT console as the one on which patients were scanned, with the same PET reconstruction parameters as those for PETHCT. Image alignment measurements The integrity of the two sets of PET/CT data were inspected using a 3D visualization and analysis tool [Advantage Workstation (AW) 4.2, GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI] to make sure that (a) patients who moved during the image session and (b) patients who had compromised ACT due to irregular breathing were excluded from further analysis. The image alignment measurements were performed also using AW. Both PET/CT data sets for each thoracic patient were analyzed for image alignment. The mismatch between PET and CT data sets caused by respiratory motion can typically be observed near the diaphragm region as an under- or over-corrected region, or a misalignment between the lesion on CT and on PET. Two criteria were used to determine image alignment: the existence of the artifact near the diaphragm, and a measurable misalignment distance (> 3 mm) between the lesion on CT and the uptake of the lesion on PET ( Fig. 1 ). Criterion 1 was used first, and if a data set did not show a respiratory artifact by the diaphragm, criterion 2 was then used. If data sets exhibited neither criterion, the measurement of misalignment was given a value 0. Otherwise the magnitude of misalignment was measured and the histograms were plotted. The viewing threshold for artifact measurement in PET was 5 g/ml and the CT viewing window was the “lung” window (window = 1000 HU, and level = ?700 HU). Patient/Lesion selection We further analyzed the data sets in the misaligned group for the effect that a breathing artifact in PET has on SUVmax and GTV measurements. For patients with multiple lesions, a maximum of 4 lesions were selected starting from the one closest to the diaphragm. In cases of multiple lesions, small lesions were selected over large lesions. Note that lesions chosen in this study may not be malignant since the focus is on the changes in PET quantification. SUV<sub>max</sub> measurement For each selected lesion, the SUVmax was measured on both PETHCT and PETACT using AW 3D measure tools. Threshold segmented GTV Both PETHCT and PETACT data sets were imported to the Pinnacle Treatment Planning System (TPS). The PET images were converted to display SUV in Pinnacle using a software tool developed in house. The auto contouring tool in Pinnacle was used to generate GTVs based on the SUV thresholds. An iterative process shown in Fig. 2 demonstrates the steps taken to determine an appropriate threshold for the auto contouring of each lesion. For each lesion, the same threshold was used on the PETHCT and the PETACT. Traditionally, SUVmax of 2.5 is suggested as an indication of malignancy. 26 Therefore, for lesions with SUVmax on PETHCT greater than 4.0, the initial threshold used was 2.5. Using the initial threshold, the GTVs on PETHCT and PETACT were segmented. If the threshold was too close to the background uptake such that adjacent tissues were included in the contour, the threshold was increased by 0.1 and the auto contouring process was repeated until an appropriate threshold could be established for both PET data sets. The purpose of using such a threshold segmentation process was to minimize any hand-contouring bias. Another initial threshold (SUV = 1.5) for lesions with lower uptake (< 4.0) was used. This was necessary because of the nature of our data sets — The PET quantification could vary drastically from PETHCT to PETACT when breathing artifact was removed. For example, if the SUVmax of a lesion increased from 2.0 on the PETHCT to 3.0 on PETACT, a threshold of 2.5 would work on PETACT, but not on PETHCT. The volume and the centroid location on GTVPET-HCT and GTVPET-ACT were measured using the tools provided on the Pinnacle TPS. GTVPET-HCT represents the threshold segmented GTV on PETHCT, and GTVPET-ACT represents the threshold segmented GTV on PETACT. The diaphragm position was measured at the most superior extent of the diaphragm (the dome of the diaphragm) on the PETACT. PETACT was used for this particular measurement because the diaphragm position on PETACT is an averaged position which is more consistent than the diaphragm position on PETHCT. The diaphragm position on PETHCT reflects only some given state of the respiratory cycle captured by the HCT. Data analysis Using the PETHCT as the reference set, the percentage changes in SUVmax, the percent changes in GTV volume, and the centroid shift between GTVPET-HCT and GTVPET-ACT were calculated. The concordance index between the two GTVs was also determined; it was defined as the ratio of intersection of GTVPET-HCT and GTVPET-ACT divided by their union 27 and was calculated using a Matlab program written to read the Pinnacle Region of Interest (ROI) file. We also calculated the distance between the centroid of a lesion on PETACT to the dome of the diaphragm. A negative tumor-diaphragm distance corresponded to a lesion located inferior to the dome of the diaphragm whereas a positive tumor-diaphragm distance corresponded to a lesion located superior to the dome of the diaphragm. The distributions of the absolute changes in SUVmax, and in GTV volume, centroid shift, and concordance index were plotted, and the correlations of these changes to lesion size and lesion location were analyzed.  Patient data acquisition 229 Thoracic patients were scanned on three PET/CT scanners (DST/RX/DSTE, GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI). 13 patients were eliminated from the study due to reasons explained in the Results section. Each patient underwent a routine PET/CT session beginning with a HCT followed by a PET scan from skull to mid-thigh. ACT was acquired immediately after the PET scan with patients remaining in the same position. The HCT, PET and ACT data sets were all acquired under free breathing protocol, i.e., patients were not given any breathing instruction. The HCT scanning parameters were 120 kV, 300 mA with a pitch of 1.35:1, and gantry rotation of 0.5 s/revolution. The x-ray collimation was 8 ×1.25 mm on the 8-slice DST and 16 × 1.25 mm on the 16-slice RX and DSTE. For the PET scan, patients were injected with 550–740 MBq of 18F-FDG and scanned 1 h after injection. The PET data were acquired for 3 min per 15-cm bed location. ACT was acquired at 120 kV, collimation of 8×2.5 mm (2-cm coverage/couch position), gantry rotation speed of 0.5 s and cine duration of 5.9 s. Tube current was adjusted depending on the patient’s weight: 10 mA for < 70 kg, 15 mA for 70–100 kg, and 20 mA for > 100 kg. The same PET data were attenuation corrected with both HCT and ACT providing each patient with two PET/CT data sets: PETHCT/HCT (current clinical protocol) and PETACT/ACT. PETHCT was generated automatically on the PET/CT console. The details of post-processing of ACT for PET attenuation correction (to generate PETACT) are described in our previous work. 21 Note that PETACT was generated on the same PET/CT console as the one on which patients were scanned, with the same PET reconstruction parameters as those for PETHCT.  Image alignment measurements The integrity of the two sets of PET/CT data were inspected using a 3D visualization and analysis tool [Advantage Workstation (AW) 4.2, GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI] to make sure that (a) patients who moved during the image session and (b) patients who had compromised ACT due to irregular breathing were excluded from further analysis. The image alignment measurements were performed also using AW. Both PET/CT data sets for each thoracic patient were analyzed for image alignment. The mismatch between PET and CT data sets caused by respiratory motion can typically be observed near the diaphragm region as an under- or over-corrected region, or a misalignment between the lesion on CT and on PET. Two criteria were used to determine image alignment: the existence of the artifact near the diaphragm, and a measurable misalignment distance (> 3 mm) between the lesion on CT and the uptake of the lesion on PET ( Fig. 1 ). Criterion 1 was used first, and if a data set did not show a respiratory artifact by the diaphragm, criterion 2 was then used. If data sets exhibited neither criterion, the measurement of misalignment was given a value 0. Otherwise the magnitude of misalignment was measured and the histograms were plotted. The viewing threshold for artifact measurement in PET was 5 g/ml and the CT viewing window was the “lung” window (window = 1000 HU, and level = ?700 HU).  Patient/Lesion selection We further analyzed the data sets in the misaligned group for the effect that a breathing artifact in PET has on SUVmax and GTV measurements. For patients with multiple lesions, a maximum of 4 lesions were selected starting from the one closest to the diaphragm. In cases of multiple lesions, small lesions were selected over large lesions. Note that lesions chosen in this study may not be malignant since the focus is on the changes in PET quantification.  SUV<sub>max</sub> measurement For each selected lesion, the SUVmax was measured on both PETHCT and PETACT using AW 3D measure tools.  Threshold segmented GTV Both PETHCT and PETACT data sets were imported to the Pinnacle Treatment Planning System (TPS). The PET images were converted to display SUV in Pinnacle using a software tool developed in house. The auto contouring tool in Pinnacle was used to generate GTVs based on the SUV thresholds. An iterative process shown in Fig. 2 demonstrates the steps taken to determine an appropriate threshold for the auto contouring of each lesion. For each lesion, the same threshold was used on the PETHCT and the PETACT. Traditionally, SUVmax of 2.5 is suggested as an indication of malignancy. 26 Therefore, for lesions with SUVmax on PETHCT greater than 4.0, the initial threshold used was 2.5. Using the initial threshold, the GTVs on PETHCT and PETACT were segmented. If the threshold was too close to the background uptake such that adjacent tissues were included in the contour, the threshold was increased by 0.1 and the auto contouring process was repeated until an appropriate threshold could be established for both PET data sets. The purpose of using such a threshold segmentation process was to minimize any hand-contouring bias. Another initial threshold (SUV = 1.5) for lesions with lower uptake (< 4.0) was used. This was necessary because of the nature of our data sets — The PET quantification could vary drastically from PETHCT to PETACT when breathing artifact was removed. For example, if the SUVmax of a lesion increased from 2.0 on the PETHCT to 3.0 on PETACT, a threshold of 2.5 would work on PETACT, but not on PETHCT. The volume and the centroid location on GTVPET-HCT and GTVPET-ACT were measured using the tools provided on the Pinnacle TPS. GTVPET-HCT represents the threshold segmented GTV on PETHCT, and GTVPET-ACT represents the threshold segmented GTV on PETACT. The diaphragm position was measured at the most superior extent of the diaphragm (the dome of the diaphragm) on the PETACT. PETACT was used for this particular measurement because the diaphragm position on PETACT is an averaged position which is more consistent than the diaphragm position on PETHCT. The diaphragm position on PETHCT reflects only some given state of the respiratory cycle captured by the HCT.  Data analysis Using the PETHCT as the reference set, the percentage changes in SUVmax, the percent changes in GTV volume, and the centroid shift between GTVPET-HCT and GTVPET-ACT were calculated. The concordance index between the two GTVs was also determined; it was defined as the ratio of intersection of GTVPET-HCT and GTVPET-ACT divided by their union 27 and was calculated using a Matlab program written to read the Pinnacle Region of Interest (ROI) file. We also calculated the distance between the centroid of a lesion on PETACT to the dome of the diaphragm. A negative tumor-diaphragm distance corresponded to a lesion located inferior to the dome of the diaphragm whereas a positive tumor-diaphragm distance corresponded to a lesion located superior to the dome of the diaphragm. The distributions of the absolute changes in SUVmax, and in GTV volume, centroid shift, and concordance index were plotted, and the correlations of these changes to lesion size and lesion location were analyzed.  RESULTS Image alignment A total of 229 lung patients were scanned with the PET/CT with ACT protocol. After initial inspection, we had 9 patients who moved during the imaging session and 4 patients with very irregular breathing which led to a compromised ACT not suitable for attenuation correction. Severe irregular breathing causes obvious discontinuities in coronal or sagittal views from one couch position to the adjacent one. After excluding these 13 patients, 216 patient studies were used for image alignment measurement and analysis. Using the two misalignment criteria, 145 of 216 patients (68%) demonstrated misalignment in their clinical PETHCT/HCT. The breathing artifacts in the clinical PETHCT/HCT were removed in 125 patients and reduced in 20 patients in the PETACT/ACT. Distributions of the misalignment (as the under-corrected region near diaphragm) are shown in Fig. 3 . In this study, we did not observe any patient cases that exhibited the over-correction by the diaphragm. Mean magnitude of misalignment (with 95% confidence interval) was 13.5 ± 0.8 mm in PETHCT/HCT and 0.8 ± 0.4 mm in PETACT/ACT ( p < 0.0001). The majority had a magnitude of misalignment between 5 and 20 mm; however, some cases were as large as 35 mm. These misalignments were either removed (86%) or reduced (14%) showing the effectiveness of ACT in minimizing the breathing artifact. A reason for a reduction instead of a complete removal of the misalignment could be the changes in the patients’ breathing pattern between PET and ACT acquisition. PET data was collected over 30–40 respiratory cycles whereas ACT was acquired over 1–2 cycles. Even though complete removal of respiratory artifact for these patients was not achieved, the use of ACT was able to reduce the misalignment between the PET and CT data sets. SUV<sub>max</sub> & GTV comparisons A proper threshold could not be established for both PETHCT and PETACT for 25 patients due to low contrast, i.e., lesions with low uptake and surrounded by high background. Since we could not generate GTVs on these data sets without user intervention, these patients were excluded from the GTV study. A total of 120 patient studies (207 lesions) were therefore included in the SUVmax and GTV delineation comparisons. Two patient examples are shown in Figs. 4 and 5 . The PETHCT represented patient data with respiration artifacts whereas the PETACT represented patient data without artifacts or with reduced artifacts. The green contour was generated on PETHCT ( Fig. 4a ), and the blue contour was generated on PETACT ( Fig. 4b ). In this example, the % SUV change, % volume change, centroid shift and concordance index were 32%, 270%, 8 mm, and 0.327, respectively. For the second example, shown in Fig. 5 , the orange contour was generated on PETHCT ( Fig. 5a ), and the blue contour was generated on PETACT ( Fig. 5b ). In this study, the % SUV change, % volume change, centroid shift and concordance index were 23%, 43%, 4 mm, and 0.539, respectively. Figs. 6a and 6b are scatter plots of percent SUVmax change and percent volume change versus lesion size, respectively. All 207 lesions (120 patients) are shown in the scatter plots. In general, the effect of the misalignment on % change in SUVmax decreased as the lesion size increased. Similarly, the % change in volume was less if the lesion was larger. The largest SUVmax and volume change were 73% and 1950%. Figs. 6c and 6d are scatter plots of centroid shift and concordance index versus lesion size, respectively. The largest changes for centroid shift was 0.98 cm. In general, centroid shift between GTVPET-HCT and GTVPET-ACT was larger for smaller lesions. Maximum concordance index was 1 when GTVPET-HCT and GTVPET-ACT were exactly the same. The lowest concordance index in the study was 0.08. The smaller the concordance index, the greater the mismatch between the two GTVs. Small lesions also demonstrated greater mismatch. Figs. 7a and 7b are scatter plots of percent SUVmax change and percent volume change versus tumor-diaphragm distance, respectively. Large variations between GTVPET-HCT and GTVPET-ACT occurred more frequently for lesions located close to the diaphragm; moreover, the severe cases were the ones located below the dome of the diaphragm. As tumor-diaphragm distances increased, the changes decreased. Figs. 7c and 7d are scatter plots of centroid shift and concordance index versus tumor-diaphragm distance, respectively. Lesions located near the diaphragm (below the dome of the diaphragm or < 10 cm from the diaphragm) had larger variations than those lesions located > 10 cm from the diaphragm. Some severe cases for GTV volume change occurred because the corresponding SUVmax changes were large. An example of this was the lesion with a 1950% change in volume; this was also the lesion that had the largest SUVmax change of 73%. In addition, SUVmax is the most commonly used clinical quantity in PET imaging and is used for monitoring treatment progress. 11 A 25% change in SUVmax has been recommended to be a significant change in the restaging process. 28 10% of the patients in the misalignment group had SUV changes from PETHCT to PETACT greater than 25% for at least one lesion. Correlations with lesion size and location We studied the correlation between the variations and the lesion size. Lesions were divided into two groups according to their sizes: small lesions (? 50 cm3) and large lesions (> 50 cm3). A paired t-test (two-tailed) was used to determine the significance between the means of the two distributions. A p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. The mean percent change in SUVmax was 10.4% for small lesions and 3.6% for large lesions, and the difference was significant ( p = 0.004). The mean concordance index was 0.749 for small lesions and 0.914 for large lesions, and the difference was also significant ( p < .0001). The mean percent change in volume was 56% for small lesions and 5% for large lesions, and the difference was not significant ( p = 0.12). The mean centroid shift was 0.19 cm for small lesions and 0.12 cm for large lesions, and the difference was also not significant ( p = 0.05). To determine the correlations between the variations and the lesion location, only lesions ? 50 cm3 (93 patients, 180 lesions) were included. Lesions were divided into 4 groups according to the distance ( d ) from the dome of the diaphragm, i.e., d ? 0 cm (group 1), 0 < d ? 5 cm (group 2), 5 cm < d ? 10 cm (group 3), and d > 10 cm (group 4). A paired t-test was used to determine the significance of the differences among the 4 groups. Bar graphs are given in Fig. 8 , representing the means of each group with the standard error of the mean for each of the four measurements. In Fig. 8a , the mean in group 1 was significantly greater than groups 2, 3, and 4. The differences among groups 2, 3, and 4 were not significant. In Fig. 8b , the mean in group 1 was significantly greater than the other 3 groups; again, the differences among groups 2, 3, 4 are not significant. In Fig. 8c , the mean centroid shift in groups 1 was greater than 2 and 3, and groups 2 and 3 were greater than group 4; between groups 2 and 3, differences were not significant. In Fig. 8d , group 1 had greater mismatch than groups 2 and 3; groups 2 and 3 mismatch were greater than group 4. The results are also tabulated in Table I . Higher percentages of lesions in group 1 had % SUVmax change >25%, % volume change > 100%, centroid shift > 5 mm, and concordance index of < 0.5 when compared to groups 2, 3 and 4.  RESULTS Image alignment A total of 229 lung patients were scanned with the PET/CT with ACT protocol. After initial inspection, we had 9 patients who moved during the imaging session and 4 patients with very irregular breathing which led to a compromised ACT not suitable for attenuation correction. Severe irregular breathing causes obvious discontinuities in coronal or sagittal views from one couch position to the adjacent one. After excluding these 13 patients, 216 patient studies were used for image alignment measurement and analysis. Using the two misalignment criteria, 145 of 216 patients (68%) demonstrated misalignment in their clinical PETHCT/HCT. The breathing artifacts in the clinical PETHCT/HCT were removed in 125 patients and reduced in 20 patients in the PETACT/ACT. Distributions of the misalignment (as the under-corrected region near diaphragm) are shown in Fig. 3 . In this study, we did not observe any patient cases that exhibited the over-correction by the diaphragm. Mean magnitude of misalignment (with 95% confidence interval) was 13.5 ± 0.8 mm in PETHCT/HCT and 0.8 ± 0.4 mm in PETACT/ACT ( p < 0.0001). The majority had a magnitude of misalignment between 5 and 20 mm; however, some cases were as large as 35 mm. These misalignments were either removed (86%) or reduced (14%) showing the effectiveness of ACT in minimizing the breathing artifact. A reason for a reduction instead of a complete removal of the misalignment could be the changes in the patients’ breathing pattern between PET and ACT acquisition. PET data was collected over 30–40 respiratory cycles whereas ACT was acquired over 1–2 cycles. Even though complete removal of respiratory artifact for these patients was not achieved, the use of ACT was able to reduce the misalignment between the PET and CT data sets. SUV<sub>max</sub> & GTV comparisons A proper threshold could not be established for both PETHCT and PETACT for 25 patients due to low contrast, i.e., lesions with low uptake and surrounded by high background. Since we could not generate GTVs on these data sets without user intervention, these patients were excluded from the GTV study. A total of 120 patient studies (207 lesions) were therefore included in the SUVmax and GTV delineation comparisons. Two patient examples are shown in Figs. 4 and 5 . The PETHCT represented patient data with respiration artifacts whereas the PETACT represented patient data without artifacts or with reduced artifacts. The green contour was generated on PETHCT ( Fig. 4a ), and the blue contour was generated on PETACT ( Fig. 4b ). In this example, the % SUV change, % volume change, centroid shift and concordance index were 32%, 270%, 8 mm, and 0.327, respectively. For the second example, shown in Fig. 5 , the orange contour was generated on PETHCT ( Fig. 5a ), and the blue contour was generated on PETACT ( Fig. 5b ). In this study, the % SUV change, % volume change, centroid shift and concordance index were 23%, 43%, 4 mm, and 0.539, respectively. Figs. 6a and 6b are scatter plots of percent SUVmax change and percent volume change versus lesion size, respectively. All 207 lesions (120 patients) are shown in the scatter plots. In general, the effect of the misalignment on % change in SUVmax decreased as the lesion size increased. Similarly, the % change in volume was less if the lesion was larger. The largest SUVmax and volume change were 73% and 1950%. Figs. 6c and 6d are scatter plots of centroid shift and concordance index versus lesion size, respectively. The largest changes for centroid shift was 0.98 cm. In general, centroid shift between GTVPET-HCT and GTVPET-ACT was larger for smaller lesions. Maximum concordance index was 1 when GTVPET-HCT and GTVPET-ACT were exactly the same. The lowest concordance index in the study was 0.08. The smaller the concordance index, the greater the mismatch between the two GTVs. Small lesions also demonstrated greater mismatch. Figs. 7a and 7b are scatter plots of percent SUVmax change and percent volume change versus tumor-diaphragm distance, respectively. Large variations between GTVPET-HCT and GTVPET-ACT occurred more frequently for lesions located close to the diaphragm; moreover, the severe cases were the ones located below the dome of the diaphragm. As tumor-diaphragm distances increased, the changes decreased. Figs. 7c and 7d are scatter plots of centroid shift and concordance index versus tumor-diaphragm distance, respectively. Lesions located near the diaphragm (below the dome of the diaphragm or < 10 cm from the diaphragm) had larger variations than those lesions located > 10 cm from the diaphragm. Some severe cases for GTV volume change occurred because the corresponding SUVmax changes were large. An example of this was the lesion with a 1950% change in volume; this was also the lesion that had the largest SUVmax change of 73%. In addition, SUVmax is the most commonly used clinical quantity in PET imaging and is used for monitoring treatment progress. 11 A 25% change in SUVmax has been recommended to be a significant change in the restaging process. 28 10% of the patients in the misalignment group had SUV changes from PETHCT to PETACT greater than 25% for at least one lesion. Correlations with lesion size and location We studied the correlation between the variations and the lesion size. Lesions were divided into two groups according to their sizes: small lesions (? 50 cm3) and large lesions (> 50 cm3). A paired t-test (two-tailed) was used to determine the significance between the means of the two distributions. A p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. The mean percent change in SUVmax was 10.4% for small lesions and 3.6% for large lesions, and the difference was significant ( p = 0.004). The mean concordance index was 0.749 for small lesions and 0.914 for large lesions, and the difference was also significant ( p < .0001). The mean percent change in volume was 56% for small lesions and 5% for large lesions, and the difference was not significant ( p = 0.12). The mean centroid shift was 0.19 cm for small lesions and 0.12 cm for large lesions, and the difference was also not significant ( p = 0.05). To determine the correlations between the variations and the lesion location, only lesions ? 50 cm3 (93 patients, 180 lesions) were included. Lesions were divided into 4 groups according to the distance ( d ) from the dome of the diaphragm, i.e., d ? 0 cm (group 1), 0 < d ? 5 cm (group 2), 5 cm < d ? 10 cm (group 3), and d > 10 cm (group 4). A paired t-test was used to determine the significance of the differences among the 4 groups. Bar graphs are given in Fig. 8 , representing the means of each group with the standard error of the mean for each of the four measurements. In Fig. 8a , the mean in group 1 was significantly greater than groups 2, 3, and 4. The differences among groups 2, 3, and 4 were not significant. In Fig. 8b , the mean in group 1 was significantly greater than the other 3 groups; again, the differences among groups 2, 3, 4 are not significant. In Fig. 8c , the mean centroid shift in groups 1 was greater than 2 and 3, and groups 2 and 3 were greater than group 4; between groups 2 and 3, differences were not significant. In Fig. 8d , group 1 had greater mismatch than groups 2 and 3; groups 2 and 3 mismatch were greater than group 4. The results are also tabulated in Table I . Higher percentages of lesions in group 1 had % SUVmax change >25%, % volume change > 100%, centroid shift > 5 mm, and concordance index of < 0.5 when compared to groups 2, 3 and 4.  Image alignment A total of 229 lung patients were scanned with the PET/CT with ACT protocol. After initial inspection, we had 9 patients who moved during the imaging session and 4 patients with very irregular breathing which led to a compromised ACT not suitable for attenuation correction. Severe irregular breathing causes obvious discontinuities in coronal or sagittal views from one couch position to the adjacent one. After excluding these 13 patients, 216 patient studies were used for image alignment measurement and analysis. Using the two misalignment criteria, 145 of 216 patients (68%) demonstrated misalignment in their clinical PETHCT/HCT. The breathing artifacts in the clinical PETHCT/HCT were removed in 125 patients and reduced in 20 patients in the PETACT/ACT. Distributions of the misalignment (as the under-corrected region near diaphragm) are shown in Fig. 3 . In this study, we did not observe any patient cases that exhibited the over-correction by the diaphragm. Mean magnitude of misalignment (with 95% confidence interval) was 13.5 ± 0.8 mm in PETHCT/HCT and 0.8 ± 0.4 mm in PETACT/ACT ( p < 0.0001). The majority had a magnitude of misalignment between 5 and 20 mm; however, some cases were as large as 35 mm. These misalignments were either removed (86%) or reduced (14%) showing the effectiveness of ACT in minimizing the breathing artifact. A reason for a reduction instead of a complete removal of the misalignment could be the changes in the patients’ breathing pattern between PET and ACT acquisition. PET data was collected over 30–40 respiratory cycles whereas ACT was acquired over 1–2 cycles. Even though complete removal of respiratory artifact for these patients was not achieved, the use of ACT was able to reduce the misalignment between the PET and CT data sets.  Image alignment A total of 229 lung patients were scanned with the PET/CT with ACT protocol. After initial inspection, we had 9 patients who moved during the imaging session and 4 patients with very irregular breathing which led to a compromised ACT not suitable for attenuation correction. Severe irregular breathing causes obvious discontinuities in coronal or sagittal views from one couch position to the adjacent one. After excluding these 13 patients, 216 patient studies were used for image alignment measurement and analysis. Using the two misalignment criteria, 145 of 216 patients (68%) demonstrated misalignment in their clinical PETHCT/HCT. The breathing artifacts in the clinical PETHCT/HCT were removed in 125 patients and reduced in 20 patients in the PETACT/ACT. Distributions of the misalignment (as the under-corrected region near diaphragm) are shown in Fig. 3 . In this study, we did not observe any patient cases that exhibited the over-correction by the diaphragm. Mean magnitude of misalignment (with 95% confidence interval) was 13.5 ± 0.8 mm in PETHCT/HCT and 0.8 ± 0.4 mm in PETACT/ACT ( p < 0.0001). The majority had a magnitude of misalignment between 5 and 20 mm; however, some cases were as large as 35 mm. These misalignments were either removed (86%) or reduced (14%) showing the effectiveness of ACT in minimizing the breathing artifact. A reason for a reduction instead of a complete removal of the misalignment could be the changes in the patients’ breathing pattern between PET and ACT acquisition. PET data was collected over 30–40 respiratory cycles whereas ACT was acquired over 1–2 cycles. Even though complete removal of respiratory artifact for these patients was not achieved, the use of ACT was able to reduce the misalignment between the PET and CT data sets.  SUV<sub>max</sub> & GTV comparisons A proper threshold could not be established for both PETHCT and PETACT for 25 patients due to low contrast, i.e., lesions with low uptake and surrounded by high background. Since we could not generate GTVs on these data sets without user intervention, these patients were excluded from the GTV study. A total of 120 patient studies (207 lesions) were therefore included in the SUVmax and GTV delineation comparisons. Two patient examples are shown in Figs. 4 and 5 . The PETHCT represented patient data with respiration artifacts whereas the PETACT represented patient data without artifacts or with reduced artifacts. The green contour was generated on PETHCT ( Fig. 4a ), and the blue contour was generated on PETACT ( Fig. 4b ). In this example, the % SUV change, % volume change, centroid shift and concordance index were 32%, 270%, 8 mm, and 0.327, respectively. For the second example, shown in Fig. 5 , the orange contour was generated on PETHCT ( Fig. 5a ), and the blue contour was generated on PETACT ( Fig. 5b ). In this study, the % SUV change, % volume change, centroid shift and concordance index were 23%, 43%, 4 mm, and 0.539, respectively. Figs. 6a and 6b are scatter plots of percent SUVmax change and percent volume change versus lesion size, respectively. All 207 lesions (120 patients) are shown in the scatter plots. In general, the effect of the misalignment on % change in SUVmax decreased as the lesion size increased. Similarly, the % change in volume was less if the lesion was larger. The largest SUVmax and volume change were 73% and 1950%. Figs. 6c and 6d are scatter plots of centroid shift and concordance index versus lesion size, respectively. The largest changes for centroid shift was 0.98 cm. In general, centroid shift between GTVPET-HCT and GTVPET-ACT was larger for smaller lesions. Maximum concordance index was 1 when GTVPET-HCT and GTVPET-ACT were exactly the same. The lowest concordance index in the study was 0.08. The smaller the concordance index, the greater the mismatch between the two GTVs. Small lesions also demonstrated greater mismatch. Figs. 7a and 7b are scatter plots of percent SUVmax change and percent volume change versus tumor-diaphragm distance, respectively. Large variations between GTVPET-HCT and GTVPET-ACT occurred more frequently for lesions located close to the diaphragm; moreover, the severe cases were the ones located below the dome of the diaphragm. As tumor-diaphragm distances increased, the changes decreased. Figs. 7c and 7d are scatter plots of centroid shift and concordance index versus tumor-diaphragm distance, respectively. Lesions located near the diaphragm (below the dome of the diaphragm or < 10 cm from the diaphragm) had larger variations than those lesions located > 10 cm from the diaphragm. Some severe cases for GTV volume change occurred because the corresponding SUVmax changes were large. An example of this was the lesion with a 1950% change in volume; this was also the lesion that had the largest SUVmax change of 73%. In addition, SUVmax is the most commonly used clinical quantity in PET imaging and is used for monitoring treatment progress. 11 A 25% change in SUVmax has been recommended to be a significant change in the restaging process. 28 10% of the patients in the misalignment group had SUV changes from PETHCT to PETACT greater than 25% for at least one lesion.  SUV<sub>max</sub> & GTV comparisons A proper threshold could not be established for both PETHCT and PETACT for 25 patients due to low contrast, i.e., lesions with low uptake and surrounded by high background. Since we could not generate GTVs on these data sets without user intervention, these patients were excluded from the GTV study. A total of 120 patient studies (207 lesions) were therefore included in the SUVmax and GTV delineation comparisons. Two patient examples are shown in Figs. 4 and 5 . The PETHCT represented patient data with respiration artifacts whereas the PETACT represented patient data without artifacts or with reduced artifacts. The green contour was generated on PETHCT ( Fig. 4a ), and the blue contour was generated on PETACT ( Fig. 4b ). In this example, the % SUV change, % volume change, centroid shift and concordance index were 32%, 270%, 8 mm, and 0.327, respectively. For the second example, shown in Fig. 5 , the orange contour was generated on PETHCT ( Fig. 5a ), and the blue contour was generated on PETACT ( Fig. 5b ). In this study, the % SUV change, % volume change, centroid shift and concordance index were 23%, 43%, 4 mm, and 0.539, respectively. Figs. 6a and 6b are scatter plots of percent SUVmax change and percent volume change versus lesion size, respectively. All 207 lesions (120 patients) are shown in the scatter plots. In general, the effect of the misalignment on % change in SUVmax decreased as the lesion size increased. Similarly, the % change in volume was less if the lesion was larger. The largest SUVmax and volume change were 73% and 1950%. Figs. 6c and 6d are scatter plots of centroid shift and concordance index versus lesion size, respectively. The largest changes for centroid shift was 0.98 cm. In general, centroid shift between GTVPET-HCT and GTVPET-ACT was larger for smaller lesions. Maximum concordance index was 1 when GTVPET-HCT and GTVPET-ACT were exactly the same. The lowest concordance index in the study was 0.08. The smaller the concordance index, the greater the mismatch between the two GTVs. Small lesions also demonstrated greater mismatch. Figs. 7a and 7b are scatter plots of percent SUVmax change and percent volume change versus tumor-diaphragm distance, respectively. Large variations between GTVPET-HCT and GTVPET-ACT occurred more frequently for lesions located close to the diaphragm; moreover, the severe cases were the ones located below the dome of the diaphragm. As tumor-diaphragm distances increased, the changes decreased. Figs. 7c and 7d are scatter plots of centroid shift and concordance index versus tumor-diaphragm distance, respectively. Lesions located near the diaphragm (below the dome of the diaphragm or < 10 cm from the diaphragm) had larger variations than those lesions located > 10 cm from the diaphragm. Some severe cases for GTV volume change occurred because the corresponding SUVmax changes were large. An example of this was the lesion with a 1950% change in volume; this was also the lesion that had the largest SUVmax change of 73%. In addition, SUVmax is the most commonly used clinical quantity in PET imaging and is used for monitoring treatment progress. 11 A 25% change in SUVmax has been recommended to be a significant change in the restaging process. 28 10% of the patients in the misalignment group had SUV changes from PETHCT to PETACT greater than 25% for at least one lesion.  Correlations with lesion size and location We studied the correlation between the variations and the lesion size. Lesions were divided into two groups according to their sizes: small lesions (? 50 cm3) and large lesions (> 50 cm3). A paired t-test (two-tailed) was used to determine the significance between the means of the two distributions. A p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. The mean percent change in SUVmax was 10.4% for small lesions and 3.6% for large lesions, and the difference was significant ( p = 0.004). The mean concordance index was 0.749 for small lesions and 0.914 for large lesions, and the difference was also significant ( p < .0001). The mean percent change in volume was 56% for small lesions and 5% for large lesions, and the difference was not significant ( p = 0.12). The mean centroid shift was 0.19 cm for small lesions and 0.12 cm for large lesions, and the difference was also not significant ( p = 0.05). To determine the correlations between the variations and the lesion location, only lesions ? 50 cm3 (93 patients, 180 lesions) were included. Lesions were divided into 4 groups according to the distance ( d ) from the dome of the diaphragm, i.e., d ? 0 cm (group 1), 0 < d ? 5 cm (group 2), 5 cm < d ? 10 cm (group 3), and d > 10 cm (group 4). A paired t-test was used to determine the significance of the differences among the 4 groups. Bar graphs are given in Fig. 8 , representing the means of each group with the standard error of the mean for each of the four measurements. In Fig. 8a , the mean in group 1 was significantly greater than groups 2, 3, and 4. The differences among groups 2, 3, and 4 were not significant. In Fig. 8b , the mean in group 1 was significantly greater than the other 3 groups; again, the differences among groups 2, 3, 4 are not significant. In Fig. 8c , the mean centroid shift in groups 1 was greater than 2 and 3, and groups 2 and 3 were greater than group 4; between groups 2 and 3, differences were not significant. In Fig. 8d , group 1 had greater mismatch than groups 2 and 3; groups 2 and 3 mismatch were greater than group 4. The results are also tabulated in Table I . Higher percentages of lesions in group 1 had % SUVmax change >25%, % volume change > 100%, centroid shift > 5 mm, and concordance index of < 0.5 when compared to groups 2, 3 and 4.  Correlations with lesion size and location We studied the correlation between the variations and the lesion size. Lesions were divided into two groups according to their sizes: small lesions (? 50 cm3) and large lesions (> 50 cm3). A paired t-test (two-tailed) was used to determine the significance between the means of the two distributions. A p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. The mean percent change in SUVmax was 10.4% for small lesions and 3.6% for large lesions, and the difference was significant ( p = 0.004). The mean concordance index was 0.749 for small lesions and 0.914 for large lesions, and the difference was also significant ( p < .0001). The mean percent change in volume was 56% for small lesions and 5% for large lesions, and the difference was not significant ( p = 0.12). The mean centroid shift was 0.19 cm for small lesions and 0.12 cm for large lesions, and the difference was also not significant ( p = 0.05). To determine the correlations between the variations and the lesion location, only lesions ? 50 cm3 (93 patients, 180 lesions) were included. Lesions were divided into 4 groups according to the distance ( d ) from the dome of the diaphragm, i.e., d ? 0 cm (group 1), 0 < d ? 5 cm (group 2), 5 cm < d ? 10 cm (group 3), and d > 10 cm (group 4). A paired t-test was used to determine the significance of the differences among the 4 groups. Bar graphs are given in Fig. 8 , representing the means of each group with the standard error of the mean for each of the four measurements. In Fig. 8a , the mean in group 1 was significantly greater than groups 2, 3, and 4. The differences among groups 2, 3, and 4 were not significant. In Fig. 8b , the mean in group 1 was significantly greater than the other 3 groups; again, the differences among groups 2, 3, 4 are not significant. In Fig. 8c , the mean centroid shift in groups 1 was greater than 2 and 3, and groups 2 and 3 were greater than group 4; between groups 2 and 3, differences were not significant. In Fig. 8d , group 1 had greater mismatch than groups 2 and 3; groups 2 and 3 mismatch were greater than group 4. The results are also tabulated in Table I . Higher percentages of lesions in group 1 had % SUVmax change >25%, % volume change > 100%, centroid shift > 5 mm, and concordance index of < 0.5 when compared to groups 2, 3 and 4.  DISCUSSIONS Using standard free breathing helical CT for attenuation correction, we observed 145 (68%) of the 216 lung patients with respiratory artifacts in their clinical PET/CT data sets. ACT was shown to be an effective method in removing or reducing the artifacts by providing a CT data set that was temporally and spatially consistent with the PET data set. Two major concerns with respect to radiotherapy planning using PET/CT when a respiration artifact occurs: (a) the uncertainty in the quantification of lesion uptake, and (b) the misalignment of the lesion between CT and PET. An example of the uncertainty in the lesion uptake is shown in Fig. 1a . The lesion was located near the diaphragm region where an underestimation of the uptake would typically occur, and a difference in the lesion uptake between PETHCT and PETACT was obvious. Contouring on PETHCT or PETACT using the same segmentation criteria could lead to a different volume and centroid location as shown by the current study. It is important to provide the physicians with a PET/CT data set without respiration artifact before applying segmentation criteria used or suggested by other literature 4 , 5 , 8 , 13 , 29 . The second concern is shown in Fig. 1b . Tumor contouring using this data set may lead to a greater observer variation because it is up to physicians’ discretion either to contour using lesion location on CT or on PET, or in some cases to generate a contour that encompasses lesions on both locations. It is also very important to provide consistent PET/CT data sets for monitoring therapy progress. If respiration artifact can result in a large uncertainty in quantification of PET data, the potential advantages of using PET imaging are compromised. We have shown that the magnitudes of the changes in SUV and in GTV are influenced by the lesion size and location. Lesions that are small and located closer to the diaphragm are more likely to be affected by the respiration artifact than those that are large and located in the upper lung. This is because a lesion located near the diaphragm “sees” more tissue changes on a given axial slice, and therefore the quantification of PET is more likely to be impacted by the respiratory motion. The magnitude of tumor motion may also be correlated to the changes in SUVmax and the changes in the GTV; however, this potential correlation is not addressed in the current study. To measure the extent of tumor motion on cine CT images, we may employ the method suggested by Cover et al. by generating maximum, minimum and average intensity projections from cine CT. 30 Typically, during a thoracic GTV contouring session by a radiation oncologist, multiple helical CT data sets (acquired at different states of respiration) or 4DCT data sets may also be available to provide additional tumor motion information. The final impact of respiration artifact in PET from PET/CT on GTV delineation may change depending on the additional contouring data sets available, as well as the manual contouring variations introduced by different observers.  DISCUSSIONS Using standard free breathing helical CT for attenuation correction, we observed 145 (68%) of the 216 lung patients with respiratory artifacts in their clinical PET/CT data sets. ACT was shown to be an effective method in removing or reducing the artifacts by providing a CT data set that was temporally and spatially consistent with the PET data set. Two major concerns with respect to radiotherapy planning using PET/CT when a respiration artifact occurs: (a) the uncertainty in the quantification of lesion uptake, and (b) the misalignment of the lesion between CT and PET. An example of the uncertainty in the lesion uptake is shown in Fig. 1a . The lesion was located near the diaphragm region where an underestimation of the uptake would typically occur, and a difference in the lesion uptake between PETHCT and PETACT was obvious. Contouring on PETHCT or PETACT using the same segmentation criteria could lead to a different volume and centroid location as shown by the current study. It is important to provide the physicians with a PET/CT data set without respiration artifact before applying segmentation criteria used or suggested by other literature 4 , 5 , 8 , 13 , 29 . The second concern is shown in Fig. 1b . Tumor contouring using this data set may lead to a greater observer variation because it is up to physicians’ discretion either to contour using lesion location on CT or on PET, or in some cases to generate a contour that encompasses lesions on both locations. It is also very important to provide consistent PET/CT data sets for monitoring therapy progress. If respiration artifact can result in a large uncertainty in quantification of PET data, the potential advantages of using PET imaging are compromised. We have shown that the magnitudes of the changes in SUV and in GTV are influenced by the lesion size and location. Lesions that are small and located closer to the diaphragm are more likely to be affected by the respiration artifact than those that are large and located in the upper lung. This is because a lesion located near the diaphragm “sees” more tissue changes on a given axial slice, and therefore the quantification of PET is more likely to be impacted by the respiratory motion. The magnitude of tumor motion may also be correlated to the changes in SUVmax and the changes in the GTV; however, this potential correlation is not addressed in the current study. To measure the extent of tumor motion on cine CT images, we may employ the method suggested by Cover et al. by generating maximum, minimum and average intensity projections from cine CT. 30 Typically, during a thoracic GTV contouring session by a radiation oncologist, multiple helical CT data sets (acquired at different states of respiration) or 4DCT data sets may also be available to provide additional tumor motion information. The final impact of respiration artifact in PET from PET/CT on GTV delineation may change depending on the additional contouring data sets available, as well as the manual contouring variations introduced by different observers.  CONCLUSIONS We demonstrated that ACT is an effective method in minimizing the respiration artifacts in PET from PET/CT. The artifacts can introduce substantial differences in the SUVmax and the threshold segmented GTVs. We recommend that when respiration artifacts are observed in the clinical PET/CT data sets, special attention should be paid to smaller lesions that are located near the diaphragm region; a margin may be incorporated on the GTV to take into consideration the potential misregistration. 