Invasion emerges from cancer cell adaptation to competitive microenvironments: Quantitative predictions from multiscale mathematical models Summary In this review we summarize our recent efforts using mathematical modeling and computation to simulate cancer invasion, with a special emphasis on the tumor microenvironment. We consider cancer progression as a complex multiscale process and approach it with three single-cell based mathematical models that examine the interactions between tumor microenvironment and cancer cells at several scales. The models exploit distinct mathematical and computational techniques, yet they share core elements and can be compared and/or related to each other. The overall aim of using mathematical models is to uncover the fundamental mechanisms that lend cancer progression its direction towards invasion and metastasis. The models effectively simulate various modes of cancer cell adaptation to the microenvironment in a growing tumor. All three point to a general mechanism underlying cancer invasion: competition for adaptation between distinct cancer cell phenotypes, driven by a tumor microenvironment with scarce resources. These theoretical predictions pose an intriguing experimental challenge: test the hypothesis that invasion is an emergent property of cancer cell populations adapting to selective microenvironment pressure, rather than culmination of cancer progression producing cells with the “invasive phenotype”. In broader terms, we propose that fundamental insights into cancer can be achieved by experimentation interacting with theoretical frameworks provided by computational and mathematical modeling.  Conclusions We hope to have justified how a theoretical framework rooted in mathematical modeling can provide a multiscale, unifying view of cancer progression, with both explanatory and experiment-driving power. Understanding mechanistic details of individual variables of cancer progression is highly desirable and, rightly, most of the cancer research enterprise is focused on this task. This molecular reductionist approach should continue unabated. However, its very success, its ability to produce enormous amounts of data at ever accelerating rates, especially at the molecular scale, has created a huge opportunity and an urgent need for integrative theoretical approaches. Mathematical modeling coupled with experimentation is one powerful approach to fulfill this opportunity and need. For example, the computational results presented here on the importance of adaptation (operating in different modes) would be difficult to grasp intuitively. Mathematical models provide a theoretical framework that produces quantitative testable hypotheses. Experimentation then becomes essential in order to verify 1) whether simulation outcomes apply to real tumors; 2) which mechanisms drive the various stages of tumor progression. Finally, there is one intriguing conclusion that is worth highlighting because it complements current translational research. It is becoming a general view that cancer is not one, but many diseases that must be characterized individually. In fact, in this genomic era of personalized medicine, it is often argued that even a given type of cancer, e.g., breast or lung cancer, is in fact a composite of many diseases that must be deconvolved at the level of individual patients, for successfully applying treatment 40 , 41 . Our models offer an alternative perspective: cancer is one disease, caused by a runaway process of evolution by natural selection, which gives progression its ruthless direction towards malignancy. The outcome of this one disease, however, is diverse in each patient, because its driving process contains stochastic components. That is, one disease, but not the same in every patient. Personalized cancer treatment is still the road to follow 42 , guided however by the quantitative perspective of properly parameterized computational models that can make sense of both the deterministic and stochastic aspects of the disease, as it arises in a specific patient. It will be fascinating to witness the reach and direction of cancer research as guided by theoretical frameworks. 