Linking Molecular Classification of Hepatocellular Carcinoma and Personalized Medicine: Preliminary Steps Recent advances have improved our understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The development of high-throughput technologies able to simultaneously investigate thousands of genes (SNP-array, gene expression microarray, etc.) has opened a new era in translational research. However, obtaining a molecular classification of HCC remains a striking challenge. Different investigators attempted to classify patients according to their liver cancer molecular background, a feature that will path the way for trial enrichment and personalized medicine. Currently, HCC can be classified in molecular classes according to Wnt-?catenin pathway activation, proliferation signature activation (associated with chromosomal instability), and other subgroups. In parallel, the first-time ever positive results of a phase III trial in advanced HCC with the multikinase inhibitor sorafenib have encouraged this approach. The current review summarizes the molecular classifications of HCC reported, analyzes the status of targeted therapies tested in clinical trials, and evaluates feasibility of personalized medicine approaches in HCC.  CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES The development of a molecular classification of HCC is crucial. Until the molecular pathogenesis of HCC is completely understood, it would be complicated to achieve high rates of curation with targeted therapies. Many progresses have been made in this regard, and preliminary reports using genome-wide approaches confirm the high genetic heterogeneity of HCC. It seems that a subgroup of patients have activation of pathways related to cell proliferation (IGF signaling, ras/MAPKK and mTOR signaling) and differentiation (Wnt-?catenin). Etiology of the underlying liver disease also seems to confer specific chromosomal aberrations. It is also clear that tumor microenvironment plays a major role in HCC intrahepatic metastasis. Probably, gene expression studies will soon allow predicting risk for HCC development based on the gene signature in cirrhotic tissue. Fortunately, sorafenib has opened the trail for target therapies in HCC. Certainly, the conjunction of precise knowledge of the molecular classes of HCC, well-designed clinical trials, and effective blockade of specific pathways with new therapies will definitely implement personalized medicine for the clinical management of HCC. 