Genetic and environmental influences on early speech, language and literacy development The genetic and environmental etiology of speech and broader language skills was examined in terms of their concurrent relationships in young children; their longitudinal association with reading; and the role they play in defining the ‘heritable phenotype’ for specific language impairment (SLI). The work was based on a large sample of 4½-year-old twins, who were assessed at home on a broad range of speech and language measures as part of the Twins Early Development Study. We found that genetic factors strongly influence variation in young children’s speech in typical development as well as in SLI, and that these genetic factors also account for much of the relationship between early speech and later reading. In contrast, shared environmental factors play a more dominant role for broader language skills, and in relating these skills to later reading; isolated impairments in language as opposed to speech appear to have largely environmental origins. Learning Outcomes 1) Readers will be able to discuss some of the ways in which behavioural genetic methods can make a useful contribution to the field of communication disorders. 2) Readers will be able to compare the genetic and environmental contributions to general language versus speech skills in young children. 3) Readers will be able to describe the likely relationship between early speech and language and later reading development, in terms of shared genetic and environmental resources. 4) Readers will be able to discuss how different ascertainment methods for clinical samples may lead to very different understandings of the nature of a disorder such as specific language impairment.  Conclusions The set of studies described in this paper suggest that there is a useful distinction to be made, in terms of etiology, between general language and speech skills. Differences in young children’s language skills, such as vocabulary and grammar, appear to be largely due to environmental influences, though genetic effects also play a significant role. Differences in speech skills, on the other hand, appear to be mostly due to genetic effects, though environmental factors also play a significant role. This pattern is reflected in the longitudinal relationship between early speech and language skills, and subsequent literacy development. While the prediction from general language skills at 4 ½ years, to reading at 7, 9 and 10 years was mediated by both genetic and environmental factors, the prediction from speech to later reading was mediated predominantly by genetic factors. Finally, the distinction between speech and language appears to be particularly important in defining the ‘heritable phenotype’ for specific language impairment: ‘pure’ language impairments seem to have environmental origins, while speech impairments are largely genetic. More generally, I hope that this work demonstrates that behavioural genetic methods go beyond estimating simple heritability, and can be a useful tool for addressing issues that are of theoretical interest, and perhaps even practical use, to the field of language development and childhood language disorders. 