The high affinity peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma agonist RS5444 inhibits both initiation and progression of colon tumors in azoxymethane-treated mice We evaluated RS5444, a thiazolidinedione high affinity PPAR? agonist, for the ability to inhibit colon carcinogenesis in azoxymethane (AOM)-treated mice. In our initial experiment, mice were treated with RS5444 during AOM treatment, and the drug was withdrawn 12 weeks after the last injection of AOM. RS5444 significantly inhibited aberrant crypt focus formation under these circumstances. Furthermore, exposure to RS5444 during the course of AOM treatment effectively blocked colon tumor formation after withdrawal of the agonist. PPAR? expression and nuclear localization were reduced in adenomas. RS5444 did not inhibit DNA synthesis in tumor cells, suggesting that PPAR? activity was impaired in adenomas. To test this hypothesis, pre-existing adenomas were treated with RS5444 for 16 weeks. We observed a slight, albeit not statistically significant, reduction in tumor incidence in RS5444-treated mice. However, histological examination revealed that tumors from RS5444-treated mice were of significantly lower grade, as evaluated by the extent of dysplasia. Furthermore, carcinoma in situ was observed in about one-third of control tumors, but was never observed in RS5444-treated tumors. We conclude that RS5444 inhibits both initiation and progression of colon tumors in the AOM model of sporadic colon carcinogenesis.  Material and methods AOM-mediated colon carcinogenesis C57BL/6J mice were obtained from our local breeding colony, which is maintained as part of an American Association for Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care facility. Animal experimentation was conducted in accordance with accepted standards of humane animal care, according to protocols approved by the Mayo Clinic College of Medicine Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Only female mice were used in these experiments, based upon our experience that there is less variance in tumorigenesis among females, and fewer animals are required to achieve statistical power as a result. At 6 weeks of age, mice received 4 intraperitoneal injections of AOM (Sigma) 10 mg/kg in 0.9% NaCl at weekly intervals, as previously described. 27 , 28 ACF formation was assessed 12 weeks after the last injection of AOM. Mice were sacrificed by asphyxiation with CO2 followed by cervical dislocation. Colons were dissected, split lengthwise and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 4 hr. Fixed colons were stained with 0.2% methylene blue, and ACF number was determined by examination under a low power dissecting microscope, as previously described. 27 , 28 Tumor formation was assessed 40 weeks after the last injection of AOM. At this time, mice were sacrificed and their colons dissected, split, fixed and examined for tumor number, location and size, as previously described. 27 , 28 Tumor volume was estimated as 0.5 (length × width). 2 All tumor-bearing colons were embedded in paraffin and sectioned for histological examination of the tumors and adjacent uninvolved epithelium. Thiazolidinedione treatment RS5444 was obtained from Diaiichi Sankyo. This compound has been previously shown to activate PPAR? in vivo and in culture, and to regulate growth and differentiation of both normal and transformed gastrointestinal epithelial cells 7 , 13 , 25 as well as transformed thyroid epithelial cells. 29 In our initial experiments, mice received RS5444 in 0.5% carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) by oral gavage. A dose of 10 mg/kg/day was administered daily for 5 days a week starting 1 week prior to the first AOM injection. Forty-five mice were enrolled in the treatment (RS5444) or control (CMC) groups. Twenty-five mice of each group were sacrificed and examined for ACF formation 16 weeks after initiation of RS5444 and 12 weeks after the last injection of AOM, as described above. At that time, RS5444 treatment was terminated, and the remaining mice (~20/group) were allowed to proceed to tumor formation, assessed 40 weeks after the last injection of AOM, as described above. In all experiments, body weight of control and experimental mice was recorded weekly. We observed a slight but statistically significant increase in body weight among the RS5444-treated mice. Alternatively, tumors were induced by AOM injection of untreated mice. Twenty-four weeks after the last injection of AOM, the mice were randomly assorted into 2 groups of 100 each. Half of these mice were fed a diet that contained RS5444 in AIN-76A chow. The RS5444-containing chow was formulated in pellets by the manufacturer, Research Diets, Inc. (New Brunswick, NJ), and control mice received standard AIN-76A chow. All mice were fed ad libidum . The dose was determined by measuring average weight and chow consumption of mice of the same age and sex, and the diet was then fortified with RS5444 sufficient to deliver an average dose of 10 mg/kg/day. Mice were sacrificed 40 weeks after the last injection of AOM, and colons were processed for tumor formation and histology, as described above. All mice were injected intraperitoneally with 100 mg/kg bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) dissolved in PBS between 9 and 10 am and 1 hr prior to sacrifice, as previously described. 27 As was the case when mice were given RS5444 by oral gavage, addition of RS5444 to the diet resulted in a significant weight gain of about 10%, compared to the animals on control diet. We did not examine any tissues other than the colon in these experiments. Immunohistochemistry and histology Fixed tissues were rehydrated, embedded in paraffin and cut into 5 µm thick sections. After deparaffinization and rehydration, nuclei were stained using the Oncogene Science BrdU antibody staining kit, as previously described. 7 All stained sections were examined visually using a transmission light microscope. Only those longitudinally sectioned crypts that had an intact, complete and well-oriented structure, and that displayed lumen at the top and muscularis mucosa at the base were counted for BrdU labeling index. A minimum of 50 crypts was counted from each of 5 or more mice. A similar approach was used to determine BrdU labeling index of tumors, except that a grid was used to count multiple representative sections of the tumor. Ten or more sections were counted from each of a minimum of 5 tumors. PPAR? immunohistochemistry was carried out as previously described. 7 The PPAR? antibody was obtained from Cell Signaling (Danvers, MA). Antibody staining was detected using the Vectastain ABC Kit (Vector Laboratories, Burlinghame, CA). Quantification of nuclear staining intensity was carried out using the Aperio slide scanner and ImageScope v8.0.39.1059 employing the ‘IHC Nuclear’ algorithm. Tumor histology was evaluated using H&E-stained sections prepared as described earlier. All sections were initially inspected using a transmission light microscope to assure uniform staining and appropriate sectioning through both tumor and normal adjacent epithelium. Multiple sections from each tumor were examined. Tumor sections were then scanned into digital images using the Aperio slide scanner. Digital images were evaluated blind for tumor grade using the following criteria: Grade 1, moderate nuclear atypia with evidence of differentiation; Grade 2, thickened tubular glands with no evidence of differentiation; Grade 3, highly branched glandular structures; Grade 4, multilayered glandular structures; Grade 5, carcinoma in situ as evidenced by complete loss of glandular structure and epithelial cell invasion into the adjacent stroma within the tumor, but no invasion of muscularis mucosa. Statistical analyses All statistical analyses were carried out using SigmaStat v3.5. Tumor incidence and incidence of carcinoma in situ were evaluated using the Fisher Exact test or Chi-squared analysis, as indicated in the figure legends. ACF formation, PPAR? nuclear staining, BrdU incorporation, tumor volume and tumor grade were evaluated using the Mann–Whitney rank sum test. PPAR? mRNA abundance was evaluated using the t -test.  AOM-mediated colon carcinogenesis C57BL/6J mice were obtained from our local breeding colony, which is maintained as part of an American Association for Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care facility. Animal experimentation was conducted in accordance with accepted standards of humane animal care, according to protocols approved by the Mayo Clinic College of Medicine Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Only female mice were used in these experiments, based upon our experience that there is less variance in tumorigenesis among females, and fewer animals are required to achieve statistical power as a result. At 6 weeks of age, mice received 4 intraperitoneal injections of AOM (Sigma) 10 mg/kg in 0.9% NaCl at weekly intervals, as previously described. 27 , 28 ACF formation was assessed 12 weeks after the last injection of AOM. Mice were sacrificed by asphyxiation with CO2 followed by cervical dislocation. Colons were dissected, split lengthwise and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 4 hr. Fixed colons were stained with 0.2% methylene blue, and ACF number was determined by examination under a low power dissecting microscope, as previously described. 27 , 28 Tumor formation was assessed 40 weeks after the last injection of AOM. At this time, mice were sacrificed and their colons dissected, split, fixed and examined for tumor number, location and size, as previously described. 27 , 28 Tumor volume was estimated as 0.5 (length × width). 2 All tumor-bearing colons were embedded in paraffin and sectioned for histological examination of the tumors and adjacent uninvolved epithelium.  Thiazolidinedione treatment RS5444 was obtained from Diaiichi Sankyo. This compound has been previously shown to activate PPAR? in vivo and in culture, and to regulate growth and differentiation of both normal and transformed gastrointestinal epithelial cells 7 , 13 , 25 as well as transformed thyroid epithelial cells. 29 In our initial experiments, mice received RS5444 in 0.5% carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) by oral gavage. A dose of 10 mg/kg/day was administered daily for 5 days a week starting 1 week prior to the first AOM injection. Forty-five mice were enrolled in the treatment (RS5444) or control (CMC) groups. Twenty-five mice of each group were sacrificed and examined for ACF formation 16 weeks after initiation of RS5444 and 12 weeks after the last injection of AOM, as described above. At that time, RS5444 treatment was terminated, and the remaining mice (~20/group) were allowed to proceed to tumor formation, assessed 40 weeks after the last injection of AOM, as described above. In all experiments, body weight of control and experimental mice was recorded weekly. We observed a slight but statistically significant increase in body weight among the RS5444-treated mice. Alternatively, tumors were induced by AOM injection of untreated mice. Twenty-four weeks after the last injection of AOM, the mice were randomly assorted into 2 groups of 100 each. Half of these mice were fed a diet that contained RS5444 in AIN-76A chow. The RS5444-containing chow was formulated in pellets by the manufacturer, Research Diets, Inc. (New Brunswick, NJ), and control mice received standard AIN-76A chow. All mice were fed ad libidum . The dose was determined by measuring average weight and chow consumption of mice of the same age and sex, and the diet was then fortified with RS5444 sufficient to deliver an average dose of 10 mg/kg/day. Mice were sacrificed 40 weeks after the last injection of AOM, and colons were processed for tumor formation and histology, as described above. All mice were injected intraperitoneally with 100 mg/kg bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) dissolved in PBS between 9 and 10 am and 1 hr prior to sacrifice, as previously described. 27 As was the case when mice were given RS5444 by oral gavage, addition of RS5444 to the diet resulted in a significant weight gain of about 10%, compared to the animals on control diet. We did not examine any tissues other than the colon in these experiments.  Immunohistochemistry and histology Fixed tissues were rehydrated, embedded in paraffin and cut into 5 µm thick sections. After deparaffinization and rehydration, nuclei were stained using the Oncogene Science BrdU antibody staining kit, as previously described. 7 All stained sections were examined visually using a transmission light microscope. Only those longitudinally sectioned crypts that had an intact, complete and well-oriented structure, and that displayed lumen at the top and muscularis mucosa at the base were counted for BrdU labeling index. A minimum of 50 crypts was counted from each of 5 or more mice. A similar approach was used to determine BrdU labeling index of tumors, except that a grid was used to count multiple representative sections of the tumor. Ten or more sections were counted from each of a minimum of 5 tumors. PPAR? immunohistochemistry was carried out as previously described. 7 The PPAR? antibody was obtained from Cell Signaling (Danvers, MA). Antibody staining was detected using the Vectastain ABC Kit (Vector Laboratories, Burlinghame, CA). Quantification of nuclear staining intensity was carried out using the Aperio slide scanner and ImageScope v8.0.39.1059 employing the ‘IHC Nuclear’ algorithm. Tumor histology was evaluated using H&E-stained sections prepared as described earlier. All sections were initially inspected using a transmission light microscope to assure uniform staining and appropriate sectioning through both tumor and normal adjacent epithelium. Multiple sections from each tumor were examined. Tumor sections were then scanned into digital images using the Aperio slide scanner. Digital images were evaluated blind for tumor grade using the following criteria: Grade 1, moderate nuclear atypia with evidence of differentiation; Grade 2, thickened tubular glands with no evidence of differentiation; Grade 3, highly branched glandular structures; Grade 4, multilayered glandular structures; Grade 5, carcinoma in situ as evidenced by complete loss of glandular structure and epithelial cell invasion into the adjacent stroma within the tumor, but no invasion of muscularis mucosa.  Statistical analyses All statistical analyses were carried out using SigmaStat v3.5. Tumor incidence and incidence of carcinoma in situ were evaluated using the Fisher Exact test or Chi-squared analysis, as indicated in the figure legends. ACF formation, PPAR? nuclear staining, BrdU incorporation, tumor volume and tumor grade were evaluated using the Mann–Whitney rank sum test. PPAR? mRNA abundance was evaluated using the t -test.  Results RS5444 inhibits early stage colon carcinogenesis in AOM-treated mice Our initial experiment was designed to determine if RS5444 inhibited the formation of preneoplastic lesions and colon tumors in the AOM model of rodent colon carcinogenesis. To this end, mice were treated with 10 mg/kg/day of RS5444 or CMC by oral gavage beginning 1 week prior to the first injection of AOM, as illustrated in Figure 1 a . One group of control and another of RS5444-treated mice were sacrificed 12 weeks after the last injection of AOM, and colons were examined for formation of preneoplastic ACF. As shown in Figure 1 b , the control mice contained a median of 8 crypts per mouse, whereas the median number of ACF in RS5444-treated mice was 2. The observation that RS5444 significantly inhibited ACF formation is consistent with published data with other thiazolidinediones 17 – 19 and confirms our initial observation that RS5444 is a potent inhibitor of early events in colon carcinogenesis in AOM-treated mice. 7 ACF number is a well known risk factor for colon tumor formation in both rodents and humans. 30 – 32 The observation that RS5444 inhibited ACF formation suggests that this drug may also inhibit colon tumor formation. However, it appears that only a small subset of ACF are capable of progression to adenomas, 33 and it is formally possible that RS5444 might have no effect on that hypothetical subpopulation of ACF that are capable of progression. It is also possible that RS5444 might restrain the progression of preneoplastic lesions, rather than block their initiation. In such a case, RS5444 might block tumor formation only as long as the drug is present, and tumors might develop after the drug is withdrawn. To evaluate these possibilities, RS5444 was withdrawn 12 weeks after the last injection of AOM (as illustrated in Fig. 1 a ), and tumor formation was assessed 28 weeks later (40 weeks after the last injection of AOM). As shown in Figure 1 c , about one-third of the control AOM-treated mice formed tumors, which were exclusively in the distal colon. However, RS5444 significantly inhibited tumor formation in AOM-treated mice, even when the drug was withdrawn after AOM injection. These data indicate that RS5444 blocked initiation of transformation, and validate the prophylactic efficacy of RS5444 in the AOM model of colon carcinogenesis. RS5444 inhibits colon tumor progression with little or no effect on growth of adenomas Our data indicate that RS5444 blocks initiation of colon carcinogenesis. However, the effects of thiazolidinediones on growth and progression of established AOM-induced colonic adenomas have never been examined. We initially evaluated PPAR? expression and cellular distribution in adenomas and in adjacent uninvolved distal epithelial, using tumors from control animals in the experiment described above. As we have previously reported, 7 PPAR? staining in the distal epithelium is more or less uniform throughout the crypts and is primarily localized to the nuclei of distal epithelial cells ( Fig. 2 a ). However, PPAR? staining in the adenomatous epithelial cells was distinctly different from that observed in adjacent uninvolved epithelia ( Fig. 2 a ). Nuclear staining was less intense in adenomatous epithelial cells, compared to normal adjacent epithelial cells ( Fig. 2 b ). As a control, we measured nuclear staining of stromal cells in tumors and normal epithelia. No significant difference in stromal PPAR? staining was observed ( Fig. 2 b ). The decreased nuclear staining intensity suggested that PPAR? expression was reduced in adenomatous epithelial cells. Furthermore, the abundance of PPAR? mRNA was significantly lower in adenomas than in isolated epithelial cells ( Fig. 2 c ). Similar observations have been reported for PPAR? mRNA abundance in human colonic polyps. 34 Immunohistochemical analysis of PPAR? expression and nuclear localization suggested that the function of this receptor may be impaired in adenomatous epithelial cells. If this is the case, thiazolidinedione PPAR? agonists such as RS5444 may have little or no effect on growth of adenomas. To test this hypothesis, we examined the effects of RS5444 in preformed adenomas in the colons of AOM-treated mice. As illustrated in Figure 3 a , AOM-treated mice were allowed to progress for 24 weeks after the last injection of AOM. At this time, we anticipated from historical controls that some of the mice should have adenomas (N. Murray, unpublished observations). Beginning at 24 weeks after the last injection of AOM, mice received RS5444 in a diet that was calculated to deliver ~10 mg/kg/day, based upon average mouse weight and chow consumption rate (N. Murray, data not shown). Mice were harvested 40 weeks after the last injection of AOM. All mice were injected with BrdU immediately prior to sacrifice. Tumors and adjacent uninvolved epithelial were sectioned, stained with BrdU antibodies and nuclear labeling indices were determined for adenomatous epithelial cells and adjacent uninvolved epithelia. As shown in Figure 3 b , RS5444 potently inhibited BrdU incorporation in normal epithelial cells, confirming our initial report that PPAR? inhibits proliferation of normal colonic epithelial cells. 7 However, RS5444 had no statistically significant effect on BrdU labeling of adenomatous epithelial cells ( Fig. 3 c ), suggesting that the ability of PPAR? to inhibit colonic epithelial cell proliferation is lost during early stage carcinogenesis. Tumor number and size were measured in control and RS5444-treated mice. As shown in Figure 4 a , we observed a decrease of about 30% in tumor incidence in the RS5444-treated mice. However, the experiment lacked statistical power to detect a significant change in tumor incidence of this magnitude. Tumor volume was highly variable. The median tumors volumes for control and RS5444-treated mice were 16 and 21 mm, 3 respectively, and no significant effect on tumor size was observed ( Fig. 4 b ). Since PPAR? is known to promote differentiation of colon cancer cells in vitro , 35 , 36 we asked if RS5444 had any effect on the extent of dysplasia exhibited by AOM-induced adenomas. Tumors from control and RS5444-treated animals were sectioned, stained with H&E and scanned images were evaluated for tumor histology. Adenomas were scored for dysplasia on a basis of 1–5, as described in the Material and Methods and illustrated in Figure 5 a . Significantly higher tumor grade was observed in the control tumors ( Fig. 5 b ), indicating more advanced dysplasia in control tumors compared to RS5444-treated tumors. The median tumor grade for control animals was 3, with a significant number of tumors with Grades 4 and 5 dysplasia observed in this group. These results are consistent with our experience with dysplasia of AOM-induced tumors in this mouse strain. 37 In contrast, the median grade for RS5444-treated tumors was 2; only 1 Grade 3 tumor and no higher grade tumors were observed in this group. Invasion into the submucosa was not observed in any AOM-induced tumor, consistent with our experience with this model. However, carcinoma in situ , characterized by loss of glandular structure and invasion of epithelial cells into the adjacent stroma ( Fig. 5 c ), was observed in 6 tumors from control animals. Carcinoma in situ was not observed in the RS5444-treated tumors indicating that this drug had a statistically significant effect on progression of preformed colonic adenomas ( Fig. 5 c ). We also measured nuclear PPAR? staining in tumors of different degrees of dysplasia. As shown in Figure 5 d , we did not observe any progression-related change in PPAR? expression. We also stained for nuclear ?-catenin in tumor sections from both control and RS5444-treated mice. All tumor cells exhibited pronounced nuclear ?-catenin staining, consistent with reports that almost all AOM-induced tumors harbor ?-catenin mutations. 38 Adjacent normal epithelial cells never exhibited significant nuclear ?-catenin staining (data not shown). We detected no significant progression-related difference in nuclear ?-catenin staining of tumor nuclei, neither did we observe any difference in nuclear ?-catenin staining in tumors from control and RS5444-treated mice.  Results RS5444 inhibits early stage colon carcinogenesis in AOM-treated mice Our initial experiment was designed to determine if RS5444 inhibited the formation of preneoplastic lesions and colon tumors in the AOM model of rodent colon carcinogenesis. To this end, mice were treated with 10 mg/kg/day of RS5444 or CMC by oral gavage beginning 1 week prior to the first injection of AOM, as illustrated in Figure 1 a . One group of control and another of RS5444-treated mice were sacrificed 12 weeks after the last injection of AOM, and colons were examined for formation of preneoplastic ACF. As shown in Figure 1 b , the control mice contained a median of 8 crypts per mouse, whereas the median number of ACF in RS5444-treated mice was 2. The observation that RS5444 significantly inhibited ACF formation is consistent with published data with other thiazolidinediones 17 – 19 and confirms our initial observation that RS5444 is a potent inhibitor of early events in colon carcinogenesis in AOM-treated mice. 7 ACF number is a well known risk factor for colon tumor formation in both rodents and humans. 30 – 32 The observation that RS5444 inhibited ACF formation suggests that this drug may also inhibit colon tumor formation. However, it appears that only a small subset of ACF are capable of progression to adenomas, 33 and it is formally possible that RS5444 might have no effect on that hypothetical subpopulation of ACF that are capable of progression. It is also possible that RS5444 might restrain the progression of preneoplastic lesions, rather than block their initiation. In such a case, RS5444 might block tumor formation only as long as the drug is present, and tumors might develop after the drug is withdrawn. To evaluate these possibilities, RS5444 was withdrawn 12 weeks after the last injection of AOM (as illustrated in Fig. 1 a ), and tumor formation was assessed 28 weeks later (40 weeks after the last injection of AOM). As shown in Figure 1 c , about one-third of the control AOM-treated mice formed tumors, which were exclusively in the distal colon. However, RS5444 significantly inhibited tumor formation in AOM-treated mice, even when the drug was withdrawn after AOM injection. These data indicate that RS5444 blocked initiation of transformation, and validate the prophylactic efficacy of RS5444 in the AOM model of colon carcinogenesis. RS5444 inhibits colon tumor progression with little or no effect on growth of adenomas Our data indicate that RS5444 blocks initiation of colon carcinogenesis. However, the effects of thiazolidinediones on growth and progression of established AOM-induced colonic adenomas have never been examined. We initially evaluated PPAR? expression and cellular distribution in adenomas and in adjacent uninvolved distal epithelial, using tumors from control animals in the experiment described above. As we have previously reported, 7 PPAR? staining in the distal epithelium is more or less uniform throughout the crypts and is primarily localized to the nuclei of distal epithelial cells ( Fig. 2 a ). However, PPAR? staining in the adenomatous epithelial cells was distinctly different from that observed in adjacent uninvolved epithelia ( Fig. 2 a ). Nuclear staining was less intense in adenomatous epithelial cells, compared to normal adjacent epithelial cells ( Fig. 2 b ). As a control, we measured nuclear staining of stromal cells in tumors and normal epithelia. No significant difference in stromal PPAR? staining was observed ( Fig. 2 b ). The decreased nuclear staining intensity suggested that PPAR? expression was reduced in adenomatous epithelial cells. Furthermore, the abundance of PPAR? mRNA was significantly lower in adenomas than in isolated epithelial cells ( Fig. 2 c ). Similar observations have been reported for PPAR? mRNA abundance in human colonic polyps. 34 Immunohistochemical analysis of PPAR? expression and nuclear localization suggested that the function of this receptor may be impaired in adenomatous epithelial cells. If this is the case, thiazolidinedione PPAR? agonists such as RS5444 may have little or no effect on growth of adenomas. To test this hypothesis, we examined the effects of RS5444 in preformed adenomas in the colons of AOM-treated mice. As illustrated in Figure 3 a , AOM-treated mice were allowed to progress for 24 weeks after the last injection of AOM. At this time, we anticipated from historical controls that some of the mice should have adenomas (N. Murray, unpublished observations). Beginning at 24 weeks after the last injection of AOM, mice received RS5444 in a diet that was calculated to deliver ~10 mg/kg/day, based upon average mouse weight and chow consumption rate (N. Murray, data not shown). Mice were harvested 40 weeks after the last injection of AOM. All mice were injected with BrdU immediately prior to sacrifice. Tumors and adjacent uninvolved epithelial were sectioned, stained with BrdU antibodies and nuclear labeling indices were determined for adenomatous epithelial cells and adjacent uninvolved epithelia. As shown in Figure 3 b , RS5444 potently inhibited BrdU incorporation in normal epithelial cells, confirming our initial report that PPAR? inhibits proliferation of normal colonic epithelial cells. 7 However, RS5444 had no statistically significant effect on BrdU labeling of adenomatous epithelial cells ( Fig. 3 c ), suggesting that the ability of PPAR? to inhibit colonic epithelial cell proliferation is lost during early stage carcinogenesis. Tumor number and size were measured in control and RS5444-treated mice. As shown in Figure 4 a , we observed a decrease of about 30% in tumor incidence in the RS5444-treated mice. However, the experiment lacked statistical power to detect a significant change in tumor incidence of this magnitude. Tumor volume was highly variable. The median tumors volumes for control and RS5444-treated mice were 16 and 21 mm, 3 respectively, and no significant effect on tumor size was observed ( Fig. 4 b ). Since PPAR? is known to promote differentiation of colon cancer cells in vitro , 35 , 36 we asked if RS5444 had any effect on the extent of dysplasia exhibited by AOM-induced adenomas. Tumors from control and RS5444-treated animals were sectioned, stained with H&E and scanned images were evaluated for tumor histology. Adenomas were scored for dysplasia on a basis of 1–5, as described in the Material and Methods and illustrated in Figure 5 a . Significantly higher tumor grade was observed in the control tumors ( Fig. 5 b ), indicating more advanced dysplasia in control tumors compared to RS5444-treated tumors. The median tumor grade for control animals was 3, with a significant number of tumors with Grades 4 and 5 dysplasia observed in this group. These results are consistent with our experience with dysplasia of AOM-induced tumors in this mouse strain. 37 In contrast, the median grade for RS5444-treated tumors was 2; only 1 Grade 3 tumor and no higher grade tumors were observed in this group. Invasion into the submucosa was not observed in any AOM-induced tumor, consistent with our experience with this model. However, carcinoma in situ , characterized by loss of glandular structure and invasion of epithelial cells into the adjacent stroma ( Fig. 5 c ), was observed in 6 tumors from control animals. Carcinoma in situ was not observed in the RS5444-treated tumors indicating that this drug had a statistically significant effect on progression of preformed colonic adenomas ( Fig. 5 c ). We also measured nuclear PPAR? staining in tumors of different degrees of dysplasia. As shown in Figure 5 d , we did not observe any progression-related change in PPAR? expression. We also stained for nuclear ?-catenin in tumor sections from both control and RS5444-treated mice. All tumor cells exhibited pronounced nuclear ?-catenin staining, consistent with reports that almost all AOM-induced tumors harbor ?-catenin mutations. 38 Adjacent normal epithelial cells never exhibited significant nuclear ?-catenin staining (data not shown). We detected no significant progression-related difference in nuclear ?-catenin staining of tumor nuclei, neither did we observe any difference in nuclear ?-catenin staining in tumors from control and RS5444-treated mice.  RS5444 inhibits early stage colon carcinogenesis in AOM-treated mice Our initial experiment was designed to determine if RS5444 inhibited the formation of preneoplastic lesions and colon tumors in the AOM model of rodent colon carcinogenesis. To this end, mice were treated with 10 mg/kg/day of RS5444 or CMC by oral gavage beginning 1 week prior to the first injection of AOM, as illustrated in Figure 1 a . One group of control and another of RS5444-treated mice were sacrificed 12 weeks after the last injection of AOM, and colons were examined for formation of preneoplastic ACF. As shown in Figure 1 b , the control mice contained a median of 8 crypts per mouse, whereas the median number of ACF in RS5444-treated mice was 2. The observation that RS5444 significantly inhibited ACF formation is consistent with published data with other thiazolidinediones 17 – 19 and confirms our initial observation that RS5444 is a potent inhibitor of early events in colon carcinogenesis in AOM-treated mice. 7 ACF number is a well known risk factor for colon tumor formation in both rodents and humans. 30 – 32 The observation that RS5444 inhibited ACF formation suggests that this drug may also inhibit colon tumor formation. However, it appears that only a small subset of ACF are capable of progression to adenomas, 33 and it is formally possible that RS5444 might have no effect on that hypothetical subpopulation of ACF that are capable of progression. It is also possible that RS5444 might restrain the progression of preneoplastic lesions, rather than block their initiation. In such a case, RS5444 might block tumor formation only as long as the drug is present, and tumors might develop after the drug is withdrawn. To evaluate these possibilities, RS5444 was withdrawn 12 weeks after the last injection of AOM (as illustrated in Fig. 1 a ), and tumor formation was assessed 28 weeks later (40 weeks after the last injection of AOM). As shown in Figure 1 c , about one-third of the control AOM-treated mice formed tumors, which were exclusively in the distal colon. However, RS5444 significantly inhibited tumor formation in AOM-treated mice, even when the drug was withdrawn after AOM injection. These data indicate that RS5444 blocked initiation of transformation, and validate the prophylactic efficacy of RS5444 in the AOM model of colon carcinogenesis.  RS5444 inhibits early stage colon carcinogenesis in AOM-treated mice Our initial experiment was designed to determine if RS5444 inhibited the formation of preneoplastic lesions and colon tumors in the AOM model of rodent colon carcinogenesis. To this end, mice were treated with 10 mg/kg/day of RS5444 or CMC by oral gavage beginning 1 week prior to the first injection of AOM, as illustrated in Figure 1 a . One group of control and another of RS5444-treated mice were sacrificed 12 weeks after the last injection of AOM, and colons were examined for formation of preneoplastic ACF. As shown in Figure 1 b , the control mice contained a median of 8 crypts per mouse, whereas the median number of ACF in RS5444-treated mice was 2. The observation that RS5444 significantly inhibited ACF formation is consistent with published data with other thiazolidinediones 17 – 19 and confirms our initial observation that RS5444 is a potent inhibitor of early events in colon carcinogenesis in AOM-treated mice. 7 ACF number is a well known risk factor for colon tumor formation in both rodents and humans. 30 – 32 The observation that RS5444 inhibited ACF formation suggests that this drug may also inhibit colon tumor formation. However, it appears that only a small subset of ACF are capable of progression to adenomas, 33 and it is formally possible that RS5444 might have no effect on that hypothetical subpopulation of ACF that are capable of progression. It is also possible that RS5444 might restrain the progression of preneoplastic lesions, rather than block their initiation. In such a case, RS5444 might block tumor formation only as long as the drug is present, and tumors might develop after the drug is withdrawn. To evaluate these possibilities, RS5444 was withdrawn 12 weeks after the last injection of AOM (as illustrated in Fig. 1 a ), and tumor formation was assessed 28 weeks later (40 weeks after the last injection of AOM). As shown in Figure 1 c , about one-third of the control AOM-treated mice formed tumors, which were exclusively in the distal colon. However, RS5444 significantly inhibited tumor formation in AOM-treated mice, even when the drug was withdrawn after AOM injection. These data indicate that RS5444 blocked initiation of transformation, and validate the prophylactic efficacy of RS5444 in the AOM model of colon carcinogenesis.  RS5444 inhibits colon tumor progression with little or no effect on growth of adenomas Our data indicate that RS5444 blocks initiation of colon carcinogenesis. However, the effects of thiazolidinediones on growth and progression of established AOM-induced colonic adenomas have never been examined. We initially evaluated PPAR? expression and cellular distribution in adenomas and in adjacent uninvolved distal epithelial, using tumors from control animals in the experiment described above. As we have previously reported, 7 PPAR? staining in the distal epithelium is more or less uniform throughout the crypts and is primarily localized to the nuclei of distal epithelial cells ( Fig. 2 a ). However, PPAR? staining in the adenomatous epithelial cells was distinctly different from that observed in adjacent uninvolved epithelia ( Fig. 2 a ). Nuclear staining was less intense in adenomatous epithelial cells, compared to normal adjacent epithelial cells ( Fig. 2 b ). As a control, we measured nuclear staining of stromal cells in tumors and normal epithelia. No significant difference in stromal PPAR? staining was observed ( Fig. 2 b ). The decreased nuclear staining intensity suggested that PPAR? expression was reduced in adenomatous epithelial cells. Furthermore, the abundance of PPAR? mRNA was significantly lower in adenomas than in isolated epithelial cells ( Fig. 2 c ). Similar observations have been reported for PPAR? mRNA abundance in human colonic polyps. 34 Immunohistochemical analysis of PPAR? expression and nuclear localization suggested that the function of this receptor may be impaired in adenomatous epithelial cells. If this is the case, thiazolidinedione PPAR? agonists such as RS5444 may have little or no effect on growth of adenomas. To test this hypothesis, we examined the effects of RS5444 in preformed adenomas in the colons of AOM-treated mice. As illustrated in Figure 3 a , AOM-treated mice were allowed to progress for 24 weeks after the last injection of AOM. At this time, we anticipated from historical controls that some of the mice should have adenomas (N. Murray, unpublished observations). Beginning at 24 weeks after the last injection of AOM, mice received RS5444 in a diet that was calculated to deliver ~10 mg/kg/day, based upon average mouse weight and chow consumption rate (N. Murray, data not shown). Mice were harvested 40 weeks after the last injection of AOM. All mice were injected with BrdU immediately prior to sacrifice. Tumors and adjacent uninvolved epithelial were sectioned, stained with BrdU antibodies and nuclear labeling indices were determined for adenomatous epithelial cells and adjacent uninvolved epithelia. As shown in Figure 3 b , RS5444 potently inhibited BrdU incorporation in normal epithelial cells, confirming our initial report that PPAR? inhibits proliferation of normal colonic epithelial cells. 7 However, RS5444 had no statistically significant effect on BrdU labeling of adenomatous epithelial cells ( Fig. 3 c ), suggesting that the ability of PPAR? to inhibit colonic epithelial cell proliferation is lost during early stage carcinogenesis. Tumor number and size were measured in control and RS5444-treated mice. As shown in Figure 4 a , we observed a decrease of about 30% in tumor incidence in the RS5444-treated mice. However, the experiment lacked statistical power to detect a significant change in tumor incidence of this magnitude. Tumor volume was highly variable. The median tumors volumes for control and RS5444-treated mice were 16 and 21 mm, 3 respectively, and no significant effect on tumor size was observed ( Fig. 4 b ). Since PPAR? is known to promote differentiation of colon cancer cells in vitro , 35 , 36 we asked if RS5444 had any effect on the extent of dysplasia exhibited by AOM-induced adenomas. Tumors from control and RS5444-treated animals were sectioned, stained with H&E and scanned images were evaluated for tumor histology. Adenomas were scored for dysplasia on a basis of 1–5, as described in the Material and Methods and illustrated in Figure 5 a . Significantly higher tumor grade was observed in the control tumors ( Fig. 5 b ), indicating more advanced dysplasia in control tumors compared to RS5444-treated tumors. The median tumor grade for control animals was 3, with a significant number of tumors with Grades 4 and 5 dysplasia observed in this group. These results are consistent with our experience with dysplasia of AOM-induced tumors in this mouse strain. 37 In contrast, the median grade for RS5444-treated tumors was 2; only 1 Grade 3 tumor and no higher grade tumors were observed in this group. Invasion into the submucosa was not observed in any AOM-induced tumor, consistent with our experience with this model. However, carcinoma in situ , characterized by loss of glandular structure and invasion of epithelial cells into the adjacent stroma ( Fig. 5 c ), was observed in 6 tumors from control animals. Carcinoma in situ was not observed in the RS5444-treated tumors indicating that this drug had a statistically significant effect on progression of preformed colonic adenomas ( Fig. 5 c ). We also measured nuclear PPAR? staining in tumors of different degrees of dysplasia. As shown in Figure 5 d , we did not observe any progression-related change in PPAR? expression. We also stained for nuclear ?-catenin in tumor sections from both control and RS5444-treated mice. All tumor cells exhibited pronounced nuclear ?-catenin staining, consistent with reports that almost all AOM-induced tumors harbor ?-catenin mutations. 38 Adjacent normal epithelial cells never exhibited significant nuclear ?-catenin staining (data not shown). We detected no significant progression-related difference in nuclear ?-catenin staining of tumor nuclei, neither did we observe any difference in nuclear ?-catenin staining in tumors from control and RS5444-treated mice.  RS5444 inhibits colon tumor progression with little or no effect on growth of adenomas Our data indicate that RS5444 blocks initiation of colon carcinogenesis. However, the effects of thiazolidinediones on growth and progression of established AOM-induced colonic adenomas have never been examined. We initially evaluated PPAR? expression and cellular distribution in adenomas and in adjacent uninvolved distal epithelial, using tumors from control animals in the experiment described above. As we have previously reported, 7 PPAR? staining in the distal epithelium is more or less uniform throughout the crypts and is primarily localized to the nuclei of distal epithelial cells ( Fig. 2 a ). However, PPAR? staining in the adenomatous epithelial cells was distinctly different from that observed in adjacent uninvolved epithelia ( Fig. 2 a ). Nuclear staining was less intense in adenomatous epithelial cells, compared to normal adjacent epithelial cells ( Fig. 2 b ). As a control, we measured nuclear staining of stromal cells in tumors and normal epithelia. No significant difference in stromal PPAR? staining was observed ( Fig. 2 b ). The decreased nuclear staining intensity suggested that PPAR? expression was reduced in adenomatous epithelial cells. Furthermore, the abundance of PPAR? mRNA was significantly lower in adenomas than in isolated epithelial cells ( Fig. 2 c ). Similar observations have been reported for PPAR? mRNA abundance in human colonic polyps. 34 Immunohistochemical analysis of PPAR? expression and nuclear localization suggested that the function of this receptor may be impaired in adenomatous epithelial cells. If this is the case, thiazolidinedione PPAR? agonists such as RS5444 may have little or no effect on growth of adenomas. To test this hypothesis, we examined the effects of RS5444 in preformed adenomas in the colons of AOM-treated mice. As illustrated in Figure 3 a , AOM-treated mice were allowed to progress for 24 weeks after the last injection of AOM. At this time, we anticipated from historical controls that some of the mice should have adenomas (N. Murray, unpublished observations). Beginning at 24 weeks after the last injection of AOM, mice received RS5444 in a diet that was calculated to deliver ~10 mg/kg/day, based upon average mouse weight and chow consumption rate (N. Murray, data not shown). Mice were harvested 40 weeks after the last injection of AOM. All mice were injected with BrdU immediately prior to sacrifice. Tumors and adjacent uninvolved epithelial were sectioned, stained with BrdU antibodies and nuclear labeling indices were determined for adenomatous epithelial cells and adjacent uninvolved epithelia. As shown in Figure 3 b , RS5444 potently inhibited BrdU incorporation in normal epithelial cells, confirming our initial report that PPAR? inhibits proliferation of normal colonic epithelial cells. 7 However, RS5444 had no statistically significant effect on BrdU labeling of adenomatous epithelial cells ( Fig. 3 c ), suggesting that the ability of PPAR? to inhibit colonic epithelial cell proliferation is lost during early stage carcinogenesis. Tumor number and size were measured in control and RS5444-treated mice. As shown in Figure 4 a , we observed a decrease of about 30% in tumor incidence in the RS5444-treated mice. However, the experiment lacked statistical power to detect a significant change in tumor incidence of this magnitude. Tumor volume was highly variable. The median tumors volumes for control and RS5444-treated mice were 16 and 21 mm, 3 respectively, and no significant effect on tumor size was observed ( Fig. 4 b ). Since PPAR? is known to promote differentiation of colon cancer cells in vitro , 35 , 36 we asked if RS5444 had any effect on the extent of dysplasia exhibited by AOM-induced adenomas. Tumors from control and RS5444-treated animals were sectioned, stained with H&E and scanned images were evaluated for tumor histology. Adenomas were scored for dysplasia on a basis of 1–5, as described in the Material and Methods and illustrated in Figure 5 a . Significantly higher tumor grade was observed in the control tumors ( Fig. 5 b ), indicating more advanced dysplasia in control tumors compared to RS5444-treated tumors. The median tumor grade for control animals was 3, with a significant number of tumors with Grades 4 and 5 dysplasia observed in this group. These results are consistent with our experience with dysplasia of AOM-induced tumors in this mouse strain. 37 In contrast, the median grade for RS5444-treated tumors was 2; only 1 Grade 3 tumor and no higher grade tumors were observed in this group. Invasion into the submucosa was not observed in any AOM-induced tumor, consistent with our experience with this model. However, carcinoma in situ , characterized by loss of glandular structure and invasion of epithelial cells into the adjacent stroma ( Fig. 5 c ), was observed in 6 tumors from control animals. Carcinoma in situ was not observed in the RS5444-treated tumors indicating that this drug had a statistically significant effect on progression of preformed colonic adenomas ( Fig. 5 c ). We also measured nuclear PPAR? staining in tumors of different degrees of dysplasia. As shown in Figure 5 d , we did not observe any progression-related change in PPAR? expression. We also stained for nuclear ?-catenin in tumor sections from both control and RS5444-treated mice. All tumor cells exhibited pronounced nuclear ?-catenin staining, consistent with reports that almost all AOM-induced tumors harbor ?-catenin mutations. 38 Adjacent normal epithelial cells never exhibited significant nuclear ?-catenin staining (data not shown). We detected no significant progression-related difference in nuclear ?-catenin staining of tumor nuclei, neither did we observe any difference in nuclear ?-catenin staining in tumors from control and RS5444-treated mice.  Discussion RS5444 is about 50 times more potent than rosiglitazone in culture. 14 The increased potency of RS5444 in vitro suggests that this compound may be efficacious as a chemopreventive agent in vivo at lower concentrations than those previously reported for other thiazolidinediones (generally in the range of 50–200 mg/kg/day in mouse studies). The use of lower concentrations of thiazolidinediones is potentially desirable, since such drugs are known to have side effects that are not mediated by PPAR?. 39 – 42 Furthermore, recent concerns about potential cardiovascular complications associated with rosiglitatone (Avandia) 26 warrant evaluation of other thiazolidinediones as potential chemopreventive agents. We report here that RS5444 inhibits ACF formation and blocks tumor formation. These data are consistent with those reported by Osawa et al ., 19 who observed inhibition of tumor formation in the colons of AOM-treated mice receiving pioglitazone or rosiglitazone. In previous studies, thiazolidinedione treatment was initiated prior to AOM treatment and was continued throughout the experiment. This protocol makes it difficult to discriminate between early and late effects of such drugs. For example, the tumor-suppressive effects of thiazolidinediones could result from blocking transformation at some early stage or from inhibiting the development of transformed cells into preneoplastic lesions. In the latter case, transformed cells might persist in a latent state and tumors might develop after withdrawal of the drug. However, we did not observe significant tumor formation after withdrawal of RS5444 from AOM-treated mice, suggesting that thiazolidinediones block some early event in transformation. We have recently shown that RS5444 causes early stage human colonic adenocarcinoma cells to withdraw irreversibly from the cell cycle. 13 We and others have also shown that PPAR? agonists promote differentiation of both normal and transformed gastrointestinal epithelial cells. 13 , 14 , 35 , 36 The data are consistent with the hypothesis that the ability of PPAR? agonists to inhibit early stage transformation in the colon is inherent in the ability of such drugs to promote differentiation of minimally transformed colonic epithelial cells. Alternatively, the ability to block initiation of transformation may be due to inhibition of proliferation of normal colonic epithelial cells, resulting in an effective decrease in the ‘target size’ for the carcinogen. Finally, we have observed that RS5444 induces several drug metabolic pathways in the colonic epithelium, 7 and it is possible that PPAR? may inhibit adduct formation in AOM-treated mice, thereby reducing the number of mutations that are induced by this carcinogen. Although the mechanism that accounts for the tumor-suppressive effects of thiazolidinediones is unknown, it is clear that transient activation of PPAR? by treatment with RS5444 very effectively blocks colon tumor formation in AOM-treated mice. A significant objective of our experiments was to determine the effect of thiazolidinediones on growth of established tumors. We were motivated in this regard by conflicting reports on the effects of thiazolidinediones on colon tumor growth in APC+/Min mice. It has previously been reported that virtually all AOM-induced tumors harbor activating ?-catenin mutations, 38 and our observation that all such tumors exhibit a high level of nuclear ?-catenin staining is consistent with the conclusion that AOM-induced tumors have undergone mutational activation of the Wnt/APC/?-catenin signaling pathway. It was therefore important to determine if PPAR? agonists promoted growth or progression of such tumors. We observed a slight, albeit not statistically significant, decrease in tumor incidence when RS5444 was administered to tumor-bearing mice, with no significant effect on tumor size. Our results are consistent with those of Niho et al ., 23 , 24 as well as more recent genetic studies, which indicate that PPAR? knockout promotes, rather than inhibits, tumor growth in APC+/Min mice. 43 We conclude, in contrast to the initial reports, that PPAR? does not promote growth of colon tumors. Although RS5444 did not inhibit growth of established tumors, we observed that control tumors were significantly more dysplastic than the tumors from RS5444-treated mice. Carcinoma in situ was observed in about one-third of the control tumors, but invasion of epithelial cells into the adjacent stroma was never observed in RS5444-treated tumors. We and others have reported that PPAR? inhibits invasion by early stage colon cancer cell lines, as measured by the ability to penetrate Matrigel-coated transwell filters in vitro . 13 , 44 Our data demonstrate that thiazolidinediones also inhibit invasion by transformed colonic epithelial cells in vivo . In conclusion, we have shown that the high affinity PPAR? agonist RS5444 blocks early events in AOM-mediated carcinogenesis and inhibits progression of pre-existing AOM-induced adenomas. These data suggest that high affinity thiazolidinedione PPAR? agonists may have clinical efficacy as a chemopreventive agents for the treatment of patients who are at increased risk for colon cancer. However, recent concerns over potential cardiovascular side effects of Avandia (rosiglitazone) 26 must be resolved, and as is invariably the case with pharmaceutical agents, the potential liability due to long term side effects must be assessed relative to the risk of development of colon cancer. On the other hand, it is clear that ACF represent a significant risk factor for human colon cancer, 45 – 47 and it is possible that high affinity PPAR? agonists such as RS5444 may have clinical efficacy in short term prophylactic treatment of individuals with large numbers of such lesions. The ability to reduce the number of ACF in such patients would likely translate into a significant reduction in colon cancer risk.  Discussion RS5444 is about 50 times more potent than rosiglitazone in culture. 14 The increased potency of RS5444 in vitro suggests that this compound may be efficacious as a chemopreventive agent in vivo at lower concentrations than those previously reported for other thiazolidinediones (generally in the range of 50–200 mg/kg/day in mouse studies). The use of lower concentrations of thiazolidinediones is potentially desirable, since such drugs are known to have side effects that are not mediated by PPAR?. 39 – 42 Furthermore, recent concerns about potential cardiovascular complications associated with rosiglitatone (Avandia) 26 warrant evaluation of other thiazolidinediones as potential chemopreventive agents. We report here that RS5444 inhibits ACF formation and blocks tumor formation. These data are consistent with those reported by Osawa et al ., 19 who observed inhibition of tumor formation in the colons of AOM-treated mice receiving pioglitazone or rosiglitazone. In previous studies, thiazolidinedione treatment was initiated prior to AOM treatment and was continued throughout the experiment. This protocol makes it difficult to discriminate between early and late effects of such drugs. For example, the tumor-suppressive effects of thiazolidinediones could result from blocking transformation at some early stage or from inhibiting the development of transformed cells into preneoplastic lesions. In the latter case, transformed cells might persist in a latent state and tumors might develop after withdrawal of the drug. However, we did not observe significant tumor formation after withdrawal of RS5444 from AOM-treated mice, suggesting that thiazolidinediones block some early event in transformation. We have recently shown that RS5444 causes early stage human colonic adenocarcinoma cells to withdraw irreversibly from the cell cycle. 13 We and others have also shown that PPAR? agonists promote differentiation of both normal and transformed gastrointestinal epithelial cells. 13 , 14 , 35 , 36 The data are consistent with the hypothesis that the ability of PPAR? agonists to inhibit early stage transformation in the colon is inherent in the ability of such drugs to promote differentiation of minimally transformed colonic epithelial cells. Alternatively, the ability to block initiation of transformation may be due to inhibition of proliferation of normal colonic epithelial cells, resulting in an effective decrease in the ‘target size’ for the carcinogen. Finally, we have observed that RS5444 induces several drug metabolic pathways in the colonic epithelium, 7 and it is possible that PPAR? may inhibit adduct formation in AOM-treated mice, thereby reducing the number of mutations that are induced by this carcinogen. Although the mechanism that accounts for the tumor-suppressive effects of thiazolidinediones is unknown, it is clear that transient activation of PPAR? by treatment with RS5444 very effectively blocks colon tumor formation in AOM-treated mice. A significant objective of our experiments was to determine the effect of thiazolidinediones on growth of established tumors. We were motivated in this regard by conflicting reports on the effects of thiazolidinediones on colon tumor growth in APC+/Min mice. It has previously been reported that virtually all AOM-induced tumors harbor activating ?-catenin mutations, 38 and our observation that all such tumors exhibit a high level of nuclear ?-catenin staining is consistent with the conclusion that AOM-induced tumors have undergone mutational activation of the Wnt/APC/?-catenin signaling pathway. It was therefore important to determine if PPAR? agonists promoted growth or progression of such tumors. We observed a slight, albeit not statistically significant, decrease in tumor incidence when RS5444 was administered to tumor-bearing mice, with no significant effect on tumor size. Our results are consistent with those of Niho et al ., 23 , 24 as well as more recent genetic studies, which indicate that PPAR? knockout promotes, rather than inhibits, tumor growth in APC+/Min mice. 43 We conclude, in contrast to the initial reports, that PPAR? does not promote growth of colon tumors. Although RS5444 did not inhibit growth of established tumors, we observed that control tumors were significantly more dysplastic than the tumors from RS5444-treated mice. Carcinoma in situ was observed in about one-third of the control tumors, but invasion of epithelial cells into the adjacent stroma was never observed in RS5444-treated tumors. We and others have reported that PPAR? inhibits invasion by early stage colon cancer cell lines, as measured by the ability to penetrate Matrigel-coated transwell filters in vitro . 13 , 44 Our data demonstrate that thiazolidinediones also inhibit invasion by transformed colonic epithelial cells in vivo . In conclusion, we have shown that the high affinity PPAR? agonist RS5444 blocks early events in AOM-mediated carcinogenesis and inhibits progression of pre-existing AOM-induced adenomas. These data suggest that high affinity thiazolidinedione PPAR? agonists may have clinical efficacy as a chemopreventive agents for the treatment of patients who are at increased risk for colon cancer. However, recent concerns over potential cardiovascular side effects of Avandia (rosiglitazone) 26 must be resolved, and as is invariably the case with pharmaceutical agents, the potential liability due to long term side effects must be assessed relative to the risk of development of colon cancer. On the other hand, it is clear that ACF represent a significant risk factor for human colon cancer, 45 – 47 and it is possible that high affinity PPAR? agonists such as RS5444 may have clinical efficacy in short term prophylactic treatment of individuals with large numbers of such lesions. The ability to reduce the number of ACF in such patients would likely translate into a significant reduction in colon cancer risk. 