Gene Expression Study on Peripheral Blood Identifies Progranulin Mutations Peripheral blood is a readily available tissue source allowing relatively noninvasive screening for a host of medical conditions. We screened total-blood progranulin (PGRN) levels in 107 patients with neurodegenerative dementias and related conditions, and 36 control subjects, and report the following findings: (1) confirmation of high progranulin expression levels in peripheral blood; (2) two subjects with reduced progranulin levels and mutations in the PGRN gene confirmed by direct sequencing; and (3) greater PGRN messenger RNA levels in patients with clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease. This proof-of-principle report supports the use of gene quantification as diagnostic screen for PGRN mutations and suggests a potential role for progranulin in Alzheimer's disease.  Results One hundred forty-three subjects were included in the study: 43 patients with clinical diagnosis of FTLD; 46 patients with AD; 13 patients with corticobasal syndrome (CBS); 3 patients with progressive supranuclear palsy; 2 patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; and 36 unaffected control subjects. Family history for dementia or psychiatric illness was positive in 50% of the FTLD patients in this series. One FTLD sample failed the quality-control test because of poor array signal and was excluded. Age, disease duration, and sex were similar across the groups, with the exception that FTLD patients were generally younger (61.2 vs 66.9 years in control subjects). Progranulin absolute expression levels were high in peripheral blood (average log2 expression level: 10.7 ± 0.4; range 9.6–11.8; 97th percentile of the normalized intensity distribution of all the genes on the array. We identified two outliers with expression signal lying approximately three standard deviations below the overall average and corresponding to 50% of reference PGRN levels ( Fig 1 ). Patient FTLD.20 is a 69-year-old woman with a clinical diagnosis of FTLD-frontotemporal dementia without family history of dementia, and the second subject (C.31) is a 44-year-old clinically normal control subject with a family history positive for dementia. Sequence analysis of the PGRN coding region in these subjects showed a point mutation (IVS7-1G>C) in Patient FTLD.20 and a microdeletion (c.675_676delCA) in Subject C.31 ( Fig 2A ). Both mutations have been described and are predicted to reduce progranulin levels via nonsense-mediated decay. 11 We sequenced the PGRN gene in the remaining 41 subjects with clinical diagnosis of FTLD and normal blood progranulin level, and did not find further progranulin mutations. The PGRN patients showed a gene expression profile distinct from the other FTLD patients, suggesting a specific pathogenetic mechanism (see Fig 2B ). A total of 412 genes were differentially expressed between PGRN mutation carriers and control subjects, most of which were also significantly different when comparing PGRN cases with the other FTLD patients. One hundred forty-three were differentially expressed when comparing the remaining 41 FTLD patients with control subjects, and the overlap between these two lists was small (see Fig 2B ), showing a PGRN -related pattern. Overrepresented gene ontology categories in this gene list include cytoskeleton, axonal transport, and neurogenesis (see Supplementary Table ). We validated the PGRN outliers in this study as well as some of the top differentially expressed genes between PGRN patients and control subjects using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). We used the two PGRN patients identified in this study, and an additional PGRN case. All the PGRN outliers were confirmed, and six of nine genes (66%) differentially expressed between PGRN mutation carriers and control subjects were confirmed by real-time qPCR (see Supplementary Figure ). We then looked at progranulin expression levels in patients with a diagnosis of probable AD. Patients with clinical diagnosis of AD showed greater PGRN mRNA levels in peripheral blood (+23%; p ? 0.001) when compared to both control subjects and FTLD/CBS patients. These levels remained significantly greater ( p ? 0.004) after exclusion of six outliers ( Fig 3 ).  Results One hundred forty-three subjects were included in the study: 43 patients with clinical diagnosis of FTLD; 46 patients with AD; 13 patients with corticobasal syndrome (CBS); 3 patients with progressive supranuclear palsy; 2 patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; and 36 unaffected control subjects. Family history for dementia or psychiatric illness was positive in 50% of the FTLD patients in this series. One FTLD sample failed the quality-control test because of poor array signal and was excluded. Age, disease duration, and sex were similar across the groups, with the exception that FTLD patients were generally younger (61.2 vs 66.9 years in control subjects). Progranulin absolute expression levels were high in peripheral blood (average log2 expression level: 10.7 ± 0.4; range 9.6–11.8; 97th percentile of the normalized intensity distribution of all the genes on the array. We identified two outliers with expression signal lying approximately three standard deviations below the overall average and corresponding to 50% of reference PGRN levels ( Fig 1 ). Patient FTLD.20 is a 69-year-old woman with a clinical diagnosis of FTLD-frontotemporal dementia without family history of dementia, and the second subject (C.31) is a 44-year-old clinically normal control subject with a family history positive for dementia. Sequence analysis of the PGRN coding region in these subjects showed a point mutation (IVS7-1G>C) in Patient FTLD.20 and a microdeletion (c.675_676delCA) in Subject C.31 ( Fig 2A ). Both mutations have been described and are predicted to reduce progranulin levels via nonsense-mediated decay. 11 We sequenced the PGRN gene in the remaining 41 subjects with clinical diagnosis of FTLD and normal blood progranulin level, and did not find further progranulin mutations. The PGRN patients showed a gene expression profile distinct from the other FTLD patients, suggesting a specific pathogenetic mechanism (see Fig 2B ). A total of 412 genes were differentially expressed between PGRN mutation carriers and control subjects, most of which were also significantly different when comparing PGRN cases with the other FTLD patients. One hundred forty-three were differentially expressed when comparing the remaining 41 FTLD patients with control subjects, and the overlap between these two lists was small (see Fig 2B ), showing a PGRN -related pattern. Overrepresented gene ontology categories in this gene list include cytoskeleton, axonal transport, and neurogenesis (see Supplementary Table ). We validated the PGRN outliers in this study as well as some of the top differentially expressed genes between PGRN patients and control subjects using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). We used the two PGRN patients identified in this study, and an additional PGRN case. All the PGRN outliers were confirmed, and six of nine genes (66%) differentially expressed between PGRN mutation carriers and control subjects were confirmed by real-time qPCR (see Supplementary Figure ). We then looked at progranulin expression levels in patients with a diagnosis of probable AD. Patients with clinical diagnosis of AD showed greater PGRN mRNA levels in peripheral blood (+23%; p ? 0.001) when compared to both control subjects and FTLD/CBS patients. These levels remained significantly greater ( p ? 0.004) after exclusion of six outliers ( Fig 3 ).  Discussion The discovery of mutations in PGRN causing FTLD has been a major breakthrough in the field. Twenty-three percent of the FTLD cases with positive family history and 5% to 10% of the total FTLD cases are caused by PGRN mutations according to a recent large-scale study. 11 Unlike the other FTLD-causing mutations reported in MAPT , mutations in PGRN act through a haploinsufficiency mechanism, resulting in reduced PGRN expression levels in mutation carriers. This suggests that alternative strategies aimed at quantifying the transcript levels can be effective in patient screening. Peripheral blood is a widely used source of DNA. Systematic evaluation of comparability of gene expression in blood and brain has shown that whole-blood gene expression profile shares significant similarities with that of multiple central nervous system tissues 12 ; therefore it may provide a suitable surrogate for gene expression in central nervous system disease in some cases as well. 13 For example, real-time quantitative PCR on peripheral leukocytes has been proposed as an alternative assay for molecular diagnosis in Friedreich's ataxia, as levels of frataxin are reduced in peripheral blood of patients with this neurodegenerative disease, 14 and microarray studies on peripheral lymphoblasts or peripheral blood have identified candidate genes relevant for AD, 15 Parkinson's disease, 16 and autism 17 pathogenesis. We found that PGRN is highly expressed in peripheral blood, confirming initial reports of high expression levels in rat lymphocytes. 18 This high blood level is consistent with the proposed role for progranulin in wound repair and/or inflammation. 19 High expression in peripheral blood allows reliable quantification of mRNA levels using microarray and real-time qPCR. We screened 143 patients and control subjects and identified reduced levels of PGRN mRNA, compatible with haploinsufficiency, in 1 out of 43 (2%) patients with clinical diagnosis of FTLD and in 1 unaffected control subject. This warrants a wide screening for progranulin mutations (including patients with family history negative for dementia) and supports gene quantification as a valid approach, an alternative to direct sequencing. We confirmed the presence of pathogenic PGRN mutations in both subjects with reduced levels of PGRN mRNA by direct sequencing. The observed reduced mRNA levels support nonsense-mediated decay as the most likely pathogenetic mechanism and constitutes a proof of principle that it is possible to screen patients for PGRN haploinsufficiency on peripheral total blood samples, without deriving cell lines, by using widely available gene quantification methods. In addition, this method would identify reduced PGRN levels caused by out-of-frame single exon deletions and duplications, as well as microdeletions, which are usually not detected through regular sequencing. However, the possibility that reduced PGRN levels can be related to active regulation of the gene has to be considered. For example, we observed a trend for PGRN increase with age in control subjects (data not shown), and other factors might be involved in regulating PGRN levels. Interestingly, three subjects (one FTLD patient, one CBS patient, and one control subject) showed reduced (60%) levels of progranulin, but tested negative for mutations in PGRN , suggesting that it might be worthwhile to investigate whether progranulin levels are contributing factors in the pathogenesis/clinical course of FTLD/CBS. The gene expression profile in the two subjects with progranulin mutations is distinct from other FTLD patients. Although suggestive that specific pathogenetic mechanisms can be involved in this genetic form of FTLD, this observation is based only on two subjects and warrants extended gene expression studies involving a larger number of patients. We reported increased mRNA PGRN levels in peripheral blood of patients with clinical diagnosis of AD, a difference that remains after the exclusion of outliers. This is the first report of quantitative assessment of PGRN expression in AD patients. Intense progranulin staining of senile plaques and microglia in AD pathology has been reported, 6 and an increase of PGRN mRNA was also reported in spinal cords of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients in an early microarray study. 20 This is intriguing and suggests the idea that, whereas decreased levels cause FTLD, increased levels of this gene are associated with distinct, but related neurodegenerative conditions such as AD and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Given the proposed roles of PGRN , this increase could be related to neuroinflammation associated with granulin peptides and/or a repair strategy. However, this finding needs to be confirmed on a larger series with neuropathological assessment. In conclusion, quantification of PGRN levels in peripheral blood samples is a valid and effective strategy for large-scale first screening in patients with dementia and related conditions. Expression data in AD patients suggest that PGRN may play a role in AD pathogenesis.  Discussion The discovery of mutations in PGRN causing FTLD has been a major breakthrough in the field. Twenty-three percent of the FTLD cases with positive family history and 5% to 10% of the total FTLD cases are caused by PGRN mutations according to a recent large-scale study. 11 Unlike the other FTLD-causing mutations reported in MAPT , mutations in PGRN act through a haploinsufficiency mechanism, resulting in reduced PGRN expression levels in mutation carriers. This suggests that alternative strategies aimed at quantifying the transcript levels can be effective in patient screening. Peripheral blood is a widely used source of DNA. Systematic evaluation of comparability of gene expression in blood and brain has shown that whole-blood gene expression profile shares significant similarities with that of multiple central nervous system tissues 12 ; therefore it may provide a suitable surrogate for gene expression in central nervous system disease in some cases as well. 13 For example, real-time quantitative PCR on peripheral leukocytes has been proposed as an alternative assay for molecular diagnosis in Friedreich's ataxia, as levels of frataxin are reduced in peripheral blood of patients with this neurodegenerative disease, 14 and microarray studies on peripheral lymphoblasts or peripheral blood have identified candidate genes relevant for AD, 15 Parkinson's disease, 16 and autism 17 pathogenesis. We found that PGRN is highly expressed in peripheral blood, confirming initial reports of high expression levels in rat lymphocytes. 18 This high blood level is consistent with the proposed role for progranulin in wound repair and/or inflammation. 19 High expression in peripheral blood allows reliable quantification of mRNA levels using microarray and real-time qPCR. We screened 143 patients and control subjects and identified reduced levels of PGRN mRNA, compatible with haploinsufficiency, in 1 out of 43 (2%) patients with clinical diagnosis of FTLD and in 1 unaffected control subject. This warrants a wide screening for progranulin mutations (including patients with family history negative for dementia) and supports gene quantification as a valid approach, an alternative to direct sequencing. We confirmed the presence of pathogenic PGRN mutations in both subjects with reduced levels of PGRN mRNA by direct sequencing. The observed reduced mRNA levels support nonsense-mediated decay as the most likely pathogenetic mechanism and constitutes a proof of principle that it is possible to screen patients for PGRN haploinsufficiency on peripheral total blood samples, without deriving cell lines, by using widely available gene quantification methods. In addition, this method would identify reduced PGRN levels caused by out-of-frame single exon deletions and duplications, as well as microdeletions, which are usually not detected through regular sequencing. However, the possibility that reduced PGRN levels can be related to active regulation of the gene has to be considered. For example, we observed a trend for PGRN increase with age in control subjects (data not shown), and other factors might be involved in regulating PGRN levels. Interestingly, three subjects (one FTLD patient, one CBS patient, and one control subject) showed reduced (60%) levels of progranulin, but tested negative for mutations in PGRN , suggesting that it might be worthwhile to investigate whether progranulin levels are contributing factors in the pathogenesis/clinical course of FTLD/CBS. The gene expression profile in the two subjects with progranulin mutations is distinct from other FTLD patients. Although suggestive that specific pathogenetic mechanisms can be involved in this genetic form of FTLD, this observation is based only on two subjects and warrants extended gene expression studies involving a larger number of patients. We reported increased mRNA PGRN levels in peripheral blood of patients with clinical diagnosis of AD, a difference that remains after the exclusion of outliers. This is the first report of quantitative assessment of PGRN expression in AD patients. Intense progranulin staining of senile plaques and microglia in AD pathology has been reported, 6 and an increase of PGRN mRNA was also reported in spinal cords of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients in an early microarray study. 20 This is intriguing and suggests the idea that, whereas decreased levels cause FTLD, increased levels of this gene are associated with distinct, but related neurodegenerative conditions such as AD and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Given the proposed roles of PGRN , this increase could be related to neuroinflammation associated with granulin peptides and/or a repair strategy. However, this finding needs to be confirmed on a larger series with neuropathological assessment. In conclusion, quantification of PGRN levels in peripheral blood samples is a valid and effective strategy for large-scale first screening in patients with dementia and related conditions. Expression data in AD patients suggest that PGRN may play a role in AD pathogenesis.  Supplementary Material Supp Fig 1 Supp Table 1  Supplementary Material Supp Fig 1 Supp Table 1  Figures Fig 1 Peripheral blood PGRN expression levels in 142 subjects. Data are expressed in log2-transformed normalized expression values. Dotted lines indicate two and three standard deviations (SDs) from the overall mean. Two samples (arrows) were outliers lying at approximately three SDs below the mean, corresponding to approximately 50% of reference progranulin messenger RNA levels. Blue denotes Alzheimer's disease patients; gray, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients; black, control subjects; green, corticobasal syndrome; red, frontotemporal lobar degeneration patients; and orange, progressive supranuclear palsy. Fig 2 (A) Electropherograms showing two detected mutations: IVS7-1G>C or c.836-1G>>C (top) and c.675_676delCA (bottom). (B) Venn diagrams representing the number of genes differentially expressed in 2 subjects with PGRN mutations (412 genes; left circle) and in 41 frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) cases (143 genes; right circle) versus control subjects. The numbers of genes are in parentheses. There are 23,802 (bottom right corner) remaining genes on the array. Fig 3 Box plot of log 2-normalized PGRN expression levels in Alzheimer's disease (AD), frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), and corticobasal syndrome (CBS) patients, and control subjects. (A) Analysis on all the subjects. (B) Analysis after exclusion of six outliers. *p ? 0.004; **p ? 0.001 .  Figures Fig 1 Peripheral blood PGRN expression levels in 142 subjects. Data are expressed in log2-transformed normalized expression values. Dotted lines indicate two and three standard deviations (SDs) from the overall mean. Two samples (arrows) were outliers lying at approximately three SDs below the mean, corresponding to approximately 50% of reference progranulin messenger RNA levels. Blue denotes Alzheimer's disease patients; gray, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients; black, control subjects; green, corticobasal syndrome; red, frontotemporal lobar degeneration patients; and orange, progressive supranuclear palsy. Fig 2 (A) Electropherograms showing two detected mutations: IVS7-1G>C or c.836-1G>>C (top) and c.675_676delCA (bottom). (B) Venn diagrams representing the number of genes differentially expressed in 2 subjects with PGRN mutations (412 genes; left circle) and in 41 frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) cases (143 genes; right circle) versus control subjects. The numbers of genes are in parentheses. There are 23,802 (bottom right corner) remaining genes on the array. Fig 3 Box plot of log 2-normalized PGRN expression levels in Alzheimer's disease (AD), frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), and corticobasal syndrome (CBS) patients, and control subjects. (A) Analysis on all the subjects. (B) Analysis after exclusion of six outliers. *p ? 0.004; **p ? 0.001 . 