A Tumor Necrosis Factor-Alpha-Mediated Pathway Promoting Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is caused by heterozygous mutations in either PKD1 or PKD2 , genes that encode polycystin (PC) -1 and -2, respectively 1 . We show here that tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-?), an inflammatory cytokine present in human ADPKD cystic fluid, disrupts the localization of PC2 to the plasma membrane and primary cilia through a scaffold protein, FIP2, which is induced by TNF-?. Treatment of mouse embryonic kidney organ cultures with TNF-? resulted in formation of cysts, and this effect was exacerbated in the Pkd2 +/? kidneys. TNF-? also stimulated cyst formation in vivo in Pkd2 +/? mice. In contrast, treatment of Pkd2 +/? mice with the TNF-? inhibitor, etanercept, prevented cyst formation. These data reveal a pathway connecting TNF-? signaling, polycystins and cystogenesis, the activation of which may reduce functional PC2 below a critical threshold, precipitating the ADPKD cellular phenotype.  Methods Cell culture IMCD (ATCC catalog no. CRL-2123) cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium/F12 medium supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen). For TNF-? treatment experiments, it was important that cells were cultured for 7–9 days at 37 °C to allow sufficient time for cilia growth before addition of TNF-?. The concentration of TNF-? (Genzyme Diagnostic, Cambridge, MA) was 200 ng/ml for all cell culture experiments. For the FIP2 knock-down experiment, cells were cultured for 7 days prior to siRNA transfection. After 48 hours, cells were either harvested for Western blot analysis or treated with TNF-? for 16 hours, followed by fixation for immunostaining. Embryonic kidney organ culture Embryonic kidneys were dissected in PBS (with calcium and magnesium) plus penicillin-streptomycin-glutamine (GIBCO, Grand Island, NY) from embryos of C57BL/6 Pkd2 +/? mice or their wild type counterparts at E15.5. The dissected kidneys were cultured at 37°C in DMEM/F12 containing 2 mM L-glutamine, 10 mM Hepes, 5 ?g/ml insulin, 5?g/ml transferrin, 2.8 mM selenium, 25 ng/ml prostaglandin E1, 32 pg/ml T3 and 250 U/ml penicillin-streptomycin. The kidneys were cultured with or without TNF-? (Genzyme Diagnostic, Cambridge, MA) at different concentrations for 48 hours and then 50 ?M 8-Bromo-cyclic AMP (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) was added for 5 days. The cultured kidneys were then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS for 6 hours, washed with PBS twice for 5 minutes each and transferred to 70% EtOH for short-term storage at room temperature or for more extended storage at 4°C. The fixed kidney samples were subsequently processed for Hematoxylin and Eosin staining following common histology protocol. TUNEL assay Cells treated with or without TNF-? were fixed with 4% PFA. TUNEL assay was performed using a fluorescent apoptosis-detection system (R&D systems, Minneapolis, MN). Fixed cells treated with TACS-nuclease were used as the positive control. Immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis Immunoprecipitation and Western blotting were performed on whole-cell lysates as previously described 29 . The antibodies used for Western blotting included rabbit polyclonal anti-FIP2 11 , rabbit anti-PC2 polyclonal antibody 96525 15 , rabbit anti-PC1 polyclonal antibody 96521 15 , rabbit anti-TNFR-I polyclonal antibody, and rabbit anti-TACE polyclonal antibody (NeoMarkers, Fremont, CA). Secondary antibodies used include: goat-anti-rabbit IgG-fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR), goat-anti-mouse IgG–Texas Red, (1:500 dilution; Molecular Probes). For western blotting, goat-anti-rabbit Ig-horseradish peroxidase (HRP or goat-anti-mouse IgG–HRP, 1:10,000 dilution; Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) were used as secondary antibodies. RNAi to inhibite FIP2 expression The oligo sequences used for FIP2 RNAi (Dharmacon, Chicago, IL) were listed below. #05 Sense sequence: 5?-GCUAUGAAAGGGCGAUUUGUU; #05 Antisense sequence: 5?-PCAAAUCGCCCUUUCAUAGCUU. #6 Sense sequence: 5?-UGAGCUGCCUGACUGAGAAUU; #6 Antisense sequence: 5?-PUUCUCAGUCAGGCAGCUCAUU. #07 Sense sequence: 5?-GAAAUGCAGUGCCGACACGUU; #07 Antisense sequence: 5?-PCGUGUCGGCACUGCAUUUCUU. #08 Sense sequence: 5?-CCAUGAAGCUAAAUAAUCAUU; #08 Antisense sequence: 5?-PUGAUUAUUUAGCUUCAUGGUU. Both sense and anti-sense oligos were used to form short RNA duplexes. The transfection was performed using the DharmaFECT siRNA transfection reagent (Dharmacon, Chicago, IL). Immunofluorescence microscopy Immunofluorescence was carried out as previously described 29 . Primary antibodies were used at the following dilutions: FIP2 (1:100), PC1 (1:500), PC2 (1:500), and flag (1:500). Secondary antibodies used included goat-anti-rabbit IgG-fluorescein isothiocyanate (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) and goat-anti-mouse IgG-Texas Red (1:500 dilution; Molecular Probes). Images were captured on an inverted microscope (Axiovert 200M, Carl Zeiss, inc.) equipped with a spinning disc confocal head (Yogogawa), Argon-Krypton laser system (Prairie Technologies, Inc.), and ORCA-ER CCD camera (Hamamatsu). Images were acquired using the Metamorph software (Molecular Devices) and 3D image reconstruction was performed using the Volocity (Improvision, Inc.) software. Collection of human ADPKD cyst fluids Cyst fluids were collected from 10 ADPKD kidneys (9 end stage and 1 early stage removed due to severe pain) by aspiration with a syringe and a needle. The kidneys were maintained at 4 °C throughout the cyst fluid collection. The collected cyst fluids were cleared by centrifugation and then snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at ?80 °C until analyzed. Cysts were described as small, medium, and large based on the cyst fluid volumes at 1–2.5 ml, 2.5–20 ml, and >20 ml, respectively. ELISA The concentrations and total amounts of TNF-? in individual cyst fluids were measured using the DuoSet ELISA Development kit for human TNF-?/TNFSF1A (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN). The concentrations of TACE and soluble TNFRs in ADPKD cyst fluids and normal human urine samples were measured by using the DuoSet ELISA Development kits for human TACE/ADAM17 (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN), for human sTNF-RI/TNFRSF1A (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) and for human sTNF RII/TNFRSF1B (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN), respectively, and following the manufacturer’s instructions. TNF-? and etanercept treatments of mice Pkd2 mutant mice ( Pkd2-183 ) were kindly provided by Stephan Somlo (Yale University). For TNF-?(Genzyme Diagnostic, Cambridge, MA) treatments, mice were intraperitoneally injected weekly, from week 4 (day 28) to week 8.5 (day 60), or from week 8.5 (day 60) to week 18.5 (day 130), with 0.5 ?g of TNF-? per gram mouse body weight per week or phosphate buffered saline (PBS). For TNF-? inhibitor etanercept (EMGEN, Thousand Oaks, CA) treatment experiments, mice were intraperitoneally injected weekly, from week 8.5 (day 60) to week 18.5 (day 130), with 125 ?g of etanercept per mouse per week or phosphate buffered saline (PBS).  Cell culture IMCD (ATCC catalog no. CRL-2123) cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium/F12 medium supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen). For TNF-? treatment experiments, it was important that cells were cultured for 7–9 days at 37 °C to allow sufficient time for cilia growth before addition of TNF-?. The concentration of TNF-? (Genzyme Diagnostic, Cambridge, MA) was 200 ng/ml for all cell culture experiments. For the FIP2 knock-down experiment, cells were cultured for 7 days prior to siRNA transfection. After 48 hours, cells were either harvested for Western blot analysis or treated with TNF-? for 16 hours, followed by fixation for immunostaining.  Embryonic kidney organ culture Embryonic kidneys were dissected in PBS (with calcium and magnesium) plus penicillin-streptomycin-glutamine (GIBCO, Grand Island, NY) from embryos of C57BL/6 Pkd2 +/? mice or their wild type counterparts at E15.5. The dissected kidneys were cultured at 37°C in DMEM/F12 containing 2 mM L-glutamine, 10 mM Hepes, 5 ?g/ml insulin, 5?g/ml transferrin, 2.8 mM selenium, 25 ng/ml prostaglandin E1, 32 pg/ml T3 and 250 U/ml penicillin-streptomycin. The kidneys were cultured with or without TNF-? (Genzyme Diagnostic, Cambridge, MA) at different concentrations for 48 hours and then 50 ?M 8-Bromo-cyclic AMP (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) was added for 5 days. The cultured kidneys were then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS for 6 hours, washed with PBS twice for 5 minutes each and transferred to 70% EtOH for short-term storage at room temperature or for more extended storage at 4°C. The fixed kidney samples were subsequently processed for Hematoxylin and Eosin staining following common histology protocol.  TUNEL assay Cells treated with or without TNF-? were fixed with 4% PFA. TUNEL assay was performed using a fluorescent apoptosis-detection system (R&D systems, Minneapolis, MN). Fixed cells treated with TACS-nuclease were used as the positive control.  Immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis Immunoprecipitation and Western blotting were performed on whole-cell lysates as previously described 29 . The antibodies used for Western blotting included rabbit polyclonal anti-FIP2 11 , rabbit anti-PC2 polyclonal antibody 96525 15 , rabbit anti-PC1 polyclonal antibody 96521 15 , rabbit anti-TNFR-I polyclonal antibody, and rabbit anti-TACE polyclonal antibody (NeoMarkers, Fremont, CA). Secondary antibodies used include: goat-anti-rabbit IgG-fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR), goat-anti-mouse IgG–Texas Red, (1:500 dilution; Molecular Probes). For western blotting, goat-anti-rabbit Ig-horseradish peroxidase (HRP or goat-anti-mouse IgG–HRP, 1:10,000 dilution; Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) were used as secondary antibodies.  RNAi to inhibite FIP2 expression The oligo sequences used for FIP2 RNAi (Dharmacon, Chicago, IL) were listed below. #05 Sense sequence: 5?-GCUAUGAAAGGGCGAUUUGUU; #05 Antisense sequence: 5?-PCAAAUCGCCCUUUCAUAGCUU. #6 Sense sequence: 5?-UGAGCUGCCUGACUGAGAAUU; #6 Antisense sequence: 5?-PUUCUCAGUCAGGCAGCUCAUU. #07 Sense sequence: 5?-GAAAUGCAGUGCCGACACGUU; #07 Antisense sequence: 5?-PCGUGUCGGCACUGCAUUUCUU. #08 Sense sequence: 5?-CCAUGAAGCUAAAUAAUCAUU; #08 Antisense sequence: 5?-PUGAUUAUUUAGCUUCAUGGUU. Both sense and anti-sense oligos were used to form short RNA duplexes. The transfection was performed using the DharmaFECT siRNA transfection reagent (Dharmacon, Chicago, IL).  Immunofluorescence microscopy Immunofluorescence was carried out as previously described 29 . Primary antibodies were used at the following dilutions: FIP2 (1:100), PC1 (1:500), PC2 (1:500), and flag (1:500). Secondary antibodies used included goat-anti-rabbit IgG-fluorescein isothiocyanate (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) and goat-anti-mouse IgG-Texas Red (1:500 dilution; Molecular Probes). Images were captured on an inverted microscope (Axiovert 200M, Carl Zeiss, inc.) equipped with a spinning disc confocal head (Yogogawa), Argon-Krypton laser system (Prairie Technologies, Inc.), and ORCA-ER CCD camera (Hamamatsu). Images were acquired using the Metamorph software (Molecular Devices) and 3D image reconstruction was performed using the Volocity (Improvision, Inc.) software.  Collection of human ADPKD cyst fluids Cyst fluids were collected from 10 ADPKD kidneys (9 end stage and 1 early stage removed due to severe pain) by aspiration with a syringe and a needle. The kidneys were maintained at 4 °C throughout the cyst fluid collection. The collected cyst fluids were cleared by centrifugation and then snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at ?80 °C until analyzed. Cysts were described as small, medium, and large based on the cyst fluid volumes at 1–2.5 ml, 2.5–20 ml, and >20 ml, respectively.  ELISA The concentrations and total amounts of TNF-? in individual cyst fluids were measured using the DuoSet ELISA Development kit for human TNF-?/TNFSF1A (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN). The concentrations of TACE and soluble TNFRs in ADPKD cyst fluids and normal human urine samples were measured by using the DuoSet ELISA Development kits for human TACE/ADAM17 (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN), for human sTNF-RI/TNFRSF1A (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) and for human sTNF RII/TNFRSF1B (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN), respectively, and following the manufacturer’s instructions.  TNF-? and etanercept treatments of mice Pkd2 mutant mice ( Pkd2-183 ) were kindly provided by Stephan Somlo (Yale University). For TNF-?(Genzyme Diagnostic, Cambridge, MA) treatments, mice were intraperitoneally injected weekly, from week 4 (day 28) to week 8.5 (day 60), or from week 8.5 (day 60) to week 18.5 (day 130), with 0.5 ?g of TNF-? per gram mouse body weight per week or phosphate buffered saline (PBS). For TNF-? inhibitor etanercept (EMGEN, Thousand Oaks, CA) treatment experiments, mice were intraperitoneally injected weekly, from week 8.5 (day 60) to week 18.5 (day 130), with 125 ?g of etanercept per mouse per week or phosphate buffered saline (PBS).  Supplementary Material Sup Fig1 Sup Fig2 Sup Fig3 Sup Fig4 Sup Fig5 Sup Fig6 Sup Methods 