Development of a Brief Survey to Measure Nursing Home Residents’ Perceptions of Pain Management Persistent severe pain in nursing home residents remains an important public health problem. One major key to quality improvement efforts is the development of tools to assist in auditing and monitoring the quality of health care delivery to these patients. A qualitative synthesis of existing pain guidelines, and input from focus groups and an expert panel, were used to develop a 10-item instrument, the Resident Assessment of Pain Management (RAPM). The psychometric properties of the RAPM were examined in a sample of 107 (82% female, average age 85) cognitively intact nursing home residents living in six Rhode Island nursing homes. Reliability and internal consistency were evaluated with test–retest and Cronbach’s alpha, respectively, and validity was examined against independent assessment of pain management by research nurses. After comparing the results of RAPM with the independent pain assessment and examining a frequency distribution and factor analysis, five of the 10 items were retained. Internal reliability of the final instrument was 0.55. The rate of reported concerns ranged from 8% stating that they were not receiving enough pain medication to 43% stating that pain interfered with their sleep. The median pain problem score (i.e., the count of the number of opportunities to improve) was 1, with 23% of residents reporting three or more concerns. Overall, RAPM was moderately correlated (Spearman correlation coefficient r = 0.43) with an independent expert nurse assessment of the quality of pain management. Evidence of construct validity for RAPM is based on the correlation of the pain problem score with nursing home resident satisfaction with pain management ( r = 0.26), reported average pain intensity ( r = 0.41), research nurse completion of the Minimum Data Set pain items ( r = 0.52), and the quality of pain documentation in the medical record ( r = 0.28). In conclusion, RAPM is a brief survey tool easily administered to nursing home residents that identifies important concerns with pain management. Although there is concern with the low internal consistency, RAPM demonstrates both criterion and construct validity that suggests its potential use in quality improvement efforts.  Methods Approach to Development and Validation The development and validation of the proposed survey instrument was based on sequential steps to ensure the reliability and validity of the measure. A qualitative synthesis of guidelines on pain management, and input from an expert panel and focus groups, were used to develop the survey items to ensure content validity. Cognitive testing of the survey instrument was then performed to ensure that respondents understood the wording of the questions and the response tasks. A pretest and pilot test of the survey tool was conducted in six Rhode Island nursing homes. Each step in the development of the survey tool is described below. Qualitative Synthesis of Guidelines on Pain Management The purpose of the literature review was to identify domains of quality pain management in the long-term care setting, as determined by professional organization guidelines ( Table 1 ). Three independent strategies were used to locate these statements. First, a Medline search was conducted for the period 1990 through 2001 using the following key words: guidelines, standards, and pain. Second, a search of web sites from professional organizations involved with pain management, the care of cancer patients, and long-term care was conducted in order to locate guidelines or similar expert statements on the assessment of pain. Two additional guidelines were found on the web search. Finally, two investigators (JT and a research assistant) reviewed the abstracts and full-text documents identifying 12 distinct guidelines or similar expert statements on the assessment of pain and pain management in the long-term care setting, and identified six domains of quality pain management. The domains were then defined and areas of disagreement were resolved by discussion. The goal in assessing the statements was not to identify differences in quality of care by setting, type of profession or service, but rather to look for common themes. Focus Groups with Residents, Family Members, and Staff Focus groups were conducted with nursing home residents, family members, and staff from the nursing home. Focus group participants were recruited through Carelink, a consortium of nonprofit nursing homes in Rhode Island. Written informed consent was obtained from all focus group participants and all participants received an honorarium of $50. The overarching goal of the focus groups was to understand from the participants’ perspective what defined excellent pain management. In the case of nursing home residents and family members, several key questions were formulated and addressed with participants: (a) what went well with pain assessment and management, and (b) what could have been improved in the management of their pain? A transcript-based analysis was completed to identify the trends and patterns that reappeared within and among the groups. Themes were coded in the margins (i.e., axial coding), taking into consideration the range and diversity of participants’ experiences. Using a grounded theory approach, 19 each investigator developed a list of themes that was inclusive of the three perspectives. The investigators compared their results and resolved areas of disagreement by discussion and input from an expert panel. Cognitive Testing of the Survey Instrument Based on the review of the guidelines, focus groups, and the advice of an expert panel, a brief survey instrument was constructed. Twenty cognitively intact nursing home residents were recruited to test the survey using a test–retest strategy. The frequency distribution was first reviewed for each potential item for inclusion in the final survey. Items with a low rate of reported concern were eliminated. The survey was then readministered between two and seven days later. The percent agreement and kappa statistic was used to examine reliability. A factor and correlational analysis was completed. Then, internal reliability was examined with Cronbach’s alpha. As previously done in the Picker Institute and the Consumer Assessment of Health Plans Survey, we formed a problem score: a count of the number of opportunities to improve pain management. Validation of the Survey Instrument A separate validation study testing the instrument was then performed in six nursing homes in Rhode Island. Each participating nursing home was a not-for-profit, participating member of a local nursing home consortium. Nursing home residents and their families were recruited for participation one week prior to their annual or quarterly care-planning meeting. By that meeting, the Resident Assessment Instrument that comprises the MDS was completed. Participating nursing homes asked each resident’s family for permission on whether they could release their name to a Brown University study nurse. That nurse obtained informed consent for residents to participate in the study. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at Brown University and the University of Massachusetts. A nurse practitioner with experience in hospice and pain consultation in nursing homes completed all pain assessments in the week prior to the quarterly or annual completion of the MDS. Each nursing home resident’s pain was assessed on at least two different days during that week, with the majority of residents having four independent pain assessments. To compare the developed tool with a gold standard, the study nurse used an established protocol for assessing pain in the nursing home population. 1 First, the Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) was attempted. The BPI is a widely used instrument that assesses the intensity of pain and the extent to which pain interferes with daily activities. The BPI has known reliability, validity, and demonstrated responsiveness as part of clinical trials. 20 If the nurse was able to complete the BPI with the patient, she then administered the Brief Pain Index-Short Form (BPI-SF) on the subsequent visit. If the patient was unable to complete the BPI, the study nurse then tried one of four unidimensional pain assessment tools recommended by Ferrell and colleagues. 8 These instruments include: (1) a 0–10 verbal pain intensity scale; 21 (2) a 100 mm horizontal visual analog scale; 22 (3) a modified Tursky scale; 23 and (4) the Rand COOP chart for pain. 24 All of the cognitively intact residents were able to use the BPI or the Verbal Descriptor Scale and the assessment was repeated again at least 48 hours after the first assessment. A review of the medical record was also completed by the study nurse that included the last full MDS along with a record of any pain medications the nursing home resident was currently receiving. Review of the chart over a one-month period provided information about quality of pain documentation. This was measured by whether there was documentation present in the medical record regarding the intensity of pain, the patient’s goals for pain management, the effect of pain on daily living activities and mood, the location of the pain, the quality of the pain, the patient’s understanding of their pain, the things that improve and worsen the pain, the previous approaches to treatment, and the responses to treatment. In addition, pain medications were noted, as was any use of an “as needed” pain medication during the seven days prior to the review. An independent report following instructions in completing the MDS was completed by the study nurse. Finally, the study nurse provided her own subjective assessment of the quality of pain management on a scale of 0 (serious concerns with pain management) to 10 (pain management appropriate to the guidelines). Analytic Methods The criterion validity (i.e., examining of the proposed problem score with a proposed “gold standard”) of the proposed pain problem score was examined by looking at the correlation of a study nurse independent assessment of quality of pain management and her completion of the Resident Assessment Instrument’s two items regarding the frequency and severity of pain. Construct validity (i.e., examining in this case whether hypothesized associations exist between the problem score and other measures of pain quality) was examined through the correlation of the pain problem score with nursing home residents’ satisfaction with pain management, their reported average pain intensity, and the quality of pain documentation in the medical record. The latter was based on the chart abstraction tool created by Weissman and colleagues 25 that examined whether key pieces of pain assessment were documented in the medical records. For each of these tests of validity, a Spearmen’s correlation coefficient was used.  Approach to Development and Validation The development and validation of the proposed survey instrument was based on sequential steps to ensure the reliability and validity of the measure. A qualitative synthesis of guidelines on pain management, and input from an expert panel and focus groups, were used to develop the survey items to ensure content validity. Cognitive testing of the survey instrument was then performed to ensure that respondents understood the wording of the questions and the response tasks. A pretest and pilot test of the survey tool was conducted in six Rhode Island nursing homes. Each step in the development of the survey tool is described below.  Qualitative Synthesis of Guidelines on Pain Management The purpose of the literature review was to identify domains of quality pain management in the long-term care setting, as determined by professional organization guidelines ( Table 1 ). Three independent strategies were used to locate these statements. First, a Medline search was conducted for the period 1990 through 2001 using the following key words: guidelines, standards, and pain. Second, a search of web sites from professional organizations involved with pain management, the care of cancer patients, and long-term care was conducted in order to locate guidelines or similar expert statements on the assessment of pain. Two additional guidelines were found on the web search. Finally, two investigators (JT and a research assistant) reviewed the abstracts and full-text documents identifying 12 distinct guidelines or similar expert statements on the assessment of pain and pain management in the long-term care setting, and identified six domains of quality pain management. The domains were then defined and areas of disagreement were resolved by discussion. The goal in assessing the statements was not to identify differences in quality of care by setting, type of profession or service, but rather to look for common themes.  Focus Groups with Residents, Family Members, and Staff Focus groups were conducted with nursing home residents, family members, and staff from the nursing home. Focus group participants were recruited through Carelink, a consortium of nonprofit nursing homes in Rhode Island. Written informed consent was obtained from all focus group participants and all participants received an honorarium of $50. The overarching goal of the focus groups was to understand from the participants’ perspective what defined excellent pain management. In the case of nursing home residents and family members, several key questions were formulated and addressed with participants: (a) what went well with pain assessment and management, and (b) what could have been improved in the management of their pain? A transcript-based analysis was completed to identify the trends and patterns that reappeared within and among the groups. Themes were coded in the margins (i.e., axial coding), taking into consideration the range and diversity of participants’ experiences. Using a grounded theory approach, 19 each investigator developed a list of themes that was inclusive of the three perspectives. The investigators compared their results and resolved areas of disagreement by discussion and input from an expert panel.  Cognitive Testing of the Survey Instrument Based on the review of the guidelines, focus groups, and the advice of an expert panel, a brief survey instrument was constructed. Twenty cognitively intact nursing home residents were recruited to test the survey using a test–retest strategy. The frequency distribution was first reviewed for each potential item for inclusion in the final survey. Items with a low rate of reported concern were eliminated. The survey was then readministered between two and seven days later. The percent agreement and kappa statistic was used to examine reliability. A factor and correlational analysis was completed. Then, internal reliability was examined with Cronbach’s alpha. As previously done in the Picker Institute and the Consumer Assessment of Health Plans Survey, we formed a problem score: a count of the number of opportunities to improve pain management.  Validation of the Survey Instrument A separate validation study testing the instrument was then performed in six nursing homes in Rhode Island. Each participating nursing home was a not-for-profit, participating member of a local nursing home consortium. Nursing home residents and their families were recruited for participation one week prior to their annual or quarterly care-planning meeting. By that meeting, the Resident Assessment Instrument that comprises the MDS was completed. Participating nursing homes asked each resident’s family for permission on whether they could release their name to a Brown University study nurse. That nurse obtained informed consent for residents to participate in the study. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at Brown University and the University of Massachusetts. A nurse practitioner with experience in hospice and pain consultation in nursing homes completed all pain assessments in the week prior to the quarterly or annual completion of the MDS. Each nursing home resident’s pain was assessed on at least two different days during that week, with the majority of residents having four independent pain assessments. To compare the developed tool with a gold standard, the study nurse used an established protocol for assessing pain in the nursing home population. 1 First, the Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) was attempted. The BPI is a widely used instrument that assesses the intensity of pain and the extent to which pain interferes with daily activities. The BPI has known reliability, validity, and demonstrated responsiveness as part of clinical trials. 20 If the nurse was able to complete the BPI with the patient, she then administered the Brief Pain Index-Short Form (BPI-SF) on the subsequent visit. If the patient was unable to complete the BPI, the study nurse then tried one of four unidimensional pain assessment tools recommended by Ferrell and colleagues. 8 These instruments include: (1) a 0–10 verbal pain intensity scale; 21 (2) a 100 mm horizontal visual analog scale; 22 (3) a modified Tursky scale; 23 and (4) the Rand COOP chart for pain. 24 All of the cognitively intact residents were able to use the BPI or the Verbal Descriptor Scale and the assessment was repeated again at least 48 hours after the first assessment. A review of the medical record was also completed by the study nurse that included the last full MDS along with a record of any pain medications the nursing home resident was currently receiving. Review of the chart over a one-month period provided information about quality of pain documentation. This was measured by whether there was documentation present in the medical record regarding the intensity of pain, the patient’s goals for pain management, the effect of pain on daily living activities and mood, the location of the pain, the quality of the pain, the patient’s understanding of their pain, the things that improve and worsen the pain, the previous approaches to treatment, and the responses to treatment. In addition, pain medications were noted, as was any use of an “as needed” pain medication during the seven days prior to the review. An independent report following instructions in completing the MDS was completed by the study nurse. Finally, the study nurse provided her own subjective assessment of the quality of pain management on a scale of 0 (serious concerns with pain management) to 10 (pain management appropriate to the guidelines).  Analytic Methods The criterion validity (i.e., examining of the proposed problem score with a proposed “gold standard”) of the proposed pain problem score was examined by looking at the correlation of a study nurse independent assessment of quality of pain management and her completion of the Resident Assessment Instrument’s two items regarding the frequency and severity of pain. Construct validity (i.e., examining in this case whether hypothesized associations exist between the problem score and other measures of pain quality) was examined through the correlation of the pain problem score with nursing home residents’ satisfaction with pain management, their reported average pain intensity, and the quality of pain documentation in the medical record. The latter was based on the chart abstraction tool created by Weissman and colleagues 25 that examined whether key pieces of pain assessment were documented in the medical records. For each of these tests of validity, a Spearmen’s correlation coefficient was used.  Development of the Survey Content: Review of Guidelines A total of 369 abstracts were identified based on the outlined search strategy. On reviewing abstracts and articles, 52 references were found that included guidelines, standards, or expert opinions on pain management in long-term care. These references were then distilled into categories reflecting 12 distinct guidelines or expert statements on quality pain management in the long-term care setting. 15 , 16 , 26 – 35 Table 2 summarizes the six domains of pain management. These domains were found in no fewer than 75% of the guidelines reviewed as being essential to the provision of quality pain management; one domain, recognition and assessment, was noted in all. Although the guidelines provided somewhat different definitions of the domain, we provided a working definition that attempts to synthesize common themes across the guidelines. That is, some elements mentioned by the professional guidelines were described in somewhat different ways, but they clearly reflected several common underlying concepts. For some domains, the proposed definition was clear and consistent across all sources. For example, all sources noted that pain could be recognized by the patient’s self-report or the health care provider’s observation of the patient. In other instances, the guidelines were less clear about the definition of a concept (e.g., giving of medication in a timely fashion or, as in the case of communication, did not link the health care providers’ obligation to document assessment, intervention, reassessment, or education of the patient). Yet, more than 50% noted the importance of communication with the health care team. Most of the expert guidelines reported that quality pain management recognizes the patient’s goals of care as guiding the intervention. More than 65% of the experts noted the importance of recognizing the patient’s acceptable level of comfort. All of the experts agreed that pain assessment leads to proper pain management and 80% agree that the pain interventions correlate with the pain assessment. All six domains are discussed in 41%, or five of the 12 guidelines.  Development of the Survey Content: Focus Groups A total of 58 persons participated in seven focus groups and one in-depth interview. Groups consisted of cognitively intact nursing home residents ( n = 2), family members ( n = 2), and staff of nursing homes ( n = 2). Family members stressed the importance of listening to the patient and being kept informed of all pain medication decisions, especially when there was a history of overmedication. This is illustrated by quotations from two care-givers. The first spoke of the need to listen to the nursing home resident while the second spoke of concern regarding overmedication: So, I think the difference here is that no matter what level of mental ability the person has left, there is still some kind of respect that there is a human being in there. I think besides listening to the family, they also listen to the patient no matter what level their memory or ability to reason is. So I am, as her care supervisor, very sensitive to medication changes. And this is something that I don’t feel the staff was aware of. And what they thought was a small dose was too much for her. Both family and staff groups emphasized the importance of ongoing care by staff that are familiar with the patient and know what behavioral signs indicate that the resident is experiencing discomfort. This is notably more important for the uncommunicative resident. This is illustrated by the following two quotations: Family: Having an aide who knew my wife was key to knowing when her pain worsened . Staff: You have to kind of watch them on a daily basis and get to know the residents . That’s the benefit of having a primary assignment. You get to build that relationship; you get to know the patient. So, if there are changes going on with that patient, it will be detected very early. Finally, the need for resident education on the treatment of pain came up in every group. The reluctance of some residents to report their pain vastly increases the difficulty of pain management. This was also a key element in creating an atmosphere of trust— that residents know that it is safe to report pain and other discomforts. Reluctance to report pain was described as a result of stoicism, fear of causing trouble or being a burden, fear of losing control, or in relation to cultural or gender issues. Family: My dad was here for about a year and I think with him it was more an issue of trust. He would tell me what he was experiencing, but he didn’t want me to tell any of the staff. He didn’t want to be seen as causing trouble . Staff: I think they suffer in silence a lot because they just don’t want to bother you . Resident: They haven’t discovered a pill yet that will help me. I just live with it. I’ve become resigned to it. I accept it . Because I’ve got arthritis in my hips and back and don’t seem to get any relief with different medication. So, the best time for me is lying down in bed. It takes the pressure off my hips and back. I don’t know. I just live with it. Both family and staff groups noted the importance of pain prevention. Family: … [Nurse Aide Name] seems to be the only one that can get her, without screaming, to bend that elbow and put that brace on. It’s amazing. It amazes me, but it might be the tone of voice, how she approaches her, and that has to be it .  Development of the Survey Content: Cognitive Testing Based on the review of the literature and analysis of the focus groups, a brief survey was drafted for cognitive testing, pretest, and test–retest among 20 cognitively intact nursing home residents. Based on cognitive testing, the key findings were that questions use simple response categories (e.g., yes or no questions). Because many nursing home residents have problems with exact timeframes, the decision was made not to ask about a specific time-frame. With the exception of one item, the test–retest reliability was satisfactory, varying between a kappa of 0.44 and 1.0 (indicating perfect agreement). One item (whether the nursing home resident had pain that prevented them from doing normal activities) had a low kappa of 0.32 and this item was dropped.  Development of the Survey Content: Validation Cognitively intact nursing home residents (defined as scoring a 0 or 1 on the Cognitive Performance Scale) were recruited from the six Rhode Island nursing homes at the time of the quarterly or annual MDS assessment. To be in compliance with privacy concerns, staff at the nursing home first approached the nursing home resident or the family member to obtain permission to release their name to researchers at Brown Medical School. Seven residents refused to have their personal information released. A total of 147 nursing home residents were approached for participation in this study. Of those approached, 30 refused to participate in the study. Table 3 characterizes those nursing home residents who participated in the survey. Ages range from 48 to 106, with an average age of 84.7 years old. The majority was white and female. The average Mini-Mental Status Exam Score was 26.8, reflecting our recruitment strategy of enrolling persons with a cognitive performance score of 0 or 1. On the last MDS, 66.4% were noted to have experienced pain and 42.6% of nursing home residents were noted to have pain that was at times moderate or excruciating in the last week. At the time of the interview, 56.3% of respondents stated that they were in pain during the time. Among those not in pain, 86.6% experienced pain at that nursing home. Thus, a total of 94.1% had experienced pain while in that nursing home. A total of eight questions ( Table 4 ) were considered for forming a pain problem score (i.e., a count of the number of items where the patient’s response called for an improvement in the quality of pain management). The range in rates of opportunity to improve pain management was from 0% (for whether the aide moves the resident in such a way as to produce pain) to 45.4% (for whether pain was reported as interfering with sleep). Two items with low rate of concerns voiced were dropped from further consideration. Factor analysis suggested a one-factor solution with all but one item loading on that factor. The question that asked whether the staff listens to what the resident said about their pain did not correlate well with other items (?0.003 to 0.15) and was dropped. The remaining five questions had an internal reliability of 0.55, with an average correlation with the total score of 0.32. The mean problem score (i.e., a count of the number of opportunities to improve pain management) was 1.5, with 47.9% of respondents identifying two or more concerns with pain management. The pain problem score varied among the six nursing homes as shown in Fig. 1 . The validity of the pain problem score was examined by comparing tests of construct validity (overall satisfaction with pain control, average pain intensity, quality of chart documentation of pain assessment, pain intensity and frequency completed on the MDS), and an independent assessment of the quality of pain management by a research nurse with certification in hospice and palliative medicine. A moderate correlation of 0.43 was found between the research nurse’s independent assessments of the quality of pain management and the pain problem score. Similarly, a moderate correlation was found with the reported average pain intensity in the past week (0.41) and a research nurse’s completion of the MDS items indicating there was daily pain, at times moderate or excruciating in severity in the last week. The association of demographic characteristics and the pain problem score were examined. With the exception of gender and the level of functional impairment, there were no statistically significant differences between age, marital status, level of education, and the length of time that the residents have been at that nursing home (all P > 0.20). Female nursing home residents exhibited a trend toward a higher rate of reported concerns for pain management (26.9% reported three or more concerns compared to 11.1% among male nursing home residents, P = 0.16). Similarly, persons with three or more reported concerns with pain management exhibited a trend toward a higher rate of functional impairment (11.1 compared to 8.9 on 0–30-point scale that examined basic function measures in the Activities of Daily Living, P = 0.11).  Results Development of the Survey Content: Review of Guidelines A total of 369 abstracts were identified based on the outlined search strategy. On reviewing abstracts and articles, 52 references were found that included guidelines, standards, or expert opinions on pain management in long-term care. These references were then distilled into categories reflecting 12 distinct guidelines or expert statements on quality pain management in the long-term care setting. 15 , 16 , 26 – 35 Table 2 summarizes the six domains of pain management. These domains were found in no fewer than 75% of the guidelines reviewed as being essential to the provision of quality pain management; one domain, recognition and assessment, was noted in all. Although the guidelines provided somewhat different definitions of the domain, we provided a working definition that attempts to synthesize common themes across the guidelines. That is, some elements mentioned by the professional guidelines were described in somewhat different ways, but they clearly reflected several common underlying concepts. For some domains, the proposed definition was clear and consistent across all sources. For example, all sources noted that pain could be recognized by the patient’s self-report or the health care provider’s observation of the patient. In other instances, the guidelines were less clear about the definition of a concept (e.g., giving of medication in a timely fashion or, as in the case of communication, did not link the health care providers’ obligation to document assessment, intervention, reassessment, or education of the patient). Yet, more than 50% noted the importance of communication with the health care team. Most of the expert guidelines reported that quality pain management recognizes the patient’s goals of care as guiding the intervention. More than 65% of the experts noted the importance of recognizing the patient’s acceptable level of comfort. All of the experts agreed that pain assessment leads to proper pain management and 80% agree that the pain interventions correlate with the pain assessment. All six domains are discussed in 41%, or five of the 12 guidelines. Development of the Survey Content: Focus Groups A total of 58 persons participated in seven focus groups and one in-depth interview. Groups consisted of cognitively intact nursing home residents ( n = 2), family members ( n = 2), and staff of nursing homes ( n = 2). Family members stressed the importance of listening to the patient and being kept informed of all pain medication decisions, especially when there was a history of overmedication. This is illustrated by quotations from two care-givers. The first spoke of the need to listen to the nursing home resident while the second spoke of concern regarding overmedication: So, I think the difference here is that no matter what level of mental ability the person has left, there is still some kind of respect that there is a human being in there. I think besides listening to the family, they also listen to the patient no matter what level their memory or ability to reason is. So I am, as her care supervisor, very sensitive to medication changes. And this is something that I don’t feel the staff was aware of. And what they thought was a small dose was too much for her. Both family and staff groups emphasized the importance of ongoing care by staff that are familiar with the patient and know what behavioral signs indicate that the resident is experiencing discomfort. This is notably more important for the uncommunicative resident. This is illustrated by the following two quotations: Family: Having an aide who knew my wife was key to knowing when her pain worsened . Staff: You have to kind of watch them on a daily basis and get to know the residents . That’s the benefit of having a primary assignment. You get to build that relationship; you get to know the patient. So, if there are changes going on with that patient, it will be detected very early. Finally, the need for resident education on the treatment of pain came up in every group. The reluctance of some residents to report their pain vastly increases the difficulty of pain management. This was also a key element in creating an atmosphere of trust— that residents know that it is safe to report pain and other discomforts. Reluctance to report pain was described as a result of stoicism, fear of causing trouble or being a burden, fear of losing control, or in relation to cultural or gender issues. Family: My dad was here for about a year and I think with him it was more an issue of trust. He would tell me what he was experiencing, but he didn’t want me to tell any of the staff. He didn’t want to be seen as causing trouble . Staff: I think they suffer in silence a lot because they just don’t want to bother you . Resident: They haven’t discovered a pill yet that will help me. I just live with it. I’ve become resigned to it. I accept it . Because I’ve got arthritis in my hips and back and don’t seem to get any relief with different medication. So, the best time for me is lying down in bed. It takes the pressure off my hips and back. I don’t know. I just live with it. Both family and staff groups noted the importance of pain prevention. Family: … [Nurse Aide Name] seems to be the only one that can get her, without screaming, to bend that elbow and put that brace on. It’s amazing. It amazes me, but it might be the tone of voice, how she approaches her, and that has to be it . Development of the Survey Content: Cognitive Testing Based on the review of the literature and analysis of the focus groups, a brief survey was drafted for cognitive testing, pretest, and test–retest among 20 cognitively intact nursing home residents. Based on cognitive testing, the key findings were that questions use simple response categories (e.g., yes or no questions). Because many nursing home residents have problems with exact timeframes, the decision was made not to ask about a specific time-frame. With the exception of one item, the test–retest reliability was satisfactory, varying between a kappa of 0.44 and 1.0 (indicating perfect agreement). One item (whether the nursing home resident had pain that prevented them from doing normal activities) had a low kappa of 0.32 and this item was dropped. Development of the Survey Content: Validation Cognitively intact nursing home residents (defined as scoring a 0 or 1 on the Cognitive Performance Scale) were recruited from the six Rhode Island nursing homes at the time of the quarterly or annual MDS assessment. To be in compliance with privacy concerns, staff at the nursing home first approached the nursing home resident or the family member to obtain permission to release their name to researchers at Brown Medical School. Seven residents refused to have their personal information released. A total of 147 nursing home residents were approached for participation in this study. Of those approached, 30 refused to participate in the study. Table 3 characterizes those nursing home residents who participated in the survey. Ages range from 48 to 106, with an average age of 84.7 years old. The majority was white and female. The average Mini-Mental Status Exam Score was 26.8, reflecting our recruitment strategy of enrolling persons with a cognitive performance score of 0 or 1. On the last MDS, 66.4% were noted to have experienced pain and 42.6% of nursing home residents were noted to have pain that was at times moderate or excruciating in the last week. At the time of the interview, 56.3% of respondents stated that they were in pain during the time. Among those not in pain, 86.6% experienced pain at that nursing home. Thus, a total of 94.1% had experienced pain while in that nursing home. A total of eight questions ( Table 4 ) were considered for forming a pain problem score (i.e., a count of the number of items where the patient’s response called for an improvement in the quality of pain management). The range in rates of opportunity to improve pain management was from 0% (for whether the aide moves the resident in such a way as to produce pain) to 45.4% (for whether pain was reported as interfering with sleep). Two items with low rate of concerns voiced were dropped from further consideration. Factor analysis suggested a one-factor solution with all but one item loading on that factor. The question that asked whether the staff listens to what the resident said about their pain did not correlate well with other items (?0.003 to 0.15) and was dropped. The remaining five questions had an internal reliability of 0.55, with an average correlation with the total score of 0.32. The mean problem score (i.e., a count of the number of opportunities to improve pain management) was 1.5, with 47.9% of respondents identifying two or more concerns with pain management. The pain problem score varied among the six nursing homes as shown in Fig. 1 . The validity of the pain problem score was examined by comparing tests of construct validity (overall satisfaction with pain control, average pain intensity, quality of chart documentation of pain assessment, pain intensity and frequency completed on the MDS), and an independent assessment of the quality of pain management by a research nurse with certification in hospice and palliative medicine. A moderate correlation of 0.43 was found between the research nurse’s independent assessments of the quality of pain management and the pain problem score. Similarly, a moderate correlation was found with the reported average pain intensity in the past week (0.41) and a research nurse’s completion of the MDS items indicating there was daily pain, at times moderate or excruciating in severity in the last week. The association of demographic characteristics and the pain problem score were examined. With the exception of gender and the level of functional impairment, there were no statistically significant differences between age, marital status, level of education, and the length of time that the residents have been at that nursing home (all P > 0.20). Female nursing home residents exhibited a trend toward a higher rate of reported concerns for pain management (26.9% reported three or more concerns compared to 11.1% among male nursing home residents, P = 0.16). Similarly, persons with three or more reported concerns with pain management exhibited a trend toward a higher rate of functional impairment (11.1 compared to 8.9 on 0–30-point scale that examined basic function measures in the Activities of Daily Living, P = 0.11).  Results Development of the Survey Content: Review of Guidelines A total of 369 abstracts were identified based on the outlined search strategy. On reviewing abstracts and articles, 52 references were found that included guidelines, standards, or expert opinions on pain management in long-term care. These references were then distilled into categories reflecting 12 distinct guidelines or expert statements on quality pain management in the long-term care setting. 15 , 16 , 26 – 35 Table 2 summarizes the six domains of pain management. These domains were found in no fewer than 75% of the guidelines reviewed as being essential to the provision of quality pain management; one domain, recognition and assessment, was noted in all. Although the guidelines provided somewhat different definitions of the domain, we provided a working definition that attempts to synthesize common themes across the guidelines. That is, some elements mentioned by the professional guidelines were described in somewhat different ways, but they clearly reflected several common underlying concepts. For some domains, the proposed definition was clear and consistent across all sources. For example, all sources noted that pain could be recognized by the patient’s self-report or the health care provider’s observation of the patient. In other instances, the guidelines were less clear about the definition of a concept (e.g., giving of medication in a timely fashion or, as in the case of communication, did not link the health care providers’ obligation to document assessment, intervention, reassessment, or education of the patient). Yet, more than 50% noted the importance of communication with the health care team. Most of the expert guidelines reported that quality pain management recognizes the patient’s goals of care as guiding the intervention. More than 65% of the experts noted the importance of recognizing the patient’s acceptable level of comfort. All of the experts agreed that pain assessment leads to proper pain management and 80% agree that the pain interventions correlate with the pain assessment. All six domains are discussed in 41%, or five of the 12 guidelines. Development of the Survey Content: Focus Groups A total of 58 persons participated in seven focus groups and one in-depth interview. Groups consisted of cognitively intact nursing home residents ( n = 2), family members ( n = 2), and staff of nursing homes ( n = 2). Family members stressed the importance of listening to the patient and being kept informed of all pain medication decisions, especially when there was a history of overmedication. This is illustrated by quotations from two care-givers. The first spoke of the need to listen to the nursing home resident while the second spoke of concern regarding overmedication: So, I think the difference here is that no matter what level of mental ability the person has left, there is still some kind of respect that there is a human being in there. I think besides listening to the family, they also listen to the patient no matter what level their memory or ability to reason is. So I am, as her care supervisor, very sensitive to medication changes. And this is something that I don’t feel the staff was aware of. And what they thought was a small dose was too much for her. Both family and staff groups emphasized the importance of ongoing care by staff that are familiar with the patient and know what behavioral signs indicate that the resident is experiencing discomfort. This is notably more important for the uncommunicative resident. This is illustrated by the following two quotations: Family: Having an aide who knew my wife was key to knowing when her pain worsened . Staff: You have to kind of watch them on a daily basis and get to know the residents . That’s the benefit of having a primary assignment. You get to build that relationship; you get to know the patient. So, if there are changes going on with that patient, it will be detected very early. Finally, the need for resident education on the treatment of pain came up in every group. The reluctance of some residents to report their pain vastly increases the difficulty of pain management. This was also a key element in creating an atmosphere of trust— that residents know that it is safe to report pain and other discomforts. Reluctance to report pain was described as a result of stoicism, fear of causing trouble or being a burden, fear of losing control, or in relation to cultural or gender issues. Family: My dad was here for about a year and I think with him it was more an issue of trust. He would tell me what he was experiencing, but he didn’t want me to tell any of the staff. He didn’t want to be seen as causing trouble . Staff: I think they suffer in silence a lot because they just don’t want to bother you . Resident: They haven’t discovered a pill yet that will help me. I just live with it. I’ve become resigned to it. I accept it . Because I’ve got arthritis in my hips and back and don’t seem to get any relief with different medication. So, the best time for me is lying down in bed. It takes the pressure off my hips and back. I don’t know. I just live with it. Both family and staff groups noted the importance of pain prevention. Family: … [Nurse Aide Name] seems to be the only one that can get her, without screaming, to bend that elbow and put that brace on. It’s amazing. It amazes me, but it might be the tone of voice, how she approaches her, and that has to be it . Development of the Survey Content: Cognitive Testing Based on the review of the literature and analysis of the focus groups, a brief survey was drafted for cognitive testing, pretest, and test–retest among 20 cognitively intact nursing home residents. Based on cognitive testing, the key findings were that questions use simple response categories (e.g., yes or no questions). Because many nursing home residents have problems with exact timeframes, the decision was made not to ask about a specific time-frame. With the exception of one item, the test–retest reliability was satisfactory, varying between a kappa of 0.44 and 1.0 (indicating perfect agreement). One item (whether the nursing home resident had pain that prevented them from doing normal activities) had a low kappa of 0.32 and this item was dropped. Development of the Survey Content: Validation Cognitively intact nursing home residents (defined as scoring a 0 or 1 on the Cognitive Performance Scale) were recruited from the six Rhode Island nursing homes at the time of the quarterly or annual MDS assessment. To be in compliance with privacy concerns, staff at the nursing home first approached the nursing home resident or the family member to obtain permission to release their name to researchers at Brown Medical School. Seven residents refused to have their personal information released. A total of 147 nursing home residents were approached for participation in this study. Of those approached, 30 refused to participate in the study. Table 3 characterizes those nursing home residents who participated in the survey. Ages range from 48 to 106, with an average age of 84.7 years old. The majority was white and female. The average Mini-Mental Status Exam Score was 26.8, reflecting our recruitment strategy of enrolling persons with a cognitive performance score of 0 or 1. On the last MDS, 66.4% were noted to have experienced pain and 42.6% of nursing home residents were noted to have pain that was at times moderate or excruciating in the last week. At the time of the interview, 56.3% of respondents stated that they were in pain during the time. Among those not in pain, 86.6% experienced pain at that nursing home. Thus, a total of 94.1% had experienced pain while in that nursing home. A total of eight questions ( Table 4 ) were considered for forming a pain problem score (i.e., a count of the number of items where the patient’s response called for an improvement in the quality of pain management). The range in rates of opportunity to improve pain management was from 0% (for whether the aide moves the resident in such a way as to produce pain) to 45.4% (for whether pain was reported as interfering with sleep). Two items with low rate of concerns voiced were dropped from further consideration. Factor analysis suggested a one-factor solution with all but one item loading on that factor. The question that asked whether the staff listens to what the resident said about their pain did not correlate well with other items (?0.003 to 0.15) and was dropped. The remaining five questions had an internal reliability of 0.55, with an average correlation with the total score of 0.32. The mean problem score (i.e., a count of the number of opportunities to improve pain management) was 1.5, with 47.9% of respondents identifying two or more concerns with pain management. The pain problem score varied among the six nursing homes as shown in Fig. 1 . The validity of the pain problem score was examined by comparing tests of construct validity (overall satisfaction with pain control, average pain intensity, quality of chart documentation of pain assessment, pain intensity and frequency completed on the MDS), and an independent assessment of the quality of pain management by a research nurse with certification in hospice and palliative medicine. A moderate correlation of 0.43 was found between the research nurse’s independent assessments of the quality of pain management and the pain problem score. Similarly, a moderate correlation was found with the reported average pain intensity in the past week (0.41) and a research nurse’s completion of the MDS items indicating there was daily pain, at times moderate or excruciating in severity in the last week. The association of demographic characteristics and the pain problem score were examined. With the exception of gender and the level of functional impairment, there were no statistically significant differences between age, marital status, level of education, and the length of time that the residents have been at that nursing home (all P > 0.20). Female nursing home residents exhibited a trend toward a higher rate of reported concerns for pain management (26.9% reported three or more concerns compared to 11.1% among male nursing home residents, P = 0.16). Similarly, persons with three or more reported concerns with pain management exhibited a trend toward a higher rate of functional impairment (11.1 compared to 8.9 on 0–30-point scale that examined basic function measures in the Activities of Daily Living, P = 0.11).  Discussion Persistent severe pain remains an important problem in U.S. nursing homes. One critical element to improve pain management is the availability of validated tools to audit pain management efforts and thereby identify opportunities to improve its quality. Previous attempts to develop tools for assessing the quality of pain management have relied on the medical record 26 and the use of the MDS. There are important limitations with the medical record and the use of the MDS. For example, an important concern with the MDS is ascertainment bias. The goal of this study was to create and validate a brief survey that asks cognitively intact nursing home resident about key processes and outcomes of pain management. Our research found that the vast majority of persons with a Cognitive Performance Scale score of 0 or 1 were able to complete a brief personal interview with minimal amounts of missing data and exhibited short-term reliability, construct validity, and criterion validity. We found that cognitively intact nursing home residents identified important concerns. For example, one in five persons with pain at night stated that they did not tell the nurse when they had pain that kept them from sleeping. Problem scores (i.e., a count of the number of opportunities to improve pain management) demonstrated variation among the six nursing homes and demonstrated evidence of construct and criterion validity. These results suggest that a brief survey could be used to help audit pain management in the nursing home setting. The use of satisfaction measures that rely on ratings or the level of satisfaction with pain management is problematic because of the paradox that high-level satisfaction is reported despite unacceptable levels of pain. For this reason, we have relied on both patient-centered reports (i.e., where the nursing home resident reports on key processes of care delivered to them) and unmet needs to characterize the quality of pain management in six nursing homes. Our results demonstrate that nursing home residents with a Cognitive Performance Scale score of 0 or 1 were able to report on their perceptions of the quality of pain management. Test-retest demonstrated sufficient reliability of their response in two interviews conducted between two and seven days apart. Tests of construct and criterion validity revealed moderate correlation, suggesting validity of the survey tool. These findings are consistent with Casarett and colleague’s study on whether satisfaction with pain management in nursing homes is a valid and reliable quality indicator. 36 That study found, similar to our study, that residents’ responses were reliable over the short term. Unlike the Casarett and colleagues’ study, however, we used newer methodologies of measuring the perception of pain management. The five-item problem score demonstrated a moderate correlation (0.43) with an independent, blinded research nurse assessment of pain over the exact same time period. These results provide preliminary but important evidence that a brief survey with cognitively intact nursing home residents could provide important information as part of an audit of the quality of pain management. The key goal of this project was to create an efficient strategy to audit pain management in the nursing home setting. Although these results provide evidence that a nursing home resident provides an important perspective on the quality of pain management, we believe that all three sources of information (the medical record, MDS, and surveys with nursing home residents) should be used to assess four key process of pain management (see Fig. 2 ). Each source of data can provide critical information for these processes of screening, comprehensive pain assessment, the formulation of care plan, and ongoing monitoring of that care plan. In a web site entitled Manage Nursing Home Pain (see www.chcr.brown.edu/pain/managenhpain.htm ), information is provided on conducting an audit with each of these sources of information and tools are provided to assist in the interpretation of the collected data. We propose that an audit composed of a review of medical records, analysis of the MDS, and a small number of interviews with cognitively intact residents should be done as an initial step to improving pain management in a nursing home. Based on these results, the use of education and rapid cycle quality improvement would be used to improve pain management. Previous research suggests that this strategy can reduce severe pain by as much as 41%. 37 Based on this project conducted with Rhode Island Quality Partners, the web site, Manage NH Pain, provides a step-by-step guide to the implementation of rapid cycle quality improvement to reduce the rate of severe pain. There are important limitations to our research that should be acknowledged. First, we tested the instrument among mostly Caucasian, English-speaking nursing home residents in six Rhode Island not-for-profit nursing homes. It is quite possible that different rate of concerns would be obtained in other nursing homes or with residents from different ethnic backgrounds. Additionally, each of the nursing homes used for the validation study are noted for their excellence in the quality of care. Second, Cronbach’s alpha, a measure of the internal consistency, was 0.55. In part, this is based on the small number of items in the problem score and our desire to reduce the respondent burden for these older, frail persons. For the purpose of quality improvement, we would recommend examining the frequency of individual items, as well as overall count of the number of opportunities to improve (i.e., a problem score). Third, some nursing home residents refused to participate in this study; specifically, older nursing home residents were less likely to participate. Fourth, the instrument wording and response tasks had to be kept quite simple for the cognitively intact residents. Because nursing home residents often had short-term memory impairment and expressed difficulty with timeframes in cognitive testing, questions were left open-ended without a specific timeframe. However, we found that nursing home resident’s reported concerns with quality of pain management demonstrated a moderate correlation with an independent, expert assessment of the quality of pain management during the same time. This suggests validity of the residents’ reported concerns regarding pain management. Persistent severe pain remains an important opportunity to improve the care of nursing homes residents. A brief survey of cognitively intact nursing home residents identified important concerns, demonstrated reliability and a moderate degree of validity when compared to the independent nurse assessment of pain. Based on this research, we believe that the developed instrument, in addition to the use of the MDS and a thorough review of the medical record, should be considered for use as the initial audit of a project to improve the quality of pain management in nursing homes.  Discussion Persistent severe pain remains an important problem in U.S. nursing homes. One critical element to improve pain management is the availability of validated tools to audit pain management efforts and thereby identify opportunities to improve its quality. Previous attempts to develop tools for assessing the quality of pain management have relied on the medical record 26 and the use of the MDS. There are important limitations with the medical record and the use of the MDS. For example, an important concern with the MDS is ascertainment bias. The goal of this study was to create and validate a brief survey that asks cognitively intact nursing home resident about key processes and outcomes of pain management. Our research found that the vast majority of persons with a Cognitive Performance Scale score of 0 or 1 were able to complete a brief personal interview with minimal amounts of missing data and exhibited short-term reliability, construct validity, and criterion validity. We found that cognitively intact nursing home residents identified important concerns. For example, one in five persons with pain at night stated that they did not tell the nurse when they had pain that kept them from sleeping. Problem scores (i.e., a count of the number of opportunities to improve pain management) demonstrated variation among the six nursing homes and demonstrated evidence of construct and criterion validity. These results suggest that a brief survey could be used to help audit pain management in the nursing home setting. The use of satisfaction measures that rely on ratings or the level of satisfaction with pain management is problematic because of the paradox that high-level satisfaction is reported despite unacceptable levels of pain. For this reason, we have relied on both patient-centered reports (i.e., where the nursing home resident reports on key processes of care delivered to them) and unmet needs to characterize the quality of pain management in six nursing homes. Our results demonstrate that nursing home residents with a Cognitive Performance Scale score of 0 or 1 were able to report on their perceptions of the quality of pain management. Test-retest demonstrated sufficient reliability of their response in two interviews conducted between two and seven days apart. Tests of construct and criterion validity revealed moderate correlation, suggesting validity of the survey tool. These findings are consistent with Casarett and colleague’s study on whether satisfaction with pain management in nursing homes is a valid and reliable quality indicator. 36 That study found, similar to our study, that residents’ responses were reliable over the short term. Unlike the Casarett and colleagues’ study, however, we used newer methodologies of measuring the perception of pain management. The five-item problem score demonstrated a moderate correlation (0.43) with an independent, blinded research nurse assessment of pain over the exact same time period. These results provide preliminary but important evidence that a brief survey with cognitively intact nursing home residents could provide important information as part of an audit of the quality of pain management. The key goal of this project was to create an efficient strategy to audit pain management in the nursing home setting. Although these results provide evidence that a nursing home resident provides an important perspective on the quality of pain management, we believe that all three sources of information (the medical record, MDS, and surveys with nursing home residents) should be used to assess four key process of pain management (see Fig. 2 ). Each source of data can provide critical information for these processes of screening, comprehensive pain assessment, the formulation of care plan, and ongoing monitoring of that care plan. In a web site entitled Manage Nursing Home Pain (see www.chcr.brown.edu/pain/managenhpain.htm ), information is provided on conducting an audit with each of these sources of information and tools are provided to assist in the interpretation of the collected data. We propose that an audit composed of a review of medical records, analysis of the MDS, and a small number of interviews with cognitively intact residents should be done as an initial step to improving pain management in a nursing home. Based on these results, the use of education and rapid cycle quality improvement would be used to improve pain management. Previous research suggests that this strategy can reduce severe pain by as much as 41%. 37 Based on this project conducted with Rhode Island Quality Partners, the web site, Manage NH Pain, provides a step-by-step guide to the implementation of rapid cycle quality improvement to reduce the rate of severe pain. There are important limitations to our research that should be acknowledged. First, we tested the instrument among mostly Caucasian, English-speaking nursing home residents in six Rhode Island not-for-profit nursing homes. It is quite possible that different rate of concerns would be obtained in other nursing homes or with residents from different ethnic backgrounds. Additionally, each of the nursing homes used for the validation study are noted for their excellence in the quality of care. Second, Cronbach’s alpha, a measure of the internal consistency, was 0.55. In part, this is based on the small number of items in the problem score and our desire to reduce the respondent burden for these older, frail persons. For the purpose of quality improvement, we would recommend examining the frequency of individual items, as well as overall count of the number of opportunities to improve (i.e., a problem score). Third, some nursing home residents refused to participate in this study; specifically, older nursing home residents were less likely to participate. Fourth, the instrument wording and response tasks had to be kept quite simple for the cognitively intact residents. Because nursing home residents often had short-term memory impairment and expressed difficulty with timeframes in cognitive testing, questions were left open-ended without a specific timeframe. However, we found that nursing home resident’s reported concerns with quality of pain management demonstrated a moderate correlation with an independent, expert assessment of the quality of pain management during the same time. This suggests validity of the residents’ reported concerns regarding pain management. Persistent severe pain remains an important opportunity to improve the care of nursing homes residents. A brief survey of cognitively intact nursing home residents identified important concerns, demonstrated reliability and a moderate degree of validity when compared to the independent nurse assessment of pain. Based on this research, we believe that the developed instrument, in addition to the use of the MDS and a thorough review of the medical record, should be considered for use as the initial audit of a project to improve the quality of pain management in nursing homes. 