Plasma 24S-hydroxycholesterol and other oxysterols in acute closed head injury Primary objective To determine if plasma levels of 24S-hydroxycholesterol, the primary catabolite of brain cholesterol, provide a measure of axonal damage in acute brain trauma. Research design Determination of plasma 24S-hydroxycholesterol in a series of persons admitted to an intensive care unit for treatment of closed head injury. Methods and procedures Levels of 24-S-hydroxycholesterol, 27-hydroxycholesterol, lathosterol and total cholesterol were measured in peripheral blood from 38 persons from 14–55 years of age treated by craniotomy and ventriculostomy for intractable intracerebral hypertension. Severity of brain injury was estimated by the Glasgow Coma Scale (range = 3–13, median = 6 points) and overall injury by the Injury Severity Scale (range = 10–48, median = 29). All subjects were intubated and anaesthetized with intravenous propofol. Plasma sterol levels were compared with those of age-matched control subjects. Outcomes and results There was no significant increase in plasma 24-S-hydroxycholesterol in subjects with head injury, but measures of peripheral cholesterol synthesis were markedly reduced as compared with values for age-matched normal control subjects. Conclusion Plasma 24S-hydroxycholesterol levels do not change with severe closed head injury.  Results This study was able to acquire plasma samples from 39 head-injured persons and 15 controls in the period of time from May 2005–July 2006. Demographics and outcome data are presented in Table I . Subjects ranged in age from 14–55 years. GCS scores ranged from 3–13 (median = 6). ISS scores ranged from 10–48 (median = 29). All persons required endotracheal ventilation; eight persons died in the Intensive Care Unit. Mean plasma 24S-Chol levels (72 ± 23 mg dL?1) corresponded to the values ascertained by Bretillon et al. [ 15 ] for normal subjects in the age range from 19–50 years, ~77 ± 4 mg dL?1. In contrast, plasma cholesterol values were very low (112 ± 34 mg dL?1) and significantly lower than controls ( Table I ). Plasma 27-OHChol levels showed a significant inverse correlation with ISS scores ( r = ?0.40, p = 0.01), as did ratios of plasma 27-hydroxycholesterol to total plasma cholesterol ( r = ?0.42, p = 0.009), while the ratio of plasma 24S- to 27-OHChol increased with ISS scores ( r = 0.41, p = 0.01). On the other hand, there was no significant correlation between plasma 27-OHChol levels, the ratio of plasma 27-Chol to plasma total cholesterol or the ratio of 24S to 27-OHChol and GCS scores.  Results This study was able to acquire plasma samples from 39 head-injured persons and 15 controls in the period of time from May 2005–July 2006. Demographics and outcome data are presented in Table I . Subjects ranged in age from 14–55 years. GCS scores ranged from 3–13 (median = 6). ISS scores ranged from 10–48 (median = 29). All persons required endotracheal ventilation; eight persons died in the Intensive Care Unit. Mean plasma 24S-Chol levels (72 ± 23 mg dL?1) corresponded to the values ascertained by Bretillon et al. [ 15 ] for normal subjects in the age range from 19–50 years, ~77 ± 4 mg dL?1. In contrast, plasma cholesterol values were very low (112 ± 34 mg dL?1) and significantly lower than controls ( Table I ). Plasma 27-OHChol levels showed a significant inverse correlation with ISS scores ( r = ?0.40, p = 0.01), as did ratios of plasma 27-hydroxycholesterol to total plasma cholesterol ( r = ?0.42, p = 0.009), while the ratio of plasma 24S- to 27-OHChol increased with ISS scores ( r = 0.41, p = 0.01). On the other hand, there was no significant correlation between plasma 27-OHChol levels, the ratio of plasma 27-Chol to plasma total cholesterol or the ratio of 24S to 27-OHChol and GCS scores.  Discussion and conclusion The stimulus for this study was the observation that plasma 24S-Chol is elevated in persons with Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia as compared with normal controls and persons with depression [ 20 ]. In the foregoing study, elevated plasma 24S-cholesterol was seen as a reflection of elevated plasma cholesterol in apolipoprotein E4 carriers, but one was unable to confirm this relationship in a subsequent study [ 21 ]. Decreasing plasma concentration of 24S-Chol with increasing dementia severity suggested that elevated 24S-cholesterol levels might accompany the early stage of neurodegenerative disease, when cell membrane damage might be greatest and brain cholesterol turnover the highest [ 20 ]. Lower levels of 24S-Chol in later stages might reflect decreased substrate. This led one to postulate that elevated 24S-cholesterol might be elevated early in the course of TBI. It was chosen to sample venous blood rather than CSF because it was thought that outside of a setting in which ventriculostomy provides direct access to CSF in cases of closed head injury, venepuncture would be a less dangerous diagnostic procedure than lumbar puncture. The patient sample was limited to persons admitted to hospital with very severe head injuries, but this seemed the ideal group in which to test the hypothesis and persons with lesser degrees of injury were seldom hospitalized. Despite severe head injury with intracranial hypertension, there was no evidence of increased brain cholesterol catabolism as measured by plasma levels of 24S-chol. Holdenreider et al. [ 22 ], who followed six subjects with acute ischemic strokes, also found no increase in plasma 24S-Chol or 27-OHChol in patients followed for 4–10 days. The inverse relationship of plasma 27-Chol with ISS scores parallels the known decrease in persons suffering severe trauma of both plasma total cholesterol [ 23 ] and the cholesterol precursor lathosterol [ 24 ]. Thus, the finding of an inverse relationship between 27-Chol and severity of injury scores is probably related to the decreased total body cholesterol production in the patients in this time of high metabolic demand. The decreased ratio of 27-Chol to cholesterol might be explained as reflecting a decrease in catabolism of pre-existing cholesterol. The differences in 24S-Chol and 27-OHChol and total cholesterol are explainable by the markedly lower plasma cholesterol in these subjects. Measurement of CSF cholesterol would not have been possible because of the presence of blood. Plasma cholesterol concentrations would not have been a suitable marker because any increase in direct release of unoxidized cholesterol from the brain into the bloodstream through the damaged blood–brain barrier would have been masked by the dramatic drop in peripheral cholesterol synthesis.  Discussion and conclusion The stimulus for this study was the observation that plasma 24S-Chol is elevated in persons with Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia as compared with normal controls and persons with depression [ 20 ]. In the foregoing study, elevated plasma 24S-cholesterol was seen as a reflection of elevated plasma cholesterol in apolipoprotein E4 carriers, but one was unable to confirm this relationship in a subsequent study [ 21 ]. Decreasing plasma concentration of 24S-Chol with increasing dementia severity suggested that elevated 24S-cholesterol levels might accompany the early stage of neurodegenerative disease, when cell membrane damage might be greatest and brain cholesterol turnover the highest [ 20 ]. Lower levels of 24S-Chol in later stages might reflect decreased substrate. This led one to postulate that elevated 24S-cholesterol might be elevated early in the course of TBI. It was chosen to sample venous blood rather than CSF because it was thought that outside of a setting in which ventriculostomy provides direct access to CSF in cases of closed head injury, venepuncture would be a less dangerous diagnostic procedure than lumbar puncture. The patient sample was limited to persons admitted to hospital with very severe head injuries, but this seemed the ideal group in which to test the hypothesis and persons with lesser degrees of injury were seldom hospitalized. Despite severe head injury with intracranial hypertension, there was no evidence of increased brain cholesterol catabolism as measured by plasma levels of 24S-chol. Holdenreider et al. [ 22 ], who followed six subjects with acute ischemic strokes, also found no increase in plasma 24S-Chol or 27-OHChol in patients followed for 4–10 days. The inverse relationship of plasma 27-Chol with ISS scores parallels the known decrease in persons suffering severe trauma of both plasma total cholesterol [ 23 ] and the cholesterol precursor lathosterol [ 24 ]. Thus, the finding of an inverse relationship between 27-Chol and severity of injury scores is probably related to the decreased total body cholesterol production in the patients in this time of high metabolic demand. The decreased ratio of 27-Chol to cholesterol might be explained as reflecting a decrease in catabolism of pre-existing cholesterol. The differences in 24S-Chol and 27-OHChol and total cholesterol are explainable by the markedly lower plasma cholesterol in these subjects. Measurement of CSF cholesterol would not have been possible because of the presence of blood. Plasma cholesterol concentrations would not have been a suitable marker because any increase in direct release of unoxidized cholesterol from the brain into the bloodstream through the damaged blood–brain barrier would have been masked by the dramatic drop in peripheral cholesterol synthesis. 