Accuracy of Family History of Hemochromatosis or Iron Overload: The Hemochromatosis and Iron Overload Screening Study Background & Aims The aim of this study was to assess the analytic validity of self-reported family history of hemochromatosis or iron overload. Methods A total of 141 probands, 549 family members, and 641 controls participated in the primary care Hemochromatosis and Iron Overload Screening Study. Participants received a postscreening clinical examination and completed questionnaires about personal and family histories of hemochromatosis or iron overload, arthritis, diabetes, liver disease, and heart disease. We evaluated sensitivities and specificities of proband-reported family history, and concordance of HFE genotype C282Y/C282Y in probands and siblings who reported having hemochromatosis or iron overload. Results The sensitivities of proband-reported family history ranged from 81.4% for hemochromatosis or iron overload to 18.4% for liver disease; specificities for diabetes, liver disease, and heart disease were greater than 94%. Hemochromatosis or iron overload was associated with a positive family history across all racial/ethnic groups in the study (odds ratio, 14.53; 95% confidence intervals, 7.41–28.49; P < .0001) and among Caucasians (odds ratio, 16.98; 95% confidence intervals, 7.53–38.32; P < .0001). There was 100% concordance of HFE genotype C282Y/C282Y in 6 probands and 8 of their siblings who reported having hemochromatosis or iron overload. Conclusions Self-reported family history of hemochromatosis or iron overload can be used to identify individuals whose risk of hemochromatosis or iron overload and associated conditions is increased. These individuals could benefit from further evaluation with iron phenotyping and HFE mutation analysis.  Results The characteristics of study participants are displayed in Table 1 . There were 141 probands and 549 family members. Ninety-nine of the 141 probands were C282Y homozygotes (70.21%), and 54 (54.5%) had increased TS and SF at the initial screening. Seventy-nine percent of the probands were Caucasian. There were no statistically significant differences between the sex and race of probands and family members. The average age of probands was greater than that of the family members ( P < .0001) ( Table 1 ). Table 2 summarizes the prevalence of disorders self-reported by probands and family members. The prevalences of H/IO and arthritis were greater in probands than in family members ( P < .0001 and P = .0037, respectively). Arthritis was the most prevalent condition reported by both probands and family members. A total of 20.6% of probands reported a previous diagnosis of H/IO. There was no significant difference in the reporting of arthritis, liver disease, or diabetes between probands who reported a previous diagnosis of H/IO and those who did not report a previous diagnosis of H/IO ( Table 3 ). More probands who previously had reported a diagnosis of H/IO also reported a diagnosis of heart disease than those who did not report a previous diagnosis of H/IO. Although the difference was significant, the number of probands who reported a diagnosis of heart disease was small. A total of 13.4% of probands with no history of H/IO had a family member who responded “no” to H/IO, whereas 62.1% of probands with a history of H/IO had a family member who responded “yes” to H/IO ( P < .0001). The sensitivities of proband reports of family history ranged from 18.39% for liver disease to 81.43% for H/IO ( Table 4 ). The sensitivity was highest for H/IO and diabetes, and lowest for liver disease. The specificities for diabetes, liver disease, and heart disease were greater than 94% ( Table 4 ). The ? values were higher for H/IO and diabetes than for the other conditions. The sensitivity and specificity of a proband who reported a family history of H/IO and that family member having the disorder were 75.0 and 91.5, respectively. There was 100% concordance of HFE genotype C282Y/C282Y in 6 probands and 8 of their siblings who reported having H/IO. Five other probands who reported no previous diagnosis of H/IO also were homozygous for HFE C282Y. Five of their 6 siblings (83.3%) also were C282Y homozygotes. A comparison of family history of H/IO reported by probands representing all racial/ethnic groups with that of controls resulted in an odds ratio of 14.5 (95% confidence intervals, 7.4 –28.5; P < .0001). A comparison of family history of H/IO reported by Caucasian probands with that of Caucasian controls resulted in an odds ratio of 17.0 (95% confidence intervals, 7.5–38.3; P < .0001).  Results The characteristics of study participants are displayed in Table 1 . There were 141 probands and 549 family members. Ninety-nine of the 141 probands were C282Y homozygotes (70.21%), and 54 (54.5%) had increased TS and SF at the initial screening. Seventy-nine percent of the probands were Caucasian. There were no statistically significant differences between the sex and race of probands and family members. The average age of probands was greater than that of the family members ( P < .0001) ( Table 1 ). Table 2 summarizes the prevalence of disorders self-reported by probands and family members. The prevalences of H/IO and arthritis were greater in probands than in family members ( P < .0001 and P = .0037, respectively). Arthritis was the most prevalent condition reported by both probands and family members. A total of 20.6% of probands reported a previous diagnosis of H/IO. There was no significant difference in the reporting of arthritis, liver disease, or diabetes between probands who reported a previous diagnosis of H/IO and those who did not report a previous diagnosis of H/IO ( Table 3 ). More probands who previously had reported a diagnosis of H/IO also reported a diagnosis of heart disease than those who did not report a previous diagnosis of H/IO. Although the difference was significant, the number of probands who reported a diagnosis of heart disease was small. A total of 13.4% of probands with no history of H/IO had a family member who responded “no” to H/IO, whereas 62.1% of probands with a history of H/IO had a family member who responded “yes” to H/IO ( P < .0001). The sensitivities of proband reports of family history ranged from 18.39% for liver disease to 81.43% for H/IO ( Table 4 ). The sensitivity was highest for H/IO and diabetes, and lowest for liver disease. The specificities for diabetes, liver disease, and heart disease were greater than 94% ( Table 4 ). The ? values were higher for H/IO and diabetes than for the other conditions. The sensitivity and specificity of a proband who reported a family history of H/IO and that family member having the disorder were 75.0 and 91.5, respectively. There was 100% concordance of HFE genotype C282Y/C282Y in 6 probands and 8 of their siblings who reported having H/IO. Five other probands who reported no previous diagnosis of H/IO also were homozygous for HFE C282Y. Five of their 6 siblings (83.3%) also were C282Y homozygotes. A comparison of family history of H/IO reported by probands representing all racial/ethnic groups with that of controls resulted in an odds ratio of 14.5 (95% confidence intervals, 7.4 –28.5; P < .0001). A comparison of family history of H/IO reported by Caucasian probands with that of Caucasian controls resulted in an odds ratio of 17.0 (95% confidence intervals, 7.5–38.3; P < .0001).  Discussion Family history of disease information is a relatively simple and cost-effective tool to identify persons at high risk who could benefit from preventive interventions. 8 A family history of disease (eg, cardiovascular disease and diabetes), also can motivate persons to adopt preventive health behaviors. 17 , 18 Although family history of H/IO information can be used to identify persons at high risk for H/IO, earlier reports indicated that the validity and utility of the information obtained needed to be assessed. 19 Persons with a family history of H/IO are at risk for developing H/IO 20 and may need iron phenotyping, genetic counseling, and HFE mutation analysis. Early diagnosis and therapeutic phlebotomy to remove excess iron can reduce the risk of developing hepatic cirrhosis, primary liver cancer, arthropathy, diabetes, hypogonadism, and cardiomyopathy. 4 , 21 , 22 Further, C282Y homozygotes are more likely to comply with recommendations to achieve and maintain iron depletion by phlebotomy than persons with H/IO phenotypes associated with other HFE genotypes. 23 The sensitivities and specificities of probands’ reports of their relative’s H/IO were 81.43% and 97.34%, respectively. The sensitivity for H/IO reports was higher than that of the other reported medical conditions, and the specificity was the second highest. Although the specificity for liver disease was the highest, only 2 participants reported having liver disease. The sensitivities for diabetes (57.86%) and heart disease (37.35%) were less, but the specificities were similar to those of a study of coronary heart disease, 24 and studies of coronary heart disease, diabetes, and hypertension. 25 , 26 Public knowledge of H/IO in North America may be low, as it is in other countries. 27 , 28 Many physicians have inadequate knowledge about H/IO, fail to obtain adequate family history of disease information, 29 and misdiagnose or delay diagnosis of H/IO. 30 Greater awareness of hemochromatosis and iron overload among patients and physicians and the use of family history of disease information could help identify high-risk individuals who would benefit from preventive interventions. In conclusion, probands reported having family members who had H/IO with great sensitivity and specificity, similar to reports for other common disorders. 24 – 26 The risk of having H/IO was associated significantly with a positive family history for H/IO. Moreover, all probands and their siblings reporting H/IO were C282Y homozygotes. We also observed that probands with C282Y/C282Y or increased values of SF and TS reported more family members with H/IO or an associated disorder than controls without C282Y/C282Y or increased values of SF and/or TS. Thus, a self-reported family history of H/IO can be used to identify family members of index patients whose risk of H/IO and associated conditions is increased. Such at-risk family members could be informed of their risk by the corresponding proband with the hopes that the family members would present themselves voluntarily for evaluation with iron phenotyping, HFE mutation analysis, and genetic counseling.  Discussion Family history of disease information is a relatively simple and cost-effective tool to identify persons at high risk who could benefit from preventive interventions. 8 A family history of disease (eg, cardiovascular disease and diabetes), also can motivate persons to adopt preventive health behaviors. 17 , 18 Although family history of H/IO information can be used to identify persons at high risk for H/IO, earlier reports indicated that the validity and utility of the information obtained needed to be assessed. 19 Persons with a family history of H/IO are at risk for developing H/IO 20 and may need iron phenotyping, genetic counseling, and HFE mutation analysis. Early diagnosis and therapeutic phlebotomy to remove excess iron can reduce the risk of developing hepatic cirrhosis, primary liver cancer, arthropathy, diabetes, hypogonadism, and cardiomyopathy. 4 , 21 , 22 Further, C282Y homozygotes are more likely to comply with recommendations to achieve and maintain iron depletion by phlebotomy than persons with H/IO phenotypes associated with other HFE genotypes. 23 The sensitivities and specificities of probands’ reports of their relative’s H/IO were 81.43% and 97.34%, respectively. The sensitivity for H/IO reports was higher than that of the other reported medical conditions, and the specificity was the second highest. Although the specificity for liver disease was the highest, only 2 participants reported having liver disease. The sensitivities for diabetes (57.86%) and heart disease (37.35%) were less, but the specificities were similar to those of a study of coronary heart disease, 24 and studies of coronary heart disease, diabetes, and hypertension. 25 , 26 Public knowledge of H/IO in North America may be low, as it is in other countries. 27 , 28 Many physicians have inadequate knowledge about H/IO, fail to obtain adequate family history of disease information, 29 and misdiagnose or delay diagnosis of H/IO. 30 Greater awareness of hemochromatosis and iron overload among patients and physicians and the use of family history of disease information could help identify high-risk individuals who would benefit from preventive interventions. In conclusion, probands reported having family members who had H/IO with great sensitivity and specificity, similar to reports for other common disorders. 24 – 26 The risk of having H/IO was associated significantly with a positive family history for H/IO. Moreover, all probands and their siblings reporting H/IO were C282Y homozygotes. We also observed that probands with C282Y/C282Y or increased values of SF and TS reported more family members with H/IO or an associated disorder than controls without C282Y/C282Y or increased values of SF and/or TS. Thus, a self-reported family history of H/IO can be used to identify family members of index patients whose risk of H/IO and associated conditions is increased. Such at-risk family members could be informed of their risk by the corresponding proband with the hopes that the family members would present themselves voluntarily for evaluation with iron phenotyping, HFE mutation analysis, and genetic counseling. 