Hepatopulmonary Syndrome: Use of Extracorporeal Life Support for Life-Threatening Hypoxia Following Liver Transplantation Hepatopulmonary syndrome is an uncommon complication of nonacute liver failure, and in rare cases, hypoxia may be the presenting sign of liver dysfunction. The condition, once thought to be a contraindication, is improved in most cases by transplantation. There is a significant risk of postoperative, hypoxia-related morbidity and mortality in patients with hepatopulmonary syndrome. We present a case of life-threatening hypoxia following liver transplantation for liver failure and associated hepatopulmonary syndrome, with successful management using extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.  DISCUSSION For many years, severe HPS was a contraindication to liver transplantation. More recently, however, case reports and series have demonstrated a reversal of this process with liver transplantation. 2 Worsening of hypoxemia may occur and contribute to posttransplantation mortality; however, if the posttransplant period is survived, the outcome is generally favorable with reversal of hypoxemia. 12 – 13 , 15 – 17 The degree of pre-OLT hypoxia associated with HPS has been felt to further delineate patients at greatest risk for postoperative complications and reduced survival; in one study, a PaO2 < 60 mmHg was associated with an increased mortality, 11 whereas a subsequent study reports a threshold for survival with a PaO2 < 50 mmHg. 14 Regardless, significant hypoxia associated with HPS appears to portend an increased risk for complications and mortality after OLT. Although management of severe hypoxia related to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) in neonatal and pediatric patients using ECMO is not a novel concept, its use after OLT for pulmonary complications is infrequently reported, with no reference to patients with HPS among these cases. Jeng et al. 18 reported ECMO support for hypoxia-mediated ARDS that developed after OLT for end-stage liver disease secondary to hemochromatosis and hepatitis B infection. This 37-year-old female was placed on ECMO (no indication of mode) on postoperative day 18 and survived for 10 days until the development of severe intracranial hemorrhage necessitating withdrawal of care. Szocik et al. 19 reported ECMO support for a massive pulmonary embolism that developed intraoperatively in a 54-year-old female with biliary cirrhosis undergoing OLT. She was supported with ECMO (no indication of mode) intraoperatively and weaned from support in the operative suite. She died 9 weeks after OLT secondary to multiorgan failure mediated by venacaval thrombosis. Fujita et al. 20 reported V-V ECMO support in a 1-month-old female who developed pulmonary hemorrhage on postoperative day 27 after OLT for idiopathic neonatal hepatitis. She was supported for a total of 4 days without complication with repeat OLT performed on ECMO on day 2 of support. She was weaned from ECMO and survived to hospital discharge. Additional reference to ECMO support post liver transplantation was noted within a series documenting pediatric pulmonary complications after OLT. 21 Three patients ranging from 4 to 9 months of age were supported with ECMO after OLT for respiratory tract infections with respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza virus, and pseudomonas. Two of the 3 patients were reported to survive to hospital discharge. The use of ECMO to support patients in the posttransplantation period needs to be weighed against the 3 main risks: anticoagulation, cannula placement, and infection. Although systemic anticoagulation is required during ECMO, the bleeding complications are usually manageable even in patients in the postoperative period. A growing population supported on ECMO in this modern era is neonates requiring support after congenital cardiac surgery correction. 22 Although bleeding is not uncommon in this group, it is successfully managed by minimization of heparin infusion rates to target activated clotting times in the lowest tolerable range. Cannula placement also requires consideration after OLT, especially in the pediatric population. Current ECMO coaxial or double lumen catheter sizes are restricted to 18 French and smaller, necessitating bicaval cannulation in patients greater than 15 kg for V-V support. Hence, the transplant surgeon will consider the risk of femoral cannulation and proximity to graft anastomosis against the risk for carotid artery sacrifice necessary for venoarterial cannulation. Finally, infectious complications with ECMO are minimized by aseptic technique and nursing care but remain a concern for any patient on ECMO. Immunosuppression associated with solid organ transplant does not appear to be a contraindication to ECMO as experience grows with supporting posttransplantation organ failure. 23 , 24 We present a case report of extracorporeal life support for life-threatening hypoxia complicating HPS after OLT in a pediatric patient. The likely etiology of his respiratory decompensation was exacerbation of severe HPS by sepsis (as outlined by the International Pediatric Sepsis Consensus Conference) -induced ARDS. 25 Elimination of the source of bacteremia by removal of the colonized central venous catheter, implementing broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy, and allowing lung parenchymal normalization are what ultimately reversed his condition. However, the severity of his respiratory failure and decompensation required more support than conventional ventilatory strategies could provide. Using V-V ECMO to provide this support while ARDS and bacteremia could be treated was successful, as it gave the management team the ability to carry out effective lung recruitment and pulmonary toileting strategies during the period of improvement in intrapulmonary shunting. Because of the marked advances in conventional ventilatory management, fewer patients are supported with ECMO for traditional respiratory failure. However, this does not make ECMO obsolete, as it clearly still has a role in complex, physiologically challenging patients. In this case, ECMO provided a safe and viable option for severe hypoxemic respiratory failure in conjunction with HPS in the post–liver transplantation period.  DISCUSSION For many years, severe HPS was a contraindication to liver transplantation. More recently, however, case reports and series have demonstrated a reversal of this process with liver transplantation. 2 Worsening of hypoxemia may occur and contribute to posttransplantation mortality; however, if the posttransplant period is survived, the outcome is generally favorable with reversal of hypoxemia. 12 – 13 , 15 – 17 The degree of pre-OLT hypoxia associated with HPS has been felt to further delineate patients at greatest risk for postoperative complications and reduced survival; in one study, a PaO2 < 60 mmHg was associated with an increased mortality, 11 whereas a subsequent study reports a threshold for survival with a PaO2 < 50 mmHg. 14 Regardless, significant hypoxia associated with HPS appears to portend an increased risk for complications and mortality after OLT. Although management of severe hypoxia related to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) in neonatal and pediatric patients using ECMO is not a novel concept, its use after OLT for pulmonary complications is infrequently reported, with no reference to patients with HPS among these cases. Jeng et al. 18 reported ECMO support for hypoxia-mediated ARDS that developed after OLT for end-stage liver disease secondary to hemochromatosis and hepatitis B infection. This 37-year-old female was placed on ECMO (no indication of mode) on postoperative day 18 and survived for 10 days until the development of severe intracranial hemorrhage necessitating withdrawal of care. Szocik et al. 19 reported ECMO support for a massive pulmonary embolism that developed intraoperatively in a 54-year-old female with biliary cirrhosis undergoing OLT. She was supported with ECMO (no indication of mode) intraoperatively and weaned from support in the operative suite. She died 9 weeks after OLT secondary to multiorgan failure mediated by venacaval thrombosis. Fujita et al. 20 reported V-V ECMO support in a 1-month-old female who developed pulmonary hemorrhage on postoperative day 27 after OLT for idiopathic neonatal hepatitis. She was supported for a total of 4 days without complication with repeat OLT performed on ECMO on day 2 of support. She was weaned from ECMO and survived to hospital discharge. Additional reference to ECMO support post liver transplantation was noted within a series documenting pediatric pulmonary complications after OLT. 21 Three patients ranging from 4 to 9 months of age were supported with ECMO after OLT for respiratory tract infections with respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza virus, and pseudomonas. Two of the 3 patients were reported to survive to hospital discharge. The use of ECMO to support patients in the posttransplantation period needs to be weighed against the 3 main risks: anticoagulation, cannula placement, and infection. Although systemic anticoagulation is required during ECMO, the bleeding complications are usually manageable even in patients in the postoperative period. A growing population supported on ECMO in this modern era is neonates requiring support after congenital cardiac surgery correction. 22 Although bleeding is not uncommon in this group, it is successfully managed by minimization of heparin infusion rates to target activated clotting times in the lowest tolerable range. Cannula placement also requires consideration after OLT, especially in the pediatric population. Current ECMO coaxial or double lumen catheter sizes are restricted to 18 French and smaller, necessitating bicaval cannulation in patients greater than 15 kg for V-V support. Hence, the transplant surgeon will consider the risk of femoral cannulation and proximity to graft anastomosis against the risk for carotid artery sacrifice necessary for venoarterial cannulation. Finally, infectious complications with ECMO are minimized by aseptic technique and nursing care but remain a concern for any patient on ECMO. Immunosuppression associated with solid organ transplant does not appear to be a contraindication to ECMO as experience grows with supporting posttransplantation organ failure. 23 , 24 We present a case report of extracorporeal life support for life-threatening hypoxia complicating HPS after OLT in a pediatric patient. The likely etiology of his respiratory decompensation was exacerbation of severe HPS by sepsis (as outlined by the International Pediatric Sepsis Consensus Conference) -induced ARDS. 25 Elimination of the source of bacteremia by removal of the colonized central venous catheter, implementing broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy, and allowing lung parenchymal normalization are what ultimately reversed his condition. However, the severity of his respiratory failure and decompensation required more support than conventional ventilatory strategies could provide. Using V-V ECMO to provide this support while ARDS and bacteremia could be treated was successful, as it gave the management team the ability to carry out effective lung recruitment and pulmonary toileting strategies during the period of improvement in intrapulmonary shunting. Because of the marked advances in conventional ventilatory management, fewer patients are supported with ECMO for traditional respiratory failure. However, this does not make ECMO obsolete, as it clearly still has a role in complex, physiologically challenging patients. In this case, ECMO provided a safe and viable option for severe hypoxemic respiratory failure in conjunction with HPS in the post–liver transplantation period. 