In vivo vitamin E administration attenuates interleukin-6 and interleukin-1? responses to an acute inflammatory insult in mouse skeletal and cardiac muscle Antioxidants are associated with reduced pro-inflammatory cytokine expression in immune cells and isolated tissues; however, no studies have examined whether short-term vitamin E administration is associated with reduced lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced cytokine expression in mouse skeletal and cardiac muscle, in vivo . These experiments tested the hypothesis that vitamin E administration attenuates nuclear factor ?B(NF-?B), IL-6, IL-1? and tumour necrosis factor ? (TNF?) responses in skeletal and cardiac muscle to an inflammatory challenge induced by systemic LPS. We compared IL-6, IL-1? and TNF? mRNA and protein, activated NF-?B and total oxidized proteins in skeletal and cardiac muscle 4 or 24 h after saline or LPS injection in mice receiving vitamin E or placebo for 3 days prior to the insult. Skeletal and cardiac IL-6 mRNA and protein were significantly elevated by LPS in both groups, but responses were significantly lower in vitamin E- compared with placebo-treated mice. In skeletal and cardiac muscle, LPS increased IL-1? mRNA and protein in placebo- but not vitamin E-treated mice. Lipopolysaccharide-induced levels of cardiac IL-1? mRNA and protein and skeletal IL-1? mRNA were lower with vitamin E than placebo. Lipopolysaccharide-induced NF-?B activation and increases in total oxidized proteins were attenuated with vitamin E compared with placebo in both tissues. Vitamin E decreased LPS-induced increases in plasma IL-1? but not IL-6 compared with placebo. The major results provide the first in vivo evidence that short-term vitamin E administration reduces IL-6 and IL-1? responses to LPS in skeletal and cardiac muscle and prevents LPS-induced increases in NF-?B activation and total oxidized proteins.  Methods Animals and experimental design Experiments were approved by the Animal Use Committee at the University of Illinois and followed the American Physiological Society Animal Care Guidelines. Adult (4-month-old) male, Balb/C mice were assigned to one of the following groups ( n =12 per group, 6 per time point): placebo–saline, placebo–LPS, vitamin E–saline and vitamin E–LPS. For three consecutive days, mice in the vitamin E groups were injected i.p. with vegetable oil containing 20% ethyl alcohol, 1% benzyl alcohol and 20 mg d -(±)-?-tocopherol (670 mg kg?1, Sigma) and mice in the placebo groups were injected i.p. with vegetable oil containing 20% ethyl alcohol, 1% benzyl alcohol and 0 mg d -(±)-?-tocopherol. This dose of d -(±)-?-tocopherol was chosen because it has been previously shown in our laboratory to significantly increase the levels of d -(±)-?-tocopherol in several mouse tissues, including liver, brain and plasma ( Berg et al. 2004 ; Godbout et al. 2004 ). On the fourth day, sterile saline (vehicle) or LPS (serotype 0127:B8, Sigma) was injected i.p. at a dose of 0.33 mg kg?1 in 0.1 ml. Four or 24 h post-injection, mice were killed by carbon dioxide inhalation, and both gastrocnemius muscles and the heart were quickly removed, trimmed of excess fat and connective tissue, wet weighed, frozen on dry ice and stored at ?80°C until subsequent analysis. For skeletal muscle analyses, one gastrocnemius was used for protein and the other for mRNA. The heart was cut along the sagittal plane, with one half used for mRNA and the other for protein analyses. Pilot studies showed no regional differences in mRNA or protein expression in the heart. Blood samples were drawn from the abdominal aorta into EDTA-coated 1 ml syringes, and the resultant plasma was stored at ?80°C. Analyses of mRNA Gastrocnemius and heart muscle samples (50–60 mg) were homogenized in 1 ml of TRI Reagent (Molecular Research Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA), and RNA was extracted according to the manufacturer’s protocol. DNAase (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA, USA) treatment was performed according to manufacturer’s protocol. The concentration of RNA was determined with a spectrophotometer and the RNA was stored at ?80°C. Quantitative real time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was used to determine the expression of IL-6, TNF? and IL-1? mRNA relative to ?-actin as described previously ( Meador et al. 2008 ). Total RNA (1 µg) from each muscle sample was reverse-transcribed using the Stratascript first strand synthesis system (Stratagene). A 1 µl aliquot of the reverse transcription product was added to a reaction mix containing 1× Full velocity™ SYBR ® Green (Stratagene) and 150 n m of the IL-6, TNF?, IL-1? or ?-actin primer pairs. We have previously shown that ?-actin mRNA expression is not acutely altered by LPS treatment ( Meador et al. 2008 ). The RT-PCRs were performed with a Stratagene M×3000P with the following parameters: a denaturing step at 95°C for 5 min, followed by 40 cycles of 10 s at 95°C and 30 s at 60°C. The primer sequences were as follows: for ? actin, forward 5?-CTGGTCGTACCACAGGCATT-3?, reverse 5?-CTCTTTGATGTCACGCACGA-3?; for IL-6, forward 5?-CTTGGGACTGATGCTGGTGA-3?, reverse 5?-TGCAAGTGCATCATCGTTGT-3?; for TNF?, forward 5?-ACCCCCTGAGTCTGCTCAAT-3?, reverse 5?-CCTGGTGGGACTTGGTTGTA-3?; and for IL-1?, forward 5?-GCTCATCTGGGATCCTCTCC-3?, reverse 5?-CCTGCCTGAAGCTCTTGTTG-3? (Operon, Huntsville, AL, USA)and generated fragments of 209, 191, 177 and 242 bp, respectively. Fluorescence measurements were taken at the end of each cycle (60°C product extension period). After amplification, a melting curve analysis was performed to verify amplification product specificity and absence of primer–dimer complexes. All PCRs were performed in duplicate for each reverse transcription product. Relative expressions of IL-6, TNF? and IL-1? were normalized by subtracting the corresponding ?-actin threshold cycle ( C T) values and using the ?? C T comparative method ( Schmittgen et al. 2000 ). Data are expressed as fold changes relative to saline control in placebo-treated mice. Protein isolation Gastrocnemius and heart muscles (50–60 mg) were homogenized in 10 volumes of an ice-cold buffer containing 50 m m Tris-HCl (pH 7.8), 2 m m potassium phosphate, 2 m m EDTA, 2 m m EDTA, 10% glycerol, 1% Triton X-100, 1 m m dithiothreitol, 3 m m benzamidine, 1 m m sodium orthovanadate, 10 m m leupeptin, 5 mg ml?1 aprotinin and 1 m m 4-[(2-aminoethyl) benzenesulphonyl fluoride] using a motor-driven glass pestle. The homogenate was immediately centrifuged at 12 000 g for 20 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was removed as the detergent-soluble fraction. Protein concentrations were determined using the BioRad Protein Assay (Hercules, CA, USA) with bovine serum albumin for the standard curve. Samples were stored immediately in aliquots at ?80°C for subsequent enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and OxyBlot analysis. ELISA analysis Interleukin-6, TNF? and IL-1? concentrations were measured in skeletal and cardiac muscle lysates and plasma by validated kits (Endogen, Rockford, IL, USA) with a detection limit of 7, 9 and 3 pg ml?1, respectively, as described previously ( Meador et al. 2008 ). Cytokine concentrations were expressed as picograms per milligram protein or picograms per millilitre for muscle and plasma, respectively. Nuclear factor ?B activation A StressXpress assay kit (EKS-445, Assay Designs, Ann Arbor, MI, USA) was used to measure the active form of NF-?B p50 according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The NF-?B p50 subunit possesses DNA binding activity. Briefly, 10 µl of isolated skeletal or cardiac cell lysates were added to streptavidin-coated plates with a bound NF-?B biotinylated-consensus sequence to capture only the active form. This assay did not require nuclear extracts, and initial pilot testing with whole cell versus nuclear extracts demonstrated no significant differences between these sample types. The captured active NF-?B was incubated with an NF-?B antibody specific to the p50 subunit and subsequently detected using a horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody. A wild-type or mutant NF-?B competitor duplex was used to ensure signal specificity. The assay was developed with a chemiluminescent substrate, and the luminescence signal was quantified in a Biotek Synergy HT plate reader (Winooski, VT, USA). Detection of protein carbonyls The OxyBlot protein oxidation detection kit (Chemicon, Temecula, CA, USA) was used according to the manufacturer’s protocol to detect skeletal or cardiac muscle protein modified by oxygen free radicals or other reactive oxygen species. OxyBlot is a well-established technique to measure the total amount of oxidized proteins in a sample. Oxidative modification of proteins by oxygen free radicals and other reactive species results in the introduction of carbonyl groups into protein side-chains. These carbonyl groups are derivatized to 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazone by a reaction with 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (DNP). Briefly, 15 µg of total protein from skeletal or cardiac lysates were denatured with SDS and then incubated for 15 min with DNP at room temperature. The DNP-derivated proteins were loaded on a 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gel and following electrophoresis and transfer were detected by Western blotting with an antibody specific to the DNP moiety of the proteins. Equal loading was verified by Ponceau S (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) staining immediately following protein transfer. Bound antibodies were detected with enhanced chemiluminescence (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ, USA). Quantification of the bands was performed using ImageQuant Analysis software (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA). According to manufacturer’s instructions, the total area of oxidized proteins was quantified and compared among saline and LPS conditions. Statistical analyses All data are presented as means±1 s.e.m. To test our hypothesis that vitamin E administration would attenuate inflammatory responses 4 h following an acute inflammatory insult, a two-way ANOVA was used to assess main effects of intervention (placebo versus vitamin E), and treatment (saline versus LPS) and interactions between intervention and treatment for all variables. A second two-way ANOVA was used to test our exploratory hypothesis at the 24 h time point. All analyses were performed with GraphPad Prism 4.0 (San Diego, CA, USA) with the significance level set at P <0.05.  Animals and experimental design Experiments were approved by the Animal Use Committee at the University of Illinois and followed the American Physiological Society Animal Care Guidelines. Adult (4-month-old) male, Balb/C mice were assigned to one of the following groups ( n =12 per group, 6 per time point): placebo–saline, placebo–LPS, vitamin E–saline and vitamin E–LPS. For three consecutive days, mice in the vitamin E groups were injected i.p. with vegetable oil containing 20% ethyl alcohol, 1% benzyl alcohol and 20 mg d -(±)-?-tocopherol (670 mg kg?1, Sigma) and mice in the placebo groups were injected i.p. with vegetable oil containing 20% ethyl alcohol, 1% benzyl alcohol and 0 mg d -(±)-?-tocopherol. This dose of d -(±)-?-tocopherol was chosen because it has been previously shown in our laboratory to significantly increase the levels of d -(±)-?-tocopherol in several mouse tissues, including liver, brain and plasma ( Berg et al. 2004 ; Godbout et al. 2004 ). On the fourth day, sterile saline (vehicle) or LPS (serotype 0127:B8, Sigma) was injected i.p. at a dose of 0.33 mg kg?1 in 0.1 ml. Four or 24 h post-injection, mice were killed by carbon dioxide inhalation, and both gastrocnemius muscles and the heart were quickly removed, trimmed of excess fat and connective tissue, wet weighed, frozen on dry ice and stored at ?80°C until subsequent analysis. For skeletal muscle analyses, one gastrocnemius was used for protein and the other for mRNA. The heart was cut along the sagittal plane, with one half used for mRNA and the other for protein analyses. Pilot studies showed no regional differences in mRNA or protein expression in the heart. Blood samples were drawn from the abdominal aorta into EDTA-coated 1 ml syringes, and the resultant plasma was stored at ?80°C.  Analyses of mRNA Gastrocnemius and heart muscle samples (50–60 mg) were homogenized in 1 ml of TRI Reagent (Molecular Research Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA), and RNA was extracted according to the manufacturer’s protocol. DNAase (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA, USA) treatment was performed according to manufacturer’s protocol. The concentration of RNA was determined with a spectrophotometer and the RNA was stored at ?80°C. Quantitative real time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was used to determine the expression of IL-6, TNF? and IL-1? mRNA relative to ?-actin as described previously ( Meador et al. 2008 ). Total RNA (1 µg) from each muscle sample was reverse-transcribed using the Stratascript first strand synthesis system (Stratagene). A 1 µl aliquot of the reverse transcription product was added to a reaction mix containing 1× Full velocity™ SYBR ® Green (Stratagene) and 150 n m of the IL-6, TNF?, IL-1? or ?-actin primer pairs. We have previously shown that ?-actin mRNA expression is not acutely altered by LPS treatment ( Meador et al. 2008 ). The RT-PCRs were performed with a Stratagene M×3000P with the following parameters: a denaturing step at 95°C for 5 min, followed by 40 cycles of 10 s at 95°C and 30 s at 60°C. The primer sequences were as follows: for ? actin, forward 5?-CTGGTCGTACCACAGGCATT-3?, reverse 5?-CTCTTTGATGTCACGCACGA-3?; for IL-6, forward 5?-CTTGGGACTGATGCTGGTGA-3?, reverse 5?-TGCAAGTGCATCATCGTTGT-3?; for TNF?, forward 5?-ACCCCCTGAGTCTGCTCAAT-3?, reverse 5?-CCTGGTGGGACTTGGTTGTA-3?; and for IL-1?, forward 5?-GCTCATCTGGGATCCTCTCC-3?, reverse 5?-CCTGCCTGAAGCTCTTGTTG-3? (Operon, Huntsville, AL, USA)and generated fragments of 209, 191, 177 and 242 bp, respectively. Fluorescence measurements were taken at the end of each cycle (60°C product extension period). After amplification, a melting curve analysis was performed to verify amplification product specificity and absence of primer–dimer complexes. All PCRs were performed in duplicate for each reverse transcription product. Relative expressions of IL-6, TNF? and IL-1? were normalized by subtracting the corresponding ?-actin threshold cycle ( C T) values and using the ?? C T comparative method ( Schmittgen et al. 2000 ). Data are expressed as fold changes relative to saline control in placebo-treated mice.  Protein isolation Gastrocnemius and heart muscles (50–60 mg) were homogenized in 10 volumes of an ice-cold buffer containing 50 m m Tris-HCl (pH 7.8), 2 m m potassium phosphate, 2 m m EDTA, 2 m m EDTA, 10% glycerol, 1% Triton X-100, 1 m m dithiothreitol, 3 m m benzamidine, 1 m m sodium orthovanadate, 10 m m leupeptin, 5 mg ml?1 aprotinin and 1 m m 4-[(2-aminoethyl) benzenesulphonyl fluoride] using a motor-driven glass pestle. The homogenate was immediately centrifuged at 12 000 g for 20 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was removed as the detergent-soluble fraction. Protein concentrations were determined using the BioRad Protein Assay (Hercules, CA, USA) with bovine serum albumin for the standard curve. Samples were stored immediately in aliquots at ?80°C for subsequent enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and OxyBlot analysis.  ELISA analysis Interleukin-6, TNF? and IL-1? concentrations were measured in skeletal and cardiac muscle lysates and plasma by validated kits (Endogen, Rockford, IL, USA) with a detection limit of 7, 9 and 3 pg ml?1, respectively, as described previously ( Meador et al. 2008 ). Cytokine concentrations were expressed as picograms per milligram protein or picograms per millilitre for muscle and plasma, respectively.  Nuclear factor ?B activation A StressXpress assay kit (EKS-445, Assay Designs, Ann Arbor, MI, USA) was used to measure the active form of NF-?B p50 according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The NF-?B p50 subunit possesses DNA binding activity. Briefly, 10 µl of isolated skeletal or cardiac cell lysates were added to streptavidin-coated plates with a bound NF-?B biotinylated-consensus sequence to capture only the active form. This assay did not require nuclear extracts, and initial pilot testing with whole cell versus nuclear extracts demonstrated no significant differences between these sample types. The captured active NF-?B was incubated with an NF-?B antibody specific to the p50 subunit and subsequently detected using a horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody. A wild-type or mutant NF-?B competitor duplex was used to ensure signal specificity. The assay was developed with a chemiluminescent substrate, and the luminescence signal was quantified in a Biotek Synergy HT plate reader (Winooski, VT, USA).  Detection of protein carbonyls The OxyBlot protein oxidation detection kit (Chemicon, Temecula, CA, USA) was used according to the manufacturer’s protocol to detect skeletal or cardiac muscle protein modified by oxygen free radicals or other reactive oxygen species. OxyBlot is a well-established technique to measure the total amount of oxidized proteins in a sample. Oxidative modification of proteins by oxygen free radicals and other reactive species results in the introduction of carbonyl groups into protein side-chains. These carbonyl groups are derivatized to 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazone by a reaction with 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (DNP). Briefly, 15 µg of total protein from skeletal or cardiac lysates were denatured with SDS and then incubated for 15 min with DNP at room temperature. The DNP-derivated proteins were loaded on a 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gel and following electrophoresis and transfer were detected by Western blotting with an antibody specific to the DNP moiety of the proteins. Equal loading was verified by Ponceau S (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) staining immediately following protein transfer. Bound antibodies were detected with enhanced chemiluminescence (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ, USA). Quantification of the bands was performed using ImageQuant Analysis software (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA). According to manufacturer’s instructions, the total area of oxidized proteins was quantified and compared among saline and LPS conditions.  Statistical analyses All data are presented as means±1 s.e.m. To test our hypothesis that vitamin E administration would attenuate inflammatory responses 4 h following an acute inflammatory insult, a two-way ANOVA was used to assess main effects of intervention (placebo versus vitamin E), and treatment (saline versus LPS) and interactions between intervention and treatment for all variables. A second two-way ANOVA was used to test our exploratory hypothesis at the 24 h time point. All analyses were performed with GraphPad Prism 4.0 (San Diego, CA, USA) with the significance level set at P <0.05.  Results Body weights Initial body weights were not different among groups (26.8±0.8, 27.4±1.0, 27.5±0.8 and 26.5±0.8 g for placebo–saline, placebo–LPS, vitamin E–saline and vitamin E–LPS groups, respectively). Additionally, no significant changes in body mass occurred within 4 or 24 h of LPS or saline exposure. Interleukin-6 mRNA and protein expression In skeletal muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in IL-6 mRNA in both groups relative to the saline control 4 h after saline or LPS injection ( Fig. 1 A ).However, in the mice receiving vitamin E, the LPS-induced increases in IL-6 mRNA were significantly reduced compared with mice receiving placebo ( Fig. 1 A ). At the protein level, LPS was associated with significant increases in IL-6 only in the mice receiving placebo, and LPS-induced IL-6 protein levels were significantly lower in the vitamin E-treated than the placebo-treated mice ( Fig. 1 B ). There were no significant differences among the groups 24 h after saline or LPS injection (data not shown). In cardiac muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in IL-6 mRNA in both groups relative to the saline control 4 h after saline or LPS injection; however, vitamin E administration significantly attenuated the response compared with placebo ( Fig. 1 C ). Lipopolysaccharide was associated with a significant increase in IL-6 protein only in the mice receiving placebo, and LPS-induced IL-6 protein levels were significantly lower in the vitamin E-treated than the placebo-treated mice ( Fig. 1 D ). At 24 h, LPS was associated with a significant increase in IL-6 mRNA in the placebo group (6.6±1.5-fold) but not the vitamin E group (3.5±0.8-fold) relative to the saline control (1.1±0.3- and 0.9±0.3-fold, respectively). These LPS-induced levels of IL-6 mRNA were significantly greater in mice receiving placebo than vitamin E. Interleukin-1? mRNA and protein expression In skeletal muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in IL-1? mRNA and protein levels only in the placebo-treated mice relative to the saline control 4 h after saline or LPS injection ( Fig. 2 A and B ). Further, LPS-induced levels of IL-1? mRNA were significantly lower in the mice receiving vitamin E compared with placebo ( Fig. 2 A ). There were no significant differences among the groups 24 h after saline or LPS injection (data not shown). In cardiac muscle, LPS was associated with significant increases in IL-1? mRNA and protein compared with the saline control only in the placebo-treated mice ( Fig. 2 C and D ). Lipopolysaccharide-induced IL-1? mRNA and protein levels in cardiac muscle were significantly higher in the mice receiving placebo compared with vitamin E ( Fig. 2 C and D ). There were no significant differences among the groups 24 h after saline or LPS injection (data not shown). Tumour necrosis factor ? mRNA and protein expression In skeletal muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in TNF? mRNA 4 h after administration in the placebo-treated mice only ( Fig. 3 A ). Lipopolysaccharide-induced TNF? mRNA levels were significantly higher in mice receiving placebo compared with vitamin E( Fig. 3 A ). There were no significant changes in TNF? protein in skeletal muscle 4 h after saline or LPS ( Fig. 3 B ). In cardiac muscle, there were no significant effects of LPS or vitamin E on TNF? mRNA or protein levels 4 h following saline or LPS ( Fig. 3 C and D ). Tumour necrosis factor ? mRNA and protein were not measured at 24 h because of the minimal changes observed at 4 h post-LPS. Nuclear factor ?B activation In both skeletal and cardiac muscle, LPS was associated with significant activation of NF-?B p50 relative to saline only in the placebo-treated mice ( Fig. 4 A and B ). Lipopolysaccharide-induced levels of active NF-?B p50 were significantly lower in mice receiving vitamin E compared with placebo ( Fig. 4 A and B ). There were no changes in activated NF-?B p50 24 h post-saline or post-LPS in either skeletal or cardiac muscle (data not shown). Total oxidized proteins In skeletal muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in oxidized proteins relative to saline only in the placebo-treated group ( Fig. 5 A ). Further, at 24 h the LPS-induced levels of total oxidized proteins were significantly lower in mice receiving vitamin E compared with placebo ( Fig. 5 A ). In cardiac muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in total oxidized proteins in the placebo group relative to saline, and the LPS-induced total oxidized protein levels were significantly greater in mice receiving placebo compared with vitamin E ( Fig. 5 B ). Plasma levels of IL-6, IL-1? and TNF? Lipopolysaccharide was associated with significant increases in plasma IL-6 in mice receiving either placebo or vitamin E compared with the saline control ( Table 1 ). Lipopolysaccharide was associated with significant increases in plasma IL-1? relative to saline in the placebo-treated mice only, and IL-1? levels after LPS were significantly greater in placebo-treated mice than vitamin E-treated mice ( Table 1 ).There were no significant changes in plasma TNF? levels in any group ( Table 1 ).  Results Body weights Initial body weights were not different among groups (26.8±0.8, 27.4±1.0, 27.5±0.8 and 26.5±0.8 g for placebo–saline, placebo–LPS, vitamin E–saline and vitamin E–LPS groups, respectively). Additionally, no significant changes in body mass occurred within 4 or 24 h of LPS or saline exposure. Interleukin-6 mRNA and protein expression In skeletal muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in IL-6 mRNA in both groups relative to the saline control 4 h after saline or LPS injection ( Fig. 1 A ).However, in the mice receiving vitamin E, the LPS-induced increases in IL-6 mRNA were significantly reduced compared with mice receiving placebo ( Fig. 1 A ). At the protein level, LPS was associated with significant increases in IL-6 only in the mice receiving placebo, and LPS-induced IL-6 protein levels were significantly lower in the vitamin E-treated than the placebo-treated mice ( Fig. 1 B ). There were no significant differences among the groups 24 h after saline or LPS injection (data not shown). In cardiac muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in IL-6 mRNA in both groups relative to the saline control 4 h after saline or LPS injection; however, vitamin E administration significantly attenuated the response compared with placebo ( Fig. 1 C ). Lipopolysaccharide was associated with a significant increase in IL-6 protein only in the mice receiving placebo, and LPS-induced IL-6 protein levels were significantly lower in the vitamin E-treated than the placebo-treated mice ( Fig. 1 D ). At 24 h, LPS was associated with a significant increase in IL-6 mRNA in the placebo group (6.6±1.5-fold) but not the vitamin E group (3.5±0.8-fold) relative to the saline control (1.1±0.3- and 0.9±0.3-fold, respectively). These LPS-induced levels of IL-6 mRNA were significantly greater in mice receiving placebo than vitamin E. Interleukin-1? mRNA and protein expression In skeletal muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in IL-1? mRNA and protein levels only in the placebo-treated mice relative to the saline control 4 h after saline or LPS injection ( Fig. 2 A and B ). Further, LPS-induced levels of IL-1? mRNA were significantly lower in the mice receiving vitamin E compared with placebo ( Fig. 2 A ). There were no significant differences among the groups 24 h after saline or LPS injection (data not shown). In cardiac muscle, LPS was associated with significant increases in IL-1? mRNA and protein compared with the saline control only in the placebo-treated mice ( Fig. 2 C and D ). Lipopolysaccharide-induced IL-1? mRNA and protein levels in cardiac muscle were significantly higher in the mice receiving placebo compared with vitamin E ( Fig. 2 C and D ). There were no significant differences among the groups 24 h after saline or LPS injection (data not shown). Tumour necrosis factor ? mRNA and protein expression In skeletal muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in TNF? mRNA 4 h after administration in the placebo-treated mice only ( Fig. 3 A ). Lipopolysaccharide-induced TNF? mRNA levels were significantly higher in mice receiving placebo compared with vitamin E( Fig. 3 A ). There were no significant changes in TNF? protein in skeletal muscle 4 h after saline or LPS ( Fig. 3 B ). In cardiac muscle, there were no significant effects of LPS or vitamin E on TNF? mRNA or protein levels 4 h following saline or LPS ( Fig. 3 C and D ). Tumour necrosis factor ? mRNA and protein were not measured at 24 h because of the minimal changes observed at 4 h post-LPS. Nuclear factor ?B activation In both skeletal and cardiac muscle, LPS was associated with significant activation of NF-?B p50 relative to saline only in the placebo-treated mice ( Fig. 4 A and B ). Lipopolysaccharide-induced levels of active NF-?B p50 were significantly lower in mice receiving vitamin E compared with placebo ( Fig. 4 A and B ). There were no changes in activated NF-?B p50 24 h post-saline or post-LPS in either skeletal or cardiac muscle (data not shown). Total oxidized proteins In skeletal muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in oxidized proteins relative to saline only in the placebo-treated group ( Fig. 5 A ). Further, at 24 h the LPS-induced levels of total oxidized proteins were significantly lower in mice receiving vitamin E compared with placebo ( Fig. 5 A ). In cardiac muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in total oxidized proteins in the placebo group relative to saline, and the LPS-induced total oxidized protein levels were significantly greater in mice receiving placebo compared with vitamin E ( Fig. 5 B ). Plasma levels of IL-6, IL-1? and TNF? Lipopolysaccharide was associated with significant increases in plasma IL-6 in mice receiving either placebo or vitamin E compared with the saline control ( Table 1 ). Lipopolysaccharide was associated with significant increases in plasma IL-1? relative to saline in the placebo-treated mice only, and IL-1? levels after LPS were significantly greater in placebo-treated mice than vitamin E-treated mice ( Table 1 ).There were no significant changes in plasma TNF? levels in any group ( Table 1 ).  Body weights Initial body weights were not different among groups (26.8±0.8, 27.4±1.0, 27.5±0.8 and 26.5±0.8 g for placebo–saline, placebo–LPS, vitamin E–saline and vitamin E–LPS groups, respectively). Additionally, no significant changes in body mass occurred within 4 or 24 h of LPS or saline exposure.  Body weights Initial body weights were not different among groups (26.8±0.8, 27.4±1.0, 27.5±0.8 and 26.5±0.8 g for placebo–saline, placebo–LPS, vitamin E–saline and vitamin E–LPS groups, respectively). Additionally, no significant changes in body mass occurred within 4 or 24 h of LPS or saline exposure.  Interleukin-6 mRNA and protein expression In skeletal muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in IL-6 mRNA in both groups relative to the saline control 4 h after saline or LPS injection ( Fig. 1 A ).However, in the mice receiving vitamin E, the LPS-induced increases in IL-6 mRNA were significantly reduced compared with mice receiving placebo ( Fig. 1 A ). At the protein level, LPS was associated with significant increases in IL-6 only in the mice receiving placebo, and LPS-induced IL-6 protein levels were significantly lower in the vitamin E-treated than the placebo-treated mice ( Fig. 1 B ). There were no significant differences among the groups 24 h after saline or LPS injection (data not shown). In cardiac muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in IL-6 mRNA in both groups relative to the saline control 4 h after saline or LPS injection; however, vitamin E administration significantly attenuated the response compared with placebo ( Fig. 1 C ). Lipopolysaccharide was associated with a significant increase in IL-6 protein only in the mice receiving placebo, and LPS-induced IL-6 protein levels were significantly lower in the vitamin E-treated than the placebo-treated mice ( Fig. 1 D ). At 24 h, LPS was associated with a significant increase in IL-6 mRNA in the placebo group (6.6±1.5-fold) but not the vitamin E group (3.5±0.8-fold) relative to the saline control (1.1±0.3- and 0.9±0.3-fold, respectively). These LPS-induced levels of IL-6 mRNA were significantly greater in mice receiving placebo than vitamin E.  Interleukin-6 mRNA and protein expression In skeletal muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in IL-6 mRNA in both groups relative to the saline control 4 h after saline or LPS injection ( Fig. 1 A ).However, in the mice receiving vitamin E, the LPS-induced increases in IL-6 mRNA were significantly reduced compared with mice receiving placebo ( Fig. 1 A ). At the protein level, LPS was associated with significant increases in IL-6 only in the mice receiving placebo, and LPS-induced IL-6 protein levels were significantly lower in the vitamin E-treated than the placebo-treated mice ( Fig. 1 B ). There were no significant differences among the groups 24 h after saline or LPS injection (data not shown). In cardiac muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in IL-6 mRNA in both groups relative to the saline control 4 h after saline or LPS injection; however, vitamin E administration significantly attenuated the response compared with placebo ( Fig. 1 C ). Lipopolysaccharide was associated with a significant increase in IL-6 protein only in the mice receiving placebo, and LPS-induced IL-6 protein levels were significantly lower in the vitamin E-treated than the placebo-treated mice ( Fig. 1 D ). At 24 h, LPS was associated with a significant increase in IL-6 mRNA in the placebo group (6.6±1.5-fold) but not the vitamin E group (3.5±0.8-fold) relative to the saline control (1.1±0.3- and 0.9±0.3-fold, respectively). These LPS-induced levels of IL-6 mRNA were significantly greater in mice receiving placebo than vitamin E.  Interleukin-1? mRNA and protein expression In skeletal muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in IL-1? mRNA and protein levels only in the placebo-treated mice relative to the saline control 4 h after saline or LPS injection ( Fig. 2 A and B ). Further, LPS-induced levels of IL-1? mRNA were significantly lower in the mice receiving vitamin E compared with placebo ( Fig. 2 A ). There were no significant differences among the groups 24 h after saline or LPS injection (data not shown). In cardiac muscle, LPS was associated with significant increases in IL-1? mRNA and protein compared with the saline control only in the placebo-treated mice ( Fig. 2 C and D ). Lipopolysaccharide-induced IL-1? mRNA and protein levels in cardiac muscle were significantly higher in the mice receiving placebo compared with vitamin E ( Fig. 2 C and D ). There were no significant differences among the groups 24 h after saline or LPS injection (data not shown).  Interleukin-1? mRNA and protein expression In skeletal muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in IL-1? mRNA and protein levels only in the placebo-treated mice relative to the saline control 4 h after saline or LPS injection ( Fig. 2 A and B ). Further, LPS-induced levels of IL-1? mRNA were significantly lower in the mice receiving vitamin E compared with placebo ( Fig. 2 A ). There were no significant differences among the groups 24 h after saline or LPS injection (data not shown). In cardiac muscle, LPS was associated with significant increases in IL-1? mRNA and protein compared with the saline control only in the placebo-treated mice ( Fig. 2 C and D ). Lipopolysaccharide-induced IL-1? mRNA and protein levels in cardiac muscle were significantly higher in the mice receiving placebo compared with vitamin E ( Fig. 2 C and D ). There were no significant differences among the groups 24 h after saline or LPS injection (data not shown).  Tumour necrosis factor ? mRNA and protein expression In skeletal muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in TNF? mRNA 4 h after administration in the placebo-treated mice only ( Fig. 3 A ). Lipopolysaccharide-induced TNF? mRNA levels were significantly higher in mice receiving placebo compared with vitamin E( Fig. 3 A ). There were no significant changes in TNF? protein in skeletal muscle 4 h after saline or LPS ( Fig. 3 B ). In cardiac muscle, there were no significant effects of LPS or vitamin E on TNF? mRNA or protein levels 4 h following saline or LPS ( Fig. 3 C and D ). Tumour necrosis factor ? mRNA and protein were not measured at 24 h because of the minimal changes observed at 4 h post-LPS.  Tumour necrosis factor ? mRNA and protein expression In skeletal muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in TNF? mRNA 4 h after administration in the placebo-treated mice only ( Fig. 3 A ). Lipopolysaccharide-induced TNF? mRNA levels were significantly higher in mice receiving placebo compared with vitamin E( Fig. 3 A ). There were no significant changes in TNF? protein in skeletal muscle 4 h after saline or LPS ( Fig. 3 B ). In cardiac muscle, there were no significant effects of LPS or vitamin E on TNF? mRNA or protein levels 4 h following saline or LPS ( Fig. 3 C and D ). Tumour necrosis factor ? mRNA and protein were not measured at 24 h because of the minimal changes observed at 4 h post-LPS.  Nuclear factor ?B activation In both skeletal and cardiac muscle, LPS was associated with significant activation of NF-?B p50 relative to saline only in the placebo-treated mice ( Fig. 4 A and B ). Lipopolysaccharide-induced levels of active NF-?B p50 were significantly lower in mice receiving vitamin E compared with placebo ( Fig. 4 A and B ). There were no changes in activated NF-?B p50 24 h post-saline or post-LPS in either skeletal or cardiac muscle (data not shown).  Nuclear factor ?B activation In both skeletal and cardiac muscle, LPS was associated with significant activation of NF-?B p50 relative to saline only in the placebo-treated mice ( Fig. 4 A and B ). Lipopolysaccharide-induced levels of active NF-?B p50 were significantly lower in mice receiving vitamin E compared with placebo ( Fig. 4 A and B ). There were no changes in activated NF-?B p50 24 h post-saline or post-LPS in either skeletal or cardiac muscle (data not shown).  Total oxidized proteins In skeletal muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in oxidized proteins relative to saline only in the placebo-treated group ( Fig. 5 A ). Further, at 24 h the LPS-induced levels of total oxidized proteins were significantly lower in mice receiving vitamin E compared with placebo ( Fig. 5 A ). In cardiac muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in total oxidized proteins in the placebo group relative to saline, and the LPS-induced total oxidized protein levels were significantly greater in mice receiving placebo compared with vitamin E ( Fig. 5 B ).  Total oxidized proteins In skeletal muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in oxidized proteins relative to saline only in the placebo-treated group ( Fig. 5 A ). Further, at 24 h the LPS-induced levels of total oxidized proteins were significantly lower in mice receiving vitamin E compared with placebo ( Fig. 5 A ). In cardiac muscle, LPS was associated with a significant increase in total oxidized proteins in the placebo group relative to saline, and the LPS-induced total oxidized protein levels were significantly greater in mice receiving placebo compared with vitamin E ( Fig. 5 B ).  Plasma levels of IL-6, IL-1? and TNF? Lipopolysaccharide was associated with significant increases in plasma IL-6 in mice receiving either placebo or vitamin E compared with the saline control ( Table 1 ). Lipopolysaccharide was associated with significant increases in plasma IL-1? relative to saline in the placebo-treated mice only, and IL-1? levels after LPS were significantly greater in placebo-treated mice than vitamin E-treated mice ( Table 1 ).There were no significant changes in plasma TNF? levels in any group ( Table 1 ).  Plasma levels of IL-6, IL-1? and TNF? Lipopolysaccharide was associated with significant increases in plasma IL-6 in mice receiving either placebo or vitamin E compared with the saline control ( Table 1 ). Lipopolysaccharide was associated with significant increases in plasma IL-1? relative to saline in the placebo-treated mice only, and IL-1? levels after LPS were significantly greater in placebo-treated mice than vitamin E-treated mice ( Table 1 ).There were no significant changes in plasma TNF? levels in any group ( Table 1 ).  Discussion The present findings provide the first in vivo evidence that short-term systemic administration of vitamin E significantly attenuates both skeletal and cardiac muscle IL-6 and IL-1? responses to an acute inflammatory insult. Further, vitamin E administration also blunted the LPS-induced increases in NF-?B activation and protein carbonyls in both skeletal and cardiac muscle. While inflammatory insults of this magnitude have been shown to be effectively resolved systemically within 24 h of the insult, the present results extend these findings to local cytokine responses in cardiac and skeletal muscle. Physiologically, the significance of these findings is highlighted by the fact that skeletal muscle comprises the largest organ system in the body (40–50% of body mass) and thus can play an important role in local and systemic inflammatory responses. In particular, skeletal muscle can produce large amounts of IL-6, which can act in an autocrine fashion ( Keller et al. 2003 ) and be released into the plasma to exert systemic actions ( Steensberg et al. 2000 ; Pedersen et al. 2001 ; Febbraio & Pedersen, 2002 ). In the present experiments, while IL-6 mRNA and protein responses to LPS were significantly attenuated with vitamin E administration compared with placebo in skeletal and cardiac muscle, these changes did not extend to the systemic level as had been previously shown following a bout of knee extensor exercise ( Fischer et al. 2004 ). Thus, this suggests that while skeletal muscle is a major source of plasma IL-6 during exercise, other sources of IL-6 contribute to plasma IL-6 during an inflammatory insult. In contrast, vitamin E administration effectively blunted LPS-induced increases in IL-1? in plasma and at the mRNA and protein levels in cardiac and skeletal muscle. To date no studies have quantified IL-6, IL-1? and TNF? mRNA and protein levels as well as activated NF-?B in skeletal and cardiac muscle lysates following an acute inflammatory insult in mice receiving vitamin E for three consecutive days. A comparison of mRNA and protein responses provides some insight regarding the effects of vitamin E on LPS-induced cytokine responses in striated muscle. For IL-6, cardiac and skeletal muscle mRNA levels were significantly increased with LPS relative to the saline control in all groups, although the response was attenuated with vitamin E compared with placebo. However, at the protein level, significant LPS-induced increases in IL-6 only occurred in the placebo group. Thus, vitamin E administration may impact regulatory steps, such as mRNA stability or translation efficiency, such that despite significant increases in IL-6 mRNA with LPS these changes were not extended to the functional protein level. In contrast to IL-6, LPS was not associated with any significant increases in IL-1? mRNA or protein in cardiac and skeletal muscle in mice receiving vitamin E. One possibility for the differences in the effects of vitamin E on expression of IL-6 and IL-1? may be the quantitative differences in their expression, since at the protein level IL-6 is ~10-fold higher than IL-1? in cardiac and skeletal muscle. While our present in vivo experiments do not directly determine the cell types contributing to the elevated cytokine production, previous reports have clearly shown that skeletal ( Steensberg et al. 2000 ; Keller et al. 2001 ; Frost et al. 2002 , 2003 ; Lang et al. 2003 ) and cardiac muscle ( Saito & Papaconstantinou, 2001 ; Lang et al. 2003 ; Vona-Davis et al. 2003 ) produce numerous cytokines, including TNF?, IL-1? and IL-6, in response to LPS. Further, the modest inflammatory insult and the absence of elevations in TNF? ( Peterson et al. 2006 ) support a very limited influx of inflammatory cells into these tissues. Independent of the cell type producing these cytokines, these data show that the inflammatory environment in both skeletal and cardiac muscle can be impacted by short-term vitamin E administration. The in vivo nature of the present study is significant, since the findings further our knowledge beyond previous in vitro findings. Specifically, the vitamin E-associated attenuation of LPS-induced increases in IL-6 and IL-1? relative to saline in cardiac muscle extends previous in vitro findings showing that cardiac myocytes isolated from septic rats produced significantly less TNF?, IL-1?, IL-6 and IL-10 when the rats were given an antioxidant cocktail for 3 days compared with a placebo group ( Carlson et al. 2006 ). Further, our comparison of cardiac and skeletal muscle highlights potential similarities in inflammatory cytokine responses in chronically active striated muscle (i.e. heart and diaphragm) compared with tonically active limb muscle. The diaphragm has been shown to have a greater cytokine response to LPS compared with limb muscle, in vivo , and the present LPS-induced levels of IL-6 protein in cardiac muscle are similar to those observed in the diaphragm ( Demoule et al. 2006 ). We found that IL-6 and IL-1? responses were both greater in cardiac than in skeletal muscle, suggesting that diaphragm and cardiac muscle are more responsive to acute inflammation than limb muscle, in vivo . This may relate to the indispensable functions and high levels of muscle activity of the heart and diaphragm compared with limb muscle. This possibility is supported by the report that when primary diaphragm and limb muscle cell cultures were studied in vitro (i.e. removed from normal patterns of activation), the differences in cytokine responses to LPS between these different muscles were diminished ( Demoule et al. 2006 ). Importantly, our work extends these findings by showing that vitamin E administration attenuates the IL-1? and IL-6 mRNA and protein responses to LPS in both skeletal limb and cardiac muscle. Interestingly, although the responses were quantitatively greater in cardiac than in skeletal muscle, we found that the fold reductions in LPS-induced levels of IL-6 and IL-1? with vitamin E compared with placebo in both tissues were generally similar. At the mRNA level, fold reductions in LPS-induced cytokine levels in skeletal and cardiac muscle, respectively, were 5.0- and 3.6-fold for IL-6 and 2.8- and 2.5-fold for IL-1?. At the protein level, fold reductions in LPS-induced cytokine levels in skeletal and cardiac muscle, respectively, were 1.8- and 2.0-fold for IL-6 and 1.5- and 2.3-fold for IL-1?. The blunted LPS-induced NF-?B activation with vitamin E compared with placebo suggests one potential mechanism contributing to the attenuated IL-6 and IL-1? responses with antioxidant administration ( Horton et al. 2001 ; Godbout et al. 2005 ; Carlson et al. 2006 ). For example, NF-?B has been shown to be involved in stimulating IL-6 release from cultured myotubes ( Kosmidou et al. 2002 ) and IL-6 mRNA expression in diaphragm, in vitro ( Demoule et al. 2006 ). Previous in vitro evidence demonstrated that administration of the antioxidant vitamins C, E and A decreased IL-6, IL-1? and TNF? secretion from cardiac myocytes relative to placebo and this was associated with decreased NF-?B activation following burn injury ( Horton et al. 2001 ) or severe sepsis ( Carlson et al. 2006 ). Specifically, both cytoplasmic and nuclear levels of NF-?B proteins were significantly lower in the cardiac muscle of septic rats following 3 days of supplementation with an antioxidant cocktail (vitamins C, E and A and zinc) compared with placebo ( Carlson et al. 2006 ). Finally, the identical 3 day vitamin E administration protocol used in the present study was previously shown to significantly attenuate LPS-induced NF-?B upregulation compared with placebo in mouse brain and this was associated with reduced IL-6 and IL-1? expression ( Godbout et al. 2005 ). The present results extend these previous findings to show that in both cardiac and skeletal muscle, in vivo , vitamin E administration blunts LPS-induced NF-?B activation and this is associated with reduced IL-6 and IL-1? responses to LPS compared with placebo. Numerous studies support the suggestion that increased oxidative stress in skeletal muscles can be associated with reduced strength and contractile efficiency ( Supinski & Callahan, 2007 ). Our analysis of total protein carbonyls does not determine the specific proteins being oxidized; however, based upon the molecular weights of some of the major oxidized species and a previous study ( Canton et al. 2004 ), it is likely that both actin (~43 kDa) and tropomyosin (~29 kDa) were affected ( Fig. 5 C ). Both of these proteins are critical for muscle contraction, and in vitro studies have shown that oxidative modifications can impair actin function ( Dalle-Donne et al. 2001 ). Thus, it is not surprising that lowering the levels of oxidized proteins through antioxidant administration or free radical scavengers has been shown to help restore the loss of strength and function in skeletal ( Shindoh et al. 1992 ; Van Surell et al. 1992 ; Supinski et al. 1993 ) or cardiac muscle ( Horton et al. 2001 ; Carlson et al. 2006 ) following an inflammatory insult. Our finding that short-term vitamin E administration prevented the LPS-induced increases in oxidized proteins observed with placebo suggests that vitamin E administration could positively impact skeletal and cardiac muscle function. These experiments using an in vivo model have provided novel data demonstrating that short-term vitamin E administration can significantly attenuate both the mRNA and the protein responses of IL-6 and IL-1? in cardiac and skeletal muscle and this was associated with reduced activation of NF-?B. At the functional protein level, in mice receiving vitamin E there were no significant LPS-induced increases in IL-6 or IL-1? in skeletal or cardiac muscle despite significant increases in IL-6mRNA. Further, administration of vitamin E also prevented an increase in total oxidized proteins, which has been associated with decrements in muscle function. It is not surprising that the most striking effects, quantitatively, were observed for IL-6, since skeletal muscle produces significant amounts of IL-6 ( Steensberg et al. 2000 ; Keller et al. 2001 ; Frost et al. 2002 , 2003 ; Lang et al. 2003 ), and LPS-induced increases in IL-6 in cardiac muscle have been shown to be greater than other cytokines, including TNF? and IL-1? ( Saito & Papaconstantinou, 2001 ; Meador et al. 2008 ). While the modest inflammatory insult used in the present studies did not result in sustained elevations in IL-6, the existing literature suggests that chronic elevations in IL-6 are associated with deleterious changes in both skeletal and cardiac muscle. Thus, vitamin E may be beneficial in individuals with chronic inflammation, such as the elderly or patients with type II diabetes or chronic heart failure.  Discussion The present findings provide the first in vivo evidence that short-term systemic administration of vitamin E significantly attenuates both skeletal and cardiac muscle IL-6 and IL-1? responses to an acute inflammatory insult. Further, vitamin E administration also blunted the LPS-induced increases in NF-?B activation and protein carbonyls in both skeletal and cardiac muscle. While inflammatory insults of this magnitude have been shown to be effectively resolved systemically within 24 h of the insult, the present results extend these findings to local cytokine responses in cardiac and skeletal muscle. Physiologically, the significance of these findings is highlighted by the fact that skeletal muscle comprises the largest organ system in the body (40–50% of body mass) and thus can play an important role in local and systemic inflammatory responses. In particular, skeletal muscle can produce large amounts of IL-6, which can act in an autocrine fashion ( Keller et al. 2003 ) and be released into the plasma to exert systemic actions ( Steensberg et al. 2000 ; Pedersen et al. 2001 ; Febbraio & Pedersen, 2002 ). In the present experiments, while IL-6 mRNA and protein responses to LPS were significantly attenuated with vitamin E administration compared with placebo in skeletal and cardiac muscle, these changes did not extend to the systemic level as had been previously shown following a bout of knee extensor exercise ( Fischer et al. 2004 ). Thus, this suggests that while skeletal muscle is a major source of plasma IL-6 during exercise, other sources of IL-6 contribute to plasma IL-6 during an inflammatory insult. In contrast, vitamin E administration effectively blunted LPS-induced increases in IL-1? in plasma and at the mRNA and protein levels in cardiac and skeletal muscle. To date no studies have quantified IL-6, IL-1? and TNF? mRNA and protein levels as well as activated NF-?B in skeletal and cardiac muscle lysates following an acute inflammatory insult in mice receiving vitamin E for three consecutive days. A comparison of mRNA and protein responses provides some insight regarding the effects of vitamin E on LPS-induced cytokine responses in striated muscle. For IL-6, cardiac and skeletal muscle mRNA levels were significantly increased with LPS relative to the saline control in all groups, although the response was attenuated with vitamin E compared with placebo. However, at the protein level, significant LPS-induced increases in IL-6 only occurred in the placebo group. Thus, vitamin E administration may impact regulatory steps, such as mRNA stability or translation efficiency, such that despite significant increases in IL-6 mRNA with LPS these changes were not extended to the functional protein level. In contrast to IL-6, LPS was not associated with any significant increases in IL-1? mRNA or protein in cardiac and skeletal muscle in mice receiving vitamin E. One possibility for the differences in the effects of vitamin E on expression of IL-6 and IL-1? may be the quantitative differences in their expression, since at the protein level IL-6 is ~10-fold higher than IL-1? in cardiac and skeletal muscle. While our present in vivo experiments do not directly determine the cell types contributing to the elevated cytokine production, previous reports have clearly shown that skeletal ( Steensberg et al. 2000 ; Keller et al. 2001 ; Frost et al. 2002 , 2003 ; Lang et al. 2003 ) and cardiac muscle ( Saito & Papaconstantinou, 2001 ; Lang et al. 2003 ; Vona-Davis et al. 2003 ) produce numerous cytokines, including TNF?, IL-1? and IL-6, in response to LPS. Further, the modest inflammatory insult and the absence of elevations in TNF? ( Peterson et al. 2006 ) support a very limited influx of inflammatory cells into these tissues. Independent of the cell type producing these cytokines, these data show that the inflammatory environment in both skeletal and cardiac muscle can be impacted by short-term vitamin E administration. The in vivo nature of the present study is significant, since the findings further our knowledge beyond previous in vitro findings. Specifically, the vitamin E-associated attenuation of LPS-induced increases in IL-6 and IL-1? relative to saline in cardiac muscle extends previous in vitro findings showing that cardiac myocytes isolated from septic rats produced significantly less TNF?, IL-1?, IL-6 and IL-10 when the rats were given an antioxidant cocktail for 3 days compared with a placebo group ( Carlson et al. 2006 ). Further, our comparison of cardiac and skeletal muscle highlights potential similarities in inflammatory cytokine responses in chronically active striated muscle (i.e. heart and diaphragm) compared with tonically active limb muscle. The diaphragm has been shown to have a greater cytokine response to LPS compared with limb muscle, in vivo , and the present LPS-induced levels of IL-6 protein in cardiac muscle are similar to those observed in the diaphragm ( Demoule et al. 2006 ). We found that IL-6 and IL-1? responses were both greater in cardiac than in skeletal muscle, suggesting that diaphragm and cardiac muscle are more responsive to acute inflammation than limb muscle, in vivo . This may relate to the indispensable functions and high levels of muscle activity of the heart and diaphragm compared with limb muscle. This possibility is supported by the report that when primary diaphragm and limb muscle cell cultures were studied in vitro (i.e. removed from normal patterns of activation), the differences in cytokine responses to LPS between these different muscles were diminished ( Demoule et al. 2006 ). Importantly, our work extends these findings by showing that vitamin E administration attenuates the IL-1? and IL-6 mRNA and protein responses to LPS in both skeletal limb and cardiac muscle. Interestingly, although the responses were quantitatively greater in cardiac than in skeletal muscle, we found that the fold reductions in LPS-induced levels of IL-6 and IL-1? with vitamin E compared with placebo in both tissues were generally similar. At the mRNA level, fold reductions in LPS-induced cytokine levels in skeletal and cardiac muscle, respectively, were 5.0- and 3.6-fold for IL-6 and 2.8- and 2.5-fold for IL-1?. At the protein level, fold reductions in LPS-induced cytokine levels in skeletal and cardiac muscle, respectively, were 1.8- and 2.0-fold for IL-6 and 1.5- and 2.3-fold for IL-1?. The blunted LPS-induced NF-?B activation with vitamin E compared with placebo suggests one potential mechanism contributing to the attenuated IL-6 and IL-1? responses with antioxidant administration ( Horton et al. 2001 ; Godbout et al. 2005 ; Carlson et al. 2006 ). For example, NF-?B has been shown to be involved in stimulating IL-6 release from cultured myotubes ( Kosmidou et al. 2002 ) and IL-6 mRNA expression in diaphragm, in vitro ( Demoule et al. 2006 ). Previous in vitro evidence demonstrated that administration of the antioxidant vitamins C, E and A decreased IL-6, IL-1? and TNF? secretion from cardiac myocytes relative to placebo and this was associated with decreased NF-?B activation following burn injury ( Horton et al. 2001 ) or severe sepsis ( Carlson et al. 2006 ). Specifically, both cytoplasmic and nuclear levels of NF-?B proteins were significantly lower in the cardiac muscle of septic rats following 3 days of supplementation with an antioxidant cocktail (vitamins C, E and A and zinc) compared with placebo ( Carlson et al. 2006 ). Finally, the identical 3 day vitamin E administration protocol used in the present study was previously shown to significantly attenuate LPS-induced NF-?B upregulation compared with placebo in mouse brain and this was associated with reduced IL-6 and IL-1? expression ( Godbout et al. 2005 ). The present results extend these previous findings to show that in both cardiac and skeletal muscle, in vivo , vitamin E administration blunts LPS-induced NF-?B activation and this is associated with reduced IL-6 and IL-1? responses to LPS compared with placebo. Numerous studies support the suggestion that increased oxidative stress in skeletal muscles can be associated with reduced strength and contractile efficiency ( Supinski & Callahan, 2007 ). Our analysis of total protein carbonyls does not determine the specific proteins being oxidized; however, based upon the molecular weights of some of the major oxidized species and a previous study ( Canton et al. 2004 ), it is likely that both actin (~43 kDa) and tropomyosin (~29 kDa) were affected ( Fig. 5 C ). Both of these proteins are critical for muscle contraction, and in vitro studies have shown that oxidative modifications can impair actin function ( Dalle-Donne et al. 2001 ). Thus, it is not surprising that lowering the levels of oxidized proteins through antioxidant administration or free radical scavengers has been shown to help restore the loss of strength and function in skeletal ( Shindoh et al. 1992 ; Van Surell et al. 1992 ; Supinski et al. 1993 ) or cardiac muscle ( Horton et al. 2001 ; Carlson et al. 2006 ) following an inflammatory insult. Our finding that short-term vitamin E administration prevented the LPS-induced increases in oxidized proteins observed with placebo suggests that vitamin E administration could positively impact skeletal and cardiac muscle function. These experiments using an in vivo model have provided novel data demonstrating that short-term vitamin E administration can significantly attenuate both the mRNA and the protein responses of IL-6 and IL-1? in cardiac and skeletal muscle and this was associated with reduced activation of NF-?B. At the functional protein level, in mice receiving vitamin E there were no significant LPS-induced increases in IL-6 or IL-1? in skeletal or cardiac muscle despite significant increases in IL-6mRNA. Further, administration of vitamin E also prevented an increase in total oxidized proteins, which has been associated with decrements in muscle function. It is not surprising that the most striking effects, quantitatively, were observed for IL-6, since skeletal muscle produces significant amounts of IL-6 ( Steensberg et al. 2000 ; Keller et al. 2001 ; Frost et al. 2002 , 2003 ; Lang et al. 2003 ), and LPS-induced increases in IL-6 in cardiac muscle have been shown to be greater than other cytokines, including TNF? and IL-1? ( Saito & Papaconstantinou, 2001 ; Meador et al. 2008 ). While the modest inflammatory insult used in the present studies did not result in sustained elevations in IL-6, the existing literature suggests that chronic elevations in IL-6 are associated with deleterious changes in both skeletal and cardiac muscle. Thus, vitamin E may be beneficial in individuals with chronic inflammation, such as the elderly or patients with type II diabetes or chronic heart failure.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Interleukin-6 mRNA and protein expression 4 h following <sc>i.p.</sc> saline or LPS in skeletal (<italic>A</italic> and <italic>B</italic>) and cardiac muscle (<italic>C</italic> and <italic>D</italic>) of mice receiving placebo or vitamin E for 3 days The mRNA data are expressed as fold changes relative to saline control in the placebo group. * Significantly different from corresponding saline group; † significantly different from placebo–LPS group. Figure 2 Interleukin-1? mRNA and protein expression 4 h following <sc>i.p.</sc> saline or LPS in skeletal (<italic>A</italic> and <italic>B</italic>) and cardiac muscle (<italic>C</italic> and <italic>D</italic>) of mice receiving placebo or vitamin E for 3 days The mRNA data are expressed as fold changes relative to saline control in the placebo group. * Significantly different from corresponding saline group; † significantly different from placebo–LPS group. Figure 3 Tumour necrosis factor ? mRNA and protein expression 4 h following <sc>i.p.</sc> saline or LPS in skeletal (<italic>A</italic> and <italic>B</italic>) and cardiac muscle (<italic>C</italic> and <italic>D</italic>) of mice receiving placebo or vitamin E for 3 days The mRNA data are expressed as fold changes relative to saline control in the placebo group. * Significantly different from corresponding saline group; † significantly different from placebo–LPS group. Figure 4 Activated NF-?B p50 in skeletal (<italic>A</italic>) or cardiac muscle (<italic>B</italic>) 4 h following <sc>i.p.</sc> saline or LPS in mice receiving placebo or vitamin E for 3 days The NF-?B p50 data are expressed as relative luminescence units (RLU). * Significantly different from corresponding saline group; † significantly different from placebo–LPS group. Figure 5 Total protein carbonyls 4 or 24 h following <sc>i.p.</sc> saline or LPS in skeletal (<italic>A</italic>) and cardiac muscle (<italic>B</italic>) of mice receiving placebo or vitamin E for 3 days In addition, C is a representative Western blot showing detection of total oxidized proteins in skeletal muscle with OxyBlot. * Significantly different from corresponding saline group; # significantly different from placebo–LPS or saline groups of 24 h. Table 1 Plasma IL-6, IL-1? and TNF? concentrations 4 or 24 h following i.p. saline or LPS in mice receiving placebo or vitamin E for 3 days Placebo Vitamin E IL-6 (pg ml?1) 4 h post-saline 28 ± 12 27 ± 15 4 h post-LPS 3859 ± 1385 * 3103 ± 878 * 24 h post-saline 13 ±4 25 ± 11 24 h post-LPS 26 ±4 21 ± 7 IL-1? (pg ml?1) 4 h post-saline 6 ±1 6± 1 4 h post-LPS 54 ± 13 * † 17 ± 5 24 h post-saline 6 ±1 7± 1 24 h post-LPS 8 ±1 8 ± 1 TNF? (pg ml?1) 4 h post-saline 10 ±2 11 ± 1 4 h post-LPS 28 ± 12 18 ± 4 24 h post-saline 8 ±1 10 ± 1 24 h post-LPS 12 ±1 13 ± 1 Values are means ± s.e.m.; n = 5 per group. * P < 0.05 compared with saline within treatment and time; † P < 0.05 comparing placebo and vitamin E within treatment.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Interleukin-6 mRNA and protein expression 4 h following <sc>i.p.</sc> saline or LPS in skeletal (<italic>A</italic> and <italic>B</italic>) and cardiac muscle (<italic>C</italic> and <italic>D</italic>) of mice receiving placebo or vitamin E for 3 days The mRNA data are expressed as fold changes relative to saline control in the placebo group. * Significantly different from corresponding saline group; † significantly different from placebo–LPS group. Figure 2 Interleukin-1? mRNA and protein expression 4 h following <sc>i.p.</sc> saline or LPS in skeletal (<italic>A</italic> and <italic>B</italic>) and cardiac muscle (<italic>C</italic> and <italic>D</italic>) of mice receiving placebo or vitamin E for 3 days The mRNA data are expressed as fold changes relative to saline control in the placebo group. * Significantly different from corresponding saline group; † significantly different from placebo–LPS group. Figure 3 Tumour necrosis factor ? mRNA and protein expression 4 h following <sc>i.p.</sc> saline or LPS in skeletal (<italic>A</italic> and <italic>B</italic>) and cardiac muscle (<italic>C</italic> and <italic>D</italic>) of mice receiving placebo or vitamin E for 3 days The mRNA data are expressed as fold changes relative to saline control in the placebo group. * Significantly different from corresponding saline group; † significantly different from placebo–LPS group. Figure 4 Activated NF-?B p50 in skeletal (<italic>A</italic>) or cardiac muscle (<italic>B</italic>) 4 h following <sc>i.p.</sc> saline or LPS in mice receiving placebo or vitamin E for 3 days The NF-?B p50 data are expressed as relative luminescence units (RLU). * Significantly different from corresponding saline group; † significantly different from placebo–LPS group. Figure 5 Total protein carbonyls 4 or 24 h following <sc>i.p.</sc> saline or LPS in skeletal (<italic>A</italic>) and cardiac muscle (<italic>B</italic>) of mice receiving placebo or vitamin E for 3 days In addition, C is a representative Western blot showing detection of total oxidized proteins in skeletal muscle with OxyBlot. * Significantly different from corresponding saline group; # significantly different from placebo–LPS or saline groups of 24 h. Table 1 Plasma IL-6, IL-1? and TNF? concentrations 4 or 24 h following i.p. saline or LPS in mice receiving placebo or vitamin E for 3 days Placebo Vitamin E IL-6 (pg ml?1) 4 h post-saline 28 ± 12 27 ± 15 4 h post-LPS 3859 ± 1385 * 3103 ± 878 * 24 h post-saline 13 ±4 25 ± 11 24 h post-LPS 26 ±4 21 ± 7 IL-1? (pg ml?1) 4 h post-saline 6 ±1 6± 1 4 h post-LPS 54 ± 13 * † 17 ± 5 24 h post-saline 6 ±1 7± 1 24 h post-LPS 8 ±1 8 ± 1 TNF? (pg ml?1) 4 h post-saline 10 ±2 11 ± 1 4 h post-LPS 28 ± 12 18 ± 4 24 h post-saline 8 ±1 10 ± 1 24 h post-LPS 12 ±1 13 ± 1 Values are means ± s.e.m.; n = 5 per group. * P < 0.05 compared with saline within treatment and time; † P < 0.05 comparing placebo and vitamin E within treatment. 