Differential Effects of Luminal Arginine and Glutamine on Metalloproteinase Production in the Postischemic Gut Background Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a group of endopeptidases induced under inflammatory conditions in the intestine which possess the capacity to degrade components of the extracellular matrix. We have previously demonstrated that MMP-2 expression correlates with increased inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) production in the stomach and that iNOS is upregulated in the postischemic gut by the luminal nutrient arginine and repressed by luminal glutamine. We therefore hypothesized that arginine would enhance expression of MMP-2 in the postischemic gut. Methods Jejunal sacs were created in rats at laparotomy and filled with either 60 mM glutamine, arginine, or magnesium sulfate (osmotic control) followed by 60 minutes of superior mesenteric artery occlusion (SMAO) and 6 hours of reperfusion and compared with shams. Jejunum was harvested, and membrane type-1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP), MMP-2, and iNOS protein expression was determined by Western analysis and MMP-9 production by gelatin zymography. Results MMP-2, MT1-MMP, MMP-9, and iNOS were all increased after SMAO compared with shams. Arginine maintained while glutamine inhibited the increase in iNOS, MT1-MMP, and MMP-2 expression in the postischemic gut. Pretreatment of the arginine group with a selective iNOS inhibitor blunted the induction of MMP-2 in the postischemic gut. There was no differential modulation of MMP-9 by the luminal nutrients. Conclusions The arginine-induced upregulation of iNOS may contribute to increased activity of MT1-MMP and MMP-2. The mechanism for this differential regulation by arginine warrants further investigation.  Methods Jejunal sacs were created in rats at laparotomy and filled with either 60 mM glutamine, arginine, or magnesium sulfate (osmotic control) followed by 60 minutes of superior mesenteric artery occlusion (SMAO) and 6 hours of reperfusion and compared with shams. Jejunum was harvested, and membrane type-1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP), MMP-2, and iNOS protein expression was determined by Western analysis and MMP-9 production by gelatin zymography.  Results MMP-2, MT1-MMP, MMP-9, and iNOS were all increased after SMAO compared with shams. Arginine maintained while glutamine inhibited the increase in iNOS, MT1-MMP, and MMP-2 expression in the postischemic gut. Pretreatment of the arginine group with a selective iNOS inhibitor blunted the induction of MMP-2 in the postischemic gut. There was no differential modulation of MMP-9 by the luminal nutrients.  Conclusions The arginine-induced upregulation of iNOS may contribute to increased activity of MT1-MMP and MMP-2. The mechanism for this differential regulation by arginine warrants further investigation.  Materials and Methods Rodent Model and Study Design All procedures performed were protocols approved by the University of Texas Houston Medical School Animal Welfare Committee. Male Sprague Dawley rats, each weighing 250–300 g, were fasted with free access to water overnight before laparotomy. Operative procedures were performed using sterile techniques under general anesthesia with isoflurane-inhaled anesthesia. An upper midline laparotomy was performed and the jejunum identified 5 cm distal to the ligament of Treitz. An 8-cm intestinal sac was created in each animal by occluding the lumen of the bowel with 3-0 silk ligatures, as previously described. 24 Sacs were filled with either 30 mM magnesium sulfate (nonabsorbable osmotic control), 60 mM glutamine, or 60 mM arginine as previously reported. 25 Sixty millimeters approximates the amount of glutamine and arginine found in commercially available immune enhancing enteral diets. Superior mesenteric artery occlusion (SMAO) was carried out for 60 minutes, based on our previous studies that demonstrated consistent differences in mucosal injury between groups with no measurable mortality. 26 After removal of the clamp, the incision was closed and rats were allowed to awaken and then observed for 6 hours. We previously demonstrated that mesenteric ischemia–reperfusion (IR) results in maximal activation of NFK?B, an upstream pro-inflammatory transcription factor activated by mesenteric IR, in the postischemic small bowel at 6 hours. 27 Sham animals underwent the identical procedure but without placement of the clamp on the superior mesenteric artery. One group of animals underwent SMAO alone with no enteral sac, as an additional control. After the 6-hour reperfusion period, rats were killed and the jejunum removed for measurement of MMP and iNOS. In addition, because arginine enhanced iNOS and MMP-2 production (see the Results section), a separate groups of rats were given either the selective iNOS inhibitor N-[3(animomethyl)benzyl]-acetamidine (1400w, 20 mg/kg) or vehicle (saline) directly into the enteral sac to further evaluate the role of iNOS in the induction of metalloproteinases. 17 , 28 MMP and iNOS Western Immunoblot Analysis Nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts from full thickness jejunum were prepared. 29 Protein expression by Western immunoblot was performed as previously described. 30 In brief, jejunal cytoplasmic extracts were loaded in each well, and the proteins separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, treated with 5% nonfat milk in Tris-buffered saline solution (20 mmol/L Tris-HCl, 130 mmol/L NaCl [pH 7.6] + 0.1% Tween 20), and incubated at 4°C overnight with a polyclonal anti-iNOS antibody (BD Biosciences Pharmingen, San Jose, CA), anti-MMP-2 antibody (1:200 dilution; Oncogene, San Diego, CA), or anti–MT1-MMP (1:500 dilution; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA). The membranes were washed with Tris-buffered saline solution and incubated with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody to identify iNOS according to enhanced chemiluminescent Western blotting detection system (Amersham Life Science, Piscataway, NJ). Autoradiograms were then analyzed using image-analysis software (Optimal 6.1) and expressed in arbitrary units. Gelatin Zymography Protein extracts (1 ?g protein/sample) were mixed with 2× running buffer (0.125 M Tris-HCl, pH 6.8; 4% [w/v] SDS; 20% [v/v] glycerol; 0.04% [w/v] bromphenol blue) and separated on a 10% polyacrylamide gel containing 1 mg/mL gelatin. The gels were washed twice in 2.5% (v/v) aqueous Triton X-100, removing the SDS and allowing the gelatinases to renature within the gel. The gels were incubated overnight in standard activity buffer (0.05%Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 5 mM CaCl2, 0.02% NaN3) at 37° C. After incubation, the gels were fixed in fixing/destaining solution [methanol: acetic acid: water (4.5:1:4.5)] for 20 minutes and subsequently stained with Coomassie blue (0.01% [w/v] in fixing/destaining solution) for 2 hours. After destaining, the gels were scanned using an HP 500 digital scanner and the images were analyzed using Optimus 6.1 software. Areas of increased gelatinolytic activity were visualized as areas of lucency. 17 Statistical Analysis Data are expressed as mean ± SEM (n ? 6/group). Data were analyzed by 1-way ANOVA. Individual group means were compared using Tukey’s multiple group comparison test. P-values < .05 were considered significant.  Rodent Model and Study Design All procedures performed were protocols approved by the University of Texas Houston Medical School Animal Welfare Committee. Male Sprague Dawley rats, each weighing 250–300 g, were fasted with free access to water overnight before laparotomy. Operative procedures were performed using sterile techniques under general anesthesia with isoflurane-inhaled anesthesia. An upper midline laparotomy was performed and the jejunum identified 5 cm distal to the ligament of Treitz. An 8-cm intestinal sac was created in each animal by occluding the lumen of the bowel with 3-0 silk ligatures, as previously described. 24 Sacs were filled with either 30 mM magnesium sulfate (nonabsorbable osmotic control), 60 mM glutamine, or 60 mM arginine as previously reported. 25 Sixty millimeters approximates the amount of glutamine and arginine found in commercially available immune enhancing enteral diets. Superior mesenteric artery occlusion (SMAO) was carried out for 60 minutes, based on our previous studies that demonstrated consistent differences in mucosal injury between groups with no measurable mortality. 26 After removal of the clamp, the incision was closed and rats were allowed to awaken and then observed for 6 hours. We previously demonstrated that mesenteric ischemia–reperfusion (IR) results in maximal activation of NFK?B, an upstream pro-inflammatory transcription factor activated by mesenteric IR, in the postischemic small bowel at 6 hours. 27 Sham animals underwent the identical procedure but without placement of the clamp on the superior mesenteric artery. One group of animals underwent SMAO alone with no enteral sac, as an additional control. After the 6-hour reperfusion period, rats were killed and the jejunum removed for measurement of MMP and iNOS. In addition, because arginine enhanced iNOS and MMP-2 production (see the Results section), a separate groups of rats were given either the selective iNOS inhibitor N-[3(animomethyl)benzyl]-acetamidine (1400w, 20 mg/kg) or vehicle (saline) directly into the enteral sac to further evaluate the role of iNOS in the induction of metalloproteinases. 17 , 28  MMP and iNOS Western Immunoblot Analysis Nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts from full thickness jejunum were prepared. 29 Protein expression by Western immunoblot was performed as previously described. 30 In brief, jejunal cytoplasmic extracts were loaded in each well, and the proteins separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, treated with 5% nonfat milk in Tris-buffered saline solution (20 mmol/L Tris-HCl, 130 mmol/L NaCl [pH 7.6] + 0.1% Tween 20), and incubated at 4°C overnight with a polyclonal anti-iNOS antibody (BD Biosciences Pharmingen, San Jose, CA), anti-MMP-2 antibody (1:200 dilution; Oncogene, San Diego, CA), or anti–MT1-MMP (1:500 dilution; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA). The membranes were washed with Tris-buffered saline solution and incubated with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody to identify iNOS according to enhanced chemiluminescent Western blotting detection system (Amersham Life Science, Piscataway, NJ). Autoradiograms were then analyzed using image-analysis software (Optimal 6.1) and expressed in arbitrary units.  Gelatin Zymography Protein extracts (1 ?g protein/sample) were mixed with 2× running buffer (0.125 M Tris-HCl, pH 6.8; 4% [w/v] SDS; 20% [v/v] glycerol; 0.04% [w/v] bromphenol blue) and separated on a 10% polyacrylamide gel containing 1 mg/mL gelatin. The gels were washed twice in 2.5% (v/v) aqueous Triton X-100, removing the SDS and allowing the gelatinases to renature within the gel. The gels were incubated overnight in standard activity buffer (0.05%Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 5 mM CaCl2, 0.02% NaN3) at 37° C. After incubation, the gels were fixed in fixing/destaining solution [methanol: acetic acid: water (4.5:1:4.5)] for 20 minutes and subsequently stained with Coomassie blue (0.01% [w/v] in fixing/destaining solution) for 2 hours. After destaining, the gels were scanned using an HP 500 digital scanner and the images were analyzed using Optimus 6.1 software. Areas of increased gelatinolytic activity were visualized as areas of lucency. 17  Statistical Analysis Data are expressed as mean ± SEM (n ? 6/group). Data were analyzed by 1-way ANOVA. Individual group means were compared using Tukey’s multiple group comparison test. P-values < .05 were considered significant.  Results Arginine Enhances Jejunal iNOS As shown in Figure 1 , iNOS protein immunoreactivity was increased in the postischemic gut (0.06 ± 0.02) compared with controls (0.017 ± 0.00). The addition of luminal arginine further augmented iNOS production after ischemia/reperfusion (0.19 ± 0.05), while glutamine (0.02 ± 0.01) was comparable with controls. Arginine Enhances Jejunal MMP Production As shown in Figure 2 , MMP-2 production in IR controls (0.21 ± 0.02) and IR glutamine (0.19 ± 0.02) were comparable to shams (0.28 ± 0.01), while MMP-2 was significantly increased by arginine (0.32 ± 0.02) in the postischemic gut. In contrast, MT1-MMP production was enhanced by IR in controls (0.70 ± 0.09) when compared with shams (0.34 ± 0.03), an effect accentuated by luminal arginine (0.91 ± 0.04) but not glutamine (0.55 ± 0.04; Figure 3 ). Of interest, MMP-9 was significantly induced by IR in all treatment groups but was not modulated by luminal nutrients ( Figure 4 ). iNOS Inhibition Prevents Arginine Induced Enhancement of Jejunal MMP Production As shown in Figure 5 , the selective iNOS inhibitor 1400w abrogated the induction of MMP-2 by arginine in the postischemic gut (0.55 ± 0.03 IR vs 0.39 ± 0.03 IR 1400w). Similarly, the induction of MT1-MMP protein production demonstrated in the IR arginine group (0.60 ± 0.03) was significantly inhibited by the addition of 1400w (0.40 ± 0.02; Figure 6 ).  Results Arginine Enhances Jejunal iNOS As shown in Figure 1 , iNOS protein immunoreactivity was increased in the postischemic gut (0.06 ± 0.02) compared with controls (0.017 ± 0.00). The addition of luminal arginine further augmented iNOS production after ischemia/reperfusion (0.19 ± 0.05), while glutamine (0.02 ± 0.01) was comparable with controls. Arginine Enhances Jejunal MMP Production As shown in Figure 2 , MMP-2 production in IR controls (0.21 ± 0.02) and IR glutamine (0.19 ± 0.02) were comparable to shams (0.28 ± 0.01), while MMP-2 was significantly increased by arginine (0.32 ± 0.02) in the postischemic gut. In contrast, MT1-MMP production was enhanced by IR in controls (0.70 ± 0.09) when compared with shams (0.34 ± 0.03), an effect accentuated by luminal arginine (0.91 ± 0.04) but not glutamine (0.55 ± 0.04; Figure 3 ). Of interest, MMP-9 was significantly induced by IR in all treatment groups but was not modulated by luminal nutrients ( Figure 4 ). iNOS Inhibition Prevents Arginine Induced Enhancement of Jejunal MMP Production As shown in Figure 5 , the selective iNOS inhibitor 1400w abrogated the induction of MMP-2 by arginine in the postischemic gut (0.55 ± 0.03 IR vs 0.39 ± 0.03 IR 1400w). Similarly, the induction of MT1-MMP protein production demonstrated in the IR arginine group (0.60 ± 0.03) was significantly inhibited by the addition of 1400w (0.40 ± 0.02; Figure 6 ).  Arginine Enhances Jejunal iNOS As shown in Figure 1 , iNOS protein immunoreactivity was increased in the postischemic gut (0.06 ± 0.02) compared with controls (0.017 ± 0.00). The addition of luminal arginine further augmented iNOS production after ischemia/reperfusion (0.19 ± 0.05), while glutamine (0.02 ± 0.01) was comparable with controls.  Arginine Enhances Jejunal iNOS As shown in Figure 1 , iNOS protein immunoreactivity was increased in the postischemic gut (0.06 ± 0.02) compared with controls (0.017 ± 0.00). The addition of luminal arginine further augmented iNOS production after ischemia/reperfusion (0.19 ± 0.05), while glutamine (0.02 ± 0.01) was comparable with controls.  Arginine Enhances Jejunal MMP Production As shown in Figure 2 , MMP-2 production in IR controls (0.21 ± 0.02) and IR glutamine (0.19 ± 0.02) were comparable to shams (0.28 ± 0.01), while MMP-2 was significantly increased by arginine (0.32 ± 0.02) in the postischemic gut. In contrast, MT1-MMP production was enhanced by IR in controls (0.70 ± 0.09) when compared with shams (0.34 ± 0.03), an effect accentuated by luminal arginine (0.91 ± 0.04) but not glutamine (0.55 ± 0.04; Figure 3 ). Of interest, MMP-9 was significantly induced by IR in all treatment groups but was not modulated by luminal nutrients ( Figure 4 ).  Arginine Enhances Jejunal MMP Production As shown in Figure 2 , MMP-2 production in IR controls (0.21 ± 0.02) and IR glutamine (0.19 ± 0.02) were comparable to shams (0.28 ± 0.01), while MMP-2 was significantly increased by arginine (0.32 ± 0.02) in the postischemic gut. In contrast, MT1-MMP production was enhanced by IR in controls (0.70 ± 0.09) when compared with shams (0.34 ± 0.03), an effect accentuated by luminal arginine (0.91 ± 0.04) but not glutamine (0.55 ± 0.04; Figure 3 ). Of interest, MMP-9 was significantly induced by IR in all treatment groups but was not modulated by luminal nutrients ( Figure 4 ).  iNOS Inhibition Prevents Arginine Induced Enhancement of Jejunal MMP Production As shown in Figure 5 , the selective iNOS inhibitor 1400w abrogated the induction of MMP-2 by arginine in the postischemic gut (0.55 ± 0.03 IR vs 0.39 ± 0.03 IR 1400w). Similarly, the induction of MT1-MMP protein production demonstrated in the IR arginine group (0.60 ± 0.03) was significantly inhibited by the addition of 1400w (0.40 ± 0.02; Figure 6 ).  iNOS Inhibition Prevents Arginine Induced Enhancement of Jejunal MMP Production As shown in Figure 5 , the selective iNOS inhibitor 1400w abrogated the induction of MMP-2 by arginine in the postischemic gut (0.55 ± 0.03 IR vs 0.39 ± 0.03 IR 1400w). Similarly, the induction of MT1-MMP protein production demonstrated in the IR arginine group (0.60 ± 0.03) was significantly inhibited by the addition of 1400w (0.40 ± 0.02; Figure 6 ).  Discussion We have been interested in the differential role of luminal nutrients on gut function and found a correlation to the degree of metabolic stress imposed by the nutrients under conditions of metabolic stress. 24 , 26 Glutamine is absorbed across the enterocyte by either carrier mediated secondary active transport or by facilitative (passive) transport. The majority of glutamine undergoes oxidative metabolism to glutamate and CO2 by glutaminase. Glutamate can then enter the Kreb’s cycle and generate ATP (adenosine 5?-triphosphate) for use by the enterocyte. Arginine can also be absorbed by carrier mediated secondary active transport, but the majority of absorption uses Na-independent carriers. Unlike glutamine, arginine is not oxidatively metabolized and, therefore, cannot generate energy (ATP) for the gut. Arginine is transported out by means of the basolateral membrane and broken down into either ornithine or urea by arginase to assist in wound healing or by nitric oxide synthase to citrulline and nitric oxide. Our data obtained in a rodent model of gut IR suggests the iNOS pathway predominates in the postischemic gut in the presence of arginine and is associated with gut injury and inflammation. 22 This is the first study to demonstrate modulation of MMP production in the jejunum by luminal nutrients. Luminal arginine, but not glutamine, enhanced MMP production in the jejunum of the postischemic gut. Furthermore, selective iNOS inhibition prevented the increase in MMP-2 production, suggesting that locally produced nitric oxide from jejunal iNOS modulates MMP production in this setting. These data are consistent with our previous findings of increased MMP-2 in the gastric mucosa in the setting of increased iNOS production and suggest that the pathways for regulating MMPs are similar in both sites. 31 Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induced the transcription as well as translation of MMP-2 along with an associated increase in the MMP-2 activator protein, MT1-MMP. 18 , 31 MT1-MMP cleaves pro-MMP-2 to active MMP-2 by forming a tri-molecular complex on the cell surface with pro-MMP-2 and TIMP-2. Regulation of MMPs can occur at the level of transcription, translation, activation, or modulated by tissue specific inhibitors. The mechanism by which MMP-2 is upregulated in this model is the focus of ongoing investigation. Although we did not specifically examine gut injury and inflammation in this study, arginine has clearly been shown to induce the pro-inflammatory transcription factor AP-1 and its downstream pro-inflammatory enzyme iNOS, in the postischemic gut. MMP-2 has been shown to promote wound healing in models of indomethacin-induced gastric ulceration. 32 However, in the current model of gut ischemia/reperfusion, MMP-2 appears to play a deleterious role in inflammation and injury by means of its association with iNOS production. Future studies to determine the effects of MMP-2 inhibition on the postischemic gut after arginine administration are warranted. In normal physiology, MMP-2 and MMP-9 produced by connective tissue are thought to contribute to tissue remodeling during development and during the repair process after tissue injury. Leukocytes, in particular macrophages, are major sources of gelatinase production. 1 – 6 However, endothelial and smooth muscle cells have been reported to produce gelatinases also. 7 – 12 While MMP-9 was detected in the postischemic gut, in contrast to MMP-2, this gelatinase was not modulated by luminal nutrients. MMP-9 production is necessary for neutrophil migration across the basement membrane and is commonly induced in other models of gut inflammation such as colitis. MMP-9 is secreted by macrophages and is also located in the cytoplasmic granules of neutrophils. Additionally, inflammatory cytokines stimulate the production of MMP-9 from lymphocytes and stromal cells. While the source of MMP-9 was not evaluated in this study, it is possible that local tissue injury from IR led to the infiltration of inflammatory cells and increased production of MMP-9. The lack of MMP-9 modulation by luminal nutrients is supported by our prior findings in an LPS model of gastric injury. In that model, we demonstrated an increase in MMP-2 production which correlated with increased iNOS production but no change in the expression of MMP-9. 18 , 31 In conclusion, arginine, but not glutamine, induced upregulation of iNOS and may contribute to increased expression of MT1-MMP and MMP-2 in the postischemic gut. The mechanism for this differential regulation by arginine warrants further investigation.  Discussion We have been interested in the differential role of luminal nutrients on gut function and found a correlation to the degree of metabolic stress imposed by the nutrients under conditions of metabolic stress. 24 , 26 Glutamine is absorbed across the enterocyte by either carrier mediated secondary active transport or by facilitative (passive) transport. The majority of glutamine undergoes oxidative metabolism to glutamate and CO2 by glutaminase. Glutamate can then enter the Kreb’s cycle and generate ATP (adenosine 5?-triphosphate) for use by the enterocyte. Arginine can also be absorbed by carrier mediated secondary active transport, but the majority of absorption uses Na-independent carriers. Unlike glutamine, arginine is not oxidatively metabolized and, therefore, cannot generate energy (ATP) for the gut. Arginine is transported out by means of the basolateral membrane and broken down into either ornithine or urea by arginase to assist in wound healing or by nitric oxide synthase to citrulline and nitric oxide. Our data obtained in a rodent model of gut IR suggests the iNOS pathway predominates in the postischemic gut in the presence of arginine and is associated with gut injury and inflammation. 22 This is the first study to demonstrate modulation of MMP production in the jejunum by luminal nutrients. Luminal arginine, but not glutamine, enhanced MMP production in the jejunum of the postischemic gut. Furthermore, selective iNOS inhibition prevented the increase in MMP-2 production, suggesting that locally produced nitric oxide from jejunal iNOS modulates MMP production in this setting. These data are consistent with our previous findings of increased MMP-2 in the gastric mucosa in the setting of increased iNOS production and suggest that the pathways for regulating MMPs are similar in both sites. 31 Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induced the transcription as well as translation of MMP-2 along with an associated increase in the MMP-2 activator protein, MT1-MMP. 18 , 31 MT1-MMP cleaves pro-MMP-2 to active MMP-2 by forming a tri-molecular complex on the cell surface with pro-MMP-2 and TIMP-2. Regulation of MMPs can occur at the level of transcription, translation, activation, or modulated by tissue specific inhibitors. The mechanism by which MMP-2 is upregulated in this model is the focus of ongoing investigation. Although we did not specifically examine gut injury and inflammation in this study, arginine has clearly been shown to induce the pro-inflammatory transcription factor AP-1 and its downstream pro-inflammatory enzyme iNOS, in the postischemic gut. MMP-2 has been shown to promote wound healing in models of indomethacin-induced gastric ulceration. 32 However, in the current model of gut ischemia/reperfusion, MMP-2 appears to play a deleterious role in inflammation and injury by means of its association with iNOS production. Future studies to determine the effects of MMP-2 inhibition on the postischemic gut after arginine administration are warranted. In normal physiology, MMP-2 and MMP-9 produced by connective tissue are thought to contribute to tissue remodeling during development and during the repair process after tissue injury. Leukocytes, in particular macrophages, are major sources of gelatinase production. 1 – 6 However, endothelial and smooth muscle cells have been reported to produce gelatinases also. 7 – 12 While MMP-9 was detected in the postischemic gut, in contrast to MMP-2, this gelatinase was not modulated by luminal nutrients. MMP-9 production is necessary for neutrophil migration across the basement membrane and is commonly induced in other models of gut inflammation such as colitis. MMP-9 is secreted by macrophages and is also located in the cytoplasmic granules of neutrophils. Additionally, inflammatory cytokines stimulate the production of MMP-9 from lymphocytes and stromal cells. While the source of MMP-9 was not evaluated in this study, it is possible that local tissue injury from IR led to the infiltration of inflammatory cells and increased production of MMP-9. The lack of MMP-9 modulation by luminal nutrients is supported by our prior findings in an LPS model of gastric injury. In that model, we demonstrated an increase in MMP-2 production which correlated with increased iNOS production but no change in the expression of MMP-9. 18 , 31 In conclusion, arginine, but not glutamine, induced upregulation of iNOS and may contribute to increased expression of MT1-MMP and MMP-2 in the postischemic gut. The mechanism for this differential regulation by arginine warrants further investigation. 