Application of Metabolomics to Cardiovascular Biomarker and Pathway Discovery  Statistical Approaches to Metabolomic Data Reduction and Pathway Analysis Although a high-throughput metabolomics approach to biomarker discovery brings many advantages, it also brings a danger of generating false positive associations due to multiple testing and overfitting of data as noted above. Application of traditional statistical approaches (e.g., Bonferroni correction) in this setting tends to levy an insurmountable statistical penalty that can obscure biologically relevant associations. Even newer statistical techniques, such as advanced resampling methods or control of the false discovery rate ( 17 ), do not address adequately the fundamental problem of how to detect subtle but important changes in multiple variables identified in an “omics” approach. For metabolites participating in known biological pathways, a bioinformatics approach using pathways analysis can harness the vast information gathered in genomics or metabolomics experiments and turn it into a strength. Specifically, although measurement error in the marker discovery phase often prevents high confidence in any one particular metabolite’s correlation, the observation that multiple metabolites in a particular biological pathway are moving in tandem brings confidence that a particular pathway, and hence any biomarkers in that pathway, truly are correlated with the perturbation. By utilizing a more principled selection process for candidate marker triage, this approach increases the likelihood that candidate biomarkers will be validated in subsequent prospective validation studies. This approach also enhances one’s ability to use the metabolomic data collected in the biomarker discovery phase to gain insight into disease biology. Systematic analysis of functional trends has become widespread and important in the analysis of DNA microarray data from model organisms ( 18 ). The value of this approach in human studies was illustrated in a recent analysis of high-throughput differential mRNA expression ( 19 ). Expression of mRNA was assessed on over 22,000 genes comparing patients with Type 2 diabetes mellitus and unaffected controls (patients with normal glucose tolerance). A group of genes with depressed expression in diabetes versus controls was identified, and tested for association with a collection of other gene characteristics. It was found that this gene set was enriched for genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation. Although individual oxidative phosphorylation genes were not dramatically reduced in expression, as a group the trend was highly significant. Furthermore, the effect was attributable to a subset of oxidative phosphorylation genes regulated by peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor coactivator 1, a regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis. Thus, the analysis of trends among differentially expressed genes led directly to insight into altered metabolism in diabetes patients and hinted at therapeutic hypotheses involving the modulation of oxidative phosphorylation pathways. There are several statistical issues complicating functional trends analysis of high-throughput data that have been rigorously addressed in software under development, including “FuncAssociate”, recently described by Berriz and Roth ( 20 ). Although the analysis software was developed for use with high-throughput mRNA expression data, this general approach may be used in conjunction with essentially any high-throughput experimental approach for identifying or ranking “interesting genes”. FuncAssociate has generally been used in conjunction with controlled-vocabulary functional annotation, e.g., Gene Ontology (GO) annotation, but can be used in conjunction with many different sources of gene/protein/metabolite annotation, e.g., expression pattern in other studies, phenotype, protein complex membership, disease association, or phylogenetic profile. Several data reduction strategies utilizing supervised learning multivariate analysis can be used to construct multivariate metabolite biomarker profiles ( 21 ). In supervised learning, an algorithm is used to transform the multivariate data from metabolite profiles into a lower dimentionality with biological interest (e.g. health vs. disease). Metabolite data (inputs) and disease status (outputs or targets) form pairs that are used in the calibration of the model with the goal of the model being to correctly associate the inputs with the targets. Discriminant analysis is a cluster-analysis based algorithm for categorical variables ( 22 ) whereas partial least squares (PLS) is a popular linear regression-based method, and artificial neural networks offer the advantage of machine-based method that can learn non-linear mappings( 23 ). Principal components analysis (PCA) applies raw data to a normalized matrix which is then projected onto a specific scoring schema ( 4 , 24 ). This schema is based upon a series of orthogonal principal components, the first of which describes the maximum variance in the original data set. PCA can be used for dimensionality reduction in a data set by retaining those characteristics of the data set that contribute most to its variance, by keeping lower-order principal components and ignoring higher-order ones. Similarly, Fisher discriminant analysis (FDA) creates normalized data matrices which decrease sample variability within a specific condition (e.g. cells grown aerobically) while maximizing sample variability between different conditions (e.g., aerobic versus anaerobic growth) ( 25 ). These relatively unbiased methods of reducing large datasets have the potential to define previously unknown relationships between metabolites in a given physiologic state. A limitation of current analytical approaches in metabolomics is that they rely on the relative or absolute concentrations of a metabolite in a given tissue or plasma sample and do not take into account varying enzymatic activities controlling metabolic flux through biological pathways. Studies examining metabolic flux incorporate isotope labeled metabolites to map the fate of enzymatic substrates. Studies of TCA cycle anaplerosis in energy metabolism ( 26 ) and fractional synthetic rate of fatty acids and cholesterol ( 27 ) have generally focused on small, well-characterized pathways in specific tissues such as muscle or liver. The integration of current analytical methods with assessment of enzymatic activities contributing to metabolic flux will help to elucidate biologically relevant metabolic changes.  Emerging “non-traditional” roles for metabolites in human physiology Secreted, small ligands such as catecholamines play central roles in cardiovascular physiology. A growing body of literature suggests previously unanticipated roles for metabolites that have been traditionally thought to function exclusively as intracellular signals. He et al. recently discovered that the “orphan” G protein coupled receptors GPR91 and GPR99, which are highly expressed in the kidney, bind the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle intermediates succinate and ? ketoglutarate, respectively ( 28 ). The working hypothesis is that a local mismatch of energy supply and demand, altered metabolism of TCA-cycle intermediates, or injury leads to michondrial dysfunction and the release of succinate and a ? ketoglutarate from tissues. Once released into the circulation the metabolites function in a hormone-like manner, binding their receptors in the renal cortex triggering the release of renin and activation of the renin-angiotensin system. In the case of tissue-ischemia from volume loss, this process might be adaptive to match metabolic demands. In other conditions associated with high succinate production, such as congestive heart failure, resultant increases in blood pressure might prove maladaptive. This recent work highlights roles for new types of circulating metabolites functioning as hormones in the body.  Application of metabolomics to unique human cardiovascular disease models Novel metabolomics techniques still suffer from signal-to-noise issues, however, and applications to humans may be limited by inter-individual variability. While recent studies have evaluated the diurnal and even seasonal variation of hemostatic and inflammatory proteins (e.g., fibrinogen, D-dimer, C-reactive protein), systematic studies have yet to be performed for metabolites in humans. Studies to identify novel disease-related pathways are also restricted by the inherent unpredictability of the onset of pathological states. As noted previously, human metabolomics studies are also at high risk for potential clinical confounders such as diet or drug effects, as well as age, gender, and comorbidities.. It has been advocated that the analysis of samples from large patient cohorts, stratified by known risk factors or exposures, may minimize the impact of clinical confounding variables ( 29 ). However, the throughput of most current metabolomics technologies, particularly those that are MS-based, precludes the analysis of large patient cohorts. To help circumvent these problems, investigators have begun to apply these emerging technologies to unique clinical scenarios where serial sampling can be performed in patients both before and after a controlled perturbation, thereby allowing each patient to serve as his or her own biological control. Clinical cardiology is uniquely suited for such investigation. As proof of principle, a targeted MS-based metabolomics platform was applied to patients undergoing exercise stress testing with myocardial perfusion imaging ( 30 ). Eighteen patients had no evidence of ischemia (controls), whereas 18 patients had inducible ischemia (cases). Plasma was fractionated by high-performance liquid chromatography and metabolites analyzed using a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer to monitor hundreds of ion pairs by targeted mass spectrometry. The majority of metabolites displayed concordant changes in cases and controls (i.e., increased in both or decreased in both). For example, lactic acid, as well as hypoxanthine and inosine, end-products of AMP catabolism increased in both cases and controls. However, six metabolites including GABA, uric acid, citric acid, and 3 metabolites yet to be unambiguously identified yielded highly significant, discordant changes in cases and controls. Using a metabolic risk score derived from metabolites with discordant changes in the two groups we were able to differentiate cases from controls with a high degree of accuracy (P<0.0001, c-statistic=0.95). Strategies emphasizing the in-depth analysis of small, extremely well-phenotyped patient cohorts are ideal in light of current technological limitations. However, such an approach has potential limitations that should be considered. First, although serial sampling in patients serving as their own biological controls helps diminish inter-individual variability and signal-to-noise issues, populations studied to date are nevertheless small. Further testing in larger cohorts may be powered to detect more subtle metabolic changes and will provide sufficient precision in the estimates of the utility of each marker to allow for appropriate relative weighting of each component. Secondly, while metabolite profiling of serum or plasma offers the advantage of simple sample collection, and may reflect the sum of metabolic changes occurring throughout the body, sampling specific tissues that serve as proximal sources of metabolites ( 31 , 32 ), enables localization of metabolic changes and may help to gauge the sensitivity and specificity of signature metabolic profiles in plasma. Alternatively, for metabolites that are rapidly cleared from the circulation, it may be more appropriate to perform metabolic profiling on urine samples. Integration of metabolomics with other omics technologies in a systems biology approach to cardiovascular disease The identification of new pathways and biomarkers in cardiovascular disease will depend on the complementary power of genetics, transcriptional profiling, proteomics, and metabolomics. For example, Mayr et al. recently utilized metabolomics and proteomics to characterize metabolic profiles of atrial tissue that predispose patients to the development of atrial fibrillation ( 32 ). Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) that provide an unbiased scan of genomic sequence variants will also catalyze integrative “omics’ approaches. For example, three groups recently identified several loci, including chromosome 9p21, associated with early onset myocardial infarction ( 33 – 35 ). The chromosomal regions identified to date do not contain genes recognizably associated with established coronary heart disease risk factors such as plasma lipoproteins. However, the integration of metabolic and proteomic data from these same patients may provide clues as to how the variants modulate the atherosclerotic process. In conclusion, an emerging set of analytical and bioinformatics tools have made it possible to profile hundreds of metabolites in complex mixtures such as plasma. Though these technologies are still under development, when coupled with other functional genomic approaches, metabolomics promises to transform our ability to profile samples with the goal of elucidating biological pathways and discovering valuable clinical biomarkers.  Integration of metabolomics with other omics technologies in a systems biology approach to cardiovascular disease The identification of new pathways and biomarkers in cardiovascular disease will depend on the complementary power of genetics, transcriptional profiling, proteomics, and metabolomics. For example, Mayr et al. recently utilized metabolomics and proteomics to characterize metabolic profiles of atrial tissue that predispose patients to the development of atrial fibrillation ( 32 ). Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) that provide an unbiased scan of genomic sequence variants will also catalyze integrative “omics’ approaches. For example, three groups recently identified several loci, including chromosome 9p21, associated with early onset myocardial infarction ( 33 – 35 ). The chromosomal regions identified to date do not contain genes recognizably associated with established coronary heart disease risk factors such as plasma lipoproteins. However, the integration of metabolic and proteomic data from these same patients may provide clues as to how the variants modulate the atherosclerotic process. In conclusion, an emerging set of analytical and bioinformatics tools have made it possible to profile hundreds of metabolites in complex mixtures such as plasma. Though these technologies are still under development, when coupled with other functional genomic approaches, metabolomics promises to transform our ability to profile samples with the goal of elucidating biological pathways and discovering valuable clinical biomarkers. 