Prostatic fluid electrolyte composition for the screening of prostate cancer: a potential solution to a major problem Early detection is the key to effective treatment of prostate cancer, and to the prevention of deaths due to progression to untreatable advanced stage cancer. Because of mitigating factors, especially benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), that result in a low accuracy (about 60%) of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) testing, there is an urgent need for a more reliable biomarker for the identification of early stage through advanced stage prostate cancer and ‘at-risk’ individuals. To address this issue we propose that changes in prostatic fluid composition could provide accurate and reliable biomarkers for the screening of prostate cancer. Most notable is the consistent and significant decrease in citrate and zinc that is associated with the development and progression of prostate cancer. In this review we provide the clinical and physiological basis and the evidence in support of the utility of prostatic fluid analysis as an effective approach for screening/detection of prostate cancer, especially early stage and ‘at-risk’ subjects. The problem of BPH interference that plagues PSA testing is eliminated in the potential prostatic fluid biomarkers. The potential development of rapid, simple, direct, accurate clinical tests provides additional advantageous conditions. Further exploration and development of citrate, zinc and other electrolytes as prostatic fluid biomarkers are urgently needed to address this critical prostate cancer issue.  Conclusion We have presented the clinical and physiological basis and evidence in support of the plausibility that changes in prostatic fluid composition (particularly citrate and zinc) will provide biomarkers for the accurate screening/ detection of prostate cancer. This approach has the advantage of being a noninvasive procedure in which expressed prostatic fluid samples can be obtained by the DRE performed during the routine urology examination. Because of the extremely high concentrations of citrate, zinc, and other electrolytes, assays can be employed that will require as little as 1ul of expressed prostatic fluid or less. The opportunity exists for immediate and rapid assays that can be performed and completed in the urology suite while the patient is still being examined. This will provide the urologist with valuable information for initial assessment of the status of the patient. This approach also has the advantage that the changes will be identified in early as well as advanced cancer, in subjects that are not positively diagnosed by the combination of PSA and biopsy, and in ‘at-risk’ individuals. Unlike PSA, BPH will not provide false-positive results. This has the potential to eliminate an estimated 500000 per year unnecessary biopsy procedures and to reduce the number of prostate cancer deaths that results when individuals with early stage malignancy are not identified by existing procedures. We return to the critical issue and question posed by Stamey et al , 2 ‘We urgently need a(…) marker that reflects prostate cancer in the current PSA range of 2 to 10 ng/ ml(…) In the meantime what are we to do in the face of such massive, unwarranted PSA screening?’ We respond that prostatic fluid markers can provide the solution to this problem. However, in order to go forward with the exploration and development of the potential utility and clinical application of prostatic fluid analysis for prostate cancer, an informed, open-minded medical community is required. In the absence of such an environment critically required funding to pursue developmental studies and clinical trials will not be available, and an important potential tool to combat prostate cancer will not see the light of day. 