Fluorescent LYVE-1 antibody to image lymphatic trafficking of cancer cells Background The lymphatic system is a major route for cancer cell dissemination, and a potential target for antitumor therapy. Despite ongoing interest in this area of research, the real time behavior of cancer cells trafficking in the lymphatic system is poorly understood due to lack of appropriate tools to image this process. Materials and Methods We have utilized monoclonal-antibody and fluorescence technology to color-code lymphatic vessels and the cancer cells inside them in a living animal. Monoclonal anti-mouse LYVE-1 antibody was conjugated to a green fluorophore and delivered to the lymphatic system of a nude mouse, allowing imaging of mouse lymphatics. Tumor cells engineered to express red fluorescent protein (RFP) were then imaged traveling within the labeled lymphatics in real time. Results AlexaFluor-labeled monoclonal anti-mouse LYVE-1 created a durable signal with clear delineation of lymphatic architecture. The duration of fluorescent signal after conjugated LYVE-1 delivery was far superior to that of FITC Dextran or control fluorophore-conjugated IgG. Tumor cells engineered to express RFP delivered to the inguinal region enabled real time tracking of tumor cell movement within the green fluorescent-labeled lymphatic vessels. Conclusions This technology offers a powerful tool for the in vivo study of real-time trafficking of tumor cells within lymphatic vessels, the deposition of the tumor cells in lymph nodes, as well as for screening of potential anti tumor lymphatic therapies.  Introduction Cancer invasion of the lymphatic system and spread to draining lymph nodes is a common occurrence and is often a first stop of the metastatic pathway. Therefore, lymphatic spread is an important component of staging and prognosis [ 1 - 3 ]. Clearly a thorough understanding of the interaction of host lymphatic tissue with invading cancer cells is critical to our ability to fight cancer metastasis. Current technologies have been able to transiently mark lymphatic architecture, [ 4 - 6 ] but no durable strategy for in vivo lymphatic visualization has yet been developed. Ex-vivo immunohistochemical staining of sectioned lymphatic tissue has revealed information on the lymphatic system and its response to specific growth factors, but these are static studies and do not reveal information on the dynamics of cancer cell trafficking within lymphatics [ 3 ]. The discovery of lymphatic endothelium-specific markers have allowed the distinction of blood versus lymphatic vessels in histologic sections, greatly improving our ability to evaluate lymphatic-specific phenomena [ 7 ]. We have combined the staining specificity of a monoclonal antibody which binds to murine LYVE-1 on lymphatic endothelial cells with the power of in vivo fluorescence imaging to facilitate real-time color-coded imaging of lymphatic vessels and tumor cell trafficking in a living animal.  Materials and Methods We have utilized monoclonal-antibody and fluorescence technology to color-code lymphatic vessels and the cancer cells inside them in a living animal. Monoclonal anti-mouse LYVE-1 antibody was conjugated to a green fluorophore and delivered to the lymphatic system of a nude mouse, allowing imaging of mouse lymphatics. Tumor cells engineered to express red fluorescent protein (RFP) were then imaged traveling within the labeled lymphatics in real time.  Results AlexaFluor-labeled monoclonal anti-mouse LYVE-1 created a durable signal with clear delineation of lymphatic architecture. The duration of fluorescent signal after conjugated LYVE-1 delivery was far superior to that of FITC Dextran or control fluorophore-conjugated IgG. Tumor cells engineered to express RFP delivered to the inguinal region enabled real time tracking of tumor cell movement within the green fluorescent-labeled lymphatic vessels.  Conclusions This technology offers a powerful tool for the in vivo study of real-time trafficking of tumor cells within lymphatic vessels, the deposition of the tumor cells in lymph nodes, as well as for screening of potential anti tumor lymphatic therapies.  Materials and Methods Antibody conjugation Monoclonal anti-mouse LYVE-1 antibody (rat IgG2a) was purchased from R&D Systems Inc. (Minneapolis, MN). The AlexaFluor 488 monoclonal antibody labeling kit was purchased from Molecular Probes Inc. (Eugene, OR). The AlexaFluor 488 reactive dye contains a tetrafluorophenyl ester group which reacts with the primary amines of proteins to form stable protein-dye conjugates. Monoclonal anti-mouse LYVE-1 was reconstituted at 1mg/mL in phosphate buffered saline (PBS). 100?L of the 1 mg/mL solution was added to the AlexaFluor 488 reactive dye mixture. The pH of the antibody-dye mixture was adjusted to 8.0-8.3 using 1M sodium bicarbonate as needed. The mixture was then allowed to incubate for 1 hour at room temperature, followed by overnight incubation at 4°C. The conjugated antibody was then separated from the remaining unconjugated dye on a purification column by centrifugation. Antibody and dye concentrations in the final sample were determined spectrophotometrically based on absorbance of the final purified conjugate at 280 nm and 494 nm, respectively. Control purified rat IgG was purchased from R&D Systems Inc. (Minneapolis, MN). For conjugation of this antibody the AlexaFluor 488 protein labeling kit was purchased from Molecular Probes Inc. (Eugene, OR). The control IgG was diluted to 2 mg/mL in PBS. 500 ?L of the diluted antibody was added to the AlexaFluor 488 reactive dye mixture. 1M sodium bicarbonate was used to adjust the pH of the antibody-dye mixture to 8.0-8.3. The mixture was allowed to incubate for 1 hour at room temperature, followed by overnight incubation at 4°C. The conjugated antibody was then separated from the remaining unconjugated dye on an elution column by gravity. Antibody and dye concentrations in the final purified sample were determined spectrophotometrically based on absorbance of the final conjugate at 280 nm and 494 nm, respectively. All conjugated antibody used in this study had reached a minimum molar ratio of 1:4 moles IgG:moles dye. Immunohistochemical staining Slides of murine axillary lymphatic tissue were fixed using ice-cold acetone for two minutes, then stored at -80° C. The slides were then blocked for 12 hours with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in PBS at 4° C. They were then washed with PBS and incubated with a 1:40 dilution of labeled antibody (0.043 ?g/mL concentration) for 3 hours at room temperature. The slides were then rinsed with PBS and secured with 80% glycerol and a cover slip. Slides were imaged using the Nikon DE-300 fluorescent inverted microscope and Spot camera RD for image acquisition. Image analysis was done using Metamorph software (Universal Imaging Corporation). Murine mesentery samples from naïve nude mice were spread over glass slides and fixed using acetone at room temperature for two minutes, then stored at -80° C. Slides were blocked for 12 hours in 5% BSA in PBS at 4° C, washed with PBS and incubated with 1:100 dilution of labeled antibody (0.02 ?g/mL concentration) for 3 hours at room temperature. Following staining, the slides were rinsed again with PBS and secured with 80% glycerol and a cover slip, then imaged using fluorescence inverted microscopy as above. Cell culture The human pancreatic cancer cell line XPA-1 was a gift from Dr. Anirban Maitra at Johns Hopkins University [ 8 - 10 ]. Cells were maintained in RPMI 1640 media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 2 mM glutamine from Gibco-BRL, Life Technologies, Inc. (Grand Island, NY.) All cells were cultured at 37° C in a 5% CO2 incubator. Red fluorescent protein (RFP) retroviral transduction and selection The pDSRed-2 vector from Clontech Laboratories, Inc. (Palo Alto, CA) was used for stable expression of RFP in the human pancreatic cancer cell line XPA-1. The pDsRed-2 retrovirus, which also contains a neomycin resistance gene, was produced in PT67 packaging cells [ 11 , 12 ]. 20% confluent XPA-1 cells were incubated with retroviral supernatants of the packaging cells for 24 hours. Fresh medium was then replenished and the cells were allowed to grow for another 12 hours. This was repeated until high levels of RFP expression were observed under fluorescence microscopy. Cells were then trypsinized and harvested, and subcultured in selective media containing Geneticin G418 from Invitrogen Corp. (Carlsbad, CA). The level of G418 was increased in a stepwise fashion from 200 ?g/mL to 2000 ?g/mL. Clones with high RFP expression were isolated and grown for 10 passages in the absence of G418 to select for stable in vitro expression of RFP. In vivo lymphatic imaging with LYVE-1 Six-week old athymic nude mice were anesthetized using 50% ketamine, 38% xylazine and 12% agepromazine maleate injected intramuscularly at a dose of 2 ?L/gm. A ventral skin flap was elevated under sterile conditions exposing the inguinal and axillary lymph nodes as well as the interconnecting lymphatics of the anterior abdominal wall. Antibody (2.4 ?g conjugated LYVE-1 or control IgG) or FITC-dextran (50 ?g/mL) in a final volume of 50 ?L was injected slowly into the tissues around the exposed inguinal lymph node using a 50 ?L Hamilton syringe (Hamilton Company, Reno NV). For repeated imaging the skin flap was sutured closed between imaging sessions, again under sterile conditions, using 6-0 polysorb surgical suture (US Surgical). The inguinal lymph node, draining lymphatics and axillary lymph node were imaged using the OV-100 Small Animal Imaging System (Olympus Corp., Tokyo, Japan) containing an MT-20 light source from Olympus Biosystems (Planegg, Germany) and DP70 CCD camera from Olympus Corp. (Tokyo, Japan). Images were processed for contrast and brightness and analyzed with the use of Photoshop Element-4. Animals were imaged immediately after antibody or FITC injection and at 4, 12, 24, 36, 48, and 72 hours post-injection. A total of three mice were used for the in vivo time course evaluation. All animal studies were conducted in accordance with the principles and procedures outlined in the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Animals under Assurance Number A3873-1. In vivo tumor cell trafficking Confluent XPA-1 RFP cells were harvested by trypsinization and washed with warm PBS. The cells were diluted to 107 cells/mL in PBS to a total volume of 200 ?L. The cells were slowly directly injected into the area around the inguinal lymph node using a 1ml 27G2 latex free syringe (Becton Dickinson) four hours after administration of AlexaFluor-labeled monoclonal anti-mouse LYVE-1 as described above. Cell movement through the draining lymphatics of the inguinal lymph node and the afferent lymphatics of the axillary lymph node was imaged in real time using the OV-100 Small Animal Imaging System. Six animals were used in the in vivo imaging of tumor cell trafficking over the course of this study.  Antibody conjugation Monoclonal anti-mouse LYVE-1 antibody (rat IgG2a) was purchased from R&D Systems Inc. (Minneapolis, MN). The AlexaFluor 488 monoclonal antibody labeling kit was purchased from Molecular Probes Inc. (Eugene, OR). The AlexaFluor 488 reactive dye contains a tetrafluorophenyl ester group which reacts with the primary amines of proteins to form stable protein-dye conjugates. Monoclonal anti-mouse LYVE-1 was reconstituted at 1mg/mL in phosphate buffered saline (PBS). 100?L of the 1 mg/mL solution was added to the AlexaFluor 488 reactive dye mixture. The pH of the antibody-dye mixture was adjusted to 8.0-8.3 using 1M sodium bicarbonate as needed. The mixture was then allowed to incubate for 1 hour at room temperature, followed by overnight incubation at 4°C. The conjugated antibody was then separated from the remaining unconjugated dye on a purification column by centrifugation. Antibody and dye concentrations in the final sample were determined spectrophotometrically based on absorbance of the final purified conjugate at 280 nm and 494 nm, respectively. Control purified rat IgG was purchased from R&D Systems Inc. (Minneapolis, MN). For conjugation of this antibody the AlexaFluor 488 protein labeling kit was purchased from Molecular Probes Inc. (Eugene, OR). The control IgG was diluted to 2 mg/mL in PBS. 500 ?L of the diluted antibody was added to the AlexaFluor 488 reactive dye mixture. 1M sodium bicarbonate was used to adjust the pH of the antibody-dye mixture to 8.0-8.3. The mixture was allowed to incubate for 1 hour at room temperature, followed by overnight incubation at 4°C. The conjugated antibody was then separated from the remaining unconjugated dye on an elution column by gravity. Antibody and dye concentrations in the final purified sample were determined spectrophotometrically based on absorbance of the final conjugate at 280 nm and 494 nm, respectively. All conjugated antibody used in this study had reached a minimum molar ratio of 1:4 moles IgG:moles dye.  Immunohistochemical staining Slides of murine axillary lymphatic tissue were fixed using ice-cold acetone for two minutes, then stored at -80° C. The slides were then blocked for 12 hours with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in PBS at 4° C. They were then washed with PBS and incubated with a 1:40 dilution of labeled antibody (0.043 ?g/mL concentration) for 3 hours at room temperature. The slides were then rinsed with PBS and secured with 80% glycerol and a cover slip. Slides were imaged using the Nikon DE-300 fluorescent inverted microscope and Spot camera RD for image acquisition. Image analysis was done using Metamorph software (Universal Imaging Corporation). Murine mesentery samples from naïve nude mice were spread over glass slides and fixed using acetone at room temperature for two minutes, then stored at -80° C. Slides were blocked for 12 hours in 5% BSA in PBS at 4° C, washed with PBS and incubated with 1:100 dilution of labeled antibody (0.02 ?g/mL concentration) for 3 hours at room temperature. Following staining, the slides were rinsed again with PBS and secured with 80% glycerol and a cover slip, then imaged using fluorescence inverted microscopy as above.  Cell culture The human pancreatic cancer cell line XPA-1 was a gift from Dr. Anirban Maitra at Johns Hopkins University [ 8 - 10 ]. Cells were maintained in RPMI 1640 media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 2 mM glutamine from Gibco-BRL, Life Technologies, Inc. (Grand Island, NY.) All cells were cultured at 37° C in a 5% CO2 incubator.  Red fluorescent protein (RFP) retroviral transduction and selection The pDSRed-2 vector from Clontech Laboratories, Inc. (Palo Alto, CA) was used for stable expression of RFP in the human pancreatic cancer cell line XPA-1. The pDsRed-2 retrovirus, which also contains a neomycin resistance gene, was produced in PT67 packaging cells [ 11 , 12 ]. 20% confluent XPA-1 cells were incubated with retroviral supernatants of the packaging cells for 24 hours. Fresh medium was then replenished and the cells were allowed to grow for another 12 hours. This was repeated until high levels of RFP expression were observed under fluorescence microscopy. Cells were then trypsinized and harvested, and subcultured in selective media containing Geneticin G418 from Invitrogen Corp. (Carlsbad, CA). The level of G418 was increased in a stepwise fashion from 200 ?g/mL to 2000 ?g/mL. Clones with high RFP expression were isolated and grown for 10 passages in the absence of G418 to select for stable in vitro expression of RFP.  In vivo lymphatic imaging with LYVE-1 Six-week old athymic nude mice were anesthetized using 50% ketamine, 38% xylazine and 12% agepromazine maleate injected intramuscularly at a dose of 2 ?L/gm. A ventral skin flap was elevated under sterile conditions exposing the inguinal and axillary lymph nodes as well as the interconnecting lymphatics of the anterior abdominal wall. Antibody (2.4 ?g conjugated LYVE-1 or control IgG) or FITC-dextran (50 ?g/mL) in a final volume of 50 ?L was injected slowly into the tissues around the exposed inguinal lymph node using a 50 ?L Hamilton syringe (Hamilton Company, Reno NV). For repeated imaging the skin flap was sutured closed between imaging sessions, again under sterile conditions, using 6-0 polysorb surgical suture (US Surgical). The inguinal lymph node, draining lymphatics and axillary lymph node were imaged using the OV-100 Small Animal Imaging System (Olympus Corp., Tokyo, Japan) containing an MT-20 light source from Olympus Biosystems (Planegg, Germany) and DP70 CCD camera from Olympus Corp. (Tokyo, Japan). Images were processed for contrast and brightness and analyzed with the use of Photoshop Element-4. Animals were imaged immediately after antibody or FITC injection and at 4, 12, 24, 36, 48, and 72 hours post-injection. A total of three mice were used for the in vivo time course evaluation. All animal studies were conducted in accordance with the principles and procedures outlined in the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Animals under Assurance Number A3873-1.  In vivo tumor cell trafficking Confluent XPA-1 RFP cells were harvested by trypsinization and washed with warm PBS. The cells were diluted to 107 cells/mL in PBS to a total volume of 200 ?L. The cells were slowly directly injected into the area around the inguinal lymph node using a 1ml 27G2 latex free syringe (Becton Dickinson) four hours after administration of AlexaFluor-labeled monoclonal anti-mouse LYVE-1 as described above. Cell movement through the draining lymphatics of the inguinal lymph node and the afferent lymphatics of the axillary lymph node was imaged in real time using the OV-100 Small Animal Imaging System. Six animals were used in the in vivo imaging of tumor cell trafficking over the course of this study.  Results In vivo lymphatic imaging using AlexaFluor-conjugated LYVE-1 provided a specific and durable signal. Delivery of conjugated LYVE-1 to the mouse inguinal lymph node allowed both immediate and delayed visualization of the draining inguinal lymphatics as well as the afferent lymphatics of the receiving axillary lymph node ( Fig. 1A-C ). This signal was detectable out to at least 48 hours post-injection with the clearest signal present at 4 hours after antibody delivery. Animals imaged similarly after administration of control conjugated IgG or FITC-dextran to the inguinal lymph node showed minimal signal in the draining lymphatics at 4 hours post-injection and no signal at 12 hours post-injection ( Figure 2 ). Durable in vivo staining of mouse lymphatics was observed in all three animals imaged over time. Immunostaining of murine lymphatic tissue using AlexaFluor-conjugated LYVE-1 is specific to lymphatic endothelium. Specificity of the conjugated LYVE-1 antibody was verified by ex-vivo analysis of mouse lymphatic tissue. Murine axillary lymphatic tissue revealed a strong fluorescent signal in the lymphatic vessels around the lymph node periphery with sparing of the germinal centers ( Fig. 3A-C ). Likewise, staining of prepared mouse mesentery showed specific staining of lymphatic vessels coursing alongside mesenteric arteries and veins with low background ( Fig. 3D ). In addition, specific in vivo binding of the antibody-AlexaFluor conjugate to the endothelium of the lymphatic vessels allowed clear delineation of the vessel walls and valves ( Fig. 3E,F ). Tumor cell trafficking through mouse lymphatics imaged with AlexaFluor-conjugated LYVE-1 was imaged in vivo in real time using live-mouse fluorescent imaging technology previously developed in our laboratory [ 13 - 15 ]. After in vivo staining of mouse lymphatic endothelium with AlexaFluor-conjugated LYVE-1, human pancreatic tumor cells expressing red-fluorescent protein (RFP) were injected into the inguinal lymph node and surrounding tissues and lymphatic trafficking was imaged. The RFP-expressing cancer cells were clearly visible within the lymphatic vessels trafficking from the inguinal lymph node to the axillary lymph node ( Fig. 4 ). Figure 4A-F show trafficking of RFP cancer cells in a fluorescent LYVE-1 labeled lymphatic. Figure 4G shows the RFP labeled cancer cells collecting in the receiving axillary lymph node that has also been labeled with the fluorescent LYVE-1 antibody. Cell trafficking through the lymphatic vasculature and into the receiving lymph node can also be imaged and recorded on video in real time using the Olympus OV-100 Small Animal Imaging System. In all six animals evaluated for in vivo imaging of tumor cell trafficking the RFP-expressing cancer cells could be reliably seen in contrast against the green labeled lymphatics.  Results In vivo lymphatic imaging using AlexaFluor-conjugated LYVE-1 provided a specific and durable signal. Delivery of conjugated LYVE-1 to the mouse inguinal lymph node allowed both immediate and delayed visualization of the draining inguinal lymphatics as well as the afferent lymphatics of the receiving axillary lymph node ( Fig. 1A-C ). This signal was detectable out to at least 48 hours post-injection with the clearest signal present at 4 hours after antibody delivery. Animals imaged similarly after administration of control conjugated IgG or FITC-dextran to the inguinal lymph node showed minimal signal in the draining lymphatics at 4 hours post-injection and no signal at 12 hours post-injection ( Figure 2 ). Durable in vivo staining of mouse lymphatics was observed in all three animals imaged over time. Immunostaining of murine lymphatic tissue using AlexaFluor-conjugated LYVE-1 is specific to lymphatic endothelium. Specificity of the conjugated LYVE-1 antibody was verified by ex-vivo analysis of mouse lymphatic tissue. Murine axillary lymphatic tissue revealed a strong fluorescent signal in the lymphatic vessels around the lymph node periphery with sparing of the germinal centers ( Fig. 3A-C ). Likewise, staining of prepared mouse mesentery showed specific staining of lymphatic vessels coursing alongside mesenteric arteries and veins with low background ( Fig. 3D ). In addition, specific in vivo binding of the antibody-AlexaFluor conjugate to the endothelium of the lymphatic vessels allowed clear delineation of the vessel walls and valves ( Fig. 3E,F ). Tumor cell trafficking through mouse lymphatics imaged with AlexaFluor-conjugated LYVE-1 was imaged in vivo in real time using live-mouse fluorescent imaging technology previously developed in our laboratory [ 13 - 15 ]. After in vivo staining of mouse lymphatic endothelium with AlexaFluor-conjugated LYVE-1, human pancreatic tumor cells expressing red-fluorescent protein (RFP) were injected into the inguinal lymph node and surrounding tissues and lymphatic trafficking was imaged. The RFP-expressing cancer cells were clearly visible within the lymphatic vessels trafficking from the inguinal lymph node to the axillary lymph node ( Fig. 4 ). Figure 4A-F show trafficking of RFP cancer cells in a fluorescent LYVE-1 labeled lymphatic. Figure 4G shows the RFP labeled cancer cells collecting in the receiving axillary lymph node that has also been labeled with the fluorescent LYVE-1 antibody. Cell trafficking through the lymphatic vasculature and into the receiving lymph node can also be imaged and recorded on video in real time using the Olympus OV-100 Small Animal Imaging System. In all six animals evaluated for in vivo imaging of tumor cell trafficking the RFP-expressing cancer cells could be reliably seen in contrast against the green labeled lymphatics.  Discussion Cancer invasion of the lymphatic system and spread to draining lymph nodes is a common occurrence and is often a first stop of the metastatic pathway [ 3 ]. Therefore, lymphatic spread is a significant component of staging and prognosis in many solid tumors [ 1 , 2 ]. Recent results suggest that lymphangiogenesis itself can contribute to tumor metastasis [ 16 , 17 ]. In some cases tumor cells appear to influence the host lymphatic architecture, possibly paving the way for their own metastasis [ 18 ], although this influence varies with different tumor types.[ 19 - 21 ] These findings underscore the importance of a thorough understanding of the interaction of host lymphatic tissue with invading cancer cells. A clear comprehension of the in vivo real-time interactions of tumor cells with their surrounding environment, including the host lymphatic system, would greatly contribute to our ability to understand tumor invasion and metastasis. In particular, imaging of the real time dynamics of cancer cell trafficking to lymph nodes is critical to the fundamental understanding of metastasis. Current technologies for lymphatic imaging are often limited to the general uptake of molecules from the interstitial space, affording only transient and nonspecific visualization of the lymphatic system. Ex-vivo immunohistochemical staining of sectioned lymphatic tissue has revealed information on the lymphatic system and its response to specific growth factors [ 3 ]. However, these are static studies and do not reveal information on the dynamics of cancer cell trafficking in lymphatics. Experimental in vivo lymphangiography relies on the lymphatic uptake of molecules such as ferritin or FITC-dextran [ 4 - 6 ]. In clinical practice, lymphatic mapping employs the use of radiocolloid solutions or dyes [ 22 , 23 ]. While these strategies can provide information about lymphatic vessel density and function, they are transient and nonspecific, and do not yield information on real-time cancer cell trafficking through lymphatic networks. LYVE-1 is a hyaluronic acid receptor with sequence similarity to CD44 expressed on lymphatic endothelial cells [ 24 ]. This marker as well as other lymph-specific markers such as Podoplanin and VEGFR-3 have made it possible to distinguish between lymphatic and vascular endothelium in ex-vivo tissue staining, as these markers are generally not expressed on the endothelial cells lining arteries and veins [ 7 ]. Monoclonal antibodies specific for LYVE-1 have been used in immunohistochemical staining for some time, but to date have not been used for in vivo lymphangiography. We describe here a novel real time dual-color imaging technology in live mice using fluorescein-conjugated LYVE-1 antibodies to simultaneously visualize lymphatic vessels and lymphatic trafficking of fluorescent protein-labeled tumor cells traveling within them. By utilizing monoclonal antibodies specific for the lymphatic endothelium the technology described in this report enables superior visualization of the anatomy of the lymphatic vessels themselves. Most importantly, the signal remains within the local lymphatic vessels for up to 48 hours, conferring ability to image intra-lymphatic cancer cell trafficking in real time. Because the antibody-AlexaFluor conjugate can outline the vessel wall rather than merely filling the lumen, we are able to follow cell movement throughout the lymphatic system using tumor cells engineered to express different colored fluorescent proteins, in this case, RFP. A recent report showed expression of LYVE-1 on a rare subset of tissue macrophages, which may account for some of the LYVE-1 positive cells found in immunohistochemical staining of tumor tissue [ 25 ]. Because the uptake of the conjugated antibody relies on functional lymphatics, the likelihood that macrophages contribute significantly to our in vivo signal is very low. There has also been a suggestion that LYVE-1 can stain blood vessels in special cases [ 6 ]. However, as can be seen in Figure 1B, C and Figure 3D no blood vessels appear to be stained in our model with LYVE-1. In summary, we have taken advantage of combining lymphatic-specific marker LYVE-1 and fluorescent protein-labeled cancer cells to develop a model system for real time color-coded imaging of the interaction of tumor cells with the host lymphatic system. Cancer cell trafficking confirms that the LYVE-1-marked structures in this model system are functional lymphatic vessels. This new technology offers unique advantages over current technologies available for in vivo lymphangiography in that lymphatic functionality (tumor-cell trafficking) is imaged in real time, and will facilitate the advancement of our understanding of both interactions of primary tumors with the host lymphatic system as well as lymphatic dissemination of cancer cells. Future studies will also determine clinical use of this powerful imaging technology.  Discussion Cancer invasion of the lymphatic system and spread to draining lymph nodes is a common occurrence and is often a first stop of the metastatic pathway [ 3 ]. Therefore, lymphatic spread is a significant component of staging and prognosis in many solid tumors [ 1 , 2 ]. Recent results suggest that lymphangiogenesis itself can contribute to tumor metastasis [ 16 , 17 ]. In some cases tumor cells appear to influence the host lymphatic architecture, possibly paving the way for their own metastasis [ 18 ], although this influence varies with different tumor types.[ 19 - 21 ] These findings underscore the importance of a thorough understanding of the interaction of host lymphatic tissue with invading cancer cells. A clear comprehension of the in vivo real-time interactions of tumor cells with their surrounding environment, including the host lymphatic system, would greatly contribute to our ability to understand tumor invasion and metastasis. In particular, imaging of the real time dynamics of cancer cell trafficking to lymph nodes is critical to the fundamental understanding of metastasis. Current technologies for lymphatic imaging are often limited to the general uptake of molecules from the interstitial space, affording only transient and nonspecific visualization of the lymphatic system. Ex-vivo immunohistochemical staining of sectioned lymphatic tissue has revealed information on the lymphatic system and its response to specific growth factors [ 3 ]. However, these are static studies and do not reveal information on the dynamics of cancer cell trafficking in lymphatics. Experimental in vivo lymphangiography relies on the lymphatic uptake of molecules such as ferritin or FITC-dextran [ 4 - 6 ]. In clinical practice, lymphatic mapping employs the use of radiocolloid solutions or dyes [ 22 , 23 ]. While these strategies can provide information about lymphatic vessel density and function, they are transient and nonspecific, and do not yield information on real-time cancer cell trafficking through lymphatic networks. LYVE-1 is a hyaluronic acid receptor with sequence similarity to CD44 expressed on lymphatic endothelial cells [ 24 ]. This marker as well as other lymph-specific markers such as Podoplanin and VEGFR-3 have made it possible to distinguish between lymphatic and vascular endothelium in ex-vivo tissue staining, as these markers are generally not expressed on the endothelial cells lining arteries and veins [ 7 ]. Monoclonal antibodies specific for LYVE-1 have been used in immunohistochemical staining for some time, but to date have not been used for in vivo lymphangiography. We describe here a novel real time dual-color imaging technology in live mice using fluorescein-conjugated LYVE-1 antibodies to simultaneously visualize lymphatic vessels and lymphatic trafficking of fluorescent protein-labeled tumor cells traveling within them. By utilizing monoclonal antibodies specific for the lymphatic endothelium the technology described in this report enables superior visualization of the anatomy of the lymphatic vessels themselves. Most importantly, the signal remains within the local lymphatic vessels for up to 48 hours, conferring ability to image intra-lymphatic cancer cell trafficking in real time. Because the antibody-AlexaFluor conjugate can outline the vessel wall rather than merely filling the lumen, we are able to follow cell movement throughout the lymphatic system using tumor cells engineered to express different colored fluorescent proteins, in this case, RFP. A recent report showed expression of LYVE-1 on a rare subset of tissue macrophages, which may account for some of the LYVE-1 positive cells found in immunohistochemical staining of tumor tissue [ 25 ]. Because the uptake of the conjugated antibody relies on functional lymphatics, the likelihood that macrophages contribute significantly to our in vivo signal is very low. There has also been a suggestion that LYVE-1 can stain blood vessels in special cases [ 6 ]. However, as can be seen in Figure 1B, C and Figure 3D no blood vessels appear to be stained in our model with LYVE-1. In summary, we have taken advantage of combining lymphatic-specific marker LYVE-1 and fluorescent protein-labeled cancer cells to develop a model system for real time color-coded imaging of the interaction of tumor cells with the host lymphatic system. Cancer cell trafficking confirms that the LYVE-1-marked structures in this model system are functional lymphatic vessels. This new technology offers unique advantages over current technologies available for in vivo lymphangiography in that lymphatic functionality (tumor-cell trafficking) is imaged in real time, and will facilitate the advancement of our understanding of both interactions of primary tumors with the host lymphatic system as well as lymphatic dissemination of cancer cells. Future studies will also determine clinical use of this powerful imaging technology.  Figures Figure 1 Fluorescence imaging of in vivo murine lymphatic system of the anterior abdominal wall after injection of AlexaFluor-conjugated LYVE-1 to the inguinal lymph node. The inguinal (a, large arrow) and axillary (a, small arrow) lymph nodes, as well as the connecting lymphatics of the anterior abdominal wall (a-c) reveal durable fluorescent staining after delivery of AlexaFluor-conjugated monoclonal anti-mouse LYVE-1 antibody. Neighboring blood vessels did not stain (b, c). Figure 2 In vivo time course of fluorescence imaging of mouse lymphatics labeled with a one-time dose of fluorescent-labeled anti-LYVE1 antibody versus control fluorescent-labeled IgG or FITC-dextran. The hours post-delivery are denoted to the left of the images. All scale bars represent 0.1mm. While there is comparable fluorescence within the lymphatics immediately after antibody or FITC delivery (a-c), after four hours the unbound compound has washed away, leaving a strong positive signal only within the LYVE-1 labeled lymphatics (d-f). The small amount of nonspecific binding present within the conjugated IgG lymphatics at 4 hours post delivery (e) was completely gone by 12 hours after delivery (h). After a single administration of conjugated anti-LYVE1 antibody, the fluorescent signal remained present for up to 48 hours in the living animal (p). See the Materials and Methods section for antibody labeling procedures and means of in vitro delivery. Figure 3 Fluorescent images of nude mouse axillary lymph node (a-c) and mesentery (d) stained with AlexaFluor-labeled anti-LYVE1 monoclonal antibody. Stained lymphatic tissue was imaged using a fluorescent inverted microscope at 10× (d), 20× (c) and 40× (a, b). Fluorescence microscopy showed staining of lymphatic vessels at the lymph node periphery with sparing of the follicles (a-c). Lymphatic vessels showed positive fluorescence while neighboring arteries and veins within the tissue did not stain (d). Binding of conjugated LYVE-1 to the lymphatic endothelium in vivo outlines vessel walls and valves (e, f). Figure 4 Sequential images of cancer cells traveling through anterior abdominal wall lymphatics. Following administration of conjugated LYVE-1, the pancreatic cancer cell line XPA-1 RFP was injected into the inguinal lymph node. Red fluorescent XPA-1 cells, both individually (small arrows) and in clusters could be seen traveling through the fluorescent LYVE-1 labeled lymphatics. (a-f). RFP labeled cancer cells could also be seen collecting in the axillary lymph node after labeling of the node and lymphatics with green fluorescent LYVE-1 antibody (g).  Figures Figure 1 Fluorescence imaging of in vivo murine lymphatic system of the anterior abdominal wall after injection of AlexaFluor-conjugated LYVE-1 to the inguinal lymph node. The inguinal (a, large arrow) and axillary (a, small arrow) lymph nodes, as well as the connecting lymphatics of the anterior abdominal wall (a-c) reveal durable fluorescent staining after delivery of AlexaFluor-conjugated monoclonal anti-mouse LYVE-1 antibody. Neighboring blood vessels did not stain (b, c). Figure 2 In vivo time course of fluorescence imaging of mouse lymphatics labeled with a one-time dose of fluorescent-labeled anti-LYVE1 antibody versus control fluorescent-labeled IgG or FITC-dextran. The hours post-delivery are denoted to the left of the images. All scale bars represent 0.1mm. While there is comparable fluorescence within the lymphatics immediately after antibody or FITC delivery (a-c), after four hours the unbound compound has washed away, leaving a strong positive signal only within the LYVE-1 labeled lymphatics (d-f). The small amount of nonspecific binding present within the conjugated IgG lymphatics at 4 hours post delivery (e) was completely gone by 12 hours after delivery (h). After a single administration of conjugated anti-LYVE1 antibody, the fluorescent signal remained present for up to 48 hours in the living animal (p). See the Materials and Methods section for antibody labeling procedures and means of in vitro delivery. Figure 3 Fluorescent images of nude mouse axillary lymph node (a-c) and mesentery (d) stained with AlexaFluor-labeled anti-LYVE1 monoclonal antibody. Stained lymphatic tissue was imaged using a fluorescent inverted microscope at 10× (d), 20× (c) and 40× (a, b). Fluorescence microscopy showed staining of lymphatic vessels at the lymph node periphery with sparing of the follicles (a-c). Lymphatic vessels showed positive fluorescence while neighboring arteries and veins within the tissue did not stain (d). Binding of conjugated LYVE-1 to the lymphatic endothelium in vivo outlines vessel walls and valves (e, f). Figure 4 Sequential images of cancer cells traveling through anterior abdominal wall lymphatics. Following administration of conjugated LYVE-1, the pancreatic cancer cell line XPA-1 RFP was injected into the inguinal lymph node. Red fluorescent XPA-1 cells, both individually (small arrows) and in clusters could be seen traveling through the fluorescent LYVE-1 labeled lymphatics. (a-f). RFP labeled cancer cells could also be seen collecting in the axillary lymph node after labeling of the node and lymphatics with green fluorescent LYVE-1 antibody (g). 