Temperament and Externalizing Behavior: Social Preference and Perceived Acceptance as Protective Factors The purpose of this study was to explore the role of social preference and perceived acceptance as moderators of the relation between child temperament and externalizing behavior. Participants included 399 children evaluated at pre-kindergarten and kindergarten assessments. Pre-kindergarten children characterized by high temperamental Surgency/Extraversion were more likely to exhibit hyperactivity and aggression in the kindergarten classroom. In addition, kindergarten perceived acceptance and social preference moderated the relation between pre-kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten hyperactivity for girls only. Girls who were characterized by high temperamental Surgency/Extraversion, high perceived acceptance, and low social preference were at risk for higher levels of teacher-reported and peer-nominated hyperactivity. In contrast, accurately high perceived acceptance was a protective factor for high temperamental Surgency/Extraversion. Findings are discussed in terms of risk and protective factors for externalizing behavior.  Method Participants The current sample ( n = 399) uses data from three cohorts of children who are part of an ongoing, longitudinal study that began when children were 2 years of age. The goal of the larger longitudinal study is to understand trajectories of externalizing behavior as they relate to children’s social and emotional development. The current study focuses on children’s peer relations as they relate to early temperament and later externalizing behavior. The goal for recruitment of all three cohorts was to obtain a sample of children with a range of behavior problems, some of whom were at risk for developing future externalizing behavior problems, that was representative of the surrounding community in terms of race and socioeconomic status (SES). All cohorts were recruited through child day care centers, the county health department, and the local Women, Infants, and Children program. Potential participants for Cohorts 1 and 2 were recruited at 2 years of age (Cohort 1: 1994–1996; Cohort 2: 2000–2001) and screened using the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL 2–3; Achenbach, 1992 ), which was completed by the mother to oversample for externalizing behavior problems. Children were identified as being at risk for future externalizing behaviors if they received an externalizing T-score of 60 or above. Children who received externalizing T-scores below 60 were also selected to ensure that a range of behavior problems was represented. A total of 307 children were selected. Cohort 3 was initially recruited when infants were 6 months of age (in 1998) for their level of frustration on the basis of laboratory observation and parent report and followed through the toddler period (see Calkins, Dedmon, Gill, Lomax, & Johnson, 2002 , for more information). Children whose mothers completed the CBCL at 2 years of age were included in the current study ( n = 140). Of the entire sample ( N = 447; 215 boys, 232 girls), 37% of the children were identified as being at risk for future externalizing problems (T ? 60 on the CBCL; Achenbach, 1992 ). There were no significant demographic differences between cohorts with regard to gender, minority status (i.e., Caucasian vs. non-Caucasian), or 2-year SES. The current study focused on the pre-kindergarten (pre-k) and kindergarten assessments. At the pre-k assessment, 399 families participated. Families lost to attrition included those who could not be located, had moved out of the area, declined participation, or did not respond to phone and letter requests to participate. At the kindergarten assessment, 365 families participated, including 4 who did not participate in the pre-k assessment. Only participants with complete data for all variables of interest were included in analyses ( n = 200; 90 boys). Because multiple assessments were conducted with mothers, children, teachers, and peers in multiple contexts (e.g., laboratory, classroom), complete data were not available for all participants. Data were missing because parents or principals did not give consent for the school assessment, schools were too far away to conduct a school assessment, teachers did not complete questionnaires, and families did not complete both the pre-k and the kindergarten laboratory assessments. The children with complete data for the current study were primarily from intact families (77%), and families were economically diverse, with Hollingshead (1975) scores ranging from 17 to 65 ( M = 43.96). Sixty-five percent were European American, 29% were African American, 4% were biracial, and 2% were Hispanic. There were no significant differences between families who were and were not included in analyses in terms of gender, minority status, 2-year SES, or 2-year externalizing T-score. In addition, there were no significant differences between families who were and were not included in analyses in terms of the nine main variables examined. Similarly, there were no demographic or study variable differences for participants excluded due solely to missing data at the kindergarten assessment. Only 3 participants were excluded due solely to missing data at the pre-k assessment. Although we oversampled for externalizing behavior problems at 2 years, the variables examined in the current study have a good distribution that seems to be representative of a community sample. For example, the average T-scores for hyperactivity and aggression were both approximately at the 50th percentile according to the general norms presented by Reynolds and Kamphaus (2004) , and both variables had a wide range of scores (see Table 1 ). Procedures Pre-k assessment When children were approximately 4.5 years old, children and their mothers completed a battery of tasks and questionnaires in the laboratory. The measure of interest for this study was a questionnaire assessing temperament. Mothers also completed a measure of externalizing behavior at this visit that was used as a control variable. Kindergarten assessment Approximately 1 year later, we obtained consent from the families to complete an assessment in the child’s kindergarten classroom. Children were either 5 or 6 years old at the time of the kindergarten assessment. At this time, we obtained an assessment of the child’s social status by interviewing peers in the classroom. This assessment did not take place until the children had at least 8 weeks in the classroom to become acclimated to their peers, and only children with parental consent were interviewed. Trained graduate and undergraduate students interviewed each child individually. The sociometric procedures used were a modified version of the Coie et al. (1982) original procedure. Instead of asking children to nominate three peers they “liked most” and “liked least,” children were asked to give unlimited nominations for each category. This method allows for more reliable results and a reduction in measurement error ( Terry, 2000 ). Furthermore, this increased precision can be achieved with fewer classmates than are needed for the limited-choice nominations ( Terry, 2000 ). The mean rate of participation across classrooms was 84% (range = 68%–94%; number of reporters = 8–22), which is well within the acceptable range ( Keane & Calkins, 2004 ). Sociometric data were collected in 158 classrooms for the current sample. The average number of students in a class was 20 (range = 10–27). Cross-gender nominations were permitted to increase the stability of measurement for the nominations to determine peer status. To ensure that the children had a good understanding of the questions, we asked them to go through several sample questions until they understood the task, and provided pictures of all of the participating children as visual prompts. Interviewers were trained to provide further information and more examples if the child did not seem to grasp the questions. In addition to sociometric nominations, teachers were also asked to fill out several questionnaires on the target child to assess the child’s social, emotional, cognitive, and behavioral functioning in the school setting. During the same year, when children were approximately 5.5 years old, mothers and their children were also asked to come back to the laboratory for another visit similar to the pre-k visit. Perceived peer acceptance and child temperament were measured at this time. Measures Pre-k externalizing behavior Mother-reported pre-k externalizing behavior measured by the CBCL (CBCL 4–18; Achenbach, 1991 ) was used as a control variable in all regression analyses. The broadband Externalizing subscale was used as a parent-report measure of externalizing behavior problems. The minor subscales of Aggression (20 items) and Delinquency (13 items) make up the overall Externalizing subscale, including items such as “argues a lot” and “gets in many fights.” Each item was rated on a 3-point scale. The CBCL is widely used and has been found to be valid and reliable ( Achenbach, 1991 ; Achenbach & Rescorla, 2001 ). One-week test–retest reliability was .93 ( Achenbach, 1991 ). Cronbach’s ? (.88) for the Externalizing subscale in the current study was good. Pre-k and kindergarten temperament The measure that was used to predict externalizing behavior in kindergarten was maternal report of the child’s pre-k temperament on the Child Behavior Questionnaire (CBQ; Rothbart, Ahadi, & Hershey, 1994 ). The CBQ was also administered at the kindergarten assessment as a control variable and to assess the stability of child temperament over time. The CBQ is a 195-item questionnaire, requiring mothers to rate their child’s behavior on a 7-point Likert scale ranging from 1 = extremely untrue to 7 = extremely true . The broad temperamental dimension of Surgency/Extraversion was the focus of the present study. The score for Surgency/Extraversion was obtained by taking the mean of the following CBQ subscales (each 13 items): High Activity Level, High-Intensity Pleasure, Impulsivity, and Shyness, which was reverse-scored; Cronbach’s ? = .71 (pre-k), .69 (kindergarten); computed on the four subscales. Sample items included in the Surgency/Extraversion composite are “is full of energy, even in the evening” and “likes rough and rowdy games.” Kindergarten sociometric nominations A social preference score was obtained from the sociometric procedures. The total number of nominations for “like most” and “like least” were standardized to obtain two separate z scores, which were subsequently subtracted to compose a social preference score ( z “like most” – z “like least” = social preference; Coie et al., 1982 ). Social preference was again standardized within classrooms after computing the difference score. Lower scores represented less likeability or overall peer status in the classroom, whereas higher scores represented greater likeability. This is a widely used technique for assessing a child’s overall likeability or peer acceptance within the classroom ( Jiang & Cillessen, 2005 ). In addition, standardized peer-nominated “fights” and “acts wild” were used as a peer report of child aggression and hyperactivity, respectively. Kindergarten perceived acceptance Perceived acceptance was measured by the Pictorial Scale of Perceived Competence and Social Acceptance for Young Children ( Harter & Pike, 1984 ) during the kindergarten assessment. This scale assessed children’s perceptions of their peer acceptance, cognitive competence, physical competence, and maternal acceptance. Perceived peer acceptance was the construct used for this study. Sample items for this subscale include “has lots of friends” and “gets asked to play by others.” A trained graduate student read each item out loud to the children while showing a corresponding picture. Each item was scored on a 4-point scale. The children were asked to decide which of two descriptors (e.g., “I have lots of friends” or “I don’t have lots of friends”) applied more to them and to indicate whether that statement was “sort of true” or “really true.” The final perceived peer acceptance score was obtained by calculating the mean score for six questions pertaining to the child’s perception of peer acceptance (Cronbach’s ? = .74). This measure was found to be valid for children in preschool and kindergarten ( Harter & Pike, 1984 ). Kindergarten externalizing behavior The outcome examined was teacher-reported externalizing behavior measured by the Behavioral Assessment System for Children–Teacher Rating Scale (BASC-TRS; Reynolds & Kamphaus, 1992 ). The BASC-TRS is a tool that is widely used for diagnostic assessment and is gender-and age-normed using standardized t scores. Teachers were asked to complete either the 2.5- to 5-year-old BASC-TRS (109 items; 71% of participants) or the 6- to 11-year-old BASC-TRS (148 items; 29% of participants), depending on the child’s age at the time of the kindergarten assessment. The 6- to 11-year-old BASC-TRS has more items because it is assessing additional constructs. The Hyperactivity (2.5–5 BASC: 10 items; 6–11 BASC: 13 items; e.g., “acts out of control,” “cannot wait to take turn”) and Aggression (2.5–5 BASC: 12 items; 6–11 BASC: 14 items; e.g., “hits other children,” “bullies others”) subscales were used to assess two types of externalizing behaviors. The frequency of occurrence for each item was rated on a 4-point scale ( never, sometimes, often, almost always ). The internal consistency, reliability, and validity for the BASC-TRS have been well established ( Reynolds & Kamphaus, 1992 ). Cronbach’s ? for the Hyperactivity (2.5–5 BASC-TRS, ? = .91; 6–11 BASC-TRS, ? = .90) and Aggression (2.5–5 BASC-TRS, ? = .90; 6–11 BASC-TRS, ? = .92) sub-scales in the current study were excellent.  Participants The current sample ( n = 399) uses data from three cohorts of children who are part of an ongoing, longitudinal study that began when children were 2 years of age. The goal of the larger longitudinal study is to understand trajectories of externalizing behavior as they relate to children’s social and emotional development. The current study focuses on children’s peer relations as they relate to early temperament and later externalizing behavior. The goal for recruitment of all three cohorts was to obtain a sample of children with a range of behavior problems, some of whom were at risk for developing future externalizing behavior problems, that was representative of the surrounding community in terms of race and socioeconomic status (SES). All cohorts were recruited through child day care centers, the county health department, and the local Women, Infants, and Children program. Potential participants for Cohorts 1 and 2 were recruited at 2 years of age (Cohort 1: 1994–1996; Cohort 2: 2000–2001) and screened using the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL 2–3; Achenbach, 1992 ), which was completed by the mother to oversample for externalizing behavior problems. Children were identified as being at risk for future externalizing behaviors if they received an externalizing T-score of 60 or above. Children who received externalizing T-scores below 60 were also selected to ensure that a range of behavior problems was represented. A total of 307 children were selected. Cohort 3 was initially recruited when infants were 6 months of age (in 1998) for their level of frustration on the basis of laboratory observation and parent report and followed through the toddler period (see Calkins, Dedmon, Gill, Lomax, & Johnson, 2002 , for more information). Children whose mothers completed the CBCL at 2 years of age were included in the current study ( n = 140). Of the entire sample ( N = 447; 215 boys, 232 girls), 37% of the children were identified as being at risk for future externalizing problems (T ? 60 on the CBCL; Achenbach, 1992 ). There were no significant demographic differences between cohorts with regard to gender, minority status (i.e., Caucasian vs. non-Caucasian), or 2-year SES. The current study focused on the pre-kindergarten (pre-k) and kindergarten assessments. At the pre-k assessment, 399 families participated. Families lost to attrition included those who could not be located, had moved out of the area, declined participation, or did not respond to phone and letter requests to participate. At the kindergarten assessment, 365 families participated, including 4 who did not participate in the pre-k assessment. Only participants with complete data for all variables of interest were included in analyses ( n = 200; 90 boys). Because multiple assessments were conducted with mothers, children, teachers, and peers in multiple contexts (e.g., laboratory, classroom), complete data were not available for all participants. Data were missing because parents or principals did not give consent for the school assessment, schools were too far away to conduct a school assessment, teachers did not complete questionnaires, and families did not complete both the pre-k and the kindergarten laboratory assessments. The children with complete data for the current study were primarily from intact families (77%), and families were economically diverse, with Hollingshead (1975) scores ranging from 17 to 65 ( M = 43.96). Sixty-five percent were European American, 29% were African American, 4% were biracial, and 2% were Hispanic. There were no significant differences between families who were and were not included in analyses in terms of gender, minority status, 2-year SES, or 2-year externalizing T-score. In addition, there were no significant differences between families who were and were not included in analyses in terms of the nine main variables examined. Similarly, there were no demographic or study variable differences for participants excluded due solely to missing data at the kindergarten assessment. Only 3 participants were excluded due solely to missing data at the pre-k assessment. Although we oversampled for externalizing behavior problems at 2 years, the variables examined in the current study have a good distribution that seems to be representative of a community sample. For example, the average T-scores for hyperactivity and aggression were both approximately at the 50th percentile according to the general norms presented by Reynolds and Kamphaus (2004) , and both variables had a wide range of scores (see Table 1 ).  Procedures Pre-k assessment When children were approximately 4.5 years old, children and their mothers completed a battery of tasks and questionnaires in the laboratory. The measure of interest for this study was a questionnaire assessing temperament. Mothers also completed a measure of externalizing behavior at this visit that was used as a control variable. Kindergarten assessment Approximately 1 year later, we obtained consent from the families to complete an assessment in the child’s kindergarten classroom. Children were either 5 or 6 years old at the time of the kindergarten assessment. At this time, we obtained an assessment of the child’s social status by interviewing peers in the classroom. This assessment did not take place until the children had at least 8 weeks in the classroom to become acclimated to their peers, and only children with parental consent were interviewed. Trained graduate and undergraduate students interviewed each child individually. The sociometric procedures used were a modified version of the Coie et al. (1982) original procedure. Instead of asking children to nominate three peers they “liked most” and “liked least,” children were asked to give unlimited nominations for each category. This method allows for more reliable results and a reduction in measurement error ( Terry, 2000 ). Furthermore, this increased precision can be achieved with fewer classmates than are needed for the limited-choice nominations ( Terry, 2000 ). The mean rate of participation across classrooms was 84% (range = 68%–94%; number of reporters = 8–22), which is well within the acceptable range ( Keane & Calkins, 2004 ). Sociometric data were collected in 158 classrooms for the current sample. The average number of students in a class was 20 (range = 10–27). Cross-gender nominations were permitted to increase the stability of measurement for the nominations to determine peer status. To ensure that the children had a good understanding of the questions, we asked them to go through several sample questions until they understood the task, and provided pictures of all of the participating children as visual prompts. Interviewers were trained to provide further information and more examples if the child did not seem to grasp the questions. In addition to sociometric nominations, teachers were also asked to fill out several questionnaires on the target child to assess the child’s social, emotional, cognitive, and behavioral functioning in the school setting. During the same year, when children were approximately 5.5 years old, mothers and their children were also asked to come back to the laboratory for another visit similar to the pre-k visit. Perceived peer acceptance and child temperament were measured at this time.  Pre-k assessment When children were approximately 4.5 years old, children and their mothers completed a battery of tasks and questionnaires in the laboratory. The measure of interest for this study was a questionnaire assessing temperament. Mothers also completed a measure of externalizing behavior at this visit that was used as a control variable.  Kindergarten assessment Approximately 1 year later, we obtained consent from the families to complete an assessment in the child’s kindergarten classroom. Children were either 5 or 6 years old at the time of the kindergarten assessment. At this time, we obtained an assessment of the child’s social status by interviewing peers in the classroom. This assessment did not take place until the children had at least 8 weeks in the classroom to become acclimated to their peers, and only children with parental consent were interviewed. Trained graduate and undergraduate students interviewed each child individually. The sociometric procedures used were a modified version of the Coie et al. (1982) original procedure. Instead of asking children to nominate three peers they “liked most” and “liked least,” children were asked to give unlimited nominations for each category. This method allows for more reliable results and a reduction in measurement error ( Terry, 2000 ). Furthermore, this increased precision can be achieved with fewer classmates than are needed for the limited-choice nominations ( Terry, 2000 ). The mean rate of participation across classrooms was 84% (range = 68%–94%; number of reporters = 8–22), which is well within the acceptable range ( Keane & Calkins, 2004 ). Sociometric data were collected in 158 classrooms for the current sample. The average number of students in a class was 20 (range = 10–27). Cross-gender nominations were permitted to increase the stability of measurement for the nominations to determine peer status. To ensure that the children had a good understanding of the questions, we asked them to go through several sample questions until they understood the task, and provided pictures of all of the participating children as visual prompts. Interviewers were trained to provide further information and more examples if the child did not seem to grasp the questions. In addition to sociometric nominations, teachers were also asked to fill out several questionnaires on the target child to assess the child’s social, emotional, cognitive, and behavioral functioning in the school setting. During the same year, when children were approximately 5.5 years old, mothers and their children were also asked to come back to the laboratory for another visit similar to the pre-k visit. Perceived peer acceptance and child temperament were measured at this time.  Measures Pre-k externalizing behavior Mother-reported pre-k externalizing behavior measured by the CBCL (CBCL 4–18; Achenbach, 1991 ) was used as a control variable in all regression analyses. The broadband Externalizing subscale was used as a parent-report measure of externalizing behavior problems. The minor subscales of Aggression (20 items) and Delinquency (13 items) make up the overall Externalizing subscale, including items such as “argues a lot” and “gets in many fights.” Each item was rated on a 3-point scale. The CBCL is widely used and has been found to be valid and reliable ( Achenbach, 1991 ; Achenbach & Rescorla, 2001 ). One-week test–retest reliability was .93 ( Achenbach, 1991 ). Cronbach’s ? (.88) for the Externalizing subscale in the current study was good. Pre-k and kindergarten temperament The measure that was used to predict externalizing behavior in kindergarten was maternal report of the child’s pre-k temperament on the Child Behavior Questionnaire (CBQ; Rothbart, Ahadi, & Hershey, 1994 ). The CBQ was also administered at the kindergarten assessment as a control variable and to assess the stability of child temperament over time. The CBQ is a 195-item questionnaire, requiring mothers to rate their child’s behavior on a 7-point Likert scale ranging from 1 = extremely untrue to 7 = extremely true . The broad temperamental dimension of Surgency/Extraversion was the focus of the present study. The score for Surgency/Extraversion was obtained by taking the mean of the following CBQ subscales (each 13 items): High Activity Level, High-Intensity Pleasure, Impulsivity, and Shyness, which was reverse-scored; Cronbach’s ? = .71 (pre-k), .69 (kindergarten); computed on the four subscales. Sample items included in the Surgency/Extraversion composite are “is full of energy, even in the evening” and “likes rough and rowdy games.” Kindergarten sociometric nominations A social preference score was obtained from the sociometric procedures. The total number of nominations for “like most” and “like least” were standardized to obtain two separate z scores, which were subsequently subtracted to compose a social preference score ( z “like most” – z “like least” = social preference; Coie et al., 1982 ). Social preference was again standardized within classrooms after computing the difference score. Lower scores represented less likeability or overall peer status in the classroom, whereas higher scores represented greater likeability. This is a widely used technique for assessing a child’s overall likeability or peer acceptance within the classroom ( Jiang & Cillessen, 2005 ). In addition, standardized peer-nominated “fights” and “acts wild” were used as a peer report of child aggression and hyperactivity, respectively. Kindergarten perceived acceptance Perceived acceptance was measured by the Pictorial Scale of Perceived Competence and Social Acceptance for Young Children ( Harter & Pike, 1984 ) during the kindergarten assessment. This scale assessed children’s perceptions of their peer acceptance, cognitive competence, physical competence, and maternal acceptance. Perceived peer acceptance was the construct used for this study. Sample items for this subscale include “has lots of friends” and “gets asked to play by others.” A trained graduate student read each item out loud to the children while showing a corresponding picture. Each item was scored on a 4-point scale. The children were asked to decide which of two descriptors (e.g., “I have lots of friends” or “I don’t have lots of friends”) applied more to them and to indicate whether that statement was “sort of true” or “really true.” The final perceived peer acceptance score was obtained by calculating the mean score for six questions pertaining to the child’s perception of peer acceptance (Cronbach’s ? = .74). This measure was found to be valid for children in preschool and kindergarten ( Harter & Pike, 1984 ). Kindergarten externalizing behavior The outcome examined was teacher-reported externalizing behavior measured by the Behavioral Assessment System for Children–Teacher Rating Scale (BASC-TRS; Reynolds & Kamphaus, 1992 ). The BASC-TRS is a tool that is widely used for diagnostic assessment and is gender-and age-normed using standardized t scores. Teachers were asked to complete either the 2.5- to 5-year-old BASC-TRS (109 items; 71% of participants) or the 6- to 11-year-old BASC-TRS (148 items; 29% of participants), depending on the child’s age at the time of the kindergarten assessment. The 6- to 11-year-old BASC-TRS has more items because it is assessing additional constructs. The Hyperactivity (2.5–5 BASC: 10 items; 6–11 BASC: 13 items; e.g., “acts out of control,” “cannot wait to take turn”) and Aggression (2.5–5 BASC: 12 items; 6–11 BASC: 14 items; e.g., “hits other children,” “bullies others”) subscales were used to assess two types of externalizing behaviors. The frequency of occurrence for each item was rated on a 4-point scale ( never, sometimes, often, almost always ). The internal consistency, reliability, and validity for the BASC-TRS have been well established ( Reynolds & Kamphaus, 1992 ). Cronbach’s ? for the Hyperactivity (2.5–5 BASC-TRS, ? = .91; 6–11 BASC-TRS, ? = .90) and Aggression (2.5–5 BASC-TRS, ? = .90; 6–11 BASC-TRS, ? = .92) sub-scales in the current study were excellent.  Pre-k externalizing behavior Mother-reported pre-k externalizing behavior measured by the CBCL (CBCL 4–18; Achenbach, 1991 ) was used as a control variable in all regression analyses. The broadband Externalizing subscale was used as a parent-report measure of externalizing behavior problems. The minor subscales of Aggression (20 items) and Delinquency (13 items) make up the overall Externalizing subscale, including items such as “argues a lot” and “gets in many fights.” Each item was rated on a 3-point scale. The CBCL is widely used and has been found to be valid and reliable ( Achenbach, 1991 ; Achenbach & Rescorla, 2001 ). One-week test–retest reliability was .93 ( Achenbach, 1991 ). Cronbach’s ? (.88) for the Externalizing subscale in the current study was good.  Pre-k and kindergarten temperament The measure that was used to predict externalizing behavior in kindergarten was maternal report of the child’s pre-k temperament on the Child Behavior Questionnaire (CBQ; Rothbart, Ahadi, & Hershey, 1994 ). The CBQ was also administered at the kindergarten assessment as a control variable and to assess the stability of child temperament over time. The CBQ is a 195-item questionnaire, requiring mothers to rate their child’s behavior on a 7-point Likert scale ranging from 1 = extremely untrue to 7 = extremely true . The broad temperamental dimension of Surgency/Extraversion was the focus of the present study. The score for Surgency/Extraversion was obtained by taking the mean of the following CBQ subscales (each 13 items): High Activity Level, High-Intensity Pleasure, Impulsivity, and Shyness, which was reverse-scored; Cronbach’s ? = .71 (pre-k), .69 (kindergarten); computed on the four subscales. Sample items included in the Surgency/Extraversion composite are “is full of energy, even in the evening” and “likes rough and rowdy games.”  Kindergarten sociometric nominations A social preference score was obtained from the sociometric procedures. The total number of nominations for “like most” and “like least” were standardized to obtain two separate z scores, which were subsequently subtracted to compose a social preference score ( z “like most” – z “like least” = social preference; Coie et al., 1982 ). Social preference was again standardized within classrooms after computing the difference score. Lower scores represented less likeability or overall peer status in the classroom, whereas higher scores represented greater likeability. This is a widely used technique for assessing a child’s overall likeability or peer acceptance within the classroom ( Jiang & Cillessen, 2005 ). In addition, standardized peer-nominated “fights” and “acts wild” were used as a peer report of child aggression and hyperactivity, respectively.  Kindergarten perceived acceptance Perceived acceptance was measured by the Pictorial Scale of Perceived Competence and Social Acceptance for Young Children ( Harter & Pike, 1984 ) during the kindergarten assessment. This scale assessed children’s perceptions of their peer acceptance, cognitive competence, physical competence, and maternal acceptance. Perceived peer acceptance was the construct used for this study. Sample items for this subscale include “has lots of friends” and “gets asked to play by others.” A trained graduate student read each item out loud to the children while showing a corresponding picture. Each item was scored on a 4-point scale. The children were asked to decide which of two descriptors (e.g., “I have lots of friends” or “I don’t have lots of friends”) applied more to them and to indicate whether that statement was “sort of true” or “really true.” The final perceived peer acceptance score was obtained by calculating the mean score for six questions pertaining to the child’s perception of peer acceptance (Cronbach’s ? = .74). This measure was found to be valid for children in preschool and kindergarten ( Harter & Pike, 1984 ).  Kindergarten externalizing behavior The outcome examined was teacher-reported externalizing behavior measured by the Behavioral Assessment System for Children–Teacher Rating Scale (BASC-TRS; Reynolds & Kamphaus, 1992 ). The BASC-TRS is a tool that is widely used for diagnostic assessment and is gender-and age-normed using standardized t scores. Teachers were asked to complete either the 2.5- to 5-year-old BASC-TRS (109 items; 71% of participants) or the 6- to 11-year-old BASC-TRS (148 items; 29% of participants), depending on the child’s age at the time of the kindergarten assessment. The 6- to 11-year-old BASC-TRS has more items because it is assessing additional constructs. The Hyperactivity (2.5–5 BASC: 10 items; 6–11 BASC: 13 items; e.g., “acts out of control,” “cannot wait to take turn”) and Aggression (2.5–5 BASC: 12 items; 6–11 BASC: 14 items; e.g., “hits other children,” “bullies others”) subscales were used to assess two types of externalizing behaviors. The frequency of occurrence for each item was rated on a 4-point scale ( never, sometimes, often, almost always ). The internal consistency, reliability, and validity for the BASC-TRS have been well established ( Reynolds & Kamphaus, 1992 ). Cronbach’s ? for the Hyperactivity (2.5–5 BASC-TRS, ? = .91; 6–11 BASC-TRS, ? = .90) and Aggression (2.5–5 BASC-TRS, ? = .90; 6–11 BASC-TRS, ? = .92) sub-scales in the current study were excellent.  Results Overview Analyses are presented in four steps. First, intercorrelations and descriptive statistics among the variables of interest are examined. Following this step, the interaction of pre-k Surgency/Extraversion with kindergarten social preference and kindergarten perceived acceptance is examined as it predicts kindergarten hyperactivity and aggression using two hierarchical linear regressions. Third, parallel hierarchical linear regressions are completed with kindergarten peer-nominated “acts wild” and “fights” as outcomes. Finally, in the fourth step, an additional model is presented to examine a competing hypothesis. Namely, the interaction between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten externalizing behavior (i.e., hyperactivity, aggression, “acts wild,” and “fights”) as it predicts social preference and perceived acceptance is examined. Significant interactions are further investigated according to methods outlined by Aiken and West (1991) . To explore gender differences, we ran all regressions separately by gender. Prior to each analysis, all continuous main effects were centered based on means within gender before creating interaction terms. Descriptive Statistics and Intercorrelations Descriptive statistics for the study variables are presented in Table 1 . The skewness values for all variables were less than or equal to 1.1. A multivariate analysis revealed that there were no significant differences among the outcome variables in terms of minority status, F (4, 195) = 1.36, p = ns . There were, however, differences in terms of gender, F (4, 195) = 33.43, p < .000. Namely, girls had lower “fights” (girls: M = ?0.38, SD = 0.69; boys: M = 0.55, SD = 1.05; Cohen’s d = ?1.05) and “acts wild” (girls: M = ?0.42, SD = 0.67; boys: M = 0.60, SD = 0.97; Cohen’s d = ?1.22) scores. Bivariate correlations also indicated that there were no significant effects of SES on the variables of interest. Intercorrelations among the study variables are presented in Table 2 . As expected, pre-k Surgency/Extraversion was positively associated with kindergarten externalizing behavior. It is also noteworthy that Surgency/Extraversion is a highly stable construct across the pre-k and kindergarten assessments ( r = .81, p < .001). There was no association between kindergarten social preference and kindergarten perceived acceptance. There was, however, a negative association between kindergarten social preference and kindergarten externalizing behavior (i.e., hyperactivity, aggression, “acts wild,” and “fights”) and a positive association between kindergarten perceived acceptance and kindergarten externalizing behavior (i.e., hyperactivity, aggression, and “acts wild”). Regressions Predicting Kindergarten Hyperactivity and Aggression One hypothesis of the current study was that kindergarten social preference and perceived acceptance would moderate the association between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten externalizing behavior. To examine this question, we completed four hierarchical linear regressions with standardized betas and change in R 2 for each step presented in Table 3 . The dependent variables for the regression analyses were kindergarten teacher-reported hyperactivity and aggression. Regressions were computed separately for boys and girls. Pre-k parent-reported externalizing behavior and kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion were entered in the first step as control variables. Step 2 included the main effects for pre-k Surgency/Extraversion, kindergarten social preference, and kindergarten perceived acceptance. Step 3 included the following interactions: Pre-k Surgency/Extraversion × Kindergarten Social Preference, Pre-k Surgency/Extraversion × Kindergarten Perceived Acceptance, and Kindergarten Social Preference × Kindergarten Perceived Acceptance. Finally, Step 4 included the three-way interaction combining pre-k Surgency/Extraversion, kindergarten social preference, and kindergarten perceived acceptance. When kindergarten teacher-reported hyperactivity was examined as the outcome of these steps, the main effects for kindergarten social preference and perceived acceptance were significant predictors. These main effects, however, were qualified for girls only by significant two-way interactions between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten social preference and between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten perceived acceptance. The overall hyperactivity model explained 39% of the variance for girls and 30% of the variance for boys. The significant two-way interactions were explored following methods outlined by Aiken and West (1991) . The first two-way interaction was depicted in Figure 1 by plotting the regression of hyperactivity ( y ) on pre-k Surgency/Extraversion ( x ) as a function of two values of social preference, Z L and Z H (i.e., one standard deviation below the mean, one standard deviation above the mean). Unstandardized B was used to calculate the regression lines. From the graph it is apparent that children with low social preference scores have the steepest slope across different levels of pre-k Surgency/Extraversion. The highest kindergarten hyperactivity score was among children with high pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and low kindergarten social preference. Similar to the first interaction, the second two-way interaction was depicted in Figure 2 by plotting the regression of hyperactivity ( y ) on pre-k Surgency/Extraversion ( x ) as a function of two values of perceived acceptance, Z L and Z H. The graph shows that hyperactivity varies at different levels of pre-k Surgency/Extraversion only in the context of high kindergarten perceived acceptance. The next step was to determine whether the slopes of the lines plotted in Figure 1 and Figure 2 were different from zero, as outlined by Aiken and West (1991) . For the first graph, two new variables were created, Z cvh and Z cvl, such that each variable reflected the social preference score minus Z H and Z L, respectively. The cross-product of each new variable with pre-k Surgency/Extraversion ( x ) was computed. Finally, hyperactivity was regressed on pre-k Surgency/Extraversion, the conditional values of social preference (i.e., Z cvh, Z cvl), and each cross-product in two separate regression analyses. The resulting t tests for the betas indicated the slope for low social preference was significantly different from zero, B = 5.56, ? = .38, t (106) = 2.00, p < .05, but the slope for high social preference was not significantly different from zero, B = ?0.37, ? = ?.03, t (106) = ?0.15, p = ns . To test the lines in Figure 2 , we computed similar analyses using conditional values of perceived acceptance. Results revealed the slope for high perceived acceptance was significantly different from zero, B = 7.24, ? = .49, t (106) = 2.81, p < .01, whereas the slope for low perceived acceptance was not, B = 0.13, ? = .01, t (106) = 0.05, p = ns . When kindergarten aggression was examined as the outcome ( Table 3 ), the main effects of kindergarten social preference and perceived acceptance were again significant predictors for boys and girls. In contrast to the regression examining hyperactivity, there were no significant two-way or three-way interactions when predicting aggression. The overall aggression model explained 23% of the variance for girls and 36% of the variance for boys. Regressions Predicting Kindergarten “Acts Wild” and “Fights” To confirm the results presented with kindergarten teacher-reported hyperactivity and aggression, we examined kindergarten peer nominations of “acts wild” and “fights” as additional measures of hyperactivity and aggression. The steps entered in the previous regressions were identical to the steps entered when “acts wild” and “fights” were examined as outcomes ( Table 3 ). Similar to the regression examining teacher-reported hyperactivity, kindergarten social preference significantly predicted kindergarten peer-nominated “acts wild.” These main effects were qualified for girls only by a significant three-way interaction among pre-k Surgency/Extraversion, kindergarten social preference, and kindergarten perceived acceptance. The model accounted for 40% of the variance for girls and 32% of the variance for boys. The significant three-way interaction was explored following methods outlined by Aiken and West (1991) , similar to the graphing procedures presented in the previous section. From the graph it is apparent that girls with inflated perceived acceptance (i.e., high perceived acceptance, low social preference) have the highest “acts wild” scores ( Figure 3 ). In contrast, having accurately high perceived acceptance (i.e., high perceived acceptance, high social preference) appears to serve as a protective factor for girls with high pre-kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion, as these children have the lowest “acts wild” scores. The next step was to determine whether the slopes of the lines plotted in Figure 3 were different from zero. Analyses were similar to those presented in the previous section and followed guidelines outlined by Aiken and West (1991) . The resulting t tests for the betas indicated that only the slope for girls with accurately high perceived acceptance was marginally different from zero, B = ?0.42, ? = ?.40, t (102) = ?1.93, p < .06. Similar to the regression predicting aggression, the main effect of kindergarten social preference significantly predicted kindergarten peer-nominated “fights” ( Table 3 ). For girls, the interaction between kindergarten social preference and kindergarten perceived acceptance significantly predicted “fights,” with girls reporting inflated perceived acceptance having the highest “fights” scores. When all steps were included, 25% of the variance in “fights” was explained for girls and 45% of the variance was explained for boys. Competing Hypothesis Given that the moderators (i.e., social preference and perceived acceptance) and outcome variables (i.e., hyperactivity, aggression, “acts wild,” and “fights”) were assessed during the same year, it could be argued that the kindergarten externalizing behaviors examined moderate the relation between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten peer acceptance (i.e., social preference and perceived acceptance) instead of peer acceptance moderating the relation between Surgency/Extraversion and externalizing behavior. To test this competing hypothesis, we computed two separate hierarchical linear regressions for girls only because the previous analyses revealed interactions for girls but not for boys. Kindergarten social preference was the dependent variable for the first regression, and kindergarten perceived acceptance was the dependent variable for the second regression. Pre-k parent-reported externalizing behavior and kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion were entered in the first step as control variables. Pre-k Surgency/Extraversion, kindergarten hyperactivity, and kindergarten “acts wild” were included in Step 2. Both two-way interactions between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and the kindergarten externalizing behaviors were entered in Step 2. Results revealed the main effect for kindergarten “acts wild” significantly predicted kindergarten social preference, ? = ?.33, t (102) = ?3.11, p < .01, and the main effect for kindergarten hyperactivity significantly predicted kindergarten perceived acceptance, ? = .33, t (102) = 2.92, p < .01. None of the two-way interactions were significant. Thus, externalizing behavior did not moderate the relation between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten peer acceptance (i.e., social preference and perceived acceptance).  Results Overview Analyses are presented in four steps. First, intercorrelations and descriptive statistics among the variables of interest are examined. Following this step, the interaction of pre-k Surgency/Extraversion with kindergarten social preference and kindergarten perceived acceptance is examined as it predicts kindergarten hyperactivity and aggression using two hierarchical linear regressions. Third, parallel hierarchical linear regressions are completed with kindergarten peer-nominated “acts wild” and “fights” as outcomes. Finally, in the fourth step, an additional model is presented to examine a competing hypothesis. Namely, the interaction between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten externalizing behavior (i.e., hyperactivity, aggression, “acts wild,” and “fights”) as it predicts social preference and perceived acceptance is examined. Significant interactions are further investigated according to methods outlined by Aiken and West (1991) . To explore gender differences, we ran all regressions separately by gender. Prior to each analysis, all continuous main effects were centered based on means within gender before creating interaction terms. Descriptive Statistics and Intercorrelations Descriptive statistics for the study variables are presented in Table 1 . The skewness values for all variables were less than or equal to 1.1. A multivariate analysis revealed that there were no significant differences among the outcome variables in terms of minority status, F (4, 195) = 1.36, p = ns . There were, however, differences in terms of gender, F (4, 195) = 33.43, p < .000. Namely, girls had lower “fights” (girls: M = ?0.38, SD = 0.69; boys: M = 0.55, SD = 1.05; Cohen’s d = ?1.05) and “acts wild” (girls: M = ?0.42, SD = 0.67; boys: M = 0.60, SD = 0.97; Cohen’s d = ?1.22) scores. Bivariate correlations also indicated that there were no significant effects of SES on the variables of interest. Intercorrelations among the study variables are presented in Table 2 . As expected, pre-k Surgency/Extraversion was positively associated with kindergarten externalizing behavior. It is also noteworthy that Surgency/Extraversion is a highly stable construct across the pre-k and kindergarten assessments ( r = .81, p < .001). There was no association between kindergarten social preference and kindergarten perceived acceptance. There was, however, a negative association between kindergarten social preference and kindergarten externalizing behavior (i.e., hyperactivity, aggression, “acts wild,” and “fights”) and a positive association between kindergarten perceived acceptance and kindergarten externalizing behavior (i.e., hyperactivity, aggression, and “acts wild”). Regressions Predicting Kindergarten Hyperactivity and Aggression One hypothesis of the current study was that kindergarten social preference and perceived acceptance would moderate the association between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten externalizing behavior. To examine this question, we completed four hierarchical linear regressions with standardized betas and change in R 2 for each step presented in Table 3 . The dependent variables for the regression analyses were kindergarten teacher-reported hyperactivity and aggression. Regressions were computed separately for boys and girls. Pre-k parent-reported externalizing behavior and kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion were entered in the first step as control variables. Step 2 included the main effects for pre-k Surgency/Extraversion, kindergarten social preference, and kindergarten perceived acceptance. Step 3 included the following interactions: Pre-k Surgency/Extraversion × Kindergarten Social Preference, Pre-k Surgency/Extraversion × Kindergarten Perceived Acceptance, and Kindergarten Social Preference × Kindergarten Perceived Acceptance. Finally, Step 4 included the three-way interaction combining pre-k Surgency/Extraversion, kindergarten social preference, and kindergarten perceived acceptance. When kindergarten teacher-reported hyperactivity was examined as the outcome of these steps, the main effects for kindergarten social preference and perceived acceptance were significant predictors. These main effects, however, were qualified for girls only by significant two-way interactions between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten social preference and between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten perceived acceptance. The overall hyperactivity model explained 39% of the variance for girls and 30% of the variance for boys. The significant two-way interactions were explored following methods outlined by Aiken and West (1991) . The first two-way interaction was depicted in Figure 1 by plotting the regression of hyperactivity ( y ) on pre-k Surgency/Extraversion ( x ) as a function of two values of social preference, Z L and Z H (i.e., one standard deviation below the mean, one standard deviation above the mean). Unstandardized B was used to calculate the regression lines. From the graph it is apparent that children with low social preference scores have the steepest slope across different levels of pre-k Surgency/Extraversion. The highest kindergarten hyperactivity score was among children with high pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and low kindergarten social preference. Similar to the first interaction, the second two-way interaction was depicted in Figure 2 by plotting the regression of hyperactivity ( y ) on pre-k Surgency/Extraversion ( x ) as a function of two values of perceived acceptance, Z L and Z H. The graph shows that hyperactivity varies at different levels of pre-k Surgency/Extraversion only in the context of high kindergarten perceived acceptance. The next step was to determine whether the slopes of the lines plotted in Figure 1 and Figure 2 were different from zero, as outlined by Aiken and West (1991) . For the first graph, two new variables were created, Z cvh and Z cvl, such that each variable reflected the social preference score minus Z H and Z L, respectively. The cross-product of each new variable with pre-k Surgency/Extraversion ( x ) was computed. Finally, hyperactivity was regressed on pre-k Surgency/Extraversion, the conditional values of social preference (i.e., Z cvh, Z cvl), and each cross-product in two separate regression analyses. The resulting t tests for the betas indicated the slope for low social preference was significantly different from zero, B = 5.56, ? = .38, t (106) = 2.00, p < .05, but the slope for high social preference was not significantly different from zero, B = ?0.37, ? = ?.03, t (106) = ?0.15, p = ns . To test the lines in Figure 2 , we computed similar analyses using conditional values of perceived acceptance. Results revealed the slope for high perceived acceptance was significantly different from zero, B = 7.24, ? = .49, t (106) = 2.81, p < .01, whereas the slope for low perceived acceptance was not, B = 0.13, ? = .01, t (106) = 0.05, p = ns . When kindergarten aggression was examined as the outcome ( Table 3 ), the main effects of kindergarten social preference and perceived acceptance were again significant predictors for boys and girls. In contrast to the regression examining hyperactivity, there were no significant two-way or three-way interactions when predicting aggression. The overall aggression model explained 23% of the variance for girls and 36% of the variance for boys. Regressions Predicting Kindergarten “Acts Wild” and “Fights” To confirm the results presented with kindergarten teacher-reported hyperactivity and aggression, we examined kindergarten peer nominations of “acts wild” and “fights” as additional measures of hyperactivity and aggression. The steps entered in the previous regressions were identical to the steps entered when “acts wild” and “fights” were examined as outcomes ( Table 3 ). Similar to the regression examining teacher-reported hyperactivity, kindergarten social preference significantly predicted kindergarten peer-nominated “acts wild.” These main effects were qualified for girls only by a significant three-way interaction among pre-k Surgency/Extraversion, kindergarten social preference, and kindergarten perceived acceptance. The model accounted for 40% of the variance for girls and 32% of the variance for boys. The significant three-way interaction was explored following methods outlined by Aiken and West (1991) , similar to the graphing procedures presented in the previous section. From the graph it is apparent that girls with inflated perceived acceptance (i.e., high perceived acceptance, low social preference) have the highest “acts wild” scores ( Figure 3 ). In contrast, having accurately high perceived acceptance (i.e., high perceived acceptance, high social preference) appears to serve as a protective factor for girls with high pre-kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion, as these children have the lowest “acts wild” scores. The next step was to determine whether the slopes of the lines plotted in Figure 3 were different from zero. Analyses were similar to those presented in the previous section and followed guidelines outlined by Aiken and West (1991) . The resulting t tests for the betas indicated that only the slope for girls with accurately high perceived acceptance was marginally different from zero, B = ?0.42, ? = ?.40, t (102) = ?1.93, p < .06. Similar to the regression predicting aggression, the main effect of kindergarten social preference significantly predicted kindergarten peer-nominated “fights” ( Table 3 ). For girls, the interaction between kindergarten social preference and kindergarten perceived acceptance significantly predicted “fights,” with girls reporting inflated perceived acceptance having the highest “fights” scores. When all steps were included, 25% of the variance in “fights” was explained for girls and 45% of the variance was explained for boys. Competing Hypothesis Given that the moderators (i.e., social preference and perceived acceptance) and outcome variables (i.e., hyperactivity, aggression, “acts wild,” and “fights”) were assessed during the same year, it could be argued that the kindergarten externalizing behaviors examined moderate the relation between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten peer acceptance (i.e., social preference and perceived acceptance) instead of peer acceptance moderating the relation between Surgency/Extraversion and externalizing behavior. To test this competing hypothesis, we computed two separate hierarchical linear regressions for girls only because the previous analyses revealed interactions for girls but not for boys. Kindergarten social preference was the dependent variable for the first regression, and kindergarten perceived acceptance was the dependent variable for the second regression. Pre-k parent-reported externalizing behavior and kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion were entered in the first step as control variables. Pre-k Surgency/Extraversion, kindergarten hyperactivity, and kindergarten “acts wild” were included in Step 2. Both two-way interactions between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and the kindergarten externalizing behaviors were entered in Step 2. Results revealed the main effect for kindergarten “acts wild” significantly predicted kindergarten social preference, ? = ?.33, t (102) = ?3.11, p < .01, and the main effect for kindergarten hyperactivity significantly predicted kindergarten perceived acceptance, ? = .33, t (102) = 2.92, p < .01. None of the two-way interactions were significant. Thus, externalizing behavior did not moderate the relation between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten peer acceptance (i.e., social preference and perceived acceptance).  Overview Analyses are presented in four steps. First, intercorrelations and descriptive statistics among the variables of interest are examined. Following this step, the interaction of pre-k Surgency/Extraversion with kindergarten social preference and kindergarten perceived acceptance is examined as it predicts kindergarten hyperactivity and aggression using two hierarchical linear regressions. Third, parallel hierarchical linear regressions are completed with kindergarten peer-nominated “acts wild” and “fights” as outcomes. Finally, in the fourth step, an additional model is presented to examine a competing hypothesis. Namely, the interaction between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten externalizing behavior (i.e., hyperactivity, aggression, “acts wild,” and “fights”) as it predicts social preference and perceived acceptance is examined. Significant interactions are further investigated according to methods outlined by Aiken and West (1991) . To explore gender differences, we ran all regressions separately by gender. Prior to each analysis, all continuous main effects were centered based on means within gender before creating interaction terms.  Overview Analyses are presented in four steps. First, intercorrelations and descriptive statistics among the variables of interest are examined. Following this step, the interaction of pre-k Surgency/Extraversion with kindergarten social preference and kindergarten perceived acceptance is examined as it predicts kindergarten hyperactivity and aggression using two hierarchical linear regressions. Third, parallel hierarchical linear regressions are completed with kindergarten peer-nominated “acts wild” and “fights” as outcomes. Finally, in the fourth step, an additional model is presented to examine a competing hypothesis. Namely, the interaction between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten externalizing behavior (i.e., hyperactivity, aggression, “acts wild,” and “fights”) as it predicts social preference and perceived acceptance is examined. Significant interactions are further investigated according to methods outlined by Aiken and West (1991) . To explore gender differences, we ran all regressions separately by gender. Prior to each analysis, all continuous main effects were centered based on means within gender before creating interaction terms.  Descriptive Statistics and Intercorrelations Descriptive statistics for the study variables are presented in Table 1 . The skewness values for all variables were less than or equal to 1.1. A multivariate analysis revealed that there were no significant differences among the outcome variables in terms of minority status, F (4, 195) = 1.36, p = ns . There were, however, differences in terms of gender, F (4, 195) = 33.43, p < .000. Namely, girls had lower “fights” (girls: M = ?0.38, SD = 0.69; boys: M = 0.55, SD = 1.05; Cohen’s d = ?1.05) and “acts wild” (girls: M = ?0.42, SD = 0.67; boys: M = 0.60, SD = 0.97; Cohen’s d = ?1.22) scores. Bivariate correlations also indicated that there were no significant effects of SES on the variables of interest. Intercorrelations among the study variables are presented in Table 2 . As expected, pre-k Surgency/Extraversion was positively associated with kindergarten externalizing behavior. It is also noteworthy that Surgency/Extraversion is a highly stable construct across the pre-k and kindergarten assessments ( r = .81, p < .001). There was no association between kindergarten social preference and kindergarten perceived acceptance. There was, however, a negative association between kindergarten social preference and kindergarten externalizing behavior (i.e., hyperactivity, aggression, “acts wild,” and “fights”) and a positive association between kindergarten perceived acceptance and kindergarten externalizing behavior (i.e., hyperactivity, aggression, and “acts wild”).  Descriptive Statistics and Intercorrelations Descriptive statistics for the study variables are presented in Table 1 . The skewness values for all variables were less than or equal to 1.1. A multivariate analysis revealed that there were no significant differences among the outcome variables in terms of minority status, F (4, 195) = 1.36, p = ns . There were, however, differences in terms of gender, F (4, 195) = 33.43, p < .000. Namely, girls had lower “fights” (girls: M = ?0.38, SD = 0.69; boys: M = 0.55, SD = 1.05; Cohen’s d = ?1.05) and “acts wild” (girls: M = ?0.42, SD = 0.67; boys: M = 0.60, SD = 0.97; Cohen’s d = ?1.22) scores. Bivariate correlations also indicated that there were no significant effects of SES on the variables of interest. Intercorrelations among the study variables are presented in Table 2 . As expected, pre-k Surgency/Extraversion was positively associated with kindergarten externalizing behavior. It is also noteworthy that Surgency/Extraversion is a highly stable construct across the pre-k and kindergarten assessments ( r = .81, p < .001). There was no association between kindergarten social preference and kindergarten perceived acceptance. There was, however, a negative association between kindergarten social preference and kindergarten externalizing behavior (i.e., hyperactivity, aggression, “acts wild,” and “fights”) and a positive association between kindergarten perceived acceptance and kindergarten externalizing behavior (i.e., hyperactivity, aggression, and “acts wild”).  Regressions Predicting Kindergarten Hyperactivity and Aggression One hypothesis of the current study was that kindergarten social preference and perceived acceptance would moderate the association between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten externalizing behavior. To examine this question, we completed four hierarchical linear regressions with standardized betas and change in R 2 for each step presented in Table 3 . The dependent variables for the regression analyses were kindergarten teacher-reported hyperactivity and aggression. Regressions were computed separately for boys and girls. Pre-k parent-reported externalizing behavior and kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion were entered in the first step as control variables. Step 2 included the main effects for pre-k Surgency/Extraversion, kindergarten social preference, and kindergarten perceived acceptance. Step 3 included the following interactions: Pre-k Surgency/Extraversion × Kindergarten Social Preference, Pre-k Surgency/Extraversion × Kindergarten Perceived Acceptance, and Kindergarten Social Preference × Kindergarten Perceived Acceptance. Finally, Step 4 included the three-way interaction combining pre-k Surgency/Extraversion, kindergarten social preference, and kindergarten perceived acceptance. When kindergarten teacher-reported hyperactivity was examined as the outcome of these steps, the main effects for kindergarten social preference and perceived acceptance were significant predictors. These main effects, however, were qualified for girls only by significant two-way interactions between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten social preference and between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten perceived acceptance. The overall hyperactivity model explained 39% of the variance for girls and 30% of the variance for boys. The significant two-way interactions were explored following methods outlined by Aiken and West (1991) . The first two-way interaction was depicted in Figure 1 by plotting the regression of hyperactivity ( y ) on pre-k Surgency/Extraversion ( x ) as a function of two values of social preference, Z L and Z H (i.e., one standard deviation below the mean, one standard deviation above the mean). Unstandardized B was used to calculate the regression lines. From the graph it is apparent that children with low social preference scores have the steepest slope across different levels of pre-k Surgency/Extraversion. The highest kindergarten hyperactivity score was among children with high pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and low kindergarten social preference. Similar to the first interaction, the second two-way interaction was depicted in Figure 2 by plotting the regression of hyperactivity ( y ) on pre-k Surgency/Extraversion ( x ) as a function of two values of perceived acceptance, Z L and Z H. The graph shows that hyperactivity varies at different levels of pre-k Surgency/Extraversion only in the context of high kindergarten perceived acceptance. The next step was to determine whether the slopes of the lines plotted in Figure 1 and Figure 2 were different from zero, as outlined by Aiken and West (1991) . For the first graph, two new variables were created, Z cvh and Z cvl, such that each variable reflected the social preference score minus Z H and Z L, respectively. The cross-product of each new variable with pre-k Surgency/Extraversion ( x ) was computed. Finally, hyperactivity was regressed on pre-k Surgency/Extraversion, the conditional values of social preference (i.e., Z cvh, Z cvl), and each cross-product in two separate regression analyses. The resulting t tests for the betas indicated the slope for low social preference was significantly different from zero, B = 5.56, ? = .38, t (106) = 2.00, p < .05, but the slope for high social preference was not significantly different from zero, B = ?0.37, ? = ?.03, t (106) = ?0.15, p = ns . To test the lines in Figure 2 , we computed similar analyses using conditional values of perceived acceptance. Results revealed the slope for high perceived acceptance was significantly different from zero, B = 7.24, ? = .49, t (106) = 2.81, p < .01, whereas the slope for low perceived acceptance was not, B = 0.13, ? = .01, t (106) = 0.05, p = ns . When kindergarten aggression was examined as the outcome ( Table 3 ), the main effects of kindergarten social preference and perceived acceptance were again significant predictors for boys and girls. In contrast to the regression examining hyperactivity, there were no significant two-way or three-way interactions when predicting aggression. The overall aggression model explained 23% of the variance for girls and 36% of the variance for boys.  Regressions Predicting Kindergarten Hyperactivity and Aggression One hypothesis of the current study was that kindergarten social preference and perceived acceptance would moderate the association between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten externalizing behavior. To examine this question, we completed four hierarchical linear regressions with standardized betas and change in R 2 for each step presented in Table 3 . The dependent variables for the regression analyses were kindergarten teacher-reported hyperactivity and aggression. Regressions were computed separately for boys and girls. Pre-k parent-reported externalizing behavior and kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion were entered in the first step as control variables. Step 2 included the main effects for pre-k Surgency/Extraversion, kindergarten social preference, and kindergarten perceived acceptance. Step 3 included the following interactions: Pre-k Surgency/Extraversion × Kindergarten Social Preference, Pre-k Surgency/Extraversion × Kindergarten Perceived Acceptance, and Kindergarten Social Preference × Kindergarten Perceived Acceptance. Finally, Step 4 included the three-way interaction combining pre-k Surgency/Extraversion, kindergarten social preference, and kindergarten perceived acceptance. When kindergarten teacher-reported hyperactivity was examined as the outcome of these steps, the main effects for kindergarten social preference and perceived acceptance were significant predictors. These main effects, however, were qualified for girls only by significant two-way interactions between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten social preference and between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten perceived acceptance. The overall hyperactivity model explained 39% of the variance for girls and 30% of the variance for boys. The significant two-way interactions were explored following methods outlined by Aiken and West (1991) . The first two-way interaction was depicted in Figure 1 by plotting the regression of hyperactivity ( y ) on pre-k Surgency/Extraversion ( x ) as a function of two values of social preference, Z L and Z H (i.e., one standard deviation below the mean, one standard deviation above the mean). Unstandardized B was used to calculate the regression lines. From the graph it is apparent that children with low social preference scores have the steepest slope across different levels of pre-k Surgency/Extraversion. The highest kindergarten hyperactivity score was among children with high pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and low kindergarten social preference. Similar to the first interaction, the second two-way interaction was depicted in Figure 2 by plotting the regression of hyperactivity ( y ) on pre-k Surgency/Extraversion ( x ) as a function of two values of perceived acceptance, Z L and Z H. The graph shows that hyperactivity varies at different levels of pre-k Surgency/Extraversion only in the context of high kindergarten perceived acceptance. The next step was to determine whether the slopes of the lines plotted in Figure 1 and Figure 2 were different from zero, as outlined by Aiken and West (1991) . For the first graph, two new variables were created, Z cvh and Z cvl, such that each variable reflected the social preference score minus Z H and Z L, respectively. The cross-product of each new variable with pre-k Surgency/Extraversion ( x ) was computed. Finally, hyperactivity was regressed on pre-k Surgency/Extraversion, the conditional values of social preference (i.e., Z cvh, Z cvl), and each cross-product in two separate regression analyses. The resulting t tests for the betas indicated the slope for low social preference was significantly different from zero, B = 5.56, ? = .38, t (106) = 2.00, p < .05, but the slope for high social preference was not significantly different from zero, B = ?0.37, ? = ?.03, t (106) = ?0.15, p = ns . To test the lines in Figure 2 , we computed similar analyses using conditional values of perceived acceptance. Results revealed the slope for high perceived acceptance was significantly different from zero, B = 7.24, ? = .49, t (106) = 2.81, p < .01, whereas the slope for low perceived acceptance was not, B = 0.13, ? = .01, t (106) = 0.05, p = ns . When kindergarten aggression was examined as the outcome ( Table 3 ), the main effects of kindergarten social preference and perceived acceptance were again significant predictors for boys and girls. In contrast to the regression examining hyperactivity, there were no significant two-way or three-way interactions when predicting aggression. The overall aggression model explained 23% of the variance for girls and 36% of the variance for boys.  Regressions Predicting Kindergarten “Acts Wild” and “Fights” To confirm the results presented with kindergarten teacher-reported hyperactivity and aggression, we examined kindergarten peer nominations of “acts wild” and “fights” as additional measures of hyperactivity and aggression. The steps entered in the previous regressions were identical to the steps entered when “acts wild” and “fights” were examined as outcomes ( Table 3 ). Similar to the regression examining teacher-reported hyperactivity, kindergarten social preference significantly predicted kindergarten peer-nominated “acts wild.” These main effects were qualified for girls only by a significant three-way interaction among pre-k Surgency/Extraversion, kindergarten social preference, and kindergarten perceived acceptance. The model accounted for 40% of the variance for girls and 32% of the variance for boys. The significant three-way interaction was explored following methods outlined by Aiken and West (1991) , similar to the graphing procedures presented in the previous section. From the graph it is apparent that girls with inflated perceived acceptance (i.e., high perceived acceptance, low social preference) have the highest “acts wild” scores ( Figure 3 ). In contrast, having accurately high perceived acceptance (i.e., high perceived acceptance, high social preference) appears to serve as a protective factor for girls with high pre-kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion, as these children have the lowest “acts wild” scores. The next step was to determine whether the slopes of the lines plotted in Figure 3 were different from zero. Analyses were similar to those presented in the previous section and followed guidelines outlined by Aiken and West (1991) . The resulting t tests for the betas indicated that only the slope for girls with accurately high perceived acceptance was marginally different from zero, B = ?0.42, ? = ?.40, t (102) = ?1.93, p < .06. Similar to the regression predicting aggression, the main effect of kindergarten social preference significantly predicted kindergarten peer-nominated “fights” ( Table 3 ). For girls, the interaction between kindergarten social preference and kindergarten perceived acceptance significantly predicted “fights,” with girls reporting inflated perceived acceptance having the highest “fights” scores. When all steps were included, 25% of the variance in “fights” was explained for girls and 45% of the variance was explained for boys.  Regressions Predicting Kindergarten “Acts Wild” and “Fights” To confirm the results presented with kindergarten teacher-reported hyperactivity and aggression, we examined kindergarten peer nominations of “acts wild” and “fights” as additional measures of hyperactivity and aggression. The steps entered in the previous regressions were identical to the steps entered when “acts wild” and “fights” were examined as outcomes ( Table 3 ). Similar to the regression examining teacher-reported hyperactivity, kindergarten social preference significantly predicted kindergarten peer-nominated “acts wild.” These main effects were qualified for girls only by a significant three-way interaction among pre-k Surgency/Extraversion, kindergarten social preference, and kindergarten perceived acceptance. The model accounted for 40% of the variance for girls and 32% of the variance for boys. The significant three-way interaction was explored following methods outlined by Aiken and West (1991) , similar to the graphing procedures presented in the previous section. From the graph it is apparent that girls with inflated perceived acceptance (i.e., high perceived acceptance, low social preference) have the highest “acts wild” scores ( Figure 3 ). In contrast, having accurately high perceived acceptance (i.e., high perceived acceptance, high social preference) appears to serve as a protective factor for girls with high pre-kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion, as these children have the lowest “acts wild” scores. The next step was to determine whether the slopes of the lines plotted in Figure 3 were different from zero. Analyses were similar to those presented in the previous section and followed guidelines outlined by Aiken and West (1991) . The resulting t tests for the betas indicated that only the slope for girls with accurately high perceived acceptance was marginally different from zero, B = ?0.42, ? = ?.40, t (102) = ?1.93, p < .06. Similar to the regression predicting aggression, the main effect of kindergarten social preference significantly predicted kindergarten peer-nominated “fights” ( Table 3 ). For girls, the interaction between kindergarten social preference and kindergarten perceived acceptance significantly predicted “fights,” with girls reporting inflated perceived acceptance having the highest “fights” scores. When all steps were included, 25% of the variance in “fights” was explained for girls and 45% of the variance was explained for boys.  Competing Hypothesis Given that the moderators (i.e., social preference and perceived acceptance) and outcome variables (i.e., hyperactivity, aggression, “acts wild,” and “fights”) were assessed during the same year, it could be argued that the kindergarten externalizing behaviors examined moderate the relation between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten peer acceptance (i.e., social preference and perceived acceptance) instead of peer acceptance moderating the relation between Surgency/Extraversion and externalizing behavior. To test this competing hypothesis, we computed two separate hierarchical linear regressions for girls only because the previous analyses revealed interactions for girls but not for boys. Kindergarten social preference was the dependent variable for the first regression, and kindergarten perceived acceptance was the dependent variable for the second regression. Pre-k parent-reported externalizing behavior and kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion were entered in the first step as control variables. Pre-k Surgency/Extraversion, kindergarten hyperactivity, and kindergarten “acts wild” were included in Step 2. Both two-way interactions between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and the kindergarten externalizing behaviors were entered in Step 2. Results revealed the main effect for kindergarten “acts wild” significantly predicted kindergarten social preference, ? = ?.33, t (102) = ?3.11, p < .01, and the main effect for kindergarten hyperactivity significantly predicted kindergarten perceived acceptance, ? = .33, t (102) = 2.92, p < .01. None of the two-way interactions were significant. Thus, externalizing behavior did not moderate the relation between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten peer acceptance (i.e., social preference and perceived acceptance).  Competing Hypothesis Given that the moderators (i.e., social preference and perceived acceptance) and outcome variables (i.e., hyperactivity, aggression, “acts wild,” and “fights”) were assessed during the same year, it could be argued that the kindergarten externalizing behaviors examined moderate the relation between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten peer acceptance (i.e., social preference and perceived acceptance) instead of peer acceptance moderating the relation between Surgency/Extraversion and externalizing behavior. To test this competing hypothesis, we computed two separate hierarchical linear regressions for girls only because the previous analyses revealed interactions for girls but not for boys. Kindergarten social preference was the dependent variable for the first regression, and kindergarten perceived acceptance was the dependent variable for the second regression. Pre-k parent-reported externalizing behavior and kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion were entered in the first step as control variables. Pre-k Surgency/Extraversion, kindergarten hyperactivity, and kindergarten “acts wild” were included in Step 2. Both two-way interactions between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and the kindergarten externalizing behaviors were entered in Step 2. Results revealed the main effect for kindergarten “acts wild” significantly predicted kindergarten social preference, ? = ?.33, t (102) = ?3.11, p < .01, and the main effect for kindergarten hyperactivity significantly predicted kindergarten perceived acceptance, ? = .33, t (102) = 2.92, p < .01. None of the two-way interactions were significant. Thus, externalizing behavior did not moderate the relation between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten peer acceptance (i.e., social preference and perceived acceptance).  Discussion The goal of this study was to examine possible moderating factors in the relation between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten externalizing behavior. In particular, the role of kindergarten perceived acceptance and kindergarten social preference as protective factors were of interest. Consistent with previous literature, pre-k mother-reported temperamental Surgency/Extraversion was positively associated with kindergarten teacher-reported externalizing behavior (i.e., hyperactivity, aggression) and kindergarten peer-nominated externalizing behavior (i.e., “acts wild,” “fights”). That is, children who were identified by mothers in pre-k as being highly active were at risk for exhibiting behavior problems in the kindergarten classroom. Children who are very active and have a high approach tendency continue to exhibit these exuberant behaviors, at times in a maladaptive manner, and exhibit anger, frustration, and aggression when their goals to explore are blocked. Given the highly active and at times aggressive nature of children high on Surgency/Extraversion, it is not surprising that these children were less well liked by their peers, evidenced by the negative correlation between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten social preference. It is noteworthy that there was not a significant correlation between social preference and perceived acceptance, indicating that children’s perceptions do not always coincide with peer nominations of their behavior. Brown and Kafer (1994) found that there was a dramatic increase in self-awareness around age 7 or 8. The kindergarteners in our sample were reporting perceived acceptance prior to this time, resulting in a greater range in the extent to which children’s perceptions correlated with peer nominations. Some children may exaggerate their acceptance to self-protect against negative feedback from peers, consistent with the theory Hughes et al. (1997) proposed to explain the inflated perceived acceptance of aggressive children. Conversely, the exaggerated perception may also make it less likely that children would internalize negative peer feedback, as it would be inconsistent with their perceptions. On the other end of the spectrum, children who report low perceived acceptance may have internalizing difficulties, which accounts for their low perceived acceptance scores and may also buffer against externalizing difficulties. Consistent with our hypothesis, pre-k Surgency/Extraversion interacted with kindergarten social preference and kindergarten perceived acceptance when predicting peer-nominated “acts wild” for girls only. Girls with inflated perceived acceptance (i.e., high perceived acceptance, low social preference) had the highest “acts wild” scores regardless of early surgency. Whereas the high perception could be the result of a defensive mechanism ( Hughes et al., 1997 ), it has also been theorized that social information-processing deficits could be implicated. Children who have difficulty understanding their social worlds would be less equipped to accurately perceive, internalize, and modify behavior based on behavioral feedback from peers. Moreover, children who are rejected and are not expressing awareness of this rejection may be less motivated to change their negative behavior when presented with feedback because of their denial of the problematic behavior. This denial is consistent with a study examining peer status and attribution biases that found rejected children were more likely to attribute their social failures to external causes ( Crick & Ladd, 1993 ). Similarly, children in an inpatient psychiatric unit who had high self-esteem were more likely to report fewer interpersonal problems compared to children with moderate self-esteem despite being more likely to be rejected by peers ( Perez, Pettit, David, Kistner, & Joiner, 2001 ). With respect to motivation, Guerra et al. (2004) found that aggressive children with self-blaming attributions were more likely to have a decrease in aggression over time compared to aggressive children with peer-blaming attributions. In addition, the three-way interaction revealed that having an accurately high perceived acceptance (high perceived acceptance, high social preference) was a protective factor for girls exhibiting high Surgency/Extraversion. Girls who are accepted by peers have more social opportunities to learn and develop social skills through modeling, practice, and behavioral feedback ( Price, 1996 ). These social skills would include learning that externalizing behavior, such as being inappropriately active, is not tolerated by peers. When children have a more difficult temperament, they may be able to learn appropriate ways of displaying their behavior so that it is not disruptive by mimicking their peers’ self-regulatory strategies. The results from this study showed that girls who recognize their high social preference are able to lower their disruptive social behavior, suggesting that recognition of peer status facilitates the learning process. Moreover, girls who are able to accurately recognize their peer status may have other social cognitive skills that also serve as protective factors. The three-way interaction predicting “acts wild” was partially corroborated by two significant two-way interactions when predicting girls’ teacher-reported hyperactivity. Namely, surgency interacted with kindergarten social preference and with kindergarten perceived acceptance. Follow-up analyses revealed that having low social preference and high perceived acceptance resulted in the highest levels of hyperactivity when the child had high, pre-kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion. It will be important to examine similar models with a larger sample to determine if the three-way interaction predicting hyperactivity was not significant due to a lack of power. It is also noteworthy that Surgency/Extraversion was moderated by social preference and perceived acceptance for girls only. Perhaps peer acceptance was found to be a protective factor for girls only because young girls have better social understanding than boys ( Dunn, Brown, Slomkowski, Tesla, & Youngblade, 1991 ). Therefore, girls may be better equipped to notice and incorporate behavioral feedback from peers, which would bolster the protective effects of increased social interactions. There are several novel features of this study. First, multiple reporters were used to reduce reporter biases when examining the relation between factors. As such, parent report was used to measure the predictor variable of child temperamental Surgency/Extraversion, peer and self report were used to assess peer acceptance, and teacher report and peer nominations were used to assess the outcome of externalizing behavior. In addition to multiple reporters, this study employed a longitudinal design to assess the effects of early temperamental risk on later behavior problems. The longitudinal design, in addition to controlling for pre-k behavior problems and kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion, helped us to understand developmental pathways linking pre-k temperament to kindergarten behavior problems. There are also several important implications that result from this study. Although temperament is related to behavior problems in the classroom, there are many environmental factors that allow children to express themselves in a prosocial manner. One such protective factor is the peer environment. In addition to peer nominations, the child’s perception of that environment is also valuable information. This study provides evidence that environmental fit can offer a good opportunity for children to appropriately manage their behavior. Although the findings support the protective effects of perceived acceptance and social preference, several limitations should be considered. First, the presence of perceived acceptance and social preference were shown to be moderators in the relation between Surgency/Extraversion and externalizing behavior; however, low perceived acceptance and high social preference could be markers of other individual factors that are facilitating the protective effects. For example, children with high perceived acceptance and low social preference may have fewer social skills, which may account for the exacerbated relation between Surgency/Extraversion and externalizing behavior for this group. However, in a similar study that looked at the protective effects of peer acceptance, neither social information processing nor child temperament fully explained the moderating effects ( Criss et al., 2002 ). Second, the moderator and outcome variables were all measured during the kindergarten year. As such, the possibility that externalizing behavior could also be a moderator in the relation between Surgency/Extraversion and peer acceptance was considered. This interaction was not found to be significant, providing support for the model that was presented. Finally, our measures of peer-nominated and self-reported acceptance did not allow for a specific measure of accuracy. Namely, we were unable to establish if children accurately identified the peers who nominated them for the “liked most” and “liked least” categories. Instead, we used a global measure of perceived acceptance; therefore, we were unable to determine if children with inflated perceived acceptance were inaccurate in the perceptions of acceptance at the dyadic level. Future research could examine whether children with low perceived acceptance are more likely to experience internalizing symptoms such as depression or anxiety. The specific mechanisms that account for the protective effects of perceived acceptance and social preference could be examined. Looking at early predictors of consistent and inconsistent perceptions could also help shed light on mechanisms of the protective effects. In addition, the role of children’s perceived acceptance as a moderator for other relations should be explored. The present study suggests that peers can provide remedial support for children exhibiting high Surgency/Extraversion prior to kindergarten. Similar to findings of previous research, we found that high social preference buffers against early temperamental risk for hyperactivity. Although peers can act as a protective factor, the story is not complete without also considering children’s perceptions of their peer status. Girls who exhibited inflated perceived acceptance had the highest levels of peer-nominated “acts wild” scores, whereas having an accurately high perceived acceptance acted as a protective factor for girls’ early Surgency/Extraversion.  Discussion The goal of this study was to examine possible moderating factors in the relation between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten externalizing behavior. In particular, the role of kindergarten perceived acceptance and kindergarten social preference as protective factors were of interest. Consistent with previous literature, pre-k mother-reported temperamental Surgency/Extraversion was positively associated with kindergarten teacher-reported externalizing behavior (i.e., hyperactivity, aggression) and kindergarten peer-nominated externalizing behavior (i.e., “acts wild,” “fights”). That is, children who were identified by mothers in pre-k as being highly active were at risk for exhibiting behavior problems in the kindergarten classroom. Children who are very active and have a high approach tendency continue to exhibit these exuberant behaviors, at times in a maladaptive manner, and exhibit anger, frustration, and aggression when their goals to explore are blocked. Given the highly active and at times aggressive nature of children high on Surgency/Extraversion, it is not surprising that these children were less well liked by their peers, evidenced by the negative correlation between pre-k Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten social preference. It is noteworthy that there was not a significant correlation between social preference and perceived acceptance, indicating that children’s perceptions do not always coincide with peer nominations of their behavior. Brown and Kafer (1994) found that there was a dramatic increase in self-awareness around age 7 or 8. The kindergarteners in our sample were reporting perceived acceptance prior to this time, resulting in a greater range in the extent to which children’s perceptions correlated with peer nominations. Some children may exaggerate their acceptance to self-protect against negative feedback from peers, consistent with the theory Hughes et al. (1997) proposed to explain the inflated perceived acceptance of aggressive children. Conversely, the exaggerated perception may also make it less likely that children would internalize negative peer feedback, as it would be inconsistent with their perceptions. On the other end of the spectrum, children who report low perceived acceptance may have internalizing difficulties, which accounts for their low perceived acceptance scores and may also buffer against externalizing difficulties. Consistent with our hypothesis, pre-k Surgency/Extraversion interacted with kindergarten social preference and kindergarten perceived acceptance when predicting peer-nominated “acts wild” for girls only. Girls with inflated perceived acceptance (i.e., high perceived acceptance, low social preference) had the highest “acts wild” scores regardless of early surgency. Whereas the high perception could be the result of a defensive mechanism ( Hughes et al., 1997 ), it has also been theorized that social information-processing deficits could be implicated. Children who have difficulty understanding their social worlds would be less equipped to accurately perceive, internalize, and modify behavior based on behavioral feedback from peers. Moreover, children who are rejected and are not expressing awareness of this rejection may be less motivated to change their negative behavior when presented with feedback because of their denial of the problematic behavior. This denial is consistent with a study examining peer status and attribution biases that found rejected children were more likely to attribute their social failures to external causes ( Crick & Ladd, 1993 ). Similarly, children in an inpatient psychiatric unit who had high self-esteem were more likely to report fewer interpersonal problems compared to children with moderate self-esteem despite being more likely to be rejected by peers ( Perez, Pettit, David, Kistner, & Joiner, 2001 ). With respect to motivation, Guerra et al. (2004) found that aggressive children with self-blaming attributions were more likely to have a decrease in aggression over time compared to aggressive children with peer-blaming attributions. In addition, the three-way interaction revealed that having an accurately high perceived acceptance (high perceived acceptance, high social preference) was a protective factor for girls exhibiting high Surgency/Extraversion. Girls who are accepted by peers have more social opportunities to learn and develop social skills through modeling, practice, and behavioral feedback ( Price, 1996 ). These social skills would include learning that externalizing behavior, such as being inappropriately active, is not tolerated by peers. When children have a more difficult temperament, they may be able to learn appropriate ways of displaying their behavior so that it is not disruptive by mimicking their peers’ self-regulatory strategies. The results from this study showed that girls who recognize their high social preference are able to lower their disruptive social behavior, suggesting that recognition of peer status facilitates the learning process. Moreover, girls who are able to accurately recognize their peer status may have other social cognitive skills that also serve as protective factors. The three-way interaction predicting “acts wild” was partially corroborated by two significant two-way interactions when predicting girls’ teacher-reported hyperactivity. Namely, surgency interacted with kindergarten social preference and with kindergarten perceived acceptance. Follow-up analyses revealed that having low social preference and high perceived acceptance resulted in the highest levels of hyperactivity when the child had high, pre-kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion. It will be important to examine similar models with a larger sample to determine if the three-way interaction predicting hyperactivity was not significant due to a lack of power. It is also noteworthy that Surgency/Extraversion was moderated by social preference and perceived acceptance for girls only. Perhaps peer acceptance was found to be a protective factor for girls only because young girls have better social understanding than boys ( Dunn, Brown, Slomkowski, Tesla, & Youngblade, 1991 ). Therefore, girls may be better equipped to notice and incorporate behavioral feedback from peers, which would bolster the protective effects of increased social interactions. There are several novel features of this study. First, multiple reporters were used to reduce reporter biases when examining the relation between factors. As such, parent report was used to measure the predictor variable of child temperamental Surgency/Extraversion, peer and self report were used to assess peer acceptance, and teacher report and peer nominations were used to assess the outcome of externalizing behavior. In addition to multiple reporters, this study employed a longitudinal design to assess the effects of early temperamental risk on later behavior problems. The longitudinal design, in addition to controlling for pre-k behavior problems and kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion, helped us to understand developmental pathways linking pre-k temperament to kindergarten behavior problems. There are also several important implications that result from this study. Although temperament is related to behavior problems in the classroom, there are many environmental factors that allow children to express themselves in a prosocial manner. One such protective factor is the peer environment. In addition to peer nominations, the child’s perception of that environment is also valuable information. This study provides evidence that environmental fit can offer a good opportunity for children to appropriately manage their behavior. Although the findings support the protective effects of perceived acceptance and social preference, several limitations should be considered. First, the presence of perceived acceptance and social preference were shown to be moderators in the relation between Surgency/Extraversion and externalizing behavior; however, low perceived acceptance and high social preference could be markers of other individual factors that are facilitating the protective effects. For example, children with high perceived acceptance and low social preference may have fewer social skills, which may account for the exacerbated relation between Surgency/Extraversion and externalizing behavior for this group. However, in a similar study that looked at the protective effects of peer acceptance, neither social information processing nor child temperament fully explained the moderating effects ( Criss et al., 2002 ). Second, the moderator and outcome variables were all measured during the kindergarten year. As such, the possibility that externalizing behavior could also be a moderator in the relation between Surgency/Extraversion and peer acceptance was considered. This interaction was not found to be significant, providing support for the model that was presented. Finally, our measures of peer-nominated and self-reported acceptance did not allow for a specific measure of accuracy. Namely, we were unable to establish if children accurately identified the peers who nominated them for the “liked most” and “liked least” categories. Instead, we used a global measure of perceived acceptance; therefore, we were unable to determine if children with inflated perceived acceptance were inaccurate in the perceptions of acceptance at the dyadic level. Future research could examine whether children with low perceived acceptance are more likely to experience internalizing symptoms such as depression or anxiety. The specific mechanisms that account for the protective effects of perceived acceptance and social preference could be examined. Looking at early predictors of consistent and inconsistent perceptions could also help shed light on mechanisms of the protective effects. In addition, the role of children’s perceived acceptance as a moderator for other relations should be explored. The present study suggests that peers can provide remedial support for children exhibiting high Surgency/Extraversion prior to kindergarten. Similar to findings of previous research, we found that high social preference buffers against early temperamental risk for hyperactivity. Although peers can act as a protective factor, the story is not complete without also considering children’s perceptions of their peer status. Girls who exhibited inflated perceived acceptance had the highest levels of peer-nominated “acts wild” scores, whereas having an accurately high perceived acceptance acted as a protective factor for girls’ early Surgency/Extraversion.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 The interaction between pre-kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten social preference as it predicts girls’ kindergarten hyperactivity. Figure 2 The interaction between pre-kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten perceived acceptance as it predicts girls’ kindergarten hyperactivity. Figure 3 The three-way interaction with pre-kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion, kindergarten social preference, and kindergarten perceived acceptance as it predicts girls’ kindergarten “acts wild.” Table 1 Descriptive Statistics Variable M SD Minimum Maximum 1. Pre-k CBCL Externalizing a 52.34 9.23 30.00 76.00 2. Pre-k Surgency/Extraversion a 4.76 0.62 2.88 6.61 3. Kindergarten social preference b ?0.01 0.95 ?2.16 2.16 4. Kindergarten perceived acceptance c 3.03 0.65 1.33 4.00 5. Kindergarten BASC Hyperactivity d 47.91 9.99 34.00 85.00 6. Kindergarten BASC Aggression d 47.83 9.29 37.00 84.00 7. Kindergarten “fights” b 0.04 0.98 ?1.81 2.92 8. Kindergarten “acts wild” b 0.04 0.96 ?1.46 2.91 9. Kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion a 4.83 0.63 3.05 6.47 Note. N = 200. Pre-k = pre-kindergarten; CBCL = Child Behavior Checklist; BASC = Behavioral Assessment System for Children. a Mother report. b Peer report. c Child report. d Teacher report. Table 2 Correlations Among Variables Variable 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1. Pre-k externalizing — 2. Pre-k surgency .25 *** — 3. K social preference ?.18 * ?.21 ** — 4. K perceived acceptance .03 .07 .00 — 5. K hyperactivity .24 ** .34 *** ?.31 *** .32 *** — 6. K aggression .30 *** .20 ** ?.38 *** .25 *** .65 *** — 7. K “fights” .20 ** .22 ** ?.47 *** .12 .26 *** .35 *** — 8. K “acts wild” .08 .29 *** ?.39 *** .16 * .50 *** .38 *** .61 *** — 9. K surgency .18 * .81 *** ?.21 ** .16 * .35 *** .24 ** .22 ** .30 *** — Note. N = 200. Pre-k = pre-kindergarten; K = kindergarten. * p < .05. ** p < .01 *** p < .001. Table 3 Hierarchical Regressions Examining Social Preference and Perceived Acceptance As Moderators Between Pre-K Surgency/Extraversion and Kindergarten Behaviors Kindergarten outcomes Hyperactivity Aggression “Acts wild” “Fights” Predictor Girls Boys Girls Boys Girls Boys Girls Boys Step 1 (.16 *** ) (.14 ** ) (.08 * ) (.19 *** ) (.09 ** ) (.07 * ) (.02) (.15 *** )   Pre-k CBCL Externalizing .10 .16 .16 † .27 ** .06 ?.12 ?.01 .21 *   K Surgency/Extraversion .02 .12 .07 .16 .29 * ?.02 .09 .02 Step 2 (.16 *** ) (.11 ** ) (.14 ** ) (.15 ** ) (.19 *** ) (.21 *** ) (.14 ** ) (.28 *** )   Pre-k Surgency/Extraversion .26 † .09 .01 ?.01 ?.16 .23 ?.09 .05   K Social Preference ?.20 * ?.21 * ?.31 ** ?.30 ** ?.37 *** ?.43 *** ?.39 *** ?.51 ***   K Perceived Acceptance .30 ** .24 * .21 * .22 ** .16 † .04 .10 .10 Step 3 (.07 * ) (.03) (.01) (.01) (.09 ** ) (.04) (.09 * ) (.01)   Pre-k Surgency × K Social Preference ?.16 * .05 ?.03 ?.02 ?.15 † .08 .14 ?.04   Pre-k Surgency × K Perceived Acceptance .19 * .19 † .08 .07 ?.04 .18 † ?.17 † .05   K Social Preference × K Perceived Acceptance ?.08 ?.08 ?.01 ?.07 ?.26 ** ?.09 ?.29 ** ?.12 Step 4 (.00) (.02) (.00) (.01) (.03 * ) (.00) (.00) (.01)   Pre-k Surgency × K Social Preference × K Perceived Acceptance ?.06 .14 ?.06 .12 ?.18 * .00 ?.07 .10 Total R 2 .39 *** .30 *** .23 ** .36 *** .40 *** .32 *** .25 ** .45 *** Note. N = 200. Standardized ? presented in each column. ? R 2 for each step appears in parentheses. Pre-k = pre-kindergarten; K = kindergarten; CBCL = Child Behavior Checklist. † p < .10. * p < .05. ** p < .01. *** p < .001.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 The interaction between pre-kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten social preference as it predicts girls’ kindergarten hyperactivity. Figure 2 The interaction between pre-kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion and kindergarten perceived acceptance as it predicts girls’ kindergarten hyperactivity. Figure 3 The three-way interaction with pre-kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion, kindergarten social preference, and kindergarten perceived acceptance as it predicts girls’ kindergarten “acts wild.” Table 1 Descriptive Statistics Variable M SD Minimum Maximum 1. Pre-k CBCL Externalizing a 52.34 9.23 30.00 76.00 2. Pre-k Surgency/Extraversion a 4.76 0.62 2.88 6.61 3. Kindergarten social preference b ?0.01 0.95 ?2.16 2.16 4. Kindergarten perceived acceptance c 3.03 0.65 1.33 4.00 5. Kindergarten BASC Hyperactivity d 47.91 9.99 34.00 85.00 6. Kindergarten BASC Aggression d 47.83 9.29 37.00 84.00 7. Kindergarten “fights” b 0.04 0.98 ?1.81 2.92 8. Kindergarten “acts wild” b 0.04 0.96 ?1.46 2.91 9. Kindergarten Surgency/Extraversion a 4.83 0.63 3.05 6.47 Note. N = 200. Pre-k = pre-kindergarten; CBCL = Child Behavior Checklist; BASC = Behavioral Assessment System for Children. a Mother report. b Peer report. c Child report. d Teacher report. Table 2 Correlations Among Variables Variable 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1. Pre-k externalizing — 2. Pre-k surgency .25 *** — 3. K social preference ?.18 * ?.21 ** — 4. K perceived acceptance .03 .07 .00 — 5. K hyperactivity .24 ** .34 *** ?.31 *** .32 *** — 6. K aggression .30 *** .20 ** ?.38 *** .25 *** .65 *** — 7. K “fights” .20 ** .22 ** ?.47 *** .12 .26 *** .35 *** — 8. K “acts wild” .08 .29 *** ?.39 *** .16 * .50 *** .38 *** .61 *** — 9. K surgency .18 * .81 *** ?.21 ** .16 * .35 *** .24 ** .22 ** .30 *** — Note. N = 200. Pre-k = pre-kindergarten; K = kindergarten. * p < .05. ** p < .01 *** p < .001. Table 3 Hierarchical Regressions Examining Social Preference and Perceived Acceptance As Moderators Between Pre-K Surgency/Extraversion and Kindergarten Behaviors Kindergarten outcomes Hyperactivity Aggression “Acts wild” “Fights” Predictor Girls Boys Girls Boys Girls Boys Girls Boys Step 1 (.16 *** ) (.14 ** ) (.08 * ) (.19 *** ) (.09 ** ) (.07 * ) (.02) (.15 *** )   Pre-k CBCL Externalizing .10 .16 .16 † .27 ** .06 ?.12 ?.01 .21 *   K Surgency/Extraversion .02 .12 .07 .16 .29 * ?.02 .09 .02 Step 2 (.16 *** ) (.11 ** ) (.14 ** ) (.15 ** ) (.19 *** ) (.21 *** ) (.14 ** ) (.28 *** )   Pre-k Surgency/Extraversion .26 † .09 .01 ?.01 ?.16 .23 ?.09 .05   K Social Preference ?.20 * ?.21 * ?.31 ** ?.30 ** ?.37 *** ?.43 *** ?.39 *** ?.51 ***   K Perceived Acceptance .30 ** .24 * .21 * .22 ** .16 † .04 .10 .10 Step 3 (.07 * ) (.03) (.01) (.01) (.09 ** ) (.04) (.09 * ) (.01)   Pre-k Surgency × K Social Preference ?.16 * .05 ?.03 ?.02 ?.15 † .08 .14 ?.04   Pre-k Surgency × K Perceived Acceptance .19 * .19 † .08 .07 ?.04 .18 † ?.17 † .05   K Social Preference × K Perceived Acceptance ?.08 ?.08 ?.01 ?.07 ?.26 ** ?.09 ?.29 ** ?.12 Step 4 (.00) (.02) (.00) (.01) (.03 * ) (.00) (.00) (.01)   Pre-k Surgency × K Social Preference × K Perceived Acceptance ?.06 .14 ?.06 .12 ?.18 * .00 ?.07 .10 Total R 2 .39 *** .30 *** .23 ** .36 *** .40 *** .32 *** .25 ** .45 *** Note. N = 200. Standardized ? presented in each column. ? R 2 for each step appears in parentheses. Pre-k = pre-kindergarten; K = kindergarten; CBCL = Child Behavior Checklist. † p < .10. * p < .05. ** p < .01. *** p < .001. 