Different cytokeratin and neuronal cell adhesion molecule staining patterns in focal nodular hyperplasia and hepatic adenoma and their significance Summary Differentiating focal nodular hyperplasia from hepatic adenoma can be challenging. Cytokeratin 7, neuronal cell adhesion molecule, and cytokeratin 19 are differentially expressed in hepatocytes, biliary epithelium, and possibly hepatic progenitor/stem cells. CD34 is known to have altered expression patterns in the hepatic endothelium in conditions associated with abnormal perfusion and in hepatocellular carcinoma. The purpose of this study was to examine the expression pattern of these markers in focal nodular hyperplasia and hepatic adenoma and assess their diagnostic use. Ten resection specimens each of hepatic adenoma and focal nodular hyperplasia (including a case of telangiectatic focal nodular hyperplasia) were selected for the study. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed using antibodies against cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 19, neuronal cell adhesion molecule, and CD34 on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections from each case. The staining patterns and intensity for each marker were analyzed. In hepatic adenoma, the cytokeratin 7 stain revealed strong positivity in hepatocytes in patches, with a gradual decrease in the staining intensity as the cells differentiated towards mature hepatocytes. Although bile ducts were typically absent in hepatic adenoma, occasional ductules could be identified with cytokeratin 7 stain. In focal nodular hyperplasia, cytokeratin 7 showed strong staining of the biliary epithelium within the fibrous septa and staining of the peripheral hepatocytes of most lobules that was focal and weaker than hepatic adenoma. Cytokeratin 19 and neuronal cell adhesion molecule showed patchy and moderate staining in the biliary epithelium of the ductules in focal nodular hyperplasia. While in the hepatic adenoma, cytokeratin 19 showed only rare positivity in occasional cells within ductules, and neuronal cell adhesion molecule marked occasional isolated cells in the lesion. CD34 showed staining of sinusoids in the inflow areas (periportal areas) in both focal nodular hyperplasia and hepatic adenoma. One case of telangiectatic focal nodular hyperplasia revealed both hepatic adenoma–like and focal nodular hyperplasia–like staining patterns. Distinct cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 19, and neuronal cell adhesion molecule staining patterns are seen in hepatic adenoma and focal nodular hyperplasia possibly suggest activation of different subsets of hepatic progenitor/stem cell and can be diagnostically useful. 