Defining disease with laser precision: laser capture microdissection in gastroenterology Laser capture microdissection (LCM) is an efficient and precise method for obtaining pure cell populations or specific cells of interest from a given tissue sample. LCM has been applied to animal and human gastroenterology research in analyzing the protein, DNA and RNA from all organs of the gastrointestinal system. There are numerous potential applications for this technology in gastroenterology research including malignancies of the esophagus, stomach, colon, biliary tract and liver. This technology can also be used to study gastrointestinal infections, inflammatory bowel disease, pancreatitis, motility, malabsorption and radiation enteropathy. LCM has multiple advantages when compared to conventional methods of microdissection, and this technology can be exploited to identify precursors to disease, diagnostic biomarkers, and therapeutic interventions.  Discussion LCM is a major advance as a microdissection technique compared to previously existing methods, but some disadvantages exist. The equipment may be considered expensive, and a manual dissection may be more cost effective and yield a reliable result. One study showed that LCM may not be necessary to identify tumor cell-specific gene expression profiles, and the macrodissected samples yielded reliable data when compared to microdissected tissue. 20 There also may be technical difficulties in preparing the tissue, and adhering the tissue to the film may be challenging. In spite of the disadvantages, LCM has been proven to be an efficient method for obtaining pure populations of cells from a heterogeneous tissue sample. LCM has the potential to help us understand the pathogenesis of many diseases as well as help to target interventions for future drugs. Future applications of LCM may include isolating selected populations of tissue for cultivation, manipulation, and cloning. This would allow a larger population of cells for current and future experiments. It is clear that LCM is a significant advancement in microdissection technology. Combining LCM with common molecular analytic techniques has provided an exciting method to visualize, dissect and analyze cells of the gastrointestinal system with precision and efficiency.  Discussion LCM is a major advance as a microdissection technique compared to previously existing methods, but some disadvantages exist. The equipment may be considered expensive, and a manual dissection may be more cost effective and yield a reliable result. One study showed that LCM may not be necessary to identify tumor cell-specific gene expression profiles, and the macrodissected samples yielded reliable data when compared to microdissected tissue. 20 There also may be technical difficulties in preparing the tissue, and adhering the tissue to the film may be challenging. In spite of the disadvantages, LCM has been proven to be an efficient method for obtaining pure populations of cells from a heterogeneous tissue sample. LCM has the potential to help us understand the pathogenesis of many diseases as well as help to target interventions for future drugs. Future applications of LCM may include isolating selected populations of tissue for cultivation, manipulation, and cloning. This would allow a larger population of cells for current and future experiments. It is clear that LCM is a significant advancement in microdissection technology. Combining LCM with common molecular analytic techniques has provided an exciting method to visualize, dissect and analyze cells of the gastrointestinal system with precision and efficiency. 