Epidemiology of Regular Prescribed Opioid Use: Results from a National, Population-Based Survey Chronic pain occurs commonly and accounts for significant suffering and costs. Although use of opioids for treatment of chronic pain is increasing, little is known about patients who use opioids regularly. We report data from the second wave of the Healthcare for Communities survey (2000—2001), a large, nationally representative household survey. We compared regular users of prescription opioids to nonusers of opioids and calculated the percentage of individuals within a given demographic or disease state that reported chronic opioid use. Approximately 2% of the 7,909 survey respondents reported use of opioid medications for at least a month, which the Healthcare for Communities survey defined as “regular use.” Opioid users were more likely than nonusers to report high levels of pain interference with their daily lives and to rate their health as fair or poor. Arthritis and back pain were the most prevalent chronic, physical health conditions among users of opioids, with 63% of regular users of opioids reporting arthritis and 59% reporting back pain. The majority of regular users of opioids had multiple pain conditions (mean= 1.9 pain conditions). Regular opioid users appear to have an overall lower level of health status and to have multiple, chronic physical health disorders.  Introduction Chronic pain is a common condition. Its estimated prevalence ranges from 2% to 50%, depending on the population studied and study design. It is one of the most common reasons for seeking health care. 1 – 6 Common sources of chronic pain resulting in regular opioid use include back pain, arthritic conditions, and headache. 7 – 10 Although most chronic pain is due to noncancer causes, an increasing number of cancer survivors have long-term chronic pain as sequela of cancer treatment. 11 The impact of chronic pain is significant and includes reduction in workplace productivity, increased health care expenditures, and decreased quality of life. 12 , 13 Cost estimates for chronic noncancer pain range from $20–$70 billion dollars annually. 14 The high burden of chronic pain, in both economic and quality-of-life outcomes, has resulted in increased attention to its treatment. Efforts have been made to liberalize the use of opioids for the treatment of chronic pain, including guidelines from the Veterans Health Administration, 15 and consensus statements from the Pain Society, 16 the American Academy of Pain Medicine, and the American Pain Society. 17 The “pain as the fifth vital sign” campaign initiated by the American Pain Society and implemented by organizations such as the Veterans Health Administration and Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health Care Organizations has increased routine assessment of pain. 18 The use of prescription opioids for chronic pain has increased significantly in recent years. Data from the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey found that prescriptions for opioid medications for chronic noncancer pain had doubled, increasing from 8% of outpatient visits for musculoskeletal disorders in 1980 to 16% in 2000. 19 Using data from the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, Gilson and colleagues found a substantial increase in retail sales for Schedule II opioid analgesics between 1997 and 2002, ranging from an increase of over 73% for morphine to more than 400% for oxycodone. Only meperidine showed a decrease in use of 6%. 20 The implications of the increased use of opioids for chronic pain are unclear. Some pain specialists view increased opioid use as evidence of better attention to and treatment of pain. 21 However, others are concerned that current evidence is not sufficient to support long-term prescribing of opioid medications for the treatment of chronic pain. 22 There is a general lack of pharmacoepidemiologic knowledge regarding opioid use. Basic population information about the physical health status, sociodemographic profile, and comorbid mental and physical health disorders of patients using opioids regularly is sparse. Hence, it is difficult to assess the overall breadth and nature of opioid prescribing and how well it may be supported by the current evidence base. This study uses data from Healthcare for Communities (HCC), a large, nationally representative, population-based survey, to supplement these sparse epidemiologic data. Specifically, we provide descriptive statistics on the sociodemographic status and physical health disorders of individuals regularly using opioids for chronic disorders.  Methods Sample Data are from HCC, a part of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation's Health Tracking Initiative. HCC was a nationwide telephone survey designed to track the effects of the changing health care system on individuals at risk for substance abuse and mental health disorders. It was conducted in 1997–1998 (HCC1) and 2000–2001 (HCC2). 23 Here, we report data from HCC2. The use of a large, community-based sample such as HCC minimizes bias resulting from the study of select patient groups and provides statistical power for subgroup analyses. The HCC1 respondents were a stratified probability sample of participants in the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation's Community Tracking Study (CTS), a nationally representative study of the U.S. civilian population during 1996–1997. The CTS includes a sample clustered within 60 randomly selected U.S. communities and a national sample. Of the 14,985 respondents selected for HCC1, 9,585 complete interviews were obtained, for a response rate of 64%. In HCC2, all HCC1 respondents were re-interviewed, with a response rate of 69.5%, and a supplemental cross-sectional sample was drawn from the second wave of the CTS, with a response rate of 52.4%. The combined HCC2 cross-sectional sample contained 7,909 respondents that were representative of the U.S. population in 2000–2001. The overall response rate was 60.5%. We used sample weights designed by HCC statisticians to adjust for the probability of selection, nonresponse, and the number of households in the CTS survey that did not have a phone. Informed consent was obtained verbally before the interview, and the study was approved by the institutional review boards at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, the University of California at Los Angeles and the RAND Corporation. Variables Dependent Variable HCC respondents were asked to read medication names directly off of their pill bottles to the interviewers, for all of their medications that were taken regularly. “Regular” use was defined as “at least several times a week for a month or more” during the past 12 months. These medications were later grouped into therapeutic categories by study staff. From this, we constructed a dichotomous measure of regular prescription opioid use as our dependent variable. Independent Variables Physical health was assessed using the Physical Component Summary-12, an aggregate measure of physical health functioning, and a measure of self-reported health (excellent, very good, good, fair or poor), both from the 12-item Short Form Health Questionnaire. 24 HCC also contains information on 17 self-reported chronic medical conditions, including painful medical conditions—specifically arthritis, back pain, headaches, and “other” chronic painful conditions. We used a trichotomous measure of “pain interference with work or daily activities such as housework” derived from the 12-item Short Form Health Questionnaired–high pain interference (extremely or quite a lot), moderate pain interference (moderately), and no pain interference (a little bit or not at all). Sociodemographic covariates include: gender, age, race, income, marital status, and education. Analyses We provide descriptive data on the HCC sample and regular users of opioids. We first calculated descriptive statistics on respondents who reported regular opioid use ( Table 1 ) and then rates of regular opioid use among individuals in different diagnostic and sociodemographic categories ( Table 2 ). Finally, we regressed regular opioid use on relevant covariates to identify sociodemographic and clinical characteristics associated with regular opioid use. The reported percentages are weighted to reflect prevalence in the general population while the sample counts are unweighted; differences were tested with the Chi-squared statistic. Analyses were conducted using STATA version 8.2 (College Station, TX) using sample weights and taking into account the clustered survey design for tests of inference.  Sample Data are from HCC, a part of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation's Health Tracking Initiative. HCC was a nationwide telephone survey designed to track the effects of the changing health care system on individuals at risk for substance abuse and mental health disorders. It was conducted in 1997–1998 (HCC1) and 2000–2001 (HCC2). 23 Here, we report data from HCC2. The use of a large, community-based sample such as HCC minimizes bias resulting from the study of select patient groups and provides statistical power for subgroup analyses. The HCC1 respondents were a stratified probability sample of participants in the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation's Community Tracking Study (CTS), a nationally representative study of the U.S. civilian population during 1996–1997. The CTS includes a sample clustered within 60 randomly selected U.S. communities and a national sample. Of the 14,985 respondents selected for HCC1, 9,585 complete interviews were obtained, for a response rate of 64%. In HCC2, all HCC1 respondents were re-interviewed, with a response rate of 69.5%, and a supplemental cross-sectional sample was drawn from the second wave of the CTS, with a response rate of 52.4%. The combined HCC2 cross-sectional sample contained 7,909 respondents that were representative of the U.S. population in 2000–2001. The overall response rate was 60.5%. We used sample weights designed by HCC statisticians to adjust for the probability of selection, nonresponse, and the number of households in the CTS survey that did not have a phone. Informed consent was obtained verbally before the interview, and the study was approved by the institutional review boards at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, the University of California at Los Angeles and the RAND Corporation.  Variables Dependent Variable HCC respondents were asked to read medication names directly off of their pill bottles to the interviewers, for all of their medications that were taken regularly. “Regular” use was defined as “at least several times a week for a month or more” during the past 12 months. These medications were later grouped into therapeutic categories by study staff. From this, we constructed a dichotomous measure of regular prescription opioid use as our dependent variable. Independent Variables Physical health was assessed using the Physical Component Summary-12, an aggregate measure of physical health functioning, and a measure of self-reported health (excellent, very good, good, fair or poor), both from the 12-item Short Form Health Questionnaire. 24 HCC also contains information on 17 self-reported chronic medical conditions, including painful medical conditions—specifically arthritis, back pain, headaches, and “other” chronic painful conditions. We used a trichotomous measure of “pain interference with work or daily activities such as housework” derived from the 12-item Short Form Health Questionnaired–high pain interference (extremely or quite a lot), moderate pain interference (moderately), and no pain interference (a little bit or not at all). Sociodemographic covariates include: gender, age, race, income, marital status, and education.  Dependent Variable HCC respondents were asked to read medication names directly off of their pill bottles to the interviewers, for all of their medications that were taken regularly. “Regular” use was defined as “at least several times a week for a month or more” during the past 12 months. These medications were later grouped into therapeutic categories by study staff. From this, we constructed a dichotomous measure of regular prescription opioid use as our dependent variable.  Independent Variables Physical health was assessed using the Physical Component Summary-12, an aggregate measure of physical health functioning, and a measure of self-reported health (excellent, very good, good, fair or poor), both from the 12-item Short Form Health Questionnaire. 24 HCC also contains information on 17 self-reported chronic medical conditions, including painful medical conditions—specifically arthritis, back pain, headaches, and “other” chronic painful conditions. We used a trichotomous measure of “pain interference with work or daily activities such as housework” derived from the 12-item Short Form Health Questionnaired–high pain interference (extremely or quite a lot), moderate pain interference (moderately), and no pain interference (a little bit or not at all). Sociodemographic covariates include: gender, age, race, income, marital status, and education.  Analyses We provide descriptive data on the HCC sample and regular users of opioids. We first calculated descriptive statistics on respondents who reported regular opioid use ( Table 1 ) and then rates of regular opioid use among individuals in different diagnostic and sociodemographic categories ( Table 2 ). Finally, we regressed regular opioid use on relevant covariates to identify sociodemographic and clinical characteristics associated with regular opioid use. The reported percentages are weighted to reflect prevalence in the general population while the sample counts are unweighted; differences were tested with the Chi-squared statistic. Analyses were conducted using STATA version 8.2 (College Station, TX) using sample weights and taking into account the clustered survey design for tests of inference.  Results Table 1 provides descriptive information about regular users of opioids; we have also included descriptive information on nonusers and the total sample for comparison. A total of 7,909 individuals completed interviews for HCC2 and were available for analysis. Approximately 2% of the sample reported using opioid medications regularly, and only a small number of individuals with regular opioid use reported having cancer in the past three years (11 out of 262). Compared with the population of nonusers of opioids, in these unadjusted results, regular users of opioids were significantly more likely to be white, report high levels of pain, and have worse self-rated health. Interestingly, in these unadjusted results, this group had statistically significant higher prevalence rates of physical conditions not typically associated with pain, such as hypertension (35%), trouble breathing (13%), and angina/heart failure (12%), compared to nonusers of opioids, although rates of these disorders are also high in the general population. Regular opioid users also had higher prevalence rates of common mental health disorders than nonusers. Over half of regular users of opioids reported their health as fair (28%) or poor (25%); 57% reported a high level of pain interference in their daily activities. Arthritis and back pain were the most prevalent chronic physical health conditions among users of opioids (63% and 59%, respectively), whereas migraines/chronic headaches and other chronic pain conditions were less frequent (38% and 35%, respectively). There was substantial overlap among the pain-related disorders. For example, 88% of regular opioid users reported arthritis, back pain, or headaches/migraines; the addition of the “other pain” category increased this number by two percentage points to 90%. Respondents that reported regular opioid use averaged 1.9 painful disorders (arthritis, back pain, headache/ migraine, and “other” pain). Table 2 reports rates of regular opioid use among individuals from different sociodemographic and diagnostic groups. Rates of regular opioid use among individuals with back pain, arthritis, headache/migraine and “other” chronic pain conditions were 8%, 5%, 7%, and 9%, respectively. Twelve percent of individuals with high levels of pain interference used opioids regularly, as did 13% of individuals in poor health. Only 2.7% of individuals with cancer in the past three years reported opioid use. Regular opioid use was most common among white individuals 30–60 years of age, and those who were married, although unadjusted results should be viewed with caution. Individuals who completed more than high school education and had higher incomes reported less opioid use. We regressed regular opioid use on the sociodemographic and clinical conditions reported in the survey to investigate the conditional effects of these variables while controlling for others ( Table 3 ). Characteristics associated with a greater likelihood of regular opioid use included being ages 18–29, white, having a painful condition (arthritis, chronic back problems, or migraine/chronic headaches) or a mental health disorder. Individuals who rated the level of pain interference with their daily lives as high or moderate were also more likely to be regular opioid users than those with no pain interference. Interestingly, individuals who reported having cancer within the last three years were significantly less likely to report regular opioid use compared to those with no cancer diagnosis, as were those with a body mass index in the overweight or obese range (>30), compared to those with a body mass index in the normal range. 25 – 30  Results Table 1 provides descriptive information about regular users of opioids; we have also included descriptive information on nonusers and the total sample for comparison. A total of 7,909 individuals completed interviews for HCC2 and were available for analysis. Approximately 2% of the sample reported using opioid medications regularly, and only a small number of individuals with regular opioid use reported having cancer in the past three years (11 out of 262). Compared with the population of nonusers of opioids, in these unadjusted results, regular users of opioids were significantly more likely to be white, report high levels of pain, and have worse self-rated health. Interestingly, in these unadjusted results, this group had statistically significant higher prevalence rates of physical conditions not typically associated with pain, such as hypertension (35%), trouble breathing (13%), and angina/heart failure (12%), compared to nonusers of opioids, although rates of these disorders are also high in the general population. Regular opioid users also had higher prevalence rates of common mental health disorders than nonusers. Over half of regular users of opioids reported their health as fair (28%) or poor (25%); 57% reported a high level of pain interference in their daily activities. Arthritis and back pain were the most prevalent chronic physical health conditions among users of opioids (63% and 59%, respectively), whereas migraines/chronic headaches and other chronic pain conditions were less frequent (38% and 35%, respectively). There was substantial overlap among the pain-related disorders. For example, 88% of regular opioid users reported arthritis, back pain, or headaches/migraines; the addition of the “other pain” category increased this number by two percentage points to 90%. Respondents that reported regular opioid use averaged 1.9 painful disorders (arthritis, back pain, headache/ migraine, and “other” pain). Table 2 reports rates of regular opioid use among individuals from different sociodemographic and diagnostic groups. Rates of regular opioid use among individuals with back pain, arthritis, headache/migraine and “other” chronic pain conditions were 8%, 5%, 7%, and 9%, respectively. Twelve percent of individuals with high levels of pain interference used opioids regularly, as did 13% of individuals in poor health. Only 2.7% of individuals with cancer in the past three years reported opioid use. Regular opioid use was most common among white individuals 30–60 years of age, and those who were married, although unadjusted results should be viewed with caution. Individuals who completed more than high school education and had higher incomes reported less opioid use. We regressed regular opioid use on the sociodemographic and clinical conditions reported in the survey to investigate the conditional effects of these variables while controlling for others ( Table 3 ). Characteristics associated with a greater likelihood of regular opioid use included being ages 18–29, white, having a painful condition (arthritis, chronic back problems, or migraine/chronic headaches) or a mental health disorder. Individuals who rated the level of pain interference with their daily lives as high or moderate were also more likely to be regular opioid users than those with no pain interference. Interestingly, individuals who reported having cancer within the last three years were significantly less likely to report regular opioid use compared to those with no cancer diagnosis, as were those with a body mass index in the overweight or obese range (>30), compared to those with a body mass index in the normal range. 25 – 30  Discussion These data suggest that in 2000–2001 approximately 2% of a community-based sample used prescription opioids regularly for at least one month at some point over the past 12 months. Interestingly, there were very few demographic differences among opioid users and nonusers. Opioid users were significantly less likely to be African American, Hispanic, or “other” race, and thus more likely to be white. Individuals older than 60 years were less likely to receive opioids compared with individuals aged 18–29. As expected, users of opioids had high rates of chronic pain interference. Users of opioids also had higher rates of mental health disorders than nonusers, a result explored in more detail in our previous studies. 25 , 26 Perhaps less expected is that opioid users typically had multiple pain and nonpainful chronic conditions, even though regular users of chronic opioids were not older than nonusers. For example, 35% had hypertension compared to a prevalence rate of 20% in the nonopioid user group. However, differences in rates of physical health disorders were significant only in unadjusted results and not significant in the multiple regression model. The most common painful conditions among regular users of opioids were arthritis and back pain, with migraine/headaches and “other” painful conditions somewhat less common. We would note that the “other” category is likely quite heterogeneous and might include conditions such as diabetic neuropathy and fibromyalgia. Our data suggest that only a small percentage of individuals who reported regular opioid use also reported having cancer. This is likely because cancer is much less common relative to back pain and arthritis. Over half of individuals who reported regular opioid use also reported their health as fair or poor. Almost 60% of opioid users reported a high level of pain interference with their daily lives. This suggests that this group of patients is still experiencing pain despite opioid therapy. However, because this was not a randomized trial, it is not possible to evaluate the efficacy of opioid therapy from these data. We cannot formally evaluate whether this level of opioid prescribing is excessive, insufficient, or appropriate due to a lack of specificity in clinical guidelines, the lack of clinical detail in the HCC data, and, in particular, the lack of long-term outcome studies of regular opioid use for painful conditions. However, we do believe several points are worth emphasizing. First, for each of the painful conditions included in the HCC survey, fewer than 10% of individuals with the disorder used opioids. Even among those with high pain interference, only 12% reported regular opioid use. Further, as one would expect in an observational study, there is a strong relationship between level of pain interference and use of opioids. 23 , 25 , 27 Clinical trials evaluating opioids for treatment of chronic pain often exclude patients with serious physical health disorders, other comorbid pain conditions, or mental health and substance use disorders. 28 – 38 Thus, our study suggests that individuals who receive opioids regularly in “real world” settings often differ dramatically from participants in opioid clinical trials; “real world” users of opioids have elevated rates of chronic physical conditions, mental health and substance abuse disorders, and multiple pain conditions. Clearly this finding highlights the need for further trials using more representative samples to study the use of opioids to treat chronic painful conditions. A major strength of our study is the use of national population-based data. These data are also unique because individuals that report having cancer within the last three years were not excluded from the study. Therefore, our results would be expected to offer a more generalizable portrait of regular users of opioids than studies utilizing settings such as pain clinics or examining pain management strategies for a specific disorder, or testing a specific pain treatment. Limitations of our work include the lack of detail about actual opioid use (e.g., dose or the effectiveness of the opioid), and lack of clinical detail about the severity of chronic conditions reported by HCC respondents. We do not know the dose or duration of opioid therapy nor do we have direct data on the effectiveness of the opioids. Despite these limitations, this study presents important descriptive information on users of opioids in a nationally representative survey. In particular, our results highlight the multiple comorbidities of these individuals and their generally poor health. As goals and strategies for pain management are expanded from the use of medications such as acetaminophen and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications to the use of opioid medications for treatment of chronic painful conditions, more research is needed to better define appropriate opioid use. Our report suggests that opioid recipients have generally poor health and multiple comorbidities, but does not tell us whether this opioid use is helping these individuals.  Discussion These data suggest that in 2000–2001 approximately 2% of a community-based sample used prescription opioids regularly for at least one month at some point over the past 12 months. Interestingly, there were very few demographic differences among opioid users and nonusers. Opioid users were significantly less likely to be African American, Hispanic, or “other” race, and thus more likely to be white. Individuals older than 60 years were less likely to receive opioids compared with individuals aged 18–29. As expected, users of opioids had high rates of chronic pain interference. Users of opioids also had higher rates of mental health disorders than nonusers, a result explored in more detail in our previous studies. 25 , 26 Perhaps less expected is that opioid users typically had multiple pain and nonpainful chronic conditions, even though regular users of chronic opioids were not older than nonusers. For example, 35% had hypertension compared to a prevalence rate of 20% in the nonopioid user group. However, differences in rates of physical health disorders were significant only in unadjusted results and not significant in the multiple regression model. The most common painful conditions among regular users of opioids were arthritis and back pain, with migraine/headaches and “other” painful conditions somewhat less common. We would note that the “other” category is likely quite heterogeneous and might include conditions such as diabetic neuropathy and fibromyalgia. Our data suggest that only a small percentage of individuals who reported regular opioid use also reported having cancer. This is likely because cancer is much less common relative to back pain and arthritis. Over half of individuals who reported regular opioid use also reported their health as fair or poor. Almost 60% of opioid users reported a high level of pain interference with their daily lives. This suggests that this group of patients is still experiencing pain despite opioid therapy. However, because this was not a randomized trial, it is not possible to evaluate the efficacy of opioid therapy from these data. We cannot formally evaluate whether this level of opioid prescribing is excessive, insufficient, or appropriate due to a lack of specificity in clinical guidelines, the lack of clinical detail in the HCC data, and, in particular, the lack of long-term outcome studies of regular opioid use for painful conditions. However, we do believe several points are worth emphasizing. First, for each of the painful conditions included in the HCC survey, fewer than 10% of individuals with the disorder used opioids. Even among those with high pain interference, only 12% reported regular opioid use. Further, as one would expect in an observational study, there is a strong relationship between level of pain interference and use of opioids. 23 , 25 , 27 Clinical trials evaluating opioids for treatment of chronic pain often exclude patients with serious physical health disorders, other comorbid pain conditions, or mental health and substance use disorders. 28 – 38 Thus, our study suggests that individuals who receive opioids regularly in “real world” settings often differ dramatically from participants in opioid clinical trials; “real world” users of opioids have elevated rates of chronic physical conditions, mental health and substance abuse disorders, and multiple pain conditions. Clearly this finding highlights the need for further trials using more representative samples to study the use of opioids to treat chronic painful conditions. A major strength of our study is the use of national population-based data. These data are also unique because individuals that report having cancer within the last three years were not excluded from the study. Therefore, our results would be expected to offer a more generalizable portrait of regular users of opioids than studies utilizing settings such as pain clinics or examining pain management strategies for a specific disorder, or testing a specific pain treatment. Limitations of our work include the lack of detail about actual opioid use (e.g., dose or the effectiveness of the opioid), and lack of clinical detail about the severity of chronic conditions reported by HCC respondents. We do not know the dose or duration of opioid therapy nor do we have direct data on the effectiveness of the opioids. Despite these limitations, this study presents important descriptive information on users of opioids in a nationally representative survey. In particular, our results highlight the multiple comorbidities of these individuals and their generally poor health. As goals and strategies for pain management are expanded from the use of medications such as acetaminophen and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications to the use of opioid medications for treatment of chronic painful conditions, more research is needed to better define appropriate opioid use. Our report suggests that opioid recipients have generally poor health and multiple comorbidities, but does not tell us whether this opioid use is helping these individuals. 