Disconnection syndromes of basal ganglia, thalamus, and cerebrocerebellar systems Disconnection syndromes were originally conceptualized as a disruption of communication between different cerebral cortical areas. Two developments mandate a re-evaluation of this notion. First, we present a synopsis of our anatomical studies in monkey elucidating principles of organization of cerebral cortex. Efferent fibers emanate from every cortical area, and are directed with topographic precision via association fibers to ipsilateral cortical areas, commissural fibers to contralateral cerebral regions, striatal fibers to basal ganglia, and projection subcortical bundles to thalamus, brainstem and/or pontocerebellar system. We note that cortical areas can be defined by their patterns of subcortical and cortical connections. Second, we consider motor, cognitive and neuropsychiatric disorders in patients with lesions restricted to basal ganglia, thalamus, or cerebellum, and recognize that these lesions mimic deficits resulting from cortical lesions, with qualitative differences between the manifestations of lesions in functionally related areas of cortical and subcortical nodes. We consider these findings on the basis of anatomical observations from tract tracing studies in monkey, viewing them as disconnection syndromes reflecting loss of the contribution of subcortical nodes to the distributed neural circuits. We introduce a new theoretical framework for the distributed neural circuits, based on general, and specific, principles of anatomical organization, and on the architecture of the nodes that comprise these systems. We propose that neural architecture determines function, i.e., each architectonically distinct cortical and subcortical area contributes a unique transform, or computation, to information processing; anatomically precise and segregated connections between nodes define behavior; and association fiber tracts that link cerebral cortical areas with each other enable the cross-modal integration required for evolved complex behaviors. This model enables the formulation and testing of future hypotheses in investigations using evolving magnetic resonance imaging techniques in humans, and in clinical studies in patients with cortical and subcortical lesions.  12. Discussion This overview of the neurology and neuropsychiatry of basal ganglia, thalamus and cerebellum makes it clear that “higher cortical functions” are not exclusively the domain of the cerebral cortex. The principle of organization of cerebral cortex, apparent from tract tracing studies, is that each cortical area has association, striatal, and projection fibers linking it in a precise manner to topographically arranged sectors within other cortical regions and subcortical areas. How does the detailed connectional anatomy of each node manifest functionally and clinically, and what is the specific contribution of each of these subcortical nodes to the generation of the observed behaviors? Interspecies hodological principles appear to be supported in that the monkey anatomy agrees in general with the human clinical repertoire, but do the anatomical arrangements identified in monkey hold true for the human brain? In addressing these issues, we present a conceptual approach that, in our view, captures the essential elements of the structure and function of the distributed neural system. 12.1. Evolutionary considerations Cerebral cortical function may be regarded from the evolutionary perspective as having its origins, both connectionally and functionally, in the subcortical regions. Sensorimotor function, emotion, and rudimentary elements of cognition are governed in lower creatures not by the cerebral cortex, which is either primitive or non-existent, but primarily by subcortical structures – primitive forebears of the basal ganglia, thalamus and cerebellum discussed here, as well as other areas we have not addressed, including the amygdala, hypothalamus and basal forebrain ( Ariëns-Kappers et al., 1936 ; MacLean, 1972 ; Karten, 1997 ). As the cerebral cortex evolved, it became superimposed upon subcortical structures in a systematic and predictable manner ( Karten, 1997 ; Northcutt and Kaas, 1995 ; McHaffie et al., 2005 ). Further, according to the mosaic hypothesis, brain evolved by size change in arrays of functionally connected structures ( Whiting and Barton, 2003 ). This has direct bearing on subcortical structures, as exemplified by the cerebrocerebellar system in which the expansion and elaboration of the prefrontal areas occurred in parallel with that of the lateral cerebellar hemispheres ( Whiting and Barton, 2003 ) and the ventral lateral dentate nucleus ( Leiner et al., 1986 ), and the interconnecting fiber bundles in the medial aspect of the cerebral peduncle ( Ramnani et al., 2006 ). The resulting cortico–cortical and cortico–subcortical interactions, linked together in a precise and topographically arranged manner by the connecting white matter tracts, has enabled a more sophisticated repertoire of behaviors. Against this background, we observe that a cortical area may be defined by its pattern of connections; that lesions within subcortical structures can mimic deficits resulting from lesions of cerebral cortical regions with which they are interconnected; and that there is a qualitative difference between the clinical manifestations of lesions in functionally related areas of different cortical and subcortical nodes. 12.2. Architecture determines function – the theory of the universal transform There is a range of clinical syndromes that results from lesions of different regions within the basal ganglia, thalamus and cerebellum. It appears likely, therefore, that for each node in the distributed neural system, the architecture and connections are reflected in function and clinical manifestations. To account for this, we adopt a reductionist approach derived from an examination of the organizational principles and detailed connectional neuroanatomy. In this view, the architecture and microconnectivity unique to each cortical and subcortical structure facilitates a neural computation, or transform, that is unique to that region. The term “universal” denotes a functional transform at the synaptic/physiological level that is consistent throughout an architectonically defined node. This universal transform theory was originally introduced with reference to the cerebellum. The recognition that cerebellum is engaged in cognitive processing and emotional regulation as well as motor control, mandated a new model that takes these disparate cerebellar roles into consideration. The early notion that the role of the cerebellum is to modulate neurologic function ( Snider, 1950 ; Dow, 1974 ; Heath, 1977 ) is compelling, and we have adopted and amended this as part of a conceptual approach to cerebellar function. We introduced the dysmetria of thought hypothesis ( Schmahmann, 1991 , 1996 , 2000 , 2004 ), which holds that the cerebellum modulates cognitive and emotional processing, as well as motor control. In this view, because cerebellar cortical histology ( Ito, 1984 ; Voogd and Glickstein, 1998 ), and cerebellar corticonuclear relations (the corticonuclear micro-complex; Ito, 1984 ) are essentially uniform throughout, the basic work that cerebellum does in the nervous system should be constant as well, hence the Universal Cerebellar Transform (UCT). The UCT is defined as the cerebellar modulation of behavior, serving as an oscillation dampener, maintaining function automatically around a homeostatic baseline, smoothing out performance in all domains. Anatomical subcircuits in the cerebrocerebellar system, discussed above, enable topographically precise interactions between cerebellum and cerebral cortex. These anatomic subcircuits provide the structural basis for putative functional subunits, and facilitate topographic organization of motor and cognitive function in the cerebellum. The computational nature of the UCT remains a matter of intense debate, including notions of oscillation dampening as defined in our dysmetria of thought hypothesis, and various forms of learning ( Barto et al., 1999 ; Leggio et al., 1999 ; Medina and Mauk, 2000 ; Molinari et al., 2002 ; Bloedel, 2004 ), timing ( Ivry, 1997 ), prediction and preparation ( Courchesne and Allen, 1997 ); sensory data acquisition ( Bower, 1997 ), feedforward internal modeling ( Miall et al., 1993 ; Miall and Reckess, 2002 ; Ito, 2005 ; Ramnani, 2006 ), and others. According to the dysmetria of thought hypothesis, the UCT is the essential functional contribution that the cerebellum makes to the distributed neural system. By corollary, therefore, there should be a Universal Cerebellar Impairment (UCI). This UCI, the hypothesis holds, is dysmetria, a word derived from the Greek term for disordered timing. When the dysmetria involves the motor domain, the various manifestations of ataxia are evident in extremity movements, eye movements, speech and equilibrium. In contrast, when the dysmetria involves non-motor functions subserved by cerebellum, this results in dysmetria of thought, or cognitive dysmetria, and manifests as the various components of the cerebellar cognitive affective syndrome ( Schmahmann and Sherman, 1998 ; Schmahmann, 2000 , 2004 ). This theory of a Universal Cerebellar Transform may be more generalizable, however, and applicable to the striatum (caudate nucleus and putamen). Like the cerebellum, the complex cytoarchitecture of the caudate nucleus and putamen, including the striosome and matrix compartments, is essentially consistent throughout the striatum, although there is further neurochemical differentiation in the ventral parts of the caudate nucleus, putamen, and ventral stria-tum–nucleus accumbens ( Holt et al., 1997 ). With regard to thalamus, there may be an overarching commonality to thalamic function. Nadeau and Crosson (1997) suggest that thalamus is active in selecting specific neuronal networks in the cortical projection fields of thalamic nuclei, acting as a gate regulating attentional processes. By enabling specific types of working memory, for example, thalamus facilitates selective engagement in different cognitive processes. But the histology of thalamic nuclei, like the histology of the cerebral cortex, varies from one nucleus to another. In the same way, then, that the specific contribution, i.e., the proposed universal transform, of prefrontal cortical area 45 is likely to differ from that of area 39 in the parietal lobe, or from primary visual area 17, subdivisions of the medial dorsal thalamic nucleus are likely to contribute in a different manner than the pulvinar medialis nucleus, or the magnocellular layer of the lateral geniculate nucleus. Within an anatomically homogenous, but connectionally complex area, such as pulvinar medialis, for example, the transform should be constant throughout the nucleus and applied to anatomically segregated domains of cognitive processing. Such a nucleus-specific functional specialization has been proposed in the case of the pulvinar. Robinson (1993) hypothesizes that the pulvinar functions as an early center for the generation of visual salience by the suppression of noise and the enhancement of significant signals, enabling cortical shifts of attention and response specification. This notion, likely applicable to the pulvinar inferior that has strong connections with visual cortices ( Yeterian and Pandya, 1997 ; Beck and Kaas, 1998 ), is consistent with our universal transform concept derived from a consideration of neuronal architecture and connections. The precise nature of the transforms of these thalamic nuclei, both at the level of the physiological transform, and the manner in which behavior is influenced, remains a matter of speculation. 12.3. Connections define behavior The connections that link the multiple geographically distributed and architectonically defined nodes in the cerebral cortex and subcortical areas. Indeed, a cortical area can be defined by its pattern of subcortical and cortical connections. Whereas architecture may determine the transform of each node, connectional patterns are likely to define behavior. Each node in the distributed neural system are highly organized required to contribute its unique transform in order to support the ultimate behavior pattern, falling within any of the domains of sensorimotor processing, cognition or emotion. Further, each node may be engaged in a number of different domains of behavior, which are subserved by anatomically distinct subpopulations of neurons within the node. Clinical manifestations of lesions in the different nodes of the distributed neural system are therefore determined by two central factors – which node is interfered with, and which subpopulation of neurons within that node, or its connecting axons, are destroyed. Centuries of investigation have led to an understanding of the functions subserved by different regions of the cerebral cortex, and cerebral cortical areas have come to be regarded as the parent nodes of the distributed networks. Based on the principles of organization of the cortical connections that we have outlined ( Schmahmann and Pandya, 2006 ), a lesion of cortex, even if restricted exquisitely to the cortex, disconnects the cortex from all the other interconnected cortical and subcortical areas, because the neurons that provide the interconnecting axons are destroyed. The notion of Wernicke and Geschwind that a lesion in a cortical association area produces a disconnection syndrome by preventing cortical areas from communicating with each other is thus extended from the cortex to the subcortical areas. A cortical lesion may thus be expected to have a sizeable behavioral impact not only because its unique transform has been damaged, but also because widespread connections are affected throughout the particular distributed neural network for which that cortical area serves as the parent node. The detailed clinical neurology of white matter lesions is beyond the scope of the present consideration, but lesions of white matter fiber pathways themselves produce clinical consequences. This point is illustrated by dementia that occurs in the setting of disseminated white matter disease ( Filley, 2001 ), post-stroke language recovery that depends on involvement of the subcallosal fasciculus of Muratoff ( Naeser et al., 1989 ), and parietal pseudothalamic pain from white matter lesions that disconnect SII cortex from thalamus ( Schmahmann and Leifer, 1992 ). The clinical deficits from loss of the white matter tracts linking different nodes may differ from those following lesions of the cortex or sub-cortical nodes for a number of reasons. White matter lesions may disrupt information destined for more than one node; they may involve association, projection and striatal fibers; and they may affect more than one functional domain. Involvement of afferent versus efferent fibers may have clinical significance – striatal fibers are unidirectional from cortex to caudate–putamen; the middle cerebellar peduncle is essentially exclusively afferent from pons to cerebellum, whereas the superior cerebellar peduncle is predominantly efferent from cerebellum to the cerebral hemispheres; and the thalamic peduncles are bi-directional. Fiber tract disruptions are often incomplete by virtue of the anatomical arrangement of the pathways and the pathologic conditions that affect white matter, and the effects of partial versus complete disconnection are likely to be pertinent. 12.4. Topography of function in subcortical nodes – functional and clinical implications The foregoing discussion sets the stage for considering the two principles that we postulate govern the clinical manifestations resulting from lesions of the subcortical nodes – the topography of the lesion within the node (i.e., the behavioral domain affected), and the transform of the affected node. This can be illustrated using selected clinical examples. Motor impairment may result from focal lesions in the precentral gyrus, basal ganglia, thalamus and cerebellum. Further, the nature of the clinical impairment differs depending on the node affected. The clumsy or paralyzed arm results from stroke involving the upper extremity representation in the precentral gyrus ( Takahashi et al., 2002 ; Castaldo et al., 2003 ; Maeder-Ingvar et al., 2005 ); dystonia and slowness of movement results from lesions of the motor regions of the putamen ( Bhatia and Marsden, 1994 ); the motor cerebellum in the anterior lobe produces incoordination of movement ( Holmes, 1917 ; Schmahmann, 2007 ); and the ventral lateral thalamic nucleus lesion may produce ataxic hemiparesis ( Dejerine and Roussy, 1906 ; Caplan et al., 1988 ; Murthy, 1988 ). The most prolonged and unremitting paralysis occurs following hemispheric lesions ( Shelton and Reding, 2001 ; Ng et al., 2007 ) that destroy not just corticospinal fibers, but the fiber tracts linking motor cortices with movement related neuronal populations in the thalamus and striatum as well ( Schmahmann and Pandya, 2006 ). The clinical impairments following involvement of the different cortical and subcortical components of the motor system make the point that each node contributes in a unique manner to the motor program, and all contributing nodes are required to produce the normal behavior. Cognitive impairments in the executive domain result from lesions of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ( Stuss and Benson, 1984 ) and its interconnected areas in the dorsolateral caudate nucleus ( Caplan et al., 1990 ), medial dorsal thalamic nucleus ( Bogousslavsky et al., 1988 ), and crus I and II of cerebellum ( Schmahmann and Sherman, 1998 ). Visual spatial impairments follow lesions of the posterior parietal cortex ( Mesulam, 1981 ), the head of the caudate nucleus ( Caplan et al., 1990 ), thalamus including the lateral posterior thalamic nucleus and pulvinar ( Watson and Heilman, 1979 ), and the posterior lobe of the cerebellum ( Schmahmann and Sherman, 1998 ). Disorders of affect, drive and motivation occur following lesions of the cingulate gyrus ( Devinsky and Luciano, 1997 ), the ventral striatum ( Levy and Dubois, 2006 ), the anterior thalamus ( Graff-Radford et al., 1985 ; Lisovoski et al., 1993 ), and the cerebellar vermis ( Pollack, 1997 ; Schmahmann and Sherman, 1998 ; Levisohn et al., 2000 ; Riva and Giorgi, 2000 ; Schmahmann et al., 2007c ). Cognitive impairments following these subcortical lesions have been conceptualized as follows. The slowness of movement (bradykinesia), thought (bradyphrenia), and mnemonic retrieval that characterize lesions of the basal ganglia suggest that the striatal deficits impair the initiation of behavior, and the ability to chunk information into manageable quanta ( Graybiel, 1998 ). The thalamus is thought to contribute a specific alerting or engagement response to the different domains of function to which it contributes. And the cerebellar role in automatization and optimizing behavior around a homeostatic baseline has been encapsulated in the dysmetria of thought theory – applying the same transform to cognition and emotion as it does to motor control ( Schmahmann, 1991 , 1996 , 2000 , 2004 ). Thus, a cortical area can be defined by its pattern of subcortical (as well as cortical) connections; lesions of subcortical structures mimic deficits resulting from lesions of the cerebral cortex; and there are qualitative differences between the clinical manifestations of lesions in functionally related areas of different cortical and subcortical nodes. 12.5. The problem of segregated loops – the role of the cerebral cortex Destruction of selected neuronal populations within subcortical nodes produces disorders of sensorimotor or higher order behavior because these lesions disrupt the interaction of domain-specific subcortical neuronal ensembles with the sensorimotor, association, or paralimbic cortical areas that govern these behaviors. But the existence of multiple parallel loops linking the cerebral cortex with subcortical nodes leads to a conceptual problem. Cortical connections with the striatum, thalamus and pontocerebellar system appear to be arranged in parallel, respecting domain specificity. There is no cross-modal communication within subcortical nodes (e.g., thalamic nuclei do not communicate with each other). Further, present evidence indicates that communication between subcortical nodes is also domain-specific, although we are mindful of possible exceptions as noted in the striatonigostriatal system ( Haber et al., 2000 ). Hence the difficulty. There is essentially no intranodal communication, and internodal communication is domain-specific; but complex behavior requires interactions between different functional domains. At some point in the anatomy of cognition, mood must inform movement, strategy must rely on memory, and so on. As emphasized early on by Franz Joseph Gall (1758–1828), Theodore Meynert (1833–1892), Wernicke and others, this is the role of the cerebral cortical association areas that “serve as the repository of past impressions arising through the afferent channels via the sensory spheres, and as the essential substratum of memory in integration or building of complex processes” (Paul Flechsig [1847–1929], translated and quoted in Barker, 1899 , p. 1070). The problem of segregated loops is resolved by the cerebral cortex that, alone among the many nodes of the distributed neural system, has the privilege of facilitating the interaction and integration of information between multiple domains in a feedforward and feedback manner. This capability is facilitated by the association fiber pathways, which are themselves exclusive to the cerebral cortex. 12.6. Human brain connectivity Knowledge of the anatomy of cortico-cortical and cortico-subcortical connections and fiber pathways of the brain is based largely on tract tracing studies in monkey. Clinical syndromes in patients are in good agreement with conclusions derived from these anatomical investigations, providing some confidence that the anatomical arrangements are likely to be generally preserved in the human. Thus, by their consistency with monkey anatomy, the clinical syndromes help clarify human brain hodology. The greater size, anatomic complexity, and functional elaboration of the human brain make it clear that this inter-species comparison may be erroneous, however, and there is a compelling need to study the anatomy and functional organization of the human brain directly, a challenge that has faced neuroscience since the ancient Greeks. The ability of MRI to identify small, acute focal lesions, together with sophisticated tools of clinical neurology and neuropsychology, enables the structure–function correlations discussed in this analysis. The advent of diffusion tensor imaging (DTI, Basser et al., 1994 ) makes it possible to visualize fiber tracts in the human brain ( Wedeen et al., 1995 ; Conturo et al., 1999 ; Catani et al., 2002 ) in a manner that may translate the findings from monkey to human. This technology is now being utilized to demonstrate some of the evolutionary principles described above, as in the case of the expansion in human of the prefrontal component of the cerebral peduncle fibers that contribute to the corticopontine pathways ( Ramnani et al., 2006 ). Connectional anatomical investigations using DTI probabilistic mapping have also been initiated for the study of cortical connections with subcortical structures. Studies of thalamic interactions with the cerebral cortex report that a large medial, dorsal region of the thalamus had highly probable prefrontal and temporal connections; a ventral posterior thalamic region had strong probability of somatosensory connections; a lateral region had high probability of motor cortical connectivity; and a posterior region was connected to the posterior parietal cortex and extrastriate cortices ( Behrens et al., 2003 ; Johansen-Berg et al., 2005 ). These findings are in general agreement with those of tracer studies in monkey, as discussed in detail above. DTI tractography has also been performed in the analysis of human corticostriatal projections. This approach revealed that the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is linked with the dorsal–posterior caudate nucleus, and the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex is linked with the ventral–anterior caudate nucleus. For the putamen, connections were defined between the supplementary motor area (SMA) and the dorsal–posterior putamen; the premotor area and the medial putamen; and the primary motor cortex and the lateral putamen ( Leh et al., 2007 ). These findings complement those of an earlier investigation ( Lehéricy et al., 2004 ) showing that the motor cortex and supplementary motor area (SMA) have connections with similar parts of the sensorimotor compartment of the human striatum, whereas the pre-SMA is linked with more rostral parts of the striatum, including the associative compartment. As in the case of the probabilistic DTI investigations of human thalamic connections, these striatal findings are also generally consistent with those derived from tract tracer injection studies in monkey. The DTI demonstration of the fiber pathways and the connections they convey is presently far short of the details elucidated in the experimental animal. Diffusion tensor imaging cannot adequately demonstrate the anatomic reality of crossing fibers ( Wedeen et al., 1995 ), a limitation that has been addressed with high angular resolution methods including diffusion spectrum imaging ( Wedeen et al., 2005 , 2008 ; Schmahmann et al., 2007b ; Fig. 13 ), Q-ball ( Tuch et al., 2002 ) and “HARDI”. The ultimate goal is to provide greater sophistication to anatomic analyses, in order to more closely approximate the details of fiber anatomy and connectional patterns achieved by neuronal tracers. The detection of white matter bundles by DSI has now been validated in the monkey ( Schmahmann et al., 2007b ). This approach may enable connectional neuroanatomical studies in the human brain that more closely approximate the detailed understanding derived from tract tracing studies in the experimental animal, a desirable goal for the field of neuroimaging in the coming years. A novel approach to mapping connections in the human brain is resting state functional connectivity using MRI (fcMRI). This method detects temporal correlations in the spontaneous oscillations of the blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) signal between brain regions while subjects rest quietly in the scanner ( Raichle et al., 2001 ; Greicius et al., 2003 , 2008 ). By showing that specific groups of brain areas show greater activity during rest than during cognitive states, fcMRI has provided support for the existence of a baseline default mode of brain function that is suspended during specific goal-directed behaviors. It has also enabled studies of functional connectivity in distributed networks in the human brain ( van de Ven et al., 2004 ; Margulies et al., 2007 ), including studies specifically of attentional networks in the frontoparietal and cingulo-opercular regions ( Fair et al., 2007 ). Resting state fcMRI has been combined with DTI tractography to provide support for the notion that resting state functional connectivity indeed reflects structural connectivity ( Greicius et al., 2008 ). Voxelwise regression analysis in an fcMRI study of the basal ganglia ( Di Martino et al., 2008 ) provided support for the existence of striatal motor, cognitive and affective divisions, and for the presence of parallel loops as determined previously by anatomical studies in animals and functional imaging studies in humans. Further, fcMRI studies in patients with depression have identified heightened connectivity between the subgenual cingulate gyrus, implicated in depression ( Mayberg et al., 2005 ), and the thalamus ( Greicius et al., 2007 ). These findings from structural and functional MRI provide independent validation of the network model of brain function, and emphasize the degree to which subcortical structures are integral to this notion. Finally, the use of clinical case material, despite all its limitations, remains an invaluable tool for the detailed evaluation of how structure relates to function. Discriminative clinical correlation with cortical, subcortical, and white matter lesions that are defined precisely by structural and functional MRI has provided valuable insights into the organization and function of the human nervous system. It has also reaffirmed notions of the distributed neural circuits and disconnection syndromes, and deepened the interdependence of clinical neuroscience and connectional neuroanatomy.  12. Discussion This overview of the neurology and neuropsychiatry of basal ganglia, thalamus and cerebellum makes it clear that “higher cortical functions” are not exclusively the domain of the cerebral cortex. The principle of organization of cerebral cortex, apparent from tract tracing studies, is that each cortical area has association, striatal, and projection fibers linking it in a precise manner to topographically arranged sectors within other cortical regions and subcortical areas. How does the detailed connectional anatomy of each node manifest functionally and clinically, and what is the specific contribution of each of these subcortical nodes to the generation of the observed behaviors? Interspecies hodological principles appear to be supported in that the monkey anatomy agrees in general with the human clinical repertoire, but do the anatomical arrangements identified in monkey hold true for the human brain? In addressing these issues, we present a conceptual approach that, in our view, captures the essential elements of the structure and function of the distributed neural system. 12.1. Evolutionary considerations Cerebral cortical function may be regarded from the evolutionary perspective as having its origins, both connectionally and functionally, in the subcortical regions. Sensorimotor function, emotion, and rudimentary elements of cognition are governed in lower creatures not by the cerebral cortex, which is either primitive or non-existent, but primarily by subcortical structures – primitive forebears of the basal ganglia, thalamus and cerebellum discussed here, as well as other areas we have not addressed, including the amygdala, hypothalamus and basal forebrain ( Ariëns-Kappers et al., 1936 ; MacLean, 1972 ; Karten, 1997 ). As the cerebral cortex evolved, it became superimposed upon subcortical structures in a systematic and predictable manner ( Karten, 1997 ; Northcutt and Kaas, 1995 ; McHaffie et al., 2005 ). Further, according to the mosaic hypothesis, brain evolved by size change in arrays of functionally connected structures ( Whiting and Barton, 2003 ). This has direct bearing on subcortical structures, as exemplified by the cerebrocerebellar system in which the expansion and elaboration of the prefrontal areas occurred in parallel with that of the lateral cerebellar hemispheres ( Whiting and Barton, 2003 ) and the ventral lateral dentate nucleus ( Leiner et al., 1986 ), and the interconnecting fiber bundles in the medial aspect of the cerebral peduncle ( Ramnani et al., 2006 ). The resulting cortico–cortical and cortico–subcortical interactions, linked together in a precise and topographically arranged manner by the connecting white matter tracts, has enabled a more sophisticated repertoire of behaviors. Against this background, we observe that a cortical area may be defined by its pattern of connections; that lesions within subcortical structures can mimic deficits resulting from lesions of cerebral cortical regions with which they are interconnected; and that there is a qualitative difference between the clinical manifestations of lesions in functionally related areas of different cortical and subcortical nodes. 12.2. Architecture determines function – the theory of the universal transform There is a range of clinical syndromes that results from lesions of different regions within the basal ganglia, thalamus and cerebellum. It appears likely, therefore, that for each node in the distributed neural system, the architecture and connections are reflected in function and clinical manifestations. To account for this, we adopt a reductionist approach derived from an examination of the organizational principles and detailed connectional neuroanatomy. In this view, the architecture and microconnectivity unique to each cortical and subcortical structure facilitates a neural computation, or transform, that is unique to that region. The term “universal” denotes a functional transform at the synaptic/physiological level that is consistent throughout an architectonically defined node. This universal transform theory was originally introduced with reference to the cerebellum. The recognition that cerebellum is engaged in cognitive processing and emotional regulation as well as motor control, mandated a new model that takes these disparate cerebellar roles into consideration. The early notion that the role of the cerebellum is to modulate neurologic function ( Snider, 1950 ; Dow, 1974 ; Heath, 1977 ) is compelling, and we have adopted and amended this as part of a conceptual approach to cerebellar function. We introduced the dysmetria of thought hypothesis ( Schmahmann, 1991 , 1996 , 2000 , 2004 ), which holds that the cerebellum modulates cognitive and emotional processing, as well as motor control. In this view, because cerebellar cortical histology ( Ito, 1984 ; Voogd and Glickstein, 1998 ), and cerebellar corticonuclear relations (the corticonuclear micro-complex; Ito, 1984 ) are essentially uniform throughout, the basic work that cerebellum does in the nervous system should be constant as well, hence the Universal Cerebellar Transform (UCT). The UCT is defined as the cerebellar modulation of behavior, serving as an oscillation dampener, maintaining function automatically around a homeostatic baseline, smoothing out performance in all domains. Anatomical subcircuits in the cerebrocerebellar system, discussed above, enable topographically precise interactions between cerebellum and cerebral cortex. These anatomic subcircuits provide the structural basis for putative functional subunits, and facilitate topographic organization of motor and cognitive function in the cerebellum. The computational nature of the UCT remains a matter of intense debate, including notions of oscillation dampening as defined in our dysmetria of thought hypothesis, and various forms of learning ( Barto et al., 1999 ; Leggio et al., 1999 ; Medina and Mauk, 2000 ; Molinari et al., 2002 ; Bloedel, 2004 ), timing ( Ivry, 1997 ), prediction and preparation ( Courchesne and Allen, 1997 ); sensory data acquisition ( Bower, 1997 ), feedforward internal modeling ( Miall et al., 1993 ; Miall and Reckess, 2002 ; Ito, 2005 ; Ramnani, 2006 ), and others. According to the dysmetria of thought hypothesis, the UCT is the essential functional contribution that the cerebellum makes to the distributed neural system. By corollary, therefore, there should be a Universal Cerebellar Impairment (UCI). This UCI, the hypothesis holds, is dysmetria, a word derived from the Greek term for disordered timing. When the dysmetria involves the motor domain, the various manifestations of ataxia are evident in extremity movements, eye movements, speech and equilibrium. In contrast, when the dysmetria involves non-motor functions subserved by cerebellum, this results in dysmetria of thought, or cognitive dysmetria, and manifests as the various components of the cerebellar cognitive affective syndrome ( Schmahmann and Sherman, 1998 ; Schmahmann, 2000 , 2004 ). This theory of a Universal Cerebellar Transform may be more generalizable, however, and applicable to the striatum (caudate nucleus and putamen). Like the cerebellum, the complex cytoarchitecture of the caudate nucleus and putamen, including the striosome and matrix compartments, is essentially consistent throughout the striatum, although there is further neurochemical differentiation in the ventral parts of the caudate nucleus, putamen, and ventral stria-tum–nucleus accumbens ( Holt et al., 1997 ). With regard to thalamus, there may be an overarching commonality to thalamic function. Nadeau and Crosson (1997) suggest that thalamus is active in selecting specific neuronal networks in the cortical projection fields of thalamic nuclei, acting as a gate regulating attentional processes. By enabling specific types of working memory, for example, thalamus facilitates selective engagement in different cognitive processes. But the histology of thalamic nuclei, like the histology of the cerebral cortex, varies from one nucleus to another. In the same way, then, that the specific contribution, i.e., the proposed universal transform, of prefrontal cortical area 45 is likely to differ from that of area 39 in the parietal lobe, or from primary visual area 17, subdivisions of the medial dorsal thalamic nucleus are likely to contribute in a different manner than the pulvinar medialis nucleus, or the magnocellular layer of the lateral geniculate nucleus. Within an anatomically homogenous, but connectionally complex area, such as pulvinar medialis, for example, the transform should be constant throughout the nucleus and applied to anatomically segregated domains of cognitive processing. Such a nucleus-specific functional specialization has been proposed in the case of the pulvinar. Robinson (1993) hypothesizes that the pulvinar functions as an early center for the generation of visual salience by the suppression of noise and the enhancement of significant signals, enabling cortical shifts of attention and response specification. This notion, likely applicable to the pulvinar inferior that has strong connections with visual cortices ( Yeterian and Pandya, 1997 ; Beck and Kaas, 1998 ), is consistent with our universal transform concept derived from a consideration of neuronal architecture and connections. The precise nature of the transforms of these thalamic nuclei, both at the level of the physiological transform, and the manner in which behavior is influenced, remains a matter of speculation. 12.3. Connections define behavior The connections that link the multiple geographically distributed and architectonically defined nodes in the cerebral cortex and subcortical areas. Indeed, a cortical area can be defined by its pattern of subcortical and cortical connections. Whereas architecture may determine the transform of each node, connectional patterns are likely to define behavior. Each node in the distributed neural system are highly organized required to contribute its unique transform in order to support the ultimate behavior pattern, falling within any of the domains of sensorimotor processing, cognition or emotion. Further, each node may be engaged in a number of different domains of behavior, which are subserved by anatomically distinct subpopulations of neurons within the node. Clinical manifestations of lesions in the different nodes of the distributed neural system are therefore determined by two central factors – which node is interfered with, and which subpopulation of neurons within that node, or its connecting axons, are destroyed. Centuries of investigation have led to an understanding of the functions subserved by different regions of the cerebral cortex, and cerebral cortical areas have come to be regarded as the parent nodes of the distributed networks. Based on the principles of organization of the cortical connections that we have outlined ( Schmahmann and Pandya, 2006 ), a lesion of cortex, even if restricted exquisitely to the cortex, disconnects the cortex from all the other interconnected cortical and subcortical areas, because the neurons that provide the interconnecting axons are destroyed. The notion of Wernicke and Geschwind that a lesion in a cortical association area produces a disconnection syndrome by preventing cortical areas from communicating with each other is thus extended from the cortex to the subcortical areas. A cortical lesion may thus be expected to have a sizeable behavioral impact not only because its unique transform has been damaged, but also because widespread connections are affected throughout the particular distributed neural network for which that cortical area serves as the parent node. The detailed clinical neurology of white matter lesions is beyond the scope of the present consideration, but lesions of white matter fiber pathways themselves produce clinical consequences. This point is illustrated by dementia that occurs in the setting of disseminated white matter disease ( Filley, 2001 ), post-stroke language recovery that depends on involvement of the subcallosal fasciculus of Muratoff ( Naeser et al., 1989 ), and parietal pseudothalamic pain from white matter lesions that disconnect SII cortex from thalamus ( Schmahmann and Leifer, 1992 ). The clinical deficits from loss of the white matter tracts linking different nodes may differ from those following lesions of the cortex or sub-cortical nodes for a number of reasons. White matter lesions may disrupt information destined for more than one node; they may involve association, projection and striatal fibers; and they may affect more than one functional domain. Involvement of afferent versus efferent fibers may have clinical significance – striatal fibers are unidirectional from cortex to caudate–putamen; the middle cerebellar peduncle is essentially exclusively afferent from pons to cerebellum, whereas the superior cerebellar peduncle is predominantly efferent from cerebellum to the cerebral hemispheres; and the thalamic peduncles are bi-directional. Fiber tract disruptions are often incomplete by virtue of the anatomical arrangement of the pathways and the pathologic conditions that affect white matter, and the effects of partial versus complete disconnection are likely to be pertinent. 12.4. Topography of function in subcortical nodes – functional and clinical implications The foregoing discussion sets the stage for considering the two principles that we postulate govern the clinical manifestations resulting from lesions of the subcortical nodes – the topography of the lesion within the node (i.e., the behavioral domain affected), and the transform of the affected node. This can be illustrated using selected clinical examples. Motor impairment may result from focal lesions in the precentral gyrus, basal ganglia, thalamus and cerebellum. Further, the nature of the clinical impairment differs depending on the node affected. The clumsy or paralyzed arm results from stroke involving the upper extremity representation in the precentral gyrus ( Takahashi et al., 2002 ; Castaldo et al., 2003 ; Maeder-Ingvar et al., 2005 ); dystonia and slowness of movement results from lesions of the motor regions of the putamen ( Bhatia and Marsden, 1994 ); the motor cerebellum in the anterior lobe produces incoordination of movement ( Holmes, 1917 ; Schmahmann, 2007 ); and the ventral lateral thalamic nucleus lesion may produce ataxic hemiparesis ( Dejerine and Roussy, 1906 ; Caplan et al., 1988 ; Murthy, 1988 ). The most prolonged and unremitting paralysis occurs following hemispheric lesions ( Shelton and Reding, 2001 ; Ng et al., 2007 ) that destroy not just corticospinal fibers, but the fiber tracts linking motor cortices with movement related neuronal populations in the thalamus and striatum as well ( Schmahmann and Pandya, 2006 ). The clinical impairments following involvement of the different cortical and subcortical components of the motor system make the point that each node contributes in a unique manner to the motor program, and all contributing nodes are required to produce the normal behavior. Cognitive impairments in the executive domain result from lesions of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ( Stuss and Benson, 1984 ) and its interconnected areas in the dorsolateral caudate nucleus ( Caplan et al., 1990 ), medial dorsal thalamic nucleus ( Bogousslavsky et al., 1988 ), and crus I and II of cerebellum ( Schmahmann and Sherman, 1998 ). Visual spatial impairments follow lesions of the posterior parietal cortex ( Mesulam, 1981 ), the head of the caudate nucleus ( Caplan et al., 1990 ), thalamus including the lateral posterior thalamic nucleus and pulvinar ( Watson and Heilman, 1979 ), and the posterior lobe of the cerebellum ( Schmahmann and Sherman, 1998 ). Disorders of affect, drive and motivation occur following lesions of the cingulate gyrus ( Devinsky and Luciano, 1997 ), the ventral striatum ( Levy and Dubois, 2006 ), the anterior thalamus ( Graff-Radford et al., 1985 ; Lisovoski et al., 1993 ), and the cerebellar vermis ( Pollack, 1997 ; Schmahmann and Sherman, 1998 ; Levisohn et al., 2000 ; Riva and Giorgi, 2000 ; Schmahmann et al., 2007c ). Cognitive impairments following these subcortical lesions have been conceptualized as follows. The slowness of movement (bradykinesia), thought (bradyphrenia), and mnemonic retrieval that characterize lesions of the basal ganglia suggest that the striatal deficits impair the initiation of behavior, and the ability to chunk information into manageable quanta ( Graybiel, 1998 ). The thalamus is thought to contribute a specific alerting or engagement response to the different domains of function to which it contributes. And the cerebellar role in automatization and optimizing behavior around a homeostatic baseline has been encapsulated in the dysmetria of thought theory – applying the same transform to cognition and emotion as it does to motor control ( Schmahmann, 1991 , 1996 , 2000 , 2004 ). Thus, a cortical area can be defined by its pattern of subcortical (as well as cortical) connections; lesions of subcortical structures mimic deficits resulting from lesions of the cerebral cortex; and there are qualitative differences between the clinical manifestations of lesions in functionally related areas of different cortical and subcortical nodes. 12.5. The problem of segregated loops – the role of the cerebral cortex Destruction of selected neuronal populations within subcortical nodes produces disorders of sensorimotor or higher order behavior because these lesions disrupt the interaction of domain-specific subcortical neuronal ensembles with the sensorimotor, association, or paralimbic cortical areas that govern these behaviors. But the existence of multiple parallel loops linking the cerebral cortex with subcortical nodes leads to a conceptual problem. Cortical connections with the striatum, thalamus and pontocerebellar system appear to be arranged in parallel, respecting domain specificity. There is no cross-modal communication within subcortical nodes (e.g., thalamic nuclei do not communicate with each other). Further, present evidence indicates that communication between subcortical nodes is also domain-specific, although we are mindful of possible exceptions as noted in the striatonigostriatal system ( Haber et al., 2000 ). Hence the difficulty. There is essentially no intranodal communication, and internodal communication is domain-specific; but complex behavior requires interactions between different functional domains. At some point in the anatomy of cognition, mood must inform movement, strategy must rely on memory, and so on. As emphasized early on by Franz Joseph Gall (1758–1828), Theodore Meynert (1833–1892), Wernicke and others, this is the role of the cerebral cortical association areas that “serve as the repository of past impressions arising through the afferent channels via the sensory spheres, and as the essential substratum of memory in integration or building of complex processes” (Paul Flechsig [1847–1929], translated and quoted in Barker, 1899 , p. 1070). The problem of segregated loops is resolved by the cerebral cortex that, alone among the many nodes of the distributed neural system, has the privilege of facilitating the interaction and integration of information between multiple domains in a feedforward and feedback manner. This capability is facilitated by the association fiber pathways, which are themselves exclusive to the cerebral cortex. 12.6. Human brain connectivity Knowledge of the anatomy of cortico-cortical and cortico-subcortical connections and fiber pathways of the brain is based largely on tract tracing studies in monkey. Clinical syndromes in patients are in good agreement with conclusions derived from these anatomical investigations, providing some confidence that the anatomical arrangements are likely to be generally preserved in the human. Thus, by their consistency with monkey anatomy, the clinical syndromes help clarify human brain hodology. The greater size, anatomic complexity, and functional elaboration of the human brain make it clear that this inter-species comparison may be erroneous, however, and there is a compelling need to study the anatomy and functional organization of the human brain directly, a challenge that has faced neuroscience since the ancient Greeks. The ability of MRI to identify small, acute focal lesions, together with sophisticated tools of clinical neurology and neuropsychology, enables the structure–function correlations discussed in this analysis. The advent of diffusion tensor imaging (DTI, Basser et al., 1994 ) makes it possible to visualize fiber tracts in the human brain ( Wedeen et al., 1995 ; Conturo et al., 1999 ; Catani et al., 2002 ) in a manner that may translate the findings from monkey to human. This technology is now being utilized to demonstrate some of the evolutionary principles described above, as in the case of the expansion in human of the prefrontal component of the cerebral peduncle fibers that contribute to the corticopontine pathways ( Ramnani et al., 2006 ). Connectional anatomical investigations using DTI probabilistic mapping have also been initiated for the study of cortical connections with subcortical structures. Studies of thalamic interactions with the cerebral cortex report that a large medial, dorsal region of the thalamus had highly probable prefrontal and temporal connections; a ventral posterior thalamic region had strong probability of somatosensory connections; a lateral region had high probability of motor cortical connectivity; and a posterior region was connected to the posterior parietal cortex and extrastriate cortices ( Behrens et al., 2003 ; Johansen-Berg et al., 2005 ). These findings are in general agreement with those of tracer studies in monkey, as discussed in detail above. DTI tractography has also been performed in the analysis of human corticostriatal projections. This approach revealed that the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is linked with the dorsal–posterior caudate nucleus, and the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex is linked with the ventral–anterior caudate nucleus. For the putamen, connections were defined between the supplementary motor area (SMA) and the dorsal–posterior putamen; the premotor area and the medial putamen; and the primary motor cortex and the lateral putamen ( Leh et al., 2007 ). These findings complement those of an earlier investigation ( Lehéricy et al., 2004 ) showing that the motor cortex and supplementary motor area (SMA) have connections with similar parts of the sensorimotor compartment of the human striatum, whereas the pre-SMA is linked with more rostral parts of the striatum, including the associative compartment. As in the case of the probabilistic DTI investigations of human thalamic connections, these striatal findings are also generally consistent with those derived from tract tracer injection studies in monkey. The DTI demonstration of the fiber pathways and the connections they convey is presently far short of the details elucidated in the experimental animal. Diffusion tensor imaging cannot adequately demonstrate the anatomic reality of crossing fibers ( Wedeen et al., 1995 ), a limitation that has been addressed with high angular resolution methods including diffusion spectrum imaging ( Wedeen et al., 2005 , 2008 ; Schmahmann et al., 2007b ; Fig. 13 ), Q-ball ( Tuch et al., 2002 ) and “HARDI”. The ultimate goal is to provide greater sophistication to anatomic analyses, in order to more closely approximate the details of fiber anatomy and connectional patterns achieved by neuronal tracers. The detection of white matter bundles by DSI has now been validated in the monkey ( Schmahmann et al., 2007b ). This approach may enable connectional neuroanatomical studies in the human brain that more closely approximate the detailed understanding derived from tract tracing studies in the experimental animal, a desirable goal for the field of neuroimaging in the coming years. A novel approach to mapping connections in the human brain is resting state functional connectivity using MRI (fcMRI). This method detects temporal correlations in the spontaneous oscillations of the blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) signal between brain regions while subjects rest quietly in the scanner ( Raichle et al., 2001 ; Greicius et al., 2003 , 2008 ). By showing that specific groups of brain areas show greater activity during rest than during cognitive states, fcMRI has provided support for the existence of a baseline default mode of brain function that is suspended during specific goal-directed behaviors. It has also enabled studies of functional connectivity in distributed networks in the human brain ( van de Ven et al., 2004 ; Margulies et al., 2007 ), including studies specifically of attentional networks in the frontoparietal and cingulo-opercular regions ( Fair et al., 2007 ). Resting state fcMRI has been combined with DTI tractography to provide support for the notion that resting state functional connectivity indeed reflects structural connectivity ( Greicius et al., 2008 ). Voxelwise regression analysis in an fcMRI study of the basal ganglia ( Di Martino et al., 2008 ) provided support for the existence of striatal motor, cognitive and affective divisions, and for the presence of parallel loops as determined previously by anatomical studies in animals and functional imaging studies in humans. Further, fcMRI studies in patients with depression have identified heightened connectivity between the subgenual cingulate gyrus, implicated in depression ( Mayberg et al., 2005 ), and the thalamus ( Greicius et al., 2007 ). These findings from structural and functional MRI provide independent validation of the network model of brain function, and emphasize the degree to which subcortical structures are integral to this notion. Finally, the use of clinical case material, despite all its limitations, remains an invaluable tool for the detailed evaluation of how structure relates to function. Discriminative clinical correlation with cortical, subcortical, and white matter lesions that are defined precisely by structural and functional MRI has provided valuable insights into the organization and function of the human nervous system. It has also reaffirmed notions of the distributed neural circuits and disconnection syndromes, and deepened the interdependence of clinical neuroscience and connectional neuroanatomy.  12.1. Evolutionary considerations Cerebral cortical function may be regarded from the evolutionary perspective as having its origins, both connectionally and functionally, in the subcortical regions. Sensorimotor function, emotion, and rudimentary elements of cognition are governed in lower creatures not by the cerebral cortex, which is either primitive or non-existent, but primarily by subcortical structures – primitive forebears of the basal ganglia, thalamus and cerebellum discussed here, as well as other areas we have not addressed, including the amygdala, hypothalamus and basal forebrain ( Ariëns-Kappers et al., 1936 ; MacLean, 1972 ; Karten, 1997 ). As the cerebral cortex evolved, it became superimposed upon subcortical structures in a systematic and predictable manner ( Karten, 1997 ; Northcutt and Kaas, 1995 ; McHaffie et al., 2005 ). Further, according to the mosaic hypothesis, brain evolved by size change in arrays of functionally connected structures ( Whiting and Barton, 2003 ). This has direct bearing on subcortical structures, as exemplified by the cerebrocerebellar system in which the expansion and elaboration of the prefrontal areas occurred in parallel with that of the lateral cerebellar hemispheres ( Whiting and Barton, 2003 ) and the ventral lateral dentate nucleus ( Leiner et al., 1986 ), and the interconnecting fiber bundles in the medial aspect of the cerebral peduncle ( Ramnani et al., 2006 ). The resulting cortico–cortical and cortico–subcortical interactions, linked together in a precise and topographically arranged manner by the connecting white matter tracts, has enabled a more sophisticated repertoire of behaviors. Against this background, we observe that a cortical area may be defined by its pattern of connections; that lesions within subcortical structures can mimic deficits resulting from lesions of cerebral cortical regions with which they are interconnected; and that there is a qualitative difference between the clinical manifestations of lesions in functionally related areas of different cortical and subcortical nodes.  12.1. Evolutionary considerations Cerebral cortical function may be regarded from the evolutionary perspective as having its origins, both connectionally and functionally, in the subcortical regions. Sensorimotor function, emotion, and rudimentary elements of cognition are governed in lower creatures not by the cerebral cortex, which is either primitive or non-existent, but primarily by subcortical structures – primitive forebears of the basal ganglia, thalamus and cerebellum discussed here, as well as other areas we have not addressed, including the amygdala, hypothalamus and basal forebrain ( Ariëns-Kappers et al., 1936 ; MacLean, 1972 ; Karten, 1997 ). As the cerebral cortex evolved, it became superimposed upon subcortical structures in a systematic and predictable manner ( Karten, 1997 ; Northcutt and Kaas, 1995 ; McHaffie et al., 2005 ). Further, according to the mosaic hypothesis, brain evolved by size change in arrays of functionally connected structures ( Whiting and Barton, 2003 ). This has direct bearing on subcortical structures, as exemplified by the cerebrocerebellar system in which the expansion and elaboration of the prefrontal areas occurred in parallel with that of the lateral cerebellar hemispheres ( Whiting and Barton, 2003 ) and the ventral lateral dentate nucleus ( Leiner et al., 1986 ), and the interconnecting fiber bundles in the medial aspect of the cerebral peduncle ( Ramnani et al., 2006 ). The resulting cortico–cortical and cortico–subcortical interactions, linked together in a precise and topographically arranged manner by the connecting white matter tracts, has enabled a more sophisticated repertoire of behaviors. Against this background, we observe that a cortical area may be defined by its pattern of connections; that lesions within subcortical structures can mimic deficits resulting from lesions of cerebral cortical regions with which they are interconnected; and that there is a qualitative difference between the clinical manifestations of lesions in functionally related areas of different cortical and subcortical nodes.  12.2. Architecture determines function – the theory of the universal transform There is a range of clinical syndromes that results from lesions of different regions within the basal ganglia, thalamus and cerebellum. It appears likely, therefore, that for each node in the distributed neural system, the architecture and connections are reflected in function and clinical manifestations. To account for this, we adopt a reductionist approach derived from an examination of the organizational principles and detailed connectional neuroanatomy. In this view, the architecture and microconnectivity unique to each cortical and subcortical structure facilitates a neural computation, or transform, that is unique to that region. The term “universal” denotes a functional transform at the synaptic/physiological level that is consistent throughout an architectonically defined node. This universal transform theory was originally introduced with reference to the cerebellum. The recognition that cerebellum is engaged in cognitive processing and emotional regulation as well as motor control, mandated a new model that takes these disparate cerebellar roles into consideration. The early notion that the role of the cerebellum is to modulate neurologic function ( Snider, 1950 ; Dow, 1974 ; Heath, 1977 ) is compelling, and we have adopted and amended this as part of a conceptual approach to cerebellar function. We introduced the dysmetria of thought hypothesis ( Schmahmann, 1991 , 1996 , 2000 , 2004 ), which holds that the cerebellum modulates cognitive and emotional processing, as well as motor control. In this view, because cerebellar cortical histology ( Ito, 1984 ; Voogd and Glickstein, 1998 ), and cerebellar corticonuclear relations (the corticonuclear micro-complex; Ito, 1984 ) are essentially uniform throughout, the basic work that cerebellum does in the nervous system should be constant as well, hence the Universal Cerebellar Transform (UCT). The UCT is defined as the cerebellar modulation of behavior, serving as an oscillation dampener, maintaining function automatically around a homeostatic baseline, smoothing out performance in all domains. Anatomical subcircuits in the cerebrocerebellar system, discussed above, enable topographically precise interactions between cerebellum and cerebral cortex. These anatomic subcircuits provide the structural basis for putative functional subunits, and facilitate topographic organization of motor and cognitive function in the cerebellum. The computational nature of the UCT remains a matter of intense debate, including notions of oscillation dampening as defined in our dysmetria of thought hypothesis, and various forms of learning ( Barto et al., 1999 ; Leggio et al., 1999 ; Medina and Mauk, 2000 ; Molinari et al., 2002 ; Bloedel, 2004 ), timing ( Ivry, 1997 ), prediction and preparation ( Courchesne and Allen, 1997 ); sensory data acquisition ( Bower, 1997 ), feedforward internal modeling ( Miall et al., 1993 ; Miall and Reckess, 2002 ; Ito, 2005 ; Ramnani, 2006 ), and others. According to the dysmetria of thought hypothesis, the UCT is the essential functional contribution that the cerebellum makes to the distributed neural system. By corollary, therefore, there should be a Universal Cerebellar Impairment (UCI). This UCI, the hypothesis holds, is dysmetria, a word derived from the Greek term for disordered timing. When the dysmetria involves the motor domain, the various manifestations of ataxia are evident in extremity movements, eye movements, speech and equilibrium. In contrast, when the dysmetria involves non-motor functions subserved by cerebellum, this results in dysmetria of thought, or cognitive dysmetria, and manifests as the various components of the cerebellar cognitive affective syndrome ( Schmahmann and Sherman, 1998 ; Schmahmann, 2000 , 2004 ). This theory of a Universal Cerebellar Transform may be more generalizable, however, and applicable to the striatum (caudate nucleus and putamen). Like the cerebellum, the complex cytoarchitecture of the caudate nucleus and putamen, including the striosome and matrix compartments, is essentially consistent throughout the striatum, although there is further neurochemical differentiation in the ventral parts of the caudate nucleus, putamen, and ventral stria-tum–nucleus accumbens ( Holt et al., 1997 ). With regard to thalamus, there may be an overarching commonality to thalamic function. Nadeau and Crosson (1997) suggest that thalamus is active in selecting specific neuronal networks in the cortical projection fields of thalamic nuclei, acting as a gate regulating attentional processes. By enabling specific types of working memory, for example, thalamus facilitates selective engagement in different cognitive processes. But the histology of thalamic nuclei, like the histology of the cerebral cortex, varies from one nucleus to another. In the same way, then, that the specific contribution, i.e., the proposed universal transform, of prefrontal cortical area 45 is likely to differ from that of area 39 in the parietal lobe, or from primary visual area 17, subdivisions of the medial dorsal thalamic nucleus are likely to contribute in a different manner than the pulvinar medialis nucleus, or the magnocellular layer of the lateral geniculate nucleus. Within an anatomically homogenous, but connectionally complex area, such as pulvinar medialis, for example, the transform should be constant throughout the nucleus and applied to anatomically segregated domains of cognitive processing. Such a nucleus-specific functional specialization has been proposed in the case of the pulvinar. Robinson (1993) hypothesizes that the pulvinar functions as an early center for the generation of visual salience by the suppression of noise and the enhancement of significant signals, enabling cortical shifts of attention and response specification. This notion, likely applicable to the pulvinar inferior that has strong connections with visual cortices ( Yeterian and Pandya, 1997 ; Beck and Kaas, 1998 ), is consistent with our universal transform concept derived from a consideration of neuronal architecture and connections. The precise nature of the transforms of these thalamic nuclei, both at the level of the physiological transform, and the manner in which behavior is influenced, remains a matter of speculation.  12.2. Architecture determines function – the theory of the universal transform There is a range of clinical syndromes that results from lesions of different regions within the basal ganglia, thalamus and cerebellum. It appears likely, therefore, that for each node in the distributed neural system, the architecture and connections are reflected in function and clinical manifestations. To account for this, we adopt a reductionist approach derived from an examination of the organizational principles and detailed connectional neuroanatomy. In this view, the architecture and microconnectivity unique to each cortical and subcortical structure facilitates a neural computation, or transform, that is unique to that region. The term “universal” denotes a functional transform at the synaptic/physiological level that is consistent throughout an architectonically defined node. This universal transform theory was originally introduced with reference to the cerebellum. The recognition that cerebellum is engaged in cognitive processing and emotional regulation as well as motor control, mandated a new model that takes these disparate cerebellar roles into consideration. The early notion that the role of the cerebellum is to modulate neurologic function ( Snider, 1950 ; Dow, 1974 ; Heath, 1977 ) is compelling, and we have adopted and amended this as part of a conceptual approach to cerebellar function. We introduced the dysmetria of thought hypothesis ( Schmahmann, 1991 , 1996 , 2000 , 2004 ), which holds that the cerebellum modulates cognitive and emotional processing, as well as motor control. In this view, because cerebellar cortical histology ( Ito, 1984 ; Voogd and Glickstein, 1998 ), and cerebellar corticonuclear relations (the corticonuclear micro-complex; Ito, 1984 ) are essentially uniform throughout, the basic work that cerebellum does in the nervous system should be constant as well, hence the Universal Cerebellar Transform (UCT). The UCT is defined as the cerebellar modulation of behavior, serving as an oscillation dampener, maintaining function automatically around a homeostatic baseline, smoothing out performance in all domains. Anatomical subcircuits in the cerebrocerebellar system, discussed above, enable topographically precise interactions between cerebellum and cerebral cortex. These anatomic subcircuits provide the structural basis for putative functional subunits, and facilitate topographic organization of motor and cognitive function in the cerebellum. The computational nature of the UCT remains a matter of intense debate, including notions of oscillation dampening as defined in our dysmetria of thought hypothesis, and various forms of learning ( Barto et al., 1999 ; Leggio et al., 1999 ; Medina and Mauk, 2000 ; Molinari et al., 2002 ; Bloedel, 2004 ), timing ( Ivry, 1997 ), prediction and preparation ( Courchesne and Allen, 1997 ); sensory data acquisition ( Bower, 1997 ), feedforward internal modeling ( Miall et al., 1993 ; Miall and Reckess, 2002 ; Ito, 2005 ; Ramnani, 2006 ), and others. According to the dysmetria of thought hypothesis, the UCT is the essential functional contribution that the cerebellum makes to the distributed neural system. By corollary, therefore, there should be a Universal Cerebellar Impairment (UCI). This UCI, the hypothesis holds, is dysmetria, a word derived from the Greek term for disordered timing. When the dysmetria involves the motor domain, the various manifestations of ataxia are evident in extremity movements, eye movements, speech and equilibrium. In contrast, when the dysmetria involves non-motor functions subserved by cerebellum, this results in dysmetria of thought, or cognitive dysmetria, and manifests as the various components of the cerebellar cognitive affective syndrome ( Schmahmann and Sherman, 1998 ; Schmahmann, 2000 , 2004 ). This theory of a Universal Cerebellar Transform may be more generalizable, however, and applicable to the striatum (caudate nucleus and putamen). Like the cerebellum, the complex cytoarchitecture of the caudate nucleus and putamen, including the striosome and matrix compartments, is essentially consistent throughout the striatum, although there is further neurochemical differentiation in the ventral parts of the caudate nucleus, putamen, and ventral stria-tum–nucleus accumbens ( Holt et al., 1997 ). With regard to thalamus, there may be an overarching commonality to thalamic function. Nadeau and Crosson (1997) suggest that thalamus is active in selecting specific neuronal networks in the cortical projection fields of thalamic nuclei, acting as a gate regulating attentional processes. By enabling specific types of working memory, for example, thalamus facilitates selective engagement in different cognitive processes. But the histology of thalamic nuclei, like the histology of the cerebral cortex, varies from one nucleus to another. In the same way, then, that the specific contribution, i.e., the proposed universal transform, of prefrontal cortical area 45 is likely to differ from that of area 39 in the parietal lobe, or from primary visual area 17, subdivisions of the medial dorsal thalamic nucleus are likely to contribute in a different manner than the pulvinar medialis nucleus, or the magnocellular layer of the lateral geniculate nucleus. Within an anatomically homogenous, but connectionally complex area, such as pulvinar medialis, for example, the transform should be constant throughout the nucleus and applied to anatomically segregated domains of cognitive processing. Such a nucleus-specific functional specialization has been proposed in the case of the pulvinar. Robinson (1993) hypothesizes that the pulvinar functions as an early center for the generation of visual salience by the suppression of noise and the enhancement of significant signals, enabling cortical shifts of attention and response specification. This notion, likely applicable to the pulvinar inferior that has strong connections with visual cortices ( Yeterian and Pandya, 1997 ; Beck and Kaas, 1998 ), is consistent with our universal transform concept derived from a consideration of neuronal architecture and connections. The precise nature of the transforms of these thalamic nuclei, both at the level of the physiological transform, and the manner in which behavior is influenced, remains a matter of speculation.  12.3. Connections define behavior The connections that link the multiple geographically distributed and architectonically defined nodes in the cerebral cortex and subcortical areas. Indeed, a cortical area can be defined by its pattern of subcortical and cortical connections. Whereas architecture may determine the transform of each node, connectional patterns are likely to define behavior. Each node in the distributed neural system are highly organized required to contribute its unique transform in order to support the ultimate behavior pattern, falling within any of the domains of sensorimotor processing, cognition or emotion. Further, each node may be engaged in a number of different domains of behavior, which are subserved by anatomically distinct subpopulations of neurons within the node. Clinical manifestations of lesions in the different nodes of the distributed neural system are therefore determined by two central factors – which node is interfered with, and which subpopulation of neurons within that node, or its connecting axons, are destroyed. Centuries of investigation have led to an understanding of the functions subserved by different regions of the cerebral cortex, and cerebral cortical areas have come to be regarded as the parent nodes of the distributed networks. Based on the principles of organization of the cortical connections that we have outlined ( Schmahmann and Pandya, 2006 ), a lesion of cortex, even if restricted exquisitely to the cortex, disconnects the cortex from all the other interconnected cortical and subcortical areas, because the neurons that provide the interconnecting axons are destroyed. The notion of Wernicke and Geschwind that a lesion in a cortical association area produces a disconnection syndrome by preventing cortical areas from communicating with each other is thus extended from the cortex to the subcortical areas. A cortical lesion may thus be expected to have a sizeable behavioral impact not only because its unique transform has been damaged, but also because widespread connections are affected throughout the particular distributed neural network for which that cortical area serves as the parent node. The detailed clinical neurology of white matter lesions is beyond the scope of the present consideration, but lesions of white matter fiber pathways themselves produce clinical consequences. This point is illustrated by dementia that occurs in the setting of disseminated white matter disease ( Filley, 2001 ), post-stroke language recovery that depends on involvement of the subcallosal fasciculus of Muratoff ( Naeser et al., 1989 ), and parietal pseudothalamic pain from white matter lesions that disconnect SII cortex from thalamus ( Schmahmann and Leifer, 1992 ). The clinical deficits from loss of the white matter tracts linking different nodes may differ from those following lesions of the cortex or sub-cortical nodes for a number of reasons. White matter lesions may disrupt information destined for more than one node; they may involve association, projection and striatal fibers; and they may affect more than one functional domain. Involvement of afferent versus efferent fibers may have clinical significance – striatal fibers are unidirectional from cortex to caudate–putamen; the middle cerebellar peduncle is essentially exclusively afferent from pons to cerebellum, whereas the superior cerebellar peduncle is predominantly efferent from cerebellum to the cerebral hemispheres; and the thalamic peduncles are bi-directional. Fiber tract disruptions are often incomplete by virtue of the anatomical arrangement of the pathways and the pathologic conditions that affect white matter, and the effects of partial versus complete disconnection are likely to be pertinent.  12.3. Connections define behavior The connections that link the multiple geographically distributed and architectonically defined nodes in the cerebral cortex and subcortical areas. Indeed, a cortical area can be defined by its pattern of subcortical and cortical connections. Whereas architecture may determine the transform of each node, connectional patterns are likely to define behavior. Each node in the distributed neural system are highly organized required to contribute its unique transform in order to support the ultimate behavior pattern, falling within any of the domains of sensorimotor processing, cognition or emotion. Further, each node may be engaged in a number of different domains of behavior, which are subserved by anatomically distinct subpopulations of neurons within the node. Clinical manifestations of lesions in the different nodes of the distributed neural system are therefore determined by two central factors – which node is interfered with, and which subpopulation of neurons within that node, or its connecting axons, are destroyed. Centuries of investigation have led to an understanding of the functions subserved by different regions of the cerebral cortex, and cerebral cortical areas have come to be regarded as the parent nodes of the distributed networks. Based on the principles of organization of the cortical connections that we have outlined ( Schmahmann and Pandya, 2006 ), a lesion of cortex, even if restricted exquisitely to the cortex, disconnects the cortex from all the other interconnected cortical and subcortical areas, because the neurons that provide the interconnecting axons are destroyed. The notion of Wernicke and Geschwind that a lesion in a cortical association area produces a disconnection syndrome by preventing cortical areas from communicating with each other is thus extended from the cortex to the subcortical areas. A cortical lesion may thus be expected to have a sizeable behavioral impact not only because its unique transform has been damaged, but also because widespread connections are affected throughout the particular distributed neural network for which that cortical area serves as the parent node. The detailed clinical neurology of white matter lesions is beyond the scope of the present consideration, but lesions of white matter fiber pathways themselves produce clinical consequences. This point is illustrated by dementia that occurs in the setting of disseminated white matter disease ( Filley, 2001 ), post-stroke language recovery that depends on involvement of the subcallosal fasciculus of Muratoff ( Naeser et al., 1989 ), and parietal pseudothalamic pain from white matter lesions that disconnect SII cortex from thalamus ( Schmahmann and Leifer, 1992 ). The clinical deficits from loss of the white matter tracts linking different nodes may differ from those following lesions of the cortex or sub-cortical nodes for a number of reasons. White matter lesions may disrupt information destined for more than one node; they may involve association, projection and striatal fibers; and they may affect more than one functional domain. Involvement of afferent versus efferent fibers may have clinical significance – striatal fibers are unidirectional from cortex to caudate–putamen; the middle cerebellar peduncle is essentially exclusively afferent from pons to cerebellum, whereas the superior cerebellar peduncle is predominantly efferent from cerebellum to the cerebral hemispheres; and the thalamic peduncles are bi-directional. Fiber tract disruptions are often incomplete by virtue of the anatomical arrangement of the pathways and the pathologic conditions that affect white matter, and the effects of partial versus complete disconnection are likely to be pertinent.  12.4. Topography of function in subcortical nodes – functional and clinical implications The foregoing discussion sets the stage for considering the two principles that we postulate govern the clinical manifestations resulting from lesions of the subcortical nodes – the topography of the lesion within the node (i.e., the behavioral domain affected), and the transform of the affected node. This can be illustrated using selected clinical examples. Motor impairment may result from focal lesions in the precentral gyrus, basal ganglia, thalamus and cerebellum. Further, the nature of the clinical impairment differs depending on the node affected. The clumsy or paralyzed arm results from stroke involving the upper extremity representation in the precentral gyrus ( Takahashi et al., 2002 ; Castaldo et al., 2003 ; Maeder-Ingvar et al., 2005 ); dystonia and slowness of movement results from lesions of the motor regions of the putamen ( Bhatia and Marsden, 1994 ); the motor cerebellum in the anterior lobe produces incoordination of movement ( Holmes, 1917 ; Schmahmann, 2007 ); and the ventral lateral thalamic nucleus lesion may produce ataxic hemiparesis ( Dejerine and Roussy, 1906 ; Caplan et al., 1988 ; Murthy, 1988 ). The most prolonged and unremitting paralysis occurs following hemispheric lesions ( Shelton and Reding, 2001 ; Ng et al., 2007 ) that destroy not just corticospinal fibers, but the fiber tracts linking motor cortices with movement related neuronal populations in the thalamus and striatum as well ( Schmahmann and Pandya, 2006 ). The clinical impairments following involvement of the different cortical and subcortical components of the motor system make the point that each node contributes in a unique manner to the motor program, and all contributing nodes are required to produce the normal behavior. Cognitive impairments in the executive domain result from lesions of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ( Stuss and Benson, 1984 ) and its interconnected areas in the dorsolateral caudate nucleus ( Caplan et al., 1990 ), medial dorsal thalamic nucleus ( Bogousslavsky et al., 1988 ), and crus I and II of cerebellum ( Schmahmann and Sherman, 1998 ). Visual spatial impairments follow lesions of the posterior parietal cortex ( Mesulam, 1981 ), the head of the caudate nucleus ( Caplan et al., 1990 ), thalamus including the lateral posterior thalamic nucleus and pulvinar ( Watson and Heilman, 1979 ), and the posterior lobe of the cerebellum ( Schmahmann and Sherman, 1998 ). Disorders of affect, drive and motivation occur following lesions of the cingulate gyrus ( Devinsky and Luciano, 1997 ), the ventral striatum ( Levy and Dubois, 2006 ), the anterior thalamus ( Graff-Radford et al., 1985 ; Lisovoski et al., 1993 ), and the cerebellar vermis ( Pollack, 1997 ; Schmahmann and Sherman, 1998 ; Levisohn et al., 2000 ; Riva and Giorgi, 2000 ; Schmahmann et al., 2007c ). Cognitive impairments following these subcortical lesions have been conceptualized as follows. The slowness of movement (bradykinesia), thought (bradyphrenia), and mnemonic retrieval that characterize lesions of the basal ganglia suggest that the striatal deficits impair the initiation of behavior, and the ability to chunk information into manageable quanta ( Graybiel, 1998 ). The thalamus is thought to contribute a specific alerting or engagement response to the different domains of function to which it contributes. And the cerebellar role in automatization and optimizing behavior around a homeostatic baseline has been encapsulated in the dysmetria of thought theory – applying the same transform to cognition and emotion as it does to motor control ( Schmahmann, 1991 , 1996 , 2000 , 2004 ). Thus, a cortical area can be defined by its pattern of subcortical (as well as cortical) connections; lesions of subcortical structures mimic deficits resulting from lesions of the cerebral cortex; and there are qualitative differences between the clinical manifestations of lesions in functionally related areas of different cortical and subcortical nodes.  12.4. Topography of function in subcortical nodes – functional and clinical implications The foregoing discussion sets the stage for considering the two principles that we postulate govern the clinical manifestations resulting from lesions of the subcortical nodes – the topography of the lesion within the node (i.e., the behavioral domain affected), and the transform of the affected node. This can be illustrated using selected clinical examples. Motor impairment may result from focal lesions in the precentral gyrus, basal ganglia, thalamus and cerebellum. Further, the nature of the clinical impairment differs depending on the node affected. The clumsy or paralyzed arm results from stroke involving the upper extremity representation in the precentral gyrus ( Takahashi et al., 2002 ; Castaldo et al., 2003 ; Maeder-Ingvar et al., 2005 ); dystonia and slowness of movement results from lesions of the motor regions of the putamen ( Bhatia and Marsden, 1994 ); the motor cerebellum in the anterior lobe produces incoordination of movement ( Holmes, 1917 ; Schmahmann, 2007 ); and the ventral lateral thalamic nucleus lesion may produce ataxic hemiparesis ( Dejerine and Roussy, 1906 ; Caplan et al., 1988 ; Murthy, 1988 ). The most prolonged and unremitting paralysis occurs following hemispheric lesions ( Shelton and Reding, 2001 ; Ng et al., 2007 ) that destroy not just corticospinal fibers, but the fiber tracts linking motor cortices with movement related neuronal populations in the thalamus and striatum as well ( Schmahmann and Pandya, 2006 ). The clinical impairments following involvement of the different cortical and subcortical components of the motor system make the point that each node contributes in a unique manner to the motor program, and all contributing nodes are required to produce the normal behavior. Cognitive impairments in the executive domain result from lesions of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ( Stuss and Benson, 1984 ) and its interconnected areas in the dorsolateral caudate nucleus ( Caplan et al., 1990 ), medial dorsal thalamic nucleus ( Bogousslavsky et al., 1988 ), and crus I and II of cerebellum ( Schmahmann and Sherman, 1998 ). Visual spatial impairments follow lesions of the posterior parietal cortex ( Mesulam, 1981 ), the head of the caudate nucleus ( Caplan et al., 1990 ), thalamus including the lateral posterior thalamic nucleus and pulvinar ( Watson and Heilman, 1979 ), and the posterior lobe of the cerebellum ( Schmahmann and Sherman, 1998 ). Disorders of affect, drive and motivation occur following lesions of the cingulate gyrus ( Devinsky and Luciano, 1997 ), the ventral striatum ( Levy and Dubois, 2006 ), the anterior thalamus ( Graff-Radford et al., 1985 ; Lisovoski et al., 1993 ), and the cerebellar vermis ( Pollack, 1997 ; Schmahmann and Sherman, 1998 ; Levisohn et al., 2000 ; Riva and Giorgi, 2000 ; Schmahmann et al., 2007c ). Cognitive impairments following these subcortical lesions have been conceptualized as follows. The slowness of movement (bradykinesia), thought (bradyphrenia), and mnemonic retrieval that characterize lesions of the basal ganglia suggest that the striatal deficits impair the initiation of behavior, and the ability to chunk information into manageable quanta ( Graybiel, 1998 ). The thalamus is thought to contribute a specific alerting or engagement response to the different domains of function to which it contributes. And the cerebellar role in automatization and optimizing behavior around a homeostatic baseline has been encapsulated in the dysmetria of thought theory – applying the same transform to cognition and emotion as it does to motor control ( Schmahmann, 1991 , 1996 , 2000 , 2004 ). Thus, a cortical area can be defined by its pattern of subcortical (as well as cortical) connections; lesions of subcortical structures mimic deficits resulting from lesions of the cerebral cortex; and there are qualitative differences between the clinical manifestations of lesions in functionally related areas of different cortical and subcortical nodes.  12.5. The problem of segregated loops – the role of the cerebral cortex Destruction of selected neuronal populations within subcortical nodes produces disorders of sensorimotor or higher order behavior because these lesions disrupt the interaction of domain-specific subcortical neuronal ensembles with the sensorimotor, association, or paralimbic cortical areas that govern these behaviors. But the existence of multiple parallel loops linking the cerebral cortex with subcortical nodes leads to a conceptual problem. Cortical connections with the striatum, thalamus and pontocerebellar system appear to be arranged in parallel, respecting domain specificity. There is no cross-modal communication within subcortical nodes (e.g., thalamic nuclei do not communicate with each other). Further, present evidence indicates that communication between subcortical nodes is also domain-specific, although we are mindful of possible exceptions as noted in the striatonigostriatal system ( Haber et al., 2000 ). Hence the difficulty. There is essentially no intranodal communication, and internodal communication is domain-specific; but complex behavior requires interactions between different functional domains. At some point in the anatomy of cognition, mood must inform movement, strategy must rely on memory, and so on. As emphasized early on by Franz Joseph Gall (1758–1828), Theodore Meynert (1833–1892), Wernicke and others, this is the role of the cerebral cortical association areas that “serve as the repository of past impressions arising through the afferent channels via the sensory spheres, and as the essential substratum of memory in integration or building of complex processes” (Paul Flechsig [1847–1929], translated and quoted in Barker, 1899 , p. 1070). The problem of segregated loops is resolved by the cerebral cortex that, alone among the many nodes of the distributed neural system, has the privilege of facilitating the interaction and integration of information between multiple domains in a feedforward and feedback manner. This capability is facilitated by the association fiber pathways, which are themselves exclusive to the cerebral cortex.  12.5. The problem of segregated loops – the role of the cerebral cortex Destruction of selected neuronal populations within subcortical nodes produces disorders of sensorimotor or higher order behavior because these lesions disrupt the interaction of domain-specific subcortical neuronal ensembles with the sensorimotor, association, or paralimbic cortical areas that govern these behaviors. But the existence of multiple parallel loops linking the cerebral cortex with subcortical nodes leads to a conceptual problem. Cortical connections with the striatum, thalamus and pontocerebellar system appear to be arranged in parallel, respecting domain specificity. There is no cross-modal communication within subcortical nodes (e.g., thalamic nuclei do not communicate with each other). Further, present evidence indicates that communication between subcortical nodes is also domain-specific, although we are mindful of possible exceptions as noted in the striatonigostriatal system ( Haber et al., 2000 ). Hence the difficulty. There is essentially no intranodal communication, and internodal communication is domain-specific; but complex behavior requires interactions between different functional domains. At some point in the anatomy of cognition, mood must inform movement, strategy must rely on memory, and so on. As emphasized early on by Franz Joseph Gall (1758–1828), Theodore Meynert (1833–1892), Wernicke and others, this is the role of the cerebral cortical association areas that “serve as the repository of past impressions arising through the afferent channels via the sensory spheres, and as the essential substratum of memory in integration or building of complex processes” (Paul Flechsig [1847–1929], translated and quoted in Barker, 1899 , p. 1070). The problem of segregated loops is resolved by the cerebral cortex that, alone among the many nodes of the distributed neural system, has the privilege of facilitating the interaction and integration of information between multiple domains in a feedforward and feedback manner. This capability is facilitated by the association fiber pathways, which are themselves exclusive to the cerebral cortex.  12.6. Human brain connectivity Knowledge of the anatomy of cortico-cortical and cortico-subcortical connections and fiber pathways of the brain is based largely on tract tracing studies in monkey. Clinical syndromes in patients are in good agreement with conclusions derived from these anatomical investigations, providing some confidence that the anatomical arrangements are likely to be generally preserved in the human. Thus, by their consistency with monkey anatomy, the clinical syndromes help clarify human brain hodology. The greater size, anatomic complexity, and functional elaboration of the human brain make it clear that this inter-species comparison may be erroneous, however, and there is a compelling need to study the anatomy and functional organization of the human brain directly, a challenge that has faced neuroscience since the ancient Greeks. The ability of MRI to identify small, acute focal lesions, together with sophisticated tools of clinical neurology and neuropsychology, enables the structure–function correlations discussed in this analysis. The advent of diffusion tensor imaging (DTI, Basser et al., 1994 ) makes it possible to visualize fiber tracts in the human brain ( Wedeen et al., 1995 ; Conturo et al., 1999 ; Catani et al., 2002 ) in a manner that may translate the findings from monkey to human. This technology is now being utilized to demonstrate some of the evolutionary principles described above, as in the case of the expansion in human of the prefrontal component of the cerebral peduncle fibers that contribute to the corticopontine pathways ( Ramnani et al., 2006 ). Connectional anatomical investigations using DTI probabilistic mapping have also been initiated for the study of cortical connections with subcortical structures. Studies of thalamic interactions with the cerebral cortex report that a large medial, dorsal region of the thalamus had highly probable prefrontal and temporal connections; a ventral posterior thalamic region had strong probability of somatosensory connections; a lateral region had high probability of motor cortical connectivity; and a posterior region was connected to the posterior parietal cortex and extrastriate cortices ( Behrens et al., 2003 ; Johansen-Berg et al., 2005 ). These findings are in general agreement with those of tracer studies in monkey, as discussed in detail above. DTI tractography has also been performed in the analysis of human corticostriatal projections. This approach revealed that the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is linked with the dorsal–posterior caudate nucleus, and the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex is linked with the ventral–anterior caudate nucleus. For the putamen, connections were defined between the supplementary motor area (SMA) and the dorsal–posterior putamen; the premotor area and the medial putamen; and the primary motor cortex and the lateral putamen ( Leh et al., 2007 ). These findings complement those of an earlier investigation ( Lehéricy et al., 2004 ) showing that the motor cortex and supplementary motor area (SMA) have connections with similar parts of the sensorimotor compartment of the human striatum, whereas the pre-SMA is linked with more rostral parts of the striatum, including the associative compartment. As in the case of the probabilistic DTI investigations of human thalamic connections, these striatal findings are also generally consistent with those derived from tract tracer injection studies in monkey. The DTI demonstration of the fiber pathways and the connections they convey is presently far short of the details elucidated in the experimental animal. Diffusion tensor imaging cannot adequately demonstrate the anatomic reality of crossing fibers ( Wedeen et al., 1995 ), a limitation that has been addressed with high angular resolution methods including diffusion spectrum imaging ( Wedeen et al., 2005 , 2008 ; Schmahmann et al., 2007b ; Fig. 13 ), Q-ball ( Tuch et al., 2002 ) and “HARDI”. The ultimate goal is to provide greater sophistication to anatomic analyses, in order to more closely approximate the details of fiber anatomy and connectional patterns achieved by neuronal tracers. The detection of white matter bundles by DSI has now been validated in the monkey ( Schmahmann et al., 2007b ). This approach may enable connectional neuroanatomical studies in the human brain that more closely approximate the detailed understanding derived from tract tracing studies in the experimental animal, a desirable goal for the field of neuroimaging in the coming years. A novel approach to mapping connections in the human brain is resting state functional connectivity using MRI (fcMRI). This method detects temporal correlations in the spontaneous oscillations of the blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) signal between brain regions while subjects rest quietly in the scanner ( Raichle et al., 2001 ; Greicius et al., 2003 , 2008 ). By showing that specific groups of brain areas show greater activity during rest than during cognitive states, fcMRI has provided support for the existence of a baseline default mode of brain function that is suspended during specific goal-directed behaviors. It has also enabled studies of functional connectivity in distributed networks in the human brain ( van de Ven et al., 2004 ; Margulies et al., 2007 ), including studies specifically of attentional networks in the frontoparietal and cingulo-opercular regions ( Fair et al., 2007 ). Resting state fcMRI has been combined with DTI tractography to provide support for the notion that resting state functional connectivity indeed reflects structural connectivity ( Greicius et al., 2008 ). Voxelwise regression analysis in an fcMRI study of the basal ganglia ( Di Martino et al., 2008 ) provided support for the existence of striatal motor, cognitive and affective divisions, and for the presence of parallel loops as determined previously by anatomical studies in animals and functional imaging studies in humans. Further, fcMRI studies in patients with depression have identified heightened connectivity between the subgenual cingulate gyrus, implicated in depression ( Mayberg et al., 2005 ), and the thalamus ( Greicius et al., 2007 ). These findings from structural and functional MRI provide independent validation of the network model of brain function, and emphasize the degree to which subcortical structures are integral to this notion. Finally, the use of clinical case material, despite all its limitations, remains an invaluable tool for the detailed evaluation of how structure relates to function. Discriminative clinical correlation with cortical, subcortical, and white matter lesions that are defined precisely by structural and functional MRI has provided valuable insights into the organization and function of the human nervous system. It has also reaffirmed notions of the distributed neural circuits and disconnection syndromes, and deepened the interdependence of clinical neuroscience and connectional neuroanatomy.  12.6. Human brain connectivity Knowledge of the anatomy of cortico-cortical and cortico-subcortical connections and fiber pathways of the brain is based largely on tract tracing studies in monkey. Clinical syndromes in patients are in good agreement with conclusions derived from these anatomical investigations, providing some confidence that the anatomical arrangements are likely to be generally preserved in the human. Thus, by their consistency with monkey anatomy, the clinical syndromes help clarify human brain hodology. The greater size, anatomic complexity, and functional elaboration of the human brain make it clear that this inter-species comparison may be erroneous, however, and there is a compelling need to study the anatomy and functional organization of the human brain directly, a challenge that has faced neuroscience since the ancient Greeks. The ability of MRI to identify small, acute focal lesions, together with sophisticated tools of clinical neurology and neuropsychology, enables the structure–function correlations discussed in this analysis. The advent of diffusion tensor imaging (DTI, Basser et al., 1994 ) makes it possible to visualize fiber tracts in the human brain ( Wedeen et al., 1995 ; Conturo et al., 1999 ; Catani et al., 2002 ) in a manner that may translate the findings from monkey to human. This technology is now being utilized to demonstrate some of the evolutionary principles described above, as in the case of the expansion in human of the prefrontal component of the cerebral peduncle fibers that contribute to the corticopontine pathways ( Ramnani et al., 2006 ). Connectional anatomical investigations using DTI probabilistic mapping have also been initiated for the study of cortical connections with subcortical structures. Studies of thalamic interactions with the cerebral cortex report that a large medial, dorsal region of the thalamus had highly probable prefrontal and temporal connections; a ventral posterior thalamic region had strong probability of somatosensory connections; a lateral region had high probability of motor cortical connectivity; and a posterior region was connected to the posterior parietal cortex and extrastriate cortices ( Behrens et al., 2003 ; Johansen-Berg et al., 2005 ). These findings are in general agreement with those of tracer studies in monkey, as discussed in detail above. DTI tractography has also been performed in the analysis of human corticostriatal projections. This approach revealed that the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is linked with the dorsal–posterior caudate nucleus, and the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex is linked with the ventral–anterior caudate nucleus. For the putamen, connections were defined between the supplementary motor area (SMA) and the dorsal–posterior putamen; the premotor area and the medial putamen; and the primary motor cortex and the lateral putamen ( Leh et al., 2007 ). These findings complement those of an earlier investigation ( Lehéricy et al., 2004 ) showing that the motor cortex and supplementary motor area (SMA) have connections with similar parts of the sensorimotor compartment of the human striatum, whereas the pre-SMA is linked with more rostral parts of the striatum, including the associative compartment. As in the case of the probabilistic DTI investigations of human thalamic connections, these striatal findings are also generally consistent with those derived from tract tracer injection studies in monkey. The DTI demonstration of the fiber pathways and the connections they convey is presently far short of the details elucidated in the experimental animal. Diffusion tensor imaging cannot adequately demonstrate the anatomic reality of crossing fibers ( Wedeen et al., 1995 ), a limitation that has been addressed with high angular resolution methods including diffusion spectrum imaging ( Wedeen et al., 2005 , 2008 ; Schmahmann et al., 2007b ; Fig. 13 ), Q-ball ( Tuch et al., 2002 ) and “HARDI”. The ultimate goal is to provide greater sophistication to anatomic analyses, in order to more closely approximate the details of fiber anatomy and connectional patterns achieved by neuronal tracers. The detection of white matter bundles by DSI has now been validated in the monkey ( Schmahmann et al., 2007b ). This approach may enable connectional neuroanatomical studies in the human brain that more closely approximate the detailed understanding derived from tract tracing studies in the experimental animal, a desirable goal for the field of neuroimaging in the coming years. A novel approach to mapping connections in the human brain is resting state functional connectivity using MRI (fcMRI). This method detects temporal correlations in the spontaneous oscillations of the blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) signal between brain regions while subjects rest quietly in the scanner ( Raichle et al., 2001 ; Greicius et al., 2003 , 2008 ). By showing that specific groups of brain areas show greater activity during rest than during cognitive states, fcMRI has provided support for the existence of a baseline default mode of brain function that is suspended during specific goal-directed behaviors. It has also enabled studies of functional connectivity in distributed networks in the human brain ( van de Ven et al., 2004 ; Margulies et al., 2007 ), including studies specifically of attentional networks in the frontoparietal and cingulo-opercular regions ( Fair et al., 2007 ). Resting state fcMRI has been combined with DTI tractography to provide support for the notion that resting state functional connectivity indeed reflects structural connectivity ( Greicius et al., 2008 ). Voxelwise regression analysis in an fcMRI study of the basal ganglia ( Di Martino et al., 2008 ) provided support for the existence of striatal motor, cognitive and affective divisions, and for the presence of parallel loops as determined previously by anatomical studies in animals and functional imaging studies in humans. Further, fcMRI studies in patients with depression have identified heightened connectivity between the subgenual cingulate gyrus, implicated in depression ( Mayberg et al., 2005 ), and the thalamus ( Greicius et al., 2007 ). These findings from structural and functional MRI provide independent validation of the network model of brain function, and emphasize the degree to which subcortical structures are integral to this notion. Finally, the use of clinical case material, despite all its limitations, remains an invaluable tool for the detailed evaluation of how structure relates to function. Discriminative clinical correlation with cortical, subcortical, and white matter lesions that are defined precisely by structural and functional MRI has provided valuable insights into the organization and function of the human nervous system. It has also reaffirmed notions of the distributed neural circuits and disconnection syndromes, and deepened the interdependence of clinical neuroscience and connectional neuroanatomy.  13. Conclusion We have reviewed anatomical, clinical, and imaging data implicating the thalamus, basal ganglia and cerebellum in cognition and emotion, in addition to their roles in motor control. We consider these clinical phenomena as disconnection syndromes, extending the earlier notions of Wernicke and Geschwind to the subcortical nodes. We introduce a new theoretical framework in which to consider the distributed neural systems, based on general, and specific, principles of anatomical organization, and on the cytoarchitecture of the nodes that comprise these systems. This model enables the formulation and testing of future hypotheses in imaging and clinical studies. 