A new in vitro model of the glial scar inhibits axon growth Astrocytes respond to central nervous system (CNS) injury with reactive astrogliosis and participate in the formation of the glial scar, an inhibitory barrier for axonal regeneration. Little is known about the injury-induced mechanisms underlying astrocyte reactivity and subsequent development of an axon-inhibitory scar. We combined two key aspects of CNS injury, mechanical trauma and co-culture with meningeal cells, to produce an in vitro model of the scar from cultures of highly differentiated astrocytes. Our model displayed widespread morphological signs of astrocyte reactivity, increases in expression of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), and accumulation of GFAP in astrocytic processes. Expression levels of scar-associated markers phosphacan, neurocan and tenascins were also increased. Importantly, neurite growth from various CNS neuronal populations was significantly reduced when neurons were seeded on the scar-like cultures, compared to growth on cultures of mature astrocytes. Quantification of neurite growth parameters on the scar model demonstrated significant reductions in neuronal adhesion and neurite lengths. Interestingly, neurite outgrowth of postnatal neurons was reduced to a greater extent than that of embryonic neurons, and outgrowth inhibition varied among neuronal populations. Scar-like reactive sites and neurite-inhibitory patches were found throughout these cultures, creating a patchwork of growth-inhibitory areas mimicking a CNS injury site. Thus, our model showed relevant aspects of scar formation and produced widespread inhibition of axonal regeneration; it should be useful both for examining mechanisms underlying scar formation and to assess various treatments for their potential to improve regeneration after CNS injury.  INTRODUCTION Trauma to the central nervous system (CNS) leads to reactive astrogliosis and the formation of a glial scar. Reactive astrocytes become stellate, with bundled intermediate filaments and augmented GFAP expression ( Bignami and Dahl 1976 ; Eng and Ghirnikar 1994 ). The glial scar comprises a dense network of reactive astrocytes and other cells with a specialized extracellular matrix, and constitutes a barrier for axon regeneration ( Reier and Houle 1988 ; Silver and Miller 2004 ). The scar contains axon growth inhibitors, such as proteoglycans and tenascins, which contribute to the failure of axon regeneration ( Morgenstern et al. 2002 ; Sandvig et al. 2004 ). The scar contains both permissive and non-permissive signals for regenerating axons ( Jones et al. 2003 ; Li and Raisman 1995 ). Mechanical impact, the rupture of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and inflammation are major factors leading to scar formation ( Reier and Houle 1988 ). Rupture of the BBB allows infiltration of macrophages from the blood and fibroblastic cells from the meninges ( Berry et al. 1983 ; Maxwell et al. 1990 ); these are necessary for scar establishment ( Abnet et al. 1991 ; Fitch and Silver 1999 ). Efforts to improve functional recovery after CNS injury depend on an understanding of scar development. However, little is known about direct causes of astrocyte activation and expression of regeneration-inhibiting proteins. Detailed investigations of the formation and properties of the glial scar would be greatly facilitated by the development of a reproducible cell culture model. Several culture models of the glial scar have been described. For example, a nitrocellulose sheet can be inserted into the cortex, with subsequent culture of the explanted scar ( McKeon et al. 1991 , 1999 ). Such explants contain constituents of in vivo scars and inhibit neurite growth, but the scarring process itself cannot be manipulated because it occurs in vivo. A second approach creates borders between astrocytes and meningeal cells; these borders show astrocyte reactivity, express growth inhibitors, and are avoided by neurites ( Ness and David 1997 ; Shearer et al. 2003 ). These and other approaches are useful in examining changes in reactive astrocytes, but to date they have not allowed quantitative measurements of neurite regeneration or inhibitor expression. Our goal was to develop a glial scar model by 1) producing more widespread scar-like conditions than in previous models, and 2) applying two relevant injury-related stimuli to highly differentiated astrocytes: stretch and interaction with meningeal fibroblasts. Traumatic mechanical impact to the CNS exposes tissue to stress that causes cellular injury and reactive astrogliosis ( Gennarelli and Thibault 1985 ; Shreiber et al. 1999 ). Interactions of astrocytes with infiltrating cells are critical to the establishment of the scar as a barrier to axonal regeneration ( Fawcett and Shearer, 2003 ). We produced tissue stretch with a brief pressure pulse delivered to cells cultured on a deformable substrate ( Ellis et al. 1995 ). The responses of cultured astrocytes to this stress include transient membrane permeability, release of free radicals and damage to intracellular organelles ( Ahmed et al. 2000 ; Ellis et al. 1995 ; Lamb et al. 1997 ). Stretch also triggers specific signaling pathways in astrocytes; these may be involved in initiating reactive astrogliosis ( Floyd et al. 2001 ; Neary et al. 2003 ; 2005 ; Rzigalinski et al. 1998 ). Stretch-induced activation of astrocytes leads to increased GFAP immunoreactivity and morphological changes ( Floyd et al. 2004 ; Tran and Neary 2006 ; Tran et al. 2008 ), but the expression of scar-associated regeneration inhibitors has not been investigated. Our model combines mechanical stretch of differentiated astrocytes with addition of meningeal fibroblasts. Each of these caused morphological changes in astrocytes (including stellation and clustering), produced hallmarks of reactive astrogliosis in “reactive sites”, and increased production of glial scar markers. Importantly, short-term coculture of different neuronal populations with this scar model demonstrated significant quantifiable inhibition of neurite growth. Our approach therefore provides a model of the glial scar that will be useful for studies of mechanisms regulating astrocyte reactivity and inhibitory protein expression, as well as for testing potential therapeutics aimed at improving regeneration after CNS injury.  METHODS Astrocyte cultures Astrocytes were cultured from newborn rat cortices as previously described ( Hertz et al. 1982 ; Neary et al. 2003 ). Cells were cultured to confluency in 15% fetal bovine serum (FBS), then switched to DMEM containing 10% horse serum. 750,000 cells were seeded onto uncoated Petri dishes or onto deformable, silastic membranes (962 mm2 Bioflex 6 well plates, Flexcell Intl.) coated with collagen I or poly-L-lysine (PLL)/ fibronectin (6?g/ml). Microglia were removed by treatments with 10 mM L-leucine-methylester followed by shaking ( Giulian and Baker 1986 ). After four weeks (wks) in culture, contaminating cells were limited to 2.8 ± 2.4% Ox42-positive microglia (mean ± SD; n= 15) and 0-5% Thy1.1-positive fibroblasts (n = 4). Prior to use serum was reduced to 0.5% for 24 hours, then omitted for 24 hours. Astrocytes changed shape, clustered, and increased GFAP staining in response to stretch or fibroblast addition on either collagen or fibronectin. Because fibronectin is highly abundant in scar regions ( Camand et al. 2004 ) and astrocyte adhesion is superior on fibronectin ( Ard et al. 1993 ), we used fibronectin for most experiments. Quantitative data did not differ between the two substrates. PLL/fibronectin was used unless noted. Mechanical stretch Cultures were stretched by abrupt deformation of the silastic culture plates (Flexplates), using the Cell Injury Controller II (Custom Design and Fabrication; Virginia Commonwealth University). This combination of pressure and biaxial stretch has been correlated with traumatic injury in vivo ( Ellis et al. 1995 ). Flexplate wells were sealed with a plug connected via tubing to a nitrogen tank with a pressure controller. Two 50 ms pulses (25-30 psi) were applied, resulting in a 3.2 psi peak pressure to the well (center deflection 10.5 mm). This stimulus intensity corresponds to the “moderate stretch” of Ellis and colleagues ( Ahmed et al. 2000 ; Ellis et al. 1995 ). Most cells recover from this injury within 48 hours ( Ellis et al. 1995 ). In our studies, 3.3% (± 0.01; N=3) of cells were permeable to propidium iodide at 24 hr, with only 1.5% (± 0.01; N=3) permeable at 48 hr, confirming a minor amount of cell death caused by the stimulus. Astrocyte-meningeal fibroblast cocultures Meningeal fibroblasts were isolated from newborn rat cortical meninges ( Niclou et al. 2003 ), using trypsin, collagenase and DNAse I (Sigma). Pelleted cells (without red blood cells) were resuspended in DMEM, 15% FBS and plated on PLL-coated Petri dishes. Meningeal fibroblasts expressed Thy1.1, the low affinity neurotrophin receptor p75 (not shown) and fibronectin ( Fig. 1B,C ; Frisen et al. 1998 ; Risling et al. 1992 ). 100,000 meningeal fibroblasts were added to astrocyte cultures at 4 weeks in vitro. FBS was reduced to 0.5% after 24 hr, then omitted for 24 hr before stretch. The astrocyte/fibroblast ratio was determined by counting fibronectin positive, GFAP-positive, and total cells (DAPI, 1:100, Chemicon) in 10 random fields per 3 day coculture. Dorsal root ganglion neurons Embryonic day (E) 15 rat dorsal root ganglion (DRG) explants were dissected and placed on stretched or unstretched astrocyte lawns (A-str; A-ctrl). Purified DRG neurons were obtained from dissociated DRG cultured for 3-4 wks. in Neurobasal medium including a salivary gland extract (containing a mixture of neurotrophic factors) and 10 ?M 5-fluoro2’-deoxyuridine to remove dividing cells ( Kleitman et al. 1998 ; Wanner and Wood 2002 ). Cultures included circa 20% large diameter neurons. Purified perikarya of these neurons were isolated from neurites, re-dissociated and seeded onto untreated astrocytes (A-ctrl) or the different “scar-like” conditions, either stretched astrocytes (A-str), astrocyte-meningeal fibroblast co-cultures (A+F) or stretched co-cultures (A+F-str). Neurons were added 24 hr after stretch in all neuron-astrocyte cocultures. Spinal cord and cortical neurons Neurons were isolated from E18 or postnatal day 4 (P4) rat spinal cords or motor cortex-enriched cortices following a modification of published protocols ( Brewer 1997 ; Price and Brewer 2001 ). Briefly, tissues were digested with papain and neurons enriched using an iodixanol step gradient (Optiprep; Accurate Chem. & Sci. Corp.). Cells were kept overnight in Hibernate medium (BrainBits), then seeded at 100,000 cells / 962 mm2 well onto astrocyte lawns in Neurobasal medium or laminin coated dishes in medium with salivary gland extract. Spinal cord cells contained >27 % and cortical cells contained 50% neurons (data not shown). Non-adherent cells from 6 stretched and 6 control neuron-astrocyte cocultures were removed and plated overnight on laminin. Immunocytochemistry Cultures were fixed for one hour (hr) in cold 4% paraformaldehyde in Tris-buffered saline (TBS), rinsed, permeabilized in 0.3% Triton in TBS for 30 minutes (min) at room temperature (RT), and blocked (5% donkey, 5% goat serum) overnight at 4°C. Primary antibodies in blocking solution were applied for 24 hr at 4°C. The following antibodies were used to identify cell types: for astrocytes guinea pig (1:400, Advanced Immunochemicals) or rabbit (1:350, Dako) anti-GFAP sera were used. For neurons rabbit anti-?3 tubulin (1:5000; Covance) was used. For meningeal fibroblasts mouse anti-fibronectin (1:250, BD Transduction/Pharmingen), mouse anti-Thy 1.1 (ATTC, TIB-103; Lake et al. 1979) and mouse anti-p75 ( Chandler et al. 1985 ) were used. For microglia mouse anti-Ox42 was used (CD11b, 1:100, Accurate Chemical & Scientific Corp.). For glial progenitors mouse anti-A2B5 was used (ATTC clone 105; Eisenbarth et al. 1979 ; Schnitzer and Schachner 1982 ). For live staining cells were incubated with hybridoma supernatants for 30 min on ice prior to fixation. After rinsing cells were incubated with secondary antibodies in blocking solution for 1 hr at RT, then stained for nuclei (DAPI or Hoechst). Secondary antibodies were goat anti-rabbit IgG-Alexa 488 (1:150, Molecular Probes), donkey anti-mouse IgG-Cy3 (1:500), donkey anti guinea pig IgG-Cy5 (1:100), donkey anti rabbit IgG-Cy3 (1:500), and donkey anti-mouse IgM-Cy 3 (1:500). All cyanine-conjugated antibodies were from Jackson Immunoresearch. After further washing in TBS, then water, cultures were dried, coverslipped, and mounted onto glass slides (Gelmount, Biomeda). Dividing cells were identified using rabbit anti-phospho-histone H3 (1:250, Upstate). To detect tenascin, fixed cultures were permeabilized for 30 seconds in 0.3% Triton, blocked for 1 hr at RT, then incubated with rabbit anti-chicken tenascin (1:400, raised against tenascin C; Chemicon) overnight at 4°C, followed by biotinylated goat anti-rabbit (1:200, Vector) for 1 hr at RT. After rinsing, avidin-Texas Red (1:75 in TBS, ICN) was applied for 1 hr at RT. Proteoglycans were stained without permeabilization. After blocking with 5% horse serum in TBS, the mouse monoclonal anti-phosphacan (3F8, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, 1:50 in 5% horse serum) was applied overnight at 4°C. After rinsing, a horse biotinylated anti-mouse IgG (1:200 in 5% horse serum; Vector) was applied for 1 hour at RT. Detection was done using avidin-biotin-horseradish peroxidase complex according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Vector) with diaminobenzidine (DAB). Imaging DAB staining was analyzed using a Zeiss Axiovert 300M microscope and Neurolucida ‘virtual slice’ module (MicroBrightField). Immunofluorescence images were acquired using an Olympus IX70 microscope. Confocal imaging was performed on a Zeiss LSM510. Image analyses were performed in the center region of the stretch wells defined by a 25 mm glass coverslip. Quantification of GFAP accumulation and space formation Peak GFAP signals and the percentages of astrocyte-free substrate were measured in the same cultures used to quantify neurite growth. GFAP signals were below peak threshold for control astrocytes ( Figure 1C,D ), and displayed in grayscale except for black (0, blue) and white (250, red). The percent GFAP-negative area (“spaces”, Fig. 1E ), and the area of peak GFAP signals (determined as a percentage of total area; Fig. 1F ) were measured for 16 images per culture in 3 cultures per condition. Stretched astrocytes had many processes with saturated, peak GFAP signals ( Fig. 1D ). GFAP signals were also used to quantify astrocyte lawn areas ( Figs. 8 - 10 ). Neurite growth quantification Confocal images were recorded systematically from neuron-containing areas covering 3.4% of each culture center (average 725 neurons per condition). Neurite growth was measured using Neurolucida 6.0 (MicroBrightfield) or a novel algorithm (see below). Neurons were defined as non-pyknotic DAPI-positive cells expressing ?3 tubulin and in contact with astrocytes and were traced blinded to conditions. “Neurite trees” were measured as the sum of the lengths of all processes per neuron; these were displayed as the average of the largest tree in each field. A semi-automated image algorithm using Igor Pro software (Wavemetrics) was used to identify neurons and measure their processes ( Stepanek et al. 2005 ). A convolution-based approach with thresholding, filtering and masking steps was used to identify neuronal perikarya and neurites ( Fig. 10E, F ). Neuron numbers were estimated by dividing total cell body areas by average soma size (117 ?m2, SD 10). Analysis was restricted to astrocyte regions by a mask excluding non-GFAP areas ( Fig. 10E ). Total neurite growth was calculated as the average total neurite area per GFAP-positive field ( Fig. 10G ), and converted to ?m2. Protein expression analyses of glial scar markers Cells were collected in 50 mM Tris (pH 8) with protease inhibitors (complete cocktail, Roche), lysed and mechanically homogenized with 0.5% Triton X100 on ice in the same buffer. For neurocan and tenascin cell lysates were treated for 1 hr at 37 °C with Chrondroitinase ABC (Chase ABC, Seikagaku) at a concentration of 1×10-4 U/ml lysate ( Moon et al. 2003 ). Conditioned media (CM) were collected, protease inhibitors were added and debris was removed before concentration (100 kilodalton, kD, exclusion filters, Centricon, Millipore) and subsequent digestion with Chase ABC. Protein was determined using the DC protein assay (Biorad). SDS PAGE was performed using 4-15% acrylamide-Tris-HCl gels (Biorad). After blotting, filters were blocked for 1 hr at RT (blocking buffer, Rockland), and incubated with primary antibodies in blocking buffer overnight at 4°C: rabbit anti-GFAP (Dako), mouse anti-phosphacan (clone 2B49, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank), rabbit anti-chicken tenascin (Chemicon), mouse anti-neurocan (1F6, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank), and mouse anti-? actin (Sigma). After washing in TBS/0.05% Tween 20, donkey anti-rabbit-IR dye 700 and anti mouse-IR dye 800 (both 1:5,000, Rockland), were applied in blocking buffer for 1 hr at RT. Bands were quantified using an Odyssey imaging system (Li-Cor Biosciences). For phosphacan, a peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (Pierce) was used with a chemiluminescent substrate (Supersignal West Pico, Pierce). Signals in cell lysates were normalized to ? actin and in CM to a standardized band from Ponceau S stained blots or Coomassie stained gels. The percentage of fibroblasts in each coculture was determined by immunostaining (see above) and used to adjust protein amounts for astrocyte-specific proteins. PCR Cell cultures were lysed using 1ml Trizol (Invitrogen) per 6 well plate followed by standard RNA precipitation and cleanup methods. Reverse transcription was done with Superscript III (Invitrogen). RNA was digested using RNAse H and RNAse cocktail (Ambion). Primer sequences were as follows: phosphacan forward 5’GAATTCTGGTCCACCAGCAG 3’, phosphacan reverse 5’GGTTTATACTGCCCTCTTTAGG 3’; phosphacan amplicon size 496 bp ( McKeon et al. 1999 ); tenascin R forward 5’GACATACAAGTCCACCGAT 3’, tenascin R reverse CTGTGAGACGATGGATGTA 3’ yielding a 827 bp product ( Probstmeier et al. 2001 ); tenascins C forward 5’TCTCCACAGCCAAAGAACCT3’, tenascin C reverse 5’TGGCCTCTCTGAGACCTGTT3’ generating a 480bp product; neurocan forward 5’CTATGCCCAGCCTTCTTTTG 3’, neurocan reverse 5’TCTCCCTGAGAGATGGAGGA 3’ leading to a 243 bp amplicon; glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase, GAPDH forward 5’AACTTTGGCATTGTGGAAGG 3’; GAPDH reverse 5’GGATGCAGGGATGATGTTCT 3’ amplifying an 132bp product; GFAP forward 5’GGAAGATCCATGAGGAGGAAG 3’, GFAP reverse 5’GCAACGGTTTCCATCAACAAGA 3’ producing a 1022 bp amplicon. PCR was performed using Taq DNA polymerase (2.5 units, Qiagen) for 30 cycles (39 for tenascin and neurocan). Quantification of band intensities was done using Genesnap. Real time PCR was performed on a Rotor-Gene 6.0.1 (Corbett). The Taqman gene expression assay was used for GFAP and tenascin R (A&B Biosystems). For Neurocan, GAPDH and phosphacan Sybr green was used with Amplitaq Gold (Sybr green master mix, A&B Bioscience). Reactions were carried out in triplicate (40 cycles) followed by a melting curve from 72°C to 95°C to assure the absence of primer dimers; signal was measured (excitation 470 nm, detection 510 nm) after each step. A dilution series of cDNAs was done and the efficiencies of the target and the reference were measured to confirm similarities in regression slopes (data not shown). The expression of each gene of interest (2-??CT) in the scar-like conditions was calculated relative to the astrocyte control RNA and normalized to GAPDH, where ?CT is CT (target) - CT (GAPDH), and ??CT is defined as ?CT (treated) - ?CT (control). Signals from A+F cocultures were corrected according to percent astrocytes counted in sister cocultures. Samples were run in triplicates and each experiment was repeated twice per culture set; four independent harvests were analyzed. Statistical Analyses Results on stretched astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures were compared to control astrocytes using two-tailed Student’s t-tests. All groups were analyzed using multiple comparisons ANOVA according to either Tukey (among all), Bonferroni (selected pairs) or Dunn (Instat; GraphPad).  Astrocyte cultures Astrocytes were cultured from newborn rat cortices as previously described ( Hertz et al. 1982 ; Neary et al. 2003 ). Cells were cultured to confluency in 15% fetal bovine serum (FBS), then switched to DMEM containing 10% horse serum. 750,000 cells were seeded onto uncoated Petri dishes or onto deformable, silastic membranes (962 mm2 Bioflex 6 well plates, Flexcell Intl.) coated with collagen I or poly-L-lysine (PLL)/ fibronectin (6?g/ml). Microglia were removed by treatments with 10 mM L-leucine-methylester followed by shaking ( Giulian and Baker 1986 ). After four weeks (wks) in culture, contaminating cells were limited to 2.8 ± 2.4% Ox42-positive microglia (mean ± SD; n= 15) and 0-5% Thy1.1-positive fibroblasts (n = 4). Prior to use serum was reduced to 0.5% for 24 hours, then omitted for 24 hours. Astrocytes changed shape, clustered, and increased GFAP staining in response to stretch or fibroblast addition on either collagen or fibronectin. Because fibronectin is highly abundant in scar regions ( Camand et al. 2004 ) and astrocyte adhesion is superior on fibronectin ( Ard et al. 1993 ), we used fibronectin for most experiments. Quantitative data did not differ between the two substrates. PLL/fibronectin was used unless noted.  Mechanical stretch Cultures were stretched by abrupt deformation of the silastic culture plates (Flexplates), using the Cell Injury Controller II (Custom Design and Fabrication; Virginia Commonwealth University). This combination of pressure and biaxial stretch has been correlated with traumatic injury in vivo ( Ellis et al. 1995 ). Flexplate wells were sealed with a plug connected via tubing to a nitrogen tank with a pressure controller. Two 50 ms pulses (25-30 psi) were applied, resulting in a 3.2 psi peak pressure to the well (center deflection 10.5 mm). This stimulus intensity corresponds to the “moderate stretch” of Ellis and colleagues ( Ahmed et al. 2000 ; Ellis et al. 1995 ). Most cells recover from this injury within 48 hours ( Ellis et al. 1995 ). In our studies, 3.3% (± 0.01; N=3) of cells were permeable to propidium iodide at 24 hr, with only 1.5% (± 0.01; N=3) permeable at 48 hr, confirming a minor amount of cell death caused by the stimulus.  Astrocyte-meningeal fibroblast cocultures Meningeal fibroblasts were isolated from newborn rat cortical meninges ( Niclou et al. 2003 ), using trypsin, collagenase and DNAse I (Sigma). Pelleted cells (without red blood cells) were resuspended in DMEM, 15% FBS and plated on PLL-coated Petri dishes. Meningeal fibroblasts expressed Thy1.1, the low affinity neurotrophin receptor p75 (not shown) and fibronectin ( Fig. 1B,C ; Frisen et al. 1998 ; Risling et al. 1992 ). 100,000 meningeal fibroblasts were added to astrocyte cultures at 4 weeks in vitro. FBS was reduced to 0.5% after 24 hr, then omitted for 24 hr before stretch. The astrocyte/fibroblast ratio was determined by counting fibronectin positive, GFAP-positive, and total cells (DAPI, 1:100, Chemicon) in 10 random fields per 3 day coculture.  Dorsal root ganglion neurons Embryonic day (E) 15 rat dorsal root ganglion (DRG) explants were dissected and placed on stretched or unstretched astrocyte lawns (A-str; A-ctrl). Purified DRG neurons were obtained from dissociated DRG cultured for 3-4 wks. in Neurobasal medium including a salivary gland extract (containing a mixture of neurotrophic factors) and 10 ?M 5-fluoro2’-deoxyuridine to remove dividing cells ( Kleitman et al. 1998 ; Wanner and Wood 2002 ). Cultures included circa 20% large diameter neurons. Purified perikarya of these neurons were isolated from neurites, re-dissociated and seeded onto untreated astrocytes (A-ctrl) or the different “scar-like” conditions, either stretched astrocytes (A-str), astrocyte-meningeal fibroblast co-cultures (A+F) or stretched co-cultures (A+F-str). Neurons were added 24 hr after stretch in all neuron-astrocyte cocultures.  Spinal cord and cortical neurons Neurons were isolated from E18 or postnatal day 4 (P4) rat spinal cords or motor cortex-enriched cortices following a modification of published protocols ( Brewer 1997 ; Price and Brewer 2001 ). Briefly, tissues were digested with papain and neurons enriched using an iodixanol step gradient (Optiprep; Accurate Chem. & Sci. Corp.). Cells were kept overnight in Hibernate medium (BrainBits), then seeded at 100,000 cells / 962 mm2 well onto astrocyte lawns in Neurobasal medium or laminin coated dishes in medium with salivary gland extract. Spinal cord cells contained >27 % and cortical cells contained 50% neurons (data not shown). Non-adherent cells from 6 stretched and 6 control neuron-astrocyte cocultures were removed and plated overnight on laminin.  Immunocytochemistry Cultures were fixed for one hour (hr) in cold 4% paraformaldehyde in Tris-buffered saline (TBS), rinsed, permeabilized in 0.3% Triton in TBS for 30 minutes (min) at room temperature (RT), and blocked (5% donkey, 5% goat serum) overnight at 4°C. Primary antibodies in blocking solution were applied for 24 hr at 4°C. The following antibodies were used to identify cell types: for astrocytes guinea pig (1:400, Advanced Immunochemicals) or rabbit (1:350, Dako) anti-GFAP sera were used. For neurons rabbit anti-?3 tubulin (1:5000; Covance) was used. For meningeal fibroblasts mouse anti-fibronectin (1:250, BD Transduction/Pharmingen), mouse anti-Thy 1.1 (ATTC, TIB-103; Lake et al. 1979) and mouse anti-p75 ( Chandler et al. 1985 ) were used. For microglia mouse anti-Ox42 was used (CD11b, 1:100, Accurate Chemical & Scientific Corp.). For glial progenitors mouse anti-A2B5 was used (ATTC clone 105; Eisenbarth et al. 1979 ; Schnitzer and Schachner 1982 ). For live staining cells were incubated with hybridoma supernatants for 30 min on ice prior to fixation. After rinsing cells were incubated with secondary antibodies in blocking solution for 1 hr at RT, then stained for nuclei (DAPI or Hoechst). Secondary antibodies were goat anti-rabbit IgG-Alexa 488 (1:150, Molecular Probes), donkey anti-mouse IgG-Cy3 (1:500), donkey anti guinea pig IgG-Cy5 (1:100), donkey anti rabbit IgG-Cy3 (1:500), and donkey anti-mouse IgM-Cy 3 (1:500). All cyanine-conjugated antibodies were from Jackson Immunoresearch. After further washing in TBS, then water, cultures were dried, coverslipped, and mounted onto glass slides (Gelmount, Biomeda). Dividing cells were identified using rabbit anti-phospho-histone H3 (1:250, Upstate). To detect tenascin, fixed cultures were permeabilized for 30 seconds in 0.3% Triton, blocked for 1 hr at RT, then incubated with rabbit anti-chicken tenascin (1:400, raised against tenascin C; Chemicon) overnight at 4°C, followed by biotinylated goat anti-rabbit (1:200, Vector) for 1 hr at RT. After rinsing, avidin-Texas Red (1:75 in TBS, ICN) was applied for 1 hr at RT. Proteoglycans were stained without permeabilization. After blocking with 5% horse serum in TBS, the mouse monoclonal anti-phosphacan (3F8, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, 1:50 in 5% horse serum) was applied overnight at 4°C. After rinsing, a horse biotinylated anti-mouse IgG (1:200 in 5% horse serum; Vector) was applied for 1 hour at RT. Detection was done using avidin-biotin-horseradish peroxidase complex according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Vector) with diaminobenzidine (DAB).  Imaging DAB staining was analyzed using a Zeiss Axiovert 300M microscope and Neurolucida ‘virtual slice’ module (MicroBrightField). Immunofluorescence images were acquired using an Olympus IX70 microscope. Confocal imaging was performed on a Zeiss LSM510. Image analyses were performed in the center region of the stretch wells defined by a 25 mm glass coverslip.  Quantification of GFAP accumulation and space formation Peak GFAP signals and the percentages of astrocyte-free substrate were measured in the same cultures used to quantify neurite growth. GFAP signals were below peak threshold for control astrocytes ( Figure 1C,D ), and displayed in grayscale except for black (0, blue) and white (250, red). The percent GFAP-negative area (“spaces”, Fig. 1E ), and the area of peak GFAP signals (determined as a percentage of total area; Fig. 1F ) were measured for 16 images per culture in 3 cultures per condition. Stretched astrocytes had many processes with saturated, peak GFAP signals ( Fig. 1D ). GFAP signals were also used to quantify astrocyte lawn areas ( Figs. 8 - 10 ).  Neurite growth quantification Confocal images were recorded systematically from neuron-containing areas covering 3.4% of each culture center (average 725 neurons per condition). Neurite growth was measured using Neurolucida 6.0 (MicroBrightfield) or a novel algorithm (see below). Neurons were defined as non-pyknotic DAPI-positive cells expressing ?3 tubulin and in contact with astrocytes and were traced blinded to conditions. “Neurite trees” were measured as the sum of the lengths of all processes per neuron; these were displayed as the average of the largest tree in each field. A semi-automated image algorithm using Igor Pro software (Wavemetrics) was used to identify neurons and measure their processes ( Stepanek et al. 2005 ). A convolution-based approach with thresholding, filtering and masking steps was used to identify neuronal perikarya and neurites ( Fig. 10E, F ). Neuron numbers were estimated by dividing total cell body areas by average soma size (117 ?m2, SD 10). Analysis was restricted to astrocyte regions by a mask excluding non-GFAP areas ( Fig. 10E ). Total neurite growth was calculated as the average total neurite area per GFAP-positive field ( Fig. 10G ), and converted to ?m2.  Protein expression analyses of glial scar markers Cells were collected in 50 mM Tris (pH 8) with protease inhibitors (complete cocktail, Roche), lysed and mechanically homogenized with 0.5% Triton X100 on ice in the same buffer. For neurocan and tenascin cell lysates were treated for 1 hr at 37 °C with Chrondroitinase ABC (Chase ABC, Seikagaku) at a concentration of 1×10-4 U/ml lysate ( Moon et al. 2003 ). Conditioned media (CM) were collected, protease inhibitors were added and debris was removed before concentration (100 kilodalton, kD, exclusion filters, Centricon, Millipore) and subsequent digestion with Chase ABC. Protein was determined using the DC protein assay (Biorad). SDS PAGE was performed using 4-15% acrylamide-Tris-HCl gels (Biorad). After blotting, filters were blocked for 1 hr at RT (blocking buffer, Rockland), and incubated with primary antibodies in blocking buffer overnight at 4°C: rabbit anti-GFAP (Dako), mouse anti-phosphacan (clone 2B49, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank), rabbit anti-chicken tenascin (Chemicon), mouse anti-neurocan (1F6, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank), and mouse anti-? actin (Sigma). After washing in TBS/0.05% Tween 20, donkey anti-rabbit-IR dye 700 and anti mouse-IR dye 800 (both 1:5,000, Rockland), were applied in blocking buffer for 1 hr at RT. Bands were quantified using an Odyssey imaging system (Li-Cor Biosciences). For phosphacan, a peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (Pierce) was used with a chemiluminescent substrate (Supersignal West Pico, Pierce). Signals in cell lysates were normalized to ? actin and in CM to a standardized band from Ponceau S stained blots or Coomassie stained gels. The percentage of fibroblasts in each coculture was determined by immunostaining (see above) and used to adjust protein amounts for astrocyte-specific proteins.  PCR Cell cultures were lysed using 1ml Trizol (Invitrogen) per 6 well plate followed by standard RNA precipitation and cleanup methods. Reverse transcription was done with Superscript III (Invitrogen). RNA was digested using RNAse H and RNAse cocktail (Ambion). Primer sequences were as follows: phosphacan forward 5’GAATTCTGGTCCACCAGCAG 3’, phosphacan reverse 5’GGTTTATACTGCCCTCTTTAGG 3’; phosphacan amplicon size 496 bp ( McKeon et al. 1999 ); tenascin R forward 5’GACATACAAGTCCACCGAT 3’, tenascin R reverse CTGTGAGACGATGGATGTA 3’ yielding a 827 bp product ( Probstmeier et al. 2001 ); tenascins C forward 5’TCTCCACAGCCAAAGAACCT3’, tenascin C reverse 5’TGGCCTCTCTGAGACCTGTT3’ generating a 480bp product; neurocan forward 5’CTATGCCCAGCCTTCTTTTG 3’, neurocan reverse 5’TCTCCCTGAGAGATGGAGGA 3’ leading to a 243 bp amplicon; glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase, GAPDH forward 5’AACTTTGGCATTGTGGAAGG 3’; GAPDH reverse 5’GGATGCAGGGATGATGTTCT 3’ amplifying an 132bp product; GFAP forward 5’GGAAGATCCATGAGGAGGAAG 3’, GFAP reverse 5’GCAACGGTTTCCATCAACAAGA 3’ producing a 1022 bp amplicon. PCR was performed using Taq DNA polymerase (2.5 units, Qiagen) for 30 cycles (39 for tenascin and neurocan). Quantification of band intensities was done using Genesnap. Real time PCR was performed on a Rotor-Gene 6.0.1 (Corbett). The Taqman gene expression assay was used for GFAP and tenascin R (A&B Biosystems). For Neurocan, GAPDH and phosphacan Sybr green was used with Amplitaq Gold (Sybr green master mix, A&B Bioscience). Reactions were carried out in triplicate (40 cycles) followed by a melting curve from 72°C to 95°C to assure the absence of primer dimers; signal was measured (excitation 470 nm, detection 510 nm) after each step. A dilution series of cDNAs was done and the efficiencies of the target and the reference were measured to confirm similarities in regression slopes (data not shown). The expression of each gene of interest (2-??CT) in the scar-like conditions was calculated relative to the astrocyte control RNA and normalized to GAPDH, where ?CT is CT (target) - CT (GAPDH), and ??CT is defined as ?CT (treated) - ?CT (control). Signals from A+F cocultures were corrected according to percent astrocytes counted in sister cocultures. Samples were run in triplicates and each experiment was repeated twice per culture set; four independent harvests were analyzed.  Statistical Analyses Results on stretched astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures were compared to control astrocytes using two-tailed Student’s t-tests. All groups were analyzed using multiple comparisons ANOVA according to either Tukey (among all), Bonferroni (selected pairs) or Dunn (Instat; GraphPad).  RESULTS Postmitotic astrocyte cultures Astrocytes were isolated from P0 cortices without passaging ( Hertz et al. 1982 ; Neary et al. 2003 ) and expanded using FBS. As a maturation step, astrocytes were cultured for 4-5 wks with adult derived horse serum. Though 70 ± 9% (mean ± SD) of the cells were dividing after the first week with FBS, mitotic cells declined to 0.6 ± 0.2 by 4 wks in culture (mean ± SD; N=3). Nestin expression also declined markedly during the first 4 wks (not shown), and the majority of cells (92% ± 3) were GFAP- and S100?-positive by this time ( Fig. 1A ). Only 5.1% (± 3.9) of the cells were A2B5-positive (N = 5), and many of these were double-labeled with GFAP, indicating transition to a mature phenotype. Untreated astrocytes formed a homogeneous lawn when cultured on Petri dishes ( Fig. 2A ), and grew multiple processes when grown on collagen- or fibronectin-coated silastic membranes ( Fig. 1A, C and Fig. 2D ). Thus, most cells in our cultures were postmitotic, highly differentiated astrocytes. Mechanical stretch creates widespread astrocyte reactivity Reactive astrogliosis is characterized by astrocyte stellation and clustering in vivo and lawn interruption in vitro ( Fitch et al. 1999 ; Neary et al. 1994 ), and by increased immunoreactivity for GFAP ( Bignami and Dahl 1976 ; Reier and Houle 1988 ). In our model, astrocyte morphology changed substantially within 24 hr in response to mechanical stretch. Control astrocytes on collagen-coated membranes displayed processes oriented near parallel, forming an uninterrupted lawn ( Figure 1A, C ). Such cell lawns remained uninterrupted immediately after stretching (not shown). Time-lapse microscopy indicated that astrocytes began to contract and extend processes in all directions within a few hr after stretch (not shown). By 24 hr cell-free spaces were surrounded by clusters of stellate astrocytes ( Figure 1B, D ). To quantify stretch-induced clustering we measured GFAP-negative areas; stretch led to a 5-fold increase in unoccupied areas over that seen in undisturbed cultures ( Fig. 1E ). Thus, astrocytes changed shape and actively rearranged after stretching. GFAP staining was increased in stretched astrocytes, especially in processes ( Fig. 1B, D ). Quantification of cell area showing peak GFAP intensity (see Methods) revealed a 3-fold increase in stretched cultures ( Fig. 1F ). Despite these changes in GFAP accumulation, real-time PCR analysis of GFAP mRNA ( Fig. 2F ), and Western blot analysis of GFAP protein ( Fig. 2G ) showed no significant increases in GFAP levels after stretch. Thus stretch induced mainly relocalization of existing GFAP in astrocytes rather than new synthesis. In summary, mechanical stretch of astrocytes induced stellation and clustering, together with an increase in GFAP accumulation in processes. Cocultures of astrocytes and fibroblasts show “reactive sites” and increased GFAP CNS injury causes breakdown of the BBB and infiltration of meningeal fibroblasts ( Abnet et al. 1991 ; Shearer and Fawcett 2001 ). To mimic this response we seeded meningeal fibroblasts onto differentiated astrocytes. After 4 days cocultures had similar numbers of astrocytes (54%) and meningeal fibroblasts (46% ± 11; mean ± SD; N=3), forming astrocyte territories with relatively unchanged cell morphologies ( Fig. 2A and border areas in Fig 2B, C ), interspersed with patches containing both cell types ( Fig. 2B, C ). Astrocytes had well established borders around groups of fibroblasts in long-term cocultures, with reactive processes entering fibroblast territory ( Figure 2 B , arrows). In mixed territories of short-term cocultures spindle-shaped astrocytes with elongated processes and focal GFAP staining mingled with fibroblast clusters (“reactive sites”, Fig. 2B, C ). GFAP mRNA increased substantially in the cocultures compared to astrocytes alone ( Fig. 2F ). Similarly, Western blotting showed nearly a 3-fold increase in GFAP protein levels in the cocultures ( Fig. 2G ). Thus, fibroblast addition led to stellation and clustering of astrocytes in reactive sites and to increased GFAP expression. Because both stress and cell infiltration contribute to injury in vivo, we examined the effects of combining the 2 stimuli. Astrocytes clustered and became stellate in response to stretch even outside fibroblast borders, while fibroblasts appeared unaltered in their distribution ( Fig. 2E ). GFAP mRNA and protein levels were each increased in stretched cocultures compared to controls, but not significantly different from unstretched cocultures ( Fig. 2F, G ). Thus, 4 days of astrocyte-fibroblast coculture had a greater effect on GFAP levels than was seen 24 hr after stretch. In summary, both stretch and meningeal fibroblasts induced the formation of many reactive sites with astrocyte clustering, stellation and GFAP accumulation; fibroblast addition also induced increases in GFAP expression. Stretch and fibroblast interaction upregulate glial scar markers in astrocytes The CNS reaction to injury includes increased expression of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs) and tenascins by astrocytes and other cells of the glial scar ( Asher et al. 2001 ; Deller et al. 1997 ; Dobbertin et al. 2003 ). We therefore examined expression of representative CSPGs and tenacins in our in vitro injury model. Phosphacan secretion was assessed in CM from control and treated astrocytes. Phosphacan-immunoreactive bands were detected in astrocyte CM, at molecular weights (MW) consistent with previous reports ( Dobbertin et al. 2003 ; Sakurai et al. 1996 ). Phosphacan levels were increased by stretch, by fibroblast addition, and by both stimuli ( Fig 3A ). Fibroblasts by themselves did not express or secrete detectable levels of phosphacan ( Fig. 3A ), suggesting that fibroblasts increased phosphacan expression by interacting with astrocytes. We found no significant changes in phosphacan mRNA 24 hr after stretch, but this measure was significantly elevated in cocultures 4 days after fibroblast addition ( Fig. 3B ). Phosphacan immunoreactivity was largely perinuclear in controls, with most processes unstained ( Fig. 3C ). Stretched astrocytes showed pronounced staining in cytoplasm and in elongated processes ( Fig. 3D ). Thus both stretch and interactions with fibroblasts increased expression of phosphacan in astrocytes. Stretching of astrocytes increased neurocan mRNA levels about 2-fold. Fibroblast addition induced a 5.6-fold increase in neurocan mRNA, while fibroblasts alone expressed little neurocan mRNA. Stretching of astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures did not further increase this parameter ( Fig. 4A ). Neurocan is secreted by astrocytes ( Asher et al. 2000 ), and we detected neurocan in astrocyte, but not fibroblast, CM ( Fig. 4B ). Secreted neurocan levels varied but were consistently increased in stretched cultures and astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures ( Fig. 4B ). Neurocan immunoreactivity in stretched cultures was evident on elongated processes as punctate staining outlining reactive astrocytes, similar to previous descriptions ( Fig. 4C ; Asher et al. 2000 ). Tenascins are increased in glial scars surrounding CNS lesions, interact with proteoglycans, and can influence neurite growth ( McKeon et al. 1991 ; Meiners et al. 1995 ; Taylor et al. 1993 ; Wintergerst et al. 1997 ; Pesheva et al. 1993 ). Both tenascin C and tenascin R mRNAs were upregulated in stretched astrocytes compared to controls ( Fig. 5A ). Tenascin R mRNA levels increased significantly in astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures, but did not increase further when cocultures were stretched ( Fig. 5B ). Levels were low in meningeal fibroblasts. We detected a tenascin signal between 180 and 210 kD on blots of astrocyte CM ( Fig. 5B ) consistent with previous reports ( Pesheva et al. 1993 ; Rathjen et al. 1991 ). Levels of tenascin in astrocyte CM were increased by stretch or by fibroblast addition ( Fig. 5C ), but were low in stretched or unstretched fibroblast CM ( Fig. 5D ). Tenascin immunoreactivity was faint in control astrocyte cultures ( Fig. 5E ), but in cocultures tenascin staining was strong in GFAP-positive hypertrophic astrocytes ( Fig. 5F ). In summary, two relevant stimuli, stretch and meningeal fibroblasts, were correlated with increases in expression of phosphacan, neurocan and tenascins in our cultures. These proteins were enriched in CM and concentrated on activated astrocytes in patches like those described above as “reactive sites”. Neurite outgrowth from DRG and cortical explants is reduced on stretched astrocytes Regenerating neurons, including DRG neurons, stop at the scar interface of a CNS lesion site ( Davies et al. 1997 ; 1999 ). Thus, a scar model might be inhibitory to neurite growth. While explants of embryonic DRG showed extensive outgrowth on control astrocytes ( Fig. 6A ), less growth was seen from explants on stretched astrocytes; neurites were short and sometimes displayed club-shaped end bulbs ( Fig. 6B ). Similarly, explants of embryonic cortex showed robust neurite outgrowth that was clearly diminished on stretched astrocytes ( Fig. 6C, D ). Neurites on the stretched cultures were fewer and fascicles appeared thinner than on control lawns. These findings suggest that stretched astrocytes provide a less growth-permissive substrate for DRG and cortical neurons. Dissociated DRG neurons display signs of growth inhibition at “reactive sites” To facilitate quantification of outgrowth, we examined dissociated neurons. Purified DRG neurons were obtained by maturation in vitro, while proliferating cells, e.g. glia, which are known to promote neurite growth ( Bixby et al. 1988 ; Letourneau et al. 1990 ; Wanner et al. 2006 ), were removed. When these neurons were seeded onto our cultures, total neuron numbers and percent neurons with neurites were not different in scar-like and control cultures (data not shown). However, neurons with large perikarya (170-240 ?m circumference) regenerated processes on control astrocytes, but not on scar-like cultures ( Fig. 7 and data not shown). Small neurons (80-120 ?m circumference) had shorter, less elaborate neurites in the scar-like conditions (e.g., Fig. 7D, E ). Neurite length of small neurons was reduced to 52% (± 12) of controls on stretched astrocytes, and more strongly on astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures (A+F: 17% ± 3; A+F-str: 26% ± 5; N = 87 neurons). Neurites often stopped at astrocyte borders with fibroblasts or spaces, often with swollen end bulbs ( Fig. 7A-C ). Neurites in scar-like cultures were generally associated with astrocyte surfaces; filopodia were sometimes seen in contact with reactive astrocyte processes ( Fig. 7C ). Thus some growth-promoting properties of astrocytes were retained; scar-like astrocyte cultures were a mixture of growth-permissive and -inhibitory patches. Overall, regeneration of DRG neurons appeared reduced in the scar-like cultures, with potential differences among DRG neuronal populations. This model will be useful in identifying the microenvironment of abortive neurite growth in scar-like cultures. Adhesion and growth of embryonic spinal cord neurons is impaired on stretched astrocytes and astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures In injured spinal cords, the glial scar is strongly inhibitory for local and descending axons. We seeded dissociated embryonic spinal cord cells for 24 hr in low density onto the various astrocyte lawns, so we were not examining growth on embryonic spinal cord-derived glia (data not shown). Fewer neurons were found on treated astrocytes compared to controls, and neurons on the treated astrocytes had shorter processes ( Fig. 8 ). Spinal neurons in stretched cultures were found almost exclusively on astrocytes, and even in “reactive sites” some neurons grew on stellate astrocyte processes ( Figure 8B ). Neuron numbers were reduced by more than 50% on treated astrocyte lawns ( Fig. 8E ). Since stretched astrocytes covered 89 % of the culture surface (not shown) and neuron density was normalized to astrocyte area, clustering and “spaces” could not account for this reduction. To test whether neurons were dying or failing to adhere, we transferred media from treated cultures onto laminin substrates. Media from stretched astrocytes provided many neurons that adhered and grew neurites, while media from controls provided almost none (data not shown). This suggests that at least some neurons that adhered to control astrocytes did not adhere to the treated cultures. For those neurons that adhered, neurite outgrowth was inhibited in all three scar-like conditions ( Fig. 8C, D, F ). Outgrowth of postnatal spinal cord neurons and cortical neurons is strongly inhibited on stretched astrocytes and astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures Mature neurons respond differently from embryonic neurons to growth inhibitory signals ( Chen et al. 1995 ; Hirose et al. 1993 ). We therefore assessed outgrowth of dissociated neurons from P4 spinal cords. P4 neurons adhered as well to the treated astrocytes as to controls (data not shown). On control astrocytes neurons grew long processes as well as shorter ones ( Fig. 9A ), whereas on stretched cocultures many neurons lacked processes or were stunted ( Fig. 9B , arrows). Some neurons had short, thin processes with swollen endings ( Fig. 9D , asterisks). Additionally, control neurite growth was mostly straight ( Fig. 9C ), whereas neurons on stretched cocultures frequently turned, showing multiple loops and swollen endings ( Fig. 9E ). These morphologies are consistent with neurons responding to an inhibitory environment. Furthering this idea, branching and neurite length/neuron were reduced to almost half of control levels, while fewer neurons had processes on the treated cultures ( Table I and data not shown). Similarly, the size of neurite trees was reduced nearly 50% in scar-like cultures ( Fig. 9F ). To examine neurite growth in an observer-independent manner, we used a semi-automated approach that identifies neurons and neurites and can be restricted to neurons on astrocyte lawns ( Fig. 10E,F ; Stepanek et al. 2005 ). This method showed that total neurite growth was strongly reduced by stretch and by coculture with fibroblasts ( Fig. 9G ). In sum, our results indicate that postnatal spinal neurons were more strongly inhibited than embryonic neurons in the scar-like cultures. We also tested neurons from P4 sensorimotor cortex, which includes the corticospinal neurons that are important for recovery after spinal cord injury ( Li et al. 1998 ). Our P4 cortical cells comprised ? 50 % neurons, which attached in similar numbers on control and treated astrocytes (data not shown). P4 cortical neurons grew long neurites on control astrocytes, while cortical neurons plated on treated cultures had shorter processes or no processes ( Fig. 10 ). Stretched astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures had significantly fewer neurons with processes than did controls (not shown). Quantification of P4 cortical neurite growth on the various astrocyte lawns was performed using both interactive tracing and automated analysis. Both methods showed a significant reduction in neurite growth on treated astrocytes ( Table I , Figure 10G, H ). Taken together, the data show that growth from postnatal cortical neurons is strongly inhibited on both stretched astrocytes and astrocytes interacting with fibroblasts.  RESULTS Postmitotic astrocyte cultures Astrocytes were isolated from P0 cortices without passaging ( Hertz et al. 1982 ; Neary et al. 2003 ) and expanded using FBS. As a maturation step, astrocytes were cultured for 4-5 wks with adult derived horse serum. Though 70 ± 9% (mean ± SD) of the cells were dividing after the first week with FBS, mitotic cells declined to 0.6 ± 0.2 by 4 wks in culture (mean ± SD; N=3). Nestin expression also declined markedly during the first 4 wks (not shown), and the majority of cells (92% ± 3) were GFAP- and S100?-positive by this time ( Fig. 1A ). Only 5.1% (± 3.9) of the cells were A2B5-positive (N = 5), and many of these were double-labeled with GFAP, indicating transition to a mature phenotype. Untreated astrocytes formed a homogeneous lawn when cultured on Petri dishes ( Fig. 2A ), and grew multiple processes when grown on collagen- or fibronectin-coated silastic membranes ( Fig. 1A, C and Fig. 2D ). Thus, most cells in our cultures were postmitotic, highly differentiated astrocytes. Mechanical stretch creates widespread astrocyte reactivity Reactive astrogliosis is characterized by astrocyte stellation and clustering in vivo and lawn interruption in vitro ( Fitch et al. 1999 ; Neary et al. 1994 ), and by increased immunoreactivity for GFAP ( Bignami and Dahl 1976 ; Reier and Houle 1988 ). In our model, astrocyte morphology changed substantially within 24 hr in response to mechanical stretch. Control astrocytes on collagen-coated membranes displayed processes oriented near parallel, forming an uninterrupted lawn ( Figure 1A, C ). Such cell lawns remained uninterrupted immediately after stretching (not shown). Time-lapse microscopy indicated that astrocytes began to contract and extend processes in all directions within a few hr after stretch (not shown). By 24 hr cell-free spaces were surrounded by clusters of stellate astrocytes ( Figure 1B, D ). To quantify stretch-induced clustering we measured GFAP-negative areas; stretch led to a 5-fold increase in unoccupied areas over that seen in undisturbed cultures ( Fig. 1E ). Thus, astrocytes changed shape and actively rearranged after stretching. GFAP staining was increased in stretched astrocytes, especially in processes ( Fig. 1B, D ). Quantification of cell area showing peak GFAP intensity (see Methods) revealed a 3-fold increase in stretched cultures ( Fig. 1F ). Despite these changes in GFAP accumulation, real-time PCR analysis of GFAP mRNA ( Fig. 2F ), and Western blot analysis of GFAP protein ( Fig. 2G ) showed no significant increases in GFAP levels after stretch. Thus stretch induced mainly relocalization of existing GFAP in astrocytes rather than new synthesis. In summary, mechanical stretch of astrocytes induced stellation and clustering, together with an increase in GFAP accumulation in processes. Cocultures of astrocytes and fibroblasts show “reactive sites” and increased GFAP CNS injury causes breakdown of the BBB and infiltration of meningeal fibroblasts ( Abnet et al. 1991 ; Shearer and Fawcett 2001 ). To mimic this response we seeded meningeal fibroblasts onto differentiated astrocytes. After 4 days cocultures had similar numbers of astrocytes (54%) and meningeal fibroblasts (46% ± 11; mean ± SD; N=3), forming astrocyte territories with relatively unchanged cell morphologies ( Fig. 2A and border areas in Fig 2B, C ), interspersed with patches containing both cell types ( Fig. 2B, C ). Astrocytes had well established borders around groups of fibroblasts in long-term cocultures, with reactive processes entering fibroblast territory ( Figure 2 B , arrows). In mixed territories of short-term cocultures spindle-shaped astrocytes with elongated processes and focal GFAP staining mingled with fibroblast clusters (“reactive sites”, Fig. 2B, C ). GFAP mRNA increased substantially in the cocultures compared to astrocytes alone ( Fig. 2F ). Similarly, Western blotting showed nearly a 3-fold increase in GFAP protein levels in the cocultures ( Fig. 2G ). Thus, fibroblast addition led to stellation and clustering of astrocytes in reactive sites and to increased GFAP expression. Because both stress and cell infiltration contribute to injury in vivo, we examined the effects of combining the 2 stimuli. Astrocytes clustered and became stellate in response to stretch even outside fibroblast borders, while fibroblasts appeared unaltered in their distribution ( Fig. 2E ). GFAP mRNA and protein levels were each increased in stretched cocultures compared to controls, but not significantly different from unstretched cocultures ( Fig. 2F, G ). Thus, 4 days of astrocyte-fibroblast coculture had a greater effect on GFAP levels than was seen 24 hr after stretch. In summary, both stretch and meningeal fibroblasts induced the formation of many reactive sites with astrocyte clustering, stellation and GFAP accumulation; fibroblast addition also induced increases in GFAP expression. Stretch and fibroblast interaction upregulate glial scar markers in astrocytes The CNS reaction to injury includes increased expression of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs) and tenascins by astrocytes and other cells of the glial scar ( Asher et al. 2001 ; Deller et al. 1997 ; Dobbertin et al. 2003 ). We therefore examined expression of representative CSPGs and tenacins in our in vitro injury model. Phosphacan secretion was assessed in CM from control and treated astrocytes. Phosphacan-immunoreactive bands were detected in astrocyte CM, at molecular weights (MW) consistent with previous reports ( Dobbertin et al. 2003 ; Sakurai et al. 1996 ). Phosphacan levels were increased by stretch, by fibroblast addition, and by both stimuli ( Fig 3A ). Fibroblasts by themselves did not express or secrete detectable levels of phosphacan ( Fig. 3A ), suggesting that fibroblasts increased phosphacan expression by interacting with astrocytes. We found no significant changes in phosphacan mRNA 24 hr after stretch, but this measure was significantly elevated in cocultures 4 days after fibroblast addition ( Fig. 3B ). Phosphacan immunoreactivity was largely perinuclear in controls, with most processes unstained ( Fig. 3C ). Stretched astrocytes showed pronounced staining in cytoplasm and in elongated processes ( Fig. 3D ). Thus both stretch and interactions with fibroblasts increased expression of phosphacan in astrocytes. Stretching of astrocytes increased neurocan mRNA levels about 2-fold. Fibroblast addition induced a 5.6-fold increase in neurocan mRNA, while fibroblasts alone expressed little neurocan mRNA. Stretching of astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures did not further increase this parameter ( Fig. 4A ). Neurocan is secreted by astrocytes ( Asher et al. 2000 ), and we detected neurocan in astrocyte, but not fibroblast, CM ( Fig. 4B ). Secreted neurocan levels varied but were consistently increased in stretched cultures and astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures ( Fig. 4B ). Neurocan immunoreactivity in stretched cultures was evident on elongated processes as punctate staining outlining reactive astrocytes, similar to previous descriptions ( Fig. 4C ; Asher et al. 2000 ). Tenascins are increased in glial scars surrounding CNS lesions, interact with proteoglycans, and can influence neurite growth ( McKeon et al. 1991 ; Meiners et al. 1995 ; Taylor et al. 1993 ; Wintergerst et al. 1997 ; Pesheva et al. 1993 ). Both tenascin C and tenascin R mRNAs were upregulated in stretched astrocytes compared to controls ( Fig. 5A ). Tenascin R mRNA levels increased significantly in astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures, but did not increase further when cocultures were stretched ( Fig. 5B ). Levels were low in meningeal fibroblasts. We detected a tenascin signal between 180 and 210 kD on blots of astrocyte CM ( Fig. 5B ) consistent with previous reports ( Pesheva et al. 1993 ; Rathjen et al. 1991 ). Levels of tenascin in astrocyte CM were increased by stretch or by fibroblast addition ( Fig. 5C ), but were low in stretched or unstretched fibroblast CM ( Fig. 5D ). Tenascin immunoreactivity was faint in control astrocyte cultures ( Fig. 5E ), but in cocultures tenascin staining was strong in GFAP-positive hypertrophic astrocytes ( Fig. 5F ). In summary, two relevant stimuli, stretch and meningeal fibroblasts, were correlated with increases in expression of phosphacan, neurocan and tenascins in our cultures. These proteins were enriched in CM and concentrated on activated astrocytes in patches like those described above as “reactive sites”. Neurite outgrowth from DRG and cortical explants is reduced on stretched astrocytes Regenerating neurons, including DRG neurons, stop at the scar interface of a CNS lesion site ( Davies et al. 1997 ; 1999 ). Thus, a scar model might be inhibitory to neurite growth. While explants of embryonic DRG showed extensive outgrowth on control astrocytes ( Fig. 6A ), less growth was seen from explants on stretched astrocytes; neurites were short and sometimes displayed club-shaped end bulbs ( Fig. 6B ). Similarly, explants of embryonic cortex showed robust neurite outgrowth that was clearly diminished on stretched astrocytes ( Fig. 6C, D ). Neurites on the stretched cultures were fewer and fascicles appeared thinner than on control lawns. These findings suggest that stretched astrocytes provide a less growth-permissive substrate for DRG and cortical neurons. Dissociated DRG neurons display signs of growth inhibition at “reactive sites” To facilitate quantification of outgrowth, we examined dissociated neurons. Purified DRG neurons were obtained by maturation in vitro, while proliferating cells, e.g. glia, which are known to promote neurite growth ( Bixby et al. 1988 ; Letourneau et al. 1990 ; Wanner et al. 2006 ), were removed. When these neurons were seeded onto our cultures, total neuron numbers and percent neurons with neurites were not different in scar-like and control cultures (data not shown). However, neurons with large perikarya (170-240 ?m circumference) regenerated processes on control astrocytes, but not on scar-like cultures ( Fig. 7 and data not shown). Small neurons (80-120 ?m circumference) had shorter, less elaborate neurites in the scar-like conditions (e.g., Fig. 7D, E ). Neurite length of small neurons was reduced to 52% (± 12) of controls on stretched astrocytes, and more strongly on astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures (A+F: 17% ± 3; A+F-str: 26% ± 5; N = 87 neurons). Neurites often stopped at astrocyte borders with fibroblasts or spaces, often with swollen end bulbs ( Fig. 7A-C ). Neurites in scar-like cultures were generally associated with astrocyte surfaces; filopodia were sometimes seen in contact with reactive astrocyte processes ( Fig. 7C ). Thus some growth-promoting properties of astrocytes were retained; scar-like astrocyte cultures were a mixture of growth-permissive and -inhibitory patches. Overall, regeneration of DRG neurons appeared reduced in the scar-like cultures, with potential differences among DRG neuronal populations. This model will be useful in identifying the microenvironment of abortive neurite growth in scar-like cultures. Adhesion and growth of embryonic spinal cord neurons is impaired on stretched astrocytes and astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures In injured spinal cords, the glial scar is strongly inhibitory for local and descending axons. We seeded dissociated embryonic spinal cord cells for 24 hr in low density onto the various astrocyte lawns, so we were not examining growth on embryonic spinal cord-derived glia (data not shown). Fewer neurons were found on treated astrocytes compared to controls, and neurons on the treated astrocytes had shorter processes ( Fig. 8 ). Spinal neurons in stretched cultures were found almost exclusively on astrocytes, and even in “reactive sites” some neurons grew on stellate astrocyte processes ( Figure 8B ). Neuron numbers were reduced by more than 50% on treated astrocyte lawns ( Fig. 8E ). Since stretched astrocytes covered 89 % of the culture surface (not shown) and neuron density was normalized to astrocyte area, clustering and “spaces” could not account for this reduction. To test whether neurons were dying or failing to adhere, we transferred media from treated cultures onto laminin substrates. Media from stretched astrocytes provided many neurons that adhered and grew neurites, while media from controls provided almost none (data not shown). This suggests that at least some neurons that adhered to control astrocytes did not adhere to the treated cultures. For those neurons that adhered, neurite outgrowth was inhibited in all three scar-like conditions ( Fig. 8C, D, F ). Outgrowth of postnatal spinal cord neurons and cortical neurons is strongly inhibited on stretched astrocytes and astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures Mature neurons respond differently from embryonic neurons to growth inhibitory signals ( Chen et al. 1995 ; Hirose et al. 1993 ). We therefore assessed outgrowth of dissociated neurons from P4 spinal cords. P4 neurons adhered as well to the treated astrocytes as to controls (data not shown). On control astrocytes neurons grew long processes as well as shorter ones ( Fig. 9A ), whereas on stretched cocultures many neurons lacked processes or were stunted ( Fig. 9B , arrows). Some neurons had short, thin processes with swollen endings ( Fig. 9D , asterisks). Additionally, control neurite growth was mostly straight ( Fig. 9C ), whereas neurons on stretched cocultures frequently turned, showing multiple loops and swollen endings ( Fig. 9E ). These morphologies are consistent with neurons responding to an inhibitory environment. Furthering this idea, branching and neurite length/neuron were reduced to almost half of control levels, while fewer neurons had processes on the treated cultures ( Table I and data not shown). Similarly, the size of neurite trees was reduced nearly 50% in scar-like cultures ( Fig. 9F ). To examine neurite growth in an observer-independent manner, we used a semi-automated approach that identifies neurons and neurites and can be restricted to neurons on astrocyte lawns ( Fig. 10E,F ; Stepanek et al. 2005 ). This method showed that total neurite growth was strongly reduced by stretch and by coculture with fibroblasts ( Fig. 9G ). In sum, our results indicate that postnatal spinal neurons were more strongly inhibited than embryonic neurons in the scar-like cultures. We also tested neurons from P4 sensorimotor cortex, which includes the corticospinal neurons that are important for recovery after spinal cord injury ( Li et al. 1998 ). Our P4 cortical cells comprised ? 50 % neurons, which attached in similar numbers on control and treated astrocytes (data not shown). P4 cortical neurons grew long neurites on control astrocytes, while cortical neurons plated on treated cultures had shorter processes or no processes ( Fig. 10 ). Stretched astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures had significantly fewer neurons with processes than did controls (not shown). Quantification of P4 cortical neurite growth on the various astrocyte lawns was performed using both interactive tracing and automated analysis. Both methods showed a significant reduction in neurite growth on treated astrocytes ( Table I , Figure 10G, H ). Taken together, the data show that growth from postnatal cortical neurons is strongly inhibited on both stretched astrocytes and astrocytes interacting with fibroblasts.  Postmitotic astrocyte cultures Astrocytes were isolated from P0 cortices without passaging ( Hertz et al. 1982 ; Neary et al. 2003 ) and expanded using FBS. As a maturation step, astrocytes were cultured for 4-5 wks with adult derived horse serum. Though 70 ± 9% (mean ± SD) of the cells were dividing after the first week with FBS, mitotic cells declined to 0.6 ± 0.2 by 4 wks in culture (mean ± SD; N=3). Nestin expression also declined markedly during the first 4 wks (not shown), and the majority of cells (92% ± 3) were GFAP- and S100?-positive by this time ( Fig. 1A ). Only 5.1% (± 3.9) of the cells were A2B5-positive (N = 5), and many of these were double-labeled with GFAP, indicating transition to a mature phenotype. Untreated astrocytes formed a homogeneous lawn when cultured on Petri dishes ( Fig. 2A ), and grew multiple processes when grown on collagen- or fibronectin-coated silastic membranes ( Fig. 1A, C and Fig. 2D ). Thus, most cells in our cultures were postmitotic, highly differentiated astrocytes.  Postmitotic astrocyte cultures Astrocytes were isolated from P0 cortices without passaging ( Hertz et al. 1982 ; Neary et al. 2003 ) and expanded using FBS. As a maturation step, astrocytes were cultured for 4-5 wks with adult derived horse serum. Though 70 ± 9% (mean ± SD) of the cells were dividing after the first week with FBS, mitotic cells declined to 0.6 ± 0.2 by 4 wks in culture (mean ± SD; N=3). Nestin expression also declined markedly during the first 4 wks (not shown), and the majority of cells (92% ± 3) were GFAP- and S100?-positive by this time ( Fig. 1A ). Only 5.1% (± 3.9) of the cells were A2B5-positive (N = 5), and many of these were double-labeled with GFAP, indicating transition to a mature phenotype. Untreated astrocytes formed a homogeneous lawn when cultured on Petri dishes ( Fig. 2A ), and grew multiple processes when grown on collagen- or fibronectin-coated silastic membranes ( Fig. 1A, C and Fig. 2D ). Thus, most cells in our cultures were postmitotic, highly differentiated astrocytes.  Mechanical stretch creates widespread astrocyte reactivity Reactive astrogliosis is characterized by astrocyte stellation and clustering in vivo and lawn interruption in vitro ( Fitch et al. 1999 ; Neary et al. 1994 ), and by increased immunoreactivity for GFAP ( Bignami and Dahl 1976 ; Reier and Houle 1988 ). In our model, astrocyte morphology changed substantially within 24 hr in response to mechanical stretch. Control astrocytes on collagen-coated membranes displayed processes oriented near parallel, forming an uninterrupted lawn ( Figure 1A, C ). Such cell lawns remained uninterrupted immediately after stretching (not shown). Time-lapse microscopy indicated that astrocytes began to contract and extend processes in all directions within a few hr after stretch (not shown). By 24 hr cell-free spaces were surrounded by clusters of stellate astrocytes ( Figure 1B, D ). To quantify stretch-induced clustering we measured GFAP-negative areas; stretch led to a 5-fold increase in unoccupied areas over that seen in undisturbed cultures ( Fig. 1E ). Thus, astrocytes changed shape and actively rearranged after stretching. GFAP staining was increased in stretched astrocytes, especially in processes ( Fig. 1B, D ). Quantification of cell area showing peak GFAP intensity (see Methods) revealed a 3-fold increase in stretched cultures ( Fig. 1F ). Despite these changes in GFAP accumulation, real-time PCR analysis of GFAP mRNA ( Fig. 2F ), and Western blot analysis of GFAP protein ( Fig. 2G ) showed no significant increases in GFAP levels after stretch. Thus stretch induced mainly relocalization of existing GFAP in astrocytes rather than new synthesis. In summary, mechanical stretch of astrocytes induced stellation and clustering, together with an increase in GFAP accumulation in processes.  Mechanical stretch creates widespread astrocyte reactivity Reactive astrogliosis is characterized by astrocyte stellation and clustering in vivo and lawn interruption in vitro ( Fitch et al. 1999 ; Neary et al. 1994 ), and by increased immunoreactivity for GFAP ( Bignami and Dahl 1976 ; Reier and Houle 1988 ). In our model, astrocyte morphology changed substantially within 24 hr in response to mechanical stretch. Control astrocytes on collagen-coated membranes displayed processes oriented near parallel, forming an uninterrupted lawn ( Figure 1A, C ). Such cell lawns remained uninterrupted immediately after stretching (not shown). Time-lapse microscopy indicated that astrocytes began to contract and extend processes in all directions within a few hr after stretch (not shown). By 24 hr cell-free spaces were surrounded by clusters of stellate astrocytes ( Figure 1B, D ). To quantify stretch-induced clustering we measured GFAP-negative areas; stretch led to a 5-fold increase in unoccupied areas over that seen in undisturbed cultures ( Fig. 1E ). Thus, astrocytes changed shape and actively rearranged after stretching. GFAP staining was increased in stretched astrocytes, especially in processes ( Fig. 1B, D ). Quantification of cell area showing peak GFAP intensity (see Methods) revealed a 3-fold increase in stretched cultures ( Fig. 1F ). Despite these changes in GFAP accumulation, real-time PCR analysis of GFAP mRNA ( Fig. 2F ), and Western blot analysis of GFAP protein ( Fig. 2G ) showed no significant increases in GFAP levels after stretch. Thus stretch induced mainly relocalization of existing GFAP in astrocytes rather than new synthesis. In summary, mechanical stretch of astrocytes induced stellation and clustering, together with an increase in GFAP accumulation in processes.  Cocultures of astrocytes and fibroblasts show “reactive sites” and increased GFAP CNS injury causes breakdown of the BBB and infiltration of meningeal fibroblasts ( Abnet et al. 1991 ; Shearer and Fawcett 2001 ). To mimic this response we seeded meningeal fibroblasts onto differentiated astrocytes. After 4 days cocultures had similar numbers of astrocytes (54%) and meningeal fibroblasts (46% ± 11; mean ± SD; N=3), forming astrocyte territories with relatively unchanged cell morphologies ( Fig. 2A and border areas in Fig 2B, C ), interspersed with patches containing both cell types ( Fig. 2B, C ). Astrocytes had well established borders around groups of fibroblasts in long-term cocultures, with reactive processes entering fibroblast territory ( Figure 2 B , arrows). In mixed territories of short-term cocultures spindle-shaped astrocytes with elongated processes and focal GFAP staining mingled with fibroblast clusters (“reactive sites”, Fig. 2B, C ). GFAP mRNA increased substantially in the cocultures compared to astrocytes alone ( Fig. 2F ). Similarly, Western blotting showed nearly a 3-fold increase in GFAP protein levels in the cocultures ( Fig. 2G ). Thus, fibroblast addition led to stellation and clustering of astrocytes in reactive sites and to increased GFAP expression. Because both stress and cell infiltration contribute to injury in vivo, we examined the effects of combining the 2 stimuli. Astrocytes clustered and became stellate in response to stretch even outside fibroblast borders, while fibroblasts appeared unaltered in their distribution ( Fig. 2E ). GFAP mRNA and protein levels were each increased in stretched cocultures compared to controls, but not significantly different from unstretched cocultures ( Fig. 2F, G ). Thus, 4 days of astrocyte-fibroblast coculture had a greater effect on GFAP levels than was seen 24 hr after stretch. In summary, both stretch and meningeal fibroblasts induced the formation of many reactive sites with astrocyte clustering, stellation and GFAP accumulation; fibroblast addition also induced increases in GFAP expression.  Cocultures of astrocytes and fibroblasts show “reactive sites” and increased GFAP CNS injury causes breakdown of the BBB and infiltration of meningeal fibroblasts ( Abnet et al. 1991 ; Shearer and Fawcett 2001 ). To mimic this response we seeded meningeal fibroblasts onto differentiated astrocytes. After 4 days cocultures had similar numbers of astrocytes (54%) and meningeal fibroblasts (46% ± 11; mean ± SD; N=3), forming astrocyte territories with relatively unchanged cell morphologies ( Fig. 2A and border areas in Fig 2B, C ), interspersed with patches containing both cell types ( Fig. 2B, C ). Astrocytes had well established borders around groups of fibroblasts in long-term cocultures, with reactive processes entering fibroblast territory ( Figure 2 B , arrows). In mixed territories of short-term cocultures spindle-shaped astrocytes with elongated processes and focal GFAP staining mingled with fibroblast clusters (“reactive sites”, Fig. 2B, C ). GFAP mRNA increased substantially in the cocultures compared to astrocytes alone ( Fig. 2F ). Similarly, Western blotting showed nearly a 3-fold increase in GFAP protein levels in the cocultures ( Fig. 2G ). Thus, fibroblast addition led to stellation and clustering of astrocytes in reactive sites and to increased GFAP expression. Because both stress and cell infiltration contribute to injury in vivo, we examined the effects of combining the 2 stimuli. Astrocytes clustered and became stellate in response to stretch even outside fibroblast borders, while fibroblasts appeared unaltered in their distribution ( Fig. 2E ). GFAP mRNA and protein levels were each increased in stretched cocultures compared to controls, but not significantly different from unstretched cocultures ( Fig. 2F, G ). Thus, 4 days of astrocyte-fibroblast coculture had a greater effect on GFAP levels than was seen 24 hr after stretch. In summary, both stretch and meningeal fibroblasts induced the formation of many reactive sites with astrocyte clustering, stellation and GFAP accumulation; fibroblast addition also induced increases in GFAP expression.  Stretch and fibroblast interaction upregulate glial scar markers in astrocytes The CNS reaction to injury includes increased expression of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs) and tenascins by astrocytes and other cells of the glial scar ( Asher et al. 2001 ; Deller et al. 1997 ; Dobbertin et al. 2003 ). We therefore examined expression of representative CSPGs and tenacins in our in vitro injury model. Phosphacan secretion was assessed in CM from control and treated astrocytes. Phosphacan-immunoreactive bands were detected in astrocyte CM, at molecular weights (MW) consistent with previous reports ( Dobbertin et al. 2003 ; Sakurai et al. 1996 ). Phosphacan levels were increased by stretch, by fibroblast addition, and by both stimuli ( Fig 3A ). Fibroblasts by themselves did not express or secrete detectable levels of phosphacan ( Fig. 3A ), suggesting that fibroblasts increased phosphacan expression by interacting with astrocytes. We found no significant changes in phosphacan mRNA 24 hr after stretch, but this measure was significantly elevated in cocultures 4 days after fibroblast addition ( Fig. 3B ). Phosphacan immunoreactivity was largely perinuclear in controls, with most processes unstained ( Fig. 3C ). Stretched astrocytes showed pronounced staining in cytoplasm and in elongated processes ( Fig. 3D ). Thus both stretch and interactions with fibroblasts increased expression of phosphacan in astrocytes. Stretching of astrocytes increased neurocan mRNA levels about 2-fold. Fibroblast addition induced a 5.6-fold increase in neurocan mRNA, while fibroblasts alone expressed little neurocan mRNA. Stretching of astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures did not further increase this parameter ( Fig. 4A ). Neurocan is secreted by astrocytes ( Asher et al. 2000 ), and we detected neurocan in astrocyte, but not fibroblast, CM ( Fig. 4B ). Secreted neurocan levels varied but were consistently increased in stretched cultures and astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures ( Fig. 4B ). Neurocan immunoreactivity in stretched cultures was evident on elongated processes as punctate staining outlining reactive astrocytes, similar to previous descriptions ( Fig. 4C ; Asher et al. 2000 ). Tenascins are increased in glial scars surrounding CNS lesions, interact with proteoglycans, and can influence neurite growth ( McKeon et al. 1991 ; Meiners et al. 1995 ; Taylor et al. 1993 ; Wintergerst et al. 1997 ; Pesheva et al. 1993 ). Both tenascin C and tenascin R mRNAs were upregulated in stretched astrocytes compared to controls ( Fig. 5A ). Tenascin R mRNA levels increased significantly in astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures, but did not increase further when cocultures were stretched ( Fig. 5B ). Levels were low in meningeal fibroblasts. We detected a tenascin signal between 180 and 210 kD on blots of astrocyte CM ( Fig. 5B ) consistent with previous reports ( Pesheva et al. 1993 ; Rathjen et al. 1991 ). Levels of tenascin in astrocyte CM were increased by stretch or by fibroblast addition ( Fig. 5C ), but were low in stretched or unstretched fibroblast CM ( Fig. 5D ). Tenascin immunoreactivity was faint in control astrocyte cultures ( Fig. 5E ), but in cocultures tenascin staining was strong in GFAP-positive hypertrophic astrocytes ( Fig. 5F ). In summary, two relevant stimuli, stretch and meningeal fibroblasts, were correlated with increases in expression of phosphacan, neurocan and tenascins in our cultures. These proteins were enriched in CM and concentrated on activated astrocytes in patches like those described above as “reactive sites”.  Stretch and fibroblast interaction upregulate glial scar markers in astrocytes The CNS reaction to injury includes increased expression of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs) and tenascins by astrocytes and other cells of the glial scar ( Asher et al. 2001 ; Deller et al. 1997 ; Dobbertin et al. 2003 ). We therefore examined expression of representative CSPGs and tenacins in our in vitro injury model. Phosphacan secretion was assessed in CM from control and treated astrocytes. Phosphacan-immunoreactive bands were detected in astrocyte CM, at molecular weights (MW) consistent with previous reports ( Dobbertin et al. 2003 ; Sakurai et al. 1996 ). Phosphacan levels were increased by stretch, by fibroblast addition, and by both stimuli ( Fig 3A ). Fibroblasts by themselves did not express or secrete detectable levels of phosphacan ( Fig. 3A ), suggesting that fibroblasts increased phosphacan expression by interacting with astrocytes. We found no significant changes in phosphacan mRNA 24 hr after stretch, but this measure was significantly elevated in cocultures 4 days after fibroblast addition ( Fig. 3B ). Phosphacan immunoreactivity was largely perinuclear in controls, with most processes unstained ( Fig. 3C ). Stretched astrocytes showed pronounced staining in cytoplasm and in elongated processes ( Fig. 3D ). Thus both stretch and interactions with fibroblasts increased expression of phosphacan in astrocytes. Stretching of astrocytes increased neurocan mRNA levels about 2-fold. Fibroblast addition induced a 5.6-fold increase in neurocan mRNA, while fibroblasts alone expressed little neurocan mRNA. Stretching of astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures did not further increase this parameter ( Fig. 4A ). Neurocan is secreted by astrocytes ( Asher et al. 2000 ), and we detected neurocan in astrocyte, but not fibroblast, CM ( Fig. 4B ). Secreted neurocan levels varied but were consistently increased in stretched cultures and astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures ( Fig. 4B ). Neurocan immunoreactivity in stretched cultures was evident on elongated processes as punctate staining outlining reactive astrocytes, similar to previous descriptions ( Fig. 4C ; Asher et al. 2000 ). Tenascins are increased in glial scars surrounding CNS lesions, interact with proteoglycans, and can influence neurite growth ( McKeon et al. 1991 ; Meiners et al. 1995 ; Taylor et al. 1993 ; Wintergerst et al. 1997 ; Pesheva et al. 1993 ). Both tenascin C and tenascin R mRNAs were upregulated in stretched astrocytes compared to controls ( Fig. 5A ). Tenascin R mRNA levels increased significantly in astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures, but did not increase further when cocultures were stretched ( Fig. 5B ). Levels were low in meningeal fibroblasts. We detected a tenascin signal between 180 and 210 kD on blots of astrocyte CM ( Fig. 5B ) consistent with previous reports ( Pesheva et al. 1993 ; Rathjen et al. 1991 ). Levels of tenascin in astrocyte CM were increased by stretch or by fibroblast addition ( Fig. 5C ), but were low in stretched or unstretched fibroblast CM ( Fig. 5D ). Tenascin immunoreactivity was faint in control astrocyte cultures ( Fig. 5E ), but in cocultures tenascin staining was strong in GFAP-positive hypertrophic astrocytes ( Fig. 5F ). In summary, two relevant stimuli, stretch and meningeal fibroblasts, were correlated with increases in expression of phosphacan, neurocan and tenascins in our cultures. These proteins were enriched in CM and concentrated on activated astrocytes in patches like those described above as “reactive sites”.  Neurite outgrowth from DRG and cortical explants is reduced on stretched astrocytes Regenerating neurons, including DRG neurons, stop at the scar interface of a CNS lesion site ( Davies et al. 1997 ; 1999 ). Thus, a scar model might be inhibitory to neurite growth. While explants of embryonic DRG showed extensive outgrowth on control astrocytes ( Fig. 6A ), less growth was seen from explants on stretched astrocytes; neurites were short and sometimes displayed club-shaped end bulbs ( Fig. 6B ). Similarly, explants of embryonic cortex showed robust neurite outgrowth that was clearly diminished on stretched astrocytes ( Fig. 6C, D ). Neurites on the stretched cultures were fewer and fascicles appeared thinner than on control lawns. These findings suggest that stretched astrocytes provide a less growth-permissive substrate for DRG and cortical neurons.  Neurite outgrowth from DRG and cortical explants is reduced on stretched astrocytes Regenerating neurons, including DRG neurons, stop at the scar interface of a CNS lesion site ( Davies et al. 1997 ; 1999 ). Thus, a scar model might be inhibitory to neurite growth. While explants of embryonic DRG showed extensive outgrowth on control astrocytes ( Fig. 6A ), less growth was seen from explants on stretched astrocytes; neurites were short and sometimes displayed club-shaped end bulbs ( Fig. 6B ). Similarly, explants of embryonic cortex showed robust neurite outgrowth that was clearly diminished on stretched astrocytes ( Fig. 6C, D ). Neurites on the stretched cultures were fewer and fascicles appeared thinner than on control lawns. These findings suggest that stretched astrocytes provide a less growth-permissive substrate for DRG and cortical neurons.  Dissociated DRG neurons display signs of growth inhibition at “reactive sites” To facilitate quantification of outgrowth, we examined dissociated neurons. Purified DRG neurons were obtained by maturation in vitro, while proliferating cells, e.g. glia, which are known to promote neurite growth ( Bixby et al. 1988 ; Letourneau et al. 1990 ; Wanner et al. 2006 ), were removed. When these neurons were seeded onto our cultures, total neuron numbers and percent neurons with neurites were not different in scar-like and control cultures (data not shown). However, neurons with large perikarya (170-240 ?m circumference) regenerated processes on control astrocytes, but not on scar-like cultures ( Fig. 7 and data not shown). Small neurons (80-120 ?m circumference) had shorter, less elaborate neurites in the scar-like conditions (e.g., Fig. 7D, E ). Neurite length of small neurons was reduced to 52% (± 12) of controls on stretched astrocytes, and more strongly on astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures (A+F: 17% ± 3; A+F-str: 26% ± 5; N = 87 neurons). Neurites often stopped at astrocyte borders with fibroblasts or spaces, often with swollen end bulbs ( Fig. 7A-C ). Neurites in scar-like cultures were generally associated with astrocyte surfaces; filopodia were sometimes seen in contact with reactive astrocyte processes ( Fig. 7C ). Thus some growth-promoting properties of astrocytes were retained; scar-like astrocyte cultures were a mixture of growth-permissive and -inhibitory patches. Overall, regeneration of DRG neurons appeared reduced in the scar-like cultures, with potential differences among DRG neuronal populations. This model will be useful in identifying the microenvironment of abortive neurite growth in scar-like cultures.  Dissociated DRG neurons display signs of growth inhibition at “reactive sites” To facilitate quantification of outgrowth, we examined dissociated neurons. Purified DRG neurons were obtained by maturation in vitro, while proliferating cells, e.g. glia, which are known to promote neurite growth ( Bixby et al. 1988 ; Letourneau et al. 1990 ; Wanner et al. 2006 ), were removed. When these neurons were seeded onto our cultures, total neuron numbers and percent neurons with neurites were not different in scar-like and control cultures (data not shown). However, neurons with large perikarya (170-240 ?m circumference) regenerated processes on control astrocytes, but not on scar-like cultures ( Fig. 7 and data not shown). Small neurons (80-120 ?m circumference) had shorter, less elaborate neurites in the scar-like conditions (e.g., Fig. 7D, E ). Neurite length of small neurons was reduced to 52% (± 12) of controls on stretched astrocytes, and more strongly on astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures (A+F: 17% ± 3; A+F-str: 26% ± 5; N = 87 neurons). Neurites often stopped at astrocyte borders with fibroblasts or spaces, often with swollen end bulbs ( Fig. 7A-C ). Neurites in scar-like cultures were generally associated with astrocyte surfaces; filopodia were sometimes seen in contact with reactive astrocyte processes ( Fig. 7C ). Thus some growth-promoting properties of astrocytes were retained; scar-like astrocyte cultures were a mixture of growth-permissive and -inhibitory patches. Overall, regeneration of DRG neurons appeared reduced in the scar-like cultures, with potential differences among DRG neuronal populations. This model will be useful in identifying the microenvironment of abortive neurite growth in scar-like cultures.  Adhesion and growth of embryonic spinal cord neurons is impaired on stretched astrocytes and astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures In injured spinal cords, the glial scar is strongly inhibitory for local and descending axons. We seeded dissociated embryonic spinal cord cells for 24 hr in low density onto the various astrocyte lawns, so we were not examining growth on embryonic spinal cord-derived glia (data not shown). Fewer neurons were found on treated astrocytes compared to controls, and neurons on the treated astrocytes had shorter processes ( Fig. 8 ). Spinal neurons in stretched cultures were found almost exclusively on astrocytes, and even in “reactive sites” some neurons grew on stellate astrocyte processes ( Figure 8B ). Neuron numbers were reduced by more than 50% on treated astrocyte lawns ( Fig. 8E ). Since stretched astrocytes covered 89 % of the culture surface (not shown) and neuron density was normalized to astrocyte area, clustering and “spaces” could not account for this reduction. To test whether neurons were dying or failing to adhere, we transferred media from treated cultures onto laminin substrates. Media from stretched astrocytes provided many neurons that adhered and grew neurites, while media from controls provided almost none (data not shown). This suggests that at least some neurons that adhered to control astrocytes did not adhere to the treated cultures. For those neurons that adhered, neurite outgrowth was inhibited in all three scar-like conditions ( Fig. 8C, D, F ).  Adhesion and growth of embryonic spinal cord neurons is impaired on stretched astrocytes and astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures In injured spinal cords, the glial scar is strongly inhibitory for local and descending axons. We seeded dissociated embryonic spinal cord cells for 24 hr in low density onto the various astrocyte lawns, so we were not examining growth on embryonic spinal cord-derived glia (data not shown). Fewer neurons were found on treated astrocytes compared to controls, and neurons on the treated astrocytes had shorter processes ( Fig. 8 ). Spinal neurons in stretched cultures were found almost exclusively on astrocytes, and even in “reactive sites” some neurons grew on stellate astrocyte processes ( Figure 8B ). Neuron numbers were reduced by more than 50% on treated astrocyte lawns ( Fig. 8E ). Since stretched astrocytes covered 89 % of the culture surface (not shown) and neuron density was normalized to astrocyte area, clustering and “spaces” could not account for this reduction. To test whether neurons were dying or failing to adhere, we transferred media from treated cultures onto laminin substrates. Media from stretched astrocytes provided many neurons that adhered and grew neurites, while media from controls provided almost none (data not shown). This suggests that at least some neurons that adhered to control astrocytes did not adhere to the treated cultures. For those neurons that adhered, neurite outgrowth was inhibited in all three scar-like conditions ( Fig. 8C, D, F ).  Outgrowth of postnatal spinal cord neurons and cortical neurons is strongly inhibited on stretched astrocytes and astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures Mature neurons respond differently from embryonic neurons to growth inhibitory signals ( Chen et al. 1995 ; Hirose et al. 1993 ). We therefore assessed outgrowth of dissociated neurons from P4 spinal cords. P4 neurons adhered as well to the treated astrocytes as to controls (data not shown). On control astrocytes neurons grew long processes as well as shorter ones ( Fig. 9A ), whereas on stretched cocultures many neurons lacked processes or were stunted ( Fig. 9B , arrows). Some neurons had short, thin processes with swollen endings ( Fig. 9D , asterisks). Additionally, control neurite growth was mostly straight ( Fig. 9C ), whereas neurons on stretched cocultures frequently turned, showing multiple loops and swollen endings ( Fig. 9E ). These morphologies are consistent with neurons responding to an inhibitory environment. Furthering this idea, branching and neurite length/neuron were reduced to almost half of control levels, while fewer neurons had processes on the treated cultures ( Table I and data not shown). Similarly, the size of neurite trees was reduced nearly 50% in scar-like cultures ( Fig. 9F ). To examine neurite growth in an observer-independent manner, we used a semi-automated approach that identifies neurons and neurites and can be restricted to neurons on astrocyte lawns ( Fig. 10E,F ; Stepanek et al. 2005 ). This method showed that total neurite growth was strongly reduced by stretch and by coculture with fibroblasts ( Fig. 9G ). In sum, our results indicate that postnatal spinal neurons were more strongly inhibited than embryonic neurons in the scar-like cultures. We also tested neurons from P4 sensorimotor cortex, which includes the corticospinal neurons that are important for recovery after spinal cord injury ( Li et al. 1998 ). Our P4 cortical cells comprised ? 50 % neurons, which attached in similar numbers on control and treated astrocytes (data not shown). P4 cortical neurons grew long neurites on control astrocytes, while cortical neurons plated on treated cultures had shorter processes or no processes ( Fig. 10 ). Stretched astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures had significantly fewer neurons with processes than did controls (not shown). Quantification of P4 cortical neurite growth on the various astrocyte lawns was performed using both interactive tracing and automated analysis. Both methods showed a significant reduction in neurite growth on treated astrocytes ( Table I , Figure 10G, H ). Taken together, the data show that growth from postnatal cortical neurons is strongly inhibited on both stretched astrocytes and astrocytes interacting with fibroblasts.  Outgrowth of postnatal spinal cord neurons and cortical neurons is strongly inhibited on stretched astrocytes and astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures Mature neurons respond differently from embryonic neurons to growth inhibitory signals ( Chen et al. 1995 ; Hirose et al. 1993 ). We therefore assessed outgrowth of dissociated neurons from P4 spinal cords. P4 neurons adhered as well to the treated astrocytes as to controls (data not shown). On control astrocytes neurons grew long processes as well as shorter ones ( Fig. 9A ), whereas on stretched cocultures many neurons lacked processes or were stunted ( Fig. 9B , arrows). Some neurons had short, thin processes with swollen endings ( Fig. 9D , asterisks). Additionally, control neurite growth was mostly straight ( Fig. 9C ), whereas neurons on stretched cocultures frequently turned, showing multiple loops and swollen endings ( Fig. 9E ). These morphologies are consistent with neurons responding to an inhibitory environment. Furthering this idea, branching and neurite length/neuron were reduced to almost half of control levels, while fewer neurons had processes on the treated cultures ( Table I and data not shown). Similarly, the size of neurite trees was reduced nearly 50% in scar-like cultures ( Fig. 9F ). To examine neurite growth in an observer-independent manner, we used a semi-automated approach that identifies neurons and neurites and can be restricted to neurons on astrocyte lawns ( Fig. 10E,F ; Stepanek et al. 2005 ). This method showed that total neurite growth was strongly reduced by stretch and by coculture with fibroblasts ( Fig. 9G ). In sum, our results indicate that postnatal spinal neurons were more strongly inhibited than embryonic neurons in the scar-like cultures. We also tested neurons from P4 sensorimotor cortex, which includes the corticospinal neurons that are important for recovery after spinal cord injury ( Li et al. 1998 ). Our P4 cortical cells comprised ? 50 % neurons, which attached in similar numbers on control and treated astrocytes (data not shown). P4 cortical neurons grew long neurites on control astrocytes, while cortical neurons plated on treated cultures had shorter processes or no processes ( Fig. 10 ). Stretched astrocyte-fibroblast cocultures had significantly fewer neurons with processes than did controls (not shown). Quantification of P4 cortical neurite growth on the various astrocyte lawns was performed using both interactive tracing and automated analysis. Both methods showed a significant reduction in neurite growth on treated astrocytes ( Table I , Figure 10G, H ). Taken together, the data show that growth from postnatal cortical neurons is strongly inhibited on both stretched astrocytes and astrocytes interacting with fibroblasts.  DISCUSSION Modeling the glial scar We have developed a model of the glial scar by subjecting highly differentiated astrocytes to two distinct injury-related stimuli: mechanical stretch and meningeal fibroblast infiltration. These treatments cause 1) increased astrocyte reactivity, including stellation, clustering and GFAP accumulation, and 2) upregulation of the glial scar markers phosphacan, neurocan and tenascins. Importantly, the scar-like cultures inhibit neurite growth from a variety of neurons. Our model revealed differences in responses of embryonic versus postnatal neurons, and between different neuronal populations. Our demonstration that astrocyte stretching led to neurite growth inhibition, as well as our localization of scar markers and growth inhibitors to astrocyte surfaces, is evidence for an inhibitory contribution of reactive astrocytes to the glial scar. Cultured astrocytes are often considered too immature to mimic reactive astrogliosis, because they promote rather than inhibit neurite outgrowth ( Fallon 1985 ; Smith et al. 1990 ). However, our neonatal astrocytes became postmitotic and highly differentiated, serving as an appropriate starting point for an injury model. Phosphacan, neurocan and tenascins were chosen as markers of scar-forming injury sites in vivo; they are upregulated in spinal cord lesions and after brain and nerve injuries ( McKeon et al. 1999 ; Tang et al. 2003 ; Wintergerst et al. 1997 ; Zhang et al. 1997 ). While cytokines and growth factors (e.g., TGF-?, EGF) stimulate proteoglycan expression in astrocytes ( Asher et al. 2000 ; Dobbertin et al. 2003 ; Smith and Strunz, 2005 ), the identity and time course of release of such proteins after CNS injury is unknown. We therefore chose to mimic primary injury-related stimuli like mechanical trauma and meningeal cells in our models. Mechanical stretch induces glial scar markers and reactivity in astrocytes Mechanical stresses like nerve compression, stretch, and percussion lead to widespread tissue damage and local astrocyte activation ( Dietrich et al. 1994 ; Maxwell and Graham 1997 ). Mechanical impacts translate into tissue strains, deformation and pressure development on the injured CNS ( Gennarelli and Thibault 1985 ; Shreiber et al. 1999 ). We found that mechanical stretch is sufficient to reproduce hallmarks of astrogliosis, including astrocyte stellation and clustering. These observations imply astrocyte contraction and movement in response to the stretch; similar behaviors may contribute to wound contraction after injury ( Faulkner et al. 2004 ; McGraw et al. 2001 ). Increased GFAP immunostaining at CNS injury sites is widely used to indicate reactive astrogliosis ( Bignami and Dahl 1976 ; Fitch and Silver 1999 ). However, it is unclear to what extent migration of astrocytes towards the injury site and astrocyte hypertrophy contribute to this increase. In our stretch model we found strong increases in peak GFAP immunofluorescence not matched by equivalent increases in de novo GFAP expression. GFAP accumulation in astrocyte processes may partially be a result of cell contraction and cytoskeletal fasciculation. Astrocyte stretch also led to increased expression of tenascins, phosphacan and neurocan. Mechanical stress upregulates expression of tenascin C, proteoglycans, and other matrix proteins in a number of other cell types, possibly via signaling through EGF or TGF? ( Lee et al. 2001 ; Tschumperlin et al. 2004 ). These ligands can also increase proteoglycan expression in cultured astrocytes ( Asher et al. 2000 ; Dobbertin et al. 2003 ; Smith and Strunz 2005 ). Stretch induces signaling through integrins, focal adhesion complexes and the actin cytoskeleton in fibroblasts ( Chiquet et al. 2003 ; 2004 ); a number of signaling pathways have been implicated ( Chiquet et al. 2004 ; Sarasa-Renedo et al. 2006 ; Lee et al. 2000 ; Gris et al. 2007 ). Similar mechanisms may be involved in stretch-induced upregulation of proteoglycans in astrocytes. Astrocyte interactions with fibroblasts create a “scar-like” mosaic lawn The interaction of astrocytes with meningeal fibroblasts and other immigrating cells is important for scar formation. Reactive astrocytes and fibroblasts establish a dense network with a glia limitans-like basal lamina. This scar limits the injury spread, but also constitutes a barrier for regenerating axons, even if these are stimulated by neurotrophins or by blocking myelin inhibitors ( Bush et al. 1999 ; Faulkner et al. 2004 ; Schnell et al. 1994 ). A similar border can be created in vitro by culturing astrocytes and meningeal cells next to one another ( Shearer and Fawcett 2001 ). We created a mixed lawn with many patches in which astrocytes faced meningeal cells, forming “reactive sites” containing stellate astrocytes with increased GFAP and increased expression of glial scar markers. Such hallmarks of reactive gliosis have also been induced via scar explantation, or cytokine/growth factor treatments of astrocytes ( Asher et al. 2000 ; Dobbertin et al. 2003 ; McKeon et al. 1999 ). Inhibitory CSPGs and tenascins may be induced in meningeal fibroblasts by coculture with astrocytes or by stretch ( Chiquet-Ehrismann and Chiquet 2003 ; MacKenna et al. 2000 ). However, in our mixed cultures astrocytes appear as major source of these proteins. Previous work showed that astrocytes plated on meningeal monolayers are smaller than those plated on astrocytes, that staining for tenascins and CSPGs differs in the two conditions, and that cerebellar neurons grew somewhat more poorly on astrocytes cultured on meningeal cells ( Ness and David 1997 ). Our findings are mainly consistent with these observations, and extend them by providing quantitative data on reactivity and expression of glial scar markers, testing the growth of different neuronal types relevant to CNS injury, and comparing two distinct injury-related stimuli (stretch and fibroblast addition). Upregulation of scar markers was more robust in astrocytes to which fibroblasts were added than in stretched astrocytes. These differences could be mainly kinetic since fibroblasts were present for several days, while stretch was confined to a single brief stimulus. Alternatively, fibroblasts might be induced to express scar markers by interacting with astrocytes. Notably, neurite-inhibitory properties of the different injury models did not differ significantly from one another. Different neuronal populations respond differently to the scar-like cultures Both CNS and DRG neurons grew well on control astrocyte lawns, but growth was strongly inhibited on “reactive sites” caused by injury stimuli. Small DRG neurons grew neurites in scar-like cultures, while large DRG neurons did not sprout. This is interesting, as among the smaller population are nociceptive neurons, which have been reported to sprout into gliotic areas after spinal cord injury ( Inman and Steward 2003 ; Ondarza et al. 2003 ). Different CNS neuronal populations differed in neurite outgrowth on our model, possibly due to differences in dendritic versus axon growth ( Le Roux and Reh 1996 ), or to regional differences in the influence of astrocytes on neurite outgrowth ( Qian et al. 1992 ). Overall, growth inhibition was greater among postnatal compared to embryonic neurons, best appreciated by comparing data for spinal neurons. Previous work showed that growth from embryonic spinal neurons can be promoted by myelin proteins that inhibit growth from postnatal neurons ( Johnson et al. 1989 ; Turnley and Bartlett 1998 ). Likewise, inhibition of neurite outgrowth from DRG or retinal neurites into astrocyte filled three-dimensional tubes was greater in postnatal than in embryonic explants ( Fawcett et al. 1989 ). Our study extends these results to show that a scar-like environment is more inhibitory to postnatal neurons. Signs of neurite growth inhibition on scar-like reactive astrocytes We found swollen neurite endings on treated astrocyte cultures, similar to those observed on inhibitory substrates in vitro and at injury sites in vivo. After injury, sensory axons are arrested and show enlarged axon terminals when contacting reactive astrocytes ( Liuzzi and Lasek 1987 ; Stensaas et al. 1987 ). Such bulbous axon terminals are considered signs of abortive regeneration, and have been labeled “dystrophic endings” ( Ramon y Cajal 1928 ), though they appear to be dynamic structures ( Tom et al. 2004 ). We also often found abrupt turns in neurite trajectories including 180° turns and looping on reactive astrocytes in each class of neuron. Such turns are similar to what has been described for encounters of DRG neurites with proteoglycan boundaries, and are suggestive of encounters with local inhibitory “hotspots” ( Snow et al. 1990 , 1996 , 2001 ). “Reactive sites” contain reactive astrocytes, increased glial scar markers and reduced neurite growth Although we could readily demonstrate reduced neurite growth, our data likely underestimate inhibition in the scar-like cultures. First, neurons were often clustered in some areas, leaving others sparsely populated. Second, many highly inhibitory areas lacked neurons, and we systematically chose the most neuron-populated areas for measurement. Treated astrocyte cultures contained “reactive sites” with clusters of stellate astrocytes showing strong GFAP staining; such sites coincided with local increases in phosphacan or tenascin immunoreactivity. Similarly, cocultures with treated astrocytes showed “inhibitory patches” with few neurons, reduced neurite outgrowth and an increase in abortive endings. Hence, our findings suggest that the injury-related stimuli transform astrocytes into a functionally heterogeneous lawn with growth-inhibiting and growth-promoting areas. We found that “reactive sites” often coincided with patches of growth-inhibited neurons, and growth-permissive areas were usually associated with less reactive astrocytes. It is not clear whether inhibitory patches coincide with increased tenascin or CSPG expression. Nevertheless, our observations support the view that glial scars possess both growth-promoting and –inhibitory signals ( Jones et al. 2003 ). CSPGs and tenascins can have both positive and negative influences on growth ( Taylor et al. 1993 ) , and astrocytes express also growth-promoting proteins ( Neugebauer et al. 1988 ; Smith et al. 1990 ; Tomaselli et al. 1986 ; Tran et al. 2008 ). Presumably, growth inhibition results when inhibitors outweigh growth-supporting molecules. Our model should allow the identification of reactive astrocyte markers as well as understanding the local interactions of neurites within such complex environments. This model should be useful to understand mechanisms underlying scar formation as well as to test treatments that may improve regeneration of CNS axons.  DISCUSSION Modeling the glial scar We have developed a model of the glial scar by subjecting highly differentiated astrocytes to two distinct injury-related stimuli: mechanical stretch and meningeal fibroblast infiltration. These treatments cause 1) increased astrocyte reactivity, including stellation, clustering and GFAP accumulation, and 2) upregulation of the glial scar markers phosphacan, neurocan and tenascins. Importantly, the scar-like cultures inhibit neurite growth from a variety of neurons. Our model revealed differences in responses of embryonic versus postnatal neurons, and between different neuronal populations. Our demonstration that astrocyte stretching led to neurite growth inhibition, as well as our localization of scar markers and growth inhibitors to astrocyte surfaces, is evidence for an inhibitory contribution of reactive astrocytes to the glial scar. Cultured astrocytes are often considered too immature to mimic reactive astrogliosis, because they promote rather than inhibit neurite outgrowth ( Fallon 1985 ; Smith et al. 1990 ). However, our neonatal astrocytes became postmitotic and highly differentiated, serving as an appropriate starting point for an injury model. Phosphacan, neurocan and tenascins were chosen as markers of scar-forming injury sites in vivo; they are upregulated in spinal cord lesions and after brain and nerve injuries ( McKeon et al. 1999 ; Tang et al. 2003 ; Wintergerst et al. 1997 ; Zhang et al. 1997 ). While cytokines and growth factors (e.g., TGF-?, EGF) stimulate proteoglycan expression in astrocytes ( Asher et al. 2000 ; Dobbertin et al. 2003 ; Smith and Strunz, 2005 ), the identity and time course of release of such proteins after CNS injury is unknown. We therefore chose to mimic primary injury-related stimuli like mechanical trauma and meningeal cells in our models. Mechanical stretch induces glial scar markers and reactivity in astrocytes Mechanical stresses like nerve compression, stretch, and percussion lead to widespread tissue damage and local astrocyte activation ( Dietrich et al. 1994 ; Maxwell and Graham 1997 ). Mechanical impacts translate into tissue strains, deformation and pressure development on the injured CNS ( Gennarelli and Thibault 1985 ; Shreiber et al. 1999 ). We found that mechanical stretch is sufficient to reproduce hallmarks of astrogliosis, including astrocyte stellation and clustering. These observations imply astrocyte contraction and movement in response to the stretch; similar behaviors may contribute to wound contraction after injury ( Faulkner et al. 2004 ; McGraw et al. 2001 ). Increased GFAP immunostaining at CNS injury sites is widely used to indicate reactive astrogliosis ( Bignami and Dahl 1976 ; Fitch and Silver 1999 ). However, it is unclear to what extent migration of astrocytes towards the injury site and astrocyte hypertrophy contribute to this increase. In our stretch model we found strong increases in peak GFAP immunofluorescence not matched by equivalent increases in de novo GFAP expression. GFAP accumulation in astrocyte processes may partially be a result of cell contraction and cytoskeletal fasciculation. Astrocyte stretch also led to increased expression of tenascins, phosphacan and neurocan. Mechanical stress upregulates expression of tenascin C, proteoglycans, and other matrix proteins in a number of other cell types, possibly via signaling through EGF or TGF? ( Lee et al. 2001 ; Tschumperlin et al. 2004 ). These ligands can also increase proteoglycan expression in cultured astrocytes ( Asher et al. 2000 ; Dobbertin et al. 2003 ; Smith and Strunz 2005 ). Stretch induces signaling through integrins, focal adhesion complexes and the actin cytoskeleton in fibroblasts ( Chiquet et al. 2003 ; 2004 ); a number of signaling pathways have been implicated ( Chiquet et al. 2004 ; Sarasa-Renedo et al. 2006 ; Lee et al. 2000 ; Gris et al. 2007 ). Similar mechanisms may be involved in stretch-induced upregulation of proteoglycans in astrocytes. Astrocyte interactions with fibroblasts create a “scar-like” mosaic lawn The interaction of astrocytes with meningeal fibroblasts and other immigrating cells is important for scar formation. Reactive astrocytes and fibroblasts establish a dense network with a glia limitans-like basal lamina. This scar limits the injury spread, but also constitutes a barrier for regenerating axons, even if these are stimulated by neurotrophins or by blocking myelin inhibitors ( Bush et al. 1999 ; Faulkner et al. 2004 ; Schnell et al. 1994 ). A similar border can be created in vitro by culturing astrocytes and meningeal cells next to one another ( Shearer and Fawcett 2001 ). We created a mixed lawn with many patches in which astrocytes faced meningeal cells, forming “reactive sites” containing stellate astrocytes with increased GFAP and increased expression of glial scar markers. Such hallmarks of reactive gliosis have also been induced via scar explantation, or cytokine/growth factor treatments of astrocytes ( Asher et al. 2000 ; Dobbertin et al. 2003 ; McKeon et al. 1999 ). Inhibitory CSPGs and tenascins may be induced in meningeal fibroblasts by coculture with astrocytes or by stretch ( Chiquet-Ehrismann and Chiquet 2003 ; MacKenna et al. 2000 ). However, in our mixed cultures astrocytes appear as major source of these proteins. Previous work showed that astrocytes plated on meningeal monolayers are smaller than those plated on astrocytes, that staining for tenascins and CSPGs differs in the two conditions, and that cerebellar neurons grew somewhat more poorly on astrocytes cultured on meningeal cells ( Ness and David 1997 ). Our findings are mainly consistent with these observations, and extend them by providing quantitative data on reactivity and expression of glial scar markers, testing the growth of different neuronal types relevant to CNS injury, and comparing two distinct injury-related stimuli (stretch and fibroblast addition). Upregulation of scar markers was more robust in astrocytes to which fibroblasts were added than in stretched astrocytes. These differences could be mainly kinetic since fibroblasts were present for several days, while stretch was confined to a single brief stimulus. Alternatively, fibroblasts might be induced to express scar markers by interacting with astrocytes. Notably, neurite-inhibitory properties of the different injury models did not differ significantly from one another. Different neuronal populations respond differently to the scar-like cultures Both CNS and DRG neurons grew well on control astrocyte lawns, but growth was strongly inhibited on “reactive sites” caused by injury stimuli. Small DRG neurons grew neurites in scar-like cultures, while large DRG neurons did not sprout. This is interesting, as among the smaller population are nociceptive neurons, which have been reported to sprout into gliotic areas after spinal cord injury ( Inman and Steward 2003 ; Ondarza et al. 2003 ). Different CNS neuronal populations differed in neurite outgrowth on our model, possibly due to differences in dendritic versus axon growth ( Le Roux and Reh 1996 ), or to regional differences in the influence of astrocytes on neurite outgrowth ( Qian et al. 1992 ). Overall, growth inhibition was greater among postnatal compared to embryonic neurons, best appreciated by comparing data for spinal neurons. Previous work showed that growth from embryonic spinal neurons can be promoted by myelin proteins that inhibit growth from postnatal neurons ( Johnson et al. 1989 ; Turnley and Bartlett 1998 ). Likewise, inhibition of neurite outgrowth from DRG or retinal neurites into astrocyte filled three-dimensional tubes was greater in postnatal than in embryonic explants ( Fawcett et al. 1989 ). Our study extends these results to show that a scar-like environment is more inhibitory to postnatal neurons. Signs of neurite growth inhibition on scar-like reactive astrocytes We found swollen neurite endings on treated astrocyte cultures, similar to those observed on inhibitory substrates in vitro and at injury sites in vivo. After injury, sensory axons are arrested and show enlarged axon terminals when contacting reactive astrocytes ( Liuzzi and Lasek 1987 ; Stensaas et al. 1987 ). Such bulbous axon terminals are considered signs of abortive regeneration, and have been labeled “dystrophic endings” ( Ramon y Cajal 1928 ), though they appear to be dynamic structures ( Tom et al. 2004 ). We also often found abrupt turns in neurite trajectories including 180° turns and looping on reactive astrocytes in each class of neuron. Such turns are similar to what has been described for encounters of DRG neurites with proteoglycan boundaries, and are suggestive of encounters with local inhibitory “hotspots” ( Snow et al. 1990 , 1996 , 2001 ). “Reactive sites” contain reactive astrocytes, increased glial scar markers and reduced neurite growth Although we could readily demonstrate reduced neurite growth, our data likely underestimate inhibition in the scar-like cultures. First, neurons were often clustered in some areas, leaving others sparsely populated. Second, many highly inhibitory areas lacked neurons, and we systematically chose the most neuron-populated areas for measurement. Treated astrocyte cultures contained “reactive sites” with clusters of stellate astrocytes showing strong GFAP staining; such sites coincided with local increases in phosphacan or tenascin immunoreactivity. Similarly, cocultures with treated astrocytes showed “inhibitory patches” with few neurons, reduced neurite outgrowth and an increase in abortive endings. Hence, our findings suggest that the injury-related stimuli transform astrocytes into a functionally heterogeneous lawn with growth-inhibiting and growth-promoting areas. We found that “reactive sites” often coincided with patches of growth-inhibited neurons, and growth-permissive areas were usually associated with less reactive astrocytes. It is not clear whether inhibitory patches coincide with increased tenascin or CSPG expression. Nevertheless, our observations support the view that glial scars possess both growth-promoting and –inhibitory signals ( Jones et al. 2003 ). CSPGs and tenascins can have both positive and negative influences on growth ( Taylor et al. 1993 ) , and astrocytes express also growth-promoting proteins ( Neugebauer et al. 1988 ; Smith et al. 1990 ; Tomaselli et al. 1986 ; Tran et al. 2008 ). Presumably, growth inhibition results when inhibitors outweigh growth-supporting molecules. Our model should allow the identification of reactive astrocyte markers as well as understanding the local interactions of neurites within such complex environments. This model should be useful to understand mechanisms underlying scar formation as well as to test treatments that may improve regeneration of CNS axons.  Modeling the glial scar We have developed a model of the glial scar by subjecting highly differentiated astrocytes to two distinct injury-related stimuli: mechanical stretch and meningeal fibroblast infiltration. These treatments cause 1) increased astrocyte reactivity, including stellation, clustering and GFAP accumulation, and 2) upregulation of the glial scar markers phosphacan, neurocan and tenascins. Importantly, the scar-like cultures inhibit neurite growth from a variety of neurons. Our model revealed differences in responses of embryonic versus postnatal neurons, and between different neuronal populations. Our demonstration that astrocyte stretching led to neurite growth inhibition, as well as our localization of scar markers and growth inhibitors to astrocyte surfaces, is evidence for an inhibitory contribution of reactive astrocytes to the glial scar. Cultured astrocytes are often considered too immature to mimic reactive astrogliosis, because they promote rather than inhibit neurite outgrowth ( Fallon 1985 ; Smith et al. 1990 ). However, our neonatal astrocytes became postmitotic and highly differentiated, serving as an appropriate starting point for an injury model. Phosphacan, neurocan and tenascins were chosen as markers of scar-forming injury sites in vivo; they are upregulated in spinal cord lesions and after brain and nerve injuries ( McKeon et al. 1999 ; Tang et al. 2003 ; Wintergerst et al. 1997 ; Zhang et al. 1997 ). While cytokines and growth factors (e.g., TGF-?, EGF) stimulate proteoglycan expression in astrocytes ( Asher et al. 2000 ; Dobbertin et al. 2003 ; Smith and Strunz, 2005 ), the identity and time course of release of such proteins after CNS injury is unknown. We therefore chose to mimic primary injury-related stimuli like mechanical trauma and meningeal cells in our models.  Modeling the glial scar We have developed a model of the glial scar by subjecting highly differentiated astrocytes to two distinct injury-related stimuli: mechanical stretch and meningeal fibroblast infiltration. These treatments cause 1) increased astrocyte reactivity, including stellation, clustering and GFAP accumulation, and 2) upregulation of the glial scar markers phosphacan, neurocan and tenascins. Importantly, the scar-like cultures inhibit neurite growth from a variety of neurons. Our model revealed differences in responses of embryonic versus postnatal neurons, and between different neuronal populations. Our demonstration that astrocyte stretching led to neurite growth inhibition, as well as our localization of scar markers and growth inhibitors to astrocyte surfaces, is evidence for an inhibitory contribution of reactive astrocytes to the glial scar. Cultured astrocytes are often considered too immature to mimic reactive astrogliosis, because they promote rather than inhibit neurite outgrowth ( Fallon 1985 ; Smith et al. 1990 ). However, our neonatal astrocytes became postmitotic and highly differentiated, serving as an appropriate starting point for an injury model. Phosphacan, neurocan and tenascins were chosen as markers of scar-forming injury sites in vivo; they are upregulated in spinal cord lesions and after brain and nerve injuries ( McKeon et al. 1999 ; Tang et al. 2003 ; Wintergerst et al. 1997 ; Zhang et al. 1997 ). While cytokines and growth factors (e.g., TGF-?, EGF) stimulate proteoglycan expression in astrocytes ( Asher et al. 2000 ; Dobbertin et al. 2003 ; Smith and Strunz, 2005 ), the identity and time course of release of such proteins after CNS injury is unknown. We therefore chose to mimic primary injury-related stimuli like mechanical trauma and meningeal cells in our models.  Mechanical stretch induces glial scar markers and reactivity in astrocytes Mechanical stresses like nerve compression, stretch, and percussion lead to widespread tissue damage and local astrocyte activation ( Dietrich et al. 1994 ; Maxwell and Graham 1997 ). Mechanical impacts translate into tissue strains, deformation and pressure development on the injured CNS ( Gennarelli and Thibault 1985 ; Shreiber et al. 1999 ). We found that mechanical stretch is sufficient to reproduce hallmarks of astrogliosis, including astrocyte stellation and clustering. These observations imply astrocyte contraction and movement in response to the stretch; similar behaviors may contribute to wound contraction after injury ( Faulkner et al. 2004 ; McGraw et al. 2001 ). Increased GFAP immunostaining at CNS injury sites is widely used to indicate reactive astrogliosis ( Bignami and Dahl 1976 ; Fitch and Silver 1999 ). However, it is unclear to what extent migration of astrocytes towards the injury site and astrocyte hypertrophy contribute to this increase. In our stretch model we found strong increases in peak GFAP immunofluorescence not matched by equivalent increases in de novo GFAP expression. GFAP accumulation in astrocyte processes may partially be a result of cell contraction and cytoskeletal fasciculation. Astrocyte stretch also led to increased expression of tenascins, phosphacan and neurocan. Mechanical stress upregulates expression of tenascin C, proteoglycans, and other matrix proteins in a number of other cell types, possibly via signaling through EGF or TGF? ( Lee et al. 2001 ; Tschumperlin et al. 2004 ). These ligands can also increase proteoglycan expression in cultured astrocytes ( Asher et al. 2000 ; Dobbertin et al. 2003 ; Smith and Strunz 2005 ). Stretch induces signaling through integrins, focal adhesion complexes and the actin cytoskeleton in fibroblasts ( Chiquet et al. 2003 ; 2004 ); a number of signaling pathways have been implicated ( Chiquet et al. 2004 ; Sarasa-Renedo et al. 2006 ; Lee et al. 2000 ; Gris et al. 2007 ). Similar mechanisms may be involved in stretch-induced upregulation of proteoglycans in astrocytes.  Mechanical stretch induces glial scar markers and reactivity in astrocytes Mechanical stresses like nerve compression, stretch, and percussion lead to widespread tissue damage and local astrocyte activation ( Dietrich et al. 1994 ; Maxwell and Graham 1997 ). Mechanical impacts translate into tissue strains, deformation and pressure development on the injured CNS ( Gennarelli and Thibault 1985 ; Shreiber et al. 1999 ). We found that mechanical stretch is sufficient to reproduce hallmarks of astrogliosis, including astrocyte stellation and clustering. These observations imply astrocyte contraction and movement in response to the stretch; similar behaviors may contribute to wound contraction after injury ( Faulkner et al. 2004 ; McGraw et al. 2001 ). Increased GFAP immunostaining at CNS injury sites is widely used to indicate reactive astrogliosis ( Bignami and Dahl 1976 ; Fitch and Silver 1999 ). However, it is unclear to what extent migration of astrocytes towards the injury site and astrocyte hypertrophy contribute to this increase. In our stretch model we found strong increases in peak GFAP immunofluorescence not matched by equivalent increases in de novo GFAP expression. GFAP accumulation in astrocyte processes may partially be a result of cell contraction and cytoskeletal fasciculation. Astrocyte stretch also led to increased expression of tenascins, phosphacan and neurocan. Mechanical stress upregulates expression of tenascin C, proteoglycans, and other matrix proteins in a number of other cell types, possibly via signaling through EGF or TGF? ( Lee et al. 2001 ; Tschumperlin et al. 2004 ). These ligands can also increase proteoglycan expression in cultured astrocytes ( Asher et al. 2000 ; Dobbertin et al. 2003 ; Smith and Strunz 2005 ). Stretch induces signaling through integrins, focal adhesion complexes and the actin cytoskeleton in fibroblasts ( Chiquet et al. 2003 ; 2004 ); a number of signaling pathways have been implicated ( Chiquet et al. 2004 ; Sarasa-Renedo et al. 2006 ; Lee et al. 2000 ; Gris et al. 2007 ). Similar mechanisms may be involved in stretch-induced upregulation of proteoglycans in astrocytes.  Astrocyte interactions with fibroblasts create a “scar-like” mosaic lawn The interaction of astrocytes with meningeal fibroblasts and other immigrating cells is important for scar formation. Reactive astrocytes and fibroblasts establish a dense network with a glia limitans-like basal lamina. This scar limits the injury spread, but also constitutes a barrier for regenerating axons, even if these are stimulated by neurotrophins or by blocking myelin inhibitors ( Bush et al. 1999 ; Faulkner et al. 2004 ; Schnell et al. 1994 ). A similar border can be created in vitro by culturing astrocytes and meningeal cells next to one another ( Shearer and Fawcett 2001 ). We created a mixed lawn with many patches in which astrocytes faced meningeal cells, forming “reactive sites” containing stellate astrocytes with increased GFAP and increased expression of glial scar markers. Such hallmarks of reactive gliosis have also been induced via scar explantation, or cytokine/growth factor treatments of astrocytes ( Asher et al. 2000 ; Dobbertin et al. 2003 ; McKeon et al. 1999 ). Inhibitory CSPGs and tenascins may be induced in meningeal fibroblasts by coculture with astrocytes or by stretch ( Chiquet-Ehrismann and Chiquet 2003 ; MacKenna et al. 2000 ). However, in our mixed cultures astrocytes appear as major source of these proteins. Previous work showed that astrocytes plated on meningeal monolayers are smaller than those plated on astrocytes, that staining for tenascins and CSPGs differs in the two conditions, and that cerebellar neurons grew somewhat more poorly on astrocytes cultured on meningeal cells ( Ness and David 1997 ). Our findings are mainly consistent with these observations, and extend them by providing quantitative data on reactivity and expression of glial scar markers, testing the growth of different neuronal types relevant to CNS injury, and comparing two distinct injury-related stimuli (stretch and fibroblast addition). Upregulation of scar markers was more robust in astrocytes to which fibroblasts were added than in stretched astrocytes. These differences could be mainly kinetic since fibroblasts were present for several days, while stretch was confined to a single brief stimulus. Alternatively, fibroblasts might be induced to express scar markers by interacting with astrocytes. Notably, neurite-inhibitory properties of the different injury models did not differ significantly from one another.  Astrocyte interactions with fibroblasts create a “scar-like” mosaic lawn The interaction of astrocytes with meningeal fibroblasts and other immigrating cells is important for scar formation. Reactive astrocytes and fibroblasts establish a dense network with a glia limitans-like basal lamina. This scar limits the injury spread, but also constitutes a barrier for regenerating axons, even if these are stimulated by neurotrophins or by blocking myelin inhibitors ( Bush et al. 1999 ; Faulkner et al. 2004 ; Schnell et al. 1994 ). A similar border can be created in vitro by culturing astrocytes and meningeal cells next to one another ( Shearer and Fawcett 2001 ). We created a mixed lawn with many patches in which astrocytes faced meningeal cells, forming “reactive sites” containing stellate astrocytes with increased GFAP and increased expression of glial scar markers. Such hallmarks of reactive gliosis have also been induced via scar explantation, or cytokine/growth factor treatments of astrocytes ( Asher et al. 2000 ; Dobbertin et al. 2003 ; McKeon et al. 1999 ). Inhibitory CSPGs and tenascins may be induced in meningeal fibroblasts by coculture with astrocytes or by stretch ( Chiquet-Ehrismann and Chiquet 2003 ; MacKenna et al. 2000 ). However, in our mixed cultures astrocytes appear as major source of these proteins. Previous work showed that astrocytes plated on meningeal monolayers are smaller than those plated on astrocytes, that staining for tenascins and CSPGs differs in the two conditions, and that cerebellar neurons grew somewhat more poorly on astrocytes cultured on meningeal cells ( Ness and David 1997 ). Our findings are mainly consistent with these observations, and extend them by providing quantitative data on reactivity and expression of glial scar markers, testing the growth of different neuronal types relevant to CNS injury, and comparing two distinct injury-related stimuli (stretch and fibroblast addition). Upregulation of scar markers was more robust in astrocytes to which fibroblasts were added than in stretched astrocytes. These differences could be mainly kinetic since fibroblasts were present for several days, while stretch was confined to a single brief stimulus. Alternatively, fibroblasts might be induced to express scar markers by interacting with astrocytes. Notably, neurite-inhibitory properties of the different injury models did not differ significantly from one another.  Different neuronal populations respond differently to the scar-like cultures Both CNS and DRG neurons grew well on control astrocyte lawns, but growth was strongly inhibited on “reactive sites” caused by injury stimuli. Small DRG neurons grew neurites in scar-like cultures, while large DRG neurons did not sprout. This is interesting, as among the smaller population are nociceptive neurons, which have been reported to sprout into gliotic areas after spinal cord injury ( Inman and Steward 2003 ; Ondarza et al. 2003 ). Different CNS neuronal populations differed in neurite outgrowth on our model, possibly due to differences in dendritic versus axon growth ( Le Roux and Reh 1996 ), or to regional differences in the influence of astrocytes on neurite outgrowth ( Qian et al. 1992 ). Overall, growth inhibition was greater among postnatal compared to embryonic neurons, best appreciated by comparing data for spinal neurons. Previous work showed that growth from embryonic spinal neurons can be promoted by myelin proteins that inhibit growth from postnatal neurons ( Johnson et al. 1989 ; Turnley and Bartlett 1998 ). Likewise, inhibition of neurite outgrowth from DRG or retinal neurites into astrocyte filled three-dimensional tubes was greater in postnatal than in embryonic explants ( Fawcett et al. 1989 ). Our study extends these results to show that a scar-like environment is more inhibitory to postnatal neurons.  Different neuronal populations respond differently to the scar-like cultures Both CNS and DRG neurons grew well on control astrocyte lawns, but growth was strongly inhibited on “reactive sites” caused by injury stimuli. Small DRG neurons grew neurites in scar-like cultures, while large DRG neurons did not sprout. This is interesting, as among the smaller population are nociceptive neurons, which have been reported to sprout into gliotic areas after spinal cord injury ( Inman and Steward 2003 ; Ondarza et al. 2003 ). Different CNS neuronal populations differed in neurite outgrowth on our model, possibly due to differences in dendritic versus axon growth ( Le Roux and Reh 1996 ), or to regional differences in the influence of astrocytes on neurite outgrowth ( Qian et al. 1992 ). Overall, growth inhibition was greater among postnatal compared to embryonic neurons, best appreciated by comparing data for spinal neurons. Previous work showed that growth from embryonic spinal neurons can be promoted by myelin proteins that inhibit growth from postnatal neurons ( Johnson et al. 1989 ; Turnley and Bartlett 1998 ). Likewise, inhibition of neurite outgrowth from DRG or retinal neurites into astrocyte filled three-dimensional tubes was greater in postnatal than in embryonic explants ( Fawcett et al. 1989 ). Our study extends these results to show that a scar-like environment is more inhibitory to postnatal neurons.  Signs of neurite growth inhibition on scar-like reactive astrocytes We found swollen neurite endings on treated astrocyte cultures, similar to those observed on inhibitory substrates in vitro and at injury sites in vivo. After injury, sensory axons are arrested and show enlarged axon terminals when contacting reactive astrocytes ( Liuzzi and Lasek 1987 ; Stensaas et al. 1987 ). Such bulbous axon terminals are considered signs of abortive regeneration, and have been labeled “dystrophic endings” ( Ramon y Cajal 1928 ), though they appear to be dynamic structures ( Tom et al. 2004 ). We also often found abrupt turns in neurite trajectories including 180° turns and looping on reactive astrocytes in each class of neuron. Such turns are similar to what has been described for encounters of DRG neurites with proteoglycan boundaries, and are suggestive of encounters with local inhibitory “hotspots” ( Snow et al. 1990 , 1996 , 2001 ).  Signs of neurite growth inhibition on scar-like reactive astrocytes We found swollen neurite endings on treated astrocyte cultures, similar to those observed on inhibitory substrates in vitro and at injury sites in vivo. After injury, sensory axons are arrested and show enlarged axon terminals when contacting reactive astrocytes ( Liuzzi and Lasek 1987 ; Stensaas et al. 1987 ). Such bulbous axon terminals are considered signs of abortive regeneration, and have been labeled “dystrophic endings” ( Ramon y Cajal 1928 ), though they appear to be dynamic structures ( Tom et al. 2004 ). We also often found abrupt turns in neurite trajectories including 180° turns and looping on reactive astrocytes in each class of neuron. Such turns are similar to what has been described for encounters of DRG neurites with proteoglycan boundaries, and are suggestive of encounters with local inhibitory “hotspots” ( Snow et al. 1990 , 1996 , 2001 ).  “Reactive sites” contain reactive astrocytes, increased glial scar markers and reduced neurite growth Although we could readily demonstrate reduced neurite growth, our data likely underestimate inhibition in the scar-like cultures. First, neurons were often clustered in some areas, leaving others sparsely populated. Second, many highly inhibitory areas lacked neurons, and we systematically chose the most neuron-populated areas for measurement. Treated astrocyte cultures contained “reactive sites” with clusters of stellate astrocytes showing strong GFAP staining; such sites coincided with local increases in phosphacan or tenascin immunoreactivity. Similarly, cocultures with treated astrocytes showed “inhibitory patches” with few neurons, reduced neurite outgrowth and an increase in abortive endings. Hence, our findings suggest that the injury-related stimuli transform astrocytes into a functionally heterogeneous lawn with growth-inhibiting and growth-promoting areas. We found that “reactive sites” often coincided with patches of growth-inhibited neurons, and growth-permissive areas were usually associated with less reactive astrocytes. It is not clear whether inhibitory patches coincide with increased tenascin or CSPG expression. Nevertheless, our observations support the view that glial scars possess both growth-promoting and –inhibitory signals ( Jones et al. 2003 ). CSPGs and tenascins can have both positive and negative influences on growth ( Taylor et al. 1993 ) , and astrocytes express also growth-promoting proteins ( Neugebauer et al. 1988 ; Smith et al. 1990 ; Tomaselli et al. 1986 ; Tran et al. 2008 ). Presumably, growth inhibition results when inhibitors outweigh growth-supporting molecules. Our model should allow the identification of reactive astrocyte markers as well as understanding the local interactions of neurites within such complex environments. This model should be useful to understand mechanisms underlying scar formation as well as to test treatments that may improve regeneration of CNS axons.  “Reactive sites” contain reactive astrocytes, increased glial scar markers and reduced neurite growth Although we could readily demonstrate reduced neurite growth, our data likely underestimate inhibition in the scar-like cultures. First, neurons were often clustered in some areas, leaving others sparsely populated. Second, many highly inhibitory areas lacked neurons, and we systematically chose the most neuron-populated areas for measurement. Treated astrocyte cultures contained “reactive sites” with clusters of stellate astrocytes showing strong GFAP staining; such sites coincided with local increases in phosphacan or tenascin immunoreactivity. Similarly, cocultures with treated astrocytes showed “inhibitory patches” with few neurons, reduced neurite outgrowth and an increase in abortive endings. Hence, our findings suggest that the injury-related stimuli transform astrocytes into a functionally heterogeneous lawn with growth-inhibiting and growth-promoting areas. We found that “reactive sites” often coincided with patches of growth-inhibited neurons, and growth-permissive areas were usually associated with less reactive astrocytes. It is not clear whether inhibitory patches coincide with increased tenascin or CSPG expression. Nevertheless, our observations support the view that glial scars possess both growth-promoting and –inhibitory signals ( Jones et al. 2003 ). CSPGs and tenascins can have both positive and negative influences on growth ( Taylor et al. 1993 ) , and astrocytes express also growth-promoting proteins ( Neugebauer et al. 1988 ; Smith et al. 1990 ; Tomaselli et al. 1986 ; Tran et al. 2008 ). Presumably, growth inhibition results when inhibitors outweigh growth-supporting molecules. Our model should allow the identification of reactive astrocyte markers as well as understanding the local interactions of neurites within such complex environments. This model should be useful to understand mechanisms underlying scar formation as well as to test treatments that may improve regeneration of CNS axons. 