A Balanced Chromosomal Translocation Disrupting ARHGEF9 Is Associated With Epilepsy, Anxiety, Aggression, and Mental Retardation Clustering of inhibitory ?-aminobutyric acidA (GABAA) and glycine receptors at synapses is thought to involve key interactions between the receptors, a “scaffolding” protein known as gephyrin and the RhoGEF collybistin. We report the identification of a balanced chromosomal translocation in a female patient presenting with a disturbed sleep-wake cycle, late-onset epileptic seizures, increased anxiety, aggressive behavior, and mental retardation, but not hyperekplexia. Fine mapping of the breakpoint indicates disruption of the collybistin gene (ARHGEF9) on chromosome Xq11, while the other breakpoint lies in a region of 18q11 that lacks any known or predicted genes. We show that defective collybistin transcripts are synthesized and exons 7–10 are replaced by cryptic exons from chromosomes X and 18. These mRNAs no longer encode the pleckstrin homology (PH) domain of collybistin, which we now show binds phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate (PI3P/ PtdIns-3-P), a phosphoinositide with an emerging role in membrane trafficking and signal transduction, rather than phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3/PtdIns-3,4,5-P) as previously suggested in the “membrane activation model” of gephyrin clustering. Consistent with this finding, expression of truncated collybistin proteins in cultured neurons interferes with synaptic localization of endogenous gephyrin and GABAA receptors. These results suggest that collybistin has a key role in membrane trafficking of gephyrin and selected GABAA receptor subtypes involved in epilepsy, anxiety, aggression, insomnia, and learning and memory.  Materials and Methods Mapping the Balanced Chromosomal Translocation in <italic>ARHGEF9</italic> Patient and control samples were obtained with informed consent. Karyotype analysis was performed using standard high-resolution techniques. For breakpoint mapping, YACs, BACs, and PACs were prepared by standard techniques, labeled with appropriately coupled dUTPs by nick translation or directly labeled by Degenerate Oligonucleotide Primer PCR (DOP-PCR), and used as probes for fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) as described [ Wirth et al., 1999 ]. For Southern blotting, PCR-amplified DNA probes were labeled with ?[32P]dCTP using random hexamers and hybridization buffer containing 10% (w/v) PEG 6000, 0.125 M Na3PO4, 0.25 M NaCl, 0.001 M EDTA, 7% (w/v) SDS, supplemented with salmon or herring sperm DNA. The probe used for breakpoint identification was amplified with primers ChrX-180019 and ChrX-181201. Suppression PCR on Rsa I-digested patient DNA was performed as described [ Siebert et al., 1995 ] with adapter primer AP1 and chromosome X sequence-specific primer ChrX-180618, followed by a nested PCR with adapter primer AP2 and ChrX-180659. For breakpoint analysis of derivative chromosome 18, genomic patient DNA was amplified with primers Chr18-85079F1 and ChrX-181201. Sequences of all primers used in this study are provided in Supplementary Table S1 (available online at http://www.interscience.wiley.com/jpages/1059-7794/suppmat ). RT-PCR and 3? RACE Analysis of <italic>ARHGEF9</italic> Transcripts Total RNA was isolated from patient and control lymphoblastoid cell line using Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. A total of 5 ?g of RNA were used for reverse transcription with Superscript III (Invitrogen) in the presence of RNAguard (GE Healthcare, Chalfont, UK), using either oligonucleotide dT or random hexamers for priming. 3? RACE was performed using primers hPEM2-Ex5 and hPEM2-Ex6 using the GeneRacer kit (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s directions. Full-length cDNAs were amplified using Pfx proofreading DNA polymerase (Invitrogen), using primers based on the human ARHGEF9 cDNA sequence (NM_015185.2) and/or 3? RACE fragments, cloned into the Bam HI and Eco RI sites of pRK5-myc and fully sequenced. All PCR products and cDNA clones were sequenced using BigDye terminator mix (Applied Biosystems, Warrington, UK) using an ABI 3100 (Applied Biosystems, Warrington, United Kingdom). Gephyrin Clustering Assays in Cellular Models Gephyrin clustering assays in cellular models were performed as previously described [ Harvey et al., 2004 ]. HEK293 cells were cotransfected with pRK5myc-hPEM2 constructs at a 1:1 ratio with enhanced green fluorescent protein (pEGFP)-gephyrin using Effectine (Qiagen, Crawley, UK) and after 24 hrs in culture were fixed in 4% (w/v) PFA in PBS and immunostained with a 1:1,000 dilution of mouse anti-myc antibody (R950-25; Invitrogen), detected using a 1:500 dilution of AlexaFluor 488 goat anti-mouse secondary antibody (Invitrogen) and counterstained with a 1:10,000 dilution of ToPro-3 (T3605; Invitrogen). Lipid Protein Overlay Assays Lipid protein overlay assays were performed according to the method of Dowler et al. [2000] . Phosphoinositides (Cell Signals, Columbus, OH) were dissolved in methanol/chloroform/water (2:1:0.8) to give concentrations in the range of 100–1.6 pmol/?l and spotted onto nitrocellulose filters (GE Healthcare, Chalfont, UK) and dried for 1 hr at room temperature (RT). Membranes were then blocked in Tris-buffered saline Tween-20 (TBST) (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, and 0.1% (v/v) Tween-20) containing 5% (w/v) skim milk powder for 1 hr at RT. Glutathione-S-transferase (GST)-tagged hPEM2 or centaurin ?1 were isolated from E. coli BL21 (DE3) from corresponding constructs cloned in pGEX4 T. GST-hPEM2 or GST-centaurin ?1 (2 ?g/ml) was then added to the blocking solution and incubated overnight at 4°C. The membranes were then washed three times with TBST. Bound protein was detected by immunoblotting with a 1:2,000 dilution of an anti-GST goat polyclonal antibody (27-4577-01; GE Healthcare) for 1 hr, three washes in TBST, and detected with a 1:2,500 dilution of horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-goat immunoglobulin G (IgG) (A5420; Sigma-Aldrich, Gillingham, UK) for 1 hr, followed by three washes in TBST. HRP activity was detected using enhanced chemiluminescence reagent (ECL; GE Healthcare) and by exposing to X-ray film for 1 to 5 min. Neuronal Cell Culture, Transfection, and Quantification of Gephyrin/GABA<sub>A</sub>R Clustering Cultures of cortical neurons were generated from embryonic day 14.5 (E14.5) mouse embryos, as described previously [ Essrich et al., 1998 ; Harvey et al., 2004 ]. They were transfected at 18 days in vitro (DIV) and processed for immunofluorescence analysis under permeabilized conditions 2 days later. The following primary antibodies were used: guinea pig anti-?2 (1:1,500; a gift from J.M. Fritschy, University of Zurich, Switzerland), rabbit anti-myc (1:1,000, clone 9E10, generated in-house), and anti-gephyrin monoclonal antibody 7a (mAb7a) (1:1,000; a gift from H. Betz, Max-Planck-Institut für Hirnforschung, Frankfurt, Germany). Antibodies were detected with 1:500 dilutions of Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated goat anti-mouse, Cy3-conjugated donkey anti-guinea pig (Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA), and Alexa Fluor 647 goat anti-rabbit (Invitrogen). Fluorescent images were captured from a Zeiss Axiophot 2 microscope (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, Thornwood, NY) equipped with a 40 × 1.3 numerical aperture objective and an ORCA-100 video camera (Hamamatsu Photonics, Bridgewater, NJ) linked to an OpenLab imaging system (Improvision, Lexington, MA). Images were adjusted for contrast using OpenLab or FlowView software, respectively, and assembled into figure palettes using Adobe PhotoShop (Adobe Systems, San Jose, CA). For semiquantitative analyses of labeled GABAAR and gephyrin clusters, digitized microscopic images were recorded, and two dendritic segments of length 40 ?m each were selected from each transfected neuron from three or more independent experiments [ Harvey et al., 2004 ]. Immunoreactive puncta were automatically selected using OpenLab, applying a fluorescence intensity threshold corresponding to twice the diffuse fluorescence measured on the shaft of the same dendrite and a target size range of 0.2 to 2 ?m in diameter. Statistical comparisons were performed using Student’s t -test.  Mapping the Balanced Chromosomal Translocation in <italic>ARHGEF9</italic> Patient and control samples were obtained with informed consent. Karyotype analysis was performed using standard high-resolution techniques. For breakpoint mapping, YACs, BACs, and PACs were prepared by standard techniques, labeled with appropriately coupled dUTPs by nick translation or directly labeled by Degenerate Oligonucleotide Primer PCR (DOP-PCR), and used as probes for fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) as described [ Wirth et al., 1999 ]. For Southern blotting, PCR-amplified DNA probes were labeled with ?[32P]dCTP using random hexamers and hybridization buffer containing 10% (w/v) PEG 6000, 0.125 M Na3PO4, 0.25 M NaCl, 0.001 M EDTA, 7% (w/v) SDS, supplemented with salmon or herring sperm DNA. The probe used for breakpoint identification was amplified with primers ChrX-180019 and ChrX-181201. Suppression PCR on Rsa I-digested patient DNA was performed as described [ Siebert et al., 1995 ] with adapter primer AP1 and chromosome X sequence-specific primer ChrX-180618, followed by a nested PCR with adapter primer AP2 and ChrX-180659. For breakpoint analysis of derivative chromosome 18, genomic patient DNA was amplified with primers Chr18-85079F1 and ChrX-181201. Sequences of all primers used in this study are provided in Supplementary Table S1 (available online at http://www.interscience.wiley.com/jpages/1059-7794/suppmat ).  RT-PCR and 3? RACE Analysis of <italic>ARHGEF9</italic> Transcripts Total RNA was isolated from patient and control lymphoblastoid cell line using Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. A total of 5 ?g of RNA were used for reverse transcription with Superscript III (Invitrogen) in the presence of RNAguard (GE Healthcare, Chalfont, UK), using either oligonucleotide dT or random hexamers for priming. 3? RACE was performed using primers hPEM2-Ex5 and hPEM2-Ex6 using the GeneRacer kit (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s directions. Full-length cDNAs were amplified using Pfx proofreading DNA polymerase (Invitrogen), using primers based on the human ARHGEF9 cDNA sequence (NM_015185.2) and/or 3? RACE fragments, cloned into the Bam HI and Eco RI sites of pRK5-myc and fully sequenced. All PCR products and cDNA clones were sequenced using BigDye terminator mix (Applied Biosystems, Warrington, UK) using an ABI 3100 (Applied Biosystems, Warrington, United Kingdom).  Gephyrin Clustering Assays in Cellular Models Gephyrin clustering assays in cellular models were performed as previously described [ Harvey et al., 2004 ]. HEK293 cells were cotransfected with pRK5myc-hPEM2 constructs at a 1:1 ratio with enhanced green fluorescent protein (pEGFP)-gephyrin using Effectine (Qiagen, Crawley, UK) and after 24 hrs in culture were fixed in 4% (w/v) PFA in PBS and immunostained with a 1:1,000 dilution of mouse anti-myc antibody (R950-25; Invitrogen), detected using a 1:500 dilution of AlexaFluor 488 goat anti-mouse secondary antibody (Invitrogen) and counterstained with a 1:10,000 dilution of ToPro-3 (T3605; Invitrogen).  Lipid Protein Overlay Assays Lipid protein overlay assays were performed according to the method of Dowler et al. [2000] . Phosphoinositides (Cell Signals, Columbus, OH) were dissolved in methanol/chloroform/water (2:1:0.8) to give concentrations in the range of 100–1.6 pmol/?l and spotted onto nitrocellulose filters (GE Healthcare, Chalfont, UK) and dried for 1 hr at room temperature (RT). Membranes were then blocked in Tris-buffered saline Tween-20 (TBST) (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, and 0.1% (v/v) Tween-20) containing 5% (w/v) skim milk powder for 1 hr at RT. Glutathione-S-transferase (GST)-tagged hPEM2 or centaurin ?1 were isolated from E. coli BL21 (DE3) from corresponding constructs cloned in pGEX4 T. GST-hPEM2 or GST-centaurin ?1 (2 ?g/ml) was then added to the blocking solution and incubated overnight at 4°C. The membranes were then washed three times with TBST. Bound protein was detected by immunoblotting with a 1:2,000 dilution of an anti-GST goat polyclonal antibody (27-4577-01; GE Healthcare) for 1 hr, three washes in TBST, and detected with a 1:2,500 dilution of horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-goat immunoglobulin G (IgG) (A5420; Sigma-Aldrich, Gillingham, UK) for 1 hr, followed by three washes in TBST. HRP activity was detected using enhanced chemiluminescence reagent (ECL; GE Healthcare) and by exposing to X-ray film for 1 to 5 min.  Neuronal Cell Culture, Transfection, and Quantification of Gephyrin/GABA<sub>A</sub>R Clustering Cultures of cortical neurons were generated from embryonic day 14.5 (E14.5) mouse embryos, as described previously [ Essrich et al., 1998 ; Harvey et al., 2004 ]. They were transfected at 18 days in vitro (DIV) and processed for immunofluorescence analysis under permeabilized conditions 2 days later. The following primary antibodies were used: guinea pig anti-?2 (1:1,500; a gift from J.M. Fritschy, University of Zurich, Switzerland), rabbit anti-myc (1:1,000, clone 9E10, generated in-house), and anti-gephyrin monoclonal antibody 7a (mAb7a) (1:1,000; a gift from H. Betz, Max-Planck-Institut für Hirnforschung, Frankfurt, Germany). Antibodies were detected with 1:500 dilutions of Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated goat anti-mouse, Cy3-conjugated donkey anti-guinea pig (Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA), and Alexa Fluor 647 goat anti-rabbit (Invitrogen). Fluorescent images were captured from a Zeiss Axiophot 2 microscope (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, Thornwood, NY) equipped with a 40 × 1.3 numerical aperture objective and an ORCA-100 video camera (Hamamatsu Photonics, Bridgewater, NJ) linked to an OpenLab imaging system (Improvision, Lexington, MA). Images were adjusted for contrast using OpenLab or FlowView software, respectively, and assembled into figure palettes using Adobe PhotoShop (Adobe Systems, San Jose, CA). For semiquantitative analyses of labeled GABAAR and gephyrin clusters, digitized microscopic images were recorded, and two dendritic segments of length 40 ?m each were selected from each transfected neuron from three or more independent experiments [ Harvey et al., 2004 ]. Immunoreactive puncta were automatically selected using OpenLab, applying a fluorescence intensity threshold corresponding to twice the diffuse fluorescence measured on the shaft of the same dendrite and a target size range of 0.2 to 2 ?m in diameter. Statistical comparisons were performed using Student’s t -test.  Results The proband was the first child of healthy unrelated parents delivered at term via Cesarean section due to obstetric problems. Birth weight (3,140 g, 50th percentile) and length (50 cm, 50th percentile) were normal. At the age of 7 months, generalized hypotonia and psychomotor developmental arrest were noted. Cerebral nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) results were normal and screening for inborn errors of metabolism excluded amino acid pathologies or organic acidurias. At the age of 1 year and 9 months her weight was 9.6 kg (5th percentile), height 75.5 cm (<5th percentile), and head circumference 46.9 cm (10th percentile). She was hypotonic and unable to sit without support. The EEG at this stage and 2 years later showed relatively slow rhythm and partial disorganization of basic activity. At the age of 6 years, her weight was 14 kg (<3rd percentile), height 98 cm (<3rd percentile), and head circumference 50 cm (25th–50th percentile). Dysmorphic features included a long and narrow face, high narrow palate, hypertrophy of the alveolar ridge, irregular teeth, and micrognathia ( Fig. 1A ). Although the patient was able to walk autonomously, she was hyperactive and had no verbal communication. At the age of 7 years, she developed generalized tonic-clonic seizures, which occurred during the initial sleeping phase, although MRI scans were normal. Since the age of 8 years, the patient has suffered from frequent mood changes and a disturbed sleep-wake rhythm. She dislikes being touched by others or the proximity of other children. In situations where she becomes agitated, which can be triggered by changes in her environment, she shows self-injurious behaviors such as hand biting and punching her head. Likewise, she shows injurious behaviors against others. At the age of 12 years the patient was profoundly mentally retarded with a psychoeducational level of 7–12 months old. At the age of 14 years the parents noticed obstructive sleep apnea, which was treated by surgery. At a recent examination, at the age of 15 years her weight was 27 kg (?3rd percentile), her height 140 cm (?3rd percentile), and her occipital-frontal circumference was 53.5 cm (?3rd percentile). She had few words or social responses and a reduced sensitivity to thermal pain was noted. Seizures, mood, and behavior problems improved through treatment with the benzodiazepine clonaze-pam, the GABA transaminase inhibitor valproic acid, and the atypical antipsychotic risperidone. Karyotyping in this individual revealed a de novo balanced chromosomal translocation 46,X,t(X;18) (q11.1;q11.21), depicted in Figure 1B . Breakpoints were mapped by sequential FISH of genomic clones from both chromosomes 18 and X. On chromosome 18, the breakpoint lies within the genomic region of clones RP11-29E21 and RP11-885L22 (chr18: 24,344,568–24,564,620) ( Fig. 1C , right panel), which does not contain any known or predicted genes. However, on chromosome X, we noted that BAC clone RP11-943J20, containing ARHGEF9 , spanned the breakpoint ( Fig. 1C , left panel). The breakpoint was localized by Southern blot analysis of patient DNA, which revealed aberrant patient-specific DNA fragments in several digests ( Fig. 1D ). Subsequent cloning and sequence analysis of the junctional fragment revealed that the breakpoint lies between exons 6 and 7 of ARHGEF9 ( Fig. 1E and F ). We ruled out a deletion at the breakpoint on derivative chromosome 18 by sequencing the PCR-amplified breakpoint region ( Fig. 1F ), indicating that the translocation is balanced. Additional aberrations unrelated to this breakpoint were also excluded by array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) analysis ( Supplementary Fig. S1 ). Since in balanced X-autosome translocations, the normal X chromosome is often preferentially inactivated [ Kalz-Füller et al., 1999 ], RNA derived from an immortalized patient leukocyte cell line was tested for ARHGEF9 transcripts. RT-PCR amplifications with primers located in ARHGEF9 exons 5 and 7, which flank the breakpoint and in exons 8 and 10, which are both located proximal to the breakpoint on the derivative X chromosome, indicated that full-length ARHGEF9 transcripts are absent in the patient, whereas products of the expected size were easily amplifiable from control RNA ( Fig. 1G ). This analysis verified that the chromosomal rearrangement has led to inactivation of the normal X chromosome and that ARHGEF9 is subject to X inactivation. However, PCR products corresponding to exons 4–6 and exons 5–6, which in the patient are present on the derivative chromosome 18, indicated that truncated ARHGEF9 transcripts are produced. Further analysis using 3? RACE revealed two classes of ARHGEF9 transcript containing exons 1–6 followed by cryptic exons derived from intronic or intergenic sequences on chromosomes X and 18, each containing a consensus polyadenylation signal ( Fig. 2A ; Supplementary Fig. S2 ). As a result, patient-specific truncated ARHGEF9 mRNAs are generated, producing two classes of truncated proteins designated hPEM-X and hPEM-18. Interestingly, splicing of these cryptic exons results in the loss of the collybistin pleckstrin homology (PH) domain and C-terminus. Using immobilized phosphoinositides and purified GST-collybistin in overlay assays [ Dowler et al., 2000 ], we determined that the PH domain is required for collybistin function ( Fig. 2C ) since it binds the phosphoinositide PI3P (PtdIns-3-P/phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate), a phosphoinositide with an emerging role in membrane trafficking and signal transduction [ Falasca and Maffucci, 2006 ]. This result was somewhat unexpected, since collybistin has previously been suggested to bind phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3/PtdIns-3,4,5-P) in the “membrane activation model” of gephyrin clustering [ Kneussel and Betz, 2000 ]. However, controls using centaurin ?1, a known PIP2 and PIP3 binding protein [ Venkateswarlu et al., 2004 ], verified that our overlay assays were capable of detecting binding to these phosphoinositides ( Fig. 2C ). Western blot analysis of myc-tagged hPEM constructs expressed in HEK293 cells indicates that the aberrant hPEM2-18 and hPEM2-X proteins are stable and expressed at levels equivalent to hPEM2SH3+ and hPEM2SH3? when normalized to endogenous ?-tubulin ( Fig. 3A and B ). Coexpression of myc-tagged hPEM2 proteins with EGFP-gephyrin in HEK293 cells revealed that, as expected [ Kins et al., 2000 ; Harvey et al., 2004 ], variants containing the regulatory SH3 domain (hPEM2SH3+) colocalize with EGFP-gephyrin in large intracellular aggregates ( Fig. 3C ), while hPEM2SH3?, lacking the SH3 domain, directs EGFP-gephyrin to submembrane clusters ( Fig. 3D ). However, although hPEM2-18 ( Fig. 3E ) and hPEM2-X ( Fig. 3F ) lack the SH3 domain, these proteins colocalize with EGFP-gephyrin and do not direct the formation of submembrane microaggregates. To examine the effects of these proteins on neuronal gephyrin and GABAAR ?2 subunit clustering, we expressed these hPEM2 constructs in primary cultures of mouse cortical neurons. Punctate immunofluorescent staining for these proteins is representative of postsynaptic GABAAR and gephyrin clusters, respectively. Overexpression of myc-hPEM2SH3+ or myc-hPEM2SH3? did not interfere with the colocalization of gephyrin or GABAARs in synaptic clusters ( Fig. 4A–D ). Quantitative analysis revealed that neither hPEM2SH3+ nor myc-hPEM2SH3? influence gephyrin puncta number ( Fig. 4I ) although deletion of the regulatory SH3 domain caused a modest increase in puncta size ( Fig. 4J ). By contrast, in neurons expressing myc-hPEM2-X ( Fig. 4E, F ) and myc-hPEM2-18 ( Fig. 4G and H ), punctuate gephyrin and GABAAR immunoreactivity was significantly reduced, suggesting that these truncated proteins can act in a dominant-negative manner and interfere with the accumulation of endogenous gephyrin and GABAARs at synaptic sites. Quantitative analyses of the punctuate gephyrin immunofluorescence ( Fig. 4I and J ) confirmed that the number of gephyrin clusters was dramatically reduced, along with a significant reduction in size of the few remaining clusters.  Results The proband was the first child of healthy unrelated parents delivered at term via Cesarean section due to obstetric problems. Birth weight (3,140 g, 50th percentile) and length (50 cm, 50th percentile) were normal. At the age of 7 months, generalized hypotonia and psychomotor developmental arrest were noted. Cerebral nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) results were normal and screening for inborn errors of metabolism excluded amino acid pathologies or organic acidurias. At the age of 1 year and 9 months her weight was 9.6 kg (5th percentile), height 75.5 cm (<5th percentile), and head circumference 46.9 cm (10th percentile). She was hypotonic and unable to sit without support. The EEG at this stage and 2 years later showed relatively slow rhythm and partial disorganization of basic activity. At the age of 6 years, her weight was 14 kg (<3rd percentile), height 98 cm (<3rd percentile), and head circumference 50 cm (25th–50th percentile). Dysmorphic features included a long and narrow face, high narrow palate, hypertrophy of the alveolar ridge, irregular teeth, and micrognathia ( Fig. 1A ). Although the patient was able to walk autonomously, she was hyperactive and had no verbal communication. At the age of 7 years, she developed generalized tonic-clonic seizures, which occurred during the initial sleeping phase, although MRI scans were normal. Since the age of 8 years, the patient has suffered from frequent mood changes and a disturbed sleep-wake rhythm. She dislikes being touched by others or the proximity of other children. In situations where she becomes agitated, which can be triggered by changes in her environment, she shows self-injurious behaviors such as hand biting and punching her head. Likewise, she shows injurious behaviors against others. At the age of 12 years the patient was profoundly mentally retarded with a psychoeducational level of 7–12 months old. At the age of 14 years the parents noticed obstructive sleep apnea, which was treated by surgery. At a recent examination, at the age of 15 years her weight was 27 kg (?3rd percentile), her height 140 cm (?3rd percentile), and her occipital-frontal circumference was 53.5 cm (?3rd percentile). She had few words or social responses and a reduced sensitivity to thermal pain was noted. Seizures, mood, and behavior problems improved through treatment with the benzodiazepine clonaze-pam, the GABA transaminase inhibitor valproic acid, and the atypical antipsychotic risperidone. Karyotyping in this individual revealed a de novo balanced chromosomal translocation 46,X,t(X;18) (q11.1;q11.21), depicted in Figure 1B . Breakpoints were mapped by sequential FISH of genomic clones from both chromosomes 18 and X. On chromosome 18, the breakpoint lies within the genomic region of clones RP11-29E21 and RP11-885L22 (chr18: 24,344,568–24,564,620) ( Fig. 1C , right panel), which does not contain any known or predicted genes. However, on chromosome X, we noted that BAC clone RP11-943J20, containing ARHGEF9 , spanned the breakpoint ( Fig. 1C , left panel). The breakpoint was localized by Southern blot analysis of patient DNA, which revealed aberrant patient-specific DNA fragments in several digests ( Fig. 1D ). Subsequent cloning and sequence analysis of the junctional fragment revealed that the breakpoint lies between exons 6 and 7 of ARHGEF9 ( Fig. 1E and F ). We ruled out a deletion at the breakpoint on derivative chromosome 18 by sequencing the PCR-amplified breakpoint region ( Fig. 1F ), indicating that the translocation is balanced. Additional aberrations unrelated to this breakpoint were also excluded by array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) analysis ( Supplementary Fig. S1 ). Since in balanced X-autosome translocations, the normal X chromosome is often preferentially inactivated [ Kalz-Füller et al., 1999 ], RNA derived from an immortalized patient leukocyte cell line was tested for ARHGEF9 transcripts. RT-PCR amplifications with primers located in ARHGEF9 exons 5 and 7, which flank the breakpoint and in exons 8 and 10, which are both located proximal to the breakpoint on the derivative X chromosome, indicated that full-length ARHGEF9 transcripts are absent in the patient, whereas products of the expected size were easily amplifiable from control RNA ( Fig. 1G ). This analysis verified that the chromosomal rearrangement has led to inactivation of the normal X chromosome and that ARHGEF9 is subject to X inactivation. However, PCR products corresponding to exons 4–6 and exons 5–6, which in the patient are present on the derivative chromosome 18, indicated that truncated ARHGEF9 transcripts are produced. Further analysis using 3? RACE revealed two classes of ARHGEF9 transcript containing exons 1–6 followed by cryptic exons derived from intronic or intergenic sequences on chromosomes X and 18, each containing a consensus polyadenylation signal ( Fig. 2A ; Supplementary Fig. S2 ). As a result, patient-specific truncated ARHGEF9 mRNAs are generated, producing two classes of truncated proteins designated hPEM-X and hPEM-18. Interestingly, splicing of these cryptic exons results in the loss of the collybistin pleckstrin homology (PH) domain and C-terminus. Using immobilized phosphoinositides and purified GST-collybistin in overlay assays [ Dowler et al., 2000 ], we determined that the PH domain is required for collybistin function ( Fig. 2C ) since it binds the phosphoinositide PI3P (PtdIns-3-P/phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate), a phosphoinositide with an emerging role in membrane trafficking and signal transduction [ Falasca and Maffucci, 2006 ]. This result was somewhat unexpected, since collybistin has previously been suggested to bind phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3/PtdIns-3,4,5-P) in the “membrane activation model” of gephyrin clustering [ Kneussel and Betz, 2000 ]. However, controls using centaurin ?1, a known PIP2 and PIP3 binding protein [ Venkateswarlu et al., 2004 ], verified that our overlay assays were capable of detecting binding to these phosphoinositides ( Fig. 2C ). Western blot analysis of myc-tagged hPEM constructs expressed in HEK293 cells indicates that the aberrant hPEM2-18 and hPEM2-X proteins are stable and expressed at levels equivalent to hPEM2SH3+ and hPEM2SH3? when normalized to endogenous ?-tubulin ( Fig. 3A and B ). Coexpression of myc-tagged hPEM2 proteins with EGFP-gephyrin in HEK293 cells revealed that, as expected [ Kins et al., 2000 ; Harvey et al., 2004 ], variants containing the regulatory SH3 domain (hPEM2SH3+) colocalize with EGFP-gephyrin in large intracellular aggregates ( Fig. 3C ), while hPEM2SH3?, lacking the SH3 domain, directs EGFP-gephyrin to submembrane clusters ( Fig. 3D ). However, although hPEM2-18 ( Fig. 3E ) and hPEM2-X ( Fig. 3F ) lack the SH3 domain, these proteins colocalize with EGFP-gephyrin and do not direct the formation of submembrane microaggregates. To examine the effects of these proteins on neuronal gephyrin and GABAAR ?2 subunit clustering, we expressed these hPEM2 constructs in primary cultures of mouse cortical neurons. Punctate immunofluorescent staining for these proteins is representative of postsynaptic GABAAR and gephyrin clusters, respectively. Overexpression of myc-hPEM2SH3+ or myc-hPEM2SH3? did not interfere with the colocalization of gephyrin or GABAARs in synaptic clusters ( Fig. 4A–D ). Quantitative analysis revealed that neither hPEM2SH3+ nor myc-hPEM2SH3? influence gephyrin puncta number ( Fig. 4I ) although deletion of the regulatory SH3 domain caused a modest increase in puncta size ( Fig. 4J ). By contrast, in neurons expressing myc-hPEM2-X ( Fig. 4E, F ) and myc-hPEM2-18 ( Fig. 4G and H ), punctuate gephyrin and GABAAR immunoreactivity was significantly reduced, suggesting that these truncated proteins can act in a dominant-negative manner and interfere with the accumulation of endogenous gephyrin and GABAARs at synaptic sites. Quantitative analyses of the punctuate gephyrin immunofluorescence ( Fig. 4I and J ) confirmed that the number of gephyrin clusters was dramatically reduced, along with a significant reduction in size of the few remaining clusters.  Discussion We describe a balanced chromosomal translocation truncating ARHGEF9 that results in a range of clinical symptoms including a disturbed sleep-wake cycle, late-onset epileptic seizures, increased anxiety, aggressive behavior, and mental retardation. The translocation results in the production of functionally defective collybistin isoforms, lacking the PH domain and C-terminus. Loss of the collybistin PH domain is predicted to abolish PI3P binding, but does not affect interactions with gephyrin via the RhoGEF domain. We demonstrate that these truncated collybistin isoforms cause loss of synaptic gephyrin and GABAARs via a dominant-negative mechanism, suggesting that the loss of specific GABAAR subtypes may underlie the symptoms observed in this individual. For example, mutations in human GABAAR ?1 and ?2 subunit genes are associated with various types of IGEs [ Baulac et al., 2001 ; Wallace et al., 2001 ; Cossette et al., 2002 ; Harkin et al., 2002 ; Kananura et al., 2002 ; Audenaert et al., 2006 ; Maljevic et al., 2006 ], while a mutation in the GABAAR ?3 subunit gene ( GABRB3 ) was reported in an individual with chronic insomnia [ Buhr et al., 2002 ]. Homozygous GABAAR ?2 subunit knockout mice show retarded growth, sensorimotor dysfunction, a reduced life-span, and epileptic seizures [ Günther et al., 1995 ; Essrich et al., 1998 ; Schweizer et al., 2003 ], while mice heterozygous for ?2 exhibit enhanced anxiety and a memory bias for threat cues, resulting in heightened sensitivity to negative associations [ Crestani et al., 1999 ]. This may be linked to GABAARs containing the ?2 subunit, which are responsible for the anxiolytic effects of benzodiazepines [ Löw et al., 2000 ]. By contrast, a loss of GABAARs containing the ?3 subunit induces a hyperdopaminergic phenotype involving a deficit in sensorimotor gating [ Yee et al., 2005 ], a common feature among psychiatric conditions, including schizophrenia. In this regard, it is noteworthy that the individual in this study responded to the use of antipsychotics and mood stabilizing drugs. In conclusion, it is now apparent that different mutations in ARHGEF9 give rise to a diverse range of clinical symptoms ( Table 1 ). The missense mutation p.G55A in the SH3 domain gives rise to a severe phenotype encompassing hyperekplexia, drug-resistant seizures, and premature death, caused by somatic and dendritic trapping of gephyrin and receptors by collybistin aggregates [ Harvey et al., 2004 ]. By contrast, a female patient with an X chromosome inversion affecting one copy of ARHGEF9 , but with low expression from the unaffected ARHGEF9 copy, suffered from mild mental retardation and sensory hyperarousal, but not seizures or hyperekplexia [ Marco et al., 2008 ]. Thus, comparatively severe phenotypes are observed when dominant-negative forms of hPEM2 are expressed, as previously shown for the p.G55A mutation [ Harvey et al., 2004 ] and the translocation reported here, which sequester gephyrin and GABAARs from synaptic sites. Collybistin may also be dispensable for GlyR clustering, since hyperekplexia does not appear to be a common feature in humans with ARHGEF9 rearrangements, nor collybistin knockout mice [ Papadopoulos et al., 2007 ], which show increased levels of anxiety and impaired spatial learning due to a selective loss of GABAARs in the hippocampus and the basolateral amygdala. This suggests that additional RhoGEFs involved in inhibitory receptor clustering remain to be identified.  Discussion We describe a balanced chromosomal translocation truncating ARHGEF9 that results in a range of clinical symptoms including a disturbed sleep-wake cycle, late-onset epileptic seizures, increased anxiety, aggressive behavior, and mental retardation. The translocation results in the production of functionally defective collybistin isoforms, lacking the PH domain and C-terminus. Loss of the collybistin PH domain is predicted to abolish PI3P binding, but does not affect interactions with gephyrin via the RhoGEF domain. We demonstrate that these truncated collybistin isoforms cause loss of synaptic gephyrin and GABAARs via a dominant-negative mechanism, suggesting that the loss of specific GABAAR subtypes may underlie the symptoms observed in this individual. For example, mutations in human GABAAR ?1 and ?2 subunit genes are associated with various types of IGEs [ Baulac et al., 2001 ; Wallace et al., 2001 ; Cossette et al., 2002 ; Harkin et al., 2002 ; Kananura et al., 2002 ; Audenaert et al., 2006 ; Maljevic et al., 2006 ], while a mutation in the GABAAR ?3 subunit gene ( GABRB3 ) was reported in an individual with chronic insomnia [ Buhr et al., 2002 ]. Homozygous GABAAR ?2 subunit knockout mice show retarded growth, sensorimotor dysfunction, a reduced life-span, and epileptic seizures [ Günther et al., 1995 ; Essrich et al., 1998 ; Schweizer et al., 2003 ], while mice heterozygous for ?2 exhibit enhanced anxiety and a memory bias for threat cues, resulting in heightened sensitivity to negative associations [ Crestani et al., 1999 ]. This may be linked to GABAARs containing the ?2 subunit, which are responsible for the anxiolytic effects of benzodiazepines [ Löw et al., 2000 ]. By contrast, a loss of GABAARs containing the ?3 subunit induces a hyperdopaminergic phenotype involving a deficit in sensorimotor gating [ Yee et al., 2005 ], a common feature among psychiatric conditions, including schizophrenia. In this regard, it is noteworthy that the individual in this study responded to the use of antipsychotics and mood stabilizing drugs. In conclusion, it is now apparent that different mutations in ARHGEF9 give rise to a diverse range of clinical symptoms ( Table 1 ). The missense mutation p.G55A in the SH3 domain gives rise to a severe phenotype encompassing hyperekplexia, drug-resistant seizures, and premature death, caused by somatic and dendritic trapping of gephyrin and receptors by collybistin aggregates [ Harvey et al., 2004 ]. By contrast, a female patient with an X chromosome inversion affecting one copy of ARHGEF9 , but with low expression from the unaffected ARHGEF9 copy, suffered from mild mental retardation and sensory hyperarousal, but not seizures or hyperekplexia [ Marco et al., 2008 ]. Thus, comparatively severe phenotypes are observed when dominant-negative forms of hPEM2 are expressed, as previously shown for the p.G55A mutation [ Harvey et al., 2004 ] and the translocation reported here, which sequester gephyrin and GABAARs from synaptic sites. Collybistin may also be dispensable for GlyR clustering, since hyperekplexia does not appear to be a common feature in humans with ARHGEF9 rearrangements, nor collybistin knockout mice [ Papadopoulos et al., 2007 ], which show increased levels of anxiety and impaired spatial learning due to a selective loss of GABAARs in the hippocampus and the basolateral amygdala. This suggests that additional RhoGEFs involved in inhibitory receptor clustering remain to be identified.  Supplementary Material Supplement  Supplementary Material Supplement 