Proposal for a New Risk Model in Myelodysplastic Syndrome That Accounts for Events Not Considered in the Original International Prognostic Scoring System BACKGROUND Recent studies have highlighted issues with the International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) model in relation to the exclusion of many subgroups that now represent a large proportion of patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) (eg, secondary MDS, chronic myelomonocytic leukemia [CMML] with leukocytosis, prior therapy) and its lack of applicability to most patients on investigational programs, because many would have received prior therapies and would have had MDS for a significant length of time. METHODS The authors analyzed 1915 patients with MDS who were referred from 1993 to 2005 (including those with CMML, secondary MDS, and MDS with prior therapy). Only 507 patients (26%) had primary MDS without prior therapy (ie, classifiable by the IPSS). Patients were divided randomly into a study group (n = 958) and a test group (n = 957). RESULTS A multivariate analysis of prognostic factors in the study group identified the following adverse, independent factors as continuous and categoric values ( P <.001): poor performance, older age, thrombocytopenia, anemia, increased bone marrow blasts, leukocytosis, chromosome 7 or complex (?3) abnormalities, and prior transfusions. Cutoffs for anemia, thrombocytopenia and blasts, and cytogenetic subsets were different according to the IPSS. The new MDS prognostic model divided patients into 4 prognostic groups with significantly different outcomes. The model was validated in the test group. Applying the prognostic score of the new model within the 4 IPSS risk groups, overall, and in patients who had primary MDS without prior therapy was found to be highly prognostic in each subset. Applying the IPSS within each of the 4 risk groups of the new MDS model was not found to be prognostic. CONCLUSIONS The new model accounts for duration of MDS and prior therapy. It is applicable to any patient with MDS at any time during the course of MDS.  MATERIALS AND METHODS All patients with a diagnosis of MDS who were referred to the Adult Leukemia Department at M. D. Anderson Cancer Center from 1993 (with prior treatment information available) to 2005 were included. Criteria for inclusion in the analysis were 1) age ?16 years, 2) a confirmed diagnosis of MDS with <30% blasts, and 3) informed consent according to institutional guidelines. Patients were included regardless of performance status, presence of organ dysfunctions, and extent of prior therapy. Patients who had secondary disease or CMML with leukocytosis were included. Patient and disease characteristics at the time of study inclusion were recorded. In the analysis of prognostic factors, the variables included were sex, age, performance status, hemoglobin, WBC counts, platelet counts, absolute neutrophil counts, bone marrow blasts (percent and cellularity), the levels of creatinine and bilirubin, the presence of Auer rods, the duration of MDS and AHD, prior malignancy and treatment, morphology (MDS vs CMML), number of cytopenia events, IPSS score (tested on all patients regardless of whether they had secondary MDS or CMML with high WBC counts), cytogenetic abnormalities, and prior therapy. Cytogenetic categories were coded as proposed previously in different models 8 , 9 into 1) diploid/loss of chromosome Y, 2) deletion in 5q only, 3) deletion in 20q only, 4) trisomy 8 alone or with 1 additional abnormality, 5) other abnormalities involving <3 changes, 6) chromosome 7 abnormality alone or with other abnormalities, and 7) complex abnormalities that involved ?3 changes. Prior treatments for MDS were grouped first as follows: 1) no prior therapy, 2) transfusions only, 3) growth factors, 4) hypomethylating agents with or without other therapy, 5) thalidomide with or without other therapy, 6) other chemotherapy (eg, hydroxyurea, topotecan plus cytarabine, idarubicin plus cytarabine). Statistical Considerations The significance of individual characteristics was evaluated by univariate and multivariate analyses. 10 , 11 Survival was calculated from the date of referral to our institution. Time to the development of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) was calculated from the date of referral to the date patients developed ?30% myeloblasts. In total, 1915 patients who were referred from 1993 to 2005 were included. Patients were divided randomly into 2 subgroups of equal size: a study group (n = 958 patients; training set) and a test group (N = 957 patients; validation set).  Statistical Considerations The significance of individual characteristics was evaluated by univariate and multivariate analyses. 10 , 11 Survival was calculated from the date of referral to our institution. Time to the development of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) was calculated from the date of referral to the date patients developed ?30% myeloblasts. In total, 1915 patients who were referred from 1993 to 2005 were included. Patients were divided randomly into 2 subgroups of equal size: a study group (n = 958 patients; training set) and a test group (N = 957 patients; validation set).  RESULTS The characteristics of the total and study groups are shown in Table 1 . Among the 1915 patients, 1097 had received growth factors, chemotherapy, or transfusions (318 had received transfusions only); and 818 had not received transfusions, growth factors, or chemotherapy. Survival of the study and test groups is shown in Figure 1 . The median survival was 14.1 months in the study and 13.2 months in the test group. This confirmed the prognostic comparability of the 2 groups. Survival by MDS and CMML subsets that were not included in the original IPSS is illustrated in Figure 2 . The results suggest a worse outcome for patients in these subsets compared with patients who had primary MDS and received no prior therapy. In particular, the median survival of patients with primary MDS without or with prior therapy was 15.1 months versus 10 months, respectively. This finding is relevant to the comparisons of control groups and treatment groups in current randomized trials. Survival according to IPSS for all patients, for patients with primary MDS (eligible for IPSS) without prior therapy for MDS, for patients with secondary MDS and CMML, for patients with CMML who have WBC counts >12 × 109/L, and for patients with primary MDS who received prior therapy are shown in Table 2 . It is interesting to note that only 507 patients (26%) had primary MDS and received no prior therapy. These data confirm the applicability of the IPSS to MDS and CMML groups who were excluded from the original IPSS study but indicate the need for the inclusion of other factors to account for survival differences from the original study ( Table 2 ). These factors are related to prior therapy, secondary MDS, CMML with WBC counts >12 × 109/L, and prior transfusion needs. In addition, refining the prognostic subsets of the original IPSS (eg, cytogenetic subsets, cutoffs for hemoglobin and platelet counts) may improve the risk prediction. Survival by cytogenetic abnormalities is shown in Table 3 . Based on the survival analyses, these abnormalities subsequently were grouped into the following categories: 1) diploid or loss of chromosome Y, deletions in 5q or 20q only; 2) trisomy 8 alone or with 1 other abnormality; 3) abnormalities that involved <3 changes; and 4) chromosome 7 abnormalities or complex abnormalities that involved ?3 changes. Table 4 shows survival according to the prior MDS therapy. Patients who received prior transfusions had worse survival compared with other treatment groups. This led to grouping patients with any prior transfusions as 1 group to examine the effect of prior therapies. Univariate and Multivariate Survival Analyses In the univariate analysis, the following factors were significant for survival ( P <.05): performance status, age, hemoglobin, platelets, bone marrow blasts, WBC count, bilirubin, bone marrow cellularity, prior chemotherapy for another malignancy, cytogenetic category, and prior MDS therapy ( Table 5 ). The multivariate analysis, which included all of the factors listed above, selected the following as independent adverse prognostic factors: poor performance status ?2 (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group), older age, higher percent bone marrow blasts, anemia, thrombocytopenia, leukocytosis, chromosome 7 abnormalities or complex abnormalities (?3 changes), and prior transfusions ( Table 5 ). Because the IPSS is an established, commonly used classification and includes 3 important consistent prognostic factors (percent bone marrow blasts, karyotype, number of cytopenias), we performed a multivariate analysis that included the IPSS score as a single prognostic factor along with the other significant factors that were identified in univariate analysis. In addition to the IPSS, a backward, stepwise Cox proportional multivariate analysis selected the following poor prognostic factors: severe thrombocytopenia (any thrombocytopenia <100 × 109/L according to the IPSS), leukocytosis (this may account for CMML with leukocytosis), poor performance status, older age, chromosome 7 or complex abnormalities (?3 changes; the IPSS underestimates the poor prognostic impact of adverse cytogenetic abnormalities in MDS), 8 and prior transfusions. This suggests that the IPSS model may be improved by proposing a new model based on the above multivariate analysis. Other features, such as secondary MDS, prior treatment for other malignancies, and duration of AHD and MDS, were not selected (ie, were accounted for by the other independent factors). This suggests that the new risk model proposed would be applicable to any patient during the course of their disease, provided the analysis of prognosis is based on the variables present at that time point. Proposed New MDS Risk Model Based on the findings described above, we developed a risk model that included the factors identified as significant by multivariate analysis in the study group. To develop a simplified risk model that was easily applicable to the MDS community setting, we fitted the Cox regression model in which continuous variables were changed to indicator variables with different ranges (eg, age, platelets, etc) based on the calculation of a hazard ratio for each interval and on the inspection of Martingale residual plots. Estimated coefficients and their weighted points 12 are shown in Tables 6 through 8 . Four prognostic risk groups are proposed for the new risk model: 1) low risk (score 0–4; 16% of patients), in which patients have an estimated median survival of 54 months and a 3-year survival rate of 63%; 2) intermediate-1 risk (score 5–6; 24% of patients), in which patients have an estimated median survival of 25 months and a 3-year survival rate of 34%; 3) intermediate-2 risk (score 7–8; 24% of patients), in which patients have an estimated median survival of 14 months and a 3-year survival rate of 16%; and 4) high risk (score ?9; 36% of patients), in which patients have an estimated median survival of 6 months and a 3-year survival rate of 4%. These groups are illustrated in Figure 3A . The proposed model was validated in the separate test group ( Fig. 3B ) ( Table 9 ). The risk stratification of patients with newly diagnosed, untreated MDS is shown in Figure 4 . Testing the new model within each IPSS subset was highly prognostic ( Figs. 5A–D ). Thus, the new MDS model added prognostic value to the IPSS. Testing the IPSS risk model within each of the 4 risk groups did not separate patients into different risk groups. Thus, the IPSS did not add any significance to the prognostic prediction of the new MDS model ( Figs. 6A–D ). Testing the new model within IPSS subsets in patients with primary MDS and no prior therapy (as in the original IPSS study) also was highly prognostic ( Figs. 7A–D ), although the numbers of patients in some subsets were small. This most likely is because of the addition of several new prognostic factors (age, performance status) and refinement of the cutoff levels for prognostic factors that were included in the original IPSS model (cytopenias, cytogenetic subsets). Testing the IPSS within each of the 4 risk groups of the new MDS model in patients with primary MDS and no prior therapy did not separate patients into different risk groups (data not shown). The New Risk Model and MDS/CMML Subsets of Interest Significance of ?-2 microglobulin levels Previous studies by our group highlighted the prognostic significance of ?-2 microglobulin levels in MDS and CMML. 13 , 14 Levels of ?-2 microglobulin were available from 1464 patients in the current study. Therefore, we applied the new proposed model to these subsets of patients. After accounting for the effect of the independent prognostic factors in the model, when ?-2 microglobulin was entered as a new continuous variable, it did not retain prognostic significance ( P = .08) Application of the new MDS model in patients with <20% blasts For this analysis, we used the accepted FAB and IPSS categorizations of MDS with the cutoff of 30% blasts to categorize MDS versus AML. 4 , 6 The recent WHO classification proposed using >20% blasts as the cutoff for AML. 5 Therefore, we validated the new MDS model in the 1676 patients with MDS defined as <20% bone marrow blasts ( Fig. 8 ). Because the new model proposes the category of 11% to 29% blasts as an independent prognostic group ( Table 6 ) it would have been expected and, in fact, was the case that the model was equally prognostic in this subset of patients with MDS defined by the presence of < 20% blasts. Application of the new MDS model in CMML with leukocytosis and secondary MDS Because the outcome of patients who have CMML with leukocytosis and secondary MDS may be of interest to particular research involving such subsets, we also validated the new risk model in these 2 individual subsets, confirming its value and the outcome of the 4 prognostic subsets as predicted by the model. Among the 176 patients who had CMML and leukocytosis, the median survival of the low-risk, intermediate-1 risk, intermediate-2 risk, and high-risk patients were 33 months, 19 months, 12 months, and 8 months, respectively ( P <.001) ( Table 9 ). Among the 571 patients who had secondary MDS, the median survival was were 43 months, 19 months, 12 months, and 6 months, respectively ( P <.001) ( Table 9 ).  RESULTS The characteristics of the total and study groups are shown in Table 1 . Among the 1915 patients, 1097 had received growth factors, chemotherapy, or transfusions (318 had received transfusions only); and 818 had not received transfusions, growth factors, or chemotherapy. Survival of the study and test groups is shown in Figure 1 . The median survival was 14.1 months in the study and 13.2 months in the test group. This confirmed the prognostic comparability of the 2 groups. Survival by MDS and CMML subsets that were not included in the original IPSS is illustrated in Figure 2 . The results suggest a worse outcome for patients in these subsets compared with patients who had primary MDS and received no prior therapy. In particular, the median survival of patients with primary MDS without or with prior therapy was 15.1 months versus 10 months, respectively. This finding is relevant to the comparisons of control groups and treatment groups in current randomized trials. Survival according to IPSS for all patients, for patients with primary MDS (eligible for IPSS) without prior therapy for MDS, for patients with secondary MDS and CMML, for patients with CMML who have WBC counts >12 × 109/L, and for patients with primary MDS who received prior therapy are shown in Table 2 . It is interesting to note that only 507 patients (26%) had primary MDS and received no prior therapy. These data confirm the applicability of the IPSS to MDS and CMML groups who were excluded from the original IPSS study but indicate the need for the inclusion of other factors to account for survival differences from the original study ( Table 2 ). These factors are related to prior therapy, secondary MDS, CMML with WBC counts >12 × 109/L, and prior transfusion needs. In addition, refining the prognostic subsets of the original IPSS (eg, cytogenetic subsets, cutoffs for hemoglobin and platelet counts) may improve the risk prediction. Survival by cytogenetic abnormalities is shown in Table 3 . Based on the survival analyses, these abnormalities subsequently were grouped into the following categories: 1) diploid or loss of chromosome Y, deletions in 5q or 20q only; 2) trisomy 8 alone or with 1 other abnormality; 3) abnormalities that involved <3 changes; and 4) chromosome 7 abnormalities or complex abnormalities that involved ?3 changes. Table 4 shows survival according to the prior MDS therapy. Patients who received prior transfusions had worse survival compared with other treatment groups. This led to grouping patients with any prior transfusions as 1 group to examine the effect of prior therapies. Univariate and Multivariate Survival Analyses In the univariate analysis, the following factors were significant for survival ( P <.05): performance status, age, hemoglobin, platelets, bone marrow blasts, WBC count, bilirubin, bone marrow cellularity, prior chemotherapy for another malignancy, cytogenetic category, and prior MDS therapy ( Table 5 ). The multivariate analysis, which included all of the factors listed above, selected the following as independent adverse prognostic factors: poor performance status ?2 (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group), older age, higher percent bone marrow blasts, anemia, thrombocytopenia, leukocytosis, chromosome 7 abnormalities or complex abnormalities (?3 changes), and prior transfusions ( Table 5 ). Because the IPSS is an established, commonly used classification and includes 3 important consistent prognostic factors (percent bone marrow blasts, karyotype, number of cytopenias), we performed a multivariate analysis that included the IPSS score as a single prognostic factor along with the other significant factors that were identified in univariate analysis. In addition to the IPSS, a backward, stepwise Cox proportional multivariate analysis selected the following poor prognostic factors: severe thrombocytopenia (any thrombocytopenia <100 × 109/L according to the IPSS), leukocytosis (this may account for CMML with leukocytosis), poor performance status, older age, chromosome 7 or complex abnormalities (?3 changes; the IPSS underestimates the poor prognostic impact of adverse cytogenetic abnormalities in MDS), 8 and prior transfusions. This suggests that the IPSS model may be improved by proposing a new model based on the above multivariate analysis. Other features, such as secondary MDS, prior treatment for other malignancies, and duration of AHD and MDS, were not selected (ie, were accounted for by the other independent factors). This suggests that the new risk model proposed would be applicable to any patient during the course of their disease, provided the analysis of prognosis is based on the variables present at that time point. Proposed New MDS Risk Model Based on the findings described above, we developed a risk model that included the factors identified as significant by multivariate analysis in the study group. To develop a simplified risk model that was easily applicable to the MDS community setting, we fitted the Cox regression model in which continuous variables were changed to indicator variables with different ranges (eg, age, platelets, etc) based on the calculation of a hazard ratio for each interval and on the inspection of Martingale residual plots. Estimated coefficients and their weighted points 12 are shown in Tables 6 through 8 . Four prognostic risk groups are proposed for the new risk model: 1) low risk (score 0–4; 16% of patients), in which patients have an estimated median survival of 54 months and a 3-year survival rate of 63%; 2) intermediate-1 risk (score 5–6; 24% of patients), in which patients have an estimated median survival of 25 months and a 3-year survival rate of 34%; 3) intermediate-2 risk (score 7–8; 24% of patients), in which patients have an estimated median survival of 14 months and a 3-year survival rate of 16%; and 4) high risk (score ?9; 36% of patients), in which patients have an estimated median survival of 6 months and a 3-year survival rate of 4%. These groups are illustrated in Figure 3A . The proposed model was validated in the separate test group ( Fig. 3B ) ( Table 9 ). The risk stratification of patients with newly diagnosed, untreated MDS is shown in Figure 4 . Testing the new model within each IPSS subset was highly prognostic ( Figs. 5A–D ). Thus, the new MDS model added prognostic value to the IPSS. Testing the IPSS risk model within each of the 4 risk groups did not separate patients into different risk groups. Thus, the IPSS did not add any significance to the prognostic prediction of the new MDS model ( Figs. 6A–D ). Testing the new model within IPSS subsets in patients with primary MDS and no prior therapy (as in the original IPSS study) also was highly prognostic ( Figs. 7A–D ), although the numbers of patients in some subsets were small. This most likely is because of the addition of several new prognostic factors (age, performance status) and refinement of the cutoff levels for prognostic factors that were included in the original IPSS model (cytopenias, cytogenetic subsets). Testing the IPSS within each of the 4 risk groups of the new MDS model in patients with primary MDS and no prior therapy did not separate patients into different risk groups (data not shown). The New Risk Model and MDS/CMML Subsets of Interest Significance of ?-2 microglobulin levels Previous studies by our group highlighted the prognostic significance of ?-2 microglobulin levels in MDS and CMML. 13 , 14 Levels of ?-2 microglobulin were available from 1464 patients in the current study. Therefore, we applied the new proposed model to these subsets of patients. After accounting for the effect of the independent prognostic factors in the model, when ?-2 microglobulin was entered as a new continuous variable, it did not retain prognostic significance ( P = .08) Application of the new MDS model in patients with <20% blasts For this analysis, we used the accepted FAB and IPSS categorizations of MDS with the cutoff of 30% blasts to categorize MDS versus AML. 4 , 6 The recent WHO classification proposed using >20% blasts as the cutoff for AML. 5 Therefore, we validated the new MDS model in the 1676 patients with MDS defined as <20% bone marrow blasts ( Fig. 8 ). Because the new model proposes the category of 11% to 29% blasts as an independent prognostic group ( Table 6 ) it would have been expected and, in fact, was the case that the model was equally prognostic in this subset of patients with MDS defined by the presence of < 20% blasts. Application of the new MDS model in CMML with leukocytosis and secondary MDS Because the outcome of patients who have CMML with leukocytosis and secondary MDS may be of interest to particular research involving such subsets, we also validated the new risk model in these 2 individual subsets, confirming its value and the outcome of the 4 prognostic subsets as predicted by the model. Among the 176 patients who had CMML and leukocytosis, the median survival of the low-risk, intermediate-1 risk, intermediate-2 risk, and high-risk patients were 33 months, 19 months, 12 months, and 8 months, respectively ( P <.001) ( Table 9 ). Among the 571 patients who had secondary MDS, the median survival was were 43 months, 19 months, 12 months, and 6 months, respectively ( P <.001) ( Table 9 ).  Univariate and Multivariate Survival Analyses In the univariate analysis, the following factors were significant for survival ( P <.05): performance status, age, hemoglobin, platelets, bone marrow blasts, WBC count, bilirubin, bone marrow cellularity, prior chemotherapy for another malignancy, cytogenetic category, and prior MDS therapy ( Table 5 ). The multivariate analysis, which included all of the factors listed above, selected the following as independent adverse prognostic factors: poor performance status ?2 (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group), older age, higher percent bone marrow blasts, anemia, thrombocytopenia, leukocytosis, chromosome 7 abnormalities or complex abnormalities (?3 changes), and prior transfusions ( Table 5 ). Because the IPSS is an established, commonly used classification and includes 3 important consistent prognostic factors (percent bone marrow blasts, karyotype, number of cytopenias), we performed a multivariate analysis that included the IPSS score as a single prognostic factor along with the other significant factors that were identified in univariate analysis. In addition to the IPSS, a backward, stepwise Cox proportional multivariate analysis selected the following poor prognostic factors: severe thrombocytopenia (any thrombocytopenia <100 × 109/L according to the IPSS), leukocytosis (this may account for CMML with leukocytosis), poor performance status, older age, chromosome 7 or complex abnormalities (?3 changes; the IPSS underestimates the poor prognostic impact of adverse cytogenetic abnormalities in MDS), 8 and prior transfusions. This suggests that the IPSS model may be improved by proposing a new model based on the above multivariate analysis. Other features, such as secondary MDS, prior treatment for other malignancies, and duration of AHD and MDS, were not selected (ie, were accounted for by the other independent factors). This suggests that the new risk model proposed would be applicable to any patient during the course of their disease, provided the analysis of prognosis is based on the variables present at that time point.  Univariate and Multivariate Survival Analyses In the univariate analysis, the following factors were significant for survival ( P <.05): performance status, age, hemoglobin, platelets, bone marrow blasts, WBC count, bilirubin, bone marrow cellularity, prior chemotherapy for another malignancy, cytogenetic category, and prior MDS therapy ( Table 5 ). The multivariate analysis, which included all of the factors listed above, selected the following as independent adverse prognostic factors: poor performance status ?2 (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group), older age, higher percent bone marrow blasts, anemia, thrombocytopenia, leukocytosis, chromosome 7 abnormalities or complex abnormalities (?3 changes), and prior transfusions ( Table 5 ). Because the IPSS is an established, commonly used classification and includes 3 important consistent prognostic factors (percent bone marrow blasts, karyotype, number of cytopenias), we performed a multivariate analysis that included the IPSS score as a single prognostic factor along with the other significant factors that were identified in univariate analysis. In addition to the IPSS, a backward, stepwise Cox proportional multivariate analysis selected the following poor prognostic factors: severe thrombocytopenia (any thrombocytopenia <100 × 109/L according to the IPSS), leukocytosis (this may account for CMML with leukocytosis), poor performance status, older age, chromosome 7 or complex abnormalities (?3 changes; the IPSS underestimates the poor prognostic impact of adverse cytogenetic abnormalities in MDS), 8 and prior transfusions. This suggests that the IPSS model may be improved by proposing a new model based on the above multivariate analysis. Other features, such as secondary MDS, prior treatment for other malignancies, and duration of AHD and MDS, were not selected (ie, were accounted for by the other independent factors). This suggests that the new risk model proposed would be applicable to any patient during the course of their disease, provided the analysis of prognosis is based on the variables present at that time point.  Proposed New MDS Risk Model Based on the findings described above, we developed a risk model that included the factors identified as significant by multivariate analysis in the study group. To develop a simplified risk model that was easily applicable to the MDS community setting, we fitted the Cox regression model in which continuous variables were changed to indicator variables with different ranges (eg, age, platelets, etc) based on the calculation of a hazard ratio for each interval and on the inspection of Martingale residual plots. Estimated coefficients and their weighted points 12 are shown in Tables 6 through 8 . Four prognostic risk groups are proposed for the new risk model: 1) low risk (score 0–4; 16% of patients), in which patients have an estimated median survival of 54 months and a 3-year survival rate of 63%; 2) intermediate-1 risk (score 5–6; 24% of patients), in which patients have an estimated median survival of 25 months and a 3-year survival rate of 34%; 3) intermediate-2 risk (score 7–8; 24% of patients), in which patients have an estimated median survival of 14 months and a 3-year survival rate of 16%; and 4) high risk (score ?9; 36% of patients), in which patients have an estimated median survival of 6 months and a 3-year survival rate of 4%. These groups are illustrated in Figure 3A . The proposed model was validated in the separate test group ( Fig. 3B ) ( Table 9 ). The risk stratification of patients with newly diagnosed, untreated MDS is shown in Figure 4 . Testing the new model within each IPSS subset was highly prognostic ( Figs. 5A–D ). Thus, the new MDS model added prognostic value to the IPSS. Testing the IPSS risk model within each of the 4 risk groups did not separate patients into different risk groups. Thus, the IPSS did not add any significance to the prognostic prediction of the new MDS model ( Figs. 6A–D ). Testing the new model within IPSS subsets in patients with primary MDS and no prior therapy (as in the original IPSS study) also was highly prognostic ( Figs. 7A–D ), although the numbers of patients in some subsets were small. This most likely is because of the addition of several new prognostic factors (age, performance status) and refinement of the cutoff levels for prognostic factors that were included in the original IPSS model (cytopenias, cytogenetic subsets). Testing the IPSS within each of the 4 risk groups of the new MDS model in patients with primary MDS and no prior therapy did not separate patients into different risk groups (data not shown).  Proposed New MDS Risk Model Based on the findings described above, we developed a risk model that included the factors identified as significant by multivariate analysis in the study group. To develop a simplified risk model that was easily applicable to the MDS community setting, we fitted the Cox regression model in which continuous variables were changed to indicator variables with different ranges (eg, age, platelets, etc) based on the calculation of a hazard ratio for each interval and on the inspection of Martingale residual plots. Estimated coefficients and their weighted points 12 are shown in Tables 6 through 8 . Four prognostic risk groups are proposed for the new risk model: 1) low risk (score 0–4; 16% of patients), in which patients have an estimated median survival of 54 months and a 3-year survival rate of 63%; 2) intermediate-1 risk (score 5–6; 24% of patients), in which patients have an estimated median survival of 25 months and a 3-year survival rate of 34%; 3) intermediate-2 risk (score 7–8; 24% of patients), in which patients have an estimated median survival of 14 months and a 3-year survival rate of 16%; and 4) high risk (score ?9; 36% of patients), in which patients have an estimated median survival of 6 months and a 3-year survival rate of 4%. These groups are illustrated in Figure 3A . The proposed model was validated in the separate test group ( Fig. 3B ) ( Table 9 ). The risk stratification of patients with newly diagnosed, untreated MDS is shown in Figure 4 . Testing the new model within each IPSS subset was highly prognostic ( Figs. 5A–D ). Thus, the new MDS model added prognostic value to the IPSS. Testing the IPSS risk model within each of the 4 risk groups did not separate patients into different risk groups. Thus, the IPSS did not add any significance to the prognostic prediction of the new MDS model ( Figs. 6A–D ). Testing the new model within IPSS subsets in patients with primary MDS and no prior therapy (as in the original IPSS study) also was highly prognostic ( Figs. 7A–D ), although the numbers of patients in some subsets were small. This most likely is because of the addition of several new prognostic factors (age, performance status) and refinement of the cutoff levels for prognostic factors that were included in the original IPSS model (cytopenias, cytogenetic subsets). Testing the IPSS within each of the 4 risk groups of the new MDS model in patients with primary MDS and no prior therapy did not separate patients into different risk groups (data not shown).  The New Risk Model and MDS/CMML Subsets of Interest Significance of ?-2 microglobulin levels Previous studies by our group highlighted the prognostic significance of ?-2 microglobulin levels in MDS and CMML. 13 , 14 Levels of ?-2 microglobulin were available from 1464 patients in the current study. Therefore, we applied the new proposed model to these subsets of patients. After accounting for the effect of the independent prognostic factors in the model, when ?-2 microglobulin was entered as a new continuous variable, it did not retain prognostic significance ( P = .08) Application of the new MDS model in patients with <20% blasts For this analysis, we used the accepted FAB and IPSS categorizations of MDS with the cutoff of 30% blasts to categorize MDS versus AML. 4 , 6 The recent WHO classification proposed using >20% blasts as the cutoff for AML. 5 Therefore, we validated the new MDS model in the 1676 patients with MDS defined as <20% bone marrow blasts ( Fig. 8 ). Because the new model proposes the category of 11% to 29% blasts as an independent prognostic group ( Table 6 ) it would have been expected and, in fact, was the case that the model was equally prognostic in this subset of patients with MDS defined by the presence of < 20% blasts. Application of the new MDS model in CMML with leukocytosis and secondary MDS Because the outcome of patients who have CMML with leukocytosis and secondary MDS may be of interest to particular research involving such subsets, we also validated the new risk model in these 2 individual subsets, confirming its value and the outcome of the 4 prognostic subsets as predicted by the model. Among the 176 patients who had CMML and leukocytosis, the median survival of the low-risk, intermediate-1 risk, intermediate-2 risk, and high-risk patients were 33 months, 19 months, 12 months, and 8 months, respectively ( P <.001) ( Table 9 ). Among the 571 patients who had secondary MDS, the median survival was were 43 months, 19 months, 12 months, and 6 months, respectively ( P <.001) ( Table 9 ).  The New Risk Model and MDS/CMML Subsets of Interest Significance of ?-2 microglobulin levels Previous studies by our group highlighted the prognostic significance of ?-2 microglobulin levels in MDS and CMML. 13 , 14 Levels of ?-2 microglobulin were available from 1464 patients in the current study. Therefore, we applied the new proposed model to these subsets of patients. After accounting for the effect of the independent prognostic factors in the model, when ?-2 microglobulin was entered as a new continuous variable, it did not retain prognostic significance ( P = .08) Application of the new MDS model in patients with <20% blasts For this analysis, we used the accepted FAB and IPSS categorizations of MDS with the cutoff of 30% blasts to categorize MDS versus AML. 4 , 6 The recent WHO classification proposed using >20% blasts as the cutoff for AML. 5 Therefore, we validated the new MDS model in the 1676 patients with MDS defined as <20% bone marrow blasts ( Fig. 8 ). Because the new model proposes the category of 11% to 29% blasts as an independent prognostic group ( Table 6 ) it would have been expected and, in fact, was the case that the model was equally prognostic in this subset of patients with MDS defined by the presence of < 20% blasts. Application of the new MDS model in CMML with leukocytosis and secondary MDS Because the outcome of patients who have CMML with leukocytosis and secondary MDS may be of interest to particular research involving such subsets, we also validated the new risk model in these 2 individual subsets, confirming its value and the outcome of the 4 prognostic subsets as predicted by the model. Among the 176 patients who had CMML and leukocytosis, the median survival of the low-risk, intermediate-1 risk, intermediate-2 risk, and high-risk patients were 33 months, 19 months, 12 months, and 8 months, respectively ( P <.001) ( Table 9 ). Among the 571 patients who had secondary MDS, the median survival was were 43 months, 19 months, 12 months, and 6 months, respectively ( P <.001) ( Table 9 ).  Significance of ?-2 microglobulin levels Previous studies by our group highlighted the prognostic significance of ?-2 microglobulin levels in MDS and CMML. 13 , 14 Levels of ?-2 microglobulin were available from 1464 patients in the current study. Therefore, we applied the new proposed model to these subsets of patients. After accounting for the effect of the independent prognostic factors in the model, when ?-2 microglobulin was entered as a new continuous variable, it did not retain prognostic significance ( P = .08)  Significance of ?-2 microglobulin levels Previous studies by our group highlighted the prognostic significance of ?-2 microglobulin levels in MDS and CMML. 13 , 14 Levels of ?-2 microglobulin were available from 1464 patients in the current study. Therefore, we applied the new proposed model to these subsets of patients. After accounting for the effect of the independent prognostic factors in the model, when ?-2 microglobulin was entered as a new continuous variable, it did not retain prognostic significance ( P = .08)  Application of the new MDS model in patients with <20% blasts For this analysis, we used the accepted FAB and IPSS categorizations of MDS with the cutoff of 30% blasts to categorize MDS versus AML. 4 , 6 The recent WHO classification proposed using >20% blasts as the cutoff for AML. 5 Therefore, we validated the new MDS model in the 1676 patients with MDS defined as <20% bone marrow blasts ( Fig. 8 ). Because the new model proposes the category of 11% to 29% blasts as an independent prognostic group ( Table 6 ) it would have been expected and, in fact, was the case that the model was equally prognostic in this subset of patients with MDS defined by the presence of < 20% blasts.  Application of the new MDS model in patients with <20% blasts For this analysis, we used the accepted FAB and IPSS categorizations of MDS with the cutoff of 30% blasts to categorize MDS versus AML. 4 , 6 The recent WHO classification proposed using >20% blasts as the cutoff for AML. 5 Therefore, we validated the new MDS model in the 1676 patients with MDS defined as <20% bone marrow blasts ( Fig. 8 ). Because the new model proposes the category of 11% to 29% blasts as an independent prognostic group ( Table 6 ) it would have been expected and, in fact, was the case that the model was equally prognostic in this subset of patients with MDS defined by the presence of < 20% blasts.  Application of the new MDS model in CMML with leukocytosis and secondary MDS Because the outcome of patients who have CMML with leukocytosis and secondary MDS may be of interest to particular research involving such subsets, we also validated the new risk model in these 2 individual subsets, confirming its value and the outcome of the 4 prognostic subsets as predicted by the model. Among the 176 patients who had CMML and leukocytosis, the median survival of the low-risk, intermediate-1 risk, intermediate-2 risk, and high-risk patients were 33 months, 19 months, 12 months, and 8 months, respectively ( P <.001) ( Table 9 ). Among the 571 patients who had secondary MDS, the median survival was were 43 months, 19 months, 12 months, and 6 months, respectively ( P <.001) ( Table 9 ).  Application of the new MDS model in CMML with leukocytosis and secondary MDS Because the outcome of patients who have CMML with leukocytosis and secondary MDS may be of interest to particular research involving such subsets, we also validated the new risk model in these 2 individual subsets, confirming its value and the outcome of the 4 prognostic subsets as predicted by the model. Among the 176 patients who had CMML and leukocytosis, the median survival of the low-risk, intermediate-1 risk, intermediate-2 risk, and high-risk patients were 33 months, 19 months, 12 months, and 8 months, respectively ( P <.001) ( Table 9 ). Among the 571 patients who had secondary MDS, the median survival was were 43 months, 19 months, 12 months, and 6 months, respectively ( P <.001) ( Table 9 ).  DISCUSSION Recent studies have highlighted issues with the IPSS model in relation to the exclusion of many subgroups that now represent a large proportion of patients with MDS (eg, secondary MDS, CMML with leukocytosis) and its lack of applicability to most patients on investigational programs, because many would have received prior therapies and would have had MDS for a significant time. In this study of 1915 patients with MDS and CMML who were referred to our institution, only 507 patients (26%) could be classified by the IPSS. Malcovati et al also emphasized the poor prognostic impact of prior transfusion requirement. 7 Two other studies suggested that the IPSS cytogenetic categories could be improved upon and that the IPSS underestimated the adverse effect of some poor cytogenetic categories. 8 , 9 To improve on the IPSS, Malcovati et al proposed a new risk model based on the WHO classification, the WHO Prognostic Scoring System (WPSS). 15 By using a learning cohort of 426 patients and a validation cohort of 739 patients, they proposed a WPSS model that included 3 factors: 1) the WHO subgroups, 2) karyotype (as defined in the IPSS), and 3) transfusion requirements. This model may have some limitations: 1) It still excludes patients who have secondary MDS and CMML with leukocytosis; 2) the WHO classification may not be easily reproducible 16 , 17 ; 3) the cytogenetic categories used in the model were those of IPSS and may not be optimal; 4) the study groups consisted of previously untreated patient, and patients who were receiving intensive chemotherapy of allogeneic transplantation at the time of transformation were censored (which would improve outcome artificially, because many of them would have had a poor short-term prognosis; 5) although age was evaluated in subset analyses, it was not incorporated into the risk model; and 6) the model may not account for several factors such as poor performance, severe thrombocytopenia, secondary disease, severe leukocytosis, or duration of MDS. Our analysis confirmed some of the shortcomings of existing prognostic models. For example, although the IPSS still identified different prognostic groups of patients who had secondary MDS, CMML with leukocytosis, and MDS with prior therapy, the prognosis for the different risk groups (eg, low risk) in each of these entities was different ( Table 2 ). Thus, patients with low-risk MDS according to the IPSS would have an estimated median survival almost half that of patients with primary, untreated MDS if they had received prior therapy (33 months vs 57 months) ( Table 2 ). This highlights the problem of comparing different study groups on new therapies when the proportions of previously treated patients differ significantly. For instance, whereas the median survival of patients receiving decitabine in 1 study at our institution was 22 months, approximately 50% of patients had received prior therapy, and 20% had secondary MDS. 18 , 19 In contrast, 2 studies of patients who were treated with azacitidine reported a median survival of 20 months, and 24 months, respectively. 20 , 21 However, the proportion of patients that received prior therapies was only approximately 10% in each study. This also emphasizes the importance of randomized studies to overcome these issues and to allow for appropriate comparisons of different therapies. The proposed prognostic model may help improve our ability to compare such therapies short of randomized trials. The current analysis of prognostic factors also attempts to address the issues with IPSS or WPSS by proposing a new risk model that considers age, percent of bone marrow blasts, severity of relevant cytopenias (anemia and thrombocytopenia), extent of prior therapy and transfusions, and adversity of cytogenetic abnormalities. The proposed model defines prognosis more precisely. For example, we demonstrated that age and performance status, factors that were not included in the IPSS, were independent adverse factors. Similarly, the cutoffs for thrombocytopenia and anemia were different along with the classification of karyotype, which, in multivariate analysis, identified only 2 adverse cytogenetic categories: any chromosome 7 abnormalities and abnormalities with ?3 changes. Finally, the new model includes prior transfusions as an independent adverse factor in line with the findings of Malcovati et al. 7 , 15 Whether the model was applied to all patients ( Figs. 5A–D ) or only to patients with untreated, primary MDS ( Figs. 7A–D ), it added to the prognostic value of IPSS within each IPSS risk group. In contrast, the IPSS did not improve the prognostic prediction within the new MDS risk groups ( Figs. 6A–D ). The proposed model also was validated in an independent test group ( Fig. 3B ). The current analysis included duration of MDS and AHD as well as prior therapy as prognostic variables. These were variables superseded in the multivariate analysis by other factors that were interrelated closely, such as the intensity of cytopenias and the percent of bone marrow blasts. Thus, the new proposed risk model is applicable to individual patients throughout the course of their disease provided the risk is calculated based on the variables at that point in time. This will help account for all patients with MDS rather than subsets, to prognosticate on patients receiving therapy, to stratify patients on investigational studies, and to compare the benefit of new therapies in different trials. The proposed risk model allows now for such evaluations in any patient with MDS or CMML, regardless of the extent of prior therapy, duration of MDS, or whether MDS is primary or secondary. It is worth noting the comparison of outcomes between patients who had primary, untreated MDS in our study group with the original IPSS study group. IPSS segregated patients with primary, untreated MDS in our study group, and the respective survival rates were quite similar in the IPSS versus this model (low risk, 5.6 years vs 4.7 years; intermediate-1 risk, 3.1 years vs 3 years; intermediate-2 risk, 1.2 years vs 1.3 years; high risk, 0.4 years vs 0.75 years). Moreover, the recent model added to the prognostic value of IPSS in each IPSS risk group ( Figs. 7A–D ), whereas the reverse analysis did not. Finally, the concordance rate between the proposed MDS model and the IPSS was only 50% ( Table 10 ), indicating the additional value of the new MDS model. In summary, we propose a new risk model for patients with MDS and CMML that refines the prognostic precision of the IPSS and that is applicable to all such patients rather than only to patients with untreated primary MDS.  DISCUSSION Recent studies have highlighted issues with the IPSS model in relation to the exclusion of many subgroups that now represent a large proportion of patients with MDS (eg, secondary MDS, CMML with leukocytosis) and its lack of applicability to most patients on investigational programs, because many would have received prior therapies and would have had MDS for a significant time. In this study of 1915 patients with MDS and CMML who were referred to our institution, only 507 patients (26%) could be classified by the IPSS. Malcovati et al also emphasized the poor prognostic impact of prior transfusion requirement. 7 Two other studies suggested that the IPSS cytogenetic categories could be improved upon and that the IPSS underestimated the adverse effect of some poor cytogenetic categories. 8 , 9 To improve on the IPSS, Malcovati et al proposed a new risk model based on the WHO classification, the WHO Prognostic Scoring System (WPSS). 15 By using a learning cohort of 426 patients and a validation cohort of 739 patients, they proposed a WPSS model that included 3 factors: 1) the WHO subgroups, 2) karyotype (as defined in the IPSS), and 3) transfusion requirements. This model may have some limitations: 1) It still excludes patients who have secondary MDS and CMML with leukocytosis; 2) the WHO classification may not be easily reproducible 16 , 17 ; 3) the cytogenetic categories used in the model were those of IPSS and may not be optimal; 4) the study groups consisted of previously untreated patient, and patients who were receiving intensive chemotherapy of allogeneic transplantation at the time of transformation were censored (which would improve outcome artificially, because many of them would have had a poor short-term prognosis; 5) although age was evaluated in subset analyses, it was not incorporated into the risk model; and 6) the model may not account for several factors such as poor performance, severe thrombocytopenia, secondary disease, severe leukocytosis, or duration of MDS. Our analysis confirmed some of the shortcomings of existing prognostic models. For example, although the IPSS still identified different prognostic groups of patients who had secondary MDS, CMML with leukocytosis, and MDS with prior therapy, the prognosis for the different risk groups (eg, low risk) in each of these entities was different ( Table 2 ). Thus, patients with low-risk MDS according to the IPSS would have an estimated median survival almost half that of patients with primary, untreated MDS if they had received prior therapy (33 months vs 57 months) ( Table 2 ). This highlights the problem of comparing different study groups on new therapies when the proportions of previously treated patients differ significantly. For instance, whereas the median survival of patients receiving decitabine in 1 study at our institution was 22 months, approximately 50% of patients had received prior therapy, and 20% had secondary MDS. 18 , 19 In contrast, 2 studies of patients who were treated with azacitidine reported a median survival of 20 months, and 24 months, respectively. 20 , 21 However, the proportion of patients that received prior therapies was only approximately 10% in each study. This also emphasizes the importance of randomized studies to overcome these issues and to allow for appropriate comparisons of different therapies. The proposed prognostic model may help improve our ability to compare such therapies short of randomized trials. The current analysis of prognostic factors also attempts to address the issues with IPSS or WPSS by proposing a new risk model that considers age, percent of bone marrow blasts, severity of relevant cytopenias (anemia and thrombocytopenia), extent of prior therapy and transfusions, and adversity of cytogenetic abnormalities. The proposed model defines prognosis more precisely. For example, we demonstrated that age and performance status, factors that were not included in the IPSS, were independent adverse factors. Similarly, the cutoffs for thrombocytopenia and anemia were different along with the classification of karyotype, which, in multivariate analysis, identified only 2 adverse cytogenetic categories: any chromosome 7 abnormalities and abnormalities with ?3 changes. Finally, the new model includes prior transfusions as an independent adverse factor in line with the findings of Malcovati et al. 7 , 15 Whether the model was applied to all patients ( Figs. 5A–D ) or only to patients with untreated, primary MDS ( Figs. 7A–D ), it added to the prognostic value of IPSS within each IPSS risk group. In contrast, the IPSS did not improve the prognostic prediction within the new MDS risk groups ( Figs. 6A–D ). The proposed model also was validated in an independent test group ( Fig. 3B ). The current analysis included duration of MDS and AHD as well as prior therapy as prognostic variables. These were variables superseded in the multivariate analysis by other factors that were interrelated closely, such as the intensity of cytopenias and the percent of bone marrow blasts. Thus, the new proposed risk model is applicable to individual patients throughout the course of their disease provided the risk is calculated based on the variables at that point in time. This will help account for all patients with MDS rather than subsets, to prognosticate on patients receiving therapy, to stratify patients on investigational studies, and to compare the benefit of new therapies in different trials. The proposed risk model allows now for such evaluations in any patient with MDS or CMML, regardless of the extent of prior therapy, duration of MDS, or whether MDS is primary or secondary. It is worth noting the comparison of outcomes between patients who had primary, untreated MDS in our study group with the original IPSS study group. IPSS segregated patients with primary, untreated MDS in our study group, and the respective survival rates were quite similar in the IPSS versus this model (low risk, 5.6 years vs 4.7 years; intermediate-1 risk, 3.1 years vs 3 years; intermediate-2 risk, 1.2 years vs 1.3 years; high risk, 0.4 years vs 0.75 years). Moreover, the recent model added to the prognostic value of IPSS in each IPSS risk group ( Figs. 7A–D ), whereas the reverse analysis did not. Finally, the concordance rate between the proposed MDS model and the IPSS was only 50% ( Table 10 ), indicating the additional value of the new MDS model. In summary, we propose a new risk model for patients with MDS and CMML that refines the prognostic precision of the IPSS and that is applicable to all such patients rather than only to patients with untreated primary MDS. 