Brief Alcohol Intervention in the Emergency Department: Moderators of Effectiveness Objective Prior research supports the effectiveness of brief interventions for reducing alcohol misuse among patients in the Emergency Department (ED). However, limited information is available regarding the mechanisms of change, which could assist clinicians in streamlining or amplifying these interventions. This paper examines moderators of outcomes among ED patients, ages 19 and older, who participated in a randomized controlled trial of a brief intervention for alcohol misuse. Method Injured patients ( N =4,476) completed a computerized survey; 575 at-risk drinkers were randomly assigned to one of four brief intervention conditions and 85% were interviewed again at 3- and 12-month follow-ups. Results Regression models using the GEE approach examined interaction effects between intervention condition (advice / no advice) and hypothesized moderator variables (stage of change, self-efficacy, acute alcohol use, attribute injury to alcohol) on alcohol outcomes over time. Overall, participants who reported higher levels of self-efficacy had lower weekly consumption and consequences whereas those with higher readiness to change had greater weekly consumption and consequences. Further, individuals who attributed their injury to alcohol and received advice had significantly lower levels of average weekly alcohol consumption and less frequent heavy drinking from baseline to 12-month follow-up compared to those who attributed their injury to alcohol but did not receive advice. Conclusions This study provides novel data regarding attribution for alcohol related injury as an important moderator of change and suggests that highlighting the alcohol-injury connection in brief ED-based alcohol interventions may augment their effectiveness.  Drinking Characteristics of the Sample and Attrition Analyses On average, participants reported consuming 20.5 (SD = 16.8) drinks per week, had engaged in 7.1 (SD = 6.0) heavy drinking episodes in the past month, and endorsed 4.7 (SD = 5.5) drinking consequences at baseline. Participants lost to follow-up did not differ from complete cases on the following baseline measures: frequency of heavy drinking, alcohol-related negative consequences, stage of change, alcohol-related injury attributions, alcohol use within 6 hours before the injury, and gender. Those lost to follow-up had higher average consumption (26.3 vs. 20.5 drink per week, p < 0.01); were significantly older (79.0% of cases with missing data were over age 22 vs. 49.5% for complete cases, p < 0.001); and had lower self-efficacy for controlling or abstaining from drinking (4.2 vs. 4.5 on a 5-point scale, p<0.01).  Descriptive Information for Moderators at Baseline The majority of participants (53.4%) were classified in the precontemplation stage of change, whereas 8.7% were in contemplation and 37.9% were in action. Regarding self-efficacy, 89.9% indicated they were very or extremely confident they could cut down or stop drinking whereas 8.9% indicated they were somewhat confident and 1.2% indicated they were a little or not at all confident. Approximately one quarter (27.1%) of participants indicated they drank within 6 hours before their injury and 15.6% perceived their injury to be related to alcohol use. Table 1 shows descriptive data for change in the alcohol-related dependent variables (i.e., quantity/frequency, heavy drinking, and DrInC consequences) over time, based on the moderator variables, and associated individual significance levels. Note that for most levels of the moderator variables, quantity/frequency, heavy drinking, and DrInC consequences significantly decreased over the follow-up period.  Moderators of Intervention Outcomes Average Consumption First, we examined the main effects of the moderator variables on average weekly consumption over time. Overall, average weekly consumption decreased over time (?2 = 97.2, df = 2, p < .001) and was lower among women than among men (?2 = 51.0, df = 1, p < .001). In addition, there were significant main effects for self-efficacy (?2=10.3, df=1, p < 0.01) and readiness to change (?2 = 24.7, df = 1, p < .001). Specifically, participants who reported higher levels of self-efficacy had lower weekly consumption whereas those with higher readiness to change had greater weekly consumption. Baseline age over 22 (?2 = 0.1, df = 1, p = 0.718), alcohol use within 6 hours before injury (?2 = 0.9, df = 1, p = 0.331) and alcohol-related injury attributions (?2 = 3.2, df = 1, p = 0.074) were not significantly associated with alcohol consumption. Second, we examined two-way interactions between treatment moderators and time, and between treatment moderators and intervention type; these findings were not significant and are not presented. Third, we examined all three-way interactions [treatment x time x moderator (self-efficacy, readiness to change, alcohol-related injury attributions, and alcohol use within 6 hours before injury)] and only one significant three-way interaction was identified: alcohol attribution, treatment, and time (?2 = 7.9, df = 2, p < .05). Individuals who attributed their injury to alcohol and received advice had significantly lower levels of average weekly alcohol consumption from baseline to 12-month follow-up compared to those who attributed their injury to alcohol but did not receive advice (see Figure 1 ). Further, as shown in Table 2 , participants in the advice condition who attributed their injury to alcohol showed a 44.6% change in mean average consumption from baseline to 12-months, as compared to a 16.7% change in consumption in the no advice by alcohol attribution group. Heavy Drinking First, we examined main effects over time and found significant effects for the following variables: age, gender, self-efficacy, and stage of change (see Table 1 for descriptive data). Overall, heavy drinking decreased over time (?2 = 69.3 df = 2, p < .001). Women reported fewer episodes of heavy drinking than men (?2 = 6.0 df = 1, p < .05); participants who were older than 22 years old (?2 = 19.2, df = 1, p < .001) and those with greater self-efficacy (?2 = 10.9, df = 1, p < .001) had fewer heavy drinking episodes. In addition, participants who reported greater readiness to change reported more frequent heavy drinking in the past month (?2 = 38.6, df = 1, p < .001). There were no significant main effects for attributions for the ED-related incident (?2 = 3.3, df = 1, p = 0.071) or alcohol use within 6 hours before injury (?2 = 0.7, df = 1, p = 0.401). Second, there were no significant two-way interactions between the moderator variables and treatment condition or time. Third, regarding all possible three-way interactions tested, there was a significant three-way interaction for alcohol attribution, advice condition, and time (?2 = 6.6, df = 2, p < .05). Specifically, individuals who attributed their injury to alcohol and received advice had significantly fewer heavy drinking episodes than participants who attributed their injury to alcohol, but did not receive advice (see Figure 2 ). Further, as shown in Table 3 , participants in the advice condition who attributed their injury to alcohol showed a 50.5% change in mean heavy drinking episodes from baseline to 12-months as compared to a 13.2% change in the no advice by alcohol attribution group. Alcohol Consequences: DrInc First, we examined main effects over time and found that negative consequences decreased over time (?2 = 39.7, df = 2, p < .001) and women reported experiencing fewer consequences than men (?2 = 13.3, df = 1, p < .001). In addition, those with greater self-efficacy reported fewer consequences (?2 = 19.4, df = 1, p < .001). Conversely, participants who attributed their injury to alcohol reported a greater number of consequences compared to those who did not make alcohol-related attributions (?2 = 16.6, df = 1, p < .001) and those who reported greater readiness to change also had a greater number of consequences (?2 = 87.3, df = 1, p < .001). There were no main effects of age (?2 = 2.9, df = 1, p = 0.087) or alcohol use within 6 hours before injury on drinking consequences (?2 = 1.2, df = 1, p = 0.282). Second, none of the possible two-way or three-way interactions tested reached significance, indicating that there were no significant moderators of treatment or time on negative consequences of drinking.  Average Consumption First, we examined the main effects of the moderator variables on average weekly consumption over time. Overall, average weekly consumption decreased over time (?2 = 97.2, df = 2, p < .001) and was lower among women than among men (?2 = 51.0, df = 1, p < .001). In addition, there were significant main effects for self-efficacy (?2=10.3, df=1, p < 0.01) and readiness to change (?2 = 24.7, df = 1, p < .001). Specifically, participants who reported higher levels of self-efficacy had lower weekly consumption whereas those with higher readiness to change had greater weekly consumption. Baseline age over 22 (?2 = 0.1, df = 1, p = 0.718), alcohol use within 6 hours before injury (?2 = 0.9, df = 1, p = 0.331) and alcohol-related injury attributions (?2 = 3.2, df = 1, p = 0.074) were not significantly associated with alcohol consumption. Second, we examined two-way interactions between treatment moderators and time, and between treatment moderators and intervention type; these findings were not significant and are not presented. Third, we examined all three-way interactions [treatment x time x moderator (self-efficacy, readiness to change, alcohol-related injury attributions, and alcohol use within 6 hours before injury)] and only one significant three-way interaction was identified: alcohol attribution, treatment, and time (?2 = 7.9, df = 2, p < .05). Individuals who attributed their injury to alcohol and received advice had significantly lower levels of average weekly alcohol consumption from baseline to 12-month follow-up compared to those who attributed their injury to alcohol but did not receive advice (see Figure 1 ). Further, as shown in Table 2 , participants in the advice condition who attributed their injury to alcohol showed a 44.6% change in mean average consumption from baseline to 12-months, as compared to a 16.7% change in consumption in the no advice by alcohol attribution group.  Heavy Drinking First, we examined main effects over time and found significant effects for the following variables: age, gender, self-efficacy, and stage of change (see Table 1 for descriptive data). Overall, heavy drinking decreased over time (?2 = 69.3 df = 2, p < .001). Women reported fewer episodes of heavy drinking than men (?2 = 6.0 df = 1, p < .05); participants who were older than 22 years old (?2 = 19.2, df = 1, p < .001) and those with greater self-efficacy (?2 = 10.9, df = 1, p < .001) had fewer heavy drinking episodes. In addition, participants who reported greater readiness to change reported more frequent heavy drinking in the past month (?2 = 38.6, df = 1, p < .001). There were no significant main effects for attributions for the ED-related incident (?2 = 3.3, df = 1, p = 0.071) or alcohol use within 6 hours before injury (?2 = 0.7, df = 1, p = 0.401). Second, there were no significant two-way interactions between the moderator variables and treatment condition or time. Third, regarding all possible three-way interactions tested, there was a significant three-way interaction for alcohol attribution, advice condition, and time (?2 = 6.6, df = 2, p < .05). Specifically, individuals who attributed their injury to alcohol and received advice had significantly fewer heavy drinking episodes than participants who attributed their injury to alcohol, but did not receive advice (see Figure 2 ). Further, as shown in Table 3 , participants in the advice condition who attributed their injury to alcohol showed a 50.5% change in mean heavy drinking episodes from baseline to 12-months as compared to a 13.2% change in the no advice by alcohol attribution group.  Alcohol Consequences: DrInc First, we examined main effects over time and found that negative consequences decreased over time (?2 = 39.7, df = 2, p < .001) and women reported experiencing fewer consequences than men (?2 = 13.3, df = 1, p < .001). In addition, those with greater self-efficacy reported fewer consequences (?2 = 19.4, df = 1, p < .001). Conversely, participants who attributed their injury to alcohol reported a greater number of consequences compared to those who did not make alcohol-related attributions (?2 = 16.6, df = 1, p < .001) and those who reported greater readiness to change also had a greater number of consequences (?2 = 87.3, df = 1, p < .001). There were no main effects of age (?2 = 2.9, df = 1, p = 0.087) or alcohol use within 6 hours before injury on drinking consequences (?2 = 1.2, df = 1, p = 0.282). Second, none of the possible two-way or three-way interactions tested reached significance, indicating that there were no significant moderators of treatment or time on negative consequences of drinking.  Methods Design Injured patients (age 19 and older) presenting to a Midwest Level 1 Emergency Department (ED; between 8am and midnight) completed a computer-based survey of health issues (see Blow et al., 2006 for additional information) and were entered in a monthly draw for $100. Eligible participants were randomly assigned to one of four intervention conditions: advice + tailored booklet, advice + generic booklet, no advice + tailored booklet, or no advice + generic booklet. Because extensive research demonstrates brief alcohol interventions are effective, a traditional “no-treatment/control” condition was not included but rather was approximated by the no advice + generic booklet condition. Following a saliva alcohol test to verify competency (e.g., BAC 100 mg/dl or less) participants received the appropriate intervention prior to discharge and completed follow-up interviews at 3- and 12-months. The study protocol was approved by the University Institutional Review Board for the use of human subjects. Participants Participants eligible for the study included ED patients 19 years of age or older who had been injured in the last 24 hours. Trained research staff determined injury classification (based on definitions of E-codes 800–968; International Classification of Diseases, 1995 ). Patients were excluded if they: were severely injured (e.g. unconscious, intubated, or in need of immediate lifesaving medical procedures); presented with a self-inflicted injury, sexual assault, overdose, poisoning, near drowning, chronic injury without specific event associated with re-injury; or were pregnant, prisoners, or did not speak English. During the recruitment period, 6,047 potentially eligible patients presented to the ED; 507 (8.4%) of patients were missed, mostly due to research staff being occupied with other patients or unable to locate the patient, or due to medical staff presence with the patient. Of the 5,540 patients approached to participate, 4,476 (80.8%) consented and 1,064 (19.2%) refused. (Assuming all the missed patients were eligible for screening, a more conservative estimate of the response rate is 74%; 4476 participants / 6047 patients presenting to the ED during the sampling frame). The majority of refusals reflect patients who reported feeling too sick, in too much pain, or too emotionally distressed to participate. Our IRB did not allow collecting additional information on missed or refused patients without consent. Participants were eligible for the randomized controlled trial if they met at-risk drinking criteria based on either average consumption in the past three months (15 or more drinks/week for men under 65; 12 or more drinks/week for women under age 65 and men age 65 and over; and 9 or more drinks/week for women age 65 and over) or heavy drinking [5 or more drinks/occasion on at least four occasions in the last month (e.g., weekly heavy drinking) for men under age 65 and 4 or more drinks/occasion on at least four occasions in the past month for younger women (under age 65) and for men and women age 65 and over]. Among the 14.5% of patients ( n =649) who screened positive for at-risk drinking, 89% ( n =575) received a BI during their ED visit. The 74 patients who left the ED prior to receiving the BI are not described in this paper. Three and 12-month follow-up interview rates exceeded 85%; all subsequent data is for participants with complete follow-up data ( n =494). Note that 90–95% (depending on 3- or 12-month interview) of follow-up data was obtained by phone; the remainder was obtained in person or by mail. Follow-up interviewers were blind to intervention condition assignment. BI participants were mostly male (71%), Caucasian (86%; 5.7% African-American, 8.3% other), never married (70%; 17% married), and college educated (80% at least some), with an average age of 27.8 (SD=11.2; median=22; range=19–76). As indicated in Blow et al. (2006) no significant differences were found across the intervention groups in age ( F =0.47, df=3/490, p = .7066), gender (?2 = 4.62, df=3, p =.2018), marital status (?2=1.97, df=6, p =.92), race/ethnicity (?2 =1.06, df=6, p =.98), or years of education (?2=3.02, df=9, p =.96). Measures ED baseline screening was computerized with alcohol questions embedded in a health and lifestyle assessment that included questions concerning type and mechanism of current injury. The follow-up interview included identical questions to that of the baseline assessment. Alcohol consumption questions included typical quantity (drinks per occasion) and frequency (days per week) of alcohol use in the past three months. A composite quantity/frequency score was calculated to reflect average weekly consumption. Heavy drinking was assessed by asking participants to indicate how frequently they consumed 4+/5+ drinks per occasion in the past month for men/women. The DrInc SIP was used to assess alcohol-related consequences ( Miller et al., 1995 ). We added two items to reflect alcohol-related injuries and arrests for drinking and driving: “While drinking or intoxicated, I have been physically hurt, injured, or burned” and “I have been arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol.” This revised SIP retained the physical, social responsibility, intrapersonal, impulse control, and interpersonal consequence subscale scores as well as the total score, with adequate internal consistency (Cronbach’s alpha= .89 –. 90). Participants were asked whether they drank alcohol within 6 hours before their injury (yes/no) and whether they attributed their injury to alcohol use (yes, maybe, no). Regarding self-efficacy, participants rated how confident they were that they could control or abstain from drinking if they wanted to change their drinking habits on a five-point Likert scale (ranging from not at all to extremely ). Readiness to change was assessed using two questions: “Do you plan to cut down on your drinking in the next 30 days?” (yes/no) and “Do you plan to cut down on your drinking in the next 6 months?” (yes/no). Based on these questions and previous algorithms used to categorize stage of change for substance use (e.g., Carey et al., 2002 ) participants were categorized into one of three stages: pre-contemplation (no plans to cut down or stop drinking in next six-months), contemplation (plans to cut down or stop drinking in next six months but not in next month), and action (plans to cut down or stop drinking in next month). Intervention During the advice session, the tailored or generic booklet was reviewed with the participant prior to discharge from the ED. Fidelity to intervention sessions was maintained via several strategies. A masters-level clinical supervisor “shadowed” therapists on a monthly basis to observe advice sessions and provide retraining as necessary. A psychologist trained in motivational interviewing conducted half-day training seminars twice yearly to review principles of motivational interviewing (e.g., rolling with resistance, developing discrepancy, etc.), including those encompassed in the FRAMES acronym (e.g., Feedback, Responsibility, Advice, Menu, Empathy, Self-Efficacy; Miller and Rollnick, 1991 ). All therapists had masters degrees in social work or related fields. For the no advice conditions, participants were told that, based on their responses to the health screen, they were at-risk for problem drinking and were given either a tailored or generic booklet to review. Analyses Analyses were conducted using SAS 9.1 statistical software. Descriptive analyses were conducted to examine variable distributions and determine the appropriateness of the analytic approach (e.g., negative binomial distribution and a log link function for all outcome measures). The primary analysis strategy evaluated the effects of the intervention (advice, no advice) over the baseline, 3-month, and 12-month follow-up periods using generalized estimating equations (GEE) due to the correlated structure of our repeated measures ( Liang & Zeger, 1986 ). Dependent variables included: average weekly alcohol consumption, frequency of heavy drinking in the past month, and consequences as measured by the DrInc (summary of all item responses). Our prior paper ( Blow et al., 2006 ) showed limited influence of tailoring as compared to generic booklets. As a result, for the purposes of examining moderators of treatment outcome, we limited out analyses to treatment effects comparing the advice and no advice conditions. This approach also provides a more powerful test of the main effects of the advice condition. Independent variables included advice (yes/no) and time (baseline, 3-months, 12-months). In addition, gender and age (<=22 and >22) were included as covariates. Gender was included because the literature and our prior work ( Blow et al., 2006 ) shows that BIs may be more effective for women than men. Age (median age 22) was included in the analyses because of the large proportion of college students in the sample and prior research from this study ( Blow et al., 2006 ) showing differential effects of brief interventions based on age. Moderators of treatment outcome were examined via interactions for treatment condition by hypothesized moderator variable (drinking within 6 hours before injury, stage of change, attributed the injury to alcohol, and self-efficacy) by time. Models were constructed separately for the three drinking outcomes, with main effects (independent variables and moderators) and covariates entered on the first step, treatment by moderator interactions entered on the second step, time by moderator interactions entered on the third step, and three-way interactions (time by treatment by moderator) entered on the fourth step. Note that the size of the smallest subgroup for the categorical predictors used in the 3-way interaction analyses ( n =36; for the no treatment by positive attribution of injury to alcohol), suggests the sample distribution was adequate for conducting these analyses. Thus, multivariate analyses examined evidence for significant changes over time in the outcome variables based on moderators of effectiveness for the advice/no advice conditions.  Design Injured patients (age 19 and older) presenting to a Midwest Level 1 Emergency Department (ED; between 8am and midnight) completed a computer-based survey of health issues (see Blow et al., 2006 for additional information) and were entered in a monthly draw for $100. Eligible participants were randomly assigned to one of four intervention conditions: advice + tailored booklet, advice + generic booklet, no advice + tailored booklet, or no advice + generic booklet. Because extensive research demonstrates brief alcohol interventions are effective, a traditional “no-treatment/control” condition was not included but rather was approximated by the no advice + generic booklet condition. Following a saliva alcohol test to verify competency (e.g., BAC 100 mg/dl or less) participants received the appropriate intervention prior to discharge and completed follow-up interviews at 3- and 12-months. The study protocol was approved by the University Institutional Review Board for the use of human subjects.  Participants Participants eligible for the study included ED patients 19 years of age or older who had been injured in the last 24 hours. Trained research staff determined injury classification (based on definitions of E-codes 800–968; International Classification of Diseases, 1995 ). Patients were excluded if they: were severely injured (e.g. unconscious, intubated, or in need of immediate lifesaving medical procedures); presented with a self-inflicted injury, sexual assault, overdose, poisoning, near drowning, chronic injury without specific event associated with re-injury; or were pregnant, prisoners, or did not speak English. During the recruitment period, 6,047 potentially eligible patients presented to the ED; 507 (8.4%) of patients were missed, mostly due to research staff being occupied with other patients or unable to locate the patient, or due to medical staff presence with the patient. Of the 5,540 patients approached to participate, 4,476 (80.8%) consented and 1,064 (19.2%) refused. (Assuming all the missed patients were eligible for screening, a more conservative estimate of the response rate is 74%; 4476 participants / 6047 patients presenting to the ED during the sampling frame). The majority of refusals reflect patients who reported feeling too sick, in too much pain, or too emotionally distressed to participate. Our IRB did not allow collecting additional information on missed or refused patients without consent. Participants were eligible for the randomized controlled trial if they met at-risk drinking criteria based on either average consumption in the past three months (15 or more drinks/week for men under 65; 12 or more drinks/week for women under age 65 and men age 65 and over; and 9 or more drinks/week for women age 65 and over) or heavy drinking [5 or more drinks/occasion on at least four occasions in the last month (e.g., weekly heavy drinking) for men under age 65 and 4 or more drinks/occasion on at least four occasions in the past month for younger women (under age 65) and for men and women age 65 and over]. Among the 14.5% of patients ( n =649) who screened positive for at-risk drinking, 89% ( n =575) received a BI during their ED visit. The 74 patients who left the ED prior to receiving the BI are not described in this paper. Three and 12-month follow-up interview rates exceeded 85%; all subsequent data is for participants with complete follow-up data ( n =494). Note that 90–95% (depending on 3- or 12-month interview) of follow-up data was obtained by phone; the remainder was obtained in person or by mail. Follow-up interviewers were blind to intervention condition assignment. BI participants were mostly male (71%), Caucasian (86%; 5.7% African-American, 8.3% other), never married (70%; 17% married), and college educated (80% at least some), with an average age of 27.8 (SD=11.2; median=22; range=19–76). As indicated in Blow et al. (2006) no significant differences were found across the intervention groups in age ( F =0.47, df=3/490, p = .7066), gender (?2 = 4.62, df=3, p =.2018), marital status (?2=1.97, df=6, p =.92), race/ethnicity (?2 =1.06, df=6, p =.98), or years of education (?2=3.02, df=9, p =.96).  Measures ED baseline screening was computerized with alcohol questions embedded in a health and lifestyle assessment that included questions concerning type and mechanism of current injury. The follow-up interview included identical questions to that of the baseline assessment. Alcohol consumption questions included typical quantity (drinks per occasion) and frequency (days per week) of alcohol use in the past three months. A composite quantity/frequency score was calculated to reflect average weekly consumption. Heavy drinking was assessed by asking participants to indicate how frequently they consumed 4+/5+ drinks per occasion in the past month for men/women. The DrInc SIP was used to assess alcohol-related consequences ( Miller et al., 1995 ). We added two items to reflect alcohol-related injuries and arrests for drinking and driving: “While drinking or intoxicated, I have been physically hurt, injured, or burned” and “I have been arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol.” This revised SIP retained the physical, social responsibility, intrapersonal, impulse control, and interpersonal consequence subscale scores as well as the total score, with adequate internal consistency (Cronbach’s alpha= .89 –. 90). Participants were asked whether they drank alcohol within 6 hours before their injury (yes/no) and whether they attributed their injury to alcohol use (yes, maybe, no). Regarding self-efficacy, participants rated how confident they were that they could control or abstain from drinking if they wanted to change their drinking habits on a five-point Likert scale (ranging from not at all to extremely ). Readiness to change was assessed using two questions: “Do you plan to cut down on your drinking in the next 30 days?” (yes/no) and “Do you plan to cut down on your drinking in the next 6 months?” (yes/no). Based on these questions and previous algorithms used to categorize stage of change for substance use (e.g., Carey et al., 2002 ) participants were categorized into one of three stages: pre-contemplation (no plans to cut down or stop drinking in next six-months), contemplation (plans to cut down or stop drinking in next six months but not in next month), and action (plans to cut down or stop drinking in next month).  Intervention During the advice session, the tailored or generic booklet was reviewed with the participant prior to discharge from the ED. Fidelity to intervention sessions was maintained via several strategies. A masters-level clinical supervisor “shadowed” therapists on a monthly basis to observe advice sessions and provide retraining as necessary. A psychologist trained in motivational interviewing conducted half-day training seminars twice yearly to review principles of motivational interviewing (e.g., rolling with resistance, developing discrepancy, etc.), including those encompassed in the FRAMES acronym (e.g., Feedback, Responsibility, Advice, Menu, Empathy, Self-Efficacy; Miller and Rollnick, 1991 ). All therapists had masters degrees in social work or related fields. For the no advice conditions, participants were told that, based on their responses to the health screen, they were at-risk for problem drinking and were given either a tailored or generic booklet to review.  Analyses Analyses were conducted using SAS 9.1 statistical software. Descriptive analyses were conducted to examine variable distributions and determine the appropriateness of the analytic approach (e.g., negative binomial distribution and a log link function for all outcome measures). The primary analysis strategy evaluated the effects of the intervention (advice, no advice) over the baseline, 3-month, and 12-month follow-up periods using generalized estimating equations (GEE) due to the correlated structure of our repeated measures ( Liang & Zeger, 1986 ). Dependent variables included: average weekly alcohol consumption, frequency of heavy drinking in the past month, and consequences as measured by the DrInc (summary of all item responses). Our prior paper ( Blow et al., 2006 ) showed limited influence of tailoring as compared to generic booklets. As a result, for the purposes of examining moderators of treatment outcome, we limited out analyses to treatment effects comparing the advice and no advice conditions. This approach also provides a more powerful test of the main effects of the advice condition. Independent variables included advice (yes/no) and time (baseline, 3-months, 12-months). In addition, gender and age (<=22 and >22) were included as covariates. Gender was included because the literature and our prior work ( Blow et al., 2006 ) shows that BIs may be more effective for women than men. Age (median age 22) was included in the analyses because of the large proportion of college students in the sample and prior research from this study ( Blow et al., 2006 ) showing differential effects of brief interventions based on age. Moderators of treatment outcome were examined via interactions for treatment condition by hypothesized moderator variable (drinking within 6 hours before injury, stage of change, attributed the injury to alcohol, and self-efficacy) by time. Models were constructed separately for the three drinking outcomes, with main effects (independent variables and moderators) and covariates entered on the first step, treatment by moderator interactions entered on the second step, time by moderator interactions entered on the third step, and three-way interactions (time by treatment by moderator) entered on the fourth step. Note that the size of the smallest subgroup for the categorical predictors used in the 3-way interaction analyses ( n =36; for the no treatment by positive attribution of injury to alcohol), suggests the sample distribution was adequate for conducting these analyses. Thus, multivariate analyses examined evidence for significant changes over time in the outcome variables based on moderators of effectiveness for the advice/no advice conditions.  Results Drinking Characteristics of the Sample and Attrition Analyses On average, participants reported consuming 20.5 (SD = 16.8) drinks per week, had engaged in 7.1 (SD = 6.0) heavy drinking episodes in the past month, and endorsed 4.7 (SD = 5.5) drinking consequences at baseline. Participants lost to follow-up did not differ from complete cases on the following baseline measures: frequency of heavy drinking, alcohol-related negative consequences, stage of change, alcohol-related injury attributions, alcohol use within 6 hours before the injury, and gender. Those lost to follow-up had higher average consumption (26.3 vs. 20.5 drink per week, p < 0.01); were significantly older (79.0% of cases with missing data were over age 22 vs. 49.5% for complete cases, p < 0.001); and had lower self-efficacy for controlling or abstaining from drinking (4.2 vs. 4.5 on a 5-point scale, p<0.01). Descriptive Information for Moderators at Baseline The majority of participants (53.4%) were classified in the precontemplation stage of change, whereas 8.7% were in contemplation and 37.9% were in action. Regarding self-efficacy, 89.9% indicated they were very or extremely confident they could cut down or stop drinking whereas 8.9% indicated they were somewhat confident and 1.2% indicated they were a little or not at all confident. Approximately one quarter (27.1%) of participants indicated they drank within 6 hours before their injury and 15.6% perceived their injury to be related to alcohol use. Table 1 shows descriptive data for change in the alcohol-related dependent variables (i.e., quantity/frequency, heavy drinking, and DrInC consequences) over time, based on the moderator variables, and associated individual significance levels. Note that for most levels of the moderator variables, quantity/frequency, heavy drinking, and DrInC consequences significantly decreased over the follow-up period. Moderators of Intervention Outcomes Average Consumption First, we examined the main effects of the moderator variables on average weekly consumption over time. Overall, average weekly consumption decreased over time (?2 = 97.2, df = 2, p < .001) and was lower among women than among men (?2 = 51.0, df = 1, p < .001). In addition, there were significant main effects for self-efficacy (?2=10.3, df=1, p < 0.01) and readiness to change (?2 = 24.7, df = 1, p < .001). Specifically, participants who reported higher levels of self-efficacy had lower weekly consumption whereas those with higher readiness to change had greater weekly consumption. Baseline age over 22 (?2 = 0.1, df = 1, p = 0.718), alcohol use within 6 hours before injury (?2 = 0.9, df = 1, p = 0.331) and alcohol-related injury attributions (?2 = 3.2, df = 1, p = 0.074) were not significantly associated with alcohol consumption. Second, we examined two-way interactions between treatment moderators and time, and between treatment moderators and intervention type; these findings were not significant and are not presented. Third, we examined all three-way interactions [treatment x time x moderator (self-efficacy, readiness to change, alcohol-related injury attributions, and alcohol use within 6 hours before injury)] and only one significant three-way interaction was identified: alcohol attribution, treatment, and time (?2 = 7.9, df = 2, p < .05). Individuals who attributed their injury to alcohol and received advice had significantly lower levels of average weekly alcohol consumption from baseline to 12-month follow-up compared to those who attributed their injury to alcohol but did not receive advice (see Figure 1 ). Further, as shown in Table 2 , participants in the advice condition who attributed their injury to alcohol showed a 44.6% change in mean average consumption from baseline to 12-months, as compared to a 16.7% change in consumption in the no advice by alcohol attribution group. Heavy Drinking First, we examined main effects over time and found significant effects for the following variables: age, gender, self-efficacy, and stage of change (see Table 1 for descriptive data). Overall, heavy drinking decreased over time (?2 = 69.3 df = 2, p < .001). Women reported fewer episodes of heavy drinking than men (?2 = 6.0 df = 1, p < .05); participants who were older than 22 years old (?2 = 19.2, df = 1, p < .001) and those with greater self-efficacy (?2 = 10.9, df = 1, p < .001) had fewer heavy drinking episodes. In addition, participants who reported greater readiness to change reported more frequent heavy drinking in the past month (?2 = 38.6, df = 1, p < .001). There were no significant main effects for attributions for the ED-related incident (?2 = 3.3, df = 1, p = 0.071) or alcohol use within 6 hours before injury (?2 = 0.7, df = 1, p = 0.401). Second, there were no significant two-way interactions between the moderator variables and treatment condition or time. Third, regarding all possible three-way interactions tested, there was a significant three-way interaction for alcohol attribution, advice condition, and time (?2 = 6.6, df = 2, p < .05). Specifically, individuals who attributed their injury to alcohol and received advice had significantly fewer heavy drinking episodes than participants who attributed their injury to alcohol, but did not receive advice (see Figure 2 ). Further, as shown in Table 3 , participants in the advice condition who attributed their injury to alcohol showed a 50.5% change in mean heavy drinking episodes from baseline to 12-months as compared to a 13.2% change in the no advice by alcohol attribution group. Alcohol Consequences: DrInc First, we examined main effects over time and found that negative consequences decreased over time (?2 = 39.7, df = 2, p < .001) and women reported experiencing fewer consequences than men (?2 = 13.3, df = 1, p < .001). In addition, those with greater self-efficacy reported fewer consequences (?2 = 19.4, df = 1, p < .001). Conversely, participants who attributed their injury to alcohol reported a greater number of consequences compared to those who did not make alcohol-related attributions (?2 = 16.6, df = 1, p < .001) and those who reported greater readiness to change also had a greater number of consequences (?2 = 87.3, df = 1, p < .001). There were no main effects of age (?2 = 2.9, df = 1, p = 0.087) or alcohol use within 6 hours before injury on drinking consequences (?2 = 1.2, df = 1, p = 0.282). Second, none of the possible two-way or three-way interactions tested reached significance, indicating that there were no significant moderators of treatment or time on negative consequences of drinking.  Results Drinking Characteristics of the Sample and Attrition Analyses On average, participants reported consuming 20.5 (SD = 16.8) drinks per week, had engaged in 7.1 (SD = 6.0) heavy drinking episodes in the past month, and endorsed 4.7 (SD = 5.5) drinking consequences at baseline. Participants lost to follow-up did not differ from complete cases on the following baseline measures: frequency of heavy drinking, alcohol-related negative consequences, stage of change, alcohol-related injury attributions, alcohol use within 6 hours before the injury, and gender. Those lost to follow-up had higher average consumption (26.3 vs. 20.5 drink per week, p < 0.01); were significantly older (79.0% of cases with missing data were over age 22 vs. 49.5% for complete cases, p < 0.001); and had lower self-efficacy for controlling or abstaining from drinking (4.2 vs. 4.5 on a 5-point scale, p<0.01). Descriptive Information for Moderators at Baseline The majority of participants (53.4%) were classified in the precontemplation stage of change, whereas 8.7% were in contemplation and 37.9% were in action. Regarding self-efficacy, 89.9% indicated they were very or extremely confident they could cut down or stop drinking whereas 8.9% indicated they were somewhat confident and 1.2% indicated they were a little or not at all confident. Approximately one quarter (27.1%) of participants indicated they drank within 6 hours before their injury and 15.6% perceived their injury to be related to alcohol use. Table 1 shows descriptive data for change in the alcohol-related dependent variables (i.e., quantity/frequency, heavy drinking, and DrInC consequences) over time, based on the moderator variables, and associated individual significance levels. Note that for most levels of the moderator variables, quantity/frequency, heavy drinking, and DrInC consequences significantly decreased over the follow-up period. Moderators of Intervention Outcomes Average Consumption First, we examined the main effects of the moderator variables on average weekly consumption over time. Overall, average weekly consumption decreased over time (?2 = 97.2, df = 2, p < .001) and was lower among women than among men (?2 = 51.0, df = 1, p < .001). In addition, there were significant main effects for self-efficacy (?2=10.3, df=1, p < 0.01) and readiness to change (?2 = 24.7, df = 1, p < .001). Specifically, participants who reported higher levels of self-efficacy had lower weekly consumption whereas those with higher readiness to change had greater weekly consumption. Baseline age over 22 (?2 = 0.1, df = 1, p = 0.718), alcohol use within 6 hours before injury (?2 = 0.9, df = 1, p = 0.331) and alcohol-related injury attributions (?2 = 3.2, df = 1, p = 0.074) were not significantly associated with alcohol consumption. Second, we examined two-way interactions between treatment moderators and time, and between treatment moderators and intervention type; these findings were not significant and are not presented. Third, we examined all three-way interactions [treatment x time x moderator (self-efficacy, readiness to change, alcohol-related injury attributions, and alcohol use within 6 hours before injury)] and only one significant three-way interaction was identified: alcohol attribution, treatment, and time (?2 = 7.9, df = 2, p < .05). Individuals who attributed their injury to alcohol and received advice had significantly lower levels of average weekly alcohol consumption from baseline to 12-month follow-up compared to those who attributed their injury to alcohol but did not receive advice (see Figure 1 ). Further, as shown in Table 2 , participants in the advice condition who attributed their injury to alcohol showed a 44.6% change in mean average consumption from baseline to 12-months, as compared to a 16.7% change in consumption in the no advice by alcohol attribution group. Heavy Drinking First, we examined main effects over time and found significant effects for the following variables: age, gender, self-efficacy, and stage of change (see Table 1 for descriptive data). Overall, heavy drinking decreased over time (?2 = 69.3 df = 2, p < .001). Women reported fewer episodes of heavy drinking than men (?2 = 6.0 df = 1, p < .05); participants who were older than 22 years old (?2 = 19.2, df = 1, p < .001) and those with greater self-efficacy (?2 = 10.9, df = 1, p < .001) had fewer heavy drinking episodes. In addition, participants who reported greater readiness to change reported more frequent heavy drinking in the past month (?2 = 38.6, df = 1, p < .001). There were no significant main effects for attributions for the ED-related incident (?2 = 3.3, df = 1, p = 0.071) or alcohol use within 6 hours before injury (?2 = 0.7, df = 1, p = 0.401). Second, there were no significant two-way interactions between the moderator variables and treatment condition or time. Third, regarding all possible three-way interactions tested, there was a significant three-way interaction for alcohol attribution, advice condition, and time (?2 = 6.6, df = 2, p < .05). Specifically, individuals who attributed their injury to alcohol and received advice had significantly fewer heavy drinking episodes than participants who attributed their injury to alcohol, but did not receive advice (see Figure 2 ). Further, as shown in Table 3 , participants in the advice condition who attributed their injury to alcohol showed a 50.5% change in mean heavy drinking episodes from baseline to 12-months as compared to a 13.2% change in the no advice by alcohol attribution group. Alcohol Consequences: DrInc First, we examined main effects over time and found that negative consequences decreased over time (?2 = 39.7, df = 2, p < .001) and women reported experiencing fewer consequences than men (?2 = 13.3, df = 1, p < .001). In addition, those with greater self-efficacy reported fewer consequences (?2 = 19.4, df = 1, p < .001). Conversely, participants who attributed their injury to alcohol reported a greater number of consequences compared to those who did not make alcohol-related attributions (?2 = 16.6, df = 1, p < .001) and those who reported greater readiness to change also had a greater number of consequences (?2 = 87.3, df = 1, p < .001). There were no main effects of age (?2 = 2.9, df = 1, p = 0.087) or alcohol use within 6 hours before injury on drinking consequences (?2 = 1.2, df = 1, p = 0.282). Second, none of the possible two-way or three-way interactions tested reached significance, indicating that there were no significant moderators of treatment or time on negative consequences of drinking.  Discussion This paper provides important information regarding moderators of the effectiveness of brief alcohol interventions in an ED setting. To our knowledge, there have been very few prior papers to examine this issue in any setting despite the call from researchers to identify the essential components of brief alcohol interventions ( Burke et al., 2003 ). Identification of moderators provides preliminary data regarding the mechanisms of change and has important implications for focusing future brief alcohol interventions in the ED in order to augment the effectiveness of these interventions. Overall, our findings suggest that BIs may be particularly effective for individuals who attribute their injury to alcohol. Furthermore, attributing the current injury to alcohol appears to maintain the efficacy of the BI, with these effects being most pronounced one year after the ED visit. Prior ED research of BIs has typically evaluated outcomes at a single follow-up period. For example, some studies have only published short-term (e.g., 3- or 6-months) outcomes ( Bazargan-Hejazi et al., 2005 ; Monti et al., 1999 ) whereas other studies have only published longer-term (e.g., 12-month) outcomes ( Gentilello et al., 1999 ; Longabaugh et al., 2001 ; Mello et al., 2005 ). Among ED studies with multiple follow-up periods, one study ( Gentilello et al., 1999 ) found BI effects were more pronounced at one-year than six-months due to increases in drinking and injury in the control group; however, another study found BI effects were more robust at 6-months than 12-months ( Neumann et al., 2006 ). These discrepancies may result from variations in the impact and extent of the control condition. For example, it may be that an ED visit for injury attenuates drinking among control participants; however, these effects may not be maintained over the long-term with drinking (or injury) returning to baseline levels by 12-months. In contrast, reductions in drinking among intervention subgroups (such as those making a connection between their drinking and their injury) may be maintained over the long-term, with one study showing lasting effects on injury at 3-years ( Gentilello et al., 1999 ). Future research with multiple, long-term follow-ups are required to test these suppositions. Researchers have theorized that BIs are effective when delivered during a health care visit due to the notion of a “teachable moment” during which patients may be more receptive to feedback regarding their drinking, particularly when delivered in the context of an empowering, non-confrontational motivational interview. Findings from this study suggest that participants who attributed their injury to drinking initially had significant reductions in alcohol use, regardless of intervention type, but that longer-term reductions for these participants were best achieved via therapist-delivered BIs. In addition, actual alcohol use within 6 hours before the injury was not related to intervention effectiveness whereas the individual’s perception that alcohol caused the injury was related to intervention effectiveness. Indeed, a recent study found that alcohol attribution was not simply a function of amount of alcohol consumed and feeling drunk, but was influenced by usual drinking pattern and cultural context ( Cherpitel et al., 2006a ). Further, our findings are consistent with Barnett et al. (2006) who found that drinking history was associated with reduced motivation to change among individuals who were mandated to a BI following an alcohol-related incident, whereas aversiveness of the incident was associated with greater motivation. Sanchez-Craig (1990) has suggested that the effectiveness of BIs result from increasing responsibility for drinking. The present findings are consistent with this notion and suggest that attribution of injury to alcohol is a piece of information that therapists may use to develop a discrepancy between current behaviors and health and social goals, and tip the decisional balance in favor of consideration of reducing or stopping alcohol misuse. When an individual does not perceive his/her injury as alcohol-related, it might be an important target of the initial MI intervention. That is, heightening awareness regarding the relationship between alcohol and injury may increase the effectiveness of the intervention; if the connection between the current injury and alcohol use is not relevant, the relationship between past or future injuries and alcohol use could be discussed. In addition, although pre-intervention self-efficacy and readiness to change were unrelated to intervention outcomes over time, further research is needed to determine whether BIs impact stage of change. Assessing stage of change immediately following the intervention would provide a more precise assessment of changes in stage of change as moderators of intervention outcome. We found that prior to the intervention, higher self-efficacy was associated with lower levels of alcohol use and fewer negative consequences whereas higher stage of change was associated with higher levels of alcohol use and more negative consequences. Regarding self-efficacy, it appears that those with higher levels of self-efficacy are indeed successful at maintaining lower levels of alcohol use and consequences, regardless of specific interventions. Conversely, those who are consuming alcohol at higher levels may be more likely to endorse readiness to change, but this has little impact on actual intervention response. It appears that stage of change as measured in this study reflects baseline problem severity, with precontemplators showing lower levels of drinking and consequences, and less interest in changing drinking, than other groups. These findings are consistent with others who have found a positive relationship between stage of change and alcohol use ( Leontieva et al., 2005 ; Shealy et al., 2007 ). There are several limitations of this study that must be noted. The site of the study was a suburban University-affiliated ED, which serves a highly educated, mostly Caucasian population. Replication is required in ED settings serving more diverse patient populations and should include admitted patients, pregnant women, suicidal patients, and patients presenting for sexual assault. In addition, as participant recruitment of injured patients occurred between the hours of 08:00 and 24:00, results may not generalize to injured patients presenting on midnight shifts or to patients presenting with medical complaints. Although the omission of a true control condition was based on extensive research demonstrating the effectiveness of BIs for alcohol, the enhanced usual care condition (i.e., no advice + generic booklet) precludes direct comparison of findings to a no intervention condition. Given the time constraints in a busy ED setting, it was not feasible to include several multi-item scales in the assessment. In addition, self-efficacy and stage of change were not measured immediately after the intervention; implementation of post-tests should be conducted to further examine these variables as potential moderators. Although the follow-up rate was excellent (85%), it is possible that findings were biased due to attrition. Future studies are needed to replicate our findings with established measures (e.g. rulers for stage of change, self-efficacy) and to expand the type of moderators examined (e.g., therapeutic alliance). Finally, future studies should assess the timing of the brief intervention relative to length of time in the ED to determine whether this impacts intervention effectiveness. Despite these limitations, this paper provides novel information regarding potential moderators of the effectiveness of brief alcohol interventions in the ED. Findings suggest that BIs may reduce drinking outcomes via identification of the link between alcohol and injury, and suggest that interventions focusing on increasing change talk in this regard may improve outcomes and reduce future injuries. In addition, interventions aimed at supporting self-efficacy may be particularly important for reducing alcohol use. These suggestions are consistent with a motivational interviewing philosophy and framework, but staff delivering these interventions require training and supervision to master these techniques. Given time and caseload pressures facing physicians in the fast-paced ED setting, it may be most beneficial and cost-effective to train other health care providers (e.g., social workers as used in the present study, nurses, mental health workers) to deliver BIs. Findings from this study shed some light on the “black box” of brief alcohol interventions that may assist clinicians and researchers in streamlining and increasing the potency of these approaches.  Discussion This paper provides important information regarding moderators of the effectiveness of brief alcohol interventions in an ED setting. To our knowledge, there have been very few prior papers to examine this issue in any setting despite the call from researchers to identify the essential components of brief alcohol interventions ( Burke et al., 2003 ). Identification of moderators provides preliminary data regarding the mechanisms of change and has important implications for focusing future brief alcohol interventions in the ED in order to augment the effectiveness of these interventions. Overall, our findings suggest that BIs may be particularly effective for individuals who attribute their injury to alcohol. Furthermore, attributing the current injury to alcohol appears to maintain the efficacy of the BI, with these effects being most pronounced one year after the ED visit. Prior ED research of BIs has typically evaluated outcomes at a single follow-up period. For example, some studies have only published short-term (e.g., 3- or 6-months) outcomes ( Bazargan-Hejazi et al., 2005 ; Monti et al., 1999 ) whereas other studies have only published longer-term (e.g., 12-month) outcomes ( Gentilello et al., 1999 ; Longabaugh et al., 2001 ; Mello et al., 2005 ). Among ED studies with multiple follow-up periods, one study ( Gentilello et al., 1999 ) found BI effects were more pronounced at one-year than six-months due to increases in drinking and injury in the control group; however, another study found BI effects were more robust at 6-months than 12-months ( Neumann et al., 2006 ). These discrepancies may result from variations in the impact and extent of the control condition. For example, it may be that an ED visit for injury attenuates drinking among control participants; however, these effects may not be maintained over the long-term with drinking (or injury) returning to baseline levels by 12-months. In contrast, reductions in drinking among intervention subgroups (such as those making a connection between their drinking and their injury) may be maintained over the long-term, with one study showing lasting effects on injury at 3-years ( Gentilello et al., 1999 ). Future research with multiple, long-term follow-ups are required to test these suppositions. Researchers have theorized that BIs are effective when delivered during a health care visit due to the notion of a “teachable moment” during which patients may be more receptive to feedback regarding their drinking, particularly when delivered in the context of an empowering, non-confrontational motivational interview. Findings from this study suggest that participants who attributed their injury to drinking initially had significant reductions in alcohol use, regardless of intervention type, but that longer-term reductions for these participants were best achieved via therapist-delivered BIs. In addition, actual alcohol use within 6 hours before the injury was not related to intervention effectiveness whereas the individual’s perception that alcohol caused the injury was related to intervention effectiveness. Indeed, a recent study found that alcohol attribution was not simply a function of amount of alcohol consumed and feeling drunk, but was influenced by usual drinking pattern and cultural context ( Cherpitel et al., 2006a ). Further, our findings are consistent with Barnett et al. (2006) who found that drinking history was associated with reduced motivation to change among individuals who were mandated to a BI following an alcohol-related incident, whereas aversiveness of the incident was associated with greater motivation. Sanchez-Craig (1990) has suggested that the effectiveness of BIs result from increasing responsibility for drinking. The present findings are consistent with this notion and suggest that attribution of injury to alcohol is a piece of information that therapists may use to develop a discrepancy between current behaviors and health and social goals, and tip the decisional balance in favor of consideration of reducing or stopping alcohol misuse. When an individual does not perceive his/her injury as alcohol-related, it might be an important target of the initial MI intervention. That is, heightening awareness regarding the relationship between alcohol and injury may increase the effectiveness of the intervention; if the connection between the current injury and alcohol use is not relevant, the relationship between past or future injuries and alcohol use could be discussed. In addition, although pre-intervention self-efficacy and readiness to change were unrelated to intervention outcomes over time, further research is needed to determine whether BIs impact stage of change. Assessing stage of change immediately following the intervention would provide a more precise assessment of changes in stage of change as moderators of intervention outcome. We found that prior to the intervention, higher self-efficacy was associated with lower levels of alcohol use and fewer negative consequences whereas higher stage of change was associated with higher levels of alcohol use and more negative consequences. Regarding self-efficacy, it appears that those with higher levels of self-efficacy are indeed successful at maintaining lower levels of alcohol use and consequences, regardless of specific interventions. Conversely, those who are consuming alcohol at higher levels may be more likely to endorse readiness to change, but this has little impact on actual intervention response. It appears that stage of change as measured in this study reflects baseline problem severity, with precontemplators showing lower levels of drinking and consequences, and less interest in changing drinking, than other groups. These findings are consistent with others who have found a positive relationship between stage of change and alcohol use ( Leontieva et al., 2005 ; Shealy et al., 2007 ). There are several limitations of this study that must be noted. The site of the study was a suburban University-affiliated ED, which serves a highly educated, mostly Caucasian population. Replication is required in ED settings serving more diverse patient populations and should include admitted patients, pregnant women, suicidal patients, and patients presenting for sexual assault. In addition, as participant recruitment of injured patients occurred between the hours of 08:00 and 24:00, results may not generalize to injured patients presenting on midnight shifts or to patients presenting with medical complaints. Although the omission of a true control condition was based on extensive research demonstrating the effectiveness of BIs for alcohol, the enhanced usual care condition (i.e., no advice + generic booklet) precludes direct comparison of findings to a no intervention condition. Given the time constraints in a busy ED setting, it was not feasible to include several multi-item scales in the assessment. In addition, self-efficacy and stage of change were not measured immediately after the intervention; implementation of post-tests should be conducted to further examine these variables as potential moderators. Although the follow-up rate was excellent (85%), it is possible that findings were biased due to attrition. Future studies are needed to replicate our findings with established measures (e.g. rulers for stage of change, self-efficacy) and to expand the type of moderators examined (e.g., therapeutic alliance). Finally, future studies should assess the timing of the brief intervention relative to length of time in the ED to determine whether this impacts intervention effectiveness. Despite these limitations, this paper provides novel information regarding potential moderators of the effectiveness of brief alcohol interventions in the ED. Findings suggest that BIs may reduce drinking outcomes via identification of the link between alcohol and injury, and suggest that interventions focusing on increasing change talk in this regard may improve outcomes and reduce future injuries. In addition, interventions aimed at supporting self-efficacy may be particularly important for reducing alcohol use. These suggestions are consistent with a motivational interviewing philosophy and framework, but staff delivering these interventions require training and supervision to master these techniques. Given time and caseload pressures facing physicians in the fast-paced ED setting, it may be most beneficial and cost-effective to train other health care providers (e.g., social workers as used in the present study, nurses, mental health workers) to deliver BIs. Findings from this study shed some light on the “black box” of brief alcohol interventions that may assist clinicians and researchers in streamlining and increasing the potency of these approaches. 