Beyond autophagy The role of UVRAG in membrane trafficking Autophagy is a lysosome-directed membrane trafficking event for the degradation of cytoplasmic components, including organelles. The past few years have seen a great advance in our understanding of the cellular machinery of autophagosome biogenesis, the hallmark of autophagy. However, our global understanding of autophagosome maturity remains relatively poor and fragmented. The topological similarity of autophagosome and endosome delivery to lysosomes suggests that autophagic and endosomal maturation may have evolved to share associated machinery to promote the lysosomal delivery of their cargoes. We have recently discovered that UVRAG, originally identified as a Beclin 1-binding autophagy protein, appears to be an important factor in autophagic and endosomal trafficking through its interaction with the class C Vps tethering complex. Given the ability of UVRAG to bind Beclin 1 and the class C Vps complex in a genetically and functionally separable manner, it may serve as an important regulator for the spatial and/or temporal control of diverse cellular trafficking events. As more non-autophagic functions of UVRAG are unveiled, our understanding of seemingly different cellular processes may move a step further.  Conclusions In recent years, there has been an explosion of information on the cellular machinery that drives the sorting of autophagic cargoes into autophagosomes and controls the release of these cargos into the lysosomal lumen. Parallel studies have revealed that many endolysosomal-related proteins, including the AAA ATPases SKD1, 10 Hrs, 12 Vti1, 11 and the small GTPases Rab5, 34 and Rab7, 8 , 9 have evolved to function in the autophagy pathway and interact with distinct components of the autophagy machinery. One of the key players in both endosomal and autophagosomal pathways is UVRAG, a modular protein that serves diverse functions in the cell ranging from autophagy and tumor suppression to membrane trafficking. Although the role of UVRAG in promoting membrane trafficking awaits further investigation, important insights have been gained through the observation that the binding of UVRAG to the C/Vps complex is required for UVRAG-mediated trafficking activity. An intriguing question is how UVRAG coordinates its distinct membrane-associated (autophagosome and endosome) trafficking activities. How are these complex processes coupled mechanistically? It is also of interest as to how endosomal and autophagic vesicle trafficking destined for the same organelle is differentially regulated. Future studies on these topics will undoubtedly illuminate new views on autophagy as an integral part of the lysosome system, and will, hopefully, suggest new approaches to a number of human diseases associated with compromised membrane trafficking.  Figure Figure 1 (A) Domain organization of UVRAG. The PR, C2, CCD and C-terminal regions are indicated. Amino acid positions are shown at the top. The binding sites for UVRAG-interacting proteins are indicated with arrows. (B) UVRAG promotes cathepsin D maturation in HCT116 cells. HCT116 cells expressing empty vector or wild-type UVRAG were labeled with [35S]-methionine for the indicated time (hours). Cathepsin D was immunoprecipitated and subjected to SDS-PAGE and radiography. The forms of cathepsin D are labeled as follows: P, proform; I, intermediate form; M, mature form. (C) Densitometric quantification of cathepsin D maturation in (B). The percentage of total radiolabeled procathepsin D at time 0 that is present as a mature form after 4 hours in the cells was quantified. 