Irradiance-dependent photobleaching and pain in ?-aminolevulinic acid-photodynamic therapy of superficial basal cell carcinomas Purpose In superficial basal cell carcinomas (sBCC) treated with photodynamic therapy with topical ?-aminolevulinic acid (ALA-PDT) we examined effects of light irradiance on photodynamic efficiency and pain. The rate of singlet oxygen production depends on the product of irradiance and photosensitizer and oxygen concentrations. High irradiance and/or photosensitizer levels cause inefficient treatment from oxygen depletion in preclinical models. Experimental Design Self-sensitized photobleaching of PpIX fluorescence was used as a surrogate metric for photodynamic dose. We developed instrumentation measuring fluorescence and reflectance from lesions and margins during treatment at 633nm with various irradiances. When PpIX was 90% bleached, irradiance was increased to 150 mW cm?2 until 200 J cm?2 were delivered. Pain was monitored. Results In 33 sBCC in 26 patients, photobleaching efficiency decreased with increasing irradiance above 20 mW cm?2, consistent with oxygen depletion. Fluences bleaching PpIX fluorescence 80% (D80) were 5.7±1.6, 4.5±0.3, 7.5±0.8, 7.4±0.3, 12.4±0.3 and 28.7±7.1 J cm?2, respectively, at 10, 20, 40, 50, 60 and 150 mW cm?2. At 20–150 mW cm?2, D80 doses required 2.5–3.5 min; times for the total 200 J cm?2 were 22.2–25.3 min. No significant pain occurred up to 50 mW cm?2; pain was not significant when irradiance then increased. Clinical responses were comparable to continuous150 mW cm?2 treatment. Conclusions ALA-PDT using ~40 mW cm?2 at 633nm is photodynamically efficient with minimum pain. Once PpIX is largely photobleached, higher irradiances allow efficient, rapid delivery of additional light. Optimal fluence at a single low irradiance is yet to be determined.  Introduction Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a selective, three-part therapy using a combination of photosensitizer, light, and oxygen to generate singlet oxygen in tissues that leads to cell death, vascular shutdown, and host inflammatory and immune responses ( 1 , 2 ). The singlet oxygen is produced from ground-state oxygen. The rate of tissue photodynamic oxygen consumption is proportional to the product of photosensitizer concentration and light irradiance. PDT is more efficient when administered at low irradiances in preclinical models ( 3 – 8 ). High irradiances and/or photosensitizer concentrations can cause depletion of available tissue oxygen, leading to inefficient and ineffective treatment ( 3 – 7 , 9 ). Topically-administered ALA-PDT is a therapy in which the pro-drug ALA is converted into the photosensitizer protoporphyrin IX (PpIX) in the skin via the heme cycle ( 10 ). Similarly, methyl-ALA-PDT (MAL-PDT) employs a methyl ester that is converted into ALA by intracellular esterases. ALA-PDT increasingly is used to treat a variety of conditions, including non-melanoma skin cancers such as superficial basal cell carcinoma (sBCC). It has advantages of tumor selectivity ( 11 ), favorable cosmetic outcomes compared to surgery and cryotherapy ( 12 ), and easy delivery ( 13 ). A drawback to topical ALA-PDT is the stinging, burning pain that can accompany treatment. In many clinical situations using PDT, the light irradiance is not controlled and may vary significantly, depending, for example, on the distance between the light source and patient ( 14 – 16 ). In addition, topical PDT can produce high local concentrations of PpIX, making irradiance-dependent photodynamic oxygen depletion a particular concern. It is difficult to define optimum irradiances in a clinical trial, because the high complete response rates necessitate large treatment groups for each treatment condition. In addition, the optimum light doses are uncertain, and the time to deliver a light dose can be unacceptably large at low irradiances. Self-sensitized photobleaching of PpIX is a surrogate metric for PDT efficiency that allows monitoring effects of irradiance. Because the PpIX can be destroyed by singlet oxygen and other reactive species generated by PDT, the rate of disappearance of PpIX with delivered light is an indirect measure of the efficiency of the treatment: greater efficiency corresponds to more rapid photobleaching. PpIX levels within the skin can be monitored by fluorescence, particularly when using red light excitation to maximize the depth of the interrogated tissue volume. We devised a means to continuously measure changes in PpIX fluorescence excited by the 633 nm treatment light without interrupting treatment, and report the first determination of photobleaching kinetics in patients as a function of irradiance. The light dose causing disappearance of a fixed fraction of the PpIX fluorescence provides a measure of the efficiency of the treatment at different irradiances, and we determined the irradiance-dependence of the fluence required to reduce PpIX fluorescence by 80% (D80). We also postulated that pain could serve as a measure of normal tissue injury and that decreased pain with increased therapeutic selectivity could be achieved at lower irradiances ( 17 , 18 ). This trial also examined the dependence of treatment-induced pain on irradiance and established a threshold irradiance, below which patients did not experience significant pain or require anesthetics or other interventions. Taken together, the results presented here motivate further clinical evaluation of the use of low irradiance in ALA-PDT and provide preliminary guidance for the choice of irradiance and fluence in trials designed to optimize pain-free, efficacious, and time-efficient protocols.  Materials & Methods Patients Selection criteria included superficial basal cell carcinomas measuring at least 5 mm but not greater than 20 mm in diameter. No patient contributed more than 2 lesions to the study at each irradiance. No effort was made to select patients for skin tone, lesion pigmentation, lesion location or other criteria. After a baseline study at 150 mW cm?2, groups of 5 lesions were examined with escalating irradiances starting at 10 mW cm?2. A stopping rule was employed such that if two patients had visual analog scale (VAS) pain scores of 4 or greater at a given irradiance then therapy at a higher initial irradiance would not be performed. Instead, an irradiance midway between that irradiance and the previous irradiance would be evaluated. In accordance with the United States Food and Drug Administration guidelines, patients were informed of the investigational nature of this study and signed a consent form. The Office of Research Subject Protection & Scientific Integrity at RPCI approved this study. Superficial BCC was confirmed for these lesions by histological biopsy two weeks prior to treatment, allowing the site to heal before treatment, or immediately following treatment. ALA Administration ALA (DUSA Pharmaceuticals, Vahalla, NY) was freshly prepared at a 20% (w/w) concentration in an oil-in-water cream (Moisturel, Westwood Pharmaceuticals). The ALA was covered by an occlusive bandage and opaque material to prevent photo-activation prior to therapy. Following application, the ALA remained on the skin for 4 h ± 15%. The area was cleaned with normal saline prior to irradiation to remove any residual cream. After the 4 h incubation period, the presence of PpIX was confirmed visually with fluorescence excited from a 405 nm LED flashlight. Visual inspection revealed lesion-to-lesion variation in initial PpIX fluorescence, which was confirmed with fluorescence spectroscopy measurements made during the therapy. Irradiation Six irradiances were used in this study: 150, 10, 20, 40, 50, and 60 mW cm?2. At 150 mW cm?2, 200 J cm?2 was delivered, as is the standard at our institution for BCC. At the lower irradiances, PDT treatment was delivered in two parts: the initial therapy was delivered at low irradiance until the fluorescence contribution from PpIX in the lesion bleached by 90% of its initial value, at which point the treatment was continued at 150 mW cm?2 until 200 J cm?2 was delivered. This protocol insured that all patients received the same total light dose and allowed treatment to be completed in a reasonable timeframe. Pain assessment Pain experienced as a result of the therapy was determined with a VAS score, in which a score of 0 represents no pain, 10 represents unbearable pain, and 4 represents moderate pain, requiring anesthetic, cooling fan or other measure; VAS ? 3 did not require interventions. Each patient was questioned about pain every 5 minutes and encouraged to notify the staff about changes in pain between these intervals. A pain score of 4 or above was treated by injections with 1% xylocaine. After the irradiance was increased to 150 mW cm?2, pain was assessed immediately and then every 5 minutes as before. Pain was not assessed, however, during the continuous 150 mW cm?2 treatment as it had previously been established that treatment at this irradiance generally required pain intervention and had a VAS score above 5. Pain was mediated in this group by conscious sedation or 1% xylocaine injection prior to therapy, repeated as necessary, and by fan cooling. Clinical Follow Up Lesions were evaluated clinically at 3 and 6 months, and then about every 6 months. Complete clinical responses were determined at ? 6 months. Instrumentation PpIX fluorescence photobleaching was measured using instrumentation and data reduction described previously ( 19 ) and described briefly herein. Fluorescence and reflectance spectra were taken repeatedly throughout PDT at two, 4 mm-diameter, spatially-resolved regions. One region was located within the sBCC lesion and the other within the perilesion margin. The system used two light sources: the treatment source was an argon-ion-pumped dye laser (Coherent Inc., Santa Clara, CA USA), band-pass filtered to operate at 632.8 nm, and the broadband reflectance source consisted of a SMA-coupled tungsten-halogen source (Avantes, Boulder, CO USA). Both the treatment and broadband beams were delivered through a GRIN lens-terminated fiber mounted in an off-surface probe 80 mm off the skin’s surface ( Fig 1 ). Fluorescence spectra were collected through a microlens-terminated detection fiber, long-pass filtered at 647.1 nm (Semrock, Rochester, NY USA), and directed to a spectrometer with a cooled diode array detector that measured fluorescence between 665 and 770 nm with 2 nm resolution (BWTek Inc, Newark, DE USA). Reflectance spectra, taken in the same delivery-detection geometry, were directed to a second spectrometer, measuring 475–800 nm with 2 nm resolution. Fluorescence spectra were corrected for dark counts, and also corrected for the instrument spectral response using a NIST-traceable calibration lamp (Ocean Optics, Dunedin, FL USA). A laptop computer (R51, IBM Corp., White Plains, NY USA) running a LabVIEW (National Instruments, Austin, TX USA) program controlled system operation. The LabVIEW interface allowed control of patient data and parameters governing the PDT time course, treatment parameters such as fluence and fluence rate, and the data acquisition schedule. Once the treatment was initiated, the instrument cycled through several steps, as illustrated in Fig 1A–D . In the first cycle, the treatment beam was delivered to the entire 25 mm treatment region, including lesion and perilesion margin, while a fluorescence spectrum was collected from the lesion. The excitation wavelength relative to the fluorescence emission of PpIX and the detection window of the instrumentation is shown in Fig 1E . In the next cycle, the treatment beam remained on and fluorescence was collected from the margin. For the next two cycles, broadband light was delivered to the same treatment region through the treatment fiber, and reflectance spectra were captured from the lesion and perilesion margin, sequentially, by the same detection fibers as used for fluorescence. Fluorescence data were acquired at intervals of between 0.3 and 3 J cm?2, depending on which irradiance was used, while reflectance data were acquired at intervals between 0.5 and 18 J cm?2. Spectra were saved to files and analyzed in real time using a Matlab (The MathWorks, Natick, MA USA) routine called by LabVIEW. After PpIX fluorescence was decreased by 90%, the instrument automatically switched to 150 mW cm?2 irradiance and delivered the remainder of the total 200 J cm?2 fluence, which was calculated by the LabVIEW program. Data analysis To obtain intrinsic tissue fluorescence, spectra were corrected for tissue absorption and scattering using an empirical correction technique explored by Wu et al . ( 20 ) in which the measured spectrum was divided by the broadband reflectance spectrum measured in the same geometry and in the same spectral window. In practice we found that reflectance spectra between 665 and 800 nm were relatively flat and stable during the therapy. This correction was therefore omitted during the real-time fluorescence analysis. Real-time corrections were instead made with representative reflectance spectra averaged from several pre-clinical experiments. The corrected fluorescence spectra were analyzed using a singular value decomposition (SVD) linear fitting algorithm in a LabVIEW-called Matlab routine, which incorporated NIST-traceable, calibrated fluorescence basis spectra for PpIX, the primary fluorescent photoproduct of PpIX, photoproduct I (photoprotoporphyrin), and tissue and fiber autofluorescence. A Fourier series was also included in the spectral basis library to identify unaccounted-for contributions in the measured spectra and any possible autofluorescence changes induced by the therapy ( 8 ). In the subsequent post-treatment analysis of the data, the fluence at which 80% of the initial PpIX had bleached (D80) was used to determine bleaching efficiency. This point was chosen because bleaching in the perilesion margin field was found experimentally to proceed more slowly than in the monitored lesion field, and D80 therefore represented a comparable bleaching metric available in each data set. D80 was determined by linear interpolation of the calculated PpIX fluorescence curve for each lesion and margin. Photobleaching and photoproduct data were normalized by the PpIX fluorescence at the start of treatment. Statistics Fisher’s exact test was used to compare the clinical responses from the 10–60 mW cm?2 irradiances to results of the prior trial at 150 mW cm?2. Statistical comparisons of initial PpIX photobleaching rates were performed using single factor analysis of variance (ANOVA). D80 fluences for lesion vs. perilesion were compared using a two-tailed t-test.  Materials & Methods Patients Selection criteria included superficial basal cell carcinomas measuring at least 5 mm but not greater than 20 mm in diameter. No patient contributed more than 2 lesions to the study at each irradiance. No effort was made to select patients for skin tone, lesion pigmentation, lesion location or other criteria. After a baseline study at 150 mW cm?2, groups of 5 lesions were examined with escalating irradiances starting at 10 mW cm?2. A stopping rule was employed such that if two patients had visual analog scale (VAS) pain scores of 4 or greater at a given irradiance then therapy at a higher initial irradiance would not be performed. Instead, an irradiance midway between that irradiance and the previous irradiance would be evaluated. In accordance with the United States Food and Drug Administration guidelines, patients were informed of the investigational nature of this study and signed a consent form. The Office of Research Subject Protection & Scientific Integrity at RPCI approved this study. Superficial BCC was confirmed for these lesions by histological biopsy two weeks prior to treatment, allowing the site to heal before treatment, or immediately following treatment. ALA Administration ALA (DUSA Pharmaceuticals, Vahalla, NY) was freshly prepared at a 20% (w/w) concentration in an oil-in-water cream (Moisturel, Westwood Pharmaceuticals). The ALA was covered by an occlusive bandage and opaque material to prevent photo-activation prior to therapy. Following application, the ALA remained on the skin for 4 h ± 15%. The area was cleaned with normal saline prior to irradiation to remove any residual cream. After the 4 h incubation period, the presence of PpIX was confirmed visually with fluorescence excited from a 405 nm LED flashlight. Visual inspection revealed lesion-to-lesion variation in initial PpIX fluorescence, which was confirmed with fluorescence spectroscopy measurements made during the therapy. Irradiation Six irradiances were used in this study: 150, 10, 20, 40, 50, and 60 mW cm?2. At 150 mW cm?2, 200 J cm?2 was delivered, as is the standard at our institution for BCC. At the lower irradiances, PDT treatment was delivered in two parts: the initial therapy was delivered at low irradiance until the fluorescence contribution from PpIX in the lesion bleached by 90% of its initial value, at which point the treatment was continued at 150 mW cm?2 until 200 J cm?2 was delivered. This protocol insured that all patients received the same total light dose and allowed treatment to be completed in a reasonable timeframe. Pain assessment Pain experienced as a result of the therapy was determined with a VAS score, in which a score of 0 represents no pain, 10 represents unbearable pain, and 4 represents moderate pain, requiring anesthetic, cooling fan or other measure; VAS ? 3 did not require interventions. Each patient was questioned about pain every 5 minutes and encouraged to notify the staff about changes in pain between these intervals. A pain score of 4 or above was treated by injections with 1% xylocaine. After the irradiance was increased to 150 mW cm?2, pain was assessed immediately and then every 5 minutes as before. Pain was not assessed, however, during the continuous 150 mW cm?2 treatment as it had previously been established that treatment at this irradiance generally required pain intervention and had a VAS score above 5. Pain was mediated in this group by conscious sedation or 1% xylocaine injection prior to therapy, repeated as necessary, and by fan cooling. Clinical Follow Up Lesions were evaluated clinically at 3 and 6 months, and then about every 6 months. Complete clinical responses were determined at ? 6 months. Instrumentation PpIX fluorescence photobleaching was measured using instrumentation and data reduction described previously ( 19 ) and described briefly herein. Fluorescence and reflectance spectra were taken repeatedly throughout PDT at two, 4 mm-diameter, spatially-resolved regions. One region was located within the sBCC lesion and the other within the perilesion margin. The system used two light sources: the treatment source was an argon-ion-pumped dye laser (Coherent Inc., Santa Clara, CA USA), band-pass filtered to operate at 632.8 nm, and the broadband reflectance source consisted of a SMA-coupled tungsten-halogen source (Avantes, Boulder, CO USA). Both the treatment and broadband beams were delivered through a GRIN lens-terminated fiber mounted in an off-surface probe 80 mm off the skin’s surface ( Fig 1 ). Fluorescence spectra were collected through a microlens-terminated detection fiber, long-pass filtered at 647.1 nm (Semrock, Rochester, NY USA), and directed to a spectrometer with a cooled diode array detector that measured fluorescence between 665 and 770 nm with 2 nm resolution (BWTek Inc, Newark, DE USA). Reflectance spectra, taken in the same delivery-detection geometry, were directed to a second spectrometer, measuring 475–800 nm with 2 nm resolution. Fluorescence spectra were corrected for dark counts, and also corrected for the instrument spectral response using a NIST-traceable calibration lamp (Ocean Optics, Dunedin, FL USA). A laptop computer (R51, IBM Corp., White Plains, NY USA) running a LabVIEW (National Instruments, Austin, TX USA) program controlled system operation. The LabVIEW interface allowed control of patient data and parameters governing the PDT time course, treatment parameters such as fluence and fluence rate, and the data acquisition schedule. Once the treatment was initiated, the instrument cycled through several steps, as illustrated in Fig 1A–D . In the first cycle, the treatment beam was delivered to the entire 25 mm treatment region, including lesion and perilesion margin, while a fluorescence spectrum was collected from the lesion. The excitation wavelength relative to the fluorescence emission of PpIX and the detection window of the instrumentation is shown in Fig 1E . In the next cycle, the treatment beam remained on and fluorescence was collected from the margin. For the next two cycles, broadband light was delivered to the same treatment region through the treatment fiber, and reflectance spectra were captured from the lesion and perilesion margin, sequentially, by the same detection fibers as used for fluorescence. Fluorescence data were acquired at intervals of between 0.3 and 3 J cm?2, depending on which irradiance was used, while reflectance data were acquired at intervals between 0.5 and 18 J cm?2. Spectra were saved to files and analyzed in real time using a Matlab (The MathWorks, Natick, MA USA) routine called by LabVIEW. After PpIX fluorescence was decreased by 90%, the instrument automatically switched to 150 mW cm?2 irradiance and delivered the remainder of the total 200 J cm?2 fluence, which was calculated by the LabVIEW program. Data analysis To obtain intrinsic tissue fluorescence, spectra were corrected for tissue absorption and scattering using an empirical correction technique explored by Wu et al . ( 20 ) in which the measured spectrum was divided by the broadband reflectance spectrum measured in the same geometry and in the same spectral window. In practice we found that reflectance spectra between 665 and 800 nm were relatively flat and stable during the therapy. This correction was therefore omitted during the real-time fluorescence analysis. Real-time corrections were instead made with representative reflectance spectra averaged from several pre-clinical experiments. The corrected fluorescence spectra were analyzed using a singular value decomposition (SVD) linear fitting algorithm in a LabVIEW-called Matlab routine, which incorporated NIST-traceable, calibrated fluorescence basis spectra for PpIX, the primary fluorescent photoproduct of PpIX, photoproduct I (photoprotoporphyrin), and tissue and fiber autofluorescence. A Fourier series was also included in the spectral basis library to identify unaccounted-for contributions in the measured spectra and any possible autofluorescence changes induced by the therapy ( 8 ). In the subsequent post-treatment analysis of the data, the fluence at which 80% of the initial PpIX had bleached (D80) was used to determine bleaching efficiency. This point was chosen because bleaching in the perilesion margin field was found experimentally to proceed more slowly than in the monitored lesion field, and D80 therefore represented a comparable bleaching metric available in each data set. D80 was determined by linear interpolation of the calculated PpIX fluorescence curve for each lesion and margin. Photobleaching and photoproduct data were normalized by the PpIX fluorescence at the start of treatment. Statistics Fisher’s exact test was used to compare the clinical responses from the 10–60 mW cm?2 irradiances to results of the prior trial at 150 mW cm?2. Statistical comparisons of initial PpIX photobleaching rates were performed using single factor analysis of variance (ANOVA). D80 fluences for lesion vs. perilesion were compared using a two-tailed t-test.  Patients Selection criteria included superficial basal cell carcinomas measuring at least 5 mm but not greater than 20 mm in diameter. No patient contributed more than 2 lesions to the study at each irradiance. No effort was made to select patients for skin tone, lesion pigmentation, lesion location or other criteria. After a baseline study at 150 mW cm?2, groups of 5 lesions were examined with escalating irradiances starting at 10 mW cm?2. A stopping rule was employed such that if two patients had visual analog scale (VAS) pain scores of 4 or greater at a given irradiance then therapy at a higher initial irradiance would not be performed. Instead, an irradiance midway between that irradiance and the previous irradiance would be evaluated. In accordance with the United States Food and Drug Administration guidelines, patients were informed of the investigational nature of this study and signed a consent form. The Office of Research Subject Protection & Scientific Integrity at RPCI approved this study. Superficial BCC was confirmed for these lesions by histological biopsy two weeks prior to treatment, allowing the site to heal before treatment, or immediately following treatment.  Patients Selection criteria included superficial basal cell carcinomas measuring at least 5 mm but not greater than 20 mm in diameter. No patient contributed more than 2 lesions to the study at each irradiance. No effort was made to select patients for skin tone, lesion pigmentation, lesion location or other criteria. After a baseline study at 150 mW cm?2, groups of 5 lesions were examined with escalating irradiances starting at 10 mW cm?2. A stopping rule was employed such that if two patients had visual analog scale (VAS) pain scores of 4 or greater at a given irradiance then therapy at a higher initial irradiance would not be performed. Instead, an irradiance midway between that irradiance and the previous irradiance would be evaluated. In accordance with the United States Food and Drug Administration guidelines, patients were informed of the investigational nature of this study and signed a consent form. The Office of Research Subject Protection & Scientific Integrity at RPCI approved this study. Superficial BCC was confirmed for these lesions by histological biopsy two weeks prior to treatment, allowing the site to heal before treatment, or immediately following treatment.  ALA Administration ALA (DUSA Pharmaceuticals, Vahalla, NY) was freshly prepared at a 20% (w/w) concentration in an oil-in-water cream (Moisturel, Westwood Pharmaceuticals). The ALA was covered by an occlusive bandage and opaque material to prevent photo-activation prior to therapy. Following application, the ALA remained on the skin for 4 h ± 15%. The area was cleaned with normal saline prior to irradiation to remove any residual cream. After the 4 h incubation period, the presence of PpIX was confirmed visually with fluorescence excited from a 405 nm LED flashlight. Visual inspection revealed lesion-to-lesion variation in initial PpIX fluorescence, which was confirmed with fluorescence spectroscopy measurements made during the therapy.  ALA Administration ALA (DUSA Pharmaceuticals, Vahalla, NY) was freshly prepared at a 20% (w/w) concentration in an oil-in-water cream (Moisturel, Westwood Pharmaceuticals). The ALA was covered by an occlusive bandage and opaque material to prevent photo-activation prior to therapy. Following application, the ALA remained on the skin for 4 h ± 15%. The area was cleaned with normal saline prior to irradiation to remove any residual cream. After the 4 h incubation period, the presence of PpIX was confirmed visually with fluorescence excited from a 405 nm LED flashlight. Visual inspection revealed lesion-to-lesion variation in initial PpIX fluorescence, which was confirmed with fluorescence spectroscopy measurements made during the therapy.  Irradiation Six irradiances were used in this study: 150, 10, 20, 40, 50, and 60 mW cm?2. At 150 mW cm?2, 200 J cm?2 was delivered, as is the standard at our institution for BCC. At the lower irradiances, PDT treatment was delivered in two parts: the initial therapy was delivered at low irradiance until the fluorescence contribution from PpIX in the lesion bleached by 90% of its initial value, at which point the treatment was continued at 150 mW cm?2 until 200 J cm?2 was delivered. This protocol insured that all patients received the same total light dose and allowed treatment to be completed in a reasonable timeframe.  Irradiation Six irradiances were used in this study: 150, 10, 20, 40, 50, and 60 mW cm?2. At 150 mW cm?2, 200 J cm?2 was delivered, as is the standard at our institution for BCC. At the lower irradiances, PDT treatment was delivered in two parts: the initial therapy was delivered at low irradiance until the fluorescence contribution from PpIX in the lesion bleached by 90% of its initial value, at which point the treatment was continued at 150 mW cm?2 until 200 J cm?2 was delivered. This protocol insured that all patients received the same total light dose and allowed treatment to be completed in a reasonable timeframe.  Pain assessment Pain experienced as a result of the therapy was determined with a VAS score, in which a score of 0 represents no pain, 10 represents unbearable pain, and 4 represents moderate pain, requiring anesthetic, cooling fan or other measure; VAS ? 3 did not require interventions. Each patient was questioned about pain every 5 minutes and encouraged to notify the staff about changes in pain between these intervals. A pain score of 4 or above was treated by injections with 1% xylocaine. After the irradiance was increased to 150 mW cm?2, pain was assessed immediately and then every 5 minutes as before. Pain was not assessed, however, during the continuous 150 mW cm?2 treatment as it had previously been established that treatment at this irradiance generally required pain intervention and had a VAS score above 5. Pain was mediated in this group by conscious sedation or 1% xylocaine injection prior to therapy, repeated as necessary, and by fan cooling.  Pain assessment Pain experienced as a result of the therapy was determined with a VAS score, in which a score of 0 represents no pain, 10 represents unbearable pain, and 4 represents moderate pain, requiring anesthetic, cooling fan or other measure; VAS ? 3 did not require interventions. Each patient was questioned about pain every 5 minutes and encouraged to notify the staff about changes in pain between these intervals. A pain score of 4 or above was treated by injections with 1% xylocaine. After the irradiance was increased to 150 mW cm?2, pain was assessed immediately and then every 5 minutes as before. Pain was not assessed, however, during the continuous 150 mW cm?2 treatment as it had previously been established that treatment at this irradiance generally required pain intervention and had a VAS score above 5. Pain was mediated in this group by conscious sedation or 1% xylocaine injection prior to therapy, repeated as necessary, and by fan cooling.  Clinical Follow Up Lesions were evaluated clinically at 3 and 6 months, and then about every 6 months. Complete clinical responses were determined at ? 6 months.  Clinical Follow Up Lesions were evaluated clinically at 3 and 6 months, and then about every 6 months. Complete clinical responses were determined at ? 6 months.  Instrumentation PpIX fluorescence photobleaching was measured using instrumentation and data reduction described previously ( 19 ) and described briefly herein. Fluorescence and reflectance spectra were taken repeatedly throughout PDT at two, 4 mm-diameter, spatially-resolved regions. One region was located within the sBCC lesion and the other within the perilesion margin. The system used two light sources: the treatment source was an argon-ion-pumped dye laser (Coherent Inc., Santa Clara, CA USA), band-pass filtered to operate at 632.8 nm, and the broadband reflectance source consisted of a SMA-coupled tungsten-halogen source (Avantes, Boulder, CO USA). Both the treatment and broadband beams were delivered through a GRIN lens-terminated fiber mounted in an off-surface probe 80 mm off the skin’s surface ( Fig 1 ). Fluorescence spectra were collected through a microlens-terminated detection fiber, long-pass filtered at 647.1 nm (Semrock, Rochester, NY USA), and directed to a spectrometer with a cooled diode array detector that measured fluorescence between 665 and 770 nm with 2 nm resolution (BWTek Inc, Newark, DE USA). Reflectance spectra, taken in the same delivery-detection geometry, were directed to a second spectrometer, measuring 475–800 nm with 2 nm resolution. Fluorescence spectra were corrected for dark counts, and also corrected for the instrument spectral response using a NIST-traceable calibration lamp (Ocean Optics, Dunedin, FL USA). A laptop computer (R51, IBM Corp., White Plains, NY USA) running a LabVIEW (National Instruments, Austin, TX USA) program controlled system operation. The LabVIEW interface allowed control of patient data and parameters governing the PDT time course, treatment parameters such as fluence and fluence rate, and the data acquisition schedule. Once the treatment was initiated, the instrument cycled through several steps, as illustrated in Fig 1A–D . In the first cycle, the treatment beam was delivered to the entire 25 mm treatment region, including lesion and perilesion margin, while a fluorescence spectrum was collected from the lesion. The excitation wavelength relative to the fluorescence emission of PpIX and the detection window of the instrumentation is shown in Fig 1E . In the next cycle, the treatment beam remained on and fluorescence was collected from the margin. For the next two cycles, broadband light was delivered to the same treatment region through the treatment fiber, and reflectance spectra were captured from the lesion and perilesion margin, sequentially, by the same detection fibers as used for fluorescence. Fluorescence data were acquired at intervals of between 0.3 and 3 J cm?2, depending on which irradiance was used, while reflectance data were acquired at intervals between 0.5 and 18 J cm?2. Spectra were saved to files and analyzed in real time using a Matlab (The MathWorks, Natick, MA USA) routine called by LabVIEW. After PpIX fluorescence was decreased by 90%, the instrument automatically switched to 150 mW cm?2 irradiance and delivered the remainder of the total 200 J cm?2 fluence, which was calculated by the LabVIEW program.  Instrumentation PpIX fluorescence photobleaching was measured using instrumentation and data reduction described previously ( 19 ) and described briefly herein. Fluorescence and reflectance spectra were taken repeatedly throughout PDT at two, 4 mm-diameter, spatially-resolved regions. One region was located within the sBCC lesion and the other within the perilesion margin. The system used two light sources: the treatment source was an argon-ion-pumped dye laser (Coherent Inc., Santa Clara, CA USA), band-pass filtered to operate at 632.8 nm, and the broadband reflectance source consisted of a SMA-coupled tungsten-halogen source (Avantes, Boulder, CO USA). Both the treatment and broadband beams were delivered through a GRIN lens-terminated fiber mounted in an off-surface probe 80 mm off the skin’s surface ( Fig 1 ). Fluorescence spectra were collected through a microlens-terminated detection fiber, long-pass filtered at 647.1 nm (Semrock, Rochester, NY USA), and directed to a spectrometer with a cooled diode array detector that measured fluorescence between 665 and 770 nm with 2 nm resolution (BWTek Inc, Newark, DE USA). Reflectance spectra, taken in the same delivery-detection geometry, were directed to a second spectrometer, measuring 475–800 nm with 2 nm resolution. Fluorescence spectra were corrected for dark counts, and also corrected for the instrument spectral response using a NIST-traceable calibration lamp (Ocean Optics, Dunedin, FL USA). A laptop computer (R51, IBM Corp., White Plains, NY USA) running a LabVIEW (National Instruments, Austin, TX USA) program controlled system operation. The LabVIEW interface allowed control of patient data and parameters governing the PDT time course, treatment parameters such as fluence and fluence rate, and the data acquisition schedule. Once the treatment was initiated, the instrument cycled through several steps, as illustrated in Fig 1A–D . In the first cycle, the treatment beam was delivered to the entire 25 mm treatment region, including lesion and perilesion margin, while a fluorescence spectrum was collected from the lesion. The excitation wavelength relative to the fluorescence emission of PpIX and the detection window of the instrumentation is shown in Fig 1E . In the next cycle, the treatment beam remained on and fluorescence was collected from the margin. For the next two cycles, broadband light was delivered to the same treatment region through the treatment fiber, and reflectance spectra were captured from the lesion and perilesion margin, sequentially, by the same detection fibers as used for fluorescence. Fluorescence data were acquired at intervals of between 0.3 and 3 J cm?2, depending on which irradiance was used, while reflectance data were acquired at intervals between 0.5 and 18 J cm?2. Spectra were saved to files and analyzed in real time using a Matlab (The MathWorks, Natick, MA USA) routine called by LabVIEW. After PpIX fluorescence was decreased by 90%, the instrument automatically switched to 150 mW cm?2 irradiance and delivered the remainder of the total 200 J cm?2 fluence, which was calculated by the LabVIEW program.  Data analysis To obtain intrinsic tissue fluorescence, spectra were corrected for tissue absorption and scattering using an empirical correction technique explored by Wu et al . ( 20 ) in which the measured spectrum was divided by the broadband reflectance spectrum measured in the same geometry and in the same spectral window. In practice we found that reflectance spectra between 665 and 800 nm were relatively flat and stable during the therapy. This correction was therefore omitted during the real-time fluorescence analysis. Real-time corrections were instead made with representative reflectance spectra averaged from several pre-clinical experiments. The corrected fluorescence spectra were analyzed using a singular value decomposition (SVD) linear fitting algorithm in a LabVIEW-called Matlab routine, which incorporated NIST-traceable, calibrated fluorescence basis spectra for PpIX, the primary fluorescent photoproduct of PpIX, photoproduct I (photoprotoporphyrin), and tissue and fiber autofluorescence. A Fourier series was also included in the spectral basis library to identify unaccounted-for contributions in the measured spectra and any possible autofluorescence changes induced by the therapy ( 8 ). In the subsequent post-treatment analysis of the data, the fluence at which 80% of the initial PpIX had bleached (D80) was used to determine bleaching efficiency. This point was chosen because bleaching in the perilesion margin field was found experimentally to proceed more slowly than in the monitored lesion field, and D80 therefore represented a comparable bleaching metric available in each data set. D80 was determined by linear interpolation of the calculated PpIX fluorescence curve for each lesion and margin. Photobleaching and photoproduct data were normalized by the PpIX fluorescence at the start of treatment.  Data analysis To obtain intrinsic tissue fluorescence, spectra were corrected for tissue absorption and scattering using an empirical correction technique explored by Wu et al . ( 20 ) in which the measured spectrum was divided by the broadband reflectance spectrum measured in the same geometry and in the same spectral window. In practice we found that reflectance spectra between 665 and 800 nm were relatively flat and stable during the therapy. This correction was therefore omitted during the real-time fluorescence analysis. Real-time corrections were instead made with representative reflectance spectra averaged from several pre-clinical experiments. The corrected fluorescence spectra were analyzed using a singular value decomposition (SVD) linear fitting algorithm in a LabVIEW-called Matlab routine, which incorporated NIST-traceable, calibrated fluorescence basis spectra for PpIX, the primary fluorescent photoproduct of PpIX, photoproduct I (photoprotoporphyrin), and tissue and fiber autofluorescence. A Fourier series was also included in the spectral basis library to identify unaccounted-for contributions in the measured spectra and any possible autofluorescence changes induced by the therapy ( 8 ). In the subsequent post-treatment analysis of the data, the fluence at which 80% of the initial PpIX had bleached (D80) was used to determine bleaching efficiency. This point was chosen because bleaching in the perilesion margin field was found experimentally to proceed more slowly than in the monitored lesion field, and D80 therefore represented a comparable bleaching metric available in each data set. D80 was determined by linear interpolation of the calculated PpIX fluorescence curve for each lesion and margin. Photobleaching and photoproduct data were normalized by the PpIX fluorescence at the start of treatment.  Statistics Fisher’s exact test was used to compare the clinical responses from the 10–60 mW cm?2 irradiances to results of the prior trial at 150 mW cm?2. Statistical comparisons of initial PpIX photobleaching rates were performed using single factor analysis of variance (ANOVA). D80 fluences for lesion vs. perilesion were compared using a two-tailed t-test.  Statistics Fisher’s exact test was used to compare the clinical responses from the 10–60 mW cm?2 irradiances to results of the prior trial at 150 mW cm?2. Statistical comparisons of initial PpIX photobleaching rates were performed using single factor analysis of variance (ANOVA). D80 fluences for lesion vs. perilesion were compared using a two-tailed t-test.  Results Patients and Lesions Twenty six patients, 11 male and 15 female, mean age 52.2 (range 17–86) contributed 33 sBCC lesions located on the face, arms, back and chest. Seven patients had nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. Data were collected on seven carcinomas at 150 mW cm?2, five each at 10, 20, 40 and 60 mW cm?2, and six at 50 mW cm?2. PpIX Photobleaching Using treatment beam excitation, sequential fluorescence measurements were taken from both the sBCC and clinically normal perilesional margin. SVD analysis performed on each measured spectrum during the course of a treatment reports the relative amplitudes of the fluorophores represented in the fit. A representative fluorescence spectrum obtained from an ALA-sensitized sBCC lesion treated at 50 mW cm?2 and analyzed with SVD is shown in Fig 2A . Here the excellent fit to the corrected fluorescence spectrum is dominated by a weighted sum of contributions from PpIX, photoproduct I, and autofluorescence with only a negligible contribution from the Fourier terms. Thus, there are no significant distortions introduced by either the tissue optical properties or the correction algorithms, and quantitative analysis of the PpIX bleaching and photoproduct accumulation and subsequent bleaching is therefore possible. PpIX and photoproduct I (photoprotoporhyrin) contributions from the same lesion are shown in Fig 2B . As PpIX monotonically bleached away with increased fluence, the contribution to fluorescence from photoproduct I was seen to increase, peaking at approximately 3 J cm?2, after which it underwent photobleaching, although with a bleaching rate that was slower than that of PpIX. PpIX and photoproduct amplitudes for a lesion treated at 150 mW cm?2 are shown in Fig. 2C . Compared to 50 mW cm?2, It is evident that both PpIX and photoprotoporhyrin bleaching was slower at the higher irradiance. The initial PpIX fluorescence varied as much as 8-fold between lesions, but there was no correlation between initial fluorescence and the subsequent photobleaching curves (data not shown). Accordingly the fluorescence data for each lesion was normalized to the initial amplitude in that lesion. For each of the irradiance groups, average bleaching curves ± SEM paired by lesion and perilesion margin are shown in Fig. 3A ; they demonstrate similar trends for all low-irradiance groups but diverge at 150 mW cm?2, where the normal skin bleached more slowly than the lesion. At the high irradiance the normal skin PpIX did not fall below 20% of its initial value, consistent with oxygen depletion limiting singlet oxygen production. However, for each irradiance the initial bleaching efficiencies (represented by the slope of the first two points in the bleaching data) were comparable for lesion and margin (p >0.17), suggesting differential oxygen depletion did not begin immediately. The variation in normalized lesional and perilesional PpIX fluorescence at the different irradiances is summarized in Fig 3B . As seen in this figure, photobleaching typically occurred more efficiently at lower irradiance, consistent with the work of other investigators ( 5 , 6 , 8 , 21 ). The bleaching kinetics were not single exponential, and the slopes changed most substantially at higher irradiances. Photosensitizer bleaching was rapid, with the lesions in the slowest group (150 mW cm?2) bleaching by 80% in 28.7 ± 7.1 J cm?2, representing less than 20% of the 200 J cm?2 prescribed fluence ( Table 1 ). Single factor ANOVA demonstrated that initial bleaching rates in lesions and margins for treatments conducted at 10 and 20 mW cm?2 were statistically similar (p > 0.7). PDT performed at irradiances of 40, 50, and 60 mW cm?2 also produced bleaching rates that were statistically indistinguishable (p > 0.38). When data from these two statistically similar treatment groups were pooled, statistical significance emerged between photobleaching rates observed at 10 and 20 mW cm?2 vs. those lesions and margins treated at irradiances of 40–60 mW cm?2 (p < 0.01). Similarly, the bleaching rates for the lesions and margins subjected to PDT at 40–60 mW cm?2 were significantly greater than that measured for PDT at 150 mW cm?2 (p < 0.01). Individual PpIX bleaching curves were used to determine the D80 for each carcinoma and margin, using linear interpolation of the data points. For the sBCC, there were significant interlesional variations in bleaching rates, particularly at very low and high irradiances. As shown in Fig 3C and summarized in Table 1 , the mean D80’s were relatively constant between 10 and 20 mW cm?2 and then increased slowly with irradiance for irradiances greater than 20 mW cm?2. The D80 fluences between lesion and margin were similar for all the low-irradiance groups. A two-tailed t-test showed that D80’s between lesion and margin were significantly different only at 150 mW cm?2 (p < 0.03), where three of the seven margins failed to reach 80% bleaching by 200 J cm?2 ( Fig 3 ). Bleaching efficiency in terms of the time required to deliver the D80 fluence was also considered: the time required to bleach PpIX by 80% (T80) was calculated by dividing D80 by the irradiance ( Table 1 ). The lesion T80’s were remarkably consistent for 20, 40, 50, 60 and 150 mW cm?2, ranging from 2.5 ± 0.1 minutes at 50 mW cm?2 to 3.5 ± 0.2 minutes at 20 mW cm?2. The 10 mW cm?2 irradiance exhibited a significantly larger T80 of 9.5 ± 2.6 minutes. The time required for our two-irradiance protocol, in which D90 is delivered at low-irradiance and then the remainder of the fluence is delivered at 150 mW cm?2, also is presented in Table 1 . Under this protocol only modest increases to treatment time are required for initial irradiances ? 20 mW cm?2. Clinical Outcomes Twenty four of the 26 lesions receiving low irradiances were available for evaluations ? 6 months after PDT (range 6–20 months); 2 BCC did not have sufficiently long follow up. Clinically, 21/24 evaulable lesions treated with the two irradiance protocol were complete responses (88%). This is not significantly different from the single treatment 96% CCR rate for a larger study of 112 sBCC at 150 mW cm?2 (p=0.148 by Fisher exact test) (Oseroff et al, manuscript in preparation). There were no difference in initial PpIX fluorescence levels or shapes of photobleaching curves between the successes and failures (data not shown). Reflectance Spectra Reflectance spectra between 475 and 800 nm were collected separately for both lesion and the perilesion margin and were used to correct fluorescence spectra. Fig. 4 shows representative reflectance measured from one lesion and adjacent margin treated at 50 mW cm?2 before PDT and after 1.0 J cm?2 was delivered. Data between 625 and 640 is excluded because of bleed-through of the treatment laser into the reflectance channel. The spectra are remarkably similar pre- and post 1.0 J cm-2 PDT, with the characteristic features of oxyhemoglobin being prominent. Rigorous analysis of the reflectance spectra acquired over the full range of irradiances will be reported elsewhere. Pain Pain was scored on a VAS scale for 26 lesions treated at 10, 20, 40, 50, and 60 mW cm?2 initial irradiance. Lesions treated at an initial irradiance of 150 mW cm?2 were excluded from pain measurements because of a previously established VAS score of above 5. Pain experienced during the therapy ± SEM is shown in Fig 5A . Pain increased with escalating irradiance, as anticipated by pilot evidence and supported by the literature ( 12 , 17 , 22 ). In this study, a pain threshold was established at an irradiance where two or more patients reported a VAS score of 4 or above, requiring pain intervention. This threshold was found to be 60 mW cm?2, at which two out of five patients reported VAS scores of 6 and 7. As previously mentioned, after the initial PpIX fluorescence contribution in the lesion had bleached by 90%, treatment irradiance was increased to 150 mW cm?2 and the treatment continued until 200 J cm?2 was delivered. Fig 5B shows the resulting change in average VAS score ± SEM resulting from the increased irradiance. Only modest increases of less than 0.5 were noted in the 20, 40, and 50 mW cm?2 groups. The decrease in VAS score at 150 mW cm?2 for the 60 mW cm?2 group was primarily the result of the single 1% xylocaine injection given to the patients who reported VAS scores of 6 and 7 during the low-irradiance interval. Patients treated at 10 mW cm?2 reported an average increase of approximately 1. There was no correlation between initial PpIX levels as determined by florescence and pain levels (data not shown).  Results Patients and Lesions Twenty six patients, 11 male and 15 female, mean age 52.2 (range 17–86) contributed 33 sBCC lesions located on the face, arms, back and chest. Seven patients had nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. Data were collected on seven carcinomas at 150 mW cm?2, five each at 10, 20, 40 and 60 mW cm?2, and six at 50 mW cm?2. PpIX Photobleaching Using treatment beam excitation, sequential fluorescence measurements were taken from both the sBCC and clinically normal perilesional margin. SVD analysis performed on each measured spectrum during the course of a treatment reports the relative amplitudes of the fluorophores represented in the fit. A representative fluorescence spectrum obtained from an ALA-sensitized sBCC lesion treated at 50 mW cm?2 and analyzed with SVD is shown in Fig 2A . Here the excellent fit to the corrected fluorescence spectrum is dominated by a weighted sum of contributions from PpIX, photoproduct I, and autofluorescence with only a negligible contribution from the Fourier terms. Thus, there are no significant distortions introduced by either the tissue optical properties or the correction algorithms, and quantitative analysis of the PpIX bleaching and photoproduct accumulation and subsequent bleaching is therefore possible. PpIX and photoproduct I (photoprotoporhyrin) contributions from the same lesion are shown in Fig 2B . As PpIX monotonically bleached away with increased fluence, the contribution to fluorescence from photoproduct I was seen to increase, peaking at approximately 3 J cm?2, after which it underwent photobleaching, although with a bleaching rate that was slower than that of PpIX. PpIX and photoproduct amplitudes for a lesion treated at 150 mW cm?2 are shown in Fig. 2C . Compared to 50 mW cm?2, It is evident that both PpIX and photoprotoporhyrin bleaching was slower at the higher irradiance. The initial PpIX fluorescence varied as much as 8-fold between lesions, but there was no correlation between initial fluorescence and the subsequent photobleaching curves (data not shown). Accordingly the fluorescence data for each lesion was normalized to the initial amplitude in that lesion. For each of the irradiance groups, average bleaching curves ± SEM paired by lesion and perilesion margin are shown in Fig. 3A ; they demonstrate similar trends for all low-irradiance groups but diverge at 150 mW cm?2, where the normal skin bleached more slowly than the lesion. At the high irradiance the normal skin PpIX did not fall below 20% of its initial value, consistent with oxygen depletion limiting singlet oxygen production. However, for each irradiance the initial bleaching efficiencies (represented by the slope of the first two points in the bleaching data) were comparable for lesion and margin (p >0.17), suggesting differential oxygen depletion did not begin immediately. The variation in normalized lesional and perilesional PpIX fluorescence at the different irradiances is summarized in Fig 3B . As seen in this figure, photobleaching typically occurred more efficiently at lower irradiance, consistent with the work of other investigators ( 5 , 6 , 8 , 21 ). The bleaching kinetics were not single exponential, and the slopes changed most substantially at higher irradiances. Photosensitizer bleaching was rapid, with the lesions in the slowest group (150 mW cm?2) bleaching by 80% in 28.7 ± 7.1 J cm?2, representing less than 20% of the 200 J cm?2 prescribed fluence ( Table 1 ). Single factor ANOVA demonstrated that initial bleaching rates in lesions and margins for treatments conducted at 10 and 20 mW cm?2 were statistically similar (p > 0.7). PDT performed at irradiances of 40, 50, and 60 mW cm?2 also produced bleaching rates that were statistically indistinguishable (p > 0.38). When data from these two statistically similar treatment groups were pooled, statistical significance emerged between photobleaching rates observed at 10 and 20 mW cm?2 vs. those lesions and margins treated at irradiances of 40–60 mW cm?2 (p < 0.01). Similarly, the bleaching rates for the lesions and margins subjected to PDT at 40–60 mW cm?2 were significantly greater than that measured for PDT at 150 mW cm?2 (p < 0.01). Individual PpIX bleaching curves were used to determine the D80 for each carcinoma and margin, using linear interpolation of the data points. For the sBCC, there were significant interlesional variations in bleaching rates, particularly at very low and high irradiances. As shown in Fig 3C and summarized in Table 1 , the mean D80’s were relatively constant between 10 and 20 mW cm?2 and then increased slowly with irradiance for irradiances greater than 20 mW cm?2. The D80 fluences between lesion and margin were similar for all the low-irradiance groups. A two-tailed t-test showed that D80’s between lesion and margin were significantly different only at 150 mW cm?2 (p < 0.03), where three of the seven margins failed to reach 80% bleaching by 200 J cm?2 ( Fig 3 ). Bleaching efficiency in terms of the time required to deliver the D80 fluence was also considered: the time required to bleach PpIX by 80% (T80) was calculated by dividing D80 by the irradiance ( Table 1 ). The lesion T80’s were remarkably consistent for 20, 40, 50, 60 and 150 mW cm?2, ranging from 2.5 ± 0.1 minutes at 50 mW cm?2 to 3.5 ± 0.2 minutes at 20 mW cm?2. The 10 mW cm?2 irradiance exhibited a significantly larger T80 of 9.5 ± 2.6 minutes. The time required for our two-irradiance protocol, in which D90 is delivered at low-irradiance and then the remainder of the fluence is delivered at 150 mW cm?2, also is presented in Table 1 . Under this protocol only modest increases to treatment time are required for initial irradiances ? 20 mW cm?2. Clinical Outcomes Twenty four of the 26 lesions receiving low irradiances were available for evaluations ? 6 months after PDT (range 6–20 months); 2 BCC did not have sufficiently long follow up. Clinically, 21/24 evaulable lesions treated with the two irradiance protocol were complete responses (88%). This is not significantly different from the single treatment 96% CCR rate for a larger study of 112 sBCC at 150 mW cm?2 (p=0.148 by Fisher exact test) (Oseroff et al, manuscript in preparation). There were no difference in initial PpIX fluorescence levels or shapes of photobleaching curves between the successes and failures (data not shown). Reflectance Spectra Reflectance spectra between 475 and 800 nm were collected separately for both lesion and the perilesion margin and were used to correct fluorescence spectra. Fig. 4 shows representative reflectance measured from one lesion and adjacent margin treated at 50 mW cm?2 before PDT and after 1.0 J cm?2 was delivered. Data between 625 and 640 is excluded because of bleed-through of the treatment laser into the reflectance channel. The spectra are remarkably similar pre- and post 1.0 J cm-2 PDT, with the characteristic features of oxyhemoglobin being prominent. Rigorous analysis of the reflectance spectra acquired over the full range of irradiances will be reported elsewhere. Pain Pain was scored on a VAS scale for 26 lesions treated at 10, 20, 40, 50, and 60 mW cm?2 initial irradiance. Lesions treated at an initial irradiance of 150 mW cm?2 were excluded from pain measurements because of a previously established VAS score of above 5. Pain experienced during the therapy ± SEM is shown in Fig 5A . Pain increased with escalating irradiance, as anticipated by pilot evidence and supported by the literature ( 12 , 17 , 22 ). In this study, a pain threshold was established at an irradiance where two or more patients reported a VAS score of 4 or above, requiring pain intervention. This threshold was found to be 60 mW cm?2, at which two out of five patients reported VAS scores of 6 and 7. As previously mentioned, after the initial PpIX fluorescence contribution in the lesion had bleached by 90%, treatment irradiance was increased to 150 mW cm?2 and the treatment continued until 200 J cm?2 was delivered. Fig 5B shows the resulting change in average VAS score ± SEM resulting from the increased irradiance. Only modest increases of less than 0.5 were noted in the 20, 40, and 50 mW cm?2 groups. The decrease in VAS score at 150 mW cm?2 for the 60 mW cm?2 group was primarily the result of the single 1% xylocaine injection given to the patients who reported VAS scores of 6 and 7 during the low-irradiance interval. Patients treated at 10 mW cm?2 reported an average increase of approximately 1. There was no correlation between initial PpIX levels as determined by florescence and pain levels (data not shown).  Patients and Lesions Twenty six patients, 11 male and 15 female, mean age 52.2 (range 17–86) contributed 33 sBCC lesions located on the face, arms, back and chest. Seven patients had nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. Data were collected on seven carcinomas at 150 mW cm?2, five each at 10, 20, 40 and 60 mW cm?2, and six at 50 mW cm?2.  Patients and Lesions Twenty six patients, 11 male and 15 female, mean age 52.2 (range 17–86) contributed 33 sBCC lesions located on the face, arms, back and chest. Seven patients had nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. Data were collected on seven carcinomas at 150 mW cm?2, five each at 10, 20, 40 and 60 mW cm?2, and six at 50 mW cm?2.  PpIX Photobleaching Using treatment beam excitation, sequential fluorescence measurements were taken from both the sBCC and clinically normal perilesional margin. SVD analysis performed on each measured spectrum during the course of a treatment reports the relative amplitudes of the fluorophores represented in the fit. A representative fluorescence spectrum obtained from an ALA-sensitized sBCC lesion treated at 50 mW cm?2 and analyzed with SVD is shown in Fig 2A . Here the excellent fit to the corrected fluorescence spectrum is dominated by a weighted sum of contributions from PpIX, photoproduct I, and autofluorescence with only a negligible contribution from the Fourier terms. Thus, there are no significant distortions introduced by either the tissue optical properties or the correction algorithms, and quantitative analysis of the PpIX bleaching and photoproduct accumulation and subsequent bleaching is therefore possible. PpIX and photoproduct I (photoprotoporhyrin) contributions from the same lesion are shown in Fig 2B . As PpIX monotonically bleached away with increased fluence, the contribution to fluorescence from photoproduct I was seen to increase, peaking at approximately 3 J cm?2, after which it underwent photobleaching, although with a bleaching rate that was slower than that of PpIX. PpIX and photoproduct amplitudes for a lesion treated at 150 mW cm?2 are shown in Fig. 2C . Compared to 50 mW cm?2, It is evident that both PpIX and photoprotoporhyrin bleaching was slower at the higher irradiance. The initial PpIX fluorescence varied as much as 8-fold between lesions, but there was no correlation between initial fluorescence and the subsequent photobleaching curves (data not shown). Accordingly the fluorescence data for each lesion was normalized to the initial amplitude in that lesion. For each of the irradiance groups, average bleaching curves ± SEM paired by lesion and perilesion margin are shown in Fig. 3A ; they demonstrate similar trends for all low-irradiance groups but diverge at 150 mW cm?2, where the normal skin bleached more slowly than the lesion. At the high irradiance the normal skin PpIX did not fall below 20% of its initial value, consistent with oxygen depletion limiting singlet oxygen production. However, for each irradiance the initial bleaching efficiencies (represented by the slope of the first two points in the bleaching data) were comparable for lesion and margin (p >0.17), suggesting differential oxygen depletion did not begin immediately. The variation in normalized lesional and perilesional PpIX fluorescence at the different irradiances is summarized in Fig 3B . As seen in this figure, photobleaching typically occurred more efficiently at lower irradiance, consistent with the work of other investigators ( 5 , 6 , 8 , 21 ). The bleaching kinetics were not single exponential, and the slopes changed most substantially at higher irradiances. Photosensitizer bleaching was rapid, with the lesions in the slowest group (150 mW cm?2) bleaching by 80% in 28.7 ± 7.1 J cm?2, representing less than 20% of the 200 J cm?2 prescribed fluence ( Table 1 ). Single factor ANOVA demonstrated that initial bleaching rates in lesions and margins for treatments conducted at 10 and 20 mW cm?2 were statistically similar (p > 0.7). PDT performed at irradiances of 40, 50, and 60 mW cm?2 also produced bleaching rates that were statistically indistinguishable (p > 0.38). When data from these two statistically similar treatment groups were pooled, statistical significance emerged between photobleaching rates observed at 10 and 20 mW cm?2 vs. those lesions and margins treated at irradiances of 40–60 mW cm?2 (p < 0.01). Similarly, the bleaching rates for the lesions and margins subjected to PDT at 40–60 mW cm?2 were significantly greater than that measured for PDT at 150 mW cm?2 (p < 0.01). Individual PpIX bleaching curves were used to determine the D80 for each carcinoma and margin, using linear interpolation of the data points. For the sBCC, there were significant interlesional variations in bleaching rates, particularly at very low and high irradiances. As shown in Fig 3C and summarized in Table 1 , the mean D80’s were relatively constant between 10 and 20 mW cm?2 and then increased slowly with irradiance for irradiances greater than 20 mW cm?2. The D80 fluences between lesion and margin were similar for all the low-irradiance groups. A two-tailed t-test showed that D80’s between lesion and margin were significantly different only at 150 mW cm?2 (p < 0.03), where three of the seven margins failed to reach 80% bleaching by 200 J cm?2 ( Fig 3 ). Bleaching efficiency in terms of the time required to deliver the D80 fluence was also considered: the time required to bleach PpIX by 80% (T80) was calculated by dividing D80 by the irradiance ( Table 1 ). The lesion T80’s were remarkably consistent for 20, 40, 50, 60 and 150 mW cm?2, ranging from 2.5 ± 0.1 minutes at 50 mW cm?2 to 3.5 ± 0.2 minutes at 20 mW cm?2. The 10 mW cm?2 irradiance exhibited a significantly larger T80 of 9.5 ± 2.6 minutes. The time required for our two-irradiance protocol, in which D90 is delivered at low-irradiance and then the remainder of the fluence is delivered at 150 mW cm?2, also is presented in Table 1 . Under this protocol only modest increases to treatment time are required for initial irradiances ? 20 mW cm?2.  PpIX Photobleaching Using treatment beam excitation, sequential fluorescence measurements were taken from both the sBCC and clinically normal perilesional margin. SVD analysis performed on each measured spectrum during the course of a treatment reports the relative amplitudes of the fluorophores represented in the fit. A representative fluorescence spectrum obtained from an ALA-sensitized sBCC lesion treated at 50 mW cm?2 and analyzed with SVD is shown in Fig 2A . Here the excellent fit to the corrected fluorescence spectrum is dominated by a weighted sum of contributions from PpIX, photoproduct I, and autofluorescence with only a negligible contribution from the Fourier terms. Thus, there are no significant distortions introduced by either the tissue optical properties or the correction algorithms, and quantitative analysis of the PpIX bleaching and photoproduct accumulation and subsequent bleaching is therefore possible. PpIX and photoproduct I (photoprotoporhyrin) contributions from the same lesion are shown in Fig 2B . As PpIX monotonically bleached away with increased fluence, the contribution to fluorescence from photoproduct I was seen to increase, peaking at approximately 3 J cm?2, after which it underwent photobleaching, although with a bleaching rate that was slower than that of PpIX. PpIX and photoproduct amplitudes for a lesion treated at 150 mW cm?2 are shown in Fig. 2C . Compared to 50 mW cm?2, It is evident that both PpIX and photoprotoporhyrin bleaching was slower at the higher irradiance. The initial PpIX fluorescence varied as much as 8-fold between lesions, but there was no correlation between initial fluorescence and the subsequent photobleaching curves (data not shown). Accordingly the fluorescence data for each lesion was normalized to the initial amplitude in that lesion. For each of the irradiance groups, average bleaching curves ± SEM paired by lesion and perilesion margin are shown in Fig. 3A ; they demonstrate similar trends for all low-irradiance groups but diverge at 150 mW cm?2, where the normal skin bleached more slowly than the lesion. At the high irradiance the normal skin PpIX did not fall below 20% of its initial value, consistent with oxygen depletion limiting singlet oxygen production. However, for each irradiance the initial bleaching efficiencies (represented by the slope of the first two points in the bleaching data) were comparable for lesion and margin (p >0.17), suggesting differential oxygen depletion did not begin immediately. The variation in normalized lesional and perilesional PpIX fluorescence at the different irradiances is summarized in Fig 3B . As seen in this figure, photobleaching typically occurred more efficiently at lower irradiance, consistent with the work of other investigators ( 5 , 6 , 8 , 21 ). The bleaching kinetics were not single exponential, and the slopes changed most substantially at higher irradiances. Photosensitizer bleaching was rapid, with the lesions in the slowest group (150 mW cm?2) bleaching by 80% in 28.7 ± 7.1 J cm?2, representing less than 20% of the 200 J cm?2 prescribed fluence ( Table 1 ). Single factor ANOVA demonstrated that initial bleaching rates in lesions and margins for treatments conducted at 10 and 20 mW cm?2 were statistically similar (p > 0.7). PDT performed at irradiances of 40, 50, and 60 mW cm?2 also produced bleaching rates that were statistically indistinguishable (p > 0.38). When data from these two statistically similar treatment groups were pooled, statistical significance emerged between photobleaching rates observed at 10 and 20 mW cm?2 vs. those lesions and margins treated at irradiances of 40–60 mW cm?2 (p < 0.01). Similarly, the bleaching rates for the lesions and margins subjected to PDT at 40–60 mW cm?2 were significantly greater than that measured for PDT at 150 mW cm?2 (p < 0.01). Individual PpIX bleaching curves were used to determine the D80 for each carcinoma and margin, using linear interpolation of the data points. For the sBCC, there were significant interlesional variations in bleaching rates, particularly at very low and high irradiances. As shown in Fig 3C and summarized in Table 1 , the mean D80’s were relatively constant between 10 and 20 mW cm?2 and then increased slowly with irradiance for irradiances greater than 20 mW cm?2. The D80 fluences between lesion and margin were similar for all the low-irradiance groups. A two-tailed t-test showed that D80’s between lesion and margin were significantly different only at 150 mW cm?2 (p < 0.03), where three of the seven margins failed to reach 80% bleaching by 200 J cm?2 ( Fig 3 ). Bleaching efficiency in terms of the time required to deliver the D80 fluence was also considered: the time required to bleach PpIX by 80% (T80) was calculated by dividing D80 by the irradiance ( Table 1 ). The lesion T80’s were remarkably consistent for 20, 40, 50, 60 and 150 mW cm?2, ranging from 2.5 ± 0.1 minutes at 50 mW cm?2 to 3.5 ± 0.2 minutes at 20 mW cm?2. The 10 mW cm?2 irradiance exhibited a significantly larger T80 of 9.5 ± 2.6 minutes. The time required for our two-irradiance protocol, in which D90 is delivered at low-irradiance and then the remainder of the fluence is delivered at 150 mW cm?2, also is presented in Table 1 . Under this protocol only modest increases to treatment time are required for initial irradiances ? 20 mW cm?2.  Clinical Outcomes Twenty four of the 26 lesions receiving low irradiances were available for evaluations ? 6 months after PDT (range 6–20 months); 2 BCC did not have sufficiently long follow up. Clinically, 21/24 evaulable lesions treated with the two irradiance protocol were complete responses (88%). This is not significantly different from the single treatment 96% CCR rate for a larger study of 112 sBCC at 150 mW cm?2 (p=0.148 by Fisher exact test) (Oseroff et al, manuscript in preparation). There were no difference in initial PpIX fluorescence levels or shapes of photobleaching curves between the successes and failures (data not shown).  Clinical Outcomes Twenty four of the 26 lesions receiving low irradiances were available for evaluations ? 6 months after PDT (range 6–20 months); 2 BCC did not have sufficiently long follow up. Clinically, 21/24 evaulable lesions treated with the two irradiance protocol were complete responses (88%). This is not significantly different from the single treatment 96% CCR rate for a larger study of 112 sBCC at 150 mW cm?2 (p=0.148 by Fisher exact test) (Oseroff et al, manuscript in preparation). There were no difference in initial PpIX fluorescence levels or shapes of photobleaching curves between the successes and failures (data not shown).  Reflectance Spectra Reflectance spectra between 475 and 800 nm were collected separately for both lesion and the perilesion margin and were used to correct fluorescence spectra. Fig. 4 shows representative reflectance measured from one lesion and adjacent margin treated at 50 mW cm?2 before PDT and after 1.0 J cm?2 was delivered. Data between 625 and 640 is excluded because of bleed-through of the treatment laser into the reflectance channel. The spectra are remarkably similar pre- and post 1.0 J cm-2 PDT, with the characteristic features of oxyhemoglobin being prominent. Rigorous analysis of the reflectance spectra acquired over the full range of irradiances will be reported elsewhere.  Reflectance Spectra Reflectance spectra between 475 and 800 nm were collected separately for both lesion and the perilesion margin and were used to correct fluorescence spectra. Fig. 4 shows representative reflectance measured from one lesion and adjacent margin treated at 50 mW cm?2 before PDT and after 1.0 J cm?2 was delivered. Data between 625 and 640 is excluded because of bleed-through of the treatment laser into the reflectance channel. The spectra are remarkably similar pre- and post 1.0 J cm-2 PDT, with the characteristic features of oxyhemoglobin being prominent. Rigorous analysis of the reflectance spectra acquired over the full range of irradiances will be reported elsewhere.  Pain Pain was scored on a VAS scale for 26 lesions treated at 10, 20, 40, 50, and 60 mW cm?2 initial irradiance. Lesions treated at an initial irradiance of 150 mW cm?2 were excluded from pain measurements because of a previously established VAS score of above 5. Pain experienced during the therapy ± SEM is shown in Fig 5A . Pain increased with escalating irradiance, as anticipated by pilot evidence and supported by the literature ( 12 , 17 , 22 ). In this study, a pain threshold was established at an irradiance where two or more patients reported a VAS score of 4 or above, requiring pain intervention. This threshold was found to be 60 mW cm?2, at which two out of five patients reported VAS scores of 6 and 7. As previously mentioned, after the initial PpIX fluorescence contribution in the lesion had bleached by 90%, treatment irradiance was increased to 150 mW cm?2 and the treatment continued until 200 J cm?2 was delivered. Fig 5B shows the resulting change in average VAS score ± SEM resulting from the increased irradiance. Only modest increases of less than 0.5 were noted in the 20, 40, and 50 mW cm?2 groups. The decrease in VAS score at 150 mW cm?2 for the 60 mW cm?2 group was primarily the result of the single 1% xylocaine injection given to the patients who reported VAS scores of 6 and 7 during the low-irradiance interval. Patients treated at 10 mW cm?2 reported an average increase of approximately 1. There was no correlation between initial PpIX levels as determined by florescence and pain levels (data not shown).  Pain Pain was scored on a VAS scale for 26 lesions treated at 10, 20, 40, 50, and 60 mW cm?2 initial irradiance. Lesions treated at an initial irradiance of 150 mW cm?2 were excluded from pain measurements because of a previously established VAS score of above 5. Pain experienced during the therapy ± SEM is shown in Fig 5A . Pain increased with escalating irradiance, as anticipated by pilot evidence and supported by the literature ( 12 , 17 , 22 ). In this study, a pain threshold was established at an irradiance where two or more patients reported a VAS score of 4 or above, requiring pain intervention. This threshold was found to be 60 mW cm?2, at which two out of five patients reported VAS scores of 6 and 7. As previously mentioned, after the initial PpIX fluorescence contribution in the lesion had bleached by 90%, treatment irradiance was increased to 150 mW cm?2 and the treatment continued until 200 J cm?2 was delivered. Fig 5B shows the resulting change in average VAS score ± SEM resulting from the increased irradiance. Only modest increases of less than 0.5 were noted in the 20, 40, and 50 mW cm?2 groups. The decrease in VAS score at 150 mW cm?2 for the 60 mW cm?2 group was primarily the result of the single 1% xylocaine injection given to the patients who reported VAS scores of 6 and 7 during the low-irradiance interval. Patients treated at 10 mW cm?2 reported an average increase of approximately 1. There was no correlation between initial PpIX levels as determined by florescence and pain levels (data not shown).  Discussion During topical ALA-PDT, illumination consumes ground state molecular oxygen supplied from the upper and mid-dermal capillaries and from diffusion from the atmosphere ( 23 ). High light dose rates together with significant photosensitizer levels can lead to oxygen depletion with loss of photodynamic efficiency. High irradiances also can increase pain during treatment. This work represents the first systematic clinical investigation of the effect of irradiance on PpIX photobleaching rate, PDT efficiency, and pain. Beyond 20 mW cm?2, the initial slopes of the photobleaching curves increase with irradiance, indicating some oxygen limitations even at low PDT dose rates. The D80 also increases with irradiance, as shown in Fig 3 and Table 1 , illustrating less efficient bleaching at high-irradiance therapy and providing a rational way to determine a bleaching-equivalent fluence for a given treatment protocol. PpIX photobleaching plots for each irradiance ( Fig 3 ) were generated by averaging the normalized bleaching curves for each lesion. The uncertainties shown in the irradiance averages are dominated by biological and patient-to-patient variances as shown in Fig 3C . This was evident in the lesions treated at 10 mW cm?2, where one lesion had a D80 of 11.5 J cm?2 compared with an average of 4.3 J cm?2 for the other 4 lesions. However, we found no correlation between D80 values or initial PpIX fluorescence and clinical responses. Our PpIX fluorescence measurements were performed using the treatment beam as the fluorescence excitation source. This was done in part to maximize the overlap between the treatment volume and the volume from which fluorescence data were acquired. Nevertheless, there are undoubtedly heterogeneities in PpIX accumulation with depth into the skin and the tumor, and the fluorescence measurements preferentially sample the upper portion of the epidermis and the carcinoma. For these reasons, the measured fluorescence may not reflect the full distribution of PpIX and the bleaching may not report the heterogeneity in photodynamic dose deposition. Therefore, the total light dose required to total light dose required to fully utilize the PpIX within the lesion is unknown. Prior work at high irradiances in multiple lesions in a small number of patients suggested a sigmoidal dose-response, with the upper knee of the curve around 100–150 J cm?2 ( 24 ). A single 633 nm light dose of 75 J cm?2 at 50 mW cm?2 produced a complete clinical response rate of 89% at 12 months ( 25 ), and 635 nm light at a dose of 12.6 J cm?2 at 7 mW cm?2 gave a one year complete clinical response rate of 84% ( 26 ). In order to deliver our “standard” light dose of 200 J cm?2 to all lesions, we increased our light delivery rate to 150 mW cm?2 after 90% photobleaching. There was no additional pain, and this approach would represent a modest time penalty of less than 14% for initial irradiances of 20–50 mW cm?2. Alternatively, since 200 J cm?2 delivered at 150 mW cm?2 is approximately 7 times the D80 fluence, it is possible that a bleaching-equivalent, and similarly efficacious, fluence would be deposited by 7 times the D80 fluence at a lower irradiance. At the highest pain-free irradiance in this study, 50 mW cm?2, this corresponds to a fluence of 51.3 J cm?2 and a treatment time of 17.1 minutes. However, a fluence-response study may be necessary to determine the appropriate low irradiance light dose. The persistence of perilesional PpIX fluorescence at high irradiances with 3 of 7 sites having >20% of initial fluorescence at 200 J cm?2 ( Fig. 3 ) is consistent with lack of oxygenation, presumably due to lack of perfusion from reversible vasospasm. The mechanisms leading to discrepancies in D80 between lesion and margin at 150 mW cm?2 are not fully understood, although there are several physiological differences between these regions. Superficial BCC blood vessels, for example, are disorganized, occupy more tissue volume, are larger in diameter, and do not have the ability to contract due to the absence of smooth muscle ( 27 – 29 ). While oxygenation changes have been studied in nodular BCC during PDT with systemically administered Photofrin ( 9 ), we are not aware of any experiments to date that have investigated blood perfusion during ALA-PDT in human subjects, although investigators have reported on perfusion in the lesion and perilesion margin before and following ALA-PDT of sBCC, showing dissimilar trends between these regions. It has been shown that prior to ALA-PDT, perfusion in the sBCC lesion was several times that found in the margin, and blood velocity was also elevated ( 11 , 27 , 30 , 31 ). Additionally, investigators have found an increase in the ratio of perfusion in the lesion compared to the margin immediately following PDT ( 30 , 31 ). Tumor margins and small islands of carcinoma cells may be fed predominately by normal vessels and could be protected from photodynamic injury. Broadband reflectance measurements provide estimates of blood oxygen saturation and can be used to correct fluorescence spectra. To make reflectance measurements, treatment irradiation was periodically paused and broadband light transmitted through the treatment fiber. The interruptions were brief and infrequent to prevent any treatment fractionation effects; acquisition times were about 1 second and the duty cycle less than 10%. The differences in initial efficiency of photobleaching shown in Fig. 3 suggest that tissue deoxygenation was rapid. The representative reflectance data presented in Fig. 4 , however, do not reflect any apparent changes in hemoglobin oxygen saturation. The reasons for this are uncertain, but it is possible that these superficial lesions are supplied with oxygen primarily via diffusion from the air ( 23 ) and, as a result, hemoglobin oxygen saturation may not be perturbed even if photochemically relevant oxygen depletion occurs. The measured hemoglobin oxygen saturation during PDT is influenced by photochemical oxygen consumption, changes in blood flow, and possible changes in metabolic oxygen consumption. The influences of these factors are being investigated using a newly developed comprehensive PDT model ( 32 ). This analysis will inform the design of future studies. Acute pain associated with ALA-PDT is the therapy’s primary side-effect. It can last for several hours ( 22 ), and has been noted to depend on light source, irradiance ( 18 ), lesion location ( 33 ), and number and size of treatment locations ( 33 , 34 ). Pain is a significant obstacle to the general clinical acceptability of ALA-PDT, particularly for patients who are among the best candidates for and benefit most from PDT, such as those with nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome, who often require multiple simultaneous treatments and large treatment fields. Therefore an important goal is to find optimal treatment protocols which equal or exceed the efficacy found using current protocols while limiting patient discomfort, reducing the need for anesthesia, and minimizing time in the clinic. Some investigators have noticed less pain associated with ALA-PDT delivered at lower fluence rates ( 17 , 18 ) or excitation wavelengths that do not coincide with PpIX absorption peaks ( 35 ), which is consistent with our evidence that pain is reduced with lower absorbed irradiance. The majority of ALA-PDT studies cite reactive pain-mitigating techniques including analgesics, water spray, air streams, and conscious sedation ( 13 , 17 , 22 , 34 ), yet limited work has been done on the relationship between PDT-induced pain and various treatment parameters. In this study, which examined treatment fields 25 mm in diameter during escalating irradiance, irradiances below 60 mW cm?2 alleviated the majority of discomfort associated with ALA-PDT and allowed delivery without requiring pain intervention. Based on the pain assessments in this study, irradiances using a ca 633 nm laser below 60 mW cm?2 are good candidates for a low-irradiance treatment protocol. In addition to laser or LED sources corresponding to the PpIX absorption peak, however, several investigators perform PDT using broadband lamps, and off-peak-absorption laser sources ( 36 ). As demonstrated by Ericson et al . ( 21 ), for a given irradiance these sources are less efficient at exciting PpIX and they therefore have a lower effective irradiance than a laser source operating near peak PpIX absorption, as was used in this study. This suggests that alternative irradiation sources operating below 60 mW cm?2 would also be below the pain threshold for sBCC lesions of comparable size. Since pain is expected to increase with irradiated areas, even lower irradiances may be necessary in some clinical situations. Note that PDT dose rate can be decreased by lowering either irradiance or PpIX concentration (e.g with short application times). Both will decrease pain and increase efficiency. However, because of loss of PpIX through photobleaching, the use of low PpIX risks destroying the sensitizer before oxidative damage sufficient to cure the lesion is caused. Note that while this study used ALA in a cream vehicle, we expect similar results from Levulan® Kerasticks® applied with at least two passes and then occluded. To the extent that use of the methyl ester of ALA produces comparable levels of PpIX, our results should be at least qualitatively transferable. Based on photodynamic efficiency, determined by bleaching, and the establishment of a pain threshold at 60 mW cm?2 for single, 2.5 cm diameter treatment fields, we conclude that for multiple and larger lesions ~40 mW cm?2 at ca 633 nm may represent an optimal irradiance for ALA-PDT of sBCC, motivating a low-irradiance trial investigating efficacy at this irradiance. Assessment of treatment efficacy, durability and cosmetic outcome is continuing for all irradiance groups. We expect comparable photobleaching rates for sBCC of other sizes, though as noted, large or multiple treatment areas may increase pain and benefit from a reduction in irradiance. Currently, we are measuring irradiance-dependent photobleaching and pain in nodular BCC and in squamous cell carcinoma in situ. While we have not found a significant change in efficacy, ALA-PDT responses depend on both direct cell kill and host inflammatory and immune responses; it is not evident how these vary with irradiance in patients. In addition to the low-irradiance clinical trial, we are working on models of PDT dose deposition in skin and also anticipate studies assessing blood perfusion in sBCC during ALA-PDT.  Discussion During topical ALA-PDT, illumination consumes ground state molecular oxygen supplied from the upper and mid-dermal capillaries and from diffusion from the atmosphere ( 23 ). High light dose rates together with significant photosensitizer levels can lead to oxygen depletion with loss of photodynamic efficiency. High irradiances also can increase pain during treatment. This work represents the first systematic clinical investigation of the effect of irradiance on PpIX photobleaching rate, PDT efficiency, and pain. Beyond 20 mW cm?2, the initial slopes of the photobleaching curves increase with irradiance, indicating some oxygen limitations even at low PDT dose rates. The D80 also increases with irradiance, as shown in Fig 3 and Table 1 , illustrating less efficient bleaching at high-irradiance therapy and providing a rational way to determine a bleaching-equivalent fluence for a given treatment protocol. PpIX photobleaching plots for each irradiance ( Fig 3 ) were generated by averaging the normalized bleaching curves for each lesion. The uncertainties shown in the irradiance averages are dominated by biological and patient-to-patient variances as shown in Fig 3C . This was evident in the lesions treated at 10 mW cm?2, where one lesion had a D80 of 11.5 J cm?2 compared with an average of 4.3 J cm?2 for the other 4 lesions. However, we found no correlation between D80 values or initial PpIX fluorescence and clinical responses. Our PpIX fluorescence measurements were performed using the treatment beam as the fluorescence excitation source. This was done in part to maximize the overlap between the treatment volume and the volume from which fluorescence data were acquired. Nevertheless, there are undoubtedly heterogeneities in PpIX accumulation with depth into the skin and the tumor, and the fluorescence measurements preferentially sample the upper portion of the epidermis and the carcinoma. For these reasons, the measured fluorescence may not reflect the full distribution of PpIX and the bleaching may not report the heterogeneity in photodynamic dose deposition. Therefore, the total light dose required to total light dose required to fully utilize the PpIX within the lesion is unknown. Prior work at high irradiances in multiple lesions in a small number of patients suggested a sigmoidal dose-response, with the upper knee of the curve around 100–150 J cm?2 ( 24 ). A single 633 nm light dose of 75 J cm?2 at 50 mW cm?2 produced a complete clinical response rate of 89% at 12 months ( 25 ), and 635 nm light at a dose of 12.6 J cm?2 at 7 mW cm?2 gave a one year complete clinical response rate of 84% ( 26 ). In order to deliver our “standard” light dose of 200 J cm?2 to all lesions, we increased our light delivery rate to 150 mW cm?2 after 90% photobleaching. There was no additional pain, and this approach would represent a modest time penalty of less than 14% for initial irradiances of 20–50 mW cm?2. Alternatively, since 200 J cm?2 delivered at 150 mW cm?2 is approximately 7 times the D80 fluence, it is possible that a bleaching-equivalent, and similarly efficacious, fluence would be deposited by 7 times the D80 fluence at a lower irradiance. At the highest pain-free irradiance in this study, 50 mW cm?2, this corresponds to a fluence of 51.3 J cm?2 and a treatment time of 17.1 minutes. However, a fluence-response study may be necessary to determine the appropriate low irradiance light dose. The persistence of perilesional PpIX fluorescence at high irradiances with 3 of 7 sites having >20% of initial fluorescence at 200 J cm?2 ( Fig. 3 ) is consistent with lack of oxygenation, presumably due to lack of perfusion from reversible vasospasm. The mechanisms leading to discrepancies in D80 between lesion and margin at 150 mW cm?2 are not fully understood, although there are several physiological differences between these regions. Superficial BCC blood vessels, for example, are disorganized, occupy more tissue volume, are larger in diameter, and do not have the ability to contract due to the absence of smooth muscle ( 27 – 29 ). While oxygenation changes have been studied in nodular BCC during PDT with systemically administered Photofrin ( 9 ), we are not aware of any experiments to date that have investigated blood perfusion during ALA-PDT in human subjects, although investigators have reported on perfusion in the lesion and perilesion margin before and following ALA-PDT of sBCC, showing dissimilar trends between these regions. It has been shown that prior to ALA-PDT, perfusion in the sBCC lesion was several times that found in the margin, and blood velocity was also elevated ( 11 , 27 , 30 , 31 ). Additionally, investigators have found an increase in the ratio of perfusion in the lesion compared to the margin immediately following PDT ( 30 , 31 ). Tumor margins and small islands of carcinoma cells may be fed predominately by normal vessels and could be protected from photodynamic injury. Broadband reflectance measurements provide estimates of blood oxygen saturation and can be used to correct fluorescence spectra. To make reflectance measurements, treatment irradiation was periodically paused and broadband light transmitted through the treatment fiber. The interruptions were brief and infrequent to prevent any treatment fractionation effects; acquisition times were about 1 second and the duty cycle less than 10%. The differences in initial efficiency of photobleaching shown in Fig. 3 suggest that tissue deoxygenation was rapid. The representative reflectance data presented in Fig. 4 , however, do not reflect any apparent changes in hemoglobin oxygen saturation. The reasons for this are uncertain, but it is possible that these superficial lesions are supplied with oxygen primarily via diffusion from the air ( 23 ) and, as a result, hemoglobin oxygen saturation may not be perturbed even if photochemically relevant oxygen depletion occurs. The measured hemoglobin oxygen saturation during PDT is influenced by photochemical oxygen consumption, changes in blood flow, and possible changes in metabolic oxygen consumption. The influences of these factors are being investigated using a newly developed comprehensive PDT model ( 32 ). This analysis will inform the design of future studies. Acute pain associated with ALA-PDT is the therapy’s primary side-effect. It can last for several hours ( 22 ), and has been noted to depend on light source, irradiance ( 18 ), lesion location ( 33 ), and number and size of treatment locations ( 33 , 34 ). Pain is a significant obstacle to the general clinical acceptability of ALA-PDT, particularly for patients who are among the best candidates for and benefit most from PDT, such as those with nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome, who often require multiple simultaneous treatments and large treatment fields. Therefore an important goal is to find optimal treatment protocols which equal or exceed the efficacy found using current protocols while limiting patient discomfort, reducing the need for anesthesia, and minimizing time in the clinic. Some investigators have noticed less pain associated with ALA-PDT delivered at lower fluence rates ( 17 , 18 ) or excitation wavelengths that do not coincide with PpIX absorption peaks ( 35 ), which is consistent with our evidence that pain is reduced with lower absorbed irradiance. The majority of ALA-PDT studies cite reactive pain-mitigating techniques including analgesics, water spray, air streams, and conscious sedation ( 13 , 17 , 22 , 34 ), yet limited work has been done on the relationship between PDT-induced pain and various treatment parameters. In this study, which examined treatment fields 25 mm in diameter during escalating irradiance, irradiances below 60 mW cm?2 alleviated the majority of discomfort associated with ALA-PDT and allowed delivery without requiring pain intervention. Based on the pain assessments in this study, irradiances using a ca 633 nm laser below 60 mW cm?2 are good candidates for a low-irradiance treatment protocol. In addition to laser or LED sources corresponding to the PpIX absorption peak, however, several investigators perform PDT using broadband lamps, and off-peak-absorption laser sources ( 36 ). As demonstrated by Ericson et al . ( 21 ), for a given irradiance these sources are less efficient at exciting PpIX and they therefore have a lower effective irradiance than a laser source operating near peak PpIX absorption, as was used in this study. This suggests that alternative irradiation sources operating below 60 mW cm?2 would also be below the pain threshold for sBCC lesions of comparable size. Since pain is expected to increase with irradiated areas, even lower irradiances may be necessary in some clinical situations. Note that PDT dose rate can be decreased by lowering either irradiance or PpIX concentration (e.g with short application times). Both will decrease pain and increase efficiency. However, because of loss of PpIX through photobleaching, the use of low PpIX risks destroying the sensitizer before oxidative damage sufficient to cure the lesion is caused. Note that while this study used ALA in a cream vehicle, we expect similar results from Levulan® Kerasticks® applied with at least two passes and then occluded. To the extent that use of the methyl ester of ALA produces comparable levels of PpIX, our results should be at least qualitatively transferable. Based on photodynamic efficiency, determined by bleaching, and the establishment of a pain threshold at 60 mW cm?2 for single, 2.5 cm diameter treatment fields, we conclude that for multiple and larger lesions ~40 mW cm?2 at ca 633 nm may represent an optimal irradiance for ALA-PDT of sBCC, motivating a low-irradiance trial investigating efficacy at this irradiance. Assessment of treatment efficacy, durability and cosmetic outcome is continuing for all irradiance groups. We expect comparable photobleaching rates for sBCC of other sizes, though as noted, large or multiple treatment areas may increase pain and benefit from a reduction in irradiance. Currently, we are measuring irradiance-dependent photobleaching and pain in nodular BCC and in squamous cell carcinoma in situ. While we have not found a significant change in efficacy, ALA-PDT responses depend on both direct cell kill and host inflammatory and immune responses; it is not evident how these vary with irradiance in patients. In addition to the low-irradiance clinical trial, we are working on models of PDT dose deposition in skin and also anticipate studies assessing blood perfusion in sBCC during ALA-PDT.  Figures and Table Fig 1 Treatment and measurement cycles during system operation include (A) PDT delivery at 632.8 nm with fluorescence monitoring in the lesion, (B) PDT delivery with fluorescence monitoring in the perilesion margin, (C) broadband interrogation with reflectance monitoring in the lesion, and (D) broadband interrogation with reflectance monitoring in the margin. (E) Normalized fluorescence emission curves for PpIX and photoproduct I illustrating the relative location of the 632.8 nm treatment beam to PpIX and photoproduct I fluorescence and the detection window in which fluorescence was monitored with this instrument. Fig 2 (A) Representative SVD-fit corrected fluorescence spectrum taken from sBCC lesion being treated with ALA-PDT at 50 mW cm?2 with 632.8 nm light. The linear decomposition shows the fluorescence contribution from PpIX, autofluorescence, photoproduct I, and Fourier terms to the corrected fluorescence signal. Several data points have been removed for clarity. (B) PpIX and photoproduct I contributions to the corrected fluorescence from the lesion measurement field throughout ALA-PDT in the same lesion normalized to the initial PpIX contribution. For this sBCC lesion, initial rapid PpIX bleaching was accompanied by a corresponding increase in photoproduct I fluorescence, which turns over and was also bleached during the course of therapy. Error bars are smaller than the plot symbols. (C) The PpIX and photoproduct contributions to fluorescence from a lesion treated at 150 mW cm?2 for 200 J cm?2. Fig 3 (A) Comparison of the averaged ± SEM, normalized PpIX contribution to the corrected fluorescence as a function of total fluence for lesion and margin fields treated with 10, 20, 40, 50, 60, and 150 mW cm?2 irradiances. PpIX contribution shows fluorescence photobleaching of PpIX during irradiation and suggests comparable bleaching trends between margin and lesion in the lower irradiance groups as well as a clear separation between average bleaching curves at 150 mW cm?2 .(B) Averaged ± SEM, normalized PpIX contribution to the corrected fluorescence as a function of delivered fluence from the lesion and margin fields during ALA-PDT of 33 sBCC lesions at 10, 20, 40, 50, 60, and 150 mW cm?2. (C) D80 values for individual sBCC (?), and their normal skin margins (?) at each irradiance. The horizontal lines are the means. † At 150 mW cm?2, three margins had not reached 80% photobleaching at the maximum light dose of 200 J cm?2 and are not included in the mean. Fig 4 Representative reflectance spectra taken from (A) a sBCC lesion and (B) adjacent margin taken prior to and after 1.0 J cm?2 PDT delivered at 50 mW cm?2. Data between 625 and 640 nm is excluded due to bleed-through of the treatment laser into the reflectance channel. Fig 5 (A) VAS pain scores ± SEM experienced with ALA-PDT of sBCC measured in this study along with results from Wang et al .2, Algermissen et al .11, and Holmes et al .5, measured at higher irradiances. (B) VAS pain scores ± SEM during low-irradiance delivery and following changeover to 150 mW cm?2 during ALA-PDT of sBCC in our study, showing only moderate increases. No pain intervention was required for patients treated at 10–50 mW cm?2 before or after changeover. † Two individuals in group received 1% xylocaine injections after reporting a VAS > 4. Table 1 The D80 fluence and T80 time required for each irradiance group to bleach PpIX by 80%, and the delivery time required to treat at low-irradiance to D80 and then deliver the remainder of 200 J cm?2 at 150 mW cm?2. Fluence Rate (mW cm?2) Lesion D80 ± SEM (J cm?2) Lesion T80 ± SEM (min) Total (low +high irrad) Treatment Time (min) Margin D80 ± SEM (J cm?2) Margin T80 ± SEM (min) 10 5.7 ± 1.6 9.5 ± 2.6 31.2 8.7 ± 1.6 14.5 ± 2.6 20 4.5 ± 0.3 3.7 ± 0.2 25.4 4.4 ± 0.8 3.7 ± 0.7 40 7.5 ± 0.8 3.1 ± 0.3 24.5 6.3 ± 0.7 2.6 ± 0.3 50 7.4 ± 0.2 2.5 ± 0.1 23.9 11.8 ± 2.5 3.9 ± 0.8 60 12.4 ± 3.0 3.4 ± 0.8 24.3 14.3 ± 3.4 4.0 ± 0.9 150 28.7 ± 7.1 3.2 ± 0.8 22.2 59.5 ± 10 6.6 ± 1.1  Figures and Table Fig 1 Treatment and measurement cycles during system operation include (A) PDT delivery at 632.8 nm with fluorescence monitoring in the lesion, (B) PDT delivery with fluorescence monitoring in the perilesion margin, (C) broadband interrogation with reflectance monitoring in the lesion, and (D) broadband interrogation with reflectance monitoring in the margin. (E) Normalized fluorescence emission curves for PpIX and photoproduct I illustrating the relative location of the 632.8 nm treatment beam to PpIX and photoproduct I fluorescence and the detection window in which fluorescence was monitored with this instrument. Fig 2 (A) Representative SVD-fit corrected fluorescence spectrum taken from sBCC lesion being treated with ALA-PDT at 50 mW cm?2 with 632.8 nm light. The linear decomposition shows the fluorescence contribution from PpIX, autofluorescence, photoproduct I, and Fourier terms to the corrected fluorescence signal. Several data points have been removed for clarity. (B) PpIX and photoproduct I contributions to the corrected fluorescence from the lesion measurement field throughout ALA-PDT in the same lesion normalized to the initial PpIX contribution. For this sBCC lesion, initial rapid PpIX bleaching was accompanied by a corresponding increase in photoproduct I fluorescence, which turns over and was also bleached during the course of therapy. Error bars are smaller than the plot symbols. (C) The PpIX and photoproduct contributions to fluorescence from a lesion treated at 150 mW cm?2 for 200 J cm?2. Fig 3 (A) Comparison of the averaged ± SEM, normalized PpIX contribution to the corrected fluorescence as a function of total fluence for lesion and margin fields treated with 10, 20, 40, 50, 60, and 150 mW cm?2 irradiances. PpIX contribution shows fluorescence photobleaching of PpIX during irradiation and suggests comparable bleaching trends between margin and lesion in the lower irradiance groups as well as a clear separation between average bleaching curves at 150 mW cm?2 .(B) Averaged ± SEM, normalized PpIX contribution to the corrected fluorescence as a function of delivered fluence from the lesion and margin fields during ALA-PDT of 33 sBCC lesions at 10, 20, 40, 50, 60, and 150 mW cm?2. (C) D80 values for individual sBCC (?), and their normal skin margins (?) at each irradiance. The horizontal lines are the means. † At 150 mW cm?2, three margins had not reached 80% photobleaching at the maximum light dose of 200 J cm?2 and are not included in the mean. Fig 4 Representative reflectance spectra taken from (A) a sBCC lesion and (B) adjacent margin taken prior to and after 1.0 J cm?2 PDT delivered at 50 mW cm?2. Data between 625 and 640 nm is excluded due to bleed-through of the treatment laser into the reflectance channel. Fig 5 (A) VAS pain scores ± SEM experienced with ALA-PDT of sBCC measured in this study along with results from Wang et al .2, Algermissen et al .11, and Holmes et al .5, measured at higher irradiances. (B) VAS pain scores ± SEM during low-irradiance delivery and following changeover to 150 mW cm?2 during ALA-PDT of sBCC in our study, showing only moderate increases. No pain intervention was required for patients treated at 10–50 mW cm?2 before or after changeover. † Two individuals in group received 1% xylocaine injections after reporting a VAS > 4. Table 1 The D80 fluence and T80 time required for each irradiance group to bleach PpIX by 80%, and the delivery time required to treat at low-irradiance to D80 and then deliver the remainder of 200 J cm?2 at 150 mW cm?2. Fluence Rate (mW cm?2) Lesion D80 ± SEM (J cm?2) Lesion T80 ± SEM (min) Total (low +high irrad) Treatment Time (min) Margin D80 ± SEM (J cm?2) Margin T80 ± SEM (min) 10 5.7 ± 1.6 9.5 ± 2.6 31.2 8.7 ± 1.6 14.5 ± 2.6 20 4.5 ± 0.3 3.7 ± 0.2 25.4 4.4 ± 0.8 3.7 ± 0.7 40 7.5 ± 0.8 3.1 ± 0.3 24.5 6.3 ± 0.7 2.6 ± 0.3 50 7.4 ± 0.2 2.5 ± 0.1 23.9 11.8 ± 2.5 3.9 ± 0.8 60 12.4 ± 3.0 3.4 ± 0.8 24.3 14.3 ± 3.4 4.0 ± 0.9 150 28.7 ± 7.1 3.2 ± 0.8 22.2 59.5 ± 10 6.6 ± 1.1 