Global DNA hypomethylation in intratubular germ cell neoplasia and seminoma, but not in nonseminomatous male germ cell tumors Alterations in methylation of CpG dinucleotides at the 5 position of deoxycytidine residues (5mC) are a hallmark of cancer cells, including testicular germ cell tumors. Virtually all testicular germ cell tumors are believed to be derived from intratubular germ cell neoplasia unclassified (IGCNU), which is thought to arise from primordial germ cells. Prior studies revealed that seminomas contain reduced levels of global DNA methylation as compared with nonseminomatous germ cell tumors. Smiraglia et al have proposed a model whereby seminomas arise from IGCNU cells derived from primordial germ cells that have undergone 5mC erasure, and nonseminomas arise from IGCNU cells derived from primordial germ cells that have already undergone de novo methylation after the original erasure of methylation and contain normal 5mC levels. Yet the methylation status of IGCNU has not been determined previously. We used immunohistochemical staining against 5mC to evaluate global methylation in IGCNU and associated invasive testicular germ cell tumors. Strikingly, staining for 5mC was undetectable (or markedly reduced) in the majority of IGCNU and seminomas, yet there was robust staining in nonseminomatous germ cell tumors. The lack of staining for 5mC in IGCNU and seminomas was also found in mixed germ cell tumors containing both seminomatous and nonseminomatous components. Lack of 5mC staining was not related to a lack of the maintenance methyltransferase (DNA methyltransferase 1) protein. We conclude that testicular germ cell tumors are derived in most cases from IGCNU cells that have undergone developmentally programmed 5mC erasure and that the degree of subsequent de novo methylation is most closely related to the differentiation state of the neoplastic cells. That is, IGCNU cells and seminoma cells remain unmethylated, whereas all other histological types appear to arise after de novo methylation.  Materials and methods Patients This study was approved by our institutional review board. H&E slides and paraffin material, from a total of 55 testicular and extratesticular germ cell tumors diagnosed between 1995 and 2005, were retrieved from the surgical pathology archives of The Johns Hopkins Hospital, USA (48 patients) and Osaka University Hospital, Japan (7 patients). All original diagnoses were confirmed by two pathologists on the study. Immunohistochemistry Representative paraffin sections were immunostained using a mouse monoclonal antibody for 5mC (Calbiochem, EMD Chemicals Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) and a rabbit polyclonal antibody for DNMT1. The DNMT1 antibody used was an affinity-purified IgG preparation as described. 31 Antigen retrieval consisted of steaming for 40 min in DAKO Target Retrieval Solution (Dako Inc., Carpinteria, CA, USA) for DNMT1 (1:16 000) and 20 min steam in citrate buffer (pH 6.0) followed by treatment in 3.5 N HCl for 15 min at room temperature for 5mC (1:4000). Primary antibody incubations were conducted at room temperature for 45 min. 5mC was detected using the PowerVision +™ immunohistochemistry Detection System from ImmunoVision Technologies Co (Norwell, MA, USA), and DNMT1 was detected using the DakoCytomation EnVision®+ System-HRP (Dako). Histochemical localization was accomplished using 3,3?-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride as the chromogen. After immunohistochemical staining, tissue sections were counterstained with hematoxylin. To verify antibody specificities the following controls were used: for 5mC we compared staining of the colonic carcinoma cell line HCT116 to a derivative of this cell line in which the DNMT1 and DNMT3b genes were subjected to targeted disruption. 32 The clone we used (the original clone 8) was reported to contain approximately 50% of the 5mC levels of the wild-type HCT116 cells as determined by reversed-phase high-pressure liquid chromatography. 32 To determine whether we could detect such a decrease we subjected the cell lines to formalin fixation and paraffin embedding to simulate tissue sections. Visual inspection after staining for 5mC showed clearly reduced levels in the knockout cell line (data not shown). In addition, we performed quantitative image analysis using newly developed software 33 and found that the overall level of the knockout cells was 62% of the parental cells, indicating a good correlation between the two methods (data not show). Further, to determine whether accessibility of the 5mC antibody or secondary reagents was altered in seminoma cells, we treated tissue sections of a negatively staining seminoma with the prokaryotic CpG-specific methylase from Spiroplasma, M. SssI methylase, which methylates unmethylated deoxycytidines within CpG dinucleotides. M. SssI treatment resulted in a marked increase in staining (data not shown), which was fully dependent upon the addition of the methyl donor, S-adenosyl-methionine (data not shown). This shows that our primary and secondary reagents can access methylated DNA within seminoma cells if indeed 5mC is present. The distribution and intensity of nuclear staining were visually assessed for each marker as a percentage of cells staining in each of four (0, 1 +, 2 + and 3 + ) intensity categories. 5mC and DNMT1 scores (?(intensity score × percentage); possible score range is 0–300) were then calculated. A score was calculated for each histological component in tumors of ‘mixed forms’ in addition to associated IGCNU when present. Statistic Analysis Findings were analyzed using the Stata 9.2. (Stata-Corp, College Station, TX, USA) software package. Equality of population medians among groups was tested using Kruskal–Wallis test for nonparametric one-way analysis of variance by ranks. Pairwise correlation coefficients were calculated to test relationship among variables.  Patients This study was approved by our institutional review board. H&E slides and paraffin material, from a total of 55 testicular and extratesticular germ cell tumors diagnosed between 1995 and 2005, were retrieved from the surgical pathology archives of The Johns Hopkins Hospital, USA (48 patients) and Osaka University Hospital, Japan (7 patients). All original diagnoses were confirmed by two pathologists on the study.  Immunohistochemistry Representative paraffin sections were immunostained using a mouse monoclonal antibody for 5mC (Calbiochem, EMD Chemicals Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) and a rabbit polyclonal antibody for DNMT1. The DNMT1 antibody used was an affinity-purified IgG preparation as described. 31 Antigen retrieval consisted of steaming for 40 min in DAKO Target Retrieval Solution (Dako Inc., Carpinteria, CA, USA) for DNMT1 (1:16 000) and 20 min steam in citrate buffer (pH 6.0) followed by treatment in 3.5 N HCl for 15 min at room temperature for 5mC (1:4000). Primary antibody incubations were conducted at room temperature for 45 min. 5mC was detected using the PowerVision +™ immunohistochemistry Detection System from ImmunoVision Technologies Co (Norwell, MA, USA), and DNMT1 was detected using the DakoCytomation EnVision®+ System-HRP (Dako). Histochemical localization was accomplished using 3,3?-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride as the chromogen. After immunohistochemical staining, tissue sections were counterstained with hematoxylin. To verify antibody specificities the following controls were used: for 5mC we compared staining of the colonic carcinoma cell line HCT116 to a derivative of this cell line in which the DNMT1 and DNMT3b genes were subjected to targeted disruption. 32 The clone we used (the original clone 8) was reported to contain approximately 50% of the 5mC levels of the wild-type HCT116 cells as determined by reversed-phase high-pressure liquid chromatography. 32 To determine whether we could detect such a decrease we subjected the cell lines to formalin fixation and paraffin embedding to simulate tissue sections. Visual inspection after staining for 5mC showed clearly reduced levels in the knockout cell line (data not shown). In addition, we performed quantitative image analysis using newly developed software 33 and found that the overall level of the knockout cells was 62% of the parental cells, indicating a good correlation between the two methods (data not show). Further, to determine whether accessibility of the 5mC antibody or secondary reagents was altered in seminoma cells, we treated tissue sections of a negatively staining seminoma with the prokaryotic CpG-specific methylase from Spiroplasma, M. SssI methylase, which methylates unmethylated deoxycytidines within CpG dinucleotides. M. SssI treatment resulted in a marked increase in staining (data not shown), which was fully dependent upon the addition of the methyl donor, S-adenosyl-methionine (data not shown). This shows that our primary and secondary reagents can access methylated DNA within seminoma cells if indeed 5mC is present. The distribution and intensity of nuclear staining were visually assessed for each marker as a percentage of cells staining in each of four (0, 1 +, 2 + and 3 + ) intensity categories. 5mC and DNMT1 scores (?(intensity score × percentage); possible score range is 0–300) were then calculated. A score was calculated for each histological component in tumors of ‘mixed forms’ in addition to associated IGCNU when present.  Statistic Analysis Findings were analyzed using the Stata 9.2. (Stata-Corp, College Station, TX, USA) software package. Equality of population medians among groups was tested using Kruskal–Wallis test for nonparametric one-way analysis of variance by ranks. Pairwise correlation coefficients were calculated to test relationship among variables.  Results Cohort Characteristics The histological types of the 55 germ cell tumors are indicated in Table 1 . The tumors included 42 germ cell tumors of one histological type (pure forms): 25 seminomas, 11 teratomas, 4 yolk sac tumors and 2 embryonal carcinomas. The remaining 13 germ cell tumors were tumors of more than one histological type (mixed forms). The latter included eight mixed-form tumors containing seminoma and one or more nonseminomatous components, and five mixed tumors containing more than one nonseminomatous component (ie, embryonal carcinoma, teratoma, yolk sac tumor and/or choriocarcinoma). Associated IGCNU was identified in 23 tumors. A total of 40 tumors were primary testicular germ cell tumors. Seven were primary extratesticular germ cell tumors including one suprasellar ‘germinoma’ of the pineal gland, one parasacral and five mediastinal tumors. Seven tumors were metastatic from prior testicular primaries. The location of the remaining lesion was not available. Patient median age was 32 years (range: 0.5–64 years). 5mC and DNMT1 expression in IGCNU, seminomas or nonseminomatous germ cell tumors were not associated with patient age (P?0.12). Global Methylation Status (Immunohistochemical 5<sup>m</sup>C Content) The 5mC content results are summarized in Table 1 . 5mC content was strikingly lower in IGCNU (median 5mC score 0; mean, 18.3; s.d., 64.9) and seminoma (median 5mC score 10; mean, 80.3, s.d., 112) compared to nonseminomatous germ cell tumors (median 5mC score 300; mean, 289.3; s.d., 32.5) ( P = 0.0001, Kruskal–Wallis). Of 33 seminomas, 14 had no immunohistochemical evidence of 5mC staining compared to the 41 nonseminomatous germ cell tumors that all had strong positive staining ( Figure 1a and b ). 5mC staining was absent in 20 of 23 IGCNU studied ( Figure 2 ). Of the three IGCNU cases staining positively, only one IGCNU lesion demonstrated strong and diffuse 5mC staining whereas the remaining two lesions had only weak and focal staining. IGCNU 5mC status was strongly correlated with the 5mC status in associated invasive seminomas (pairwise r ¼ 0.73, P = 0.0004) but not with that of the invasive nonseminomatous germ cell tumors (pairwise P = 0.46). In general, diffuse and strong 5mC staining was observed in associated non-neoplastic seminiferous tubules including non-neoplastic spermatogonia. Finally, no significant difference in 5mC levels in IGCNU lesions was seen when grouped according to associated germ cell tumor types (pure seminomas, pure nonseminomatous germ cell tumors and mixed) ( P = 0.71, Kruskal–Wallis). A summary of 5mC results is graphically depicted in Figure 3 . DNMT1 Expression In marked contrast to 5mC levels, all IGCNU and germ cell tumors stained positively for DNMT1 ( Table 2 ). No significant overall difference in DNMT1 expression was detected between IGCNU (median DNMT1 score 200; mean, 204.7; s.d., 54.8), seminomatous (median DNMT1 score 200, mean, 223.5; s.d., 59.0) and nonseminomatous germ cell tumor groups (median DNMT1 score 230; mean, 212; s.d., 91.7; P = 0.12, Kruskal–Wallis). However, DNMT1 scores were significantly higher in the embryonal carcinoma subset of nonseminomatous germ cell tumors (median DNMT1 score 300; mean, 284; s.d., 26) compared to seminoma and IGCNU ( P = 0.037, Kruskal–Wallis). No statistically significant correlation was present between DNMT1 status in IGCNU and associated seminomas ( r = 0.14; P = 0.57, pairwise) nor associated nonseminomatous germ cell tumors ( r = 0.09; P = 0.84, pairwise). Relationship between 5<sup>m</sup>C and DNMT1 Status In the nonseminomatous germ cell tumor group, DNMT1 staining correlated with 5mC status ( r = 0.46; P = 0.035, pairwise). By contrast, no correlation between 5mC and DNMT1 status was present in the seminomas ( r = 0.32; P = 0.07, pairwise) or IGCNU ( r = 0.02; P = 0.9, pairwise). 5<sup>m</sup>C and DNMT1 Status in Mixed Germ Cell Neoplasm Group In the subset of tumors containing mixed seminoma and nonseminomatous germ cell tumor components, strikingly lower 5mC was again seen in IGCNU elements (median 5mC score 0; mean, 17.1; s.d., 37.3) and seminomatous elements (median 5mC score 0; mean, 47.5; s.d., 96.6) compared to nonseminomatous germ cell tumor components (median 5mC score 300; mean, 292; s.d., 14.8, P = 0.0003, Kruskal–Wallis). 5mC staining was absent in the seminomatous component of five of eight mixed germ cell tumors compared to none of the corresponding nonseminomatous germ cell tumor components ( P = 0.0004, Kruskal–Wallis; Figure 4 ). No statistically significant difference in DNMT1 scores was demonstrated between the seminomas and concurrent nonseminomatous germ cell tumor components of mixed tumors ( P = 0.07, Kruskal–Wallis). 5mC status strongly correlated with DNMT1 expression in the nonseminomatous germ cell tumor components (CC, 1.0; P < 0.0001, pairwise) but not in the IGCNU or seminomatous components ( P > 0.6, pairwise) of the mixed germ cell tumors.  Results Cohort Characteristics The histological types of the 55 germ cell tumors are indicated in Table 1 . The tumors included 42 germ cell tumors of one histological type (pure forms): 25 seminomas, 11 teratomas, 4 yolk sac tumors and 2 embryonal carcinomas. The remaining 13 germ cell tumors were tumors of more than one histological type (mixed forms). The latter included eight mixed-form tumors containing seminoma and one or more nonseminomatous components, and five mixed tumors containing more than one nonseminomatous component (ie, embryonal carcinoma, teratoma, yolk sac tumor and/or choriocarcinoma). Associated IGCNU was identified in 23 tumors. A total of 40 tumors were primary testicular germ cell tumors. Seven were primary extratesticular germ cell tumors including one suprasellar ‘germinoma’ of the pineal gland, one parasacral and five mediastinal tumors. Seven tumors were metastatic from prior testicular primaries. The location of the remaining lesion was not available. Patient median age was 32 years (range: 0.5–64 years). 5mC and DNMT1 expression in IGCNU, seminomas or nonseminomatous germ cell tumors were not associated with patient age (P?0.12). Global Methylation Status (Immunohistochemical 5<sup>m</sup>C Content) The 5mC content results are summarized in Table 1 . 5mC content was strikingly lower in IGCNU (median 5mC score 0; mean, 18.3; s.d., 64.9) and seminoma (median 5mC score 10; mean, 80.3, s.d., 112) compared to nonseminomatous germ cell tumors (median 5mC score 300; mean, 289.3; s.d., 32.5) ( P = 0.0001, Kruskal–Wallis). Of 33 seminomas, 14 had no immunohistochemical evidence of 5mC staining compared to the 41 nonseminomatous germ cell tumors that all had strong positive staining ( Figure 1a and b ). 5mC staining was absent in 20 of 23 IGCNU studied ( Figure 2 ). Of the three IGCNU cases staining positively, only one IGCNU lesion demonstrated strong and diffuse 5mC staining whereas the remaining two lesions had only weak and focal staining. IGCNU 5mC status was strongly correlated with the 5mC status in associated invasive seminomas (pairwise r ¼ 0.73, P = 0.0004) but not with that of the invasive nonseminomatous germ cell tumors (pairwise P = 0.46). In general, diffuse and strong 5mC staining was observed in associated non-neoplastic seminiferous tubules including non-neoplastic spermatogonia. Finally, no significant difference in 5mC levels in IGCNU lesions was seen when grouped according to associated germ cell tumor types (pure seminomas, pure nonseminomatous germ cell tumors and mixed) ( P = 0.71, Kruskal–Wallis). A summary of 5mC results is graphically depicted in Figure 3 . DNMT1 Expression In marked contrast to 5mC levels, all IGCNU and germ cell tumors stained positively for DNMT1 ( Table 2 ). No significant overall difference in DNMT1 expression was detected between IGCNU (median DNMT1 score 200; mean, 204.7; s.d., 54.8), seminomatous (median DNMT1 score 200, mean, 223.5; s.d., 59.0) and nonseminomatous germ cell tumor groups (median DNMT1 score 230; mean, 212; s.d., 91.7; P = 0.12, Kruskal–Wallis). However, DNMT1 scores were significantly higher in the embryonal carcinoma subset of nonseminomatous germ cell tumors (median DNMT1 score 300; mean, 284; s.d., 26) compared to seminoma and IGCNU ( P = 0.037, Kruskal–Wallis). No statistically significant correlation was present between DNMT1 status in IGCNU and associated seminomas ( r = 0.14; P = 0.57, pairwise) nor associated nonseminomatous germ cell tumors ( r = 0.09; P = 0.84, pairwise). Relationship between 5<sup>m</sup>C and DNMT1 Status In the nonseminomatous germ cell tumor group, DNMT1 staining correlated with 5mC status ( r = 0.46; P = 0.035, pairwise). By contrast, no correlation between 5mC and DNMT1 status was present in the seminomas ( r = 0.32; P = 0.07, pairwise) or IGCNU ( r = 0.02; P = 0.9, pairwise). 5<sup>m</sup>C and DNMT1 Status in Mixed Germ Cell Neoplasm Group In the subset of tumors containing mixed seminoma and nonseminomatous germ cell tumor components, strikingly lower 5mC was again seen in IGCNU elements (median 5mC score 0; mean, 17.1; s.d., 37.3) and seminomatous elements (median 5mC score 0; mean, 47.5; s.d., 96.6) compared to nonseminomatous germ cell tumor components (median 5mC score 300; mean, 292; s.d., 14.8, P = 0.0003, Kruskal–Wallis). 5mC staining was absent in the seminomatous component of five of eight mixed germ cell tumors compared to none of the corresponding nonseminomatous germ cell tumor components ( P = 0.0004, Kruskal–Wallis; Figure 4 ). No statistically significant difference in DNMT1 scores was demonstrated between the seminomas and concurrent nonseminomatous germ cell tumor components of mixed tumors ( P = 0.07, Kruskal–Wallis). 5mC status strongly correlated with DNMT1 expression in the nonseminomatous germ cell tumor components (CC, 1.0; P < 0.0001, pairwise) but not in the IGCNU or seminomatous components ( P > 0.6, pairwise) of the mixed germ cell tumors.  Cohort Characteristics The histological types of the 55 germ cell tumors are indicated in Table 1 . The tumors included 42 germ cell tumors of one histological type (pure forms): 25 seminomas, 11 teratomas, 4 yolk sac tumors and 2 embryonal carcinomas. The remaining 13 germ cell tumors were tumors of more than one histological type (mixed forms). The latter included eight mixed-form tumors containing seminoma and one or more nonseminomatous components, and five mixed tumors containing more than one nonseminomatous component (ie, embryonal carcinoma, teratoma, yolk sac tumor and/or choriocarcinoma). Associated IGCNU was identified in 23 tumors. A total of 40 tumors were primary testicular germ cell tumors. Seven were primary extratesticular germ cell tumors including one suprasellar ‘germinoma’ of the pineal gland, one parasacral and five mediastinal tumors. Seven tumors were metastatic from prior testicular primaries. The location of the remaining lesion was not available. Patient median age was 32 years (range: 0.5–64 years). 5mC and DNMT1 expression in IGCNU, seminomas or nonseminomatous germ cell tumors were not associated with patient age (P?0.12).  Cohort Characteristics The histological types of the 55 germ cell tumors are indicated in Table 1 . The tumors included 42 germ cell tumors of one histological type (pure forms): 25 seminomas, 11 teratomas, 4 yolk sac tumors and 2 embryonal carcinomas. The remaining 13 germ cell tumors were tumors of more than one histological type (mixed forms). The latter included eight mixed-form tumors containing seminoma and one or more nonseminomatous components, and five mixed tumors containing more than one nonseminomatous component (ie, embryonal carcinoma, teratoma, yolk sac tumor and/or choriocarcinoma). Associated IGCNU was identified in 23 tumors. A total of 40 tumors were primary testicular germ cell tumors. Seven were primary extratesticular germ cell tumors including one suprasellar ‘germinoma’ of the pineal gland, one parasacral and five mediastinal tumors. Seven tumors were metastatic from prior testicular primaries. The location of the remaining lesion was not available. Patient median age was 32 years (range: 0.5–64 years). 5mC and DNMT1 expression in IGCNU, seminomas or nonseminomatous germ cell tumors were not associated with patient age (P?0.12).  Global Methylation Status (Immunohistochemical 5<sup>m</sup>C Content) The 5mC content results are summarized in Table 1 . 5mC content was strikingly lower in IGCNU (median 5mC score 0; mean, 18.3; s.d., 64.9) and seminoma (median 5mC score 10; mean, 80.3, s.d., 112) compared to nonseminomatous germ cell tumors (median 5mC score 300; mean, 289.3; s.d., 32.5) ( P = 0.0001, Kruskal–Wallis). Of 33 seminomas, 14 had no immunohistochemical evidence of 5mC staining compared to the 41 nonseminomatous germ cell tumors that all had strong positive staining ( Figure 1a and b ). 5mC staining was absent in 20 of 23 IGCNU studied ( Figure 2 ). Of the three IGCNU cases staining positively, only one IGCNU lesion demonstrated strong and diffuse 5mC staining whereas the remaining two lesions had only weak and focal staining. IGCNU 5mC status was strongly correlated with the 5mC status in associated invasive seminomas (pairwise r ¼ 0.73, P = 0.0004) but not with that of the invasive nonseminomatous germ cell tumors (pairwise P = 0.46). In general, diffuse and strong 5mC staining was observed in associated non-neoplastic seminiferous tubules including non-neoplastic spermatogonia. Finally, no significant difference in 5mC levels in IGCNU lesions was seen when grouped according to associated germ cell tumor types (pure seminomas, pure nonseminomatous germ cell tumors and mixed) ( P = 0.71, Kruskal–Wallis). A summary of 5mC results is graphically depicted in Figure 3 .  Global Methylation Status (Immunohistochemical 5<sup>m</sup>C Content) The 5mC content results are summarized in Table 1 . 5mC content was strikingly lower in IGCNU (median 5mC score 0; mean, 18.3; s.d., 64.9) and seminoma (median 5mC score 10; mean, 80.3, s.d., 112) compared to nonseminomatous germ cell tumors (median 5mC score 300; mean, 289.3; s.d., 32.5) ( P = 0.0001, Kruskal–Wallis). Of 33 seminomas, 14 had no immunohistochemical evidence of 5mC staining compared to the 41 nonseminomatous germ cell tumors that all had strong positive staining ( Figure 1a and b ). 5mC staining was absent in 20 of 23 IGCNU studied ( Figure 2 ). Of the three IGCNU cases staining positively, only one IGCNU lesion demonstrated strong and diffuse 5mC staining whereas the remaining two lesions had only weak and focal staining. IGCNU 5mC status was strongly correlated with the 5mC status in associated invasive seminomas (pairwise r ¼ 0.73, P = 0.0004) but not with that of the invasive nonseminomatous germ cell tumors (pairwise P = 0.46). In general, diffuse and strong 5mC staining was observed in associated non-neoplastic seminiferous tubules including non-neoplastic spermatogonia. Finally, no significant difference in 5mC levels in IGCNU lesions was seen when grouped according to associated germ cell tumor types (pure seminomas, pure nonseminomatous germ cell tumors and mixed) ( P = 0.71, Kruskal–Wallis). A summary of 5mC results is graphically depicted in Figure 3 .  DNMT1 Expression In marked contrast to 5mC levels, all IGCNU and germ cell tumors stained positively for DNMT1 ( Table 2 ). No significant overall difference in DNMT1 expression was detected between IGCNU (median DNMT1 score 200; mean, 204.7; s.d., 54.8), seminomatous (median DNMT1 score 200, mean, 223.5; s.d., 59.0) and nonseminomatous germ cell tumor groups (median DNMT1 score 230; mean, 212; s.d., 91.7; P = 0.12, Kruskal–Wallis). However, DNMT1 scores were significantly higher in the embryonal carcinoma subset of nonseminomatous germ cell tumors (median DNMT1 score 300; mean, 284; s.d., 26) compared to seminoma and IGCNU ( P = 0.037, Kruskal–Wallis). No statistically significant correlation was present between DNMT1 status in IGCNU and associated seminomas ( r = 0.14; P = 0.57, pairwise) nor associated nonseminomatous germ cell tumors ( r = 0.09; P = 0.84, pairwise).  DNMT1 Expression In marked contrast to 5mC levels, all IGCNU and germ cell tumors stained positively for DNMT1 ( Table 2 ). No significant overall difference in DNMT1 expression was detected between IGCNU (median DNMT1 score 200; mean, 204.7; s.d., 54.8), seminomatous (median DNMT1 score 200, mean, 223.5; s.d., 59.0) and nonseminomatous germ cell tumor groups (median DNMT1 score 230; mean, 212; s.d., 91.7; P = 0.12, Kruskal–Wallis). However, DNMT1 scores were significantly higher in the embryonal carcinoma subset of nonseminomatous germ cell tumors (median DNMT1 score 300; mean, 284; s.d., 26) compared to seminoma and IGCNU ( P = 0.037, Kruskal–Wallis). No statistically significant correlation was present between DNMT1 status in IGCNU and associated seminomas ( r = 0.14; P = 0.57, pairwise) nor associated nonseminomatous germ cell tumors ( r = 0.09; P = 0.84, pairwise).  Relationship between 5<sup>m</sup>C and DNMT1 Status In the nonseminomatous germ cell tumor group, DNMT1 staining correlated with 5mC status ( r = 0.46; P = 0.035, pairwise). By contrast, no correlation between 5mC and DNMT1 status was present in the seminomas ( r = 0.32; P = 0.07, pairwise) or IGCNU ( r = 0.02; P = 0.9, pairwise).  Relationship between 5<sup>m</sup>C and DNMT1 Status In the nonseminomatous germ cell tumor group, DNMT1 staining correlated with 5mC status ( r = 0.46; P = 0.035, pairwise). By contrast, no correlation between 5mC and DNMT1 status was present in the seminomas ( r = 0.32; P = 0.07, pairwise) or IGCNU ( r = 0.02; P = 0.9, pairwise).  5<sup>m</sup>C and DNMT1 Status in Mixed Germ Cell Neoplasm Group In the subset of tumors containing mixed seminoma and nonseminomatous germ cell tumor components, strikingly lower 5mC was again seen in IGCNU elements (median 5mC score 0; mean, 17.1; s.d., 37.3) and seminomatous elements (median 5mC score 0; mean, 47.5; s.d., 96.6) compared to nonseminomatous germ cell tumor components (median 5mC score 300; mean, 292; s.d., 14.8, P = 0.0003, Kruskal–Wallis). 5mC staining was absent in the seminomatous component of five of eight mixed germ cell tumors compared to none of the corresponding nonseminomatous germ cell tumor components ( P = 0.0004, Kruskal–Wallis; Figure 4 ). No statistically significant difference in DNMT1 scores was demonstrated between the seminomas and concurrent nonseminomatous germ cell tumor components of mixed tumors ( P = 0.07, Kruskal–Wallis). 5mC status strongly correlated with DNMT1 expression in the nonseminomatous germ cell tumor components (CC, 1.0; P < 0.0001, pairwise) but not in the IGCNU or seminomatous components ( P > 0.6, pairwise) of the mixed germ cell tumors.  5<sup>m</sup>C and DNMT1 Status in Mixed Germ Cell Neoplasm Group In the subset of tumors containing mixed seminoma and nonseminomatous germ cell tumor components, strikingly lower 5mC was again seen in IGCNU elements (median 5mC score 0; mean, 17.1; s.d., 37.3) and seminomatous elements (median 5mC score 0; mean, 47.5; s.d., 96.6) compared to nonseminomatous germ cell tumor components (median 5mC score 300; mean, 292; s.d., 14.8, P = 0.0003, Kruskal–Wallis). 5mC staining was absent in the seminomatous component of five of eight mixed germ cell tumors compared to none of the corresponding nonseminomatous germ cell tumor components ( P = 0.0004, Kruskal–Wallis; Figure 4 ). No statistically significant difference in DNMT1 scores was demonstrated between the seminomas and concurrent nonseminomatous germ cell tumor components of mixed tumors ( P = 0.07, Kruskal–Wallis). 5mC status strongly correlated with DNMT1 expression in the nonseminomatous germ cell tumor components (CC, 1.0; P < 0.0001, pairwise) but not in the IGCNU or seminomatous components ( P > 0.6, pairwise) of the mixed germ cell tumors.  Discussion In the current study we used immunohistochemical staining against 5mC to evaluate global methylation in IGCNU and associated invasive testicular germ cell tumors. Our most significant findings were that staining for 5mC was undetectable (or markedly reduced) in the vast majority of IGCNU and in most seminomas, yet there was robust 5mC staining in nonseminomatous germ cell tumors. The lack of staining for 5mC in IGCNU and seminoma was also found in mixed germ cell tumors in which there were both seminomatous and nonseminomatous components. Thus, 5mC staining closely correlated with morphological features of these tumors. This in situ analysis was critical for our finding of profound hypomethylation in IGCNU and seminoma, as we were able to evaluate the relative methylation status of both the neoplastic cells and the nontumor host cells (eg, tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes). The non-neoplastic cells have clearly confounded previous estimates of methylation levels performed by other techniques. Importantly, our staining results are quite consistent with previous work showing markedly lower levels of 5mC in seminoma as compared to nonseminomatous germ cell tumors. 15 , 16 , 17 These results support previous models suggesting that in the majority of cases IGCNU cells are derived from primordial germ cells that have matured/differentiated to the point at which the majority of their 5mC marks have been erased 1 , 14 , 17 , 24 – 28 ( Figure 5 ), but have not yet matured to the point where the normal developmentally programmed de novo methylation has occurred. Since IGCNU cells appear unmethylated, even when associated with pure nonseminomatous germ cell tumors that are apparently fully methylated, these results suggest that in most cases, nonseminomatous germ cell tumors do not appear to be derived from IGCNU cells that have undergone developmentally programmed de novo methylation. 14 Our data show that the absence of detectable 5mC signal is most closely related to the differentiation state of the neoplastic cells (IGCNU and invasive germ cell tumor cells), regardless of the presence of associated seminoma, nonseminomatous germ cell tumor or mixed germ cell tumor components. Thus, we propose a slightly modified model in which seminoma cells, which are morphologically and phenotypically highly similar to IGCNU cells, retain virtual absence of detectable methylation in most cases ( Figure 5 ). And, IGCNU or seminoma cells that differentiate into any other male testicular germ cell tumor type undergo de novo CpG methylation in an apparent attempt to recapitulate the process of normal development ( Figure 5 ). This model allows for both ‘linear’ development of IGCNU to seminoma and then to nonseminomatous germ cell tumors, as well as, ‘nonlinear’ development of IGCNU directly into nonseminomatous germ cell tumors. The fact that a rare IGCNU (1 out of 23 studied lesions) showed diffuse strong 5mC staining suggests that de novo methylation can occur in IGCNU, or rare IGCNU lesions can be derived from methylated progenitor cells as originally suggested by Smiraglia et al . 14 Additional studies are needed to determine whether the reason for lack of 5mC in these cells is a failure in de novo methylation or an active demethylation activity in these cells. The mechanisms underlying the frequently observed global hypomethylation in cancers remain poorly understood. 34 , 35 However, it appears that the mechanisms are different in testicular germ cell tumors compared with somatic tumors as testicular germ cell tumors arise from primordial germ cells that undergo erasure of methylation marks as part of their normal maturation process into mature gametes, 20 – 22 and cells from which somatic cancers arise are presumably fully methylated. De novo methylation is catalyzed in germs cells by the de novo methyltransferases DNA methyltransferases 3A (DNMT3A) and its cofactor DNMT3-like DNMT3L. 23 These established patterns are maintained by DNMT1. 23 , 36 In the current study the presence of apparently normal levels of DNMT1 in seminoma, nonseminomatous germ cell tumors and IGCNU would suggest a mechanism other than lower expression of DNMT1 to be responsible for our observed overall differences in 5mC levels in these tumors. In the current study, the higher levels of DNMT1 in a subset of nonseminomatous germ cell tumors, namely embryonal carcinoma, and the observed correlation of 5mC and DNMT1 expression only in the nonseminomatous germ cell tumors could point to a role for DNMT1 expression levels in controlling overall 5mC levels in that subset of lesions. In terms of lack of de novo methylation, future studies to examine the levels of the de novo methyltransferases will be important to determine if a lack of these enzymes in IGCNU cells and seminoma cells may be responsible for the lack of their methylation. In our model, it is not clear whether methylation occurs first in seminoma cells or rare IGCNU lesions and then differentiation takes place (perhaps as a result of the methylation events) or whether differentiation occurs first. This can be tested in part by forced expression of de novo methyltransferases in seminomas cells 37 in culture to determine whether this facilitates differentiation into other germ cell tumor cell types. In summary, we found strikingly low staining for 5mC in precursor IGCNU lesions associated with testicular germ cell tumors. This marked hypomethylation was present in the majority of IGCNU, regardless of whether these lesions were associated with seminoma, which were similarly hypomethylated, or with nonseminomatous germ cell tumors, which appeared to contain normal levels of methylation. We interpret our findings as supportive of previous modified models of germ cell tumor development in which IGCNU cells arise (in most cases) from a primordial germ cell that had previously undergone normal developmental erasure of methylation marks. Seminomas cells, which are phenotypically highly similar to IGCNU cells, generally retain this lack of methylation whereas nonseminomatous germ cell tumors do not. Additional studies are needed to further explore the molecular basis of the dynamics of these proposed methylation changes and to determine whether abnormal retention of primordial germ cells lacking 5mC predisposes to genetic instability, IGCNU and germ cell tumor development.  Discussion In the current study we used immunohistochemical staining against 5mC to evaluate global methylation in IGCNU and associated invasive testicular germ cell tumors. Our most significant findings were that staining for 5mC was undetectable (or markedly reduced) in the vast majority of IGCNU and in most seminomas, yet there was robust 5mC staining in nonseminomatous germ cell tumors. The lack of staining for 5mC in IGCNU and seminoma was also found in mixed germ cell tumors in which there were both seminomatous and nonseminomatous components. Thus, 5mC staining closely correlated with morphological features of these tumors. This in situ analysis was critical for our finding of profound hypomethylation in IGCNU and seminoma, as we were able to evaluate the relative methylation status of both the neoplastic cells and the nontumor host cells (eg, tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes). The non-neoplastic cells have clearly confounded previous estimates of methylation levels performed by other techniques. Importantly, our staining results are quite consistent with previous work showing markedly lower levels of 5mC in seminoma as compared to nonseminomatous germ cell tumors. 15 , 16 , 17 These results support previous models suggesting that in the majority of cases IGCNU cells are derived from primordial germ cells that have matured/differentiated to the point at which the majority of their 5mC marks have been erased 1 , 14 , 17 , 24 – 28 ( Figure 5 ), but have not yet matured to the point where the normal developmentally programmed de novo methylation has occurred. Since IGCNU cells appear unmethylated, even when associated with pure nonseminomatous germ cell tumors that are apparently fully methylated, these results suggest that in most cases, nonseminomatous germ cell tumors do not appear to be derived from IGCNU cells that have undergone developmentally programmed de novo methylation. 14 Our data show that the absence of detectable 5mC signal is most closely related to the differentiation state of the neoplastic cells (IGCNU and invasive germ cell tumor cells), regardless of the presence of associated seminoma, nonseminomatous germ cell tumor or mixed germ cell tumor components. Thus, we propose a slightly modified model in which seminoma cells, which are morphologically and phenotypically highly similar to IGCNU cells, retain virtual absence of detectable methylation in most cases ( Figure 5 ). And, IGCNU or seminoma cells that differentiate into any other male testicular germ cell tumor type undergo de novo CpG methylation in an apparent attempt to recapitulate the process of normal development ( Figure 5 ). This model allows for both ‘linear’ development of IGCNU to seminoma and then to nonseminomatous germ cell tumors, as well as, ‘nonlinear’ development of IGCNU directly into nonseminomatous germ cell tumors. The fact that a rare IGCNU (1 out of 23 studied lesions) showed diffuse strong 5mC staining suggests that de novo methylation can occur in IGCNU, or rare IGCNU lesions can be derived from methylated progenitor cells as originally suggested by Smiraglia et al . 14 Additional studies are needed to determine whether the reason for lack of 5mC in these cells is a failure in de novo methylation or an active demethylation activity in these cells. The mechanisms underlying the frequently observed global hypomethylation in cancers remain poorly understood. 34 , 35 However, it appears that the mechanisms are different in testicular germ cell tumors compared with somatic tumors as testicular germ cell tumors arise from primordial germ cells that undergo erasure of methylation marks as part of their normal maturation process into mature gametes, 20 – 22 and cells from which somatic cancers arise are presumably fully methylated. De novo methylation is catalyzed in germs cells by the de novo methyltransferases DNA methyltransferases 3A (DNMT3A) and its cofactor DNMT3-like DNMT3L. 23 These established patterns are maintained by DNMT1. 23 , 36 In the current study the presence of apparently normal levels of DNMT1 in seminoma, nonseminomatous germ cell tumors and IGCNU would suggest a mechanism other than lower expression of DNMT1 to be responsible for our observed overall differences in 5mC levels in these tumors. In the current study, the higher levels of DNMT1 in a subset of nonseminomatous germ cell tumors, namely embryonal carcinoma, and the observed correlation of 5mC and DNMT1 expression only in the nonseminomatous germ cell tumors could point to a role for DNMT1 expression levels in controlling overall 5mC levels in that subset of lesions. In terms of lack of de novo methylation, future studies to examine the levels of the de novo methyltransferases will be important to determine if a lack of these enzymes in IGCNU cells and seminoma cells may be responsible for the lack of their methylation. In our model, it is not clear whether methylation occurs first in seminoma cells or rare IGCNU lesions and then differentiation takes place (perhaps as a result of the methylation events) or whether differentiation occurs first. This can be tested in part by forced expression of de novo methyltransferases in seminomas cells 37 in culture to determine whether this facilitates differentiation into other germ cell tumor cell types. In summary, we found strikingly low staining for 5mC in precursor IGCNU lesions associated with testicular germ cell tumors. This marked hypomethylation was present in the majority of IGCNU, regardless of whether these lesions were associated with seminoma, which were similarly hypomethylated, or with nonseminomatous germ cell tumors, which appeared to contain normal levels of methylation. We interpret our findings as supportive of previous modified models of germ cell tumor development in which IGCNU cells arise (in most cases) from a primordial germ cell that had previously undergone normal developmental erasure of methylation marks. Seminomas cells, which are phenotypically highly similar to IGCNU cells, generally retain this lack of methylation whereas nonseminomatous germ cell tumors do not. Additional studies are needed to further explore the molecular basis of the dynamics of these proposed methylation changes and to determine whether abnormal retention of primordial germ cells lacking 5mC predisposes to genetic instability, IGCNU and germ cell tumor development. 