Annexin II/annexin II receptor axis regulates adhesion, migration, homing, and growth of prostate cancer One of the most life-threatening complications of prostate cancer is skeletal metastasis. In order to develop treatment for metastasis, it is important to understand its molecular mechanisms. Our work in this field has drawn parallels between hematopoietic stem cell and prostate cancer homing to the marrow. Our recent work demonstrated that annexin II expressed by osteoblasts and endothelial cells plays a critical role in niche selection. In this study, we demonstrate that annexin II and its receptor play a crucial role in establishing metastasis of prostate cancer. Prostate cancer cell lines migrate toward annexin II and the adhesion of prostate cancer to osteoblasts and endothelial cells was inhibited by annexin II. By blocking annexin II or its receptor in animal models, short-term and long-term localization of prostate cancers are limited. Annexin II may also facilitate the growth of prostate cancer in vitro and in vivo by the MAPK pathway. These data strongly suggest annexin II and its receptor axis plays a central role in prostate cancer metastasis, and that prostate cancer utilize the hematopoietic stem cell homing mechanisms to gain access to the niche.  Materials and Methods Cell culture PC-3 (CRL-1435), DU145 (HTB-81), and LNCaP (CRL-1740) prostate cancer cell lines were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Rockville, MD). The metastatic subline LNCaP C4-2B were originally isolated from a lymph node of a patient with disseminated bony and lymph node involvement [ Wu et al., 1998 ]. PC-3Luc cells were constructed by stably transfecting PC-3 cells with luciferase construct, as previously described [ Loberg et al., 2006 ]. The human bone marrow endothelial cells ( HBMECs ) were isolated from a normal Caucasian male and immortalized with SV40 large T-antigen [ Lehr and Pienta, 1998 ]. Cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and were supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum ( FBS ; Invitrogen) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Invitrogen), and maintained at 37°C, 5% CO2, and 100% humidity. Anxa2 receptor (Anxa2r) silencing A 60-bp oligonucleotide, containing 19-nucleotides to a portion of the human Anxa2r and its reverse complement sequences separated by a 9-nucleotide spacer sequence, were subcloned into the BglII and HindIII restriction sites of the 3.2-kb plasmid pSUPER containing the H1-RNA promoter (Oligoengine, Seattle, WA). PC-3Luc cells were transfected with siRNA Anxa2r vectors ( PC-3 siAnxa2r cells ) and a scrambled control ( PC-3 siControl cells) using Superfect (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA) as described previously [ Jung et al., 2007 ]. SiRNA knock down was monitored by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction ( Q PCR ). Human osteoblasts Human osteoblasts were established by explant culture from normal human trabecular bone obtained from patients undergoing orthopedic surgery in accordance with the University of Michigan’s Investigational Review Board, as previously described [ Taichman and Emerson, 1994 ]. Isolation of primary murine calvarial cells Primary calvarial cells were isolated, as previously described [ Koh et al., 2005 ]. Briefly, calvariae of mice (1–4 day old) were dissected, isolated from periosteum, and subjected to sequential digestions of 20, 40, and 90 min in collagenase A (2 mg/ml; Roche Molecular Biochemicals, Indianapolis, IN) with 0.25% trypsin (Invitrogen). Cells from the third digestion were plated in ?-MEM (Invitrogen) with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin and streptomycin. Murine models All experimental procedures were approved by the University of Michigan Committee for the Use and Care of Animals ( UCUCA ). C57BL6 mice, male severe combined immune deficient ( SCID ) mice (5–6 weeks of age), and male athymic (nude) mice (4–6 weeks of age) were purchased from Harlan Bioscience (Indianapolis, IN). The laboratory of Dr K.A. Hajjar (Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY) generated the Anxa2-deficient ( Anxa2 ?/? ) animals used in our study and graciously provided our laboratory with a pair of the homozygous Anxa2 ?/? mice for breeding. Antibodies and Reagents The anti-Anxa2 antibody (Clone 5; mouse IgG1) was purchased from BD Pharmingen, (San Diego, CA). Antibodies targeting Anxa2r were generated in the laboratory of Dr. G.D. Roodman (University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA) and were described in detail previously [ Lu et al., 2006 ]. The antibodies to phosphorylated Akt (Ser473), total Akt, phosphorylated p44/42 MAP kinase (Thr202/Tyr204), total p44/42 MAP kinase, and horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-labeled goat anti-rabbit IgG (H + L) were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA). The control antibodies for these investigations included immonoglobulin (Ig) G1? (clone MOPC 31C; Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO), IgG1 (clone X40; Becton-Dickinson, San Jose, CA), IgG2a (clone 20102; R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN). Purified bovine lung Anxa2 was purchased from Biodesign International (Saco, ME). Anxa2 N-terminal peptide corresponding to the 1 to 12 amino acids and a random peptide (TVLLHEICKSSL) were synthesized, as previously detailed [ Jung et al., 2007 ]. Recombinant human CXCL12 was purchased from R&D Systems. Immunohistochemistry Murine bones were harvested and fixed in 10% buffered formalin and decalcified in EDTA, and 2 to 3 ?M paraffin-embedded slides were prepared and stained with antibody to Anxa2 or an IgG matched isotype control in conjunction with a HRP-AEC staining system kit using anti-mouse biotinylated antibodies following the manufactures protocols (R&D Systems). Human osteoblasts were cultured in Lab-Tek II 4-chamber slides (Nalge Nunc International, Naperville, IL) at 5 × 104 cells/chamber. After 24 h, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 25 min at room temperature, washed and endogenous peroxidase activity quenched with 75 mM NH4Cl and 20 mM Glycine in PBS at room temperature for 10 minutes. Thereafter, primary antibody incubations at a 1:200 dilution in PBS using the anti-Anxa2 or an IgG matched isotype control for 1 h at room temperature. Antibody detection was performed using an HRP-AEC staining kit (R&D Systems), and counter stained with hematoxylin (Sigma-Aldrich). Binding assays Anxa2 binding assays were performed with purified bovine lung Anxa2 or Bovine Serum Albumin ( BSA ; Sigma-Aldrich) plated into 96-wellplates for 24 hours at 4°C, washed, and then blocked with 0.1% BSA for 2 hours. For cell-to-cell binding assays, the human osteoblasts, murine calvarial cells, and HBMECs were plated onto 96-well plates at a concentration of 10,000 cells per well (100 ?L per well) in growth mediums, and the cultures were incubated for 2 days. PC-3, PC-3siAnxa2r, or PC-3siControl cells labeled with 2.5 ?g/mL of the lipophilic dye carboxyfluorescein diacetate (CFDA; Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) in RPMI for 30 minutes at 37°C, and washed in PBS. Thereafter, the cells were left for 30 minutes to reduce nonspecific background, and subsequently resuspended in PBS to deliver 105 cells/well in the adhesion assay. Adhesion assays were performed in PBS containing Ca+2/Mg+2 where the cells were added to a final reaction volume of 100 ?L at 4°C. After washing fluorescence was quantified. In some cases, the cells were incubated in 5 ?g/mL of an anti-Anxa2 or IgG matched isotype control antibody, or 1 ?g/mL of an Anxa2 N-terminal peptide or a random peptide control to block adhesion for 15 minutes on ice prior to seeding onto the monolayers. Transwell chemotaxis assay Cell invasion into a reconstituted extracellular matrices coating of Matrigel™ overlaid on 8 ?M pore sized in polyethylene terephthalate membranes was performed in dual chambered invasion plates (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) as previously described [ Sun et al., 2007 ; Wang et al., 2007 ]. Spontaneous invasion was compared to invasion supported by Anxa2. For blocking studies, rhCXCL12 at a final concentration of 200 ng/mL was added to the lower chamber, and Anxa2 N-terminal peptide or a random peptide control at a final concentration of 1 ?g/mL was added to the upper chamber along with the cells. Reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) and <italic>Q</italic>PCR RT-PCR and Q PCR was carried out using standard techniques. Briefly, total RNA was isolated using RNeasy Mini Kit (QIAGEN), and first-strand cDNA was synthesized in a 20 ?L reaction volume using 0.4 ?g of total RNA. The sequences of the forward and reverse primers of Anxa2r were 5?-CGGAGTCTACTGGCAAAACG-3? and 5?-GCCTTCTGCTGCTATCTAAG-3?. The reaction profile was 94°C for 1 min, 60°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 2 minutes for 35 cycles, followed by a 10-min extension at 72°C. PCR products were separated by electrophoresis in 1.2% agarose gels and visualized by ethidium bromide staining. RT products were analyzed by Q PCR in TaqMan® Gene Expression Assays of several target genes: Anxa2r (Hs01588662_s1) and ?-Actin (Hs99999903_m1) (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Q PCR analysis was performed using 15.0 ?l of TaqMan® Universal PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems), 1.5 ?l of TaqMan® Gene Expression Assay (forward and reverse primers at 18 ?M and Taqman probe at 5 ?M), 1 ?l of the RT product, and 12.5 ?l of RNAse/DNAse-free water in a total volume of 30 ?l. Reactions without template and/or enzyme were used as negative controls. The 2nd step PCR reaction (95°C for 30 seconds, 60°C) was run for 40 cycles after an initial single cycle of 95°C for 15 minutes to activate the Taq polymerase. The PCR product was detected as an increase in fluorescence using an ABI PRISM 7700 instrument (Applied Biosystems). RNA quantity (CR) was normalized to the housekeeping gene ?-Actin control by using the formula CR=2(40?Ct of sample)?(40?Ct of control). The threshold cycle (Ct) is the cycle at which a significant increase in fluorescence occurs. Tissue microarray and immunostaining Human prostate adenocarcinoma tissue microarray was purchased from US Biomax, Inc. (Rockville, MD). Tumors were graded using the Gleason grading system and examined to identify areas of benign prostate, prostate cancer and bone metastasis. The formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues were deparaffinized and placed in a pressure cooker containing 0.01 M buffered sodium citrate solution (pH 6.0), boiled and chilled to room temp for antigen retrieval. The slides were incubated overnight at room temperature with anti-Anxa2r antibody diluted 1:100. A blinded pathologist analyzed arrays and staining intensity was ranked on a scale from 0 to 3 (0, negative; 1, weak; 2, moderate; and 3, strong intensity staining). Anxa 2 treatments PC-3 cells (1×106) were cultured in 6-well plates in RPMI medium (1 mL) without FBS for 5 h. After serum starvation, the cells were treated with 1000 ng/ml Anxa2 for 5, 15, 30, 45, and 60 minutes. The cells were extracted for protein and analyzed for phosphorylated p44/42 MAP kinase (Thr202/Tyr204) and for phosphorylated Akt by Western blotting analysis. Total p44/42 MAP kinase and Akt were used as an internal control for loading. Proliferation assay The murine calvarial cells from Anxa2 +/+ or Anxa2 ?/? mice were plated into triplicate 96-well plates at a concentration of 10,000 cells per well (100 ?L per well) in growth medium with 0.1% FBS. The next day, PC-3Luc cells were added to the wells at a concentration of 5,000 cells per well. Thereafter, the cultures were incubated in an atmosphere of 5% CO2 and 95% O2 at 37°C for 3 days. Proliferation was determined by using a CCD IVIS system with a 50-mm lens (Xenogen Corp., Alameda, CA) and the results were analyzed using LivingImage software (Xenogen Corp.). In vivo metastasis assays PC-3Luc cells were introduced into male SCID mice by intracardiac ( i.c. ) injections. Immediately prior, the recipient mice were inoculated by intraperitoneal ( i.p. ) injections with (i) anti-Anxa2 antibody, (ii) the Anxa2 N-terminal peptide, or (iii) a mixed IgG matched isotype control antibodies/random peptide control each at 10 ?g/kg. Short-term engraftment was assessed at 12h by Q PCR using for luciferase 2CP gene [ luc2CP , CGGCTGGCAGAAGCTATGAA(forward), TCGCTGCACACCACGAT (reverse), and 5?-FAM-CTATGGGCTGAATACAAACC (TaqMan probe; Applied Biosystems)]. Data were normalized to mouse tissue ?-actin (mm00607939-s1). PC-3siAnxa2r or PC-3siControl cells were used to assess the role of Anxa2 in long-term PCa homing. Bioluminescent imaging (BLI) BLI was done as previously described through The University of Michigan Small Animal Imaging Resource facility [ Loberg et al., 2007 ]. Briefly, cells were introduced into male SCID mice by i.c. injections. Mice were imaged at 30 days by BLI. Mice were injected with luciferin (40 mg/mL) by i.p. injections and ventral images were acquired 15 min postinjection under 1.75% isofluorane/air anesthesia. Total tumor burden of each animal was calculated using regions of interest ( ROI ) that encompassed the entire animal. Vertebral body transplants (vossicles) Lumbar vertebrae were isolated from Anxa2 +/+ or Anxa2 ?/? mice 7 days after birth. The vertebrae were sectioned into single vertebral bodies (vossicles). Athymic (nude) mice were used as transplant recipients. Four vossicles per mouse were implanted into subcutaneous ( s.c. ) pouches. Before implantations, PC-3Luc cells were introduced into both vossicles (10,000 cells/10 ?L of PBS). Mice were imaged at 30 days by BLI. Statistical Analyses All in vitro experiments were performed at least three times with similar results and representative assay are shown. Numerical data are expressed as mean ± standard error. Statistical analysis was performed by ANOVA or Student’s t test using the GraphPad Instat statistical program (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA) with significance at P < 0.05. For the Q PCR assays, a Kruskal-Wallis test and Dunn’s multiple comparisons tests were utilized with the level of significance set at P < 0.05.  Cell culture PC-3 (CRL-1435), DU145 (HTB-81), and LNCaP (CRL-1740) prostate cancer cell lines were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Rockville, MD). The metastatic subline LNCaP C4-2B were originally isolated from a lymph node of a patient with disseminated bony and lymph node involvement [ Wu et al., 1998 ]. PC-3Luc cells were constructed by stably transfecting PC-3 cells with luciferase construct, as previously described [ Loberg et al., 2006 ]. The human bone marrow endothelial cells ( HBMECs ) were isolated from a normal Caucasian male and immortalized with SV40 large T-antigen [ Lehr and Pienta, 1998 ]. Cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and were supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum ( FBS ; Invitrogen) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Invitrogen), and maintained at 37°C, 5% CO2, and 100% humidity.  Anxa2 receptor (Anxa2r) silencing A 60-bp oligonucleotide, containing 19-nucleotides to a portion of the human Anxa2r and its reverse complement sequences separated by a 9-nucleotide spacer sequence, were subcloned into the BglII and HindIII restriction sites of the 3.2-kb plasmid pSUPER containing the H1-RNA promoter (Oligoengine, Seattle, WA). PC-3Luc cells were transfected with siRNA Anxa2r vectors ( PC-3 siAnxa2r cells ) and a scrambled control ( PC-3 siControl cells) using Superfect (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA) as described previously [ Jung et al., 2007 ]. SiRNA knock down was monitored by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction ( Q PCR ).  Human osteoblasts Human osteoblasts were established by explant culture from normal human trabecular bone obtained from patients undergoing orthopedic surgery in accordance with the University of Michigan’s Investigational Review Board, as previously described [ Taichman and Emerson, 1994 ].  Isolation of primary murine calvarial cells Primary calvarial cells were isolated, as previously described [ Koh et al., 2005 ]. Briefly, calvariae of mice (1–4 day old) were dissected, isolated from periosteum, and subjected to sequential digestions of 20, 40, and 90 min in collagenase A (2 mg/ml; Roche Molecular Biochemicals, Indianapolis, IN) with 0.25% trypsin (Invitrogen). Cells from the third digestion were plated in ?-MEM (Invitrogen) with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin and streptomycin.  Murine models All experimental procedures were approved by the University of Michigan Committee for the Use and Care of Animals ( UCUCA ). C57BL6 mice, male severe combined immune deficient ( SCID ) mice (5–6 weeks of age), and male athymic (nude) mice (4–6 weeks of age) were purchased from Harlan Bioscience (Indianapolis, IN). The laboratory of Dr K.A. Hajjar (Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY) generated the Anxa2-deficient ( Anxa2 ?/? ) animals used in our study and graciously provided our laboratory with a pair of the homozygous Anxa2 ?/? mice for breeding.  Antibodies and Reagents The anti-Anxa2 antibody (Clone 5; mouse IgG1) was purchased from BD Pharmingen, (San Diego, CA). Antibodies targeting Anxa2r were generated in the laboratory of Dr. G.D. Roodman (University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA) and were described in detail previously [ Lu et al., 2006 ]. The antibodies to phosphorylated Akt (Ser473), total Akt, phosphorylated p44/42 MAP kinase (Thr202/Tyr204), total p44/42 MAP kinase, and horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-labeled goat anti-rabbit IgG (H + L) were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA). The control antibodies for these investigations included immonoglobulin (Ig) G1? (clone MOPC 31C; Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO), IgG1 (clone X40; Becton-Dickinson, San Jose, CA), IgG2a (clone 20102; R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN). Purified bovine lung Anxa2 was purchased from Biodesign International (Saco, ME). Anxa2 N-terminal peptide corresponding to the 1 to 12 amino acids and a random peptide (TVLLHEICKSSL) were synthesized, as previously detailed [ Jung et al., 2007 ]. Recombinant human CXCL12 was purchased from R&D Systems.  Immunohistochemistry Murine bones were harvested and fixed in 10% buffered formalin and decalcified in EDTA, and 2 to 3 ?M paraffin-embedded slides were prepared and stained with antibody to Anxa2 or an IgG matched isotype control in conjunction with a HRP-AEC staining system kit using anti-mouse biotinylated antibodies following the manufactures protocols (R&D Systems). Human osteoblasts were cultured in Lab-Tek II 4-chamber slides (Nalge Nunc International, Naperville, IL) at 5 × 104 cells/chamber. After 24 h, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 25 min at room temperature, washed and endogenous peroxidase activity quenched with 75 mM NH4Cl and 20 mM Glycine in PBS at room temperature for 10 minutes. Thereafter, primary antibody incubations at a 1:200 dilution in PBS using the anti-Anxa2 or an IgG matched isotype control for 1 h at room temperature. Antibody detection was performed using an HRP-AEC staining kit (R&D Systems), and counter stained with hematoxylin (Sigma-Aldrich).  Binding assays Anxa2 binding assays were performed with purified bovine lung Anxa2 or Bovine Serum Albumin ( BSA ; Sigma-Aldrich) plated into 96-wellplates for 24 hours at 4°C, washed, and then blocked with 0.1% BSA for 2 hours. For cell-to-cell binding assays, the human osteoblasts, murine calvarial cells, and HBMECs were plated onto 96-well plates at a concentration of 10,000 cells per well (100 ?L per well) in growth mediums, and the cultures were incubated for 2 days. PC-3, PC-3siAnxa2r, or PC-3siControl cells labeled with 2.5 ?g/mL of the lipophilic dye carboxyfluorescein diacetate (CFDA; Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) in RPMI for 30 minutes at 37°C, and washed in PBS. Thereafter, the cells were left for 30 minutes to reduce nonspecific background, and subsequently resuspended in PBS to deliver 105 cells/well in the adhesion assay. Adhesion assays were performed in PBS containing Ca+2/Mg+2 where the cells were added to a final reaction volume of 100 ?L at 4°C. After washing fluorescence was quantified. In some cases, the cells were incubated in 5 ?g/mL of an anti-Anxa2 or IgG matched isotype control antibody, or 1 ?g/mL of an Anxa2 N-terminal peptide or a random peptide control to block adhesion for 15 minutes on ice prior to seeding onto the monolayers.  Transwell chemotaxis assay Cell invasion into a reconstituted extracellular matrices coating of Matrigel™ overlaid on 8 ?M pore sized in polyethylene terephthalate membranes was performed in dual chambered invasion plates (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) as previously described [ Sun et al., 2007 ; Wang et al., 2007 ]. Spontaneous invasion was compared to invasion supported by Anxa2. For blocking studies, rhCXCL12 at a final concentration of 200 ng/mL was added to the lower chamber, and Anxa2 N-terminal peptide or a random peptide control at a final concentration of 1 ?g/mL was added to the upper chamber along with the cells.  Reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) and <italic>Q</italic>PCR RT-PCR and Q PCR was carried out using standard techniques. Briefly, total RNA was isolated using RNeasy Mini Kit (QIAGEN), and first-strand cDNA was synthesized in a 20 ?L reaction volume using 0.4 ?g of total RNA. The sequences of the forward and reverse primers of Anxa2r were 5?-CGGAGTCTACTGGCAAAACG-3? and 5?-GCCTTCTGCTGCTATCTAAG-3?. The reaction profile was 94°C for 1 min, 60°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 2 minutes for 35 cycles, followed by a 10-min extension at 72°C. PCR products were separated by electrophoresis in 1.2% agarose gels and visualized by ethidium bromide staining. RT products were analyzed by Q PCR in TaqMan® Gene Expression Assays of several target genes: Anxa2r (Hs01588662_s1) and ?-Actin (Hs99999903_m1) (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Q PCR analysis was performed using 15.0 ?l of TaqMan® Universal PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems), 1.5 ?l of TaqMan® Gene Expression Assay (forward and reverse primers at 18 ?M and Taqman probe at 5 ?M), 1 ?l of the RT product, and 12.5 ?l of RNAse/DNAse-free water in a total volume of 30 ?l. Reactions without template and/or enzyme were used as negative controls. The 2nd step PCR reaction (95°C for 30 seconds, 60°C) was run for 40 cycles after an initial single cycle of 95°C for 15 minutes to activate the Taq polymerase. The PCR product was detected as an increase in fluorescence using an ABI PRISM 7700 instrument (Applied Biosystems). RNA quantity (CR) was normalized to the housekeeping gene ?-Actin control by using the formula CR=2(40?Ct of sample)?(40?Ct of control). The threshold cycle (Ct) is the cycle at which a significant increase in fluorescence occurs.  Tissue microarray and immunostaining Human prostate adenocarcinoma tissue microarray was purchased from US Biomax, Inc. (Rockville, MD). Tumors were graded using the Gleason grading system and examined to identify areas of benign prostate, prostate cancer and bone metastasis. The formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues were deparaffinized and placed in a pressure cooker containing 0.01 M buffered sodium citrate solution (pH 6.0), boiled and chilled to room temp for antigen retrieval. The slides were incubated overnight at room temperature with anti-Anxa2r antibody diluted 1:100. A blinded pathologist analyzed arrays and staining intensity was ranked on a scale from 0 to 3 (0, negative; 1, weak; 2, moderate; and 3, strong intensity staining).  Anxa 2 treatments PC-3 cells (1×106) were cultured in 6-well plates in RPMI medium (1 mL) without FBS for 5 h. After serum starvation, the cells were treated with 1000 ng/ml Anxa2 for 5, 15, 30, 45, and 60 minutes. The cells were extracted for protein and analyzed for phosphorylated p44/42 MAP kinase (Thr202/Tyr204) and for phosphorylated Akt by Western blotting analysis. Total p44/42 MAP kinase and Akt were used as an internal control for loading.  Proliferation assay The murine calvarial cells from Anxa2 +/+ or Anxa2 ?/? mice were plated into triplicate 96-well plates at a concentration of 10,000 cells per well (100 ?L per well) in growth medium with 0.1% FBS. The next day, PC-3Luc cells were added to the wells at a concentration of 5,000 cells per well. Thereafter, the cultures were incubated in an atmosphere of 5% CO2 and 95% O2 at 37°C for 3 days. Proliferation was determined by using a CCD IVIS system with a 50-mm lens (Xenogen Corp., Alameda, CA) and the results were analyzed using LivingImage software (Xenogen Corp.).  In vivo metastasis assays PC-3Luc cells were introduced into male SCID mice by intracardiac ( i.c. ) injections. Immediately prior, the recipient mice were inoculated by intraperitoneal ( i.p. ) injections with (i) anti-Anxa2 antibody, (ii) the Anxa2 N-terminal peptide, or (iii) a mixed IgG matched isotype control antibodies/random peptide control each at 10 ?g/kg. Short-term engraftment was assessed at 12h by Q PCR using for luciferase 2CP gene [ luc2CP , CGGCTGGCAGAAGCTATGAA(forward), TCGCTGCACACCACGAT (reverse), and 5?-FAM-CTATGGGCTGAATACAAACC (TaqMan probe; Applied Biosystems)]. Data were normalized to mouse tissue ?-actin (mm00607939-s1). PC-3siAnxa2r or PC-3siControl cells were used to assess the role of Anxa2 in long-term PCa homing.  Bioluminescent imaging (BLI) BLI was done as previously described through The University of Michigan Small Animal Imaging Resource facility [ Loberg et al., 2007 ]. Briefly, cells were introduced into male SCID mice by i.c. injections. Mice were imaged at 30 days by BLI. Mice were injected with luciferin (40 mg/mL) by i.p. injections and ventral images were acquired 15 min postinjection under 1.75% isofluorane/air anesthesia. Total tumor burden of each animal was calculated using regions of interest ( ROI ) that encompassed the entire animal.  Vertebral body transplants (vossicles) Lumbar vertebrae were isolated from Anxa2 +/+ or Anxa2 ?/? mice 7 days after birth. The vertebrae were sectioned into single vertebral bodies (vossicles). Athymic (nude) mice were used as transplant recipients. Four vossicles per mouse were implanted into subcutaneous ( s.c. ) pouches. Before implantations, PC-3Luc cells were introduced into both vossicles (10,000 cells/10 ?L of PBS). Mice were imaged at 30 days by BLI.  Statistical Analyses All in vitro experiments were performed at least three times with similar results and representative assay are shown. Numerical data are expressed as mean ± standard error. Statistical analysis was performed by ANOVA or Student’s t test using the GraphPad Instat statistical program (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA) with significance at P < 0.05. For the Q PCR assays, a Kruskal-Wallis test and Dunn’s multiple comparisons tests were utilized with the level of significance set at P < 0.05.  Results Anxa2 is expressed on osteoblasts surface in bone marrow To determine whether Anxa2 is expressed at the sites relevant to the localization of PCa to the bone marrow endosteal and endothelial niches, immunohistochemistry for Anxa2 was performed. As demonstrated in Figure 1A , Anxa2 immunoreactivity was most intense at the endosteal osteoblastic surfaces of the marrow closest the growth plate ( Figure 1A-1, 2 ). In some cases, bone marrow endothelial cells also displayed immunoreactivity towards Anxa2 ( Figure 1A-1, 3 ). No signal was observed in the absence of the specific anti-Anxa2 antibody ( Figure 1A-4 ) and the bone marrow from Anxa2 ?/? mice ( Figure 1A-5 ). Human primary osteoblasts also demonstrated perinuclear and cytoplasmic expression of Anxa2 in nearly all of the cells under basal conditions ( Figure 1B ). These findings suggest that Anxa2 is expressed on osteoblasts in the bone marrow. PCa binds to and migrates toward Anxa2 Our recent studies demonstrate that HSCs use Anxa2 to bind to endothelial cells and osteoblasts [ Jung et al., 2007 ]. Studies were therefore undertaken to determine if Anxa2 serves as an adhesive molecule for PCa. PC-3 cells bind to Anxa2 in a dose dependent manner ( Figure 2A-1 , and other PCa cell lines not shown ). Cell-to-cell adhesion assays were next performed using a bone marrow endothelial cells and osteoblasts that expresses abundant Anxa2. Here, the PCa cells bound rapidly to the HBMEC cells and the Anxa2 N-terminal competing peptide significantly reduced PC-3 cells binding to HBMECs compared to a scrambled control peptide ( Figure 2A-2 ). Next, we performed the binding assays between PC-3 cells and human or murine osteoblasts. The data demonstrate that the binding of PC-3 cells to human osteoblasts was significantly inhibited using antibody to Anxa2 ( Figure 2B-1 ). When the binding of PC-3 cells to osteoblasts derived from Anxa2 +/+ or Anxa2 ?/? mice was evaluated, it was noted that significantly more PC-3 cells bound to the Anxa2 +/+ osteoblasts than to the Anxa2 ?/? osteoblasts ( Figure 2B-2 ). Once tumor cells have adhered to and moved through the endothelium, they must invade through the extracellular matrix. The ability of Anxa2 to influence PCa invasion was studied using a reconstituted extracellular matrix in porous chambers. PC-3 cells were placed in the upper chamber in serum free medium, whereas Anxa2 at increasing doses was placed in the lower chamber to establish a chemoattractive gradient. After 8 h, quantification of the cells migrating into the reconstituted matrix in triplicate assays was performed. Anxa2 supported the invasion of PC-3 cells into the reconstituted matrix ( Figure 2C ). To further determine if Anxa2 is used to localize PCa cells to tissue spaces, CXCL12 was employed to establish a chemoattractive gradient [ Taichman et al., 2002 ]. When rhCXCL12 was placed in the bottom chamber, PC-3 cells migrated towards the chemokine ( Figure 2D ). When Anxa2 was added to the upper chamber of the culture dish with rhCXCL12 present in the bottom, fewer PC-3 cells migrated towards the chemokine CXCL12. Similar results were observed when an N-terminal competing Anxa2 peptide was included in the assay ( Figure 2D ). These data support the notion that PCa binds to, and moves toward Anxa2, and further suggests that Anxa2 participates in tissue localization of PCa. Anxa2 is involved in PCa metastasis In order to test our hypothesis that Anxa2 is critical for the development of metastases in vivo , we established three experimental groups. In each case, the animals were inoculated with PC-3Luc cells by i.c . injection. Immediately prior to the i.c. injection, the animals were injected i.p . with (i) an antibody to Anxa2, (ii) the N-terminal competing Anxa2 peptide, or (iii) an isotype matched, non-specific antibody combined with a scrambled the amino acid sequence of the N-terminal competing peptide. The animals were subsequently sacrificed at 12 h and tissues were harvested. Q PCR was utilized as our primary outcome to detect the tagged human cells. As shown in Figure 3 , all of the animals in injected with PC-3 cells alone demonstrated significant homing/lodging of the cancer cells in a number of tissues. Animals injected with antibody to Anxa2 and the Anxa2 N-terminal competing peptide significantly reduced the total metastatic load of the animals compared to the IgG/peptide treated control group. Animals not injected with human cells did not demonstrate any signal for luciferase (data not shown). These data suggested that Anxa2 plays an important role in short-term homing of PCa and regulates PCa metastasis. Anxa2r expressed on PCa A single pass Anxa2r membrane receptor was cloned and identified to bind the p11 fraction of Anxa2 (Anxa2r) [ Lu et al., 2006 ]. To determine if PCa cells express the Anxa2r, RT-PCR and Q PCR for the Anxa2r was performed. As demonstrated in Figure 4A , PC-3 cells expressed mRNA for the Anxa2r. We also performed Q PCR for 4 different human PCa cell lines to compare their expression levels. The Anxa2r mRNA was most strongly expressed by the DU145 cell line ( Figure 4B ). Modest expression was seen in the PC-3, LNCaP, and C4-2B cell lines ( Figure 4B ). Next, to evaluate the widest range of Anxa2r expression, PCa tissue microarrays were examined. Tumors were graded using the Gleason grading system and examined to identify areas of benign prostate and PCa. Staining of microarrays with antibody to Anxa2r revealed moderate-to-strong Anxa2r protein expression in clinically localized PCa samples with cytoplasmic and nuclear localization ( Figure 4C-1–6 ). Anxa2r protein expression was enhanced with increasing tumor grade, although statistically there were no significant differences in localized tumor and metastatic lesions ( Figure 4C-1–6 , and data not presented ). Anxa2r involved in PCa metastasis To test whether Anxa2r is also critical for the development of metastases, siRNAs were employed to alter the expression of Anxa2r on PCa cells. PC-3Luc cells were transfected with siRNAs targeting the Anxa2r. Our best siRNA was able to decrease Anxa2r mRNA expression by ~ 60% by 48h ( Figure 5A ). By knocking down the Anxa2r, PCa cells bind less vigorously to HBMECs compared with cells transfected with a scrambled siRNA ( Figure 5B ). Similar results were seen using the C4-2B and LNCaP cell lines (not presented). Next, to explore the in vivo role of Anxa2r in PCa metastases, PC-3siAnxa2r or PC-3siControl cells were injected i.c. into SCID mice. At one month, significantly fewer lesions were identified in the PC-3siAnxa2r cells injected group compared to those animals that received the cells expressing the scrambled controls ( Figure 5C ). These data support the hypothesis that Anxa2r plays a critical role in PCa metastasis. Anxa2 regulates PCa proliferation and survival via MAPK signaling pathway To determine whether Anxa2 supports PCa survival or proliferation, we examined the viability of PC-3Luc cells that were plated on osteoblasts derived from Anxa2 +/+ or Anxa2 ?/? mice. Significantly more PC-3Luc cells grew on the Anxa2 +/+ osteoblasts than on the Anxa2 ?/? osteoblasts ( Figure 6A-1, 2 ). To further explore whether Anxa2 supports PCa growth in vivo , PC-3Luc cells were injected directly into vertebral bodies ( vossicles ) derived from Anxa2 +/+ or Anxa2 ?/? animals, and transplanted into immunodeficient hosts. Bioluminescent imaging was performed at one month to evaluate luciferase activity in the implanted vossicles. The data demonstrated that the growth of the PCa was greater in the vossicles derived from Anxa2 +/+ animals ( Figure 6B-1, 2 ). To explore how Anxa2 regulates survival/growth, we next examined the effects of Anxa2 on Erk1/2 or Akt activation in PCa cells. PCa cells were treated with Anxa2, and Akt and Erk1/2 phosphorylation were evaluated by western blotting. The data demonstrated that Anxa2 rapidly induces Erk1/2 phosphorylation in PC-3 cells within 5 min, whereas Anxa2 did not activate the Akt pathway ( Figure 6C ). These data suggested that once PCa has metastasized to the bone, Anxa2 then facilitates the PCa growth via the MAPK pathway.  Results Anxa2 is expressed on osteoblasts surface in bone marrow To determine whether Anxa2 is expressed at the sites relevant to the localization of PCa to the bone marrow endosteal and endothelial niches, immunohistochemistry for Anxa2 was performed. As demonstrated in Figure 1A , Anxa2 immunoreactivity was most intense at the endosteal osteoblastic surfaces of the marrow closest the growth plate ( Figure 1A-1, 2 ). In some cases, bone marrow endothelial cells also displayed immunoreactivity towards Anxa2 ( Figure 1A-1, 3 ). No signal was observed in the absence of the specific anti-Anxa2 antibody ( Figure 1A-4 ) and the bone marrow from Anxa2 ?/? mice ( Figure 1A-5 ). Human primary osteoblasts also demonstrated perinuclear and cytoplasmic expression of Anxa2 in nearly all of the cells under basal conditions ( Figure 1B ). These findings suggest that Anxa2 is expressed on osteoblasts in the bone marrow. PCa binds to and migrates toward Anxa2 Our recent studies demonstrate that HSCs use Anxa2 to bind to endothelial cells and osteoblasts [ Jung et al., 2007 ]. Studies were therefore undertaken to determine if Anxa2 serves as an adhesive molecule for PCa. PC-3 cells bind to Anxa2 in a dose dependent manner ( Figure 2A-1 , and other PCa cell lines not shown ). Cell-to-cell adhesion assays were next performed using a bone marrow endothelial cells and osteoblasts that expresses abundant Anxa2. Here, the PCa cells bound rapidly to the HBMEC cells and the Anxa2 N-terminal competing peptide significantly reduced PC-3 cells binding to HBMECs compared to a scrambled control peptide ( Figure 2A-2 ). Next, we performed the binding assays between PC-3 cells and human or murine osteoblasts. The data demonstrate that the binding of PC-3 cells to human osteoblasts was significantly inhibited using antibody to Anxa2 ( Figure 2B-1 ). When the binding of PC-3 cells to osteoblasts derived from Anxa2 +/+ or Anxa2 ?/? mice was evaluated, it was noted that significantly more PC-3 cells bound to the Anxa2 +/+ osteoblasts than to the Anxa2 ?/? osteoblasts ( Figure 2B-2 ). Once tumor cells have adhered to and moved through the endothelium, they must invade through the extracellular matrix. The ability of Anxa2 to influence PCa invasion was studied using a reconstituted extracellular matrix in porous chambers. PC-3 cells were placed in the upper chamber in serum free medium, whereas Anxa2 at increasing doses was placed in the lower chamber to establish a chemoattractive gradient. After 8 h, quantification of the cells migrating into the reconstituted matrix in triplicate assays was performed. Anxa2 supported the invasion of PC-3 cells into the reconstituted matrix ( Figure 2C ). To further determine if Anxa2 is used to localize PCa cells to tissue spaces, CXCL12 was employed to establish a chemoattractive gradient [ Taichman et al., 2002 ]. When rhCXCL12 was placed in the bottom chamber, PC-3 cells migrated towards the chemokine ( Figure 2D ). When Anxa2 was added to the upper chamber of the culture dish with rhCXCL12 present in the bottom, fewer PC-3 cells migrated towards the chemokine CXCL12. Similar results were observed when an N-terminal competing Anxa2 peptide was included in the assay ( Figure 2D ). These data support the notion that PCa binds to, and moves toward Anxa2, and further suggests that Anxa2 participates in tissue localization of PCa. Anxa2 is involved in PCa metastasis In order to test our hypothesis that Anxa2 is critical for the development of metastases in vivo , we established three experimental groups. In each case, the animals were inoculated with PC-3Luc cells by i.c . injection. Immediately prior to the i.c. injection, the animals were injected i.p . with (i) an antibody to Anxa2, (ii) the N-terminal competing Anxa2 peptide, or (iii) an isotype matched, non-specific antibody combined with a scrambled the amino acid sequence of the N-terminal competing peptide. The animals were subsequently sacrificed at 12 h and tissues were harvested. Q PCR was utilized as our primary outcome to detect the tagged human cells. As shown in Figure 3 , all of the animals in injected with PC-3 cells alone demonstrated significant homing/lodging of the cancer cells in a number of tissues. Animals injected with antibody to Anxa2 and the Anxa2 N-terminal competing peptide significantly reduced the total metastatic load of the animals compared to the IgG/peptide treated control group. Animals not injected with human cells did not demonstrate any signal for luciferase (data not shown). These data suggested that Anxa2 plays an important role in short-term homing of PCa and regulates PCa metastasis. Anxa2r expressed on PCa A single pass Anxa2r membrane receptor was cloned and identified to bind the p11 fraction of Anxa2 (Anxa2r) [ Lu et al., 2006 ]. To determine if PCa cells express the Anxa2r, RT-PCR and Q PCR for the Anxa2r was performed. As demonstrated in Figure 4A , PC-3 cells expressed mRNA for the Anxa2r. We also performed Q PCR for 4 different human PCa cell lines to compare their expression levels. The Anxa2r mRNA was most strongly expressed by the DU145 cell line ( Figure 4B ). Modest expression was seen in the PC-3, LNCaP, and C4-2B cell lines ( Figure 4B ). Next, to evaluate the widest range of Anxa2r expression, PCa tissue microarrays were examined. Tumors were graded using the Gleason grading system and examined to identify areas of benign prostate and PCa. Staining of microarrays with antibody to Anxa2r revealed moderate-to-strong Anxa2r protein expression in clinically localized PCa samples with cytoplasmic and nuclear localization ( Figure 4C-1–6 ). Anxa2r protein expression was enhanced with increasing tumor grade, although statistically there were no significant differences in localized tumor and metastatic lesions ( Figure 4C-1–6 , and data not presented ). Anxa2r involved in PCa metastasis To test whether Anxa2r is also critical for the development of metastases, siRNAs were employed to alter the expression of Anxa2r on PCa cells. PC-3Luc cells were transfected with siRNAs targeting the Anxa2r. Our best siRNA was able to decrease Anxa2r mRNA expression by ~ 60% by 48h ( Figure 5A ). By knocking down the Anxa2r, PCa cells bind less vigorously to HBMECs compared with cells transfected with a scrambled siRNA ( Figure 5B ). Similar results were seen using the C4-2B and LNCaP cell lines (not presented). Next, to explore the in vivo role of Anxa2r in PCa metastases, PC-3siAnxa2r or PC-3siControl cells were injected i.c. into SCID mice. At one month, significantly fewer lesions were identified in the PC-3siAnxa2r cells injected group compared to those animals that received the cells expressing the scrambled controls ( Figure 5C ). These data support the hypothesis that Anxa2r plays a critical role in PCa metastasis. Anxa2 regulates PCa proliferation and survival via MAPK signaling pathway To determine whether Anxa2 supports PCa survival or proliferation, we examined the viability of PC-3Luc cells that were plated on osteoblasts derived from Anxa2 +/+ or Anxa2 ?/? mice. Significantly more PC-3Luc cells grew on the Anxa2 +/+ osteoblasts than on the Anxa2 ?/? osteoblasts ( Figure 6A-1, 2 ). To further explore whether Anxa2 supports PCa growth in vivo , PC-3Luc cells were injected directly into vertebral bodies ( vossicles ) derived from Anxa2 +/+ or Anxa2 ?/? animals, and transplanted into immunodeficient hosts. Bioluminescent imaging was performed at one month to evaluate luciferase activity in the implanted vossicles. The data demonstrated that the growth of the PCa was greater in the vossicles derived from Anxa2 +/+ animals ( Figure 6B-1, 2 ). To explore how Anxa2 regulates survival/growth, we next examined the effects of Anxa2 on Erk1/2 or Akt activation in PCa cells. PCa cells were treated with Anxa2, and Akt and Erk1/2 phosphorylation were evaluated by western blotting. The data demonstrated that Anxa2 rapidly induces Erk1/2 phosphorylation in PC-3 cells within 5 min, whereas Anxa2 did not activate the Akt pathway ( Figure 6C ). These data suggested that once PCa has metastasized to the bone, Anxa2 then facilitates the PCa growth via the MAPK pathway.  Anxa2 is expressed on osteoblasts surface in bone marrow To determine whether Anxa2 is expressed at the sites relevant to the localization of PCa to the bone marrow endosteal and endothelial niches, immunohistochemistry for Anxa2 was performed. As demonstrated in Figure 1A , Anxa2 immunoreactivity was most intense at the endosteal osteoblastic surfaces of the marrow closest the growth plate ( Figure 1A-1, 2 ). In some cases, bone marrow endothelial cells also displayed immunoreactivity towards Anxa2 ( Figure 1A-1, 3 ). No signal was observed in the absence of the specific anti-Anxa2 antibody ( Figure 1A-4 ) and the bone marrow from Anxa2 ?/? mice ( Figure 1A-5 ). Human primary osteoblasts also demonstrated perinuclear and cytoplasmic expression of Anxa2 in nearly all of the cells under basal conditions ( Figure 1B ). These findings suggest that Anxa2 is expressed on osteoblasts in the bone marrow.  Anxa2 is expressed on osteoblasts surface in bone marrow To determine whether Anxa2 is expressed at the sites relevant to the localization of PCa to the bone marrow endosteal and endothelial niches, immunohistochemistry for Anxa2 was performed. As demonstrated in Figure 1A , Anxa2 immunoreactivity was most intense at the endosteal osteoblastic surfaces of the marrow closest the growth plate ( Figure 1A-1, 2 ). In some cases, bone marrow endothelial cells also displayed immunoreactivity towards Anxa2 ( Figure 1A-1, 3 ). No signal was observed in the absence of the specific anti-Anxa2 antibody ( Figure 1A-4 ) and the bone marrow from Anxa2 ?/? mice ( Figure 1A-5 ). Human primary osteoblasts also demonstrated perinuclear and cytoplasmic expression of Anxa2 in nearly all of the cells under basal conditions ( Figure 1B ). These findings suggest that Anxa2 is expressed on osteoblasts in the bone marrow.  PCa binds to and migrates toward Anxa2 Our recent studies demonstrate that HSCs use Anxa2 to bind to endothelial cells and osteoblasts [ Jung et al., 2007 ]. Studies were therefore undertaken to determine if Anxa2 serves as an adhesive molecule for PCa. PC-3 cells bind to Anxa2 in a dose dependent manner ( Figure 2A-1 , and other PCa cell lines not shown ). Cell-to-cell adhesion assays were next performed using a bone marrow endothelial cells and osteoblasts that expresses abundant Anxa2. Here, the PCa cells bound rapidly to the HBMEC cells and the Anxa2 N-terminal competing peptide significantly reduced PC-3 cells binding to HBMECs compared to a scrambled control peptide ( Figure 2A-2 ). Next, we performed the binding assays between PC-3 cells and human or murine osteoblasts. The data demonstrate that the binding of PC-3 cells to human osteoblasts was significantly inhibited using antibody to Anxa2 ( Figure 2B-1 ). When the binding of PC-3 cells to osteoblasts derived from Anxa2 +/+ or Anxa2 ?/? mice was evaluated, it was noted that significantly more PC-3 cells bound to the Anxa2 +/+ osteoblasts than to the Anxa2 ?/? osteoblasts ( Figure 2B-2 ). Once tumor cells have adhered to and moved through the endothelium, they must invade through the extracellular matrix. The ability of Anxa2 to influence PCa invasion was studied using a reconstituted extracellular matrix in porous chambers. PC-3 cells were placed in the upper chamber in serum free medium, whereas Anxa2 at increasing doses was placed in the lower chamber to establish a chemoattractive gradient. After 8 h, quantification of the cells migrating into the reconstituted matrix in triplicate assays was performed. Anxa2 supported the invasion of PC-3 cells into the reconstituted matrix ( Figure 2C ). To further determine if Anxa2 is used to localize PCa cells to tissue spaces, CXCL12 was employed to establish a chemoattractive gradient [ Taichman et al., 2002 ]. When rhCXCL12 was placed in the bottom chamber, PC-3 cells migrated towards the chemokine ( Figure 2D ). When Anxa2 was added to the upper chamber of the culture dish with rhCXCL12 present in the bottom, fewer PC-3 cells migrated towards the chemokine CXCL12. Similar results were observed when an N-terminal competing Anxa2 peptide was included in the assay ( Figure 2D ). These data support the notion that PCa binds to, and moves toward Anxa2, and further suggests that Anxa2 participates in tissue localization of PCa.  PCa binds to and migrates toward Anxa2 Our recent studies demonstrate that HSCs use Anxa2 to bind to endothelial cells and osteoblasts [ Jung et al., 2007 ]. Studies were therefore undertaken to determine if Anxa2 serves as an adhesive molecule for PCa. PC-3 cells bind to Anxa2 in a dose dependent manner ( Figure 2A-1 , and other PCa cell lines not shown ). Cell-to-cell adhesion assays were next performed using a bone marrow endothelial cells and osteoblasts that expresses abundant Anxa2. Here, the PCa cells bound rapidly to the HBMEC cells and the Anxa2 N-terminal competing peptide significantly reduced PC-3 cells binding to HBMECs compared to a scrambled control peptide ( Figure 2A-2 ). Next, we performed the binding assays between PC-3 cells and human or murine osteoblasts. The data demonstrate that the binding of PC-3 cells to human osteoblasts was significantly inhibited using antibody to Anxa2 ( Figure 2B-1 ). When the binding of PC-3 cells to osteoblasts derived from Anxa2 +/+ or Anxa2 ?/? mice was evaluated, it was noted that significantly more PC-3 cells bound to the Anxa2 +/+ osteoblasts than to the Anxa2 ?/? osteoblasts ( Figure 2B-2 ). Once tumor cells have adhered to and moved through the endothelium, they must invade through the extracellular matrix. The ability of Anxa2 to influence PCa invasion was studied using a reconstituted extracellular matrix in porous chambers. PC-3 cells were placed in the upper chamber in serum free medium, whereas Anxa2 at increasing doses was placed in the lower chamber to establish a chemoattractive gradient. After 8 h, quantification of the cells migrating into the reconstituted matrix in triplicate assays was performed. Anxa2 supported the invasion of PC-3 cells into the reconstituted matrix ( Figure 2C ). To further determine if Anxa2 is used to localize PCa cells to tissue spaces, CXCL12 was employed to establish a chemoattractive gradient [ Taichman et al., 2002 ]. When rhCXCL12 was placed in the bottom chamber, PC-3 cells migrated towards the chemokine ( Figure 2D ). When Anxa2 was added to the upper chamber of the culture dish with rhCXCL12 present in the bottom, fewer PC-3 cells migrated towards the chemokine CXCL12. Similar results were observed when an N-terminal competing Anxa2 peptide was included in the assay ( Figure 2D ). These data support the notion that PCa binds to, and moves toward Anxa2, and further suggests that Anxa2 participates in tissue localization of PCa.  Anxa2 is involved in PCa metastasis In order to test our hypothesis that Anxa2 is critical for the development of metastases in vivo , we established three experimental groups. In each case, the animals were inoculated with PC-3Luc cells by i.c . injection. Immediately prior to the i.c. injection, the animals were injected i.p . with (i) an antibody to Anxa2, (ii) the N-terminal competing Anxa2 peptide, or (iii) an isotype matched, non-specific antibody combined with a scrambled the amino acid sequence of the N-terminal competing peptide. The animals were subsequently sacrificed at 12 h and tissues were harvested. Q PCR was utilized as our primary outcome to detect the tagged human cells. As shown in Figure 3 , all of the animals in injected with PC-3 cells alone demonstrated significant homing/lodging of the cancer cells in a number of tissues. Animals injected with antibody to Anxa2 and the Anxa2 N-terminal competing peptide significantly reduced the total metastatic load of the animals compared to the IgG/peptide treated control group. Animals not injected with human cells did not demonstrate any signal for luciferase (data not shown). These data suggested that Anxa2 plays an important role in short-term homing of PCa and regulates PCa metastasis.  Anxa2 is involved in PCa metastasis In order to test our hypothesis that Anxa2 is critical for the development of metastases in vivo , we established three experimental groups. In each case, the animals were inoculated with PC-3Luc cells by i.c . injection. Immediately prior to the i.c. injection, the animals were injected i.p . with (i) an antibody to Anxa2, (ii) the N-terminal competing Anxa2 peptide, or (iii) an isotype matched, non-specific antibody combined with a scrambled the amino acid sequence of the N-terminal competing peptide. The animals were subsequently sacrificed at 12 h and tissues were harvested. Q PCR was utilized as our primary outcome to detect the tagged human cells. As shown in Figure 3 , all of the animals in injected with PC-3 cells alone demonstrated significant homing/lodging of the cancer cells in a number of tissues. Animals injected with antibody to Anxa2 and the Anxa2 N-terminal competing peptide significantly reduced the total metastatic load of the animals compared to the IgG/peptide treated control group. Animals not injected with human cells did not demonstrate any signal for luciferase (data not shown). These data suggested that Anxa2 plays an important role in short-term homing of PCa and regulates PCa metastasis.  Anxa2r expressed on PCa A single pass Anxa2r membrane receptor was cloned and identified to bind the p11 fraction of Anxa2 (Anxa2r) [ Lu et al., 2006 ]. To determine if PCa cells express the Anxa2r, RT-PCR and Q PCR for the Anxa2r was performed. As demonstrated in Figure 4A , PC-3 cells expressed mRNA for the Anxa2r. We also performed Q PCR for 4 different human PCa cell lines to compare their expression levels. The Anxa2r mRNA was most strongly expressed by the DU145 cell line ( Figure 4B ). Modest expression was seen in the PC-3, LNCaP, and C4-2B cell lines ( Figure 4B ). Next, to evaluate the widest range of Anxa2r expression, PCa tissue microarrays were examined. Tumors were graded using the Gleason grading system and examined to identify areas of benign prostate and PCa. Staining of microarrays with antibody to Anxa2r revealed moderate-to-strong Anxa2r protein expression in clinically localized PCa samples with cytoplasmic and nuclear localization ( Figure 4C-1–6 ). Anxa2r protein expression was enhanced with increasing tumor grade, although statistically there were no significant differences in localized tumor and metastatic lesions ( Figure 4C-1–6 , and data not presented ).  Anxa2r expressed on PCa A single pass Anxa2r membrane receptor was cloned and identified to bind the p11 fraction of Anxa2 (Anxa2r) [ Lu et al., 2006 ]. To determine if PCa cells express the Anxa2r, RT-PCR and Q PCR for the Anxa2r was performed. As demonstrated in Figure 4A , PC-3 cells expressed mRNA for the Anxa2r. We also performed Q PCR for 4 different human PCa cell lines to compare their expression levels. The Anxa2r mRNA was most strongly expressed by the DU145 cell line ( Figure 4B ). Modest expression was seen in the PC-3, LNCaP, and C4-2B cell lines ( Figure 4B ). Next, to evaluate the widest range of Anxa2r expression, PCa tissue microarrays were examined. Tumors were graded using the Gleason grading system and examined to identify areas of benign prostate and PCa. Staining of microarrays with antibody to Anxa2r revealed moderate-to-strong Anxa2r protein expression in clinically localized PCa samples with cytoplasmic and nuclear localization ( Figure 4C-1–6 ). Anxa2r protein expression was enhanced with increasing tumor grade, although statistically there were no significant differences in localized tumor and metastatic lesions ( Figure 4C-1–6 , and data not presented ).  Anxa2r involved in PCa metastasis To test whether Anxa2r is also critical for the development of metastases, siRNAs were employed to alter the expression of Anxa2r on PCa cells. PC-3Luc cells were transfected with siRNAs targeting the Anxa2r. Our best siRNA was able to decrease Anxa2r mRNA expression by ~ 60% by 48h ( Figure 5A ). By knocking down the Anxa2r, PCa cells bind less vigorously to HBMECs compared with cells transfected with a scrambled siRNA ( Figure 5B ). Similar results were seen using the C4-2B and LNCaP cell lines (not presented). Next, to explore the in vivo role of Anxa2r in PCa metastases, PC-3siAnxa2r or PC-3siControl cells were injected i.c. into SCID mice. At one month, significantly fewer lesions were identified in the PC-3siAnxa2r cells injected group compared to those animals that received the cells expressing the scrambled controls ( Figure 5C ). These data support the hypothesis that Anxa2r plays a critical role in PCa metastasis.  Anxa2r involved in PCa metastasis To test whether Anxa2r is also critical for the development of metastases, siRNAs were employed to alter the expression of Anxa2r on PCa cells. PC-3Luc cells were transfected with siRNAs targeting the Anxa2r. Our best siRNA was able to decrease Anxa2r mRNA expression by ~ 60% by 48h ( Figure 5A ). By knocking down the Anxa2r, PCa cells bind less vigorously to HBMECs compared with cells transfected with a scrambled siRNA ( Figure 5B ). Similar results were seen using the C4-2B and LNCaP cell lines (not presented). Next, to explore the in vivo role of Anxa2r in PCa metastases, PC-3siAnxa2r or PC-3siControl cells were injected i.c. into SCID mice. At one month, significantly fewer lesions were identified in the PC-3siAnxa2r cells injected group compared to those animals that received the cells expressing the scrambled controls ( Figure 5C ). These data support the hypothesis that Anxa2r plays a critical role in PCa metastasis.  Anxa2 regulates PCa proliferation and survival via MAPK signaling pathway To determine whether Anxa2 supports PCa survival or proliferation, we examined the viability of PC-3Luc cells that were plated on osteoblasts derived from Anxa2 +/+ or Anxa2 ?/? mice. Significantly more PC-3Luc cells grew on the Anxa2 +/+ osteoblasts than on the Anxa2 ?/? osteoblasts ( Figure 6A-1, 2 ). To further explore whether Anxa2 supports PCa growth in vivo , PC-3Luc cells were injected directly into vertebral bodies ( vossicles ) derived from Anxa2 +/+ or Anxa2 ?/? animals, and transplanted into immunodeficient hosts. Bioluminescent imaging was performed at one month to evaluate luciferase activity in the implanted vossicles. The data demonstrated that the growth of the PCa was greater in the vossicles derived from Anxa2 +/+ animals ( Figure 6B-1, 2 ). To explore how Anxa2 regulates survival/growth, we next examined the effects of Anxa2 on Erk1/2 or Akt activation in PCa cells. PCa cells were treated with Anxa2, and Akt and Erk1/2 phosphorylation were evaluated by western blotting. The data demonstrated that Anxa2 rapidly induces Erk1/2 phosphorylation in PC-3 cells within 5 min, whereas Anxa2 did not activate the Akt pathway ( Figure 6C ). These data suggested that once PCa has metastasized to the bone, Anxa2 then facilitates the PCa growth via the MAPK pathway.  Anxa2 regulates PCa proliferation and survival via MAPK signaling pathway To determine whether Anxa2 supports PCa survival or proliferation, we examined the viability of PC-3Luc cells that were plated on osteoblasts derived from Anxa2 +/+ or Anxa2 ?/? mice. Significantly more PC-3Luc cells grew on the Anxa2 +/+ osteoblasts than on the Anxa2 ?/? osteoblasts ( Figure 6A-1, 2 ). To further explore whether Anxa2 supports PCa growth in vivo , PC-3Luc cells were injected directly into vertebral bodies ( vossicles ) derived from Anxa2 +/+ or Anxa2 ?/? animals, and transplanted into immunodeficient hosts. Bioluminescent imaging was performed at one month to evaluate luciferase activity in the implanted vossicles. The data demonstrated that the growth of the PCa was greater in the vossicles derived from Anxa2 +/+ animals ( Figure 6B-1, 2 ). To explore how Anxa2 regulates survival/growth, we next examined the effects of Anxa2 on Erk1/2 or Akt activation in PCa cells. PCa cells were treated with Anxa2, and Akt and Erk1/2 phosphorylation were evaluated by western blotting. The data demonstrated that Anxa2 rapidly induces Erk1/2 phosphorylation in PC-3 cells within 5 min, whereas Anxa2 did not activate the Akt pathway ( Figure 6C ). These data suggested that once PCa has metastasized to the bone, Anxa2 then facilitates the PCa growth via the MAPK pathway.  Discussion In this paper, we demonstrate that Anxa2/Anxa2r axis plays a crucial role in establishing metastasis of PCa by regulating the adhesion and migration of PCa to osteobalsts and endothelial cells. PCa cells migrate toward Anxa2 and the adhesion of PCa to osteoblasts and endothelial cells was inhibited by an Anxa2 peptide and an anti-Anxa2 antibody and by siRNA knockdown of Anxa2r. In in vivo studies, the short-term localization of PCa cells to a number of tissues was substantially inhibited by Anxa2 peptides or anti-Anxa2 antibodies. The long-term localization of PCa cells to a number of tissues was also inhibited by siRNA knockdown of Anxa2r. Moreover, Anxa2 is involved in the regulation of PCa growth in vitro and in vivo by activating the MAPK signaling pathway. Together, these data strongly suggested that Anxa2/Anxa2r axis plays an important role in regulating the metastasis of PCa to the marrow. It is well known that HSCs localize to bone during fetal life and during marrow transplantation. In the bone marrow, HSCs are known to associate with at least 2 separate niches, the endosteal niche (oateoblasts) and the vascular niche (endothelial cells). We have recently demonstrated that osteoblasts and marrow endothelial cells express Anxa2 which functions as a molecule that regulates hematopoietic stem engraftment [ Jung et al., 2007 ]. We have hypothesized based upon the hematopoietic model that metastatic PCa use a similar pathway to localize to the bone marrow [ Taichman et al., 2002 ]. Although both hematopoietic cells and PCa cells home to the bone marrow, we are not aware of any investigation that addresses whether Anxa2 operates in the pathogenesis of PCa metastasis as an adhesion ligand. Our functional studies demonstrate that Anxa2 alters the adherence, migration, and invasion of human PCa cell lines. For example, it was observed that PCa cells adhere to Anxa2 and that the N-terminal Anxa2 peptide dramatically inhibited PCa binding to bone marrow-derived endothelial cells. Moreover, it was demonstrated that Anxa2 supported the invasion of PCa cell lines into reconstituted extracellular matrices, and that invasion stimulated by CXCL12 could be blocked by with Anxa2 itself or the N-terminal Anxa2 peptide. In fact, recently we observed that CXCL12 binds to Anxa2, which could account for the loss of growth of PCa in Anxa2?/? vossicles and why the addition of Anxa2 to the migration chambers prevented chemotaxis to CXCL12 1 . While specific transendothelial migration assays were not performed, the initial binding of PCa cells to the endothelium is a necessary prerequesite for egress of tumors out of the vascular system. It was also demonstrated Anxa2 plays an important role in regulating the binding between PCa and osteoblasts. To further confirm the involvement of Anxa2 in the PCa metastasis, it was found that blocking Anxa2 with a monoclonal antibody or N-terminal peptide prevented PCa homing to the marrow and other sites of PCa metastasis. Collectively, our results suggest that PCa cells use Anxa2 as they spread to bone and other tissues. Our data also suggest that Anxa2 may also regulate the proliferation of PCa cells at metastastic sites. Moreover, ligand binding of PCa cells to Anxa2 resulted in activation of activated Erk1/2 signaling. In bone, Anxa2 has been demonstrated to play a role in osteoclastic activation and osteoblast mineralization, although the mechanism for these actions remains unclear [ Takahashi et al., 1994 ; Wang and Kirsch, 2002 ]. One scenario is that extracellular Anxa2 levels are regulated by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 that stimulates the proliferation of osteoclastic precursors possibly through T-cell intermediaries through the secretion of GM-CSF [ Menaa et al., 1999 ]. Osteoclastic activity is critical for PCa growth in bone [ Zhang et al., 2001 ]. Alternatively, Anxa2 may regulate vascular in growth that is critical for tumor proliferation. Although the detailed mechanisms for this remain unclear, Anxa2 may be involved in the survival or growth of PCa either in a direct or indirect way. Work by our group and others have defined the role that CXCL12 and its receptors (CXCR4 and RDC1/CXCR7) play in the metastatic process of PCa [ Cooper et al., 2004 ; Havens et al., 2006 ; Sun et al., 2007 ; Sun et al., 2005 ; Sun et al., 2003 ; Taichman et al., 2002 ; Wang et al., 2007 ; Wang et al., 2005 ]. In PCa, we observed that CXCR4 expression relates to increasing tumor grade [ Sun et al., 2003 ] and that CXCL12 signaling through CXCR4 triggers the adhesion of PCa to bone marrow endothelial cells, by activating CD164 [ Havens et al., 2006 ] and ?v?3 integrins [ Sun et al., 2007 ]. Moreover, a positive correlation exists between tissue levels of CXCL12 and sites where metastatic PCa lesions are observed suggesting a selective effect (pelvis, tibia, femur, liver and adrenals) [ Sun et al., 2005 ]. Interestingly we found a significant number of PCa cells in the prostate 24h after i.c. injection. Previously we noted that PCa cells do disseminate back to the prostate from a s.c. tumor [ Havens et al., 2008 ]. The basis for these observations however remains unclear. One of the mechanisms for this could be that prostate tissue expresses CXCL12 [ Berquin et al., 2005 ]. Another could be that PCa cells are attracted to the primary site possibly due to other homing mechanisms or because of it’s ‘fertile soil’. Further studies will be needed to sort out these possibilities While CXCL12 and its receptors participate in the homing of PCa to the niche, the events activated by PCa to co-opt the niche remain unclear. It is tantalizing to hypothesize that one of the potential reasons why metastatic PCa induce the expression of an osteoblastic phenotype is to establish a paracrine loop to further support their expansion/growth through enhanced production of CXCL12 and Anxa2. For example, Anxa2 itself is associated with proliferating and invasive cancers, possibly as a marker of malignancy [ Reeves et al., 1992 ] including lung, pancreatic, brain, colon, and gastric carcinomas, and is correlated with poor prognosis [ Cole et al., 1992 ; Diaz et al., 2004 ; Emoto et al., 2001 ; Roseman et al., 1994 ; Vishwanatha et al., 1993 ]. Yet, the loss of Anxa2 expression appears to be specific for PCa disease [ Banerjee et al., 2003 ; Chetcuti et al., 2001 ; Kirshner et al., 2003 ; Liu et al., 2003 ; Semov et al., 2005 ; Smitherman et al., 2004 ]. Therefore, it is possible that the absence of Anxa2 places selective pressures on PCa tumors to metastasize to bone, a rich source of Anxa2. It is also possible that Anxa2 serves as an adhesion molecule for PCa such that blocking Anxa2 or its receptor limits metastasis and subsequent tumor growth. Part of the mechanism may be that engagement of Anxa2 receptors on PCa stimulates the expression of a number of other receptors on PCa, many of which may be activated by proliferative signals including CXCR4. Thus, a ‘vicious cycle’ would be established by PCa in which increases in osteoblast numbers expand niche size by increasing the availability of Anxa2 and CXCL12. As a result, tumor expansion in the marrow may result by providing a docking signal that is normally absent (i.e. Anxa2) and promotion of proliferation (i.e. CXCL12), which may explain why bone metastases are so difficult to treat clinically. While further studies are clearly needed, these data suggest that Anxa2/Anxa2r plays a significant role in the metastatic cascades of PCa and thereby suggest novel targets for therapeutic intervention to prevent PCa metastasis.  Discussion In this paper, we demonstrate that Anxa2/Anxa2r axis plays a crucial role in establishing metastasis of PCa by regulating the adhesion and migration of PCa to osteobalsts and endothelial cells. PCa cells migrate toward Anxa2 and the adhesion of PCa to osteoblasts and endothelial cells was inhibited by an Anxa2 peptide and an anti-Anxa2 antibody and by siRNA knockdown of Anxa2r. In in vivo studies, the short-term localization of PCa cells to a number of tissues was substantially inhibited by Anxa2 peptides or anti-Anxa2 antibodies. The long-term localization of PCa cells to a number of tissues was also inhibited by siRNA knockdown of Anxa2r. Moreover, Anxa2 is involved in the regulation of PCa growth in vitro and in vivo by activating the MAPK signaling pathway. Together, these data strongly suggested that Anxa2/Anxa2r axis plays an important role in regulating the metastasis of PCa to the marrow. It is well known that HSCs localize to bone during fetal life and during marrow transplantation. In the bone marrow, HSCs are known to associate with at least 2 separate niches, the endosteal niche (oateoblasts) and the vascular niche (endothelial cells). We have recently demonstrated that osteoblasts and marrow endothelial cells express Anxa2 which functions as a molecule that regulates hematopoietic stem engraftment [ Jung et al., 2007 ]. We have hypothesized based upon the hematopoietic model that metastatic PCa use a similar pathway to localize to the bone marrow [ Taichman et al., 2002 ]. Although both hematopoietic cells and PCa cells home to the bone marrow, we are not aware of any investigation that addresses whether Anxa2 operates in the pathogenesis of PCa metastasis as an adhesion ligand. Our functional studies demonstrate that Anxa2 alters the adherence, migration, and invasion of human PCa cell lines. For example, it was observed that PCa cells adhere to Anxa2 and that the N-terminal Anxa2 peptide dramatically inhibited PCa binding to bone marrow-derived endothelial cells. Moreover, it was demonstrated that Anxa2 supported the invasion of PCa cell lines into reconstituted extracellular matrices, and that invasion stimulated by CXCL12 could be blocked by with Anxa2 itself or the N-terminal Anxa2 peptide. In fact, recently we observed that CXCL12 binds to Anxa2, which could account for the loss of growth of PCa in Anxa2?/? vossicles and why the addition of Anxa2 to the migration chambers prevented chemotaxis to CXCL12 1 . While specific transendothelial migration assays were not performed, the initial binding of PCa cells to the endothelium is a necessary prerequesite for egress of tumors out of the vascular system. It was also demonstrated Anxa2 plays an important role in regulating the binding between PCa and osteoblasts. To further confirm the involvement of Anxa2 in the PCa metastasis, it was found that blocking Anxa2 with a monoclonal antibody or N-terminal peptide prevented PCa homing to the marrow and other sites of PCa metastasis. Collectively, our results suggest that PCa cells use Anxa2 as they spread to bone and other tissues. Our data also suggest that Anxa2 may also regulate the proliferation of PCa cells at metastastic sites. Moreover, ligand binding of PCa cells to Anxa2 resulted in activation of activated Erk1/2 signaling. In bone, Anxa2 has been demonstrated to play a role in osteoclastic activation and osteoblast mineralization, although the mechanism for these actions remains unclear [ Takahashi et al., 1994 ; Wang and Kirsch, 2002 ]. One scenario is that extracellular Anxa2 levels are regulated by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 that stimulates the proliferation of osteoclastic precursors possibly through T-cell intermediaries through the secretion of GM-CSF [ Menaa et al., 1999 ]. Osteoclastic activity is critical for PCa growth in bone [ Zhang et al., 2001 ]. Alternatively, Anxa2 may regulate vascular in growth that is critical for tumor proliferation. Although the detailed mechanisms for this remain unclear, Anxa2 may be involved in the survival or growth of PCa either in a direct or indirect way. Work by our group and others have defined the role that CXCL12 and its receptors (CXCR4 and RDC1/CXCR7) play in the metastatic process of PCa [ Cooper et al., 2004 ; Havens et al., 2006 ; Sun et al., 2007 ; Sun et al., 2005 ; Sun et al., 2003 ; Taichman et al., 2002 ; Wang et al., 2007 ; Wang et al., 2005 ]. In PCa, we observed that CXCR4 expression relates to increasing tumor grade [ Sun et al., 2003 ] and that CXCL12 signaling through CXCR4 triggers the adhesion of PCa to bone marrow endothelial cells, by activating CD164 [ Havens et al., 2006 ] and ?v?3 integrins [ Sun et al., 2007 ]. Moreover, a positive correlation exists between tissue levels of CXCL12 and sites where metastatic PCa lesions are observed suggesting a selective effect (pelvis, tibia, femur, liver and adrenals) [ Sun et al., 2005 ]. Interestingly we found a significant number of PCa cells in the prostate 24h after i.c. injection. Previously we noted that PCa cells do disseminate back to the prostate from a s.c. tumor [ Havens et al., 2008 ]. The basis for these observations however remains unclear. One of the mechanisms for this could be that prostate tissue expresses CXCL12 [ Berquin et al., 2005 ]. Another could be that PCa cells are attracted to the primary site possibly due to other homing mechanisms or because of it’s ‘fertile soil’. Further studies will be needed to sort out these possibilities While CXCL12 and its receptors participate in the homing of PCa to the niche, the events activated by PCa to co-opt the niche remain unclear. It is tantalizing to hypothesize that one of the potential reasons why metastatic PCa induce the expression of an osteoblastic phenotype is to establish a paracrine loop to further support their expansion/growth through enhanced production of CXCL12 and Anxa2. For example, Anxa2 itself is associated with proliferating and invasive cancers, possibly as a marker of malignancy [ Reeves et al., 1992 ] including lung, pancreatic, brain, colon, and gastric carcinomas, and is correlated with poor prognosis [ Cole et al., 1992 ; Diaz et al., 2004 ; Emoto et al., 2001 ; Roseman et al., 1994 ; Vishwanatha et al., 1993 ]. Yet, the loss of Anxa2 expression appears to be specific for PCa disease [ Banerjee et al., 2003 ; Chetcuti et al., 2001 ; Kirshner et al., 2003 ; Liu et al., 2003 ; Semov et al., 2005 ; Smitherman et al., 2004 ]. Therefore, it is possible that the absence of Anxa2 places selective pressures on PCa tumors to metastasize to bone, a rich source of Anxa2. It is also possible that Anxa2 serves as an adhesion molecule for PCa such that blocking Anxa2 or its receptor limits metastasis and subsequent tumor growth. Part of the mechanism may be that engagement of Anxa2 receptors on PCa stimulates the expression of a number of other receptors on PCa, many of which may be activated by proliferative signals including CXCR4. Thus, a ‘vicious cycle’ would be established by PCa in which increases in osteoblast numbers expand niche size by increasing the availability of Anxa2 and CXCL12. As a result, tumor expansion in the marrow may result by providing a docking signal that is normally absent (i.e. Anxa2) and promotion of proliferation (i.e. CXCL12), which may explain why bone metastases are so difficult to treat clinically. While further studies are clearly needed, these data suggest that Anxa2/Anxa2r plays a significant role in the metastatic cascades of PCa and thereby suggest novel targets for therapeutic intervention to prevent PCa metastasis. 