Brain acetylcholinesterase activity controls systemic cytokine levels through the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway The excessive release of cytokines by the immune system contributes importantly to the pathogenesis of inflammatory diseases. Recent advances in understanding the biology of cytokine toxicity led to the discovery of the “cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway,” defined as neural signals transmitted via the vagus nerve that inhibit cytokine release through a mechanism that requires the alpha7 subunit-containing nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (?7nAChR). Vagus nerve regulation of peripheral functions is controlled by brain nuclei and neural networks, but despite considerable importance, little is known about the molecular basis for central regulation of the vagus nerve-based cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway. Here we report that brain acetylcholinesterase activity controls systemic and organ specific TNF production during endotoxemia. Peripheral administration of the acetylcholinesterase inhibitor galantamine significantly reduced serum TNF levels through vagus nerve signaling, and protected against lethality during murine endotoxemia. Administration of a centrally-acting muscarinic receptor antagonist abolished the suppression of TNF by galantamine, indicating that suppressing acetylcholinesterase activity, coupled with central muscarinic receptors, controls peripheral cytokine responses. Administration of galantamine to ?7nAChR knockout mice failed to suppress TNF levels, indicating that the ?7nAChR-mediated cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway is required for the anti-inflammatory effect of galantamine. These findings show that inhibition of brain acetylcholinesterase suppresses systemic inflammation through a central muscarinic receptor-mediated and vagal- and ?7nAChR-dependent mechanism. Our data also indicate that a clinically used centrally-acting acetylcholinesterase inhibitor can be utilized to suppress abnormal inflammation to therapeutic advantage.  Results Galantamine is a competitive and reversible acetylcholinesterase inhibitor that crosses the blood brain barrier, significantly increases brain cholinergic network activity( Reichman, 2003 ; Ellis, 2005 ), and activates vagus nerve outflow( Waldburger et al. , 2008 ). Galantamine dose-dependently lowered serum TNF levels in endotoxemic mice ( Fig. 1a ). and the highest suppression was achieved with a drug dose (4 mg/kg, i.p.) that was previously shown to inhibit mouse brain acetylcholinesterase activity by 43%.( Bickel et al. , 1991 ). Surgical transection of the right cervical vagus nerve, which innervates the celiac ganglia through abdominal posterior branches( Berthoud and Powley, 1993 ) and predominantly controls TNF release from spleen( Huston et al. , 2006 ), reduced galantamine-induced suppression of TNF ( Fig. 1b ). Galantamine administration in doses that significantly inhibited serum TNF levels ( Fig. 1b ) failed to significantly alter serum corticosterone levels, which were elevated during endotoxemia ( Fig. 1c ). This observation indicated that the suppressive effect of galantamine on serum TNF could not be attributed to elevated anti-inflammatory corticosteroids. In addition to reducing serum TNF levels, administration of galantamine conferred significant protection against endotoxin lethality ( Fig. 1d ). We next studied whether central muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, which mediate the activity of brain cholinergic pathways, are required for the anti-inflammatory effect of acetylcholinesterase inhibition. Pre-treatment with atropine sulfate, a muscarinic receptor antagonist that crosses the blood brain barrier, reversed the effect of galantamine on serum TNF levels ( Fig. 1e ). Pre-treatment with atropine methyl nitrate, a muscarinic receptor antagonist that does not penetrate the blood brain barrier, failed to alter galantamine suppression of TNF levels ( Fig. 1e ). Atropine sulfate, but not atropine methyl nitrate, eliminated the survival improvement conferred by galantamine ( Fig. 1f ). Pre-treatment with atropine sulfate or atropine methyl nitrate alone did not significantly alter serum TNF and survival during endotoxemia (data not shown). Together these data indicate that galantamine suppresses TNF production and endotoxin lethality through a centrally controlled, muscarinic receptor-, vagus nerve-dependent mechanism. The molecular mechanism of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway requires the ?7nAChR ( Wang et al. , 2003 ). To determine whether the ?7nAChR is required for galantamine suppression of TNF, we next measured TNF levels in wild type mice and ?7nAChR knockout mice treated with galantamine and subjected to endotoxemia. Galantamine reduced serum TNF levels in wild type mice, but failed to significantly alter cytokine levels in ?7nAChR knockout mice ( Fig. 2a ), indicating that the ?7nAChR was required for galantamine suppression of serum TNF levels. We had previously shown that the spleen is the principal organ that integrates the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway control of TNF release during endotoxemia( Huston et al. , 2006 ). Galatamine administration significantly inhibited TNF in the spleen of wild type mice, but not in the ?7nAChR knockout mice ( Fig. 2b ). These results indicate that the suppression of TNF production by galantamine requires cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway signaling to spleen via the ?7nAChR. To determine the specificity of acetylcholinesterase inhibition in preventing cytokine release, we utilized huperzine A, a structurally distinct, highly selective, centrally-acting acetylcholinesterase inhibitor( Zangara, 2003 ). Huperzine A (0.4 mg/kg, i.p.) administration significantly reduced serum TNF levels ( Fig. 3a ) and improved survival ( Fig. 3b ) during endotoxemia. Administration of atropine sulfate significantly decreased the survival-improving efficacy of huperzine A ( Fig. 3c ), whereas administration of atropine methyl nitrate failed to significantly alter huperzine A-induced survival benefit ( Fig. 3c ). Huperzine A or galantamine also reduced serum IL-6 levels ( Fig. 3d ), as expected from activation of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway.  Results Galantamine is a competitive and reversible acetylcholinesterase inhibitor that crosses the blood brain barrier, significantly increases brain cholinergic network activity( Reichman, 2003 ; Ellis, 2005 ), and activates vagus nerve outflow( Waldburger et al. , 2008 ). Galantamine dose-dependently lowered serum TNF levels in endotoxemic mice ( Fig. 1a ). and the highest suppression was achieved with a drug dose (4 mg/kg, i.p.) that was previously shown to inhibit mouse brain acetylcholinesterase activity by 43%.( Bickel et al. , 1991 ). Surgical transection of the right cervical vagus nerve, which innervates the celiac ganglia through abdominal posterior branches( Berthoud and Powley, 1993 ) and predominantly controls TNF release from spleen( Huston et al. , 2006 ), reduced galantamine-induced suppression of TNF ( Fig. 1b ). Galantamine administration in doses that significantly inhibited serum TNF levels ( Fig. 1b ) failed to significantly alter serum corticosterone levels, which were elevated during endotoxemia ( Fig. 1c ). This observation indicated that the suppressive effect of galantamine on serum TNF could not be attributed to elevated anti-inflammatory corticosteroids. In addition to reducing serum TNF levels, administration of galantamine conferred significant protection against endotoxin lethality ( Fig. 1d ). We next studied whether central muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, which mediate the activity of brain cholinergic pathways, are required for the anti-inflammatory effect of acetylcholinesterase inhibition. Pre-treatment with atropine sulfate, a muscarinic receptor antagonist that crosses the blood brain barrier, reversed the effect of galantamine on serum TNF levels ( Fig. 1e ). Pre-treatment with atropine methyl nitrate, a muscarinic receptor antagonist that does not penetrate the blood brain barrier, failed to alter galantamine suppression of TNF levels ( Fig. 1e ). Atropine sulfate, but not atropine methyl nitrate, eliminated the survival improvement conferred by galantamine ( Fig. 1f ). Pre-treatment with atropine sulfate or atropine methyl nitrate alone did not significantly alter serum TNF and survival during endotoxemia (data not shown). Together these data indicate that galantamine suppresses TNF production and endotoxin lethality through a centrally controlled, muscarinic receptor-, vagus nerve-dependent mechanism. The molecular mechanism of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway requires the ?7nAChR ( Wang et al. , 2003 ). To determine whether the ?7nAChR is required for galantamine suppression of TNF, we next measured TNF levels in wild type mice and ?7nAChR knockout mice treated with galantamine and subjected to endotoxemia. Galantamine reduced serum TNF levels in wild type mice, but failed to significantly alter cytokine levels in ?7nAChR knockout mice ( Fig. 2a ), indicating that the ?7nAChR was required for galantamine suppression of serum TNF levels. We had previously shown that the spleen is the principal organ that integrates the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway control of TNF release during endotoxemia( Huston et al. , 2006 ). Galatamine administration significantly inhibited TNF in the spleen of wild type mice, but not in the ?7nAChR knockout mice ( Fig. 2b ). These results indicate that the suppression of TNF production by galantamine requires cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway signaling to spleen via the ?7nAChR. To determine the specificity of acetylcholinesterase inhibition in preventing cytokine release, we utilized huperzine A, a structurally distinct, highly selective, centrally-acting acetylcholinesterase inhibitor( Zangara, 2003 ). Huperzine A (0.4 mg/kg, i.p.) administration significantly reduced serum TNF levels ( Fig. 3a ) and improved survival ( Fig. 3b ) during endotoxemia. Administration of atropine sulfate significantly decreased the survival-improving efficacy of huperzine A ( Fig. 3c ), whereas administration of atropine methyl nitrate failed to significantly alter huperzine A-induced survival benefit ( Fig. 3c ). Huperzine A or galantamine also reduced serum IL-6 levels ( Fig. 3d ), as expected from activation of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway.  Discussion Here we show that galantamine, a clinically used acetylcholinesterase inhibitor suppresses systemic cytokine levels during endotoxemia. The cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway, through ?7nAChR-mediated signaling, conveys the primary central, muscarinic receptor-dependent galantamine effect to inhibition of systemic TNF release. These findings have major implications for understanding how the brain regulates the innate immune response during infection or injury, and for the possible clinical use of clinically approved centrally-acting cholinergic drugs as anti-inflammatory agents to suppress peripheral inflammation. Galantamine doses in the range reported here significantly inhibit brain acetylcholinesterase activity in levels that can be achieved in patients ( Barnes et al. , 2000 ; Geerts, 2005 ). The brain cholinergic system modulates attention, learning, memory, REM sleep, the control of movements, and other peripheral functions( Gotoh et al. , 1989 ; Steriade, 1992 ; Sarter and Bruno, 1997 ; Perry et al. , 1999 ; Li et al. , 2003 ). Now it appears that this neuromodulatory system regulates the peripheral cytokine response to lethal endotoxemia. through brain mechanisms that may also involve other neurotransmitter systems. Our data indicate that brain cholinergic muscarinic networks communicate with the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway to suppress peripheral inflammation. These findings do not exclude contribution by other immunoregulatory mechanisms, including catecholaminergic pathways ( Pavlov and Tracey, 2004 ; Paton et al. , 2005 ; Flierl et al. , 2007 ). Decreased activity in central cholinergic networks, a decline of vagus nerve outflow, and increases in serum cytokine levels are associated with inflammatory disease and aging ( Bartus et al. , 1982 ; Luine and Hearns, 1990 ; Muir, 1997 ; Csiszar et al. , 2003 ; Krabbe et al. , 2004 ; De Meersman and Stein, 2007 ; Marsland et al. , 2007 ). It is interesting to consider whether dysfunction in central cholinergic signaling underlies the risk of developing cytokine-mediated tissue injury. Galantamine is widely used in the treatment of cholinergic insufficiency and memory loss during Alzheimer’s disease, but the potential use of this agent for suppressing peripheral inflammation had not been considered previously. It is now plausible that pharmacologically targeting brain acetylcholinesterase to increase activity of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway will suppress inflammation in diseases mediated by cytokines (e.g. rheumatoid arthritis, septic shock, and inflammatory bowel disease).  Discussion Here we show that galantamine, a clinically used acetylcholinesterase inhibitor suppresses systemic cytokine levels during endotoxemia. The cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway, through ?7nAChR-mediated signaling, conveys the primary central, muscarinic receptor-dependent galantamine effect to inhibition of systemic TNF release. These findings have major implications for understanding how the brain regulates the innate immune response during infection or injury, and for the possible clinical use of clinically approved centrally-acting cholinergic drugs as anti-inflammatory agents to suppress peripheral inflammation. Galantamine doses in the range reported here significantly inhibit brain acetylcholinesterase activity in levels that can be achieved in patients ( Barnes et al. , 2000 ; Geerts, 2005 ). The brain cholinergic system modulates attention, learning, memory, REM sleep, the control of movements, and other peripheral functions( Gotoh et al. , 1989 ; Steriade, 1992 ; Sarter and Bruno, 1997 ; Perry et al. , 1999 ; Li et al. , 2003 ). Now it appears that this neuromodulatory system regulates the peripheral cytokine response to lethal endotoxemia. through brain mechanisms that may also involve other neurotransmitter systems. Our data indicate that brain cholinergic muscarinic networks communicate with the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway to suppress peripheral inflammation. These findings do not exclude contribution by other immunoregulatory mechanisms, including catecholaminergic pathways ( Pavlov and Tracey, 2004 ; Paton et al. , 2005 ; Flierl et al. , 2007 ). Decreased activity in central cholinergic networks, a decline of vagus nerve outflow, and increases in serum cytokine levels are associated with inflammatory disease and aging ( Bartus et al. , 1982 ; Luine and Hearns, 1990 ; Muir, 1997 ; Csiszar et al. , 2003 ; Krabbe et al. , 2004 ; De Meersman and Stein, 2007 ; Marsland et al. , 2007 ). It is interesting to consider whether dysfunction in central cholinergic signaling underlies the risk of developing cytokine-mediated tissue injury. Galantamine is widely used in the treatment of cholinergic insufficiency and memory loss during Alzheimer’s disease, but the potential use of this agent for suppressing peripheral inflammation had not been considered previously. It is now plausible that pharmacologically targeting brain acetylcholinesterase to increase activity of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway will suppress inflammation in diseases mediated by cytokines (e.g. rheumatoid arthritis, septic shock, and inflammatory bowel disease). 