Association of Gadolinium Based MRI Contrast Agents and Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis Purpose To investigate the recently discovered association between gadolinium based MRI contrast agents and the development of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) in patients with chronic kidney disease or acute kidney injury. Materials and Methods A systematic review of the PubMed database and publicly available patient databases was performed to characterize NSF and its possible association with exposure to gadolinium based MRI contrast agents. Results Data from case series reports, NSF patient databases, NSF case reporting to the Federal Drug Administration (FDA) after gadolinium contrast agent exposure, and retrospective case-control studies suggest a strong association between the use of gadolinium based MRI contrast agents and the subsequent development of NSF in patients with renal disease. These data also suggest that the risk of NSF depends on the degree of renal dysfunction, dose of contrast agent, gadolinium contrast agent stability, and severity of concomitant illness. Thus, the occurrence of NSF after gadolinium contrast agent exposure may vary from negligible up to 2–5% in select high-risk clinical situations. Conclusions MRI utilizing gadolinium based contrast agents must be undertaken judiciously in patients with renal dysfunction carefully weighing, on a case by case basis, the benefits of MRI and the risk of NSF as well as the disadvantages of undergoing alternative imaging studies or foregoing imaging studies.  Conclusions NSF is a rare, but devastating disease. Although associative from a rigorous perspective, the newly discovered link between NSF and gadolinium based MRI contrast agent exposure in patients with renal dysfunction raises the depressing prospect of morbidity and mortality related to well-intentioned radiologic studies, but also raises the hope of curtailing NSF in the future. A major barrier to this hope is physician and patient education. In this paper, we have provided the practicing urologist a framework to approach contrasted MRI studies in patients with renal dysfunction carefully weighing the risk of NSF against the benefit of the study or the disadvantages of alternative approaches. 