Estrogen Regulation of Glucose Metabolism and Mitochondrial Function: Therapeutic Implications for Prevention of Alzheimer’s Disease Estrogen-induced signaling pathways in hippocampal and cortical neurons converge upon the mitochondria to enhance mitochondrial function and to sustain aerobic glycolysis and citric acid cycle-driven oxidative phosphorylation and ATP generation. Data derived from experimental and clinical paradigms investigating estrogen intervention in healthy systems and prior to neurodegenerative insult indicate enhanced neural defense and survival through maintenance of calcium homeostasis, enhanced glycolysis coupled to the citric acid cycle (aerobic glycolysis), sustained and enhanced mitochondrial function, protection against free radical damage, efficient cholesterol trafficking and beta amyloid clearance. The convergence of E2 mechanisms of action onto mitochondrial is also a potential point of vulnerability when activated in a degenerating neural system and could exacerbate the degenerative processes through increased load on dysregulated calcium homeostasis. The data indicate that as the continuum of neurological health progresses from healthy to unhealthy so too do the benefits of estrogen or hormone therapy. If neurons are healthy at the time of estrogen exposure, their response to estrogen is beneficial for both neuronal survival and neurological function. In contrast, if neurological health is compromised, estrogen exposure over time exacerbates neurological demise. The healthy cell bias of estrogen action hypothesis provides a lens through which to assess the disparities in outcomes across the basic to clinical domains of scientific inquiry and on which to predict future applications of estrogen and hormone therapeutic interventions sustain neurological health and to prevent age-associated neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s. Overall, E2 promotes the energetic capacity of brain mitochondria by maximizing aerobic glycolysis (oxidative phosphorylation coupled to pyruvate metabolism). The enhanced aerobic glycolysis in the aging brain would be predicted to prevent conversion of the brain to using alternative sources of fuel such as the ketone body pathway characteristic of Alzheimer’s.  Implications for initiating estrogen therapy and for generalizing preventive strategies to treatment strategies Decades of basic science investigation of estrogen action in brain and subsequent observational and clinical trials indicated the benefit of estrogen based therapies [ 59 , 101 – 103 ]. Embedded among these reports were suggestions that the beneficial effects of estrogen were conditional [ 104 – 110 ]. Results of the widely publicized Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study (WHIMS) clinical trial drew substantial attention to just how conditional estrogen and hormone therapy can be [ 111 , 112 ]. Analysis of the model systems used across the basic to clinical research continuum separate into two broad classes, those that use prevention interventions in healthy organisms and those that use hormone interventions in organisms with compromised neurological function [ 101 ]. Basic science analyses that led to elucidation of the neurotrophic and neuroprotective effects of estrogen and the underlying mechanisms of action typically used a prevention experimental paradigm [ 101 ]. The prevention paradigm relies on healthy neurons/brains/animals/humans as the starting foundation followed by exposure to estrogen/hormone followed by exposure to neurodegenerative insult. The prevention paradigm of basic science analyses parallels the human studies of Sherwin and colleagues who investigated the cognitive impact of estrogen therapy in women with surgical or pharmacological-induced menopause [ 113 ]. Observational, retrospective and prospective, studies are also consistent with the outcomes of basic science analyses [ 101 ]. For the most part, the epidemiological observational data indicate reduction in risk of Alzheimer’s disease in women who began estrogen or hormone therapy at the time of the menopause [ 101 , 105 , 114 ] but see [ 115 ]. The comparable benefit seen in most observational studies and basic science analyses suggest that for the most part, the data within the observational studies were derived from women with healthy neurological status. In contrast, studies that fall within the second class, hormone intervention in women with compromised neurological function, i.e. a treatment paradigm, exhibit a mixed profile [ 101 ]. This was first evident in the results from the Cache County in which risk of AD varied with age of HT initiation and duration of use [ 105 ]. A woman’s sex-specific increase in risk disappeared entirely with more than 10 years of treatment with most of the HT-related reduction in incidence reflecting former use. There was no effect with current HRT use unless duration of treatment exceeded 10 years [ 105 ]. Efficacy of ET which observed in the early AD treatment trials which lasted 1.5–2 months [ 116 ] was not sustained when ET for an extended period of time [ 117 , 118 ]. In a randomized double-blind clinical trial of estrogen therapy in a cohort in aged women, >72 years of age, diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease, estrogen therapy resulted in a modest benefit of estrogen therapy in the short-term (2 months) and adverse progression of disease in the long-term (12 months) [ 117 , 118 ]. In the WHIMS cohort of women, 65–79 years of age, with no indicators of neurological disease but with variable health status, no statistically significant increase in AD risk occurred in the ET/CEE arm of the trial [ 111 ]. However, these was no benefit of ET and there was a clear decline in cognitive performance over time [ 111 ]. In contrast, the combination of CEE+MPA for 5 years increased the risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease by 2 fold [ 112 ] and when the results of the ET and HT data were combined there was a 2 fold increase in the risk of AD [ 112 ]. Subsequent post-hoc analyses of the WHIMS data suggested that women who had reported prior hormone user had a significantly lower risk of AD disease and all-cause dementia during the WHIMS trials [ 119 ]. Collectively, the data suggest that as the continuum of neurological health progresses from healthy to unhealthy so too do the benefits of estrogen or hormone therapy [ 101 ]. If neurons are healthy at the time of estrogen exposure, their response to estrogen is beneficial for both neurological function and survival. In contrast, if neurological health is compromised, estrogen exposure over time exacerbates neurological demise. The healthy cell bias of estrogen action hypothesis predicts that estrogen therapy if initiated at the time of peri-to menopause when neurological health is not yet comprised, will be of benefit as manifested as reduced risk for age-associated neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s. Further, E2 promotion of glycolysis and glycolytic coupled citric acid function, mitochondrial respiration and ATP generation, antioxidant and antiapoptotic mechanisms serves as the pivotal pathway by which estrogen sustains neurological health and defense. The reliance of this pathway on Ca2+ signaling and on mitochondrial Ca2+ buffering is an Achilles heel of estrogen action in degenerating systems in which Ca2+ homeostasis is dysregulated. Addition of estrogen under these conditions, while of modest benefit initially, an effect likely mediated by neurons not yet affected by the disease, adds to the Ca2+ homeostatic challenge with predictable exacerbation of the degenerative process [ 109 ]. Major challenges for optimal estrogen and hormone therapy remain. Beyond the timing issue, the real and perceived risks of hormone therapy remain and were amplified by results of both the WHI and WHIMS trials. It is clear that many, but not all , women could potentially benefit from estrogen or hormone therapy intervention. Biomarkers to identify women appropriate for and which type of hormone regimen remains largely undeveloped beyond the hot flash. Hormone therapy interventions that selectively target the benefits of estrogen while avoiding untoward risk factors remains an unmet need in women’s health. Estrogen alternatives that activate estrogen mechanisms in brain but not in breast or uterus such as NeuroSERMs and PhytoSERMs are promising strategies for sustaining the benefits of estrogen in brain to prevent age associated neurodegenerative disease. Investigating mechanisms of estrogen action in parallel to identifying events antecedent to the development Alzheimer’s pathology that have mechanistic plausibility, provides insights into the basis for disparities between basic science discovery and clinical outcomes. More generally, results of these investigations raise questions regarding applying preventive strategies to treatment modalities in the clinical realm and the reliance of healthy model systems that are abruptly exposed to neurodegenerative insults that typically develop incrementally, slowly and accumulate over time in the preclinical discovery realm. This is particularly true for age-associated neurodegenerative diseases in which the normal aging brain undergoes dramatic changes that are either unrelated to or are the earliest signs of neurodegenerative vulnerability [ 88 , 89 , 91 , 92 , 120 ]. Efforts to bridge these gaps in women’s cognitive health are emerging and hold the promise to serve as a model for mechanistic and translational neuroscience research at the bench and the bedside [ 121 ] and http://www.nia.nih.gov/ResearchInformation/ExtramuralPrograms/NeuroscienceOfAging/NNA_Conferences/BenchtoBedside.htm .  Implications for initiating estrogen therapy and for generalizing preventive strategies to treatment strategies Decades of basic science investigation of estrogen action in brain and subsequent observational and clinical trials indicated the benefit of estrogen based therapies [ 59 , 101 – 103 ]. Embedded among these reports were suggestions that the beneficial effects of estrogen were conditional [ 104 – 110 ]. Results of the widely publicized Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study (WHIMS) clinical trial drew substantial attention to just how conditional estrogen and hormone therapy can be [ 111 , 112 ]. Analysis of the model systems used across the basic to clinical research continuum separate into two broad classes, those that use prevention interventions in healthy organisms and those that use hormone interventions in organisms with compromised neurological function [ 101 ]. Basic science analyses that led to elucidation of the neurotrophic and neuroprotective effects of estrogen and the underlying mechanisms of action typically used a prevention experimental paradigm [ 101 ]. The prevention paradigm relies on healthy neurons/brains/animals/humans as the starting foundation followed by exposure to estrogen/hormone followed by exposure to neurodegenerative insult. The prevention paradigm of basic science analyses parallels the human studies of Sherwin and colleagues who investigated the cognitive impact of estrogen therapy in women with surgical or pharmacological-induced menopause [ 113 ]. Observational, retrospective and prospective, studies are also consistent with the outcomes of basic science analyses [ 101 ]. For the most part, the epidemiological observational data indicate reduction in risk of Alzheimer’s disease in women who began estrogen or hormone therapy at the time of the menopause [ 101 , 105 , 114 ] but see [ 115 ]. The comparable benefit seen in most observational studies and basic science analyses suggest that for the most part, the data within the observational studies were derived from women with healthy neurological status. In contrast, studies that fall within the second class, hormone intervention in women with compromised neurological function, i.e. a treatment paradigm, exhibit a mixed profile [ 101 ]. This was first evident in the results from the Cache County in which risk of AD varied with age of HT initiation and duration of use [ 105 ]. A woman’s sex-specific increase in risk disappeared entirely with more than 10 years of treatment with most of the HT-related reduction in incidence reflecting former use. There was no effect with current HRT use unless duration of treatment exceeded 10 years [ 105 ]. Efficacy of ET which observed in the early AD treatment trials which lasted 1.5–2 months [ 116 ] was not sustained when ET for an extended period of time [ 117 , 118 ]. In a randomized double-blind clinical trial of estrogen therapy in a cohort in aged women, >72 years of age, diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease, estrogen therapy resulted in a modest benefit of estrogen therapy in the short-term (2 months) and adverse progression of disease in the long-term (12 months) [ 117 , 118 ]. In the WHIMS cohort of women, 65–79 years of age, with no indicators of neurological disease but with variable health status, no statistically significant increase in AD risk occurred in the ET/CEE arm of the trial [ 111 ]. However, these was no benefit of ET and there was a clear decline in cognitive performance over time [ 111 ]. In contrast, the combination of CEE+MPA for 5 years increased the risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease by 2 fold [ 112 ] and when the results of the ET and HT data were combined there was a 2 fold increase in the risk of AD [ 112 ]. Subsequent post-hoc analyses of the WHIMS data suggested that women who had reported prior hormone user had a significantly lower risk of AD disease and all-cause dementia during the WHIMS trials [ 119 ]. Collectively, the data suggest that as the continuum of neurological health progresses from healthy to unhealthy so too do the benefits of estrogen or hormone therapy [ 101 ]. If neurons are healthy at the time of estrogen exposure, their response to estrogen is beneficial for both neurological function and survival. In contrast, if neurological health is compromised, estrogen exposure over time exacerbates neurological demise. The healthy cell bias of estrogen action hypothesis predicts that estrogen therapy if initiated at the time of peri-to menopause when neurological health is not yet comprised, will be of benefit as manifested as reduced risk for age-associated neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s. Further, E2 promotion of glycolysis and glycolytic coupled citric acid function, mitochondrial respiration and ATP generation, antioxidant and antiapoptotic mechanisms serves as the pivotal pathway by which estrogen sustains neurological health and defense. The reliance of this pathway on Ca2+ signaling and on mitochondrial Ca2+ buffering is an Achilles heel of estrogen action in degenerating systems in which Ca2+ homeostasis is dysregulated. Addition of estrogen under these conditions, while of modest benefit initially, an effect likely mediated by neurons not yet affected by the disease, adds to the Ca2+ homeostatic challenge with predictable exacerbation of the degenerative process [ 109 ]. Major challenges for optimal estrogen and hormone therapy remain. Beyond the timing issue, the real and perceived risks of hormone therapy remain and were amplified by results of both the WHI and WHIMS trials. It is clear that many, but not all , women could potentially benefit from estrogen or hormone therapy intervention. Biomarkers to identify women appropriate for and which type of hormone regimen remains largely undeveloped beyond the hot flash. Hormone therapy interventions that selectively target the benefits of estrogen while avoiding untoward risk factors remains an unmet need in women’s health. Estrogen alternatives that activate estrogen mechanisms in brain but not in breast or uterus such as NeuroSERMs and PhytoSERMs are promising strategies for sustaining the benefits of estrogen in brain to prevent age associated neurodegenerative disease. Investigating mechanisms of estrogen action in parallel to identifying events antecedent to the development Alzheimer’s pathology that have mechanistic plausibility, provides insights into the basis for disparities between basic science discovery and clinical outcomes. More generally, results of these investigations raise questions regarding applying preventive strategies to treatment modalities in the clinical realm and the reliance of healthy model systems that are abruptly exposed to neurodegenerative insults that typically develop incrementally, slowly and accumulate over time in the preclinical discovery realm. This is particularly true for age-associated neurodegenerative diseases in which the normal aging brain undergoes dramatic changes that are either unrelated to or are the earliest signs of neurodegenerative vulnerability [ 88 , 89 , 91 , 92 , 120 ]. Efforts to bridge these gaps in women’s cognitive health are emerging and hold the promise to serve as a model for mechanistic and translational neuroscience research at the bench and the bedside [ 121 ] and http://www.nia.nih.gov/ResearchInformation/ExtramuralPrograms/NeuroscienceOfAging/NNA_Conferences/BenchtoBedside.htm .  Figure Figure 1 Estrogen (E<sub>2</sub>) promotes glycolysis and glycolytic coupled tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) function, mitochondrial respiration and ATP generation to prevent switch to ketone bodies as an alternative fuel source E2 increases key enzymes in the glycolytic pathway to promote generation of pyruvate and its conversion by pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) to acetyl-CoA to initiate and sustain the TCA cycle. Under metabolically challenging conditions (i.e. starvation, aging and neurodegeneration) neurons can utilize acetyl-CoA generated from ketone body metabolism (ketolysis), produced by the liver or under conditions of starvation in neighboring glial cells. This latter pathway is much less efficient and can inhibit residual glycolysis. In AD there is a generalized shift towards use of an alternative fuel, ketone bodies, and away from glycolytic energy production. E2 enhances the glycolytic/pyruvate/acetyl-CoA pathway to generate electrons required for oxidative phosphorylation and ATP generation to sustain utilization of glucose as the primary fuel source for the brain.  Figure Figure 1 Estrogen (E<sub>2</sub>) promotes glycolysis and glycolytic coupled tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) function, mitochondrial respiration and ATP generation to prevent switch to ketone bodies as an alternative fuel source E2 increases key enzymes in the glycolytic pathway to promote generation of pyruvate and its conversion by pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) to acetyl-CoA to initiate and sustain the TCA cycle. Under metabolically challenging conditions (i.e. starvation, aging and neurodegeneration) neurons can utilize acetyl-CoA generated from ketone body metabolism (ketolysis), produced by the liver or under conditions of starvation in neighboring glial cells. This latter pathway is much less efficient and can inhibit residual glycolysis. In AD there is a generalized shift towards use of an alternative fuel, ketone bodies, and away from glycolytic energy production. E2 enhances the glycolytic/pyruvate/acetyl-CoA pathway to generate electrons required for oxidative phosphorylation and ATP generation to sustain utilization of glucose as the primary fuel source for the brain. 