Noradrenergic transmission in the extended amygdala: role in increased drug-seeking and relapse during protracted drug abstinence Studies reviewed here implicate the extended amygdala in the negative affective states and increased drug-seeking that occur during protracted abstinence from chronic drug exposure. Norepinephrine (NE) and corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) signaling in the extended amygdala, including the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, shell of the nucleus accumbens, and central nucleus of the amygdala, are generally involved in behavioral responses to environmental and internal stressors. Hyperactivity of stress response systems during addiction drives many negative components of drug abstinence. In particular, NE signaling from the nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS) to the extended amygdala, along with increased CRF transmission within the extended amygdala, are critical for the aversiveness of acute opiate withdrawal as well as stress-induced relapse of drug-seeking for opiates, cocaine, ethanol, and nicotine. NE and CRF transmission in the extended amygdala are also implicated in the increased anxiety that occurs during prolonged abstinence from chronic opiates, cocaine, ethanol, and cannabinoids. Many of these stress-associated behaviors are reversed by NE or CRF antagonists given systemically or locally within the extended amygdala. Finally, increased Fos activation in the extended amygdala and NTS is associated with the enhanced preference for drugs and decreased preference for natural rewards observed during protracted abstinence from opiates and cocaine, indicating that these areas are involved in the altered reward processing associated with addiction. Together, these findings suggest that involvement of the extended amygdala and its noradrenergic afferents in anxiety, stress-induced relapse, and altered reward processing reflects a common function for these circuits in stress modulation of drug-seeking.  Conclusion We reviewed studies indicating that NE and CRF signaling within the extended amygdala are involved in the aversiveness of acute opiate withdrawal and stress-induced reinstatement of drug-seeking in a virtually identical manner. NE and CRF are also necessary for the enhanced anxiety that accompanies protracted abstinence from chronic drug exposure. We also reviewed data showing that the extended amygdala and NTS are associated with the increased drug-seeking and decreased natural reward-seeking that occurs during protracted abstinence. The orexin system may also play a prominent role in withdrawal and relapse behaviors, perhaps in part because of its strong connections with the extended amygdala and NE- and CRF-containing structures. More recent evidence indicates that NE acting within the extended amygdala is critical for the positive reinforcing properties of drugs, particularly opiates. The extended amygdala is involved in behavioral responses related to stress and anxiety, and this may explain its role in the aversiveness of withdrawal and stress-induced reinstatement. However, the role of NE in positive reinforcement remains enigmatic, and the exact mechanisms of involvement in opiate reward as well as the enhanced drug-seeking and altered reward processing aspects of addiction remain to be elucidated. We presented evidence throughout that indicates that the VTA DA system may be one important site of action for increased extended amygdala output during stress-related aspects of protracted abstinence. Taken together, the studies reviewed here indicate that acute withdrawal and protracted abstinence following chronic drug exposure are associated with increased NTS activation, increased NE release and responsivity in the extended amygdala, and increased CRF release in the extended amygdala. This amplification of stress response systems in the extended amygdala during abstinence seems to similarly account for the aversiveness of acute withdrawal, increased anxiety, stress-induced relapse, and altered reward-processing for drugs and natural rewards. Overall, these studies implicate NE and neuropeptide transmission in the extended amygdala in several stress-related components of addiction which contribute to the increased drug-seeking and relapse vulnerability that makes recovery from addiction so difficult. 