On-Chip, Cell-Based Microarray Immunofluorescence Assay for High-Throughput Analysis of Target Proteins We have developed an immunofluorescence-based assay for high-throughput analysis of target proteins on a three-dimensional cellular microarray platform. This process integrates the use of three-dimensional cellular microarrays, which should better mimic the cellular microenvironment, with sensitive immunofluorescence detection and provides quantitative information on cell function. To demonstrate this assay platform, we examined the accumulation of the ? subunit of the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF-1?) after chemical stimulation of human pancreatic tumor cells encapsulated in 3D alginate spots in volumes as low as 60 nL. We also tested the effect of the known dysregulator of HIF-1?, 2-methoxyestradiol (2ME2), on the levels of HIF-1? using a dual microarray stamping technique. This chip-based in situ Western immunoassay protocol was able to provide quantitative information on cell function, namely, the cellular response to hypoxia mimicking conditions and the reduction of HIF-1? levels after cell treatment with 2ME2. This system is the first to enable high-content screening of cellular protein levels on a 3D human cell microarray platform.  EXPERIMENTAL SECTION Cell Culture Upon thawing, Mia PaCa-2 human pancreatic tumor cells (ATCC, Manassas, VA) were grown in T75 tissue culture flasks until confluence at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 incubator (HEPA class100, Thermo, Waltham, MA), using low-glucose Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1% (v/v) penicillin–streptomycin, and 1% (v/v) MEM nonessential aminoacids, all from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA). The cells were either trypsinized and seeded in six-well plates (1 × 105 cells/mL) or used for cell spotting on functionalized glass slides. After each passage, viable and dead cells were determined by counting in a hemocytometer using an optical microscope and the trypan blue dye (Invitrogen) exclusion test. Western Blotting Analysis of HIF-1? Levels in Mia PaCa-2 Cells Mia PaCa-2 cells were used to assess the expression of HIF-1?. The cells were seeded in six-well plates (1 × 105 cells/mL) and grown until confluence at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 incubator. The medium was replaced every 48 h. The hypoxia-mimicking agent carbobenzoxy-L-leucyl-L-leucyl-L-leucinal (MG-132, EMD Chemicals, Gibbstown, NJ) was used for induction of HIF-1? expression and 2-methoxyestradiol (2ME2, Sigma, St. Louis, MO) was used for inhibition of HIF-1?. A whole-cell extract was prepared by lysing the cells with 100 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.8) and 0.2% (v/v) Triton X-100 supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. After cell lysis, the lysate was collected and equal amounts of protein were loaded in each lane. The samples were resolved in a 7.5% precast SDS-PAGE gel for 1 h at 100 V and electrotransferred to a cellulose membrane, both from Bio-Rad (Hercules, CA). The membrane was then immersed in blocking buffer (5% (w/v) skim milk and 0.05% (v/v) Tween-20 in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)) overnight with agitation. The primary antibody (mouse monoclonal anti-HIF-1?, BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) was diluted (1:250, v/v) in the blocking buffer and incubated with the membrane for 1 h at room temperature. The membrane was then washed three times for 10 min with 0.05% (v/v) Tween-20 in PBS (PBS-T) and incubated with the secondary antibody (peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG, Pierce, Rockford, IL) (1:1000 dilution in blocking buffer) overnight at 4 °C. The membrane was again washed three times for 10 min with PBS-T and immunoreactivity was visualized using a chemiluminescence reagent (SuperSignal, Pierce). ? -Actin was used as internal control (rabbit monoclonal anti- ? -actin, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA). Glass Slide Modification Borosilicate glass slides (25 × 75 mm2, Fisher, Pittsburgh, PA) were prewashed with ethanol followed by acid treatment in concentrated sulfuric acid (98%) overnight to remove dust and oil from the glass surface. The slides were then sonicated for 30 min and rinsed in deionized distilled water five times and then once in acetone. The cleaned glass slides were dried using a nitrogen stream and then baked at 120 °C for 15 min prior to use. To generate slides for cell spotting the acid-cleaned glass slides were spin-coated (WS-400B-6NPP/Lite, Laurell Co., North Wales, PA) with 0.1% (w/v) poly (styrene- co -maleic anhydride) (PS-MA, Sigma) in toluene solution as described previously. 4 Briefly, the 0.1% (w/v) PS-MA solution was prepared starting from a 1% (w/v) stock solution, and 1.5 mL was spin-coated on top of a clean glass slide surface at 3000 rpm for 30 s. Methyltrimethoxysilane (MTMOS, Sigma)-coated slides were also prepared as described previously. 3 These slides were used for stamping MG-132 and 2ME2 in the cell spots to perform HIF-1? induction/inhibition studies on the microarrays. Cell Spotting A poly-L-lysine (PLL)-Ba2+ mixture was prepared by mixing a solution of BaCl2 in water (0.1 M) and sterile PLL (0.01% (w/v)), both from Sigma, in a 1:2 volume ratio, respectively. This mixture was spotted on the PS-MA-coated glass slides using a MicroSys 5100–4SQ noncontact microarray spotter (Genomic Solutions, Ann Arbor, MI). A mixture of low-viscosity alginate (Sigma) and cell suspension in DMEM (supplemented with 10% FBS) was prepared so that the final concentrations of cells and of alginate were 6 × 106 cells/mL and 1% (w/v), respectively. During cell spotting, the humidity within the microarrayer chamber was maintained above 90% to retard water evaporation from the applied spots. To minimize potential microbial contamination, the microarray spotter chamber was sterilized with 70% ethanol prior to use, and growth medium was supplemented with antibiotics (penicillin and streptomycin). Cellular Viability Assay The spotted slides were immersed in DMEM/10%FBS complete medium and incubated at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 incubator for 5 days. Medium was changed after 48 and 96 h. Cellular viability was assessed every day with the LIVE/DEAD Viability/Cytotoxicity Kit for mammalian cells (Invitrogen). Briefly, the slides were rinsed three times in PBS and a solution containing 0.5 ? M calcein AM was used to detect viable cells through green fluorescence intensity. The fluorescence was scanned and quantified from the scanning image using GenePix Pro 6.0 (Molecular Devices Co., Sunnyvale, CA). The fold increase in total viable cell number was calculated by the ratio of the fluorescence intensity at each day and the fluorescence intensity at day 0. Mimicking Hypoxia in Cellular Microarray Spotted slides were immersed in 10% FBS-supplemented DMEM medium and incubated for 3–4 days at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 incubator. Several dilutions of the hypoxia mimicking agent MG-132 were made by adding this agent to the culture medium, followed by 6-h incubation. The slides were then processed, and the levels of HIF-1? were detected using the in situ immunofluorescence assay. Slides incubated under normoxic conditions (no MG-132 added) were used for comparison. To show the potential of this platform for screening small molecules and their effects in cell models, we dispensed 60 nL of known concentrations of MG-132 and 2ME2 onto MTMOS-coated slides. The resulting array was immediately stamped on top of the 3D cellular array, such that each compound-containing spot contacted a cell spot. 4 A silicone gasket was used to maintain proper spacing between the two slides. The dual slide system was subsequently incubated for 6 h at 37 °C in a nearly 100% humidified hybridization chamber (ArrayIt, Sunnyvale, CA) to prevent evaporation. After stamping, the cell spots were rinsed and the cellular microarray was analyzed using the in-cell, chip-based Western assay. Cellular Microarray-Based Immunofluorescence Assay Following incubation the slides were rinsed three times in washing buffer (PBS containing 20 mM CaCl2) for at least 15 min, followed by fixation with a solution of methanol and acetone (1:1, v/v) for 20 min at ?20 °C. The slides were then rinsed twice in washing buffer and incubated overnight in blocking solution (SuperBlock, Pierce). The primary antibody (mouse anti-HIF-1?, 1:500 dilution in PBS-T containing 1% (w/v) bovine serum albumin (BSA)) was then added to the slides, and the cells were incubated overnight at 4 °C. The slides were then washed three times in washing buffer for 15 min each, the secondary antibody (peroxidase-conjugated goat-anti mouse IgG, Molecular Probes (Carlsbad, CA), 1:1000 dilution in PBS-T containing 1% (w/v) BSA) was added to the slides, and the cells were incubated for 3 h at room temperature. A tyramide signal amplification kit (Molecular Probes) was used following the manufacturer’s instructions to detect the presence of the protein HIF-1? through fluorescence analysis. The fluorescence was measured with the slide scanner and the images of stained cells were analyzed using the program GenePix Pro 6.0. The fluorescence signal of ? -actin (determined by the same protocol using triplicate slides for each condition) was used as the internal control.  Cell Culture Upon thawing, Mia PaCa-2 human pancreatic tumor cells (ATCC, Manassas, VA) were grown in T75 tissue culture flasks until confluence at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 incubator (HEPA class100, Thermo, Waltham, MA), using low-glucose Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1% (v/v) penicillin–streptomycin, and 1% (v/v) MEM nonessential aminoacids, all from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA). The cells were either trypsinized and seeded in six-well plates (1 × 105 cells/mL) or used for cell spotting on functionalized glass slides. After each passage, viable and dead cells were determined by counting in a hemocytometer using an optical microscope and the trypan blue dye (Invitrogen) exclusion test.  Western Blotting Analysis of HIF-1? Levels in Mia PaCa-2 Cells Mia PaCa-2 cells were used to assess the expression of HIF-1?. The cells were seeded in six-well plates (1 × 105 cells/mL) and grown until confluence at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 incubator. The medium was replaced every 48 h. The hypoxia-mimicking agent carbobenzoxy-L-leucyl-L-leucyl-L-leucinal (MG-132, EMD Chemicals, Gibbstown, NJ) was used for induction of HIF-1? expression and 2-methoxyestradiol (2ME2, Sigma, St. Louis, MO) was used for inhibition of HIF-1?. A whole-cell extract was prepared by lysing the cells with 100 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.8) and 0.2% (v/v) Triton X-100 supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. After cell lysis, the lysate was collected and equal amounts of protein were loaded in each lane. The samples were resolved in a 7.5% precast SDS-PAGE gel for 1 h at 100 V and electrotransferred to a cellulose membrane, both from Bio-Rad (Hercules, CA). The membrane was then immersed in blocking buffer (5% (w/v) skim milk and 0.05% (v/v) Tween-20 in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)) overnight with agitation. The primary antibody (mouse monoclonal anti-HIF-1?, BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) was diluted (1:250, v/v) in the blocking buffer and incubated with the membrane for 1 h at room temperature. The membrane was then washed three times for 10 min with 0.05% (v/v) Tween-20 in PBS (PBS-T) and incubated with the secondary antibody (peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG, Pierce, Rockford, IL) (1:1000 dilution in blocking buffer) overnight at 4 °C. The membrane was again washed three times for 10 min with PBS-T and immunoreactivity was visualized using a chemiluminescence reagent (SuperSignal, Pierce). ? -Actin was used as internal control (rabbit monoclonal anti- ? -actin, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA).  Glass Slide Modification Borosilicate glass slides (25 × 75 mm2, Fisher, Pittsburgh, PA) were prewashed with ethanol followed by acid treatment in concentrated sulfuric acid (98%) overnight to remove dust and oil from the glass surface. The slides were then sonicated for 30 min and rinsed in deionized distilled water five times and then once in acetone. The cleaned glass slides were dried using a nitrogen stream and then baked at 120 °C for 15 min prior to use. To generate slides for cell spotting the acid-cleaned glass slides were spin-coated (WS-400B-6NPP/Lite, Laurell Co., North Wales, PA) with 0.1% (w/v) poly (styrene- co -maleic anhydride) (PS-MA, Sigma) in toluene solution as described previously. 4 Briefly, the 0.1% (w/v) PS-MA solution was prepared starting from a 1% (w/v) stock solution, and 1.5 mL was spin-coated on top of a clean glass slide surface at 3000 rpm for 30 s. Methyltrimethoxysilane (MTMOS, Sigma)-coated slides were also prepared as described previously. 3 These slides were used for stamping MG-132 and 2ME2 in the cell spots to perform HIF-1? induction/inhibition studies on the microarrays.  Cell Spotting A poly-L-lysine (PLL)-Ba2+ mixture was prepared by mixing a solution of BaCl2 in water (0.1 M) and sterile PLL (0.01% (w/v)), both from Sigma, in a 1:2 volume ratio, respectively. This mixture was spotted on the PS-MA-coated glass slides using a MicroSys 5100–4SQ noncontact microarray spotter (Genomic Solutions, Ann Arbor, MI). A mixture of low-viscosity alginate (Sigma) and cell suspension in DMEM (supplemented with 10% FBS) was prepared so that the final concentrations of cells and of alginate were 6 × 106 cells/mL and 1% (w/v), respectively. During cell spotting, the humidity within the microarrayer chamber was maintained above 90% to retard water evaporation from the applied spots. To minimize potential microbial contamination, the microarray spotter chamber was sterilized with 70% ethanol prior to use, and growth medium was supplemented with antibiotics (penicillin and streptomycin).  Cellular Viability Assay The spotted slides were immersed in DMEM/10%FBS complete medium and incubated at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 incubator for 5 days. Medium was changed after 48 and 96 h. Cellular viability was assessed every day with the LIVE/DEAD Viability/Cytotoxicity Kit for mammalian cells (Invitrogen). Briefly, the slides were rinsed three times in PBS and a solution containing 0.5 ? M calcein AM was used to detect viable cells through green fluorescence intensity. The fluorescence was scanned and quantified from the scanning image using GenePix Pro 6.0 (Molecular Devices Co., Sunnyvale, CA). The fold increase in total viable cell number was calculated by the ratio of the fluorescence intensity at each day and the fluorescence intensity at day 0.  Mimicking Hypoxia in Cellular Microarray Spotted slides were immersed in 10% FBS-supplemented DMEM medium and incubated for 3–4 days at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 incubator. Several dilutions of the hypoxia mimicking agent MG-132 were made by adding this agent to the culture medium, followed by 6-h incubation. The slides were then processed, and the levels of HIF-1? were detected using the in situ immunofluorescence assay. Slides incubated under normoxic conditions (no MG-132 added) were used for comparison. To show the potential of this platform for screening small molecules and their effects in cell models, we dispensed 60 nL of known concentrations of MG-132 and 2ME2 onto MTMOS-coated slides. The resulting array was immediately stamped on top of the 3D cellular array, such that each compound-containing spot contacted a cell spot. 4 A silicone gasket was used to maintain proper spacing between the two slides. The dual slide system was subsequently incubated for 6 h at 37 °C in a nearly 100% humidified hybridization chamber (ArrayIt, Sunnyvale, CA) to prevent evaporation. After stamping, the cell spots were rinsed and the cellular microarray was analyzed using the in-cell, chip-based Western assay.  Cellular Microarray-Based Immunofluorescence Assay Following incubation the slides were rinsed three times in washing buffer (PBS containing 20 mM CaCl2) for at least 15 min, followed by fixation with a solution of methanol and acetone (1:1, v/v) for 20 min at ?20 °C. The slides were then rinsed twice in washing buffer and incubated overnight in blocking solution (SuperBlock, Pierce). The primary antibody (mouse anti-HIF-1?, 1:500 dilution in PBS-T containing 1% (w/v) bovine serum albumin (BSA)) was then added to the slides, and the cells were incubated overnight at 4 °C. The slides were then washed three times in washing buffer for 15 min each, the secondary antibody (peroxidase-conjugated goat-anti mouse IgG, Molecular Probes (Carlsbad, CA), 1:1000 dilution in PBS-T containing 1% (w/v) BSA) was added to the slides, and the cells were incubated for 3 h at room temperature. A tyramide signal amplification kit (Molecular Probes) was used following the manufacturer’s instructions to detect the presence of the protein HIF-1? through fluorescence analysis. The fluorescence was measured with the slide scanner and the images of stained cells were analyzed using the program GenePix Pro 6.0. The fluorescence signal of ? -actin (determined by the same protocol using triplicate slides for each condition) was used as the internal control.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION We employed human pancreatic tumor cells, Mia PaCa-2, which are known to overexpress the hypoxia-inducible factor in response to hypoxic conditions. 17 Hypoxic conditions in vivo, particularly those related to angiogenesis, occur within a 3D cellular environment. To achieve a similar situation for the current work, we used a 3D cell-on-a-chip technique involving alginate-based matrixes on a microscope slide that was recently developed in our groups. 4 The glass surface of the slides was functionalized with a reactive copolymer of polystyrene and maleic anhydride (PS-MA; Figure 1a ), which increases the surface hydrophobicity and provides reactive groups to covalently attach the highly cationic PLL. A mixture of PLL and BaCl2, used to initiate alginate gelation, was spotted onto defined positions on the PS-MA surface. The formation of 3D spots was achieved by spotting 60 nL of an alginate solution containing the cells onto the PLL/BaCl2 bottom layer; alginate gelation was nearly instantaneous, and the positively charged PLL promoted attachment of the negatively charged polysaccharide constituent of alginate upon gelation. The resulting spots had a diameter of ~800 ? m and a center-to-center distance between adjacent spots of ~1200 ? m ( Figure 1b ). This spotting method requires very little reagent for fabrication of the biochip and produces a functional microarray platform for high-throughput studies that is compatible with conventional microarray scanning for quantitative analysis. To assess the suitability of the microscale 3D alginate matrix for cell growth, an array of 560 spots containing human pancreatic Mia PaCa-2 cells at an initial seeding density of 100 cells/spot was incubated in cell culture medium for 5 days. During this period, the cells remained confined within the spots and no visible gel detachment from the slide was observed, indicating that the spots were structurally stable. Cell viability assays were performed daily by staining a slide with the fluorescent dyes calcein AM and ethidium homodimer-I to quantify live and dead cells, respectively. High levels of live cells were detected after 5 days in culture ( Figure 1c ), indicating that the hydrogel environment did not seriously affect cellular viability. Live cell numbers per spot correlated linearly with green fluorescence intensity ( Figure 1d ), which facilitated cell growth calculations. Moreover, the cells reached a (4.7 ± 0.7)-fold increase in total cell number at the end of the 5-day incubation period ( Figure 1e ). Also shown in Figure 1e are images of representative individual microarray spots. No change in spot diameter was observed, indicating that the alginate matrix was stable throughout time in culture. The calculated apparent specific growth rate was 0.30 ± 0.05 day?1 with a corresponding doubling time of 2.2 ± 0.3 days; these values are similar to those obtained for Mia PaCa-2 cell growth in six-well plate cultures (0.37 ± 0.01 day?1 and 1.9 ± 0.04 days). Mia PaCa-2 cells could thus be cultured in the microarray system without losing viability, and the culture performance was not affected by the near 2000-fold scale reduction from typical 96-well plates. In order to quantify HIF-1? levels in situ, Mia PaCa-2 cells were treated with serial dilutions of MG-132 (carbobenzoxy-L-leucyl-L-leucyl-L-leucinal) to stimulate the accumulation of HIF-1?. MG-132 is a potent, reversible, and cell-permeable proteasome inhibitor that reduces the degradation of ubiquitin-conjugated proteins in mammalian cells by the 26S complex. 18 Under normoxic conditions, HIF-1? is rapidly degraded by the proteasome; however, the use of proteasome inhibitors has been shown to result in the cellular accumulation of HIF-1?. 19 Western blotting analysis of whole-cell lysates from six-well plates revealed a clear dose-dependent response of HIF-1? accumulation as a result of increasing concentrations of MG-132 ( Figure 2 ). As a control, cellular levels of ? -actin were measured. This protein is not under the influence of hypoxic control elements and represents a simple and assayable target that is dependent only on cell viability. 15 Therefore, blockage of the proteasomal degradation machinery by a proteasome inhibitor results in substantial accumulation of HIF-1?. This immunofluorescent method was scaled down to function at the microscale and allow high-throughput analysis. Such an in-cell, on-chip Western analysis would enable rapid quantification of the levels of specific cell marker proteins on the microarray. The strategy is depicted in Figure 3 . Briefly, after fixing the cells, a primary antibody specific to the target protein was added to the chip. A strong signal was obtained by adding a horseradish peroxidase (HRP) secondary antibody complex that binds to the primary antibody. The HRP generates multiple copies of a tyramide dye, which is highly reactive and covalently attaches to nucleophilic residues in the vicinity of the HRP–target interaction site, minimizing diffusion-related loss of signal and enabling the quantification of the target protein in each individual spot without spot-to-spot contamination. The levels of HIF-1? expressed in Mia PaCa-2 cells cultured for 3 days on the microarray platform were measured using the in-cell, on-chip Western protocol following 6-h exposure with MG-132 at concentrations up to 100 ? M. As was observed with the standard Western analysis, a dose-dependent response of HIF-1? accumulation with increasing concentrations of MG-132 was obtained ( Figure 4a ). To account for spot-to-spot variability, all data were normalized by dividing the signal obtained for HIF-1? (given by the Alexa Fluor 488 dye) by the level of the internal control ? -actin (provided by the Alexa Fluor 594 dye). The signal measured across a block of 12 × 12 spots under identical conditions (100 ? M MG-132 added) was not influenced by the position on the chip ( Figure 4b ) or between chips. With respect to the latter, under conditions where 100 ? M MG-132 was added (similar to Figure 4b ), the ratio of Log (HIF-1?/ ? -actin) was essentially constant among three independent chips and ranged from 1.50 ± 0.06 to 1.48 ± 0.05. The extent of nonspecific binding of secondary antibody was evaluated by spotting the cells and reproducing the protocol without adding the primary antibody. The signal due to nonspecific binding was <10% of the signal obtained at the lowest concentration of MG-132 applied to the chip. This signal was subtracted from the fluorescence signal obtained for each MG-132 concentration. By taking into account the minimal background signal and using the signal of ? -actin as internal control, the accumulation of HIF-1? was monitored in response to increasing concentrations of MG-132. Lower concentrations of MG-132 (<5 ? M) did not induce a significant increase in the levels of HIF-1?. However, when compared with basal levels (no MG-132 added), higher concentrations of MG-132 (>5 ? M) led to the stabilization of HIF-1? and the consequent accumulation of this protein in the cells. A nearly 8-fold increase in HIF-1? levels was obtained for cells induced at the highest concentration of MG-132 (100 ? M) when compared with the signal obtained in the absence of inducer. To compare our method with standard Western blotting, we calculated the half-maximal effective concentration (EC50) of MG-132 that induces an increase in HIF-1? response. To that end, the data were normalized so that the lowest response corresponded to the baseline and the highest response to the maximum, or 100% activation, and EC50 values were calculated from the sigmoidal dose–response curves ( Figure 4c ). A chip-based EC50 value of 9.1 ± 2.1 ? M was calculated based on the in situ quantification of HIF-1?, which is comparable to the EC50 value calculated using the standard Western blotting results (EC50 = 7.2 ± 0.2 ? M). The results on-chip, therefore, were similar to those obtained using the standard Western blotting, which demonstrates that the in-cell, on-chip immunofluorescence protocol serves as a reliable, high-throughput technique to quantify the levels of target proteins in situ. We also evaluated an on-chip, in-cell immunofluorescence assay to determine loss of function (e.g., inhibition) using both MG-132 and 2ME2. The latter is an endogenous estrogen metabolite that inhibits angiogenesis and endothelial cell proliferation 20 in an oxygen- and proteasome-independent manner. 15 To facilitate the addition of both compounds onto the cell-containing microarray, an MTMOS-coated glass slide was prepared and spotted with specific concentrations of MG-132 and 2ME2. The MTMOS slide is complementary to the 3D cell-containing alginate array. Bringing both slides together via stamping, followed by incubation, provides a dual slide system that enables the small molecules to diffuse into the cell spots and induce a biological response. A similar stamping strategy was shown to be effective in the high-throughput analysis of small molecule cytotoxicity. 4 The high-throughput capacity of the on-chip, in-cell immunofluorescence assay was then tested using a 14 × 20 array of 60-nL spots printed onto MTMOS-coated slides with MG-132 (100 ? M) or with MG-132 (100 ? M) plus 2ME2 (100 ? M). The printed MTMOS slides were then stamped on top of the 3D cell-containing alginate array (also prepared in a 14 × 20 spot arrangement that was a mirror image of the small-molecule-containing slide), such that each small-molecule spot was in contact with a cell spot, as previously described. The stamped slides were incubated for 6 h, after which the slides were separated and the levels of HIF-1? were measured. As before, ? -actin was used as an internal control. The presence of MG-132 resulted in high levels of HIF-1? expression ( Figure 5a ). The stamping procedure did not affect the overall stability of the microarray spots or cell viability; the scanned images show uniform spots with the inset indicating a high level of protein expressed by the cells in a representative spot. 2ME2 caused considerable reduction of HIF-1? levels (reduction in green fluorescence in the scanned image in Figure 5a ). In neither case (MG-132 with and without 2ME2) did the level of the cellular control ? -actin change. These results are consistent with the influence of 2ME2 on cell function. 2ME2 acts by depolymerizing tumor cell microtubules, which results in blockage of HIF-1? nuclear accumulation and HIF-transcriptional activity. 15 As a result, even in the presence of MG-132, posttranscriptional downregulation of HIF-1? would occur. The results in Figure 5b are consistent with the effect of 2ME2, where inhibition was observed even in the presence of 100 ? M MG-132. Finally, consistent with such activity, conventional Western blotting analysis of whole-cell lysates ( Figure 5c ) showed that 2ME2 reduced HIF-1? accumulation even in the presence of high concentrations of MG-132. These results demonstrate the feasibility of using the in-cell, on-chip immunofluorescence technique to screen small molecules and to evaluate their effects on the expression levels of molecular targets.  CONCLUSIONS We have developed a microarray-based in-cell immunoassay protocol for the quantification of protein levels in 3D cultured human cells. This approach may be used to evaluate the effects of small molecules on target protein levels. In the case of the hypoxia mimicking agent MG-132, the resulting in-cell, on-chip induction and accumulation of HIF-1? in human pancreatic tumor cells were observed, and changes in HIF-1? levels resulting from the use of different concentrations of MG-132 were assessed. Inhibition of HIF-1? on the microarray platform was also examined through use of the small-molecule inhibitor 2ME2. The results with MG-132 and 2ME2 were in close agreement to those obtained using conventional Western immunoblotting of cells under hypoxic mimicking conditions. 15 The 3D cell microarray is a high-throughput platform that enables quantification of on-chip cellular protein levels following perturbation of the cells upon addition of small molecules. This method should have many applications in high-content, cell-based screening regimens for the discovery of new therapeutic agents. 