Incidence and Management of Colorectal Cancer in Liver Transplant Recipients Liver transplant recipients are at an increased risk of developing de novo malignancies because of the prolonged immunosuppression necessary to avoid acute and chronic rejections. Skin cancers and lymphoproliferative diseases are the most common malignancies, but the overall incidence of colon cancer in this patient population does differ from that of the general population. Therefore, colorectal cancer (CRC) is a major health concern in liver transplant recipients. Furthermore, there are unique subsets of liver transplant recipients, such as those with primary sclerosing cholangitis and inflammatory bowel disease, who are at an increased risk for developing CRC after liver transplantation and might require special screening/surveillance strategies. The similar principles for management of colon cancer can be applied to transplant recipients if the adjustment to maintain the need for the long-term immunosuppression is made. Colectomy can be performed safely during the posttransplantation period. Prophylactic colectomy at the time of liver transplantation has been performed in some patients at high risk or with known premalignant conditions. Chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil and oxaliplatin has been used in transplant recipients for the treatment of metastatic CRC; however, further research is required to examine the safety, tolerability, and efficacy of combination chemotherapy and biologic agents in this patient population. This review summarizes the incidence, risk factors, diagnosis, and management of de novo CRC in liver transplant recipients.  Conclusion The majority of patients who develop de novo CRC after liver transplantation have PSC with UC as their indications for the transplantation. Colorectal cancer after liver transplantation is more often a right-sided lesion, is aggressive, and is associated with a higher rate of metastasis and poor survival. Patients who undergo liver transplantation for PSC should have annual follow-up screening examination with colonoscopy and random colorectal mucosal biopsies for early detection of CRC. When a dysplasia is found on the colonic biopsy specimen, early colectomy should be strongly considered for patients. Although the removal of colon before or during transplantation in patients with underlying PSC appears to enhance survival, prospective studies are necessary before recommendations can be made for prophylactic colectomy. Only limited information for chemotherapy options in liver transplant recipients is currently available, and further study is warranted. 