Early RB94 Produced Cytotoxicity Is Independent of Caspase Activation and 50 kb DNA Fragmentation RB94, which lacks the NH2-terminal 112 amino acid residues of the full-length RB (RB110) is a more potent inhibitor of cancer cell growth than RB 110, being cytotoxic to all cancer cell lines studied, independent of their genetic abnormalities. Although we initially thought RB94 induced cell death was caspase dependent, such caspase activation now appears to be a late event. Cells that remained attached 48 hr after transduction with Ad-RB94 showed, among other changes, nuclear enlargement, peripheral nuclear chromatin condensation, and often micronucleation. In addition, the cells were TUNEL positive but showed no cleavage of caspase 3 or 9. Only after the cells detached was cleavage of both caspase 3 and 9 observed. These TUNEL positive cells showed neither cytochrome C mitochondrial translocation usually found in typical apoptotic cells nor DNA laddering indicative of oligonucleosomal DNA fragmentation. In addition, although 50 kb DNA fragmentation was produced in these TUNEL positive cells, which was dependent on apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF), inhibiting this fragmentation by siAIF did not inhibit TUNEL formation or cytotoxicity. Since RB94 will soon be used for gene therapy further understanding the molecular basis of these early changes in killing cancer cells is one of our particularly important present goals.  Introduction RB94 is produced by translation of the wild-type RB gene (RB110) from the second in-frame AUG codon and lacks the N-terminal 112 amino acids present in RB110 ( 1 ). We have shown that RB94 is significantly more cytotoxic than wild-type RB110 to all tumor cell types studied to date, including bladder cancer cell lines, and it kills human cancer cells whatever the genetic defects may be in the malignant cells ( 1 , 2 ). However, normal human cells appear to have no or limited susceptibility to RB94 toxicity although RB94 is cytotoxic to genetically altered transformed human cells such as those immortalized with E6 and E7 ( 1 – 3 ). Differences between RB94 and RB110 include the fact that RB94 has a longer half-life than RB110, being in an active hypophosphorylated form for longer periods of time ( 1 , 2 ) and causes rapid telomere erosion and chromosomal crisis leading to what was initially thought to be caspase-dependent apoptosis ( 3 ). Since systemic delivery of RB94 will soon be used in clinical studies ( 4 ) we wished to examine the RB94 induced changes and the time course of their appearance more closely and determine if even earlier RB94 specific changes might be identified. This in turn might lead to a better understanding of the basis for the unique cytotoxity observed in cancer cells produced by RB94 without showing evidence to date of any tumor resistance. The same RB negative UC14 and RB positive UC9 bladder cancer cells were used in this study as were previously utilized as was the adenoviral RB94 construct ( 3 ). RB94 expression in this adenovirus is under tetracycline control and can be blocked by doxycycline, which allows RB94 specific changes to be identified. Ad-RB110 also was used as a positive control to show that the results were RB94 specific and also not adenoviral related.  Material and Methods Cell lines, cell culture and photography The bladder cancer cell line, UC14, which lacks both the RB-1 and p16 gene and UC9, which is RB positive and p16 negative, were used in this study ( 5 ). These cells were maintained cultured in MEM NEAA EARL’S SALT medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, penicillin and streptomycin. Normal human urothelial cells have recently been immortalized by hTERT (TERT-NHUCs) ( 6 ). They otherwise appear to be entirely normal and were grown as previously described. For the immunochemical studies cells were cultured on glass coverslips. For phase microscopic studies they were grown in 6 well cell culture dishes and an inverted phase-contrast microscope (Olympus CKX31) was used to observe cell changes. Using a conventional digital camera and adaptor for the CKX31 microscope, the cell status for each time point and treatment was recorded under 10x, 20x and 40x magnification. Time points and test groups The time points focused upon were 24 and 48 hours after treatment, although some experiments were maintained for 72 and 96 hours and in others earlier time points were done. Cells were transduced with 100 MOI of either Ad-RB94 or Ad-RB110. AdRB94 plus doxycycline (1?g/ml) was also used to prevent RB expression as a viral control, since Ad-RB94 is under control of tetracycline regulation. The sources of the viruses and the transduction procedure have previously been described ( 3 ). Immunohistochemistry and TUNEL assay The monoclonal anti-RB antibody (QED Biosciences, San Diego, CA) and the Oncor Apoptotag kits (Chemicon International, Temecula, CA) were used for RB and apoptotic cell staining respectively. RB immunohistochemical staining was done as described ( 4 ) and the TUNEL assay was performed according to the manufacture’s procedures. Confocal studies: The apoptosis procedure was done according to the protocol from the manufacture (Chemicon International, Billerica, MA). Briefly, UC14 cells grown on coverslips were fixed with 1% paraformaldehyde in PBS, pH7.4. After washing three times with PBS, cells were post-fixed in precooled methanol:acetic acid 2:1 for 5 minutes at ?20 °C and again washed two times with PBS. The cells were then incubated with equilibration buffer for 10 seconds at room temperature, and followed by one hour incubation with TdT enzyme at 37 °C. The enzymatic reaction was stopped by 10 minutes incubation with stop buffer at room temperature. The working strength anti-digoxigenin conjugate and monoclonal anti-RB antibody (1:1000) were applied to the cells and incubated at 4 °C overnight. After washing three times with PBS, goat anti-mouse Alexa 594 antibody was added to the coverslips followed by incubation at room temperature for an hour. Finally, the slides were mounted with mounting medium (DAKO, Carpinteria, CA) containing 0.5?g/ml DAPI. The staining status was evaluated under Olympus IS71 with FV500 confocal laser microscope. Caspase assay Western blotting was done to measure caspase 3 and 9 cleavage. Both antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling (Danvers, MA). Briefly, cultured cells were lysed in cold lysis buffer (1% Triton X-100, 1mM EDTA, 150mM NaCL, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.2 mMNa2VO4, 10mg/ml each of leupeptin, phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, and apotine) (Roche Molecular Biochemical, Indianapolis, IN). Fifty ?g of each protein sample was loaded in each lane. Bound antibody was detected using the enhanced chemiluminescence detection kit (Pierce Biotechnology IN, Rockford, IL). Cytochrome C release analysis by western blot Cells were trypsinized and resuspended in 100?l cytosolic lysis buffer containing 25mM Tris, 5mM MgCl2, and complete mini proteinase inhibitors (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) at pH 7.4. The cells were set on ice for 5 min. before spinning at 14000 rpm for 5min. The supernatant (cytosolic fraction) was transferred to a new centrifuge tube and stored at ?20°C. To the pellet above, 100?l lysis buffer containing 1% Triton X-100, 150mM NaCl, 25mM Tris, and complete mini proteinase inhibitors at pH 7.4 was added. After being lysed on a rotator for 30min. at 4 °C, it was then spun at 14000 rpm for 5 min. The supernatant (mitochondrial fraction) was transferred to a new centrifuge tube and stored at ?20 °C. Western blot was done with anti-cytochrome C monoclonal Ab from BD Biosciences Pharmingen (San Diego, CA) at concentration of 1:2000. MTT Assay The various cells were seeded into 24-well plates at 4 × 104 cells/well before infection. The cells were infected for 2.5 h as described above, and at different time points the medium was removed, and 200 ?l of medium were added containing 1 mg/ml MTT. After 3 h, the reaction was stopped with 200 ?l of N,N-dimethylformamide lysis buffer, and the resultant solution read at A595 nm with a microreader. All time points were done in triplicate. Statistical analysis was done using the General Linear Models of the Statistica software (StatSoft, Inc., Tulsa, OK). Analysis of DNA fragmentation by field-inversion gel electrophoresis (FIGE) The formation of 50 kb DNA fragments was monitored by FIGE as described previously ( 7 ). Cells were harvested by exposure to trypsin, resuspended in 100 ?l PBS, and mixed with 100 ?l of a buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 10 mM EDTA, and 2% low melting point agarose. The mixtures were transferred to the wells of a FIGE plug mold and incubated for 30 min at 4 °C. The plugs were ejected and incubated for 16 h at 37 °C in a lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 10 mM EDTA, and 0.2 mg/ml proteinase K (Promega, Inc, Madison, WI). The plugs were washed 3x for 1 h at 4 °C in a buffer containing 10 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, and inserted into the wells of a 1% agarose gel. DNA fragments were then resolved by FIGE (FIGE Mapper, Biorad, Inc, Hercules, CA) in 0.5x TBE buffer at a forward voltage of 180 V and a reverse voltage of 120V for 16 h using a switch time ramp of 0.1 – 3.5 s (Program #4 provided by the manufacturer). Gels were then stained with ethidium bromide and images were obtained using a gel documentation system (Fotodyne, Inc., Hartland, WI). Studies on Apoptosis Inducing Factor (AIF) The siRNAs targeting AIF have been described ( 8 ). The AIF siRNA was kindly provided by Dr. Katsumi Kitagawa at St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis TN. 2×105 UC 14 cells were seeded in 6-well plate one day before the transduction. On the day of transduction 10?l of AIF siRNA (forward sequence: CUUGUUCCAGCGAUGGCAU, reverse sequence: AUGCCAUCGCUGGAACAAG) was added in 50?l OPTI-MEMI serum free medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad CA) and the mix incubated for 5 minutes at room temperature. In another tube 0.75?l Lipofectamin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad CA) was mixed in 50?l serum free medium for 5 minutes at room temperature. The contents of each was then added together, mixed and incubated for 15 min. Meanwhile 500?l of serum free medium was added to each well after washing once with PBS. The mixture of AIF siRNA and lipofectamin was then added to each well. The cells were incubated for 4 hours at 37°C followed by medium change in MEM+10%FBS. After 72 hours incubation, the cells were split and treated with Ad-RB94 as described above for subsequent experiments. The siRNA knock down of AIF was confirmed by Western blotting.  Cell lines, cell culture and photography The bladder cancer cell line, UC14, which lacks both the RB-1 and p16 gene and UC9, which is RB positive and p16 negative, were used in this study ( 5 ). These cells were maintained cultured in MEM NEAA EARL’S SALT medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, penicillin and streptomycin. Normal human urothelial cells have recently been immortalized by hTERT (TERT-NHUCs) ( 6 ). They otherwise appear to be entirely normal and were grown as previously described. For the immunochemical studies cells were cultured on glass coverslips. For phase microscopic studies they were grown in 6 well cell culture dishes and an inverted phase-contrast microscope (Olympus CKX31) was used to observe cell changes. Using a conventional digital camera and adaptor for the CKX31 microscope, the cell status for each time point and treatment was recorded under 10x, 20x and 40x magnification.  Time points and test groups The time points focused upon were 24 and 48 hours after treatment, although some experiments were maintained for 72 and 96 hours and in others earlier time points were done. Cells were transduced with 100 MOI of either Ad-RB94 or Ad-RB110. AdRB94 plus doxycycline (1?g/ml) was also used to prevent RB expression as a viral control, since Ad-RB94 is under control of tetracycline regulation. The sources of the viruses and the transduction procedure have previously been described ( 3 ).  Immunohistochemistry and TUNEL assay The monoclonal anti-RB antibody (QED Biosciences, San Diego, CA) and the Oncor Apoptotag kits (Chemicon International, Temecula, CA) were used for RB and apoptotic cell staining respectively. RB immunohistochemical staining was done as described ( 4 ) and the TUNEL assay was performed according to the manufacture’s procedures. Confocal studies: The apoptosis procedure was done according to the protocol from the manufacture (Chemicon International, Billerica, MA). Briefly, UC14 cells grown on coverslips were fixed with 1% paraformaldehyde in PBS, pH7.4. After washing three times with PBS, cells were post-fixed in precooled methanol:acetic acid 2:1 for 5 minutes at ?20 °C and again washed two times with PBS. The cells were then incubated with equilibration buffer for 10 seconds at room temperature, and followed by one hour incubation with TdT enzyme at 37 °C. The enzymatic reaction was stopped by 10 minutes incubation with stop buffer at room temperature. The working strength anti-digoxigenin conjugate and monoclonal anti-RB antibody (1:1000) were applied to the cells and incubated at 4 °C overnight. After washing three times with PBS, goat anti-mouse Alexa 594 antibody was added to the coverslips followed by incubation at room temperature for an hour. Finally, the slides were mounted with mounting medium (DAKO, Carpinteria, CA) containing 0.5?g/ml DAPI. The staining status was evaluated under Olympus IS71 with FV500 confocal laser microscope.  Caspase assay Western blotting was done to measure caspase 3 and 9 cleavage. Both antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling (Danvers, MA). Briefly, cultured cells were lysed in cold lysis buffer (1% Triton X-100, 1mM EDTA, 150mM NaCL, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.2 mMNa2VO4, 10mg/ml each of leupeptin, phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, and apotine) (Roche Molecular Biochemical, Indianapolis, IN). Fifty ?g of each protein sample was loaded in each lane. Bound antibody was detected using the enhanced chemiluminescence detection kit (Pierce Biotechnology IN, Rockford, IL).  Cytochrome C release analysis by western blot Cells were trypsinized and resuspended in 100?l cytosolic lysis buffer containing 25mM Tris, 5mM MgCl2, and complete mini proteinase inhibitors (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) at pH 7.4. The cells were set on ice for 5 min. before spinning at 14000 rpm for 5min. The supernatant (cytosolic fraction) was transferred to a new centrifuge tube and stored at ?20°C. To the pellet above, 100?l lysis buffer containing 1% Triton X-100, 150mM NaCl, 25mM Tris, and complete mini proteinase inhibitors at pH 7.4 was added. After being lysed on a rotator for 30min. at 4 °C, it was then spun at 14000 rpm for 5 min. The supernatant (mitochondrial fraction) was transferred to a new centrifuge tube and stored at ?20 °C. Western blot was done with anti-cytochrome C monoclonal Ab from BD Biosciences Pharmingen (San Diego, CA) at concentration of 1:2000.  MTT Assay The various cells were seeded into 24-well plates at 4 × 104 cells/well before infection. The cells were infected for 2.5 h as described above, and at different time points the medium was removed, and 200 ?l of medium were added containing 1 mg/ml MTT. After 3 h, the reaction was stopped with 200 ?l of N,N-dimethylformamide lysis buffer, and the resultant solution read at A595 nm with a microreader. All time points were done in triplicate. Statistical analysis was done using the General Linear Models of the Statistica software (StatSoft, Inc., Tulsa, OK).  Analysis of DNA fragmentation by field-inversion gel electrophoresis (FIGE) The formation of 50 kb DNA fragments was monitored by FIGE as described previously ( 7 ). Cells were harvested by exposure to trypsin, resuspended in 100 ?l PBS, and mixed with 100 ?l of a buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 10 mM EDTA, and 2% low melting point agarose. The mixtures were transferred to the wells of a FIGE plug mold and incubated for 30 min at 4 °C. The plugs were ejected and incubated for 16 h at 37 °C in a lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 10 mM EDTA, and 0.2 mg/ml proteinase K (Promega, Inc, Madison, WI). The plugs were washed 3x for 1 h at 4 °C in a buffer containing 10 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, and inserted into the wells of a 1% agarose gel. DNA fragments were then resolved by FIGE (FIGE Mapper, Biorad, Inc, Hercules, CA) in 0.5x TBE buffer at a forward voltage of 180 V and a reverse voltage of 120V for 16 h using a switch time ramp of 0.1 – 3.5 s (Program #4 provided by the manufacturer). Gels were then stained with ethidium bromide and images were obtained using a gel documentation system (Fotodyne, Inc., Hartland, WI).  Studies on Apoptosis Inducing Factor (AIF) The siRNAs targeting AIF have been described ( 8 ). The AIF siRNA was kindly provided by Dr. Katsumi Kitagawa at St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis TN. 2×105 UC 14 cells were seeded in 6-well plate one day before the transduction. On the day of transduction 10?l of AIF siRNA (forward sequence: CUUGUUCCAGCGAUGGCAU, reverse sequence: AUGCCAUCGCUGGAACAAG) was added in 50?l OPTI-MEMI serum free medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad CA) and the mix incubated for 5 minutes at room temperature. In another tube 0.75?l Lipofectamin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad CA) was mixed in 50?l serum free medium for 5 minutes at room temperature. The contents of each was then added together, mixed and incubated for 15 min. Meanwhile 500?l of serum free medium was added to each well after washing once with PBS. The mixture of AIF siRNA and lipofectamin was then added to each well. The cells were incubated for 4 hours at 37°C followed by medium change in MEM+10%FBS. After 72 hours incubation, the cells were split and treated with Ad-RB94 as described above for subsequent experiments. The siRNA knock down of AIF was confirmed by Western blotting.  Results Changes at the Phase Microscopic Level Following Ad-RB94 treatment various morphological changes were seen that were not found in either Ad-RB94 plus doxycycline treated or Ad-RB110 transduced UC14 or UC9 cells. These were especially evident by 36–48 hr after treatment. They included cellular enlargement, micronucleation (seen in approximately 10% of the cells), and peripheral nuclear chromatin condensation (seen in approximately 30–40% of the cells) ( Fig. 1B ). The peripheral nuclear condensation and blebbing was also readily seen by DAPI staining ( Fig. 1B insert). In addition a significant number of cells began to detach into the tissue culture medium by 48 hours after treatment ( Fig. 1B ). None of the changes were seen in Ad-RB110 or Ad-RB94 + doxycycline treated cells. RB Staining and TUNEL The RB negative UC14 cells were stained for RB94 following Ad-RB94 treatment to evaluate the transduction frequency or stained to determine the number of TUNEL positive cells present. The earliest time that the UC14 cells showed significant RB94 staining was at 24 hr post-transduction but these cells were TUNEL negative. The RB94 positive cells became TUNEL positive by 36 hr after treatment. TUNEL staining was seen primarily in cells with peripheral nuclear chromatin condensation but was also present in some micronucleated cells. At this time point as well as 48 hr after treatment the percentages of RB positive and TUNEL positive cells that remained attached were almost equal being between 40–50% of the cells ( Fig. 2A and Fig. 2B , respectively). Confocal analysis of cells stained for both TUNEL and RB showed that TUNEL positive cells were also RB94 positive ( Fig. 2C ). In contrast, cells which were RB positive after being treated with Ad-RB110 showed no morphological changes and were TUNEL negative. Moreover, cells treated with Ad-RB94 + doxycycline also showed no RB positive staining nor were they TUNEL positive, again indicating the doxycycline had completely blocked the RB94 protein expression and that the TUNEL positive cells originated as a direct result of RB94 treatment. TUNEL positive cells with similar morphology as seen in UC14 were also apparent 24 hrs after Ad-RB94 treatment of UC9 cells and were seen primarily in cells with peripheral nuclear chromatin condensation (not shown). In addition, although at the 24 hr time point after Ad-RB94 treatment at least 50% of the UC-14 cells showed RB94 nuclear staining, including cells with micronucleation, by 96 hr after Ad-RB94 treatment the majority of attached cells were no longer RB94 positive cells, indicating that most of the RB94 expressing cells were no longer viable and had detached from the dish. Lack of Caspase Activation or Cytochrome C Changes in TUNEL Positive Attached Cells No cleavage of caspase 3 and 9 occurred in the attached cells at the 48 hr time point ( Fig. 3A and B ), despite the fact that the cells were TUNEL positive ( Fig. 1E ). Examination of cleaved caspase 3 in these TUNEL positive cells using confocal microscopy and an anti-caspase 3 specific antibody which recognizes cleaved caspase 3 also showed no caspase positive cells (not shown). Cleavage of caspase 3 and 9 did occur subsequently in the cells after they had detached and floated in the medium 48 hr after Ad-RB94 treatment ( Fig. 3A and B respectively). In addition, no translocation of cytochrome C from the mitochondria into the cytoplasm, a component of typical apoptosis, was seen prior to or at the same time TUNEL positive cells were observed ( Fig. 3C ). Both were examined at 27 hr, 29 hr, 36 hr and 48 hr time points. The expected cytochrome C translocation into the cytoplasm was seen after treatment with staurosporine which produces typical caspase-dependent apoptosis and all the cytochrome c also was seen in the mitochondria of control cells, indicting that the mitochondrial and cytoplasmic fraction was successful. Ad-RB94 Produces AIF Related 50 kb DNA Fragmentation Which Is Blocked by AIF Inhibition Although numerous attempts were made to document typical oligonucleosomal DNA fragmentation and the production of DNA laddering by RB94 in the attached TUNEL positive cells, none could be identified. In contrast, the production of HMW 50 kb DNA fragmentation was readily observed in both UC-9 and UC14 attached cells following Ad-RB94 treatment ( Fig. 4A ). Caspase-independent apoptosis and peripheral nuclear condensation has been reported in association with the production of 50kb DNA fragmentation which involved translocation of the apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) from the mitochondria to the nucleus ( 9 – 11 ). Therefore AIF siRNAs were used to determine the role of AIF status in Ad-RB94 produced 50 kb DNA fragmentation and to document if this fragmentation could be reversed whether or not it also inhibited the cytotoxicity caused by Ad-RB94. In fact AIF protein could readily be blocked in Ad-RB94 treated cells by AIF siRNA ( Fig. 4A ) and in turn completely blocked Ad-RB94 induced 50 kb DNA fragmentation in both UC9 and UC14 cells ( Fig. 4B ). However, RB-94 induced apoptosis as measured by TUNEL formation (not shown) or morphological changes ( Fig. 4C ) was not blocked by AIF siRNA. Ad-RB94 Is Not Cytotoxic to Normal Urothelial Cells Long term stable normal human urothelial cells expressing hTERT have recently become available ( 5 ). These TERT-NHUCs were examined to determine if they showed any growth inhibition or cytotoxicity to Ad-RB94. The NHUCs are easily transfected by adenoviral constructs and at an MOI of 100 over 50% of the cells show expression of the transfected gene such as Ad-?gal at 24 or 48hrs after treatment. Ad-RB94 produced no inhibition of cell growth as measured by the MTT assay, no morphological changes as seen by phase microscopy and no apoptosis as examined by TUNEL ( Fig. 5 )  Results Changes at the Phase Microscopic Level Following Ad-RB94 treatment various morphological changes were seen that were not found in either Ad-RB94 plus doxycycline treated or Ad-RB110 transduced UC14 or UC9 cells. These were especially evident by 36–48 hr after treatment. They included cellular enlargement, micronucleation (seen in approximately 10% of the cells), and peripheral nuclear chromatin condensation (seen in approximately 30–40% of the cells) ( Fig. 1B ). The peripheral nuclear condensation and blebbing was also readily seen by DAPI staining ( Fig. 1B insert). In addition a significant number of cells began to detach into the tissue culture medium by 48 hours after treatment ( Fig. 1B ). None of the changes were seen in Ad-RB110 or Ad-RB94 + doxycycline treated cells. RB Staining and TUNEL The RB negative UC14 cells were stained for RB94 following Ad-RB94 treatment to evaluate the transduction frequency or stained to determine the number of TUNEL positive cells present. The earliest time that the UC14 cells showed significant RB94 staining was at 24 hr post-transduction but these cells were TUNEL negative. The RB94 positive cells became TUNEL positive by 36 hr after treatment. TUNEL staining was seen primarily in cells with peripheral nuclear chromatin condensation but was also present in some micronucleated cells. At this time point as well as 48 hr after treatment the percentages of RB positive and TUNEL positive cells that remained attached were almost equal being between 40–50% of the cells ( Fig. 2A and Fig. 2B , respectively). Confocal analysis of cells stained for both TUNEL and RB showed that TUNEL positive cells were also RB94 positive ( Fig. 2C ). In contrast, cells which were RB positive after being treated with Ad-RB110 showed no morphological changes and were TUNEL negative. Moreover, cells treated with Ad-RB94 + doxycycline also showed no RB positive staining nor were they TUNEL positive, again indicating the doxycycline had completely blocked the RB94 protein expression and that the TUNEL positive cells originated as a direct result of RB94 treatment. TUNEL positive cells with similar morphology as seen in UC14 were also apparent 24 hrs after Ad-RB94 treatment of UC9 cells and were seen primarily in cells with peripheral nuclear chromatin condensation (not shown). In addition, although at the 24 hr time point after Ad-RB94 treatment at least 50% of the UC-14 cells showed RB94 nuclear staining, including cells with micronucleation, by 96 hr after Ad-RB94 treatment the majority of attached cells were no longer RB94 positive cells, indicating that most of the RB94 expressing cells were no longer viable and had detached from the dish. Lack of Caspase Activation or Cytochrome C Changes in TUNEL Positive Attached Cells No cleavage of caspase 3 and 9 occurred in the attached cells at the 48 hr time point ( Fig. 3A and B ), despite the fact that the cells were TUNEL positive ( Fig. 1E ). Examination of cleaved caspase 3 in these TUNEL positive cells using confocal microscopy and an anti-caspase 3 specific antibody which recognizes cleaved caspase 3 also showed no caspase positive cells (not shown). Cleavage of caspase 3 and 9 did occur subsequently in the cells after they had detached and floated in the medium 48 hr after Ad-RB94 treatment ( Fig. 3A and B respectively). In addition, no translocation of cytochrome C from the mitochondria into the cytoplasm, a component of typical apoptosis, was seen prior to or at the same time TUNEL positive cells were observed ( Fig. 3C ). Both were examined at 27 hr, 29 hr, 36 hr and 48 hr time points. The expected cytochrome C translocation into the cytoplasm was seen after treatment with staurosporine which produces typical caspase-dependent apoptosis and all the cytochrome c also was seen in the mitochondria of control cells, indicting that the mitochondrial and cytoplasmic fraction was successful. Ad-RB94 Produces AIF Related 50 kb DNA Fragmentation Which Is Blocked by AIF Inhibition Although numerous attempts were made to document typical oligonucleosomal DNA fragmentation and the production of DNA laddering by RB94 in the attached TUNEL positive cells, none could be identified. In contrast, the production of HMW 50 kb DNA fragmentation was readily observed in both UC-9 and UC14 attached cells following Ad-RB94 treatment ( Fig. 4A ). Caspase-independent apoptosis and peripheral nuclear condensation has been reported in association with the production of 50kb DNA fragmentation which involved translocation of the apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) from the mitochondria to the nucleus ( 9 – 11 ). Therefore AIF siRNAs were used to determine the role of AIF status in Ad-RB94 produced 50 kb DNA fragmentation and to document if this fragmentation could be reversed whether or not it also inhibited the cytotoxicity caused by Ad-RB94. In fact AIF protein could readily be blocked in Ad-RB94 treated cells by AIF siRNA ( Fig. 4A ) and in turn completely blocked Ad-RB94 induced 50 kb DNA fragmentation in both UC9 and UC14 cells ( Fig. 4B ). However, RB-94 induced apoptosis as measured by TUNEL formation (not shown) or morphological changes ( Fig. 4C ) was not blocked by AIF siRNA. Ad-RB94 Is Not Cytotoxic to Normal Urothelial Cells Long term stable normal human urothelial cells expressing hTERT have recently become available ( 5 ). These TERT-NHUCs were examined to determine if they showed any growth inhibition or cytotoxicity to Ad-RB94. The NHUCs are easily transfected by adenoviral constructs and at an MOI of 100 over 50% of the cells show expression of the transfected gene such as Ad-?gal at 24 or 48hrs after treatment. Ad-RB94 produced no inhibition of cell growth as measured by the MTT assay, no morphological changes as seen by phase microscopy and no apoptosis as examined by TUNEL ( Fig. 5 )  Changes at the Phase Microscopic Level Following Ad-RB94 treatment various morphological changes were seen that were not found in either Ad-RB94 plus doxycycline treated or Ad-RB110 transduced UC14 or UC9 cells. These were especially evident by 36–48 hr after treatment. They included cellular enlargement, micronucleation (seen in approximately 10% of the cells), and peripheral nuclear chromatin condensation (seen in approximately 30–40% of the cells) ( Fig. 1B ). The peripheral nuclear condensation and blebbing was also readily seen by DAPI staining ( Fig. 1B insert). In addition a significant number of cells began to detach into the tissue culture medium by 48 hours after treatment ( Fig. 1B ). None of the changes were seen in Ad-RB110 or Ad-RB94 + doxycycline treated cells.  Changes at the Phase Microscopic Level Following Ad-RB94 treatment various morphological changes were seen that were not found in either Ad-RB94 plus doxycycline treated or Ad-RB110 transduced UC14 or UC9 cells. These were especially evident by 36–48 hr after treatment. They included cellular enlargement, micronucleation (seen in approximately 10% of the cells), and peripheral nuclear chromatin condensation (seen in approximately 30–40% of the cells) ( Fig. 1B ). The peripheral nuclear condensation and blebbing was also readily seen by DAPI staining ( Fig. 1B insert). In addition a significant number of cells began to detach into the tissue culture medium by 48 hours after treatment ( Fig. 1B ). None of the changes were seen in Ad-RB110 or Ad-RB94 + doxycycline treated cells.  RB Staining and TUNEL The RB negative UC14 cells were stained for RB94 following Ad-RB94 treatment to evaluate the transduction frequency or stained to determine the number of TUNEL positive cells present. The earliest time that the UC14 cells showed significant RB94 staining was at 24 hr post-transduction but these cells were TUNEL negative. The RB94 positive cells became TUNEL positive by 36 hr after treatment. TUNEL staining was seen primarily in cells with peripheral nuclear chromatin condensation but was also present in some micronucleated cells. At this time point as well as 48 hr after treatment the percentages of RB positive and TUNEL positive cells that remained attached were almost equal being between 40–50% of the cells ( Fig. 2A and Fig. 2B , respectively). Confocal analysis of cells stained for both TUNEL and RB showed that TUNEL positive cells were also RB94 positive ( Fig. 2C ). In contrast, cells which were RB positive after being treated with Ad-RB110 showed no morphological changes and were TUNEL negative. Moreover, cells treated with Ad-RB94 + doxycycline also showed no RB positive staining nor were they TUNEL positive, again indicating the doxycycline had completely blocked the RB94 protein expression and that the TUNEL positive cells originated as a direct result of RB94 treatment. TUNEL positive cells with similar morphology as seen in UC14 were also apparent 24 hrs after Ad-RB94 treatment of UC9 cells and were seen primarily in cells with peripheral nuclear chromatin condensation (not shown). In addition, although at the 24 hr time point after Ad-RB94 treatment at least 50% of the UC-14 cells showed RB94 nuclear staining, including cells with micronucleation, by 96 hr after Ad-RB94 treatment the majority of attached cells were no longer RB94 positive cells, indicating that most of the RB94 expressing cells were no longer viable and had detached from the dish.  RB Staining and TUNEL The RB negative UC14 cells were stained for RB94 following Ad-RB94 treatment to evaluate the transduction frequency or stained to determine the number of TUNEL positive cells present. The earliest time that the UC14 cells showed significant RB94 staining was at 24 hr post-transduction but these cells were TUNEL negative. The RB94 positive cells became TUNEL positive by 36 hr after treatment. TUNEL staining was seen primarily in cells with peripheral nuclear chromatin condensation but was also present in some micronucleated cells. At this time point as well as 48 hr after treatment the percentages of RB positive and TUNEL positive cells that remained attached were almost equal being between 40–50% of the cells ( Fig. 2A and Fig. 2B , respectively). Confocal analysis of cells stained for both TUNEL and RB showed that TUNEL positive cells were also RB94 positive ( Fig. 2C ). In contrast, cells which were RB positive after being treated with Ad-RB110 showed no morphological changes and were TUNEL negative. Moreover, cells treated with Ad-RB94 + doxycycline also showed no RB positive staining nor were they TUNEL positive, again indicating the doxycycline had completely blocked the RB94 protein expression and that the TUNEL positive cells originated as a direct result of RB94 treatment. TUNEL positive cells with similar morphology as seen in UC14 were also apparent 24 hrs after Ad-RB94 treatment of UC9 cells and were seen primarily in cells with peripheral nuclear chromatin condensation (not shown). In addition, although at the 24 hr time point after Ad-RB94 treatment at least 50% of the UC-14 cells showed RB94 nuclear staining, including cells with micronucleation, by 96 hr after Ad-RB94 treatment the majority of attached cells were no longer RB94 positive cells, indicating that most of the RB94 expressing cells were no longer viable and had detached from the dish.  Lack of Caspase Activation or Cytochrome C Changes in TUNEL Positive Attached Cells No cleavage of caspase 3 and 9 occurred in the attached cells at the 48 hr time point ( Fig. 3A and B ), despite the fact that the cells were TUNEL positive ( Fig. 1E ). Examination of cleaved caspase 3 in these TUNEL positive cells using confocal microscopy and an anti-caspase 3 specific antibody which recognizes cleaved caspase 3 also showed no caspase positive cells (not shown). Cleavage of caspase 3 and 9 did occur subsequently in the cells after they had detached and floated in the medium 48 hr after Ad-RB94 treatment ( Fig. 3A and B respectively). In addition, no translocation of cytochrome C from the mitochondria into the cytoplasm, a component of typical apoptosis, was seen prior to or at the same time TUNEL positive cells were observed ( Fig. 3C ). Both were examined at 27 hr, 29 hr, 36 hr and 48 hr time points. The expected cytochrome C translocation into the cytoplasm was seen after treatment with staurosporine which produces typical caspase-dependent apoptosis and all the cytochrome c also was seen in the mitochondria of control cells, indicting that the mitochondrial and cytoplasmic fraction was successful.  Lack of Caspase Activation or Cytochrome C Changes in TUNEL Positive Attached Cells No cleavage of caspase 3 and 9 occurred in the attached cells at the 48 hr time point ( Fig. 3A and B ), despite the fact that the cells were TUNEL positive ( Fig. 1E ). Examination of cleaved caspase 3 in these TUNEL positive cells using confocal microscopy and an anti-caspase 3 specific antibody which recognizes cleaved caspase 3 also showed no caspase positive cells (not shown). Cleavage of caspase 3 and 9 did occur subsequently in the cells after they had detached and floated in the medium 48 hr after Ad-RB94 treatment ( Fig. 3A and B respectively). In addition, no translocation of cytochrome C from the mitochondria into the cytoplasm, a component of typical apoptosis, was seen prior to or at the same time TUNEL positive cells were observed ( Fig. 3C ). Both were examined at 27 hr, 29 hr, 36 hr and 48 hr time points. The expected cytochrome C translocation into the cytoplasm was seen after treatment with staurosporine which produces typical caspase-dependent apoptosis and all the cytochrome c also was seen in the mitochondria of control cells, indicting that the mitochondrial and cytoplasmic fraction was successful.  Ad-RB94 Produces AIF Related 50 kb DNA Fragmentation Which Is Blocked by AIF Inhibition Although numerous attempts were made to document typical oligonucleosomal DNA fragmentation and the production of DNA laddering by RB94 in the attached TUNEL positive cells, none could be identified. In contrast, the production of HMW 50 kb DNA fragmentation was readily observed in both UC-9 and UC14 attached cells following Ad-RB94 treatment ( Fig. 4A ). Caspase-independent apoptosis and peripheral nuclear condensation has been reported in association with the production of 50kb DNA fragmentation which involved translocation of the apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) from the mitochondria to the nucleus ( 9 – 11 ). Therefore AIF siRNAs were used to determine the role of AIF status in Ad-RB94 produced 50 kb DNA fragmentation and to document if this fragmentation could be reversed whether or not it also inhibited the cytotoxicity caused by Ad-RB94. In fact AIF protein could readily be blocked in Ad-RB94 treated cells by AIF siRNA ( Fig. 4A ) and in turn completely blocked Ad-RB94 induced 50 kb DNA fragmentation in both UC9 and UC14 cells ( Fig. 4B ). However, RB-94 induced apoptosis as measured by TUNEL formation (not shown) or morphological changes ( Fig. 4C ) was not blocked by AIF siRNA.  Ad-RB94 Produces AIF Related 50 kb DNA Fragmentation Which Is Blocked by AIF Inhibition Although numerous attempts were made to document typical oligonucleosomal DNA fragmentation and the production of DNA laddering by RB94 in the attached TUNEL positive cells, none could be identified. In contrast, the production of HMW 50 kb DNA fragmentation was readily observed in both UC-9 and UC14 attached cells following Ad-RB94 treatment ( Fig. 4A ). Caspase-independent apoptosis and peripheral nuclear condensation has been reported in association with the production of 50kb DNA fragmentation which involved translocation of the apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) from the mitochondria to the nucleus ( 9 – 11 ). Therefore AIF siRNAs were used to determine the role of AIF status in Ad-RB94 produced 50 kb DNA fragmentation and to document if this fragmentation could be reversed whether or not it also inhibited the cytotoxicity caused by Ad-RB94. In fact AIF protein could readily be blocked in Ad-RB94 treated cells by AIF siRNA ( Fig. 4A ) and in turn completely blocked Ad-RB94 induced 50 kb DNA fragmentation in both UC9 and UC14 cells ( Fig. 4B ). However, RB-94 induced apoptosis as measured by TUNEL formation (not shown) or morphological changes ( Fig. 4C ) was not blocked by AIF siRNA.  Ad-RB94 Is Not Cytotoxic to Normal Urothelial Cells Long term stable normal human urothelial cells expressing hTERT have recently become available ( 5 ). These TERT-NHUCs were examined to determine if they showed any growth inhibition or cytotoxicity to Ad-RB94. The NHUCs are easily transfected by adenoviral constructs and at an MOI of 100 over 50% of the cells show expression of the transfected gene such as Ad-?gal at 24 or 48hrs after treatment. Ad-RB94 produced no inhibition of cell growth as measured by the MTT assay, no morphological changes as seen by phase microscopy and no apoptosis as examined by TUNEL ( Fig. 5 )  Ad-RB94 Is Not Cytotoxic to Normal Urothelial Cells Long term stable normal human urothelial cells expressing hTERT have recently become available ( 5 ). These TERT-NHUCs were examined to determine if they showed any growth inhibition or cytotoxicity to Ad-RB94. The NHUCs are easily transfected by adenoviral constructs and at an MOI of 100 over 50% of the cells show expression of the transfected gene such as Ad-?gal at 24 or 48hrs after treatment. Ad-RB94 produced no inhibition of cell growth as measured by the MTT assay, no morphological changes as seen by phase microscopy and no apoptosis as examined by TUNEL ( Fig. 5 )  Discussion Finding new agents for the treatment of cancer is a major focus of cancer research. RB94 has been found to have characteristics that make it a rather unique and potentially new modality for the treatment of various cancers. First, RB94 has produced cell death in all types of cancer cells, independent of their genetic changes. In addition, to date no cancer cell has been found to be resistant to RB94, as no long term positive cells have been obtained following RB94 transfer, unlike the case following RB110 treatment. Moreover, RB94 has not been cytotoxic to normal human cells ( 1 – 3 ) including the NHUC cells studied here. Therefore RB94 should have a very favorable therapeutic index. Since a clinical trial is soon planned using systemic delivery of RB94 for various cancers ( 4 ) it is important to better understand the mechanism(s) by which RB94 causes cell death in cancer cells. We have shown that RB94 produces rapid telomere erosion and chromosomal crisis is human cancer cells but not human normal cells, which could be a key mechanism of RB94 produced tumor cell kill ( 3 ). However, such changes are most apparent approximately 48 hr or later after RB94 exposure. Therefore discovering even earlier significant changes produced by RB94 may provide a window to allow a better understanding of the mechanism(s) of RB94-produced cancer cell death. In this paper we have documented that the initially RB negative UC14 cells became TUNEL positive by 36 hours after Ad-RB94 transfect ion and in the wild-type RB positive UC9 cells TUNEL positive cells were present even at 24 hours after Ad-RB94 treatment. Such TUNEL positivity was found primarily in cells with peripheral nuclear chromatin condensation. However, these TUNEL positive cells showed no evidence of caspase 3 or 9 cleavage, including examination of caspase status at the single cell level using confocal analysis. Caspase 3 and 9 cleavage only occurred in those cells which had detached from the dish, the latter beginning approximately 48 hours after treatment. Therefore caspase cleavage is only seen late in the cytotoxicity produced by RB94. These results are consistent with previous studies where we found that PARP cleavage occurred in cells but only after they detached from the dish ( 3 ). In recent studies we also have found that various tumor cell lines are consistently TUNEL positive (unpublished results) following RB94 treatment and it may be possible to use the presence of increased TUNEL positive cells in tumors following RB94 treatment as a marker of RB94 produced cell death in the clinical setting. However, we found no cytochrome C transfer from the mitochondria to the cytoplasm following RB94 transfection. Such transfer is usually observed in caspase dependent apoptosis and these negative findings provided additional support that the early cytotoxic changes following Ad-RB94 treatment are caspase independent. Finally, HMW 50 kD DNA fragment was produced by RB94 positive cells in both UC9 and UC14 cell lines ( Fig. 5A ). These observations were consistent with Stage 1 initiated apoptosis in which caspase independent HMW 50 kD DNA fragmentation occurs as well as peripheral nuclear chromatin condensation and it has been proposed that such DNA fragmentation is produced through an AIF induced mechanism ( 7 – 9 ). Indeed we found that blocking AIF by AIF siRNA inhibited RB94 produced HMW 50 kb DNA fragmentation ( Figure 4B ). However, this did block RB94 induced cytotoxicity as measured by the number of TUNEL positive cells or morphological changes observed, including peripheral nuclear chromatin condensation or cellular detachment. Although this study confirms the involvement of AIF in the production of HMW 50 kb DNA fragmentation to our knowledge this is the first time that HMW 50 kb DNA fragmentation has been blocked without having any effect on apoptosis. Future studies will continue to concentrated be on the molecular mechanism(s) of RB94 produced cytotoxicity in a larger number and types of human cancer cells. We believe these studies are critical not only because of the potential clinical importance of RB94 as a new modality of treatment but also that some of the changes produced by RB94 may involve in a new mechanism of apoptosis. Understanding such molecular events also could help reveal the reason(s) for a lack of RB94 drug resistance to cancer cells observed to date as well as the absence of cytotoxicity to normal human cells. Finally, since RB94 will soon be used in a systemic cancer gene therapy trial and the finding of TUNEL positivity in tumor cells after treatment may an important early marker of RB94 efficacy whereas caspase cleavage may be a late marker. Both of these issues will be addressed in the clinical trial.  Discussion Finding new agents for the treatment of cancer is a major focus of cancer research. RB94 has been found to have characteristics that make it a rather unique and potentially new modality for the treatment of various cancers. First, RB94 has produced cell death in all types of cancer cells, independent of their genetic changes. In addition, to date no cancer cell has been found to be resistant to RB94, as no long term positive cells have been obtained following RB94 transfer, unlike the case following RB110 treatment. Moreover, RB94 has not been cytotoxic to normal human cells ( 1 – 3 ) including the NHUC cells studied here. Therefore RB94 should have a very favorable therapeutic index. Since a clinical trial is soon planned using systemic delivery of RB94 for various cancers ( 4 ) it is important to better understand the mechanism(s) by which RB94 causes cell death in cancer cells. We have shown that RB94 produces rapid telomere erosion and chromosomal crisis is human cancer cells but not human normal cells, which could be a key mechanism of RB94 produced tumor cell kill ( 3 ). However, such changes are most apparent approximately 48 hr or later after RB94 exposure. Therefore discovering even earlier significant changes produced by RB94 may provide a window to allow a better understanding of the mechanism(s) of RB94-produced cancer cell death. In this paper we have documented that the initially RB negative UC14 cells became TUNEL positive by 36 hours after Ad-RB94 transfect ion and in the wild-type RB positive UC9 cells TUNEL positive cells were present even at 24 hours after Ad-RB94 treatment. Such TUNEL positivity was found primarily in cells with peripheral nuclear chromatin condensation. However, these TUNEL positive cells showed no evidence of caspase 3 or 9 cleavage, including examination of caspase status at the single cell level using confocal analysis. Caspase 3 and 9 cleavage only occurred in those cells which had detached from the dish, the latter beginning approximately 48 hours after treatment. Therefore caspase cleavage is only seen late in the cytotoxicity produced by RB94. These results are consistent with previous studies where we found that PARP cleavage occurred in cells but only after they detached from the dish ( 3 ). In recent studies we also have found that various tumor cell lines are consistently TUNEL positive (unpublished results) following RB94 treatment and it may be possible to use the presence of increased TUNEL positive cells in tumors following RB94 treatment as a marker of RB94 produced cell death in the clinical setting. However, we found no cytochrome C transfer from the mitochondria to the cytoplasm following RB94 transfection. Such transfer is usually observed in caspase dependent apoptosis and these negative findings provided additional support that the early cytotoxic changes following Ad-RB94 treatment are caspase independent. Finally, HMW 50 kD DNA fragment was produced by RB94 positive cells in both UC9 and UC14 cell lines ( Fig. 5A ). These observations were consistent with Stage 1 initiated apoptosis in which caspase independent HMW 50 kD DNA fragmentation occurs as well as peripheral nuclear chromatin condensation and it has been proposed that such DNA fragmentation is produced through an AIF induced mechanism ( 7 – 9 ). Indeed we found that blocking AIF by AIF siRNA inhibited RB94 produced HMW 50 kb DNA fragmentation ( Figure 4B ). However, this did block RB94 induced cytotoxicity as measured by the number of TUNEL positive cells or morphological changes observed, including peripheral nuclear chromatin condensation or cellular detachment. Although this study confirms the involvement of AIF in the production of HMW 50 kb DNA fragmentation to our knowledge this is the first time that HMW 50 kb DNA fragmentation has been blocked without having any effect on apoptosis. Future studies will continue to concentrated be on the molecular mechanism(s) of RB94 produced cytotoxicity in a larger number and types of human cancer cells. We believe these studies are critical not only because of the potential clinical importance of RB94 as a new modality of treatment but also that some of the changes produced by RB94 may involve in a new mechanism of apoptosis. Understanding such molecular events also could help reveal the reason(s) for a lack of RB94 drug resistance to cancer cells observed to date as well as the absence of cytotoxicity to normal human cells. Finally, since RB94 will soon be used in a systemic cancer gene therapy trial and the finding of TUNEL positivity in tumor cells after treatment may an important early marker of RB94 efficacy whereas caspase cleavage may be a late marker. Both of these issues will be addressed in the clinical trial.  Figures Figure 1 Morphological microscopic changes in RB negative UC-14 cells following Ad-RB94 transfection. A . Normal morphology in untreated cells B . Typical morphological changes seen 48 hours after Ad-RB94 treatment of UC-14 cells. These included micronucleation (red arrows) seen in approximately 10 per cent of the cells and approximately 30% of the cells with enlarged nuclei showing a peripheral nuclear condensed ring-like appearance (black arrows). Note the round floating cells also seen, which represent RB94 induced cells detaching from the dish (green arrows). Magnification 400X. The insert in the lower right shows DAPI staining of a cell with the peripheral nuclear condensation noted in phase contrast by black arrows. Figure 2 RB94 and TUNEL staining after Ad-RB94 treatment. A. RB94 staining (brown nuclear staining) was seen in approximately 40–50% of the initially RB negative UC14 cells 48 hrs after Ad-RB94 treatment. B. TUNEL staining (brown nuclear staining) was similarly observed in approximately the percentage of cells 48hr afterAd-RB94 treatment that were RB94 positive as shown in 2A. Magnification 400X. C. Confocal examination showing both RB94 and TUNEL staining in the same cells. Plate 1-DAPI staining (blue), Plate 2- TUNEL staining (green), Plate 3-RB94 staining (red), Plate 4-TUNEL and RB94 staining (merged). Figure 3 Lack of caspase 3, and caspase 9 cleavage or cytochrome C translocation in attached cells 48 h after Ad-RB94 treatment. A and B. No caspase 3 or caspase 9 cleavage, respectively was seen in the cells which were still attached 48 hr after treatment, although many of these cells were TUNEL positive (see Fig. 2B ). Cleavage of caspases 3, and 9 was observed in the detached, floating cells, however C. No cytochrome C translocation from the mitochonrdria to the cytoplasm was observed after Ad-RB94 treatment unlike that observe after treatment with staurosporine (STS) shown as a postitve control which produced which is known to produce typical caspase –dependent apoptosis. In addition cytochrome C is only found in the mitochondria of control cells as expected illustrating the success of the purity of the mitochondrial and cytoplasmic fractions. Figure 4 Ad-RB94 produced 50 kilbase DNA fragmentation involves AIF but is not a mechanism of RB94 produced cytotoxicity. A. AIF siRNA blocks AIF protein production in control and Ad-RB94 treated cells (arrow). B. Ad-RB94 produces 50 kb DNA fragmentation in UC9 and UC14 cells which was inhibited by AIF si RNA as shown by FIGE C. Morphological changes seen in Ad-RB94 treated cells, including enlarged nuclei with a peripheral nuclear condensed ring-like appearance (black arrows) and cellular detachment (see Fig. 1B ), were not blocked by AIF siRNA. Magnification 400X. All cells were evaluated 48 hrs after Ad-RB94 treatment in each experiment. Figure 5 Lack of cytotoxicity produced by Ad-RB94 in normal human urothelial cells (TERT-NHUCs). Left Plate. No decrease in cell growth is seen in the TERT-NHUCs after Ad-RB-94 treatment. Ad-?gal was also used as a control at the same MOI as Ad-RB94 and in which approximately 50% of the cells show ?gal staining 48 hr after treatment. Right Plates, A and B. No morphological changes are seen 48 hrs after Ad-RB94 treatment compared to untreated control TERT-NHUCs. C and D. Only rare TUNEL positive cells were seen in either control or Ad-RB94 treated cells (arrows) indicating that Ad-RB94 did not produce apoptosis as measured by TUNEL in TERT-NHUCs compared to cancer cells (see Fig. 2B ). Magnification 400X.  Figures Figure 1 Morphological microscopic changes in RB negative UC-14 cells following Ad-RB94 transfection. A . Normal morphology in untreated cells B . Typical morphological changes seen 48 hours after Ad-RB94 treatment of UC-14 cells. These included micronucleation (red arrows) seen in approximately 10 per cent of the cells and approximately 30% of the cells with enlarged nuclei showing a peripheral nuclear condensed ring-like appearance (black arrows). Note the round floating cells also seen, which represent RB94 induced cells detaching from the dish (green arrows). Magnification 400X. The insert in the lower right shows DAPI staining of a cell with the peripheral nuclear condensation noted in phase contrast by black arrows. Figure 2 RB94 and TUNEL staining after Ad-RB94 treatment. A. RB94 staining (brown nuclear staining) was seen in approximately 40–50% of the initially RB negative UC14 cells 48 hrs after Ad-RB94 treatment. B. TUNEL staining (brown nuclear staining) was similarly observed in approximately the percentage of cells 48hr afterAd-RB94 treatment that were RB94 positive as shown in 2A. Magnification 400X. C. Confocal examination showing both RB94 and TUNEL staining in the same cells. Plate 1-DAPI staining (blue), Plate 2- TUNEL staining (green), Plate 3-RB94 staining (red), Plate 4-TUNEL and RB94 staining (merged). Figure 3 Lack of caspase 3, and caspase 9 cleavage or cytochrome C translocation in attached cells 48 h after Ad-RB94 treatment. A and B. No caspase 3 or caspase 9 cleavage, respectively was seen in the cells which were still attached 48 hr after treatment, although many of these cells were TUNEL positive (see Fig. 2B ). Cleavage of caspases 3, and 9 was observed in the detached, floating cells, however C. No cytochrome C translocation from the mitochonrdria to the cytoplasm was observed after Ad-RB94 treatment unlike that observe after treatment with staurosporine (STS) shown as a postitve control which produced which is known to produce typical caspase –dependent apoptosis. In addition cytochrome C is only found in the mitochondria of control cells as expected illustrating the success of the purity of the mitochondrial and cytoplasmic fractions. Figure 4 Ad-RB94 produced 50 kilbase DNA fragmentation involves AIF but is not a mechanism of RB94 produced cytotoxicity. A. AIF siRNA blocks AIF protein production in control and Ad-RB94 treated cells (arrow). B. Ad-RB94 produces 50 kb DNA fragmentation in UC9 and UC14 cells which was inhibited by AIF si RNA as shown by FIGE C. Morphological changes seen in Ad-RB94 treated cells, including enlarged nuclei with a peripheral nuclear condensed ring-like appearance (black arrows) and cellular detachment (see Fig. 1B ), were not blocked by AIF siRNA. Magnification 400X. All cells were evaluated 48 hrs after Ad-RB94 treatment in each experiment. Figure 5 Lack of cytotoxicity produced by Ad-RB94 in normal human urothelial cells (TERT-NHUCs). Left Plate. No decrease in cell growth is seen in the TERT-NHUCs after Ad-RB-94 treatment. Ad-?gal was also used as a control at the same MOI as Ad-RB94 and in which approximately 50% of the cells show ?gal staining 48 hr after treatment. Right Plates, A and B. No morphological changes are seen 48 hrs after Ad-RB94 treatment compared to untreated control TERT-NHUCs. C and D. Only rare TUNEL positive cells were seen in either control or Ad-RB94 treated cells (arrows) indicating that Ad-RB94 did not produce apoptosis as measured by TUNEL in TERT-NHUCs compared to cancer cells (see Fig. 2B ). Magnification 400X. 