Large recurrent microdeletions associated with schizophrenia Reduced fecundity, associated with severe mental disorders 1 , places negative selection pressure on risk alleles and may explain, in part, why common variants have not been found that confer risk of disorders such as autism 2 schizophrenia 3 and mental retardation 4 . Thus, rare variants may account for a larger fraction of the overall genetic risk than previously assumed. In contrast to rare single nucleotide mutations, rare copy number variations (CNVs) can be detected using genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism arrays. This has led to the identification of CNVs associated with mental retardation 4 , 5 and autism 2 . In a genome-wide search for CNVs associating with schizophrenia, we used a population-based sample to identify de novo CNVs by analysing 9,878 transmissions from parents to offspring. The 66 de novo CNVs identified were tested for association in a sample of 1,433 schizophrenia cases and 33,250 controls. Three deletions at 1q21.1, 15q11.2 and 15q13.3 showing nominal association with schizophrenia in the first sample (phase I) were followed up in a second sample of 3,285 cases and 7,951 controls (phase II). All three deletions significantly associate with schizophrenia and related psychoses in the combined sample. The identification of these rare, recurrent risk variants, having occurred independently in multiple founders and being subject to negative selection, is important in itself. CNV analysis may also point the way to the identification of additional and more prevalent risk variants in genes and pathways involved in schizophrenia.  METHODS SUMMARY Subjects This study was approved by the National Bioethics Committees or the Local Research Ethical Committees and Data Protection Commissions or laws in the respective countries, Iceland, United Kingdom (Scotland and England), Germany, Finland, Italy, Denmark, Norway, The Netherlands and China. Informed consent was obtained from all patients (Supplementary Information). Of the 4,718 genotyped cases, 4,571 were diagnosed with schizophrenia, 39 with unspecified functional psychosis, 86 with schizoaffective disorder, 10 with schizophreniform and 12 with persistent delusional disorders (Supplementary Information). Genotyping The SGENE samples (samples from six European groups, http://www.sgene.eu/ ) typed on the HumanHap300 chip were used in phase I of the study ( Table 1 ). In phase II, ( Table 2 ) CNV data were derived from the HumanHap300 chip, the HumanHap550 chip, the Affymetrix GeneChip(r) GenomeWide SNP 6.0 or dosage measured using Taqman probes 27 . The Scottish samples in Table 2 were typed at Duke University (HumanHap550) in collaboration with GlaxoSmithKline as were 420 of the German samples, all from Munich (HumanHap300). The remaining CNV data (HumanHap550) from Germany ( Table 2 ?, n =491) were obtained from the University of Bonn. Norwegian samples (Affymetrix GeneChip(r) GenomeWide SNP 6.0 array) were analysed using the Affymetrix Power Tools 1.8.0. Dosage data for Danish and Chinese samples were generated at deCODE using Taqman assays 27 . Samples with CNVs were verified by genotyping respective samples using the HumanCNV370 chip. Statistical analysis For the genome-wide study of de novo CNV associating with schizophrenia the significance threshold was set at 7.6×10?4 which is approximately 0.05/66, the number of de novo CNVs identified and tested. All P -values are two-sided and there is no overlap between samples in Tables 1 and 2 . An exact conditional Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test (conditional on the strata margins) was used to test for association of schizophrenia and the various CNVs.  Subjects This study was approved by the National Bioethics Committees or the Local Research Ethical Committees and Data Protection Commissions or laws in the respective countries, Iceland, United Kingdom (Scotland and England), Germany, Finland, Italy, Denmark, Norway, The Netherlands and China. Informed consent was obtained from all patients (Supplementary Information). Of the 4,718 genotyped cases, 4,571 were diagnosed with schizophrenia, 39 with unspecified functional psychosis, 86 with schizoaffective disorder, 10 with schizophreniform and 12 with persistent delusional disorders (Supplementary Information).  Genotyping The SGENE samples (samples from six European groups, http://www.sgene.eu/ ) typed on the HumanHap300 chip were used in phase I of the study ( Table 1 ). In phase II, ( Table 2 ) CNV data were derived from the HumanHap300 chip, the HumanHap550 chip, the Affymetrix GeneChip(r) GenomeWide SNP 6.0 or dosage measured using Taqman probes 27 . The Scottish samples in Table 2 were typed at Duke University (HumanHap550) in collaboration with GlaxoSmithKline as were 420 of the German samples, all from Munich (HumanHap300). The remaining CNV data (HumanHap550) from Germany ( Table 2 ?, n =491) were obtained from the University of Bonn. Norwegian samples (Affymetrix GeneChip(r) GenomeWide SNP 6.0 array) were analysed using the Affymetrix Power Tools 1.8.0. Dosage data for Danish and Chinese samples were generated at deCODE using Taqman assays 27 . Samples with CNVs were verified by genotyping respective samples using the HumanCNV370 chip.  Statistical analysis For the genome-wide study of de novo CNV associating with schizophrenia the significance threshold was set at 7.6×10?4 which is approximately 0.05/66, the number of de novo CNVs identified and tested. All P -values are two-sided and there is no overlap between samples in Tables 1 and 2 . An exact conditional Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test (conditional on the strata margins) was used to test for association of schizophrenia and the various CNVs.  Supplementary Material Supplementary Information  METHODS <italic>De novo</italic> CNV analysis To uncover de novo CNVs genome-wide we analysed data from a population-based sample of 2,160 trios and 5,558 parent-offspring pairs, totalling 9,878 transmissions. Samples were genotyped using the Illumina HumanHap300 or the HumanCNV370 chips. To identify de novo deletions, we combined two complementary methods: DosageMiner, a Hidden Markov Model algorithm based on intensity data that is similar to that reported previously 29 and a procedure using inheritance errors and the neighbouring genotype configurations comparable to that described previously 30 . When only one parent was typed, using genotype information allowed us to identify deletions as putatively de novo by assessment of regional parental heterozygosity. To identify de novo duplications we analysed CNV data from the 2,160 trios using DosageMiner. CNVs in phase 1 were identified by using DosageMiner, software developed by deCODE genetics, and loss of heterozygosity analysis. CNV events stand out in the data from two perspectives. First, all sample intensities for SNPs/probes within a CNV should be increased or decreased relative to neighbouring SNPs/probes that are not in a CNV region; second, CNVs can be detected from the transmission from parent to child. To determine deviations in signal intensity we start by normalizing the intensities. The normalized intensities for each colour channel were determined by a fit of the following equation: log ( x ij )= f ( ? i,gc ( j )) + ? j,gen ( i,j ) + ? i + ? ij , where i is sample index, j is SNP index, x ij is colour intensity for sample i in SNP j , gc ( j ) is an indicator of G+C content around SNP j , f is a smooth function of G+C content, ? i are sample-specific parameters for G+C content, gen ( i,j ) is the genotype for sample i for SNP j , ? j,gt is the SNP effect for genotype gt and SNP j , ? i is sample effect, and ? ij is the unexplained part of the signal, including noise. The same model with another set of parameters is used for the other colour y ij . A generalized additive model 31 is used to fit the smooth function f . After fitting the model, the data are normalized by removing the systematic model components. We consider a region to be a deletion/duplication if the average intensity over at least ten markers in a region falls below/above an empirically determined threshold. To identify regions demonstrating loss of heterozygosity (LOH), markers are split into three classes: (1) shows LOH; (2) inconsistent with LOH; and (3) consistent with LOH. Class 3 is further split into two subclasses: (a) consistent with transmitted LOH; (b) consistent with de novo LOH. A marker shows LOH if a child is homozygous for one allele and a parent is homozygous for the other allele. A marker is inconsistent with LOH if the child is heterozygous. A marker is consistent with LOH if the child is homozygous and the parent is homozygous for the same allele or heterozygous. In case the parent is homozygous for the same allele as the child, the marker is consistent with transmitted LOH, and in case the parent is homozygous for the other allele, the marker is only consistent with de novo LOH. A stretch containing a single marker showing LOH is likely to be due to a genotyping error, but because our genotyping error rate is low and independent of position on the genome, the occurrence of more than one marker showing LOH in a consecutive stretch on the genome is more likely to be evidence of a deletion in the child. We consider a region to be a putative deletion if at least two markers are showing LOH and de novo if consistent with de novo LOH. We analysed 9,878 offspring-parent pairs consisting of a total of 7,718 offspring and 7,121 parents. Using LOH analysis we define a candidate deleted region if more than one marker shows inheritance error within a region of homozygous markers. We identified a total of 270 candidate de novo deletions using this approach. Of these, 80 belong to six distinct individuals which all had multiple regions identified as de novo deletions on the same chromosome. On further inspection of the data for these individuals we concluded that they were examples of uniparental disomy. Once these individuals were removed, the remaining 190 putative de novo deletions were compared with the output of DosageMiner, and 55 were consistently called deletions by both approaches. These 55 de novo deletions represent 51 loci ( Supplementary Table 3 ). In addition 15 large duplications, of 20 or more consecutive markers, were also identified in the trio sample by DosageMiner ( Supplementary Table 3 ). Dosage measurements using Taqman assays The Danish and Chinese samples in Table 2 were typed using Taqman assays 27 . The 1q21.1 assay ( PRK assay) and 15q11.2 assay ( NIPA2 assay) were designed using Primer Express software. Applied Biosystems provided FAM-labelled probes for the assay which were run as described previously 27 . For the reference assay we used a probe in the CFTR gene and used the same protocol. The second reference assay, RNASEP ready to use assay, was supplied by Applied Biosystems. Samples identified with deletions or duplications by the Taqman dosage measurements were confirmed by typing the sample on the Illumina HumanCNV370 array. Probe and primers used for the 1q21.1 assay: 6FAM-CCTGCTGTGTGGGCT-MGB (minor groove binder), PRK-F, CCTTCAGACCAGCGGATAACA and PRK-R, CATGGCAGCAGGATTTGGA. Probe and primers used for the 15q11.2 assay: 6FAM-CAGAGCAGATTGTTATGTAC-MGB, NIPA2-F, GACT GAAAACGCGCCGATT and NIPA2-R, CCATGGACAGACAAACATTCTTG. Probe and primers used for the CFTR assay: 6FAM-ATTAAGCACAGTGGAAGAA-MGBNFQ (minor groove binder non-fluorescent quencher), CFTR-F, AACTGGAGCCTTCAGAGGGTAA and CFTR-R, CCAGGAAAACTGAGAACAGAATGA. Plates were sealed with optical adhesive cover (Applied Biosystems) and the real-time PCR carried out on an ABI 7900 HT machine for 40 cycles of 15 s at 95 °C and 1 min at 60 °C starting out with an initial step of 10 min at 95 °C.  <italic>De novo</italic> CNV analysis To uncover de novo CNVs genome-wide we analysed data from a population-based sample of 2,160 trios and 5,558 parent-offspring pairs, totalling 9,878 transmissions. Samples were genotyped using the Illumina HumanHap300 or the HumanCNV370 chips. To identify de novo deletions, we combined two complementary methods: DosageMiner, a Hidden Markov Model algorithm based on intensity data that is similar to that reported previously 29 and a procedure using inheritance errors and the neighbouring genotype configurations comparable to that described previously 30 . When only one parent was typed, using genotype information allowed us to identify deletions as putatively de novo by assessment of regional parental heterozygosity. To identify de novo duplications we analysed CNV data from the 2,160 trios using DosageMiner. CNVs in phase 1 were identified by using DosageMiner, software developed by deCODE genetics, and loss of heterozygosity analysis. CNV events stand out in the data from two perspectives. First, all sample intensities for SNPs/probes within a CNV should be increased or decreased relative to neighbouring SNPs/probes that are not in a CNV region; second, CNVs can be detected from the transmission from parent to child. To determine deviations in signal intensity we start by normalizing the intensities. The normalized intensities for each colour channel were determined by a fit of the following equation: log ( x ij )= f ( ? i,gc ( j )) + ? j,gen ( i,j ) + ? i + ? ij , where i is sample index, j is SNP index, x ij is colour intensity for sample i in SNP j , gc ( j ) is an indicator of G+C content around SNP j , f is a smooth function of G+C content, ? i are sample-specific parameters for G+C content, gen ( i,j ) is the genotype for sample i for SNP j , ? j,gt is the SNP effect for genotype gt and SNP j , ? i is sample effect, and ? ij is the unexplained part of the signal, including noise. The same model with another set of parameters is used for the other colour y ij . A generalized additive model 31 is used to fit the smooth function f . After fitting the model, the data are normalized by removing the systematic model components. We consider a region to be a deletion/duplication if the average intensity over at least ten markers in a region falls below/above an empirically determined threshold. To identify regions demonstrating loss of heterozygosity (LOH), markers are split into three classes: (1) shows LOH; (2) inconsistent with LOH; and (3) consistent with LOH. Class 3 is further split into two subclasses: (a) consistent with transmitted LOH; (b) consistent with de novo LOH. A marker shows LOH if a child is homozygous for one allele and a parent is homozygous for the other allele. A marker is inconsistent with LOH if the child is heterozygous. A marker is consistent with LOH if the child is homozygous and the parent is homozygous for the same allele or heterozygous. In case the parent is homozygous for the same allele as the child, the marker is consistent with transmitted LOH, and in case the parent is homozygous for the other allele, the marker is only consistent with de novo LOH. A stretch containing a single marker showing LOH is likely to be due to a genotyping error, but because our genotyping error rate is low and independent of position on the genome, the occurrence of more than one marker showing LOH in a consecutive stretch on the genome is more likely to be evidence of a deletion in the child. We consider a region to be a putative deletion if at least two markers are showing LOH and de novo if consistent with de novo LOH. We analysed 9,878 offspring-parent pairs consisting of a total of 7,718 offspring and 7,121 parents. Using LOH analysis we define a candidate deleted region if more than one marker shows inheritance error within a region of homozygous markers. We identified a total of 270 candidate de novo deletions using this approach. Of these, 80 belong to six distinct individuals which all had multiple regions identified as de novo deletions on the same chromosome. On further inspection of the data for these individuals we concluded that they were examples of uniparental disomy. Once these individuals were removed, the remaining 190 putative de novo deletions were compared with the output of DosageMiner, and 55 were consistently called deletions by both approaches. These 55 de novo deletions represent 51 loci ( Supplementary Table 3 ). In addition 15 large duplications, of 20 or more consecutive markers, were also identified in the trio sample by DosageMiner ( Supplementary Table 3 ).  Dosage measurements using Taqman assays The Danish and Chinese samples in Table 2 were typed using Taqman assays 27 . The 1q21.1 assay ( PRK assay) and 15q11.2 assay ( NIPA2 assay) were designed using Primer Express software. Applied Biosystems provided FAM-labelled probes for the assay which were run as described previously 27 . For the reference assay we used a probe in the CFTR gene and used the same protocol. The second reference assay, RNASEP ready to use assay, was supplied by Applied Biosystems. Samples identified with deletions or duplications by the Taqman dosage measurements were confirmed by typing the sample on the Illumina HumanCNV370 array. Probe and primers used for the 1q21.1 assay: 6FAM-CCTGCTGTGTGGGCT-MGB (minor groove binder), PRK-F, CCTTCAGACCAGCGGATAACA and PRK-R, CATGGCAGCAGGATTTGGA. Probe and primers used for the 15q11.2 assay: 6FAM-CAGAGCAGATTGTTATGTAC-MGB, NIPA2-F, GACT GAAAACGCGCCGATT and NIPA2-R, CCATGGACAGACAAACATTCTTG. Probe and primers used for the CFTR assay: 6FAM-ATTAAGCACAGTGGAAGAA-MGBNFQ (minor groove binder non-fluorescent quencher), CFTR-F, AACTGGAGCCTTCAGAGGGTAA and CFTR-R, CCAGGAAAACTGAGAACAGAATGA. Plates were sealed with optical adhesive cover (Applied Biosystems) and the real-time PCR carried out on an ABI 7900 HT machine for 40 cycles of 15 s at 95 °C and 1 min at 60 °C starting out with an initial step of 10 min at 95 °C. 