Beyond Insulin Resistance: Innate Immunity in Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis Obesity is an inflammatory disorder characterized by heightened activity of the innate immune system. Innate immune activation is central to the development of obesity-related insulin resistance; it also plays an important role in obesity-related tissue damage, such as that seen in atherosclerosis. Recent research has implicated the innate immune system in the pathophysiology of obesity-related liver disease. This review summarizes how innate immune processes, occurring both within and outside the liver, cause not only insulin resistance but also end-organ damage in the form of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. (HEPATOLOGY 2008;48:670-678.)  Conclusion As research into the pathophysiology of NAFLD expands, it is becoming clear that the disease involves a number of innate immune processes both within and outside the liver. It is also becoming evident that steatosis and inflammation actively influence each other by multiple mechanisms, even across organs, as shown in the case of inflamed adipose tissue affecting the metabolic status of the liver. These findings support a theme already common among those who research the metabolic syndrome—that the distinction between metabolism and inflammation has blurred. 1 , 15 , 71 , 101 Hotamisligil 1 recently noted that the close interconnection between metabolism and inflammation creates a “chicken and egg” dilemma in which it is difficult to tell which process (nutrient excess or inflammation) actually initiates the metabolic syndrome. The available data support a model in which lipids are the primary stimulus to innate immune activation, with the resulting inflammatory milieu then causing metabolic dysregulation (insulin resistance and further fat deposition) and setting into motion a vicious cycle that culminates in end-organ dysfunction. With regard to innate immunity in NAFLD, yet to be reconciled is whether fatty liver disease is an organ-autonomous process or absolutely requires a contribution from inflamed adipose tissue. Although some studies suggest that features of NAFLD are inducible by events occurring solely within the liver, 9 , 20 others clearly show that inflamed fat worsens these abnormalities. 3 , 4 Still others argue that NASH occurs in patients with lipodystrophy, who have no adipose tissue and thus no adipose tissue inflammation. 102 Although the last observation would seem to support a liver-autonomous view of NAFLD pathogenesis, it is important to recall that normal adipose tissue produces adiponectin and other adipokines whose functions are to promote lipid homeostasis and suppress inflammation. 103 Metabolic and immune interplay between liver and adipose tissue, therefore, is likely operative in both health and disease, and both organs must be taken into consideration to obtain a complete and accurate picture of NASH pathogenesis. From a translational perspective, research on innate immune activation in NAFLD has led to several diagnostic and therapeutic advances. For example, high serum levels of MCP-1 and low serum levels of adiponectin are being exploited as markers of disease severity. 93 , 104 , 105 Similarly, hepatocyte apoptosis in fatty livers, much of which is likely Fas-mediated, forms the basis for using cytokeratin-18 as an independent serum marker of NAFLD. 106 , 107 One rationale for using fish oil to prevent or treat NASH comes from scientific evidence that n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids suppress proinflammatory signaling through TLRs. 108 Furthermore, the anti-inflammatory properties of PPAR ? agonists offer an explanation for their efficacy in NASH in spite of persistent adiposity. 109 As understanding of the complex relationship between metabolism and inflammation grows, there will undoubtedly be more opportunities to apply knowledge of innate immunity to the management and ultimately the prevention of fatty liver disease. 