Cognitive Effects of Hormone Therapy in Men With Prostate Cancer BACKGROUND Men who receive androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT) for prostate cancer experience several side effects from this treatment. A few recent studies have examined the cognitive implications of ADT and how they impact a patient’s treatment decision-making, occupational pursuits, and quality of life. For this report, the authors explored possible mechanisms for this association, reviewed research in animal studies and aging men, and examined the growing literature focused on the relation between ADT and cognitive functioning in patients with prostate cancer. METHODS A systematic literature search was conducted using the PubMed and Information Sciences Institute Web of Knowledge-Web of Science databases to identify relevant studies that investigated the relation between ADT in men with prostate cancer and its cognitive effects. RESULTS Testosterone and its derivatives may have an impact on cognition through several mechanisms in the brain, as supported by studies of animals and in aging men. Studies that researched the impact of ADT on cognition in patients with prostate cancer patients were designed relatively well but suffered from small sample sizes. Between 47% and 69% of men on ADT declined in at least 1 cognitive area, most commonly in visuospatial abilities and executive functioning. Some studies reported contradictory results with increased functioning in verbal memory. CONCLUSIONS There is a strong argument that androgen-ablation therapy is linked to subtle but significant cognitive declines in men with prostate cancer. The authors believe that clinicians should become aware of this correlation as the use of ADT increases and should inform and monitor patients for this possible side effect of treatment.  MATERIALS AND METHODS We used a systematic literature search by using the PubMed database and the Information Sciences Institute (ISI) Web of Knowledge-Web of Science to identify pertinent studies that examined the relation between hormone therapy in men with prostate cancer and the cognitive effects observed in these patients. Firs, wet used keywords ‘androgen deprivation therapy’ and ‘cognition’ to perform the PubMed search. Then, we used ISI Web of Knowledge-Web of Science to cross reference articles that cited the article identified through PubMed. Because there are only a few relevant studies on this subject, all the studies identified are reviewed below. Cognitive Functioning and Androgen-Ablation Therapy in Men With Prostate Cancer The following studies are the first in a growing body of literature that has researched the impact of androgen ablation on cognitive functioning. These generally are well designed studies that use a longitudinal design with controls to examine these cognitive implications. These studies, as often is true for initial studies, suffer from small sample sizes and, thus, have reduced power. From these studies, we can draw the conclusion that androgen-ablation therapy appears to have subtle yet significant negative effects on specific domains of cognition as opposed to inducing gross cognitive changes that sweep across all cognitive domains ( Table 3 ). This is evident in the finding that most of these studies examined multiple domains of cognition yet generally reported results in only 1 or 2 of these domains. Animal studies and studies in hypogonadal men suggest that testosterone may correlate with working memory, verbal memory, and visuospatial abilities. Thus, it is reasonable that the cognitive domains that appear to be most susceptible to the impact of androgen ablation in this research are visuospatial abilities (including visuospatial memory), working memory, and executive functioning. It is noteworthy that studies have reported contradictory results in the area of verbal memory, with some studies suggesting an improvement in verbal memory and others reporting a decline in verbal memory. Green et al were the first to systematically research the impact of androgen-ablation therapy on the cognitive functioning of men with prostate cancer. Sixty-five men (mean age, 73 years) with advanced prostate cancer were assigned randomly to 1 of 4 groups: leuprolide (N = 19), goserelin (N = 20), cyproterone acetate (N = 11), and monitoring without hormone treatment (N = 15). All men participated in a battery of neuropsychological assessments at baseline (ie, 1 week before treatment) and then 6 months later. PSA and testosterone levels decreased significantly from baseline to 6 months for the 3 hormonally treated groups. Conflicting results emerged in the memory domain; men in the goserelin group surprisingly improved on 2 measures of memory (verbal [Wechsler Memory Scale-Revised] and visual [Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure test]) but declined in another measure of verbal memory (Auditory Verbal Learning Test). The goserelin group also declined in a measure of executive functioning (Trails B). Of the 50 men on active treatments, 24 men showed a reliable decline (ie, >1 standard deviation) on at least 1 cognitive task, and 7 men showed a reliable change on 2 tasks, whereas the monitoring-only group showed no decline on any of the tasks. 48 Cherrier et al studied the impact of intermittent androgen suppression (IAS) on cognitive functioning in 19 men with increasing PSA after primary therapy for prostate cancer and compared these men with 15 healthy community controls. Cases and controls underwent validated neuropsychological assessments before the onset of IAS, at 9 months (the conclusion of IAS), and at 12 months (3 months off IAS). The patients ranged in age from 51 years to 76 years. Mean testosterone levels decreased significantly for the IAS group from baseline (3.6 ng/mL) to the 9-month assessment point (0.26 ng/mL), and then significantly increased at the 12-month assessment (3.2 ng/mL). At the 9-month assessment point, 69% of men in the IAS group demonstrated a clinically significant decline in a visuospatial ability task (mental rotation), and, at 12 months, the control group outperformed the IAS group on a measure of visuospatial memory (route test). 49 In a longitudinal study, Almeida et al followed 37 patients with prostate cancer who started a 36-week course of androgen-ablation therapy. 50 Those researchers assessed cognition with the Cambridge Examination for Mental Disorders of the Elderly-Cognitive Battery (CAMCO-G) and with tests of verbal memory, visual memory, and visuospatial ability. They assessed the patients a total of 8 times over 1 year. At the end of the 36-week course of ablation therapy, they observed an increase in performance on a test of verbal memory and visual memory. At the 1-year follow-up assessment (18 weeks off of ablation therapy), there was a significant increase in total CAMCO-G scores and verbal memory. These results suggest that androgen-ablation therapy may have a positive impact on verbal and visual memory and that the removal of the treatment has a similar impact. These results should be reviewed with caution, because the extremely frequent administration of neuropsychological tests leads to practice effects (ie, patients improve over time with practice), and no comparison group was included in the study. It is quite possible that the results of this study were artifacts because of practice effects. Salminen et al researched the cognitive effects of ADT on 26 men who were diagnosed recently with prostate cancer and who began ADT 2 months before radiotherapy. Assessments occurred at baseline, at 6 months, and at 12 months. The neuropsychological battery consisted of 14 tests that took 3 hours to administer. The average age of the sample was 65 years, and all men reached castrate level at 6 months. From baseline to 12 months, tests of visuomotor speed and of reaction time saw significant decreases. The decline in testosterone coincided with a decline in visuomotor processing (digit symbol), reaction time (10-choice reaction time), working memory speed (subtraction), sustained attention (vigilance), and recognition speed (recognition of letters). 13 Salminen et al also conducted a prospective study of men with newly diagnosed prostate cancer to investigate the association between ADT and estradiol decline and the impact of ADT on cognitive performance. For that study, cognitive testing was conducted on 23 men with prostate cancer (mean age, 65 years) at baseline, at 6 months, and at 12 months of AD. An extensive, standardized, cognitive test battery was given at these time points. The findings indicated a subsequent correlation between the cognitive domains of verbal fluency, visual recognition, and visual memory and a decline in estradiol during AD. Other cognitive domains appeared to be unaffected by estradiol decline during 12 months of AD. These results suggest marginal but selective associations between testosterone decline, estradiol, and cognitive performance. 51 Bussiere et al 52 studied performance on several memory tasks in a group of 14 men who were receiving ADT (mean age, 67 years; average, 1991 days on androgen-ablation therapy) compared with an age-matched group of 16 healthy men. That study did not examine any other domains of cognitive functioning. Twelve of the men from the study group received leuprolide acetate, and the other 2 men underwent orchiectomy. The memory tasks included 3 parts: encoding, retention interval, and recognition. Retention measurements occurred at 3 intervals: immediate, at 2 minutes, and at 12 minutes. At each interval, the men were presented with sets of words from the encoding phase to determine whether they recognized them. AD did not affect encoding or retrieval significantly, but it did impair retention. There was no significant difference between the study group and the control group at the immediate condition. However, at the 2-minute and 12-minute intervals, the study group could recognize words no better than chance, whereas the control group continued to perform above chance. 52 In a longitudinal study, Beer et al took a different approach and examined the effects of estradiol administration in men with prostate cancer who previously underwent AD. The study included 18 men with prostate cancer (mean age, 70 years; average, 1954 days on androgen-ablation therapy) and 2 control groups. One group of controls consisted of age-matched men with prostate cancer who were undergoing AD but not receiving the estradiol treatment, and the other control group consisted of age-matched, healthy men. At baseline and then 4 weeks later, the study used the immediate and delayed paragraph tests to test long-term memory, Subject Ordered Pointing), and Trail tests to assess working memory. The baseline results showed that men with prostate cancer (both groups) performed significantly worse than the controls, specifically in their immediate and delayed verbal memory scores. After the estradiol replacement treatment, the study group improved in immediate verbal memory and delayed verbal memory, whereas there was no improvement in the control groups. Further analysis indicated that only immediate verbal memory improved significantly in the study group. 53 In a pilot study, Jenkins et al assessed 32 men with standard neuropsychological assessments at 3 time intervals: at baseline, 3 months, and 9 months. The average age of these men was 67.5 years, and they used androgen-ablation therapy for 3 to 5 months. Twenty-five healthy men, similar in age, served as the control group. Although there was no overall group effect, a greater percent of men in the ablation group reported a significant cognitive decline in 1 task (47%) compared with the control group (17%; odds ratio, 4.412; P < .05) at the 3-month time point. There were no significant differences between the groups at the 9-month time point. On specific domain analysis, the tasks most impacted at the 3 month time point were spatial memory and ability. 54 Joly et al compared physical and cognitive function in a cross-sectional study of 57 patients who were receiving ADT for nonmetastatic prostate cancer and 51 healthy, age-matched controls. Thirty patients received ADT as adjuvant treatment after prostatectomy or radiotherapy, and 27 patients received ADT for increasing levels of PSA. The median duration on ablation therapy was 1.8 years (range, 0.4–7.4 years). To assess cognitive functioning, the researcher administered the Sensitivity Cognitive Screen and a self-reported assessment on cognitive deficits (the Functional Assessment of Cancer Treatment-Cognitive Scale [FACT-COG]). In contrast to other studies cited above, Joly and colleagues observed that, although men with nonmetastatic prostate cancer who received ADT experienced more treatment-related symptoms, they demonstrated no differences in cognitive function on either the High Sensitivity Cognitive Screen or the FACT-COG. The authors suggested that the High Sensitivity Cognitive Screen may not be sensitive enough to detect the subtle cognitive changes that occur after ADT. In addition, self-report of cognitive function has not been correlated consistently with actual neuropsychological testing. 55  Cognitive Functioning and Androgen-Ablation Therapy in Men With Prostate Cancer The following studies are the first in a growing body of literature that has researched the impact of androgen ablation on cognitive functioning. These generally are well designed studies that use a longitudinal design with controls to examine these cognitive implications. These studies, as often is true for initial studies, suffer from small sample sizes and, thus, have reduced power. From these studies, we can draw the conclusion that androgen-ablation therapy appears to have subtle yet significant negative effects on specific domains of cognition as opposed to inducing gross cognitive changes that sweep across all cognitive domains ( Table 3 ). This is evident in the finding that most of these studies examined multiple domains of cognition yet generally reported results in only 1 or 2 of these domains. Animal studies and studies in hypogonadal men suggest that testosterone may correlate with working memory, verbal memory, and visuospatial abilities. Thus, it is reasonable that the cognitive domains that appear to be most susceptible to the impact of androgen ablation in this research are visuospatial abilities (including visuospatial memory), working memory, and executive functioning. It is noteworthy that studies have reported contradictory results in the area of verbal memory, with some studies suggesting an improvement in verbal memory and others reporting a decline in verbal memory. Green et al were the first to systematically research the impact of androgen-ablation therapy on the cognitive functioning of men with prostate cancer. Sixty-five men (mean age, 73 years) with advanced prostate cancer were assigned randomly to 1 of 4 groups: leuprolide (N = 19), goserelin (N = 20), cyproterone acetate (N = 11), and monitoring without hormone treatment (N = 15). All men participated in a battery of neuropsychological assessments at baseline (ie, 1 week before treatment) and then 6 months later. PSA and testosterone levels decreased significantly from baseline to 6 months for the 3 hormonally treated groups. Conflicting results emerged in the memory domain; men in the goserelin group surprisingly improved on 2 measures of memory (verbal [Wechsler Memory Scale-Revised] and visual [Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure test]) but declined in another measure of verbal memory (Auditory Verbal Learning Test). The goserelin group also declined in a measure of executive functioning (Trails B). Of the 50 men on active treatments, 24 men showed a reliable decline (ie, >1 standard deviation) on at least 1 cognitive task, and 7 men showed a reliable change on 2 tasks, whereas the monitoring-only group showed no decline on any of the tasks. 48 Cherrier et al studied the impact of intermittent androgen suppression (IAS) on cognitive functioning in 19 men with increasing PSA after primary therapy for prostate cancer and compared these men with 15 healthy community controls. Cases and controls underwent validated neuropsychological assessments before the onset of IAS, at 9 months (the conclusion of IAS), and at 12 months (3 months off IAS). The patients ranged in age from 51 years to 76 years. Mean testosterone levels decreased significantly for the IAS group from baseline (3.6 ng/mL) to the 9-month assessment point (0.26 ng/mL), and then significantly increased at the 12-month assessment (3.2 ng/mL). At the 9-month assessment point, 69% of men in the IAS group demonstrated a clinically significant decline in a visuospatial ability task (mental rotation), and, at 12 months, the control group outperformed the IAS group on a measure of visuospatial memory (route test). 49 In a longitudinal study, Almeida et al followed 37 patients with prostate cancer who started a 36-week course of androgen-ablation therapy. 50 Those researchers assessed cognition with the Cambridge Examination for Mental Disorders of the Elderly-Cognitive Battery (CAMCO-G) and with tests of verbal memory, visual memory, and visuospatial ability. They assessed the patients a total of 8 times over 1 year. At the end of the 36-week course of ablation therapy, they observed an increase in performance on a test of verbal memory and visual memory. At the 1-year follow-up assessment (18 weeks off of ablation therapy), there was a significant increase in total CAMCO-G scores and verbal memory. These results suggest that androgen-ablation therapy may have a positive impact on verbal and visual memory and that the removal of the treatment has a similar impact. These results should be reviewed with caution, because the extremely frequent administration of neuropsychological tests leads to practice effects (ie, patients improve over time with practice), and no comparison group was included in the study. It is quite possible that the results of this study were artifacts because of practice effects. Salminen et al researched the cognitive effects of ADT on 26 men who were diagnosed recently with prostate cancer and who began ADT 2 months before radiotherapy. Assessments occurred at baseline, at 6 months, and at 12 months. The neuropsychological battery consisted of 14 tests that took 3 hours to administer. The average age of the sample was 65 years, and all men reached castrate level at 6 months. From baseline to 12 months, tests of visuomotor speed and of reaction time saw significant decreases. The decline in testosterone coincided with a decline in visuomotor processing (digit symbol), reaction time (10-choice reaction time), working memory speed (subtraction), sustained attention (vigilance), and recognition speed (recognition of letters). 13 Salminen et al also conducted a prospective study of men with newly diagnosed prostate cancer to investigate the association between ADT and estradiol decline and the impact of ADT on cognitive performance. For that study, cognitive testing was conducted on 23 men with prostate cancer (mean age, 65 years) at baseline, at 6 months, and at 12 months of AD. An extensive, standardized, cognitive test battery was given at these time points. The findings indicated a subsequent correlation between the cognitive domains of verbal fluency, visual recognition, and visual memory and a decline in estradiol during AD. Other cognitive domains appeared to be unaffected by estradiol decline during 12 months of AD. These results suggest marginal but selective associations between testosterone decline, estradiol, and cognitive performance. 51 Bussiere et al 52 studied performance on several memory tasks in a group of 14 men who were receiving ADT (mean age, 67 years; average, 1991 days on androgen-ablation therapy) compared with an age-matched group of 16 healthy men. That study did not examine any other domains of cognitive functioning. Twelve of the men from the study group received leuprolide acetate, and the other 2 men underwent orchiectomy. The memory tasks included 3 parts: encoding, retention interval, and recognition. Retention measurements occurred at 3 intervals: immediate, at 2 minutes, and at 12 minutes. At each interval, the men were presented with sets of words from the encoding phase to determine whether they recognized them. AD did not affect encoding or retrieval significantly, but it did impair retention. There was no significant difference between the study group and the control group at the immediate condition. However, at the 2-minute and 12-minute intervals, the study group could recognize words no better than chance, whereas the control group continued to perform above chance. 52 In a longitudinal study, Beer et al took a different approach and examined the effects of estradiol administration in men with prostate cancer who previously underwent AD. The study included 18 men with prostate cancer (mean age, 70 years; average, 1954 days on androgen-ablation therapy) and 2 control groups. One group of controls consisted of age-matched men with prostate cancer who were undergoing AD but not receiving the estradiol treatment, and the other control group consisted of age-matched, healthy men. At baseline and then 4 weeks later, the study used the immediate and delayed paragraph tests to test long-term memory, Subject Ordered Pointing), and Trail tests to assess working memory. The baseline results showed that men with prostate cancer (both groups) performed significantly worse than the controls, specifically in their immediate and delayed verbal memory scores. After the estradiol replacement treatment, the study group improved in immediate verbal memory and delayed verbal memory, whereas there was no improvement in the control groups. Further analysis indicated that only immediate verbal memory improved significantly in the study group. 53 In a pilot study, Jenkins et al assessed 32 men with standard neuropsychological assessments at 3 time intervals: at baseline, 3 months, and 9 months. The average age of these men was 67.5 years, and they used androgen-ablation therapy for 3 to 5 months. Twenty-five healthy men, similar in age, served as the control group. Although there was no overall group effect, a greater percent of men in the ablation group reported a significant cognitive decline in 1 task (47%) compared with the control group (17%; odds ratio, 4.412; P < .05) at the 3-month time point. There were no significant differences between the groups at the 9-month time point. On specific domain analysis, the tasks most impacted at the 3 month time point were spatial memory and ability. 54 Joly et al compared physical and cognitive function in a cross-sectional study of 57 patients who were receiving ADT for nonmetastatic prostate cancer and 51 healthy, age-matched controls. Thirty patients received ADT as adjuvant treatment after prostatectomy or radiotherapy, and 27 patients received ADT for increasing levels of PSA. The median duration on ablation therapy was 1.8 years (range, 0.4–7.4 years). To assess cognitive functioning, the researcher administered the Sensitivity Cognitive Screen and a self-reported assessment on cognitive deficits (the Functional Assessment of Cancer Treatment-Cognitive Scale [FACT-COG]). In contrast to other studies cited above, Joly and colleagues observed that, although men with nonmetastatic prostate cancer who received ADT experienced more treatment-related symptoms, they demonstrated no differences in cognitive function on either the High Sensitivity Cognitive Screen or the FACT-COG. The authors suggested that the High Sensitivity Cognitive Screen may not be sensitive enough to detect the subtle cognitive changes that occur after ADT. In addition, self-report of cognitive function has not been correlated consistently with actual neuropsychological testing. 55  DISCUSSION The research outlining possible mechanisms between testosterone and cognition, the data from animal studies, and the results from studies researching cognition in older men support a rationale to investigate the association between ADT and cognitive functioning. The growing literature that has explored this question in men with prostate cancer also generally supports the connection between AD and cognitive decline. However, there are important points with regard to the results and to issues of methodology that should be emphasized when drawing conclusions from this literature. In terms of the results from the studies, the cognitive changes appear to be subtle and impact specific domains as opposed to gross changes that sweep across multiple aspects of cognitive functioning. For example, a large percentage of men (range, 47%–69%) reported a decline in at least 1 task area; however, Green et al reported that only 14% of men experienced declines in ?2 areas. Also, it is significant that these studies generally tested multiple domains of cognitive functioning yet observed differences in only 2 or 3 domains. The specific domains that are most likely to be impacted are visuospatial abilities and executive functioning. It is noteworthy that the studies reported contradictory results in verbal memory. It is also important to highlight issues of methodology within this body of literature. There is significant variability in terms of the types of cognitive tests administered. Most studies used comprehensive neuropsychological batteries; however, the tests that were used to assess specific domains generally varied across studies. Second, only 3 of the 9 studies that we reviewed defined ‘cognitive impairment,’ and the definition was not consistent across studies. These issues make it difficult to compare results and develop firm conclusions from the literature. In addition, these studies also have not proven a direct connection between androgen ablation and cognition. Although there appear to be specific mechanisms for testosterone to directly impact cognition, it is possible that the side effects of androgen-ablation therapy (eg, hot flashes, fatigue, and anemia) may contribute indirectly to impaired cognition. Finally, all of these studies tend to use relatively small sample sizes (most likely leading to reduced power), and the findings have not been entirely consistent across studies. The most obvious example of this inconsistency occurred in the study by Joly et al, in which no cognitive decline was reported after ablation therapy. Despite these important considerations, when reviewing this literature as a whole, we conclude from the data that androgen ablation does have implications for cognitive functioning. Therefore, larger longitudinal studies are warranted. Larger studies should explore the moderating/mediating implications of the side effects of ablation therapy (eg, hot flashes, changes in mood, anemia) on cognitive functioning. In addition, future studies should attempt to integrate brain imaging as a component of this research. In studies of the cognitive effects of chemotherapy in women with breast cancer, brain imaging has provided evidence of brain alteration; however, compensatory activation has allowed patients to maintain performance on neuropsychological tasks. 56 It is possible that neuropsychological tests may not be sensitive enough to detect changes in cognitive functioning or may not test the limits of cognitive function. 56 Brain imaging may be useful to determine the extent of the impact of androgen-ablation therapy on cognition. It is also important to consider the clinical implications of these findings. It would be valuable for physicians who use androgen ablation to treat men with prostate cancer to be aware of this relation so they can inform patients and monitor them for possible side effects, as appropriate.  DISCUSSION The research outlining possible mechanisms between testosterone and cognition, the data from animal studies, and the results from studies researching cognition in older men support a rationale to investigate the association between ADT and cognitive functioning. The growing literature that has explored this question in men with prostate cancer also generally supports the connection between AD and cognitive decline. However, there are important points with regard to the results and to issues of methodology that should be emphasized when drawing conclusions from this literature. In terms of the results from the studies, the cognitive changes appear to be subtle and impact specific domains as opposed to gross changes that sweep across multiple aspects of cognitive functioning. For example, a large percentage of men (range, 47%–69%) reported a decline in at least 1 task area; however, Green et al reported that only 14% of men experienced declines in ?2 areas. Also, it is significant that these studies generally tested multiple domains of cognitive functioning yet observed differences in only 2 or 3 domains. The specific domains that are most likely to be impacted are visuospatial abilities and executive functioning. It is noteworthy that the studies reported contradictory results in verbal memory. It is also important to highlight issues of methodology within this body of literature. There is significant variability in terms of the types of cognitive tests administered. Most studies used comprehensive neuropsychological batteries; however, the tests that were used to assess specific domains generally varied across studies. Second, only 3 of the 9 studies that we reviewed defined ‘cognitive impairment,’ and the definition was not consistent across studies. These issues make it difficult to compare results and develop firm conclusions from the literature. In addition, these studies also have not proven a direct connection between androgen ablation and cognition. Although there appear to be specific mechanisms for testosterone to directly impact cognition, it is possible that the side effects of androgen-ablation therapy (eg, hot flashes, fatigue, and anemia) may contribute indirectly to impaired cognition. Finally, all of these studies tend to use relatively small sample sizes (most likely leading to reduced power), and the findings have not been entirely consistent across studies. The most obvious example of this inconsistency occurred in the study by Joly et al, in which no cognitive decline was reported after ablation therapy. Despite these important considerations, when reviewing this literature as a whole, we conclude from the data that androgen ablation does have implications for cognitive functioning. Therefore, larger longitudinal studies are warranted. Larger studies should explore the moderating/mediating implications of the side effects of ablation therapy (eg, hot flashes, changes in mood, anemia) on cognitive functioning. In addition, future studies should attempt to integrate brain imaging as a component of this research. In studies of the cognitive effects of chemotherapy in women with breast cancer, brain imaging has provided evidence of brain alteration; however, compensatory activation has allowed patients to maintain performance on neuropsychological tasks. 56 It is possible that neuropsychological tests may not be sensitive enough to detect changes in cognitive functioning or may not test the limits of cognitive function. 56 Brain imaging may be useful to determine the extent of the impact of androgen-ablation therapy on cognition. It is also important to consider the clinical implications of these findings. It would be valuable for physicians who use androgen ablation to treat men with prostate cancer to be aware of this relation so they can inform patients and monitor them for possible side effects, as appropriate. 