Brain Extracellular Matrix in Neurodegeneration The role of extracellular matrix (ECM) in neurological development, function and degeneration has evolved from a simplistic physical adhesion to a system of intricate cellular signaling. While most cells require ECM adhesion to survive, it is now clear that differentiated function is intimately dependent upon cellular interaction with the ECM. Therefore, it is not surprising that the ECM is increasingly found to be involved in the enigmatic process of neurodegeneration. Descriptive studies of human neurodegenerative disorders and experimental studies of animal models of neurodegeneration have begun to define potential mechanisms of ECM disruption that can lead to synaptic and neuronal loss.  DISCUSSION Neurodegenerative states can be divided into two groups based on the major ECM changes ( Figure 3 ). Age-related progressive neurodegenerative diseases, such as AD, are characterized by changes in the expression of proteoglycans and association with protein aggregation and amyloidosis. It is not known whether protein aggregation or deposition is a primary event leading to those secondary events of proteoglycan expression or whether the two processes are interrelated. Alternatively, changes in proteoglycans are the primary event that triggers protein aggregation. These changes are accompanied by a secondary microglial activation. The role and timing of microglial activation relative to A? deposition are controversial. The extent of microglial activation in A? deposition has been hypothesized to be limited to the transition from diffuse to mature plaques, when amounts of A? deposits and the degree of neuritic changes increase ( 78 ). As of now, no clear correlation between ECM breakdown and neuronal death is apparent. From the work of Bruckner et al , it seems that neurons surrounded by PNNs are spared from neurodegenerative changes in AD. Breakdown of the PNNs mostly around parvalbumin-positive neurons without the actual loss of the neurons suggests a change in the neuronal environment that could affect their function or susceptibility to further insult. MS, HIVD or KA excitotoxic insults are characterized by an increase in the expression of proteolytic enzymes that could damage ECM integrity and synaptic plasticity. The induction of MMPs and tPA activity can further enhance the inflammatory response by inducing chemotaxis and generation of products that increase microglial reactivity or augment ingress of blood monocytes. Apart from inducing ECM proteolytic activity, not much is known about how the changes in the ECM affect neurons and what are the signaling pathways and response elements involved in neurodegeneration. From other model systems, it is clear that cell–ECM interactions can regulate gene expression at the transcriptional level. Matrix-stimulated transcription of differentiation-specific genes has been demonstrated, for example, in hepatocytes and mammary epithelial cells. Neurons grown on laminin exhibited increased resistance to glutamate-induced apoptosis compared with neurons grown on polylysine. Treatment of cultures with an antibody against integrin ?1 abolished the protective effect of laminin. As neurons maintained on laminin exhibited a sustained activation of the Akt signaling pathway, levels of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 were increased. This could be reversed by treatment with wortmannin ( 37 ). Rho GTPases are key transducers of integrin/ECM and growth factor signaling. Rac was found as a critical pro-survival GTPase in cerebellar granule neurons. Clostridium difficile toxin B, a specific Rho family inhibitor, induced a selective caspase-mediated degradation of Rac-1. Both Tox B and dominant negative N17Rac-1 elicited cerebellar granule neuron apoptosis, characterized by cytochrome C release and activation of caspase-9 and 3. ToxB stimulated mitochondrial translocation and conformational activation of Bax, c-Jun activation and induction of the BH3 protein Bim. These results indicate that Rac acts downstream of integrins and growth factors to promote neuronal survival by repressing c-Jun/Bim-mediated mitochondrial apoptosis ( 50 ). In summary, neurodegeneration is accompanied by a myriad of ECM changes. Unfortunately, the complexity of potential factors and abundance of various models has not allowed resolution of whether ECM alterations precede or postdate neuronal dysfunction. The studies highlighted in this review support the importance of the ECM in mounting the differentiated integrity of neuronal function and that disturbance of ECM in disease is casually related to neurodegeneration. Neurons surrounded by PNNs are less affected by these disease processes suggesting that laminin and integrin signaling are important for neuronal survival. From other model systems, it is apparent that cell–ECM interactions are important for the regulation of transcription factors that can promote apoptosis. Elucidation of the interaction between neurons and their surrounding ECM remains a daunting problem for neuropathology.  DISCUSSION Neurodegenerative states can be divided into two groups based on the major ECM changes ( Figure 3 ). Age-related progressive neurodegenerative diseases, such as AD, are characterized by changes in the expression of proteoglycans and association with protein aggregation and amyloidosis. It is not known whether protein aggregation or deposition is a primary event leading to those secondary events of proteoglycan expression or whether the two processes are interrelated. Alternatively, changes in proteoglycans are the primary event that triggers protein aggregation. These changes are accompanied by a secondary microglial activation. The role and timing of microglial activation relative to A? deposition are controversial. The extent of microglial activation in A? deposition has been hypothesized to be limited to the transition from diffuse to mature plaques, when amounts of A? deposits and the degree of neuritic changes increase ( 78 ). As of now, no clear correlation between ECM breakdown and neuronal death is apparent. From the work of Bruckner et al , it seems that neurons surrounded by PNNs are spared from neurodegenerative changes in AD. Breakdown of the PNNs mostly around parvalbumin-positive neurons without the actual loss of the neurons suggests a change in the neuronal environment that could affect their function or susceptibility to further insult. MS, HIVD or KA excitotoxic insults are characterized by an increase in the expression of proteolytic enzymes that could damage ECM integrity and synaptic plasticity. The induction of MMPs and tPA activity can further enhance the inflammatory response by inducing chemotaxis and generation of products that increase microglial reactivity or augment ingress of blood monocytes. Apart from inducing ECM proteolytic activity, not much is known about how the changes in the ECM affect neurons and what are the signaling pathways and response elements involved in neurodegeneration. From other model systems, it is clear that cell–ECM interactions can regulate gene expression at the transcriptional level. Matrix-stimulated transcription of differentiation-specific genes has been demonstrated, for example, in hepatocytes and mammary epithelial cells. Neurons grown on laminin exhibited increased resistance to glutamate-induced apoptosis compared with neurons grown on polylysine. Treatment of cultures with an antibody against integrin ?1 abolished the protective effect of laminin. As neurons maintained on laminin exhibited a sustained activation of the Akt signaling pathway, levels of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 were increased. This could be reversed by treatment with wortmannin ( 37 ). Rho GTPases are key transducers of integrin/ECM and growth factor signaling. Rac was found as a critical pro-survival GTPase in cerebellar granule neurons. Clostridium difficile toxin B, a specific Rho family inhibitor, induced a selective caspase-mediated degradation of Rac-1. Both Tox B and dominant negative N17Rac-1 elicited cerebellar granule neuron apoptosis, characterized by cytochrome C release and activation of caspase-9 and 3. ToxB stimulated mitochondrial translocation and conformational activation of Bax, c-Jun activation and induction of the BH3 protein Bim. These results indicate that Rac acts downstream of integrins and growth factors to promote neuronal survival by repressing c-Jun/Bim-mediated mitochondrial apoptosis ( 50 ). In summary, neurodegeneration is accompanied by a myriad of ECM changes. Unfortunately, the complexity of potential factors and abundance of various models has not allowed resolution of whether ECM alterations precede or postdate neuronal dysfunction. The studies highlighted in this review support the importance of the ECM in mounting the differentiated integrity of neuronal function and that disturbance of ECM in disease is casually related to neurodegeneration. Neurons surrounded by PNNs are less affected by these disease processes suggesting that laminin and integrin signaling are important for neuronal survival. From other model systems, it is apparent that cell–ECM interactions are important for the regulation of transcription factors that can promote apoptosis. Elucidation of the interaction between neurons and their surrounding ECM remains a daunting problem for neuropathology.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Perineuronal nets (PNNs) Macaque brain stained with microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2) (green) and Wisteria floribunda agglutinin (WFA) (red) ( A ). Model of PNNs ( B ). Hypothetical PNN ternary complex of tenascin, chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs) and hyaluronic acid (HA). Figure 2 Interaction of heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling. Figure 3 Possible mechanisms of extracellular matrix (ECM)-related neurodegeneration. Aging or protein aggregation accelerated by genetic mutation can be associated with ECM alterations that would result to co-deposition of ECM components [eg, heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) and chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs)]. Those ECM alterations can result in loss of protective perineuronal nets (PNNs) and increased susceptibility to cell death. Dying neurons can induce inflammation, degradation of ECM and induction of a more robust inflammatory response. Alternatively, inflammatory-induced neurodegeneration can induce ECM degradation through proteolytic activity [eg, matrix metalloproteinase (MMPs) and tissue plasminogen activator (tPA)], induction of chemotaxis and microglial activation. The resulting trafficking of inflammatory cells and secretion of cytokines can induce neuronal death that would feed the vicious cycle. Abbreviations: MS = multiple sclerosis; HIVD = human immunodeficiency virus dementia. Table 1 Extracellular matrix (ECM) components. Molecule Description GAGs ?Heparan sulfate (HS) Polymer of disaccharide of N-acetylglucosamine and glucoronic acid. HS moieties of cell surface proteoglycans modulate the biological responses to FGF. ?Chondroitin sulfate (CS) Polymer of disaccharide of N-acetylgalactosamine and glucoronic acid. ?Dermatan sulfate (DS) Polymer of disaccharide of N-acetylgalactosamine and iduronic acid. ?Keratan sulfate (KS) Polymer of disaccharide of N-acetylgalactosamine and galactose. ?Hyaluronic acid (HA) Non-sulfated polymer of N-acetylglucosamine and glucoronic acid. As opposed to other GAGs, it is not attached to a core protein. Component of PNNs. The biological effects of HA are mediated through cell surface receptors including CD44 and receptor for HA-mediated motility. Proteoglycans ?Glypican A family of six GPI-anchored cell surface HSPGs that are widely expressed in the CNS. Bind laminin, thrombospondin, FGFs, VEGF and IGF. Associated with neurogenesis and neurite outgrowth. ?Syndecan A family of four membrane-associated HSPGs. Bind tenascin-C, fibronectin, laminin, HB-GAM, bFGF and TGF?. Associated with LTP and synaptic function and neurite outgrowth. ?Phosphacan A secreted CSPG. Bind tenascin-R/C and HB-GAM. Associated with neurogenesis, neuronal migration and neurite outgrowth. ?Versican Secreted CSPG. Binds to HA, tenascin-R and fibronectin. Different alternative spliced variants have been identified. Associated with neuronal migration and neurite outgrowth. ?Brevican Secreted and GPI-anchored CSPG. Binds to HA and tenascin-R. Associated with neurite outgrowth and synaptic function. ?Neurocan A secreted CSPG. Binds to HA, tenascin-R/C and bFGF. Associated with neurite outgrowth and synaptic function. Other proteins ?Tenascin ECM protein associated with PNNs. Binds to brevican, phosphacan, neurocan, HA, syndecan, glypican and integrins. Associated with neurite outgrowth and LTP and synaptic function. ?Laminin A secreted family of key members of the ECM. Binds predominantly to integrins. Associated with migration, survival and synaptic function. ECM-modulating enzymes ?MMP Family of zinc-dependent extracellular proteases. Associated with neurogenesis, survival and plasticity. ?TIMP Inhibitor of MMPs. Associated with neuronal survival and plasticity. ?tPA Serine protease that converts inactive plasminogen to active plasmin. Key initiator of MMPs. Associated with neurite outgrowth, neuronal migration, survival and synaptic function. ?ADAMTS Protease family with aggrecanase activity associated with the ECM through a thrombospondin motif. ?Plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 A serine proteinase inhibitor (serpin) plasminogen activator inhibitor. ?Hyaluronidase Family of enzymes that degrade HA. ?Heparanase An endo-?-D-glucuronidase that catalyzes the hydrolytic cleavage of the ?-1,4-glycosidic bond in HS. ?Chondroitinase Lyase that degrades CS. ECM-binding factors ?FGF FGFs constitute a large family of polypeptides (eg, aFGF, bFGF, KGF) that are important in the control of cell growth and differentiation and play a key role in oncogenesis, developmental processes and neuronal development. ?HB-GAM HB-GAM (also designated as pleiotrophin) and midkine form a two-member family of ECM proteins that bind tightly to sulfated carbohydrate structures such as HS. Binds to phosphacan and syndecan. Associated with neurite outgrowth, axon guidance and synaptogenesis. ?PDGF PDGF is one of the numerous growth factors that regulate cell growth and division. ?VEGF VEGF is an important signaling molecule involved in angiogenesis. Abbreviations: PNN = perineuronal net; CSPG = chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan; GAG = glycosaminoglycan; CNS = central nervous system; GPI = glycosyl phosphatidylinositol; HSPG = heparan sulfate proteoglycan; FGF = fibroblast growth factor; VEGF = vascular endothelial growth factor; HB-GAM = heparin-binding growth-associated molecule; bFGF = basic fibroblast growth factor; TGF? = transforming growth factor ?; LTP = long-term potentiation; MMP = matrix metalloproteinase; TIMP = tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinase; tPA = tissue plasminogen activator; ADAMTS = A disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs; PDGF = platelet-derived growth factor. Table 2 Neuronal functions modulated by extracellular matrix (ECM). Neuronal function ECM modulators Reference Neurogenesis Glypican, phosphacan, MMPs ( 8 , 27 ) Migration Versican, RPTP-?/phosphacan ( 8 ) Neurite outgrowth and inhibition Glypican-1/3, N-syndecan, neurocan, phosphacan, brevican, versican, HB-GAM ( 8 , 27 ) Survival PNNs, laminin, TIMP-1, MMPs, tPA ( 1 , 7 , 17 , 25 , 46 , 47 , 52 – 54 , 63 , 68 , 69 , 79 , 80 , 92 , 97 ) LTP and synaptic function NCAM, syndecans, MMPs, TIMPs, reelin, HB-GAM, tenascin-R, tenascin-C, brevican, neurocan, laminin, tPA ( 7 , 8 , 26 , 52 , 60 , 61 , 85 , 88 , 95 ) Abbreviations: PNN = perineuronal net; MMP = matrix metalloproteinase; tPA = tissue plasminogen activator; LTP = long-term potentiation; NCAM = neuronal cell adhesion molecule; HB-GAM = heparin-binding growth-associated molecule; TIMP = tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinase.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Perineuronal nets (PNNs) Macaque brain stained with microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2) (green) and Wisteria floribunda agglutinin (WFA) (red) ( A ). Model of PNNs ( B ). Hypothetical PNN ternary complex of tenascin, chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs) and hyaluronic acid (HA). Figure 2 Interaction of heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling. Figure 3 Possible mechanisms of extracellular matrix (ECM)-related neurodegeneration. Aging or protein aggregation accelerated by genetic mutation can be associated with ECM alterations that would result to co-deposition of ECM components [eg, heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) and chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs)]. Those ECM alterations can result in loss of protective perineuronal nets (PNNs) and increased susceptibility to cell death. Dying neurons can induce inflammation, degradation of ECM and induction of a more robust inflammatory response. Alternatively, inflammatory-induced neurodegeneration can induce ECM degradation through proteolytic activity [eg, matrix metalloproteinase (MMPs) and tissue plasminogen activator (tPA)], induction of chemotaxis and microglial activation. The resulting trafficking of inflammatory cells and secretion of cytokines can induce neuronal death that would feed the vicious cycle. Abbreviations: MS = multiple sclerosis; HIVD = human immunodeficiency virus dementia. Table 1 Extracellular matrix (ECM) components. Molecule Description GAGs ?Heparan sulfate (HS) Polymer of disaccharide of N-acetylglucosamine and glucoronic acid. HS moieties of cell surface proteoglycans modulate the biological responses to FGF. ?Chondroitin sulfate (CS) Polymer of disaccharide of N-acetylgalactosamine and glucoronic acid. ?Dermatan sulfate (DS) Polymer of disaccharide of N-acetylgalactosamine and iduronic acid. ?Keratan sulfate (KS) Polymer of disaccharide of N-acetylgalactosamine and galactose. ?Hyaluronic acid (HA) Non-sulfated polymer of N-acetylglucosamine and glucoronic acid. As opposed to other GAGs, it is not attached to a core protein. Component of PNNs. The biological effects of HA are mediated through cell surface receptors including CD44 and receptor for HA-mediated motility. Proteoglycans ?Glypican A family of six GPI-anchored cell surface HSPGs that are widely expressed in the CNS. Bind laminin, thrombospondin, FGFs, VEGF and IGF. Associated with neurogenesis and neurite outgrowth. ?Syndecan A family of four membrane-associated HSPGs. Bind tenascin-C, fibronectin, laminin, HB-GAM, bFGF and TGF?. Associated with LTP and synaptic function and neurite outgrowth. ?Phosphacan A secreted CSPG. Bind tenascin-R/C and HB-GAM. Associated with neurogenesis, neuronal migration and neurite outgrowth. ?Versican Secreted CSPG. Binds to HA, tenascin-R and fibronectin. Different alternative spliced variants have been identified. Associated with neuronal migration and neurite outgrowth. ?Brevican Secreted and GPI-anchored CSPG. Binds to HA and tenascin-R. Associated with neurite outgrowth and synaptic function. ?Neurocan A secreted CSPG. Binds to HA, tenascin-R/C and bFGF. Associated with neurite outgrowth and synaptic function. Other proteins ?Tenascin ECM protein associated with PNNs. Binds to brevican, phosphacan, neurocan, HA, syndecan, glypican and integrins. Associated with neurite outgrowth and LTP and synaptic function. ?Laminin A secreted family of key members of the ECM. Binds predominantly to integrins. Associated with migration, survival and synaptic function. ECM-modulating enzymes ?MMP Family of zinc-dependent extracellular proteases. Associated with neurogenesis, survival and plasticity. ?TIMP Inhibitor of MMPs. Associated with neuronal survival and plasticity. ?tPA Serine protease that converts inactive plasminogen to active plasmin. Key initiator of MMPs. Associated with neurite outgrowth, neuronal migration, survival and synaptic function. ?ADAMTS Protease family with aggrecanase activity associated with the ECM through a thrombospondin motif. ?Plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 A serine proteinase inhibitor (serpin) plasminogen activator inhibitor. ?Hyaluronidase Family of enzymes that degrade HA. ?Heparanase An endo-?-D-glucuronidase that catalyzes the hydrolytic cleavage of the ?-1,4-glycosidic bond in HS. ?Chondroitinase Lyase that degrades CS. ECM-binding factors ?FGF FGFs constitute a large family of polypeptides (eg, aFGF, bFGF, KGF) that are important in the control of cell growth and differentiation and play a key role in oncogenesis, developmental processes and neuronal development. ?HB-GAM HB-GAM (also designated as pleiotrophin) and midkine form a two-member family of ECM proteins that bind tightly to sulfated carbohydrate structures such as HS. Binds to phosphacan and syndecan. Associated with neurite outgrowth, axon guidance and synaptogenesis. ?PDGF PDGF is one of the numerous growth factors that regulate cell growth and division. ?VEGF VEGF is an important signaling molecule involved in angiogenesis. Abbreviations: PNN = perineuronal net; CSPG = chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan; GAG = glycosaminoglycan; CNS = central nervous system; GPI = glycosyl phosphatidylinositol; HSPG = heparan sulfate proteoglycan; FGF = fibroblast growth factor; VEGF = vascular endothelial growth factor; HB-GAM = heparin-binding growth-associated molecule; bFGF = basic fibroblast growth factor; TGF? = transforming growth factor ?; LTP = long-term potentiation; MMP = matrix metalloproteinase; TIMP = tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinase; tPA = tissue plasminogen activator; ADAMTS = A disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs; PDGF = platelet-derived growth factor. Table 2 Neuronal functions modulated by extracellular matrix (ECM). Neuronal function ECM modulators Reference Neurogenesis Glypican, phosphacan, MMPs ( 8 , 27 ) Migration Versican, RPTP-?/phosphacan ( 8 ) Neurite outgrowth and inhibition Glypican-1/3, N-syndecan, neurocan, phosphacan, brevican, versican, HB-GAM ( 8 , 27 ) Survival PNNs, laminin, TIMP-1, MMPs, tPA ( 1 , 7 , 17 , 25 , 46 , 47 , 52 – 54 , 63 , 68 , 69 , 79 , 80 , 92 , 97 ) LTP and synaptic function NCAM, syndecans, MMPs, TIMPs, reelin, HB-GAM, tenascin-R, tenascin-C, brevican, neurocan, laminin, tPA ( 7 , 8 , 26 , 52 , 60 , 61 , 85 , 88 , 95 ) Abbreviations: PNN = perineuronal net; MMP = matrix metalloproteinase; tPA = tissue plasminogen activator; LTP = long-term potentiation; NCAM = neuronal cell adhesion molecule; HB-GAM = heparin-binding growth-associated molecule; TIMP = tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinase. 