Trypanosoma cruzi in non-human primates with a history of stillbirths: a retrospective study ( Papio hamadryas spp.) and case report ( Macaca fascicularis ) Background Congenital transmission of Trypanosoma cruzi has been described in humans and experimental work has been conducted with mice, but not with non-human primates (NHPs). Methods We conducted a retrospective study of female baboons ( Papio hamadryas spp.) naturally seropositive or seronegative for T. cruzi with history of fetal loss, and we report a stillbirth in a cynomolgus macaque ( Macaca fascicularis ) with placental T. cruzi amastigotes. Results There were no differences in menstrual cycle parameters and the number of fetal losses between seropositive and seronegative baboons with history of fetal loss. The amount of parasite DNA detected using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) in M. fascicularis placenta was within the range detected in infected baboon tissues. Conclusions There is no evidence that chronic maternal T. cruzi infection causes fetal loss in baboons. Q-PCR is a useful diagnostic tool to study archived NHP placentas.  Introduction Chagas disease (also known as American trypanosomiasis) affects 16–18 million people in Central and South America and 0.6% of pregnant women in some regions in the United States [ 14 , 15 ]. The cause of this disease, the protozoan parasite ( Trypanosoma cruzi ), is usually transmitted by various species of triatomines, but blood transfusion is also a significant source of infection. These routes of transmission have become less important; however, as insect control and blood screening programs have been implemented in endemic countries, and congenital (vertical) transmission is now more common in some areas of Latin America than is infection caused by vector transmission [ 2 , 6 , 17 , 23 ]. Chagas disease is characterized by acute, intermediate, and chronic stages of infection. Transmission of T. cruzi from mother to fetus can occur during all stages of the disease [ 23 , 37 , 43 , 52 ]. Maternal–fetal transmission cannot be prevented because the most common therapeutic agents used to treat T. cruzi infection, nifurtimox, and benznidazole, cannot be used in pregnant women due to their high toxicity [ 22 ]. No chemoprophylaxis administered to seropositive pregnant women has been shown to prevent transplacental passage of the parasite [ 28 ]. Congenital Chagas disease has been associated with premature labor, stillbirth, abortion, and placentitis [ 5 ], but the evidence for the influence of T. cruzi antibody presence on the incidence of stillbirth and abortion is controversial. Although some authors have found an increased risk of abortion or premature birth in seropositive mothers, other studies have not demonstrated an association between serologic status and pregnancy outcome [ 6 , 8 , 14 , 26 ]. Non-human primates such as the baboon and macaque are excellent models for research in both reproduction [ 25 ] and infection with T. cruzi [ 34 ]. To date, the effect of maternal T. cruzi infection on pregnancy outcome has been studied in mice, but not in NHPs [ 9 , 26 , 50 , 52 ]. The goals of the present study were to investigate whether maternal seropositivity for T. cruzi in baboons ( P. hamadryas spp.) influences the frequency of stillbirths/abortions and to examine maternal age, weight, menstrual function, parity, placental histopathology, and inflammatory markers in seropositive and seronegative baboons in this group. We also analyzed an individual case of stillbirth in a cynomolgus macaque ( Macaca fascicularis ) with T. cruzi -related placentitis in the absence of fetal infection. The amount of T. cruzi DNA in the macaque placenta (archived formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue) was quantified using a quantitative polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) assay.  Methods We conducted a retrospective study of female baboons ( Papio hamadryas spp.) naturally seropositive or seronegative for T. cruzi with history of fetal loss, and we report a stillbirth in a cynomolgus macaque ( Macaca fascicularis ) with placental T. cruzi amastigotes.  Results There were no differences in menstrual cycle parameters and the number of fetal losses between seropositive and seronegative baboons with history of fetal loss. The amount of parasite DNA detected using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) in M. fascicularis placenta was within the range detected in infected baboon tissues.  Conclusions There is no evidence that chronic maternal T. cruzi infection causes fetal loss in baboons. Q-PCR is a useful diagnostic tool to study archived NHP placentas.  Materials and methods Animals The NHPs used in this study were members of an AAALAC International accredited colony managed by the Southwest National Primate Research Center (SNPRC) at the Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research (SFBR) in San Antonio, TX, USA. The primates were housed in metal and concrete indoor/outdoor enclosures, fed commercial NHP diets, and offered water ad libitum . All procedures were performed in accordance with guidelines of the SFBR Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Serology Seropositivity to T. cruzi was assessed using an in vitro enzyme immunoassay (EIA) for the qualitative detection of antibody to T. cruzi (Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL, USA). This assay does not cross-react with the non-pathogenic trypanosome Trypanosoma rangeli , which is transmitted by some of the same vectors as T. cruzi [ 40 ]. Additionally, most of the baboons were assessed for seropositivity on serial samples with two or more tests at each time point (ranging from 2 to 15 tests per animal over 15 years). These additional assays, all of which detect IgG, were as follows: enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA; using T. cruzi antibody; IVD Research, Inc., Carlsbad, CA, USA, and Bio-Manguinhos, Ministry of Health, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil), Indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA; using immobilized T. cruzi , Bio-Manguinhos), Immuno-chromatographic assay (ICA or Chagas Stat-Pak™ Assay; using T. cruzi recombinant antigens, Chembio Diagnostic Systems, Medford, NY, USA). All five tests gave highly concordant results. In most cases a window of time during which seroconversion occurred was determined. Retrospective study: design and reproductive and clinical history This study was a retrospective analysis of weight and reproductive histories of 84 female baboons having at least one incidence of fetal loss and having been evaluated by serological testing for presence of T. cruzi antibodies. Serum for antibody testing was selected from SNPRC blood and tissue bank based on the dates prior to or at the time of the first reproductive event (as generally at the age of 7 years old). We randomly selected animals for T. cruzi testing from a population of baboons with a history of fetal loss. Weights of the baboons were recorded between the ages of 9 and 11 years, at nonpregnant time points. Turgescence scores were recorded every 3–7 days, and the animals were observed daily for indications of pregnancy or pregnancy loss. Case report A 12-year-old M. fascicularis naturally infected with T. cruzi was presented with stillbirth at term. Gross examination revealed a macerated stillborn fetus with uninflated lungs. This female had delivered one full-term healthy offspring vaginally before the stillbirth and has delivered three healthy offspring after the reported case. Pathology Three placentas from seronegative dams and one from a seropositive dam were available for examination from the group of 84 stillborn baboons. Additionally, two placentas, one from a M. fascicularis seronegative for T. cruzi and the other from a M. fascicularis seropositive for T. cruzi , were examined. All tissues were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for a minimum of 48 hours, processed conventionally, embedded in paraffin, cut at 5 µm, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. To evaluate placental inflammatory responses available baboon and macaque placental tissues were additionally stained with CD45RO (Clone UCHL-1), natural killer cell (CD 57, Clone NK-1) and macrophage (CD68, Clone KP-1) (Dakopatts, Copenhagen, Denmark) antibodies as described elsewhere [ 1 ]. The number of positive stained cells was calculated at 40× magnification in 16 randomly chosen fields of view and presented as number of positive stained cells per square millimeter of tissue on the slide. Trypanosoma cruzi DNA extraction and detection in archived tissues Tissue collection Placental tissue was collected from the T. cruzi seronegative and seropositive M. fascicularis . Archived esophageal and myocardial tissues from four seropositive and four seronegative male baboons were used as positive and negative controls for the PCR reaction. Protozoal amastigotes were detected histologically in the myocardium, but not in esophageal sections of the seropositive male baboons. DNA extraction Tissue was excised from the paraffin blocks using sterile scalpel blades. Approximately 25 mg tissue was placed into 1.2 ml of xylene, vortexed, and centrifuged at 8000 × g for 5 minutes at room temperature. Supernatant was removed by pipetting; the pellet was washed twice in 1.2 ml of absolute ethanol. DNA extraction was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions using a Qiagen (Valencia, CA, USA) tissue DNA extraction kit. DNA concentration was measured in DNA dilution with 10 mm Tris, pH 8.5. The yield of DNA extracted ranged from 9.78 to 37 ng/µl. Quantitative PCR Quantitative PCR was performed with primers specific for T. cruzi minicircle S36/S35 [ 12 ], using 2× Quantitec sybr green master mix (Qiagen) with 30 µ m of each primer in the reaction in ABI PRISM 800 system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). A standard curve for quantification was generated from the dilution of T. cruzi DNA (American Type Culture Collection, Manassas, VA, USA). The specificity of the product was verified by performing PCR with the same primer set using HOT Star Tag DNA polymerase (Qiagen) and subsequent product sequencing. Melting curves were generated and analyzed at the end of Q-PCR cycles. Statistical analysis Records of menstrual cycle (dates of vaginal bleedings and degree of turgescence) were randomly distributed to three blinded observers to avoid bias. Statistical analysis was performed using statistica 6.0 (StatSoft, Inc., 2001, Tulsa, Oklahoma, USA). Data are presented as mean ± SEM. Comparison of means from independent samples was conducted using Student’s t -test adjusted by variance. The relative amount of T. cruzi DNA was compared using ANOVA with a Fisher post hoc test. We considered P -values below 0.05 to be statistically significant.  Animals The NHPs used in this study were members of an AAALAC International accredited colony managed by the Southwest National Primate Research Center (SNPRC) at the Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research (SFBR) in San Antonio, TX, USA. The primates were housed in metal and concrete indoor/outdoor enclosures, fed commercial NHP diets, and offered water ad libitum . All procedures were performed in accordance with guidelines of the SFBR Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.  Serology Seropositivity to T. cruzi was assessed using an in vitro enzyme immunoassay (EIA) for the qualitative detection of antibody to T. cruzi (Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL, USA). This assay does not cross-react with the non-pathogenic trypanosome Trypanosoma rangeli , which is transmitted by some of the same vectors as T. cruzi [ 40 ]. Additionally, most of the baboons were assessed for seropositivity on serial samples with two or more tests at each time point (ranging from 2 to 15 tests per animal over 15 years). These additional assays, all of which detect IgG, were as follows: enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA; using T. cruzi antibody; IVD Research, Inc., Carlsbad, CA, USA, and Bio-Manguinhos, Ministry of Health, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil), Indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA; using immobilized T. cruzi , Bio-Manguinhos), Immuno-chromatographic assay (ICA or Chagas Stat-Pak™ Assay; using T. cruzi recombinant antigens, Chembio Diagnostic Systems, Medford, NY, USA). All five tests gave highly concordant results. In most cases a window of time during which seroconversion occurred was determined.  Retrospective study: design and reproductive and clinical history This study was a retrospective analysis of weight and reproductive histories of 84 female baboons having at least one incidence of fetal loss and having been evaluated by serological testing for presence of T. cruzi antibodies. Serum for antibody testing was selected from SNPRC blood and tissue bank based on the dates prior to or at the time of the first reproductive event (as generally at the age of 7 years old). We randomly selected animals for T. cruzi testing from a population of baboons with a history of fetal loss. Weights of the baboons were recorded between the ages of 9 and 11 years, at nonpregnant time points. Turgescence scores were recorded every 3–7 days, and the animals were observed daily for indications of pregnancy or pregnancy loss.  Case report A 12-year-old M. fascicularis naturally infected with T. cruzi was presented with stillbirth at term. Gross examination revealed a macerated stillborn fetus with uninflated lungs. This female had delivered one full-term healthy offspring vaginally before the stillbirth and has delivered three healthy offspring after the reported case.  Pathology Three placentas from seronegative dams and one from a seropositive dam were available for examination from the group of 84 stillborn baboons. Additionally, two placentas, one from a M. fascicularis seronegative for T. cruzi and the other from a M. fascicularis seropositive for T. cruzi , were examined. All tissues were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for a minimum of 48 hours, processed conventionally, embedded in paraffin, cut at 5 µm, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. To evaluate placental inflammatory responses available baboon and macaque placental tissues were additionally stained with CD45RO (Clone UCHL-1), natural killer cell (CD 57, Clone NK-1) and macrophage (CD68, Clone KP-1) (Dakopatts, Copenhagen, Denmark) antibodies as described elsewhere [ 1 ]. The number of positive stained cells was calculated at 40× magnification in 16 randomly chosen fields of view and presented as number of positive stained cells per square millimeter of tissue on the slide.  Trypanosoma cruzi DNA extraction and detection in archived tissues Tissue collection Placental tissue was collected from the T. cruzi seronegative and seropositive M. fascicularis . Archived esophageal and myocardial tissues from four seropositive and four seronegative male baboons were used as positive and negative controls for the PCR reaction. Protozoal amastigotes were detected histologically in the myocardium, but not in esophageal sections of the seropositive male baboons. DNA extraction Tissue was excised from the paraffin blocks using sterile scalpel blades. Approximately 25 mg tissue was placed into 1.2 ml of xylene, vortexed, and centrifuged at 8000 × g for 5 minutes at room temperature. Supernatant was removed by pipetting; the pellet was washed twice in 1.2 ml of absolute ethanol. DNA extraction was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions using a Qiagen (Valencia, CA, USA) tissue DNA extraction kit. DNA concentration was measured in DNA dilution with 10 mm Tris, pH 8.5. The yield of DNA extracted ranged from 9.78 to 37 ng/µl. Quantitative PCR Quantitative PCR was performed with primers specific for T. cruzi minicircle S36/S35 [ 12 ], using 2× Quantitec sybr green master mix (Qiagen) with 30 µ m of each primer in the reaction in ABI PRISM 800 system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). A standard curve for quantification was generated from the dilution of T. cruzi DNA (American Type Culture Collection, Manassas, VA, USA). The specificity of the product was verified by performing PCR with the same primer set using HOT Star Tag DNA polymerase (Qiagen) and subsequent product sequencing. Melting curves were generated and analyzed at the end of Q-PCR cycles.  Tissue collection Placental tissue was collected from the T. cruzi seronegative and seropositive M. fascicularis . Archived esophageal and myocardial tissues from four seropositive and four seronegative male baboons were used as positive and negative controls for the PCR reaction. Protozoal amastigotes were detected histologically in the myocardium, but not in esophageal sections of the seropositive male baboons.  DNA extraction Tissue was excised from the paraffin blocks using sterile scalpel blades. Approximately 25 mg tissue was placed into 1.2 ml of xylene, vortexed, and centrifuged at 8000 × g for 5 minutes at room temperature. Supernatant was removed by pipetting; the pellet was washed twice in 1.2 ml of absolute ethanol. DNA extraction was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions using a Qiagen (Valencia, CA, USA) tissue DNA extraction kit. DNA concentration was measured in DNA dilution with 10 mm Tris, pH 8.5. The yield of DNA extracted ranged from 9.78 to 37 ng/µl.  Quantitative PCR Quantitative PCR was performed with primers specific for T. cruzi minicircle S36/S35 [ 12 ], using 2× Quantitec sybr green master mix (Qiagen) with 30 µ m of each primer in the reaction in ABI PRISM 800 system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). A standard curve for quantification was generated from the dilution of T. cruzi DNA (American Type Culture Collection, Manassas, VA, USA). The specificity of the product was verified by performing PCR with the same primer set using HOT Star Tag DNA polymerase (Qiagen) and subsequent product sequencing. Melting curves were generated and analyzed at the end of Q-PCR cycles.  Statistical analysis Records of menstrual cycle (dates of vaginal bleedings and degree of turgescence) were randomly distributed to three blinded observers to avoid bias. Statistical analysis was performed using statistica 6.0 (StatSoft, Inc., 2001, Tulsa, Oklahoma, USA). Data are presented as mean ± SEM. Comparison of means from independent samples was conducted using Student’s t -test adjusted by variance. The relative amount of T. cruzi DNA was compared using ANOVA with a Fisher post hoc test. We considered P -values below 0.05 to be statistically significant.  Results Trypanosoma cruzi serology among animals with a history of fetal loss Of 84 serologically tested female baboons, 13 were seropositive and 71 were seronegative ( Table 1 ). There were no differences between seropositive and seronegative animals regarding parity and menstrual cycle characteristics; however, the mean weight of the animals in the seropositive group was higher than that of those in the seronegative group ( Table 2 ). Pathology There were no differences in placental structure, hemorrhage, fibrin deposits, or inflammation between the placentas from the three seronegative and one seropositive baboon stillbirths. The analyses of immunohistochemistry for CD45RO, CD57, and CD68 positive cells revealed that the numbers of positive cells in placenta from the seropositive animal were 5, 27, and 67 per mm2 of tissue, respectively. In placentas from the seronegative animals the relative amount of positive cells ranged between 22–485, 22–459 and 136–366 per mm2, respectively ( Fig. 1 ). Case report Histologically there was a severe, multifocal necrosuppurative placentitis with intracellular protozoal amastigotes morphologically consistent with T. cruzi ( Fig. 2A ). Lesions and organisms were not observed in the fetus. A placenta was collected after stillbirth from a T. cruzi -negative M. fascicularis for comparison ( Fig. 2E ). The number of cells expressing CD45RO and CD57 markers in the infected placenta ( Fig. 2B,C ) was 260 and 84 per mm2, respectively; the number of cells expressing these markers was lower in the placenta from non-infected animal ( Fig. 2F,G ) (42 and 5 per mm2, respectively). The number of cells expressing CD68 in the infected placenta was 485 per mm2 compared with 747 cells/ mm2 in the non-infected placenta ( Fig. 2D,H ). The analyses of PCR data revealed the relative amount of T. cruzi DNA in placenta as 2.09. This amount was consistent with the relative amount of T. cruzi DNA in the tissues of the group of seropositive baboons with histologically visualized parasites and was significantly higher compared with the seropositive animals without parasites and to seronegative animals ( Fig. 3 ).  Results Trypanosoma cruzi serology among animals with a history of fetal loss Of 84 serologically tested female baboons, 13 were seropositive and 71 were seronegative ( Table 1 ). There were no differences between seropositive and seronegative animals regarding parity and menstrual cycle characteristics; however, the mean weight of the animals in the seropositive group was higher than that of those in the seronegative group ( Table 2 ). Pathology There were no differences in placental structure, hemorrhage, fibrin deposits, or inflammation between the placentas from the three seronegative and one seropositive baboon stillbirths. The analyses of immunohistochemistry for CD45RO, CD57, and CD68 positive cells revealed that the numbers of positive cells in placenta from the seropositive animal were 5, 27, and 67 per mm2 of tissue, respectively. In placentas from the seronegative animals the relative amount of positive cells ranged between 22–485, 22–459 and 136–366 per mm2, respectively ( Fig. 1 ). Case report Histologically there was a severe, multifocal necrosuppurative placentitis with intracellular protozoal amastigotes morphologically consistent with T. cruzi ( Fig. 2A ). Lesions and organisms were not observed in the fetus. A placenta was collected after stillbirth from a T. cruzi -negative M. fascicularis for comparison ( Fig. 2E ). The number of cells expressing CD45RO and CD57 markers in the infected placenta ( Fig. 2B,C ) was 260 and 84 per mm2, respectively; the number of cells expressing these markers was lower in the placenta from non-infected animal ( Fig. 2F,G ) (42 and 5 per mm2, respectively). The number of cells expressing CD68 in the infected placenta was 485 per mm2 compared with 747 cells/ mm2 in the non-infected placenta ( Fig. 2D,H ). The analyses of PCR data revealed the relative amount of T. cruzi DNA in placenta as 2.09. This amount was consistent with the relative amount of T. cruzi DNA in the tissues of the group of seropositive baboons with histologically visualized parasites and was significantly higher compared with the seropositive animals without parasites and to seronegative animals ( Fig. 3 ).  Trypanosoma cruzi serology among animals with a history of fetal loss Of 84 serologically tested female baboons, 13 were seropositive and 71 were seronegative ( Table 1 ). There were no differences between seropositive and seronegative animals regarding parity and menstrual cycle characteristics; however, the mean weight of the animals in the seropositive group was higher than that of those in the seronegative group ( Table 2 ).  Trypanosoma cruzi serology among animals with a history of fetal loss Of 84 serologically tested female baboons, 13 were seropositive and 71 were seronegative ( Table 1 ). There were no differences between seropositive and seronegative animals regarding parity and menstrual cycle characteristics; however, the mean weight of the animals in the seropositive group was higher than that of those in the seronegative group ( Table 2 ).  Pathology There were no differences in placental structure, hemorrhage, fibrin deposits, or inflammation between the placentas from the three seronegative and one seropositive baboon stillbirths. The analyses of immunohistochemistry for CD45RO, CD57, and CD68 positive cells revealed that the numbers of positive cells in placenta from the seropositive animal were 5, 27, and 67 per mm2 of tissue, respectively. In placentas from the seronegative animals the relative amount of positive cells ranged between 22–485, 22–459 and 136–366 per mm2, respectively ( Fig. 1 ).  Pathology There were no differences in placental structure, hemorrhage, fibrin deposits, or inflammation between the placentas from the three seronegative and one seropositive baboon stillbirths. The analyses of immunohistochemistry for CD45RO, CD57, and CD68 positive cells revealed that the numbers of positive cells in placenta from the seropositive animal were 5, 27, and 67 per mm2 of tissue, respectively. In placentas from the seronegative animals the relative amount of positive cells ranged between 22–485, 22–459 and 136–366 per mm2, respectively ( Fig. 1 ).  Case report Histologically there was a severe, multifocal necrosuppurative placentitis with intracellular protozoal amastigotes morphologically consistent with T. cruzi ( Fig. 2A ). Lesions and organisms were not observed in the fetus. A placenta was collected after stillbirth from a T. cruzi -negative M. fascicularis for comparison ( Fig. 2E ). The number of cells expressing CD45RO and CD57 markers in the infected placenta ( Fig. 2B,C ) was 260 and 84 per mm2, respectively; the number of cells expressing these markers was lower in the placenta from non-infected animal ( Fig. 2F,G ) (42 and 5 per mm2, respectively). The number of cells expressing CD68 in the infected placenta was 485 per mm2 compared with 747 cells/ mm2 in the non-infected placenta ( Fig. 2D,H ). The analyses of PCR data revealed the relative amount of T. cruzi DNA in placenta as 2.09. This amount was consistent with the relative amount of T. cruzi DNA in the tissues of the group of seropositive baboons with histologically visualized parasites and was significantly higher compared with the seropositive animals without parasites and to seronegative animals ( Fig. 3 ).  Case report Histologically there was a severe, multifocal necrosuppurative placentitis with intracellular protozoal amastigotes morphologically consistent with T. cruzi ( Fig. 2A ). Lesions and organisms were not observed in the fetus. A placenta was collected after stillbirth from a T. cruzi -negative M. fascicularis for comparison ( Fig. 2E ). The number of cells expressing CD45RO and CD57 markers in the infected placenta ( Fig. 2B,C ) was 260 and 84 per mm2, respectively; the number of cells expressing these markers was lower in the placenta from non-infected animal ( Fig. 2F,G ) (42 and 5 per mm2, respectively). The number of cells expressing CD68 in the infected placenta was 485 per mm2 compared with 747 cells/ mm2 in the non-infected placenta ( Fig. 2D,H ). The analyses of PCR data revealed the relative amount of T. cruzi DNA in placenta as 2.09. This amount was consistent with the relative amount of T. cruzi DNA in the tissues of the group of seropositive baboons with histologically visualized parasites and was significantly higher compared with the seropositive animals without parasites and to seronegative animals ( Fig. 3 ).  Discussion In the southern United States, infection with T. cruzi and resulting seroconversion has been demonstrated in a variety of wild animals and domesticated dogs [ 4 , 24 , 27 , 48 , 54 ]. The acute and chronic stages of Chagas disease have been studied in several NHP species including the rhesus macaque and the baboon [ 7 , 33 , 35 , 47 , 56 – 58 ] ( Table 3 ). Chagas disease was first observed in a colony baboon at the SFBR in San Antonio, Texas in 1986 [ 21 ]. The outdoor housing of animals results in natural infection through exposure to the triatomine insect vector. In primates it is presumed that transmission is mainly through ingestion of infected insects [ 49 ]. There have been a few reports of Chagas disease in humans in the United States and there has been concern about the safety of the blood supply as donors from endemic areas migrate to the United States [ 5 , 11 , 29 , 38 , 46 ]. The seroprevalence in pregnant women in endemic areas has been shown to be as high as 81% and congenital transmission can occur in 2–21% of cases [ 2 , 3 , 8 , 19 , 20 , 51 , 55 ]. Why transmission from mother to fetus is not more common is still being studied. Torrico et al. [ 52 ] found that transmission rates were decreased in older women with higher parity and that when parasites were not transmitted to the fetus there was no effect on outcome of gestation or health of newborns in seropositive mothers. Our retrospective study did not find any influence of maternal age on the number of stillbirths. Moreover, the indirect indices of maternal hormonal status in our study – length of menstrual cycle and periovulatory phase – in both groups were not different between seropositive and seronegative animals and were within published values for baboons [ 34 ]. Our study was performed on a selected population of baboons with at least one incident of fetal loss and may not mirror the situation in the overall colony. Further analyses are underway at the SNPRC. The surprising finding – higher body weight in seropositive animals with fetal loss compared with seronegative ones – could be explained partly, that by increased macrophage infiltration into the omental tissues in infected humans [ 12 ]. Lujan et al. [ 30 ] showed that chorionic villi from normal human placentas do not allow penetration or sustained infection by T. cruzi in vitro . This finding is in agreement with the documented histologic presence of parasites in the placenta of newborns in which congenital transmission did not occur, and is consistent with the case presented here [ 56 ]. Fretes and de Fabro [ 18 ] showed that two of six placentas from women seropositive for T. cruzi contained occlusion of the villi blood vessels with hyalinization of their walls. We did not observe this feature, possibly due to our restricted number of samples. The features of placental infection – lymphocyte infiltration and villitis in our case – were similar to those described for human placental reaction to the parasite [ 1 , 13 , 17 ]; however, contrary to the observations in women, we did not find increased inflammation in placentas from the seropositive baboons when compared with the placentas of seronegative animals; and the number of placental macrophages was not increased in the infected placenta of the M. fascicularis , compared with the placenta from non-infected animal. The absence of signs of fetal T. cruzi infection in the presence of an infected placenta in the reported case may be due to chronic infection and minimal body parasite invasion, as supported by the quantitative PCR data. The data presented in this study are also in agreement with our previous report regarding absence of seropositive offspring in chronically infected baboons [ 53 ]. In summary, there was no difference in fertility, menstrual cycle parameters and number of stillbirth/ abortions, between seropositive and seronegative baboons seronegative for T. cruzi in the population of animals with at least one incident of fetal loss. Placental lesions in the presence of T. cruzi amastigotes in the decidua ( M. fascicularis ) were similar to those reported in humans except the placental macrophage reaction (with no difference compared with the placenta from seronegative animal). Applied here for the first time in NHPs, Q-PCR of T. cruzi DNA is a useful diagnostic tool to study the presence of T. cruzi in archived NHP placentas.  Discussion In the southern United States, infection with T. cruzi and resulting seroconversion has been demonstrated in a variety of wild animals and domesticated dogs [ 4 , 24 , 27 , 48 , 54 ]. The acute and chronic stages of Chagas disease have been studied in several NHP species including the rhesus macaque and the baboon [ 7 , 33 , 35 , 47 , 56 – 58 ] ( Table 3 ). Chagas disease was first observed in a colony baboon at the SFBR in San Antonio, Texas in 1986 [ 21 ]. The outdoor housing of animals results in natural infection through exposure to the triatomine insect vector. In primates it is presumed that transmission is mainly through ingestion of infected insects [ 49 ]. There have been a few reports of Chagas disease in humans in the United States and there has been concern about the safety of the blood supply as donors from endemic areas migrate to the United States [ 5 , 11 , 29 , 38 , 46 ]. The seroprevalence in pregnant women in endemic areas has been shown to be as high as 81% and congenital transmission can occur in 2–21% of cases [ 2 , 3 , 8 , 19 , 20 , 51 , 55 ]. Why transmission from mother to fetus is not more common is still being studied. Torrico et al. [ 52 ] found that transmission rates were decreased in older women with higher parity and that when parasites were not transmitted to the fetus there was no effect on outcome of gestation or health of newborns in seropositive mothers. Our retrospective study did not find any influence of maternal age on the number of stillbirths. Moreover, the indirect indices of maternal hormonal status in our study – length of menstrual cycle and periovulatory phase – in both groups were not different between seropositive and seronegative animals and were within published values for baboons [ 34 ]. Our study was performed on a selected population of baboons with at least one incident of fetal loss and may not mirror the situation in the overall colony. Further analyses are underway at the SNPRC. The surprising finding – higher body weight in seropositive animals with fetal loss compared with seronegative ones – could be explained partly, that by increased macrophage infiltration into the omental tissues in infected humans [ 12 ]. Lujan et al. [ 30 ] showed that chorionic villi from normal human placentas do not allow penetration or sustained infection by T. cruzi in vitro . This finding is in agreement with the documented histologic presence of parasites in the placenta of newborns in which congenital transmission did not occur, and is consistent with the case presented here [ 56 ]. Fretes and de Fabro [ 18 ] showed that two of six placentas from women seropositive for T. cruzi contained occlusion of the villi blood vessels with hyalinization of their walls. We did not observe this feature, possibly due to our restricted number of samples. The features of placental infection – lymphocyte infiltration and villitis in our case – were similar to those described for human placental reaction to the parasite [ 1 , 13 , 17 ]; however, contrary to the observations in women, we did not find increased inflammation in placentas from the seropositive baboons when compared with the placentas of seronegative animals; and the number of placental macrophages was not increased in the infected placenta of the M. fascicularis , compared with the placenta from non-infected animal. The absence of signs of fetal T. cruzi infection in the presence of an infected placenta in the reported case may be due to chronic infection and minimal body parasite invasion, as supported by the quantitative PCR data. The data presented in this study are also in agreement with our previous report regarding absence of seropositive offspring in chronically infected baboons [ 53 ]. In summary, there was no difference in fertility, menstrual cycle parameters and number of stillbirth/ abortions, between seropositive and seronegative baboons seronegative for T. cruzi in the population of animals with at least one incident of fetal loss. Placental lesions in the presence of T. cruzi amastigotes in the decidua ( M. fascicularis ) were similar to those reported in humans except the placental macrophage reaction (with no difference compared with the placenta from seronegative animal). Applied here for the first time in NHPs, Q-PCR of T. cruzi DNA is a useful diagnostic tool to study the presence of T. cruzi in archived NHP placentas. 