Stromal, Fibrous, and Fatty Gastrointestinal Tumors Associated With A PDGFRA Gene Mutation We report the case of a woman with 3 different types of gastrointestinal tumors—stromal, fibrous, and fatty—and a germline defect of the PDGFRA gene (V561D). The patient, now 52 years old, presented in 1977 at age 22 years with a gastric tumor and a duodenal lipoma. Subsequently, she developed KIT-negative, CD34-positive obstructing small intestinal fibrous tumors that required three laparotomies and intestinal resections. Most recently (in 2002), more than 100 of the fibrous tumors were resected and in addition multiple small intestinal lipomas and multiple gastric KIT- and CD34-positive stromal tumors. The nosology of the fibrous tumors was not clear, although they resembled inflammatory fibrous polyps. The lesions were hypocellular and featured poorly outlined spindle, stellate, and polygonal CD34-positive and KIT-negative cells. They penetrated through the muscularis propria and expanded the subserosa and occasionally extended into the mesentery. There was no metastasis. The patient is currently asymptomatic; radiologic study in June 2007 revealed postoperative changes only. None of the patient’s primary relatives have had similar tumors.  Introduction Stromal tumors of the stomach (GISTs) are currently attracting great interest because of 1) shared attributes with the interstitial cells of Cajal (ICC) ( 13 ), 2) expression of the receptor tyrosine kinases KIT and PDGFRA (platelet-derived growth factor receptor ?) ( 10 , 11 , 16 ), 3) exhibition of mutations of the KIT and PDGFRA genes ( 11 , 13 ), 4) response to certain synthetic tyrosine kinase inhibitors ( 7 ), and 5) occurrence as a component of several syndromes. The tumors may be benign or malignant, single or multiple, sporadic or familial, syndromic or nonsyndromic. The sporadic neoplasm occurs equally in older men and women and usually behaves as a benign tumor ( 23 ); the familial neoplasm affects the sexes equally and tends to occur in younger individuals. The tumors occur alone or with other conditions, including 1) neurofibromatosis 1 (NF 1) ( 23 , 30 ), 2) mast cell tumors, urticaria pigmentosa, and skin pigmentation and combinations of these conditions ( 20 , 24 ), and 3) paraganglioma (the Carney-Stratakis syndrome) ( 4 , 26 ). The neoplasms are also the major component of the nonfamilial Carney triad, a disorder that includes pulmonary chondroma, extra-adrenal paraganglioma, and other tumors ( 3 , 21 ). Gain-of-function (activating) KIT mutations occur in 85% to 90% of gastric GISTs ( 29 ). A minority of the tumors has gain-of-function (activating) mutations of the PDGFRA gene ( 11 ). PDGFRA is a member of the same family of receptor kinases as KIT ( 29 ). The mutations result in constitutive ligand-independent kinase dysfunction. Succinic dehydrogenase subunit B, C, and D (SDHB, SDHC and SDHD) gene mutations were recently found in GISTs associated with paragangliomas ( 22 ). Herein, we report the clinical and pathological findings in a phenotypically normal woman, now 52 years old, in whom a gastric and a duodenal neoplasm was identified at age 22 years. Subsequently, she underwent three operations for multiple gastric GISTs and small intestinal fibrous and lipomatous tumors. Molecular studies of one of the GISTs showed a germline defect of the PDGFRA gene (V561D) ( 26 ). The combination of tumors in the patient probably represents another syndrome involving gastric GISTs.  Case Report In September 1977, a 22-year-old woman complained of occasional nausea. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed a 5-mm nonulcerated gastric antral polyp and a rounded, sessile, 6-mm polyp just beyond the superior angle of the duodenum that was biopsied. At age 32 (July 1987), she complained of abdominal cramping pain. A gastric barium study with follow-through showed a 3-cm gastric mass, 2 polypoid 1.5-cm masses in the descending portion of the duodenum, and 11 submucosal small intestinal lesions, one to three cm in diameter, with a smooth contour. At laparotomy, several gastric abnormalities were found: a large mass extended from the posterior wall; there was a golf-ball–sized antral mass; and the serosal surface was studded with verrucous lesions. Four segmental gastric resections were performed to excise 1) 2 firm, white nodules with a homogeneous cut surface, each 0.5 cm; 2) several firm to soft, violaceous to tan nodules, each 1 to 1.5 cm; 3) an irregularly shaped bosselated, firm but elastic mass, 2 cm in diameter; and 4) a posterior wall lesion, measuring 6 × 3 × 0.5 cm. Several tumors were not excised. There were multiple masses throughout the small bowel, one of which had become intussuscepted. The intestinal wall was very thick and leathery, and the serosa had a whitish appearance. Some tumors extended into the mesentery. The area of the intussusception including several of the neoplasms was resected. Microscopically, the examining pathologist thought the lesions were very unusual and obtained the opinions of 4 consultants. The respective diagnoses were 1) malignant schwannoma, leiomyosarcoma, and multiple hamartomas, 2) multiple leiomyoblastomas; 3) high grade round cell (lipoblastic) liposarcomas; and 4) inflammatory fibroid polyp (small intestine) and multifocal stromal tumors (stomach). The final pathological diagnos rendered wasgastric and small intestinal mesenchymal nodules of uncertain nature. An 8-misonth course of chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, dacarbazine, and vincristin) was administered. At age 35 (February 1990), the patient developed acute small bowel obstruction. During the third laparotomy, the surgeon found multiple small intestinal polypoid lesions, measuring up to 5 cm in diameter; one was intussuscepted. A 23-cm segment of mid small bowel was resected. The pathological diagnosis rendered was neurofibromatosis. At age 47 (January 2002), the patient had renewed symptoms of intestinal obstruction. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed a gastric submucosal prepyloric mass and a lesion partially obstructing the first part of the duodenum. Abdominal computed tomographic (CT) examination revealed marked thickening of the entire small bowel wall and an 8-cm mass involving the gastric greater curvature. Colonoscopy showed mild diverticular disease. At laparotomy, the thickened small bowel was dilated and was, as described in the surgical report, “extensively infiltrated with a white tumor extending from 20 cm distal to the ligament of Treitz to 90 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve.” The involved small bowel was resected (estimated by the surgeon to weigh more than 15 pounds [6.8 kg]). The large tumor obstructing the first part of the duodenum was also excised. There were multiple small gastric serosal nodules and 2 large masses attached to the greater curvature: an 8-cm cystic lesion and a 6-cm stalked lesion that was adherent to the liver and diaphragm. A partial gastrectomy and local excision of the greater curvature lesions were performed; several small tumor nodules were not resected. The appendix was abnormal and was excised. At age 52 (June 2007), the patient was well and had no complaints. Abdominal CT examination showed postoperative changes only. No member of the patient’s family has had gastric or small intestinal tumors. The patient’s parents were of Italian and English-Scottish extraction. The father died at age 54 of complications of diabetes mellitus and the mother at age 81 of hypertension and renal failure. Her only sibling, a brother, died suddenly at age 46; there was no autopsy.  Materials and Methods The clinical, radiologic, endoscopic, and pathological reports from the patient’s duodenal biopsy and 4 subsequent surgical procedures were obtained together with the histologic slides from the 1977, 1987, 1989, and 2002 operations and the paraffin blocks and the resection specimens from the most recent (2002) laparotomy. Additional blocks from the latter resections were processed. The specimens were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. Sections 5 ? thick were obtained for routine and immunohistochemical staining. The following stains were used: hematoxylin–eosin (H & E), periodic acid-Schiff with diastase predigestion, and Masson trichrome. In immunohistochemical studies (streptavidin-biotin peroxidase complex method), antibodies were selectively used against the following: CD117 (Dako, Carpinteria, California; polyclonal, dilution 1/100), CD34 (Beckton Dickinson and Co, San Jose, California; MY10, dilution 1/100); actin (Dako; 1A4, dilution 1/100); desmin (Dako; DER11, dilution 1/200); vimentin (Dako; VG1, dilution 1/20); S-100 (Dako; polyclonal, dilution 1/100); neurofilament (Dako; 2F11, dilution 1/800); calponin (Dako; CALP, dilution 1/500); fascin (Dako; 55K-2, dilution 1/500); CD35 (Dako; Ber-Mac-DRC, dilution 1/5); cyclin D1 (Lab Vision Corp, Fremont, California; SP4, 1/50); BCL-2 (Dako; dilution1/20); and PKC? (Becton, Dickinson and Co; 27, dilution 1/200).  Results The different gastrointestinal tumor types found at the patient’s surgical procedures were generally similar. All were represented in her 2002 surgical specimens. Therefore, only the findings in this procedure are described to avoid repetition. The findings at the earlier procedures and those in 2002 are summarized in Table 1 . The 2002 pathological findings included 1) gastric GISTs, 2) gastric, duodenal, jejunal and appendiceal fibrous tumors, 3) jejunal lipomas, and 4) jejunal diverticula. Pathology Stomach and Duodenum Two large lesions were attached to the serosa: an 8 cm cyst containing liquid and sediment ( Fig. 1 A ) and a 6-cm pedunculated tumor. There was also a series of intramural and subserosal tumorlets, 1 to 3 mm in greatest dimension ( Fig. 1 B ); some were calcified and gritty when cut. Microscopically, the 6 cm tumor featured a solid sheet of sharply outlined, moderate-sized epithelioid cells with clear or acidophilic cytoplasm ( Fig. 1 C ); there were some spindle cells. The tumorlets were composed of plump spindle cells with occasional epithelioid cells; some had varying amounts of hyaline material; others were completely hyalinized and sometimes calcified; most were circumscribed, some showed subtle infiltration among the bundles of the muscularis. A plaque-like submucosal fibrous tumor, 1 cm thick and histologically similar to the jejunal tumors to be described later, was covered by fundal-type mucosa ( Fig. 2 ). Results of immunostaining of both lesions are presented in Table 2 . The rim of duodenum was thickened by a sclerotic hypocellular submucosal fibrous tumor extending from Brunner’s glands through the markedly thickened muscularis propria to the subserosa. The collagen bundles in the submucosa were arranged in parallel and vertical to the long axis of the bowel. Jejunum and Appendix The 120-cm length of small intestine was markedly dilated, twisted and distorted by numerous tumors; the serosa had an opaque off-white appearance. One hundred fourteen intramural spheroidal or oval, circumscribed, submucosal nodules ranging in size from 0.5 to 7.5 cm, protruded into the bowel lumen, many side-by-side. The lesions were covered by a flat mucosa, devoid of plicae ( Fig. 3 A ); a few, covered by intact serosa, protruded from the bowel. A wide-mouthed diverticulum, 7 cm in diameter, had a 6 mm-thick wall ( Fig. 3 B ). The tumors had different consistencies: the majority (80%) felt hard, some were firm, and a few were soft. The hard tumors (fibrous) had an off-white cut surface, the firm tumors an off-white and yellow apperance (combined fibrous tumor and lipomas), and the 12 soft tumors appeared yellow (lipomas) ( Fig. 3 B ). The appendix measured 4.5 × 2.5 × 2.5 cm; the wall was thickened and whitish, and the tip dilated. Microscopically, the tumors were of 2 types ( Fig. 4 ), fibrous and fatty that occurred separately, side-by-side, and superficial to one another, the lipoma always being closest to the mucosa. Exceptionally, a fibrous tumor infiltrated just into a lipoma ( Fig. 4 A ). The fibrous tumors were circumscribed but unencapsulated with a uniform, bland appearance, interrupted by occasional large blood vessels and a few medium-sized to large, spherical to oval microcysts. The lesions were hypocellular to moderately cellular focally and composed of haphazardly arranged, small stellate, spindle, and polygonal cells with a minimal amount of acidophilic cytoplasm set in abundant collagen fibers and collagen bundles ( Fig. 4 B ). Vimentin staining showed that the cells had ample cytoplasm that extended into narrow tapering cell processes. The nuclei were moderately chromatic, uniform, small, round, oval, polygonal and irregular in shape with fine evenly dispersed chromatin granules and a single small nucleolus. Mitotic figures were not seen. The cells were compatible with fibroblasts but will be referred to herein as fibroid tumor type (FTT) cells for several reasons including the fact that their lineage could not be identified. There was a sprinkling of eosinophils close to the mucosa in some of the tumors but not elsewhere; mast cells were scattered throughout the tumors. Immunostaining results are presented in Table 2 . From the submucosal base of the fibrous lesions, the process extended through the muscularis propria to involve the subserosa and rarely the mesentery ( Figs. 5 and 6 ). Tumor cells and collagen penetrated into the muscularis propria, separating and encasing groups of fibers, many of which were degenerating and anucleate. There was no ICC hyperplasia. The appendiceal lumen, submucosa and muscularis propria were replaced by a hypocellular mass of spindle and stellate collagen-producing FTT cells that extended into the mesoappendix. The soft submucosal tumors were circumscribed but unencapsulated and composed of masses of mature fat cells. The diverticulum ( Fig. 3 B ) was lined by flattened jejunal mucosa. The muscularis mucosae was hypertrophied (0.3 mm thick) and its layers were easily distinguishable. The submucosa was replaced by a hypocellular sheet of polygonal and spindle cells FTT cells and collagen, punctuated by dilated thin-walled vessels. The muscularis propria was not recognizable. (Another jejunal diverticulum measuring 4.5 × 3.5 × 2.5 cm was previously found and excised when the patient was 34 years old.)  Results The different gastrointestinal tumor types found at the patient’s surgical procedures were generally similar. All were represented in her 2002 surgical specimens. Therefore, only the findings in this procedure are described to avoid repetition. The findings at the earlier procedures and those in 2002 are summarized in Table 1 . The 2002 pathological findings included 1) gastric GISTs, 2) gastric, duodenal, jejunal and appendiceal fibrous tumors, 3) jejunal lipomas, and 4) jejunal diverticula. Pathology Stomach and Duodenum Two large lesions were attached to the serosa: an 8 cm cyst containing liquid and sediment ( Fig. 1 A ) and a 6-cm pedunculated tumor. There was also a series of intramural and subserosal tumorlets, 1 to 3 mm in greatest dimension ( Fig. 1 B ); some were calcified and gritty when cut. Microscopically, the 6 cm tumor featured a solid sheet of sharply outlined, moderate-sized epithelioid cells with clear or acidophilic cytoplasm ( Fig. 1 C ); there were some spindle cells. The tumorlets were composed of plump spindle cells with occasional epithelioid cells; some had varying amounts of hyaline material; others were completely hyalinized and sometimes calcified; most were circumscribed, some showed subtle infiltration among the bundles of the muscularis. A plaque-like submucosal fibrous tumor, 1 cm thick and histologically similar to the jejunal tumors to be described later, was covered by fundal-type mucosa ( Fig. 2 ). Results of immunostaining of both lesions are presented in Table 2 . The rim of duodenum was thickened by a sclerotic hypocellular submucosal fibrous tumor extending from Brunner’s glands through the markedly thickened muscularis propria to the subserosa. The collagen bundles in the submucosa were arranged in parallel and vertical to the long axis of the bowel. Jejunum and Appendix The 120-cm length of small intestine was markedly dilated, twisted and distorted by numerous tumors; the serosa had an opaque off-white appearance. One hundred fourteen intramural spheroidal or oval, circumscribed, submucosal nodules ranging in size from 0.5 to 7.5 cm, protruded into the bowel lumen, many side-by-side. The lesions were covered by a flat mucosa, devoid of plicae ( Fig. 3 A ); a few, covered by intact serosa, protruded from the bowel. A wide-mouthed diverticulum, 7 cm in diameter, had a 6 mm-thick wall ( Fig. 3 B ). The tumors had different consistencies: the majority (80%) felt hard, some were firm, and a few were soft. The hard tumors (fibrous) had an off-white cut surface, the firm tumors an off-white and yellow apperance (combined fibrous tumor and lipomas), and the 12 soft tumors appeared yellow (lipomas) ( Fig. 3 B ). The appendix measured 4.5 × 2.5 × 2.5 cm; the wall was thickened and whitish, and the tip dilated. Microscopically, the tumors were of 2 types ( Fig. 4 ), fibrous and fatty that occurred separately, side-by-side, and superficial to one another, the lipoma always being closest to the mucosa. Exceptionally, a fibrous tumor infiltrated just into a lipoma ( Fig. 4 A ). The fibrous tumors were circumscribed but unencapsulated with a uniform, bland appearance, interrupted by occasional large blood vessels and a few medium-sized to large, spherical to oval microcysts. The lesions were hypocellular to moderately cellular focally and composed of haphazardly arranged, small stellate, spindle, and polygonal cells with a minimal amount of acidophilic cytoplasm set in abundant collagen fibers and collagen bundles ( Fig. 4 B ). Vimentin staining showed that the cells had ample cytoplasm that extended into narrow tapering cell processes. The nuclei were moderately chromatic, uniform, small, round, oval, polygonal and irregular in shape with fine evenly dispersed chromatin granules and a single small nucleolus. Mitotic figures were not seen. The cells were compatible with fibroblasts but will be referred to herein as fibroid tumor type (FTT) cells for several reasons including the fact that their lineage could not be identified. There was a sprinkling of eosinophils close to the mucosa in some of the tumors but not elsewhere; mast cells were scattered throughout the tumors. Immunostaining results are presented in Table 2 . From the submucosal base of the fibrous lesions, the process extended through the muscularis propria to involve the subserosa and rarely the mesentery ( Figs. 5 and 6 ). Tumor cells and collagen penetrated into the muscularis propria, separating and encasing groups of fibers, many of which were degenerating and anucleate. There was no ICC hyperplasia. The appendiceal lumen, submucosa and muscularis propria were replaced by a hypocellular mass of spindle and stellate collagen-producing FTT cells that extended into the mesoappendix. The soft submucosal tumors were circumscribed but unencapsulated and composed of masses of mature fat cells. The diverticulum ( Fig. 3 B ) was lined by flattened jejunal mucosa. The muscularis mucosae was hypertrophied (0.3 mm thick) and its layers were easily distinguishable. The submucosa was replaced by a hypocellular sheet of polygonal and spindle cells FTT cells and collagen, punctuated by dilated thin-walled vessels. The muscularis propria was not recognizable. (Another jejunal diverticulum measuring 4.5 × 3.5 × 2.5 cm was previously found and excised when the patient was 34 years old.)  Pathology Stomach and Duodenum Two large lesions were attached to the serosa: an 8 cm cyst containing liquid and sediment ( Fig. 1 A ) and a 6-cm pedunculated tumor. There was also a series of intramural and subserosal tumorlets, 1 to 3 mm in greatest dimension ( Fig. 1 B ); some were calcified and gritty when cut. Microscopically, the 6 cm tumor featured a solid sheet of sharply outlined, moderate-sized epithelioid cells with clear or acidophilic cytoplasm ( Fig. 1 C ); there were some spindle cells. The tumorlets were composed of plump spindle cells with occasional epithelioid cells; some had varying amounts of hyaline material; others were completely hyalinized and sometimes calcified; most were circumscribed, some showed subtle infiltration among the bundles of the muscularis. A plaque-like submucosal fibrous tumor, 1 cm thick and histologically similar to the jejunal tumors to be described later, was covered by fundal-type mucosa ( Fig. 2 ). Results of immunostaining of both lesions are presented in Table 2 . The rim of duodenum was thickened by a sclerotic hypocellular submucosal fibrous tumor extending from Brunner’s glands through the markedly thickened muscularis propria to the subserosa. The collagen bundles in the submucosa were arranged in parallel and vertical to the long axis of the bowel. Jejunum and Appendix The 120-cm length of small intestine was markedly dilated, twisted and distorted by numerous tumors; the serosa had an opaque off-white appearance. One hundred fourteen intramural spheroidal or oval, circumscribed, submucosal nodules ranging in size from 0.5 to 7.5 cm, protruded into the bowel lumen, many side-by-side. The lesions were covered by a flat mucosa, devoid of plicae ( Fig. 3 A ); a few, covered by intact serosa, protruded from the bowel. A wide-mouthed diverticulum, 7 cm in diameter, had a 6 mm-thick wall ( Fig. 3 B ). The tumors had different consistencies: the majority (80%) felt hard, some were firm, and a few were soft. The hard tumors (fibrous) had an off-white cut surface, the firm tumors an off-white and yellow apperance (combined fibrous tumor and lipomas), and the 12 soft tumors appeared yellow (lipomas) ( Fig. 3 B ). The appendix measured 4.5 × 2.5 × 2.5 cm; the wall was thickened and whitish, and the tip dilated. Microscopically, the tumors were of 2 types ( Fig. 4 ), fibrous and fatty that occurred separately, side-by-side, and superficial to one another, the lipoma always being closest to the mucosa. Exceptionally, a fibrous tumor infiltrated just into a lipoma ( Fig. 4 A ). The fibrous tumors were circumscribed but unencapsulated with a uniform, bland appearance, interrupted by occasional large blood vessels and a few medium-sized to large, spherical to oval microcysts. The lesions were hypocellular to moderately cellular focally and composed of haphazardly arranged, small stellate, spindle, and polygonal cells with a minimal amount of acidophilic cytoplasm set in abundant collagen fibers and collagen bundles ( Fig. 4 B ). Vimentin staining showed that the cells had ample cytoplasm that extended into narrow tapering cell processes. The nuclei were moderately chromatic, uniform, small, round, oval, polygonal and irregular in shape with fine evenly dispersed chromatin granules and a single small nucleolus. Mitotic figures were not seen. The cells were compatible with fibroblasts but will be referred to herein as fibroid tumor type (FTT) cells for several reasons including the fact that their lineage could not be identified. There was a sprinkling of eosinophils close to the mucosa in some of the tumors but not elsewhere; mast cells were scattered throughout the tumors. Immunostaining results are presented in Table 2 . From the submucosal base of the fibrous lesions, the process extended through the muscularis propria to involve the subserosa and rarely the mesentery ( Figs. 5 and 6 ). Tumor cells and collagen penetrated into the muscularis propria, separating and encasing groups of fibers, many of which were degenerating and anucleate. There was no ICC hyperplasia. The appendiceal lumen, submucosa and muscularis propria were replaced by a hypocellular mass of spindle and stellate collagen-producing FTT cells that extended into the mesoappendix. The soft submucosal tumors were circumscribed but unencapsulated and composed of masses of mature fat cells. The diverticulum ( Fig. 3 B ) was lined by flattened jejunal mucosa. The muscularis mucosae was hypertrophied (0.3 mm thick) and its layers were easily distinguishable. The submucosa was replaced by a hypocellular sheet of polygonal and spindle cells FTT cells and collagen, punctuated by dilated thin-walled vessels. The muscularis propria was not recognizable. (Another jejunal diverticulum measuring 4.5 × 3.5 × 2.5 cm was previously found and excised when the patient was 34 years old.)  Pathology Stomach and Duodenum Two large lesions were attached to the serosa: an 8 cm cyst containing liquid and sediment ( Fig. 1 A ) and a 6-cm pedunculated tumor. There was also a series of intramural and subserosal tumorlets, 1 to 3 mm in greatest dimension ( Fig. 1 B ); some were calcified and gritty when cut. Microscopically, the 6 cm tumor featured a solid sheet of sharply outlined, moderate-sized epithelioid cells with clear or acidophilic cytoplasm ( Fig. 1 C ); there were some spindle cells. The tumorlets were composed of plump spindle cells with occasional epithelioid cells; some had varying amounts of hyaline material; others were completely hyalinized and sometimes calcified; most were circumscribed, some showed subtle infiltration among the bundles of the muscularis. A plaque-like submucosal fibrous tumor, 1 cm thick and histologically similar to the jejunal tumors to be described later, was covered by fundal-type mucosa ( Fig. 2 ). Results of immunostaining of both lesions are presented in Table 2 . The rim of duodenum was thickened by a sclerotic hypocellular submucosal fibrous tumor extending from Brunner’s glands through the markedly thickened muscularis propria to the subserosa. The collagen bundles in the submucosa were arranged in parallel and vertical to the long axis of the bowel. Jejunum and Appendix The 120-cm length of small intestine was markedly dilated, twisted and distorted by numerous tumors; the serosa had an opaque off-white appearance. One hundred fourteen intramural spheroidal or oval, circumscribed, submucosal nodules ranging in size from 0.5 to 7.5 cm, protruded into the bowel lumen, many side-by-side. The lesions were covered by a flat mucosa, devoid of plicae ( Fig. 3 A ); a few, covered by intact serosa, protruded from the bowel. A wide-mouthed diverticulum, 7 cm in diameter, had a 6 mm-thick wall ( Fig. 3 B ). The tumors had different consistencies: the majority (80%) felt hard, some were firm, and a few were soft. The hard tumors (fibrous) had an off-white cut surface, the firm tumors an off-white and yellow apperance (combined fibrous tumor and lipomas), and the 12 soft tumors appeared yellow (lipomas) ( Fig. 3 B ). The appendix measured 4.5 × 2.5 × 2.5 cm; the wall was thickened and whitish, and the tip dilated. Microscopically, the tumors were of 2 types ( Fig. 4 ), fibrous and fatty that occurred separately, side-by-side, and superficial to one another, the lipoma always being closest to the mucosa. Exceptionally, a fibrous tumor infiltrated just into a lipoma ( Fig. 4 A ). The fibrous tumors were circumscribed but unencapsulated with a uniform, bland appearance, interrupted by occasional large blood vessels and a few medium-sized to large, spherical to oval microcysts. The lesions were hypocellular to moderately cellular focally and composed of haphazardly arranged, small stellate, spindle, and polygonal cells with a minimal amount of acidophilic cytoplasm set in abundant collagen fibers and collagen bundles ( Fig. 4 B ). Vimentin staining showed that the cells had ample cytoplasm that extended into narrow tapering cell processes. The nuclei were moderately chromatic, uniform, small, round, oval, polygonal and irregular in shape with fine evenly dispersed chromatin granules and a single small nucleolus. Mitotic figures were not seen. The cells were compatible with fibroblasts but will be referred to herein as fibroid tumor type (FTT) cells for several reasons including the fact that their lineage could not be identified. There was a sprinkling of eosinophils close to the mucosa in some of the tumors but not elsewhere; mast cells were scattered throughout the tumors. Immunostaining results are presented in Table 2 . From the submucosal base of the fibrous lesions, the process extended through the muscularis propria to involve the subserosa and rarely the mesentery ( Figs. 5 and 6 ). Tumor cells and collagen penetrated into the muscularis propria, separating and encasing groups of fibers, many of which were degenerating and anucleate. There was no ICC hyperplasia. The appendiceal lumen, submucosa and muscularis propria were replaced by a hypocellular mass of spindle and stellate collagen-producing FTT cells that extended into the mesoappendix. The soft submucosal tumors were circumscribed but unencapsulated and composed of masses of mature fat cells. The diverticulum ( Fig. 3 B ) was lined by flattened jejunal mucosa. The muscularis mucosae was hypertrophied (0.3 mm thick) and its layers were easily distinguishable. The submucosa was replaced by a hypocellular sheet of polygonal and spindle cells FTT cells and collagen, punctuated by dilated thin-walled vessels. The muscularis propria was not recognizable. (Another jejunal diverticulum measuring 4.5 × 3.5 × 2.5 cm was previously found and excised when the patient was 34 years old.)  Stomach and Duodenum Two large lesions were attached to the serosa: an 8 cm cyst containing liquid and sediment ( Fig. 1 A ) and a 6-cm pedunculated tumor. There was also a series of intramural and subserosal tumorlets, 1 to 3 mm in greatest dimension ( Fig. 1 B ); some were calcified and gritty when cut. Microscopically, the 6 cm tumor featured a solid sheet of sharply outlined, moderate-sized epithelioid cells with clear or acidophilic cytoplasm ( Fig. 1 C ); there were some spindle cells. The tumorlets were composed of plump spindle cells with occasional epithelioid cells; some had varying amounts of hyaline material; others were completely hyalinized and sometimes calcified; most were circumscribed, some showed subtle infiltration among the bundles of the muscularis. A plaque-like submucosal fibrous tumor, 1 cm thick and histologically similar to the jejunal tumors to be described later, was covered by fundal-type mucosa ( Fig. 2 ). Results of immunostaining of both lesions are presented in Table 2 . The rim of duodenum was thickened by a sclerotic hypocellular submucosal fibrous tumor extending from Brunner’s glands through the markedly thickened muscularis propria to the subserosa. The collagen bundles in the submucosa were arranged in parallel and vertical to the long axis of the bowel.  Stomach and Duodenum Two large lesions were attached to the serosa: an 8 cm cyst containing liquid and sediment ( Fig. 1 A ) and a 6-cm pedunculated tumor. There was also a series of intramural and subserosal tumorlets, 1 to 3 mm in greatest dimension ( Fig. 1 B ); some were calcified and gritty when cut. Microscopically, the 6 cm tumor featured a solid sheet of sharply outlined, moderate-sized epithelioid cells with clear or acidophilic cytoplasm ( Fig. 1 C ); there were some spindle cells. The tumorlets were composed of plump spindle cells with occasional epithelioid cells; some had varying amounts of hyaline material; others were completely hyalinized and sometimes calcified; most were circumscribed, some showed subtle infiltration among the bundles of the muscularis. A plaque-like submucosal fibrous tumor, 1 cm thick and histologically similar to the jejunal tumors to be described later, was covered by fundal-type mucosa ( Fig. 2 ). Results of immunostaining of both lesions are presented in Table 2 . The rim of duodenum was thickened by a sclerotic hypocellular submucosal fibrous tumor extending from Brunner’s glands through the markedly thickened muscularis propria to the subserosa. The collagen bundles in the submucosa were arranged in parallel and vertical to the long axis of the bowel.  Jejunum and Appendix The 120-cm length of small intestine was markedly dilated, twisted and distorted by numerous tumors; the serosa had an opaque off-white appearance. One hundred fourteen intramural spheroidal or oval, circumscribed, submucosal nodules ranging in size from 0.5 to 7.5 cm, protruded into the bowel lumen, many side-by-side. The lesions were covered by a flat mucosa, devoid of plicae ( Fig. 3 A ); a few, covered by intact serosa, protruded from the bowel. A wide-mouthed diverticulum, 7 cm in diameter, had a 6 mm-thick wall ( Fig. 3 B ). The tumors had different consistencies: the majority (80%) felt hard, some were firm, and a few were soft. The hard tumors (fibrous) had an off-white cut surface, the firm tumors an off-white and yellow apperance (combined fibrous tumor and lipomas), and the 12 soft tumors appeared yellow (lipomas) ( Fig. 3 B ). The appendix measured 4.5 × 2.5 × 2.5 cm; the wall was thickened and whitish, and the tip dilated. Microscopically, the tumors were of 2 types ( Fig. 4 ), fibrous and fatty that occurred separately, side-by-side, and superficial to one another, the lipoma always being closest to the mucosa. Exceptionally, a fibrous tumor infiltrated just into a lipoma ( Fig. 4 A ). The fibrous tumors were circumscribed but unencapsulated with a uniform, bland appearance, interrupted by occasional large blood vessels and a few medium-sized to large, spherical to oval microcysts. The lesions were hypocellular to moderately cellular focally and composed of haphazardly arranged, small stellate, spindle, and polygonal cells with a minimal amount of acidophilic cytoplasm set in abundant collagen fibers and collagen bundles ( Fig. 4 B ). Vimentin staining showed that the cells had ample cytoplasm that extended into narrow tapering cell processes. The nuclei were moderately chromatic, uniform, small, round, oval, polygonal and irregular in shape with fine evenly dispersed chromatin granules and a single small nucleolus. Mitotic figures were not seen. The cells were compatible with fibroblasts but will be referred to herein as fibroid tumor type (FTT) cells for several reasons including the fact that their lineage could not be identified. There was a sprinkling of eosinophils close to the mucosa in some of the tumors but not elsewhere; mast cells were scattered throughout the tumors. Immunostaining results are presented in Table 2 . From the submucosal base of the fibrous lesions, the process extended through the muscularis propria to involve the subserosa and rarely the mesentery ( Figs. 5 and 6 ). Tumor cells and collagen penetrated into the muscularis propria, separating and encasing groups of fibers, many of which were degenerating and anucleate. There was no ICC hyperplasia. The appendiceal lumen, submucosa and muscularis propria were replaced by a hypocellular mass of spindle and stellate collagen-producing FTT cells that extended into the mesoappendix. The soft submucosal tumors were circumscribed but unencapsulated and composed of masses of mature fat cells. The diverticulum ( Fig. 3 B ) was lined by flattened jejunal mucosa. The muscularis mucosae was hypertrophied (0.3 mm thick) and its layers were easily distinguishable. The submucosa was replaced by a hypocellular sheet of polygonal and spindle cells FTT cells and collagen, punctuated by dilated thin-walled vessels. The muscularis propria was not recognizable. (Another jejunal diverticulum measuring 4.5 × 3.5 × 2.5 cm was previously found and excised when the patient was 34 years old.)  Jejunum and Appendix The 120-cm length of small intestine was markedly dilated, twisted and distorted by numerous tumors; the serosa had an opaque off-white appearance. One hundred fourteen intramural spheroidal or oval, circumscribed, submucosal nodules ranging in size from 0.5 to 7.5 cm, protruded into the bowel lumen, many side-by-side. The lesions were covered by a flat mucosa, devoid of plicae ( Fig. 3 A ); a few, covered by intact serosa, protruded from the bowel. A wide-mouthed diverticulum, 7 cm in diameter, had a 6 mm-thick wall ( Fig. 3 B ). The tumors had different consistencies: the majority (80%) felt hard, some were firm, and a few were soft. The hard tumors (fibrous) had an off-white cut surface, the firm tumors an off-white and yellow apperance (combined fibrous tumor and lipomas), and the 12 soft tumors appeared yellow (lipomas) ( Fig. 3 B ). The appendix measured 4.5 × 2.5 × 2.5 cm; the wall was thickened and whitish, and the tip dilated. Microscopically, the tumors were of 2 types ( Fig. 4 ), fibrous and fatty that occurred separately, side-by-side, and superficial to one another, the lipoma always being closest to the mucosa. Exceptionally, a fibrous tumor infiltrated just into a lipoma ( Fig. 4 A ). The fibrous tumors were circumscribed but unencapsulated with a uniform, bland appearance, interrupted by occasional large blood vessels and a few medium-sized to large, spherical to oval microcysts. The lesions were hypocellular to moderately cellular focally and composed of haphazardly arranged, small stellate, spindle, and polygonal cells with a minimal amount of acidophilic cytoplasm set in abundant collagen fibers and collagen bundles ( Fig. 4 B ). Vimentin staining showed that the cells had ample cytoplasm that extended into narrow tapering cell processes. The nuclei were moderately chromatic, uniform, small, round, oval, polygonal and irregular in shape with fine evenly dispersed chromatin granules and a single small nucleolus. Mitotic figures were not seen. The cells were compatible with fibroblasts but will be referred to herein as fibroid tumor type (FTT) cells for several reasons including the fact that their lineage could not be identified. There was a sprinkling of eosinophils close to the mucosa in some of the tumors but not elsewhere; mast cells were scattered throughout the tumors. Immunostaining results are presented in Table 2 . From the submucosal base of the fibrous lesions, the process extended through the muscularis propria to involve the subserosa and rarely the mesentery ( Figs. 5 and 6 ). Tumor cells and collagen penetrated into the muscularis propria, separating and encasing groups of fibers, many of which were degenerating and anucleate. There was no ICC hyperplasia. The appendiceal lumen, submucosa and muscularis propria were replaced by a hypocellular mass of spindle and stellate collagen-producing FTT cells that extended into the mesoappendix. The soft submucosal tumors were circumscribed but unencapsulated and composed of masses of mature fat cells. The diverticulum ( Fig. 3 B ) was lined by flattened jejunal mucosa. The muscularis mucosae was hypertrophied (0.3 mm thick) and its layers were easily distinguishable. The submucosa was replaced by a hypocellular sheet of polygonal and spindle cells FTT cells and collagen, punctuated by dilated thin-walled vessels. The muscularis propria was not recognizable. (Another jejunal diverticulum measuring 4.5 × 3.5 × 2.5 cm was previously found and excised when the patient was 34 years old.)  Discussion The patient we describe had 3 types of gastrointestinal tumors: 1) gastric GISTs, 2) more than 100 fibrous tumors involving the stomach, duodenum, jejunum and appendix, and 3) duodenal and small intestinal lipomas. The gastric and duodenal lesions were first found in 1977 when the patient was 22 years old. Subsequently, she underwent 3 small bowel resections over a 15-year period for intestinal obstruction caused by the jejunal fibrous tumors. The patient is presently asymptomatic; a recent abdominal CT examination showed postoperative changes only. No member of her family is similarly affected. The occurrence of 3 different types of tumors in any patient would be an unexpected finding, particularly if the individual was young, each of the neoplasms multifocal and multicentric, and all occurred in the same organ or system of the body. Because of these considerations, it seemed unlikely that the tumor events in our patient were random—rather it was more likely they were related and resulted from a common etiology that probably was genetic. And, in fact, molecular analysis of the patient’s tumor and peripheral blood DNA showed a germline mutation in the PDGFRA gene (V561D mutation) ( 26 ). Somatic PDGFRA mutations have been reported in sporadic GISTs ( 6 , 12 , 18 ). Germline mutations of the gene have been described in several families. In one, a missense mutation of the gene (2675G>T) was found ( 5 ). In another, the mutation (Y555C) occurred with small intestinal neurofibromatosis ( 8 ). In the latter, the tumors were histologically similar to the fibrous tumors in our patient and in both cases the tumors were S-100 negative. The diagnosis of neurofibromatosis was based on the histology the small intestinal tumors; the affected members did not have the NF 1 phenotype. Patients with classical NF 1 phenotype have exhibited small intestinal spindle cell GISTs associated with ICC hyperplasia that were KIT- and CD34–positive ( 1 ). The gastric and jejunal spindle cell tumors in our patient were KIT-negative. Classification of our patient’s gastric GISTs and the small intestinal lipomas was straightforward. Nosology of her gastric, small intestinal and appendiceal fibrous tumors was less certain. These tumors had the following features: they 1) were hard, white, polypoid, broad-based, nonulcerated, lesions that protruded into the gut lumen or occasionally from the serosa; 2) exhibited hypocellularity to moderate cellularity without detected mitotic activity; 3) displayed a patternless sheet of elongated CD34-positive, CD 117-negative stellate and spindle cells set in an abundant moderately to heavily collagenized stroma; 4) had a sharply defined internal border (toward the mucosa); 5) penetrated through the muscularis propria into the subserosa; and 6) did not metastasize. The patient’s jejunal diverticula were likely secondary to fibrous replacement of the muscularis propria. The patient’s pathologic findings extended from the stomach to the appendix but did not involve the olon. The gastric GISTs were not ulcerated and probably did not did not cause symptoms despite their large size. The small intestinal fibrous lesions caused repeated episodes of intussusception—their broad-based configuration and collagen content militated against twisting and strangulation but favored intussusception. The small intestinal lipomas presumably did not cause symptoms. None of the tumors types metastasized during the long follow-up period. The jejunal diverticula may have resulted from fibrous replacement of the muscularis propria. These fibrous tumors shared histologic and immunohistochemical attributes with inflammatory fibrous polyps, lesions putatively of dendritic cell origin, but they also showed histologic and some immunohistochemical differences from these tumors ( Tables 3 and 4 )—the lesions were not identical. As mentioned earlier, CD34-positive spindle cells populate NF 1-associated small intestinal GISTs, but the latter tumors also feature CD 117-positive cells and skenoid fibers that were not present in the fibrous tumors we describe. Each of the 3 tumor types in our patient or similar tumors has occurred multifocally in other patients, alone, or with other tumors, as part of a syndrome: cases of ( 1 ) familial small intestinal inflammatory fibroid polyps have been reported ( 2 , 8 ); 2) multiple gastric GISTs, with and without other associations, have been described ( 3 , 15 , 27 , 29 ); and 3) multiple small bowel lipomas, occasionally with associations ( 9 , 19 , 31 ) have been described. But, to our knowledge, no patient with intestinal GISTs, fibrous tumors and lipomas has ever been reported.  Discussion The patient we describe had 3 types of gastrointestinal tumors: 1) gastric GISTs, 2) more than 100 fibrous tumors involving the stomach, duodenum, jejunum and appendix, and 3) duodenal and small intestinal lipomas. The gastric and duodenal lesions were first found in 1977 when the patient was 22 years old. Subsequently, she underwent 3 small bowel resections over a 15-year period for intestinal obstruction caused by the jejunal fibrous tumors. The patient is presently asymptomatic; a recent abdominal CT examination showed postoperative changes only. No member of her family is similarly affected. The occurrence of 3 different types of tumors in any patient would be an unexpected finding, particularly if the individual was young, each of the neoplasms multifocal and multicentric, and all occurred in the same organ or system of the body. Because of these considerations, it seemed unlikely that the tumor events in our patient were random—rather it was more likely they were related and resulted from a common etiology that probably was genetic. And, in fact, molecular analysis of the patient’s tumor and peripheral blood DNA showed a germline mutation in the PDGFRA gene (V561D mutation) ( 26 ). Somatic PDGFRA mutations have been reported in sporadic GISTs ( 6 , 12 , 18 ). Germline mutations of the gene have been described in several families. In one, a missense mutation of the gene (2675G>T) was found ( 5 ). In another, the mutation (Y555C) occurred with small intestinal neurofibromatosis ( 8 ). In the latter, the tumors were histologically similar to the fibrous tumors in our patient and in both cases the tumors were S-100 negative. The diagnosis of neurofibromatosis was based on the histology the small intestinal tumors; the affected members did not have the NF 1 phenotype. Patients with classical NF 1 phenotype have exhibited small intestinal spindle cell GISTs associated with ICC hyperplasia that were KIT- and CD34–positive ( 1 ). The gastric and jejunal spindle cell tumors in our patient were KIT-negative. Classification of our patient’s gastric GISTs and the small intestinal lipomas was straightforward. Nosology of her gastric, small intestinal and appendiceal fibrous tumors was less certain. These tumors had the following features: they 1) were hard, white, polypoid, broad-based, nonulcerated, lesions that protruded into the gut lumen or occasionally from the serosa; 2) exhibited hypocellularity to moderate cellularity without detected mitotic activity; 3) displayed a patternless sheet of elongated CD34-positive, CD 117-negative stellate and spindle cells set in an abundant moderately to heavily collagenized stroma; 4) had a sharply defined internal border (toward the mucosa); 5) penetrated through the muscularis propria into the subserosa; and 6) did not metastasize. The patient’s jejunal diverticula were likely secondary to fibrous replacement of the muscularis propria. The patient’s pathologic findings extended from the stomach to the appendix but did not involve the olon. The gastric GISTs were not ulcerated and probably did not did not cause symptoms despite their large size. The small intestinal fibrous lesions caused repeated episodes of intussusception—their broad-based configuration and collagen content militated against twisting and strangulation but favored intussusception. The small intestinal lipomas presumably did not cause symptoms. None of the tumors types metastasized during the long follow-up period. The jejunal diverticula may have resulted from fibrous replacement of the muscularis propria. These fibrous tumors shared histologic and immunohistochemical attributes with inflammatory fibrous polyps, lesions putatively of dendritic cell origin, but they also showed histologic and some immunohistochemical differences from these tumors ( Tables 3 and 4 )—the lesions were not identical. As mentioned earlier, CD34-positive spindle cells populate NF 1-associated small intestinal GISTs, but the latter tumors also feature CD 117-positive cells and skenoid fibers that were not present in the fibrous tumors we describe. Each of the 3 tumor types in our patient or similar tumors has occurred multifocally in other patients, alone, or with other tumors, as part of a syndrome: cases of ( 1 ) familial small intestinal inflammatory fibroid polyps have been reported ( 2 , 8 ); 2) multiple gastric GISTs, with and without other associations, have been described ( 3 , 15 , 27 , 29 ); and 3) multiple small bowel lipomas, occasionally with associations ( 9 , 19 , 31 ) have been described. But, to our knowledge, no patient with intestinal GISTs, fibrous tumors and lipomas has ever been reported. 