Integrins in Lens Development and Disease Integrins are the major cell surface receptors for proteins in the extracellular matrix. These receptors form major cell signaling centers that are bidirectional, communicating messages between the cell and its environment. They are a large receptor family, with members well-known to regulate cellular processes essential to both development and disease. In this review we examine the literature regarding integrins in the lens. Here we cover integrin function in lens cell differentiation, in the development of the lens and in protection of the lens epithelial cell phenotype. In addition, we analyze the role of integrins in the progression of lens fibrotic diseases, focusing particularly on integrin regulation of TGF? signaling pathways in Posterior Capsule Opacification (PCO) and Anterior Subcapsular Cataract (ASC).  Conclusions As a receptor family, the integrins are linked to critical events in cell differentiation and tissue morphogenesis including cell attachment, proliferation, migration, polarity, and survival. Integrins signal differentiation-specific gene expression and direct tissue morphogenesis ( Naylor et al., 2005 ). Integrins provide positional information that ensures a differentiation event does not occur until cells are in the right time or place for an event to be initiated. In addition, through their adhesion to components of the extracellular matrix, integrin receptors also ensure the appropriate temporal and spatial activation of growth factor receptor signaling pathways during development. Considering the complex make-up of the lens capsule and the importance of its matrix elements in signaling differentiation events it is not surprising that there are many integrin receptors expressed in the embryonic lens and that their expression pattern often is differentiation-state specific. These receptors include the laminin receptors ?3?1, ?6?1, and ?6?4, the collagen type IV receptors ?1?1 and ?2?1, the fibronectin receptor ?5?1 and the tenascin receptor ?v?3. While for many ? integrins confirmation of their function awaits further analysis, the ?1 receptor family is essential for maintaining the lens epithelial phenotype and has a role in signaling fiber cell differentiation. The lens developmental defects that result from loss of ?1 integrin are linked to induction of apoptosis, and suggest that ?1 provides an essential cell survival signal in lens development. This connection between ?1 integrin and survival in the developing lens is consistent with the well-known function of this integrin family in preventing anoikis ( Frisch and Francis, 1994 ) and the observation of generally reduced cell survival in embryos with a targeted mutation in the ?1 integrin cytoplasmic domain ( Hirsch et al., 2002 ). In addition, there is a strong correlation between expression of the ?6 integrin subunit, and both cell survival and differentiation. ?6 integrin signals oligodendrocyte differentiation by regulating a survival pathway that involves coordinated signaling with a growth factor receptor ( Colognato et al., 2002 ). These studies also concluded that a Src kinase transduces this ?6 integrin survival/differentiation signal ( Colognato et al., 2004 ). Our own studies of lens development have shown that ?6 integrin plays a requisite role in the initiation of lens differentiation and that this function is tied to the activation of an IGF-1R cell survival signaling pathway that is transactivated through a Src kinase. This ?6 integrin survival signaling pathway appears to be activated in order to regulate the apoptotic-like cell pathway that signals initiation of differentiation in the embryonic lens. Given the suitability of the lens developmental paradigm to experimental analysis, it is likely that this tissue will continue to be a valuable resource for deciphering integrin function in differentiation that will be applicable to many developmental systems. Altered integrin function is closely linked to the progression of fibrotic diseases of the lens. Dramatic changes in both integrin expression and in the composition of the matrix microenvironment are reported in both ASC and PCO and are linked to activation of TGF? signaling pathways. TGF?, a common factor in tissue injury and repair, is activated following both cataract surgery and eye trauma. Activation of latent TGF? and regulation of TGF? receptor function involves a number of ?v integrin heterodimers including ?v?5, ?v?6 and ?v?3, all of which are expressed in lens fibrotic disease. The type of matrix proteins secreted following activation of TGF? signaling pathways, such a collagen type I, lead to increased rigidity of the microenvironment. Increased matrix rigidity is implicated in many diseases; in breast cancer the stiffness of the stroma correlates with malignancy ( Kass et al., 2007 ). Matrix rigidity, when signaled to epithelial cells through their integrin receptors as a mechanotransduction event, contributes to transdifferentiation to a mesenchymal phenotype. Given the change in integrin expression associated with lens EMT, including induction of the fibronectin receptor ?5?1 integrin, mechanotransduction from the matrix through these integrins is likely to contribute to the progression of the lens fibrotic diseases PCO and ASC. Once the lens mesenchymal phenotype is established, the cells express new integrins that participate in the transmission of their endogenous contractile forces to the surrounding matrix. This pathway is responsible for the wrinkling of the posterior lens capsule in PCO that leads to the loss of vision associated with this disease. Such contractile events also can free molecules bound to the matrix that could enhance the progression of lens EMT as well as reveal cryptic sites within the ECM for new functions important to the disease process. Therefore, integrins are central to the development of lens fibrotic disease almost in a circular manner, activating TGF? signaling, induced by TGF? signaling, transmitting signaling from the altered matrix environment that contribute to the transdifferentiation of lens epithelial cells to a myofibroblast and the transmission of force generated signals from the myofibroblast cytoskeleton back to the matrix that itself alters the tissue environment. Finally, it is important to emphasize that integrins are important protectors of the lens epithelial phenotype. This property is made evident by studies with the targeted deletion of ?1 integrin in the lens which show that even in the absence of changes in the integrity of the lens capsule, lens epithelial cells without ?1 integrin receptors undergo at least a partial EMT. Overall, studies of lens integrins from many labs, using methods of investigation involving both in vivo and in culture models, have emphasized the importance of integrin receptors in development of the lens, in maintaining lens homeostasis and in promoting the progression of lens fibrotic disease.  Figures and Table Figure 1 Diagrams of integrin receptors in the developing lens This diagram groups the integrin receptors identified in the developing lens by their matrix affinities. These include the laminin receptors ?3?1, ?6?1, ?6?4, the collagen receptors ?1?1, ?2?1, the fibronectin receptor ?5?1 and the tenascin receptor ?v?3. Figure 2 A model of ?6 integrin/IGF-1R/ERK coordinated signaling pathway activated as lens cells initiate differentiation The great versatility of integrin receptors relies on their ability to form signaling complexes with many distinct signaling effectors. Possibly most important among these is the coordinate signaling between integrins and growth factor receptors. These signaling complexes are identified by co-immunoprecipitation of their component molecules. Modeled in this diagram is the ?6 integrin signaling pathway activated as lens cells initiate their differentiation in the equatorial zone. This pathway involves transactivation of IGF-1R and ERK by ?6 integrin. The activation of the IGF-1R leads to an ERK-dependent induction of Bcl-2 and IAP3. INTEGRINS OF THE DEVELOPING LENSA MATRIX-BASED VIEW Epithelial Fiber ? Integrin Subunits ?1 ?1 1, 5, 9 chicken, rat ?3 ?3 4 chicken ?4 ?4 3 chicken ? Integrin Subunits - Laminin receptors 1, 5, 6 chicken, rat, mouse ?3A nd 5 rat ?6 ?6 1, 2, 6, 8 chicken, mouse 3, 5 chicken, rat 3, 5 chicken, rat ? Integrin Subunits - Collagen receptors 6, 7 mouse ?1 nd 4 chicken ? Integrin Subunits – Fibronectin receptor ?5 nd 2, 6, 8 chicken, mouse nd = not detected 1 - Menko and Philip (1995) Exp Cell Res 218, 516-21. 2 - Menko et al. (1998) Ann N Y Acad Sci 842, 36-41. 3 - Walker and Menko (1999) Dev Biol 210, 497-511. 4 - Walker et al. (2002) . Dev Dyn 223, 273-84. 5 - Wederell et al. (2005) . Exp Eye Res 81, 326-39. 6 - Barbour et al. (2004) . Curr Eye Res 29, 1-10. 7 - Wu and Santoro (1994) Dev Dyn 199, 292-314. 8 - Duncan et al. (2000) J Cell Sci 113, 3173-85. 9 - Bassnett et al. (1999) . J Cell Sci 112, 2155-65. 