Different inflammatory reactions to vitamin D 3 among the lateral, third and fourth ventricular choroid plexuses of the rat The four choroid plexuses in the brain ventricles are not identical, but differences among them have rarely been studied. The present work concerns the inflammatory and hemorrhagic choroid plexitis produced in Lewis rats by a single gavage of cholecalciferol (vitamin D3) or related steroids with vitamin D activity. Plexitis was very severe in the fourth ventricular plexus, somewhat less severe in the lateral ventricular plexuses, and almost absent in the third ventricular plexus. These findings were compared to the scanty data from the literature on differences among the plexuses.  Introduction The brain has choroid plexuses in each lateral ventricle, the third ventricle and the fourth ventricle. The extensive literature on choroid plexuses attests to their importance for production of cerebrospinal fluid and maintenance of homeostasis in the brain: (reviewed by Milhorat, [1976] ; Netsky and Shuangshoti [1975] ; and Johanson [2003] ). Quay [1966] studied differences in metabolism of the several choroid plexuses and he had the following complaint: “Unfortunately, published results are sometimes not accompanied by mention of the particular ventricular sources of the choroid plexuses studied. Even when the anatomical sources are mentioned there is no evidence of comparisons having been made of choroid plexuses from different regions. The tacit but unstated and untested assumption prevails that the choroid plexuses of different ventricles are metabolically similar or equivalent”. With only a few exceptions, the current literature still implies that all four plexuses are essentially identical. Nevertheless, differences in development and histology of the several plexuses have been described in fetal rabbits and fetal humans [ Tennyson 1975 , Tennyson and Pappas 1964 ]. Also functional differences among the several choroid plexuses have been described [ Harbut and Johanson 1986 , Walters et al. 1992 ]. In the present work, knowledge of the heterogeneity of choroid plexuses of rats has been extended. Toward this end, the inflammatory response of the four choroid plexuses to a vitamin D3 preparation has been studied histologically.  Materials and Methods Lewis rats of both sexes were bred and maintained in this Institute in plastic cages with corncob bedding. Tap water and food pellets (Laboratory Rodent Diet 5001, PMI Nutrition International, Brentwood, MO) were freely available. Rats were used when 100-200 grams in weight. They were given cholecalciferol (vitamin D3), or other steroids dissolved at 4mg/ml in vegetable oil, at a dose of 1ml/100g by gastric intubation. Three or four days later the rats were euthanized in carbon dioxide and serum was obtained for chemical analysis in a Hitachi Model 747-100 chemical analyzer. For comparison with cholecalciferol, groups of 4 rats were given ergocalciferol (vitamin D2, 25 hydroxy cholecalciferol), or dihydrotachysterol “(Hytakerol”), a highly potent synthetic material with activity similar to parathormone. Other groups of 4 rats were given chemically related sterols which did not affect calcium and phosphate metabolism: 7-dehydrocholesterol (precursor of cholecalciferol) and ergosterol (precursor of ergocalciferol). Control rats were given vegetable oil without any steroid. Statistical analysis: two sample t tests compared the serum calcium, phosphorus and urea nitrogen levels between the cholecalciferol treated and control rats. Brains were fixed in Bouin's fluid or phosphate buffered 10% formalin (4% formaldehyde). Brain in coronal sections and viscera were embedded in paraffin and sections were cut at 5 microns. Sections were stained by hematoxylin and eosin. Formalin fixed tissues were also stained by the Von Kossa procedure for carbonates and phosphates (usually accepted as representing calcium deposits). The lesions were scored according to the extent and severity of the hemorrhage, edema and inflammation. Plexuses with severe lesions over all or most of its extent were scored 4+; severe lesions that involved about half the plexus were 3+, and severe lesions over only a small area were 2+. Lesions that had only mild edema, very few neutrophils and no hemorrhage were scored 1+.  Results The normal choroid plexus consisted of papillary processes (villi) covered by cuboidal or columnar epithelium and containing capillaries. The base of the plexus, from which the papillary processes arose, contained arterioles, venules, and a few fibroblasts. After the treatment with cholecalciferol, many areas of plexus were hemorrhagic and/or were inflamed as indicated by exudation of fibrin-rich edema fluid and infiltration by polymorphonuclear neutrophils ( Fig. 1 ). In most areas, the epithelium that covered the villi was intact but it was severely attenuated or ulcerated when the underlying stroma was densely packed with neutrophils or was very edematous. Such areas frequently had blood, fibrin and edema fluids in the ventricular lumens as well as in the plexus. The most severe and widespread lesions were found in the fourth ventricular plexuses ( Table 1 ). The lesions in the lateral ventricular plexuses were usually less severe but in 6 of the 35 rats they were equal or slightly more severe than the lesions in the fourth ventricular plexuses. The third ventricular plexuses were devoid of lesions in all experiments except for 3 rats that had minimal inflammation (1+) in this plexus. The brain parenchyma had no inflammation. Von Kossa stains of formalin-fixed brains revealed only minor calcification in a few small areas of the choroid plexus inflammation. The calcium granules in these areas were often deposited in a linear manner along capillaries or encircling capillaries. The bulk of the inflamed or hemorrhagic areas had no evidence of calcium deposition, in contrast to heavy calcification of heart, kidney and brown fat caused by cholecalciferol in the same rats. Plexuses with little or no inflammation had no calcium deposits. Ependyma and brain parenchyma had no calcium deposits. Dihydrotachysterol in doses of 1 or 4 mg/100g, and ergocalciferol in dose of 4mg/100g, produced choroid plexitis identical to that produced by cholecalciferol at 4mg/100g. In contrast, the steroids without vitamin D activity (7-dehydrocholesterol and ergosterol) were ineffective despite doses of 4 or 16 mg/100 g. Control rats gavaged only with vegetable oil had no plexitis. Serum levels of calcium were elevated in cholecalciferol treated rats, average 17.4 mg/dL, compared to control rats, average 12.1 mg/dL ( Table 2 ). Serum phosphorus in cholecalciferol treated rats was also increased but to a lesser degree: average 13.2 mg/dL compared to normal rats, average 11.3 mg/dL. Urea nitrogen was usually elevated but variable ( Table 2 ). This reflects the variable degree of calcific deposits in renal cortex. Ca, P and urea values were all significantly different between treated and control groups, p <. 0001, when each was tested by a two group t test with 45 degrees of freedom ( Table 2 ).  Results The normal choroid plexus consisted of papillary processes (villi) covered by cuboidal or columnar epithelium and containing capillaries. The base of the plexus, from which the papillary processes arose, contained arterioles, venules, and a few fibroblasts. After the treatment with cholecalciferol, many areas of plexus were hemorrhagic and/or were inflamed as indicated by exudation of fibrin-rich edema fluid and infiltration by polymorphonuclear neutrophils ( Fig. 1 ). In most areas, the epithelium that covered the villi was intact but it was severely attenuated or ulcerated when the underlying stroma was densely packed with neutrophils or was very edematous. Such areas frequently had blood, fibrin and edema fluids in the ventricular lumens as well as in the plexus. The most severe and widespread lesions were found in the fourth ventricular plexuses ( Table 1 ). The lesions in the lateral ventricular plexuses were usually less severe but in 6 of the 35 rats they were equal or slightly more severe than the lesions in the fourth ventricular plexuses. The third ventricular plexuses were devoid of lesions in all experiments except for 3 rats that had minimal inflammation (1+) in this plexus. The brain parenchyma had no inflammation. Von Kossa stains of formalin-fixed brains revealed only minor calcification in a few small areas of the choroid plexus inflammation. The calcium granules in these areas were often deposited in a linear manner along capillaries or encircling capillaries. The bulk of the inflamed or hemorrhagic areas had no evidence of calcium deposition, in contrast to heavy calcification of heart, kidney and brown fat caused by cholecalciferol in the same rats. Plexuses with little or no inflammation had no calcium deposits. Ependyma and brain parenchyma had no calcium deposits. Dihydrotachysterol in doses of 1 or 4 mg/100g, and ergocalciferol in dose of 4mg/100g, produced choroid plexitis identical to that produced by cholecalciferol at 4mg/100g. In contrast, the steroids without vitamin D activity (7-dehydrocholesterol and ergosterol) were ineffective despite doses of 4 or 16 mg/100 g. Control rats gavaged only with vegetable oil had no plexitis. Serum levels of calcium were elevated in cholecalciferol treated rats, average 17.4 mg/dL, compared to control rats, average 12.1 mg/dL ( Table 2 ). Serum phosphorus in cholecalciferol treated rats was also increased but to a lesser degree: average 13.2 mg/dL compared to normal rats, average 11.3 mg/dL. Urea nitrogen was usually elevated but variable ( Table 2 ). This reflects the variable degree of calcific deposits in renal cortex. Ca, P and urea values were all significantly different between treated and control groups, p <. 0001, when each was tested by a two group t test with 45 degrees of freedom ( Table 2 ).  Discussion Vitamin D is known to increase the calcium content of the blood and also the brain, the cerebrospinal fluid and the choroid plexuses (Murphy 1988). Excessive vitamin D has caused calcification of the choroid plexus of cats and other species (Morita 1995), but inflammation and hemorrhage were not mentioned. Hans Selye [1962] in his monograph on Calciphylaxis, made several references to the choroid plexuses of rats. He observed calcification of the blood vessels of the third ventricular plexus 6 to 15 days after administration of dihydrotachysterol orally and chromic or chromous chloride intravenously (see page 100, Plate V A and figure 69). He made no mention of inflammation and none is visible in his photomicrographs. The choroid plexuses of the lateral and fourth ventricular plexuses were not mentioned or illustrated. The absence of inflammation in Selye's rats may be due to his use of the third ventricle plexus and to a longer survival. He also gave a metallic salt intravenously (we did not inject a metallic salt). Nevertheless, the inflammation in the choroid plexuses of our rats was caused by or related to disturbance of calcium-phosphorus metabolism as the lesions were produced only by the steroids known to have vitamin D – like activity. The other difference with Selye's results concerns the paucity of calcium disclosed by Von Kossa stains in the choroid plexuses of our rats despite the massive calcification of heart and kidney. However, this does not exclude an essential and primary effect of calcium because the Von Kossa stain may not reveal low concentrations of this mineral. More studies of calcium in the choroid plexus are needed; choroid plexus is not even mentioned in the excellent review of calcification processes by Anderson (1980) . Inflammation of the choroid plexuses has been recorded in lymphocytic choriomeningitis and other infectious diseases (extensively reviewed by Netsky and Shuangshoti, [1975] ) and other instances have been added subsequently [ Levine 1987 , Levine et al. 1987 , Quan et al. 1999 ] but comparisons of the various plexuses have not been recorded. In 1973, we reported that the anti-mitotic drug, cyclophosphamide, produced choroid plexitis in rats [ Levine and Sowinski 1973 ]. The lesions were characterized by severe edema and hemorrhage with relatively minor leukocytic infiltration. The lesions were most severe in the fourth ventricular plexus and least severe in the third ventricular plexus, a distribution similar to the cholecalciferol lesions reported herein. (The extraneural lesions caused by cyclophosphamide were completely different in distribution and character from the extraneural lesions after cholecalciferol). The paucity of leukocytes in the choroid plexuses can be explained by the toxic effect of cyclophosphamide on leukocytes. The coincidence of distribution patterns in plexus lesions caused by these two quite different agents suggested that there might be some underlying guiding influence related to plexus structure or function that determined distribution. Innervation might be such a guiding influence. However, the number of sympathetic and cholinergic nerve fibers in the ventricular choroid plexuses of rats and other species followed the pattern: third > lateral > fourth [ Lindvall et al. 1977 , 1979], which is the reverse of the cholecalciferol and cyclophosphamide lesions. Scanning electron microscopy revealed an interesting morphologic difference between the normal rat's fourth and lateral ventricular plexuses, namely bleb-covered choroidal epithelial cells were much more common in the fourth ventricle [ Collins and Morriss 1975 ]. Transmission electon microscopy did not reveal any ultrastructural differences among the lateral, third and fourth ventricular choroid plexuses of the young pig [ Davis et al. 1973 ] but we are not aware of a similar study on the rat. The rat's plexuses were studied for content of transferrin and its messenger RNA; the lateral and third ventricular plexuses were richly endowed but the fourth ventricle lacked this important entity [ Bloch et al. 1987 ]. This distribution is completely out of synchrony with our observations of plexitis. It is interesting that differences among the plexuses are already present in the newborn rat [ Strazielle and Ghersi-Egea 1997 ]. Wet and dry weight of the rat's choroid plexuses (absolute or relative to brain weight) as well as rate of increased weight growth, were greatest for the fourth ventricle plexus and least for the third ventricle plexus and intermediate for lateral ventricle plexuses [ Quay 1972 ]. The fourth ventricular plexus was also the heaviest after feeding rats a low K, low Na diet [ Quay 1972 ]. These data parallel our observations on plexitis. Different abilities in the several plexuses for uptake of cholecalciferol may have been important for our observations, especially because binding sites for 1, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 have been described in mouse and calf choroid plexus [ Walters et al. 1992 ]. However, no pertinent data are available except that Suzuki et al. studied uptake of cimetidine by lateral and fourth ventricular plexuses and found no differences in drug transport [ Suzuki et al 1986 ]. The third ventricular plexus was not examined. However, Suzuki et al. (1974) found the third ventricular plexus response to reserpine was less than the other plexuses. The literature cited above has revealed differences among the choroid plexuses with respect to weight and surface ultrastructure that parallel and might be related to the distribution of cholecalciferol lesions. The vascular patterns in the normal lateral ventricular plexus of dogs, rabbits and humans have been studied [ Gomez and Potts, 1982 ; Millen and Woollam, 1953 ] but there is no such study on rats nor any comparison of the vascularity of the several plexuses despite the obvious importance of blood supply for development of lesions. Nevertheless, the histology of the rat choroid plexus suggests that vascularity may be important. The third ventricular plexus differs from the others because it is smaller, its villi are shorter and all of them are relatively close to the large veins in the tela choroidea that forms the roof ot the third ventricle ( Fig. 1 ). (The tela choroidea is a double fold of pia mater between the brain tissue above (fornix) and the epithelium in the roof of the third ventricle below; it contains the choroid and internal cerebral veins). In the other ventricles, the villi and the vessels they contain are greatly elongated and most of each villus is at a considerable distance from the tela choroidea and its vessels. This suggests the possibility that the usual congested appearance of the veins in the third ventricular tela choroidea indicates low or slow blood flow which might be related to the virtual absence of lesions in the third ventricular choroid plexus. In many species the choroid plexuses contain mast cells which could influence an inflammatory process, but the rat's choroid plexuses do not contain mast cells or they are very scanty [ Dropp 1972 , Kiernan 1976 ]. In summary, three different experimental lesions have been reported. Both the cyclophosphamide plexitis and the cholecalciferol lesions described herein are hemorrhagic and inflammatory but differ in cell types and etiology. Selye's choroid plexus injury takes the form of calcification with no inflammation described so far, but it is caused by the same vitamin D derivatives that we used in the present work. The overlap in histopathology and etiology of these three forms of choroid plexus injury should be studied further to resolve the discrepancies, but especially to expand investigation of differences among the four choroid plexuses contained in every brain.  Discussion Vitamin D is known to increase the calcium content of the blood and also the brain, the cerebrospinal fluid and the choroid plexuses (Murphy 1988). Excessive vitamin D has caused calcification of the choroid plexus of cats and other species (Morita 1995), but inflammation and hemorrhage were not mentioned. Hans Selye [1962] in his monograph on Calciphylaxis, made several references to the choroid plexuses of rats. He observed calcification of the blood vessels of the third ventricular plexus 6 to 15 days after administration of dihydrotachysterol orally and chromic or chromous chloride intravenously (see page 100, Plate V A and figure 69). He made no mention of inflammation and none is visible in his photomicrographs. The choroid plexuses of the lateral and fourth ventricular plexuses were not mentioned or illustrated. The absence of inflammation in Selye's rats may be due to his use of the third ventricle plexus and to a longer survival. He also gave a metallic salt intravenously (we did not inject a metallic salt). Nevertheless, the inflammation in the choroid plexuses of our rats was caused by or related to disturbance of calcium-phosphorus metabolism as the lesions were produced only by the steroids known to have vitamin D – like activity. The other difference with Selye's results concerns the paucity of calcium disclosed by Von Kossa stains in the choroid plexuses of our rats despite the massive calcification of heart and kidney. However, this does not exclude an essential and primary effect of calcium because the Von Kossa stain may not reveal low concentrations of this mineral. More studies of calcium in the choroid plexus are needed; choroid plexus is not even mentioned in the excellent review of calcification processes by Anderson (1980) . Inflammation of the choroid plexuses has been recorded in lymphocytic choriomeningitis and other infectious diseases (extensively reviewed by Netsky and Shuangshoti, [1975] ) and other instances have been added subsequently [ Levine 1987 , Levine et al. 1987 , Quan et al. 1999 ] but comparisons of the various plexuses have not been recorded. In 1973, we reported that the anti-mitotic drug, cyclophosphamide, produced choroid plexitis in rats [ Levine and Sowinski 1973 ]. The lesions were characterized by severe edema and hemorrhage with relatively minor leukocytic infiltration. The lesions were most severe in the fourth ventricular plexus and least severe in the third ventricular plexus, a distribution similar to the cholecalciferol lesions reported herein. (The extraneural lesions caused by cyclophosphamide were completely different in distribution and character from the extraneural lesions after cholecalciferol). The paucity of leukocytes in the choroid plexuses can be explained by the toxic effect of cyclophosphamide on leukocytes. The coincidence of distribution patterns in plexus lesions caused by these two quite different agents suggested that there might be some underlying guiding influence related to plexus structure or function that determined distribution. Innervation might be such a guiding influence. However, the number of sympathetic and cholinergic nerve fibers in the ventricular choroid plexuses of rats and other species followed the pattern: third > lateral > fourth [ Lindvall et al. 1977 , 1979], which is the reverse of the cholecalciferol and cyclophosphamide lesions. Scanning electron microscopy revealed an interesting morphologic difference between the normal rat's fourth and lateral ventricular plexuses, namely bleb-covered choroidal epithelial cells were much more common in the fourth ventricle [ Collins and Morriss 1975 ]. Transmission electon microscopy did not reveal any ultrastructural differences among the lateral, third and fourth ventricular choroid plexuses of the young pig [ Davis et al. 1973 ] but we are not aware of a similar study on the rat. The rat's plexuses were studied for content of transferrin and its messenger RNA; the lateral and third ventricular plexuses were richly endowed but the fourth ventricle lacked this important entity [ Bloch et al. 1987 ]. This distribution is completely out of synchrony with our observations of plexitis. It is interesting that differences among the plexuses are already present in the newborn rat [ Strazielle and Ghersi-Egea 1997 ]. Wet and dry weight of the rat's choroid plexuses (absolute or relative to brain weight) as well as rate of increased weight growth, were greatest for the fourth ventricle plexus and least for the third ventricle plexus and intermediate for lateral ventricle plexuses [ Quay 1972 ]. The fourth ventricular plexus was also the heaviest after feeding rats a low K, low Na diet [ Quay 1972 ]. These data parallel our observations on plexitis. Different abilities in the several plexuses for uptake of cholecalciferol may have been important for our observations, especially because binding sites for 1, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 have been described in mouse and calf choroid plexus [ Walters et al. 1992 ]. However, no pertinent data are available except that Suzuki et al. studied uptake of cimetidine by lateral and fourth ventricular plexuses and found no differences in drug transport [ Suzuki et al 1986 ]. The third ventricular plexus was not examined. However, Suzuki et al. (1974) found the third ventricular plexus response to reserpine was less than the other plexuses. The literature cited above has revealed differences among the choroid plexuses with respect to weight and surface ultrastructure that parallel and might be related to the distribution of cholecalciferol lesions. The vascular patterns in the normal lateral ventricular plexus of dogs, rabbits and humans have been studied [ Gomez and Potts, 1982 ; Millen and Woollam, 1953 ] but there is no such study on rats nor any comparison of the vascularity of the several plexuses despite the obvious importance of blood supply for development of lesions. Nevertheless, the histology of the rat choroid plexus suggests that vascularity may be important. The third ventricular plexus differs from the others because it is smaller, its villi are shorter and all of them are relatively close to the large veins in the tela choroidea that forms the roof ot the third ventricle ( Fig. 1 ). (The tela choroidea is a double fold of pia mater between the brain tissue above (fornix) and the epithelium in the roof of the third ventricle below; it contains the choroid and internal cerebral veins). In the other ventricles, the villi and the vessels they contain are greatly elongated and most of each villus is at a considerable distance from the tela choroidea and its vessels. This suggests the possibility that the usual congested appearance of the veins in the third ventricular tela choroidea indicates low or slow blood flow which might be related to the virtual absence of lesions in the third ventricular choroid plexus. In many species the choroid plexuses contain mast cells which could influence an inflammatory process, but the rat's choroid plexuses do not contain mast cells or they are very scanty [ Dropp 1972 , Kiernan 1976 ]. In summary, three different experimental lesions have been reported. Both the cyclophosphamide plexitis and the cholecalciferol lesions described herein are hemorrhagic and inflammatory but differ in cell types and etiology. Selye's choroid plexus injury takes the form of calcification with no inflammation described so far, but it is caused by the same vitamin D derivatives that we used in the present work. The overlap in histopathology and etiology of these three forms of choroid plexus injury should be studied further to resolve the discrepancies, but especially to expand investigation of differences among the four choroid plexuses contained in every brain. 