Neutralizing antibodies to therapeutic enzymes: considerations for testing, prevention and treatment Lysosomal storage diseases are characterized by deficiencies in lysosomal enzymes, allowing accumulation of target substrate in cells and eventually causing cell death. Enzyme replacement therapy is the principal treatment for most of these diseases. However, these therapies are often complicated by immune responses to the enzymes, blocking efficacy and causing severe adverse outcomes by neutralizing product activity. It is thus crucial to understand the relationships between genetic mutations, endogenous residual enzyme proteins (cross-reactive immunologic material), development of neutralizing antibodies and their impact on clinical outcomes of lysosomal storage diseases. For patients in whom neutralizing antibodies may cause severe adverse clinical outcomes, it is paramount to develop tolerance inducing protocols to preclude, where predictable, or treat such life-threatening responses.  Conclusions When using ERT in the setting of LSDs, it is crucial to have sensitive and specific binding antibody assays as well as neutralization assays for both cellular enzyme uptake and catalytic activity. Serial sampling for product-specific antibodies from patients with defined mutations and CRIM status will provide a vital tool in individual patient management and in expanding our understanding of the relationships between genetic mutation, CRIM status, immune response and clinical outcome for each enzyme or factor deficiency disorder. Moreover, in the setting of ERT for Pompe’s disease, it is crucial to define the CRIM status of the patient before onset of ERT, as CRIM-negative patients are expected to develop neutralizing antibody responses that abrogate the efficacy of ERT and are thus candidates for tolerance-inducing therapies. In other LSDs in which antibody responses are generated, it is crucial to conduct clinical and experimental studies in relevant animal models to elucidate the effects of the antibody response on therapeutic efficacy. It is necessary to balance the potential detrimental effects of the antibody response on treatment outcome and the potential adverse effects of the tolerance inducing therapy. 