Tumor Hypoxia Detected by Positron Emission Tomography with 60Cu-ATSM as a Predictor of Response and Survival in Patients Undergoing Neoadjuvant Chemoradiotherapy for Rectal Carcinoma: A Pilot Study PURPOSE The response of rectal cancers to neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy is variable. Tumor hypoxia reduces the effectiveness of both radiation therapy and chemotherapy and is a well-known risk factor for tumor radioresistence. We hypothesized that imaging with the novel hypoxia-detecting agent, 60Cu-diacetyl-bis (N4-methylthiosemicarbazone) (60Cu-ATSM), previously validated in cervical and lung cancers, would predict the response of rectal cancers to neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy and prognosis. METHODS Patients with locally invasive (T2–4) primary or node-positive rectal cancer located <12 cm from the anal verge were recruited for this pilot study. Pretreatment tumor size and stage were determined by endorectal ultrasonography, CT, and magnetic resonance imaging. Eleven patients also underwent clinical positron emission tomography with 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose at the discretion of the treating clinician. The primary tumor was imaged by positron emission tomography with 60Cu-ATSM, and accumulation of the tracer was measured semiquantitatively by determining the tumor-to-muscle activity ratio. Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy was then administered (within 2 weeks of 60Cu-ATSM-positron emission tomography) and consisted of 45 Gy given in 25 fractions to the pelvis with continuous intravenous infusion of 5-fluorouracil (225 mg/m2/day). Proctectomy was performed six to eight weeks after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy and the tumor submitted to pathology for size measurement and staging. Tumor-to-muscle activity ratios were compared with tumor 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose uptake, tumor response to neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy, and with patient survival. RESULTS Nineteen patients were enrolled in the study, two of whom were excluded from final analysis (1 death during neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy and 1 tumor perforation during neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy requiring emergent surgery). Of the 17 remaining patients, 14 had a reduction in tumor size and 13 were downstaged. The median tumor-to-muscle activity ratio of 2.6 discriminated those with worse prognosis from those with better prognosis. Both overall and progression-free survivals were worse with hypoxic tumors (tumor-to-muscle activity ratio >2.6) than with nonhypoxic tumors (tumor-to-muscle activity ratio ?2.6; both P <0.05). In addition, 2 of the 3 tumors with no change in size had tumor-to-muscle activity ratios >2.6 (positive predictive value 66 percent), whereas 6 of 14 with decreased size had tumor-to-muscle activity ratios >2.6 (negative predictive value 57 percent). Three of the 4 tumors not downstaged had tumor-to-muscle activity ratios >2.6 (positive predictive value 75 percent), whereas 5 of 13 downstaged tumors had tumor-to-muscle activity ratios >2.6 (negative predictive value 62 percent). The mean tumor-to-muscle activity ratio for downstaged tumors (2.2) was significantly lower than that of nondownstaged tumors (3.3) ( P =0.03). The difference in mean tumor-to-muscle activity ratio between downsized (2.3) and nondownsized (2.9) tumors did not reach statistical significance ( P =0.36). Tumor 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose uptake (n=11) did not correlate with 60Cu-ATSM uptake (r=0.4; P =0.9) and there was no significant difference in mean tumor 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose uptake between patients with hypoxic tumors and those with normoxic tumors ( P =0.3). CONCLUSIONS The results of this small pilot study suggest that 60Cu-ATSM-PET may be predictive of survival and, possibly, tumor response to neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy in patients with rectal cancer. A larger Phase II study is warranted to validate these results.  RESULTS Patients Nineteen patients were enrolled in the study. Two were excluded from the final analysis; one patient died during NCRT and another patient’s tumor perforated before completion of NCRT necessitating emergency surgery. The demographic characteristics and study results for the remaining 17 patients are summarized in Table 1 . Their mean age was 57.2 (range, 32–73) years, and there were 11 men and 6 women. All tumors were in the lower two-thirds of the rectum, and the mean distance from the anal verge was 6 cm (±3.45) in the group. Surgical resection was by low anterior resection (LAR) with coloanal anastomosis in 12 patients, LAR with colostomy in 1 patient, and by abdominoperineal resection in 4 patients. Radial margins were clear in 14 of 17 patients. There was no operative mortality. Based on the final pathology, the tumors were well differentiated in 1 patient, moderately differentiated in 11, and poorly differentiated in 3. Tumor differentiation was not reported in two patients (1 with a complete pathologic response and 1 with only a few scattered cells present within pools of mucin). Four patients had mucinous tumors. The mean (± standard deviation) 60Cu-ATSM T/M for the 17 rectal cancers was 2.5±0.9). The median value was 2.6, and this threshold was used to dichotomize the patients for comparisons of response and survival in relation to 60Cu-ATSM uptake. Fourteen patients had a reduction in tumor size (mean reduction in tumor area 14.2±8.4 cm) and 13 were downstaged ( Table 1 ). Two of the 3 tumors with no change in size had T/M>2.6 (positive predictive value (PPV) 66 percent), whereas 6 of 14 with decreased size had T/M>2.6 (negative predictive value (NPV) 57 percent). Three of the 4 tumors not downstaged had T/M>2.6 (PPV 75 percent), whereas 5 of 13 downstaged tumors had T/M>2.6 (NPV 62 percent). The mean T/M ratio for downstaged tumors (2.2±0.8) was significantly lower than that of nondownstaged tumors (3.3±0.5; P = 0.03). However, the difference in mean T/M ratio between downsized (2.4±.0.9) and nondownsized (2.9± 0.9) tumors did not reach statistical significance ( P = 0.36). No correlation was found between tumor size and stage before therapy and 60Cu-ATSM uptake. Of interest, the three patients with involved radial margins on final pathology all had hypoxic tumors with T/M ratios of 3.7, 3.0, and 2.9, respectively. The mean follow-up time for those patients alive at the time of last follow-up was 4.1 years. None of the patients with normoxic tumors (T/M?2.6) developed recurrent disease or died as a result of their tumor. The progression-free survival at three years was 50 percent for patients with hypoxic tumors (T/M>2.6), and their overall survival was 63 percent (both P <0.05; Fig. 1 ). There was no significant difference in tumor SUVmax for FDG of patients with hypoxic tumors (7.8±3.5) and those with normoxic tumors (11.9±8.9; P =0.3). No significant correlation was found between tumor FDG uptake and T/M ratios for 60Cu-ATSM (r=0.04; P =0.9).  RESULTS Patients Nineteen patients were enrolled in the study. Two were excluded from the final analysis; one patient died during NCRT and another patient’s tumor perforated before completion of NCRT necessitating emergency surgery. The demographic characteristics and study results for the remaining 17 patients are summarized in Table 1 . Their mean age was 57.2 (range, 32–73) years, and there were 11 men and 6 women. All tumors were in the lower two-thirds of the rectum, and the mean distance from the anal verge was 6 cm (±3.45) in the group. Surgical resection was by low anterior resection (LAR) with coloanal anastomosis in 12 patients, LAR with colostomy in 1 patient, and by abdominoperineal resection in 4 patients. Radial margins were clear in 14 of 17 patients. There was no operative mortality. Based on the final pathology, the tumors were well differentiated in 1 patient, moderately differentiated in 11, and poorly differentiated in 3. Tumor differentiation was not reported in two patients (1 with a complete pathologic response and 1 with only a few scattered cells present within pools of mucin). Four patients had mucinous tumors. The mean (± standard deviation) 60Cu-ATSM T/M for the 17 rectal cancers was 2.5±0.9). The median value was 2.6, and this threshold was used to dichotomize the patients for comparisons of response and survival in relation to 60Cu-ATSM uptake. Fourteen patients had a reduction in tumor size (mean reduction in tumor area 14.2±8.4 cm) and 13 were downstaged ( Table 1 ). Two of the 3 tumors with no change in size had T/M>2.6 (positive predictive value (PPV) 66 percent), whereas 6 of 14 with decreased size had T/M>2.6 (negative predictive value (NPV) 57 percent). Three of the 4 tumors not downstaged had T/M>2.6 (PPV 75 percent), whereas 5 of 13 downstaged tumors had T/M>2.6 (NPV 62 percent). The mean T/M ratio for downstaged tumors (2.2±0.8) was significantly lower than that of nondownstaged tumors (3.3±0.5; P = 0.03). However, the difference in mean T/M ratio between downsized (2.4±.0.9) and nondownsized (2.9± 0.9) tumors did not reach statistical significance ( P = 0.36). No correlation was found between tumor size and stage before therapy and 60Cu-ATSM uptake. Of interest, the three patients with involved radial margins on final pathology all had hypoxic tumors with T/M ratios of 3.7, 3.0, and 2.9, respectively. The mean follow-up time for those patients alive at the time of last follow-up was 4.1 years. None of the patients with normoxic tumors (T/M?2.6) developed recurrent disease or died as a result of their tumor. The progression-free survival at three years was 50 percent for patients with hypoxic tumors (T/M>2.6), and their overall survival was 63 percent (both P <0.05; Fig. 1 ). There was no significant difference in tumor SUVmax for FDG of patients with hypoxic tumors (7.8±3.5) and those with normoxic tumors (11.9±8.9; P =0.3). No significant correlation was found between tumor FDG uptake and T/M ratios for 60Cu-ATSM (r=0.04; P =0.9).  Patients Nineteen patients were enrolled in the study. Two were excluded from the final analysis; one patient died during NCRT and another patient’s tumor perforated before completion of NCRT necessitating emergency surgery. The demographic characteristics and study results for the remaining 17 patients are summarized in Table 1 . Their mean age was 57.2 (range, 32–73) years, and there were 11 men and 6 women. All tumors were in the lower two-thirds of the rectum, and the mean distance from the anal verge was 6 cm (±3.45) in the group. Surgical resection was by low anterior resection (LAR) with coloanal anastomosis in 12 patients, LAR with colostomy in 1 patient, and by abdominoperineal resection in 4 patients. Radial margins were clear in 14 of 17 patients. There was no operative mortality. Based on the final pathology, the tumors were well differentiated in 1 patient, moderately differentiated in 11, and poorly differentiated in 3. Tumor differentiation was not reported in two patients (1 with a complete pathologic response and 1 with only a few scattered cells present within pools of mucin). Four patients had mucinous tumors. The mean (± standard deviation) 60Cu-ATSM T/M for the 17 rectal cancers was 2.5±0.9). The median value was 2.6, and this threshold was used to dichotomize the patients for comparisons of response and survival in relation to 60Cu-ATSM uptake. Fourteen patients had a reduction in tumor size (mean reduction in tumor area 14.2±8.4 cm) and 13 were downstaged ( Table 1 ). Two of the 3 tumors with no change in size had T/M>2.6 (positive predictive value (PPV) 66 percent), whereas 6 of 14 with decreased size had T/M>2.6 (negative predictive value (NPV) 57 percent). Three of the 4 tumors not downstaged had T/M>2.6 (PPV 75 percent), whereas 5 of 13 downstaged tumors had T/M>2.6 (NPV 62 percent). The mean T/M ratio for downstaged tumors (2.2±0.8) was significantly lower than that of nondownstaged tumors (3.3±0.5; P = 0.03). However, the difference in mean T/M ratio between downsized (2.4±.0.9) and nondownsized (2.9± 0.9) tumors did not reach statistical significance ( P = 0.36). No correlation was found between tumor size and stage before therapy and 60Cu-ATSM uptake. Of interest, the three patients with involved radial margins on final pathology all had hypoxic tumors with T/M ratios of 3.7, 3.0, and 2.9, respectively. The mean follow-up time for those patients alive at the time of last follow-up was 4.1 years. None of the patients with normoxic tumors (T/M?2.6) developed recurrent disease or died as a result of their tumor. The progression-free survival at three years was 50 percent for patients with hypoxic tumors (T/M>2.6), and their overall survival was 63 percent (both P <0.05; Fig. 1 ). There was no significant difference in tumor SUVmax for FDG of patients with hypoxic tumors (7.8±3.5) and those with normoxic tumors (11.9±8.9; P =0.3). No significant correlation was found between tumor FDG uptake and T/M ratios for 60Cu-ATSM (r=0.04; P =0.9).  Patients Nineteen patients were enrolled in the study. Two were excluded from the final analysis; one patient died during NCRT and another patient’s tumor perforated before completion of NCRT necessitating emergency surgery. The demographic characteristics and study results for the remaining 17 patients are summarized in Table 1 . Their mean age was 57.2 (range, 32–73) years, and there were 11 men and 6 women. All tumors were in the lower two-thirds of the rectum, and the mean distance from the anal verge was 6 cm (±3.45) in the group. Surgical resection was by low anterior resection (LAR) with coloanal anastomosis in 12 patients, LAR with colostomy in 1 patient, and by abdominoperineal resection in 4 patients. Radial margins were clear in 14 of 17 patients. There was no operative mortality. Based on the final pathology, the tumors were well differentiated in 1 patient, moderately differentiated in 11, and poorly differentiated in 3. Tumor differentiation was not reported in two patients (1 with a complete pathologic response and 1 with only a few scattered cells present within pools of mucin). Four patients had mucinous tumors. The mean (± standard deviation) 60Cu-ATSM T/M for the 17 rectal cancers was 2.5±0.9). The median value was 2.6, and this threshold was used to dichotomize the patients for comparisons of response and survival in relation to 60Cu-ATSM uptake. Fourteen patients had a reduction in tumor size (mean reduction in tumor area 14.2±8.4 cm) and 13 were downstaged ( Table 1 ). Two of the 3 tumors with no change in size had T/M>2.6 (positive predictive value (PPV) 66 percent), whereas 6 of 14 with decreased size had T/M>2.6 (negative predictive value (NPV) 57 percent). Three of the 4 tumors not downstaged had T/M>2.6 (PPV 75 percent), whereas 5 of 13 downstaged tumors had T/M>2.6 (NPV 62 percent). The mean T/M ratio for downstaged tumors (2.2±0.8) was significantly lower than that of nondownstaged tumors (3.3±0.5; P = 0.03). However, the difference in mean T/M ratio between downsized (2.4±.0.9) and nondownsized (2.9± 0.9) tumors did not reach statistical significance ( P = 0.36). No correlation was found between tumor size and stage before therapy and 60Cu-ATSM uptake. Of interest, the three patients with involved radial margins on final pathology all had hypoxic tumors with T/M ratios of 3.7, 3.0, and 2.9, respectively. The mean follow-up time for those patients alive at the time of last follow-up was 4.1 years. None of the patients with normoxic tumors (T/M?2.6) developed recurrent disease or died as a result of their tumor. The progression-free survival at three years was 50 percent for patients with hypoxic tumors (T/M>2.6), and their overall survival was 63 percent (both P <0.05; Fig. 1 ). There was no significant difference in tumor SUVmax for FDG of patients with hypoxic tumors (7.8±3.5) and those with normoxic tumors (11.9±8.9; P =0.3). No significant correlation was found between tumor FDG uptake and T/M ratios for 60Cu-ATSM (r=0.04; P =0.9).  DISCUSSION Rectal cancer is a common oncologic problem. It is estimated that there will be nearly 41,420 new cases of rectal cancer in the United States in 2007. 24 In locally advanced rectal cancer, preoperative NCRT has become the standard of care. 3 The benefits of effective NCRT include treatment of mesorectal lymph node disease and downstaging and downsizing of the primary tumor, which may improve the proportion of curative surgery and reduce the rate of local recurrence. However, not all patients respond to NCRT and benefit from such therapy; thus, nonresponders are subjected to the toxicity and cost of an ineffective treatment. To avoid treatment toxicity in nonresponding patients, prediction of response before initiation of therapy could be an important tool in tailoring preoperative therapy. 25 The current clinical tools are limited in predicting responsiveness to NCRT. A number of histologic and molecular markers, such as p53 nuclear staining and thymidylate synthase expression, have been identified as predictors of pathologic response. 26 , 27 However, these markers have not been shown consistently to be accurate in predicting response to NCRT. More recently, gene expression profiling using microarrays, has been shown to be potentially of value in discriminating responders from nonresponders. 28 However, even in responders a complete pathologic response after preoperative chemoradiation does not reliably predict late outcome. 29 Hypoxia has been recognized as a major obstacle to tumor radiotherapy and often chemotherapy. Hypoxic tumors are less responsive to therapy, behave more aggressively, and have poorer prognosis. Tumor hypoxia has been most extensively studied in carcinomas of the head and neck and cervix, where it has been shown to be an important predictor of poor response to chemoradiotherapy. 18 , 30 , 31 The presence of hypoxia in colorectal cancers has been documented and likely is an important factor in determining responsiveness to therapy and prognosis in these patients as well. 32 , 33 Several methods have been described that can provide measures of oxygen content within tumors. Commercially available polarographic oxygen electrodes (Eppendorf GMbH, Hamburg, Germany) are capable of direct measurement of oxygen content of the tumor, and this method is considered the “standard.” 34 However, oxygen electrodes are not used in routine clinical practice because the procedure is invasive, technically demanding, and subject to sampling errors. Functional imaging strategies, as an alternate to oxygen electrodes, may be ideal for clinical evaluation of tumor oxygenation. 7 , 34 Recently, we have shown that PET imaging with 60Cu-ATSM is a reliable method for predicting response to therapy in NSCLC 12 , 13 as well as in predicting disease-free and overall survival in patients with cervical cancer. 13 60Cu-ATSM is a positron-emitting radiopharmaceutical that accumulates selectively in hypoxic cells, clears rapidly from the blood, and washes out rapidly from normoxic cells. In vitro studies of tumor cells in culture have shown that the uptake of 64Cu-ATSM was clearly dependent on the oxygen concentration in the medium and its uptake was significantly greater than the uptake of FMISO, a well-known hypoxic tracer, which peaked after a much longer incubation time (2 hours vs . 15 minute). 11 Thus, 60Cu-ATSM has a better hypoxic-to-normoxic uptake ratio. In the current study, we have shown that 60Cu-ATSM uptake, as measured by T/M ratio, was reasonably accurate in predicting downstaging after NCRT, although less successful in predicting change in the tumor size. No correlation was found between tumor size and stage before therapy and 60Cu-ATSM uptake. More significantly, perhaps, 60Cu-ATSM uptake also allowed for discrimination of patients with poor and good prognosis. The overall and progression-free survivals were worse in patients with hypoxic tumors (T/M>2.6) than in those with nonhypoxic tumors (T/M?2.6). In addition, the three patients with involved radial margins at resection all had hypoxic tumors as measured by 60Cu-ATSM-PET. However, it should be stressed that this was a pilot study with a small number of patients and limited follow-up. Therefore, the ability of 60Cu-ATSM-PET to predict prognosis must still be considered largely unknown and will require further study. Although this is the first report to assess hypoxia imaging as a predictor of tumor response and patient outcome in rectal carcinoma, a previous report from Box et al . 35 linked anemia with the same end points in a group of 100 patients with rectal cancer. Those authors reported that patients with normal hemoglobin levels during NCRT achieved better tumor response, less local recurrence, and improved overall survival compared with anemic patients. They speculated that correcting anemia before NCRT might improve tumor response and oncologic outcomes. There have been a number of recent reports examining the role of FDG-PET in the evaluation of patients with primary cancers. It has been shown that the SUV for FDG uptake is reflective of tumor aggressiveness and is a predictor of patient outcome in several tumor types. 14 , 15 , 19 , 36 , 37 Specific to rectal cancer, Gearhart et al . 37 have suggested that FDG-PET improves the accuracy of staging in patients with low rectal cancer and may result in changes to the treatment plan in a significant percentage. Other authors have used FDG-PET to assess response to neoadjuvant therapy based on reduction in tumor SUV after treatment. 38 - 41 However, the potential role of 60Cu-ATSM-PET in patients with rectal cancer differs from that of FDG-PET. Our findings suggest that 60Cu-ATSM-PET may be able to predict response to neoadjuvant therapy before it is given. This may allow tailoring of the treatment plan at a very early stage, perhaps by directing patients predicted to be nonresponders into clinical trials designed to increase the efficacy of standard NCRT. Our finding of no significant correlation between the uptake measures for the two tracers also supports the idea that 60Cu-ATSM-PET provides unique prognostic information that cannot be derived from FDG-PET ( Fig. 2 )  DISCUSSION Rectal cancer is a common oncologic problem. It is estimated that there will be nearly 41,420 new cases of rectal cancer in the United States in 2007. 24 In locally advanced rectal cancer, preoperative NCRT has become the standard of care. 3 The benefits of effective NCRT include treatment of mesorectal lymph node disease and downstaging and downsizing of the primary tumor, which may improve the proportion of curative surgery and reduce the rate of local recurrence. However, not all patients respond to NCRT and benefit from such therapy; thus, nonresponders are subjected to the toxicity and cost of an ineffective treatment. To avoid treatment toxicity in nonresponding patients, prediction of response before initiation of therapy could be an important tool in tailoring preoperative therapy. 25 The current clinical tools are limited in predicting responsiveness to NCRT. A number of histologic and molecular markers, such as p53 nuclear staining and thymidylate synthase expression, have been identified as predictors of pathologic response. 26 , 27 However, these markers have not been shown consistently to be accurate in predicting response to NCRT. More recently, gene expression profiling using microarrays, has been shown to be potentially of value in discriminating responders from nonresponders. 28 However, even in responders a complete pathologic response after preoperative chemoradiation does not reliably predict late outcome. 29 Hypoxia has been recognized as a major obstacle to tumor radiotherapy and often chemotherapy. Hypoxic tumors are less responsive to therapy, behave more aggressively, and have poorer prognosis. Tumor hypoxia has been most extensively studied in carcinomas of the head and neck and cervix, where it has been shown to be an important predictor of poor response to chemoradiotherapy. 18 , 30 , 31 The presence of hypoxia in colorectal cancers has been documented and likely is an important factor in determining responsiveness to therapy and prognosis in these patients as well. 32 , 33 Several methods have been described that can provide measures of oxygen content within tumors. Commercially available polarographic oxygen electrodes (Eppendorf GMbH, Hamburg, Germany) are capable of direct measurement of oxygen content of the tumor, and this method is considered the “standard.” 34 However, oxygen electrodes are not used in routine clinical practice because the procedure is invasive, technically demanding, and subject to sampling errors. Functional imaging strategies, as an alternate to oxygen electrodes, may be ideal for clinical evaluation of tumor oxygenation. 7 , 34 Recently, we have shown that PET imaging with 60Cu-ATSM is a reliable method for predicting response to therapy in NSCLC 12 , 13 as well as in predicting disease-free and overall survival in patients with cervical cancer. 13 60Cu-ATSM is a positron-emitting radiopharmaceutical that accumulates selectively in hypoxic cells, clears rapidly from the blood, and washes out rapidly from normoxic cells. In vitro studies of tumor cells in culture have shown that the uptake of 64Cu-ATSM was clearly dependent on the oxygen concentration in the medium and its uptake was significantly greater than the uptake of FMISO, a well-known hypoxic tracer, which peaked after a much longer incubation time (2 hours vs . 15 minute). 11 Thus, 60Cu-ATSM has a better hypoxic-to-normoxic uptake ratio. In the current study, we have shown that 60Cu-ATSM uptake, as measured by T/M ratio, was reasonably accurate in predicting downstaging after NCRT, although less successful in predicting change in the tumor size. No correlation was found between tumor size and stage before therapy and 60Cu-ATSM uptake. More significantly, perhaps, 60Cu-ATSM uptake also allowed for discrimination of patients with poor and good prognosis. The overall and progression-free survivals were worse in patients with hypoxic tumors (T/M>2.6) than in those with nonhypoxic tumors (T/M?2.6). In addition, the three patients with involved radial margins at resection all had hypoxic tumors as measured by 60Cu-ATSM-PET. However, it should be stressed that this was a pilot study with a small number of patients and limited follow-up. Therefore, the ability of 60Cu-ATSM-PET to predict prognosis must still be considered largely unknown and will require further study. Although this is the first report to assess hypoxia imaging as a predictor of tumor response and patient outcome in rectal carcinoma, a previous report from Box et al . 35 linked anemia with the same end points in a group of 100 patients with rectal cancer. Those authors reported that patients with normal hemoglobin levels during NCRT achieved better tumor response, less local recurrence, and improved overall survival compared with anemic patients. They speculated that correcting anemia before NCRT might improve tumor response and oncologic outcomes. There have been a number of recent reports examining the role of FDG-PET in the evaluation of patients with primary cancers. It has been shown that the SUV for FDG uptake is reflective of tumor aggressiveness and is a predictor of patient outcome in several tumor types. 14 , 15 , 19 , 36 , 37 Specific to rectal cancer, Gearhart et al . 37 have suggested that FDG-PET improves the accuracy of staging in patients with low rectal cancer and may result in changes to the treatment plan in a significant percentage. Other authors have used FDG-PET to assess response to neoadjuvant therapy based on reduction in tumor SUV after treatment. 38 - 41 However, the potential role of 60Cu-ATSM-PET in patients with rectal cancer differs from that of FDG-PET. Our findings suggest that 60Cu-ATSM-PET may be able to predict response to neoadjuvant therapy before it is given. This may allow tailoring of the treatment plan at a very early stage, perhaps by directing patients predicted to be nonresponders into clinical trials designed to increase the efficacy of standard NCRT. Our finding of no significant correlation between the uptake measures for the two tracers also supports the idea that 60Cu-ATSM-PET provides unique prognostic information that cannot be derived from FDG-PET ( Fig. 2 )  CONCLUSIONS In this current pilot study, we have shown that 60Cu-ATSM-PET is a promising predictor of survival and, to a lesser extent, tumor response to NCRT in patients with rectal cancer. The NCI has recognized the potential of functional imaging of hypoxia and has made its development a high priority. 42 Our studies on Cu-ATSM led to a NCI DCIDE application (Cu-ATSM: Preclinical Development via the DCIDE Program, PI: J. S. Lewis) that was used for a successful application to the FDA for an IND for 64Cu-ATSM PET imaging of tumor hypoxia in humans. Larger studies are now needed to validate the threshold that best differentiates hypoxic from nonhypoxic tumors. 