Modest loss of peripheral axons and formation of brain inclusions in mice with targeted deletion of gigaxonin exon 1 Mutations in gigaxonin are responsible for Giant Axonal Neuropathy (GAN), a progressive neurodegenerative disorder associated with abnormal accumulations of Intermediate Filaments (IFs). Gigaxonin is the substrate-specific adaptor for a new Cul3-E3-ubiquitin ligase family that promotes the proteasome dependent degradation of its partners MAP1B, MAP8 and TBCB. Here, we report the generation of a mouse model with targeted deletion of Gan exon 1 ( Gan ?exon1;?exon1 ). Analyses of the Gan ?exon1;?exon1 mice revealed increased levels of various IFs proteins in nervous system and the presence of IFs inclusion bodies in the brain. Despite deficiency of full length gigaxonin, the Gan ?exon1;?exon1 mice do not develop overt neurological phenotypes and giant axons reminiscent of the human GAN disease. We propose that the existence of a short gigaxonin isoform expressed in the spinal cord could underlie the mitigation of GAN-phenotypes in Gan ?exon1;?exon1 mice. Nonetheless, the Gan ?exon1;?exon1 mice exhibited modest increase in axon calibers and 27% axonal loss in the L5 ventral roots. This new mouse model should provide a useful tool for testing potential therapeutic approaches for GAN disease.  Materials and methods Knockout mice A 10.4 kb fragment of the GAN gene, including exon 1 and part of the upstream promoter, were subcloned into a pQZ1 cloning vector. The 0.9 kb Acs I- Xma I fragment containing exon 1 and part of the 3’ promoter was replaced with a Neo cassette. The vector was then digested by Not I and Pma CI. The targeting fragment was isolated and electroporated into embryonic stem (ES) cells. Positive clones were picked up and amplified. The homologous recombination event was detected by Southern blot using an external 5’- Eco RV probe. The use of animals and all surgical procedures described in this article were carried out according to The Guide to the Care and Use of Experimental Animals of the Canadian Council on Animal Care . Southern blots and PCR DNA was extracted from mouse tails with phenol-chloroform procedure. A PCR-amplified fragment of the Gan promoter was used as a 500bp probe. Genomic DNA digested with Eco RV and analyzed according to Southern blotting methods ( Couillard-Despres et al., 1998 ). The probe detected a 10-kb wild-type band and a 5-kb band for the knockout mice. For PCR genotyping, wild type primers chosen inside the deleted region amplified a sequence of 190bp. Standard Neo primers were used for genotyping of the knockout allele and yielded to an amplification product of 280bp. Primers sequence is described table 1 . RT-PCR Total RNA from brain and spinal cord was extracted with trizol reagent according to the manufacturing instructions (Invitrogen, Burlington, ON). RNA concentration was determined at 260nm and aliquots of 5?g were stored at -80°C. Pairs of primers were chosen to target Gan cDNA and are described in table 1 . RT-PCR was performed in one step with Superscript-Taq RT-PCR one step kit (Invitrogen, Burlington, ON) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. RT-PCR products were separated by electrophoresis on agarose gel. Western blot/ Dot blot After dissection, tissues were homogenized in a SUB denaturing buffer (0,5% SDS/8 M urea in 7.4 phosphate buffer) with a pool of protease inhibitors [phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, Saint-Louis, MI)]. Homogenates were centrifuged at 13 000 rpm 20 min at room temperature. The protein concentration of the supernatant was determined by the method of Bradford. Equal amount of proteins were loaded on SDS-PAGE and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane, or directly loaded on membrane through dot blot apparatus. Membrane was blocked in PBSMT (PBS1X; tween 0.1%; dry milk 5%) and then incubated with a dilution of different primary antibodies in PBSMT overnight at 4°C. The different antibodies were gigA/gigB (gigaxonin; Bomont et al ., manuscript in preparation), N52 (NF-H), NN18 (NF-M), NR4 (NF-L), Tau1, ?-internexin, Vimentin, GFAP, ?-tubulin, ?-tubulin, ?-tubulin and actin (Chemicon, Temecula, CA), except for tubulins (Sigma, Saint-Louis, MI), and NFL (Novocastra, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK). Incubation with the secondary antibody diluted 1:5000 (Jackson Immunoresearch, West Grove, PA) was done at room temperature 30 min. Detection was done by chemiluminescence (Perkin and Elmer, Waltham, MA). Immunohistochemistry Mice were perfused with NaCl 0.9% and fixed with 4% PFA (paraformaldehyde) pH7.4. Brain and spinal cord were dissected and then post-fixed in PFA 4% pH7.4; sucrose 10%. Brains and spinal cords were cut on microtom in 25? sections. Tissues were stocked at -20°C in a cryopreservative solution and used for immunodetection. Tissue samples were washed in 50 mM potassium PBS and preincubated for 30 min at room temperature in blocking solution (potassium PBS containing 0.4% Triton X-100, 1% BSA, and 4% goat serum). The slices were incubated overnight at 4°C with the appropriate dilution of primary antibody in blocking serum. The slices were then washed and incubated for 90 min at room temperature in the secondary biotinylated Ab solution 1/1500 in potassium PBS containing 0.4% Triton X-100 and 1% BSA. After washing, the sections were incubated in ABC complex 1h at room temperature. Staining was developed by incubating the samples in 0.5mg/ml DAB + 0.003% H2O2 in potassium PBS. The rinsed tissues were mounted on superfrost slides (Fisher, Ottawa ON), counterstained with hematoxylin, dehydrated in graded concentration of EtOH and xylene, and coverslipped with DPX. Immunofluorescence As previously described for immunohistochemistry until incubation with primary Ab (NF-H poly; ?-internexin, Chemicon, Temecula CA), the tissues sections were washed in KPBS and then incubated for 90 min in secondary Ab (Alexa fluor, Invitrogen, Burlington, ON) diluted 1:500 in potassium PBS containing 0.4% Triton X-100 and 1% BSA. The sections were mounted on superfrosst slides (Fisher, Ottawa, ON) and finally coverslipped with PVA-DABKO. Axon and neuronal cell count Dorsal root ganglions from 6 months old mice were dissected after perfusion with PFA and then post fixed in glutaraldehyde 3%. Tissue samples were washed three times in 0.1M NaHPO4 pH 7.4 and then treated with osmium tetroxyde 2% in NaHPO4 0.1M for 2 hours at room temperature. The samples were then deshydrated in increased concentration of EtOH and in Acetone. The final deshydratation was performed 1 hour RT with 50% epoxy resin in acetone. Ventral (VR) and dorsal roots (DR) were properly separated and embedded in epoxy resin at least 2 hour RT before cooking overnight at 60°C. Resulting blocks were cut in 1? semi-thin section and stained with toluidine blue. Axon calibers were evaluated with stereomiscrocopy (Neurolucida Tablet). Grip strength test Hind limb grip strength testing was done by using a Chatillon DFIS-2 digital force gauge (model DFIS 2, Ametek, Paoli, PA). Briefly, mice were allowed to grip wire mesh of the apparatus by their hind limbs. The animal was moved away from the bar slowly and apparatus measured if the animal exerted active force against the movement. Readings were taken in T-peak and measured in grams of force. Each animal was given three trials per examining period ( Kerr et al., 2003 ).  Knockout mice A 10.4 kb fragment of the GAN gene, including exon 1 and part of the upstream promoter, were subcloned into a pQZ1 cloning vector. The 0.9 kb Acs I- Xma I fragment containing exon 1 and part of the 3’ promoter was replaced with a Neo cassette. The vector was then digested by Not I and Pma CI. The targeting fragment was isolated and electroporated into embryonic stem (ES) cells. Positive clones were picked up and amplified. The homologous recombination event was detected by Southern blot using an external 5’- Eco RV probe. The use of animals and all surgical procedures described in this article were carried out according to The Guide to the Care and Use of Experimental Animals of the Canadian Council on Animal Care .  Southern blots and PCR DNA was extracted from mouse tails with phenol-chloroform procedure. A PCR-amplified fragment of the Gan promoter was used as a 500bp probe. Genomic DNA digested with Eco RV and analyzed according to Southern blotting methods ( Couillard-Despres et al., 1998 ). The probe detected a 10-kb wild-type band and a 5-kb band for the knockout mice. For PCR genotyping, wild type primers chosen inside the deleted region amplified a sequence of 190bp. Standard Neo primers were used for genotyping of the knockout allele and yielded to an amplification product of 280bp. Primers sequence is described table 1 .  RT-PCR Total RNA from brain and spinal cord was extracted with trizol reagent according to the manufacturing instructions (Invitrogen, Burlington, ON). RNA concentration was determined at 260nm and aliquots of 5?g were stored at -80°C. Pairs of primers were chosen to target Gan cDNA and are described in table 1 . RT-PCR was performed in one step with Superscript-Taq RT-PCR one step kit (Invitrogen, Burlington, ON) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. RT-PCR products were separated by electrophoresis on agarose gel.  Western blot/ Dot blot After dissection, tissues were homogenized in a SUB denaturing buffer (0,5% SDS/8 M urea in 7.4 phosphate buffer) with a pool of protease inhibitors [phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, Saint-Louis, MI)]. Homogenates were centrifuged at 13 000 rpm 20 min at room temperature. The protein concentration of the supernatant was determined by the method of Bradford. Equal amount of proteins were loaded on SDS-PAGE and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane, or directly loaded on membrane through dot blot apparatus. Membrane was blocked in PBSMT (PBS1X; tween 0.1%; dry milk 5%) and then incubated with a dilution of different primary antibodies in PBSMT overnight at 4°C. The different antibodies were gigA/gigB (gigaxonin; Bomont et al ., manuscript in preparation), N52 (NF-H), NN18 (NF-M), NR4 (NF-L), Tau1, ?-internexin, Vimentin, GFAP, ?-tubulin, ?-tubulin, ?-tubulin and actin (Chemicon, Temecula, CA), except for tubulins (Sigma, Saint-Louis, MI), and NFL (Novocastra, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK). Incubation with the secondary antibody diluted 1:5000 (Jackson Immunoresearch, West Grove, PA) was done at room temperature 30 min. Detection was done by chemiluminescence (Perkin and Elmer, Waltham, MA).  Immunohistochemistry Mice were perfused with NaCl 0.9% and fixed with 4% PFA (paraformaldehyde) pH7.4. Brain and spinal cord were dissected and then post-fixed in PFA 4% pH7.4; sucrose 10%. Brains and spinal cords were cut on microtom in 25? sections. Tissues were stocked at -20°C in a cryopreservative solution and used for immunodetection. Tissue samples were washed in 50 mM potassium PBS and preincubated for 30 min at room temperature in blocking solution (potassium PBS containing 0.4% Triton X-100, 1% BSA, and 4% goat serum). The slices were incubated overnight at 4°C with the appropriate dilution of primary antibody in blocking serum. The slices were then washed and incubated for 90 min at room temperature in the secondary biotinylated Ab solution 1/1500 in potassium PBS containing 0.4% Triton X-100 and 1% BSA. After washing, the sections were incubated in ABC complex 1h at room temperature. Staining was developed by incubating the samples in 0.5mg/ml DAB + 0.003% H2O2 in potassium PBS. The rinsed tissues were mounted on superfrost slides (Fisher, Ottawa ON), counterstained with hematoxylin, dehydrated in graded concentration of EtOH and xylene, and coverslipped with DPX.  Immunofluorescence As previously described for immunohistochemistry until incubation with primary Ab (NF-H poly; ?-internexin, Chemicon, Temecula CA), the tissues sections were washed in KPBS and then incubated for 90 min in secondary Ab (Alexa fluor, Invitrogen, Burlington, ON) diluted 1:500 in potassium PBS containing 0.4% Triton X-100 and 1% BSA. The sections were mounted on superfrosst slides (Fisher, Ottawa, ON) and finally coverslipped with PVA-DABKO.  Axon and neuronal cell count Dorsal root ganglions from 6 months old mice were dissected after perfusion with PFA and then post fixed in glutaraldehyde 3%. Tissue samples were washed three times in 0.1M NaHPO4 pH 7.4 and then treated with osmium tetroxyde 2% in NaHPO4 0.1M for 2 hours at room temperature. The samples were then deshydrated in increased concentration of EtOH and in Acetone. The final deshydratation was performed 1 hour RT with 50% epoxy resin in acetone. Ventral (VR) and dorsal roots (DR) were properly separated and embedded in epoxy resin at least 2 hour RT before cooking overnight at 60°C. Resulting blocks were cut in 1? semi-thin section and stained with toluidine blue. Axon calibers were evaluated with stereomiscrocopy (Neurolucida Tablet).  Grip strength test Hind limb grip strength testing was done by using a Chatillon DFIS-2 digital force gauge (model DFIS 2, Ametek, Paoli, PA). Briefly, mice were allowed to grip wire mesh of the apparatus by their hind limbs. The animal was moved away from the bar slowly and apparatus measured if the animal exerted active force against the movement. Readings were taken in T-peak and measured in grams of force. Each animal was given three trials per examining period ( Kerr et al., 2003 ).  Results Generation of gigaxonin-deficient mice The Gan gene (~46 kb) is composed of 11 exons separated by 10 introns in mice ( Bomont et al , 2000 ; Gene ID: 209239, NCBI). Exons 1 and 2 are separated by over 20 kb. Our strategy to disrupt expression of Gan was to remove a 1 kb sequence containing part of the promoter with the translation initiation site in the first exon. A targeting vector was generated to replace exon 1 and part of the 3’-promoter by a neo cassette ( Fig. 1A ). The vector was digested with restriction enzymes to yield a 1.5 kb targeting fragment that was then electroporated in ES cells. Neomycin-resistant colonies were picked up for Southern blot analysis. ES cell clones positive for homologous recombination were then microinjected into mouse blastocysts to generate chimeric founder mice. Male chimeras were then mated with C57BL/6 females to generate mice heterozygous for Gan exon 1 deletion. Genotyping of DNA extracted from mouse tails was determined either by Southern blot analysis using a 500-bp 5’- Eco RV probe ( Fig. 1C ) or by PCR using primers flanking exon 1 ( Fig. 1B ). Mendelian transmission of the disrupted Gan gene was obtained by the breeding of heterozygous F1 mice. The mice homozygous for exon 1 deletion ( Gan ?exon1;?exon1 ) did not exhibit overt neurological phenotypes. The Gan ?exon1;?exon1 mice were viable and reproduced normally. Their lifespan did not differ significantly from that of normal mice (data not shown). mRNA and protein analyses Immunoblotting with monoclonal antibody raised against both the N-terminal and C-terminal gigaxonin domain confirmed the absence of full length 65 kDa protein in brain and spinal cord of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice ( Fig. 2A ). Intriguingly, these antibodies also detected a prominent 47.5 kDa protein in spinal cord samples of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 ( Fig. 2A ). This smaller protein was present in lower amount in the spinal cord of heterozygous Gan ?exon1;wt mice and wild type Gan wt;wt mice. The presence of this 47.5 kDa band prompted us to investigate the expression of GAN transcripts in spinal cord of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice. RT-PCR analyses were performed with primers to amplify the region between exons 1 and 2 as well as the region between exons 2 and 7. Using RT-PCR primers for exons 1 to 2, no band was detected in CNS RNA samples from Gan ?ex1;?ex1 , as expected from exon 1 deletion ( Fig. 2B ). However, RT-PCR with primers for exons 2 and 7 yielded a band in spinal cord samples from Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice but not in other tissues such as brain and liver ( Fig. 2B ). This transcript spans Gan exon 2 to 11 and it is missing exon 1. Thus, the RT-PCR results confirm the lack of full lenght Gan mRNA in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice but they support the existence of shorter gigaxonin species in the spinal cord. This short gigaxonin variant will be called sGig ( Fig 2C, D,E ). Changes in IF protein levels in the nervous system It is well established that gigaxonin-deprived tissues from GAN patients present characteristic accumulations of IFs ( Asbury et al. 1972 , Berg et al., 1972 , Prineas et al., 1976). We therefore examined whether the absence of exon 1 in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice resulted in abnormal levels of IFs and of other cytoskeletal components. Western blot analyses of total protein extracts at 3 months of age from the brain, cerebellum and spinal cord revealed modest increases in protein levels of IF proteins including NF-L, NF-M, NF-H and -internexin ( Fig. 3A ). A two-fold increase in peripherin and vimentin levels were also observed in the spinal cord of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice when compared to normal littermates. The analysis of sciatic nerve sections revealed enhanced NF protein levels along the nerve. The three subunits seem to be more abundant in the nerve proximal region ( Fig. 3B ). The increased levels of neuronal IF proteins in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 was not due to increased mRNA expression. RT-PCR analysis for NF-L, NF-M and NF-H showed no differences of transcript levels in the brain, cerebellum or spinal cord of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice and littermate controls ( Fig. 3C ). To determine if the variations in IF protein levels were constant during aging, dot blot immunodetection analyses were performed for NF subunits, ?-internexin and vimentin at different ages ( Fig. 4 ). The results confirmed a deregulation of all IF protein levels early as 3 months of age that was still present at 24 months of age. In particular, NF-H and NF-L levels were increased up to two folds at all ages in the brain, cerebellum and spinal cord samples of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice. NF-M levels remained unchanged at 6 and 12 months of age in cerebellum and spinal cord samples of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice. The ?-internexin levels were increased by up to 3.8 fold in the cerebellum of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice at 3 months of age as compared to controls. In the brain as well as in the ventral part of the lumbar spinal cord, the immunostaining for NF-L was stronger but no inclusions were detected ( Fig. 5A, 5E ). The most notable changes came from the immunodetection of NF-H and ?-internexin. In the cerebral cortex these two proteins formed accumulations in the neuronal cell bodies of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice( Fig. 5B-C ). These IF accumulations appear as early as one month of age and are still present at 12 months of age (data not shown). Double immunofluorescence revealed that NF-H and ?-internexin accumulations did not always colocalize ( Fig. 5D ). In the lumbar spinal cord, the NF-H signal was more intense in cell bodies from Gan ?ex1;?ex1 tissue as compared to wild-type samples ( Fig. 5G-H ). ?-internexin staining showed IF accumulations resembling those detected in the cerebral cortex ( Fig. 5I-J ). Finally, even though western blots exhibited higher level of peripherin in the spinal cord, immunohistochemistry did not reveal significant peripherin accumulations in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 spinal motor neurons ( Fig. 5K-L ). Absence of full length gigaxonin does not lead to significant motoneuron death As expected, western blot analysis of both L4/L5 ventral (VR) and dorsal (DR) roots revealed a slight increase of NF content ( Fig. 6A, 6D ). In order to investigate if this increase in NF content was accompagned by axonal degeneration, L5 VR and DR of 6 months mice were dissected and cut into 1 semi thin sections. DR and VR axons number and caliber were then analyzed by stereomicroscopy. This allowed us to show that neither the number of sensory axons nor the axon caliber was altered in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 dorsal root compared to wild type ( Fig. 6B, 6C ). However, the number of motor axons was significantly diminished by 27% in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 ventral root compared to wild-type ( Fig. 6E ). A subset of axons from Gan ?ex1;?ex1 exhibited larger calibers than control mice ( Fig. 6F ). As there was evidence of axonal degeneration in the L5 ventral root of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice, we carried out a motor neuron count in the lumbar spinal cord. Tissue sections from normal and Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice at 1, 2, 3, 6, and 12 months of age were stained with thionine followed by neuronal count. There was a tendency for decreased number of motor neuron cell bodies at 6 months in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 as compared to normal mice but the changes were not significant ( Fig. 7A ). The Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice did not exhibit motor dysfunction during aging. Grip strength analyses were performed and no differences could be observed between wild type and knockout mice ( fig. 7B ).  Results Generation of gigaxonin-deficient mice The Gan gene (~46 kb) is composed of 11 exons separated by 10 introns in mice ( Bomont et al , 2000 ; Gene ID: 209239, NCBI). Exons 1 and 2 are separated by over 20 kb. Our strategy to disrupt expression of Gan was to remove a 1 kb sequence containing part of the promoter with the translation initiation site in the first exon. A targeting vector was generated to replace exon 1 and part of the 3’-promoter by a neo cassette ( Fig. 1A ). The vector was digested with restriction enzymes to yield a 1.5 kb targeting fragment that was then electroporated in ES cells. Neomycin-resistant colonies were picked up for Southern blot analysis. ES cell clones positive for homologous recombination were then microinjected into mouse blastocysts to generate chimeric founder mice. Male chimeras were then mated with C57BL/6 females to generate mice heterozygous for Gan exon 1 deletion. Genotyping of DNA extracted from mouse tails was determined either by Southern blot analysis using a 500-bp 5’- Eco RV probe ( Fig. 1C ) or by PCR using primers flanking exon 1 ( Fig. 1B ). Mendelian transmission of the disrupted Gan gene was obtained by the breeding of heterozygous F1 mice. The mice homozygous for exon 1 deletion ( Gan ?exon1;?exon1 ) did not exhibit overt neurological phenotypes. The Gan ?exon1;?exon1 mice were viable and reproduced normally. Their lifespan did not differ significantly from that of normal mice (data not shown). mRNA and protein analyses Immunoblotting with monoclonal antibody raised against both the N-terminal and C-terminal gigaxonin domain confirmed the absence of full length 65 kDa protein in brain and spinal cord of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice ( Fig. 2A ). Intriguingly, these antibodies also detected a prominent 47.5 kDa protein in spinal cord samples of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 ( Fig. 2A ). This smaller protein was present in lower amount in the spinal cord of heterozygous Gan ?exon1;wt mice and wild type Gan wt;wt mice. The presence of this 47.5 kDa band prompted us to investigate the expression of GAN transcripts in spinal cord of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice. RT-PCR analyses were performed with primers to amplify the region between exons 1 and 2 as well as the region between exons 2 and 7. Using RT-PCR primers for exons 1 to 2, no band was detected in CNS RNA samples from Gan ?ex1;?ex1 , as expected from exon 1 deletion ( Fig. 2B ). However, RT-PCR with primers for exons 2 and 7 yielded a band in spinal cord samples from Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice but not in other tissues such as brain and liver ( Fig. 2B ). This transcript spans Gan exon 2 to 11 and it is missing exon 1. Thus, the RT-PCR results confirm the lack of full lenght Gan mRNA in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice but they support the existence of shorter gigaxonin species in the spinal cord. This short gigaxonin variant will be called sGig ( Fig 2C, D,E ). Changes in IF protein levels in the nervous system It is well established that gigaxonin-deprived tissues from GAN patients present characteristic accumulations of IFs ( Asbury et al. 1972 , Berg et al., 1972 , Prineas et al., 1976). We therefore examined whether the absence of exon 1 in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice resulted in abnormal levels of IFs and of other cytoskeletal components. Western blot analyses of total protein extracts at 3 months of age from the brain, cerebellum and spinal cord revealed modest increases in protein levels of IF proteins including NF-L, NF-M, NF-H and -internexin ( Fig. 3A ). A two-fold increase in peripherin and vimentin levels were also observed in the spinal cord of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice when compared to normal littermates. The analysis of sciatic nerve sections revealed enhanced NF protein levels along the nerve. The three subunits seem to be more abundant in the nerve proximal region ( Fig. 3B ). The increased levels of neuronal IF proteins in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 was not due to increased mRNA expression. RT-PCR analysis for NF-L, NF-M and NF-H showed no differences of transcript levels in the brain, cerebellum or spinal cord of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice and littermate controls ( Fig. 3C ). To determine if the variations in IF protein levels were constant during aging, dot blot immunodetection analyses were performed for NF subunits, ?-internexin and vimentin at different ages ( Fig. 4 ). The results confirmed a deregulation of all IF protein levels early as 3 months of age that was still present at 24 months of age. In particular, NF-H and NF-L levels were increased up to two folds at all ages in the brain, cerebellum and spinal cord samples of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice. NF-M levels remained unchanged at 6 and 12 months of age in cerebellum and spinal cord samples of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice. The ?-internexin levels were increased by up to 3.8 fold in the cerebellum of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice at 3 months of age as compared to controls. In the brain as well as in the ventral part of the lumbar spinal cord, the immunostaining for NF-L was stronger but no inclusions were detected ( Fig. 5A, 5E ). The most notable changes came from the immunodetection of NF-H and ?-internexin. In the cerebral cortex these two proteins formed accumulations in the neuronal cell bodies of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice( Fig. 5B-C ). These IF accumulations appear as early as one month of age and are still present at 12 months of age (data not shown). Double immunofluorescence revealed that NF-H and ?-internexin accumulations did not always colocalize ( Fig. 5D ). In the lumbar spinal cord, the NF-H signal was more intense in cell bodies from Gan ?ex1;?ex1 tissue as compared to wild-type samples ( Fig. 5G-H ). ?-internexin staining showed IF accumulations resembling those detected in the cerebral cortex ( Fig. 5I-J ). Finally, even though western blots exhibited higher level of peripherin in the spinal cord, immunohistochemistry did not reveal significant peripherin accumulations in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 spinal motor neurons ( Fig. 5K-L ). Absence of full length gigaxonin does not lead to significant motoneuron death As expected, western blot analysis of both L4/L5 ventral (VR) and dorsal (DR) roots revealed a slight increase of NF content ( Fig. 6A, 6D ). In order to investigate if this increase in NF content was accompagned by axonal degeneration, L5 VR and DR of 6 months mice were dissected and cut into 1 semi thin sections. DR and VR axons number and caliber were then analyzed by stereomicroscopy. This allowed us to show that neither the number of sensory axons nor the axon caliber was altered in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 dorsal root compared to wild type ( Fig. 6B, 6C ). However, the number of motor axons was significantly diminished by 27% in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 ventral root compared to wild-type ( Fig. 6E ). A subset of axons from Gan ?ex1;?ex1 exhibited larger calibers than control mice ( Fig. 6F ). As there was evidence of axonal degeneration in the L5 ventral root of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice, we carried out a motor neuron count in the lumbar spinal cord. Tissue sections from normal and Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice at 1, 2, 3, 6, and 12 months of age were stained with thionine followed by neuronal count. There was a tendency for decreased number of motor neuron cell bodies at 6 months in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 as compared to normal mice but the changes were not significant ( Fig. 7A ). The Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice did not exhibit motor dysfunction during aging. Grip strength analyses were performed and no differences could be observed between wild type and knockout mice ( fig. 7B ).  Generation of gigaxonin-deficient mice The Gan gene (~46 kb) is composed of 11 exons separated by 10 introns in mice ( Bomont et al , 2000 ; Gene ID: 209239, NCBI). Exons 1 and 2 are separated by over 20 kb. Our strategy to disrupt expression of Gan was to remove a 1 kb sequence containing part of the promoter with the translation initiation site in the first exon. A targeting vector was generated to replace exon 1 and part of the 3’-promoter by a neo cassette ( Fig. 1A ). The vector was digested with restriction enzymes to yield a 1.5 kb targeting fragment that was then electroporated in ES cells. Neomycin-resistant colonies were picked up for Southern blot analysis. ES cell clones positive for homologous recombination were then microinjected into mouse blastocysts to generate chimeric founder mice. Male chimeras were then mated with C57BL/6 females to generate mice heterozygous for Gan exon 1 deletion. Genotyping of DNA extracted from mouse tails was determined either by Southern blot analysis using a 500-bp 5’- Eco RV probe ( Fig. 1C ) or by PCR using primers flanking exon 1 ( Fig. 1B ). Mendelian transmission of the disrupted Gan gene was obtained by the breeding of heterozygous F1 mice. The mice homozygous for exon 1 deletion ( Gan ?exon1;?exon1 ) did not exhibit overt neurological phenotypes. The Gan ?exon1;?exon1 mice were viable and reproduced normally. Their lifespan did not differ significantly from that of normal mice (data not shown).  Generation of gigaxonin-deficient mice The Gan gene (~46 kb) is composed of 11 exons separated by 10 introns in mice ( Bomont et al , 2000 ; Gene ID: 209239, NCBI). Exons 1 and 2 are separated by over 20 kb. Our strategy to disrupt expression of Gan was to remove a 1 kb sequence containing part of the promoter with the translation initiation site in the first exon. A targeting vector was generated to replace exon 1 and part of the 3’-promoter by a neo cassette ( Fig. 1A ). The vector was digested with restriction enzymes to yield a 1.5 kb targeting fragment that was then electroporated in ES cells. Neomycin-resistant colonies were picked up for Southern blot analysis. ES cell clones positive for homologous recombination were then microinjected into mouse blastocysts to generate chimeric founder mice. Male chimeras were then mated with C57BL/6 females to generate mice heterozygous for Gan exon 1 deletion. Genotyping of DNA extracted from mouse tails was determined either by Southern blot analysis using a 500-bp 5’- Eco RV probe ( Fig. 1C ) or by PCR using primers flanking exon 1 ( Fig. 1B ). Mendelian transmission of the disrupted Gan gene was obtained by the breeding of heterozygous F1 mice. The mice homozygous for exon 1 deletion ( Gan ?exon1;?exon1 ) did not exhibit overt neurological phenotypes. The Gan ?exon1;?exon1 mice were viable and reproduced normally. Their lifespan did not differ significantly from that of normal mice (data not shown).  mRNA and protein analyses Immunoblotting with monoclonal antibody raised against both the N-terminal and C-terminal gigaxonin domain confirmed the absence of full length 65 kDa protein in brain and spinal cord of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice ( Fig. 2A ). Intriguingly, these antibodies also detected a prominent 47.5 kDa protein in spinal cord samples of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 ( Fig. 2A ). This smaller protein was present in lower amount in the spinal cord of heterozygous Gan ?exon1;wt mice and wild type Gan wt;wt mice. The presence of this 47.5 kDa band prompted us to investigate the expression of GAN transcripts in spinal cord of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice. RT-PCR analyses were performed with primers to amplify the region between exons 1 and 2 as well as the region between exons 2 and 7. Using RT-PCR primers for exons 1 to 2, no band was detected in CNS RNA samples from Gan ?ex1;?ex1 , as expected from exon 1 deletion ( Fig. 2B ). However, RT-PCR with primers for exons 2 and 7 yielded a band in spinal cord samples from Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice but not in other tissues such as brain and liver ( Fig. 2B ). This transcript spans Gan exon 2 to 11 and it is missing exon 1. Thus, the RT-PCR results confirm the lack of full lenght Gan mRNA in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice but they support the existence of shorter gigaxonin species in the spinal cord. This short gigaxonin variant will be called sGig ( Fig 2C, D,E ).  mRNA and protein analyses Immunoblotting with monoclonal antibody raised against both the N-terminal and C-terminal gigaxonin domain confirmed the absence of full length 65 kDa protein in brain and spinal cord of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice ( Fig. 2A ). Intriguingly, these antibodies also detected a prominent 47.5 kDa protein in spinal cord samples of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 ( Fig. 2A ). This smaller protein was present in lower amount in the spinal cord of heterozygous Gan ?exon1;wt mice and wild type Gan wt;wt mice. The presence of this 47.5 kDa band prompted us to investigate the expression of GAN transcripts in spinal cord of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice. RT-PCR analyses were performed with primers to amplify the region between exons 1 and 2 as well as the region between exons 2 and 7. Using RT-PCR primers for exons 1 to 2, no band was detected in CNS RNA samples from Gan ?ex1;?ex1 , as expected from exon 1 deletion ( Fig. 2B ). However, RT-PCR with primers for exons 2 and 7 yielded a band in spinal cord samples from Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice but not in other tissues such as brain and liver ( Fig. 2B ). This transcript spans Gan exon 2 to 11 and it is missing exon 1. Thus, the RT-PCR results confirm the lack of full lenght Gan mRNA in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice but they support the existence of shorter gigaxonin species in the spinal cord. This short gigaxonin variant will be called sGig ( Fig 2C, D,E ).  Changes in IF protein levels in the nervous system It is well established that gigaxonin-deprived tissues from GAN patients present characteristic accumulations of IFs ( Asbury et al. 1972 , Berg et al., 1972 , Prineas et al., 1976). We therefore examined whether the absence of exon 1 in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice resulted in abnormal levels of IFs and of other cytoskeletal components. Western blot analyses of total protein extracts at 3 months of age from the brain, cerebellum and spinal cord revealed modest increases in protein levels of IF proteins including NF-L, NF-M, NF-H and -internexin ( Fig. 3A ). A two-fold increase in peripherin and vimentin levels were also observed in the spinal cord of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice when compared to normal littermates. The analysis of sciatic nerve sections revealed enhanced NF protein levels along the nerve. The three subunits seem to be more abundant in the nerve proximal region ( Fig. 3B ). The increased levels of neuronal IF proteins in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 was not due to increased mRNA expression. RT-PCR analysis for NF-L, NF-M and NF-H showed no differences of transcript levels in the brain, cerebellum or spinal cord of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice and littermate controls ( Fig. 3C ). To determine if the variations in IF protein levels were constant during aging, dot blot immunodetection analyses were performed for NF subunits, ?-internexin and vimentin at different ages ( Fig. 4 ). The results confirmed a deregulation of all IF protein levels early as 3 months of age that was still present at 24 months of age. In particular, NF-H and NF-L levels were increased up to two folds at all ages in the brain, cerebellum and spinal cord samples of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice. NF-M levels remained unchanged at 6 and 12 months of age in cerebellum and spinal cord samples of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice. The ?-internexin levels were increased by up to 3.8 fold in the cerebellum of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice at 3 months of age as compared to controls. In the brain as well as in the ventral part of the lumbar spinal cord, the immunostaining for NF-L was stronger but no inclusions were detected ( Fig. 5A, 5E ). The most notable changes came from the immunodetection of NF-H and ?-internexin. In the cerebral cortex these two proteins formed accumulations in the neuronal cell bodies of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice( Fig. 5B-C ). These IF accumulations appear as early as one month of age and are still present at 12 months of age (data not shown). Double immunofluorescence revealed that NF-H and ?-internexin accumulations did not always colocalize ( Fig. 5D ). In the lumbar spinal cord, the NF-H signal was more intense in cell bodies from Gan ?ex1;?ex1 tissue as compared to wild-type samples ( Fig. 5G-H ). ?-internexin staining showed IF accumulations resembling those detected in the cerebral cortex ( Fig. 5I-J ). Finally, even though western blots exhibited higher level of peripherin in the spinal cord, immunohistochemistry did not reveal significant peripherin accumulations in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 spinal motor neurons ( Fig. 5K-L ).  Changes in IF protein levels in the nervous system It is well established that gigaxonin-deprived tissues from GAN patients present characteristic accumulations of IFs ( Asbury et al. 1972 , Berg et al., 1972 , Prineas et al., 1976). We therefore examined whether the absence of exon 1 in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice resulted in abnormal levels of IFs and of other cytoskeletal components. Western blot analyses of total protein extracts at 3 months of age from the brain, cerebellum and spinal cord revealed modest increases in protein levels of IF proteins including NF-L, NF-M, NF-H and -internexin ( Fig. 3A ). A two-fold increase in peripherin and vimentin levels were also observed in the spinal cord of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice when compared to normal littermates. The analysis of sciatic nerve sections revealed enhanced NF protein levels along the nerve. The three subunits seem to be more abundant in the nerve proximal region ( Fig. 3B ). The increased levels of neuronal IF proteins in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 was not due to increased mRNA expression. RT-PCR analysis for NF-L, NF-M and NF-H showed no differences of transcript levels in the brain, cerebellum or spinal cord of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice and littermate controls ( Fig. 3C ). To determine if the variations in IF protein levels were constant during aging, dot blot immunodetection analyses were performed for NF subunits, ?-internexin and vimentin at different ages ( Fig. 4 ). The results confirmed a deregulation of all IF protein levels early as 3 months of age that was still present at 24 months of age. In particular, NF-H and NF-L levels were increased up to two folds at all ages in the brain, cerebellum and spinal cord samples of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice. NF-M levels remained unchanged at 6 and 12 months of age in cerebellum and spinal cord samples of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice. The ?-internexin levels were increased by up to 3.8 fold in the cerebellum of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice at 3 months of age as compared to controls. In the brain as well as in the ventral part of the lumbar spinal cord, the immunostaining for NF-L was stronger but no inclusions were detected ( Fig. 5A, 5E ). The most notable changes came from the immunodetection of NF-H and ?-internexin. In the cerebral cortex these two proteins formed accumulations in the neuronal cell bodies of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice( Fig. 5B-C ). These IF accumulations appear as early as one month of age and are still present at 12 months of age (data not shown). Double immunofluorescence revealed that NF-H and ?-internexin accumulations did not always colocalize ( Fig. 5D ). In the lumbar spinal cord, the NF-H signal was more intense in cell bodies from Gan ?ex1;?ex1 tissue as compared to wild-type samples ( Fig. 5G-H ). ?-internexin staining showed IF accumulations resembling those detected in the cerebral cortex ( Fig. 5I-J ). Finally, even though western blots exhibited higher level of peripherin in the spinal cord, immunohistochemistry did not reveal significant peripherin accumulations in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 spinal motor neurons ( Fig. 5K-L ).  Absence of full length gigaxonin does not lead to significant motoneuron death As expected, western blot analysis of both L4/L5 ventral (VR) and dorsal (DR) roots revealed a slight increase of NF content ( Fig. 6A, 6D ). In order to investigate if this increase in NF content was accompagned by axonal degeneration, L5 VR and DR of 6 months mice were dissected and cut into 1 semi thin sections. DR and VR axons number and caliber were then analyzed by stereomicroscopy. This allowed us to show that neither the number of sensory axons nor the axon caliber was altered in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 dorsal root compared to wild type ( Fig. 6B, 6C ). However, the number of motor axons was significantly diminished by 27% in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 ventral root compared to wild-type ( Fig. 6E ). A subset of axons from Gan ?ex1;?ex1 exhibited larger calibers than control mice ( Fig. 6F ). As there was evidence of axonal degeneration in the L5 ventral root of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice, we carried out a motor neuron count in the lumbar spinal cord. Tissue sections from normal and Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice at 1, 2, 3, 6, and 12 months of age were stained with thionine followed by neuronal count. There was a tendency for decreased number of motor neuron cell bodies at 6 months in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 as compared to normal mice but the changes were not significant ( Fig. 7A ). The Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice did not exhibit motor dysfunction during aging. Grip strength analyses were performed and no differences could be observed between wild type and knockout mice ( fig. 7B ).  Absence of full length gigaxonin does not lead to significant motoneuron death As expected, western blot analysis of both L4/L5 ventral (VR) and dorsal (DR) roots revealed a slight increase of NF content ( Fig. 6A, 6D ). In order to investigate if this increase in NF content was accompagned by axonal degeneration, L5 VR and DR of 6 months mice were dissected and cut into 1 semi thin sections. DR and VR axons number and caliber were then analyzed by stereomicroscopy. This allowed us to show that neither the number of sensory axons nor the axon caliber was altered in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 dorsal root compared to wild type ( Fig. 6B, 6C ). However, the number of motor axons was significantly diminished by 27% in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 ventral root compared to wild-type ( Fig. 6E ). A subset of axons from Gan ?ex1;?ex1 exhibited larger calibers than control mice ( Fig. 6F ). As there was evidence of axonal degeneration in the L5 ventral root of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice, we carried out a motor neuron count in the lumbar spinal cord. Tissue sections from normal and Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice at 1, 2, 3, 6, and 12 months of age were stained with thionine followed by neuronal count. There was a tendency for decreased number of motor neuron cell bodies at 6 months in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 as compared to normal mice but the changes were not significant ( Fig. 7A ). The Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice did not exhibit motor dysfunction during aging. Grip strength analyses were performed and no differences could be observed between wild type and knockout mice ( fig. 7B ).  Discussion Here we report the characterization of mice with targeted disruption the Gan gene by insertion of a Neo cassette in exon 1. This method succeeded in eliminating expression of the full length form of gigaxonin ( Fig. 2B ). The Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice exhibited enhanced levels of several IF proteins, a histological pathological feature in GAN patients ( Fig.3 - 4 ). Increase levels of IF proteins in nervous tissue were detected for NF proteins, ?-internexin, peripherin as well as vimentin. Microscopy of peripheral nerve revealed that some of the motor axons in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice at 6 months of age were larger than normal and that there was a significant axonal loss of 26% ( Fig. 6 ). However, the Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice failed to develop giant axons typical of the human GAN disease. The modest but significant loss of motor axons was not associated with reduced number of spinal motor neurons and with motor dysfunction ( Fig. 7 ). A most intriguing result came from histological analyses of brain sections that revealed accumulations of NF-H and of ?-internexin specifically in the cortex ( Fig. 5 ). These accumulations formed neuronal intracytoplasmic inclusions that are highly reminiscent of ?-internexin inclusions found in human neuronal filament inclusion disease (NFID) ( Cairns et al., 2004a ; Cairns et al., 2004a ; Joseph 2005). Like in human NFID, the inclusions in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice are mainly composed of ?-internexin and they occur predominantly in the cerebral cortex. These inclusions were positive for NF-H and ?-internexin but negative for other NF subunits, tau and ?-synuclein like accumulations found in Alzheimer’s disease or Parkinson’s disease. No genetic mutations have been linked to NFID so far ( Momeni et al., 2006 ). Giant axonal neuropathy is a progressive and fatal sensory motor neuropathy that affects both the CNS and PNS ( Asbury et al., 1972 ; Berg et al., 1972 ; Ouvrier et al., 1974 ; Igisu et al., 1975 ). Hence, mutations in GAN often lead to severe phenotypes in humans. Despite a disorganization of IF network, formation of neuronal filament inclusions in cerebral cortex and slight increase in caliber of motor axons, the Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice exhibited only mild phenotypes when compared to human GAN disease. Here, the Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice did not show limb weakness despite a significant loss of motor axons. The mice lacking exon 3-5 of Gan described in a previous study exhibited heterogenous phenotypes with some of them having observable neurological phenotypes ( Ding et al., 2006 ; Yang et al., 2007 ). However, Ding et al. (2006) did not report the extent of axonal degeneration in their Gan null mouse. One plausible explanation for the differences in phenotypes between the two Gan null mouse models is that the presence of a shorter form of gigaxonin (<50 kDa) in the spinal cord of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice may compensate in part for the absence of full length Gan protein ( Fig. 2B ). This smaller Gan protein (s-Gig) would lack the first 80 amino acids corresponding to exon 1 and part of exon 2 ( Fig. 2D-E ). It has been shown that vimentin forms aggregates in fibroblasts from patients with GAN ( Pena, 1981 ; Bomont and Koenig, 2003 ). However, fibroblasts from patients bearing the GAN R15S mutation in the N-terminal domain do not develop vimentin aggregates. This result suggests that a perfectly intact BTB domain is not necessary for gigaxonin activity even thought its function would not be optimal ( Bomont and Koenig, 2003 ). This would be in line with the view that even if s-Gig lacks part of the BTB-domain, it may still remain partly functional. It is noteworthy that we detected increased IF protein levels and IF inclusions in the cortex where there was complete absence of Gigaxonin ( Fig. 3 and 5 ). No IF inclusions occurred in spinal cord where s-Gig is detected ( Fig. 3A and 5 ). So, the presence of s-Gig may explain the lack of neurological phenotypes in the Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice. Our results confirm the importance of Gigaxonin in modulating the levels and organization of IF proteins. It supports the notion that a Gigaxonin deficiency can provoke formation of neuronal IF inclusions. As neuronal IF proteins have very long half live ( Millecamps et al., 2007 ), IFs are prone to form abnormal accumulations following microtubule-based transport defects such as those caused by GAN gene mutations. The Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mouse model presented here exhibit some features of the human GAN disease including the presence of neuronal IFs inclusions. In future, these mice should provide a useful tool for testing potential therapeutic approaches for this disease.  Discussion Here we report the characterization of mice with targeted disruption the Gan gene by insertion of a Neo cassette in exon 1. This method succeeded in eliminating expression of the full length form of gigaxonin ( Fig. 2B ). The Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice exhibited enhanced levels of several IF proteins, a histological pathological feature in GAN patients ( Fig.3 - 4 ). Increase levels of IF proteins in nervous tissue were detected for NF proteins, ?-internexin, peripherin as well as vimentin. Microscopy of peripheral nerve revealed that some of the motor axons in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice at 6 months of age were larger than normal and that there was a significant axonal loss of 26% ( Fig. 6 ). However, the Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice failed to develop giant axons typical of the human GAN disease. The modest but significant loss of motor axons was not associated with reduced number of spinal motor neurons and with motor dysfunction ( Fig. 7 ). A most intriguing result came from histological analyses of brain sections that revealed accumulations of NF-H and of ?-internexin specifically in the cortex ( Fig. 5 ). These accumulations formed neuronal intracytoplasmic inclusions that are highly reminiscent of ?-internexin inclusions found in human neuronal filament inclusion disease (NFID) ( Cairns et al., 2004a ; Cairns et al., 2004a ; Joseph 2005). Like in human NFID, the inclusions in Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice are mainly composed of ?-internexin and they occur predominantly in the cerebral cortex. These inclusions were positive for NF-H and ?-internexin but negative for other NF subunits, tau and ?-synuclein like accumulations found in Alzheimer’s disease or Parkinson’s disease. No genetic mutations have been linked to NFID so far ( Momeni et al., 2006 ). Giant axonal neuropathy is a progressive and fatal sensory motor neuropathy that affects both the CNS and PNS ( Asbury et al., 1972 ; Berg et al., 1972 ; Ouvrier et al., 1974 ; Igisu et al., 1975 ). Hence, mutations in GAN often lead to severe phenotypes in humans. Despite a disorganization of IF network, formation of neuronal filament inclusions in cerebral cortex and slight increase in caliber of motor axons, the Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice exhibited only mild phenotypes when compared to human GAN disease. Here, the Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice did not show limb weakness despite a significant loss of motor axons. The mice lacking exon 3-5 of Gan described in a previous study exhibited heterogenous phenotypes with some of them having observable neurological phenotypes ( Ding et al., 2006 ; Yang et al., 2007 ). However, Ding et al. (2006) did not report the extent of axonal degeneration in their Gan null mouse. One plausible explanation for the differences in phenotypes between the two Gan null mouse models is that the presence of a shorter form of gigaxonin (<50 kDa) in the spinal cord of Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice may compensate in part for the absence of full length Gan protein ( Fig. 2B ). This smaller Gan protein (s-Gig) would lack the first 80 amino acids corresponding to exon 1 and part of exon 2 ( Fig. 2D-E ). It has been shown that vimentin forms aggregates in fibroblasts from patients with GAN ( Pena, 1981 ; Bomont and Koenig, 2003 ). However, fibroblasts from patients bearing the GAN R15S mutation in the N-terminal domain do not develop vimentin aggregates. This result suggests that a perfectly intact BTB domain is not necessary for gigaxonin activity even thought its function would not be optimal ( Bomont and Koenig, 2003 ). This would be in line with the view that even if s-Gig lacks part of the BTB-domain, it may still remain partly functional. It is noteworthy that we detected increased IF protein levels and IF inclusions in the cortex where there was complete absence of Gigaxonin ( Fig. 3 and 5 ). No IF inclusions occurred in spinal cord where s-Gig is detected ( Fig. 3A and 5 ). So, the presence of s-Gig may explain the lack of neurological phenotypes in the Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mice. Our results confirm the importance of Gigaxonin in modulating the levels and organization of IF proteins. It supports the notion that a Gigaxonin deficiency can provoke formation of neuronal IF inclusions. As neuronal IF proteins have very long half live ( Millecamps et al., 2007 ), IFs are prone to form abnormal accumulations following microtubule-based transport defects such as those caused by GAN gene mutations. The Gan ?ex1;?ex1 mouse model presented here exhibit some features of the human GAN disease including the presence of neuronal IFs inclusions. In future, these mice should provide a useful tool for testing potential therapeutic approaches for this disease. 