Acute Myeloid Leukemia with a Complex Karyotype Patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) harboring ?3 acquired chromosome aberrations in the absence of prognostically favorable t(8;21)(q22;q22), inv(16)(p13q22)/t(16;16)(p13;q22) and t(15;17)(q22;q21) form a separate category - AML with a complex karyotype. They constitute 10–12% of all AML patents, with the incidence of complex karyotypes increasing with the more advanced age. Recent studies using molecular-cytogenetic techniques (spectral karyotyping, M-FISH) and array comparative genomic hybridization considerably improved characterization of previously unidentified, partially identified or cryptic chromosome aberrations, and allowed precise delineation of genomic imbalances. The emerging nonrandom pattern of abnormalities includes relative paucity, but not absence, of balanced rearrangements (translocations, insertions or inversions), predominance of aberrations leading to loss of chromosome material (monosomies, deletions and unbalanced translocations) that involve, in decreasing order, chromosome arms 5q, 17p, 7q, 18q, 16q, 17q, 12p, 20q, 18p and 3p, and the presence of recurrent, albeit less frequent and often hidden (in marker chromosomes and unbalanced translocations) aberrations leading to overrepresentation of segments from 8q, 11q, 21q, 22q, 1p, 9p, and 13q. Several candidate genes have been identified as targets of genomic losses, e.g., TP53 , CTNNA1 , NF1 , ETV6 and TCF4 , and amplifications, e.g., ERG , ETS2, APP, ETS1, FLI1, MLL, DDX6, GAB2, MYC, TRIB1 and CDX2 . Treatment outcomes of complex karyotype patients receiving chemotherapy are very poor; they can be improved to some extent by allogeneic stem-cell transplantation in younger patients. It is hoped that better understanding of genomic alterations will result in identification of novel therapeutic targets and improved prognosis in patients with complex karyotypes.  CONCLUSION Recent studies using multicolor FISH, FISH with region-specific probes, a-CGH and molecular genetic techniques have begun unraveling the complexity of genomic alterations occurring in AML patients with multiple chromosome aberrations. It is hoped that these and future studies will not only lead to better understanding biologic basis of leukemic transformation in these patients but will also result in identification of cytogenetic and molecular subsets of patients with a complex karyotype that may respond differently to therapy because of the presence or absence of specific chromosome and/or gene alterations. Further characterization of such genetic alterations will likely allow development of targeted therapeutic approaches that will improve the currently very poor prognosis of AML patients with a complex karyotype. 