lnterleukin-4, lnterleukin-13, Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription factor 6, and Allergic Asthma Interleukin (IL)-4 and ll-13 share many biological activities. To some extent, this is because they both signal via a shared receptor. IL-4R?. Ligation of IL-4R?. results in activation of Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription factor 6 (STAT6) and Insulin Receptor Substrate (IRS) molecules. In T- and B-cells, IL-4R?. signaling contributes to cell-mediated and humoral aspects of allergic inflammation. It has recently become clear that ll-4 and IL-13 produced in inflamed tissues activate signaling in normally resident cells of the airway. The purpose of this review is to critically evaluate the contributions of IL-4- and IL-13-induced tissue responses, especially those mediated by STATS, to some of the pathologic features of asthma including eosinophilic inflammation, airway hyperresponsiveness, subepithelial fibrosis and excessive mucus production. We also review the functions of some recently identified ll-4- and/or IL-13-induced mediators that provide some detail on molecular mechanisms and suggest an important contribution to host defense.  CONCLUSIONS In summary, IL-4 and/or IL-13 mediated airway epithelial cell responses likely contribute to gob-5- and SPDEF-dependent excessive mucus production. IL-4 and/or IL-13 mediated airway smooth muscle cell and epithelial cell responses may contribute to the development of AHR, and either pathway might involve induction of arginase I. IL-4 and/or IL-13 induce airway epithelial expression of chemokines in vitro . However, an important role for ll-4 and/or IL-13 induced epithelial chemokine production and recruitment of inflammatory cells into the airway has not been confirmed in vivo . Alternatively, IL-4 and/or IL-13 effects on dendritic cells may contribute to allergic inflammation. IL-4 and/or IL-13 effects on macrophages and eosinophils might contribute to the development of subepithelial fibrosis by inducing production of TGF-?. We propose a working model of the pathologic cellular events mediated by IL-4 and IL-13 in the allergic airway (Illustration 2 ). Inhibition of STAT6 as a potential asthma therapy may be difficult since it is an intracellular target. Blockade of IL-4R? would be predicted to provide benefit by blocking the effects of both IL-4 and IL-13. However, the inhibition of IL-4-mediated signaling in T-helper cells might have the disadvantage of preventing Th2 differentiation and consequently impairing anti-parasite immunity. Further, blockade of IL-4 alone in the airways might not be an effective treatment due to the persistence of IL-13. However, blockade of IL-13 alone in the airways has proven to be an effective treatment in pre-clinical models of asthma in mice [ 52 , 54 ], in sheep [ 117 ], and in non-human allergic primates [ 118 ]. It remains to be determined whether targeting IL-13 in the airway will improve the condition of patients with asthma. 