The error-related negativity (ERN) and psychopathology: Toward an Endophenotype The ERN is a negative deflection in the event-related potential that peaks approximately 50 ms after the commission of an error. The ERN is thought to reflect early error-processing activity of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). First, we review current functional, neurobiological, and developmental data on the ERN. Next, the ERN is discussed in terms of three psychiatric disorders characterized by abnormal response monitoring: anxiety disorders, depression, and substance abuse. These data indicate that increased and decreased error-related brain activity is associated with the internalizing and externalizing dimensions of psychopathology, respectively. Recent data further suggest that abnormal error-processing indexed by the ERN indexes trait- but not state-related symptoms, especially related to anxiety. Overall, these data point to utility of ERN in studying risk for psychiatric disorders, and are discussed in terms of the endophenotype construct.  Error-Monitoring and Individual Differences Error monitoring and age A number of studies has examined developmental changes in the ERN. In a large study that examined the ERN in children from age 7 to 18, Davies and colleagues did not find an observable ERN in children younger than 12 ( Davies, Segalowitz, & Gavin, 2004a , 2004b ). Contrary to this, other studies have reported ERNs in children ranging in age from 7 to 11 ( Hajcak, Franklin, Foa, & Simons, 2007 ; Kim, Iwaki, Imashioya, Uno, & Fujita, 2007 ; Wiersema, van der Meere, & Roeyers, 2007 ). Preliminary data from our lab provides evidence that ERNs are even present in children as young as 5, provided simple tasks are employed ( Torpey, Hajcak, & Klein, 2007 ). In regard to developmental trends in ERN amplitude, several researchers have reported smaller ERN amplitudes in children (ages 7–18) compared to adults ( Kim et al., 2007 ; Wiersema et al., 2007 ). The ERN has also been correlated with age, suggesting that it increases with development ( Hajcak et al., 2007 ). One study showed that adolescents (ages 13 – 14) have comparable ERN amplitudes to adults (ages 23 – 24; Wiersema et al., 2007 ). On the other hand, Ladouceur and colleagues (2004) found that the ERN amplitude was larger in late adolescents (ages 14 – 17) compared to early adolescents (ages 9 – 14). Overall, these findings suggest that changes in ERN amplitude reflect developmental changes in the brain, possibly reflecting the continued maturation of the medial prefrontal cortex, with increasing ERN amplitude through childhood and adolescence that plateaus in late adolescents or early adulthood ( Davies et al., 2004a , 2004b ) In older adults (ranging between ages 54 – 85), studies have consistently found decreased ERN amplitude when compared to young adults (ranging between ages 18–28; Band & Kok, 2000 ; Falkenstein, Hoormann, & Hohnsbein, 2001 ; Mathalon et al., 2003 ; Mathewson et al., 2005 ; Nieuwenhuis et al., 2002 ; Themanson et al., 2006 ). It is important to note, though, that some of these findings may be confounded by behavioral differences, such as decreased accuracy in older adult groups ( Band & Kok, 2000 ; Mathewson et al., 2005 ; Nieuwenhuis et al., 2002 ). One of the initial studies suggested that decreased ERN amplitude in older adults may result from a decreased ability to detect errors ( Band & Kok, 2000 ). Although this may be true in more difficult tasks, it is unclear why the ERN would be reduced when subjects perform relatively simple tasks. Another suggestion is that decreased ERN amplitude is due to diminished dopaminergic function that occurs with normal aging ( Nieuwenhuis et al., 2002 ). Likewise, decreased ERN amplitude in children may be due to neurodevelopment of medial prefrontal cortex ( Stuss, 1992 ) and dopaminergic neurons that continues until early adulthood ( Levitt, 2003 ; Segawa, 2000 ). In support of this view, the scalp distribution of the ERN in 5 – 6 year olds appears to be more posterior compared to adults ( Torpey et al., 2007 ), suggesting some anteriorization over the course of development. Therefore, it is possible that developmental changes in DA and the prefrontal cortex across the life span are at the root of developmental changes in ERN amplitude. Error-monitoring and psychopathology ERN and anxiety Consistent with the notion that obsessive-compulsive disorder might be characterized by abnormal action monitoring ( Pitman, 1987 ), Gehring and colleagues first reported that patients with OCD had increased ERNs compared to age-matched controls ( Gehring, Himle, & Nisenson, 2000 ). This pattern of results has now been replicated ( Johannes et al., 2001 ; Ruchsow, Gron et al., 2005 ), and consistent results have also been reported in children with both generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) and OCD ( Hajcak et al., 2007 ; Ladouceur, Dahl, Birmaher, Axelson, & Ryan, 2006 ). Additionally, several fMRI studies have confirmed the findings of increased error-related brain activity in OCD patients ( Fitzgerald et al., 2005 ; Maltby, Tolin, Worhunsky, O’Keefe, & Kiehl, 2005 ; Ursu, Stenger, Shear, Jones, & Carter, 2003 ). One study found increased ACC activity in both error and correct trials in OCD patients, signifying an overall hyperactivity in the ACC during response monitoring ( Ursu et al., 2003 ); similar results were reported in an ERP study that showed both an increased ERN and CRN in high-OC subjects ( Hajcak & Simons, 2002 ). Hajcak and colleagues (2007) demonstrated that ERN amplitude does not change after successful treatment in pediatric OCD. These findings have since been replicated in an additional report ( Ladouceur, Dahl, Birmaher, Axelson, & Ryan, 2007 ). Another study that examined state-related changes in anxiety with spider phobic individuals found that the ERN amplitude did not change during symptom provocation with the presence of a tarantula ( Moser et al., 2005 ). Combined, these studies suggest that the ERN is not affected by state-related changes in anxious symptoms. In support of this possibility, several studies have examined the ERN with respect to personality traits that are closely related to pathological anxiety. Two studies have found that subjects scoring high on negative affect have significantly larger ERN amplitudes compared to subjects scoring low on negative affect ( Hajcak, McDonald et al., 2004 ; Luu et al., 2000 ). Additionally, pathological worry has been associated with increased ERN amplitude ( Hajcak, McDonald, & Simons, 2003a ). An fMRI study similarly found increased ACC activity on error trials in individuals with high trait anxiety ( Paulus, Feinstein, Simmons, & Stein, 2004 ). Other evidence suggests that negative affect is strongly related to individual differences in punishment sensitivity ( Carver & White, 1994 ; Watson, Wiese, Validya, & Tellegen, 1999 ). Two studies have examined behavioral inhibition system (BIS) and behavioral activation system (BAS) scores relative to ERN amplitude ( Amodio, Master et al., 2007 ; Boksem, Tops, Wester, Meijman, & Lorist, 2006 ). BIS and BAS scores are thought to represent punishment sensitivity and reward seeking, respectively ( Carver & White, 1994 ; Gray, 1972 , 1981 ). Consistent with the notion that errors are aversive, both Boksem and colleagues (2006) and Amodio and colleagues (2007) found that subjects with high BIS scores also had larger ERNs. BIS and BAS traits relate to biases towards reactive and proactive control respectively ( Boksem et al., 2006 ; Braver, Gray, & Burgess, 2007 ; Gray & Braver, 2002 ), and may also relate to learning style. For example, another study found that participants who learned by avoiding negative events (i.e., reactive control) had larger ERNs than individuals who learned from positive events (i.e., proactive control; Frank, Woroch, & Curran, 2005 ). ERN and depression Depressed individuals exhibit increased sensitivity to mistakes and negative feedback ( Elliott, Sahakian, Michael, Paykel, & Dolan, 1998 ; Steffens, Wagner, Levy, Horn, & Krishnan, 2001 ). Individuals endorsing depressive symptoms were shown to have decreased accuracy after incorrect compared to correct trials, which is evidence of poor performance adjustments following errors ( Holmes & Pizzagalli, 2007 ; Pizzagalli, Peccoralo, Davidson, & Cohen, 2006 ). A negatively biased view of the environment is also thought to be a strong factor in the development of depression ( Beck, 1967 ; Leppanen, 2006 ). Depressed individuals accurately judged the number of error responses they made, but underestimated the number of correct responses in a working memory task ( Dunn, Dalgleish, Lawrence, & Ogilvie, 2007 ). In line with these negative processing biases, depressed individuals also exhibit abnormal error-related activity. For example, while performing a Stroop task, depressed subjects had greater ERN amplitude compared to controls ( Holmes & Pizzagalli, 2008 ). Additionally, while performing a Flanker’s task, depressed subjects had greater ERN amplitude in neutral and punishment conditions compared to controls, but no difference in ERN amplitude during a reward condition which supports the notion that depressed individuals are especially sensitive to punishment ( Chiu & Deldin, 2007 ). An fMRI study likewise found increased rostral ACC activity in depressed patients compared to controls during error trials ( Steele, Meyer, & Ebmeier, 2004 ). Conceptually, both anxiety and depression appear to be characterized by an increased sensitivity to committing errors – consistent with studies that report an increased ERN in relation to anxiety and depression. In fact, Hajcak and colleagues (2004) argued that abnormal ERN amplitude may not be specific to pathological conditions of depression or pathological anxiety, but rather reflect an underlying characteristic that is central to both of these disorders – negative affect (cf., Luu et al., 2000 ). However, an alternative possibility is that the ERN is increased in all forms of psychopathology. Next, we review evidence that the ERN shows an opposite pattern of effects in disorders characterized by insensitivity to errors and other forms of punishment - namely substance abuse. ERN and substance abuse In the only study to date that has examined the ERN in relation to substance abuse, Franken and colleagues found that cocaine dependent patients had decreased ERN amplitudes compared to a control group ( Franken, van Strien, Franzek, & van de Wetering, 2007 ). The relation between substances of abuse and error monitoring has also has also been studied by acutely administering alcohol to healthy volunteers. Both low and moderate doses of alcohol decrease ERN amplitude in healthy individuals ( Easdon, Izenberg, Armilio, Yu, & Alain, 2005 ; Ridderinkhof et al., 2002 ). However, no studies to date have looked at state-related ERN changes in substance abusers. Imaging studies, however, support the notion that substance abusers, regardless of what drugs they abuse, exhibit reduced error-related ACC activity. For example studies have found decreased error-related ACC activity in individuals who use marijuana ( Gruber & Yurgelun-Todd, 2005 ), opiates ( Forman et al., 2004 ), cocaine ( Goldstein et al., 2007 ; Kaufman, Ross, Stein, & Garavan, 2003 ) and methamphetamine ( London et al., 2005 ). Overall, these results suggest that individuals with substance abuse may have a decrement in error-processing, although more ERP studies are required to examine this with specific regard to the ERN. A hallmark personality characteristic in substance abuse is impulsivity ( Moeller et al., 2001 ) which is often characterized by enhanced sensitivity to reward and reduced sensitivity to punishment ( Corr, 2002 ; Monterosso & Ainslie, 1999 ). Similarly, those at risk for developing substance abuse disorders are more sensitive to rewards than punishment ( Finn, Kessler, & Hussong, 1994 ) and are particularly insensitive to long-term negative consequences which are usually dismissed in favor of short-term rewards ( Grant, Contoreggi, & London, 2000 ; Petry, Bickel, & Arnett, 1998 ). Consistent with the suggestion that impulsivity is related to increased sensitivity to reward and decreased sensitivity to punishment ( Corr, 2002 ; Monterosso & Ainslie, 1999 ), studies show that individuals who score high on impulsivity scales have decreased ERN amplitudes in response to errors ( Potts, George, Martin, & Barratt, 2006 ; Ruchsow, Spitzer, Gron, Grothe, & Kiefer, 2005 ). Other studies have found similar results using more indirect measures of impulsivity. For example, individuals characterized as externalizing often have impulsive control problems ( Krueger, Hicks, Patrick, & Carlson, 2002 ; Krueger, Markon, Patrick, & Iacono, 2005 ). As expected, high externalizing individuals also had smaller ERN amplitudes ( Hall, Bernat, & Patrick, 2007 ). Overall then, increased ERNs appear specific to disorders such as anxiety and depression, whereas decreased ERNs have been reported in individuals with substance abuse and impulsive personality characteristics. This pattern of increased and decreased ERNs fit well within contemporary models of psychopathology that posit two higher-order factors of psychopathology ( Krueger, 1999 ): specifically, internalizing and externalizing disorders might be characterized by hyperactive and hypoactive error-processing, respectively, as indexed by the ERN. Summary ERN is a reliable index of error-processing, evident just 50 ms after individuals make mistakes; the available evidence indicates that the ERN is generated in the ACC, and likely reflects dopaminergic activity related to the on-going evaluation of errors and response conflict ( Holroyd & Coles, 2002 ; Yeung et al., 2004 ). There is increasing evidence that ERN also relates to motivational and affective variables, and might be tied to neural systems that support defensive behaviors and avoidance learning ( Frank et al., 2005 ; Hajcak & Foti, 2008 ). Individuals with internalizing disorders, characterized by increased sensitivity to errors (i.e., anxiety and depression), are characterized by increased ERNs. Similar results are found in personality traits closely related to internalizing forms of psychopathology: individuals that score high in negative affect, anxiety, worry, and behavioral inhibition all have increased ERN amplitudes (e.g., Amodio, Master et al., 2007 ; Boksem et al., 2006 ; Hajcak et al., 2003a ; Hajcak, McDonald et al., 2004 ). Moreover, it appears that state-related changes in anxiety do not have a corresponding influence on the ERN ( Hajcak et al., 2007 ; Moser et al., 2005 ). Collectively, these results support the notion that abnormalities of the ERN are related to stable characteristics related to internalizing disorders. Externalizing disorders, on the other hand, are characterized by impulsivity and behaviors that go against societal norms ( Krueger, Caspi, Moffitt, & Silva, 1998 ; Krueger, Markon, Patrick, Benning, & Kramer, 2007 ). Individuals with substance abuse problems are often typified by impulsive behaviors ( Moeller et al., 2001 ) and often making decisions that result in short-term rewards at the expense of long-term negative consequences ( Grant et al., 2000 ; Petry et al., 1998 ). Psychophysiological and imaging studies confirm that individuals with substance abuse disorders have decreased ERN amplitude ( Franken et al., 2007 ) and error-related brain activation (i.e., Goldstein et al., 2007 ), indicating that these individuals are less sensitive to errors. Personality traits, such as impulsivity, that are associated with externalizing are characterized by a similar reduction in the ERN (e.g., Potts et al., 2006 ); along similar lines, individuals who are characterized by insensitivity to punishment have reduced ERNs in the context of punishment but not reward ( Dikman & Allen, 2000 ). These results support the notion that a reduced ERN appears related to the externalizing dimension of personality and psychopathology.  Error monitoring and age A number of studies has examined developmental changes in the ERN. In a large study that examined the ERN in children from age 7 to 18, Davies and colleagues did not find an observable ERN in children younger than 12 ( Davies, Segalowitz, & Gavin, 2004a , 2004b ). Contrary to this, other studies have reported ERNs in children ranging in age from 7 to 11 ( Hajcak, Franklin, Foa, & Simons, 2007 ; Kim, Iwaki, Imashioya, Uno, & Fujita, 2007 ; Wiersema, van der Meere, & Roeyers, 2007 ). Preliminary data from our lab provides evidence that ERNs are even present in children as young as 5, provided simple tasks are employed ( Torpey, Hajcak, & Klein, 2007 ). In regard to developmental trends in ERN amplitude, several researchers have reported smaller ERN amplitudes in children (ages 7–18) compared to adults ( Kim et al., 2007 ; Wiersema et al., 2007 ). The ERN has also been correlated with age, suggesting that it increases with development ( Hajcak et al., 2007 ). One study showed that adolescents (ages 13 – 14) have comparable ERN amplitudes to adults (ages 23 – 24; Wiersema et al., 2007 ). On the other hand, Ladouceur and colleagues (2004) found that the ERN amplitude was larger in late adolescents (ages 14 – 17) compared to early adolescents (ages 9 – 14). Overall, these findings suggest that changes in ERN amplitude reflect developmental changes in the brain, possibly reflecting the continued maturation of the medial prefrontal cortex, with increasing ERN amplitude through childhood and adolescence that plateaus in late adolescents or early adulthood ( Davies et al., 2004a , 2004b ) In older adults (ranging between ages 54 – 85), studies have consistently found decreased ERN amplitude when compared to young adults (ranging between ages 18–28; Band & Kok, 2000 ; Falkenstein, Hoormann, & Hohnsbein, 2001 ; Mathalon et al., 2003 ; Mathewson et al., 2005 ; Nieuwenhuis et al., 2002 ; Themanson et al., 2006 ). It is important to note, though, that some of these findings may be confounded by behavioral differences, such as decreased accuracy in older adult groups ( Band & Kok, 2000 ; Mathewson et al., 2005 ; Nieuwenhuis et al., 2002 ). One of the initial studies suggested that decreased ERN amplitude in older adults may result from a decreased ability to detect errors ( Band & Kok, 2000 ). Although this may be true in more difficult tasks, it is unclear why the ERN would be reduced when subjects perform relatively simple tasks. Another suggestion is that decreased ERN amplitude is due to diminished dopaminergic function that occurs with normal aging ( Nieuwenhuis et al., 2002 ). Likewise, decreased ERN amplitude in children may be due to neurodevelopment of medial prefrontal cortex ( Stuss, 1992 ) and dopaminergic neurons that continues until early adulthood ( Levitt, 2003 ; Segawa, 2000 ). In support of this view, the scalp distribution of the ERN in 5 – 6 year olds appears to be more posterior compared to adults ( Torpey et al., 2007 ), suggesting some anteriorization over the course of development. Therefore, it is possible that developmental changes in DA and the prefrontal cortex across the life span are at the root of developmental changes in ERN amplitude.  Error-monitoring and psychopathology ERN and anxiety Consistent with the notion that obsessive-compulsive disorder might be characterized by abnormal action monitoring ( Pitman, 1987 ), Gehring and colleagues first reported that patients with OCD had increased ERNs compared to age-matched controls ( Gehring, Himle, & Nisenson, 2000 ). This pattern of results has now been replicated ( Johannes et al., 2001 ; Ruchsow, Gron et al., 2005 ), and consistent results have also been reported in children with both generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) and OCD ( Hajcak et al., 2007 ; Ladouceur, Dahl, Birmaher, Axelson, & Ryan, 2006 ). Additionally, several fMRI studies have confirmed the findings of increased error-related brain activity in OCD patients ( Fitzgerald et al., 2005 ; Maltby, Tolin, Worhunsky, O’Keefe, & Kiehl, 2005 ; Ursu, Stenger, Shear, Jones, & Carter, 2003 ). One study found increased ACC activity in both error and correct trials in OCD patients, signifying an overall hyperactivity in the ACC during response monitoring ( Ursu et al., 2003 ); similar results were reported in an ERP study that showed both an increased ERN and CRN in high-OC subjects ( Hajcak & Simons, 2002 ). Hajcak and colleagues (2007) demonstrated that ERN amplitude does not change after successful treatment in pediatric OCD. These findings have since been replicated in an additional report ( Ladouceur, Dahl, Birmaher, Axelson, & Ryan, 2007 ). Another study that examined state-related changes in anxiety with spider phobic individuals found that the ERN amplitude did not change during symptom provocation with the presence of a tarantula ( Moser et al., 2005 ). Combined, these studies suggest that the ERN is not affected by state-related changes in anxious symptoms. In support of this possibility, several studies have examined the ERN with respect to personality traits that are closely related to pathological anxiety. Two studies have found that subjects scoring high on negative affect have significantly larger ERN amplitudes compared to subjects scoring low on negative affect ( Hajcak, McDonald et al., 2004 ; Luu et al., 2000 ). Additionally, pathological worry has been associated with increased ERN amplitude ( Hajcak, McDonald, & Simons, 2003a ). An fMRI study similarly found increased ACC activity on error trials in individuals with high trait anxiety ( Paulus, Feinstein, Simmons, & Stein, 2004 ). Other evidence suggests that negative affect is strongly related to individual differences in punishment sensitivity ( Carver & White, 1994 ; Watson, Wiese, Validya, & Tellegen, 1999 ). Two studies have examined behavioral inhibition system (BIS) and behavioral activation system (BAS) scores relative to ERN amplitude ( Amodio, Master et al., 2007 ; Boksem, Tops, Wester, Meijman, & Lorist, 2006 ). BIS and BAS scores are thought to represent punishment sensitivity and reward seeking, respectively ( Carver & White, 1994 ; Gray, 1972 , 1981 ). Consistent with the notion that errors are aversive, both Boksem and colleagues (2006) and Amodio and colleagues (2007) found that subjects with high BIS scores also had larger ERNs. BIS and BAS traits relate to biases towards reactive and proactive control respectively ( Boksem et al., 2006 ; Braver, Gray, & Burgess, 2007 ; Gray & Braver, 2002 ), and may also relate to learning style. For example, another study found that participants who learned by avoiding negative events (i.e., reactive control) had larger ERNs than individuals who learned from positive events (i.e., proactive control; Frank, Woroch, & Curran, 2005 ). ERN and depression Depressed individuals exhibit increased sensitivity to mistakes and negative feedback ( Elliott, Sahakian, Michael, Paykel, & Dolan, 1998 ; Steffens, Wagner, Levy, Horn, & Krishnan, 2001 ). Individuals endorsing depressive symptoms were shown to have decreased accuracy after incorrect compared to correct trials, which is evidence of poor performance adjustments following errors ( Holmes & Pizzagalli, 2007 ; Pizzagalli, Peccoralo, Davidson, & Cohen, 2006 ). A negatively biased view of the environment is also thought to be a strong factor in the development of depression ( Beck, 1967 ; Leppanen, 2006 ). Depressed individuals accurately judged the number of error responses they made, but underestimated the number of correct responses in a working memory task ( Dunn, Dalgleish, Lawrence, & Ogilvie, 2007 ). In line with these negative processing biases, depressed individuals also exhibit abnormal error-related activity. For example, while performing a Stroop task, depressed subjects had greater ERN amplitude compared to controls ( Holmes & Pizzagalli, 2008 ). Additionally, while performing a Flanker’s task, depressed subjects had greater ERN amplitude in neutral and punishment conditions compared to controls, but no difference in ERN amplitude during a reward condition which supports the notion that depressed individuals are especially sensitive to punishment ( Chiu & Deldin, 2007 ). An fMRI study likewise found increased rostral ACC activity in depressed patients compared to controls during error trials ( Steele, Meyer, & Ebmeier, 2004 ). Conceptually, both anxiety and depression appear to be characterized by an increased sensitivity to committing errors – consistent with studies that report an increased ERN in relation to anxiety and depression. In fact, Hajcak and colleagues (2004) argued that abnormal ERN amplitude may not be specific to pathological conditions of depression or pathological anxiety, but rather reflect an underlying characteristic that is central to both of these disorders – negative affect (cf., Luu et al., 2000 ). However, an alternative possibility is that the ERN is increased in all forms of psychopathology. Next, we review evidence that the ERN shows an opposite pattern of effects in disorders characterized by insensitivity to errors and other forms of punishment - namely substance abuse. ERN and substance abuse In the only study to date that has examined the ERN in relation to substance abuse, Franken and colleagues found that cocaine dependent patients had decreased ERN amplitudes compared to a control group ( Franken, van Strien, Franzek, & van de Wetering, 2007 ). The relation between substances of abuse and error monitoring has also has also been studied by acutely administering alcohol to healthy volunteers. Both low and moderate doses of alcohol decrease ERN amplitude in healthy individuals ( Easdon, Izenberg, Armilio, Yu, & Alain, 2005 ; Ridderinkhof et al., 2002 ). However, no studies to date have looked at state-related ERN changes in substance abusers. Imaging studies, however, support the notion that substance abusers, regardless of what drugs they abuse, exhibit reduced error-related ACC activity. For example studies have found decreased error-related ACC activity in individuals who use marijuana ( Gruber & Yurgelun-Todd, 2005 ), opiates ( Forman et al., 2004 ), cocaine ( Goldstein et al., 2007 ; Kaufman, Ross, Stein, & Garavan, 2003 ) and methamphetamine ( London et al., 2005 ). Overall, these results suggest that individuals with substance abuse may have a decrement in error-processing, although more ERP studies are required to examine this with specific regard to the ERN. A hallmark personality characteristic in substance abuse is impulsivity ( Moeller et al., 2001 ) which is often characterized by enhanced sensitivity to reward and reduced sensitivity to punishment ( Corr, 2002 ; Monterosso & Ainslie, 1999 ). Similarly, those at risk for developing substance abuse disorders are more sensitive to rewards than punishment ( Finn, Kessler, & Hussong, 1994 ) and are particularly insensitive to long-term negative consequences which are usually dismissed in favor of short-term rewards ( Grant, Contoreggi, & London, 2000 ; Petry, Bickel, & Arnett, 1998 ). Consistent with the suggestion that impulsivity is related to increased sensitivity to reward and decreased sensitivity to punishment ( Corr, 2002 ; Monterosso & Ainslie, 1999 ), studies show that individuals who score high on impulsivity scales have decreased ERN amplitudes in response to errors ( Potts, George, Martin, & Barratt, 2006 ; Ruchsow, Spitzer, Gron, Grothe, & Kiefer, 2005 ). Other studies have found similar results using more indirect measures of impulsivity. For example, individuals characterized as externalizing often have impulsive control problems ( Krueger, Hicks, Patrick, & Carlson, 2002 ; Krueger, Markon, Patrick, & Iacono, 2005 ). As expected, high externalizing individuals also had smaller ERN amplitudes ( Hall, Bernat, & Patrick, 2007 ). Overall then, increased ERNs appear specific to disorders such as anxiety and depression, whereas decreased ERNs have been reported in individuals with substance abuse and impulsive personality characteristics. This pattern of increased and decreased ERNs fit well within contemporary models of psychopathology that posit two higher-order factors of psychopathology ( Krueger, 1999 ): specifically, internalizing and externalizing disorders might be characterized by hyperactive and hypoactive error-processing, respectively, as indexed by the ERN.  ERN and anxiety Consistent with the notion that obsessive-compulsive disorder might be characterized by abnormal action monitoring ( Pitman, 1987 ), Gehring and colleagues first reported that patients with OCD had increased ERNs compared to age-matched controls ( Gehring, Himle, & Nisenson, 2000 ). This pattern of results has now been replicated ( Johannes et al., 2001 ; Ruchsow, Gron et al., 2005 ), and consistent results have also been reported in children with both generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) and OCD ( Hajcak et al., 2007 ; Ladouceur, Dahl, Birmaher, Axelson, & Ryan, 2006 ). Additionally, several fMRI studies have confirmed the findings of increased error-related brain activity in OCD patients ( Fitzgerald et al., 2005 ; Maltby, Tolin, Worhunsky, O’Keefe, & Kiehl, 2005 ; Ursu, Stenger, Shear, Jones, & Carter, 2003 ). One study found increased ACC activity in both error and correct trials in OCD patients, signifying an overall hyperactivity in the ACC during response monitoring ( Ursu et al., 2003 ); similar results were reported in an ERP study that showed both an increased ERN and CRN in high-OC subjects ( Hajcak & Simons, 2002 ). Hajcak and colleagues (2007) demonstrated that ERN amplitude does not change after successful treatment in pediatric OCD. These findings have since been replicated in an additional report ( Ladouceur, Dahl, Birmaher, Axelson, & Ryan, 2007 ). Another study that examined state-related changes in anxiety with spider phobic individuals found that the ERN amplitude did not change during symptom provocation with the presence of a tarantula ( Moser et al., 2005 ). Combined, these studies suggest that the ERN is not affected by state-related changes in anxious symptoms. In support of this possibility, several studies have examined the ERN with respect to personality traits that are closely related to pathological anxiety. Two studies have found that subjects scoring high on negative affect have significantly larger ERN amplitudes compared to subjects scoring low on negative affect ( Hajcak, McDonald et al., 2004 ; Luu et al., 2000 ). Additionally, pathological worry has been associated with increased ERN amplitude ( Hajcak, McDonald, & Simons, 2003a ). An fMRI study similarly found increased ACC activity on error trials in individuals with high trait anxiety ( Paulus, Feinstein, Simmons, & Stein, 2004 ). Other evidence suggests that negative affect is strongly related to individual differences in punishment sensitivity ( Carver & White, 1994 ; Watson, Wiese, Validya, & Tellegen, 1999 ). Two studies have examined behavioral inhibition system (BIS) and behavioral activation system (BAS) scores relative to ERN amplitude ( Amodio, Master et al., 2007 ; Boksem, Tops, Wester, Meijman, & Lorist, 2006 ). BIS and BAS scores are thought to represent punishment sensitivity and reward seeking, respectively ( Carver & White, 1994 ; Gray, 1972 , 1981 ). Consistent with the notion that errors are aversive, both Boksem and colleagues (2006) and Amodio and colleagues (2007) found that subjects with high BIS scores also had larger ERNs. BIS and BAS traits relate to biases towards reactive and proactive control respectively ( Boksem et al., 2006 ; Braver, Gray, & Burgess, 2007 ; Gray & Braver, 2002 ), and may also relate to learning style. For example, another study found that participants who learned by avoiding negative events (i.e., reactive control) had larger ERNs than individuals who learned from positive events (i.e., proactive control; Frank, Woroch, & Curran, 2005 ).  ERN and depression Depressed individuals exhibit increased sensitivity to mistakes and negative feedback ( Elliott, Sahakian, Michael, Paykel, & Dolan, 1998 ; Steffens, Wagner, Levy, Horn, & Krishnan, 2001 ). Individuals endorsing depressive symptoms were shown to have decreased accuracy after incorrect compared to correct trials, which is evidence of poor performance adjustments following errors ( Holmes & Pizzagalli, 2007 ; Pizzagalli, Peccoralo, Davidson, & Cohen, 2006 ). A negatively biased view of the environment is also thought to be a strong factor in the development of depression ( Beck, 1967 ; Leppanen, 2006 ). Depressed individuals accurately judged the number of error responses they made, but underestimated the number of correct responses in a working memory task ( Dunn, Dalgleish, Lawrence, & Ogilvie, 2007 ). In line with these negative processing biases, depressed individuals also exhibit abnormal error-related activity. For example, while performing a Stroop task, depressed subjects had greater ERN amplitude compared to controls ( Holmes & Pizzagalli, 2008 ). Additionally, while performing a Flanker’s task, depressed subjects had greater ERN amplitude in neutral and punishment conditions compared to controls, but no difference in ERN amplitude during a reward condition which supports the notion that depressed individuals are especially sensitive to punishment ( Chiu & Deldin, 2007 ). An fMRI study likewise found increased rostral ACC activity in depressed patients compared to controls during error trials ( Steele, Meyer, & Ebmeier, 2004 ). Conceptually, both anxiety and depression appear to be characterized by an increased sensitivity to committing errors – consistent with studies that report an increased ERN in relation to anxiety and depression. In fact, Hajcak and colleagues (2004) argued that abnormal ERN amplitude may not be specific to pathological conditions of depression or pathological anxiety, but rather reflect an underlying characteristic that is central to both of these disorders – negative affect (cf., Luu et al., 2000 ). However, an alternative possibility is that the ERN is increased in all forms of psychopathology. Next, we review evidence that the ERN shows an opposite pattern of effects in disorders characterized by insensitivity to errors and other forms of punishment - namely substance abuse.  ERN and substance abuse In the only study to date that has examined the ERN in relation to substance abuse, Franken and colleagues found that cocaine dependent patients had decreased ERN amplitudes compared to a control group ( Franken, van Strien, Franzek, & van de Wetering, 2007 ). The relation between substances of abuse and error monitoring has also has also been studied by acutely administering alcohol to healthy volunteers. Both low and moderate doses of alcohol decrease ERN amplitude in healthy individuals ( Easdon, Izenberg, Armilio, Yu, & Alain, 2005 ; Ridderinkhof et al., 2002 ). However, no studies to date have looked at state-related ERN changes in substance abusers. Imaging studies, however, support the notion that substance abusers, regardless of what drugs they abuse, exhibit reduced error-related ACC activity. For example studies have found decreased error-related ACC activity in individuals who use marijuana ( Gruber & Yurgelun-Todd, 2005 ), opiates ( Forman et al., 2004 ), cocaine ( Goldstein et al., 2007 ; Kaufman, Ross, Stein, & Garavan, 2003 ) and methamphetamine ( London et al., 2005 ). Overall, these results suggest that individuals with substance abuse may have a decrement in error-processing, although more ERP studies are required to examine this with specific regard to the ERN. A hallmark personality characteristic in substance abuse is impulsivity ( Moeller et al., 2001 ) which is often characterized by enhanced sensitivity to reward and reduced sensitivity to punishment ( Corr, 2002 ; Monterosso & Ainslie, 1999 ). Similarly, those at risk for developing substance abuse disorders are more sensitive to rewards than punishment ( Finn, Kessler, & Hussong, 1994 ) and are particularly insensitive to long-term negative consequences which are usually dismissed in favor of short-term rewards ( Grant, Contoreggi, & London, 2000 ; Petry, Bickel, & Arnett, 1998 ). Consistent with the suggestion that impulsivity is related to increased sensitivity to reward and decreased sensitivity to punishment ( Corr, 2002 ; Monterosso & Ainslie, 1999 ), studies show that individuals who score high on impulsivity scales have decreased ERN amplitudes in response to errors ( Potts, George, Martin, & Barratt, 2006 ; Ruchsow, Spitzer, Gron, Grothe, & Kiefer, 2005 ). Other studies have found similar results using more indirect measures of impulsivity. For example, individuals characterized as externalizing often have impulsive control problems ( Krueger, Hicks, Patrick, & Carlson, 2002 ; Krueger, Markon, Patrick, & Iacono, 2005 ). As expected, high externalizing individuals also had smaller ERN amplitudes ( Hall, Bernat, & Patrick, 2007 ). Overall then, increased ERNs appear specific to disorders such as anxiety and depression, whereas decreased ERNs have been reported in individuals with substance abuse and impulsive personality characteristics. This pattern of increased and decreased ERNs fit well within contemporary models of psychopathology that posit two higher-order factors of psychopathology ( Krueger, 1999 ): specifically, internalizing and externalizing disorders might be characterized by hyperactive and hypoactive error-processing, respectively, as indexed by the ERN.  Summary ERN is a reliable index of error-processing, evident just 50 ms after individuals make mistakes; the available evidence indicates that the ERN is generated in the ACC, and likely reflects dopaminergic activity related to the on-going evaluation of errors and response conflict ( Holroyd & Coles, 2002 ; Yeung et al., 2004 ). There is increasing evidence that ERN also relates to motivational and affective variables, and might be tied to neural systems that support defensive behaviors and avoidance learning ( Frank et al., 2005 ; Hajcak & Foti, 2008 ). Individuals with internalizing disorders, characterized by increased sensitivity to errors (i.e., anxiety and depression), are characterized by increased ERNs. Similar results are found in personality traits closely related to internalizing forms of psychopathology: individuals that score high in negative affect, anxiety, worry, and behavioral inhibition all have increased ERN amplitudes (e.g., Amodio, Master et al., 2007 ; Boksem et al., 2006 ; Hajcak et al., 2003a ; Hajcak, McDonald et al., 2004 ). Moreover, it appears that state-related changes in anxiety do not have a corresponding influence on the ERN ( Hajcak et al., 2007 ; Moser et al., 2005 ). Collectively, these results support the notion that abnormalities of the ERN are related to stable characteristics related to internalizing disorders. Externalizing disorders, on the other hand, are characterized by impulsivity and behaviors that go against societal norms ( Krueger, Caspi, Moffitt, & Silva, 1998 ; Krueger, Markon, Patrick, Benning, & Kramer, 2007 ). Individuals with substance abuse problems are often typified by impulsive behaviors ( Moeller et al., 2001 ) and often making decisions that result in short-term rewards at the expense of long-term negative consequences ( Grant et al., 2000 ; Petry et al., 1998 ). Psychophysiological and imaging studies confirm that individuals with substance abuse disorders have decreased ERN amplitude ( Franken et al., 2007 ) and error-related brain activation (i.e., Goldstein et al., 2007 ), indicating that these individuals are less sensitive to errors. Personality traits, such as impulsivity, that are associated with externalizing are characterized by a similar reduction in the ERN (e.g., Potts et al., 2006 ); along similar lines, individuals who are characterized by insensitivity to punishment have reduced ERNs in the context of punishment but not reward ( Dikman & Allen, 2000 ). These results support the notion that a reduced ERN appears related to the externalizing dimension of personality and psychopathology.  Conclusions and Future Directions We have previously proposed that the ERN might be a useful endophenotype for internalizing disorders ( Hajcak, Franklin, Foa, & Simons, 2007 ). In particular, the ERN might reflect information-processing abnormalities that mediate the pathway between genetic predisposition and disease states (Gottesmann & Gould 2003). Gottesmann and Gould (2003) highlighted several characteristics of endophenotypes. First, an endophenotype should be associated with a disease. Several studies have shown that increased error-related brain activity characterizes patients with anxious ( Gehring, Himle, & Nisenson, 2000 ; Hajcak et al., 2003a ; Hajcak, McDonald et al., 2004 ; Hajcak & Simons, 2002 ; Ruchsow, Spitzer et al., 2005 ) and depressive symptoms ( Chiu & Deldin, 2007 ). Additionally, an endophenotype should be state-independent. This has been verified in anxiety disorders, with studies showing no change in ERN amplitude during symptom provocation ( Moser et al., 2005 ) or after successful treatment ( Hajcak et al., 2007 ; Ladouceur et al., 2007 ). To our knowledge, though, there have been no research studies to date that have looked at state changes in symptoms of depressed patients. Endophenotypes must also be heritable. Preliminary studies reported by Anohkin, Golosheykin, and Myers (2008) indicate that error-related brain activity is heritable, with estimates in the range of .30 to .50. Also, endophenotypes should be more evident in unaffected first-degree family members of patients compared to first-degree family members of non-patients. This has not been assessed, as of yet, and is certainly an important topic for future study. Of course, the present review highlights the possibility that a reduced ERN might also relate to the externalizing dimension of personality and psychopathology; however, further research needs to be done to confirm and extend these findings. Future studies might clarify other remaining issues. For example, more studies are needed to assess changes in ERN amplitude after successful treatment in order to tease apart state and trait influences on the ERN. Some studies have already suggested that trait-related differences in anxiety relate to an increased ERN, whereas no studies have similarly examined the impact of state-related depressive changes on the ERN. Finally, longitudinal studies beginning in childhood are necessary to examine the ERN in children prior to the development of psychiatric disorders to establish a time-line for when differences in ERN amplitude begin to signify risk. Although many psychiatric disorders can be categorized into the internalizing-externalizing dimension, psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia do not fit well within this model – and questions remains as to whether or not psychotic disorders represent an entirely unique dimension (see Krueger & Tackett, 2003 ). Interestingly, the literature suggests that individuals with schizophrenia represent a unique dimension: in contrast with the internalizing and externalizing dimensions characterized by increased and decreased error-sensitivity, respectively, schizophrenia is characterized by a general inability to self-monitor ( Malenka, Angel, Hampton, & Berger, 1982 ; Stirling, Hellewell, & Quraishi, 1998 ). Although most studies indicate that individuals with schizophrenia have smaller ERN amplitudes ( Alain, McNeely, He, Christensen, & West, 2002 ; Bates, Kiehl, Laurens, & Liddle, 2002 ; Bates, Liddle, Kiehl, & Ngan, 2004 ; Kim et al., 2006 ; Morris, Heerey, Gold, & Holroyd, 2007 ; Morris, Yee, & Nuechterlein, 2006 ), some evidence suggests that individuals with schizophrenia also have larger CRN amplitudes that are comparable in magnitude to their ERNs ( Mathalon et al., 2002 ; Morris et al., 2006 ). These findings are similar to what is seen in individuals with prefrontal cortex lesions who have no difference between their ERN and CRN amplitudes ( Gehring & Knight, 2000 ). The similarities between schizophrenia and prefrontal cortex lesion patients are not surprising as deficits in the prefrontal cortex are thought to contribute to the etiology of schizophrenia ( Galderisi et al., 2007 ; Zhou et al., 2007 ). One difference between these two groups is that PFC lesion patients have normal ERN amplitudes, whereas schizophrenia patients have smaller ERN amplitudes. During errors of commission, schizophrenic patients had a decreased hemodynamic response in the ACC ( Carter, MacDonald, Ross, & Stenger, 2001 ) and more specifically in the rostral ACC ( Laurens, Ngan, Bates, Kiehl, & Liddle, 2003 ). Additionally, studies suggest that schizophrenia is also characterized by decreased structure and function of the ACC ( Zetzsche et al., 2007 ). Future studies should investigate both the ERN and the CRN in schizophrenia to determine whether changes in both of these components represent a general inability of individuals with schizophrenia to self-monitor. It is of interest to note that there is an abundant literature on the P300 component in schizophrenia which suggests that deficits in attention may impact task performance and related psychophysiological measures (see Ford, 1999 for a review). Thus, ERN findings may result from a more general deficit found in schizophrenia rather than being specific to response monitoring.  Figure Figure 1 The response locked ERPs for error and correct trials at FCz, where the ERN was maximal (a). The response onset occurred at 0 msec and negative is plotted up. Scalp topography of error-related brain activity from 0 to 100 msec post-response (b). Scalp topography of error positivity from 200 to 400 msec post-response (c). 