RNA interference screen for human genes associated with West Nile virus infection West Nile virus (WNV), and related flaviviruses such as tick-borne encephalitis, Japanese encephalitis, yellow fever and dengue viruses, constitute a significant global human health problem 1 . However, our understanding of the molecular interaction of WNV (and related flaviviruses) with mammalian host cells is limited 1 . WNV encodes only 10 proteins, implying that the virus may use many cellular proteins for infection 1 . WNV enters the cytoplasm through pH-dependent endocytosis, undergoes cycles of translation and replication, assembles progeny virions in association with endoplasmic reticulum, and exits along the secretory pathway 1 – 3 . RNA-interference (RNAi) presents a powerful forward genetics approach to dissect virus-host cell interactions 4 – 6 . Here we report the identification of 305 host proteins impacting WNV infection, using a human genome-wide RNAi screen. Functional clustering of the genes revealed a complex dependence of this virus on host cell physiology, requiring a wide variety of molecules and cellular pathways for successful infection. We further demonstrate a requirement for the ubiquitin ligase CBLL1 in WNV internalization, a post-entry role for the endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) pathway in viral infection, and the monocarboxylic acid transporter MCT4 as a viral replication resistance factor. By extending this study to dengue virus, we show that flaviviruses have both overlapping and unique interaction strategies with host cells. This study provides the first comprehensive molecular portrait of WNV-human cell interactions that forms a paradigm for understanding single plus-stranded RNA virus infection, and reveals potential antiviral targets.  Methods WNV RNAi screen and candidate protein selection criteria A library of 21,121 siRNA pools targeting human genome (Dharmacon siARRAY siRNA Library, Human Genome, G-005000-05, Thermo Fsher Scientific, CO) was used. For both the primary and validation screens, HeLa cells (384-well format) were transfected (using Dharmafect 1, Dharmacon) in duplicates with siRNA (50 nM) for 72 h, infected for 24 h with West Nile (WNV strain 2741) or 30 h with dengue (DENV New Guinea C strain) viruses, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, immunostained with antibodies detecting viral E-proteins (TRITC labeled, anti-WNV-E antibody developed in horse, or monoclonal anti-DENV-E, Chemicon), and imaged by fluorescence microscopy (Molecular Devices, 4x magnification) at TRITC filter for virus and DAPI filter for nuclei. Infection was done at a multiplicity of infection of 0.3 for both WNV and DENV. Generally, infection was in the range of 20–30% for both WNV and DENV. As positive control of infection reduction due to gene silencing, endosomal proton pump vATPase was silenced. Cell number/well was in the range of 7000–9000. The percent infection was relatively linear in the cell number range in which the screen was performed ( Supplementary Figure 1f ). Each 384-well plate had additional control wells with a non-targeting control siRNA (siCONTROL non-targeting siRNA, Dharmacon) (for determining the general effect of siRNA transfection on infection), siRNA targeting PLK-1 whose silencing kills the cells (for determining general knockdown efficiency), fluorescently labeled non-targeting control siRNA (for determining transfection efficiency), and wells with neither transfection reagent nor siRNA. Quantification of the effect of gene silencing on viral infection was done using the software Metamorph (Molecular Devices), which counted cell that were immuno-stained vs non-stained for virus antigen. Based on the infection kinetics and infection inhibition by the silencing of a host gene known to be required for the infection of both WNV and DENV (vATPase, Supplementary Figure 1b ), we defined an infection reduction of 2-fold or greater at 24 h for WNV or 30 h for DENV as the threshold for hit selection. Silencing of vATPase resulted in a reduction of infection of 2.9±0.3 fold compared to the controls for WNV or 2.7±0.4 for DENV ( Supplementary Figure 1b . Cell lines, Virus propagation Gene silencing and infection studies were done on low passage HeLa (ATCC# CCL-2.1) cells maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. West Nile (strain 2471, Dr. John Anderson, Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station), and dengue -2 (New Guinea C strain, Dr. Aravinda de Silva, North Carolina University) viruses were grown on vero (ATCC# CRL-1586) or C6/36 (ATCC# CRL-1660) cells, respectively. Gene knockdown verification, RNAi resistant mutant generation and phenotype rescue For the quantitation of the target transcript reduction, pooled siRNAs corresponding to the tested genes were transfected (50 nM) to cells (or cells pre-transfected with cDNAs of genes) in 48-well plates for 3 days, total RNA was isolated using RNeasy kit (Qiagen), and cDNA was prepared by iScript kit (Biorad). Quantitative PCR (QPCR) was performed by using Sybergreen reagent (Biorad). The primers used were given in the Supplementary Table 7 . To generate RNAi resistant variants of genes, four silent mutations each was introduced into those sequences of DERL2 and PITPNM2 where siRNA binds (in the expression vector pCDNA6.2 with V5 tag), using QuickChange Mutagenesis kit (Strategene) ( Supplementary Table 7 shows the mutagenesis primer sequences). HeLa cells transfected separately with wild type or mutant copies of the genes were selected for 8 days using blasticidin, treated with siRNA for 72 h, and either WNV infection assay or Western blot (for knock down and rescue verification) was performed. Six random fields of fluorescent images (10× objective, Zeiss Axiovert 200M) of WNV infected mutant vs wild type gene expressing cells were counted to quantify and assess the rescue of viral infection by mutant genes. For Western blot, cells were lysed in 1% 50mM Tris-HCL, 150mM NaCl and Triton X-100. Western blot was performed to verify the extent of knockdown and rescue of DERL2 and PITPNM2 using anti-V5 antibodies (Invitrogen). Anti-CBLL1 antibody was obtained from Abcam. Cytotoxicity Cytotoxic effects of gene silencing and MG132 treatments were determined using LDH release assay kit (Roche). Supernatants of gene silenced cells were harvested at 3 days post-transfection or 1–24 h post treatment for compounds, and assayed for LDH release according to manufacturer’s protocol. Viral RNA transfection and secretion studies Two kinds of studies were done using viral genomic RNA transfection: (a) Determination of the effect of gene silencing on viral RNA translation, and (b) Determination of the effect of gene silencing on progeny virion secretion. The RNA of a subgenomic replicon of WNV (lacking complete genes for the capsid, pre- membrane, and envelope proteins) was used for viral translation studies 30 , while a full length viral genome was used for viral secretion studies 31 . The viral RNA was prepared as described previously 31 . The viral RNA was transiently transfected into HeLa cells by electroporation, aftergene knock down with siRNA for 3 days. Mouse hyperimmune ascetic fluid against WNV was used for the immunofluorescence of replicon transfected cells, after 14 h of transfection. For the viral secretion assay, the culture supernatants were collected at 24 h from HeLa cells electroporated with (400ng) full length WNV genomic RNA for ERAD silenced cells. As positive control for inhibition of WNV secretion, Brefeldin A (10?g/ml) was used, by adding 12 h post infection. To study the viral release from MCT4 silenced cells, supernatants were collected at 12 h and 24 h (post-infection), and performed a plaque formation assay. For anti-WNV siRNA (siRNA sequence is given in Supplementary Table 9 ) treatment of replicon silenced cells, cells are first transfected with anti-WNV siRNA for 6 h, followed by electropration of replicon, and fixed after 30 h for IFA. Inhibitor studies HeLa cells were treated with 15?M MG132 (Biomol) or 700?g/ml cycloheximide (Sigma) (dissolved in DMSO) or DMSO for various time periods as described in the text or figure. For determining the role ubiquitination in viral internalization, HeLa cells were pre-treated with MG132 for 1 h, TRITC-WNV was added (MOI of 100), incubated for 1–4 h at 37°C, fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, and confocal microscopy was performed. For determining the post-entry requirements of ubiquitination, the virus was inoculated (MOI of 0.3), incubated at 37°C, and MG132 was added at different time points. The cells were fixed and immunostained after 18 h. The final DMSO concentration was no more than 0.2% of the total culture medium. Vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) and HIV studies The human immunodeficiency virus (VSV-G carrying pHXBGFP-IRES-nef, an infectious molecular clone expressing GFP; Premlata Shankar, CBRI, Harvard University) infection experiments were done by infecting gene silenced cells at an MOI of 0.3 for 24 h, followed by fluorescent imaging (10x, Zeiss) to quantify the percent infection. For the VSV experiments, cells were pre-treated for 1 h with either DMSO or 15?M MG132, followed by infection with VSV expressing GFP (MOI of 0.5) for 12 h. GFP-positive VSV cells were quantified by flow cytometry. WNV entry and colocalization studies Modification of a previous protocol was used for these studies 32 . Purified virus was exchanged into phosphate buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4) through repeated cycles of concentration by centrifugation (800 × g) and dilution with PBS, using 15 ml ultrafiltration tubes (10kD, Amicon). The virus in PBS (equivalent to 0.5mg/ml protein) was incubated with tetramethyl rhodaminyl isothiocyanate (TRITC, Pierce Biotechnology) (0.3mg/ml, in dimethyl formamide) for 1 h at room temperature. After removal of excess dye, labeled virus (WNV-TRITC) was immediately used for experiments. Labeling did not abolish viral infectivity. Infectious entry of WNV-TRITC was sensitive to the vATPase inhibitor Bafilomycin, and colocalized with Rab5 labeled compartments, similar to the entry mechanism of unlabeled WNV ( Supplementary Figure 14a and b ). For colocalization imaging, Rab5-GFP or Rab7-GFP transduced HeLa cells were used (Gift from Tatjana Dragic, Albert Einstein College of medicine). For the entry assay (or Rab5/7-GFP colocalization experiments), cells in 48 well culture plates were transfected with siRNA for 48 h, and re-plated onto glass slide bottom chambers (MatTek) in DMEM (with 5% serum and 20 mM Hepes, pH 7.4). After further 24 h, WNV-TRITC (MOI of ~100, to capture sufficient events) was added to the cells and allowed to bind for 1 h at 4 °C, and cells were shifted to 37 °C for different time periods, fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, and confocal imaging was performed, on a LSM 510 confocalmicroscope equipped with a Zeiss axiovert 100 M base, using 100× oil objective (ZeissMicroImaging, Inc.). Z-stack imaging was done at 0.5?m sections. Virus particles within the cells were counted using the software velocity and ImageJ. Enrichment analysis of biological process and molecular function categories Genes were classified into biological process and molecular function terms using the PANTHER system. To assess the statistical enrichment or over-representation of these categories for the set of hits relative to the global set of genes examined in the RNAi screen, P-values were computed using the hypergeometric probability distribution, which was implemented in the R-language ( http://www.r-project.org/ ). The hypergeometric distribution describes the probability of finding s or more genes associated with a particular category, in a set of g genes essential for WNV infection (identified from the RNAi screen), given that there are S genes associated with that same category in the global set of G genes examined in the genome-wide RNAi screen. For each category, c and the list of genes l, and P value was calculated as: P ( c , l ) = 1 ? ? k ? { 0 , 1 , … , s } ( C ( g , k ) C ( G ? g , S ? k ) / C ( G , S ) ) where G and g denote the total number of unique genes screened and those identified as essential for WNV infectivity, respectively. S and s represent the number of genes from G and g , respectively, that is associated with each annotation category. The binomial coefficient is of the form C ( n , r ). A P -value <0.05 was considered significant. Categories assigned with at least 10 genes are displayed in the Figure 1b and c . A similar approach was used to examine over-representation in Figure 4a , except that the assessment of enrichment for biological process categories was made relative to their representation among all HSFs identified. Analysis of Gene Expression across 79 tissues Microarray data files were obtained from the Novartis GNF human expression atlas version2 resource, and expression values of 33,689 probe sets from the HG-U133A (Affymetrix) platform and the GNF1H custom chip were analyzed. The dataset was normalized using global median scaling, and we filtered the data by excluding from the analysis those probe sets with 100% ‘absent’ calls (MAS5.0 algorithm) across all 79 tissues. The dataset was further filtered by setting a minimum threshold value >20 in at least one sample for each probe set and a maximum-mean expression value >100. Hierarchical clustering (centroid linkage method) was performed with Cluster 3.0 using Pearson’s correlation as the similarity metric 33 . Z-score transformation was applied to each probeset across all arrays prior to generating ‘heatmaps’ for visualization using TreeView 34 . Constructing human protein interaction network The protein networks construction used protein interaction data obtained from the Human Protein Reference Database (HPRD), Biomolecular Interaction Network Database (BIND), Ingenuity pathways database (Montainview) and functional information from the literature. The network uses graph theoretical representations in which components (gene products) are depicted as nodes and interactions between components as edges. Graph layout descriptions were written in the Dot language, which implements a multi-dimensional scaling heuristic and uses an iterative solver (Newton-Raphson algorithm) that searches for low-energy configurations to optimize the graph layout when creating a virtual physical model (Spring model) for visualization.  WNV RNAi screen and candidate protein selection criteria A library of 21,121 siRNA pools targeting human genome (Dharmacon siARRAY siRNA Library, Human Genome, G-005000-05, Thermo Fsher Scientific, CO) was used. For both the primary and validation screens, HeLa cells (384-well format) were transfected (using Dharmafect 1, Dharmacon) in duplicates with siRNA (50 nM) for 72 h, infected for 24 h with West Nile (WNV strain 2741) or 30 h with dengue (DENV New Guinea C strain) viruses, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, immunostained with antibodies detecting viral E-proteins (TRITC labeled, anti-WNV-E antibody developed in horse, or monoclonal anti-DENV-E, Chemicon), and imaged by fluorescence microscopy (Molecular Devices, 4x magnification) at TRITC filter for virus and DAPI filter for nuclei. Infection was done at a multiplicity of infection of 0.3 for both WNV and DENV. Generally, infection was in the range of 20–30% for both WNV and DENV. As positive control of infection reduction due to gene silencing, endosomal proton pump vATPase was silenced. Cell number/well was in the range of 7000–9000. The percent infection was relatively linear in the cell number range in which the screen was performed ( Supplementary Figure 1f ). Each 384-well plate had additional control wells with a non-targeting control siRNA (siCONTROL non-targeting siRNA, Dharmacon) (for determining the general effect of siRNA transfection on infection), siRNA targeting PLK-1 whose silencing kills the cells (for determining general knockdown efficiency), fluorescently labeled non-targeting control siRNA (for determining transfection efficiency), and wells with neither transfection reagent nor siRNA. Quantification of the effect of gene silencing on viral infection was done using the software Metamorph (Molecular Devices), which counted cell that were immuno-stained vs non-stained for virus antigen. Based on the infection kinetics and infection inhibition by the silencing of a host gene known to be required for the infection of both WNV and DENV (vATPase, Supplementary Figure 1b ), we defined an infection reduction of 2-fold or greater at 24 h for WNV or 30 h for DENV as the threshold for hit selection. Silencing of vATPase resulted in a reduction of infection of 2.9±0.3 fold compared to the controls for WNV or 2.7±0.4 for DENV ( Supplementary Figure 1b .  Cell lines, Virus propagation Gene silencing and infection studies were done on low passage HeLa (ATCC# CCL-2.1) cells maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. West Nile (strain 2471, Dr. John Anderson, Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station), and dengue -2 (New Guinea C strain, Dr. Aravinda de Silva, North Carolina University) viruses were grown on vero (ATCC# CRL-1586) or C6/36 (ATCC# CRL-1660) cells, respectively.  Gene knockdown verification, RNAi resistant mutant generation and phenotype rescue For the quantitation of the target transcript reduction, pooled siRNAs corresponding to the tested genes were transfected (50 nM) to cells (or cells pre-transfected with cDNAs of genes) in 48-well plates for 3 days, total RNA was isolated using RNeasy kit (Qiagen), and cDNA was prepared by iScript kit (Biorad). Quantitative PCR (QPCR) was performed by using Sybergreen reagent (Biorad). The primers used were given in the Supplementary Table 7 . To generate RNAi resistant variants of genes, four silent mutations each was introduced into those sequences of DERL2 and PITPNM2 where siRNA binds (in the expression vector pCDNA6.2 with V5 tag), using QuickChange Mutagenesis kit (Strategene) ( Supplementary Table 7 shows the mutagenesis primer sequences). HeLa cells transfected separately with wild type or mutant copies of the genes were selected for 8 days using blasticidin, treated with siRNA for 72 h, and either WNV infection assay or Western blot (for knock down and rescue verification) was performed. Six random fields of fluorescent images (10× objective, Zeiss Axiovert 200M) of WNV infected mutant vs wild type gene expressing cells were counted to quantify and assess the rescue of viral infection by mutant genes. For Western blot, cells were lysed in 1% 50mM Tris-HCL, 150mM NaCl and Triton X-100. Western blot was performed to verify the extent of knockdown and rescue of DERL2 and PITPNM2 using anti-V5 antibodies (Invitrogen). Anti-CBLL1 antibody was obtained from Abcam.  Cytotoxicity Cytotoxic effects of gene silencing and MG132 treatments were determined using LDH release assay kit (Roche). Supernatants of gene silenced cells were harvested at 3 days post-transfection or 1–24 h post treatment for compounds, and assayed for LDH release according to manufacturer’s protocol.  Viral RNA transfection and secretion studies Two kinds of studies were done using viral genomic RNA transfection: (a) Determination of the effect of gene silencing on viral RNA translation, and (b) Determination of the effect of gene silencing on progeny virion secretion. The RNA of a subgenomic replicon of WNV (lacking complete genes for the capsid, pre- membrane, and envelope proteins) was used for viral translation studies 30 , while a full length viral genome was used for viral secretion studies 31 . The viral RNA was prepared as described previously 31 . The viral RNA was transiently transfected into HeLa cells by electroporation, aftergene knock down with siRNA for 3 days. Mouse hyperimmune ascetic fluid against WNV was used for the immunofluorescence of replicon transfected cells, after 14 h of transfection. For the viral secretion assay, the culture supernatants were collected at 24 h from HeLa cells electroporated with (400ng) full length WNV genomic RNA for ERAD silenced cells. As positive control for inhibition of WNV secretion, Brefeldin A (10?g/ml) was used, by adding 12 h post infection. To study the viral release from MCT4 silenced cells, supernatants were collected at 12 h and 24 h (post-infection), and performed a plaque formation assay. For anti-WNV siRNA (siRNA sequence is given in Supplementary Table 9 ) treatment of replicon silenced cells, cells are first transfected with anti-WNV siRNA for 6 h, followed by electropration of replicon, and fixed after 30 h for IFA.  Inhibitor studies HeLa cells were treated with 15?M MG132 (Biomol) or 700?g/ml cycloheximide (Sigma) (dissolved in DMSO) or DMSO for various time periods as described in the text or figure. For determining the role ubiquitination in viral internalization, HeLa cells were pre-treated with MG132 for 1 h, TRITC-WNV was added (MOI of 100), incubated for 1–4 h at 37°C, fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, and confocal microscopy was performed. For determining the post-entry requirements of ubiquitination, the virus was inoculated (MOI of 0.3), incubated at 37°C, and MG132 was added at different time points. The cells were fixed and immunostained after 18 h. The final DMSO concentration was no more than 0.2% of the total culture medium.  Vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) and HIV studies The human immunodeficiency virus (VSV-G carrying pHXBGFP-IRES-nef, an infectious molecular clone expressing GFP; Premlata Shankar, CBRI, Harvard University) infection experiments were done by infecting gene silenced cells at an MOI of 0.3 for 24 h, followed by fluorescent imaging (10x, Zeiss) to quantify the percent infection. For the VSV experiments, cells were pre-treated for 1 h with either DMSO or 15?M MG132, followed by infection with VSV expressing GFP (MOI of 0.5) for 12 h. GFP-positive VSV cells were quantified by flow cytometry.  WNV entry and colocalization studies Modification of a previous protocol was used for these studies 32 . Purified virus was exchanged into phosphate buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4) through repeated cycles of concentration by centrifugation (800 × g) and dilution with PBS, using 15 ml ultrafiltration tubes (10kD, Amicon). The virus in PBS (equivalent to 0.5mg/ml protein) was incubated with tetramethyl rhodaminyl isothiocyanate (TRITC, Pierce Biotechnology) (0.3mg/ml, in dimethyl formamide) for 1 h at room temperature. After removal of excess dye, labeled virus (WNV-TRITC) was immediately used for experiments. Labeling did not abolish viral infectivity. Infectious entry of WNV-TRITC was sensitive to the vATPase inhibitor Bafilomycin, and colocalized with Rab5 labeled compartments, similar to the entry mechanism of unlabeled WNV ( Supplementary Figure 14a and b ). For colocalization imaging, Rab5-GFP or Rab7-GFP transduced HeLa cells were used (Gift from Tatjana Dragic, Albert Einstein College of medicine). For the entry assay (or Rab5/7-GFP colocalization experiments), cells in 48 well culture plates were transfected with siRNA for 48 h, and re-plated onto glass slide bottom chambers (MatTek) in DMEM (with 5% serum and 20 mM Hepes, pH 7.4). After further 24 h, WNV-TRITC (MOI of ~100, to capture sufficient events) was added to the cells and allowed to bind for 1 h at 4 °C, and cells were shifted to 37 °C for different time periods, fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, and confocal imaging was performed, on a LSM 510 confocalmicroscope equipped with a Zeiss axiovert 100 M base, using 100× oil objective (ZeissMicroImaging, Inc.). Z-stack imaging was done at 0.5?m sections. Virus particles within the cells were counted using the software velocity and ImageJ.  Enrichment analysis of biological process and molecular function categories Genes were classified into biological process and molecular function terms using the PANTHER system. To assess the statistical enrichment or over-representation of these categories for the set of hits relative to the global set of genes examined in the RNAi screen, P-values were computed using the hypergeometric probability distribution, which was implemented in the R-language ( http://www.r-project.org/ ). The hypergeometric distribution describes the probability of finding s or more genes associated with a particular category, in a set of g genes essential for WNV infection (identified from the RNAi screen), given that there are S genes associated with that same category in the global set of G genes examined in the genome-wide RNAi screen. For each category, c and the list of genes l, and P value was calculated as: P ( c , l ) = 1 ? ? k ? { 0 , 1 , … , s } ( C ( g , k ) C ( G ? g , S ? k ) / C ( G , S ) ) where G and g denote the total number of unique genes screened and those identified as essential for WNV infectivity, respectively. S and s represent the number of genes from G and g , respectively, that is associated with each annotation category. The binomial coefficient is of the form C ( n , r ). A P -value <0.05 was considered significant. Categories assigned with at least 10 genes are displayed in the Figure 1b and c . A similar approach was used to examine over-representation in Figure 4a , except that the assessment of enrichment for biological process categories was made relative to their representation among all HSFs identified.  Analysis of Gene Expression across 79 tissues Microarray data files were obtained from the Novartis GNF human expression atlas version2 resource, and expression values of 33,689 probe sets from the HG-U133A (Affymetrix) platform and the GNF1H custom chip were analyzed. The dataset was normalized using global median scaling, and we filtered the data by excluding from the analysis those probe sets with 100% ‘absent’ calls (MAS5.0 algorithm) across all 79 tissues. The dataset was further filtered by setting a minimum threshold value >20 in at least one sample for each probe set and a maximum-mean expression value >100. Hierarchical clustering (centroid linkage method) was performed with Cluster 3.0 using Pearson’s correlation as the similarity metric 33 . Z-score transformation was applied to each probeset across all arrays prior to generating ‘heatmaps’ for visualization using TreeView 34 .  Constructing human protein interaction network The protein networks construction used protein interaction data obtained from the Human Protein Reference Database (HPRD), Biomolecular Interaction Network Database (BIND), Ingenuity pathways database (Montainview) and functional information from the literature. The network uses graph theoretical representations in which components (gene products) are depicted as nodes and interactions between components as edges. Graph layout descriptions were written in the Dot language, which implements a multi-dimensional scaling heuristic and uses an iterative solver (Newton-Raphson algorithm) that searches for low-energy configurations to optimize the graph layout when creating a virtual physical model (Spring model) for visualization.  Supplementary Material Supplementary Figures 1-14 and Supple Tables 3-9 with Legends Table 1 Table 2  Figures Figure 1 RNAi screen and bioinformatics (a) West Nile virus RNAi screen strategy (see text for description). (b–c) Bioinformatics classification of hits into (b) biological process and (c) molecular function categories. * Denotes categories found enriched ( p <0.05) relative to all the genes examined in the RNAi screen. Only categories with ten or more members are displayed. Figure 2 CBLL1 (a–e) and ERAD (f–g) silencing reduces West Nile virus (WNV) infection (a and b) CBLL1 silencing reduces WNV immunostained cells (MOI ~0.3, 10x, Zeiss). Red (virus), blue (nucleus). (c) a time course analysis showing reduced internalization of TRITC-WNV (MOI ~100) into CBLL1 silenced cells. (d) Localization of TRITC-WNV within CBLL1 silenced cells (percentage of total cells showing the phenotypes, 20 images, ~6 cells each). Plasma membrane alone (PM only), inside the cell (In only), and both PM and inside (In+PM). AP3S2 and vATPase were controls (see text). (e) MG132 reduces WNV internalization (MOI ~100). (f) ERAD network. Yellow squares denote hits; blue circles represent other host proteins within the network neighborhood. Dotted line indicates complexes. (g) ERAD silencing reduces WNV infection (MOI ~0.3). DERL2R is RNAi resistant mutant of DERL2. For (a) and (g), the % of infected control NT-siRNA cells (~30%) was set at 100% and used to normalize the % infection of siRNA-treated cells (from six fields of ~8000 cells). Values for (c) and (e) are number of virus particles/cell (mean of 20 cells). Results are mean ± SD from a representative experiment performed in triplicates. Figure 3 MCT4 silencing enhances WNV replication (a and b) MCT4 silencing increases the number of WNV immunostained cells (MOI ~0.3, 10x, Zeiss). Red (virus), blue (nucleus). (c) QPCR of WNV RNA levels in control NT-siRNA and MCT4 silenced cells (ng viral RNA/beta actin). (d) immunostaining for WNV E-protein in MCT4 silenced cells. (e) WNV secretion from MCT4 silenced cells, expressed as plaque forming units/ml (PFU/ml). Values in (a) and (d) are percentage of total cells immunostained for WNV (six images having ~1000 cells each). Results are mean ± SD from a representative experiment performed in triplicates. Figure 4 (a–c) Interaction of West Nile virus (WNV) and dengue virus (DENV) with host cells (a) Classification of HSFs common to both WNV and DENV or specific to WNV, into biological process categories. * Denotes categories found enriched ( p <0.05) relative to all identified HSFs. (b) Focal adhesion complex (FAC) network. Cyan line connects the core proteins. Yellow squares (WNV specific HSFs), red squares (WNV and DENV shared HSFs), blue circles (other host proteins within the network neighborhood). (c) Effect of silencing of PXN, SHC1 and PITPNM2 on WNV and DENV infection (the % of infected control NT-siRNA cells (~30%) was set at 100% and used to normalize the % infection of siRNA-treated cells (from six fields of ~8000 cells). PITPNM2R indicates RNAi resistant mutant of PITPNM2. Results are mean ± SD from a representative experiment performed in triplicates. 