INSULIN RESISTANCE POST-BURN: UNDERLYING MECHANISMS AND CURRENT THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES The profound hypermetabolic response to burn injury is associated with insulin resistance and hyperglycemia, significantly contributing to the incidence of morbidity and mortality in this patient population. These responses are present in all trauma, surgical, or critically ill patients, but the severity, length, and magnitude is unique for burn patients. Although advances in therapeutic strategies to attenuate the post-burn hypermetabolic response have significantly improved the clinical outcome of these patients over the past years, therapeutic approaches to overcome stress-induced hyperglycemia have remained challenging. Intensive insulin therapy has been shown to significantly reduce morbidity and mortality in critically ill patients. High incidence of hypoglycemic events and difficult blood glucose titrations have led to investigation of alternative strategies, including the use of metformin, a biguanide, or fenofibrate, a PPAR-? agonist. Nevertheless, weaknesses and potential side affects of these drugs reinforces the need for better understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying insulin resistance post-burn that may lead to novel therapeutic strategies further improving the prognosis of these patients. This review aims to discuss the mechanisms underlying insulin resistance induced hyperglycemia post-burn and outlines current therapeutic strategies that are being used to modulate hyperglycemia following thermal trauma.  Conclusion The profound metabolic alterations post-burn associated with persistent changes in glucose metabolism and impaired insulin sensitivity significantly contribute to adverse outcome of this patient population. Even though advances in therapy strategies in order to attenuate the hypermetabolic response to burn have significantly improved the clinical outcome of these patients over the past years, therapeutic approaches to overcome stress-induced hyperglycemia have remained challenging. Maintaining blood glucose at levels below 110 mg/dl using intensive insulin therapy has been shown to reduce mortality and morbidity in critically ill patients, however, associated hypoglycemic events have led to the investigation of alternative strategies, including the use of metformin and the PPAR-? agonist fenofibrate. Nevertheless, further studies are warranted to determine ideal glucose ranges and the safety and appropriate use of these drugs in severely burned patients. Aside from the discussion about the ideal target glucose range, we currently lack understanding by which mechanisms insulin administration may improve morbidity and mortality in severely burned patients. Are these effects due to insulin itself or due to glucose modulation? Better understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying insulin resistance post-burn may help solving this question and may lead to the development of novel therapeutic options in order to treat stress-induced hyperglycemia thus further improving the prognosis of this unique patient population. 