Depression Case Finding Strategies in a Care Management Program for Chronically Ill Medicare Recipients Objective To examine case-finding strategies for depression in the context of a disease management program for chronically ill Medicare recipients. Study Design Observational analysis of telephone/mail surveys and claims data collected for the Medicare Health Support (MHS) program. Methods This study examines data from 14,902 participants with diabetes and/or congestive heart failure in the MHS program administered by Green Ribbon Health.. Depression screening was performed by administering a 2-item screener (PHQ-2) by telephone or mail. Additional information about depression was drawn from ICD-9 depression diagnoses from claims and self-reported use of antidepressant medications. We compared screener positive rates for depression on the PHQ-2 administered by telephone or mail, examined variations in screener positives by care manager, and compared rates of positive screens to antidepressant use and claims diagnoses of depression. Results Nearly 14 % of participants received an ICD-9 diagnosis of depression in the year prior to program enrollment; 7% reported taking antidepressants, and 5 % screened positive on the PHQ-2. Substantial variation in positive depression screens by care manager was found that could not be explained by case mix, prior depression diagnoses or current depression treatment. After adjusting for demographic and clinical differences, the PHQ2 positive rate was 6.5% by phone and 14.1% by mail screen (p<0.001). Conclusion A combined depression screening approach with mail screening (using the PHQ-2) augmented by information about antidepressant use and claims diagnoses of depression may be the most cost-effective method to identify depression in a large sample of medically ill Medicare recipients.  INTRODUCTION Chronic conditions are a leading cause of illness, disability, and death among Medicare beneficiaries and account for a disproportionate share of health care expenditures. For example, about 14% of Medicare beneficiaries have congestive heart failure (CHF), but they account for 43% of Medicare spending; similarly, about 18% of Medicare beneficiaries have diabetes, yet they account for 32% of Medicare spending. The Medicare Modernization Act of 2003 (Section 721) created the voluntary Medicare Health Support (MHS) program, to coordinate care for high-risk Medicare beneficiaries with significant chronic illness under traditional fee-for-service Medicare 1 . In its initial phase, MHS consisted of three-year pilot programs in eight sites across the US, each operated by a different MHS organization (MHSO). The MHS program provides care management services to Medicare beneficiaries with congestive heart failure (CHF) and/or complex diabetes. Each MHSO site is being implemented as a randomized control trial and covers approximately 20,000–30,000 beneficiaries. Beneficiary enrollment began in summer, 2005. Phase I of MHS specifically recommends screening for depression. Patients with diabetes and CHF have been found to have a two-fold higher prevalence of depression than other medical controls 2 . Based on the severity and complexity of their medical conditions, the MHS target population is likely to have prevalence rates of major depression of 15 to 25%. Medically ill patients with comorbid depression have lower adherence to recommended treatments, such as pharmacotherapy; and to self-care regimens, such as changing diet, increasing exercise, and smoking cessation 3 . Medically ill patients with comorbid depression are more functionally impaired, have higher complication and mortality rates, and have 50% – 100% higher medical costs than those without depression, even after controlling for demographics and severity of medical illness. Improving quality of depression care management for patients with comorbid depression and diabetes has been shown to improve patients’ depression outcomes significantly and to save medical costs over a 2-year period 4 5 relative to “usual” care. This paper describes efforts to optimize depression case-finding by one of the MHSOs, Green Ribbon Health (GRH). While there is a growing consensus about the value of identifying depression, as a necessary first step to effective intervention, there is relatively little evidence about practical methods for large-scale case-finding, particularly in a real-world population of medically ill older adults. We discuss results and feedback of care manager focus groups and describe training and operational tactics to enhance competency for depression screening and care management interventions. We report findings from alternative methods of administering depression screening (e.g., telephonic, by mail, or in person), as well as from combining administrative and screener data into a multi-pronged hierarchical depression case-finding strategy.  METHODS Intervention MHS is designed to serve fee-for-service Medicare beneficiaries with CHF and/or complex diabetes who live in one of the MHS catchment areas (see http://www.cms.hhs.gov/CCIP/04_RegionalPrograms.asp , as of July, 2007) 1 . Beneficiaries were ineligible for MHS if they belonged to a Medicare Advantage plan, had end stage renal disease, or were enrolled in hospice. Green Ribbon Health (GRH) serves MHS beneficiaries in 9 counties in the state of Florida. GRH’s MHS program began operation on November 1, 2005. The core of the GRH multi-disciplinary care coordination model is telephonic interface by a Personal Nurse (PN), who educates and supports participants in managing their own health and following their providers’ prescribed plan of care. For complex cases that require more intensive intervention, Personal Nurses (PNs)can engage the support of a Field Care Manager (FCM). The FCM team includes social workers and registered nurses, who interact with participants, caregivers and families in person. As a third element of GRH’s program, trained Community Health Workers (CHWs) moderate workshops to promote self management skills; CHWs also compile relevant community resources and maintain GRH’s Community Resource Directory. All participants receive a health assessment at least every 6–12 months, using the “Medicare Domain Assessment Tool” (mDAT) developed for GRH. Depression screening is a core requirement of GRH’s program and is administered at set intervals as part of the mDAT, which includes a 2-item depression screener, the PHQ-2 6 , and when needed as assessed by the PN or FCM(collectively referred to as CM). All GRH participants (and their caregivers) with possible depression are eligible to receive health support and education regarding depression (e.g., about prevalence, risks, and treatment). Participants screening positive for depression on the PHQ-2 are further evaluated using the PHQ-9 7 and can then be referred to their primary care provider or a specialist for assessment, diagnosis and treatment recommendations. CMs monitor depressive symptoms and response to treatment, and provide information to participants to help them manage their symptoms and connect to appropriate resources. CMs also promote self care and help participants communicate directly with their physician(s); for participants whose depression is not improving, CMs interface with the provider for review and adjustment of the treatment plan. Sample This study reports on 14,902 Medicare Beneficiaries participating in GRH’s MHS program who completed an initial Medicare Domain Assessment Tool (designated as mDAT1). Data and Measures Data on GRH’s MHS beneficiaries come from three main sources: mDATs administered by GRH; data on beneficiary-reported use of prescription drugs, assessed via periodic interviews conducted by GRH’s CMs (typically in conjunction with mDATs); and Medicare eligibility and claims data provided to GRH by CMS. Demographics Limited demographic information was available via CMS, including beneficiaries’ age, sex, and race/ethnicity. Other sociodemographic measures, particularly education, literacy, employment status, and occupation, were available on fewer than 5% of the analysis sample. Clinical status and case mix Measures available via CMS included the condition(s) for which the beneficiary qualified for MHS (i.e., diabetes and CHF), beneficiaries’ HCC risk score (i.e., CMS’s version of the Hierarchical Condition Categories risk adjustment method), and “high,” “medium,” and “low” risk designations based on the HCC score. In addition, GRH developed a risk-tiering algorithm that used the HCC score and information from the mDAT to classify beneficiaries into “High Impact,” “Prevention,” and “Monitor” Level of Intervention risk categories. Depression status Information on possible depression came from four sources: the PHQ-2 screens administered as part of the mDATs (a score of 3 or higher, out of a possible 6 has been identified as the optimum cutoff point on the PHQ-2) 6 ; ICD-9 depression diagnosis codes from Medicare claims data (current depression: 296.2, 296.3, 298.0, 300.4, 309.1, 311; prior episodes of depression: 296.2–296.9, 298, 300.4, 309.0, 309.1, 309.28, 311); and beneficiary reports of using antidepressant medication, from GRH’s medication assessment interviews (any medication with an FDA indication for depression). Analyses To assess the rate of possible depression in GRH’s MHS sample, we examined the overall fraction of beneficiaries who screened positive on the PHQ-2 at mDAT1, as well as the fraction with a recent depression diagnoses and/or antidepressant use. In addition, because CMs varied in their experience with depression, which might affect their administration of the PHQ-2, we examined whether PHQ-2 positive rates varied by CM, and possible correlates with such variation. Given lower-than-expected depression screening results and significant variation across CMs in PHQ-2 positive rates, GRH conducted interviews and a focus group with CMs. GRH invited CMs with both relatively low and relatively high PHQ-2 positive rates in their mDAT1 panels, to learn about CM’s perceptions regarding depression screening, including possible reasons for CM variations, and identify possible strategies to improve screening processes. These discussions confirmed that CMs often found it challenging to administer the PHQ-2 questions. mDAT 1s were conducted early on in the program where a focus on enrollment may have precluded the development of a trusting therapeutic relationship, where both the care manager and participant felt comfortable disclosing and discussing sensitive health issues and topics such as depression. CMs also described substantial ’competing demands,” particularly engaging participants in the MHS program and conducting data intensive initial clinical assessments. In response to these and other issues further defined in Table 1 , GRH conducted a focused retraining of all CMs to improve the level of competency and effectiveness of telephone-based depression screening and CMs’ comfort in addressing depression with medically ill older adults. This training included education on the use of the PHQ screening tool, on talking about depression with clients, and on dealing with high impact situations such as bereavement, grief, severe depression and suicide. While nearly all (99%) of mDAT1s were administered by telephone, some 14% of completed mDAT2s were administered by mail, via a “mail blitz” campaign by GRH intended to raise mDAT response rates, and as follow -up among beneficiaries who were difficult to reach by phone. Overall, 85% of beneficiaries (N=12,677) who completed mDAT1 completed mDAT2. We examined differences in PHQ-2 positive rates between phone-and mail -based mDATs, using bivariate analyses and also using multivariate logistic regression to account for possible differences in case mix. Finally, we examine the efficiency of alternative case-finding strategies for depression in GRH’s MHS sample. In particular, we illustrate the degree of independence and overlap between three sources of information on possible depression: PHQ-2 screens, beneficiary-reported use of antidepressant medication, and information on ICD-9 depression diagnoses from Medicare claims data.  Intervention MHS is designed to serve fee-for-service Medicare beneficiaries with CHF and/or complex diabetes who live in one of the MHS catchment areas (see http://www.cms.hhs.gov/CCIP/04_RegionalPrograms.asp , as of July, 2007) 1 . Beneficiaries were ineligible for MHS if they belonged to a Medicare Advantage plan, had end stage renal disease, or were enrolled in hospice. Green Ribbon Health (GRH) serves MHS beneficiaries in 9 counties in the state of Florida. GRH’s MHS program began operation on November 1, 2005. The core of the GRH multi-disciplinary care coordination model is telephonic interface by a Personal Nurse (PN), who educates and supports participants in managing their own health and following their providers’ prescribed plan of care. For complex cases that require more intensive intervention, Personal Nurses (PNs)can engage the support of a Field Care Manager (FCM). The FCM team includes social workers and registered nurses, who interact with participants, caregivers and families in person. As a third element of GRH’s program, trained Community Health Workers (CHWs) moderate workshops to promote self management skills; CHWs also compile relevant community resources and maintain GRH’s Community Resource Directory. All participants receive a health assessment at least every 6–12 months, using the “Medicare Domain Assessment Tool” (mDAT) developed for GRH. Depression screening is a core requirement of GRH’s program and is administered at set intervals as part of the mDAT, which includes a 2-item depression screener, the PHQ-2 6 , and when needed as assessed by the PN or FCM(collectively referred to as CM). All GRH participants (and their caregivers) with possible depression are eligible to receive health support and education regarding depression (e.g., about prevalence, risks, and treatment). Participants screening positive for depression on the PHQ-2 are further evaluated using the PHQ-9 7 and can then be referred to their primary care provider or a specialist for assessment, diagnosis and treatment recommendations. CMs monitor depressive symptoms and response to treatment, and provide information to participants to help them manage their symptoms and connect to appropriate resources. CMs also promote self care and help participants communicate directly with their physician(s); for participants whose depression is not improving, CMs interface with the provider for review and adjustment of the treatment plan.  Sample This study reports on 14,902 Medicare Beneficiaries participating in GRH’s MHS program who completed an initial Medicare Domain Assessment Tool (designated as mDAT1).  Data and Measures Data on GRH’s MHS beneficiaries come from three main sources: mDATs administered by GRH; data on beneficiary-reported use of prescription drugs, assessed via periodic interviews conducted by GRH’s CMs (typically in conjunction with mDATs); and Medicare eligibility and claims data provided to GRH by CMS. Demographics Limited demographic information was available via CMS, including beneficiaries’ age, sex, and race/ethnicity. Other sociodemographic measures, particularly education, literacy, employment status, and occupation, were available on fewer than 5% of the analysis sample. Clinical status and case mix Measures available via CMS included the condition(s) for which the beneficiary qualified for MHS (i.e., diabetes and CHF), beneficiaries’ HCC risk score (i.e., CMS’s version of the Hierarchical Condition Categories risk adjustment method), and “high,” “medium,” and “low” risk designations based on the HCC score. In addition, GRH developed a risk-tiering algorithm that used the HCC score and information from the mDAT to classify beneficiaries into “High Impact,” “Prevention,” and “Monitor” Level of Intervention risk categories. Depression status Information on possible depression came from four sources: the PHQ-2 screens administered as part of the mDATs (a score of 3 or higher, out of a possible 6 has been identified as the optimum cutoff point on the PHQ-2) 6 ; ICD-9 depression diagnosis codes from Medicare claims data (current depression: 296.2, 296.3, 298.0, 300.4, 309.1, 311; prior episodes of depression: 296.2–296.9, 298, 300.4, 309.0, 309.1, 309.28, 311); and beneficiary reports of using antidepressant medication, from GRH’s medication assessment interviews (any medication with an FDA indication for depression).  Demographics Limited demographic information was available via CMS, including beneficiaries’ age, sex, and race/ethnicity. Other sociodemographic measures, particularly education, literacy, employment status, and occupation, were available on fewer than 5% of the analysis sample.  Clinical status and case mix Measures available via CMS included the condition(s) for which the beneficiary qualified for MHS (i.e., diabetes and CHF), beneficiaries’ HCC risk score (i.e., CMS’s version of the Hierarchical Condition Categories risk adjustment method), and “high,” “medium,” and “low” risk designations based on the HCC score. In addition, GRH developed a risk-tiering algorithm that used the HCC score and information from the mDAT to classify beneficiaries into “High Impact,” “Prevention,” and “Monitor” Level of Intervention risk categories.  Depression status Information on possible depression came from four sources: the PHQ-2 screens administered as part of the mDATs (a score of 3 or higher, out of a possible 6 has been identified as the optimum cutoff point on the PHQ-2) 6 ; ICD-9 depression diagnosis codes from Medicare claims data (current depression: 296.2, 296.3, 298.0, 300.4, 309.1, 311; prior episodes of depression: 296.2–296.9, 298, 300.4, 309.0, 309.1, 309.28, 311); and beneficiary reports of using antidepressant medication, from GRH’s medication assessment interviews (any medication with an FDA indication for depression).  Analyses To assess the rate of possible depression in GRH’s MHS sample, we examined the overall fraction of beneficiaries who screened positive on the PHQ-2 at mDAT1, as well as the fraction with a recent depression diagnoses and/or antidepressant use. In addition, because CMs varied in their experience with depression, which might affect their administration of the PHQ-2, we examined whether PHQ-2 positive rates varied by CM, and possible correlates with such variation. Given lower-than-expected depression screening results and significant variation across CMs in PHQ-2 positive rates, GRH conducted interviews and a focus group with CMs. GRH invited CMs with both relatively low and relatively high PHQ-2 positive rates in their mDAT1 panels, to learn about CM’s perceptions regarding depression screening, including possible reasons for CM variations, and identify possible strategies to improve screening processes. These discussions confirmed that CMs often found it challenging to administer the PHQ-2 questions. mDAT 1s were conducted early on in the program where a focus on enrollment may have precluded the development of a trusting therapeutic relationship, where both the care manager and participant felt comfortable disclosing and discussing sensitive health issues and topics such as depression. CMs also described substantial ’competing demands,” particularly engaging participants in the MHS program and conducting data intensive initial clinical assessments. In response to these and other issues further defined in Table 1 , GRH conducted a focused retraining of all CMs to improve the level of competency and effectiveness of telephone-based depression screening and CMs’ comfort in addressing depression with medically ill older adults. This training included education on the use of the PHQ screening tool, on talking about depression with clients, and on dealing with high impact situations such as bereavement, grief, severe depression and suicide. While nearly all (99%) of mDAT1s were administered by telephone, some 14% of completed mDAT2s were administered by mail, via a “mail blitz” campaign by GRH intended to raise mDAT response rates, and as follow -up among beneficiaries who were difficult to reach by phone. Overall, 85% of beneficiaries (N=12,677) who completed mDAT1 completed mDAT2. We examined differences in PHQ-2 positive rates between phone-and mail -based mDATs, using bivariate analyses and also using multivariate logistic regression to account for possible differences in case mix. Finally, we examine the efficiency of alternative case-finding strategies for depression in GRH’s MHS sample. In particular, we illustrate the degree of independence and overlap between three sources of information on possible depression: PHQ-2 screens, beneficiary-reported use of antidepressant medication, and information on ICD-9 depression diagnoses from Medicare claims data.  FINDINGS Descriptive characteristics for the study sample are shown in Table 2 . The first column shows beneficiaries who completed mDAT1 by phone (an additional 190 beneficiaries who completed mDAT1 via face-to-face interview are excluded here). Beneficiaries are principally white, and slightly more than half are male. More than three-fourths have complex diabetes, while one-fifth have both diabetes and CHF. Nearly 14% received an ICD-9 diagnosis of depression in the year prior to mDAT1, 7% reported currently taking antidepressant medication, and just 5% screened positive for depression on the PHQ-2. Snowbirds, or beneficiaries who have recorded residences outside of the state of Florida, represent about 6% of the population. Figure 1 presents information on each CM’s beneficiary panel for conducting mDAT1. Overall, 77 different CMs administered mDAT1s. For the 46 who administered 50 or more by telephone, Figure 1 shows the fractions of each CM’s caseload screening positive on the PHQ-2 depression screen ( Fig. 1a ), with an ICD-9 depression diagnosis in the prior year ( Fig. 1b ), and classified as “high risk” based on the HCC risk adjustment score ( Fig. 1c ). Of these measures, the PHQ-2 positive rate is much more variable, and this variation cannot be accounted for by case mix. Indeed, for 10 of the 40 CMs who screened 200 or more MHS beneficiaries, the PHQ -2 positive rate was 2% or lower; two of these CMs, who each screened approximately 300 beneficiaries, did not have a single positive PHQ (detailed results available by request). In contrast, only two of the 45 CMs in Figure 1 had fewer than 10% of their caseload with a recent ICD-9 depression diagnosis (and the PHQ-2 positive rate of those two CMs was 5–6% at mDAT1). The second panel of Table 2 shows beneficiaries who completed mDAT2 by phone (84%) or mail (14%). (An additional 305 beneficiaries completed mDAT2 in person and are excluded here.) Compared with phone respondents, mail mDAT2 respondents are slightly older, and slightly more likely to be male and white (all p<0.05). Main clinical and risk characteristics do not differ statistically by phone vs. mail. However, mail respondents are more than twice as likely to screen positive for depression (p<0.001), despite being less likely to have an ICD -9 depression diagnosis in the prior year (p<0.001). We also used multivariate logistic regression to examine the effect of mDAT2 mode on PHQ-2 screening; controlling for the demographic and clinical characteristics in Table 2 , the predicted PHQ2 positive rate was 6.5% by phone and 14.1% by mail (p<0.001), i.e., adjusting for covariates increases the mDAT mode effect slightly (detailed results in Appendix Table 1 ). Finally, Table 3 illustrates the results of alternative case-finding strategies for depression. Specifically, we applied each of the three available indicators of possible depression – positive PHQ-2s, reported use of antidepressants, and ICD-9 depression diagnoses – in each of the eight possible sequences. For each step of each sequence, we list the cumulative and marginal fractions of beneficiaries identified by the given indicators. Based on telephone responses to both mDAT1 and mDAT2, ICD-9 codes identified the most new/additional beneficiaries, while PHQ-2 screens identified the fewest. Based on mail administration of mDAT2, however, this pattern changes, with antidepressant medication data identifying the most new/additional beneficiaries, followed closely by PHQ-2s, and with ICD-9 codes identifying the fewest.  DISCUSSION Results of telephone screening for depression using the PHQ-2 as a part of the mDAT suggest surprisingly low rates of depression and substantial variation in screener positive rates depending on the person administering the screens. Several instruments have been developed and tested as screens for depression in older adults 8 , 9 , 10 , Among the most commonly used tools are the Geriatric Depression Scale 11 and the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale 12 . The 2-item Patient Heath Questionnaire (PHQ-2) has become one of the most widely used screening instruments in recent years, due to its brevity and ease of use. Initially validated in large samples of mixed-aged primary care patients 6 , this 2-item screener has also been validated in VA populations of largely older medically ill adults 13 14 and more recently in a large nationally representative sample of community-living older adults 15 . In the latter study, 8,205 older adults were screened with the PHQ -2 and evaluated with a structured diagnostic interview for DSM-IV major depression with a total of 26 % of participants screening positive for depression The study found that the PHQ-2’s criterion validity for major depression was good (with a sensitivity of 100%, a specificity of 77%, and AUC of 0.88, and a positive predictive value of 14%). The Green Ribbon experience with administering the PHQ-2 by telephone found a substantially lower screener positive rate than the study reported by Li and colleagues 15 . Reasons for the differences might include the fact that in one case, trained research interviewers focusing specifically on depression administered the questions whereas in the case of GRH’s MHS program, the questions are administered by CMs who may have had little or no experience or exposure to depression assessments, especially in a telephonic format delivered early in a therapeutic relationship and for whom administration of a depression screen in the context of the mDAT is only a small part of their overall scope of work. It is also possible that the MHS population is more medically ill than the participants in the study reported by Li and colleagues, and concerns have been raised about the performance of depression screeners in medically ill populations 16 and the old old 17 . The fact that the mail-version of the PHQ-2 screen yielded a consistently higher screener positive rates than telephonic administration of these screens suggests that the problem may not be primarily that of the particular screening tool but rather related to the method of administration. GRH focused retraining of all care managers to improve the effectiveness of telephone-based depression screening and CMs’ comfort in addressing depression with medically ill older adults. This training was generally well received and CMs described it as helpful; and perhaps as a result of training, mDAT2 screener positive rates were slightly higher than mDAT1 (6.6% vs. 5.1%) but remained lower than expected. In part because of persistently low telephone screening rates, a mailing of PHQ-2 screens was added during the collection of mDAT2. Such a mail-based approach has been successfully used in a study with over 10,000 older primary care patients at Group Health Cooperative 18 . Consistent with this earlier work, we observed substantially higher rates of positive depression screens (doubling from 6.6 % to 13.6 %), especially after adjusting for differences in beneficiaries who received telephone or mail screens for mDAT2. Based on the initial experience with screening, the case-finding strategy for depression was expanded to include information about depression status from ICD-9 claims diagnoses and self report of antidepressant medication use. We found that approximately 10 % of program participants had a claims diagnosis of depression in the year prior to program entry, a finding that is consistent with data from the Medicare current beneficiary survey and other Medicare claims data 19 and over 15 % of program participants reported the use of anti depressant medication. The addition of depression diagnoses and antidepressant medications substantially improved our case finding methods, increasing the proportion of participants with possible depression from 6.6 % (in the case of telephone screening) and 13.6 % (in the case of mail screening) to about 28 .5 %. Using the information available, we explored several case-finding strategies (summarized in the models presented in table 3 ) for this chronically ill Medicare population and based on our experience to date, we recommend the following case-finding method: (1) mail screening using the PHQ-2 (perhaps augmented by telephone-screening in patients who do not return a mail screen), (2) assessment of antidepressant use over the prior year, and (3) checking for beneficiaries with ICD-9 depression claims who have not been identified by one of the two prior methods. Using this approach, the number of participants who would need a telephone screen would be substantially smaller, and a group of staff who are well trained and experienced in telephone-based depression screening could be designated to perform such screens, which should decrease variability of results. Limitations of this work include the fact that we do not report on the entire sample eligible for GRH’s MHS program but only those 14,902 participants for whom depression screening information (via mDAT) was available. Another limitation includes the fact that we do not know the exact denominator of the sample for mail screening but focus on the results of returned screens. However, when we adjusted for sociodemographic and clinical differences between individuals screened in person and by mail and after adjustment, projected screener positive rates for patients screened by mail actually increased. Finally, the validity of the case finding methods used may be limited (e.g., patients reporting the use of an antidepressant may be taking the medication for another indication such as chronic pain) and we do not have a ‘gold standard’ diagnosis of depression. It is important to point out that screening and other case findings strategies are only the beginning of effective care management of depression. Depression screening and systematic feedback to providers alone have been shown to increase diagnosis rates but not to improve depression outcomes. 20 On the other hand, studies have shown that screening combined with methods to improve exposure to effective treatment does improve depression outcomes. This is the reason that the National Preventive Services Task Force (NPSTF) recommends routine screening for depression only if adequate mechanisms are in place to provide depression treatment 21 . Effective care programs for depression go well beyond case finding and focus on the identification of patients who are not treated or not effectively treated and patients who are in treatment and persistently depressed (e.g., repeat screener positive). Future research will attempt to evaluate the effectiveness of care management and depression treatment in the context of MHS.  DISCUSSION Results of telephone screening for depression using the PHQ-2 as a part of the mDAT suggest surprisingly low rates of depression and substantial variation in screener positive rates depending on the person administering the screens. Several instruments have been developed and tested as screens for depression in older adults 8 , 9 , 10 , Among the most commonly used tools are the Geriatric Depression Scale 11 and the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale 12 . The 2-item Patient Heath Questionnaire (PHQ-2) has become one of the most widely used screening instruments in recent years, due to its brevity and ease of use. Initially validated in large samples of mixed-aged primary care patients 6 , this 2-item screener has also been validated in VA populations of largely older medically ill adults 13 14 and more recently in a large nationally representative sample of community-living older adults 15 . In the latter study, 8,205 older adults were screened with the PHQ -2 and evaluated with a structured diagnostic interview for DSM-IV major depression with a total of 26 % of participants screening positive for depression The study found that the PHQ-2’s criterion validity for major depression was good (with a sensitivity of 100%, a specificity of 77%, and AUC of 0.88, and a positive predictive value of 14%). The Green Ribbon experience with administering the PHQ-2 by telephone found a substantially lower screener positive rate than the study reported by Li and colleagues 15 . Reasons for the differences might include the fact that in one case, trained research interviewers focusing specifically on depression administered the questions whereas in the case of GRH’s MHS program, the questions are administered by CMs who may have had little or no experience or exposure to depression assessments, especially in a telephonic format delivered early in a therapeutic relationship and for whom administration of a depression screen in the context of the mDAT is only a small part of their overall scope of work. It is also possible that the MHS population is more medically ill than the participants in the study reported by Li and colleagues, and concerns have been raised about the performance of depression screeners in medically ill populations 16 and the old old 17 . The fact that the mail-version of the PHQ-2 screen yielded a consistently higher screener positive rates than telephonic administration of these screens suggests that the problem may not be primarily that of the particular screening tool but rather related to the method of administration. GRH focused retraining of all care managers to improve the effectiveness of telephone-based depression screening and CMs’ comfort in addressing depression with medically ill older adults. This training was generally well received and CMs described it as helpful; and perhaps as a result of training, mDAT2 screener positive rates were slightly higher than mDAT1 (6.6% vs. 5.1%) but remained lower than expected. In part because of persistently low telephone screening rates, a mailing of PHQ-2 screens was added during the collection of mDAT2. Such a mail-based approach has been successfully used in a study with over 10,000 older primary care patients at Group Health Cooperative 18 . Consistent with this earlier work, we observed substantially higher rates of positive depression screens (doubling from 6.6 % to 13.6 %), especially after adjusting for differences in beneficiaries who received telephone or mail screens for mDAT2. Based on the initial experience with screening, the case-finding strategy for depression was expanded to include information about depression status from ICD-9 claims diagnoses and self report of antidepressant medication use. We found that approximately 10 % of program participants had a claims diagnosis of depression in the year prior to program entry, a finding that is consistent with data from the Medicare current beneficiary survey and other Medicare claims data 19 and over 15 % of program participants reported the use of anti depressant medication. The addition of depression diagnoses and antidepressant medications substantially improved our case finding methods, increasing the proportion of participants with possible depression from 6.6 % (in the case of telephone screening) and 13.6 % (in the case of mail screening) to about 28 .5 %. Using the information available, we explored several case-finding strategies (summarized in the models presented in table 3 ) for this chronically ill Medicare population and based on our experience to date, we recommend the following case-finding method: (1) mail screening using the PHQ-2 (perhaps augmented by telephone-screening in patients who do not return a mail screen), (2) assessment of antidepressant use over the prior year, and (3) checking for beneficiaries with ICD-9 depression claims who have not been identified by one of the two prior methods. Using this approach, the number of participants who would need a telephone screen would be substantially smaller, and a group of staff who are well trained and experienced in telephone-based depression screening could be designated to perform such screens, which should decrease variability of results. Limitations of this work include the fact that we do not report on the entire sample eligible for GRH’s MHS program but only those 14,902 participants for whom depression screening information (via mDAT) was available. Another limitation includes the fact that we do not know the exact denominator of the sample for mail screening but focus on the results of returned screens. However, when we adjusted for sociodemographic and clinical differences between individuals screened in person and by mail and after adjustment, projected screener positive rates for patients screened by mail actually increased. Finally, the validity of the case finding methods used may be limited (e.g., patients reporting the use of an antidepressant may be taking the medication for another indication such as chronic pain) and we do not have a ‘gold standard’ diagnosis of depression. It is important to point out that screening and other case findings strategies are only the beginning of effective care management of depression. Depression screening and systematic feedback to providers alone have been shown to increase diagnosis rates but not to improve depression outcomes. 20 On the other hand, studies have shown that screening combined with methods to improve exposure to effective treatment does improve depression outcomes. This is the reason that the National Preventive Services Task Force (NPSTF) recommends routine screening for depression only if adequate mechanisms are in place to provide depression treatment 21 . Effective care programs for depression go well beyond case finding and focus on the identification of patients who are not treated or not effectively treated and patients who are in treatment and persistently depressed (e.g., repeat screener positive). Future research will attempt to evaluate the effectiveness of care management and depression treatment in the context of MHS. 