Loss of T cell-mediated antitumor immunity after construct-specific downregulation of retrovirally encoded T-cell receptor expression in vivo Adoptive T-cell therapy is clinically efficacious in the treatment of select cancers. However, it is often difficult to obtain adequate numbers of tumor-specific T cells for therapy. One method for overcoming this limitation is to generate tumor-specific T cells by retrovirally mediated T-cell-receptor (TCR) gene transfer. However, despite instances of therapeutic success, major obstacles remain, including attaining the survival of retrovirally modified T cells in vivo as well as inducing long-term and multi-gene retroviral expression. Using a murine model of adoptively transferred retrovirally modified CD8+ T cells, where antitumor immunity was dependent on sustained, multigene expression, we found that in vitro assays are poor indicators of in vivo efficacy. Despite persisting for over 9 months in a nonlymphopenic environment, genetically modified T cells exhibited discordant retrovirally mediated gene expression in vivo not readily evident from initial in vitro assays. In particular, one of the two TCR subunit genes necessary for antigen specificity was selectively lost in vivo . As this discordant gene expression was associated with the loss of antitumor immunity, consideration of these findings may provide guidance in the design, evaluation and application of retroviral vectors for use in the treatment of cancer and other human disease.  Introduction Adoptive T-cell therapy has shown efficacy in the treatment of select human cancers. 1 However, it is often difficult to isolate and expand tumor-specific T cells for subsequent adoptive transfer. One approach for overcoming this problem is to use retroviral vectors to artificially bestow tumor specificity to T cells by the transfer of tumor-specific T-cell-receptor (TCR) genes. 2 – 5 Not only has this approach shown success in mouse models, 6 , 7 but also efficacy was recently demonstrated in human cancer patients. 8 In the latter case, Morgan et al . demonstrated objective tumor responses in 2 of 15 patients adoptively transferred with TCR gene-modified T cells. Despite these successes, significant limitations remain. One obstacle includes the difficulty in achieving the long-term survival of adoptively transferred T cells. The ability of adoptively transferred T cells to persist is important for the ability to clear tumor, 9 and in the study mentioned previously, Morgen et al . 8 showed that in the two responding patients, donor T cells persisted at high levels for at least 1 year after transfer. The complexity of this issue is often overlooked as the survival of adoptively transferred T cells is often measured in hosts that have undergone irradiation or other forms of cytoreduction depleting the host lymphocyte pool. In such cases of lymphodepletion, donor T cells engraft and survive much more efficiently. 10 , 11 Were it possible to more efficiently engraft donor T cells in nonlymphopenic hosts, adoptive T-cell therapy might be more effective. Another limitation in applying TCR gene transfer as a therapeutic is the inability to achieve reliable long-term and multigene expression in vivo . Successful TCR gene transfer to redirect T-cell specificity requires the sustained expression of two distinct TCR subunit genes (either the ? and ? TCR subunits, or in some cases the ? and ? TCR subunits), and in addition, the utility of retroviral vectors is often enhanced by the inclusion of a third gene mediating the selection of transduced cells. Although careful planning in the design of new retroviral vectors may reduce the likelihood of suboptimal gene expression, practical experience often tells us that the process is often unpredictable. 12 In the study by Morgen et al ., 8 despite the persistence of donor T cells in two patients, retrovirally mediated TCR expression declined over time, likely limiting the therapeutic value. As it is usually difficult to evaluate whether a given retroviral vector can direct gene expression in vivo , gene expression is often initially evaluated using in vitro assays. In particular, immortalized cell lines, which are easy to cultivate, are frequently selected as initial targets for retroviral transduction. Unlike primary cells that are in most situations the cellular targets for gene therapies, immortalized cell lines do not require the same degree of external stimuli to induce proliferation. The latter is necessary for retroviral transduction with the Moloney murine leukemia virus (MoMLV)-derived retroviral vectors. 13 These qualities make immortalized cell lines convenient vehicles to rapidly assess newly developed retroviral vectors for appropriate gene expression and function. For retroviral vectors that direct the expression of multiple genes, the use of an immortalized cell line can be particularly useful, as the evaluation of the vector may require more complex testing and the use of greater numbers of transduced cells. However, although the aforementioned differences that make them attractive in vitro targets for vector screening, it is not clear to what extent results obtained with retrovirally transduced immortalized cells lines are representative of those obtained with retrovirally transduced primary cells. Moreover, retrovirally modified cells may behave differently in vitro as compared with the complex in vivo environment. For this study, we evaluated these issues using a previously characterized multigene retroviral vector designated ovASBN . 14 This retroviral vector encodes the genes to direct the expression of the ovalbumin-specific OT-I TCR (including the genes encoding for both the ? and ? OT-I TCR subunits) 15 , 16 and the drug-resistant gene product to neomycin. The TCR ?-subunit gene is driven off the MoMLV LTR promoter, whereas the TCR ?-subunit gene is driven off the SR? promoter. The neomycin drug resistance gene is driven off an internal ribosome entry site (IRES) derived from the encephalomyocarditis virus. We have previously demonstrated T cells retrovirally modified with this ovASBN retroviral vector (designated B6ovASBN-vector T cells) could functionally recognize relevant antigen in vitro with the same avidity as its parental T-cell clone. 14 Building on these previous results, our current focus was to evaluate the ability of B6ovASBN-vector cells to function in a therapeutic manner in vivo . Contrary to our expectations based on in vitro results, we found no evidence that B6ovASBN-vector cells could function therapeutically and mediate tumor regression in vivo . This was in contrast to the potent therapeutic effect of our positive control T cells and despite the ability of adoptively transferred B6ovASBN-vector cells to persist in vivo . Detailed analysis of this problem revealed that there was discordant gene expression of the retrovirally encoded genes in vivo , when compared with what we observed in vitro . Specifically, we observed a loss in the expression of one of the retrovirally encoded genes in vivo and in certain in vitro situations. Interpretation of these results may provide guidance for the development and utilization of retroviral vectors in other circumstances.  Materials and methods Animals All mice used were 6–14 weeks old, purchased from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME), and maintained in specific pathogen-free conditions at the Medical University of South Carolina (Charleston, SC) in accordance with the National Institutes of Health guidelines. C57BL/6-Ly5.1 (B6.SJL-PtprcaPep3b/BoyJ) mice are congenic to wild-type C57BL/6-Ly5.2 mice at the Ly5 (CD45) allele, 17 use of which allowed us to distinguish donor T cells following adoptive transfer. OT-I TCR transgenic mice express the OT-I TCR (Va2/V?5) transgene encoding a TCR specific for the OVA epitope (SIINFEKL-H2-Kb). 16 OT-I TCR transgenic/Ly5.1 mice were generated by crossing OT-I mice to C57BL/6-Ly5.1 mice. Antibodies and other reagents The following monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) were used for this study: B20.1, anti-V?2; MR9-4, anti-V?5; MR5-2, anti-V?8.1/8.2; 145-2C11, anti-CD3?; 37.51, anti-CD28; A20, anti-Ly5.1 (CD45.1); 53-6.7, anti-CD8; IM7, anti-CD44; MEL-14, anti-CD62L; 53-6.7, anti-CD8; and 2.4G2, FC Block (all from BD Pharmingen, La Jolla, CA). Murine interleukin-2 (IL-2) was reconstituted in 0.1% bovine serum albumin (BSA)/phosphate-buffered saline and stored at 20 1C according to the manufacturer's recommendation (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN). The SIINFEKL peptide (OVA H-2Kb) epitope was synthesized by American Peptide (Sunnyvale, CA). Carboxyfluorescein diacetate, succinimidyl ester (CFSE) and carboxy SNARF-1, acetoxymethyl ester, acetate (SNARF) were purchased from Molecular Probes Inc. (Eugene, OR). Flow cytometry Cells were analyzed by flow cytometric analysis as previously described. 18 Briefly, cells were washed in fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) buffer consisting of 0.5% BSA and 0.02% sodium azide in Hanks’ Balanced Salt Solution. Cells were prestained with Fc block for 5 min at 4 °C, incubated with mAb for 30 min at 4 °C and washed twice before analysis. Cell surface immunofluorescence was measured using a FACSCalibur flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) and analyzed with FlowJo software (Ashland, OR) or CellQuest software (BD Biosciences). Cell lines All cell lines were maintained in complete RPMI-based medium as described previously. 14 B16-ova cells (B16 cells transfected with the ovalbumin gene) 19 were kindly provided by R Dutton (Trudeau Institute, NY) with the permission of E Lord (University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY) and maintained in complete medium supplemented with 500 ?g ml–1 geneticin (also called G418 or neomycin; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The parental cell B16 line is a melanoma derived from C57BL/6-Ly5.2 mice. 20 58?– ?– cells were kindly provided by E Palmer (Laboratory of Transplantation Immunology and Nephrology, University Hospital, Basel, Switzerland). 21 After retroviral transduction, 58?– ?– cells were selected in 800 ?g ml–1 G418 and/or 400 ?g ml–1 hygromycin B (Boehringer Mannheim, Indianapolis, IN). Retroviral vector and supernatant production Constructs containing OT-I TCR genes were kindly provided by Francis Carbone (University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia). 15 As previously described, 14 the ovASBN retroviral vector was created by the insertion of the OT-TCR ? gene into the Xho I restriction site and the insertion of the OT-I TCR ? gene into the Sal I restriction site of the ‘pg1 SAMEN SR?’ vector. For construction of the ovBSN and ovSBN constructs, the OT-I TCR ? gene was inserted into the Sal I or Xho I restriction enzyme sites, respectively. For construction of the ovASN and ovSAN constructs, the OT-I TCR ? gene was inserted into the Sal I or Xho I restriction enzyme sites, respectively. For construction of the ovAN and ovBN constructs, OT-I TCR ? and ? genes, respectively, were cloned into the Xho I restriction enzyme site of the previously described ‘pgSAMEN’ vector. 22 For the generation of constructs encoding the hygromycin B resistance gene, we modified the ‘pgSAMEN’ vector by the removal of the IRES-neomycin coding sequence ( Xho I/ BamH I fragment) and replacing this with IRES-hygromycin B coding sequence ( BamH I/ Xba I fragment from the ‘pIREShyg’ vector (Clontech, Mountain View, CA), resulting in the creation of the ‘pgSAMEH’ vector. The ovAH and ovBH retroviral constructs were then created by cloning the OT-I TCR ? and ? genes into the Sal I restriction enzyme site of the ‘pgSAMEH’ vector, respectively. All retroviral vectors were transfected into GPE86 cells kindly provided by A Bank (Columbia University, New York, NY). 23 Packaging cell clones were isolated by limiting dilution and screened for those producing high-titer vector. Twenty-four hours before harvesting retroviral supernatant, the tissue culture medium was changed and retroviral supernatant was harvested, filtered (0.2 ?m polyethersulfone) and frozen until use. Transduction of murine T cells Mouse T cells were retrovirally transduced as previously described 14 in a manner that selectively induces the proliferation of CD8+ T cells. 24 , 25 In brief, splenocytes were harvested from C57BL/6-Ly5.1 mice and activated with plate-bound anti-CD3? and anti-CD28 antibodies. Forty-eight hours after stimulation, cultures were maintained by adding with murine IL-2 (20 ng ml1) and viral supernatant every other day. On day 10 of culture, cells were restimulated with plate-bound ant-CD3? and anti-CD28 antibodies in the presence of G418 (500 ?g ml–1). On day 12, cultures were replated with IL-2 and G418. G418-resistant and live cells were expanded and used for experiments on days 15–17 of culture. In experiments where culture conditions were extended (as in Figure 6 ), cells were maintained at 1–2 million cells per milliliter and murine IL-2 (20 ng ml1) was added every other day. Nomenclature for retrovirally modified T cells consisted of the mouse strain used for transduction plus the retroviral vector name in superscript (mouse strainname of vector). B16-ova tumor challenge The B16-ova tumor challenge model used was a modification of a previously reported protocol. 26 C57BL/6 mice were first injected intravenously (i.v.) with 500 000 B16-ova tumor cells. After 3 days, mice were treated by intravenous injection with 10 million retrovirally transduced T cells. Approximately 17 days after tumor challenge, mice were killed and lungs were harvested. Metastases were easily identified as discrete black spots on normal lung tissue and were counted in a blinded fashion. In vivo <italic>cytotoxicity assay</italic> The in vivo cytotoxicity model was a modification of a previously reported protocol. 27 Briefly, spleen cells were harvested from C57BL/6 mice and separated into two groups. One group was pulsed with SIINFEKL peptide (5 ?g ml–1) for 2–3 h, whereas the other group was incubated in media alone. After the incubation, each group of cells was washed 3× and then labeled with a fluorescent dye. Target cells with peptide were labeled with 1.5 ? m CFSE and target cells without peptide were labeled with 1.0 ? m SNARF. In some experiments, target cells without peptide were labeled with 0.375 ? m CFSE instead of 1.0 ? m SNARF. Labeling was performed according to the directions from the manufacturer, Molecular Probes. As indicated, effecter T cells were also adoptively transferred into mice either before or after injection of target cells. Twelve hours after injection of target cells, spleens were harvested and analyzed by flow cytometry for target cells based on fluorescence with CFSE or SNARF.  Animals All mice used were 6–14 weeks old, purchased from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME), and maintained in specific pathogen-free conditions at the Medical University of South Carolina (Charleston, SC) in accordance with the National Institutes of Health guidelines. C57BL/6-Ly5.1 (B6.SJL-PtprcaPep3b/BoyJ) mice are congenic to wild-type C57BL/6-Ly5.2 mice at the Ly5 (CD45) allele, 17 use of which allowed us to distinguish donor T cells following adoptive transfer. OT-I TCR transgenic mice express the OT-I TCR (Va2/V?5) transgene encoding a TCR specific for the OVA epitope (SIINFEKL-H2-Kb). 16 OT-I TCR transgenic/Ly5.1 mice were generated by crossing OT-I mice to C57BL/6-Ly5.1 mice.  Antibodies and other reagents The following monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) were used for this study: B20.1, anti-V?2; MR9-4, anti-V?5; MR5-2, anti-V?8.1/8.2; 145-2C11, anti-CD3?; 37.51, anti-CD28; A20, anti-Ly5.1 (CD45.1); 53-6.7, anti-CD8; IM7, anti-CD44; MEL-14, anti-CD62L; 53-6.7, anti-CD8; and 2.4G2, FC Block (all from BD Pharmingen, La Jolla, CA). Murine interleukin-2 (IL-2) was reconstituted in 0.1% bovine serum albumin (BSA)/phosphate-buffered saline and stored at 20 1C according to the manufacturer's recommendation (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN). The SIINFEKL peptide (OVA H-2Kb) epitope was synthesized by American Peptide (Sunnyvale, CA). Carboxyfluorescein diacetate, succinimidyl ester (CFSE) and carboxy SNARF-1, acetoxymethyl ester, acetate (SNARF) were purchased from Molecular Probes Inc. (Eugene, OR).  Flow cytometry Cells were analyzed by flow cytometric analysis as previously described. 18 Briefly, cells were washed in fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) buffer consisting of 0.5% BSA and 0.02% sodium azide in Hanks’ Balanced Salt Solution. Cells were prestained with Fc block for 5 min at 4 °C, incubated with mAb for 30 min at 4 °C and washed twice before analysis. Cell surface immunofluorescence was measured using a FACSCalibur flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) and analyzed with FlowJo software (Ashland, OR) or CellQuest software (BD Biosciences).  Cell lines All cell lines were maintained in complete RPMI-based medium as described previously. 14 B16-ova cells (B16 cells transfected with the ovalbumin gene) 19 were kindly provided by R Dutton (Trudeau Institute, NY) with the permission of E Lord (University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY) and maintained in complete medium supplemented with 500 ?g ml–1 geneticin (also called G418 or neomycin; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The parental cell B16 line is a melanoma derived from C57BL/6-Ly5.2 mice. 20 58?– ?– cells were kindly provided by E Palmer (Laboratory of Transplantation Immunology and Nephrology, University Hospital, Basel, Switzerland). 21 After retroviral transduction, 58?– ?– cells were selected in 800 ?g ml–1 G418 and/or 400 ?g ml–1 hygromycin B (Boehringer Mannheim, Indianapolis, IN).  Retroviral vector and supernatant production Constructs containing OT-I TCR genes were kindly provided by Francis Carbone (University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia). 15 As previously described, 14 the ovASBN retroviral vector was created by the insertion of the OT-TCR ? gene into the Xho I restriction site and the insertion of the OT-I TCR ? gene into the Sal I restriction site of the ‘pg1 SAMEN SR?’ vector. For construction of the ovBSN and ovSBN constructs, the OT-I TCR ? gene was inserted into the Sal I or Xho I restriction enzyme sites, respectively. For construction of the ovASN and ovSAN constructs, the OT-I TCR ? gene was inserted into the Sal I or Xho I restriction enzyme sites, respectively. For construction of the ovAN and ovBN constructs, OT-I TCR ? and ? genes, respectively, were cloned into the Xho I restriction enzyme site of the previously described ‘pgSAMEN’ vector. 22 For the generation of constructs encoding the hygromycin B resistance gene, we modified the ‘pgSAMEN’ vector by the removal of the IRES-neomycin coding sequence ( Xho I/ BamH I fragment) and replacing this with IRES-hygromycin B coding sequence ( BamH I/ Xba I fragment from the ‘pIREShyg’ vector (Clontech, Mountain View, CA), resulting in the creation of the ‘pgSAMEH’ vector. The ovAH and ovBH retroviral constructs were then created by cloning the OT-I TCR ? and ? genes into the Sal I restriction enzyme site of the ‘pgSAMEH’ vector, respectively. All retroviral vectors were transfected into GPE86 cells kindly provided by A Bank (Columbia University, New York, NY). 23 Packaging cell clones were isolated by limiting dilution and screened for those producing high-titer vector. Twenty-four hours before harvesting retroviral supernatant, the tissue culture medium was changed and retroviral supernatant was harvested, filtered (0.2 ?m polyethersulfone) and frozen until use.  Transduction of murine T cells Mouse T cells were retrovirally transduced as previously described 14 in a manner that selectively induces the proliferation of CD8+ T cells. 24 , 25 In brief, splenocytes were harvested from C57BL/6-Ly5.1 mice and activated with plate-bound anti-CD3? and anti-CD28 antibodies. Forty-eight hours after stimulation, cultures were maintained by adding with murine IL-2 (20 ng ml1) and viral supernatant every other day. On day 10 of culture, cells were restimulated with plate-bound ant-CD3? and anti-CD28 antibodies in the presence of G418 (500 ?g ml–1). On day 12, cultures were replated with IL-2 and G418. G418-resistant and live cells were expanded and used for experiments on days 15–17 of culture. In experiments where culture conditions were extended (as in Figure 6 ), cells were maintained at 1–2 million cells per milliliter and murine IL-2 (20 ng ml1) was added every other day. Nomenclature for retrovirally modified T cells consisted of the mouse strain used for transduction plus the retroviral vector name in superscript (mouse strainname of vector).  B16-ova tumor challenge The B16-ova tumor challenge model used was a modification of a previously reported protocol. 26 C57BL/6 mice were first injected intravenously (i.v.) with 500 000 B16-ova tumor cells. After 3 days, mice were treated by intravenous injection with 10 million retrovirally transduced T cells. Approximately 17 days after tumor challenge, mice were killed and lungs were harvested. Metastases were easily identified as discrete black spots on normal lung tissue and were counted in a blinded fashion.  In vivo <italic>cytotoxicity assay</italic> The in vivo cytotoxicity model was a modification of a previously reported protocol. 27 Briefly, spleen cells were harvested from C57BL/6 mice and separated into two groups. One group was pulsed with SIINFEKL peptide (5 ?g ml–1) for 2–3 h, whereas the other group was incubated in media alone. After the incubation, each group of cells was washed 3× and then labeled with a fluorescent dye. Target cells with peptide were labeled with 1.5 ? m CFSE and target cells without peptide were labeled with 1.0 ? m SNARF. In some experiments, target cells without peptide were labeled with 0.375 ? m CFSE instead of 1.0 ? m SNARF. Labeling was performed according to the directions from the manufacturer, Molecular Probes. As indicated, effecter T cells were also adoptively transferred into mice either before or after injection of target cells. Twelve hours after injection of target cells, spleens were harvested and analyzed by flow cytometry for target cells based on fluorescence with CFSE or SNARF.  Results <italic>The functional ability of B6<sup>ovASBN-vector</sup> cells</italic> in vivo We have previously demonstrated that T cells retrovirally modified with the ovASBN vector (B6ovASBN-vector T cells) could recognize antigen in vitro with the same avidity as their parental T-cell clone. Therefore, we predicted that these B6ovASBN-vector T cells would be efficacious at mediating antitumor immunity of tumors expressing relevant antigen. We tested this by injecting C57BL/6 mice intravenously with the well-characterized ovalbumin-expressing B16-ova tumor. 19 Three days after tumor injection, mice were treated by the adoptive transfer of 10 million retrovirally transduced B6ovASBN-vector T cells. As controls, we adoptively transferred both negative and positive control T cells. Negative control T cells (designated B6control-vector) were generated by transducing C57BL/6T cells with a control retroviral vector, whereas positive control cells (designated OT-Icontrol-vector) were generated by transducing antigen-specific TCR transgenic OT-I T cells 16 with the same control vector. Three weeks after adoptive T-cell transfer, lungs were harvested and metastases were counted. As shown in Figure 1 , adoptive transfer with positive control OT-Icontrol-vector cells almost completely eliminated all lung metastases. However, adoptive transfer of B6ovASBN-vector cells failed to mediate any reduction in the number of lung metastases when compared with tumor-bearing mice either given 10 million negative control B6control-vector cells or not treated with an adoptive transfer of T cells. The inability of B6ovASBN-vector cells to mediate an antitumor effect was not due to an insufficient number of antigen-specific cells, given that as few as 1 million positive control cells (OT-Icontrol-vector) could mediate an almost complete reduction in the number of lung metastases (data not shown). One explanation for the lack of therapeutic effect of B6ovASBN-vector cells in vivo might be a loss of antigen-specific avidity in vivo . In our previous report, we demonstrated that B6ovASBN-vector cells have a high antigen-specific avidity in vitro similar to the positive control (OT-Icontrol-vector). However, it is possible that the relative avidity could be altered in vivo as compared with the in vitro environment. To address the question of antigen-specific avidity, we used peptide-pulsed cells as targets in vivo instead of tumor cells. The advantage of peptide-pulsed target cells is that they likely express a much higher level of antigen on their surface than tumor cells. Thus, if the B6ovASBN-vector cells have a moderate reduction in antigen-specific avidity in vivo , we would expect them to likely retain the capacity to lyse peptide-pulsed target cells. However, we found no evidence that B6ovASBN-vector cells retained any ability to recognize antigen in vivo . For these experiments, mice were adoptively transferred with a mixture of target cells including peptide (OVA)-pulsed and unpulsed splenocytes. To allow their identification, the target cells were either CFSE-labeled (peptide-pulsed target cells) or SNARF-labeled (unpulsed target cells). Six hours after adoptive transfer of target cells, mice were adoptively transferred with 3 million retrovirally modified T cells. As shown in Supplementary Figure 1, the adoptive transfer of positive control cells (OT-Icontrol-vector) into target cell-bearing mice resulted in the specific loss of almost all peptide-pulsed target cells. However, the adoptive transfer of B6ovASBN-vector cells again failed to show any preferential loss of peptide-pulsed target cells when compared with either mice given 3 million negative control cells (B6control-vector) or mice not given any T cells. As in the previous experiment, the adoptive transfer of as few as 1 million positive control OT-Icontrol-vector cells resulted in antigen-specific cytotoxicity in vivo . Collectively, the results from these experiments show that unlike the ability of B6ovASBN-vector cells to mediate antigen-specific functional ability in vitro ,these B6ovASBN-vector cells appeared to lack this functional capability in vivo . Furthermore, this functional deficiency in vivo was most likely not a result of a subtle loss in antigen-specific avidity. <italic>B6<sup>ovASBN-vector</sup> cells survive and disseminate</italic> in vivo A second potential explanation that could account for the discrepancy between the ability of the positive control OT-Icontrol-vector cells and B6ovASBN-vector cells to mediate antigen-specific functional ability might be a failure for the B6ovASBN-vector cells to survive and disseminate in vivo . We addressed this by adoptively transferring retrovirally modified T cells into unirradiated Ly5 congenic B6 mice and assessing the distribution of the adoptively transferred cells in different organs over time. As shown in Figure 2 , retrovirally modified T cells were capable of surviving and disseminating to various organs throughout the mouse. Initially, during the first 5 days, the highest percentage of donor cells was found in the lung and the liver, consistent with where activated T cells would be expected to localize after intravenous tail vein injection. 28 Subsequently, the percentage of donor cells in the lung and the liver gradually decreased. In other sites, including the spleen, lymph node (LN), and peripheral blood (PBL), the percentage of donor cells peaked around days 7–14, after which there was a gradual decrease in the percentage of donor cells. We observed no differences between the distribution and survival of B6ovASBN-vector cells and the positive control OT-Icontrol-vector cells (data not shown). These results clearly demonstrate that the inability of the retrovirally modified T cells to function in vivo was not related to a failure to survive or disseminate to the appropriate locale. B6<sup>ovASBN-vector</sup> cells display discordant gene expression in vivo Having demonstrated the capacity of B6ovASBN-vector cells to localize appropriately in vivo , we next assessed whether these cells also maintained expression of the retrovirally encoded TCR ?- and ?-subunits in vivo , a prerequisite for the possession of functional activity. Because there are no clonotypic antibodies available against the OT-I TCR, we utilized antibodies against the shared V?2 and V?5 regions used by the ?- and ?-subunits of the OT-I TCR. B6ovASBN-vector cells showed a high but heterogeneous level of TCR V?2 expression in vivo ( Figure 3 , top panel), similar to the pattern of expression observed in vitro . 14 Also as observed previously in vitro , in vivo we found homogeneous levels of the TCR V?2 on a fraction of control B6control-vector cells. As these control B6control-vector cells have not been retrovirally modified with a V?2 gene containing retroviral vector, these 5–10% of cells expressing homogeneous V?2 are representative of T cells having randomly incorporating the endogenous V?2 region into the ?-subunit of their TCR. Thus, to obtain an estimate of the percentage of B6ovASBN-vector cells expressing retrovirally encoded V?2, the percentage of cells expressing the endogenous subunit as observed on control B6control-vector cells must first be subtracted. Even taking this into account, the results in Figure 3 clearly show a high but heterogeneous level of retrovirally encoded V?2 subunit in B6ovASBN-vector cells. In stark contrast with the obvious expression of retrovirally encoded V?2, we were unable to detect retrovirally encoded V?5 expression on B6ovASBN-vector cells in vivo ( Figure 3 , middle panel). This was true of B6ovASBN-vector cells isolated from either the lung or the liver at day 3 or 4, respectively, after adoptive transfer. We also assessed the expression of V?5 at other time points and in other anatomical locations, but consistently failed to observe any expression of V?5 above that of the 10–15% of T cells randomly incorporating this subunit into their endogenous TCR repertoire (data not shown). This striking finding indicates that in vivo ,B6ovASBN-vector cells are able to maintain normal levels of retrovirally encoded V?2 expression, but that these same cells are unable to maintain the expression of the retrovirally encoded V?5 TCR subunit. As a control, we also assessed the expression of an irrelevant TCR variable region, V?8 ( Figure 3 , bottom panel). As expected, this variable region was used to an equal extent on both B6ovASBN-vector cells and negative control B6control-vector cells. As an additional control, we also assessed the expression of V?2, V?5 and V?8 in vivo on positive control OT-Icontrol-vector cells. As previously observed in vitro , 14 these positive control cells have a high level of V?2 and V?5 expressions, but not V?8 expression (see Supplementary Figure 2). Cumulatively, these data indicate that the differences we have observed with V?2 expression among the different T-cell populations are specifically related to changes resulting from expression of the retrovirally encoded TCR subunit, and not a result of the random outgrowth of clonal populations of T cells. The ovASBN retroviral vector directs sustained TCR expression in the absence of drug selection The results from Figure 3 imply that the inability of B6ovASBN-vector cells to function in a therapeutic manner was most likely a direct consequence of the failure of these cells to maintain retrovirally encoded V?5 expression in vivo . This was unexpected, as we had previously shown in vitro that B6ovASBN-vector cells both express the retrovirally encoded V?5 and function in an antigen-specific manner dependent on this V?5 expression. To help clarify this in vitro and in vivo discrepancy, we evaluated whether retrovirally mediated V?5 expression could be maintained in vitro for a long period of time without drug selection. We used 58?– ?– cells, an immortalized hybridoma T-cell line defective in the cell surface expression of the endogenousTCR ?- and ?-subunits. 29 After transduction with the ovASBN retroviral vector and selecting for drug resistance, we split the 58?– ?– cultures into two separate cultures with or without G418 drug selection. In both conditions, the 58?– ?– cells maintained equivalent levels of CD3? on their surface ( Figure 4 ), indicating the cells maintained simultaneous surface expression of both the ? and ? TCR gene products. Loss of cell surface expression of either retrovirally encoded TCR subunit would have been indicated by a loss of CD3? surface staining, given that 58?– ?– cells lack endogenous ? and ? TCR gene products, both of which are required to maintain CD3? surface expression. 21 , 29 Thus, these results show that even without drug selection, simultaneous expression of the two critical retrovirally encoded TCR gene products could be sustained for a long period of time in immortalized cells in vitro . Generation of single-chain TCR retroviral constructs As we did not find evidence explaining the loss of retrovirally mediated V?5 expression using the immortalized 58?– ?– cells, we next evaluated this question in the more complex environment of the mature primary T cell. In this environment, the discrepancy between our in vitro and in vivo results could be a result of immunologic or technical reasons. For example, there might be a specific deficiency in vivo in the ability of the exogenous TCR ? gene product to associate with the appropriate protein subunits necessary for localization to the cell surface. Alternatively, the retroviral construct used in our experiments may not direct the expression of all exogenous genes equally in vivo , and specifically, there might be a defect in the expression of the OT-I TCR ? gene in the ovASBN retroviral vector. This corresponds to the SR? promoter gene position of the ‘pg1 SAMEN SR?’ vector. To gain a better understanding of which of these two possibilities might be affecting our model, we designed eight new single TCR subunit retroviral constructs using either the V?5 or the V?2 TCR subunit genes derived from the OT-I TCR (see Supplementary Figure 3a). In six of these constructs, the inserted TCR subunit gene was positioned to be under the transcriptional control of the MoMLV LTR promoter. These LTR-driven single-chain constructs included both V?5 single-chain constructs ( ovBN, ovBSN and ovBH ) and V?2 single-chain constructs ( ovAN, ovASN and ovAH ). We also generated two single-chain retroviral constructs where the SR? promoter drove the expression of either the V?5( ovSBN ) or the V?2 ( ovSAN ) gene. In six of the eight of these constructs, we included a drug resistance gene neomycin ( ovAN, ovASN, ovSAN, ovBN, ovBSN and ovSBN ) and in two of the eight constructs we used the hygromycin resistance gene ( ovAH and ovBH ). In all cases, expression of the drug resistance gene was driven off an IRES from the encephalomyocarditis virus. For all constructs, retroviral transduction of target cells resulted in the acquisition of drug resistance corresponding to the relevant drug resistance gene (data not shown). To verify that each construct was also capable of directing cell surface expression of the relevant TCR subunit, we used a two-step transduction protocol of the 58?– ?– cells. First, the 58?– ?– cells were transduced with one of the two hygromycin-containing constructs ( ovAH or ovBH ) and selected in hygromycin-containing media to obtain a pure population of genetically modified cells. Second, the hygromycin-resistant cells (either the 58?– ?–/ ovAH or the 58?– ?–/ ovBH ) were transduced with a neomycin-containing construct. These cells were then selected in G418-containing media to obtain a pure population of 58?– ?– cells transduced with both a hygromycin and neomycin-containing construct. In all cases where 58?– ?– cells were transduced with both V?2- and V?5-containing retroviral vectors, a significant percentage of cells expressed CD3? (Supplementary Figure 3b and c). As this CD3? surface expression is dependent on the simultaneous expression of both the ? and ? TCR subunits (as described for Figure 4 ), these results show that all eight constructs are capable of directing cell surface expression of their encoded TCR subunits. Single-chain TCR retroviral constructs direct promoter-specific expression in vitro and <italic>in vivo</italic> Having established that our single-chain TCR retroviral constructs were capable of directing expression of the retrovirally encoded TCR subunit in 58?– ?– cells, we could now evaluate whether the failure to maintain ovASBN vector-encoded V?5 expression in vivo was related to immunological issues associated with the ability of the exogenous TCR ? chain to localize to the surface or technical issues linked to our retroviral construct. We assessed these two possibilities by retrovirally transducing primary T cells from C57BL/6 mice with one of the four retroviral constructs, namely ovASN, ovSAN ovBSN , and ovSBN . Drug-resistant primary T cells were designated B6ovASN-vector, B6ovSAN-vector, B6ovBSN-vector, and B6ovSBN-vector, respectively. These retrovirally transduced cell populations allowed us to compare, either in vitro or in vivo , the expression of different exogenous genes under the control of either the LTR or SR? promoter. Expression of the retrovirally encoded V?2 and V?5 TCR genes was first assessed in vitro . All four T-cell populations, B6ovASN-vector,B6ovSAN-vector,B6ovBSN-vector, and B6ovSBN-vector, directed expression of their specific retrovirally encoded TCR subunit gene when compared with control B6control-vector T cells ( Figure 5a ). Furthermore, as expected, only B6ovASBN-vector T cells showed the expression of both retrovirally encoded V?5 and V?2 TCR genes, again indicating that the changes in TCR expression were construct-specific. We next evaluated the ability of B6ovASN-vector and B6ovSAN-vector T cells to maintain the expression of their retrovirally encoded V?2 gene in vivo after adoptive transfer into mice. As a prerequisite, we show that 2 weeks after adoptive transfer, both B6ovASN-vector and B6ovSAN-vector T cells persist in the spleen ( Figure 5b ). Furthermore, in Figures 5b and c , we show that in contrast to B6ovSAN-vector and B6control-vector T cells, only B6ovASN-vector T cells maintain the expression of retrovirally encoded V?2 in vivo . These results are consistent with a model where construct-specific SR?-driven gene expression is preferentially lost in vivo . In further support of this model, we observed a similar loss of retrovirally encoded V?5 transgene in B6ovSBN-vector T cells but not in B6BSN-vector T cells (data not shown). <italic>Prolonged</italic> in vitro culture results in a gradual decrease in SR?-driven gene expression Having shown using multiple retroviral constructs that gene expression at the SR? promoter position was detectable in vitro but not in vivo , we examined the ability of the SR? promoter position to direct sustained gene expression in prolonged in vitro cultures of primary T cells. We compared the expression of V?2 in four different primary retrovirally transduced T-cell cultures (B6control-vector, B6ovASBN-vector, B6ovASN-vector and B6ovSAN-vector) at both an early and late time point following drug selection ( Figures 6a and b ). Interestingly, extension of the culture conditions for just 2.5 weeks resulted in the selective loss of retrovirally encoded SR?-driven V?2 expression (B6ovSAN-vector) but not LTR-driven V?2 expression (B6ovASBN-vector, B6ovASN-vector). We observed a similar reduction in retrovirally encoded SR?-driven V?5 expression over time when comparing the SR?-driven B6ovASBN-vector and B6ovSBN-vector T cells with LTR-driven B6ovBSN-vector T cells ( Figure 6c ). Although the loss in SR?-driven gene expression in vitro was not as dramatic as we observed in vivo after adoptive transfer of T cells into mice ( Figures 3 and 5c ), these in vitro results demonstrate the external factors leading to the loss of SR?-driven gene expression are not exclusively present in vivo . Adoptively transferred retrovirally modified T cells transition into memory T cells, persist in a nonlymphopenic environment, and maintain retrovirally encoded transgene expression Successful therapy by adoptive transfer of retrovirally modified T cells will in many circumstances require the ability of the adoptively transferred cells to persist and exhibit sustained gene expression. We evaluated this in our model using nonlymphopenic C57BL/6 mice as recipients. Nine months after the adoptive transfer of 10 million B6ovASBN-vector cells T cells, we observed the persistence of these cells in multiple organs including the spleen, LN and PBL ( Figures 7a and b ). Within the lymphocyte gate based on forward scatter and side scatter properties, these donor T cells represented roughly 0.5–1% of the total cells. As a percentage of total CD8+ T cells, the persistence of adoptively transferred cells was even more impressive, as roughly 3–5% of the total CD8+ cells were of donor origin (data not shown). Expression of V?2 and V?5 was compared in donor and host T cells ( Figure 7a ). As was observed immediately after adoptive transfer, we did not detect a level of V?5 expression on donor B6ovASBN-vector cells that differed from that of host T cells. However, donor B6ovASBN-vector cells did maintain high but heterogeneous level of V?2 when compared with host T cells. These results clearly demonstrate that not only did adoptively transferred B6ovASBN-vector cells persist in an unirradiated host but also they maintained expression of the V?2 transgene at a level comparable to that seen immediately after transfer. To further assess these adoptively transferred T cells, we assessed them for the expression of markers of memory T cells. Nine months after transfer, these cells expressed high levels of CD44 and CD62L, markers consistent with central memory phenotype 10 , 30 ( Figure 7c ). Consistent with this phenotype, these cells also lacked expression of CD25 and CD69 (data not shown).  Results <italic>The functional ability of B6<sup>ovASBN-vector</sup> cells</italic> in vivo We have previously demonstrated that T cells retrovirally modified with the ovASBN vector (B6ovASBN-vector T cells) could recognize antigen in vitro with the same avidity as their parental T-cell clone. Therefore, we predicted that these B6ovASBN-vector T cells would be efficacious at mediating antitumor immunity of tumors expressing relevant antigen. We tested this by injecting C57BL/6 mice intravenously with the well-characterized ovalbumin-expressing B16-ova tumor. 19 Three days after tumor injection, mice were treated by the adoptive transfer of 10 million retrovirally transduced B6ovASBN-vector T cells. As controls, we adoptively transferred both negative and positive control T cells. Negative control T cells (designated B6control-vector) were generated by transducing C57BL/6T cells with a control retroviral vector, whereas positive control cells (designated OT-Icontrol-vector) were generated by transducing antigen-specific TCR transgenic OT-I T cells 16 with the same control vector. Three weeks after adoptive T-cell transfer, lungs were harvested and metastases were counted. As shown in Figure 1 , adoptive transfer with positive control OT-Icontrol-vector cells almost completely eliminated all lung metastases. However, adoptive transfer of B6ovASBN-vector cells failed to mediate any reduction in the number of lung metastases when compared with tumor-bearing mice either given 10 million negative control B6control-vector cells or not treated with an adoptive transfer of T cells. The inability of B6ovASBN-vector cells to mediate an antitumor effect was not due to an insufficient number of antigen-specific cells, given that as few as 1 million positive control cells (OT-Icontrol-vector) could mediate an almost complete reduction in the number of lung metastases (data not shown). One explanation for the lack of therapeutic effect of B6ovASBN-vector cells in vivo might be a loss of antigen-specific avidity in vivo . In our previous report, we demonstrated that B6ovASBN-vector cells have a high antigen-specific avidity in vitro similar to the positive control (OT-Icontrol-vector). However, it is possible that the relative avidity could be altered in vivo as compared with the in vitro environment. To address the question of antigen-specific avidity, we used peptide-pulsed cells as targets in vivo instead of tumor cells. The advantage of peptide-pulsed target cells is that they likely express a much higher level of antigen on their surface than tumor cells. Thus, if the B6ovASBN-vector cells have a moderate reduction in antigen-specific avidity in vivo , we would expect them to likely retain the capacity to lyse peptide-pulsed target cells. However, we found no evidence that B6ovASBN-vector cells retained any ability to recognize antigen in vivo . For these experiments, mice were adoptively transferred with a mixture of target cells including peptide (OVA)-pulsed and unpulsed splenocytes. To allow their identification, the target cells were either CFSE-labeled (peptide-pulsed target cells) or SNARF-labeled (unpulsed target cells). Six hours after adoptive transfer of target cells, mice were adoptively transferred with 3 million retrovirally modified T cells. As shown in Supplementary Figure 1, the adoptive transfer of positive control cells (OT-Icontrol-vector) into target cell-bearing mice resulted in the specific loss of almost all peptide-pulsed target cells. However, the adoptive transfer of B6ovASBN-vector cells again failed to show any preferential loss of peptide-pulsed target cells when compared with either mice given 3 million negative control cells (B6control-vector) or mice not given any T cells. As in the previous experiment, the adoptive transfer of as few as 1 million positive control OT-Icontrol-vector cells resulted in antigen-specific cytotoxicity in vivo . Collectively, the results from these experiments show that unlike the ability of B6ovASBN-vector cells to mediate antigen-specific functional ability in vitro ,these B6ovASBN-vector cells appeared to lack this functional capability in vivo . Furthermore, this functional deficiency in vivo was most likely not a result of a subtle loss in antigen-specific avidity. <italic>B6<sup>ovASBN-vector</sup> cells survive and disseminate</italic> in vivo A second potential explanation that could account for the discrepancy between the ability of the positive control OT-Icontrol-vector cells and B6ovASBN-vector cells to mediate antigen-specific functional ability might be a failure for the B6ovASBN-vector cells to survive and disseminate in vivo . We addressed this by adoptively transferring retrovirally modified T cells into unirradiated Ly5 congenic B6 mice and assessing the distribution of the adoptively transferred cells in different organs over time. As shown in Figure 2 , retrovirally modified T cells were capable of surviving and disseminating to various organs throughout the mouse. Initially, during the first 5 days, the highest percentage of donor cells was found in the lung and the liver, consistent with where activated T cells would be expected to localize after intravenous tail vein injection. 28 Subsequently, the percentage of donor cells in the lung and the liver gradually decreased. In other sites, including the spleen, lymph node (LN), and peripheral blood (PBL), the percentage of donor cells peaked around days 7–14, after which there was a gradual decrease in the percentage of donor cells. We observed no differences between the distribution and survival of B6ovASBN-vector cells and the positive control OT-Icontrol-vector cells (data not shown). These results clearly demonstrate that the inability of the retrovirally modified T cells to function in vivo was not related to a failure to survive or disseminate to the appropriate locale. B6<sup>ovASBN-vector</sup> cells display discordant gene expression in vivo Having demonstrated the capacity of B6ovASBN-vector cells to localize appropriately in vivo , we next assessed whether these cells also maintained expression of the retrovirally encoded TCR ?- and ?-subunits in vivo , a prerequisite for the possession of functional activity. Because there are no clonotypic antibodies available against the OT-I TCR, we utilized antibodies against the shared V?2 and V?5 regions used by the ?- and ?-subunits of the OT-I TCR. B6ovASBN-vector cells showed a high but heterogeneous level of TCR V?2 expression in vivo ( Figure 3 , top panel), similar to the pattern of expression observed in vitro . 14 Also as observed previously in vitro , in vivo we found homogeneous levels of the TCR V?2 on a fraction of control B6control-vector cells. As these control B6control-vector cells have not been retrovirally modified with a V?2 gene containing retroviral vector, these 5–10% of cells expressing homogeneous V?2 are representative of T cells having randomly incorporating the endogenous V?2 region into the ?-subunit of their TCR. Thus, to obtain an estimate of the percentage of B6ovASBN-vector cells expressing retrovirally encoded V?2, the percentage of cells expressing the endogenous subunit as observed on control B6control-vector cells must first be subtracted. Even taking this into account, the results in Figure 3 clearly show a high but heterogeneous level of retrovirally encoded V?2 subunit in B6ovASBN-vector cells. In stark contrast with the obvious expression of retrovirally encoded V?2, we were unable to detect retrovirally encoded V?5 expression on B6ovASBN-vector cells in vivo ( Figure 3 , middle panel). This was true of B6ovASBN-vector cells isolated from either the lung or the liver at day 3 or 4, respectively, after adoptive transfer. We also assessed the expression of V?5 at other time points and in other anatomical locations, but consistently failed to observe any expression of V?5 above that of the 10–15% of T cells randomly incorporating this subunit into their endogenous TCR repertoire (data not shown). This striking finding indicates that in vivo ,B6ovASBN-vector cells are able to maintain normal levels of retrovirally encoded V?2 expression, but that these same cells are unable to maintain the expression of the retrovirally encoded V?5 TCR subunit. As a control, we also assessed the expression of an irrelevant TCR variable region, V?8 ( Figure 3 , bottom panel). As expected, this variable region was used to an equal extent on both B6ovASBN-vector cells and negative control B6control-vector cells. As an additional control, we also assessed the expression of V?2, V?5 and V?8 in vivo on positive control OT-Icontrol-vector cells. As previously observed in vitro , 14 these positive control cells have a high level of V?2 and V?5 expressions, but not V?8 expression (see Supplementary Figure 2). Cumulatively, these data indicate that the differences we have observed with V?2 expression among the different T-cell populations are specifically related to changes resulting from expression of the retrovirally encoded TCR subunit, and not a result of the random outgrowth of clonal populations of T cells. The ovASBN retroviral vector directs sustained TCR expression in the absence of drug selection The results from Figure 3 imply that the inability of B6ovASBN-vector cells to function in a therapeutic manner was most likely a direct consequence of the failure of these cells to maintain retrovirally encoded V?5 expression in vivo . This was unexpected, as we had previously shown in vitro that B6ovASBN-vector cells both express the retrovirally encoded V?5 and function in an antigen-specific manner dependent on this V?5 expression. To help clarify this in vitro and in vivo discrepancy, we evaluated whether retrovirally mediated V?5 expression could be maintained in vitro for a long period of time without drug selection. We used 58?– ?– cells, an immortalized hybridoma T-cell line defective in the cell surface expression of the endogenousTCR ?- and ?-subunits. 29 After transduction with the ovASBN retroviral vector and selecting for drug resistance, we split the 58?– ?– cultures into two separate cultures with or without G418 drug selection. In both conditions, the 58?– ?– cells maintained equivalent levels of CD3? on their surface ( Figure 4 ), indicating the cells maintained simultaneous surface expression of both the ? and ? TCR gene products. Loss of cell surface expression of either retrovirally encoded TCR subunit would have been indicated by a loss of CD3? surface staining, given that 58?– ?– cells lack endogenous ? and ? TCR gene products, both of which are required to maintain CD3? surface expression. 21 , 29 Thus, these results show that even without drug selection, simultaneous expression of the two critical retrovirally encoded TCR gene products could be sustained for a long period of time in immortalized cells in vitro . Generation of single-chain TCR retroviral constructs As we did not find evidence explaining the loss of retrovirally mediated V?5 expression using the immortalized 58?– ?– cells, we next evaluated this question in the more complex environment of the mature primary T cell. In this environment, the discrepancy between our in vitro and in vivo results could be a result of immunologic or technical reasons. For example, there might be a specific deficiency in vivo in the ability of the exogenous TCR ? gene product to associate with the appropriate protein subunits necessary for localization to the cell surface. Alternatively, the retroviral construct used in our experiments may not direct the expression of all exogenous genes equally in vivo , and specifically, there might be a defect in the expression of the OT-I TCR ? gene in the ovASBN retroviral vector. This corresponds to the SR? promoter gene position of the ‘pg1 SAMEN SR?’ vector. To gain a better understanding of which of these two possibilities might be affecting our model, we designed eight new single TCR subunit retroviral constructs using either the V?5 or the V?2 TCR subunit genes derived from the OT-I TCR (see Supplementary Figure 3a). In six of these constructs, the inserted TCR subunit gene was positioned to be under the transcriptional control of the MoMLV LTR promoter. These LTR-driven single-chain constructs included both V?5 single-chain constructs ( ovBN, ovBSN and ovBH ) and V?2 single-chain constructs ( ovAN, ovASN and ovAH ). We also generated two single-chain retroviral constructs where the SR? promoter drove the expression of either the V?5( ovSBN ) or the V?2 ( ovSAN ) gene. In six of the eight of these constructs, we included a drug resistance gene neomycin ( ovAN, ovASN, ovSAN, ovBN, ovBSN and ovSBN ) and in two of the eight constructs we used the hygromycin resistance gene ( ovAH and ovBH ). In all cases, expression of the drug resistance gene was driven off an IRES from the encephalomyocarditis virus. For all constructs, retroviral transduction of target cells resulted in the acquisition of drug resistance corresponding to the relevant drug resistance gene (data not shown). To verify that each construct was also capable of directing cell surface expression of the relevant TCR subunit, we used a two-step transduction protocol of the 58?– ?– cells. First, the 58?– ?– cells were transduced with one of the two hygromycin-containing constructs ( ovAH or ovBH ) and selected in hygromycin-containing media to obtain a pure population of genetically modified cells. Second, the hygromycin-resistant cells (either the 58?– ?–/ ovAH or the 58?– ?–/ ovBH ) were transduced with a neomycin-containing construct. These cells were then selected in G418-containing media to obtain a pure population of 58?– ?– cells transduced with both a hygromycin and neomycin-containing construct. In all cases where 58?– ?– cells were transduced with both V?2- and V?5-containing retroviral vectors, a significant percentage of cells expressed CD3? (Supplementary Figure 3b and c). As this CD3? surface expression is dependent on the simultaneous expression of both the ? and ? TCR subunits (as described for Figure 4 ), these results show that all eight constructs are capable of directing cell surface expression of their encoded TCR subunits. Single-chain TCR retroviral constructs direct promoter-specific expression in vitro and <italic>in vivo</italic> Having established that our single-chain TCR retroviral constructs were capable of directing expression of the retrovirally encoded TCR subunit in 58?– ?– cells, we could now evaluate whether the failure to maintain ovASBN vector-encoded V?5 expression in vivo was related to immunological issues associated with the ability of the exogenous TCR ? chain to localize to the surface or technical issues linked to our retroviral construct. We assessed these two possibilities by retrovirally transducing primary T cells from C57BL/6 mice with one of the four retroviral constructs, namely ovASN, ovSAN ovBSN , and ovSBN . Drug-resistant primary T cells were designated B6ovASN-vector, B6ovSAN-vector, B6ovBSN-vector, and B6ovSBN-vector, respectively. These retrovirally transduced cell populations allowed us to compare, either in vitro or in vivo , the expression of different exogenous genes under the control of either the LTR or SR? promoter. Expression of the retrovirally encoded V?2 and V?5 TCR genes was first assessed in vitro . All four T-cell populations, B6ovASN-vector,B6ovSAN-vector,B6ovBSN-vector, and B6ovSBN-vector, directed expression of their specific retrovirally encoded TCR subunit gene when compared with control B6control-vector T cells ( Figure 5a ). Furthermore, as expected, only B6ovASBN-vector T cells showed the expression of both retrovirally encoded V?5 and V?2 TCR genes, again indicating that the changes in TCR expression were construct-specific. We next evaluated the ability of B6ovASN-vector and B6ovSAN-vector T cells to maintain the expression of their retrovirally encoded V?2 gene in vivo after adoptive transfer into mice. As a prerequisite, we show that 2 weeks after adoptive transfer, both B6ovASN-vector and B6ovSAN-vector T cells persist in the spleen ( Figure 5b ). Furthermore, in Figures 5b and c , we show that in contrast to B6ovSAN-vector and B6control-vector T cells, only B6ovASN-vector T cells maintain the expression of retrovirally encoded V?2 in vivo . These results are consistent with a model where construct-specific SR?-driven gene expression is preferentially lost in vivo . In further support of this model, we observed a similar loss of retrovirally encoded V?5 transgene in B6ovSBN-vector T cells but not in B6BSN-vector T cells (data not shown). <italic>Prolonged</italic> in vitro culture results in a gradual decrease in SR?-driven gene expression Having shown using multiple retroviral constructs that gene expression at the SR? promoter position was detectable in vitro but not in vivo , we examined the ability of the SR? promoter position to direct sustained gene expression in prolonged in vitro cultures of primary T cells. We compared the expression of V?2 in four different primary retrovirally transduced T-cell cultures (B6control-vector, B6ovASBN-vector, B6ovASN-vector and B6ovSAN-vector) at both an early and late time point following drug selection ( Figures 6a and b ). Interestingly, extension of the culture conditions for just 2.5 weeks resulted in the selective loss of retrovirally encoded SR?-driven V?2 expression (B6ovSAN-vector) but not LTR-driven V?2 expression (B6ovASBN-vector, B6ovASN-vector). We observed a similar reduction in retrovirally encoded SR?-driven V?5 expression over time when comparing the SR?-driven B6ovASBN-vector and B6ovSBN-vector T cells with LTR-driven B6ovBSN-vector T cells ( Figure 6c ). Although the loss in SR?-driven gene expression in vitro was not as dramatic as we observed in vivo after adoptive transfer of T cells into mice ( Figures 3 and 5c ), these in vitro results demonstrate the external factors leading to the loss of SR?-driven gene expression are not exclusively present in vivo . Adoptively transferred retrovirally modified T cells transition into memory T cells, persist in a nonlymphopenic environment, and maintain retrovirally encoded transgene expression Successful therapy by adoptive transfer of retrovirally modified T cells will in many circumstances require the ability of the adoptively transferred cells to persist and exhibit sustained gene expression. We evaluated this in our model using nonlymphopenic C57BL/6 mice as recipients. Nine months after the adoptive transfer of 10 million B6ovASBN-vector cells T cells, we observed the persistence of these cells in multiple organs including the spleen, LN and PBL ( Figures 7a and b ). Within the lymphocyte gate based on forward scatter and side scatter properties, these donor T cells represented roughly 0.5–1% of the total cells. As a percentage of total CD8+ T cells, the persistence of adoptively transferred cells was even more impressive, as roughly 3–5% of the total CD8+ cells were of donor origin (data not shown). Expression of V?2 and V?5 was compared in donor and host T cells ( Figure 7a ). As was observed immediately after adoptive transfer, we did not detect a level of V?5 expression on donor B6ovASBN-vector cells that differed from that of host T cells. However, donor B6ovASBN-vector cells did maintain high but heterogeneous level of V?2 when compared with host T cells. These results clearly demonstrate that not only did adoptively transferred B6ovASBN-vector cells persist in an unirradiated host but also they maintained expression of the V?2 transgene at a level comparable to that seen immediately after transfer. To further assess these adoptively transferred T cells, we assessed them for the expression of markers of memory T cells. Nine months after transfer, these cells expressed high levels of CD44 and CD62L, markers consistent with central memory phenotype 10 , 30 ( Figure 7c ). Consistent with this phenotype, these cells also lacked expression of CD25 and CD69 (data not shown).  <italic>The functional ability of B6<sup>ovASBN-vector</sup> cells</italic> in vivo We have previously demonstrated that T cells retrovirally modified with the ovASBN vector (B6ovASBN-vector T cells) could recognize antigen in vitro with the same avidity as their parental T-cell clone. Therefore, we predicted that these B6ovASBN-vector T cells would be efficacious at mediating antitumor immunity of tumors expressing relevant antigen. We tested this by injecting C57BL/6 mice intravenously with the well-characterized ovalbumin-expressing B16-ova tumor. 19 Three days after tumor injection, mice were treated by the adoptive transfer of 10 million retrovirally transduced B6ovASBN-vector T cells. As controls, we adoptively transferred both negative and positive control T cells. Negative control T cells (designated B6control-vector) were generated by transducing C57BL/6T cells with a control retroviral vector, whereas positive control cells (designated OT-Icontrol-vector) were generated by transducing antigen-specific TCR transgenic OT-I T cells 16 with the same control vector. Three weeks after adoptive T-cell transfer, lungs were harvested and metastases were counted. As shown in Figure 1 , adoptive transfer with positive control OT-Icontrol-vector cells almost completely eliminated all lung metastases. However, adoptive transfer of B6ovASBN-vector cells failed to mediate any reduction in the number of lung metastases when compared with tumor-bearing mice either given 10 million negative control B6control-vector cells or not treated with an adoptive transfer of T cells. The inability of B6ovASBN-vector cells to mediate an antitumor effect was not due to an insufficient number of antigen-specific cells, given that as few as 1 million positive control cells (OT-Icontrol-vector) could mediate an almost complete reduction in the number of lung metastases (data not shown). One explanation for the lack of therapeutic effect of B6ovASBN-vector cells in vivo might be a loss of antigen-specific avidity in vivo . In our previous report, we demonstrated that B6ovASBN-vector cells have a high antigen-specific avidity in vitro similar to the positive control (OT-Icontrol-vector). However, it is possible that the relative avidity could be altered in vivo as compared with the in vitro environment. To address the question of antigen-specific avidity, we used peptide-pulsed cells as targets in vivo instead of tumor cells. The advantage of peptide-pulsed target cells is that they likely express a much higher level of antigen on their surface than tumor cells. Thus, if the B6ovASBN-vector cells have a moderate reduction in antigen-specific avidity in vivo , we would expect them to likely retain the capacity to lyse peptide-pulsed target cells. However, we found no evidence that B6ovASBN-vector cells retained any ability to recognize antigen in vivo . For these experiments, mice were adoptively transferred with a mixture of target cells including peptide (OVA)-pulsed and unpulsed splenocytes. To allow their identification, the target cells were either CFSE-labeled (peptide-pulsed target cells) or SNARF-labeled (unpulsed target cells). Six hours after adoptive transfer of target cells, mice were adoptively transferred with 3 million retrovirally modified T cells. As shown in Supplementary Figure 1, the adoptive transfer of positive control cells (OT-Icontrol-vector) into target cell-bearing mice resulted in the specific loss of almost all peptide-pulsed target cells. However, the adoptive transfer of B6ovASBN-vector cells again failed to show any preferential loss of peptide-pulsed target cells when compared with either mice given 3 million negative control cells (B6control-vector) or mice not given any T cells. As in the previous experiment, the adoptive transfer of as few as 1 million positive control OT-Icontrol-vector cells resulted in antigen-specific cytotoxicity in vivo . Collectively, the results from these experiments show that unlike the ability of B6ovASBN-vector cells to mediate antigen-specific functional ability in vitro ,these B6ovASBN-vector cells appeared to lack this functional capability in vivo . Furthermore, this functional deficiency in vivo was most likely not a result of a subtle loss in antigen-specific avidity.  <italic>The functional ability of B6<sup>ovASBN-vector</sup> cells</italic> in vivo We have previously demonstrated that T cells retrovirally modified with the ovASBN vector (B6ovASBN-vector T cells) could recognize antigen in vitro with the same avidity as their parental T-cell clone. Therefore, we predicted that these B6ovASBN-vector T cells would be efficacious at mediating antitumor immunity of tumors expressing relevant antigen. We tested this by injecting C57BL/6 mice intravenously with the well-characterized ovalbumin-expressing B16-ova tumor. 19 Three days after tumor injection, mice were treated by the adoptive transfer of 10 million retrovirally transduced B6ovASBN-vector T cells. As controls, we adoptively transferred both negative and positive control T cells. Negative control T cells (designated B6control-vector) were generated by transducing C57BL/6T cells with a control retroviral vector, whereas positive control cells (designated OT-Icontrol-vector) were generated by transducing antigen-specific TCR transgenic OT-I T cells 16 with the same control vector. Three weeks after adoptive T-cell transfer, lungs were harvested and metastases were counted. As shown in Figure 1 , adoptive transfer with positive control OT-Icontrol-vector cells almost completely eliminated all lung metastases. However, adoptive transfer of B6ovASBN-vector cells failed to mediate any reduction in the number of lung metastases when compared with tumor-bearing mice either given 10 million negative control B6control-vector cells or not treated with an adoptive transfer of T cells. The inability of B6ovASBN-vector cells to mediate an antitumor effect was not due to an insufficient number of antigen-specific cells, given that as few as 1 million positive control cells (OT-Icontrol-vector) could mediate an almost complete reduction in the number of lung metastases (data not shown). One explanation for the lack of therapeutic effect of B6ovASBN-vector cells in vivo might be a loss of antigen-specific avidity in vivo . In our previous report, we demonstrated that B6ovASBN-vector cells have a high antigen-specific avidity in vitro similar to the positive control (OT-Icontrol-vector). However, it is possible that the relative avidity could be altered in vivo as compared with the in vitro environment. To address the question of antigen-specific avidity, we used peptide-pulsed cells as targets in vivo instead of tumor cells. The advantage of peptide-pulsed target cells is that they likely express a much higher level of antigen on their surface than tumor cells. Thus, if the B6ovASBN-vector cells have a moderate reduction in antigen-specific avidity in vivo , we would expect them to likely retain the capacity to lyse peptide-pulsed target cells. However, we found no evidence that B6ovASBN-vector cells retained any ability to recognize antigen in vivo . For these experiments, mice were adoptively transferred with a mixture of target cells including peptide (OVA)-pulsed and unpulsed splenocytes. To allow their identification, the target cells were either CFSE-labeled (peptide-pulsed target cells) or SNARF-labeled (unpulsed target cells). Six hours after adoptive transfer of target cells, mice were adoptively transferred with 3 million retrovirally modified T cells. As shown in Supplementary Figure 1, the adoptive transfer of positive control cells (OT-Icontrol-vector) into target cell-bearing mice resulted in the specific loss of almost all peptide-pulsed target cells. However, the adoptive transfer of B6ovASBN-vector cells again failed to show any preferential loss of peptide-pulsed target cells when compared with either mice given 3 million negative control cells (B6control-vector) or mice not given any T cells. As in the previous experiment, the adoptive transfer of as few as 1 million positive control OT-Icontrol-vector cells resulted in antigen-specific cytotoxicity in vivo . Collectively, the results from these experiments show that unlike the ability of B6ovASBN-vector cells to mediate antigen-specific functional ability in vitro ,these B6ovASBN-vector cells appeared to lack this functional capability in vivo . Furthermore, this functional deficiency in vivo was most likely not a result of a subtle loss in antigen-specific avidity.  <italic>B6<sup>ovASBN-vector</sup> cells survive and disseminate</italic> in vivo A second potential explanation that could account for the discrepancy between the ability of the positive control OT-Icontrol-vector cells and B6ovASBN-vector cells to mediate antigen-specific functional ability might be a failure for the B6ovASBN-vector cells to survive and disseminate in vivo . We addressed this by adoptively transferring retrovirally modified T cells into unirradiated Ly5 congenic B6 mice and assessing the distribution of the adoptively transferred cells in different organs over time. As shown in Figure 2 , retrovirally modified T cells were capable of surviving and disseminating to various organs throughout the mouse. Initially, during the first 5 days, the highest percentage of donor cells was found in the lung and the liver, consistent with where activated T cells would be expected to localize after intravenous tail vein injection. 28 Subsequently, the percentage of donor cells in the lung and the liver gradually decreased. In other sites, including the spleen, lymph node (LN), and peripheral blood (PBL), the percentage of donor cells peaked around days 7–14, after which there was a gradual decrease in the percentage of donor cells. We observed no differences between the distribution and survival of B6ovASBN-vector cells and the positive control OT-Icontrol-vector cells (data not shown). These results clearly demonstrate that the inability of the retrovirally modified T cells to function in vivo was not related to a failure to survive or disseminate to the appropriate locale.  <italic>B6<sup>ovASBN-vector</sup> cells survive and disseminate</italic> in vivo A second potential explanation that could account for the discrepancy between the ability of the positive control OT-Icontrol-vector cells and B6ovASBN-vector cells to mediate antigen-specific functional ability might be a failure for the B6ovASBN-vector cells to survive and disseminate in vivo . We addressed this by adoptively transferring retrovirally modified T cells into unirradiated Ly5 congenic B6 mice and assessing the distribution of the adoptively transferred cells in different organs over time. As shown in Figure 2 , retrovirally modified T cells were capable of surviving and disseminating to various organs throughout the mouse. Initially, during the first 5 days, the highest percentage of donor cells was found in the lung and the liver, consistent with where activated T cells would be expected to localize after intravenous tail vein injection. 28 Subsequently, the percentage of donor cells in the lung and the liver gradually decreased. In other sites, including the spleen, lymph node (LN), and peripheral blood (PBL), the percentage of donor cells peaked around days 7–14, after which there was a gradual decrease in the percentage of donor cells. We observed no differences between the distribution and survival of B6ovASBN-vector cells and the positive control OT-Icontrol-vector cells (data not shown). These results clearly demonstrate that the inability of the retrovirally modified T cells to function in vivo was not related to a failure to survive or disseminate to the appropriate locale.  B6<sup>ovASBN-vector</sup> cells display discordant gene expression in vivo Having demonstrated the capacity of B6ovASBN-vector cells to localize appropriately in vivo , we next assessed whether these cells also maintained expression of the retrovirally encoded TCR ?- and ?-subunits in vivo , a prerequisite for the possession of functional activity. Because there are no clonotypic antibodies available against the OT-I TCR, we utilized antibodies against the shared V?2 and V?5 regions used by the ?- and ?-subunits of the OT-I TCR. B6ovASBN-vector cells showed a high but heterogeneous level of TCR V?2 expression in vivo ( Figure 3 , top panel), similar to the pattern of expression observed in vitro . 14 Also as observed previously in vitro , in vivo we found homogeneous levels of the TCR V?2 on a fraction of control B6control-vector cells. As these control B6control-vector cells have not been retrovirally modified with a V?2 gene containing retroviral vector, these 5–10% of cells expressing homogeneous V?2 are representative of T cells having randomly incorporating the endogenous V?2 region into the ?-subunit of their TCR. Thus, to obtain an estimate of the percentage of B6ovASBN-vector cells expressing retrovirally encoded V?2, the percentage of cells expressing the endogenous subunit as observed on control B6control-vector cells must first be subtracted. Even taking this into account, the results in Figure 3 clearly show a high but heterogeneous level of retrovirally encoded V?2 subunit in B6ovASBN-vector cells. In stark contrast with the obvious expression of retrovirally encoded V?2, we were unable to detect retrovirally encoded V?5 expression on B6ovASBN-vector cells in vivo ( Figure 3 , middle panel). This was true of B6ovASBN-vector cells isolated from either the lung or the liver at day 3 or 4, respectively, after adoptive transfer. We also assessed the expression of V?5 at other time points and in other anatomical locations, but consistently failed to observe any expression of V?5 above that of the 10–15% of T cells randomly incorporating this subunit into their endogenous TCR repertoire (data not shown). This striking finding indicates that in vivo ,B6ovASBN-vector cells are able to maintain normal levels of retrovirally encoded V?2 expression, but that these same cells are unable to maintain the expression of the retrovirally encoded V?5 TCR subunit. As a control, we also assessed the expression of an irrelevant TCR variable region, V?8 ( Figure 3 , bottom panel). As expected, this variable region was used to an equal extent on both B6ovASBN-vector cells and negative control B6control-vector cells. As an additional control, we also assessed the expression of V?2, V?5 and V?8 in vivo on positive control OT-Icontrol-vector cells. As previously observed in vitro , 14 these positive control cells have a high level of V?2 and V?5 expressions, but not V?8 expression (see Supplementary Figure 2). Cumulatively, these data indicate that the differences we have observed with V?2 expression among the different T-cell populations are specifically related to changes resulting from expression of the retrovirally encoded TCR subunit, and not a result of the random outgrowth of clonal populations of T cells.  B6<sup>ovASBN-vector</sup> cells display discordant gene expression in vivo Having demonstrated the capacity of B6ovASBN-vector cells to localize appropriately in vivo , we next assessed whether these cells also maintained expression of the retrovirally encoded TCR ?- and ?-subunits in vivo , a prerequisite for the possession of functional activity. Because there are no clonotypic antibodies available against the OT-I TCR, we utilized antibodies against the shared V?2 and V?5 regions used by the ?- and ?-subunits of the OT-I TCR. B6ovASBN-vector cells showed a high but heterogeneous level of TCR V?2 expression in vivo ( Figure 3 , top panel), similar to the pattern of expression observed in vitro . 14 Also as observed previously in vitro , in vivo we found homogeneous levels of the TCR V?2 on a fraction of control B6control-vector cells. As these control B6control-vector cells have not been retrovirally modified with a V?2 gene containing retroviral vector, these 5–10% of cells expressing homogeneous V?2 are representative of T cells having randomly incorporating the endogenous V?2 region into the ?-subunit of their TCR. Thus, to obtain an estimate of the percentage of B6ovASBN-vector cells expressing retrovirally encoded V?2, the percentage of cells expressing the endogenous subunit as observed on control B6control-vector cells must first be subtracted. Even taking this into account, the results in Figure 3 clearly show a high but heterogeneous level of retrovirally encoded V?2 subunit in B6ovASBN-vector cells. In stark contrast with the obvious expression of retrovirally encoded V?2, we were unable to detect retrovirally encoded V?5 expression on B6ovASBN-vector cells in vivo ( Figure 3 , middle panel). This was true of B6ovASBN-vector cells isolated from either the lung or the liver at day 3 or 4, respectively, after adoptive transfer. We also assessed the expression of V?5 at other time points and in other anatomical locations, but consistently failed to observe any expression of V?5 above that of the 10–15% of T cells randomly incorporating this subunit into their endogenous TCR repertoire (data not shown). This striking finding indicates that in vivo ,B6ovASBN-vector cells are able to maintain normal levels of retrovirally encoded V?2 expression, but that these same cells are unable to maintain the expression of the retrovirally encoded V?5 TCR subunit. As a control, we also assessed the expression of an irrelevant TCR variable region, V?8 ( Figure 3 , bottom panel). As expected, this variable region was used to an equal extent on both B6ovASBN-vector cells and negative control B6control-vector cells. As an additional control, we also assessed the expression of V?2, V?5 and V?8 in vivo on positive control OT-Icontrol-vector cells. As previously observed in vitro , 14 these positive control cells have a high level of V?2 and V?5 expressions, but not V?8 expression (see Supplementary Figure 2). Cumulatively, these data indicate that the differences we have observed with V?2 expression among the different T-cell populations are specifically related to changes resulting from expression of the retrovirally encoded TCR subunit, and not a result of the random outgrowth of clonal populations of T cells.  The ovASBN retroviral vector directs sustained TCR expression in the absence of drug selection The results from Figure 3 imply that the inability of B6ovASBN-vector cells to function in a therapeutic manner was most likely a direct consequence of the failure of these cells to maintain retrovirally encoded V?5 expression in vivo . This was unexpected, as we had previously shown in vitro that B6ovASBN-vector cells both express the retrovirally encoded V?5 and function in an antigen-specific manner dependent on this V?5 expression. To help clarify this in vitro and in vivo discrepancy, we evaluated whether retrovirally mediated V?5 expression could be maintained in vitro for a long period of time without drug selection. We used 58?– ?– cells, an immortalized hybridoma T-cell line defective in the cell surface expression of the endogenousTCR ?- and ?-subunits. 29 After transduction with the ovASBN retroviral vector and selecting for drug resistance, we split the 58?– ?– cultures into two separate cultures with or without G418 drug selection. In both conditions, the 58?– ?– cells maintained equivalent levels of CD3? on their surface ( Figure 4 ), indicating the cells maintained simultaneous surface expression of both the ? and ? TCR gene products. Loss of cell surface expression of either retrovirally encoded TCR subunit would have been indicated by a loss of CD3? surface staining, given that 58?– ?– cells lack endogenous ? and ? TCR gene products, both of which are required to maintain CD3? surface expression. 21 , 29 Thus, these results show that even without drug selection, simultaneous expression of the two critical retrovirally encoded TCR gene products could be sustained for a long period of time in immortalized cells in vitro .  The ovASBN retroviral vector directs sustained TCR expression in the absence of drug selection The results from Figure 3 imply that the inability of B6ovASBN-vector cells to function in a therapeutic manner was most likely a direct consequence of the failure of these cells to maintain retrovirally encoded V?5 expression in vivo . This was unexpected, as we had previously shown in vitro that B6ovASBN-vector cells both express the retrovirally encoded V?5 and function in an antigen-specific manner dependent on this V?5 expression. To help clarify this in vitro and in vivo discrepancy, we evaluated whether retrovirally mediated V?5 expression could be maintained in vitro for a long period of time without drug selection. We used 58?– ?– cells, an immortalized hybridoma T-cell line defective in the cell surface expression of the endogenousTCR ?- and ?-subunits. 29 After transduction with the ovASBN retroviral vector and selecting for drug resistance, we split the 58?– ?– cultures into two separate cultures with or without G418 drug selection. In both conditions, the 58?– ?– cells maintained equivalent levels of CD3? on their surface ( Figure 4 ), indicating the cells maintained simultaneous surface expression of both the ? and ? TCR gene products. Loss of cell surface expression of either retrovirally encoded TCR subunit would have been indicated by a loss of CD3? surface staining, given that 58?– ?– cells lack endogenous ? and ? TCR gene products, both of which are required to maintain CD3? surface expression. 21 , 29 Thus, these results show that even without drug selection, simultaneous expression of the two critical retrovirally encoded TCR gene products could be sustained for a long period of time in immortalized cells in vitro .  Generation of single-chain TCR retroviral constructs As we did not find evidence explaining the loss of retrovirally mediated V?5 expression using the immortalized 58?– ?– cells, we next evaluated this question in the more complex environment of the mature primary T cell. In this environment, the discrepancy between our in vitro and in vivo results could be a result of immunologic or technical reasons. For example, there might be a specific deficiency in vivo in the ability of the exogenous TCR ? gene product to associate with the appropriate protein subunits necessary for localization to the cell surface. Alternatively, the retroviral construct used in our experiments may not direct the expression of all exogenous genes equally in vivo , and specifically, there might be a defect in the expression of the OT-I TCR ? gene in the ovASBN retroviral vector. This corresponds to the SR? promoter gene position of the ‘pg1 SAMEN SR?’ vector. To gain a better understanding of which of these two possibilities might be affecting our model, we designed eight new single TCR subunit retroviral constructs using either the V?5 or the V?2 TCR subunit genes derived from the OT-I TCR (see Supplementary Figure 3a). In six of these constructs, the inserted TCR subunit gene was positioned to be under the transcriptional control of the MoMLV LTR promoter. These LTR-driven single-chain constructs included both V?5 single-chain constructs ( ovBN, ovBSN and ovBH ) and V?2 single-chain constructs ( ovAN, ovASN and ovAH ). We also generated two single-chain retroviral constructs where the SR? promoter drove the expression of either the V?5( ovSBN ) or the V?2 ( ovSAN ) gene. In six of the eight of these constructs, we included a drug resistance gene neomycin ( ovAN, ovASN, ovSAN, ovBN, ovBSN and ovSBN ) and in two of the eight constructs we used the hygromycin resistance gene ( ovAH and ovBH ). In all cases, expression of the drug resistance gene was driven off an IRES from the encephalomyocarditis virus. For all constructs, retroviral transduction of target cells resulted in the acquisition of drug resistance corresponding to the relevant drug resistance gene (data not shown). To verify that each construct was also capable of directing cell surface expression of the relevant TCR subunit, we used a two-step transduction protocol of the 58?– ?– cells. First, the 58?– ?– cells were transduced with one of the two hygromycin-containing constructs ( ovAH or ovBH ) and selected in hygromycin-containing media to obtain a pure population of genetically modified cells. Second, the hygromycin-resistant cells (either the 58?– ?–/ ovAH or the 58?– ?–/ ovBH ) were transduced with a neomycin-containing construct. These cells were then selected in G418-containing media to obtain a pure population of 58?– ?– cells transduced with both a hygromycin and neomycin-containing construct. In all cases where 58?– ?– cells were transduced with both V?2- and V?5-containing retroviral vectors, a significant percentage of cells expressed CD3? (Supplementary Figure 3b and c). As this CD3? surface expression is dependent on the simultaneous expression of both the ? and ? TCR subunits (as described for Figure 4 ), these results show that all eight constructs are capable of directing cell surface expression of their encoded TCR subunits.  Generation of single-chain TCR retroviral constructs As we did not find evidence explaining the loss of retrovirally mediated V?5 expression using the immortalized 58?– ?– cells, we next evaluated this question in the more complex environment of the mature primary T cell. In this environment, the discrepancy between our in vitro and in vivo results could be a result of immunologic or technical reasons. For example, there might be a specific deficiency in vivo in the ability of the exogenous TCR ? gene product to associate with the appropriate protein subunits necessary for localization to the cell surface. Alternatively, the retroviral construct used in our experiments may not direct the expression of all exogenous genes equally in vivo , and specifically, there might be a defect in the expression of the OT-I TCR ? gene in the ovASBN retroviral vector. This corresponds to the SR? promoter gene position of the ‘pg1 SAMEN SR?’ vector. To gain a better understanding of which of these two possibilities might be affecting our model, we designed eight new single TCR subunit retroviral constructs using either the V?5 or the V?2 TCR subunit genes derived from the OT-I TCR (see Supplementary Figure 3a). In six of these constructs, the inserted TCR subunit gene was positioned to be under the transcriptional control of the MoMLV LTR promoter. These LTR-driven single-chain constructs included both V?5 single-chain constructs ( ovBN, ovBSN and ovBH ) and V?2 single-chain constructs ( ovAN, ovASN and ovAH ). We also generated two single-chain retroviral constructs where the SR? promoter drove the expression of either the V?5( ovSBN ) or the V?2 ( ovSAN ) gene. In six of the eight of these constructs, we included a drug resistance gene neomycin ( ovAN, ovASN, ovSAN, ovBN, ovBSN and ovSBN ) and in two of the eight constructs we used the hygromycin resistance gene ( ovAH and ovBH ). In all cases, expression of the drug resistance gene was driven off an IRES from the encephalomyocarditis virus. For all constructs, retroviral transduction of target cells resulted in the acquisition of drug resistance corresponding to the relevant drug resistance gene (data not shown). To verify that each construct was also capable of directing cell surface expression of the relevant TCR subunit, we used a two-step transduction protocol of the 58?– ?– cells. First, the 58?– ?– cells were transduced with one of the two hygromycin-containing constructs ( ovAH or ovBH ) and selected in hygromycin-containing media to obtain a pure population of genetically modified cells. Second, the hygromycin-resistant cells (either the 58?– ?–/ ovAH or the 58?– ?–/ ovBH ) were transduced with a neomycin-containing construct. These cells were then selected in G418-containing media to obtain a pure population of 58?– ?– cells transduced with both a hygromycin and neomycin-containing construct. In all cases where 58?– ?– cells were transduced with both V?2- and V?5-containing retroviral vectors, a significant percentage of cells expressed CD3? (Supplementary Figure 3b and c). As this CD3? surface expression is dependent on the simultaneous expression of both the ? and ? TCR subunits (as described for Figure 4 ), these results show that all eight constructs are capable of directing cell surface expression of their encoded TCR subunits.  Single-chain TCR retroviral constructs direct promoter-specific expression in vitro and <italic>in vivo</italic> Having established that our single-chain TCR retroviral constructs were capable of directing expression of the retrovirally encoded TCR subunit in 58?– ?– cells, we could now evaluate whether the failure to maintain ovASBN vector-encoded V?5 expression in vivo was related to immunological issues associated with the ability of the exogenous TCR ? chain to localize to the surface or technical issues linked to our retroviral construct. We assessed these two possibilities by retrovirally transducing primary T cells from C57BL/6 mice with one of the four retroviral constructs, namely ovASN, ovSAN ovBSN , and ovSBN . Drug-resistant primary T cells were designated B6ovASN-vector, B6ovSAN-vector, B6ovBSN-vector, and B6ovSBN-vector, respectively. These retrovirally transduced cell populations allowed us to compare, either in vitro or in vivo , the expression of different exogenous genes under the control of either the LTR or SR? promoter. Expression of the retrovirally encoded V?2 and V?5 TCR genes was first assessed in vitro . All four T-cell populations, B6ovASN-vector,B6ovSAN-vector,B6ovBSN-vector, and B6ovSBN-vector, directed expression of their specific retrovirally encoded TCR subunit gene when compared with control B6control-vector T cells ( Figure 5a ). Furthermore, as expected, only B6ovASBN-vector T cells showed the expression of both retrovirally encoded V?5 and V?2 TCR genes, again indicating that the changes in TCR expression were construct-specific. We next evaluated the ability of B6ovASN-vector and B6ovSAN-vector T cells to maintain the expression of their retrovirally encoded V?2 gene in vivo after adoptive transfer into mice. As a prerequisite, we show that 2 weeks after adoptive transfer, both B6ovASN-vector and B6ovSAN-vector T cells persist in the spleen ( Figure 5b ). Furthermore, in Figures 5b and c , we show that in contrast to B6ovSAN-vector and B6control-vector T cells, only B6ovASN-vector T cells maintain the expression of retrovirally encoded V?2 in vivo . These results are consistent with a model where construct-specific SR?-driven gene expression is preferentially lost in vivo . In further support of this model, we observed a similar loss of retrovirally encoded V?5 transgene in B6ovSBN-vector T cells but not in B6BSN-vector T cells (data not shown).  Single-chain TCR retroviral constructs direct promoter-specific expression in vitro and <italic>in vivo</italic> Having established that our single-chain TCR retroviral constructs were capable of directing expression of the retrovirally encoded TCR subunit in 58?– ?– cells, we could now evaluate whether the failure to maintain ovASBN vector-encoded V?5 expression in vivo was related to immunological issues associated with the ability of the exogenous TCR ? chain to localize to the surface or technical issues linked to our retroviral construct. We assessed these two possibilities by retrovirally transducing primary T cells from C57BL/6 mice with one of the four retroviral constructs, namely ovASN, ovSAN ovBSN , and ovSBN . Drug-resistant primary T cells were designated B6ovASN-vector, B6ovSAN-vector, B6ovBSN-vector, and B6ovSBN-vector, respectively. These retrovirally transduced cell populations allowed us to compare, either in vitro or in vivo , the expression of different exogenous genes under the control of either the LTR or SR? promoter. Expression of the retrovirally encoded V?2 and V?5 TCR genes was first assessed in vitro . All four T-cell populations, B6ovASN-vector,B6ovSAN-vector,B6ovBSN-vector, and B6ovSBN-vector, directed expression of their specific retrovirally encoded TCR subunit gene when compared with control B6control-vector T cells ( Figure 5a ). Furthermore, as expected, only B6ovASBN-vector T cells showed the expression of both retrovirally encoded V?5 and V?2 TCR genes, again indicating that the changes in TCR expression were construct-specific. We next evaluated the ability of B6ovASN-vector and B6ovSAN-vector T cells to maintain the expression of their retrovirally encoded V?2 gene in vivo after adoptive transfer into mice. As a prerequisite, we show that 2 weeks after adoptive transfer, both B6ovASN-vector and B6ovSAN-vector T cells persist in the spleen ( Figure 5b ). Furthermore, in Figures 5b and c , we show that in contrast to B6ovSAN-vector and B6control-vector T cells, only B6ovASN-vector T cells maintain the expression of retrovirally encoded V?2 in vivo . These results are consistent with a model where construct-specific SR?-driven gene expression is preferentially lost in vivo . In further support of this model, we observed a similar loss of retrovirally encoded V?5 transgene in B6ovSBN-vector T cells but not in B6BSN-vector T cells (data not shown).  <italic>Prolonged</italic> in vitro culture results in a gradual decrease in SR?-driven gene expression Having shown using multiple retroviral constructs that gene expression at the SR? promoter position was detectable in vitro but not in vivo , we examined the ability of the SR? promoter position to direct sustained gene expression in prolonged in vitro cultures of primary T cells. We compared the expression of V?2 in four different primary retrovirally transduced T-cell cultures (B6control-vector, B6ovASBN-vector, B6ovASN-vector and B6ovSAN-vector) at both an early and late time point following drug selection ( Figures 6a and b ). Interestingly, extension of the culture conditions for just 2.5 weeks resulted in the selective loss of retrovirally encoded SR?-driven V?2 expression (B6ovSAN-vector) but not LTR-driven V?2 expression (B6ovASBN-vector, B6ovASN-vector). We observed a similar reduction in retrovirally encoded SR?-driven V?5 expression over time when comparing the SR?-driven B6ovASBN-vector and B6ovSBN-vector T cells with LTR-driven B6ovBSN-vector T cells ( Figure 6c ). Although the loss in SR?-driven gene expression in vitro was not as dramatic as we observed in vivo after adoptive transfer of T cells into mice ( Figures 3 and 5c ), these in vitro results demonstrate the external factors leading to the loss of SR?-driven gene expression are not exclusively present in vivo .  <italic>Prolonged</italic> in vitro culture results in a gradual decrease in SR?-driven gene expression Having shown using multiple retroviral constructs that gene expression at the SR? promoter position was detectable in vitro but not in vivo , we examined the ability of the SR? promoter position to direct sustained gene expression in prolonged in vitro cultures of primary T cells. We compared the expression of V?2 in four different primary retrovirally transduced T-cell cultures (B6control-vector, B6ovASBN-vector, B6ovASN-vector and B6ovSAN-vector) at both an early and late time point following drug selection ( Figures 6a and b ). Interestingly, extension of the culture conditions for just 2.5 weeks resulted in the selective loss of retrovirally encoded SR?-driven V?2 expression (B6ovSAN-vector) but not LTR-driven V?2 expression (B6ovASBN-vector, B6ovASN-vector). We observed a similar reduction in retrovirally encoded SR?-driven V?5 expression over time when comparing the SR?-driven B6ovASBN-vector and B6ovSBN-vector T cells with LTR-driven B6ovBSN-vector T cells ( Figure 6c ). Although the loss in SR?-driven gene expression in vitro was not as dramatic as we observed in vivo after adoptive transfer of T cells into mice ( Figures 3 and 5c ), these in vitro results demonstrate the external factors leading to the loss of SR?-driven gene expression are not exclusively present in vivo .  Adoptively transferred retrovirally modified T cells transition into memory T cells, persist in a nonlymphopenic environment, and maintain retrovirally encoded transgene expression Successful therapy by adoptive transfer of retrovirally modified T cells will in many circumstances require the ability of the adoptively transferred cells to persist and exhibit sustained gene expression. We evaluated this in our model using nonlymphopenic C57BL/6 mice as recipients. Nine months after the adoptive transfer of 10 million B6ovASBN-vector cells T cells, we observed the persistence of these cells in multiple organs including the spleen, LN and PBL ( Figures 7a and b ). Within the lymphocyte gate based on forward scatter and side scatter properties, these donor T cells represented roughly 0.5–1% of the total cells. As a percentage of total CD8+ T cells, the persistence of adoptively transferred cells was even more impressive, as roughly 3–5% of the total CD8+ cells were of donor origin (data not shown). Expression of V?2 and V?5 was compared in donor and host T cells ( Figure 7a ). As was observed immediately after adoptive transfer, we did not detect a level of V?5 expression on donor B6ovASBN-vector cells that differed from that of host T cells. However, donor B6ovASBN-vector cells did maintain high but heterogeneous level of V?2 when compared with host T cells. These results clearly demonstrate that not only did adoptively transferred B6ovASBN-vector cells persist in an unirradiated host but also they maintained expression of the V?2 transgene at a level comparable to that seen immediately after transfer. To further assess these adoptively transferred T cells, we assessed them for the expression of markers of memory T cells. Nine months after transfer, these cells expressed high levels of CD44 and CD62L, markers consistent with central memory phenotype 10 , 30 ( Figure 7c ). Consistent with this phenotype, these cells also lacked expression of CD25 and CD69 (data not shown).  Adoptively transferred retrovirally modified T cells transition into memory T cells, persist in a nonlymphopenic environment, and maintain retrovirally encoded transgene expression Successful therapy by adoptive transfer of retrovirally modified T cells will in many circumstances require the ability of the adoptively transferred cells to persist and exhibit sustained gene expression. We evaluated this in our model using nonlymphopenic C57BL/6 mice as recipients. Nine months after the adoptive transfer of 10 million B6ovASBN-vector cells T cells, we observed the persistence of these cells in multiple organs including the spleen, LN and PBL ( Figures 7a and b ). Within the lymphocyte gate based on forward scatter and side scatter properties, these donor T cells represented roughly 0.5–1% of the total cells. As a percentage of total CD8+ T cells, the persistence of adoptively transferred cells was even more impressive, as roughly 3–5% of the total CD8+ cells were of donor origin (data not shown). Expression of V?2 and V?5 was compared in donor and host T cells ( Figure 7a ). As was observed immediately after adoptive transfer, we did not detect a level of V?5 expression on donor B6ovASBN-vector cells that differed from that of host T cells. However, donor B6ovASBN-vector cells did maintain high but heterogeneous level of V?2 when compared with host T cells. These results clearly demonstrate that not only did adoptively transferred B6ovASBN-vector cells persist in an unirradiated host but also they maintained expression of the V?2 transgene at a level comparable to that seen immediately after transfer. To further assess these adoptively transferred T cells, we assessed them for the expression of markers of memory T cells. Nine months after transfer, these cells expressed high levels of CD44 and CD62L, markers consistent with central memory phenotype 10 , 30 ( Figure 7c ). Consistent with this phenotype, these cells also lacked expression of CD25 and CD69 (data not shown).  Discussion One of the most significant hurdles to achieving therapeutically successful gene therapy for a broader range of human diseases and genetic disorders is attaining sustained multigene expression from a single construct in vivo . Generic issues relevant to this include (1) the persistence and trafficking of the transduced cells in vivo , (2) the successful vector-driven expression of the target gene and (3) the subsequent duration of gene expression. To contribute to a better understanding of the issues relevant to attaining such sustained gene expression, we evaluated retrovirally mediated gene expression on adoptively transferred murine T cells in the context of antigen-specific TCR transduction. Specifically, we began these studies by using a retroviral vector encoding the expression of three distinct genes, and we showed, using an immortalized cell line, that, in vitro , we could achieve sustained and simultaneous gene expression of all three vector genes independent of drug selection. However, contrary to our initial prediction, this pattern of gene expression was not present in vivo , and following the adoptive transfer of retrovirally modified primary T cells, there was a dramatic and selective loss in expression of one of the three vector genes. This loss of gene expression in vivo was associated with the placement of the transgene in a promoter-specific vector position, as when we generated alternative promoter-specific retroviral vectors, we were able to reproduce the promoter-specific and transgene positional selective loss of gene expression in vivo . Upon careful examination, we also observed a more subtle and gradual loss of gene expression in extended in vitro cultures of primary retrovirally modified T cells. Interestingly, this was not observed in experiments using the artificial 58?– ?– cell line, indicating a difference between primary T cell cultures and immortalized T cell lines. Importantly, despite this discordance in gene expression in specific situations, we found that retrovirally modified T cells could persist in a nonlymphopenic mouse for over 9 months and that these adoptively transferred T cells exhibited a phenotype consistent with memory T cells. Furthermore, these retrovirally modified T cells were able to maintain the expression of a retrovirally encoded gene for more than 9 months in vivo despite a lack of drug selection. A wide variety of mechanisms have been reported that may lead to the loss of promoter-specific gene expression in vivo . 12 , 31 – 37 In many studies, DNA methylation has been linked to the loss of transgene expression; however, it is unclear whether such methylation plays a causative role or is a secondary consequence of other mechanisms. 32 Perhaps, more clinically relevant than completely understanding these molecular details are determining the external factors that may modify retrovirally mediated gene expression. In the context of T cells, one particularly relevant report showed that the activation state of T cells may affect their ability to direct gene expression. Specifically, Quinn et al . 38 showed that they could rescue LTR promoter-driven transgene expression in T cells by stimulation and activation through the TCR. However, this activation state-dependent re-induction of gene expression did not appear to be relevant in our studies, as we were unable to rescue SR? promoter-driven transgene expression by re-stimulation (with anti-CD3?/CD28) of retrovirally modified T cells either in vitro or ex vivo (data not shown). Two alternative explanations for the apparent loss of gene expression we observed in vivo might be (1) the selective rejection of the donor T cells as a result of transgene expression 39 , 40 or (2) toxicity associated with transgene expression. We think that these possibilities are not likely, as the relevant transgene could be expressed at high levels in vivo when linked with the LTR promoter instead of the SR? promoter. Numerous other mechanisms that could play a contributory role to our observed loss of gene expression have also been reported. For example, expression of the neomycin resistance gene has been linked to problems with gene expression. 41 – 43 Although we cannot directly exclude any of these mechanisms as contributory, our results suggest either (1) a problem directly associated with the SR? promoter's ability to maintain gene expression in vivo on murine T cells or (2) a problem indirectly related to the SR? promoter gene position in the specific retroviral construct used in these studies. Thus, our results would dictate the use of caution in the evaluation or application of either SR? promoter containing vectors or pgSAMEN-related retroviral vectors. To our knowledge, there is no evidence that the SR? promoter can drive transgene expression directly in peripheral T cells in vivo , although, as with our studies, it has been reported that the SR? promoter can drive transgene expression in T cells in vitro . 44 , 45 Interestingly, there is also conflicting data as to whether SR?-driven transgene expression occurs in the thymus. 46 , 47 Further studies will be needed to elucidate the causative agent for our observed loss of gene expression. Perhaps the most important observation from our study was the inability of in vitro assays to adequately predict levels of multigene retroviral construct expression in vivo . In particular, the linked expression of two genes in vitro was not indicative of linked expression in vivo . While this discordance was most apparent from the in vitro evaluation of the retrovirally transduced immortalized cell line, we also observed this phenomenon, although to a lesser degree, when retrovirally transduced primary T cells were used for evaluation in vitro . These results are of particular concern, as in vitro assays are often used to predict results in vivo . 48 – 55 Moreover, immortalized cell lines, which exhibited properties of greatest discordance to in vivo results, are normally of greatest ease to work with and thus often the most attractive candidates to evaluate the ability of retroviral vectors to direct gene expression. Our results suggest that careful consideration be given to the different physiological conditions present in vitro and in vivo . The capacity of T cells in our model to survive in vivo is noteworthy. In most studies showing the persistence of genetically modified T lymphocytes, the recipients were lymphopenic. 6 , 8 , 54 , 56 – 58 In such settings, donor T cells face reduced competition with host lymphocytes and persist much more effectively. 11 In our study, however, recipients were not lymphopenic, and thus, the ability to detect a significant percentage of donor T cells expressing one of the retrovirally encoded transgenes at 9 months is particularly impressive. It is unclear why T cells generated through our T-cell transduction protocol persisted so effectively, but several factors may be relevant. Primarily, T cells were cultured for prolonged periods of time prior to injection using a sequential activation and expansion strategy. 24 , 25 Furthermore, our retroviral transduction protocol involved the stimulation of T cells from bulk splenocyte cultures with supernatant harvested from third-party cells. These culture conditions may be permissive for the presence of factors with potent T-cell co-stimulatory properties. 59 – 63 If these activation and culture conditions are indeed critical to preconditioning T cells for the long-term survival following adoptive transfer, it may indicate the need for careful consideration of attempts to genetically modify T cells with newer viral vectors that do not require cell division 64 and may inadvertently not provide crucial co-stimulatory factors.  Discussion One of the most significant hurdles to achieving therapeutically successful gene therapy for a broader range of human diseases and genetic disorders is attaining sustained multigene expression from a single construct in vivo . Generic issues relevant to this include (1) the persistence and trafficking of the transduced cells in vivo , (2) the successful vector-driven expression of the target gene and (3) the subsequent duration of gene expression. To contribute to a better understanding of the issues relevant to attaining such sustained gene expression, we evaluated retrovirally mediated gene expression on adoptively transferred murine T cells in the context of antigen-specific TCR transduction. Specifically, we began these studies by using a retroviral vector encoding the expression of three distinct genes, and we showed, using an immortalized cell line, that, in vitro , we could achieve sustained and simultaneous gene expression of all three vector genes independent of drug selection. However, contrary to our initial prediction, this pattern of gene expression was not present in vivo , and following the adoptive transfer of retrovirally modified primary T cells, there was a dramatic and selective loss in expression of one of the three vector genes. This loss of gene expression in vivo was associated with the placement of the transgene in a promoter-specific vector position, as when we generated alternative promoter-specific retroviral vectors, we were able to reproduce the promoter-specific and transgene positional selective loss of gene expression in vivo . Upon careful examination, we also observed a more subtle and gradual loss of gene expression in extended in vitro cultures of primary retrovirally modified T cells. Interestingly, this was not observed in experiments using the artificial 58?– ?– cell line, indicating a difference between primary T cell cultures and immortalized T cell lines. Importantly, despite this discordance in gene expression in specific situations, we found that retrovirally modified T cells could persist in a nonlymphopenic mouse for over 9 months and that these adoptively transferred T cells exhibited a phenotype consistent with memory T cells. Furthermore, these retrovirally modified T cells were able to maintain the expression of a retrovirally encoded gene for more than 9 months in vivo despite a lack of drug selection. A wide variety of mechanisms have been reported that may lead to the loss of promoter-specific gene expression in vivo . 12 , 31 – 37 In many studies, DNA methylation has been linked to the loss of transgene expression; however, it is unclear whether such methylation plays a causative role or is a secondary consequence of other mechanisms. 32 Perhaps, more clinically relevant than completely understanding these molecular details are determining the external factors that may modify retrovirally mediated gene expression. In the context of T cells, one particularly relevant report showed that the activation state of T cells may affect their ability to direct gene expression. Specifically, Quinn et al . 38 showed that they could rescue LTR promoter-driven transgene expression in T cells by stimulation and activation through the TCR. However, this activation state-dependent re-induction of gene expression did not appear to be relevant in our studies, as we were unable to rescue SR? promoter-driven transgene expression by re-stimulation (with anti-CD3?/CD28) of retrovirally modified T cells either in vitro or ex vivo (data not shown). Two alternative explanations for the apparent loss of gene expression we observed in vivo might be (1) the selective rejection of the donor T cells as a result of transgene expression 39 , 40 or (2) toxicity associated with transgene expression. We think that these possibilities are not likely, as the relevant transgene could be expressed at high levels in vivo when linked with the LTR promoter instead of the SR? promoter. Numerous other mechanisms that could play a contributory role to our observed loss of gene expression have also been reported. For example, expression of the neomycin resistance gene has been linked to problems with gene expression. 41 – 43 Although we cannot directly exclude any of these mechanisms as contributory, our results suggest either (1) a problem directly associated with the SR? promoter's ability to maintain gene expression in vivo on murine T cells or (2) a problem indirectly related to the SR? promoter gene position in the specific retroviral construct used in these studies. Thus, our results would dictate the use of caution in the evaluation or application of either SR? promoter containing vectors or pgSAMEN-related retroviral vectors. To our knowledge, there is no evidence that the SR? promoter can drive transgene expression directly in peripheral T cells in vivo , although, as with our studies, it has been reported that the SR? promoter can drive transgene expression in T cells in vitro . 44 , 45 Interestingly, there is also conflicting data as to whether SR?-driven transgene expression occurs in the thymus. 46 , 47 Further studies will be needed to elucidate the causative agent for our observed loss of gene expression. Perhaps the most important observation from our study was the inability of in vitro assays to adequately predict levels of multigene retroviral construct expression in vivo . In particular, the linked expression of two genes in vitro was not indicative of linked expression in vivo . While this discordance was most apparent from the in vitro evaluation of the retrovirally transduced immortalized cell line, we also observed this phenomenon, although to a lesser degree, when retrovirally transduced primary T cells were used for evaluation in vitro . These results are of particular concern, as in vitro assays are often used to predict results in vivo . 48 – 55 Moreover, immortalized cell lines, which exhibited properties of greatest discordance to in vivo results, are normally of greatest ease to work with and thus often the most attractive candidates to evaluate the ability of retroviral vectors to direct gene expression. Our results suggest that careful consideration be given to the different physiological conditions present in vitro and in vivo . The capacity of T cells in our model to survive in vivo is noteworthy. In most studies showing the persistence of genetically modified T lymphocytes, the recipients were lymphopenic. 6 , 8 , 54 , 56 – 58 In such settings, donor T cells face reduced competition with host lymphocytes and persist much more effectively. 11 In our study, however, recipients were not lymphopenic, and thus, the ability to detect a significant percentage of donor T cells expressing one of the retrovirally encoded transgenes at 9 months is particularly impressive. It is unclear why T cells generated through our T-cell transduction protocol persisted so effectively, but several factors may be relevant. Primarily, T cells were cultured for prolonged periods of time prior to injection using a sequential activation and expansion strategy. 24 , 25 Furthermore, our retroviral transduction protocol involved the stimulation of T cells from bulk splenocyte cultures with supernatant harvested from third-party cells. These culture conditions may be permissive for the presence of factors with potent T-cell co-stimulatory properties. 59 – 63 If these activation and culture conditions are indeed critical to preconditioning T cells for the long-term survival following adoptive transfer, it may indicate the need for careful consideration of attempts to genetically modify T cells with newer viral vectors that do not require cell division 64 and may inadvertently not provide crucial co-stimulatory factors.  Conclusion Developing the technology to modify cells genetically and to direct complex multigene expression for sustained periods of time in vivo will be the cornerstone for improved therapies to a growing list of human disorders. Our study exemplifies the complexity of technically relevant issues that must be understood to achieve appropriate multigene expression. In particular, interpretation of our results dictates the use of caution in using in vitro assays or alternative cell types as a surrogate for predicting retrovirally mediated expression in vivo . However, rather than being pessimistic, we believe our results are a cause for optimism, as we demonstrated that retrovirally modified T cells not only were capable of persisting but also were directing sustained gene expression in these cells. To date, retroviral vectors have been used with varying degrees of success in gene therapy trials in which the therapeutic effect was dependent on only one gene being expressed. Our study provides insight into the technically demanding issues that will be relevant to designing appropriate retroviral vectors for successful multigene therapy.  Figures Figure 1 B6ovASBN-vector cells fail to mediate a therapeutic response in a B16-ova (B16 cells transfected with the ovalbumin gene) lung metastases model. C57BL/6 mice were injected intravenously (i.v.) with 500 000 B16-ova tumor cells. After 3 days, mice were treated by intravenous adoptive transfer of 10 million retrovirally transduced T cells. Seventeen days after tumor injection, mice were killed and lung metastases were counted in a blinded fashion. Each triangle shown represents one mouse and the bar represents the average metastases per condition. The average number of metastases is also shown at the bottom below the condition name. In each condition, at least five mice were used. Results are representative of three experiments. Figure 2 Retrovirally transduced T cells persist after transfer into unirradiated C57BL/6 mice. A total of 10 million retrovirally-transduced T cells (Ly5.1) were adoptively transferred by intravenous tail vein injection into normal C57BL/6 (Ly5.2) mice. At various time points after injection, mice were killed, and the percentage of Ly5.1+ donor T cells in the various organs was assessed by flow cytometry. Each time point represents the average of at least two mice. Error bars show standard deviation at each data point. Figure 3 B6ovASBN-vector cells express exogenous V?2 but not V?5 1 day after adoptive transfer. Retrovirally transduced T cells were adoptively transferred i.v. into unirradiated C57BL/6-Ly5.2 recipients. Single-cell suspensions were then prepared from either the lung or the liver on days 3 or 4, respectively, following adoptive transfer. Cells were then stained for the expression of V?2, V?5 or V?8 (as control). Staining of B6ovASBN-vector cells is indicated by the dark line. Control staining of B6control-vector cells is indicated by the shaded histogram. A similar pattern of T cell-receptor (TCR) subunit expression was observed in the spleen, LN and PBL at other time points after adoptive transfer. Figure 4 Maintenance of retrovirally mediated T cell-receptor (TCR) expression in vitro in the absence of drug selection: 58?– ?– hybridoma cells were transduced with the ovASBN construct and selected in G418-containing media for 2 weeks. Subsequently, cells were split into two groups, and maintained in vitro with or without G418 for an additional 4 weeks. Cells were then assayed for CD3? expression by FACS analysis. The shaded histogram indicates staining of control 58?– ?– cells not modified by gene transfer. Figure 5 Retrovirally encoded T cell-receptor (TCR) expression in vitro and in vivo .( a ) In vitro expression of retrovirally encoded TCR subunits on murine T cells. Retrovirally modified CD8+ T cells were generated by transduction with the ovASBN, ovSAN, ovSAN, ovBSN, ovSBN or control retroviral vectors. Shown is the expression of V?5 and V?2 on day 16 of culture. ( b ) In vivo expression of retrovirally encoded TCR subunits on donor murine T cells. Retrovirally modified T cells were prepared as in panel a, but adoptively transferred into unirradiated mice. Two weeks after adoptive transfer, mice were killed and splenocytes were harvested and assessed for both the percentage of donor T cells and TCR subunit expression. The number in the gated box indicates the percentage of donor T cells among the entire splenocyte population. ( c ) Shows the same as in panel ? except histograms are gated on donor lymphocytes. The number shown within each histogram indicates the percentage of cells gating positive. Similar results were obtained at other time points, and also with the ovBSN and ovSBN retroviral constructs. Figure 6 Retrovirally encoded gene expression driven off the SR? promoter position is diminished over time in vitro . ( a ) T cell-receptor (TCR) expression at an early time point, in vitro . Retrovirally modified T cells were generated as described in Figure 5 . Retrovirally encoded TCR subunit expression was evaluated on day 16 of culture. ( b ) In vitro TCR expression at a late time point. Cells were generated as in panel a, except cells were cultured for an extra 2.5 weeks in vitro . ( c ) Consolidated results of retrovirally encoded TCR expression over time. Cells were analyzed as in panels a and b, and the percentage of exogenous V?5 expression was determined by the following formula: ((V?5 expression of the relevant construct)–(V?5 expression from control cells)). The two dark gray lines indicate exogenous V?5 staining of T cells transduced with a SR?-driven V?5 transgene. The black line indicates exogenous V?5 staining of T cells transduced with an LTR-driven V?5 transgene. The light gray lines shows, as control, the absence of exogenous V?5 staining in cells transduced with a retroviral vector lacking the V?5 transgene. Similar results were obtained in two independent experiments. Figure 7 B6ovASBN-vector maintains the expression of LTR-driven V?2 expression 9 months after adoptive transfer and exhibits a memory phenotype. ( a ) B6ovASBN-vector cells express exogenous V?2 but no detectable exogenous V?5 expression. Spleen cells were harvested 9 months following the adoptive transfer of 10 million B6ovASBN-vector cells into unirradiated C57BL/6 recipient mice. Depicted in the top row are dot plots of Ly5.1 versus TCR subunit expression. Underneath are histograms gated on the donor cells. ( b ) Cells harvested from the LN and PBL as in panel a. ( c ) Expression of CD44 and CD62L on donor lymphocytes harvested from the spleen as in panel a. The shaded histogram depicts CD44 and CD62L expression on the host lymphocytes. Results are representative of two similar experiments. 