Topical Peroxisome Proliferator Activated Receptor Activators Accelerate Postnatal Stratum Corneum Acidification Previous studies have shown that pH declines from between 6 and 7 at birth to adult levels (pH 5.0–5.5) over 5–6 days in neonatal rat stratum corneum (SC). As a result, at birth, neonatal epidermis displays decreased permeability barrier homeostasis and SC integrity, improving days 5–6. We determined here whether peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) activators accelerate postnatal SC acidification. Topical treatment with two different PPAR? activators, clofibrate and WY14643, accelerated the postnatal decline in SC surface pH, whereas treatment with PPAR? activators did not and a PPAR?/? activator had only a modest effect. Treatment with clofibrate significantly accelerated normalization of barrier function. The morphological basis for the improvement in barrier function in PPAR?-treated animals includes accelerated secretion of lamellar bodies and enhanced, postsecretory processing of secreted lamellar body contents into mature lamellar membranes. Activity of ?-glucocerebrosidase increased after PPAR?-activator treatment. PPAR? activator also improved SC integrity, which correlated with an increase in corneodesmosome density and increased desmoglein-1 content, with a decline in serine protease activity. Topical treatment of newborn animals with a PPAR? activator increased secretory phospholipase A2 activity, which likely accounts for accelerated SC acidification. Thus, PPAR? activators accelerate neonatal SC acidification, in parallel with improved permeability homeostasis and SC integrity/cohesion. Hence, PPAR? activators might be useful to prevent or treat certain common neonatal dermatoses.  INTRODUCTION It is well known that the surface pH of the human adult skin is acidic with a pH between 5 and 5.5 ( Heuss, 1892 ; Schade, 1928 ; Marchionini and Hausknecht, 1938 ; Blank, 1939 ; Bernstein and Hermann, 1942 ; Draize, 1942 ; Arbenz, 1952 ; Behrendt and Green, 1958 ; Beare et al ., 1960 ; Jolly, 1961 ; Baden and Pathak, 1967 ; Tippelt, 1969 ; Braun-Falco and Korting, 1986 ; Zlotogorski, 1987 ; Korting et al ., 1990 ; Seidenari and Giusti, 1995 ; Berardesca et al ., 1998 ; Yosipovitch et al ., 1998 ; Eberlein-Konig et al ., 2000 ; Fluhr et al ., 2000 ), but the mechanisms that account for this acidification remain only partially defined. It has been postulated that exogenous mechanisms (that is, originating outside the epidermis), such as free fatty acids of pilosebaceous origin ( Puhvel et al ., 1975 ; Bibel et al ., 1989 ), microbial metabolites ( Di Marzio et al ., 1999 ), and eccrine gland-derived products, such as lactic acid ( Ament et al ., 1997 ; Thueson et al ., 1998 ), contribute to stratum corneum (SC) acidification. But recent studies have shown that endogenous pathways also contribute to SC acidification ( Fluhr et al ., 2001a , 2004a ; Behne et al ., 2002a ). Free fatty acid generation from phospholipid hydrolysis catalyzed by secretory phospholipase A2 (sPLA2, Mao-Qiang et al ., 1996 ; Fluhr et al ., 2001a , 2004a ), generation of acidic metabolites of filaggrin metabolism, such as cis -urocanic acid from histidine ( Schwarz et al ., 1986 ; Krien and Kermici, 2000 ), and a sodium/proton pump antiporter, sodium/hydrogen antiporter-1 (NHE-1; Behne et al ., 2002b , 2003 ; Fluhr et al ., 2004a ), appears to contribute to SC acidification. Yet, the skin surface is not fully acidified in newborn rodents and humans ( Behrendt and Green, 1958 ; Visscher et al ., 2000 ; Yosipovitch et al ., 2000 ; Fluhr et al ., 2004a ). While in humans it takes several weeks to months before the SC is fully acidified ( Behrendt and Green, 1958 ; Visscher et al ., 2000 ; Yosipovitch et al ., 2000 ; Giusti et al ., 2001 ) in the neonatal rat, the SC attains adult pH levels over the first postnatal week ( Fluhr et al ., 2004a ). Inhibition of either sPLA2 or NHE-1 delays postnatal SC acidification, suggesting that these two endogenous pathways of acidification contribute to the postnatal acidification ( Fluhr et al ., 2004a ) at a time when neither the normal microbial flora nor filaggrin proteolysis appear to be contributory. Moreover, murine epidermis is devoid of eccrine glands, whose products therefore are not available to acidify the SC. While the major function of the low surface pH has been assumed to be antimicrobial ( Aly et al ., 1975 ; Hartmann, 1983 ; Bibel et al ., 1989 ), recent studies have suggested that the acidic pH of the SC is also essential for normal permeability barrier homeostasis and SC integrity and cohesion (the converse of desquamation). Specifically, in newborn rodents the recovery of permeability barrier function following acute barrier disruption is delayed because of incomplete maturation of lamellar membranes in the SC ( Fluhr et al ., 2004b ), an abnormality that has been attributed in turn to decreased activity of at least one key enzyme for lipid processing; ?-glucocerebrosidase (?-GlucCer’ase), which exhibits optimal activity at an acidic pH. Pertinently, both permeability barrier homeostasis and the maturation of SC lamellar membranes improve with topical treatment of the newborn animals with an acidic buffer ( Fluhr et al ., 2004b ). Similarly, abnormal SC integrity and cohesion are corrected by topical acidic buffers ( Fluhr et al ., 2004b ); corneodesmosomes (CDs) density increases with acidic buffer treatment, and desmoglein 1 (DSG1) and corneodesmosin protein content increase in parallel. An increase in serine protease activity in the SC in newborn animals, because of the higher pH that optimizes catalytic activity of this family of enzymes, appears to account for increased degradation of CD in neonatal SC. Notably, the increased serine protease activity and the reduced density of CD are corrected by topical treatment with an acidic buffer linking the structural abnormalities in CD with the alterations in SC integrity ( Fluhr et al ., 2004b ). Together, these experiments demonstrate that a decrease in pH in neonatal animals improves both permeability barrier homeostasis and SC integrity indicating an important role for pH in regulating these functions during the perinatal period. Conversely, the elevated surface pH in neonates could contribute to their common clinical abnormalities. Recent studies have shown that topical treatment of newborn animals with activators of LXR, a nuclear hormone receptor that forms heterodimers with RXR followed by activation of gene transcription, can accelerate SC acidification, at least in part because of an increase in sPLA2 activity ( Fluhr et al ., 2005 ). This LXR-mediated acceleration of acidification was associated with an improvement in both permeability barrier homeostasis and SC integrity. Additionally, the structural abnormalities in both SC lamellar membranes and CD density in newborn animals were ameliorated by treatment with LXR activators, accounting for the improvement in these functions ( Fluhr et al ., 2005 ). Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) are members of the same subfamily of nuclear hormone receptors as LXR. Three isotypes have been described: PPAR? (NR1C1), PPAR?/? (NR1C2), and PPAR? (NR1C3), which all are expressed in epidermis, and most specifically in human keratinocytes ( Rivier et al ., 1998 ; Kuenzli and Saurat, 2004 ). Endogenous fatty acids and their metabolites activate PPARs, as do specific drugs (PPAR?, clofibrates and WY14643; PPAR?/?, GW1514; PPAR?, thiazolidinediones, such as ciglitazone and troglitazone; Kliewer et al ., 1999 ). In adult animals, topical treatment with activators of these PPAR isoforms, and the addition of activators to human keratinocyte cultures stimulates keratinocyte differentiation ( Hanley et al ., 1998 ; Komuves et al ., 2000 ; Mao-Qiang et al ., 2004 ; Schmuth et al ., 2004 ). In addition, topical treatment of normal adult animals with PPAR activators improves permeability barrier homeostasis following acute barrier disruption ( Man et al ., 2006 ). Finally, PPAR? and PPAR?/? activators accelerate the formation of the epidermal permeability barrier and stimulate differentiation during fetal development, whereas PPAR? displays no effects ( Komuves et al ., 1998 ; Hanley et al ., 1999 ; Michalik et al ., 2002 ; Schmuth et al ., 2002a ). Given the beneficial effect of LXR activation on SC pH and cutaneous structure and function ( Fluhr et al ., 2005 ), we hypothesized that treatment with one or more PPAR activators could also accelerate neonatal acidification, resulting in normalization of the abnormalities in cutaneous function that occur in neonatal epidermis.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Materials, animals, and experimental procedures Timed-pregnant Sprague–Dawley rats were obtained from Simonson Laboratories (Gilroy, California) and fed Purina mouse diet and water ad libitum . The PPAR ligands were obtained as follows: PPAR?, clofibrate and WY14643 were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, MO); PPAR?/?, GW1514 was a gift from Dr Willson (GlaxoSmithKline); PPAR?, ciglitazone and troglitazone were obtained from Cayman Chemical Laboratories (Ann Arbor, MI). Animal protocols were approved by the Animal Care Subcommittee (Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco). The compounds were dissolved in acetone at a concentration of 10 m m . The pHs of the solutions containing PPAR activators or vehicle alone were similar (pH 6.5–7.0). The newborn rats were treated on each flank 2× per day over 3 days with 20 µl of the freshly prepared solutions. To prevent the mothers from licking the applied substances off the newborn rats, we placed the pups in a plastic container in a 37 °C incubator for 2–3 hours. The pups were placed in groups (vehicle treated separated from activator treated). The measurements were performed after 3 days of treatment. Permeability barrier homeostasis Barrier function was determined by measurement of TEWL with an electrolytic water analyzer (MEECO, Warrington, PA). Stratum corneum hydration was measured with a corneometer (Corneometer CM 820, Courage and Khazaka, Cologne, Germany). Surface pH was measured with a flat, glass surface electrode from Mettler-Toledo (Giessen, Germany), attached to a pH meter (Skin pH Meter PH 900, Courage and Khazaka). Propylene glycol and ethanol were from Fisher Scientific (Fairlane, NJ), whereas BPB was from Sigma Chemical Co. (St Louis, MO). EnzCheck Protease Assay Kit was purchased from Molecular Probes (Eugene, OR). The strippings were performed with 22 mm DSquame 100 tapes, purchased from CuDerm (Dallas, TX). To assess the importance of sPLA2, neonatal animals were treated topically twice daily for 3 days with BPB (4 mg/ml) in propylene glycol:ethanol (7:3, v/v) vehicle or the vehicle alone applied to the backs and flanks of the newborn rats (?10 µl/cm2) as described previously for hairless mice ( Mao-Qiang et al ., 1996 ; Fluhr et al ., 2001b ). The inhibitor doses that we employed have been shown previously to inhibit secretory PLA2 activity selectively in different tissues and cell types ( Jain et al ., 1991 ; Hornfelt et al ., 1999 ; Longo et al ., 1999 ; Okamoto et al ., 2007 ) and to be nontoxic to murine skin, without evidence of inhibition of other synthetic activities ( Mao-Qiang et al ., 1995 , 1996 ). Most importantly, previous studies have shown that topical treatment with BPB inhibits the metabolism of phospholipids to free fatty acids in the SC ( Mao-Qiang et al ., 1995 , 1996 ). The animal procedures were approved by the Animal Studies Committee of the San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center and were performed in accordance with the guidelines. SC integrity and barrier homeostasis SC integrity was assessed as the change in TEWL value after a predefined number of D-Squame tape strippings. After acute barrier disruption by tape stripping with a TEWL value of about 10–15 × over baseline, barrier recovery rates were calculated with the following formula: (100?(TEWL immediately after stripping?TEWL at different time points)/(TEWL immediately after stripping?baseline TEWL) × 100%). Electron microscopy Samples for electron microscopy were minced to 1 mm3 cubes, placed in modified Karnovsky’s fixative, and postfixed in either reduced 1% osmium or buffered 0.2% ruthenium tetroxide with 0.5% ferrocyanide ( Hou et al ., 1991 ). Samples were examined in a Zeiss 10A electron microscope (Carl Zeiss, Thornwood, NY) operated at 60 kV. Dr Peter Elias reviewed and interpreted the electron micrographs without knowledge of the treatment group. Micrographs shown for electron microscopy are representative of the changes observed in three or more samples obtained from at least two different litters for each treatment. Quantitation of CD density was performed in 25–30 randomly obtained micrographs, all taken at 25,000 magnification, using a planimeter (Plan Wheel, Scalex Corp., Carlsbad, CA), and Scale-Link version 3.0 software (Scalex). CD density was calculated as unit length of CD/total length of cornified envelopes, and means ± SEM for each group was compared statistically ( Figure 6 ). Assessment of lipid processing enzyme activities sPLA<sub>2</sub> activity sPLA2 activity was assessed in pooled, sequential SC tape strips (D-Squame) with a fluorometric assay, as described by ( Radvanyi et al ., 1989 ; Mazereeuw-Hautier et al ., 2000 ). Briefly, in newborn rats, the SC was stripped down to the glistening layer after 3 days of treatment twice daily with PPAR activators or vehicle, and assayed as described previously ( Fluhr et al ., 2004b ). Zymographic assessment of ?-glucocerebrosidase activity Enzyme activity was measured using a modification of a previously described method ( Takagi et al ., 1999 ) that has been previously employed in neonatal rat studies ( Hachem et al ., 2003 ; Fluhr et al ., 2004a ). Briefly, enzyme activity was measured by applying 20 µl of 10 m m resorufin ?- d -glucopyranoside dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide to the backs of the newborn rats. The resorufin dye becomes fluorescent once the substrate is enzymatically cleaved. Following topical application, neonatal pups were placed for 2–3 hours in a plastic container at 37–38 °C. At the end of these in vivo incubations, 4-mm punch-out biopsies were taken from treated and control sites. The biopsies were placed on a plastic coverslip with a punched out center, inverted onto a microscopic slide, and covered with a second, nonpunched coverslip. The cleaved compound was visualized with a confocal microscope at an excitation wavelength of 568 nm and an emission wavelength of 580 nm. Resorufin alone served as an additional negative control and as a further check for specificity (data not shown). ?-GlucCer’ase enzyme activity was blocked when the fluorogenic substrate was co-applied with 10 m m conduritol B epoxide (data not shown). Zymographic assessment of protease activity Enzyme activity was assessed as previously described ( Hachem et al ., 2003 ; Fluhr et al ., 2004a ) with skin from treated neonatal rats. To obtain en face views harvested skin was placed in a chamber slide system with the SC facing toward the beam and visualized directly in a confocal microscope (Leica TCS SP, Heidelberg, Germany) at an excitation wavelength of 485 nm and an emission wavelength of 530 nm. Immunofluorescence Desmoglein 1 expression DSG 1 expression was visualized as described previously ( Fluhr et al ., 2001a ). NHE1 expression Rabbit anti-mouse NHE1 antibody was purchased from Chemicom (Temecula, CA) and FITC-labeled goat anti-rabbit antibody was purchased from Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories, INC (West Grove, PA). Skin biopsies were taken after 3 days of vehicle or activator treatment. sections (10 µm) were incubated with NHE1 antibody at a concentration of 15 µg/ml for 2 hours at room temperature. After washing three times with PBS a 1:200 dilution of FITC-labeled secondary was applied to sections and incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature. Statistical analyses Statistical analyses were performed using Prism 3 (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA). Normal distribution was tested before calculating the comparison with an unpaired t -test. In experiments with more than three groups, an analysis of variance was calculated followed by an ?-corrected post hoc test (Bonferroni). Values are expressed as mean ± SEM. The significance level was set at P < 0.05.  Materials, animals, and experimental procedures Timed-pregnant Sprague–Dawley rats were obtained from Simonson Laboratories (Gilroy, California) and fed Purina mouse diet and water ad libitum . The PPAR ligands were obtained as follows: PPAR?, clofibrate and WY14643 were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, MO); PPAR?/?, GW1514 was a gift from Dr Willson (GlaxoSmithKline); PPAR?, ciglitazone and troglitazone were obtained from Cayman Chemical Laboratories (Ann Arbor, MI). Animal protocols were approved by the Animal Care Subcommittee (Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco). The compounds were dissolved in acetone at a concentration of 10 m m . The pHs of the solutions containing PPAR activators or vehicle alone were similar (pH 6.5–7.0). The newborn rats were treated on each flank 2× per day over 3 days with 20 µl of the freshly prepared solutions. To prevent the mothers from licking the applied substances off the newborn rats, we placed the pups in a plastic container in a 37 °C incubator for 2–3 hours. The pups were placed in groups (vehicle treated separated from activator treated). The measurements were performed after 3 days of treatment. Permeability barrier homeostasis Barrier function was determined by measurement of TEWL with an electrolytic water analyzer (MEECO, Warrington, PA). Stratum corneum hydration was measured with a corneometer (Corneometer CM 820, Courage and Khazaka, Cologne, Germany). Surface pH was measured with a flat, glass surface electrode from Mettler-Toledo (Giessen, Germany), attached to a pH meter (Skin pH Meter PH 900, Courage and Khazaka). Propylene glycol and ethanol were from Fisher Scientific (Fairlane, NJ), whereas BPB was from Sigma Chemical Co. (St Louis, MO). EnzCheck Protease Assay Kit was purchased from Molecular Probes (Eugene, OR). The strippings were performed with 22 mm DSquame 100 tapes, purchased from CuDerm (Dallas, TX). To assess the importance of sPLA2, neonatal animals were treated topically twice daily for 3 days with BPB (4 mg/ml) in propylene glycol:ethanol (7:3, v/v) vehicle or the vehicle alone applied to the backs and flanks of the newborn rats (?10 µl/cm2) as described previously for hairless mice ( Mao-Qiang et al ., 1996 ; Fluhr et al ., 2001b ). The inhibitor doses that we employed have been shown previously to inhibit secretory PLA2 activity selectively in different tissues and cell types ( Jain et al ., 1991 ; Hornfelt et al ., 1999 ; Longo et al ., 1999 ; Okamoto et al ., 2007 ) and to be nontoxic to murine skin, without evidence of inhibition of other synthetic activities ( Mao-Qiang et al ., 1995 , 1996 ). Most importantly, previous studies have shown that topical treatment with BPB inhibits the metabolism of phospholipids to free fatty acids in the SC ( Mao-Qiang et al ., 1995 , 1996 ). The animal procedures were approved by the Animal Studies Committee of the San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center and were performed in accordance with the guidelines. SC integrity and barrier homeostasis SC integrity was assessed as the change in TEWL value after a predefined number of D-Squame tape strippings. After acute barrier disruption by tape stripping with a TEWL value of about 10–15 × over baseline, barrier recovery rates were calculated with the following formula: (100?(TEWL immediately after stripping?TEWL at different time points)/(TEWL immediately after stripping?baseline TEWL) × 100%).  Permeability barrier homeostasis Barrier function was determined by measurement of TEWL with an electrolytic water analyzer (MEECO, Warrington, PA). Stratum corneum hydration was measured with a corneometer (Corneometer CM 820, Courage and Khazaka, Cologne, Germany). Surface pH was measured with a flat, glass surface electrode from Mettler-Toledo (Giessen, Germany), attached to a pH meter (Skin pH Meter PH 900, Courage and Khazaka). Propylene glycol and ethanol were from Fisher Scientific (Fairlane, NJ), whereas BPB was from Sigma Chemical Co. (St Louis, MO). EnzCheck Protease Assay Kit was purchased from Molecular Probes (Eugene, OR). The strippings were performed with 22 mm DSquame 100 tapes, purchased from CuDerm (Dallas, TX). To assess the importance of sPLA2, neonatal animals were treated topically twice daily for 3 days with BPB (4 mg/ml) in propylene glycol:ethanol (7:3, v/v) vehicle or the vehicle alone applied to the backs and flanks of the newborn rats (?10 µl/cm2) as described previously for hairless mice ( Mao-Qiang et al ., 1996 ; Fluhr et al ., 2001b ). The inhibitor doses that we employed have been shown previously to inhibit secretory PLA2 activity selectively in different tissues and cell types ( Jain et al ., 1991 ; Hornfelt et al ., 1999 ; Longo et al ., 1999 ; Okamoto et al ., 2007 ) and to be nontoxic to murine skin, without evidence of inhibition of other synthetic activities ( Mao-Qiang et al ., 1995 , 1996 ). Most importantly, previous studies have shown that topical treatment with BPB inhibits the metabolism of phospholipids to free fatty acids in the SC ( Mao-Qiang et al ., 1995 , 1996 ). The animal procedures were approved by the Animal Studies Committee of the San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center and were performed in accordance with the guidelines.  SC integrity and barrier homeostasis SC integrity was assessed as the change in TEWL value after a predefined number of D-Squame tape strippings. After acute barrier disruption by tape stripping with a TEWL value of about 10–15 × over baseline, barrier recovery rates were calculated with the following formula: (100?(TEWL immediately after stripping?TEWL at different time points)/(TEWL immediately after stripping?baseline TEWL) × 100%).  Electron microscopy Samples for electron microscopy were minced to 1 mm3 cubes, placed in modified Karnovsky’s fixative, and postfixed in either reduced 1% osmium or buffered 0.2% ruthenium tetroxide with 0.5% ferrocyanide ( Hou et al ., 1991 ). Samples were examined in a Zeiss 10A electron microscope (Carl Zeiss, Thornwood, NY) operated at 60 kV. Dr Peter Elias reviewed and interpreted the electron micrographs without knowledge of the treatment group. Micrographs shown for electron microscopy are representative of the changes observed in three or more samples obtained from at least two different litters for each treatment. Quantitation of CD density was performed in 25–30 randomly obtained micrographs, all taken at 25,000 magnification, using a planimeter (Plan Wheel, Scalex Corp., Carlsbad, CA), and Scale-Link version 3.0 software (Scalex). CD density was calculated as unit length of CD/total length of cornified envelopes, and means ± SEM for each group was compared statistically ( Figure 6 ). Assessment of lipid processing enzyme activities sPLA<sub>2</sub> activity sPLA2 activity was assessed in pooled, sequential SC tape strips (D-Squame) with a fluorometric assay, as described by ( Radvanyi et al ., 1989 ; Mazereeuw-Hautier et al ., 2000 ). Briefly, in newborn rats, the SC was stripped down to the glistening layer after 3 days of treatment twice daily with PPAR activators or vehicle, and assayed as described previously ( Fluhr et al ., 2004b ). Zymographic assessment of ?-glucocerebrosidase activity Enzyme activity was measured using a modification of a previously described method ( Takagi et al ., 1999 ) that has been previously employed in neonatal rat studies ( Hachem et al ., 2003 ; Fluhr et al ., 2004a ). Briefly, enzyme activity was measured by applying 20 µl of 10 m m resorufin ?- d -glucopyranoside dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide to the backs of the newborn rats. The resorufin dye becomes fluorescent once the substrate is enzymatically cleaved. Following topical application, neonatal pups were placed for 2–3 hours in a plastic container at 37–38 °C. At the end of these in vivo incubations, 4-mm punch-out biopsies were taken from treated and control sites. The biopsies were placed on a plastic coverslip with a punched out center, inverted onto a microscopic slide, and covered with a second, nonpunched coverslip. The cleaved compound was visualized with a confocal microscope at an excitation wavelength of 568 nm and an emission wavelength of 580 nm. Resorufin alone served as an additional negative control and as a further check for specificity (data not shown). ?-GlucCer’ase enzyme activity was blocked when the fluorogenic substrate was co-applied with 10 m m conduritol B epoxide (data not shown). Zymographic assessment of protease activity Enzyme activity was assessed as previously described ( Hachem et al ., 2003 ; Fluhr et al ., 2004a ) with skin from treated neonatal rats. To obtain en face views harvested skin was placed in a chamber slide system with the SC facing toward the beam and visualized directly in a confocal microscope (Leica TCS SP, Heidelberg, Germany) at an excitation wavelength of 485 nm and an emission wavelength of 530 nm.  Assessment of lipid processing enzyme activities sPLA<sub>2</sub> activity sPLA2 activity was assessed in pooled, sequential SC tape strips (D-Squame) with a fluorometric assay, as described by ( Radvanyi et al ., 1989 ; Mazereeuw-Hautier et al ., 2000 ). Briefly, in newborn rats, the SC was stripped down to the glistening layer after 3 days of treatment twice daily with PPAR activators or vehicle, and assayed as described previously ( Fluhr et al ., 2004b ).  Zymographic assessment of ?-glucocerebrosidase activity Enzyme activity was measured using a modification of a previously described method ( Takagi et al ., 1999 ) that has been previously employed in neonatal rat studies ( Hachem et al ., 2003 ; Fluhr et al ., 2004a ). Briefly, enzyme activity was measured by applying 20 µl of 10 m m resorufin ?- d -glucopyranoside dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide to the backs of the newborn rats. The resorufin dye becomes fluorescent once the substrate is enzymatically cleaved. Following topical application, neonatal pups were placed for 2–3 hours in a plastic container at 37–38 °C. At the end of these in vivo incubations, 4-mm punch-out biopsies were taken from treated and control sites. The biopsies were placed on a plastic coverslip with a punched out center, inverted onto a microscopic slide, and covered with a second, nonpunched coverslip. The cleaved compound was visualized with a confocal microscope at an excitation wavelength of 568 nm and an emission wavelength of 580 nm. Resorufin alone served as an additional negative control and as a further check for specificity (data not shown). ?-GlucCer’ase enzyme activity was blocked when the fluorogenic substrate was co-applied with 10 m m conduritol B epoxide (data not shown).  Zymographic assessment of protease activity Enzyme activity was assessed as previously described ( Hachem et al ., 2003 ; Fluhr et al ., 2004a ) with skin from treated neonatal rats. To obtain en face views harvested skin was placed in a chamber slide system with the SC facing toward the beam and visualized directly in a confocal microscope (Leica TCS SP, Heidelberg, Germany) at an excitation wavelength of 485 nm and an emission wavelength of 530 nm.  Immunofluorescence Desmoglein 1 expression DSG 1 expression was visualized as described previously ( Fluhr et al ., 2001a ). NHE1 expression Rabbit anti-mouse NHE1 antibody was purchased from Chemicom (Temecula, CA) and FITC-labeled goat anti-rabbit antibody was purchased from Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories, INC (West Grove, PA). Skin biopsies were taken after 3 days of vehicle or activator treatment. sections (10 µm) were incubated with NHE1 antibody at a concentration of 15 µg/ml for 2 hours at room temperature. After washing three times with PBS a 1:200 dilution of FITC-labeled secondary was applied to sections and incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature.  Desmoglein 1 expression DSG 1 expression was visualized as described previously ( Fluhr et al ., 2001a ).  NHE1 expression Rabbit anti-mouse NHE1 antibody was purchased from Chemicom (Temecula, CA) and FITC-labeled goat anti-rabbit antibody was purchased from Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories, INC (West Grove, PA). Skin biopsies were taken after 3 days of vehicle or activator treatment. sections (10 µm) were incubated with NHE1 antibody at a concentration of 15 µg/ml for 2 hours at room temperature. After washing three times with PBS a 1:200 dilution of FITC-labeled secondary was applied to sections and incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature.  Statistical analyses Statistical analyses were performed using Prism 3 (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA). Normal distribution was tested before calculating the comparison with an unpaired t -test. In experiments with more than three groups, an analysis of variance was calculated followed by an ?-corrected post hoc test (Bonferroni). Values are expressed as mean ± SEM. The significance level was set at P < 0.05.  Supplementary Material Suppl1 Suppl2 Suppl3  RESULTS Topical PPAR? activators accelerate postnatal acidification Our initial experiments examined whether topical treatment of newborn mice with PPAR activators would accelerate the acidification of the SC. Skin surface pH varies from approximately 6.0 to 7.0 between different litters of newborn rats. The explanation for this variation in surface pH is unknown but because of this variation we only compare measurements in the same group of newborn animals studied simultaneously under identical conditions. As shown in Figure 1 , treatment with two different PPAR? activators, clofibrate and WY14643, resulted in a decrease in SC surface pH, whereas treatment with GW1514, a PPAR?/? activator, resulted in lesser changes than that nevertheless achieved statistical significance. In contrast, treatment with the PPAR? activator, ciglitazone, had no effect on SC surface pH, whereas the PPAR? activator, troglitazone, actually increased surface pH. Topical treatment with PPAR activators did not alter either basal transepidermal water loss (TEWL) or SC hydration (data not shown). Accelerated postnatal acidification by PPAR? activators improves permeability barrier homeostasis in neonates We next determined whether PPAR? and PPAR?/? activators, which both accelerated postnatal acidification, would improve permeability barrier homeostasis in neonates. As shown in Figure 2 , treatment with the PPAR? activator, clofibrate, significantly accelerated the kinetics of barrier recovery following acute disruption by tape stripping. The PPAR?/? activator, GW1514, displayed only modest effects on barrier recovery that did not achieve statistical significance, consistent with the modest changes in SC pH. Accelerated lamellar body secretion and postsecretory lipid processing account for improved barrier function The morphological basis for the PPAR?-activator-induced improvement in permeability homeostasis following acute barrier disruption is shown in electron micrographs in Figure 3 . First, accelerated secretion of lamellar bodies occurs in clofibrate-treated animals ( Figure 3c and c insert). The increase in secretion can be readily detected at the SC: stratum granulosum (SG) interface and within the lower layers of the SG (premature secretion; Figure 3c ). In contrast, secretion of lamellar bodies is not observed below the SC: SG interface in vehicle-treated or -untreated animals ( Figure 3b ). The secretion of lamellar bodies below the SC: SG interface is not usually observed ( Figure 3c and c insert, arrows). Second, there are fully processed, mature lamellar membranes within the first and second interspace of the SC in the PPAR?-activator-treated animals ( Figure 3a , arrows) whereas in vehicle-treated control animals, the lamellar material is largely unprocessed ( Figure 3b , asterisks). ?-GlucCer’ase is a key enzyme required for processing of secreted lamellar body lipids into mature membranes. As shown in Figure S1 , the activity of ?-GlucCer’ase, measured by in situ zymography, increases following PPAR?-activator treatment of neonatal rat skin. Together, these changes likely account for the improvement in permeability barrier homeostasis in PPAR?-treated newborn animals. PPAR? activators improve SC integrity The effects of topical treatment with either PPAR? or PPAR?/? activator on SC integrity are shown in Figure 4 . SC integrity was assessed as the change in TEWL after three tape strippings with D-Squame tape. The PPAR? activator, clofibrate, markedly reduced the increase in TEWL after tape stripping indicating an improved SC integrity, whereas GW1514, a PPAR?/? activator, displayed only modest effects, which did not achieve statistical significance. The variation in TEWL after three tape strippings in these experiments was similar to that seen in previous studies. Furthermore, in the basal state there were 17–18 cell layers in PPAR?-treated neonates compared to 10–15 cell layers in vehicle-treated neonates suggesting an increase in SC thickness. The morphological basis for the improvement in SC integrity with PPAR? treatment is shown in Figure 5 . The density of CDs appears to increase markedly in PPAR?-treated animals in comparison to vehicle-treated neonates, and CD persists to higher levels of SC ( Figure 5a and b ; arrows). In vehicle-treated neonates, CD degradation ( Figure 5c , open arrows) begins immediately above the SG–SC interface, and few CD persist into mid-SC. Quantitative comparison of CD density per unit length cornified envelope (CE) in PPAR? vs vehicle-treated neonates demonstrated a more than twofold increase in CD density in clofibrate-treated samples ( Figure 6 ; P < 0.001). Additionally, staining for DSG1, a key protein constituent of CDs, increases in PPAR?-treated animals as shown in Figure S2 . Although the mechanism for the decrease in CD in newborn animals is incompletely understood, in adult epidermis, CD are degraded primarily by serine proteases in the SC ( Brattsand et al ., 2005 ). As shown in Figure S3 , serine protease activity declines in the epidermis of neonates treated with clofibrate. PPAR? activator increases sPLA2 activity, which is important for acidification A number of different mechanisms could contribute to the PPAR?-induced acceleration of postnatal acidification. Previous studies have shown that sPLA2 plays an important role in the postnatal acidification of newborn animals ( Fluhr et al ., 2004a ), and LXR-activator-induced postnatal acceleration of acidification correlated with an increase in sPLA2 activity. As shown in Figure 7 , topical treatment of newborn animals with clofibrate, a PPAR? activator, increases sPLA2 activity, whereas in contrast, immunostaining for NHE1 remains similar in vehicle-control and clofibrate-treated newborn animals (data not shown). Finally, that the postnatal increase in sPLA2 activity is important for postnatal acidification is shown in Figure 8 . Simultaneous treatment with the PPAR? activator and bromphenacylbromide (BPB), a broad inhibitor of sPLA2 activity, blocked the ability of the PPAR? activator to acidify the SC of newborn animals.  RESULTS Topical PPAR? activators accelerate postnatal acidification Our initial experiments examined whether topical treatment of newborn mice with PPAR activators would accelerate the acidification of the SC. Skin surface pH varies from approximately 6.0 to 7.0 between different litters of newborn rats. The explanation for this variation in surface pH is unknown but because of this variation we only compare measurements in the same group of newborn animals studied simultaneously under identical conditions. As shown in Figure 1 , treatment with two different PPAR? activators, clofibrate and WY14643, resulted in a decrease in SC surface pH, whereas treatment with GW1514, a PPAR?/? activator, resulted in lesser changes than that nevertheless achieved statistical significance. In contrast, treatment with the PPAR? activator, ciglitazone, had no effect on SC surface pH, whereas the PPAR? activator, troglitazone, actually increased surface pH. Topical treatment with PPAR activators did not alter either basal transepidermal water loss (TEWL) or SC hydration (data not shown). Accelerated postnatal acidification by PPAR? activators improves permeability barrier homeostasis in neonates We next determined whether PPAR? and PPAR?/? activators, which both accelerated postnatal acidification, would improve permeability barrier homeostasis in neonates. As shown in Figure 2 , treatment with the PPAR? activator, clofibrate, significantly accelerated the kinetics of barrier recovery following acute disruption by tape stripping. The PPAR?/? activator, GW1514, displayed only modest effects on barrier recovery that did not achieve statistical significance, consistent with the modest changes in SC pH. Accelerated lamellar body secretion and postsecretory lipid processing account for improved barrier function The morphological basis for the PPAR?-activator-induced improvement in permeability homeostasis following acute barrier disruption is shown in electron micrographs in Figure 3 . First, accelerated secretion of lamellar bodies occurs in clofibrate-treated animals ( Figure 3c and c insert). The increase in secretion can be readily detected at the SC: stratum granulosum (SG) interface and within the lower layers of the SG (premature secretion; Figure 3c ). In contrast, secretion of lamellar bodies is not observed below the SC: SG interface in vehicle-treated or -untreated animals ( Figure 3b ). The secretion of lamellar bodies below the SC: SG interface is not usually observed ( Figure 3c and c insert, arrows). Second, there are fully processed, mature lamellar membranes within the first and second interspace of the SC in the PPAR?-activator-treated animals ( Figure 3a , arrows) whereas in vehicle-treated control animals, the lamellar material is largely unprocessed ( Figure 3b , asterisks). ?-GlucCer’ase is a key enzyme required for processing of secreted lamellar body lipids into mature membranes. As shown in Figure S1 , the activity of ?-GlucCer’ase, measured by in situ zymography, increases following PPAR?-activator treatment of neonatal rat skin. Together, these changes likely account for the improvement in permeability barrier homeostasis in PPAR?-treated newborn animals. PPAR? activators improve SC integrity The effects of topical treatment with either PPAR? or PPAR?/? activator on SC integrity are shown in Figure 4 . SC integrity was assessed as the change in TEWL after three tape strippings with D-Squame tape. The PPAR? activator, clofibrate, markedly reduced the increase in TEWL after tape stripping indicating an improved SC integrity, whereas GW1514, a PPAR?/? activator, displayed only modest effects, which did not achieve statistical significance. The variation in TEWL after three tape strippings in these experiments was similar to that seen in previous studies. Furthermore, in the basal state there were 17–18 cell layers in PPAR?-treated neonates compared to 10–15 cell layers in vehicle-treated neonates suggesting an increase in SC thickness. The morphological basis for the improvement in SC integrity with PPAR? treatment is shown in Figure 5 . The density of CDs appears to increase markedly in PPAR?-treated animals in comparison to vehicle-treated neonates, and CD persists to higher levels of SC ( Figure 5a and b ; arrows). In vehicle-treated neonates, CD degradation ( Figure 5c , open arrows) begins immediately above the SG–SC interface, and few CD persist into mid-SC. Quantitative comparison of CD density per unit length cornified envelope (CE) in PPAR? vs vehicle-treated neonates demonstrated a more than twofold increase in CD density in clofibrate-treated samples ( Figure 6 ; P < 0.001). Additionally, staining for DSG1, a key protein constituent of CDs, increases in PPAR?-treated animals as shown in Figure S2 . Although the mechanism for the decrease in CD in newborn animals is incompletely understood, in adult epidermis, CD are degraded primarily by serine proteases in the SC ( Brattsand et al ., 2005 ). As shown in Figure S3 , serine protease activity declines in the epidermis of neonates treated with clofibrate. PPAR? activator increases sPLA2 activity, which is important for acidification A number of different mechanisms could contribute to the PPAR?-induced acceleration of postnatal acidification. Previous studies have shown that sPLA2 plays an important role in the postnatal acidification of newborn animals ( Fluhr et al ., 2004a ), and LXR-activator-induced postnatal acceleration of acidification correlated with an increase in sPLA2 activity. As shown in Figure 7 , topical treatment of newborn animals with clofibrate, a PPAR? activator, increases sPLA2 activity, whereas in contrast, immunostaining for NHE1 remains similar in vehicle-control and clofibrate-treated newborn animals (data not shown). Finally, that the postnatal increase in sPLA2 activity is important for postnatal acidification is shown in Figure 8 . Simultaneous treatment with the PPAR? activator and bromphenacylbromide (BPB), a broad inhibitor of sPLA2 activity, blocked the ability of the PPAR? activator to acidify the SC of newborn animals.  Topical PPAR? activators accelerate postnatal acidification Our initial experiments examined whether topical treatment of newborn mice with PPAR activators would accelerate the acidification of the SC. Skin surface pH varies from approximately 6.0 to 7.0 between different litters of newborn rats. The explanation for this variation in surface pH is unknown but because of this variation we only compare measurements in the same group of newborn animals studied simultaneously under identical conditions. As shown in Figure 1 , treatment with two different PPAR? activators, clofibrate and WY14643, resulted in a decrease in SC surface pH, whereas treatment with GW1514, a PPAR?/? activator, resulted in lesser changes than that nevertheless achieved statistical significance. In contrast, treatment with the PPAR? activator, ciglitazone, had no effect on SC surface pH, whereas the PPAR? activator, troglitazone, actually increased surface pH. Topical treatment with PPAR activators did not alter either basal transepidermal water loss (TEWL) or SC hydration (data not shown).  Topical PPAR? activators accelerate postnatal acidification Our initial experiments examined whether topical treatment of newborn mice with PPAR activators would accelerate the acidification of the SC. Skin surface pH varies from approximately 6.0 to 7.0 between different litters of newborn rats. The explanation for this variation in surface pH is unknown but because of this variation we only compare measurements in the same group of newborn animals studied simultaneously under identical conditions. As shown in Figure 1 , treatment with two different PPAR? activators, clofibrate and WY14643, resulted in a decrease in SC surface pH, whereas treatment with GW1514, a PPAR?/? activator, resulted in lesser changes than that nevertheless achieved statistical significance. In contrast, treatment with the PPAR? activator, ciglitazone, had no effect on SC surface pH, whereas the PPAR? activator, troglitazone, actually increased surface pH. Topical treatment with PPAR activators did not alter either basal transepidermal water loss (TEWL) or SC hydration (data not shown).  Accelerated postnatal acidification by PPAR? activators improves permeability barrier homeostasis in neonates We next determined whether PPAR? and PPAR?/? activators, which both accelerated postnatal acidification, would improve permeability barrier homeostasis in neonates. As shown in Figure 2 , treatment with the PPAR? activator, clofibrate, significantly accelerated the kinetics of barrier recovery following acute disruption by tape stripping. The PPAR?/? activator, GW1514, displayed only modest effects on barrier recovery that did not achieve statistical significance, consistent with the modest changes in SC pH.  Accelerated postnatal acidification by PPAR? activators improves permeability barrier homeostasis in neonates We next determined whether PPAR? and PPAR?/? activators, which both accelerated postnatal acidification, would improve permeability barrier homeostasis in neonates. As shown in Figure 2 , treatment with the PPAR? activator, clofibrate, significantly accelerated the kinetics of barrier recovery following acute disruption by tape stripping. The PPAR?/? activator, GW1514, displayed only modest effects on barrier recovery that did not achieve statistical significance, consistent with the modest changes in SC pH.  Accelerated lamellar body secretion and postsecretory lipid processing account for improved barrier function The morphological basis for the PPAR?-activator-induced improvement in permeability homeostasis following acute barrier disruption is shown in electron micrographs in Figure 3 . First, accelerated secretion of lamellar bodies occurs in clofibrate-treated animals ( Figure 3c and c insert). The increase in secretion can be readily detected at the SC: stratum granulosum (SG) interface and within the lower layers of the SG (premature secretion; Figure 3c ). In contrast, secretion of lamellar bodies is not observed below the SC: SG interface in vehicle-treated or -untreated animals ( Figure 3b ). The secretion of lamellar bodies below the SC: SG interface is not usually observed ( Figure 3c and c insert, arrows). Second, there are fully processed, mature lamellar membranes within the first and second interspace of the SC in the PPAR?-activator-treated animals ( Figure 3a , arrows) whereas in vehicle-treated control animals, the lamellar material is largely unprocessed ( Figure 3b , asterisks). ?-GlucCer’ase is a key enzyme required for processing of secreted lamellar body lipids into mature membranes. As shown in Figure S1 , the activity of ?-GlucCer’ase, measured by in situ zymography, increases following PPAR?-activator treatment of neonatal rat skin. Together, these changes likely account for the improvement in permeability barrier homeostasis in PPAR?-treated newborn animals.  Accelerated lamellar body secretion and postsecretory lipid processing account for improved barrier function The morphological basis for the PPAR?-activator-induced improvement in permeability homeostasis following acute barrier disruption is shown in electron micrographs in Figure 3 . First, accelerated secretion of lamellar bodies occurs in clofibrate-treated animals ( Figure 3c and c insert). The increase in secretion can be readily detected at the SC: stratum granulosum (SG) interface and within the lower layers of the SG (premature secretion; Figure 3c ). In contrast, secretion of lamellar bodies is not observed below the SC: SG interface in vehicle-treated or -untreated animals ( Figure 3b ). The secretion of lamellar bodies below the SC: SG interface is not usually observed ( Figure 3c and c insert, arrows). Second, there are fully processed, mature lamellar membranes within the first and second interspace of the SC in the PPAR?-activator-treated animals ( Figure 3a , arrows) whereas in vehicle-treated control animals, the lamellar material is largely unprocessed ( Figure 3b , asterisks). ?-GlucCer’ase is a key enzyme required for processing of secreted lamellar body lipids into mature membranes. As shown in Figure S1 , the activity of ?-GlucCer’ase, measured by in situ zymography, increases following PPAR?-activator treatment of neonatal rat skin. Together, these changes likely account for the improvement in permeability barrier homeostasis in PPAR?-treated newborn animals.  PPAR? activators improve SC integrity The effects of topical treatment with either PPAR? or PPAR?/? activator on SC integrity are shown in Figure 4 . SC integrity was assessed as the change in TEWL after three tape strippings with D-Squame tape. The PPAR? activator, clofibrate, markedly reduced the increase in TEWL after tape stripping indicating an improved SC integrity, whereas GW1514, a PPAR?/? activator, displayed only modest effects, which did not achieve statistical significance. The variation in TEWL after three tape strippings in these experiments was similar to that seen in previous studies. Furthermore, in the basal state there were 17–18 cell layers in PPAR?-treated neonates compared to 10–15 cell layers in vehicle-treated neonates suggesting an increase in SC thickness. The morphological basis for the improvement in SC integrity with PPAR? treatment is shown in Figure 5 . The density of CDs appears to increase markedly in PPAR?-treated animals in comparison to vehicle-treated neonates, and CD persists to higher levels of SC ( Figure 5a and b ; arrows). In vehicle-treated neonates, CD degradation ( Figure 5c , open arrows) begins immediately above the SG–SC interface, and few CD persist into mid-SC. Quantitative comparison of CD density per unit length cornified envelope (CE) in PPAR? vs vehicle-treated neonates demonstrated a more than twofold increase in CD density in clofibrate-treated samples ( Figure 6 ; P < 0.001). Additionally, staining for DSG1, a key protein constituent of CDs, increases in PPAR?-treated animals as shown in Figure S2 . Although the mechanism for the decrease in CD in newborn animals is incompletely understood, in adult epidermis, CD are degraded primarily by serine proteases in the SC ( Brattsand et al ., 2005 ). As shown in Figure S3 , serine protease activity declines in the epidermis of neonates treated with clofibrate.  PPAR? activators improve SC integrity The effects of topical treatment with either PPAR? or PPAR?/? activator on SC integrity are shown in Figure 4 . SC integrity was assessed as the change in TEWL after three tape strippings with D-Squame tape. The PPAR? activator, clofibrate, markedly reduced the increase in TEWL after tape stripping indicating an improved SC integrity, whereas GW1514, a PPAR?/? activator, displayed only modest effects, which did not achieve statistical significance. The variation in TEWL after three tape strippings in these experiments was similar to that seen in previous studies. Furthermore, in the basal state there were 17–18 cell layers in PPAR?-treated neonates compared to 10–15 cell layers in vehicle-treated neonates suggesting an increase in SC thickness. The morphological basis for the improvement in SC integrity with PPAR? treatment is shown in Figure 5 . The density of CDs appears to increase markedly in PPAR?-treated animals in comparison to vehicle-treated neonates, and CD persists to higher levels of SC ( Figure 5a and b ; arrows). In vehicle-treated neonates, CD degradation ( Figure 5c , open arrows) begins immediately above the SG–SC interface, and few CD persist into mid-SC. Quantitative comparison of CD density per unit length cornified envelope (CE) in PPAR? vs vehicle-treated neonates demonstrated a more than twofold increase in CD density in clofibrate-treated samples ( Figure 6 ; P < 0.001). Additionally, staining for DSG1, a key protein constituent of CDs, increases in PPAR?-treated animals as shown in Figure S2 . Although the mechanism for the decrease in CD in newborn animals is incompletely understood, in adult epidermis, CD are degraded primarily by serine proteases in the SC ( Brattsand et al ., 2005 ). As shown in Figure S3 , serine protease activity declines in the epidermis of neonates treated with clofibrate.  PPAR? activator increases sPLA2 activity, which is important for acidification A number of different mechanisms could contribute to the PPAR?-induced acceleration of postnatal acidification. Previous studies have shown that sPLA2 plays an important role in the postnatal acidification of newborn animals ( Fluhr et al ., 2004a ), and LXR-activator-induced postnatal acceleration of acidification correlated with an increase in sPLA2 activity. As shown in Figure 7 , topical treatment of newborn animals with clofibrate, a PPAR? activator, increases sPLA2 activity, whereas in contrast, immunostaining for NHE1 remains similar in vehicle-control and clofibrate-treated newborn animals (data not shown). Finally, that the postnatal increase in sPLA2 activity is important for postnatal acidification is shown in Figure 8 . Simultaneous treatment with the PPAR? activator and bromphenacylbromide (BPB), a broad inhibitor of sPLA2 activity, blocked the ability of the PPAR? activator to acidify the SC of newborn animals.  PPAR? activator increases sPLA2 activity, which is important for acidification A number of different mechanisms could contribute to the PPAR?-induced acceleration of postnatal acidification. Previous studies have shown that sPLA2 plays an important role in the postnatal acidification of newborn animals ( Fluhr et al ., 2004a ), and LXR-activator-induced postnatal acceleration of acidification correlated with an increase in sPLA2 activity. As shown in Figure 7 , topical treatment of newborn animals with clofibrate, a PPAR? activator, increases sPLA2 activity, whereas in contrast, immunostaining for NHE1 remains similar in vehicle-control and clofibrate-treated newborn animals (data not shown). Finally, that the postnatal increase in sPLA2 activity is important for postnatal acidification is shown in Figure 8 . Simultaneous treatment with the PPAR? activator and bromphenacylbromide (BPB), a broad inhibitor of sPLA2 activity, blocked the ability of the PPAR? activator to acidify the SC of newborn animals.  DISCUSSION In both humans and in various animal models skin surface pH is less acidic at birth and in humans it takes several weeks to achieve adult levels of acidification whereas in rodents, acidification occurs rapidly and adult levels are achieved within several days ( Behrendt and Green, 1958 ; Visscher et al ., 2000 ; Yosipovitch et al ., 2000 ; Fluhr et al ., 2004a ). Thus, in rodents, the acidification of the SC post-birth is compressed into a relatively short time period, which facilitates studies. In rodents, the less acidic skin surface pH that is present at birth results in alterations in permeability barrier homeostasis (normal barrier function at baseline but a delay in barrier repair after acute barrier disruption) and a decrease in SC integrity and cohesion both of which are corrected by acidification of the SC ( Fluhr et al ., 2004a , b ). The combination of decreases in both permeability barrier homeostasis and the ability of the SC to withstand mechanical injury (decreased SC integrity and cohesion) would increase the susceptibility of the skin to cutaneous disorders. Numerous studies and clinical observations have reported that infants’ skin is more susceptible to injury than adult skin ( Lund et al ., 1997 ). Moreover, it is well recognized that the growth of skin pathogens, such as Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes , is inhibited by an acidic skin pH, whereas the growth of normal skin flora flourishes at an acidic pH ( Puhvel et al ., 1975 ; Korting et al ., 1990 , 1992 ). Therefore, the increased risk of cutaneous infections in newborns could be due in part to an elevated skin surface pH ( Yosipovitch et al ., 2000 ) that can persist until at least 3 months ( Hoeger and Enzmann, 2002 ), and may not become completely normal until 2 years of age ( Giusti et al ., 2001 ). Thus the less acidic surface pH in the newborn period could have harmful effects. Given the potential harmful consequences of a less acidic skin surface pH in newborns, we have utilized the rodent model to begin to assess several different therapeutic approaches to accelerate the acidification of the SC in the newborn period. A recent study by our laboratory has shown that topical treatment with activators of LXR, a nuclear hormone receptor that is activated by oxysterols, accelerates postnatal acidification of the SC ( Fluhr et al ., 2005 ). This accelerated acidification was due in part to an increase in sPLA2 activity. Moreover, this accelerated acidification of the SC was associated with an improvement in both permeability barrier homeostasis and in SC integrity/cohesion. The improvement in barrier function was associated with an increased maturation of lamellar membranes attributable to an increase in the activity of ?-GlucCer’ase, an enzyme that is most active at pH 5.5. The improvement of SC integrity/cohesion was associated with an increase in CD and DSG1 expression ( Fluhr et al ., 2005 ). In the present study, we explored the ability of PPAR activators to accelerate SC acidification. There are three PPAR isoforms, ?, ?, and ?, and all three isoforms are present in the epidermis ( Kuenzli and Saurat, 2003 ). These receptors heterodimerize with RXR and are activated by fatty acids, prostaglandins, eicosanoids, and other lipid metabolites ( Kliewer et al ., 1999 ). Studies by our laboratory and others have shown that activation of PPAR?, ?, and ? have major effects on epidermal/keratinocyte function. First, the addition of PPAR ligands to cultured human keratinocytes and topical application of PPAR ligands to mouse skin stimulates the increased expression of differentiation related proteins such as involucrin, loricrin, profilaggrin, and transglutaminase 1 ( Hanley et al ., 1997 ; Komuves et al ., 2000 ; Westergaard et al ., 2001 ; Fluhr et al ., 2004a ; Kuenzli and Saurat, 2004 ; Mao-Qiang et al ., 2004 ; Burdick et al ., 2006 ). Second, topical treatment of murine skin with PPAR ligands improves permeability barrier homeostasis resulting in an acceleration of barrier recovery following acute disruption ( Man et al ., 2006 ). Associated with the improved permeability barrier homeostasis was an increase in (1) epidermal cholesterol, fatty acid, and sphingolipid synthesis, (2) lamellar body secretion, and (3) ?-GlucCer’ase activity, all of which could contribute to the enhanced barrier homeostasis. Finally, PPAR? and PPAR? but not PPAR? activators accelerate the formation of the SC during fetal development, resulting in the earlier appearance of a mature permeability barrier ( Hanley et al ., 1997 , 1999 ; Komuves et al ., 1998 ; Schmuth et al ., 2002b ). We demonstrate in the present paper that topical treatment of newborn rat skin with two different PPAR? activators accelerates the acidification of newborn SC, whereas a PPAR? activator had only a modest effect. In contrast, treatment with a PPAR? activator, ciglitazone had no effect on SC acidification, whereas the PPAR? activator, troglitazone increased surface pH. The basis for this difference between two different PPAR? activators is unknown but other studies have shown that the spectrum of genes activated by different PPAR? ligands can vary considerably ( Camp et al ., 2000 ). In humans it is well recognized that pioglitazone decreases serum triglyceride levels in patients with diabetes whereas rosiglitazone either has no effect or increases serum triglycerides ( Goldberg et al ., 2005 ). In this paper, we measured surface pH but previous studies in both adults and neonates have shown that changes in surface pH reflect the changes in pH that occur throughout the SC measured by fluorescence lifetime imaging (FLIM; Behne et al ., 2002a , 2003 ). Thus, the decrease in surface pH reported in this paper indicates that PPAR activators are acidifying the SC, which as discussed below will have an impact on the catalytic activity of the enzymes that reside in the SC. In some cases, an acidic milieu will increase enzyme activity (for example, ?-GlucCer’ase) and in other instances will decrease catalytic activity (for example serine proteases). Treatment with PPAR? activators improved permeability barrier homeostasis and SC integrity in newborn animals whereas PPAR? activators had only a modest effect on the functional defects consistent with its limited effect on SC acidification. The improvement in SC integrity/cohesion in PPAR?-activator-treated skin was associated with an increase in the size and density of CDs and an increase in staining for DSG1, a major protein of CDs. In adult animals, one of the key factors regulating CD degradation is the activity of serine proteases in the SC and we have shown that increasing the pH in SC of adult animals increases serine protease catalytic activity, that is, serine protease catalytic activity is inhibited by an acidic pH and activated by a neutral pH. In previous studies, we have shown that serine protease activity is increased in the SC of newborn animals and can be reduced by acidifying the SC ( Fluhr et al ., 2004b ). In the present paper, we demonstrate that treatment of newborn skin with PPAR? activators, which decreases SC pH, also decreases serine protease activity and we would hypothesize that this reduction in serine protease activity accounts, at least in part, for the increase in CD size and density leading to an improvement in SC integrity and cohesion. The improvement in permeability barrier homeostasis in the PPAR?-treated newborn animals was associated with an increase in ?-GlucCer’ase activity in the SC. ?-GlucCer’ase is a key enzyme required for the extracellular conversion of glucosylceramidase to ceramides, which allows for the formation of mature lamellar membranes that inhibit water movement ( Holleran et al ., 1993 ). Inhibition of ?-GlucCer’ase activity or the absence of the enzyme in genetic disorders (Gaucher’s disease) or knockout mice results in immature lamellar membranes and impaired permeability barrier homeostasis ( Holleran et al ., 1994 ). It is well known that the activity of ?-GlucCer’ase is optimal at an acidic pH and that a neutral pH inhibits catalytic activity ( Holleran et al ., 1992 ). Thus, the acidification of the SC induced by PPAR? activators not unexpectedly increased ?-GlucCer’ase activity thereby resulting in the appearance of more mature lamellar membranes in the extracellular spaces of the SC. The more mature lamellar membranes in newborn animals treated with PPAR? activators could explain the improvement in permeability barrier homeostasis. In addition to lowering SC pH, PPAR? activators have many other effects on the epidermis that could have a beneficial effect on SC structure and function. Specifically, previous studies in adult animals have shown that PPAR? activators improve permeability barrier homeostasis independent of effects on SC pH by increasing epidermal lipid synthesis, stimulating lamellar body secretion, and increasing ?-GlucCer’ase activity ( Man et al ., 2006 ) Additionally, PPAR? activators increase the expression of proteins required for differentiation such as loricrin, involucrin, filaggrin, and transglutaminase 1 ( Hanley et al ., 1999 ; Komuves et al ., 2000 ; Westergaard et al ., 2001 ; Kuenzli and Saurat, 2003 ; Schmuth et al ., 2004 ; Burdick et al ., 2006 ; Kim et al ., 2006 ). Thus, it is likely that while the decrease in SC pH induced by PPAR? activators is important in the improved function of neonatal skin other factors are also likely to contribute to the beneficial effects. There are numerous potential mechanisms by which SC pH could decrease in newborn animals. In previous studies, we demonstrated that both NHE1 and sPLA2 play a role in SC acidification during the neonatal period ( Fluhr and Elias, 2002 ; Behne et al ., 2003 ). In the present study, we demonstrate that sPLA2 activity in the SC is increased by topical treatment with PPAR? activators during the neonatal period. Additionally, inhibiting sPLA2 with BPB prevented the acidification of the SC induced by PPAR? activators, further supporting a role for sPLA2. It should be recognized that BPB has effects other than inhibiting sPLA2 activity (for example, BPB induces calcium influx in fibroblasts ( Ogata et al ., 2002 ) and therefore it is possible that the prevention of SC acidification induced by PPAR? activators is because of effects other than inhibition of sPLA2 activity. In contrast, treatment with PPAR? activators did not increase staining for NHE1, suggesting that increases in NHE1 were not accounting for the accelerated reduction in SC pH induced by PPAR? activators. It should be recognized that many pathways contribute to SC acidification and it is likely that PPAR activators could be activating multiple pathways. In summary, the present study demonstrates that treatment of newborn skin with PPAR? activators accelerates SC acidification during the neonatal period. In contrast, treatment with PPAR? activators had no effect whereas PPAR? activators had only a modest effect. In addition, treatment with PPAR? activators also improved permeability homeostasis and SC integrity/cohesion in newborn animals, an effect that could be at least partially attributed to the acidification of the SC. It should be recognized that there are a number of differences between rodent and human skin and therefore further studies are required to determine if the acceleration of stratum corneum acidification and the beneficial effects induced by PPAR? activators shown here in newborn rodents also occurs in human newborns. These studies suggest that PPAR? activators might be of clinical benefit in the prevention and/or treatment of cutaneous disorders that occur during the neonatal period.  DISCUSSION In both humans and in various animal models skin surface pH is less acidic at birth and in humans it takes several weeks to achieve adult levels of acidification whereas in rodents, acidification occurs rapidly and adult levels are achieved within several days ( Behrendt and Green, 1958 ; Visscher et al ., 2000 ; Yosipovitch et al ., 2000 ; Fluhr et al ., 2004a ). Thus, in rodents, the acidification of the SC post-birth is compressed into a relatively short time period, which facilitates studies. In rodents, the less acidic skin surface pH that is present at birth results in alterations in permeability barrier homeostasis (normal barrier function at baseline but a delay in barrier repair after acute barrier disruption) and a decrease in SC integrity and cohesion both of which are corrected by acidification of the SC ( Fluhr et al ., 2004a , b ). The combination of decreases in both permeability barrier homeostasis and the ability of the SC to withstand mechanical injury (decreased SC integrity and cohesion) would increase the susceptibility of the skin to cutaneous disorders. Numerous studies and clinical observations have reported that infants’ skin is more susceptible to injury than adult skin ( Lund et al ., 1997 ). Moreover, it is well recognized that the growth of skin pathogens, such as Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes , is inhibited by an acidic skin pH, whereas the growth of normal skin flora flourishes at an acidic pH ( Puhvel et al ., 1975 ; Korting et al ., 1990 , 1992 ). Therefore, the increased risk of cutaneous infections in newborns could be due in part to an elevated skin surface pH ( Yosipovitch et al ., 2000 ) that can persist until at least 3 months ( Hoeger and Enzmann, 2002 ), and may not become completely normal until 2 years of age ( Giusti et al ., 2001 ). Thus the less acidic surface pH in the newborn period could have harmful effects. Given the potential harmful consequences of a less acidic skin surface pH in newborns, we have utilized the rodent model to begin to assess several different therapeutic approaches to accelerate the acidification of the SC in the newborn period. A recent study by our laboratory has shown that topical treatment with activators of LXR, a nuclear hormone receptor that is activated by oxysterols, accelerates postnatal acidification of the SC ( Fluhr et al ., 2005 ). This accelerated acidification was due in part to an increase in sPLA2 activity. Moreover, this accelerated acidification of the SC was associated with an improvement in both permeability barrier homeostasis and in SC integrity/cohesion. The improvement in barrier function was associated with an increased maturation of lamellar membranes attributable to an increase in the activity of ?-GlucCer’ase, an enzyme that is most active at pH 5.5. The improvement of SC integrity/cohesion was associated with an increase in CD and DSG1 expression ( Fluhr et al ., 2005 ). In the present study, we explored the ability of PPAR activators to accelerate SC acidification. There are three PPAR isoforms, ?, ?, and ?, and all three isoforms are present in the epidermis ( Kuenzli and Saurat, 2003 ). These receptors heterodimerize with RXR and are activated by fatty acids, prostaglandins, eicosanoids, and other lipid metabolites ( Kliewer et al ., 1999 ). Studies by our laboratory and others have shown that activation of PPAR?, ?, and ? have major effects on epidermal/keratinocyte function. First, the addition of PPAR ligands to cultured human keratinocytes and topical application of PPAR ligands to mouse skin stimulates the increased expression of differentiation related proteins such as involucrin, loricrin, profilaggrin, and transglutaminase 1 ( Hanley et al ., 1997 ; Komuves et al ., 2000 ; Westergaard et al ., 2001 ; Fluhr et al ., 2004a ; Kuenzli and Saurat, 2004 ; Mao-Qiang et al ., 2004 ; Burdick et al ., 2006 ). Second, topical treatment of murine skin with PPAR ligands improves permeability barrier homeostasis resulting in an acceleration of barrier recovery following acute disruption ( Man et al ., 2006 ). Associated with the improved permeability barrier homeostasis was an increase in (1) epidermal cholesterol, fatty acid, and sphingolipid synthesis, (2) lamellar body secretion, and (3) ?-GlucCer’ase activity, all of which could contribute to the enhanced barrier homeostasis. Finally, PPAR? and PPAR? but not PPAR? activators accelerate the formation of the SC during fetal development, resulting in the earlier appearance of a mature permeability barrier ( Hanley et al ., 1997 , 1999 ; Komuves et al ., 1998 ; Schmuth et al ., 2002b ). We demonstrate in the present paper that topical treatment of newborn rat skin with two different PPAR? activators accelerates the acidification of newborn SC, whereas a PPAR? activator had only a modest effect. In contrast, treatment with a PPAR? activator, ciglitazone had no effect on SC acidification, whereas the PPAR? activator, troglitazone increased surface pH. The basis for this difference between two different PPAR? activators is unknown but other studies have shown that the spectrum of genes activated by different PPAR? ligands can vary considerably ( Camp et al ., 2000 ). In humans it is well recognized that pioglitazone decreases serum triglyceride levels in patients with diabetes whereas rosiglitazone either has no effect or increases serum triglycerides ( Goldberg et al ., 2005 ). In this paper, we measured surface pH but previous studies in both adults and neonates have shown that changes in surface pH reflect the changes in pH that occur throughout the SC measured by fluorescence lifetime imaging (FLIM; Behne et al ., 2002a , 2003 ). Thus, the decrease in surface pH reported in this paper indicates that PPAR activators are acidifying the SC, which as discussed below will have an impact on the catalytic activity of the enzymes that reside in the SC. In some cases, an acidic milieu will increase enzyme activity (for example, ?-GlucCer’ase) and in other instances will decrease catalytic activity (for example serine proteases). Treatment with PPAR? activators improved permeability barrier homeostasis and SC integrity in newborn animals whereas PPAR? activators had only a modest effect on the functional defects consistent with its limited effect on SC acidification. The improvement in SC integrity/cohesion in PPAR?-activator-treated skin was associated with an increase in the size and density of CDs and an increase in staining for DSG1, a major protein of CDs. In adult animals, one of the key factors regulating CD degradation is the activity of serine proteases in the SC and we have shown that increasing the pH in SC of adult animals increases serine protease catalytic activity, that is, serine protease catalytic activity is inhibited by an acidic pH and activated by a neutral pH. In previous studies, we have shown that serine protease activity is increased in the SC of newborn animals and can be reduced by acidifying the SC ( Fluhr et al ., 2004b ). In the present paper, we demonstrate that treatment of newborn skin with PPAR? activators, which decreases SC pH, also decreases serine protease activity and we would hypothesize that this reduction in serine protease activity accounts, at least in part, for the increase in CD size and density leading to an improvement in SC integrity and cohesion. The improvement in permeability barrier homeostasis in the PPAR?-treated newborn animals was associated with an increase in ?-GlucCer’ase activity in the SC. ?-GlucCer’ase is a key enzyme required for the extracellular conversion of glucosylceramidase to ceramides, which allows for the formation of mature lamellar membranes that inhibit water movement ( Holleran et al ., 1993 ). Inhibition of ?-GlucCer’ase activity or the absence of the enzyme in genetic disorders (Gaucher’s disease) or knockout mice results in immature lamellar membranes and impaired permeability barrier homeostasis ( Holleran et al ., 1994 ). It is well known that the activity of ?-GlucCer’ase is optimal at an acidic pH and that a neutral pH inhibits catalytic activity ( Holleran et al ., 1992 ). Thus, the acidification of the SC induced by PPAR? activators not unexpectedly increased ?-GlucCer’ase activity thereby resulting in the appearance of more mature lamellar membranes in the extracellular spaces of the SC. The more mature lamellar membranes in newborn animals treated with PPAR? activators could explain the improvement in permeability barrier homeostasis. In addition to lowering SC pH, PPAR? activators have many other effects on the epidermis that could have a beneficial effect on SC structure and function. Specifically, previous studies in adult animals have shown that PPAR? activators improve permeability barrier homeostasis independent of effects on SC pH by increasing epidermal lipid synthesis, stimulating lamellar body secretion, and increasing ?-GlucCer’ase activity ( Man et al ., 2006 ) Additionally, PPAR? activators increase the expression of proteins required for differentiation such as loricrin, involucrin, filaggrin, and transglutaminase 1 ( Hanley et al ., 1999 ; Komuves et al ., 2000 ; Westergaard et al ., 2001 ; Kuenzli and Saurat, 2003 ; Schmuth et al ., 2004 ; Burdick et al ., 2006 ; Kim et al ., 2006 ). Thus, it is likely that while the decrease in SC pH induced by PPAR? activators is important in the improved function of neonatal skin other factors are also likely to contribute to the beneficial effects. There are numerous potential mechanisms by which SC pH could decrease in newborn animals. In previous studies, we demonstrated that both NHE1 and sPLA2 play a role in SC acidification during the neonatal period ( Fluhr and Elias, 2002 ; Behne et al ., 2003 ). In the present study, we demonstrate that sPLA2 activity in the SC is increased by topical treatment with PPAR? activators during the neonatal period. Additionally, inhibiting sPLA2 with BPB prevented the acidification of the SC induced by PPAR? activators, further supporting a role for sPLA2. It should be recognized that BPB has effects other than inhibiting sPLA2 activity (for example, BPB induces calcium influx in fibroblasts ( Ogata et al ., 2002 ) and therefore it is possible that the prevention of SC acidification induced by PPAR? activators is because of effects other than inhibition of sPLA2 activity. In contrast, treatment with PPAR? activators did not increase staining for NHE1, suggesting that increases in NHE1 were not accounting for the accelerated reduction in SC pH induced by PPAR? activators. It should be recognized that many pathways contribute to SC acidification and it is likely that PPAR activators could be activating multiple pathways. In summary, the present study demonstrates that treatment of newborn skin with PPAR? activators accelerates SC acidification during the neonatal period. In contrast, treatment with PPAR? activators had no effect whereas PPAR? activators had only a modest effect. In addition, treatment with PPAR? activators also improved permeability homeostasis and SC integrity/cohesion in newborn animals, an effect that could be at least partially attributed to the acidification of the SC. It should be recognized that there are a number of differences between rodent and human skin and therefore further studies are required to determine if the acceleration of stratum corneum acidification and the beneficial effects induced by PPAR? activators shown here in newborn rodents also occurs in human newborns. These studies suggest that PPAR? activators might be of clinical benefit in the prevention and/or treatment of cutaneous disorders that occur during the neonatal period. 