Perceived Risk of Breast Cancer among Latinas Attending Community Clinics: Risk Comprehension and Relationship with Mammography Adherence Objective To describe breast cancer risk perceptions, determine risk comprehension, and evaluate mammography adherence among Latinas. Methods Latina women age ? 35, primarily from Central and South America, were recruited from community-based clinics to complete in-person interviews (n=450). Risk comprehension was calculated as the difference between numeric perceived risk and Gail risk score. Based on recommended guidelines from the year data were collected (2002), mammography adherence was defined as having a mammogram every one to two years for women ? 40 years of age. Results Breast cancer risk comprehension was low, as 81% of women overestimated their risk and only 6.9% of women were high risk based on Gail risk scores. Greater cancer worry and younger age were significantly associated with greater perceived risk and risk overestimation. Of women age eligible for mammography (n = 328), 29.0% were non-adherent to screening guidelines. Adherence was associated with older age, (OR = 2.99, 95% CI = 1.76 – 5.09), having insurance (OR = 1.81, 95% CI = 1.03 – 3.17), greater acculturation (OR = 1.18, 95% CI = 1.02 – 1.36), and higher breast cancer knowledge (OR = 2.03, 95% CI = 1.21 – 3.40). Conclusions While most Latinas over-estimated their breast cancer risk, older age, having insurance, being more acculturated, and having greater knowledge were associated with greater screening adherence in this Latino population. Perceived risk, risk comprehension, and cancer worry were not associated with adherence. In Latinas, screening interventions should emphasize knowledge and target education efforts at younger, uninsured, and less acculturated mammography-eligible women.  Introduction The rapid growth and aging of the Latino population, along with acculturation to US lifestyles that increase the risk of breast cancer [ 1 ], will increase the absolute number of Latino women (hereafter referred to as Latinas) at risk for breast cancer over the coming decades. Although breast cancer incidence rates remain lower among Latinas compared to non-Hispanic Whites and African-American women [ 2 ], Latinas are more likely to be diagnosed with advanced breast cancer compared to non-Hispanic White women [ 3 ]. Despite these trends, rates of mammography adherence remain suboptimal in the Latina population [ 4 – 7 ]. There are several possible reasons for low screening adherence in Latinas, including low breast cancer knowledge, lack of insurance / access to care, and low education [ 5 , 7 – 10 ]. Results have been equivocal for the impact of acculturation (and English ability) on screening adherence [ 8 , 11 – 15 ]. These reasons for non-adherence map onto the predisposing, enabling, and need factors described in the Behavioral Model for Vulnerable Populations [ 16 ]. Specifically, the predisposing and enabling factors that likely impact mammography behavior include sociodemographics, insurance, knowledge, access to care, and acculturation, while need factors could include perceived breast cancer risk, comprehension of risk, and breast cancer worry. In other populations, perceptions of breast cancer risk appear to impact screening behaviors [ 17 , 18 ]. For instance, research conducted with African American women indicates a non-linear relationship between perceived risk and screening adherence [ 19 ]. However, we know little about the impact of perceived risk on screening in Latinas. We are aware of only one study that has examined perceived risk and mammography adherence in Latinas [ 10 ]. In that study, perceived risk was measured as comparative risk (likelihood of getting cancer compared to other people their age) and was unrelated to mammography outcomes. Moreover, the construct of breast cancer risk comprehension, representing how closely a woman’s perceived risk matches her objective risk (based on family history, reproductive history and prior biopsies), has only been explored with predominately Caucasian samples [ 20 – 22 ]. To our knowledge, other types of perceived risk (e.g., absolute risk, numerical risk), risk comprehension, and cancer worry have not been assessed in prior work with Latinas. Thus, constructs associated with perceived breast cancer risk remain under explored in broad groups of Latinas, particularly as these factors may relate to mammography adherence. The purpose of this study is to describe the correlates of perceived risk and comprehension of risk, and to assess the degrees of association between risk and a related risk construct - cancer worry - on adherence to mammography guidelines after considering covariates (e.g., predisposing factors) in a sample of Central and South American Latinas attending community health clinics. We hypothesized that younger age and a more significant family history would be associated with greater perceived risk [ 23 ]. We also hypothesized that Latina women, similar to other women [ 20 , 22 ], would overestimate their actual risk of breast cancer. In addition, we hypothesized that adherence to mammography recommendations would be associated with higher perceived risk for breast cancer, greater (more accurate) risk comprehension and more cancer worry. Finally, we explored the impact of level of acculturation on adherence to mammography guidelines, hypothesizing that greater acculturation would be associated with higher levels of adherence.  Sample Characteristics In the final sample of 447 women, the mean age was 50.5 (SD = 10.5) and the majority of women were married (64%), had less than a high school education (73%), and were uninsured (68%). Fewer women had experienced a breast biopsy (12%) or had a family history of breast cancer (5%). The largest number of participants (n = 172; 38.2%) were born in El Salvador, and the mean level of acculturation was low (see Table 1 ).  Rates of Perceived Risk and Risk Comprehension Based on absolute estimates of perceived risk, one-quarter (26.2%) of the sample considered themselves to be at high risk for breast cancer, meaning that they rated their risk as 3, or “definitely” will get breast cancer. For comparative risk estimates, 24.4% reported their risk of breast cancer as higher than the average woman’s risk. The average numeric estimate of perceived risk was 9.0 (SD=4.8). All estimates of risk (absolute, comparative, numeric) were statistically significantly correlated ( r’ s ranging from .22 to .38, all p’ s < .0001). For objective risk, only 6.9% of the sample was high risk as defined by the eligibility requirements for the STAR Trial (i.e., 5-year Gail score of ?1.7%). Based on differences between objective and subjective (i.e., perceived numeric risk) estimates, more than three-quarters (81%, n=362) of the sample overestimated their breast cancer risk.  Variables Associated with Perceived Breast Cancer Risk We examined bivariate associations between our three perceived risk variables (absolute, comparative, and numeric) and predisposing / enabling (age, education, race, insurance, marital status, clinic site, acculturation, cancer worry, breast cancer knowledge), and need (Gail score) factors. The three perceived risk variables were all significantly associated with cancer worry, with higher levels of cancer worry associated with higher perceived risk. In addition, clinic site was associated with absolute perceived risk (see Table 2 ). No other variables were significantly associated with the perceived risk measures. In adjusted ANOVA models for our two perceived risk outcomes (absolute and comparative risk), clinic site ( F = 6.3, p = .01; F = 4.7, p = .03), and cancer worry ( F = 11.8, p < .001; F = 5.2, p = .02) were independently associated with absolute risk and comparative risk, respectively. In a multiple regression model, cancer worry was independently associated with numeric perceived risk ( t = 5.3, p < .001; ? = 0.3), with greater worry associated with greater perceived risk. Variables Associated with Risk Comprehension Overall, 85 participants held accurate estimates of breast cancer risk and 362 overestimated risk. Risk overestimation was associated with being born in El Salvador, younger age, and higher breast cancer worry ( Table 2 ). No other variables were associated with risk comprehension. In the logistic regression model with backward elimination of variables, older age (OR = 1.84, 95% CI = 1.13, 3.01) and lower cancer worry (OR = 0.64, 95% CI = 0.50 – 0.82) were independent predictors of accurate risk comprehension ( Table 4 ). Thus, risk overestimation was more likely to occur in younger women and in women with greater cancer worry. Adherence to mammography recommendations Of women age 43 and older, 29% (n=95) were classified as not adherent to mammography guidelines. Women from different countries had varying rates of non-adherence to mammography guidelines, with women from Guatemala reporting the highest rates of non-adherence (50.0%), followed by Bolivia (41.2%), Peru (38.1%), El Salvador (30.0%), Nicaragua (23.5%), Columbia (18.2%), Honduras (18.2%), and Ecuador (15.4%). Variables associated with adherence at the bivariate and multivariate levels included age 50 years or older, (OR = 2.99, 95% CI = 1.76 – 5.09), having insurance (OR = 1.81, 95% CI = 1.03 – 3.17), greater acculturation (OR = 1.18, 95% CI = 1.02 – 1.36), and higher breast cancer knowledge (OR = 2.03, 95% CI = 1.21 – 3.40; see Tables 3 and 5 ). Country of birth, level of education, cancer worry, and risk comprehension were not associated with adherence. Women at high-risk for breast cancer based on Gail scores (n = 31) had the same rate of non-adherence to mammography guidelines (29%) as women in the entire sample.  Variables Associated with Risk Comprehension Overall, 85 participants held accurate estimates of breast cancer risk and 362 overestimated risk. Risk overestimation was associated with being born in El Salvador, younger age, and higher breast cancer worry ( Table 2 ). No other variables were associated with risk comprehension. In the logistic regression model with backward elimination of variables, older age (OR = 1.84, 95% CI = 1.13, 3.01) and lower cancer worry (OR = 0.64, 95% CI = 0.50 – 0.82) were independent predictors of accurate risk comprehension ( Table 4 ). Thus, risk overestimation was more likely to occur in younger women and in women with greater cancer worry.  Adherence to mammography recommendations Of women age 43 and older, 29% (n=95) were classified as not adherent to mammography guidelines. Women from different countries had varying rates of non-adherence to mammography guidelines, with women from Guatemala reporting the highest rates of non-adherence (50.0%), followed by Bolivia (41.2%), Peru (38.1%), El Salvador (30.0%), Nicaragua (23.5%), Columbia (18.2%), Honduras (18.2%), and Ecuador (15.4%). Variables associated with adherence at the bivariate and multivariate levels included age 50 years or older, (OR = 2.99, 95% CI = 1.76 – 5.09), having insurance (OR = 1.81, 95% CI = 1.03 – 3.17), greater acculturation (OR = 1.18, 95% CI = 1.02 – 1.36), and higher breast cancer knowledge (OR = 2.03, 95% CI = 1.21 – 3.40; see Tables 3 and 5 ). Country of birth, level of education, cancer worry, and risk comprehension were not associated with adherence. Women at high-risk for breast cancer based on Gail scores (n = 31) had the same rate of non-adherence to mammography guidelines (29%) as women in the entire sample.  Materials and Methods Setting In the Washington DC metropolitan area, Latinos make up 15% of the total population. Many Latinos in the area are recently immigrated and typically come to the US from Central and South American countries. The predominant countries of origin for the DC Latino population are El Salvador, Ecuador, Peru and Columbia [ 24 ]. Data were collected from women recruited from three community-based clinics in the DC area that provide services at no cost to primarily uninsured Latino individuals. The three community clinics are non-federally funded and the majority of the staff at the clinics is bilingual, English- and Spanish-speaking. Non-physician staff at each clinic served as interviewers. The clinics are part of the Latin American Cancer Research Coalition, a National Cancer Institute Community Network Program. The present study was part of an IRB-approved larger trial investigating an intervention to educate Latina patients about a breast cancer prevention trial (Study of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene; STAR trial) [ 24 ]. During the larger trial women were screened for STAR eligibility and in a baseline interview answered questions about willingness to participate in clinical trials, use of screening, and their perceptions of risk of breast cancer. The present study used data from the baseline interviews of the larger trial. Sample The sample consisted of 450 Latinas who were 35 years of age and older and were seen for a medical appointment at one of the three clinics. More than half of all patients served at these clinics are women (Range, 55% to 83% of clinic population). The average age of the women served at these clinics is 57 years, and El Salvador is the country of origin for the largest segment of clinic patients (Range, 42% to 51% of clinic populations). In addition, most patients are monolingual in Spanish and on average, have completed eight years of education. The women served at the three clinics are similar in terms of demographics, education, country of origin, and language abilities to the other clinics within the Latin American Cancer Research Coalition [ 25 ]. Of the 450 women who completed interviews, three were missing data related to either actual and/or perceived breast cancer risk. Thus, the final sample consisted of 447 women; for analyses related to mammogram adherence, we included the 328 women who were 43 years or older, as described below. Recruitment and Survey Procedures Using appointment logs and medical records, clinic staff determined women’s eligibility prior to scheduled clinic appointments. Women were eligible if they were 35 years of age and older and attended an appointment at one of the three clinics. Study staff approached all potentially eligible women during their scheduled appointment for consent to participate. A small number of women were missed during appointment sessions due to administrative delays or other clinic flow issues unrelated to the study questions. Of the eligible women approached, 96% consented to participate. The IRB-approved consent procedures and interviews were conducted in a private area while women waited for their appointment. In-person interviews were conducted in the language of the patient’s choice using a computer-assisted format. Almost all women elected to have their interview conducted in Spanish (97.5%), and 95% agreed to the computer-assisted format. The remaining 5% of responses were recorded on a hard copy of the study questionnaire. The interview took approximately 30 minutes to complete. All interviewers were bilingual, completed extensive training, and engaged in mock interviews. Measures We first piloted a brief version of the study interview in a separate sample of 79 Latinas, assessing sociodemographics, acculturation, family history of cancer, medical history, and perceived risk [ 26 ]. Women were able to understand the questions and reported relatively high perceived risk (e.g., 19% of pilot sample rated their risk for breast cancer as “high”). Using our pilot results and following the factors outlined in The Behavioral Model for Vulnerable Populations [ 16 ] we assessed the following variables in the present study. Predisposing and Enabling Factors Sociodemographics Information was collected on age, marital status, education, insurance status, and employment. Variables were categorized as follows: age (< 50 years vs. ? 50 years), marital status (married vs. not married), education (< High School vs. ? High School), insurance status (yes vs. no), and employment (yes vs. no). We created a binary variable for age (< 50 years vs. ? 50 years) to account for the increase in risk of breast cancer for women age 50 and over. Acculturation We assessed acculturation with three questions related to language use [ 27 ]. Women were asked to identify the language they (a) spoke at home, (b) thought in, and (c) spoke outside the home with the following options: (1) Only Spanish, (2) Spanish better than English, (3) Both equally, (4) English better than Spanish, or (5) Only English. Level of acculturation was determined by summing responses to these questions. Higher scores represent higher levels of acculturation. Cancer Worry We measured breast cancer worry with two questions used in prior research [ 28 , 29 ]. Specifically, we asked participants, “In the past month, how often have you thought about your own chances of getting breast cancer?” and “In the past month, how often have these thoughts affected your mood?” Responses to both questions were on a Likert scale (not at all or rarely, sometimes, often to a lot) and were summed to create an overall cancer worry score. Breast Cancer Knowledge We used a 13-item scale to measure breast cancer knowledge [ 24 ]. Response options were true, false, or unsure, and questions assessed knowledge related to the etiology of breast cancer, screening recommendations, population-level rates of breast cancer, how age relates to risk for breast cancer, and screening and treatment. Sample items included “A hard blow to the breast may cause a woman to get cancer later in life,” “Mammography can detect lumps that can’t be felt,” and “If a woman gets regular mammography, she does not need to do breast self exams or have physical examinations.” Scores were calculated as percent of correct responses, ranging from 0% to 100% correct. Responses of unsure were coded as incorrect. To account for a bimodal distribution of knowledge scores, we created a binary breast cancer knowledge score with a median split to represent low and high knowledge. Need Factors Perceived risk Perceived risk was assessed with three distinct items. First, an absolute estimate of perceived risk was obtained through responses on a 3-point Likert scale (“not at all” to “definitely”) to the question, “How likely do you think it is that you will develop breast cancer?” To assess comparative risk , participants were asked “How do you think your risk of dying from breast cancer compares to an average women your own age?” on a 3-point Likert scale (“lower than average” to “higher than average”) [ 30 ]. For numeric risk , participants were asked to rate their likelihood of developing breast cancer on a scale from 0 (definitely will not get breast cancer) to 20 (definitely will get breast cancer). The items were not combined into scales. Medical History/Gail model risk We used the Gail risk model to estimate objective risk [ 31 ], with scores determined by age at menarche (e.g., < 12, 12 to 13, and ? 14), biopsy history (calculated separately for women < 50 and women ? 50 by number of biopsies), pregnancy history (age at first live birth), history of atypical hyperplasia, number of first degree relatives (mother, daughter, sister) with breast or ovarian cancer, and current age. High (? 1.7%) and low (< 1.7%) objective risk were categorized as the 5-year risk of disease, with high risk scores being equal to or greater than the 5-year risk of disease among the average 60-year old women [ 31 , 32 ]. Risk Comprehension Based on prior research, we calculated risk comprehension as the difference between subjective numeric risk estimates and objective Gail score percentage risk [ 20 ]. We converted numeric risk and Gail scores to a common metric. Specifically, numeric risk was multiplied by 5 so that the original scale (0–20) became a 0 to 100 scale (Range = 5 to 100) and 5-year Gail model risk scores were multiplied by 10 to provide percentages between 1.0 and 100 (Range = 1.66 to 38.3). We then subtracted objective risk from perceived numeric risk. We categorized risk comprehension as accurate if the difference between subjective and objective risk estimates was less than 10 points in either direction, an underestimate if the difference was greater than 10 points below objective risk, and an overestimate if greater than 10 points above objective risk. Only 2% of the sample (n=9) underestimated risk, so the underestimation and accurate risk categories were collapsed, as done in prior research [ 22 ]. Health Behavior Outcomes Adherence to Mammography Recommendations Mammography use was classified as never, ever, and recent (? 2 years). Specifically, women were asked if they had ever had a mammogram (yes/no), when they had their most recent mammogram (within 1 to 2 years, more than 2 years but less than 3 years ago, or more than 3 years ago), and whether they had a mammogram during the two years before the most recent mammogram (yes/no). For these analyses, we only included women age 43 or older (n = 328) to match guidelines outlined by the National Cancer Institute for mammography in 2002, the year in which the data were collected [ 33 ]. Women age 43 and older were considered adherent if they reported having a recent mammogram (? 2 years). Women age 45 and older were considered adherent if they reported having a recent mammogram (? 2 years) and having a mammogram prior to the most recent mammogram. Analysis After generating descriptive statistics to characterize the sample, we conducted bivariate analyses using ? 2 tests, t tests and Pearson correlation coefficients to determine the association between perceived risk, risk comprehension, and adherence to mammography guidelines. Depending on the scale of each outcome variable—continuous, or binary— and the scale of the independent variable – categorical or continuous - we used ANOVAs, linear regression, and logistic regression to identify variables that were associated with each outcome. Next, we entered significant ( p < .05) bivariate predictors of our outcomes (perceived risk, risk comprehension, and adherence) as well as predictors associated with the predisposing, enabling, and need factors from our conceptual model, into the multivariate analyses. We used logistic regression models for our statistical analyses investigating predictors of risk comprehension and adherence to mammography. The final models were selected using backward elimination procedures. This approach allowed us to control for relevant sociodemographics (e.g., education, insurance status, clinic site) while assessing the effect of the main predictors. In subsequent sensitivity analyses we evaluated the effect of potential correlation of the outcomes within clinic by using related logistic regression models based on Generalized Estimating Equations (GEE) with an exchangeable working correlation structure. The estimated within-clinic correlations were practically null, and the overall results were not changed. Thus, we elected to report the results from the previously described logistic regression models.  Setting In the Washington DC metropolitan area, Latinos make up 15% of the total population. Many Latinos in the area are recently immigrated and typically come to the US from Central and South American countries. The predominant countries of origin for the DC Latino population are El Salvador, Ecuador, Peru and Columbia [ 24 ]. Data were collected from women recruited from three community-based clinics in the DC area that provide services at no cost to primarily uninsured Latino individuals. The three community clinics are non-federally funded and the majority of the staff at the clinics is bilingual, English- and Spanish-speaking. Non-physician staff at each clinic served as interviewers. The clinics are part of the Latin American Cancer Research Coalition, a National Cancer Institute Community Network Program. The present study was part of an IRB-approved larger trial investigating an intervention to educate Latina patients about a breast cancer prevention trial (Study of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene; STAR trial) [ 24 ]. During the larger trial women were screened for STAR eligibility and in a baseline interview answered questions about willingness to participate in clinical trials, use of screening, and their perceptions of risk of breast cancer. The present study used data from the baseline interviews of the larger trial.  Sample The sample consisted of 450 Latinas who were 35 years of age and older and were seen for a medical appointment at one of the three clinics. More than half of all patients served at these clinics are women (Range, 55% to 83% of clinic population). The average age of the women served at these clinics is 57 years, and El Salvador is the country of origin for the largest segment of clinic patients (Range, 42% to 51% of clinic populations). In addition, most patients are monolingual in Spanish and on average, have completed eight years of education. The women served at the three clinics are similar in terms of demographics, education, country of origin, and language abilities to the other clinics within the Latin American Cancer Research Coalition [ 25 ]. Of the 450 women who completed interviews, three were missing data related to either actual and/or perceived breast cancer risk. Thus, the final sample consisted of 447 women; for analyses related to mammogram adherence, we included the 328 women who were 43 years or older, as described below.  Recruitment and Survey Procedures Using appointment logs and medical records, clinic staff determined women’s eligibility prior to scheduled clinic appointments. Women were eligible if they were 35 years of age and older and attended an appointment at one of the three clinics. Study staff approached all potentially eligible women during their scheduled appointment for consent to participate. A small number of women were missed during appointment sessions due to administrative delays or other clinic flow issues unrelated to the study questions. Of the eligible women approached, 96% consented to participate. The IRB-approved consent procedures and interviews were conducted in a private area while women waited for their appointment. In-person interviews were conducted in the language of the patient’s choice using a computer-assisted format. Almost all women elected to have their interview conducted in Spanish (97.5%), and 95% agreed to the computer-assisted format. The remaining 5% of responses were recorded on a hard copy of the study questionnaire. The interview took approximately 30 minutes to complete. All interviewers were bilingual, completed extensive training, and engaged in mock interviews.  Measures We first piloted a brief version of the study interview in a separate sample of 79 Latinas, assessing sociodemographics, acculturation, family history of cancer, medical history, and perceived risk [ 26 ]. Women were able to understand the questions and reported relatively high perceived risk (e.g., 19% of pilot sample rated their risk for breast cancer as “high”). Using our pilot results and following the factors outlined in The Behavioral Model for Vulnerable Populations [ 16 ] we assessed the following variables in the present study. Predisposing and Enabling Factors Sociodemographics Information was collected on age, marital status, education, insurance status, and employment. Variables were categorized as follows: age (< 50 years vs. ? 50 years), marital status (married vs. not married), education (< High School vs. ? High School), insurance status (yes vs. no), and employment (yes vs. no). We created a binary variable for age (< 50 years vs. ? 50 years) to account for the increase in risk of breast cancer for women age 50 and over. Acculturation We assessed acculturation with three questions related to language use [ 27 ]. Women were asked to identify the language they (a) spoke at home, (b) thought in, and (c) spoke outside the home with the following options: (1) Only Spanish, (2) Spanish better than English, (3) Both equally, (4) English better than Spanish, or (5) Only English. Level of acculturation was determined by summing responses to these questions. Higher scores represent higher levels of acculturation. Cancer Worry We measured breast cancer worry with two questions used in prior research [ 28 , 29 ]. Specifically, we asked participants, “In the past month, how often have you thought about your own chances of getting breast cancer?” and “In the past month, how often have these thoughts affected your mood?” Responses to both questions were on a Likert scale (not at all or rarely, sometimes, often to a lot) and were summed to create an overall cancer worry score. Breast Cancer Knowledge We used a 13-item scale to measure breast cancer knowledge [ 24 ]. Response options were true, false, or unsure, and questions assessed knowledge related to the etiology of breast cancer, screening recommendations, population-level rates of breast cancer, how age relates to risk for breast cancer, and screening and treatment. Sample items included “A hard blow to the breast may cause a woman to get cancer later in life,” “Mammography can detect lumps that can’t be felt,” and “If a woman gets regular mammography, she does not need to do breast self exams or have physical examinations.” Scores were calculated as percent of correct responses, ranging from 0% to 100% correct. Responses of unsure were coded as incorrect. To account for a bimodal distribution of knowledge scores, we created a binary breast cancer knowledge score with a median split to represent low and high knowledge. Need Factors Perceived risk Perceived risk was assessed with three distinct items. First, an absolute estimate of perceived risk was obtained through responses on a 3-point Likert scale (“not at all” to “definitely”) to the question, “How likely do you think it is that you will develop breast cancer?” To assess comparative risk , participants were asked “How do you think your risk of dying from breast cancer compares to an average women your own age?” on a 3-point Likert scale (“lower than average” to “higher than average”) [ 30 ]. For numeric risk , participants were asked to rate their likelihood of developing breast cancer on a scale from 0 (definitely will not get breast cancer) to 20 (definitely will get breast cancer). The items were not combined into scales. Medical History/Gail model risk We used the Gail risk model to estimate objective risk [ 31 ], with scores determined by age at menarche (e.g., < 12, 12 to 13, and ? 14), biopsy history (calculated separately for women < 50 and women ? 50 by number of biopsies), pregnancy history (age at first live birth), history of atypical hyperplasia, number of first degree relatives (mother, daughter, sister) with breast or ovarian cancer, and current age. High (? 1.7%) and low (< 1.7%) objective risk were categorized as the 5-year risk of disease, with high risk scores being equal to or greater than the 5-year risk of disease among the average 60-year old women [ 31 , 32 ]. Risk Comprehension Based on prior research, we calculated risk comprehension as the difference between subjective numeric risk estimates and objective Gail score percentage risk [ 20 ]. We converted numeric risk and Gail scores to a common metric. Specifically, numeric risk was multiplied by 5 so that the original scale (0–20) became a 0 to 100 scale (Range = 5 to 100) and 5-year Gail model risk scores were multiplied by 10 to provide percentages between 1.0 and 100 (Range = 1.66 to 38.3). We then subtracted objective risk from perceived numeric risk. We categorized risk comprehension as accurate if the difference between subjective and objective risk estimates was less than 10 points in either direction, an underestimate if the difference was greater than 10 points below objective risk, and an overestimate if greater than 10 points above objective risk. Only 2% of the sample (n=9) underestimated risk, so the underestimation and accurate risk categories were collapsed, as done in prior research [ 22 ]. Health Behavior Outcomes Adherence to Mammography Recommendations Mammography use was classified as never, ever, and recent (? 2 years). Specifically, women were asked if they had ever had a mammogram (yes/no), when they had their most recent mammogram (within 1 to 2 years, more than 2 years but less than 3 years ago, or more than 3 years ago), and whether they had a mammogram during the two years before the most recent mammogram (yes/no). For these analyses, we only included women age 43 or older (n = 328) to match guidelines outlined by the National Cancer Institute for mammography in 2002, the year in which the data were collected [ 33 ]. Women age 43 and older were considered adherent if they reported having a recent mammogram (? 2 years). Women age 45 and older were considered adherent if they reported having a recent mammogram (? 2 years) and having a mammogram prior to the most recent mammogram.  Predisposing and Enabling Factors Sociodemographics Information was collected on age, marital status, education, insurance status, and employment. Variables were categorized as follows: age (< 50 years vs. ? 50 years), marital status (married vs. not married), education (< High School vs. ? High School), insurance status (yes vs. no), and employment (yes vs. no). We created a binary variable for age (< 50 years vs. ? 50 years) to account for the increase in risk of breast cancer for women age 50 and over. Acculturation We assessed acculturation with three questions related to language use [ 27 ]. Women were asked to identify the language they (a) spoke at home, (b) thought in, and (c) spoke outside the home with the following options: (1) Only Spanish, (2) Spanish better than English, (3) Both equally, (4) English better than Spanish, or (5) Only English. Level of acculturation was determined by summing responses to these questions. Higher scores represent higher levels of acculturation. Cancer Worry We measured breast cancer worry with two questions used in prior research [ 28 , 29 ]. Specifically, we asked participants, “In the past month, how often have you thought about your own chances of getting breast cancer?” and “In the past month, how often have these thoughts affected your mood?” Responses to both questions were on a Likert scale (not at all or rarely, sometimes, often to a lot) and were summed to create an overall cancer worry score. Breast Cancer Knowledge We used a 13-item scale to measure breast cancer knowledge [ 24 ]. Response options were true, false, or unsure, and questions assessed knowledge related to the etiology of breast cancer, screening recommendations, population-level rates of breast cancer, how age relates to risk for breast cancer, and screening and treatment. Sample items included “A hard blow to the breast may cause a woman to get cancer later in life,” “Mammography can detect lumps that can’t be felt,” and “If a woman gets regular mammography, she does not need to do breast self exams or have physical examinations.” Scores were calculated as percent of correct responses, ranging from 0% to 100% correct. Responses of unsure were coded as incorrect. To account for a bimodal distribution of knowledge scores, we created a binary breast cancer knowledge score with a median split to represent low and high knowledge.  Sociodemographics Information was collected on age, marital status, education, insurance status, and employment. Variables were categorized as follows: age (< 50 years vs. ? 50 years), marital status (married vs. not married), education (< High School vs. ? High School), insurance status (yes vs. no), and employment (yes vs. no). We created a binary variable for age (< 50 years vs. ? 50 years) to account for the increase in risk of breast cancer for women age 50 and over.  Acculturation We assessed acculturation with three questions related to language use [ 27 ]. Women were asked to identify the language they (a) spoke at home, (b) thought in, and (c) spoke outside the home with the following options: (1) Only Spanish, (2) Spanish better than English, (3) Both equally, (4) English better than Spanish, or (5) Only English. Level of acculturation was determined by summing responses to these questions. Higher scores represent higher levels of acculturation.  Cancer Worry We measured breast cancer worry with two questions used in prior research [ 28 , 29 ]. Specifically, we asked participants, “In the past month, how often have you thought about your own chances of getting breast cancer?” and “In the past month, how often have these thoughts affected your mood?” Responses to both questions were on a Likert scale (not at all or rarely, sometimes, often to a lot) and were summed to create an overall cancer worry score.  Breast Cancer Knowledge We used a 13-item scale to measure breast cancer knowledge [ 24 ]. Response options were true, false, or unsure, and questions assessed knowledge related to the etiology of breast cancer, screening recommendations, population-level rates of breast cancer, how age relates to risk for breast cancer, and screening and treatment. Sample items included “A hard blow to the breast may cause a woman to get cancer later in life,” “Mammography can detect lumps that can’t be felt,” and “If a woman gets regular mammography, she does not need to do breast self exams or have physical examinations.” Scores were calculated as percent of correct responses, ranging from 0% to 100% correct. Responses of unsure were coded as incorrect. To account for a bimodal distribution of knowledge scores, we created a binary breast cancer knowledge score with a median split to represent low and high knowledge.  Need Factors Perceived risk Perceived risk was assessed with three distinct items. First, an absolute estimate of perceived risk was obtained through responses on a 3-point Likert scale (“not at all” to “definitely”) to the question, “How likely do you think it is that you will develop breast cancer?” To assess comparative risk , participants were asked “How do you think your risk of dying from breast cancer compares to an average women your own age?” on a 3-point Likert scale (“lower than average” to “higher than average”) [ 30 ]. For numeric risk , participants were asked to rate their likelihood of developing breast cancer on a scale from 0 (definitely will not get breast cancer) to 20 (definitely will get breast cancer). The items were not combined into scales. Medical History/Gail model risk We used the Gail risk model to estimate objective risk [ 31 ], with scores determined by age at menarche (e.g., < 12, 12 to 13, and ? 14), biopsy history (calculated separately for women < 50 and women ? 50 by number of biopsies), pregnancy history (age at first live birth), history of atypical hyperplasia, number of first degree relatives (mother, daughter, sister) with breast or ovarian cancer, and current age. High (? 1.7%) and low (< 1.7%) objective risk were categorized as the 5-year risk of disease, with high risk scores being equal to or greater than the 5-year risk of disease among the average 60-year old women [ 31 , 32 ]. Risk Comprehension Based on prior research, we calculated risk comprehension as the difference between subjective numeric risk estimates and objective Gail score percentage risk [ 20 ]. We converted numeric risk and Gail scores to a common metric. Specifically, numeric risk was multiplied by 5 so that the original scale (0–20) became a 0 to 100 scale (Range = 5 to 100) and 5-year Gail model risk scores were multiplied by 10 to provide percentages between 1.0 and 100 (Range = 1.66 to 38.3). We then subtracted objective risk from perceived numeric risk. We categorized risk comprehension as accurate if the difference between subjective and objective risk estimates was less than 10 points in either direction, an underestimate if the difference was greater than 10 points below objective risk, and an overestimate if greater than 10 points above objective risk. Only 2% of the sample (n=9) underestimated risk, so the underestimation and accurate risk categories were collapsed, as done in prior research [ 22 ].  Perceived risk Perceived risk was assessed with three distinct items. First, an absolute estimate of perceived risk was obtained through responses on a 3-point Likert scale (“not at all” to “definitely”) to the question, “How likely do you think it is that you will develop breast cancer?” To assess comparative risk , participants were asked “How do you think your risk of dying from breast cancer compares to an average women your own age?” on a 3-point Likert scale (“lower than average” to “higher than average”) [ 30 ]. For numeric risk , participants were asked to rate their likelihood of developing breast cancer on a scale from 0 (definitely will not get breast cancer) to 20 (definitely will get breast cancer). The items were not combined into scales.  Medical History/Gail model risk We used the Gail risk model to estimate objective risk [ 31 ], with scores determined by age at menarche (e.g., < 12, 12 to 13, and ? 14), biopsy history (calculated separately for women < 50 and women ? 50 by number of biopsies), pregnancy history (age at first live birth), history of atypical hyperplasia, number of first degree relatives (mother, daughter, sister) with breast or ovarian cancer, and current age. High (? 1.7%) and low (< 1.7%) objective risk were categorized as the 5-year risk of disease, with high risk scores being equal to or greater than the 5-year risk of disease among the average 60-year old women [ 31 , 32 ].  Risk Comprehension Based on prior research, we calculated risk comprehension as the difference between subjective numeric risk estimates and objective Gail score percentage risk [ 20 ]. We converted numeric risk and Gail scores to a common metric. Specifically, numeric risk was multiplied by 5 so that the original scale (0–20) became a 0 to 100 scale (Range = 5 to 100) and 5-year Gail model risk scores were multiplied by 10 to provide percentages between 1.0 and 100 (Range = 1.66 to 38.3). We then subtracted objective risk from perceived numeric risk. We categorized risk comprehension as accurate if the difference between subjective and objective risk estimates was less than 10 points in either direction, an underestimate if the difference was greater than 10 points below objective risk, and an overestimate if greater than 10 points above objective risk. Only 2% of the sample (n=9) underestimated risk, so the underestimation and accurate risk categories were collapsed, as done in prior research [ 22 ].  Health Behavior Outcomes Adherence to Mammography Recommendations Mammography use was classified as never, ever, and recent (? 2 years). Specifically, women were asked if they had ever had a mammogram (yes/no), when they had their most recent mammogram (within 1 to 2 years, more than 2 years but less than 3 years ago, or more than 3 years ago), and whether they had a mammogram during the two years before the most recent mammogram (yes/no). For these analyses, we only included women age 43 or older (n = 328) to match guidelines outlined by the National Cancer Institute for mammography in 2002, the year in which the data were collected [ 33 ]. Women age 43 and older were considered adherent if they reported having a recent mammogram (? 2 years). Women age 45 and older were considered adherent if they reported having a recent mammogram (? 2 years) and having a mammogram prior to the most recent mammogram.  Adherence to Mammography Recommendations Mammography use was classified as never, ever, and recent (? 2 years). Specifically, women were asked if they had ever had a mammogram (yes/no), when they had their most recent mammogram (within 1 to 2 years, more than 2 years but less than 3 years ago, or more than 3 years ago), and whether they had a mammogram during the two years before the most recent mammogram (yes/no). For these analyses, we only included women age 43 or older (n = 328) to match guidelines outlined by the National Cancer Institute for mammography in 2002, the year in which the data were collected [ 33 ]. Women age 43 and older were considered adherent if they reported having a recent mammogram (? 2 years). Women age 45 and older were considered adherent if they reported having a recent mammogram (? 2 years) and having a mammogram prior to the most recent mammogram.  Analysis After generating descriptive statistics to characterize the sample, we conducted bivariate analyses using ? 2 tests, t tests and Pearson correlation coefficients to determine the association between perceived risk, risk comprehension, and adherence to mammography guidelines. Depending on the scale of each outcome variable—continuous, or binary— and the scale of the independent variable – categorical or continuous - we used ANOVAs, linear regression, and logistic regression to identify variables that were associated with each outcome. Next, we entered significant ( p < .05) bivariate predictors of our outcomes (perceived risk, risk comprehension, and adherence) as well as predictors associated with the predisposing, enabling, and need factors from our conceptual model, into the multivariate analyses. We used logistic regression models for our statistical analyses investigating predictors of risk comprehension and adherence to mammography. The final models were selected using backward elimination procedures. This approach allowed us to control for relevant sociodemographics (e.g., education, insurance status, clinic site) while assessing the effect of the main predictors. In subsequent sensitivity analyses we evaluated the effect of potential correlation of the outcomes within clinic by using related logistic regression models based on Generalized Estimating Equations (GEE) with an exchangeable working correlation structure. The estimated within-clinic correlations were practically null, and the overall results were not changed. Thus, we elected to report the results from the previously described logistic regression models.  Study Strengths and Limitations Strengths of this study include the focus on an understudied and primarily uninsured Latina population recruited from community health clinics. Latinas in our sample were from predominately Central American countries, whereas prior research has often focused on women from Mexico and Puerto Rico. Our inclusion of multiple risk perception measures allowed us to evaluate the relationship of each measure with adherence. Although the measurement approaches (absolute, comparative, and numeric perceived risk) were associated with one another, none were associated with mammography adherence. Finally, we had a very high participation rate, likely due to our use of bilingual study interviewers and conduct of the survey within clinics that were trusted by our study population [ 37 , 38 ]. Limitations to the present study should be noted, including use of a clinic-based convenience sample and assessment of mammography adherence through self-report. Our clinic-based sample may differ from non-clinic based samples regarding both perceived risk and mammography adherence, and thus results may not generalize to Latina women who do not seek care through community health clinics. For example, women seen through community health clinics may be more likely to engage in breast cancer screening behaviors compared to women who do not regularly seek health care. In contrast, patients at community clinics may engage in less cancer prevention behavior than women who are seen regularly by a primary care physician. In terms of self-report of mammography adherence, some evidence indicates women over-report adherence [ 39 ], whereas other evidence suggests women are able to report mammography adherence with acceptable sensitivity and specificity [ 40 , 41 ]. If women in the present study over-reported adherence, then an even greater proportion of this population may have been non-adherent to screening. Adherence to mammography screening guidelines in the present study followed 2002 recommendations of the National Cancer Institute, which at the time advised women 40 years of age and older to have a mammogram every 1 to 2 years. Other agencies (e.g., American Cancer Society) had different recommendations in 2002, such that women over age 50 should have a mammogram every year [ 42 ]. As such, our data reflect a conservative estimate of the number of women who were non-adherent to mammography screening guidelines. In addition, the current sample consisted of a small number of women at high risk of breast cancer based on objective criteria, thus limiting our power to detect significant relationships within this sub-sample. Use of the Gail model in a population of Latinas could also be considered a limitation as few studies have used this model in racial and ethnic minority populations [ 43 , 44 ]. Moreover, even less is known about how the Gail model applies to particular subgroups of Latinas (e.g., Salvadoran women). This study has important implications for primary care providers and clinics treating Latinas. Our high participation rate indicates that Latinas are willing to engage in dialog about breast cancer screening [ 24 ]. The key finding from this research stresses the importance of education to improve breast cancer knowledge in this population—teaching Latinas more about breast cancer, including symptoms (and lack thereof), screening/early detection recommendations, and risk factors—may be an effective approach to improve mammography adherence. These education efforts may not benefit from any focus on improving the risk comprehension in Latinas, as our data indicate that risk comprehension is not associated with screening behavior. Future research would benefit from use of prospective designs, ascertainment of actual mammography behaviors, and inclusion of larger numbers of high-risk Latinas. Finally, future work should build on and expand existing efforts to intervene with Latinas so that cultural influences are appropriately considered when educating these women about breast cancer and breast screening behaviors [ 45 ].  Results Sample Characteristics In the final sample of 447 women, the mean age was 50.5 (SD = 10.5) and the majority of women were married (64%), had less than a high school education (73%), and were uninsured (68%). Fewer women had experienced a breast biopsy (12%) or had a family history of breast cancer (5%). The largest number of participants (n = 172; 38.2%) were born in El Salvador, and the mean level of acculturation was low (see Table 1 ). Rates of Perceived Risk and Risk Comprehension Based on absolute estimates of perceived risk, one-quarter (26.2%) of the sample considered themselves to be at high risk for breast cancer, meaning that they rated their risk as 3, or “definitely” will get breast cancer. For comparative risk estimates, 24.4% reported their risk of breast cancer as higher than the average woman’s risk. The average numeric estimate of perceived risk was 9.0 (SD=4.8). All estimates of risk (absolute, comparative, numeric) were statistically significantly correlated ( r’ s ranging from .22 to .38, all p’ s < .0001). For objective risk, only 6.9% of the sample was high risk as defined by the eligibility requirements for the STAR Trial (i.e., 5-year Gail score of ?1.7%). Based on differences between objective and subjective (i.e., perceived numeric risk) estimates, more than three-quarters (81%, n=362) of the sample overestimated their breast cancer risk. Variables Associated with Perceived Breast Cancer Risk We examined bivariate associations between our three perceived risk variables (absolute, comparative, and numeric) and predisposing / enabling (age, education, race, insurance, marital status, clinic site, acculturation, cancer worry, breast cancer knowledge), and need (Gail score) factors. The three perceived risk variables were all significantly associated with cancer worry, with higher levels of cancer worry associated with higher perceived risk. In addition, clinic site was associated with absolute perceived risk (see Table 2 ). No other variables were significantly associated with the perceived risk measures. In adjusted ANOVA models for our two perceived risk outcomes (absolute and comparative risk), clinic site ( F = 6.3, p = .01; F = 4.7, p = .03), and cancer worry ( F = 11.8, p < .001; F = 5.2, p = .02) were independently associated with absolute risk and comparative risk, respectively. In a multiple regression model, cancer worry was independently associated with numeric perceived risk ( t = 5.3, p < .001; ? = 0.3), with greater worry associated with greater perceived risk. Variables Associated with Risk Comprehension Overall, 85 participants held accurate estimates of breast cancer risk and 362 overestimated risk. Risk overestimation was associated with being born in El Salvador, younger age, and higher breast cancer worry ( Table 2 ). No other variables were associated with risk comprehension. In the logistic regression model with backward elimination of variables, older age (OR = 1.84, 95% CI = 1.13, 3.01) and lower cancer worry (OR = 0.64, 95% CI = 0.50 – 0.82) were independent predictors of accurate risk comprehension ( Table 4 ). Thus, risk overestimation was more likely to occur in younger women and in women with greater cancer worry. Adherence to mammography recommendations Of women age 43 and older, 29% (n=95) were classified as not adherent to mammography guidelines. Women from different countries had varying rates of non-adherence to mammography guidelines, with women from Guatemala reporting the highest rates of non-adherence (50.0%), followed by Bolivia (41.2%), Peru (38.1%), El Salvador (30.0%), Nicaragua (23.5%), Columbia (18.2%), Honduras (18.2%), and Ecuador (15.4%). Variables associated with adherence at the bivariate and multivariate levels included age 50 years or older, (OR = 2.99, 95% CI = 1.76 – 5.09), having insurance (OR = 1.81, 95% CI = 1.03 – 3.17), greater acculturation (OR = 1.18, 95% CI = 1.02 – 1.36), and higher breast cancer knowledge (OR = 2.03, 95% CI = 1.21 – 3.40; see Tables 3 and 5 ). Country of birth, level of education, cancer worry, and risk comprehension were not associated with adherence. Women at high-risk for breast cancer based on Gail scores (n = 31) had the same rate of non-adherence to mammography guidelines (29%) as women in the entire sample.  Results Sample Characteristics In the final sample of 447 women, the mean age was 50.5 (SD = 10.5) and the majority of women were married (64%), had less than a high school education (73%), and were uninsured (68%). Fewer women had experienced a breast biopsy (12%) or had a family history of breast cancer (5%). The largest number of participants (n = 172; 38.2%) were born in El Salvador, and the mean level of acculturation was low (see Table 1 ). Rates of Perceived Risk and Risk Comprehension Based on absolute estimates of perceived risk, one-quarter (26.2%) of the sample considered themselves to be at high risk for breast cancer, meaning that they rated their risk as 3, or “definitely” will get breast cancer. For comparative risk estimates, 24.4% reported their risk of breast cancer as higher than the average woman’s risk. The average numeric estimate of perceived risk was 9.0 (SD=4.8). All estimates of risk (absolute, comparative, numeric) were statistically significantly correlated ( r’ s ranging from .22 to .38, all p’ s < .0001). For objective risk, only 6.9% of the sample was high risk as defined by the eligibility requirements for the STAR Trial (i.e., 5-year Gail score of ?1.7%). Based on differences between objective and subjective (i.e., perceived numeric risk) estimates, more than three-quarters (81%, n=362) of the sample overestimated their breast cancer risk. Variables Associated with Perceived Breast Cancer Risk We examined bivariate associations between our three perceived risk variables (absolute, comparative, and numeric) and predisposing / enabling (age, education, race, insurance, marital status, clinic site, acculturation, cancer worry, breast cancer knowledge), and need (Gail score) factors. The three perceived risk variables were all significantly associated with cancer worry, with higher levels of cancer worry associated with higher perceived risk. In addition, clinic site was associated with absolute perceived risk (see Table 2 ). No other variables were significantly associated with the perceived risk measures. In adjusted ANOVA models for our two perceived risk outcomes (absolute and comparative risk), clinic site ( F = 6.3, p = .01; F = 4.7, p = .03), and cancer worry ( F = 11.8, p < .001; F = 5.2, p = .02) were independently associated with absolute risk and comparative risk, respectively. In a multiple regression model, cancer worry was independently associated with numeric perceived risk ( t = 5.3, p < .001; ? = 0.3), with greater worry associated with greater perceived risk. Variables Associated with Risk Comprehension Overall, 85 participants held accurate estimates of breast cancer risk and 362 overestimated risk. Risk overestimation was associated with being born in El Salvador, younger age, and higher breast cancer worry ( Table 2 ). No other variables were associated with risk comprehension. In the logistic regression model with backward elimination of variables, older age (OR = 1.84, 95% CI = 1.13, 3.01) and lower cancer worry (OR = 0.64, 95% CI = 0.50 – 0.82) were independent predictors of accurate risk comprehension ( Table 4 ). Thus, risk overestimation was more likely to occur in younger women and in women with greater cancer worry. Adherence to mammography recommendations Of women age 43 and older, 29% (n=95) were classified as not adherent to mammography guidelines. Women from different countries had varying rates of non-adherence to mammography guidelines, with women from Guatemala reporting the highest rates of non-adherence (50.0%), followed by Bolivia (41.2%), Peru (38.1%), El Salvador (30.0%), Nicaragua (23.5%), Columbia (18.2%), Honduras (18.2%), and Ecuador (15.4%). Variables associated with adherence at the bivariate and multivariate levels included age 50 years or older, (OR = 2.99, 95% CI = 1.76 – 5.09), having insurance (OR = 1.81, 95% CI = 1.03 – 3.17), greater acculturation (OR = 1.18, 95% CI = 1.02 – 1.36), and higher breast cancer knowledge (OR = 2.03, 95% CI = 1.21 – 3.40; see Tables 3 and 5 ). Country of birth, level of education, cancer worry, and risk comprehension were not associated with adherence. Women at high-risk for breast cancer based on Gail scores (n = 31) had the same rate of non-adherence to mammography guidelines (29%) as women in the entire sample.  Discussion To our knowledge, this is the first study to evaluate the relationships between perceived risk, risk comprehension, cancer worry and mammography adherence while considering demographics, acculturation, and breast cancer knowledge in Latinas. Overall, Latinas significantly overestimated their cancer risk. Interestingly, risk perceptions and cancer worry were not associated with adherence, although age, insurance status, acculturation, and knowledge were independently associated with screening behavior. Latinas’ overestimation of their breast cancer risk is consistent with findings among Caucasian women [ 20 , 22 ]. Similarly, the significant relationship between cancer worry and perceived risk is also consistent with prior research indicating a strong and significant relationship between these two variables [ 30 , 34 ]. In these prior studies, cancer worry has been treated as both an independent predictor of perceived risk and as an outcome of perceived risk. Thus, the direction and nature of this relationship among Latina women warrants further evaluation in studies with prospective research designs. Slightly less than one-third (29%) of Latinas were non-adherent to mammography guidelines. Consistent with prior research with Latinas who identified as Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, and Central American [ 10 ], breast cancer knowledge was significantly associated with screening adherence in our population of both Central and South American Latinas, with lower knowledge associated with lower rates of adherence. Women from the various Central and South American countries reported differing rates of adherence. Due to low sample sizes of women from certain countries, we were not able to evaluate these differences statistically; however, future research with Latinas could explore whether individual cultural differences account for these discrepancies. Similar to prior research, sociodemographic characteristics including younger age and not having insurance were associated with non-adherence to mammography guidelines [ 5 , 7 – 10 ]. Our findings of the positive association between acculturation and adherence may clarify equivocal results in prior studies. Women who were less acculturated reported lower rates of adherence. Other culturally-relevant factors that may be associated with adherence include cancer fatalism and medical mistrust, as these constructs may influence risk perception and mammography adherence in Latinas [ 35 ]. Examination of these pathways will be important to explore in future research. Our finding that Latinas between ages 43 and 50 were less likely to adhere to mammography screening guidelines than women age 50 and older is consistent with cancer screening research conducted with Latinas [ 5 ] and other populations [ 36 ]. These results indicate that women eligible for mammography may not be initiating this screening behavior at the appropriate time. Although the Latina population in the present study had access to community health clinics, access to free or reduced-cost mammography services was not assessed. Unlike predictors of mammography adherence in predominately non-Hispanic White samples and contrary to expectation in the present study, perceived risk, risk comprehension and cancer worry were not associated with adherence in Latinas, whereas breast cancer knowledge was associated with adherence. Thus, for Latinas, education about breast cancer and mammography may be more valuable intervention targets than efforts to improve risk comprehension, particularly among newly-immigrated and/or mono-lingual Latinas. Moreover, these interventions may be particularly useful in younger Latinas who are appropriate candidates for mammography but have not yet initiated screening. Study Strengths and Limitations Strengths of this study include the focus on an understudied and primarily uninsured Latina population recruited from community health clinics. Latinas in our sample were from predominately Central American countries, whereas prior research has often focused on women from Mexico and Puerto Rico. Our inclusion of multiple risk perception measures allowed us to evaluate the relationship of each measure with adherence. Although the measurement approaches (absolute, comparative, and numeric perceived risk) were associated with one another, none were associated with mammography adherence. Finally, we had a very high participation rate, likely due to our use of bilingual study interviewers and conduct of the survey within clinics that were trusted by our study population [ 37 , 38 ]. Limitations to the present study should be noted, including use of a clinic-based convenience sample and assessment of mammography adherence through self-report. Our clinic-based sample may differ from non-clinic based samples regarding both perceived risk and mammography adherence, and thus results may not generalize to Latina women who do not seek care through community health clinics. For example, women seen through community health clinics may be more likely to engage in breast cancer screening behaviors compared to women who do not regularly seek health care. In contrast, patients at community clinics may engage in less cancer prevention behavior than women who are seen regularly by a primary care physician. In terms of self-report of mammography adherence, some evidence indicates women over-report adherence [ 39 ], whereas other evidence suggests women are able to report mammography adherence with acceptable sensitivity and specificity [ 40 , 41 ]. If women in the present study over-reported adherence, then an even greater proportion of this population may have been non-adherent to screening. Adherence to mammography screening guidelines in the present study followed 2002 recommendations of the National Cancer Institute, which at the time advised women 40 years of age and older to have a mammogram every 1 to 2 years. Other agencies (e.g., American Cancer Society) had different recommendations in 2002, such that women over age 50 should have a mammogram every year [ 42 ]. As such, our data reflect a conservative estimate of the number of women who were non-adherent to mammography screening guidelines. In addition, the current sample consisted of a small number of women at high risk of breast cancer based on objective criteria, thus limiting our power to detect significant relationships within this sub-sample. Use of the Gail model in a population of Latinas could also be considered a limitation as few studies have used this model in racial and ethnic minority populations [ 43 , 44 ]. Moreover, even less is known about how the Gail model applies to particular subgroups of Latinas (e.g., Salvadoran women). This study has important implications for primary care providers and clinics treating Latinas. Our high participation rate indicates that Latinas are willing to engage in dialog about breast cancer screening [ 24 ]. The key finding from this research stresses the importance of education to improve breast cancer knowledge in this population—teaching Latinas more about breast cancer, including symptoms (and lack thereof), screening/early detection recommendations, and risk factors—may be an effective approach to improve mammography adherence. These education efforts may not benefit from any focus on improving the risk comprehension in Latinas, as our data indicate that risk comprehension is not associated with screening behavior. Future research would benefit from use of prospective designs, ascertainment of actual mammography behaviors, and inclusion of larger numbers of high-risk Latinas. Finally, future work should build on and expand existing efforts to intervene with Latinas so that cultural influences are appropriately considered when educating these women about breast cancer and breast screening behaviors [ 45 ].  Discussion To our knowledge, this is the first study to evaluate the relationships between perceived risk, risk comprehension, cancer worry and mammography adherence while considering demographics, acculturation, and breast cancer knowledge in Latinas. Overall, Latinas significantly overestimated their cancer risk. Interestingly, risk perceptions and cancer worry were not associated with adherence, although age, insurance status, acculturation, and knowledge were independently associated with screening behavior. Latinas’ overestimation of their breast cancer risk is consistent with findings among Caucasian women [ 20 , 22 ]. Similarly, the significant relationship between cancer worry and perceived risk is also consistent with prior research indicating a strong and significant relationship between these two variables [ 30 , 34 ]. In these prior studies, cancer worry has been treated as both an independent predictor of perceived risk and as an outcome of perceived risk. Thus, the direction and nature of this relationship among Latina women warrants further evaluation in studies with prospective research designs. Slightly less than one-third (29%) of Latinas were non-adherent to mammography guidelines. Consistent with prior research with Latinas who identified as Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, and Central American [ 10 ], breast cancer knowledge was significantly associated with screening adherence in our population of both Central and South American Latinas, with lower knowledge associated with lower rates of adherence. Women from the various Central and South American countries reported differing rates of adherence. Due to low sample sizes of women from certain countries, we were not able to evaluate these differences statistically; however, future research with Latinas could explore whether individual cultural differences account for these discrepancies. Similar to prior research, sociodemographic characteristics including younger age and not having insurance were associated with non-adherence to mammography guidelines [ 5 , 7 – 10 ]. Our findings of the positive association between acculturation and adherence may clarify equivocal results in prior studies. Women who were less acculturated reported lower rates of adherence. Other culturally-relevant factors that may be associated with adherence include cancer fatalism and medical mistrust, as these constructs may influence risk perception and mammography adherence in Latinas [ 35 ]. Examination of these pathways will be important to explore in future research. Our finding that Latinas between ages 43 and 50 were less likely to adhere to mammography screening guidelines than women age 50 and older is consistent with cancer screening research conducted with Latinas [ 5 ] and other populations [ 36 ]. These results indicate that women eligible for mammography may not be initiating this screening behavior at the appropriate time. Although the Latina population in the present study had access to community health clinics, access to free or reduced-cost mammography services was not assessed. Unlike predictors of mammography adherence in predominately non-Hispanic White samples and contrary to expectation in the present study, perceived risk, risk comprehension and cancer worry were not associated with adherence in Latinas, whereas breast cancer knowledge was associated with adherence. Thus, for Latinas, education about breast cancer and mammography may be more valuable intervention targets than efforts to improve risk comprehension, particularly among newly-immigrated and/or mono-lingual Latinas. Moreover, these interventions may be particularly useful in younger Latinas who are appropriate candidates for mammography but have not yet initiated screening. Study Strengths and Limitations Strengths of this study include the focus on an understudied and primarily uninsured Latina population recruited from community health clinics. Latinas in our sample were from predominately Central American countries, whereas prior research has often focused on women from Mexico and Puerto Rico. Our inclusion of multiple risk perception measures allowed us to evaluate the relationship of each measure with adherence. Although the measurement approaches (absolute, comparative, and numeric perceived risk) were associated with one another, none were associated with mammography adherence. Finally, we had a very high participation rate, likely due to our use of bilingual study interviewers and conduct of the survey within clinics that were trusted by our study population [ 37 , 38 ]. Limitations to the present study should be noted, including use of a clinic-based convenience sample and assessment of mammography adherence through self-report. Our clinic-based sample may differ from non-clinic based samples regarding both perceived risk and mammography adherence, and thus results may not generalize to Latina women who do not seek care through community health clinics. For example, women seen through community health clinics may be more likely to engage in breast cancer screening behaviors compared to women who do not regularly seek health care. In contrast, patients at community clinics may engage in less cancer prevention behavior than women who are seen regularly by a primary care physician. In terms of self-report of mammography adherence, some evidence indicates women over-report adherence [ 39 ], whereas other evidence suggests women are able to report mammography adherence with acceptable sensitivity and specificity [ 40 , 41 ]. If women in the present study over-reported adherence, then an even greater proportion of this population may have been non-adherent to screening. Adherence to mammography screening guidelines in the present study followed 2002 recommendations of the National Cancer Institute, which at the time advised women 40 years of age and older to have a mammogram every 1 to 2 years. Other agencies (e.g., American Cancer Society) had different recommendations in 2002, such that women over age 50 should have a mammogram every year [ 42 ]. As such, our data reflect a conservative estimate of the number of women who were non-adherent to mammography screening guidelines. In addition, the current sample consisted of a small number of women at high risk of breast cancer based on objective criteria, thus limiting our power to detect significant relationships within this sub-sample. Use of the Gail model in a population of Latinas could also be considered a limitation as few studies have used this model in racial and ethnic minority populations [ 43 , 44 ]. Moreover, even less is known about how the Gail model applies to particular subgroups of Latinas (e.g., Salvadoran women). This study has important implications for primary care providers and clinics treating Latinas. Our high participation rate indicates that Latinas are willing to engage in dialog about breast cancer screening [ 24 ]. The key finding from this research stresses the importance of education to improve breast cancer knowledge in this population—teaching Latinas more about breast cancer, including symptoms (and lack thereof), screening/early detection recommendations, and risk factors—may be an effective approach to improve mammography adherence. These education efforts may not benefit from any focus on improving the risk comprehension in Latinas, as our data indicate that risk comprehension is not associated with screening behavior. Future research would benefit from use of prospective designs, ascertainment of actual mammography behaviors, and inclusion of larger numbers of high-risk Latinas. Finally, future work should build on and expand existing efforts to intervene with Latinas so that cultural influences are appropriately considered when educating these women about breast cancer and breast screening behaviors [ 45 ].  Conclusion While most Latinas over-estimated their breast cancer risk, older age, having insurance, being more acculturated, and having greater knowledge were associated with greater screening adherence in this Latino population. Perceived risk, risk comprehension, and cancer worry were not associated with adherence. In Latinas, screening interventions should emphasize knowledge and target education efforts at younger, uninsured, and less acculturated mammography-eligible women. 