Modelling Myc inhibition as a cancer therapy Myc is a pleiotropic basic helix–loop–helix leucine zipper transcription factor that coordinates expression of the diverse intracellular and extracellular programs that together are necessary for growth and expansion of somatic cells 1 . In principle, this makes inhibition of Myc an attractive pharmacological approach for treating diverse types of cancer. However, enthusiasm has been muted by lack of direct evidence that Myc inhibition would be therapeutically efficacious, concerns that it would induce serious side effects by inhibiting proliferation of normal tissues, and practical difficulties in designing Myc inhibitory drugs. We have modelled genetically both the therapeutic impact and the side effects of systemic Myc inhibition in a preclinical mouse model of Ras-induced lung adenocarcinoma by reversible, systemic expression of a dominant-interfering Myc mutant. We show that Myc inhibition triggers rapid regression of incipient and established lung tumours, defining an unexpected role for endogenous Myc function in the maintenance of Ras-dependent tumours in vivo . Systemic Myc inhibition also exerts profound effects on normal regenerating tissues. However, these effects are well tolerated over extended periods and rapidly and completely reversible. Our data demonstrate the feasibility of targeting Myc, a common downstream conduit for many oncogenic signals, as an effective, efficient and tumour-specific cancer therapy.  METHODS SUMMARY Transgene construction and generation of mice Omomyc cDNA was cloned into the pTRE2 plasmid (Clontech). The TRE-Omomyc transgene was microinjected into the male pronucleus of day-1-fertilized ( CBA × C57BL/6 ) F1 embryos, which were transferred into day-1-plugged pseudopregnant foster mice. CMVrtTA mice were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory (Tg(rtTAhCMV)4Bjd/J). LSL-Kras G12D mice were gifts from T. Jacks and the ?- actin-rtTA + mice from S. Artandi. Excision of the STOP element was triggered by infection with a Cre-recombinase-expressing adenovirus (5 × 107 p.f.u.) 22 . Doxycycline (2 mg ml?1 plus 5% sucrose) was added to drinking water. All mice were treated in accordance with protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at UCSF (IACUC approval number AN076148). Histology and immunohistochemistry Tissues were stained with haematoxylin and eosin. For antigen retrieval, sections were boiled for 1 min in 0.01M citrate buffer (pH 6.0). Primary antibody (anti-Ki67 (Neomarkers)) was applied in blocking buffer for 2 h. Incorporated BrdU and apoptotic cells were identified with the BrdU Detection kit II (Roche) and Apoptag kit (Chemicon). HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (Dako and Molecular Probes) were applied for 30 min and visualized with DAB (Vector Laboratories). Cell proliferation was quantified by scoring Ki67-positive cells as a proportion of total cells at the BADJs in lung tissue (approximately 100 BADJs per mouse), as a percentage of total basal cells in skin (at least 600 total cells per mouse), and as a proportion of total cells in each seminiferous tubule in testis (approximately 80 tubules per section). At least three mice were used for every experimental condition and genotype ( Supplementary Table 3 ). Determination of mRNA levels using real-time PCR Real-time quantitative RT–PCR (TaqMan) was used to quantify mRNA levels. Total RNA was isolated using Trizol reagent (Gibco). Total RNA (1 µg) was reverse transcribed using the iScript cDNA synthesis kit (Bio-Rad). The Gus gene was used as an internal amplification control.  Transgene construction and generation of mice Omomyc cDNA was cloned into the pTRE2 plasmid (Clontech). The TRE-Omomyc transgene was microinjected into the male pronucleus of day-1-fertilized ( CBA × C57BL/6 ) F1 embryos, which were transferred into day-1-plugged pseudopregnant foster mice. CMVrtTA mice were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory (Tg(rtTAhCMV)4Bjd/J). LSL-Kras G12D mice were gifts from T. Jacks and the ?- actin-rtTA + mice from S. Artandi. Excision of the STOP element was triggered by infection with a Cre-recombinase-expressing adenovirus (5 × 107 p.f.u.) 22 . Doxycycline (2 mg ml?1 plus 5% sucrose) was added to drinking water. All mice were treated in accordance with protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at UCSF (IACUC approval number AN076148).  Histology and immunohistochemistry Tissues were stained with haematoxylin and eosin. For antigen retrieval, sections were boiled for 1 min in 0.01M citrate buffer (pH 6.0). Primary antibody (anti-Ki67 (Neomarkers)) was applied in blocking buffer for 2 h. Incorporated BrdU and apoptotic cells were identified with the BrdU Detection kit II (Roche) and Apoptag kit (Chemicon). HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (Dako and Molecular Probes) were applied for 30 min and visualized with DAB (Vector Laboratories). Cell proliferation was quantified by scoring Ki67-positive cells as a proportion of total cells at the BADJs in lung tissue (approximately 100 BADJs per mouse), as a percentage of total basal cells in skin (at least 600 total cells per mouse), and as a proportion of total cells in each seminiferous tubule in testis (approximately 80 tubules per section). At least three mice were used for every experimental condition and genotype ( Supplementary Table 3 ).  Determination of mRNA levels using real-time PCR Real-time quantitative RT–PCR (TaqMan) was used to quantify mRNA levels. Total RNA was isolated using Trizol reagent (Gibco). Total RNA (1 µg) was reverse transcribed using the iScript cDNA synthesis kit (Bio-Rad). The Gus gene was used as an internal amplification control.  Supplementary Material supplement 