Critical pathways in cellular senescence and immortalization revealed by gene expression profiling Bypassing cellular senescence and becoming immortal is a prerequisite step in the tumorigenic transformation of a cell. It has long been known that loss of a key tumor suppressor gene, such as p53, is necessary, but not sufficient, for spontaneous cellular immortalization. Therefore, there must be additional mutations and/or epigenetic alterations required for immortalization to occur. Early work on these processes included somatic cell genetic studies to estimate the number of senescence genes, and microcell-mediated transfer of chromosomes into immortalized cells to identify putative senescence-inducing genetic loci. These principal studies laid the foundation for the field of senescence/immortalization, but were labor intensive and the results were somewhat limited. The advent of gene expression profiling and bioinformatics analysis greatly facilitated the identification of genes and pathways that regulate cellular senescence/immortalization. In this review, we present the findings of several gene expression profiling studies and supporting functional data, where available. We identified universal genes regulating senescence/immortalization and found that the key regulator genes represented six pathways: the cell cycle pRB/p53, cytoskeletal, interferon-related, insulin growth factor-related, MAP kinase and oxidative stress pathway. The identification of the genes and pathways regulating senescence/immortalization could provide novel molecular targets for the treatment and/or prevention of cancer.  Conclusion Carcinogenesis is widely accepted to be a multistep process resulting from the accrual of mutations in tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes that confers growth advantages and/or genomic instability to the cell. One of the critical steps in this process is immortalization. Senescence is a mechanism by which cells can suppress unregulated growth by arresting cell proliferation. In contrast, cancer cells have the ability to grow indefinitely because they bypassed replicative senescence and become immortal. In the absence of immortalization, a cell is unable to undergo malignant transformation. Therefore, identification of the genes and pathways regulating the process by which cells bypass senescence and become immortal could provide novel early molecular targets for the treatment and/or prevention of cancer. In this review, we have presented what we believe are the critical pathways in cellular senescence and immortalization based on information gathered from several gene expression profiling studies and some of these genes have functionally implicated certain cellular processes in senescence and immortalization ( Figure 1 and Supplemental Table 1 ). There are a variety of cellular factors and mechanisms involved in bypassing senescence leading to the cellular immortalization including telomere length, genomic instability and epigenetic gene silencing due to gene methylation. The loss of growth-suppressive genes, and the ensuing cellular immortalization, can result from multiple mechanisms including chromosomal recombination, numerical changes in chromosomes, point mutations and epigenetic silencing. These changes have been considered cell origin dependent as well as dependent on their cell culture conditions ( Zhang et al ., 2004 ). However, there is considerable overlap of the genes and pathways that regulate senescence/immortalization, even across cell types, indicating at least some commonality among these regulatory pathways ( Supplemental Tables 1 and 2 ). In our analysis, there are several common genes regulating these processes and many of these genes that were identified as regulators of senescence/immortalization fall into six main pathways: the cell cycle pRB/p53 pathway, cytoskeletal genes, IFN pathway, IGF pathway genes, MAP kinase pathway and oxidative stress pathway. In reality, these pathways are so interwoven that it is difficult to describe them as individually involved in the transition from senescence to immortalization ( Figure 1 ). Our conclusion is that a comprehensive, well-controlled gene-profiling study is necessary to fully understand senescence/immortalization. Ideally, this mega study would be performed using different cell systems on a single experimental gene-profiling platform. It would necessarily require functional data on the most common senescence/immortalization regulatory genes identified to produce a universal picture of the genes and pathways that regulate senescence/immortalization. A study of this proportion may be difficult to fund, thus we propose the next step should be to extend the work in this review and compile data from gene expression profiling experiments and functional data of senescence/immortalization regulatory genes into a large database. An in-depth analysis of this database could potentially help define and identify novel senescence/immortalization genes.  Supplementary Material supp data 