Serotonin Transporter Genotype and Depressive Phenotype Determination by Discriminant Analysis of Glucose Metabolism under Acute Tryptophan Depletion Acute tryptophan depletion (ATD) putatively results in a transient reduction in central serotonin transmission, and induces depressed mood in some un-medicated subjects with remitted major depressive disorder (MDD). The 5-HT transporter promoter region length polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) has been shown to influence behavioral and metabolic responses to ATD, as well as the risk for developing MDD within the context of stress. The current study investigates the relationships between 5-HTTLPR genotype, neurophysiologic response to ATD, and diagnostic phenotype (healthy control subjects versus MDD subjects differentiated by their depressive response to ATD) using 18FDG-PET. Un-medicated subjects with remitted MDD and healthy controls were genotyped for the long (l) and short (s) alleles of the 5-HTTLPR polymorphism and categorized into one of three genotypes. On two separate occasions, subjects received either a placebo or an amino acid mixture designed to deplete plasma tryptophan, followed by 18FDG-PET scanning. Depressive symptoms were rated to determine the diagnostic phenotype. Descriptive and predictive discriminant analyses were performed using brain regional metabolic data to classify according to phenotype and genotype. Overall, 79% of the cases were classified correctly by genotype, and 85% were classified correctly by phenotype. In a leave-one-out cross-validation, 72% of the subjects were classified correctly as carrying an s-allele, and 79% of the subjects were classified correctly by primary diagnosis. The robust nature of the classification results indicates that much of the variance in metabolic response to ATD is accounted for by genotypic and phenotypic category.  Introduction Overwhelming evidence implicates alterations in serotonergic function in the pathophysiology of affective disorders, and many anti-depressant drugs exert their primary pharmacological actions on serotonin receptors or the serotonin transporter (5-HTT). The expression rate of 5-HTT is controlled by the serotonin transporter promoter region length polymorphism (5-HTTLPR), which has been extensively studied in affective disorders. A functional polymorphism of 5-HTTLPR was discovered in which the “short” (s) allelic version resulted in a nearly 30–40% reduction in the rate of expression of 5-HTT mRNA in vitro ( Lesch et al. 1996 ). Although the magnitude of 5-HTT binding does not appear to differ across 5-HTTLPR genotypes in vivo in depressed patients ( Mann et al. 2000 ; Kasper et al. 2002 ) and healthy subjects ( Shioe et al. 2003 ), this polymorphism has been shown to alter emotional processing in healthy humans ( Pezawas et al. 2005 ), and to influence the responsiveness to both selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressant drugs ( Rausch et al. 2002 ; Yu et al. 2002 ) and acute tryptophan depletion (ATD) in patients with major depressive disorder (MDD) ( Moreno et al. 2002 ; Neumeister et al. 2002 ). Moreover, multiple studies have reported that stressful life events appear to interact with the presence of the s-allele, resulting in increased susceptibility to major depressive disorder (MDD) ( Caspi et al. 2003 ; Eley et al. 2004 ; Kendler et al. 2005 ), although one study failed to replicate this finding ( Surtees et al. 2005 ). Other studies found an association between the low activity s-haplotype and increased vulnerability for affective disorders irrespective of the incidence of major life stressors ( Collier et al. 1996 ; Eley et al. 2004 ; Hoefgen et al. 2005 ), although not all studies agree ( Serretti et al. 2002 ; Mendlewicz et al. 2004 ). Also important in the function of the serotonergic system, the essential amino acid tryptophan is the precursor for serotonin synthesis ( Baumann 1985 ). Several studies have demonstrated that plasma tryptophan levels are abnormally reduced in depressed subjects as compared to healthy controls (reviewed in ( Ressler and Nemeroff 2000 )); this effect is not evident in currently remitted subjects with major depressive disorder (RMDD) ( Neumeister et al. 2004 ). The ATD procedure, in which subjects are administered a mixture of all essential amino acids except tryptophan, results in a dramatic decrease in plasma tryptophan concentrations ( Vielhaber et al. 2005 ). ATD results in a significant lowering of mood scores in some but not all unmedicated subjects with RMDD ( Smith et al. 1997 ; Leyton et al. 2000 ), as well as in recently remitted subjects currently maintained on an SSRI ( Delgado et al. 1990 ) or other drugs that exert their primary pharmacological effects on 5-HT ( Delgado et al. 2002 ). In contrast, relatively few healthy controls exhibit mood lowering effects in response to ATD, and those who do show a lesser degree of reported negative mood than RMDD subjects ( Moreno et al. 1999 ). Recently, numerous studies have demonstrated a link between the 5-HTTLPR polymorphism and the behavioral response to ATD. RMDD subjects who are homozygous for the long, or “l” allele of the 5-HTTLPR polymorphism (l/l) exhibit a significantly greater increase in depressive symptoms than RMDD subjects who carry at least one copy of the “short”, or s-allele ( Moreno et al. 2002 ). In healthy controls, however, the relationship appears to be reversed, at least in females, with healthy female s-homozygotes (s/s) exhibiting the greatest susceptibility to ATD, with an apparent additive effect of positive family history of affective disorders ( Neumeister et al. 2002 ). Although several studies have assessed the effects of ATD on regional cerebral blood flow ( Morris et al. 1999 ) or hemodynamic responses to emotional stimuli ( Roiser et al. 2008 ), few studies have investigated the effects of ATD on regional glucose metabolism. Glucose metabolism offers important advantages over hemodynamic imaging for investigating the effects of serotonergic challenges on neuronal activity, because of the relative insensitivity of FDG-PET to the potentially confounding vascular effects of manipulating serotonergic function ( Cohen et al. 1996 ). One study showed a decrease in cerebral metabolic rate in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (PFC), thalamus, and orbitofrontal cortex in only those RMDD patients who relapsed during depletion, together with an increase in baseline metabolic rate in the prefrontal cortical and limbic regions of subjects prone to relapse ( Bremner et al. 1997 ). Conversely, our previously published results showed increased metabolic rate in the orbitofrontal cortex, medial thalamus, cingulate, and ventral striatum during ATD as compared to sham depletion in RMDD subjects, but not controls ( Neumeister et al. 2004 ). Several studies have reported alterations of cerebral glucose metabolism in MDD in the absence of pharmacologic challenge ( Drevets et al. 2004 ). Abnormalities have been noted in regions that also undergo metabolic changes during ATD, and many of these metabolic abnormalities appeared to be mood state dependant. Studies of the metabolic response to ATD and baseline studies of depression both implicate a visceromotor network of structures within the medial and orbital prefrontal cortex that shares extensive monosynaptic connections with the amygdala, hippocampal subiculum, and ventral striatum in the pathophysiology of MDD. This network has been shown to play a major role in modulating the endocrine, autonomic, and experiential aspects of emotional behavior ( Ongur and Price 2000 ; Ongur et al. 2003 ). Previous studies on the effects of the 5-HTTLPR polymorphism on the cerebral metabolic response to ATD have revealed a complex pattern in which both the direction and magnitude of metabolic changes are differentially modulated across regions on the basis of this polymorphism. One study of glucose metabolism in healthy humans found that ATD resulted in more prominent metabolic reductions in s-carriers versus l/l subjects in the left superior frontal gyrus, left precentral gyrus, and left superior temporal gyrus, and in the l/l subjects versus s-carriers in the right insula and right superior temporal gyrus ( Smith et al. 2004 ). Previously published results from the present study showed increased glucose metabolism in the right amygdala, bilateral hippocampus, and bilateral subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) during ATD relative to sham depletion in l/l subjects. Interestingly, s/l subjects exhibited decreased metabolism in the right amygdala and right hippocampus in during ATD relative to sham depletion ( Neumeister et al. 2006 ). Our current discriminant analysis was motivated by the robust differences in the metabolic response to ATD between RMDD subjects and healthy controls, between RMDD subjects who relapsed under ATD versus those who did not, ( Neumeister et al. 2004 ) and between genotypic ( Neumeister et al. 2006 ) groups in our previous analyses of these data. While these studies demonstrated differences across certain subsets of the population, they did not demonstrate whether these groups could be distinguished solely on the basis of the metabolic data. The goal of the present study was to identify networks of regions capable of distinguishing across genotypic and phenotypic categories. The identification of the most salient regions differentiating phenotypes may inform future studies on depression, and the response of the brain to ATD. The group of regions differentiating across genotypes may yield insight into the specific effects of the 5-HTTLPR genotype on brain function.  Methods Subjects Twenty-six healthy control (HC) subjects with no personal or family (first-degree relative) history of psychiatric disorders (age=34±12; 17 female) and twenty seven subjects with MDD in full remission (RMDD; age=40±13; 18 female) were selected from a pool of volunteers to obtain age, gender, and genotype balanced samples. Remission was defined according to the DSM-IV criteria for “full remission” from MDD. In addition, this study required a period of at least three months immediately prior to imaging during which the subject did not take an antidepressant agent and the Hamilton Depression Rating Scales (HDRS; 24-item) scores were in the non-depressed range (<8). Subjects were excluded if they had major medical illnesses or neurological disorders, met DSM-IV criteria for substance abuse within one year, had a lifetime history of substance dependence, or met general MRI exclusion criteria (e.g. pacemaker, etc.). Pregnant or lactating women were excluded, and premenopausal women were studied during the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle. The menstrual phase was determined using time since onset of last menses, and a home urine ovulation kit to detect the mid-cycle luteinizing hormone surge (Clear Plan Easy, Whitehall Laboratories, Madison NJ) to identify the time of ovulation within the index menstrual cycle. Written consent was obtained from all subjects as approved by the NIMH Institutional Review Board and the NIH Radiation Safety Committee. Genotyping Genotyping was performed as reported previously ( Neumeister et al. 2006 ). Oligonucleotide primers and dye-labeled probes were designed to optimize allele discrimination using Primer ExpressTM software (ABI). ABI PRISM 7700 Sequence Detection system software processed the PCR fluorescence data and generated genotypes. The genotypes for two controls and two RMDD subjects could not be confirmed due to a lack of sufficient remaining genetic material, so their image data were excluded from the genotype discriminant analyses. Genetic and demographic characteristics of the subjects included are shown in table 1 . In addition, subjects were genotyped post-hoc for the lg allele, which is the “long” allele with a common G substitution. This allele confers a similar effect on expression as the s allele in in vitro studies ( Hu et al. 2006 ). Of the healthy l/l subjects, two were la/la, two were lg/lg, and one was la/lg. Of the healthy s/l subjects, four were s/lg and nine were s/la. In the RMDD sample, seven of the l/l subjects were la/la, one was lg/lg, and two were la/lg. All of the RMDD s/l subjects were s/la. Subjects were selected from a larger cohort to obtain proportionally more subjects homozygous for the s-allele than in the general population (typical frequency of the s/s genotype is 19% in the general population). Initial analyses were performed using the original biallelic classification (s or l) to facilitate comparisons with a greater proportion of the literature. Notably, this approach contrasts with that of our original publication, in which the triallelic classification was used to re-classify subjects into a biallelic model, such that both lg/s and lg/lg were classified as s/s, and both s/la and lg/la were classified as s/l ( Neumeister et al. 2006 ). Accordingly, in the current study a discriminant analysis of the metabolic data was performed post hoc in which this same reclassification of the triallelic subtypes was applied. Tryptophan Depletion Procedure The study design was a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study. Subjects were randomly assigned to undergo either ATD or sham depletion at the first session. At least six days separated each session to avoid any overlap of effects. On the ATD day, subjects ingested 70 white capsules containing an amino acid mixture consisting of L-isoleucine (4.2g), L-leucine (6.6g), L-lysine (4.8g), L-methionine (1.5g), L-phenylalanine (6.6g), L-threonine (3.0g) and L-valine (4.8g) at 7:00am. Subjects were restricted from eating on the day of study until completion of the PET scan at 4:00 pm, at which time they returned to unrestricted food intake. For the sham condition, subjects ingested 70 capsules containing a total of 31.5g of lactose. Study raters were blind to condition and diagnosis. Mood ratings (HDRS) were obtained at 7:00 am, and then 7 and 24 hours later. Subjects were classified into one of three phenotypic groups – healthy control, RMDD relapser, and RMDD non-relapser – based on diagnosis and the depressive response to ATD. Relapse was defined as having a post-depletion HDRS score of 11 or greater. No healthy control subject exhibited a post ATD HDRS score >7. Image Acquisition: To provide an anatomical reference for the PET images, magnetic resonance images (MRI) were obtained for each subject, using a 3 Tesla GE Signa Scanner (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, Wisconsin). Scans were acquired using a 3D MP-RAGE sequence (TE=2.98ms, TR=7.5ms, TI=725ms, voxel size=0.9×0.9×1.2mm). FDG PET scans were initiated between 5 and 7 hours following the administration of the amino acid mixture, at the approximate peak of the biochemical and behavioral effects of ATD ( Neumeister et al. 1997 ). Image data were acquired following intravenous injection of 4.5 mCi of FDG using a GE Advance PET scanner (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, Wisconsin) in 3D mode. Brain uptake of FDG was measured using a ten minute emission scan 45 minutes following the injection, and regional cerebral glucose utilization (rCMRGlu) was calculated using a cardiac input function as described in Neumeister, et. al. ( Neumeister et al. 2004 ). Image analysis Regional PET measures were acquired in MRI-based regions of interest (ROIs) using MEDx software (Medical Numerics, Sterling, VA). ROIs were chosen on the basis of previously published monoamine depletion studies conducted in medicated RMDD subjects, and previous functional imaging studies in untreated, currently depressed MDD subjects ( Drevets et al. 1997 ; Hasler et al. 2008 ). ROI included amygdala, hippocampus, ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (PFC), ventral striatum, pregenual anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), subgenual ACC, medial thalamus, posterior cingulate cortex, anteromedial PFC, dorsolateral PFC, lateral orbital cortex, and anterior insula. All ROI were defined a priori on an MRI template image. Each MRI was registered to the template image, and individual ROI were manually adjusted according to the individual’s anatomy. A different rater (ACN) placed the regions in this study from the previously published results ( Neumeister et al. 2006 ), although the same general guidelines for placement were followed, with the exception of the amygdala. In the present study, the lateral aspect of the amygdala was favored over the more medial nuclei, in order to conform more closely to the ROI placement developed in Drevets, et. al. ( Drevets et al. 2002 ) In addition, four new regions were placed: frontal polar cortex, superior temporal gyrus (STG), habenula, and infralimbic cortex. These ROI were chosen on the basis of previously published studies of animal models of depression ( Caldecott-Hazard et al. 1988 ), as well as human neuroimaging studies implicating these regions in the pathophysiology of mood disorders ( Coryell et al. 2005 ; Nugent et al. 2006 ; Hasler et al. 2008 ). These new ROI were defined a priori on axial slices of the 2mm isotropic voxel MRI template image. The frontal polar cortex ROI included the cortex of the superior frontal gyrus extending from 2mm dorsal to 18mm ventral to the horizontal plane containing both the anterior and posterior commissures. The infralimbic cortex region was defined as the subcallosal anterior cingulate cortex situated posterior to the coronal plane in which the striatum is first seen divided by the internal capsule, and extending 12mm (6 images slices) ventral to the ventral surface of the corpus callosum. The STG ROI encompassed the cortex of this gyrus situated along the temporal pole between 6mm and 30mm ventral to the bi- commissural plane. Finally, the habenula ROI was defined in three image slices, beginning in the slice 8mm dorsal to the bicommissural plane and extending dorsally. The ROI were converted into binary masks and then transformed into the native space of the subject’s MRI. Binary gray matter masks then were applied to these regions to ensure that only gray matter pixels were included in the analysis. The ROI then were transferred to the coregistered PET images of rCMRGlu, and the mean metabolic activity was obtained. A measure of mean activity across the entire brain, calculated as the mean of all gray matter pixels in the PET image, was used to normalize the regional measures and factor out nonspecific global effects. For each region, a difference measurement was obtained by subtracting the ATD from the sham metabolic value. Statistical Analysis Behavioral analyses of depression rating scales were conducted using a mixed model in SAS, and post-hoc tests are corrected for multiple comparisons using the Tukey/Kramer test for unbalanced samples. For the initial discriminant analyses, only two-groups were used, as our sample size had relatively low power for discriminating subjects into three phenotypic or genotypic groups. Thus, first a control vs. remitted MDD analysis and an s-carrier vs. l/l genotype analysis were performed. Following these two group discriminant analyses, post-hoc three-group analyses were performed, first phenotypic (control, RMDD relapser, and RMDD non-relapser) then genotypic (l/l, s/l, and s/s). Finally, an exploratory discriminant analysis was performed on a 4-group sample, with subjects divided by diagnostic category and status as a carrier of the s-allele. All statistical analyses were carried out using the SAS System (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). Variables to be included in the discriminant analysis were chosen using an automated stepwise process. Initially, no variables were included in the model. At each step, the Wilks’ Lambda was calculated for all variables. If any variables met criteria to enter the model, it was entered, and if any variables in the model failed to meet the criteria, it was removed. When no more variables could be added to or removed from the model, the procedure ended. The Wilks’ Lambda significance threshold for retention in the model was 0.25, which was derived as a general recommendation from Monte Carlo simulation studies ( Costanza and Afifi 1979 ). Following determination of variables with the greatest discriminatory power, two different types of discriminant analyses were performed. First, for the two- and three-group analyses, a descriptive canonical discriminant analysis was carried out, in which linear combinations of the variables of interest were constructed which best summarized the differences between classes, in order to give a visual representation of the discrimination of the groups. Second, for all datasets, a predictive discriminant function was derived using a measure of generalized squared distance, based on the pooled covariance matrix. This assumed that the variables were normally distributed within groups. A cross-validation was performed, where the discriminant function was derived leaving out each observation in turn, and classifying that observation to determine the accuracy of the derived discriminant function. Differences between ATD and sham in the a priori regions were conducted using MANOVA to determine any significant differences between genotypic or phenotypic groups, with either genotype or phenotype as the independent variable. In addition, the metabolic difference between ATD and sham conditions was tested for a significant difference in each region and subject classification category by one-sample t-tests.  Subjects Twenty-six healthy control (HC) subjects with no personal or family (first-degree relative) history of psychiatric disorders (age=34±12; 17 female) and twenty seven subjects with MDD in full remission (RMDD; age=40±13; 18 female) were selected from a pool of volunteers to obtain age, gender, and genotype balanced samples. Remission was defined according to the DSM-IV criteria for “full remission” from MDD. In addition, this study required a period of at least three months immediately prior to imaging during which the subject did not take an antidepressant agent and the Hamilton Depression Rating Scales (HDRS; 24-item) scores were in the non-depressed range (<8). Subjects were excluded if they had major medical illnesses or neurological disorders, met DSM-IV criteria for substance abuse within one year, had a lifetime history of substance dependence, or met general MRI exclusion criteria (e.g. pacemaker, etc.). Pregnant or lactating women were excluded, and premenopausal women were studied during the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle. The menstrual phase was determined using time since onset of last menses, and a home urine ovulation kit to detect the mid-cycle luteinizing hormone surge (Clear Plan Easy, Whitehall Laboratories, Madison NJ) to identify the time of ovulation within the index menstrual cycle. Written consent was obtained from all subjects as approved by the NIMH Institutional Review Board and the NIH Radiation Safety Committee.  Genotyping Genotyping was performed as reported previously ( Neumeister et al. 2006 ). Oligonucleotide primers and dye-labeled probes were designed to optimize allele discrimination using Primer ExpressTM software (ABI). ABI PRISM 7700 Sequence Detection system software processed the PCR fluorescence data and generated genotypes. The genotypes for two controls and two RMDD subjects could not be confirmed due to a lack of sufficient remaining genetic material, so their image data were excluded from the genotype discriminant analyses. Genetic and demographic characteristics of the subjects included are shown in table 1 . In addition, subjects were genotyped post-hoc for the lg allele, which is the “long” allele with a common G substitution. This allele confers a similar effect on expression as the s allele in in vitro studies ( Hu et al. 2006 ). Of the healthy l/l subjects, two were la/la, two were lg/lg, and one was la/lg. Of the healthy s/l subjects, four were s/lg and nine were s/la. In the RMDD sample, seven of the l/l subjects were la/la, one was lg/lg, and two were la/lg. All of the RMDD s/l subjects were s/la. Subjects were selected from a larger cohort to obtain proportionally more subjects homozygous for the s-allele than in the general population (typical frequency of the s/s genotype is 19% in the general population). Initial analyses were performed using the original biallelic classification (s or l) to facilitate comparisons with a greater proportion of the literature. Notably, this approach contrasts with that of our original publication, in which the triallelic classification was used to re-classify subjects into a biallelic model, such that both lg/s and lg/lg were classified as s/s, and both s/la and lg/la were classified as s/l ( Neumeister et al. 2006 ). Accordingly, in the current study a discriminant analysis of the metabolic data was performed post hoc in which this same reclassification of the triallelic subtypes was applied.  Tryptophan Depletion Procedure The study design was a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study. Subjects were randomly assigned to undergo either ATD or sham depletion at the first session. At least six days separated each session to avoid any overlap of effects. On the ATD day, subjects ingested 70 white capsules containing an amino acid mixture consisting of L-isoleucine (4.2g), L-leucine (6.6g), L-lysine (4.8g), L-methionine (1.5g), L-phenylalanine (6.6g), L-threonine (3.0g) and L-valine (4.8g) at 7:00am. Subjects were restricted from eating on the day of study until completion of the PET scan at 4:00 pm, at which time they returned to unrestricted food intake. For the sham condition, subjects ingested 70 capsules containing a total of 31.5g of lactose. Study raters were blind to condition and diagnosis. Mood ratings (HDRS) were obtained at 7:00 am, and then 7 and 24 hours later. Subjects were classified into one of three phenotypic groups – healthy control, RMDD relapser, and RMDD non-relapser – based on diagnosis and the depressive response to ATD. Relapse was defined as having a post-depletion HDRS score of 11 or greater. No healthy control subject exhibited a post ATD HDRS score >7.  Image Acquisition: To provide an anatomical reference for the PET images, magnetic resonance images (MRI) were obtained for each subject, using a 3 Tesla GE Signa Scanner (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, Wisconsin). Scans were acquired using a 3D MP-RAGE sequence (TE=2.98ms, TR=7.5ms, TI=725ms, voxel size=0.9×0.9×1.2mm). FDG PET scans were initiated between 5 and 7 hours following the administration of the amino acid mixture, at the approximate peak of the biochemical and behavioral effects of ATD ( Neumeister et al. 1997 ). Image data were acquired following intravenous injection of 4.5 mCi of FDG using a GE Advance PET scanner (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, Wisconsin) in 3D mode. Brain uptake of FDG was measured using a ten minute emission scan 45 minutes following the injection, and regional cerebral glucose utilization (rCMRGlu) was calculated using a cardiac input function as described in Neumeister, et. al. ( Neumeister et al. 2004 ).  Image analysis Regional PET measures were acquired in MRI-based regions of interest (ROIs) using MEDx software (Medical Numerics, Sterling, VA). ROIs were chosen on the basis of previously published monoamine depletion studies conducted in medicated RMDD subjects, and previous functional imaging studies in untreated, currently depressed MDD subjects ( Drevets et al. 1997 ; Hasler et al. 2008 ). ROI included amygdala, hippocampus, ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (PFC), ventral striatum, pregenual anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), subgenual ACC, medial thalamus, posterior cingulate cortex, anteromedial PFC, dorsolateral PFC, lateral orbital cortex, and anterior insula. All ROI were defined a priori on an MRI template image. Each MRI was registered to the template image, and individual ROI were manually adjusted according to the individual’s anatomy. A different rater (ACN) placed the regions in this study from the previously published results ( Neumeister et al. 2006 ), although the same general guidelines for placement were followed, with the exception of the amygdala. In the present study, the lateral aspect of the amygdala was favored over the more medial nuclei, in order to conform more closely to the ROI placement developed in Drevets, et. al. ( Drevets et al. 2002 ) In addition, four new regions were placed: frontal polar cortex, superior temporal gyrus (STG), habenula, and infralimbic cortex. These ROI were chosen on the basis of previously published studies of animal models of depression ( Caldecott-Hazard et al. 1988 ), as well as human neuroimaging studies implicating these regions in the pathophysiology of mood disorders ( Coryell et al. 2005 ; Nugent et al. 2006 ; Hasler et al. 2008 ). These new ROI were defined a priori on axial slices of the 2mm isotropic voxel MRI template image. The frontal polar cortex ROI included the cortex of the superior frontal gyrus extending from 2mm dorsal to 18mm ventral to the horizontal plane containing both the anterior and posterior commissures. The infralimbic cortex region was defined as the subcallosal anterior cingulate cortex situated posterior to the coronal plane in which the striatum is first seen divided by the internal capsule, and extending 12mm (6 images slices) ventral to the ventral surface of the corpus callosum. The STG ROI encompassed the cortex of this gyrus situated along the temporal pole between 6mm and 30mm ventral to the bi- commissural plane. Finally, the habenula ROI was defined in three image slices, beginning in the slice 8mm dorsal to the bicommissural plane and extending dorsally. The ROI were converted into binary masks and then transformed into the native space of the subject’s MRI. Binary gray matter masks then were applied to these regions to ensure that only gray matter pixels were included in the analysis. The ROI then were transferred to the coregistered PET images of rCMRGlu, and the mean metabolic activity was obtained. A measure of mean activity across the entire brain, calculated as the mean of all gray matter pixels in the PET image, was used to normalize the regional measures and factor out nonspecific global effects. For each region, a difference measurement was obtained by subtracting the ATD from the sham metabolic value.  Statistical Analysis Behavioral analyses of depression rating scales were conducted using a mixed model in SAS, and post-hoc tests are corrected for multiple comparisons using the Tukey/Kramer test for unbalanced samples. For the initial discriminant analyses, only two-groups were used, as our sample size had relatively low power for discriminating subjects into three phenotypic or genotypic groups. Thus, first a control vs. remitted MDD analysis and an s-carrier vs. l/l genotype analysis were performed. Following these two group discriminant analyses, post-hoc three-group analyses were performed, first phenotypic (control, RMDD relapser, and RMDD non-relapser) then genotypic (l/l, s/l, and s/s). Finally, an exploratory discriminant analysis was performed on a 4-group sample, with subjects divided by diagnostic category and status as a carrier of the s-allele. All statistical analyses were carried out using the SAS System (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). Variables to be included in the discriminant analysis were chosen using an automated stepwise process. Initially, no variables were included in the model. At each step, the Wilks’ Lambda was calculated for all variables. If any variables met criteria to enter the model, it was entered, and if any variables in the model failed to meet the criteria, it was removed. When no more variables could be added to or removed from the model, the procedure ended. The Wilks’ Lambda significance threshold for retention in the model was 0.25, which was derived as a general recommendation from Monte Carlo simulation studies ( Costanza and Afifi 1979 ). Following determination of variables with the greatest discriminatory power, two different types of discriminant analyses were performed. First, for the two- and three-group analyses, a descriptive canonical discriminant analysis was carried out, in which linear combinations of the variables of interest were constructed which best summarized the differences between classes, in order to give a visual representation of the discrimination of the groups. Second, for all datasets, a predictive discriminant function was derived using a measure of generalized squared distance, based on the pooled covariance matrix. This assumed that the variables were normally distributed within groups. A cross-validation was performed, where the discriminant function was derived leaving out each observation in turn, and classifying that observation to determine the accuracy of the derived discriminant function. Differences between ATD and sham in the a priori regions were conducted using MANOVA to determine any significant differences between genotypic or phenotypic groups, with either genotype or phenotype as the independent variable. In addition, the metabolic difference between ATD and sham conditions was tested for a significant difference in each region and subject classification category by one-sample t-tests.  Results Figure 1 presents the differences across genotypes in the HDRS between the ATD and sham sessions for HC and RMDD subjects included in the present genotype analysis. The mixed model revealed significant main effects of diagnosis, genotype, and treatment (ATD vs. sham), as well as significant interactions of genotype*treatment and diagnosis*treatment. Post-hoc tests revealed significant increases in HDRS scores under ATD in both the l/l and s/l subgroups (p<0.001 for each). Only RMDD subjects showed a significant increase in HDRS under ATD (p<0.001). In the HC sample, no HC subject experienced an HDRS score above 7. In the RMDD group, only one subject (17%) from the s/s subgroup relapsed, as compared to 50% of the s/l and 90% of the l/l subgroup. For the comparison between the HC and RMDD subjects, the stepwise discriminant analysis selected the following regions in the optimized discriminatory ROI set: right and left medial thalamus, infralimbic cortex, left subgenual ACC, right and left ventrolateral PFC, left orbital cortex, left pregenual ACC, left hippocampus, left posterior cingulate, left amygdala, left and right anterior insula, left anteromedial PFC, and right dorsolateral PFC. From these, one descriptive canonical variable was calculated, with a mean of D = 1.56 for the healthy control sample, and D = ?1.50 for the remitted MDD sample; these means differed significantly between groups at p<0.0001 by a two sample t-test. Results of the predictive discriminant analysis are shown in Table 2 . In both the original and the leave-one-out cross-validation, none of the s/s or non-relapsing remitted RMDD subjects was misclassified as a healthy control. In the s-carrier vs. l/l subject comparison, the stepwise discriminant routine selected the following regions in the optimized discriminatory ROI set: right ventral striatum, left medial thalamus, right frontal polar cortex, left habenula, right and left STG, right pregenual ACC, infralimbic cortex, left orbital cortex, and left anteromedial PFC. The mean of the descriptive canonical variable was D = ?1.63 in the LL group, and D = 0.719 in the s-carrier group. These differed at the p<0.0001 level by a two sample t-test. The predictive discriminant analysis results are shown in Table 3 . In the leave-one-out cross-validation, only one s/s subject, a healthy control, was misclassified as a non-s-carrier, and only one RMDD s-carrier was misclassified as an l/l. Following these comparisons, post-hoc three-group discriminant analyses were performed. For the phenotype analysis, the stepwise elimination routine resulted in a similar set of variables as the two group diagnostic analysis: left and right medial thalamus, infralimbic cortex, left subgenual ACC, right ventrolateral PFC, left and right orbital cortex, left and right pregenual ACC, right posterior cingulate, left and right amygdala, right ventral striatum, right STG, and right frontal polar cortex. The results of the descriptive canonical discriminant analysis appear in figure 2 , where both canonical variables are plotted for each subject. Class means for the first canonical variable were D1 = 1.25, ?1.99, and ?0.74 for control, RMDD non-relapser, and RMDD relapser; class means for the second canonical variable were D2 = ?0.308, ?1.277, and 1.223, for control, RMDD non-relapser, and RMDD relapser, respectively. The means of the two canonical variables were significantly different between groups by one-way ANOVA for phenotype at the p<0.0001 level. All individual comparisons between phenotypes were significant at the p<0.05 level by the Tukey HSD test. The results of the predictive discriminant analysis are shown in Table 4 . Interestingly, misclassified HC subjects (N=11) were more often classified as relapsing RMDD subjects (N=8) than non-relapsing RMDD subjects (N=3). The stepwise process for discrimination by genotype selected the following regions in the optimized discriminatory ROI set: right and left ventral striatum, left medial thalamus, left frontal polar cortex, left habenula, right and left STG, right pregenual ACC, infralimbic cortex, left and right orbital cortex, left ventrolateral PFC, right and left posterior cingulate cortex, right anterior insula, left hippocampus, and right amygdala. The results of the canonical discriminant analysis appear in Figure 3 , where both canonical variables are plotted for each subject. Class means for the first canonical variable were D1 = ?1.79, 1.61, and ?0.71 for l/l, s/l, and s/s, respectively; while means for the second canonical variable were D2 = ?0.90, ?0.29, and 1.65 for l/l, s/l, and s/s, respectively. The means of the two canonical variables were significantly different between genotypes at p<0.0001, with all pair-wise comparisons significant at p<0.05 for the first canonical variable, and the comparisons s/l versus s/s and l/l versus s/s significant at p<0.05 for the second canonical variable, by Tukey’s HSD test. Results for the predictive discriminant analysis appear in Table 5 . Re-analysis of the present data set in which the lg-allele was treated as equivalent to the s-allele resulted in significantly poorer classification of subjects. In the exploratory four group analysis, the following variables were chosen in the optimized discriminatory ROI set: right frontal polar cortex, left pregenual ACC, infralimbic cortex, left habenula, left STG, right ventrolateral PFC, right orbital cortex, right medial thalamus, left hippocampus, left subgenual ACC, and left and right amygdala. Seven of these regions also were selected as discriminating on the basis of diagnosis, while three of these also were selected as discriminating on the basis of s-carrier status; infralimbic cortex was discriminating for both. MANOVA of these regions by diagnosis and haplotype was significant (F=2.67, p<0.0001). In univariate statistics, right frontal polar cortex (F=3.32, p=0.0280) and left pregenual PFC (F=2.89, p=0.0458) exhibited significant differences between groups. Number and percentages of classified subjects for the predictive full analysis and leave-one-out cross-validation are shown in Table 6 . In the basic analysis, all healthy l/l subjects were classified correctly, and all misclassified healthy s-carriers (N=5) were placed in one of the RMDD groups. In the leave-one-out cross-validation, no healthy l/l subject was placed in the remitted s-carrier group, and most of the misclassified healthy s-carriers (N=10) were placed in one of the RMDD subject groups (N=7). In both the basic and leave-one-out cross-validation, no RMDD s-carrier was misclassified as a healthy l/l subject, while the RMDD l/l subjects were more often classified as healthy controls than as RMDD s-carriers. An ANOVA analysis was performed for the a priori variables. Mean normalized regional metabolic values are listed for each group in table 7 and table 8 . In the table, variables chosen as discriminating are highlighted, and variables that differed between groups are denoted. Metabolic differences between the sham and ATD session, as measured by a one-sample t-test, are also indicated.  Results Figure 1 presents the differences across genotypes in the HDRS between the ATD and sham sessions for HC and RMDD subjects included in the present genotype analysis. The mixed model revealed significant main effects of diagnosis, genotype, and treatment (ATD vs. sham), as well as significant interactions of genotype*treatment and diagnosis*treatment. Post-hoc tests revealed significant increases in HDRS scores under ATD in both the l/l and s/l subgroups (p<0.001 for each). Only RMDD subjects showed a significant increase in HDRS under ATD (p<0.001). In the HC sample, no HC subject experienced an HDRS score above 7. In the RMDD group, only one subject (17%) from the s/s subgroup relapsed, as compared to 50% of the s/l and 90% of the l/l subgroup. For the comparison between the HC and RMDD subjects, the stepwise discriminant analysis selected the following regions in the optimized discriminatory ROI set: right and left medial thalamus, infralimbic cortex, left subgenual ACC, right and left ventrolateral PFC, left orbital cortex, left pregenual ACC, left hippocampus, left posterior cingulate, left amygdala, left and right anterior insula, left anteromedial PFC, and right dorsolateral PFC. From these, one descriptive canonical variable was calculated, with a mean of D = 1.56 for the healthy control sample, and D = ?1.50 for the remitted MDD sample; these means differed significantly between groups at p<0.0001 by a two sample t-test. Results of the predictive discriminant analysis are shown in Table 2 . In both the original and the leave-one-out cross-validation, none of the s/s or non-relapsing remitted RMDD subjects was misclassified as a healthy control. In the s-carrier vs. l/l subject comparison, the stepwise discriminant routine selected the following regions in the optimized discriminatory ROI set: right ventral striatum, left medial thalamus, right frontal polar cortex, left habenula, right and left STG, right pregenual ACC, infralimbic cortex, left orbital cortex, and left anteromedial PFC. The mean of the descriptive canonical variable was D = ?1.63 in the LL group, and D = 0.719 in the s-carrier group. These differed at the p<0.0001 level by a two sample t-test. The predictive discriminant analysis results are shown in Table 3 . In the leave-one-out cross-validation, only one s/s subject, a healthy control, was misclassified as a non-s-carrier, and only one RMDD s-carrier was misclassified as an l/l. Following these comparisons, post-hoc three-group discriminant analyses were performed. For the phenotype analysis, the stepwise elimination routine resulted in a similar set of variables as the two group diagnostic analysis: left and right medial thalamus, infralimbic cortex, left subgenual ACC, right ventrolateral PFC, left and right orbital cortex, left and right pregenual ACC, right posterior cingulate, left and right amygdala, right ventral striatum, right STG, and right frontal polar cortex. The results of the descriptive canonical discriminant analysis appear in figure 2 , where both canonical variables are plotted for each subject. Class means for the first canonical variable were D1 = 1.25, ?1.99, and ?0.74 for control, RMDD non-relapser, and RMDD relapser; class means for the second canonical variable were D2 = ?0.308, ?1.277, and 1.223, for control, RMDD non-relapser, and RMDD relapser, respectively. The means of the two canonical variables were significantly different between groups by one-way ANOVA for phenotype at the p<0.0001 level. All individual comparisons between phenotypes were significant at the p<0.05 level by the Tukey HSD test. The results of the predictive discriminant analysis are shown in Table 4 . Interestingly, misclassified HC subjects (N=11) were more often classified as relapsing RMDD subjects (N=8) than non-relapsing RMDD subjects (N=3). The stepwise process for discrimination by genotype selected the following regions in the optimized discriminatory ROI set: right and left ventral striatum, left medial thalamus, left frontal polar cortex, left habenula, right and left STG, right pregenual ACC, infralimbic cortex, left and right orbital cortex, left ventrolateral PFC, right and left posterior cingulate cortex, right anterior insula, left hippocampus, and right amygdala. The results of the canonical discriminant analysis appear in Figure 3 , where both canonical variables are plotted for each subject. Class means for the first canonical variable were D1 = ?1.79, 1.61, and ?0.71 for l/l, s/l, and s/s, respectively; while means for the second canonical variable were D2 = ?0.90, ?0.29, and 1.65 for l/l, s/l, and s/s, respectively. The means of the two canonical variables were significantly different between genotypes at p<0.0001, with all pair-wise comparisons significant at p<0.05 for the first canonical variable, and the comparisons s/l versus s/s and l/l versus s/s significant at p<0.05 for the second canonical variable, by Tukey’s HSD test. Results for the predictive discriminant analysis appear in Table 5 . Re-analysis of the present data set in which the lg-allele was treated as equivalent to the s-allele resulted in significantly poorer classification of subjects. In the exploratory four group analysis, the following variables were chosen in the optimized discriminatory ROI set: right frontal polar cortex, left pregenual ACC, infralimbic cortex, left habenula, left STG, right ventrolateral PFC, right orbital cortex, right medial thalamus, left hippocampus, left subgenual ACC, and left and right amygdala. Seven of these regions also were selected as discriminating on the basis of diagnosis, while three of these also were selected as discriminating on the basis of s-carrier status; infralimbic cortex was discriminating for both. MANOVA of these regions by diagnosis and haplotype was significant (F=2.67, p<0.0001). In univariate statistics, right frontal polar cortex (F=3.32, p=0.0280) and left pregenual PFC (F=2.89, p=0.0458) exhibited significant differences between groups. Number and percentages of classified subjects for the predictive full analysis and leave-one-out cross-validation are shown in Table 6 . In the basic analysis, all healthy l/l subjects were classified correctly, and all misclassified healthy s-carriers (N=5) were placed in one of the RMDD groups. In the leave-one-out cross-validation, no healthy l/l subject was placed in the remitted s-carrier group, and most of the misclassified healthy s-carriers (N=10) were placed in one of the RMDD subject groups (N=7). In both the basic and leave-one-out cross-validation, no RMDD s-carrier was misclassified as a healthy l/l subject, while the RMDD l/l subjects were more often classified as healthy controls than as RMDD s-carriers. An ANOVA analysis was performed for the a priori variables. Mean normalized regional metabolic values are listed for each group in table 7 and table 8 . In the table, variables chosen as discriminating are highlighted, and variables that differed between groups are denoted. Metabolic differences between the sham and ATD session, as measured by a one-sample t-test, are also indicated.  Discussion This study demonstrated the sensitivity and specificity of classifying subjects into phenotypic and genotypic categories based upon their regional brain metabolic responses to ATD. The regions where the metabolic responses to ATD provided the greatest discriminatory power for classifying both HC and RMDD subjects according to genotype and phenotype were all regions that previously were implicated in the pathophysiology of MDD (reviewed below) and had been shown to be interconnected by extensive, monosynaptic, anatomical projections ( Ongur et. al. 2003 ). As such, the results of this study highlight the importance of studying the pathophysiology of MDD from a network based perspective. Moreover, the identification of separate regions for discrimination between genotype and phenotype may illustrate distinctions between trait and state-like alterations, respectively, in the function of neural systems that modulate and process emotional, behavioral and neurophysiological responses to ATD in depression Although the sensitivity of this study was limited by the relatively small sample size, the discriminant analysis of the metabolic data correctly classified 85% of the subjects according to phenotype (RMDD relapser or non-relapser versus HC; table 4 ) and 86% of the subjects by genotype (l/l versus s/l or s/s, table 5 ). In the leave-one-out cross-validation, 78% of the subjects were classified correctly as carrying at least one s-allele ( table 3 ), and 79% of the subjects were classified correctly by primary diagnosis (RMDD versus HC, table 2 ). Although not as robust under cross-validation as the two-group classifications, the three-group discriminant analyses nevertheless performed far better than the 33% correct classification rate expected by chance alone ( table 4 and table 5 ). Specifically, the three-group discriminant analysis correctly classified 85%, 90%, and 82% of the subjects into the HC, RMDD-nonrelapser, and RMDD-relapser categories, respectively, although these rates declined to 58%, 70%, and 65%, respectively, in the leave-one-out cross-validation. Similarly, the analysis correctly classified 87%, 91%, and 75% of the subjects into the l/l, l/s, or s/s categories, respectively, although these rates decreased to 47%, 73%, and 50%, respectively, in the leave-one-out cross-validation. The relatively lower discriminative power of the three-group analyses (based upon the leave-one-out cross validations) presumably reflects the limited sample sizes of the smallest cells. As the instability on cross-validation may also result from outlying subjects, we used a multivariate statistical approach (Mahalanobis distance for each classified subject to the group centroid) to identify outliers in the primary diagnosis and haplotype discriminant analyses. No subject exhibited a distance greater than three (in units of standard deviation) from their respective group centroid. Discriminant analyses by primary diagnosis and haplotype were repeated after removing subjects with distances greater than two from the group mean (by this criteria, one outlier was present in each analysis). The primary changes in the groups of regions selected as discriminating involved adding or subtracting a region contralateral to a region appearing in both with- and without-outlier groups, or the exchange of a region appearing in the with-outlier group for the contralateral region in the without-outlier group. The most substantive changes in the groups of discriminating variables selected by the stepwise algorithm were the addition of right frontal polar cortex to the discriminant analysis by primary diagnosis, and the addition of right hippocampus to the discriminant analysis by haplotype. Of note, with the outlier removed from the discriminant analysis by primary diagnosis, overall discrimination went down slightly, (90% as opposed to 93% in the original analysis), but cross-validation accuracy improved (87% of all cases were correctly classified, as opposed to 79% in the original analysis). The removal of the outlying subject from the haplotype discriminat analysis did not significantly change the percentage of correctly classified subjects in both the overall and cross-validated analyses. We feel that the consistency of these analyses reflect the robustness of the presented results. The exploratory four-group analyses also appeared fruitful, with 70% to 100% of each group being correctly classified in the initial discriminant analysis. These rates remained relatively high in the leave-one-out cross-validation, compared to the by-chance correct classification rate of 25%. Although such higher-order analyses potentially are the most informative for classifying individual cases, establishing their sensitivity and specificity will require future studies involving larger sample sizes. In a larger sample size, the statistical quality of the pooled covariance matrix would increase, and thus improve the discriminatory power of the predictive discriminant function. We chose to perform our discriminant analysis using MRI-based ROI selected a priori , over the alternative method of using voxelwise analysis to functionally define ROI from the image data, in order to avoid biasing the results toward the noise distribution of the specific sample studied. This approach thus increased the generalizability of our results, although it may have reduced sensitivity by excluding highly discriminatory regions from the analysis. Thus, future studies of larger sample sizes are needed which can extend these results by applying techniques such as principle components analysis to further refine the networks mediating differential responses to ATD in RMDD subjects versus healthy controls. Our finding that subjects can be reliably classified as carrying the s-allele on the basis of their metabolic response to ATD supports other evidence showing the functional impact of the s-allele. For example, genetic epidemiology and antidepressant drug efficacy studies have reported that the 5-HTTLPR gene polymorphism is functional, specifically with respect to influencing the vulnerability for developing depression and the responsiveness to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) treatment. Multiple studies have shown that s/s subjects exhibit a greater risk for developing depression within the context of significant psychosocial stressors ( Caspi et al. 2003 ; Eley et al. 2004 ; Kendler et al. 2005 ) or chronic medical illness ( Grabe et al. 2005 ). The mechanism underlying this interaction remains unclear, although it may involve the interaction of the serotonergic system and the neuroendocrine response during stress. Acute administration of the SSRI citalopram, which would increase intrasynaptic serotonin concentrations, reportedly resulted in a greater increase in cortisol in healthy l/l subjects as compared to s/s subjects, compatible with the hypothesis that the 5-HTTLPR polymorphism modulates the relationship between the serotonergic system and glucocorticoid release ( Smith et al. 2004 ). Studies of the effect of the 5-HTTLPR genotype on antidepressant drug responses also have shown a functional impact of this polymorphism. These studies reported that depressed patients with the l/l genotype exhibit better response to SSRI’s than patients with at least one s-allele ( Rausch et al. 2002 ; Yu et al. 2002 ). In contrast, studies of mid-life, or late-life Korean depressed patients reported that s/s subjects showed significantly greater improvement during SSRI treatment than l/l or s/l groups ( Kim et al. 2000 ; Kim et al. 2006 ), and one study showed no association between 5-HTTLPR and antidepressant response ( Kraft et al. 2007 ). Because the therapeutic mechanisms of SSRI treatment appear to at least partly involve enhancement of 5-HT neurotransmission ( Blier and de Montigny 1998 ; Charney and Drevets 2002 ; Cannon et al. 2006 ), the differential responsiveness to SSRI treatment in s/s patients suggests that the serotonergic system plays a relatively less important role in modulating the function of neural systems that mediate depressive symptoms in s/s patients. Our finding that the depressive response to ATD is attenuated in s/s RMDD subjects suggests an important corollary to this hypothesis, namely that the compensatory neurobiological mechanisms involved in maintaining symptom remission during recovery from MDD are less dependent upon the serotonergic system in s/s subjects than l/l subjects. In this regard the response to ATD of s/s subjects resembles that of patients taking antidepressant agents that potently inhibit norepinephrine reuptake but do not significantly inhibit serotonin reuptake, as such subjects do not experience the depressive relapse under ATD ( Delgado et al. 1999 ) that is seen reliably in RMDD cases who are maintained on SSRI agents ( Spillmann et al. 2001 ; O'Reardon et al. 2004 ). Recently, evidence was reported for a “lg” variant of the l-allele which may alter 5-HTT mRNA expression in vitro in a manner similar to that of the s-allele ( Hu et al. 2006 ). Re-analysis of the present data set in which the lg-allele was treated as equivalent to the s-allele resulted in significantly poorer classification of subjects, suggesting that the effect of the lg-allele may not be entirely homologous to that of the s-allele. In our previous manuscript, it should be noted that this method of re-classification of the lg-allele as equivalent to the s-allele was used exclusively ( Neumeister et al. 2006 ). The patterns of misclassifications merit comment. In the two-group diagnostic phenotype analysis and cross-validation, no s/s RMDD subject was misclassified as a healthy control. This specificity also was supported by the two-group s-carrier vs. l/l analysis, in which only one s/s subject (a healthy control) and one RMDD s-carrier (an s/l subject) were misclassified as l/l subjects. This provides further evidence of the distinctiveness of the s/s depressed group, with respect to the depressive risk conveyed by the s-allele in the context of stress ( Caspi et al. 2003 ), and the differential treatment response of s/s MDD subjects to SSRI’s ( Rausch et al. 2002 ; Yu et al. 2002 ). There is precedence to support the idea that subjects can be distinguished by genotype on the basis of physiologic data alone. Although a discriminant analysis was not performed, Pezawas, et. al. ( Pezawas et al. 2005 ) found that healthy s-carriers showed a pattern of hemodynamic responses in the amygdala and ACC to fearful face stimuli that was distinct from that of healthy l/l subjects, and which resembled the neurophysiological pattern seen during exposure to sad face stimuli in depressed MDD subjects relative to healthy controls ( Drevets et al. 1997 ; Neumeister et al. 2006 ). In the two-group diagnostic phenotype analysis, no non-relapsing RMDD subject was misclassified as a healthy control. Moreover, in the phenotype analysis, misclassified healthy subjects were more likely to be classified as relapsing rather than non-relapsing RMDD subjects. This observation supports the hypothesis that subjects who do not relapse under ATD differ neurobiologically from their relapsing counterparts, potentially indicating the presence of a distinct depressive subtype. The regions selected by the stepwise procedure for discrimination form part of an extended visceromotor network, involving parts of the orbital and medial PFC together with anatomically related areas of the temporal lobe, cingulate gyrus, striatum, thalamus, and brainstem ( Ongur and Price 2000 ; Ongur et al. 2003 ). The data from this study, which show different groups of regions selected for discrimination among genotypic and phenotypic groups, suggest the existence of overlapping, complementary systems for emotion modulation and experience. The infralimbic cortex, right pregenual PFC, left orbital cortex, and left medial thalamus were selected in each of the two- and three-group discriminant analyses as discriminating regions. This may indicate that these regions are integrally involved in the pathophysiology of depression, and involved in both state- and trait-like alterations in brain function. The means metabolic values in these areas for various groups are shown in Figure 4 . Increasing evidence from animal studies implicates the infralimbic cortex in processes related to mood disorders. A significant body of evidence indicates that the infralimbic cortex plays a vital role in extinction learning, and may therefore be responsible for inhibiting emotional expression ( Quirk and Mueller 2008 ). Data also exist that indicate that long term potentiation in the thalamus, another region found to be highly discriminating in our analysis and also implicated in the pathophysiology of MDD ( Drevets et al. 1992 ), augments infralimbic consolidation of extinction learning ( Herry and Garcia 2002 ). In contrast, infralimbic cortex projections to the nucleus tractus solitarious and anterior bed nucleus of the stria terminalis may imply a role for the infralimbic cortex in glucocorticoid release and activation of the HPA axis following stress ( Herman et al. 2005 ). The infralimbic cortex also projects strongly to dorsal and median raphe nuclei ( Hajos et al. 1998 ), which provide the principal source of serotonin release in the brain. Activity in the pregenual ACC has been shown to be increased in MDD to an extent that correlates inversely with depression rating scores ( Drevets et al. 1992 ). Additionally, the magnitude of activity in the right pregenual ACC in depressed subjects who subsequently respond favorably to treatment is higher than in depressives who prove treatment non-responsive ( Mayberg et al. 1997 ), suggesting this region plays a compensatory role in modulating depressive symptoms. The orbital cortex exhibits increased hemodynamic activity during a variety of emotional conditions, including major depressive episodes ( Maddock 1999 ; Drevets 2004 ). Moreover, the left lateral orbital cortex was shown by Ketter et. al. ( Ketter et al. 2001 ) to contain abnormally elevated glucose metabolism in mildly, but not moderately-to-severely, depressed patients with bipolar disorder as compared to healthy controls. These findings were similar to those obtained in PET studies of unipolar depression, where glucose metabolism and CBF in the left lateral orbital cortex/inferior frontal gyrus region were increased during the depressed phase to an extent that was inversely correlated with depression severity ( Drevets et al. 1992 ; Drevets et al. 2002 ; Drevets 2004 ; Neumeister et al. 2004 ). These inverse relationships between left lateral orbital cortex activity and depression severity appear consistent with other types of evidence indicating that this region functions to modulate or inhibit emotional expression and experience (reviewed in ( Drevets 2004 )). These findings are also consistent with our result, that ATD was associated with an increase in orbital cortex metabolism in the RMDD subjects, and particularly in the RMDD subjects who maintained remission during ATD ( Figure 4 ), although in contrast, the healthy l/l subjects also show an increase in orbital cortex metabolism during ATD. Activity in thalamus has been shown to correlate positively with depression scores during the depressed phase of MDD ( Milak et al. 2005 ), consistent with our finding that thalamic metabolism increased significantly under ATD in the RMDD, and showed a trend for increased metabolism in the remitted MDD relapsers taken alone. Additionally, the l/l subjects, who had the greatest susceptibility to ATD ( Figure 1 ), exhibited a significantly greater increase in metabolism under ATD as compared to the s-carrier subjects. The thalamus also is a major site of serotonergic neurotransmission, as evidenced by its particularly high density of binding sites for 5-HTT ( Smith 1999 ; Cannon et al. 2006 ), and has been shown to exhibit increased basal hemodynamic activation in response to SSRI infusion ( McKie et al. 2005 ). Several other regions merit comment on the basis of their known role in the pathophysiology of mood disorders. The left subgenual PFC, left pregenual PFC, right ventrolateral PFC, and left amygdala were chosen for both the diagnosis and phenotype discriminant analysis, but neither the haplotype or genotype analysis. Discrimination of subjects on the basis of phenotypic categories may identify a subset of regions where activity underlies the experience of the depressed condition (a state effect). In the literature, both state- and trait- like functions have been demonstrated in these regions (reviewed in ( Drevets et al. 2004 )). In previously published results from this group of subjects ( Neumeister et al. 2006 ), the metabolic response in the more medial aspect of the amygdala was differentially affected by the 5-HTTLPR genotype, as amygdala metabolism increased under ATD in the l/l subjects. In contrast, we found that metabolism in the more lateral aspect of the amygdala showed a trend for increased metabolism under ATD only in the non-relapsing RMDD subjects. Our findings are interesting in light of studies showing that healthy s-carrier subjects as well as s-carrier subjects with anxiety disorders show increased hemodynamic activity in the amygdala in response to emotionally provocative stimuli as compared to their l/l counterparts (reviewed in ( Hariri and Holmes 2006 )). The intriguing differences between this study and prior results may reflect the heterogeneity of function in amygdalar nuclei, the selection bias of this study toward a unique group of subjects able to maintain remission for long periods of time without medication, or may simply illustrate the difference between a ATD-induced depressed mood state and an ordinary depressive episode. In contrast, the left habenula and left superior temporal gyrus were discriminatory in the haplotype and genotype analyses, but not the diagnosis or phenotype analyses. Discrimination on the basis of genotype may isolate regions that exert modulatory effects over emotional experience, and where neural functions thus may underlie predisposition for developing MDD (a trait effect). Indeed, animal studies of rats bred for congenital learned helplessness exhibit hypermetabolism in the habenula ( Shumake et al. 2003 ; Henn and Vollmayr 2005 ). The right posterior cingulate, left ventral striatum, and left frontal polar cortex were discriminatory only in the three-group genotype analysis, perhaps indicating the role of these regions in a network that may be altered between the s/s and s/l groups. These regions have been implicated in emotional processing, thus a genetic modulation of function in these areas is remarkable (reviewed in ( Maddock 1999 ; Drevets 2004 ; Hasler et al. 2008 )), The ability of a network of regions to discriminate based on phenotypic status, particularly in differentiating relapsing and non-relapsing remitted MDD subjects, is consistent with the pattern of metabolic abnormalities seen in depressed MDD samples relative to healthy controls, as well as the pattern of metabolic responses seen in these regions under the experience of aversive stimuli or negative affect. The finding that these regions can reliably discriminate between subjects based solely on diagnostic category, irrespective of response to ATD, also may indicate an alteration in the experience of negative emotions, present even after remission of a depressive episode. Further research in at-risk subjects may elucidate whether such trait-like differences in metabolism constitute a precursor to, or a consequence of MDD. Conversely, the identification of mood modulating regions as discriminators of genotype may indicate that alterations in the inherent function of these structures may give rise to an underlying susceptibility to MDD and other disorders?  Discussion This study demonstrated the sensitivity and specificity of classifying subjects into phenotypic and genotypic categories based upon their regional brain metabolic responses to ATD. The regions where the metabolic responses to ATD provided the greatest discriminatory power for classifying both HC and RMDD subjects according to genotype and phenotype were all regions that previously were implicated in the pathophysiology of MDD (reviewed below) and had been shown to be interconnected by extensive, monosynaptic, anatomical projections ( Ongur et. al. 2003 ). As such, the results of this study highlight the importance of studying the pathophysiology of MDD from a network based perspective. Moreover, the identification of separate regions for discrimination between genotype and phenotype may illustrate distinctions between trait and state-like alterations, respectively, in the function of neural systems that modulate and process emotional, behavioral and neurophysiological responses to ATD in depression Although the sensitivity of this study was limited by the relatively small sample size, the discriminant analysis of the metabolic data correctly classified 85% of the subjects according to phenotype (RMDD relapser or non-relapser versus HC; table 4 ) and 86% of the subjects by genotype (l/l versus s/l or s/s, table 5 ). In the leave-one-out cross-validation, 78% of the subjects were classified correctly as carrying at least one s-allele ( table 3 ), and 79% of the subjects were classified correctly by primary diagnosis (RMDD versus HC, table 2 ). Although not as robust under cross-validation as the two-group classifications, the three-group discriminant analyses nevertheless performed far better than the 33% correct classification rate expected by chance alone ( table 4 and table 5 ). Specifically, the three-group discriminant analysis correctly classified 85%, 90%, and 82% of the subjects into the HC, RMDD-nonrelapser, and RMDD-relapser categories, respectively, although these rates declined to 58%, 70%, and 65%, respectively, in the leave-one-out cross-validation. Similarly, the analysis correctly classified 87%, 91%, and 75% of the subjects into the l/l, l/s, or s/s categories, respectively, although these rates decreased to 47%, 73%, and 50%, respectively, in the leave-one-out cross-validation. The relatively lower discriminative power of the three-group analyses (based upon the leave-one-out cross validations) presumably reflects the limited sample sizes of the smallest cells. As the instability on cross-validation may also result from outlying subjects, we used a multivariate statistical approach (Mahalanobis distance for each classified subject to the group centroid) to identify outliers in the primary diagnosis and haplotype discriminant analyses. No subject exhibited a distance greater than three (in units of standard deviation) from their respective group centroid. Discriminant analyses by primary diagnosis and haplotype were repeated after removing subjects with distances greater than two from the group mean (by this criteria, one outlier was present in each analysis). The primary changes in the groups of regions selected as discriminating involved adding or subtracting a region contralateral to a region appearing in both with- and without-outlier groups, or the exchange of a region appearing in the with-outlier group for the contralateral region in the without-outlier group. The most substantive changes in the groups of discriminating variables selected by the stepwise algorithm were the addition of right frontal polar cortex to the discriminant analysis by primary diagnosis, and the addition of right hippocampus to the discriminant analysis by haplotype. Of note, with the outlier removed from the discriminant analysis by primary diagnosis, overall discrimination went down slightly, (90% as opposed to 93% in the original analysis), but cross-validation accuracy improved (87% of all cases were correctly classified, as opposed to 79% in the original analysis). The removal of the outlying subject from the haplotype discriminat analysis did not significantly change the percentage of correctly classified subjects in both the overall and cross-validated analyses. We feel that the consistency of these analyses reflect the robustness of the presented results. The exploratory four-group analyses also appeared fruitful, with 70% to 100% of each group being correctly classified in the initial discriminant analysis. These rates remained relatively high in the leave-one-out cross-validation, compared to the by-chance correct classification rate of 25%. Although such higher-order analyses potentially are the most informative for classifying individual cases, establishing their sensitivity and specificity will require future studies involving larger sample sizes. In a larger sample size, the statistical quality of the pooled covariance matrix would increase, and thus improve the discriminatory power of the predictive discriminant function. We chose to perform our discriminant analysis using MRI-based ROI selected a priori , over the alternative method of using voxelwise analysis to functionally define ROI from the image data, in order to avoid biasing the results toward the noise distribution of the specific sample studied. This approach thus increased the generalizability of our results, although it may have reduced sensitivity by excluding highly discriminatory regions from the analysis. Thus, future studies of larger sample sizes are needed which can extend these results by applying techniques such as principle components analysis to further refine the networks mediating differential responses to ATD in RMDD subjects versus healthy controls. Our finding that subjects can be reliably classified as carrying the s-allele on the basis of their metabolic response to ATD supports other evidence showing the functional impact of the s-allele. For example, genetic epidemiology and antidepressant drug efficacy studies have reported that the 5-HTTLPR gene polymorphism is functional, specifically with respect to influencing the vulnerability for developing depression and the responsiveness to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) treatment. Multiple studies have shown that s/s subjects exhibit a greater risk for developing depression within the context of significant psychosocial stressors ( Caspi et al. 2003 ; Eley et al. 2004 ; Kendler et al. 2005 ) or chronic medical illness ( Grabe et al. 2005 ). The mechanism underlying this interaction remains unclear, although it may involve the interaction of the serotonergic system and the neuroendocrine response during stress. Acute administration of the SSRI citalopram, which would increase intrasynaptic serotonin concentrations, reportedly resulted in a greater increase in cortisol in healthy l/l subjects as compared to s/s subjects, compatible with the hypothesis that the 5-HTTLPR polymorphism modulates the relationship between the serotonergic system and glucocorticoid release ( Smith et al. 2004 ). Studies of the effect of the 5-HTTLPR genotype on antidepressant drug responses also have shown a functional impact of this polymorphism. These studies reported that depressed patients with the l/l genotype exhibit better response to SSRI’s than patients with at least one s-allele ( Rausch et al. 2002 ; Yu et al. 2002 ). In contrast, studies of mid-life, or late-life Korean depressed patients reported that s/s subjects showed significantly greater improvement during SSRI treatment than l/l or s/l groups ( Kim et al. 2000 ; Kim et al. 2006 ), and one study showed no association between 5-HTTLPR and antidepressant response ( Kraft et al. 2007 ). Because the therapeutic mechanisms of SSRI treatment appear to at least partly involve enhancement of 5-HT neurotransmission ( Blier and de Montigny 1998 ; Charney and Drevets 2002 ; Cannon et al. 2006 ), the differential responsiveness to SSRI treatment in s/s patients suggests that the serotonergic system plays a relatively less important role in modulating the function of neural systems that mediate depressive symptoms in s/s patients. Our finding that the depressive response to ATD is attenuated in s/s RMDD subjects suggests an important corollary to this hypothesis, namely that the compensatory neurobiological mechanisms involved in maintaining symptom remission during recovery from MDD are less dependent upon the serotonergic system in s/s subjects than l/l subjects. In this regard the response to ATD of s/s subjects resembles that of patients taking antidepressant agents that potently inhibit norepinephrine reuptake but do not significantly inhibit serotonin reuptake, as such subjects do not experience the depressive relapse under ATD ( Delgado et al. 1999 ) that is seen reliably in RMDD cases who are maintained on SSRI agents ( Spillmann et al. 2001 ; O'Reardon et al. 2004 ). Recently, evidence was reported for a “lg” variant of the l-allele which may alter 5-HTT mRNA expression in vitro in a manner similar to that of the s-allele ( Hu et al. 2006 ). Re-analysis of the present data set in which the lg-allele was treated as equivalent to the s-allele resulted in significantly poorer classification of subjects, suggesting that the effect of the lg-allele may not be entirely homologous to that of the s-allele. In our previous manuscript, it should be noted that this method of re-classification of the lg-allele as equivalent to the s-allele was used exclusively ( Neumeister et al. 2006 ). The patterns of misclassifications merit comment. In the two-group diagnostic phenotype analysis and cross-validation, no s/s RMDD subject was misclassified as a healthy control. This specificity also was supported by the two-group s-carrier vs. l/l analysis, in which only one s/s subject (a healthy control) and one RMDD s-carrier (an s/l subject) were misclassified as l/l subjects. This provides further evidence of the distinctiveness of the s/s depressed group, with respect to the depressive risk conveyed by the s-allele in the context of stress ( Caspi et al. 2003 ), and the differential treatment response of s/s MDD subjects to SSRI’s ( Rausch et al. 2002 ; Yu et al. 2002 ). There is precedence to support the idea that subjects can be distinguished by genotype on the basis of physiologic data alone. Although a discriminant analysis was not performed, Pezawas, et. al. ( Pezawas et al. 2005 ) found that healthy s-carriers showed a pattern of hemodynamic responses in the amygdala and ACC to fearful face stimuli that was distinct from that of healthy l/l subjects, and which resembled the neurophysiological pattern seen during exposure to sad face stimuli in depressed MDD subjects relative to healthy controls ( Drevets et al. 1997 ; Neumeister et al. 2006 ). In the two-group diagnostic phenotype analysis, no non-relapsing RMDD subject was misclassified as a healthy control. Moreover, in the phenotype analysis, misclassified healthy subjects were more likely to be classified as relapsing rather than non-relapsing RMDD subjects. This observation supports the hypothesis that subjects who do not relapse under ATD differ neurobiologically from their relapsing counterparts, potentially indicating the presence of a distinct depressive subtype. The regions selected by the stepwise procedure for discrimination form part of an extended visceromotor network, involving parts of the orbital and medial PFC together with anatomically related areas of the temporal lobe, cingulate gyrus, striatum, thalamus, and brainstem ( Ongur and Price 2000 ; Ongur et al. 2003 ). The data from this study, which show different groups of regions selected for discrimination among genotypic and phenotypic groups, suggest the existence of overlapping, complementary systems for emotion modulation and experience. The infralimbic cortex, right pregenual PFC, left orbital cortex, and left medial thalamus were selected in each of the two- and three-group discriminant analyses as discriminating regions. This may indicate that these regions are integrally involved in the pathophysiology of depression, and involved in both state- and trait-like alterations in brain function. The means metabolic values in these areas for various groups are shown in Figure 4 . Increasing evidence from animal studies implicates the infralimbic cortex in processes related to mood disorders. A significant body of evidence indicates that the infralimbic cortex plays a vital role in extinction learning, and may therefore be responsible for inhibiting emotional expression ( Quirk and Mueller 2008 ). Data also exist that indicate that long term potentiation in the thalamus, another region found to be highly discriminating in our analysis and also implicated in the pathophysiology of MDD ( Drevets et al. 1992 ), augments infralimbic consolidation of extinction learning ( Herry and Garcia 2002 ). In contrast, infralimbic cortex projections to the nucleus tractus solitarious and anterior bed nucleus of the stria terminalis may imply a role for the infralimbic cortex in glucocorticoid release and activation of the HPA axis following stress ( Herman et al. 2005 ). The infralimbic cortex also projects strongly to dorsal and median raphe nuclei ( Hajos et al. 1998 ), which provide the principal source of serotonin release in the brain. Activity in the pregenual ACC has been shown to be increased in MDD to an extent that correlates inversely with depression rating scores ( Drevets et al. 1992 ). Additionally, the magnitude of activity in the right pregenual ACC in depressed subjects who subsequently respond favorably to treatment is higher than in depressives who prove treatment non-responsive ( Mayberg et al. 1997 ), suggesting this region plays a compensatory role in modulating depressive symptoms. The orbital cortex exhibits increased hemodynamic activity during a variety of emotional conditions, including major depressive episodes ( Maddock 1999 ; Drevets 2004 ). Moreover, the left lateral orbital cortex was shown by Ketter et. al. ( Ketter et al. 2001 ) to contain abnormally elevated glucose metabolism in mildly, but not moderately-to-severely, depressed patients with bipolar disorder as compared to healthy controls. These findings were similar to those obtained in PET studies of unipolar depression, where glucose metabolism and CBF in the left lateral orbital cortex/inferior frontal gyrus region were increased during the depressed phase to an extent that was inversely correlated with depression severity ( Drevets et al. 1992 ; Drevets et al. 2002 ; Drevets 2004 ; Neumeister et al. 2004 ). These inverse relationships between left lateral orbital cortex activity and depression severity appear consistent with other types of evidence indicating that this region functions to modulate or inhibit emotional expression and experience (reviewed in ( Drevets 2004 )). These findings are also consistent with our result, that ATD was associated with an increase in orbital cortex metabolism in the RMDD subjects, and particularly in the RMDD subjects who maintained remission during ATD ( Figure 4 ), although in contrast, the healthy l/l subjects also show an increase in orbital cortex metabolism during ATD. Activity in thalamus has been shown to correlate positively with depression scores during the depressed phase of MDD ( Milak et al. 2005 ), consistent with our finding that thalamic metabolism increased significantly under ATD in the RMDD, and showed a trend for increased metabolism in the remitted MDD relapsers taken alone. Additionally, the l/l subjects, who had the greatest susceptibility to ATD ( Figure 1 ), exhibited a significantly greater increase in metabolism under ATD as compared to the s-carrier subjects. The thalamus also is a major site of serotonergic neurotransmission, as evidenced by its particularly high density of binding sites for 5-HTT ( Smith 1999 ; Cannon et al. 2006 ), and has been shown to exhibit increased basal hemodynamic activation in response to SSRI infusion ( McKie et al. 2005 ). Several other regions merit comment on the basis of their known role in the pathophysiology of mood disorders. The left subgenual PFC, left pregenual PFC, right ventrolateral PFC, and left amygdala were chosen for both the diagnosis and phenotype discriminant analysis, but neither the haplotype or genotype analysis. Discrimination of subjects on the basis of phenotypic categories may identify a subset of regions where activity underlies the experience of the depressed condition (a state effect). In the literature, both state- and trait- like functions have been demonstrated in these regions (reviewed in ( Drevets et al. 2004 )). In previously published results from this group of subjects ( Neumeister et al. 2006 ), the metabolic response in the more medial aspect of the amygdala was differentially affected by the 5-HTTLPR genotype, as amygdala metabolism increased under ATD in the l/l subjects. In contrast, we found that metabolism in the more lateral aspect of the amygdala showed a trend for increased metabolism under ATD only in the non-relapsing RMDD subjects. Our findings are interesting in light of studies showing that healthy s-carrier subjects as well as s-carrier subjects with anxiety disorders show increased hemodynamic activity in the amygdala in response to emotionally provocative stimuli as compared to their l/l counterparts (reviewed in ( Hariri and Holmes 2006 )). The intriguing differences between this study and prior results may reflect the heterogeneity of function in amygdalar nuclei, the selection bias of this study toward a unique group of subjects able to maintain remission for long periods of time without medication, or may simply illustrate the difference between a ATD-induced depressed mood state and an ordinary depressive episode. In contrast, the left habenula and left superior temporal gyrus were discriminatory in the haplotype and genotype analyses, but not the diagnosis or phenotype analyses. Discrimination on the basis of genotype may isolate regions that exert modulatory effects over emotional experience, and where neural functions thus may underlie predisposition for developing MDD (a trait effect). Indeed, animal studies of rats bred for congenital learned helplessness exhibit hypermetabolism in the habenula ( Shumake et al. 2003 ; Henn and Vollmayr 2005 ). The right posterior cingulate, left ventral striatum, and left frontal polar cortex were discriminatory only in the three-group genotype analysis, perhaps indicating the role of these regions in a network that may be altered between the s/s and s/l groups. These regions have been implicated in emotional processing, thus a genetic modulation of function in these areas is remarkable (reviewed in ( Maddock 1999 ; Drevets 2004 ; Hasler et al. 2008 )), The ability of a network of regions to discriminate based on phenotypic status, particularly in differentiating relapsing and non-relapsing remitted MDD subjects, is consistent with the pattern of metabolic abnormalities seen in depressed MDD samples relative to healthy controls, as well as the pattern of metabolic responses seen in these regions under the experience of aversive stimuli or negative affect. The finding that these regions can reliably discriminate between subjects based solely on diagnostic category, irrespective of response to ATD, also may indicate an alteration in the experience of negative emotions, present even after remission of a depressive episode. Further research in at-risk subjects may elucidate whether such trait-like differences in metabolism constitute a precursor to, or a consequence of MDD. Conversely, the identification of mood modulating regions as discriminators of genotype may indicate that alterations in the inherent function of these structures may give rise to an underlying susceptibility to MDD and other disorders?  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Difference in HDRS scores between ATD and Sham sessions. Healthy control subjects showed no significant differences between groups; RMDD subjects: l/l > s/s, p<0.05 by Tukey’s multiple comparison test. Figure 2 Plot of Canonicial discriminant variables derived to discriminate subjects based on phenotype. Figure 3 Plot of Canonical discriminant variables derived to discriminate subjects based on genotype. Figure 4 Plot of mean and standard error of the normalized metabolism under ATD minus the normalized metabolism under the sham condition, for the four regions found to discriminate across diagnosis, phenotype, haplotype, and genotype. Brackets indicate between-group significance or trend for significance. * trend for significance at p<0.1 in one-sample t-test ** significance at p<0.05 in one-sample t-test atrend for significance at p<0.1 in ANOVA across four groups (divided by diagnosis and haplotype) btrend for significance at p<0.1 in ANOVA across genotype csignificant in ANOVA across haplotype and genotype at p<0.05. Table 1 Genetic and demographic information l/l age gender s/l age gender s/s age gender Healthy Control N=5 36±19.1 2F, 3M N=13 34±10.8 9F, 4M N=6 34±9.4 4F, 2M Remitted MDD N=10 38±13.5 8F, 2M N=9 41±11.5 5F, 4M N=6 40±15.8 3F, 3M Table 2 Number and percent of observations classified by diagnosis, for the initial analysis and the leave-one-out cross-validation. Discriminant Analysis Into Diagnosis NC R-MDD From Diagnosis NC 23 3 88.5% 11.5% R-MDD 1 26 3.7% 96.3% Leave-one-out cross-validation Into Diagnosis NC R-MDD From Diagnosis NC 20 6 76.9% 23.1% R-MDD 5 22 18.5% 81.5% Table 3 Number and percent of observations classified by status as an s-allele carrier, for the initial analysis and the leave-one-out cross-validation. Into Gene Category LL S-Carrier From Gene Category LL 12 3 80.0% 20.0% S-Carrier 1 33 2.9% 97.1 % Leave-one-out cross-validation Into Genotype Class LL S-Carrier From Gene Category LL 10 5 66.7% 33.3% S-Carrier 6 28 17.7% 82.4% Table 4 Number and percent of observations classified as one of the three phenotypes from each phenotypic category, for the initial analysis and the leave-one-out cross-validation. Discriminant Into Phenotype Analysis NC RD-NR RD-R From Phenotype NC 22 0 4 84.6% 0.0% 15.4% RD-NR 0 9 1 0.0% 90.0% 10.0% RD-R 2 1 14 11.8% 5.9% 82.4% Leave-one-out Into Phenotype Cross-Validation NC RD-NR RD-R From Phenotype NC 15 3 8 57.7% 11.5% 30.8% RD-NR 0 7 3 0.0% 70.0% 30.0% RD-R 3 3 11 17.7% 17.7% 64.7% Table 5 Number and percent of observations classified as one of the three genotypes from each genotypic category, for the initial analysis and the leave-one-out cross-validation. Discriminant Into Genotype Analysis LL SL SS From Genotype LL 13 1 1 86.7% 6.7% 6.7% SL 0 20 2 0.0% 90.9% 9.1% SS 2 1 9 16.7% 8.3% 75.0% Leave-one-out Into Genotype Cross-Validation LL SL SS From Genotype LL 7 5 3 46.7% 33.3% 20.0% SL 1 16 5 4.6% 72.7% 22.7% SS 3 3 8 25.0% 25.0% 50.0% Table 6 Number and percent of observations classified as one four genotype-phenotype groups from each genotype-phenotyope category, for the initial analysis and leave-one-out cross-validation Discriminant Classified Group Analysis NC-LL NC-S Carr RD-LL RD-S Carr Actual Group NC-LL 5 0 0 0 100.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% NC-S Carrier 0 14 2 3 0.0% 73.7% 10.5% 15.8% RD-LL 1 1 7 1 10.0% 10.0% 70.0% 10.0% RD-S Carrier 0 1 2 12 0.0% 6.7% 13.3% 80.0% Leave-one-out Classified Group Cross-validation NC-LL NC-S Carr RD-LL RD-S Carr Actual Group NC-LL 2 2 1 0 40.0% 40.0% 20.0% 0.0% NC-S Carrier 3 9 2 5 15.8% 47.4% 10.5% 26.3% RD-LL 2 3 4 1 20.0% 30.0% 40.0% 10.0% RD-S Carrier 0 3 4 8 0.0% 20.0% 26.7% 53.3% Table 7 Means (standard deviations) for normalized metabolism under ATD minus normalized metabolism under the sham condition for primary diagnostic and phenotypic groups. Asterisks in individual cells indicate that value is significant by one-sample t-test, astericks in ANOVA column indicate significance on between-groups ANOVA. Region Primary Diagnosis ANOVA Phenotype ANOVA TD-SHAM HC RMDD RMDD non-relapser RMDD relapser InfraLimbic Cortex 0.021 (0.072) ?0.018 (0.065) ** ?0.025 (0.067) ?0.014 (0.065) Left Subgenual PFC 0.0036 (0.047) 0.015 (0.038) ** 0.022 (0.045) 0.011 (0.034) Left Pregenual PFC 0.0032 (0.040) 0.015 (0.040) * 0.011 (0.043) 0.017 (0.040) * Right Pregenual PFC 0.014 (0.063) 0.0061 (0.053) 0.021 (0.038) ?0.0028 (0.060) Right Dorsolateral PFC ?0.023 (0.053) 0.016 (0.060) 0.016 (0.077) 0.016 (0.051) Left Anteromedial PFC 0.0064 (0.027) 0.0019 (0.028) 0.00094 (0.031) 0.0024 (0.026) Left Ventrolateral PFC 0.0083 (0.030) 0.0016 ( 0.032) 0.0057 (0.029) ?0.00079 (0.034) Right Ventrolateral PFC 0.014 (0.037) ?0.00076 (0.030) 0.0019 (0.023) ?0.0023 (0.035) Left Orbital Cortex 0.0019 (0.031) 0.018 (0.031) ** * 0.021 (0.018) *** 0.016 (0.037) * Right Orbital Cortex 0.0016 (0.030) 0.011 (0.030) * 0.023 (0.027) ** 0.0035 (0.030) Left Anterior Insula 0.010 ( 0.052) 0.014 (0.063) 0.016 (0.057) 0.014 (0.068) Right Anterior Insula 0.016 (0.069) 0.031 (0.080) * 0.058 (0.075) ** 0.015 (0.080) Left Hippocampus 0.016 (0.077) ?0.017 (0.077) ?0.0041 (0.063) ?0.025 (0.085) Left Amygdala ?0.012 (0.075) ?0.0012 (0.12) 0.044 (0.076) * ?0.028 (0.13) Right Amygdala 0.012 (0.078) ?0.0081 (0.072) ?0.0058 (0.060) ?0.0094 (0.080) Left Medial Thalamus 0.0063 (0.11) 0.026 (0.098) ** ?0.0000016 (0.11) 0.042 (0.087) * Right Medial Thalamus ?0.019 (0.12) 0.042 (0.086) * 0.043 (0.11) 0.041 (0.071) ** Left Ventral Striatum 0.0030 (0.072) 0.039 (0.087) ** 0.038 (0.082) 0.039 (0.092) * Right Ventral Striatum 0.018 (0.084) 0.027 (0.074) * 0.0042 (0.061) 0.040 (0.080) * Right Frontal Polar Cortex 0.0038 (0.030) ?0.0074 (0.025) ?0.0013 (0.024) ?0.011 (0.025) * Left Posterior Cingulate ?0.0035 (0.052) 0.0083 (0.059) 0.022 (0.040) 0.00018 (0.067) Right Posterior Cingulate 0.0014 (0.071) 0.025 (0.061) ** 0.044 (0.068) * 0.014 (0.056) Left Superior Temporal Gy 0.0082 (0.030) ?0.0013 (0.036) ?0.0013 (0.033) ?0.0013 (0.038) * trend for significance at p<0.1 ** significant at p<0.05 *** significant at p<0.005 **** significant at p<0.0005 Table 8 Means (standard deviations) for normalized metabolism under ATD minus normalized metabolism under the sham condition for haplotype and genotype groups. Asterisks in individual cells indicate that value is significant by one-sample t-test, asterisks in ANOVA column indicate significance on between-groups ANOVA. Region SPositive ANOVA Genotype ANOVA TD-SHAM l/l s-carrier s/l s/s InfraLimbic Cortex 0.027 (0.075) ?0.0044 (0.067) ?0.0019 (0.071) ?0.0090 (0.063) Right Pregenual PFC ?0.011 (0.061) 0.019 (0.057) * 0.031 (0.057) ** ?0.0034 (0.053) * Left Anteromedial PFC 0.0016 (0.030 0.0071 (0.026) 0.0089 (0.026) 0.0040 (0.027) Left Ventrolateral PFC 0.00007 (0.029) 0.0075 (0.032) 0.013 (0.032) * ?0.0032 (0.032) Left Orbital Cortex 0.021 (0.033) ** 0.0072 (0.029) 0.0068 (0.032) 0.0080 (0.025) Right Orbital Cortex 0.010 (0.034) 0.0045 (0.028) 0.0059 (0.026) 0.0020 (0.033) Right Anterior Insula 0.0098 (0.072) 0.024 (0.071) * 0.013 (0.061) 0.045 (0.086) * Left Hippocampus ?0.0022 (0.077) 0.0042 (0.082) 0.0056 (0.084) 0.0017 (0.084) Right Amygdala 0.014 (0.076) ?0.00053 (0.074) 0.0058 (0.069) ?0.012 (0.085) Left Medial Thalamus 0.066 (0.079) ** 0.0011 (0.11) ** ?0.020 (0.10) ?0.035 (0.12) ** Left Ventral Striatum 0.026 (0.082) 0.015 (0.084) 0.020 (0.090) 0.0058 (0.073) Right Ventral Striatum 0.058 (0.067) *** 0.0048 (0.071) ** 0.013 (0.071) ?0.010 (0.070) ** Left Habenula 0.043 (0.13) ?0.012 (0.15) ?0.028 (0.13) 0.017 (0.18) Left Frontal Polar Cortex 0.0055 (0.033) 0.0080 (0.035) 0.016 (0.030 * ?0.0061 (0.040) Right Frontal Polar Cortex 0.010 (0.031) ?0.0068 (0.026) ** ?0.010 (0.026) * ?0.00085 (0.024) * Left Posterior Cingulate 0.0055 (0.049) ?0.0015 (0.050) ?0.011 (0.053 0.0165 (0.042) Right Posterior Cingulate 0.037 (0.059) ** ?0.0010 (0.067) * ?0.0063 (0.079) 0.0087 (0.034) Left Superior Temporal Gy ?0.0093 (0.038) 0.010 (0.031) * * 0.0078 (0.024) 0.014 (0.043) Right Superior Temporal Gy ?0.0058 (0.024) 0.0018 (0.039) 0.0018 (0.040) 0.0019 (0.040) * trend for significance at p<0.1 ** significant at p<0.05 *** significant at p<0.005 Table 9 Means (standard deviations) for normalized metabolism under ATD minus normalized metabolism under the sham condition for the four groups divided by haplotype and diagnosis. Asterisks in individual cells indicates that value is significant by one-sample t-test, astericks in ANOVA column indicate significance on between-groups ANOVA. Region Four Group ANOVA TD-SHAM HC l/l HC s-carrier RMDD l/l RMDDD s-carrier InfraLimbic Cortex 0.070 (0.086) 0.013 (0.068) 0.0051 (0.062) ?0.026 (0.062) * Left Subgenual PFC ?0.0070 (0.046) 0.0069 (0.050) 0.015 (0.037) 0.015 (0.041) Left Pregenual PFC ?0.035 (0.056) 0.018 (0.028) ** 0.016 (0.039) 0.017 (0.041) ** Right Ventrolateral PFC 0.014 (0.026) 0.017 (0.038) * ?0.0038 (0.043) 0.00038 (0.021) Right Orbital Cortex 0.0071 (0.029) ?0.0019 (0.032) 0.012 (0.038) 0.013 (0.022) ** Left Hippocampus ?0.015 (0.045) 0.028 (0.085) 0.0039 (0.091) ?0.026 (0.071) Left Amygdala ?0.033 (0.067) ?0.0064 (0.079) 0.022 (0.13) 0.0032 (0.098) Right Amygdala 0.019 (0.073) 0.013 (0.084) 0.012 (0.082) ?0.017 (0.057) Right Medial Thalamus 0.021 (0.15) ?0.030 (0.12) 0.064 (0.075) ** 0.024 ( 0.085) Left Habenula ?0.038 (0.080) 0.030 (0.11) 0.084 (0.14) * ?0.066 (0.17) * Right Frontal Polar Cortex 0.032 (0.028) * ?0.0036 (0.027) ?0.00039 (0.028) ?0.011 (0.024) * ** Left Superior Temporal Gy 0.013 (0.022) 0.0076 (0.034) ?0.021 (0.040) 0.013 (0.029) * * * trend for significance at p<0.1 ** significant at p<0.05 *** significant at p<0.005  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Difference in HDRS scores between ATD and Sham sessions. Healthy control subjects showed no significant differences between groups; RMDD subjects: l/l > s/s, p<0.05 by Tukey’s multiple comparison test. Figure 2 Plot of Canonicial discriminant variables derived to discriminate subjects based on phenotype. Figure 3 Plot of Canonical discriminant variables derived to discriminate subjects based on genotype. Figure 4 Plot of mean and standard error of the normalized metabolism under ATD minus the normalized metabolism under the sham condition, for the four regions found to discriminate across diagnosis, phenotype, haplotype, and genotype. Brackets indicate between-group significance or trend for significance. * trend for significance at p<0.1 in one-sample t-test ** significance at p<0.05 in one-sample t-test atrend for significance at p<0.1 in ANOVA across four groups (divided by diagnosis and haplotype) btrend for significance at p<0.1 in ANOVA across genotype csignificant in ANOVA across haplotype and genotype at p<0.05. Table 1 Genetic and demographic information l/l age gender s/l age gender s/s age gender Healthy Control N=5 36±19.1 2F, 3M N=13 34±10.8 9F, 4M N=6 34±9.4 4F, 2M Remitted MDD N=10 38±13.5 8F, 2M N=9 41±11.5 5F, 4M N=6 40±15.8 3F, 3M Table 2 Number and percent of observations classified by diagnosis, for the initial analysis and the leave-one-out cross-validation. Discriminant Analysis Into Diagnosis NC R-MDD From Diagnosis NC 23 3 88.5% 11.5% R-MDD 1 26 3.7% 96.3% Leave-one-out cross-validation Into Diagnosis NC R-MDD From Diagnosis NC 20 6 76.9% 23.1% R-MDD 5 22 18.5% 81.5% Table 3 Number and percent of observations classified by status as an s-allele carrier, for the initial analysis and the leave-one-out cross-validation. Into Gene Category LL S-Carrier From Gene Category LL 12 3 80.0% 20.0% S-Carrier 1 33 2.9% 97.1 % Leave-one-out cross-validation Into Genotype Class LL S-Carrier From Gene Category LL 10 5 66.7% 33.3% S-Carrier 6 28 17.7% 82.4% Table 4 Number and percent of observations classified as one of the three phenotypes from each phenotypic category, for the initial analysis and the leave-one-out cross-validation. Discriminant Into Phenotype Analysis NC RD-NR RD-R From Phenotype NC 22 0 4 84.6% 0.0% 15.4% RD-NR 0 9 1 0.0% 90.0% 10.0% RD-R 2 1 14 11.8% 5.9% 82.4% Leave-one-out Into Phenotype Cross-Validation NC RD-NR RD-R From Phenotype NC 15 3 8 57.7% 11.5% 30.8% RD-NR 0 7 3 0.0% 70.0% 30.0% RD-R 3 3 11 17.7% 17.7% 64.7% Table 5 Number and percent of observations classified as one of the three genotypes from each genotypic category, for the initial analysis and the leave-one-out cross-validation. Discriminant Into Genotype Analysis LL SL SS From Genotype LL 13 1 1 86.7% 6.7% 6.7% SL 0 20 2 0.0% 90.9% 9.1% SS 2 1 9 16.7% 8.3% 75.0% Leave-one-out Into Genotype Cross-Validation LL SL SS From Genotype LL 7 5 3 46.7% 33.3% 20.0% SL 1 16 5 4.6% 72.7% 22.7% SS 3 3 8 25.0% 25.0% 50.0% Table 6 Number and percent of observations classified as one four genotype-phenotype groups from each genotype-phenotyope category, for the initial analysis and leave-one-out cross-validation Discriminant Classified Group Analysis NC-LL NC-S Carr RD-LL RD-S Carr Actual Group NC-LL 5 0 0 0 100.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% NC-S Carrier 0 14 2 3 0.0% 73.7% 10.5% 15.8% RD-LL 1 1 7 1 10.0% 10.0% 70.0% 10.0% RD-S Carrier 0 1 2 12 0.0% 6.7% 13.3% 80.0% Leave-one-out Classified Group Cross-validation NC-LL NC-S Carr RD-LL RD-S Carr Actual Group NC-LL 2 2 1 0 40.0% 40.0% 20.0% 0.0% NC-S Carrier 3 9 2 5 15.8% 47.4% 10.5% 26.3% RD-LL 2 3 4 1 20.0% 30.0% 40.0% 10.0% RD-S Carrier 0 3 4 8 0.0% 20.0% 26.7% 53.3% Table 7 Means (standard deviations) for normalized metabolism under ATD minus normalized metabolism under the sham condition for primary diagnostic and phenotypic groups. Asterisks in individual cells indicate that value is significant by one-sample t-test, astericks in ANOVA column indicate significance on between-groups ANOVA. Region Primary Diagnosis ANOVA Phenotype ANOVA TD-SHAM HC RMDD RMDD non-relapser RMDD relapser InfraLimbic Cortex 0.021 (0.072) ?0.018 (0.065) ** ?0.025 (0.067) ?0.014 (0.065) Left Subgenual PFC 0.0036 (0.047) 0.015 (0.038) ** 0.022 (0.045) 0.011 (0.034) Left Pregenual PFC 0.0032 (0.040) 0.015 (0.040) * 0.011 (0.043) 0.017 (0.040) * Right Pregenual PFC 0.014 (0.063) 0.0061 (0.053) 0.021 (0.038) ?0.0028 (0.060) Right Dorsolateral PFC ?0.023 (0.053) 0.016 (0.060) 0.016 (0.077) 0.016 (0.051) Left Anteromedial PFC 0.0064 (0.027) 0.0019 (0.028) 0.00094 (0.031) 0.0024 (0.026) Left Ventrolateral PFC 0.0083 (0.030) 0.0016 ( 0.032) 0.0057 (0.029) ?0.00079 (0.034) Right Ventrolateral PFC 0.014 (0.037) ?0.00076 (0.030) 0.0019 (0.023) ?0.0023 (0.035) Left Orbital Cortex 0.0019 (0.031) 0.018 (0.031) ** * 0.021 (0.018) *** 0.016 (0.037) * Right Orbital Cortex 0.0016 (0.030) 0.011 (0.030) * 0.023 (0.027) ** 0.0035 (0.030) Left Anterior Insula 0.010 ( 0.052) 0.014 (0.063) 0.016 (0.057) 0.014 (0.068) Right Anterior Insula 0.016 (0.069) 0.031 (0.080) * 0.058 (0.075) ** 0.015 (0.080) Left Hippocampus 0.016 (0.077) ?0.017 (0.077) ?0.0041 (0.063) ?0.025 (0.085) Left Amygdala ?0.012 (0.075) ?0.0012 (0.12) 0.044 (0.076) * ?0.028 (0.13) Right Amygdala 0.012 (0.078) ?0.0081 (0.072) ?0.0058 (0.060) ?0.0094 (0.080) Left Medial Thalamus 0.0063 (0.11) 0.026 (0.098) ** ?0.0000016 (0.11) 0.042 (0.087) * Right Medial Thalamus ?0.019 (0.12) 0.042 (0.086) * 0.043 (0.11) 0.041 (0.071) ** Left Ventral Striatum 0.0030 (0.072) 0.039 (0.087) ** 0.038 (0.082) 0.039 (0.092) * Right Ventral Striatum 0.018 (0.084) 0.027 (0.074) * 0.0042 (0.061) 0.040 (0.080) * Right Frontal Polar Cortex 0.0038 (0.030) ?0.0074 (0.025) ?0.0013 (0.024) ?0.011 (0.025) * Left Posterior Cingulate ?0.0035 (0.052) 0.0083 (0.059) 0.022 (0.040) 0.00018 (0.067) Right Posterior Cingulate 0.0014 (0.071) 0.025 (0.061) ** 0.044 (0.068) * 0.014 (0.056) Left Superior Temporal Gy 0.0082 (0.030) ?0.0013 (0.036) ?0.0013 (0.033) ?0.0013 (0.038) * trend for significance at p<0.1 ** significant at p<0.05 *** significant at p<0.005 **** significant at p<0.0005 Table 8 Means (standard deviations) for normalized metabolism under ATD minus normalized metabolism under the sham condition for haplotype and genotype groups. Asterisks in individual cells indicate that value is significant by one-sample t-test, asterisks in ANOVA column indicate significance on between-groups ANOVA. Region SPositive ANOVA Genotype ANOVA TD-SHAM l/l s-carrier s/l s/s InfraLimbic Cortex 0.027 (0.075) ?0.0044 (0.067) ?0.0019 (0.071) ?0.0090 (0.063) Right Pregenual PFC ?0.011 (0.061) 0.019 (0.057) * 0.031 (0.057) ** ?0.0034 (0.053) * Left Anteromedial PFC 0.0016 (0.030 0.0071 (0.026) 0.0089 (0.026) 0.0040 (0.027) Left Ventrolateral PFC 0.00007 (0.029) 0.0075 (0.032) 0.013 (0.032) * ?0.0032 (0.032) Left Orbital Cortex 0.021 (0.033) ** 0.0072 (0.029) 0.0068 (0.032) 0.0080 (0.025) Right Orbital Cortex 0.010 (0.034) 0.0045 (0.028) 0.0059 (0.026) 0.0020 (0.033) Right Anterior Insula 0.0098 (0.072) 0.024 (0.071) * 0.013 (0.061) 0.045 (0.086) * Left Hippocampus ?0.0022 (0.077) 0.0042 (0.082) 0.0056 (0.084) 0.0017 (0.084) Right Amygdala 0.014 (0.076) ?0.00053 (0.074) 0.0058 (0.069) ?0.012 (0.085) Left Medial Thalamus 0.066 (0.079) ** 0.0011 (0.11) ** ?0.020 (0.10) ?0.035 (0.12) ** Left Ventral Striatum 0.026 (0.082) 0.015 (0.084) 0.020 (0.090) 0.0058 (0.073) Right Ventral Striatum 0.058 (0.067) *** 0.0048 (0.071) ** 0.013 (0.071) ?0.010 (0.070) ** Left Habenula 0.043 (0.13) ?0.012 (0.15) ?0.028 (0.13) 0.017 (0.18) Left Frontal Polar Cortex 0.0055 (0.033) 0.0080 (0.035) 0.016 (0.030 * ?0.0061 (0.040) Right Frontal Polar Cortex 0.010 (0.031) ?0.0068 (0.026) ** ?0.010 (0.026) * ?0.00085 (0.024) * Left Posterior Cingulate 0.0055 (0.049) ?0.0015 (0.050) ?0.011 (0.053 0.0165 (0.042) Right Posterior Cingulate 0.037 (0.059) ** ?0.0010 (0.067) * ?0.0063 (0.079) 0.0087 (0.034) Left Superior Temporal Gy ?0.0093 (0.038) 0.010 (0.031) * * 0.0078 (0.024) 0.014 (0.043) Right Superior Temporal Gy ?0.0058 (0.024) 0.0018 (0.039) 0.0018 (0.040) 0.0019 (0.040) * trend for significance at p<0.1 ** significant at p<0.05 *** significant at p<0.005 Table 9 Means (standard deviations) for normalized metabolism under ATD minus normalized metabolism under the sham condition for the four groups divided by haplotype and diagnosis. Asterisks in individual cells indicates that value is significant by one-sample t-test, astericks in ANOVA column indicate significance on between-groups ANOVA. Region Four Group ANOVA TD-SHAM HC l/l HC s-carrier RMDD l/l RMDDD s-carrier InfraLimbic Cortex 0.070 (0.086) 0.013 (0.068) 0.0051 (0.062) ?0.026 (0.062) * Left Subgenual PFC ?0.0070 (0.046) 0.0069 (0.050) 0.015 (0.037) 0.015 (0.041) Left Pregenual PFC ?0.035 (0.056) 0.018 (0.028) ** 0.016 (0.039) 0.017 (0.041) ** Right Ventrolateral PFC 0.014 (0.026) 0.017 (0.038) * ?0.0038 (0.043) 0.00038 (0.021) Right Orbital Cortex 0.0071 (0.029) ?0.0019 (0.032) 0.012 (0.038) 0.013 (0.022) ** Left Hippocampus ?0.015 (0.045) 0.028 (0.085) 0.0039 (0.091) ?0.026 (0.071) Left Amygdala ?0.033 (0.067) ?0.0064 (0.079) 0.022 (0.13) 0.0032 (0.098) Right Amygdala 0.019 (0.073) 0.013 (0.084) 0.012 (0.082) ?0.017 (0.057) Right Medial Thalamus 0.021 (0.15) ?0.030 (0.12) 0.064 (0.075) ** 0.024 ( 0.085) Left Habenula ?0.038 (0.080) 0.030 (0.11) 0.084 (0.14) * ?0.066 (0.17) * Right Frontal Polar Cortex 0.032 (0.028) * ?0.0036 (0.027) ?0.00039 (0.028) ?0.011 (0.024) * ** Left Superior Temporal Gy 0.013 (0.022) 0.0076 (0.034) ?0.021 (0.040) 0.013 (0.029) * * * trend for significance at p<0.1 ** significant at p<0.05 *** significant at p<0.005 