STATUS OF MINIMAL RESIDUAL DISEASE TESTING IN CHILDHOOD HEMATOLOGIC MALIGNANCIES In children with acute leukemia, measurements of minimal residual disease (MRD) provide unique information on treatment response and have become a crucial component of contemporary treatment protocols. In acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), the most useful MRD assays are based on polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of antigen-receptor genes, and on flow cytometric detection of abnormal immunophenotypes. The latter is the only MRD assay available for most patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML). PCR amplification of chromosomal breakpoints and fusion transcripts can also be used to track MRD in a minority of patients with ALL or AML. Because of the strong correlation between MRD levels and risk of relapse, several ongoing regimens include treatment intensification for children with higher MRD. Treatment deintensification for patients with early MRD clearance is also being tested. In addition to their direct clinical application, MRD measurements can be used to better understand the molecular and cellular mechanisms of drug resistance in vivo. The identification of new markers of leukemia and the use of increasingly sophisticated technologies for detection of rare cells should further facilitate routine monitoring of MRD and elucidate the features of drug-resistant leukemic cells.  Conclusions Currently available MRD assays ensure the objective and sensitive assessment of treatment response in most patients with acute leukemia. For example, in our recently closed Total XV study, 481 of 482 (99.8%) children with ALL could be monitored by flow cytometry and/or PCR amplification of IG and TCR genes; the only patient whose cells lacked suitable markers for these techniques had MLL-AF4 and response to therapy could be monitored by PCR amplification of the corresponding fusion transcript. It is now important to further simplify the assays so they can be implemented widely. To this end, new markers emerging from genome-wide expression studies might help reducing the number of antibodies required for flow cytometric analysis of MRD ( Chen et al , 2001 ). MRD studies can be used to quickly assess the effectiveness of novel antileukemic agents, and support innovative designs for Phase II studies. In this regard, an exciting opportunity is the possibility of determining the status of cell signaling pathways in the leukemic cell population ( Irish et al , 2006 ). Taking advantage of new flow cytometers capable of detecting 9 or more parameters, it should be possible to assess whether the signaling pathways targeted by tyrosine kinase inhibitors are affected in the MRD cell population.  Figure and Table Figure 1 MRD monitoring strategy used in the current Total XVI study at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital. Table 1 Methods for monitoring MRD in childhood leukemia Method ALL AML % of cases with marker Sensitivity % of cases with marker Sensitivity Flow cytometric detection of abnormal phenotypes 98% 10?4 93% 10?3?10?4 PCR amplification of IG or TCR genes 90% (10?5) 10?4?10?5 <10% RT-PCR amplification fusion transcripts <50% 10?3?10?5 <20% 10?3?10?5 