A Disorder of Executive Function and Its Role in Language Processing R. Martin and colleagues have proposed separate stores for the maintenance of phonological and semantic information in short-term memory. Evidence from patients with aphasia has shown that damage to these separable buffers has specific consequences for language comprehension and production, suggesting an interdependence between language and memory systems. This article discusses recent research on aphasic patients with limited-capacity short-term memories (STMs) and reviews evidence suggesting that deficits in retaining semantic information in STM may be caused by a disorder in the executive control process of inhibition, specific to verbal representations. In contrast, a phonological STM deficit may be due to overly rapid decay. In semantic STM deficits, it is hypothesized that the inhibitory deficit produces difficulty inhibiting irrelevant verbal representations, which may lead to excessive interference. In turn, the excessive interference associated with semantic STM deficits has implications for single-word and sentence processing, and it may be the source of the reduced STM capacity shown by these patients.  Conclusions As suggested by the many studies discussed here, recent research with aphasic STM patients suggests an inhibition deficit may underlie the semantic STM deficit seen in some aphasic patients with left frontal damage. More specifically, it has been suggested that this inhibition deficit is specific to verbal materials because it was not found to generalize to nonverbal materials. 11 This suggests a separation between verbal and nonverbal inhibition processes: lesions to left inferior frontal areas can selectively damage verbal inhibition. Patients with deficits in semantic STM typically produce nonfluent speech and have impaired comprehension. Thus deficits in verbal inhibition, and its function in STM, have implications for both language production and comprehension. On the production side, the failure to inhibit irrelevant representations may serve as the source of nonfluent production. Competition among uninhibited competitors may cause slower retrieval or selection, leading to slow, labored production. Similarly, the inability to resolve ambiguity may impair comprehension at lexical and/or syntactic levels of representation. If a sentence contains ambiguity, various word or sentence representations may compete for activation; this competition occurs because inappropriate meanings are not easily inhibited. The suggestion that the control process of inhibition is involved in working memory fits nicely with the model of working memory presented by Baddeley. 4 , 18 It is possible that inhibition is (at least) one component of the central executive, and this inhibition component functions to allow fluent production and intact comprehension in verbal working memory. Finally, the relationship between inhibition and STM needs to be assessed further and with a wider range of patients. Is semantic STM necessarily associated with an inhibition deficit? Patients with phonological STM deficits appear to show normal inhibition/interference effects; what is the source of their STM deficit? Future research should examine the role of other proposed executive control processes 17 in working memory. Do the shifting and/or updating executive functions have specific functional roles in working memory? Does a deficit in one of these processes create specific patterns of impairments, as seen with inhibition? One way to approach these questions is with neuroimaging techniques, investigating relationships between inhibition tasks (such as the recent negatives task) and language tasks (such as picture-word interference). Are the same areas activated when interference resolution is necessary? These are clearly important questions that will reveal more about the mechanisms of the central executive component of working memory, in addition to the executive processes involved in accessing and manipulating information in working memory. 