Molecular Pathology of Head and Neck Cancer: Implications for Diagnosis, Prognosis, and Treatment The prototypic head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) arises from the mucosal lining of the upper aerodigestive tract, demonstrates squamous differentiation microscopically, involves older men with a long history of cigarette smoking and alcohol consumption, and is treated by multimodality therapy. HNSCC has long been regarded as a uniform disease process requiring a methodical and unwavering therapeutic approach. Divergence in epidemiologic trends among HNSCCs arising from different anatomic sites has introduced a view that, morphologic repetition aside, head and neck cancers form a heterogeneous group. This view has been supported at the molecular genetic level. A more complete understanding of the molecular genetics of head and neck cancer is providing new insights into long-held but poorly comprehended concepts such as field cancerization and is introducing various biomarkers with potential application for diagnosing, staging, monitoring, and prognosticating HNSCC.  CONCLUSIONS Reflecting to some degree the limitations of conventional microscopy, HNSCCs have long been regarded as a tedious group with little variation from tumor to tumor. This notion, in turn, has fostered a one-size-fits-all attitude toward the management of patients with HNSCC. Today, molecular genetic analysis allows us to probe beneath the phenotypic surface to the underlying etiologic abnormalities. These new approaches are helping to elucidate long-recognized but poorly understood biologic concepts such as field cancerization and are helping to explain perplexing clinical patterns such as local tumor recurrence following seemingly complete resection. Analysis of the molecular genetic changes of HNSCCs discloses not just individual tumor differences, but also consistent large-scale differences that permit the recognition of important subtypes of HNSCCs (e.g., HPV-positive versus HPV-negative HNSCCs). An appreciation of these differences is critical to novel treatment strategies that aim to enhance immunologic responses to tumor-specific antigens and to target individual components of the molecular genetic apparatus supporting tumor development and growth. 