Down-regulation of NR4A1 in follicular thyroid carcinomas is restored following lithium treatment SUMMARY Introduction The identification of follicular thyroid adenoma-associated transcripts will lead to a better understanding of the events involved in pathogenesis and progression of follicular tumors. Using Serial Analysis of Gene Expression, we identified five genes that are absent in a malignant follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC) library, but expressed in follicular adenoma (FTA) and normal thyroid libraries. Methods NR4A1 , one of the five genes, was validated in a set of 27 normal thyroid tissues, 10 FTAs and 14 FTCs and three thyroid carcinoma cell lines by real time PCR. NR4A1 can be transiently increased by a variety of stimuli, including lithium, which is used as adjuvant therapy of thyroid carcinoma with 131I. We tested if lithium could restore NR4A1 expression. The expression of other genes potentially involved in the same signaling pathway was tested. To this end, lithium was used at different concentration (10mM or 20mM) and time (2h and 24 h) and the level of expression was tested by quantitative PCR. We next tested if Lithium could affect cell growth and apoptosis. Results We observed that NR4A1 expression was under-expressed in most of the FTCs investigated, compared to expression in normal thyroid tissues and FTAs. We also found a positive correlation between NR4A1 and FOSB gene expression. Lithium induced NR4A1 and FOSB expression, reduced CCDN1 expression, inhibited cell growth and triggered apoptosis in a FTC cell line. Conclusions NR4A1 is under-expressed in most of FTCs. The loss of expression of both NR4A1 and the Wnt pathway gene FOSB was correlated with malignancy. This is consistent with the hypothesis that its loss of expression is part of the transformation process of FTCs, either as a direct or indirect consequence of Wnt pathway alterations. Lithium restores NR4A1 expression, induces apoptosis and reduces cell growth. These findings may explain a possible molecular mechanism of lithium’s therapeutic action.  INTRODUCTION The number of thyroid cancer cases is increasing and for women this malignancy has one of the highest rates of increased incidence in the United States. Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) and follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC) are the most frequent thyroid cancer subtypes 1 . During the last two decades we have seen progress in our understanding of the molecular biology of these cancers. The importance of the MAPK pathway has been identified in PTC, resulting from RAS/BRAF mutations or rearrangements of the RET oncogene 2 – 4 . Less is known about the molecular events underlying FTC. The most frequent genetic alterations in FTC comprise point mutations of the RAS genes and PAX8-PPAR ? rearrangements. Although they were initially proposed as potentially associated with pathogenesis of FTC, these genetic events also occur with significant prevalence in FTA 5 – 9 . Although it has been suggested that those FTAs with PAX8-PPAR ? are more likely to transform into a malignant tumor 10 , 11 , to date there is no compelling in vitro or in vivo evidence. Moreover, a high proportion of FTCs are negative for the rearrangement 7 and, therefore, unrevealed genes or pathways may be involved in the pathogenesis of this type of thyroid tumor. The identification of novel FTA-associated transcripts, could lead to a better understanding of the events involved in pathogenesis and progression of FTC. We compared the gene expression profiles of three SAGE libraries generated from thyroid tumors and a normal thyroid tissue 12 , 13 . The expression analysis was performed originally to locate clinical markers and the data are posted at http://cgap.nci.nih.gov/SAGE . Using SAGE Digital Gene Expression Displayer (DGED), a tool to compare SAGE libraries, we identified five genes that are expressed in normal thyroid and FTA but not expressed in the malignant FTC. One of these genes, NR4A1, encodes an orphan member of the steroid/thyroid/retinoid super-family, whose members act mainly as transcription factors that induce or repress gene expression 14 . NR4A1 ( Nuclear receptor subfamily 4, group A, member 1) was of particular interest because it was under-expressed in several tumors compared with the corresponding normal tissues 15 , 16 and because NR4A1 appears to up-regulate pro-apoptosis genes 17 , 18 . Consequently, one can hypothesized that lost or reduced NR4A1 expression in tumors may be associated with malignant transformation of follicular thyroid cells. Although the mechanisms involved in the transcriptional regulation of NR4A1 is not completely understood, it was described as a target of Wnt-1 (Wingless-type MMTV integration site family, member 1 16 . The best understood Wnt pathway is the canonical pathway, which controls cell proliferation through inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK3?) and increase in transcriptional activation of ?-catenin targets. Although the authors described NR4A1 as a Wnt-1 responsive gene with decreased expression in tumors, they suggested that NR4A1 may be up-regulated by a noncanonical Wnt signaling pathway 16 . NR4A1 was also of interest because its expression can be transiently increased by a variety of stimulus, including lithium a drug that has been used to therapy of thyroid cancer 16 , 19 – 21 . It was shown that lithium acts as a specific inhibitor of the glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK3?). Although Lithium has been used as adjuvant to the 131I therapy of thyroid cancer, the cellular target of lithium is still unknown. We investigated the expression of NRA41 in a set of normal thyroid tissues, FTAs and FTCs. Subsequently, we investigated the level of expression of other genes downstream the Wnt signaling pathway and correlate their expression with NR4A1 expression. We next sought to test whether lithium could restore the NR4A1 expression in thyroid cell lines and explain a possible molecular mechanism for the effect of lithium as an adjuvant therapy for thyroid cancer.  Methods NR4A1 , one of the five genes, was validated in a set of 27 normal thyroid tissues, 10 FTAs and 14 FTCs and three thyroid carcinoma cell lines by real time PCR. NR4A1 can be transiently increased by a variety of stimuli, including lithium, which is used as adjuvant therapy of thyroid carcinoma with 131I. We tested if lithium could restore NR4A1 expression. The expression of other genes potentially involved in the same signaling pathway was tested. To this end, lithium was used at different concentration (10mM or 20mM) and time (2h and 24 h) and the level of expression was tested by quantitative PCR. We next tested if Lithium could affect cell growth and apoptosis.  Results We observed that NR4A1 expression was under-expressed in most of the FTCs investigated, compared to expression in normal thyroid tissues and FTAs. We also found a positive correlation between NR4A1 and FOSB gene expression. Lithium induced NR4A1 and FOSB expression, reduced CCDN1 expression, inhibited cell growth and triggered apoptosis in a FTC cell line.  Conclusions NR4A1 is under-expressed in most of FTCs. The loss of expression of both NR4A1 and the Wnt pathway gene FOSB was correlated with malignancy. This is consistent with the hypothesis that its loss of expression is part of the transformation process of FTCs, either as a direct or indirect consequence of Wnt pathway alterations. Lithium restores NR4A1 expression, induces apoptosis and reduces cell growth. These findings may explain a possible molecular mechanism of lithium’s therapeutic action.  MATERIAL AND METHODS SAGE digital gene expression displayer DGED was used to identify genes differentially expressed between benign (normal tissue and FTA) and malignant (FTC) SAGE libraries. The full set of tag counts for all thyroid libraries is available for downloading or analysis at the Cancer Genome Anatomy Project SAGE Genie Web site ( http://cgap.nci.nih.gov/SAGE ) 12 . To identify genes differentially expressed, we defined as criteria P <0.05 and 10-fold difference in the level of expression between the two groups ( Fig. 1 ). Tissue specimens A total of 41 thyroid tissue specimens obtained from patients undergoing thyroid surgery for thyroid disease at Hospital São Paulo, Federal University of São Paulo, Brazil, were used in this study. Samples were frozen immediately after surgery and stored at ?80°C and included 27 normal thyroids (NTs) 10 FTAs and 14 malignant (FTCs) tissues. Among 14 FTCs, 6 were classified as widely invasive follicular thyroid tumors (WIFC) (capsular and vascular invasion and extension of the tumor beyond the thyroid gland). All tissue samples were obtained with informed consent according to established Human Studies Protocols at Federal University of São Paulo. The study of patient materials was conducted according to the principles expressed in the Declaration of Helsinki. Cell lines A FTC (WRO), PTC (NPA) and an undifferentiated thyroid carcinoma (ARO) cell lines used in this study were previously characterized 22 – 25 . Cell lines were grown in DMEM (Invitrogen Corp., Carlsbad, CA) supplemented with 10% FBS (Invitrogen), with 100 units/mL of penicillin and 100 ?g/mL streptomycin in a humidified incubator containing 5% CO2 at 37°C as described 26 , 27 . RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis and quantitative PCR (qPCR) Total RNA isolation and cDNA synthesis were performed as previously reported 13 . Briefly, one microgram of total RNA was treated with a DNAse (Ambion, Austin, TX) and was reverse-transcribed to cDNA using Super-Script II Reverse Transcriptase kit with an oligo(dT)12–18 primer and 10 units of RNase inhibitor (Invitrogen). An aliquot of cDNA was used in 20?L PCR reaction containing SYBR Green PCR Master Mix and 200 nM of each primer for the target ( NR4A1, CCDN1 and FOS) or reference genes (ribosomal protein S8 and QPC). Primers were designed using Primer3 software ( http://frodo.wi.mit.edu/cgi-bin/primer3/primer3_www.cgi ). The PCR reaction was performed for 40 cycles of a 4-step program: 94°C for 15 sec, annealing temperature for 20 sec, 72°C for 20 sec, and a fluorescence-read step for 20 sec. qPCR reactions were performed in triplicate. The threshold cycle (Ct) was obtained using Applied Biosystem software and was averaged (SD ?1). Gene expression was normalized using the average of 2-reference genes. Fold changes were calculated as previously described 28 . NR4A1, FOSB and CCDN1 expression after lithium treatment 5 × 106 cells WRO cells were plated in 35mm plates. After 24 hours, cells were harvest with fresh medium containing lithium chloride (LiCl; Sigma-Aldrich Corp. St. Louis, MO, USA). Concentration (10mM and 20mM) and time (2 and 24 hours) were determined according to previous studies 16 , 29 . Doses of 10mM and 20mM lithium are commonly used to achieve GSK3? inhibition and activation of Wnt/?-catenin signaling 29 . Total RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis and qPCR for NR4A1, FOSB, CCDN1 and reference genes were performed as described above. Additionally, the Sodium-Iodide-Symporter (NIS) expression was tested following lithium treatment. MTT assay We next investigated the effect of lithium on cell proliferation. In brief, 2 × 104 WRO cells were seeded in 35-mm in quintuplicate, allowed to adhere overnight, and then treated with lithium at 10mM and 20mM concentrations. At each time point, cell growth rates were analyzed following addition of 3,4-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2.5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) (Sigma) reagent to the cultured cells as described 30 . Absorbance was measured using spectrophotometer at a wavelength of 560 nm. Apoptosis assay We investigated if lithium could induce apoptosis in WRO cells. Briefly, 2 × 104 cells WRO cells were plated in 35mm plates in quintuplicate. Cells were then treated with lithium at 10mM and 20mM concentrations. At indicated time, Annexin V–positive cells were measured using the Guava Nexin kit as described 30 . Statistical analysis qPCR values were log-transformed before application of statistical tests. Unpaired student t test was used to examine differences between two groups and ANOVA with Bonferroni correction was used to examine differences among groups (StatView software). To test the significance of the relationship between genes, Pearson correlation was used. Chi-squared (?2) with odds ratio (OR) was performed to determine the risk for tumorigenesis. A P value of < 0.05 was considered significant.  SAGE digital gene expression displayer DGED was used to identify genes differentially expressed between benign (normal tissue and FTA) and malignant (FTC) SAGE libraries. The full set of tag counts for all thyroid libraries is available for downloading or analysis at the Cancer Genome Anatomy Project SAGE Genie Web site ( http://cgap.nci.nih.gov/SAGE ) 12 . To identify genes differentially expressed, we defined as criteria P <0.05 and 10-fold difference in the level of expression between the two groups ( Fig. 1 ).  Tissue specimens A total of 41 thyroid tissue specimens obtained from patients undergoing thyroid surgery for thyroid disease at Hospital São Paulo, Federal University of São Paulo, Brazil, were used in this study. Samples were frozen immediately after surgery and stored at ?80°C and included 27 normal thyroids (NTs) 10 FTAs and 14 malignant (FTCs) tissues. Among 14 FTCs, 6 were classified as widely invasive follicular thyroid tumors (WIFC) (capsular and vascular invasion and extension of the tumor beyond the thyroid gland). All tissue samples were obtained with informed consent according to established Human Studies Protocols at Federal University of São Paulo. The study of patient materials was conducted according to the principles expressed in the Declaration of Helsinki.  Cell lines A FTC (WRO), PTC (NPA) and an undifferentiated thyroid carcinoma (ARO) cell lines used in this study were previously characterized 22 – 25 . Cell lines were grown in DMEM (Invitrogen Corp., Carlsbad, CA) supplemented with 10% FBS (Invitrogen), with 100 units/mL of penicillin and 100 ?g/mL streptomycin in a humidified incubator containing 5% CO2 at 37°C as described 26 , 27 .  RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis and quantitative PCR (qPCR) Total RNA isolation and cDNA synthesis were performed as previously reported 13 . Briefly, one microgram of total RNA was treated with a DNAse (Ambion, Austin, TX) and was reverse-transcribed to cDNA using Super-Script II Reverse Transcriptase kit with an oligo(dT)12–18 primer and 10 units of RNase inhibitor (Invitrogen). An aliquot of cDNA was used in 20?L PCR reaction containing SYBR Green PCR Master Mix and 200 nM of each primer for the target ( NR4A1, CCDN1 and FOS) or reference genes (ribosomal protein S8 and QPC). Primers were designed using Primer3 software ( http://frodo.wi.mit.edu/cgi-bin/primer3/primer3_www.cgi ). The PCR reaction was performed for 40 cycles of a 4-step program: 94°C for 15 sec, annealing temperature for 20 sec, 72°C for 20 sec, and a fluorescence-read step for 20 sec. qPCR reactions were performed in triplicate. The threshold cycle (Ct) was obtained using Applied Biosystem software and was averaged (SD ?1). Gene expression was normalized using the average of 2-reference genes. Fold changes were calculated as previously described 28 .  NR4A1, FOSB and CCDN1 expression after lithium treatment 5 × 106 cells WRO cells were plated in 35mm plates. After 24 hours, cells were harvest with fresh medium containing lithium chloride (LiCl; Sigma-Aldrich Corp. St. Louis, MO, USA). Concentration (10mM and 20mM) and time (2 and 24 hours) were determined according to previous studies 16 , 29 . Doses of 10mM and 20mM lithium are commonly used to achieve GSK3? inhibition and activation of Wnt/?-catenin signaling 29 . Total RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis and qPCR for NR4A1, FOSB, CCDN1 and reference genes were performed as described above. Additionally, the Sodium-Iodide-Symporter (NIS) expression was tested following lithium treatment.  MTT assay We next investigated the effect of lithium on cell proliferation. In brief, 2 × 104 WRO cells were seeded in 35-mm in quintuplicate, allowed to adhere overnight, and then treated with lithium at 10mM and 20mM concentrations. At each time point, cell growth rates were analyzed following addition of 3,4-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2.5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) (Sigma) reagent to the cultured cells as described 30 . Absorbance was measured using spectrophotometer at a wavelength of 560 nm.  Apoptosis assay We investigated if lithium could induce apoptosis in WRO cells. Briefly, 2 × 104 cells WRO cells were plated in 35mm plates in quintuplicate. Cells were then treated with lithium at 10mM and 20mM concentrations. At indicated time, Annexin V–positive cells were measured using the Guava Nexin kit as described 30 .  Statistical analysis qPCR values were log-transformed before application of statistical tests. Unpaired student t test was used to examine differences between two groups and ANOVA with Bonferroni correction was used to examine differences among groups (StatView software). To test the significance of the relationship between genes, Pearson correlation was used. Chi-squared (?2) with odds ratio (OR) was performed to determine the risk for tumorigenesis. A P value of < 0.05 was considered significant.  RESULTS Genes potentially associated with pathogenesis of thyroid tumors Differentially expressed genes can be found by comparison of various SAGE libraries using the SAGE Digital Gene Expression Display (SAGE DGED) 31 . We compared two pools of thyroid SAGE libraries. Pool A included both normal thyroid and FTA and pool B consisted of FTC library. Using P <0.05 as the value for statistical significance and 10-fold as the difference in the level of expression, we identified 6 transcripts differentially expressed between pool A and pool B. Our primary focus was on genes whose expression was lower in FTC library such as TPO, TFF3 , NR4A1, and IYD ( Fig. 1 ). NR4A1 was selected for further investigation. NR4A1 expression in thyroid tissues The data predicted by SAGE was validated by qPCR using a set of 27 normal thyroid tissues, 10 FTAs and 14 FTCs. We observed that NR4A1 expression was under-expressed in most FTCs investigated (65%), compared with the expression observed in normals ( P =0.01) and FTAs ( Fig. 2A ). The expression was remarkably lower in widely invasive follicular carcinoma than adenoma ( P =0.02) ( Fig. 2B ). To determine the risk of tumorigenesis, the level of NR4A1 expression was analyzed in FTCs (n=14) and normal thyroid (n=22) groups. Using 0.1 as the cutoff value, expression levels lower than 0.1 were observed in 5 of 22 normal thyroids and 8 of 14 FTCs. A low level of NR4A1 expression was associated with an increased risk of FTC (Odds ratio= 5.8; ?2:6,352; P = 0.0117; IC95%: 1.39 – 24.67). To provide a more accurate estimate of the risks of malignancy associated with NR4A1 level of expression, a larger series and absolute values are needed. FOSB and CCND1 expression in thyroid samples Since NR4A1 was suggested as downstream of Wnt-1 signaling pathway, we investigated the expression of canonical Wnt-1 target genes such as FOSB and CCDN1 . Additionally, we sought to determine whether there is a correlation among expression levels for NR4A1, FOSB and CCND1 . FOSB was under-expressed in most of thyroid carcinomas and a number of FTAs compared to normal thyroid, although not significant ( Fig. 2C ). Intriguingly, CCDN1 was over-expressed in both FTCs ( P < 0.01) and FTAs ( P = 0.01), compared to normal thyroid ( Fig. 2D ). We found a positive correlation between NR4A1 and FOSB genes in normal tissue ( P = 0.0065), adenoma ( P = 0.0429) and carcinoma tissue ( P = 0.0020) ( Fig. 2E ). There was no correlation between NR4A1 and CCND1 ( Fig. 2F ). Lithium restores NR4A1 and FOSB expression and reduced CCND1 expression in FTC cell line We next investigated expression levels of NR4A1, CCND1 and FOSB in thyroid carcinoma cell lines: NPA, ARO and WRO. NR4A1 and FOSB were under-expressed in all cell lines compared to normal thyroid. CCND1 was over-expressed in WRO, compared to normal thyroid ( Fig. 3A, B and C ). Since the WRO follicular thyroid carcinoma cell line had patterns expression of the tested genes similar to those observed in FTCs, it was selected for further analysis. WRO cells were cultured in medium containing Lithium Chloride (LiCL) at different concentrations and time and the level of expression of selected genes were determined. In multiple experiments, qPCR analysis showed a consistent increased of NR4A1 transcripts in 2h lithium-treated cells compared with untreated controls, in a dose-dependent manner. A greater effect was observed when cells were treated with 20 mM LiCl for 2 h ( Fig 4A ). After 24 h, NR4A1 expression was up-regulated only at high doses of lithium ( Fig 4B ) . The expression of FOSB , an early gene, was restored after 2 h treatment when 20 mM lithium was used and was down-regulated in cells exposed to 10 mM LiCl for 2 h ( Fig. 4C and D ). FOSB was down-regulated in and 24 h lithium-treated cells compared with untreated controls, in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 4D ). The expression of CCND1 was biphasic with a slight increase at 2 h of lithium treatment followed by a down-regulation at 24 h as compared with untreated control cells. Comparable effects of lithium on CCND1 expression were previously reported 32 ( Fig. 4E and 4F ). Since lithium has been suggested to act as an adjuvant to 131I therapy by inhibiting its release from the thyroid, we tested whether the expression of the sodium-iodide symporter (NIS) changed after lithium treatment. We did not find any difference in expression of NIS in WRO-treated cells compared with non-treated controls (data not shown). Lithium inhibits cell growth and induces apoptosis in FTC cell line Although controversy, previous studies showed that over-expression of NR4A1 inhibited cell growth and induced apoptosis. Since lithium restores NR4A1 expression in FTC cell line, we investigated the effect of lithium on cell growth and apoptosis. As showed in Fig. 5A , lithium treatment resulted in a progressive and dose-dependant cell growth inhibition as compared with the untreated control cells. The reduction in cell proliferation in 20 mM lithium treated cells was statistically significant in all treatment points compared to control cells ( P <0.001). To quantify the apoptotic rate of WRO cells following treatment, different concentration of lithium were tested at 48 and 72 hours, a time in which growth inhibition was more evident for both concentrations. Lithium significantly increased the number of apoptotic cells in a time and dose-dependent manner ( P <0.001) ( Fig. 5B ).  RESULTS Genes potentially associated with pathogenesis of thyroid tumors Differentially expressed genes can be found by comparison of various SAGE libraries using the SAGE Digital Gene Expression Display (SAGE DGED) 31 . We compared two pools of thyroid SAGE libraries. Pool A included both normal thyroid and FTA and pool B consisted of FTC library. Using P <0.05 as the value for statistical significance and 10-fold as the difference in the level of expression, we identified 6 transcripts differentially expressed between pool A and pool B. Our primary focus was on genes whose expression was lower in FTC library such as TPO, TFF3 , NR4A1, and IYD ( Fig. 1 ). NR4A1 was selected for further investigation. NR4A1 expression in thyroid tissues The data predicted by SAGE was validated by qPCR using a set of 27 normal thyroid tissues, 10 FTAs and 14 FTCs. We observed that NR4A1 expression was under-expressed in most FTCs investigated (65%), compared with the expression observed in normals ( P =0.01) and FTAs ( Fig. 2A ). The expression was remarkably lower in widely invasive follicular carcinoma than adenoma ( P =0.02) ( Fig. 2B ). To determine the risk of tumorigenesis, the level of NR4A1 expression was analyzed in FTCs (n=14) and normal thyroid (n=22) groups. Using 0.1 as the cutoff value, expression levels lower than 0.1 were observed in 5 of 22 normal thyroids and 8 of 14 FTCs. A low level of NR4A1 expression was associated with an increased risk of FTC (Odds ratio= 5.8; ?2:6,352; P = 0.0117; IC95%: 1.39 – 24.67). To provide a more accurate estimate of the risks of malignancy associated with NR4A1 level of expression, a larger series and absolute values are needed. FOSB and CCND1 expression in thyroid samples Since NR4A1 was suggested as downstream of Wnt-1 signaling pathway, we investigated the expression of canonical Wnt-1 target genes such as FOSB and CCDN1 . Additionally, we sought to determine whether there is a correlation among expression levels for NR4A1, FOSB and CCND1 . FOSB was under-expressed in most of thyroid carcinomas and a number of FTAs compared to normal thyroid, although not significant ( Fig. 2C ). Intriguingly, CCDN1 was over-expressed in both FTCs ( P < 0.01) and FTAs ( P = 0.01), compared to normal thyroid ( Fig. 2D ). We found a positive correlation between NR4A1 and FOSB genes in normal tissue ( P = 0.0065), adenoma ( P = 0.0429) and carcinoma tissue ( P = 0.0020) ( Fig. 2E ). There was no correlation between NR4A1 and CCND1 ( Fig. 2F ). Lithium restores NR4A1 and FOSB expression and reduced CCND1 expression in FTC cell line We next investigated expression levels of NR4A1, CCND1 and FOSB in thyroid carcinoma cell lines: NPA, ARO and WRO. NR4A1 and FOSB were under-expressed in all cell lines compared to normal thyroid. CCND1 was over-expressed in WRO, compared to normal thyroid ( Fig. 3A, B and C ). Since the WRO follicular thyroid carcinoma cell line had patterns expression of the tested genes similar to those observed in FTCs, it was selected for further analysis. WRO cells were cultured in medium containing Lithium Chloride (LiCL) at different concentrations and time and the level of expression of selected genes were determined. In multiple experiments, qPCR analysis showed a consistent increased of NR4A1 transcripts in 2h lithium-treated cells compared with untreated controls, in a dose-dependent manner. A greater effect was observed when cells were treated with 20 mM LiCl for 2 h ( Fig 4A ). After 24 h, NR4A1 expression was up-regulated only at high doses of lithium ( Fig 4B ) . The expression of FOSB , an early gene, was restored after 2 h treatment when 20 mM lithium was used and was down-regulated in cells exposed to 10 mM LiCl for 2 h ( Fig. 4C and D ). FOSB was down-regulated in and 24 h lithium-treated cells compared with untreated controls, in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 4D ). The expression of CCND1 was biphasic with a slight increase at 2 h of lithium treatment followed by a down-regulation at 24 h as compared with untreated control cells. Comparable effects of lithium on CCND1 expression were previously reported 32 ( Fig. 4E and 4F ). Since lithium has been suggested to act as an adjuvant to 131I therapy by inhibiting its release from the thyroid, we tested whether the expression of the sodium-iodide symporter (NIS) changed after lithium treatment. We did not find any difference in expression of NIS in WRO-treated cells compared with non-treated controls (data not shown). Lithium inhibits cell growth and induces apoptosis in FTC cell line Although controversy, previous studies showed that over-expression of NR4A1 inhibited cell growth and induced apoptosis. Since lithium restores NR4A1 expression in FTC cell line, we investigated the effect of lithium on cell growth and apoptosis. As showed in Fig. 5A , lithium treatment resulted in a progressive and dose-dependant cell growth inhibition as compared with the untreated control cells. The reduction in cell proliferation in 20 mM lithium treated cells was statistically significant in all treatment points compared to control cells ( P <0.001). To quantify the apoptotic rate of WRO cells following treatment, different concentration of lithium were tested at 48 and 72 hours, a time in which growth inhibition was more evident for both concentrations. Lithium significantly increased the number of apoptotic cells in a time and dose-dependent manner ( P <0.001) ( Fig. 5B ).  Genes potentially associated with pathogenesis of thyroid tumors Differentially expressed genes can be found by comparison of various SAGE libraries using the SAGE Digital Gene Expression Display (SAGE DGED) 31 . We compared two pools of thyroid SAGE libraries. Pool A included both normal thyroid and FTA and pool B consisted of FTC library. Using P <0.05 as the value for statistical significance and 10-fold as the difference in the level of expression, we identified 6 transcripts differentially expressed between pool A and pool B. Our primary focus was on genes whose expression was lower in FTC library such as TPO, TFF3 , NR4A1, and IYD ( Fig. 1 ). NR4A1 was selected for further investigation.  Genes potentially associated with pathogenesis of thyroid tumors Differentially expressed genes can be found by comparison of various SAGE libraries using the SAGE Digital Gene Expression Display (SAGE DGED) 31 . We compared two pools of thyroid SAGE libraries. Pool A included both normal thyroid and FTA and pool B consisted of FTC library. Using P <0.05 as the value for statistical significance and 10-fold as the difference in the level of expression, we identified 6 transcripts differentially expressed between pool A and pool B. Our primary focus was on genes whose expression was lower in FTC library such as TPO, TFF3 , NR4A1, and IYD ( Fig. 1 ). NR4A1 was selected for further investigation.  NR4A1 expression in thyroid tissues The data predicted by SAGE was validated by qPCR using a set of 27 normal thyroid tissues, 10 FTAs and 14 FTCs. We observed that NR4A1 expression was under-expressed in most FTCs investigated (65%), compared with the expression observed in normals ( P =0.01) and FTAs ( Fig. 2A ). The expression was remarkably lower in widely invasive follicular carcinoma than adenoma ( P =0.02) ( Fig. 2B ). To determine the risk of tumorigenesis, the level of NR4A1 expression was analyzed in FTCs (n=14) and normal thyroid (n=22) groups. Using 0.1 as the cutoff value, expression levels lower than 0.1 were observed in 5 of 22 normal thyroids and 8 of 14 FTCs. A low level of NR4A1 expression was associated with an increased risk of FTC (Odds ratio= 5.8; ?2:6,352; P = 0.0117; IC95%: 1.39 – 24.67). To provide a more accurate estimate of the risks of malignancy associated with NR4A1 level of expression, a larger series and absolute values are needed.  NR4A1 expression in thyroid tissues The data predicted by SAGE was validated by qPCR using a set of 27 normal thyroid tissues, 10 FTAs and 14 FTCs. We observed that NR4A1 expression was under-expressed in most FTCs investigated (65%), compared with the expression observed in normals ( P =0.01) and FTAs ( Fig. 2A ). The expression was remarkably lower in widely invasive follicular carcinoma than adenoma ( P =0.02) ( Fig. 2B ). To determine the risk of tumorigenesis, the level of NR4A1 expression was analyzed in FTCs (n=14) and normal thyroid (n=22) groups. Using 0.1 as the cutoff value, expression levels lower than 0.1 were observed in 5 of 22 normal thyroids and 8 of 14 FTCs. A low level of NR4A1 expression was associated with an increased risk of FTC (Odds ratio= 5.8; ?2:6,352; P = 0.0117; IC95%: 1.39 – 24.67). To provide a more accurate estimate of the risks of malignancy associated with NR4A1 level of expression, a larger series and absolute values are needed.  FOSB and CCND1 expression in thyroid samples Since NR4A1 was suggested as downstream of Wnt-1 signaling pathway, we investigated the expression of canonical Wnt-1 target genes such as FOSB and CCDN1 . Additionally, we sought to determine whether there is a correlation among expression levels for NR4A1, FOSB and CCND1 . FOSB was under-expressed in most of thyroid carcinomas and a number of FTAs compared to normal thyroid, although not significant ( Fig. 2C ). Intriguingly, CCDN1 was over-expressed in both FTCs ( P < 0.01) and FTAs ( P = 0.01), compared to normal thyroid ( Fig. 2D ). We found a positive correlation between NR4A1 and FOSB genes in normal tissue ( P = 0.0065), adenoma ( P = 0.0429) and carcinoma tissue ( P = 0.0020) ( Fig. 2E ). There was no correlation between NR4A1 and CCND1 ( Fig. 2F ).  FOSB and CCND1 expression in thyroid samples Since NR4A1 was suggested as downstream of Wnt-1 signaling pathway, we investigated the expression of canonical Wnt-1 target genes such as FOSB and CCDN1 . Additionally, we sought to determine whether there is a correlation among expression levels for NR4A1, FOSB and CCND1 . FOSB was under-expressed in most of thyroid carcinomas and a number of FTAs compared to normal thyroid, although not significant ( Fig. 2C ). Intriguingly, CCDN1 was over-expressed in both FTCs ( P < 0.01) and FTAs ( P = 0.01), compared to normal thyroid ( Fig. 2D ). We found a positive correlation between NR4A1 and FOSB genes in normal tissue ( P = 0.0065), adenoma ( P = 0.0429) and carcinoma tissue ( P = 0.0020) ( Fig. 2E ). There was no correlation between NR4A1 and CCND1 ( Fig. 2F ).  Lithium restores NR4A1 and FOSB expression and reduced CCND1 expression in FTC cell line We next investigated expression levels of NR4A1, CCND1 and FOSB in thyroid carcinoma cell lines: NPA, ARO and WRO. NR4A1 and FOSB were under-expressed in all cell lines compared to normal thyroid. CCND1 was over-expressed in WRO, compared to normal thyroid ( Fig. 3A, B and C ). Since the WRO follicular thyroid carcinoma cell line had patterns expression of the tested genes similar to those observed in FTCs, it was selected for further analysis. WRO cells were cultured in medium containing Lithium Chloride (LiCL) at different concentrations and time and the level of expression of selected genes were determined. In multiple experiments, qPCR analysis showed a consistent increased of NR4A1 transcripts in 2h lithium-treated cells compared with untreated controls, in a dose-dependent manner. A greater effect was observed when cells were treated with 20 mM LiCl for 2 h ( Fig 4A ). After 24 h, NR4A1 expression was up-regulated only at high doses of lithium ( Fig 4B ) . The expression of FOSB , an early gene, was restored after 2 h treatment when 20 mM lithium was used and was down-regulated in cells exposed to 10 mM LiCl for 2 h ( Fig. 4C and D ). FOSB was down-regulated in and 24 h lithium-treated cells compared with untreated controls, in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 4D ). The expression of CCND1 was biphasic with a slight increase at 2 h of lithium treatment followed by a down-regulation at 24 h as compared with untreated control cells. Comparable effects of lithium on CCND1 expression were previously reported 32 ( Fig. 4E and 4F ). Since lithium has been suggested to act as an adjuvant to 131I therapy by inhibiting its release from the thyroid, we tested whether the expression of the sodium-iodide symporter (NIS) changed after lithium treatment. We did not find any difference in expression of NIS in WRO-treated cells compared with non-treated controls (data not shown).  Lithium restores NR4A1 and FOSB expression and reduced CCND1 expression in FTC cell line We next investigated expression levels of NR4A1, CCND1 and FOSB in thyroid carcinoma cell lines: NPA, ARO and WRO. NR4A1 and FOSB were under-expressed in all cell lines compared to normal thyroid. CCND1 was over-expressed in WRO, compared to normal thyroid ( Fig. 3A, B and C ). Since the WRO follicular thyroid carcinoma cell line had patterns expression of the tested genes similar to those observed in FTCs, it was selected for further analysis. WRO cells were cultured in medium containing Lithium Chloride (LiCL) at different concentrations and time and the level of expression of selected genes were determined. In multiple experiments, qPCR analysis showed a consistent increased of NR4A1 transcripts in 2h lithium-treated cells compared with untreated controls, in a dose-dependent manner. A greater effect was observed when cells were treated with 20 mM LiCl for 2 h ( Fig 4A ). After 24 h, NR4A1 expression was up-regulated only at high doses of lithium ( Fig 4B ) . The expression of FOSB , an early gene, was restored after 2 h treatment when 20 mM lithium was used and was down-regulated in cells exposed to 10 mM LiCl for 2 h ( Fig. 4C and D ). FOSB was down-regulated in and 24 h lithium-treated cells compared with untreated controls, in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 4D ). The expression of CCND1 was biphasic with a slight increase at 2 h of lithium treatment followed by a down-regulation at 24 h as compared with untreated control cells. Comparable effects of lithium on CCND1 expression were previously reported 32 ( Fig. 4E and 4F ). Since lithium has been suggested to act as an adjuvant to 131I therapy by inhibiting its release from the thyroid, we tested whether the expression of the sodium-iodide symporter (NIS) changed after lithium treatment. We did not find any difference in expression of NIS in WRO-treated cells compared with non-treated controls (data not shown).  Lithium inhibits cell growth and induces apoptosis in FTC cell line Although controversy, previous studies showed that over-expression of NR4A1 inhibited cell growth and induced apoptosis. Since lithium restores NR4A1 expression in FTC cell line, we investigated the effect of lithium on cell growth and apoptosis. As showed in Fig. 5A , lithium treatment resulted in a progressive and dose-dependant cell growth inhibition as compared with the untreated control cells. The reduction in cell proliferation in 20 mM lithium treated cells was statistically significant in all treatment points compared to control cells ( P <0.001). To quantify the apoptotic rate of WRO cells following treatment, different concentration of lithium were tested at 48 and 72 hours, a time in which growth inhibition was more evident for both concentrations. Lithium significantly increased the number of apoptotic cells in a time and dose-dependent manner ( P <0.001) ( Fig. 5B ).  Lithium inhibits cell growth and induces apoptosis in FTC cell line Although controversy, previous studies showed that over-expression of NR4A1 inhibited cell growth and induced apoptosis. Since lithium restores NR4A1 expression in FTC cell line, we investigated the effect of lithium on cell growth and apoptosis. As showed in Fig. 5A , lithium treatment resulted in a progressive and dose-dependant cell growth inhibition as compared with the untreated control cells. The reduction in cell proliferation in 20 mM lithium treated cells was statistically significant in all treatment points compared to control cells ( P <0.001). To quantify the apoptotic rate of WRO cells following treatment, different concentration of lithium were tested at 48 and 72 hours, a time in which growth inhibition was more evident for both concentrations. Lithium significantly increased the number of apoptotic cells in a time and dose-dependent manner ( P <0.001) ( Fig. 5B ).  DISCUSSION In this study, using SAGE Digital Gene Expression Display and validation by qPCR, we found that NR4A1 was under-expressed in most of FTCs compared to normal thyroid and FTA, and markedly lower in widely invasive follicular thyroid carcinoma. NR4A1 , also known as Nur77 , TR3 and NGFI-B , an orphan nuclear receptor, was first described as an immediate early gene induced in response to serum or phorbol ester stimulation of quiescent fibroblasts. Although it was initially known for its role in cell proliferation and differentiation, later was shown to be a potent pro-apoptotic molecule in different cell types. Inhibition of NR4A1 activity either by over-expressing a dominant-negative form or using antisense RNA, inhibited apoptosis 33 , 34 . Consistent with its apoptotic activity, over-expression of NR4A1 in some cell lines leads to apoptosis. It was demonstrated that its apoptotic activity can be altered through AKT-mediated phosphorylation in the DNA binding domain of NR4A1 and substantially diminishes its ability to bind DNA and diminish its apoptotic activity 35 . Others have suggested that NR4A1 is phosphorylated through the ERK5 pathway 36 . Moreover, it was suggested that NR4A1 -mediated apoptosis involves transcription-independent mitochondrial targeting of NR4A1 . When induced by apoptotic stimuli, NR4A1 translocates into the cytoplasm where it binds to Bcl2 and provokes conformational change of Bcl2. This results in conversion of Bcl2 from a cell protector to a cell killer 37 , 38 . Based on its apoptotic effects, many studies were performed searching for a link between tumorigenesis and NR4A1 expression. NR4A 1 expression was reduced in several tumor subtypes compared to normal matched samples 16 . Recently it was described that down-regulation of NR4A1 was a common feature in leukemia blast cells from human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) 39 . Additional evidence that supports a role for NR4A1 in tumorigenesis comes from the observation that NR4A1 abrogation in mice led to a rapidly lethal and transplantable leukemic disease with pathological features most closely resembling AML. Based on these findings, it was suggested a new role of NR4A1 , a critical tumor suppressor of myeloid leukemogenesis 39 . The aforementioned evidences of its potential role as a tumor suppressor gene and the fact that we found a decreased expression of NR4A1 in follicular thyroid carcinomas compared to normal thyroid and FTA, suggest that the down-regulation of NR4A1 expression might be an important event during thyroid tumorigenesis. Given that NR4A1 induction is regulated by a variety of cell- and stimulus-specific such as growth factors, calcium, inflammatory cytokines, peptide hormones, phorbol esters, neurotransmitters and lithium 16 , 19 , 40 , we hypothesize whether these agents could restore the expression of NR4A1 . The effect of lithium on thyroid was first observed in patients who received lithium for mood diseases and developed goiter 41 . Later it was demonstrated that lithium inhibits the release of radioiodine from the thyroid 42 . Due to this effect lithium is considered an option for adjuvant treatment with radioiodine for selected cases of thyroid cancers 21 , 43 , 44 . Based on the fact that lithium has been used as therapeutic drug for thyroid carcinomas for several years but it therapeutic action remains an enigma and that it induces NR4A1 expression 16 , we hypothesize that lithium might exert its therapeutic effect by restoring the expression of NR4A1 . We show here that when a follicular thyroid carcinoma cell was exposed to 10 mM or 20 mM of lithium, NR4A1 expression increased at significant levels after 2 hours of treatment, in a dose-dependent manner. Additionally, since NR4A1 over-expression in response to a variety of stimuli and chemotherapeutic agents was involved in growth suppression and apoptosis of many cell types 18 , 45 , we further examined if lithium could trigger apoptosis and reduce cell growth in a FTC cell line. We demonstrated here that lithium inhibited cell growth and induced apoptosis in a dose dependent manner. This helps implicate a potential role for NR4A1 in thyroid cells and therapeutic mechanism of lithium action. However, we do not know yet if induction of the cell death pathway by lithium is accompanied by translocation of NR4A1 from the nucleus to the cytosol/mitochondria or by post-trascriptional modification by ERK5 or by AKT-mediated phosphorylation. These possibilities need further investigation. Converse to our observations, it has been reported that 5 mM lithium stimulates proliferation of two thyroid carcinoma cell lines (papillary and follicular). The authors suggested that inhibition of GSK3? by lithium lead to an enhancement of proliferation by increasing the ?-catenin levels 29 and, therefore, mimic the canonical Wnt/?-catenin signaling 29 , 46 . However, it was demonstrated that although the inhibition of the GSK3? pathway occurred at concentrations as low as 1 mM lithium, substantial growth inhibition of tumor cells does not appear until treatment with 10 mM lithium 47 . Recently, it was demonstrated that treatment with lithium inhibited growth of a medullary thyroid carcinoma cell line (TT) both in vivo and in vitro and that exerts its effect via inhibition of the glycogen synthase kinase 3? (GSK3?). Increased concentration of lithium significantly reduced growth of TT cells in a dose dependent fashion 48 . Inhibition of GSK3? by specific inhibitors has shown to reduce tumors growth in other cancers including colon, melanoma and glioblastoma 49 – 51 . Therefore, these conflicting results could be explained not only for the different concentrations used but also by the fact that the effect of lithium may not be general but cell type specific. Since it was described that lithium is able to mimic Wnt signaling 46 it was logical to assume that lithium could modulate other genes downstream in the canonical Wnt/?-catenin signaling pathway. We therefore, investigated whether lithium modulated the expression of previously described Wnt-1 target genes CCND1 52 and FOSB 53 . We observed a rapid and dose-dependent increased expression of FOSB in thyroid cells following lithium treatment. The rapid and transient expression of FOSB parallel those observed for NR4A1 , suggested they may have a similar mechanism of activation. Our results are in accordance with the literature where a reduced expression of the immediate early gene FOSB was observed following stimulation of cells by Wnt-1 53 . This study also demonstrated that the expression of FOSB was significant reduced in human colon cancer relative to normal tissue 53 . We therefore investigated the expression of FOSB in the set of samples where NR4A1 expression was tested. We not only found a reduced expression of FOSB in thyroid tumor compared to normal thyroid but a positive correlation with NR4A1 . CCND1 , a reduced expression of CCND1 was observed after 24 h treatment with lithium. Kunnimalaiyaan et al ., 48 previously demonstrated a decreased expression of CCND1 parallel to the increased expression of cell cycle inhibitors such as p21, p15 and p27 following lithium treatment. Whether lithium inhibits GSK3? and restores NR4A1 and FOSB expression and decreases CCND1 expression through the canonical Wnt/?-catenin signaling pathway, is still not clear. Although CCND1 was over-expressed in follicular tumors, there was no correlation with the expression of NR4A1. Of note, CCND1 over-expression and FOSB under-expression were previously described as associated with tumorigenesis of papillary thyroid carcinoma 54 , 55 . Whether NR4A1 play a role in the pathogenesis of papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) is controversy. Previous studies using gene expression profiling following expression of genetic events that are hallmarks of PTC demonstrated that NR4A1 was among the genes found under-expressed in cells expressing either RET/PTC3 , RAS or BRAF genetic alteration, although not confirmed by qPCR 56 . Conflicting evidence is that NR4A1 was described as one of the genes induced by RET/PTC3 57 . In conclusion, we show that NR4A1 is down-regulated in follicular thyroid carcinoma compared to normal thyroid and follicular adenomas. This event may be associated with cancer development. The level of NR4A1 correlates with FOSB which suggests they may be part of the same signaling pathway. Lithium restores the expression of NR4A1 and FOSB and reduced expression of CCND1 which reveals a possible molecular mechanism of lithium action. We suggest that this adjuvant to 131I therapy modulates NR4A1 gene expression. Therefore, lithium may be an alternative therapeutic adjuvant mainly in those cases of widely invasive follicular thyroid carcinoma.  DISCUSSION In this study, using SAGE Digital Gene Expression Display and validation by qPCR, we found that NR4A1 was under-expressed in most of FTCs compared to normal thyroid and FTA, and markedly lower in widely invasive follicular thyroid carcinoma. NR4A1 , also known as Nur77 , TR3 and NGFI-B , an orphan nuclear receptor, was first described as an immediate early gene induced in response to serum or phorbol ester stimulation of quiescent fibroblasts. Although it was initially known for its role in cell proliferation and differentiation, later was shown to be a potent pro-apoptotic molecule in different cell types. Inhibition of NR4A1 activity either by over-expressing a dominant-negative form or using antisense RNA, inhibited apoptosis 33 , 34 . Consistent with its apoptotic activity, over-expression of NR4A1 in some cell lines leads to apoptosis. It was demonstrated that its apoptotic activity can be altered through AKT-mediated phosphorylation in the DNA binding domain of NR4A1 and substantially diminishes its ability to bind DNA and diminish its apoptotic activity 35 . Others have suggested that NR4A1 is phosphorylated through the ERK5 pathway 36 . Moreover, it was suggested that NR4A1 -mediated apoptosis involves transcription-independent mitochondrial targeting of NR4A1 . When induced by apoptotic stimuli, NR4A1 translocates into the cytoplasm where it binds to Bcl2 and provokes conformational change of Bcl2. This results in conversion of Bcl2 from a cell protector to a cell killer 37 , 38 . Based on its apoptotic effects, many studies were performed searching for a link between tumorigenesis and NR4A1 expression. NR4A 1 expression was reduced in several tumor subtypes compared to normal matched samples 16 . Recently it was described that down-regulation of NR4A1 was a common feature in leukemia blast cells from human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) 39 . Additional evidence that supports a role for NR4A1 in tumorigenesis comes from the observation that NR4A1 abrogation in mice led to a rapidly lethal and transplantable leukemic disease with pathological features most closely resembling AML. Based on these findings, it was suggested a new role of NR4A1 , a critical tumor suppressor of myeloid leukemogenesis 39 . The aforementioned evidences of its potential role as a tumor suppressor gene and the fact that we found a decreased expression of NR4A1 in follicular thyroid carcinomas compared to normal thyroid and FTA, suggest that the down-regulation of NR4A1 expression might be an important event during thyroid tumorigenesis. Given that NR4A1 induction is regulated by a variety of cell- and stimulus-specific such as growth factors, calcium, inflammatory cytokines, peptide hormones, phorbol esters, neurotransmitters and lithium 16 , 19 , 40 , we hypothesize whether these agents could restore the expression of NR4A1 . The effect of lithium on thyroid was first observed in patients who received lithium for mood diseases and developed goiter 41 . Later it was demonstrated that lithium inhibits the release of radioiodine from the thyroid 42 . Due to this effect lithium is considered an option for adjuvant treatment with radioiodine for selected cases of thyroid cancers 21 , 43 , 44 . Based on the fact that lithium has been used as therapeutic drug for thyroid carcinomas for several years but it therapeutic action remains an enigma and that it induces NR4A1 expression 16 , we hypothesize that lithium might exert its therapeutic effect by restoring the expression of NR4A1 . We show here that when a follicular thyroid carcinoma cell was exposed to 10 mM or 20 mM of lithium, NR4A1 expression increased at significant levels after 2 hours of treatment, in a dose-dependent manner. Additionally, since NR4A1 over-expression in response to a variety of stimuli and chemotherapeutic agents was involved in growth suppression and apoptosis of many cell types 18 , 45 , we further examined if lithium could trigger apoptosis and reduce cell growth in a FTC cell line. We demonstrated here that lithium inhibited cell growth and induced apoptosis in a dose dependent manner. This helps implicate a potential role for NR4A1 in thyroid cells and therapeutic mechanism of lithium action. However, we do not know yet if induction of the cell death pathway by lithium is accompanied by translocation of NR4A1 from the nucleus to the cytosol/mitochondria or by post-trascriptional modification by ERK5 or by AKT-mediated phosphorylation. These possibilities need further investigation. Converse to our observations, it has been reported that 5 mM lithium stimulates proliferation of two thyroid carcinoma cell lines (papillary and follicular). The authors suggested that inhibition of GSK3? by lithium lead to an enhancement of proliferation by increasing the ?-catenin levels 29 and, therefore, mimic the canonical Wnt/?-catenin signaling 29 , 46 . However, it was demonstrated that although the inhibition of the GSK3? pathway occurred at concentrations as low as 1 mM lithium, substantial growth inhibition of tumor cells does not appear until treatment with 10 mM lithium 47 . Recently, it was demonstrated that treatment with lithium inhibited growth of a medullary thyroid carcinoma cell line (TT) both in vivo and in vitro and that exerts its effect via inhibition of the glycogen synthase kinase 3? (GSK3?). Increased concentration of lithium significantly reduced growth of TT cells in a dose dependent fashion 48 . Inhibition of GSK3? by specific inhibitors has shown to reduce tumors growth in other cancers including colon, melanoma and glioblastoma 49 – 51 . Therefore, these conflicting results could be explained not only for the different concentrations used but also by the fact that the effect of lithium may not be general but cell type specific. Since it was described that lithium is able to mimic Wnt signaling 46 it was logical to assume that lithium could modulate other genes downstream in the canonical Wnt/?-catenin signaling pathway. We therefore, investigated whether lithium modulated the expression of previously described Wnt-1 target genes CCND1 52 and FOSB 53 . We observed a rapid and dose-dependent increased expression of FOSB in thyroid cells following lithium treatment. The rapid and transient expression of FOSB parallel those observed for NR4A1 , suggested they may have a similar mechanism of activation. Our results are in accordance with the literature where a reduced expression of the immediate early gene FOSB was observed following stimulation of cells by Wnt-1 53 . This study also demonstrated that the expression of FOSB was significant reduced in human colon cancer relative to normal tissue 53 . We therefore investigated the expression of FOSB in the set of samples where NR4A1 expression was tested. We not only found a reduced expression of FOSB in thyroid tumor compared to normal thyroid but a positive correlation with NR4A1 . CCND1 , a reduced expression of CCND1 was observed after 24 h treatment with lithium. Kunnimalaiyaan et al ., 48 previously demonstrated a decreased expression of CCND1 parallel to the increased expression of cell cycle inhibitors such as p21, p15 and p27 following lithium treatment. Whether lithium inhibits GSK3? and restores NR4A1 and FOSB expression and decreases CCND1 expression through the canonical Wnt/?-catenin signaling pathway, is still not clear. Although CCND1 was over-expressed in follicular tumors, there was no correlation with the expression of NR4A1. Of note, CCND1 over-expression and FOSB under-expression were previously described as associated with tumorigenesis of papillary thyroid carcinoma 54 , 55 . Whether NR4A1 play a role in the pathogenesis of papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) is controversy. Previous studies using gene expression profiling following expression of genetic events that are hallmarks of PTC demonstrated that NR4A1 was among the genes found under-expressed in cells expressing either RET/PTC3 , RAS or BRAF genetic alteration, although not confirmed by qPCR 56 . Conflicting evidence is that NR4A1 was described as one of the genes induced by RET/PTC3 57 . In conclusion, we show that NR4A1 is down-regulated in follicular thyroid carcinoma compared to normal thyroid and follicular adenomas. This event may be associated with cancer development. The level of NR4A1 correlates with FOSB which suggests they may be part of the same signaling pathway. Lithium restores the expression of NR4A1 and FOSB and reduced expression of CCND1 which reveals a possible molecular mechanism of lithium action. We suggest that this adjuvant to 131I therapy modulates NR4A1 gene expression. Therefore, lithium may be an alternative therapeutic adjuvant mainly in those cases of widely invasive follicular thyroid carcinoma.  Figures Fig. 1 SAGE Digital Gene Expression Displayer (DGED) The comparison of thyroid SAGE libraries identified those genes differentially expressed genes greater than 10-fold with P<0.05. Pool A includes a normal thyroid library and a follicular thyroid adenoma library. Pool B includes a follicular thyroid carcinoma library. Fig. 2 Relative expression (RE) analysis of selected genes in thyroid tumors and normal thyroid. Transcripts levels were normalized to the average of 2-internal controls. The qPCR data were log transformed for statistical analysis. Changes were calculated by comparison of the mean expression value. (A) NR4A1 was down-regulated in follicular thyroid carcinoma compared to normal thyroid ( P =0.01). (B) The expression of NR4A1 was dramatically reduced in widely invasive thyroid carcinoma (WITC) compared to adenoma ( P =0.02). (C) Although FOSB was down-regulated in follicular carcinomas compared to normal thyroid, it was not considered significant (D) CCND1 was over-expressed in both follicular adenoma ( P =0.01) and follicular carcinoma( P =0.006) compared to normal thyroid. (E) All cases together showing a positive correlation was found between the levels of NR4A1 and FOSB . (F) All cases together, showing no correlation between NR4A1 and CCND1 . Expression was significantly different at the 0.05 level (*). Fig. 3 Relative levels of expression of NR4A1 (A), FOSB (B) and CCND1 (C) determined by qPCR in a papillary thyroid carcinoma cell line (NPA), follicular thyroid carcinoma cell line (WRO) and undifferentiated thyroid carcinoma cell line (ARO), compared to the expression (mean) observed in normal thyroid. Fig. 4 Effect of lithium treatment on NR4A1 (A,B) FOSB (C,D) and CCND1 (E,F) expression. A follicular thyroid carcinoma cell line (WRO) was treated with LiCl 10mM (L10) and 20mM (L20) for 2 hours and 24 hours. Transcripts levels were normalized to the average of 2-internal control and qPCR data are averaged from two experiments performed in triplicate. The qPCR data were log transformed for statistical analysis. Changes were calculated by comparison of the mean expression value. Expression was considered significant when P<0.05 (*) and P<0.01(**). Fig. 5 Effect of lithium on cell growth (A) and apoptosis (B) in a follicular thyroid cell line (WRO). The effect was tested using 10mM (L10) and 20mM (L20). (A) Growth assay by MTT was performed as described in material and methods. Lithium significantly reduced cell growth in a dose-dependent manner. The data represents the mean ± SD of absorbance at 560 nm of experiments performed in quintuplicate on each of four days. (B) To quantify the apoptotic rate of WRO cells following lithium treatment, we analyzed annexin-V binding using a Guava Nexin kit as described in material an methods section. The data represents the mean ± SD of percentage of apoptotic cells following lithium treatment. An increase of apoptosis was observed in a time and dose-dependent manner. Changes were significant when P<0.05 (*) and P<0.001(**).  Figures Fig. 1 SAGE Digital Gene Expression Displayer (DGED) The comparison of thyroid SAGE libraries identified those genes differentially expressed genes greater than 10-fold with P<0.05. Pool A includes a normal thyroid library and a follicular thyroid adenoma library. Pool B includes a follicular thyroid carcinoma library. Fig. 2 Relative expression (RE) analysis of selected genes in thyroid tumors and normal thyroid. Transcripts levels were normalized to the average of 2-internal controls. The qPCR data were log transformed for statistical analysis. Changes were calculated by comparison of the mean expression value. (A) NR4A1 was down-regulated in follicular thyroid carcinoma compared to normal thyroid ( P =0.01). (B) The expression of NR4A1 was dramatically reduced in widely invasive thyroid carcinoma (WITC) compared to adenoma ( P =0.02). (C) Although FOSB was down-regulated in follicular carcinomas compared to normal thyroid, it was not considered significant (D) CCND1 was over-expressed in both follicular adenoma ( P =0.01) and follicular carcinoma( P =0.006) compared to normal thyroid. (E) All cases together showing a positive correlation was found between the levels of NR4A1 and FOSB . (F) All cases together, showing no correlation between NR4A1 and CCND1 . Expression was significantly different at the 0.05 level (*). Fig. 3 Relative levels of expression of NR4A1 (A), FOSB (B) and CCND1 (C) determined by qPCR in a papillary thyroid carcinoma cell line (NPA), follicular thyroid carcinoma cell line (WRO) and undifferentiated thyroid carcinoma cell line (ARO), compared to the expression (mean) observed in normal thyroid. Fig. 4 Effect of lithium treatment on NR4A1 (A,B) FOSB (C,D) and CCND1 (E,F) expression. A follicular thyroid carcinoma cell line (WRO) was treated with LiCl 10mM (L10) and 20mM (L20) for 2 hours and 24 hours. Transcripts levels were normalized to the average of 2-internal control and qPCR data are averaged from two experiments performed in triplicate. The qPCR data were log transformed for statistical analysis. Changes were calculated by comparison of the mean expression value. Expression was considered significant when P<0.05 (*) and P<0.01(**). Fig. 5 Effect of lithium on cell growth (A) and apoptosis (B) in a follicular thyroid cell line (WRO). The effect was tested using 10mM (L10) and 20mM (L20). (A) Growth assay by MTT was performed as described in material and methods. Lithium significantly reduced cell growth in a dose-dependent manner. The data represents the mean ± SD of absorbance at 560 nm of experiments performed in quintuplicate on each of four days. (B) To quantify the apoptotic rate of WRO cells following lithium treatment, we analyzed annexin-V binding using a Guava Nexin kit as described in material an methods section. The data represents the mean ± SD of percentage of apoptotic cells following lithium treatment. An increase of apoptosis was observed in a time and dose-dependent manner. Changes were significant when P<0.05 (*) and P<0.001(**). 