The Th2 Transcription Factor c-Maf Inhibits IL-12p35 Gene Expression in Activated Macrophages by Targeting NF- ? B Nuclear Translocation The inflammatory response of macrophages to infectious agents is a highly dynamic and orchestrated process involving the release of a variety of inflammatory mediators, including interleukin-12 (IL-12), as a consequence of the recognition of the pathogens. Regulation of IL-12 gene expression by the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 represents a major homeostatic process underlying host-pathogen and host-self interactions. Our group first reported that the Th2-specific transcription factor c-Maf is expressed also in macrophages treated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and IL-10. When overexpressed, c-Maf can potently suppress IL-12 production. However, c-Maf does not appear to be a physiologic regulator of IL-12p40 gene transcription because p40 production is not dysregulated in c-Maf-deficient macrophages. In this study, we investigated the role of c-Maf in regulation of the transcription of the p35 gene, which encodes the chain that is rate limiting in the synthesis of the heterodimeric IL-12. We report that c-Maf is a physiologic modulator of IL-12p35 gene expression and IL-12p70 production. We identify a novel NF- ? B element within the proximal p35 promoter and show that c-Maf inhibits p35 transcription by antagonizing the effects of NF- ? B, especially c-Rel, on p35 activation. It does so not by directly interacting with the target DNA but by interfering with the nuclear localization of NF- ? B c-Rel. This study contributes to our understanding of the molecular basis of the homeostatic regulation of IL-12 production by c-Maf, which plays a dual role both in the function of antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and in T helper cell differentiation.  INTRODUCTION Macrophages are an essential component of the innate immune apparatus. Inflammatory macrophages are derived largely from circulating monocytes, which infiltrate damaged tissue, but some arise by local cell division. 1 Inflammation at the site of infection is initiated by the response of macrophages to pathogens, which form the first line of defense against invading microorganisms by recognizing, ingesting, and destroying them. The inflammatory response to infectious agents is a highly dynamic and orchestrated process involving the release of a variety of inflammatory mediators as a consequence of the recognition of the pathogens. These include prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and platelet-activating factor (PAF), followed by secretion of such cytokines as interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor necrosis factor- ? (TNF- ? ), and chemokines, such as monocyte chemotactic protein-1/2 (MCP-1/2). Cellular musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma (c-Maf) is the cellular counterpart of v-Maf, the transforming gene of the avian retrovirus AS42. Like c-Fos and c-Jun, c-Maf belongs to a growing family of basic leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factors. 2 The transforming role of c-Maf is implicated in human patients with multiple myeloma (MM), a disease in which malignant plasma cells derived from a single plasma cell clone accumulate in the bone marrow. In this malignant disease, c-Maf has been identified as one of three most frequently dysregulated proto-oncogenes by chromosomal translocation to an IgH locus, along with cyclin D1 (CD1) and fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3). 3 , 4 The role of CD1, FGFR3, and c-Maf in the etiology of MM has not been clearly defined. By some estimates, c-Maf and MafB translocation and dysregulation account for approximately 25% of MMs. 3 , 5 , 6 The first direct in vivo demonstration of a physiologic role of c-Maf was provided by studies in mice genetically rendered deficient in this gene. 7 – 9 Disruption of the c-Maf gene affected both intrauterine and postnatal survival. 7 In addition, it has been shown that deficiency in c-Maf results in a specific defect of IL-4 production by CD4+ T lymphocytes and a lack of Th2 differentiation. 10 c-Maf is expressed in Th2 but not Th1 clones and is induced during normal precursor cell differentiation along a Th2 but not Th1 lineage. c-Maf binds to a c-Maf response element (MARE) in the proximal IL-4 promoter in Th2 but not Th1 clones. Furthermore, c-Maf acts in synergy with the nuclear factor of activated T cells (NF-ATp) to initiate endogenous IL-4 production by B cells. 11 Thus, c-Maf is both a developmentally and immunologically important gene. IL-12 is a heterodimeric cytokine composed of the p35 and p40 subunits. It is produced by antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and plays a critical role in host defense against intracellular microbial infection and control of malignancy via its ability to stimulate both innate and adaptive immune effector cells. Heterodimers of p40 and p35 are formed via disulfide bonds and secreted, usually upon stimulation of producer cells. In addition to forming heterodimers with p35, both mouse and human p40 are secreted in large excess as free p40 monomers and can also form homodimers (p402), which exhibit biologic activities antagonistic to heterodimeric IL-12p70. 12 , 13 Furthermore, p40 is able to dimerize with p19, a gene discovered in a computational screen of genomic databases as a p35 homolog, resulting in the formation of IL-23, which has biologic activities both similar to and distinct from those of IL-12. 14 Homodimers of p35 have not been reported to date. However, p35, which is not secreted in the absence of a second chain, may heterodimerize and be secreted together with a second cellular protein. The potency of IL-12 renders itself to stringent regulation for the timing, locality, and magnitude of its production during an immune response. Subversion of the delicate control and balance frequently leads to immunologic disorders. Regulation of IL-12 gene expression in phagocytes by the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 represents a major homeostatic process underlying host-pathogen and host-self interactions. In a previous study, our group first reported that IL-10 and c-Maf induce their mutual expression in inflammatory macrophages. 15 We demonstrated that c-Maf is one of the physiologic mediators of IL-10’s immunosuppressive activities. When overexpressed, c-Maf selectively inhibits transcriptional activation of both IL-12p40 and IL-12p35 genes while potently activating IL-10 and IL-4 expression, potentially contributing to the development of a state of anti-inflammation and dichotomy of immunologic polarization. c-Maf induces changes in nuclear DNA-binding activities at multiple sites, including the E twenty-six (Ets), GATA sequence in the IL-12 promoter (GA-12), NF- ? B, CCAAT element binding protein (C/EBP), and activated protein-1 (AP-1) elements. However, although c-Maf-deficient murine macrophages display impaired IL-10 production, IL-10-mediated inhibition of IL-12 production remains intact, 15 indicating the existence of alternative mediators in the absence of c-Maf. This study raises the possibility that c-Maf serves a dual role in the immune system: to drive IL-4-mediated Th2 response and to inhibit IL-12-mediated Th1 response by acting on the transcription of these two pivotal cytokines. Because of the importance of p35 as the limiting chain for IL-12 synthesis and to assist in the better understanding of the different immunologic activities of p35 from those of p40, we undertook the present study to investigate the physiologic role of c-Maf in regulation of p35 gene transcription and explored the molecular mechanism involved in this process.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Cells and reagents The murine macrophagelike cell line RAW264.7 was obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Rockville, MD), and maintained in RPMI 1640 containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mM L-glutamine, and penicillin/streptomycin. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from Escherichia coli 0127:B8 was purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). All antibodies used in EMSA and Western blot analyses were from Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, Inc. (Santa Cruz, CA). Generation of macrophages from fetal liver of c-Maf knockout mice and genotying Disruption of both copies of the c-Maf gene affected both intrauterine and postnatal survival, so we derived macrophages from day 14 embryos of c-Maf+/? mothers on a mixed background of 129 and C57BL6. 7 Mother mice were killed by CO2 inhalation, the trunk was soaked in 70% ethanol for 3–5 min, a midline incision was made on the abdomen, and the gestational uterus was dissected, exposing the embryos. Embryos were dissected, and embryonic liver was excised and transferred into a 60-mm Petri dish. A few drops of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) were added to the liver, which was cut into small pieces with scissors. Single cells were prepared by mechanical disaggregating grinding with a syringe insert against a cell strainer (70 ? m nylon, Falcon, Lincoln Park, NJ). The strainer was rinsed with DMEM containing high glucose and spun down at 1200 rpm for 5 min, and the cell pellet was resuspended in DMEM (high-glucose, endotoxin tested) (GIBCO-BRL, Gaithersburg, MD) supplemented with 10% heat inactivated FBS, streptomycin (100 ? g/mL), penicillin (100 U/mL), and 20% L929 conditioned medium. Three to four days later, the cells were fed fresh conditioned medium, and 6 days later, the cells were detached by treatment with 10 mM EDTA in PBS. Some of the cells were analyzed by flow cytometry (staining with F4/80), which demonstrated a purity of >98% macrophages. 16 The mature macrophages were replated after counting for further experimentation. Determination of the genotype of each embryo was performed by PCR using genomic DNA derived from a hind leg and primers that were able to differentiate the wild-type c-Maf gene from the disrupted copy. 7 Plasmids All human IL-12p35 promoter constructs were as described. 17 Transfections Transient transfections were performed by electroporation as previously described. 18 Cytokine assay Mouse IL-12p70 was measured from appropriately diluted culture supernatants using ELISA kits from PharMingen (San Diego, CA). RNase protection assay (RPA) RPAs were performed using the mouse CK2 RiboQuant Multiprobe RNase Protection Assay system from PharMingen according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A total of 10 ? g RNA was used for each determination. Nuclear extraction Nuclear extractions for Western blot analysis and for EMSA assays were done according to the method of Schreiber et al. 19 Briefly, 5–10 × 106 cells were washed and resuspended in 600 ? L buffer containing 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 10 mM KCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, and 0.5 mM PMSF for 15 min on ice. Cells were lysed in 0.6% NP-40 with vortexing for 10 sec. The homogenate was centrifuged for 30 sec in a microfuge, and the nuclear pellet was resuspended in ice-cold buffer containing 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 0.4 M NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, and 1 mM PMSF at 4°C for 15 min with rocking. Following centrifugation in a microfuge for 5 min, the supernatant was either used immediately or frozen at ?70°C. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) EMSA and supershifts were performed as described previously. 20 Statistical analysis Student’s t -test was used for data analysis where appropriate. Data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD) unless otherwise indicated.  Cells and reagents The murine macrophagelike cell line RAW264.7 was obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Rockville, MD), and maintained in RPMI 1640 containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mM L-glutamine, and penicillin/streptomycin. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from Escherichia coli 0127:B8 was purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). All antibodies used in EMSA and Western blot analyses were from Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, Inc. (Santa Cruz, CA).  Generation of macrophages from fetal liver of c-Maf knockout mice and genotying Disruption of both copies of the c-Maf gene affected both intrauterine and postnatal survival, so we derived macrophages from day 14 embryos of c-Maf+/? mothers on a mixed background of 129 and C57BL6. 7 Mother mice were killed by CO2 inhalation, the trunk was soaked in 70% ethanol for 3–5 min, a midline incision was made on the abdomen, and the gestational uterus was dissected, exposing the embryos. Embryos were dissected, and embryonic liver was excised and transferred into a 60-mm Petri dish. A few drops of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) were added to the liver, which was cut into small pieces with scissors. Single cells were prepared by mechanical disaggregating grinding with a syringe insert against a cell strainer (70 ? m nylon, Falcon, Lincoln Park, NJ). The strainer was rinsed with DMEM containing high glucose and spun down at 1200 rpm for 5 min, and the cell pellet was resuspended in DMEM (high-glucose, endotoxin tested) (GIBCO-BRL, Gaithersburg, MD) supplemented with 10% heat inactivated FBS, streptomycin (100 ? g/mL), penicillin (100 U/mL), and 20% L929 conditioned medium. Three to four days later, the cells were fed fresh conditioned medium, and 6 days later, the cells were detached by treatment with 10 mM EDTA in PBS. Some of the cells were analyzed by flow cytometry (staining with F4/80), which demonstrated a purity of >98% macrophages. 16 The mature macrophages were replated after counting for further experimentation. Determination of the genotype of each embryo was performed by PCR using genomic DNA derived from a hind leg and primers that were able to differentiate the wild-type c-Maf gene from the disrupted copy. 7  Plasmids All human IL-12p35 promoter constructs were as described. 17  Transfections Transient transfections were performed by electroporation as previously described. 18  Cytokine assay Mouse IL-12p70 was measured from appropriately diluted culture supernatants using ELISA kits from PharMingen (San Diego, CA).  RNase protection assay (RPA) RPAs were performed using the mouse CK2 RiboQuant Multiprobe RNase Protection Assay system from PharMingen according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A total of 10 ? g RNA was used for each determination.  Nuclear extraction Nuclear extractions for Western blot analysis and for EMSA assays were done according to the method of Schreiber et al. 19 Briefly, 5–10 × 106 cells were washed and resuspended in 600 ? L buffer containing 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 10 mM KCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, and 0.5 mM PMSF for 15 min on ice. Cells were lysed in 0.6% NP-40 with vortexing for 10 sec. The homogenate was centrifuged for 30 sec in a microfuge, and the nuclear pellet was resuspended in ice-cold buffer containing 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 0.4 M NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, and 1 mM PMSF at 4°C for 15 min with rocking. Following centrifugation in a microfuge for 5 min, the supernatant was either used immediately or frozen at ?70°C.  Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) EMSA and supershifts were performed as described previously. 20  Statistical analysis Student’s t -test was used for data analysis where appropriate. Data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD) unless otherwise indicated.  RESULTS IL-12p35 mRNA expression and p70 production in c-Maf-deficient macrophages To determine whether c-Maf is involved in the regulation of p35 gene expression, we used macrophages derived from c-Maf knockout mice on the C57B6 background. Because of the prevalent embryonic lethality of homozygous c-Maf deficiency, 7 we obtained c-Maf-deficient macrophages derived from the fetal liver of day 14–15 embryos. These macrophages were highly pure (98.4% by F4/80 staining) ( Fig. 1A, B ). We next examined IL-12p70 production by these macrophages following LPS stimulation ( Fig. 1C ). IL-12 production was significantly enhanced in c-Maf?/? cells compared to macrophages generated from wild-type and heterozygous litter-mates. We had shown previously that IL-12p40 production following LPS stimulation was not significantly altered in c-Maf?/? macrophages, whereas IL-10 production was severely impaired. However, IL-10-induced inhibition of IL-12 production was intact in c-Maf?/? mcrophages. 15 , 21 This suggested to us that the enhanced p70 production may occur at the level of altered p35 expression. To gain a broader appreciation of gene expression in c-Maf-deficient macrophages, we performed an RPA following LPS stimulation ( Fig. 1D, E ). Interestingly, p35 mRNA was expressed at significantly higher levels in c-Maf-deficient cells, whereas p40 mRNA expression was not altered to a remarkable degree. In addition, augmented IL-1 ? mRNA levels and lower levels of IL-10 mRNA expression were observed in c-Maf knockout macrophages. These results establish that c-Maf is a physiologic negative regulator of the expression of p35 and IL-12 production. Regulation of p35 transcription by c-Maf To further delineate the molecular mechanism by which c-Maf exerts its inhibitory effects on p35 gene expression, we used a well-established transient transfection system in the murine monocytic cell line RAW264.7, which has been used extensively for studies of macrophage-derived cytokines. 18 , 22 – 25 A human IL-12p35 promoter containing a 1143-bp genomic fragment spanning from +61 to ?1082 relative to the transcription start site (+1) linked with the firefly luciferase reporter gene 26 , 27 was cotransfected into RAW264.7 cells with a vector constitutively expressing human c-Maf. As shown in Figure 2A , LPS treatment alone did not stimulate the p35 transcription, whereas a combination of interferon- ? (IFN- ? ) priming followed by LPS stimulation strongly induced its transcription, as we showed previously. 17 The transcriptional activity of p35 under all conditions was potently inhibited. To further verify the role of c-Maf in modulating the induction of IL-12p35 transcription by a reverse approach, we used a dominant negative Maf mutant, Mxi-v-Maf, which is a fusion of Sin3-interaction domain (SID, or repressor domain) of Mxi1 and full-length v-Maf. It can form dimers and bind DNA but lacks trans-activator function. Therefore, it acts in dominant negative fashion. ND5Q5H-GCN4-R22E is a chimera of amino-terminally truncated Maf and leucine zipper of yeast GCN4. It cannot form heterodimers with endogenous bZIP proteins but can form homodimer. The resultant dimer neither binds to MARE nor activates transcription; therefore, this mutant serves as an inert control vector for Mxi-v-Maf. 28 When Mxi-v-Maf was co-transfected with the p35 promoter in the presence of c-Maf, it strongly antagonized c-Maf’s inhibitory effect on p35 transcription, whereas the control vector ND5Q5H-GCN4-R22E (ND5Q5H) did not have the c-Maf-neutralizing effect at all ( Fig. 2B ). These results strongly corroborate the study in c-Maf?/? macrophages with regard to the role of c-Maf as a physiological inhibitor of IL-12 p35 transcription. To localize the p35 promoter elements that mediate c-Maf’s suppressive effect on p35 transcription, we tested a large panel of 5? and 3? deletion promoter constructs. These constructs contained either 5? (C2 and C3) or 3?(C4 and C5) deletions. They were cotransfected with the c-Maf expression vector into RAW264.7 cells stimulated with IFN- ? and LPS. As shown in Figure 2C , the removal of 403 bp (C2) and 453 bp (C3) from the 5?-end did not reduce either their inducibility by IFN- ? and LPS or their repression by c-Maf, whereas deletion of 129 bp from the 3?-end of the promoter (C4) strongly affected both responses in that the basal level rose strongly and the repression by c-Maf decreased from ~14-fold of the C1 construct to ~3-fold. The C5 construct with a 53-bp 3? deletion responded almost normally to c-Maf. Further deletional analysis ruled out the region downstream ?33 as critical to c-Maf response (data not shown). Taken together, these results indicate that the 76-bp region between ?68 and +8 of the p35 promoter may contain a putative element(s) through which c-Maf exerts its transcriptional repression of the IL-12p35 gene. Identification of novel NF-?B response element To further delineate the promoter element that responds to c-Maf-induced inhibition, we generated a series of seven constructs that contained sequential 5-base substitutions in the region between ?67 and ?33 just upstream of the TATA box (M1–M7) ( Fig. 3A ). As shown in Figure 3B , four of the seven mutant constructs (M1–M4) completely lost response to c-Maf in the sense that their transcriptional activity stimulated by IFN- ? and LPS could no longer be inhibited by c-Maf, indicating that the region between ?67 and ?47 harbors a potential response element(s) that directly or indirectly mediates c-Maf-induced inhibition. Because the region between ?67 and ?47 contains a putative NF- ? B motif ( Fig. 3A ), we further analyzed the response of these mutants to stimulation by IFN- ? and LPS. It revealed that the same mutants, M1–M4, that lost the inhibitory response by c-Maf also lost a significant portion of their ability to be induced by IFN- ? and LPS; whereas the wild-type construct was stimulated some 38-fold, the M1–M4 constructs were only induced by ~4–6-fold ( Fig. 3C ). This result indicated that the response element (RE) targeted by c-Maf directly or indirectly overlaps with that of the IFN- ? /LPS response. It is well established by our own work as well as others that activation of NF- ? B c-Rel is critical for p35 transcription stimulated by LPS and IFN- ? . 17 , 29 To further test our hypothesis, we analyzed the M1–M7 mutants with respect to their ability to respond to c-Rel overexpression by cotransfection. We observed that the region from ?62 to ?47 covered by the M2–M4 mutants was particularly critical for the c-Rel response of the p35 promoter ( Fig. 3D ), indicating that this region does contain a functional NF- ? B c-Rel response element, which is targeted directly or indirectly by c-Maf. It is worth pointing out that the NF- ? B element has never previously been defined for the human p35 promoter. Effects of c-Maf on NF-?B-mediated p35 transcription The overlap of the c-Maf response and c-Rel responsiveness in the same region suggested that c-Maf may be able to inhibit NF- ? B-mediated p35 transcriptional activation. To test this hypothesis, we cotransfected NF- ? B c-Rel, p65, and p50 together with c-Maf with the ?629/+61 p35 promoter-reporter intoRAW264.7 cells. We observed that the stimulatory activity of p35 transcription by these NF- ? B transcription factors was totally abrogated by c-Maf ( Fig. 4 ). It was noted that c-Rel was most potent in inducing p35 transcriptional activation, and p50 was least effective, consistent with the essential physiologic role of c-Rel in the regulation of IL-12p35 expression. 29 These results indicate that c-Maf inhibits p35 transcription by interfering with the ability of NF- ? B, especially c-Rel, to activate p35 transcription, which can be accomplished in several ways, such as inhibition of NF- ? B’s expression, nuclear translocation, DNA-binding activity, or its transactivating potential Effects of c-Maf expression on NF-?B binding To confirm that the NF- ? B response region at ?62 to ?47 could interact with NF- ? B factors, we performed EMSA using nuclear extracts from IFN- ? /LPS-stimulated RAW264.7 cells and a probe containing the ?65/?44 sequence of the p35 promoter. As shown in Figure 5A , this probe formed two specific nuclear complexes (lane 7, marked by arrows), which were supershifted by antibodies directed to NF- ? B p50 (lane 3), p65 (lane 4), and c-Rel (lane 5) but not by the control rabbit IgG (lane 2) or antibody to PU.1 (lane 6). These complexes were also competed off efficiently by the cold probe ( Fig. 5A , lane 8) and an NF- ? B consensus sequence (lane 10) but not by a mutant probe containing the M2 mutation that altered the putative NF- ? B sequence (lane 9) or by the MARE (lane 11), which could directly bind c-Maf. 2 Likewise, the NF- ? B-CS probe interacted with these factors more strongly ( Fig. 5A , lane 13), which were competed off completely by itself (lane 14) and less efficiently but significantly by the ?65/?44 probe (lane 15). This result indicates that NF- ? B p50, p65, and c-Rel can interact directly with the c-Maf-RE. We further hypothesized that if the c-Maf-RE and NF- ? B element overlap, although c-Maf does not bind this region directly, it may interfere with NF- ? B binding, resulting in inhibition of IFN- ? /LPS-stimulated p35 gene transcription. Indeed, when c-Maf was overexpressed by transient transfection of RAW264.7 cells, it inhibited the IFN- ? /LPS-induced NF- ? B binding to the ?65/?44 probe ( Fig. 5B ) both in resting cells (compare lanes 2 and 4) and in activated cells (compare lanes 3 and 5). In particular, c-Maf expression inhibited the activating heterodimer binding by p50/p65 and p50/c-Rel. To determine the level of inhibition of NF- ? B binding to the p35 promoter by c-Maf, we examined the cytoplasmic and nuclear distribution of the major NF- ? B components by Western analysis. As shown in Figure 5C , expression of c-Maf in RAW264.7 cells had little effect on the cytoplasmic levels of c-Rel, p65, and p50 with or without stimulation. However, c-Maf strongly prevented the nuclear localization of all three components, but particularly c-Rel. Taken together, these data demonstrate unequivocally that c-Maf response functionally overlaps with the NF- ? B element and that c-Maf inhibits p35 transcription by interfering with NF- ? B’s nuclear transport and target DNA-binding activity.  RESULTS IL-12p35 mRNA expression and p70 production in c-Maf-deficient macrophages To determine whether c-Maf is involved in the regulation of p35 gene expression, we used macrophages derived from c-Maf knockout mice on the C57B6 background. Because of the prevalent embryonic lethality of homozygous c-Maf deficiency, 7 we obtained c-Maf-deficient macrophages derived from the fetal liver of day 14–15 embryos. These macrophages were highly pure (98.4% by F4/80 staining) ( Fig. 1A, B ). We next examined IL-12p70 production by these macrophages following LPS stimulation ( Fig. 1C ). IL-12 production was significantly enhanced in c-Maf?/? cells compared to macrophages generated from wild-type and heterozygous litter-mates. We had shown previously that IL-12p40 production following LPS stimulation was not significantly altered in c-Maf?/? macrophages, whereas IL-10 production was severely impaired. However, IL-10-induced inhibition of IL-12 production was intact in c-Maf?/? mcrophages. 15 , 21 This suggested to us that the enhanced p70 production may occur at the level of altered p35 expression. To gain a broader appreciation of gene expression in c-Maf-deficient macrophages, we performed an RPA following LPS stimulation ( Fig. 1D, E ). Interestingly, p35 mRNA was expressed at significantly higher levels in c-Maf-deficient cells, whereas p40 mRNA expression was not altered to a remarkable degree. In addition, augmented IL-1 ? mRNA levels and lower levels of IL-10 mRNA expression were observed in c-Maf knockout macrophages. These results establish that c-Maf is a physiologic negative regulator of the expression of p35 and IL-12 production. Regulation of p35 transcription by c-Maf To further delineate the molecular mechanism by which c-Maf exerts its inhibitory effects on p35 gene expression, we used a well-established transient transfection system in the murine monocytic cell line RAW264.7, which has been used extensively for studies of macrophage-derived cytokines. 18 , 22 – 25 A human IL-12p35 promoter containing a 1143-bp genomic fragment spanning from +61 to ?1082 relative to the transcription start site (+1) linked with the firefly luciferase reporter gene 26 , 27 was cotransfected into RAW264.7 cells with a vector constitutively expressing human c-Maf. As shown in Figure 2A , LPS treatment alone did not stimulate the p35 transcription, whereas a combination of interferon- ? (IFN- ? ) priming followed by LPS stimulation strongly induced its transcription, as we showed previously. 17 The transcriptional activity of p35 under all conditions was potently inhibited. To further verify the role of c-Maf in modulating the induction of IL-12p35 transcription by a reverse approach, we used a dominant negative Maf mutant, Mxi-v-Maf, which is a fusion of Sin3-interaction domain (SID, or repressor domain) of Mxi1 and full-length v-Maf. It can form dimers and bind DNA but lacks trans-activator function. Therefore, it acts in dominant negative fashion. ND5Q5H-GCN4-R22E is a chimera of amino-terminally truncated Maf and leucine zipper of yeast GCN4. It cannot form heterodimers with endogenous bZIP proteins but can form homodimer. The resultant dimer neither binds to MARE nor activates transcription; therefore, this mutant serves as an inert control vector for Mxi-v-Maf. 28 When Mxi-v-Maf was co-transfected with the p35 promoter in the presence of c-Maf, it strongly antagonized c-Maf’s inhibitory effect on p35 transcription, whereas the control vector ND5Q5H-GCN4-R22E (ND5Q5H) did not have the c-Maf-neutralizing effect at all ( Fig. 2B ). These results strongly corroborate the study in c-Maf?/? macrophages with regard to the role of c-Maf as a physiological inhibitor of IL-12 p35 transcription. To localize the p35 promoter elements that mediate c-Maf’s suppressive effect on p35 transcription, we tested a large panel of 5? and 3? deletion promoter constructs. These constructs contained either 5? (C2 and C3) or 3?(C4 and C5) deletions. They were cotransfected with the c-Maf expression vector into RAW264.7 cells stimulated with IFN- ? and LPS. As shown in Figure 2C , the removal of 403 bp (C2) and 453 bp (C3) from the 5?-end did not reduce either their inducibility by IFN- ? and LPS or their repression by c-Maf, whereas deletion of 129 bp from the 3?-end of the promoter (C4) strongly affected both responses in that the basal level rose strongly and the repression by c-Maf decreased from ~14-fold of the C1 construct to ~3-fold. The C5 construct with a 53-bp 3? deletion responded almost normally to c-Maf. Further deletional analysis ruled out the region downstream ?33 as critical to c-Maf response (data not shown). Taken together, these results indicate that the 76-bp region between ?68 and +8 of the p35 promoter may contain a putative element(s) through which c-Maf exerts its transcriptional repression of the IL-12p35 gene. Identification of novel NF-?B response element To further delineate the promoter element that responds to c-Maf-induced inhibition, we generated a series of seven constructs that contained sequential 5-base substitutions in the region between ?67 and ?33 just upstream of the TATA box (M1–M7) ( Fig. 3A ). As shown in Figure 3B , four of the seven mutant constructs (M1–M4) completely lost response to c-Maf in the sense that their transcriptional activity stimulated by IFN- ? and LPS could no longer be inhibited by c-Maf, indicating that the region between ?67 and ?47 harbors a potential response element(s) that directly or indirectly mediates c-Maf-induced inhibition. Because the region between ?67 and ?47 contains a putative NF- ? B motif ( Fig. 3A ), we further analyzed the response of these mutants to stimulation by IFN- ? and LPS. It revealed that the same mutants, M1–M4, that lost the inhibitory response by c-Maf also lost a significant portion of their ability to be induced by IFN- ? and LPS; whereas the wild-type construct was stimulated some 38-fold, the M1–M4 constructs were only induced by ~4–6-fold ( Fig. 3C ). This result indicated that the response element (RE) targeted by c-Maf directly or indirectly overlaps with that of the IFN- ? /LPS response. It is well established by our own work as well as others that activation of NF- ? B c-Rel is critical for p35 transcription stimulated by LPS and IFN- ? . 17 , 29 To further test our hypothesis, we analyzed the M1–M7 mutants with respect to their ability to respond to c-Rel overexpression by cotransfection. We observed that the region from ?62 to ?47 covered by the M2–M4 mutants was particularly critical for the c-Rel response of the p35 promoter ( Fig. 3D ), indicating that this region does contain a functional NF- ? B c-Rel response element, which is targeted directly or indirectly by c-Maf. It is worth pointing out that the NF- ? B element has never previously been defined for the human p35 promoter. Effects of c-Maf on NF-?B-mediated p35 transcription The overlap of the c-Maf response and c-Rel responsiveness in the same region suggested that c-Maf may be able to inhibit NF- ? B-mediated p35 transcriptional activation. To test this hypothesis, we cotransfected NF- ? B c-Rel, p65, and p50 together with c-Maf with the ?629/+61 p35 promoter-reporter intoRAW264.7 cells. We observed that the stimulatory activity of p35 transcription by these NF- ? B transcription factors was totally abrogated by c-Maf ( Fig. 4 ). It was noted that c-Rel was most potent in inducing p35 transcriptional activation, and p50 was least effective, consistent with the essential physiologic role of c-Rel in the regulation of IL-12p35 expression. 29 These results indicate that c-Maf inhibits p35 transcription by interfering with the ability of NF- ? B, especially c-Rel, to activate p35 transcription, which can be accomplished in several ways, such as inhibition of NF- ? B’s expression, nuclear translocation, DNA-binding activity, or its transactivating potential Effects of c-Maf expression on NF-?B binding To confirm that the NF- ? B response region at ?62 to ?47 could interact with NF- ? B factors, we performed EMSA using nuclear extracts from IFN- ? /LPS-stimulated RAW264.7 cells and a probe containing the ?65/?44 sequence of the p35 promoter. As shown in Figure 5A , this probe formed two specific nuclear complexes (lane 7, marked by arrows), which were supershifted by antibodies directed to NF- ? B p50 (lane 3), p65 (lane 4), and c-Rel (lane 5) but not by the control rabbit IgG (lane 2) or antibody to PU.1 (lane 6). These complexes were also competed off efficiently by the cold probe ( Fig. 5A , lane 8) and an NF- ? B consensus sequence (lane 10) but not by a mutant probe containing the M2 mutation that altered the putative NF- ? B sequence (lane 9) or by the MARE (lane 11), which could directly bind c-Maf. 2 Likewise, the NF- ? B-CS probe interacted with these factors more strongly ( Fig. 5A , lane 13), which were competed off completely by itself (lane 14) and less efficiently but significantly by the ?65/?44 probe (lane 15). This result indicates that NF- ? B p50, p65, and c-Rel can interact directly with the c-Maf-RE. We further hypothesized that if the c-Maf-RE and NF- ? B element overlap, although c-Maf does not bind this region directly, it may interfere with NF- ? B binding, resulting in inhibition of IFN- ? /LPS-stimulated p35 gene transcription. Indeed, when c-Maf was overexpressed by transient transfection of RAW264.7 cells, it inhibited the IFN- ? /LPS-induced NF- ? B binding to the ?65/?44 probe ( Fig. 5B ) both in resting cells (compare lanes 2 and 4) and in activated cells (compare lanes 3 and 5). In particular, c-Maf expression inhibited the activating heterodimer binding by p50/p65 and p50/c-Rel. To determine the level of inhibition of NF- ? B binding to the p35 promoter by c-Maf, we examined the cytoplasmic and nuclear distribution of the major NF- ? B components by Western analysis. As shown in Figure 5C , expression of c-Maf in RAW264.7 cells had little effect on the cytoplasmic levels of c-Rel, p65, and p50 with or without stimulation. However, c-Maf strongly prevented the nuclear localization of all three components, but particularly c-Rel. Taken together, these data demonstrate unequivocally that c-Maf response functionally overlaps with the NF- ? B element and that c-Maf inhibits p35 transcription by interfering with NF- ? B’s nuclear transport and target DNA-binding activity.  IL-12p35 mRNA expression and p70 production in c-Maf-deficient macrophages To determine whether c-Maf is involved in the regulation of p35 gene expression, we used macrophages derived from c-Maf knockout mice on the C57B6 background. Because of the prevalent embryonic lethality of homozygous c-Maf deficiency, 7 we obtained c-Maf-deficient macrophages derived from the fetal liver of day 14–15 embryos. These macrophages were highly pure (98.4% by F4/80 staining) ( Fig. 1A, B ). We next examined IL-12p70 production by these macrophages following LPS stimulation ( Fig. 1C ). IL-12 production was significantly enhanced in c-Maf?/? cells compared to macrophages generated from wild-type and heterozygous litter-mates. We had shown previously that IL-12p40 production following LPS stimulation was not significantly altered in c-Maf?/? macrophages, whereas IL-10 production was severely impaired. However, IL-10-induced inhibition of IL-12 production was intact in c-Maf?/? mcrophages. 15 , 21 This suggested to us that the enhanced p70 production may occur at the level of altered p35 expression. To gain a broader appreciation of gene expression in c-Maf-deficient macrophages, we performed an RPA following LPS stimulation ( Fig. 1D, E ). Interestingly, p35 mRNA was expressed at significantly higher levels in c-Maf-deficient cells, whereas p40 mRNA expression was not altered to a remarkable degree. In addition, augmented IL-1 ? mRNA levels and lower levels of IL-10 mRNA expression were observed in c-Maf knockout macrophages. These results establish that c-Maf is a physiologic negative regulator of the expression of p35 and IL-12 production.  IL-12p35 mRNA expression and p70 production in c-Maf-deficient macrophages To determine whether c-Maf is involved in the regulation of p35 gene expression, we used macrophages derived from c-Maf knockout mice on the C57B6 background. Because of the prevalent embryonic lethality of homozygous c-Maf deficiency, 7 we obtained c-Maf-deficient macrophages derived from the fetal liver of day 14–15 embryos. These macrophages were highly pure (98.4% by F4/80 staining) ( Fig. 1A, B ). We next examined IL-12p70 production by these macrophages following LPS stimulation ( Fig. 1C ). IL-12 production was significantly enhanced in c-Maf?/? cells compared to macrophages generated from wild-type and heterozygous litter-mates. We had shown previously that IL-12p40 production following LPS stimulation was not significantly altered in c-Maf?/? macrophages, whereas IL-10 production was severely impaired. However, IL-10-induced inhibition of IL-12 production was intact in c-Maf?/? mcrophages. 15 , 21 This suggested to us that the enhanced p70 production may occur at the level of altered p35 expression. To gain a broader appreciation of gene expression in c-Maf-deficient macrophages, we performed an RPA following LPS stimulation ( Fig. 1D, E ). Interestingly, p35 mRNA was expressed at significantly higher levels in c-Maf-deficient cells, whereas p40 mRNA expression was not altered to a remarkable degree. In addition, augmented IL-1 ? mRNA levels and lower levels of IL-10 mRNA expression were observed in c-Maf knockout macrophages. These results establish that c-Maf is a physiologic negative regulator of the expression of p35 and IL-12 production.  Regulation of p35 transcription by c-Maf To further delineate the molecular mechanism by which c-Maf exerts its inhibitory effects on p35 gene expression, we used a well-established transient transfection system in the murine monocytic cell line RAW264.7, which has been used extensively for studies of macrophage-derived cytokines. 18 , 22 – 25 A human IL-12p35 promoter containing a 1143-bp genomic fragment spanning from +61 to ?1082 relative to the transcription start site (+1) linked with the firefly luciferase reporter gene 26 , 27 was cotransfected into RAW264.7 cells with a vector constitutively expressing human c-Maf. As shown in Figure 2A , LPS treatment alone did not stimulate the p35 transcription, whereas a combination of interferon- ? (IFN- ? ) priming followed by LPS stimulation strongly induced its transcription, as we showed previously. 17 The transcriptional activity of p35 under all conditions was potently inhibited. To further verify the role of c-Maf in modulating the induction of IL-12p35 transcription by a reverse approach, we used a dominant negative Maf mutant, Mxi-v-Maf, which is a fusion of Sin3-interaction domain (SID, or repressor domain) of Mxi1 and full-length v-Maf. It can form dimers and bind DNA but lacks trans-activator function. Therefore, it acts in dominant negative fashion. ND5Q5H-GCN4-R22E is a chimera of amino-terminally truncated Maf and leucine zipper of yeast GCN4. It cannot form heterodimers with endogenous bZIP proteins but can form homodimer. The resultant dimer neither binds to MARE nor activates transcription; therefore, this mutant serves as an inert control vector for Mxi-v-Maf. 28 When Mxi-v-Maf was co-transfected with the p35 promoter in the presence of c-Maf, it strongly antagonized c-Maf’s inhibitory effect on p35 transcription, whereas the control vector ND5Q5H-GCN4-R22E (ND5Q5H) did not have the c-Maf-neutralizing effect at all ( Fig. 2B ). These results strongly corroborate the study in c-Maf?/? macrophages with regard to the role of c-Maf as a physiological inhibitor of IL-12 p35 transcription. To localize the p35 promoter elements that mediate c-Maf’s suppressive effect on p35 transcription, we tested a large panel of 5? and 3? deletion promoter constructs. These constructs contained either 5? (C2 and C3) or 3?(C4 and C5) deletions. They were cotransfected with the c-Maf expression vector into RAW264.7 cells stimulated with IFN- ? and LPS. As shown in Figure 2C , the removal of 403 bp (C2) and 453 bp (C3) from the 5?-end did not reduce either their inducibility by IFN- ? and LPS or their repression by c-Maf, whereas deletion of 129 bp from the 3?-end of the promoter (C4) strongly affected both responses in that the basal level rose strongly and the repression by c-Maf decreased from ~14-fold of the C1 construct to ~3-fold. The C5 construct with a 53-bp 3? deletion responded almost normally to c-Maf. Further deletional analysis ruled out the region downstream ?33 as critical to c-Maf response (data not shown). Taken together, these results indicate that the 76-bp region between ?68 and +8 of the p35 promoter may contain a putative element(s) through which c-Maf exerts its transcriptional repression of the IL-12p35 gene.  Regulation of p35 transcription by c-Maf To further delineate the molecular mechanism by which c-Maf exerts its inhibitory effects on p35 gene expression, we used a well-established transient transfection system in the murine monocytic cell line RAW264.7, which has been used extensively for studies of macrophage-derived cytokines. 18 , 22 – 25 A human IL-12p35 promoter containing a 1143-bp genomic fragment spanning from +61 to ?1082 relative to the transcription start site (+1) linked with the firefly luciferase reporter gene 26 , 27 was cotransfected into RAW264.7 cells with a vector constitutively expressing human c-Maf. As shown in Figure 2A , LPS treatment alone did not stimulate the p35 transcription, whereas a combination of interferon- ? (IFN- ? ) priming followed by LPS stimulation strongly induced its transcription, as we showed previously. 17 The transcriptional activity of p35 under all conditions was potently inhibited. To further verify the role of c-Maf in modulating the induction of IL-12p35 transcription by a reverse approach, we used a dominant negative Maf mutant, Mxi-v-Maf, which is a fusion of Sin3-interaction domain (SID, or repressor domain) of Mxi1 and full-length v-Maf. It can form dimers and bind DNA but lacks trans-activator function. Therefore, it acts in dominant negative fashion. ND5Q5H-GCN4-R22E is a chimera of amino-terminally truncated Maf and leucine zipper of yeast GCN4. It cannot form heterodimers with endogenous bZIP proteins but can form homodimer. The resultant dimer neither binds to MARE nor activates transcription; therefore, this mutant serves as an inert control vector for Mxi-v-Maf. 28 When Mxi-v-Maf was co-transfected with the p35 promoter in the presence of c-Maf, it strongly antagonized c-Maf’s inhibitory effect on p35 transcription, whereas the control vector ND5Q5H-GCN4-R22E (ND5Q5H) did not have the c-Maf-neutralizing effect at all ( Fig. 2B ). These results strongly corroborate the study in c-Maf?/? macrophages with regard to the role of c-Maf as a physiological inhibitor of IL-12 p35 transcription. To localize the p35 promoter elements that mediate c-Maf’s suppressive effect on p35 transcription, we tested a large panel of 5? and 3? deletion promoter constructs. These constructs contained either 5? (C2 and C3) or 3?(C4 and C5) deletions. They were cotransfected with the c-Maf expression vector into RAW264.7 cells stimulated with IFN- ? and LPS. As shown in Figure 2C , the removal of 403 bp (C2) and 453 bp (C3) from the 5?-end did not reduce either their inducibility by IFN- ? and LPS or their repression by c-Maf, whereas deletion of 129 bp from the 3?-end of the promoter (C4) strongly affected both responses in that the basal level rose strongly and the repression by c-Maf decreased from ~14-fold of the C1 construct to ~3-fold. The C5 construct with a 53-bp 3? deletion responded almost normally to c-Maf. Further deletional analysis ruled out the region downstream ?33 as critical to c-Maf response (data not shown). Taken together, these results indicate that the 76-bp region between ?68 and +8 of the p35 promoter may contain a putative element(s) through which c-Maf exerts its transcriptional repression of the IL-12p35 gene.  Identification of novel NF-?B response element To further delineate the promoter element that responds to c-Maf-induced inhibition, we generated a series of seven constructs that contained sequential 5-base substitutions in the region between ?67 and ?33 just upstream of the TATA box (M1–M7) ( Fig. 3A ). As shown in Figure 3B , four of the seven mutant constructs (M1–M4) completely lost response to c-Maf in the sense that their transcriptional activity stimulated by IFN- ? and LPS could no longer be inhibited by c-Maf, indicating that the region between ?67 and ?47 harbors a potential response element(s) that directly or indirectly mediates c-Maf-induced inhibition. Because the region between ?67 and ?47 contains a putative NF- ? B motif ( Fig. 3A ), we further analyzed the response of these mutants to stimulation by IFN- ? and LPS. It revealed that the same mutants, M1–M4, that lost the inhibitory response by c-Maf also lost a significant portion of their ability to be induced by IFN- ? and LPS; whereas the wild-type construct was stimulated some 38-fold, the M1–M4 constructs were only induced by ~4–6-fold ( Fig. 3C ). This result indicated that the response element (RE) targeted by c-Maf directly or indirectly overlaps with that of the IFN- ? /LPS response. It is well established by our own work as well as others that activation of NF- ? B c-Rel is critical for p35 transcription stimulated by LPS and IFN- ? . 17 , 29 To further test our hypothesis, we analyzed the M1–M7 mutants with respect to their ability to respond to c-Rel overexpression by cotransfection. We observed that the region from ?62 to ?47 covered by the M2–M4 mutants was particularly critical for the c-Rel response of the p35 promoter ( Fig. 3D ), indicating that this region does contain a functional NF- ? B c-Rel response element, which is targeted directly or indirectly by c-Maf. It is worth pointing out that the NF- ? B element has never previously been defined for the human p35 promoter.  Identification of novel NF-?B response element To further delineate the promoter element that responds to c-Maf-induced inhibition, we generated a series of seven constructs that contained sequential 5-base substitutions in the region between ?67 and ?33 just upstream of the TATA box (M1–M7) ( Fig. 3A ). As shown in Figure 3B , four of the seven mutant constructs (M1–M4) completely lost response to c-Maf in the sense that their transcriptional activity stimulated by IFN- ? and LPS could no longer be inhibited by c-Maf, indicating that the region between ?67 and ?47 harbors a potential response element(s) that directly or indirectly mediates c-Maf-induced inhibition. Because the region between ?67 and ?47 contains a putative NF- ? B motif ( Fig. 3A ), we further analyzed the response of these mutants to stimulation by IFN- ? and LPS. It revealed that the same mutants, M1–M4, that lost the inhibitory response by c-Maf also lost a significant portion of their ability to be induced by IFN- ? and LPS; whereas the wild-type construct was stimulated some 38-fold, the M1–M4 constructs were only induced by ~4–6-fold ( Fig. 3C ). This result indicated that the response element (RE) targeted by c-Maf directly or indirectly overlaps with that of the IFN- ? /LPS response. It is well established by our own work as well as others that activation of NF- ? B c-Rel is critical for p35 transcription stimulated by LPS and IFN- ? . 17 , 29 To further test our hypothesis, we analyzed the M1–M7 mutants with respect to their ability to respond to c-Rel overexpression by cotransfection. We observed that the region from ?62 to ?47 covered by the M2–M4 mutants was particularly critical for the c-Rel response of the p35 promoter ( Fig. 3D ), indicating that this region does contain a functional NF- ? B c-Rel response element, which is targeted directly or indirectly by c-Maf. It is worth pointing out that the NF- ? B element has never previously been defined for the human p35 promoter.  Effects of c-Maf on NF-?B-mediated p35 transcription The overlap of the c-Maf response and c-Rel responsiveness in the same region suggested that c-Maf may be able to inhibit NF- ? B-mediated p35 transcriptional activation. To test this hypothesis, we cotransfected NF- ? B c-Rel, p65, and p50 together with c-Maf with the ?629/+61 p35 promoter-reporter intoRAW264.7 cells. We observed that the stimulatory activity of p35 transcription by these NF- ? B transcription factors was totally abrogated by c-Maf ( Fig. 4 ). It was noted that c-Rel was most potent in inducing p35 transcriptional activation, and p50 was least effective, consistent with the essential physiologic role of c-Rel in the regulation of IL-12p35 expression. 29 These results indicate that c-Maf inhibits p35 transcription by interfering with the ability of NF- ? B, especially c-Rel, to activate p35 transcription, which can be accomplished in several ways, such as inhibition of NF- ? B’s expression, nuclear translocation, DNA-binding activity, or its transactivating potential  Effects of c-Maf on NF-?B-mediated p35 transcription The overlap of the c-Maf response and c-Rel responsiveness in the same region suggested that c-Maf may be able to inhibit NF- ? B-mediated p35 transcriptional activation. To test this hypothesis, we cotransfected NF- ? B c-Rel, p65, and p50 together with c-Maf with the ?629/+61 p35 promoter-reporter intoRAW264.7 cells. We observed that the stimulatory activity of p35 transcription by these NF- ? B transcription factors was totally abrogated by c-Maf ( Fig. 4 ). It was noted that c-Rel was most potent in inducing p35 transcriptional activation, and p50 was least effective, consistent with the essential physiologic role of c-Rel in the regulation of IL-12p35 expression. 29 These results indicate that c-Maf inhibits p35 transcription by interfering with the ability of NF- ? B, especially c-Rel, to activate p35 transcription, which can be accomplished in several ways, such as inhibition of NF- ? B’s expression, nuclear translocation, DNA-binding activity, or its transactivating potential  Effects of c-Maf expression on NF-?B binding To confirm that the NF- ? B response region at ?62 to ?47 could interact with NF- ? B factors, we performed EMSA using nuclear extracts from IFN- ? /LPS-stimulated RAW264.7 cells and a probe containing the ?65/?44 sequence of the p35 promoter. As shown in Figure 5A , this probe formed two specific nuclear complexes (lane 7, marked by arrows), which were supershifted by antibodies directed to NF- ? B p50 (lane 3), p65 (lane 4), and c-Rel (lane 5) but not by the control rabbit IgG (lane 2) or antibody to PU.1 (lane 6). These complexes were also competed off efficiently by the cold probe ( Fig. 5A , lane 8) and an NF- ? B consensus sequence (lane 10) but not by a mutant probe containing the M2 mutation that altered the putative NF- ? B sequence (lane 9) or by the MARE (lane 11), which could directly bind c-Maf. 2 Likewise, the NF- ? B-CS probe interacted with these factors more strongly ( Fig. 5A , lane 13), which were competed off completely by itself (lane 14) and less efficiently but significantly by the ?65/?44 probe (lane 15). This result indicates that NF- ? B p50, p65, and c-Rel can interact directly with the c-Maf-RE. We further hypothesized that if the c-Maf-RE and NF- ? B element overlap, although c-Maf does not bind this region directly, it may interfere with NF- ? B binding, resulting in inhibition of IFN- ? /LPS-stimulated p35 gene transcription. Indeed, when c-Maf was overexpressed by transient transfection of RAW264.7 cells, it inhibited the IFN- ? /LPS-induced NF- ? B binding to the ?65/?44 probe ( Fig. 5B ) both in resting cells (compare lanes 2 and 4) and in activated cells (compare lanes 3 and 5). In particular, c-Maf expression inhibited the activating heterodimer binding by p50/p65 and p50/c-Rel. To determine the level of inhibition of NF- ? B binding to the p35 promoter by c-Maf, we examined the cytoplasmic and nuclear distribution of the major NF- ? B components by Western analysis. As shown in Figure 5C , expression of c-Maf in RAW264.7 cells had little effect on the cytoplasmic levels of c-Rel, p65, and p50 with or without stimulation. However, c-Maf strongly prevented the nuclear localization of all three components, but particularly c-Rel. Taken together, these data demonstrate unequivocally that c-Maf response functionally overlaps with the NF- ? B element and that c-Maf inhibits p35 transcription by interfering with NF- ? B’s nuclear transport and target DNA-binding activity.  Effects of c-Maf expression on NF-?B binding To confirm that the NF- ? B response region at ?62 to ?47 could interact with NF- ? B factors, we performed EMSA using nuclear extracts from IFN- ? /LPS-stimulated RAW264.7 cells and a probe containing the ?65/?44 sequence of the p35 promoter. As shown in Figure 5A , this probe formed two specific nuclear complexes (lane 7, marked by arrows), which were supershifted by antibodies directed to NF- ? B p50 (lane 3), p65 (lane 4), and c-Rel (lane 5) but not by the control rabbit IgG (lane 2) or antibody to PU.1 (lane 6). These complexes were also competed off efficiently by the cold probe ( Fig. 5A , lane 8) and an NF- ? B consensus sequence (lane 10) but not by a mutant probe containing the M2 mutation that altered the putative NF- ? B sequence (lane 9) or by the MARE (lane 11), which could directly bind c-Maf. 2 Likewise, the NF- ? B-CS probe interacted with these factors more strongly ( Fig. 5A , lane 13), which were competed off completely by itself (lane 14) and less efficiently but significantly by the ?65/?44 probe (lane 15). This result indicates that NF- ? B p50, p65, and c-Rel can interact directly with the c-Maf-RE. We further hypothesized that if the c-Maf-RE and NF- ? B element overlap, although c-Maf does not bind this region directly, it may interfere with NF- ? B binding, resulting in inhibition of IFN- ? /LPS-stimulated p35 gene transcription. Indeed, when c-Maf was overexpressed by transient transfection of RAW264.7 cells, it inhibited the IFN- ? /LPS-induced NF- ? B binding to the ?65/?44 probe ( Fig. 5B ) both in resting cells (compare lanes 2 and 4) and in activated cells (compare lanes 3 and 5). In particular, c-Maf expression inhibited the activating heterodimer binding by p50/p65 and p50/c-Rel. To determine the level of inhibition of NF- ? B binding to the p35 promoter by c-Maf, we examined the cytoplasmic and nuclear distribution of the major NF- ? B components by Western analysis. As shown in Figure 5C , expression of c-Maf in RAW264.7 cells had little effect on the cytoplasmic levels of c-Rel, p65, and p50 with or without stimulation. However, c-Maf strongly prevented the nuclear localization of all three components, but particularly c-Rel. Taken together, these data demonstrate unequivocally that c-Maf response functionally overlaps with the NF- ? B element and that c-Maf inhibits p35 transcription by interfering with NF- ? B’s nuclear transport and target DNA-binding activity.  DISCUSSION The significance of this study is underscored by the importance of c-Maf and IL-12 in development and immunity. In addition to its well-known role in IL-4 gene transcription and Th2 development, c-Maf also plays important roles in macrophage function. First, c-Maf induces monocytic differentiation and apoptosis in myeloid progenitors. Hegde et al. 30 investigated the transcriptional mechanisms that drive colony-forming unit granulocyte-macrophage (CFU-GM) myeloid progenitors to differentiate into cells of either the granulocytic or monocytic lineage and showed that the c-Maf and c-Myb transcription factors physically interacted in myeloid cells to form inhibitory complexes that hinder transactivation of c-Myb target genes through direct binding to Myb consensus sites. These complexes arose in a developmentally regulated pattern, peaking at the promyelocyte stage or, in cell model systems, appearing soon after the induction of monocytic differentiation. 30 Elevated levels of c-Maf protein led to marked increases in Myb/Maf complexes and the accumulation of monocyte/macrophage cells, followed by a decrease in Bcl-2 protein levels and subsequent apoptotic cell death. Analysis of targets that could mediate these phenotypic changes indicated that c-Maf likely plays a key role in myeloid cell development through dual mechanisms: inhibition of a select set of c-Myb regulated targets, such as Bcl-2 and CD13/APN, coupled with the activation of undefined differentiation-promoting genes. 30 In the present study, we show that c-Maf is a physiologic inhibitor of IL-12p35 gene transcription and p70 production. It does so by preventing the nuclear translocation of c-Rel and p65, thus blocking the transcriptional activation initiated by inflammatory stimulators. It is noted that although the M1–M4 mutant constructs have lost the c-Maf response, they are still inducible by IFN- ? /LPS. However, this residual inducibility only corresponds to 10% of the inducibility of the wild-type construct and could result from binding of transcription factors, such as c-Rel, to different sites in the ?631/+61 sequence. The presence of c-Maf seems not to interfere with this NF- ? B-independent activation, further supporting the finding that c-Maf-mediated inhibition selectively targets NF- ? B. How c-Maf prevents the nuclear export of NF- ? B is currently not known. The possibility of a direct interaction between NF- ? B and c-Maf was reported by a recent study aimed at understanding the pathophysiology of minimal change nephrotic syndrome (MCNS), the most frequent of glomerular diseases in children, in which T cell dysfunction may be involved. 31 In this study, overexpression of c-Maf in T cells induced a high level of IL-4 promoter-driven luciferase activity. In contrast, coexpression of c-Maf with NF- ? B p65 inhibited the c-Maf-dependent IL-4 promoter activity, and p65 expelled c-Maf from its DNA-binding site on IL-4 gene promoter, resulting in active inhibition of IL-4 gene transcription. 31 It should be stressed, however, that unlike the IL-4 promoter, c-Maf does not appear to be able to directly bind to the p35 promoter, as evidenced by the inability of the MARE sequence to compete against the NF- ? B binding to the p35 promoter ( Fig. 5A ). Alternatively, it has been reported that elevation of intracellular cyclic AMP (cAMP) in Jurkat T leukemia cells activated with phorbol ester (PDBu)/calcium ionophore (A23187) increased the DNA binding of c-Rel, not by increasing the synthesis of c-Rel but by enhancing the nuclear localization of this protein. 32 It has also been shown that transient and selective p65 serine 536 phosphorylation induced by T cell costimulation is mediated by I ? B kinase ? and controls the kinetics of p65 nuclear import. 33 It is possible that c-Maf interferes with the phosphorylation of c-Rel/p56, thus preventing them from migrating into the nucleus. IL-12 is a principal activator of natural killer (NK), cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL), and Th cells in response to pathogenic perturbations in our body. When stimulated by IL-12, these immune effector cells become highly effective in the elimination of cancer cells and in the establishment of tumor immunity. The importance of IL-12 in tumor surveillance, regression, and immunity has been amply demonstrated in recent years in both experimental animal systems and preliminary human clinical trials. Yet most of what we know about how IL-12 production is controlled has been derived from studies involving microbial antigens. Much is to be learned about how oncogenes or tumor-derived products interact with the immune system and impact on IL-12 production by APCs. c-Maf is a proto-oncogene of the bZIP family that play important roles in normal development and physiology. We hypothesize that in malignant processes, deregulated c-Maf may promote oncogenic development partly through its direct effects on cell proliferation and survival and partly through its ability to suppress the production of immune stimulatory factors, such as IL-12, thereby inhibiting activation of the major effector cells of the immune surveillance apparatus. The elucidation of the molecular mechanisms by which c-Maf inhibits IL-12p35 gene expression via paracrine pathways in accessory cells and IL-12’s immunoregulatory activities in effector cells will provide a better understanding of the way tumors and their derivatives interact with immune effectors. Further investigations into the way oncogenic products wield their influence on the immune defense machinery in vivo will lead to new avenues through which novel therapeutic targets could be identified and characterized for the benefit of cancer prevention and treatment.  DISCUSSION The significance of this study is underscored by the importance of c-Maf and IL-12 in development and immunity. In addition to its well-known role in IL-4 gene transcription and Th2 development, c-Maf also plays important roles in macrophage function. First, c-Maf induces monocytic differentiation and apoptosis in myeloid progenitors. Hegde et al. 30 investigated the transcriptional mechanisms that drive colony-forming unit granulocyte-macrophage (CFU-GM) myeloid progenitors to differentiate into cells of either the granulocytic or monocytic lineage and showed that the c-Maf and c-Myb transcription factors physically interacted in myeloid cells to form inhibitory complexes that hinder transactivation of c-Myb target genes through direct binding to Myb consensus sites. These complexes arose in a developmentally regulated pattern, peaking at the promyelocyte stage or, in cell model systems, appearing soon after the induction of monocytic differentiation. 30 Elevated levels of c-Maf protein led to marked increases in Myb/Maf complexes and the accumulation of monocyte/macrophage cells, followed by a decrease in Bcl-2 protein levels and subsequent apoptotic cell death. Analysis of targets that could mediate these phenotypic changes indicated that c-Maf likely plays a key role in myeloid cell development through dual mechanisms: inhibition of a select set of c-Myb regulated targets, such as Bcl-2 and CD13/APN, coupled with the activation of undefined differentiation-promoting genes. 30 In the present study, we show that c-Maf is a physiologic inhibitor of IL-12p35 gene transcription and p70 production. It does so by preventing the nuclear translocation of c-Rel and p65, thus blocking the transcriptional activation initiated by inflammatory stimulators. It is noted that although the M1–M4 mutant constructs have lost the c-Maf response, they are still inducible by IFN- ? /LPS. However, this residual inducibility only corresponds to 10% of the inducibility of the wild-type construct and could result from binding of transcription factors, such as c-Rel, to different sites in the ?631/+61 sequence. The presence of c-Maf seems not to interfere with this NF- ? B-independent activation, further supporting the finding that c-Maf-mediated inhibition selectively targets NF- ? B. How c-Maf prevents the nuclear export of NF- ? B is currently not known. The possibility of a direct interaction between NF- ? B and c-Maf was reported by a recent study aimed at understanding the pathophysiology of minimal change nephrotic syndrome (MCNS), the most frequent of glomerular diseases in children, in which T cell dysfunction may be involved. 31 In this study, overexpression of c-Maf in T cells induced a high level of IL-4 promoter-driven luciferase activity. In contrast, coexpression of c-Maf with NF- ? B p65 inhibited the c-Maf-dependent IL-4 promoter activity, and p65 expelled c-Maf from its DNA-binding site on IL-4 gene promoter, resulting in active inhibition of IL-4 gene transcription. 31 It should be stressed, however, that unlike the IL-4 promoter, c-Maf does not appear to be able to directly bind to the p35 promoter, as evidenced by the inability of the MARE sequence to compete against the NF- ? B binding to the p35 promoter ( Fig. 5A ). Alternatively, it has been reported that elevation of intracellular cyclic AMP (cAMP) in Jurkat T leukemia cells activated with phorbol ester (PDBu)/calcium ionophore (A23187) increased the DNA binding of c-Rel, not by increasing the synthesis of c-Rel but by enhancing the nuclear localization of this protein. 32 It has also been shown that transient and selective p65 serine 536 phosphorylation induced by T cell costimulation is mediated by I ? B kinase ? and controls the kinetics of p65 nuclear import. 33 It is possible that c-Maf interferes with the phosphorylation of c-Rel/p56, thus preventing them from migrating into the nucleus. IL-12 is a principal activator of natural killer (NK), cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL), and Th cells in response to pathogenic perturbations in our body. When stimulated by IL-12, these immune effector cells become highly effective in the elimination of cancer cells and in the establishment of tumor immunity. The importance of IL-12 in tumor surveillance, regression, and immunity has been amply demonstrated in recent years in both experimental animal systems and preliminary human clinical trials. Yet most of what we know about how IL-12 production is controlled has been derived from studies involving microbial antigens. Much is to be learned about how oncogenes or tumor-derived products interact with the immune system and impact on IL-12 production by APCs. c-Maf is a proto-oncogene of the bZIP family that play important roles in normal development and physiology. We hypothesize that in malignant processes, deregulated c-Maf may promote oncogenic development partly through its direct effects on cell proliferation and survival and partly through its ability to suppress the production of immune stimulatory factors, such as IL-12, thereby inhibiting activation of the major effector cells of the immune surveillance apparatus. The elucidation of the molecular mechanisms by which c-Maf inhibits IL-12p35 gene expression via paracrine pathways in accessory cells and IL-12’s immunoregulatory activities in effector cells will provide a better understanding of the way tumors and their derivatives interact with immune effectors. Further investigations into the way oncogenic products wield their influence on the immune defense machinery in vivo will lead to new avenues through which novel therapeutic targets could be identified and characterized for the benefit of cancer prevention and treatment.  Figures FIG. 1 Gene expression in c-Maf-deficient macrophages. ( A, B ) Macrophages were generated from wild-type or c-Maf knockout (KO) embryonic livers by culturing in L929 cell conditioned medium for 7 days and analyzed by flow cytometry using an isotype control antibody ( A ) and antibody for F4/80 ( B ). The numbers in each quarter indicate the percentages of the subsets. (C, D, E) Fetal liver-derived macrophages in culture were stimulated for 24 h ( C ) or 4 h ( D ) by LPS. ( C ) ELISA was performed to measure MuIL-12p70 secretion from macrophages generated from a total of 11 wild type or heterozygous embryos (+/+, +/?) and 11 homozygous KO?/? embryos from three separate matings. Results are mean plus SE. Student’s t -test was performed showing a significant difference. RNA was isolated for RPA ( D ) using the mCK2 probe set from BD-PharMingen (San Diego, CA). The arrows at right point to the respective mRNAs being detected. The numbers at the top indicate embryo IDs. ( E ) Densitometric analysis of p35 and p40 mRNA levels in D . The analysis was performed using ImageQuant software. The data represent the average of four embryonic macrophage lines of each genotype with standard error, normalized against the mRNA level of L32 in each sample. FIG. 2 c-Maf inhibits IL-12p35 transcription. (A) The human IL-12p35 promoter-luciferase construct (reporter) was cotransfected transiently with the human c-Maf expression vector (effector) or its empty parental vector pCEFL into RAW264.7 cells at a molar ratio of 3:1 (reporter/effector). Cells were then stimulated with IFN- ? (10 ng/mL, 16 h) followed by LPS (1 ? g/mL, 7 h). Cell lysates were prepared and assayed for luciferase activity using a luminometer. The data are summaries of three independent experiments, with SD. (B) The IL-12p35 promoter reporter was cotransfected with c-Maf or its control vector pCEFL in the presence or absence of the Maf-DNM, Mxi1-v-Maf or its control vector ND5Q5H-GCN4-R22E (ND5Q5H), into RAW264.7 cells in a 1:0.25:1 molar ratios (p35/c-Maf/DNM). Cells were then stimulated with IFN- ? and LPS, and luciferase activity was measured as described in A , and expressed as relative promoter activities with respect to that of p35 cotransfected with pCEFL and ND5Q5H, which was set as 1. (C) Deletions of the human IL-12p35 promoter-luciferase reporter constructs were generated from the wild type construct (C1) by PCR for 5? (C2 and C3) and 3 ? (C4 and C5) deletions. These constructs were cotransfected into RAW264.7 cells with c-Maf. Cells were stimulated with IFN- ? and LPS as described in A . The empty vector pCEFL was used as a negative control. Promoter coordinates are indicated relative to the transcription initiation site (TIS), which is +1, marked by a curved black arrow. All data represent mean plus SD from three independent experiments normalized against the internal control: a cotransfected CMV- LacZ ( ? -galactosidase) construct. FIG. 3 Localization of a novel NF- ? B response element in the p35 promoter. ( A ) Sequence of the p35 promoter between ?67 and ?33 relative to the transcription initiation site TIS (+ 1 ) is shown. The positions of the seven base-substitution mutant constructs are indicated by open brackets, numbered M1 through M7. The putative NF- ? B motif was predicted on the bottom strand by MatInspector. (B ) Base-substitution mutants of the p35 promoter-reporter constructs M1–M7 in the backbone of ?629/+61 were generated by PCR and analyzed for their response to c-Maf-mediated inhibition. The coordinates of the specific nucleotides that were substituted by transversions are indicated by the numbers in brackets. TIS, the transcription initiation site. Data represent one of three independent experiments, with very similar results. ( C ) The IFN- ? /LPS response of these mutants was measured following their transfection into RAW264.7 cells stimulated with IFN- ? and LPS. Data represent one of three separate experiments, with very similar results. ( D ) The c-Rel response of these mutants was measured by cotransfecting a c-Rel expression vector (or its control vector) with the p35 promoter-reporter, then stimulating the transfected cells by LPS for 7 h. Note that LPS stimulation is needed to induce phosphorylation of the endogenous I ? B ? , resulting in the liberation and activation of NF- ? B species. FIG. 4 Effects of c-Maf on NF- ? B-stimulated p35 transcription. The ?629/+61 p35 promoter-luciferase reporter was cotransfected with c-Rel ( A ) or p65 ( B ) or p50 ( C ), together with c-Maf, in a molar ratio of 1:1:0.3 (reporter/NF- ? B/c-Maf/pCEFL). Cells were stimulated with IFN- ? and LPS for 7 h and harvested. Cell lysates were prepared for luciferase activity measurement. Data represent three independent experiments with SD. pMFG is the control vector for the NF- ? B components. 17 FIG. 5 NF- ? B binding to the NF- ? B-RE and c-Maf-mediated interference. ( A ) EMSA was performed using nuclear extracts isolated from IFN- ? and LPS-stimulated RAW264.7 cells. The probe was derived from ?65/?44 of the p35 promoter containing the NF- ? B-RE. The various complexes of NF- ? B species are indicated. ns, nonspecific binding activity. ( B ) EMSA was performed as described for A . The nuclear extracts used were derived from RAW264.7 cells transiently transfected with c-Maf or its control vector pCEFL. Twenty-four hours after transfection, cells were stimulated with IFN- ? and LPS for 4 h before nuclear extraction. The plus and minus signs indicate stimulation with IFN- ? LPS or not. FP, free probe. ( C ) Western blot analysis was performed with equal amounts of cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins isolated from IFN- ? and LPS-stimulated RAW264.7 cells transfected with pCEFL or c-Maf. Cyclin D1, a nuclear protein, was measured as a loading control for nuclear extracts. Note that the cytoplasmic extracts also displayed the presence of CD1, indicative of slight contamination. Data represent one of three independent experiments, with highly similar results.  Figures FIG. 1 Gene expression in c-Maf-deficient macrophages. ( A, B ) Macrophages were generated from wild-type or c-Maf knockout (KO) embryonic livers by culturing in L929 cell conditioned medium for 7 days and analyzed by flow cytometry using an isotype control antibody ( A ) and antibody for F4/80 ( B ). The numbers in each quarter indicate the percentages of the subsets. (C, D, E) Fetal liver-derived macrophages in culture were stimulated for 24 h ( C ) or 4 h ( D ) by LPS. ( C ) ELISA was performed to measure MuIL-12p70 secretion from macrophages generated from a total of 11 wild type or heterozygous embryos (+/+, +/?) and 11 homozygous KO?/? embryos from three separate matings. Results are mean plus SE. Student’s t -test was performed showing a significant difference. RNA was isolated for RPA ( D ) using the mCK2 probe set from BD-PharMingen (San Diego, CA). The arrows at right point to the respective mRNAs being detected. The numbers at the top indicate embryo IDs. ( E ) Densitometric analysis of p35 and p40 mRNA levels in D . The analysis was performed using ImageQuant software. The data represent the average of four embryonic macrophage lines of each genotype with standard error, normalized against the mRNA level of L32 in each sample. FIG. 2 c-Maf inhibits IL-12p35 transcription. (A) The human IL-12p35 promoter-luciferase construct (reporter) was cotransfected transiently with the human c-Maf expression vector (effector) or its empty parental vector pCEFL into RAW264.7 cells at a molar ratio of 3:1 (reporter/effector). Cells were then stimulated with IFN- ? (10 ng/mL, 16 h) followed by LPS (1 ? g/mL, 7 h). Cell lysates were prepared and assayed for luciferase activity using a luminometer. The data are summaries of three independent experiments, with SD. (B) The IL-12p35 promoter reporter was cotransfected with c-Maf or its control vector pCEFL in the presence or absence of the Maf-DNM, Mxi1-v-Maf or its control vector ND5Q5H-GCN4-R22E (ND5Q5H), into RAW264.7 cells in a 1:0.25:1 molar ratios (p35/c-Maf/DNM). Cells were then stimulated with IFN- ? and LPS, and luciferase activity was measured as described in A , and expressed as relative promoter activities with respect to that of p35 cotransfected with pCEFL and ND5Q5H, which was set as 1. (C) Deletions of the human IL-12p35 promoter-luciferase reporter constructs were generated from the wild type construct (C1) by PCR for 5? (C2 and C3) and 3 ? (C4 and C5) deletions. These constructs were cotransfected into RAW264.7 cells with c-Maf. Cells were stimulated with IFN- ? and LPS as described in A . The empty vector pCEFL was used as a negative control. Promoter coordinates are indicated relative to the transcription initiation site (TIS), which is +1, marked by a curved black arrow. All data represent mean plus SD from three independent experiments normalized against the internal control: a cotransfected CMV- LacZ ( ? -galactosidase) construct. FIG. 3 Localization of a novel NF- ? B response element in the p35 promoter. ( A ) Sequence of the p35 promoter between ?67 and ?33 relative to the transcription initiation site TIS (+ 1 ) is shown. The positions of the seven base-substitution mutant constructs are indicated by open brackets, numbered M1 through M7. The putative NF- ? B motif was predicted on the bottom strand by MatInspector. (B ) Base-substitution mutants of the p35 promoter-reporter constructs M1–M7 in the backbone of ?629/+61 were generated by PCR and analyzed for their response to c-Maf-mediated inhibition. The coordinates of the specific nucleotides that were substituted by transversions are indicated by the numbers in brackets. TIS, the transcription initiation site. Data represent one of three independent experiments, with very similar results. ( C ) The IFN- ? /LPS response of these mutants was measured following their transfection into RAW264.7 cells stimulated with IFN- ? and LPS. Data represent one of three separate experiments, with very similar results. ( D ) The c-Rel response of these mutants was measured by cotransfecting a c-Rel expression vector (or its control vector) with the p35 promoter-reporter, then stimulating the transfected cells by LPS for 7 h. Note that LPS stimulation is needed to induce phosphorylation of the endogenous I ? B ? , resulting in the liberation and activation of NF- ? B species. FIG. 4 Effects of c-Maf on NF- ? B-stimulated p35 transcription. The ?629/+61 p35 promoter-luciferase reporter was cotransfected with c-Rel ( A ) or p65 ( B ) or p50 ( C ), together with c-Maf, in a molar ratio of 1:1:0.3 (reporter/NF- ? B/c-Maf/pCEFL). Cells were stimulated with IFN- ? and LPS for 7 h and harvested. Cell lysates were prepared for luciferase activity measurement. Data represent three independent experiments with SD. pMFG is the control vector for the NF- ? B components. 17 FIG. 5 NF- ? B binding to the NF- ? B-RE and c-Maf-mediated interference. ( A ) EMSA was performed using nuclear extracts isolated from IFN- ? and LPS-stimulated RAW264.7 cells. The probe was derived from ?65/?44 of the p35 promoter containing the NF- ? B-RE. The various complexes of NF- ? B species are indicated. ns, nonspecific binding activity. ( B ) EMSA was performed as described for A . The nuclear extracts used were derived from RAW264.7 cells transiently transfected with c-Maf or its control vector pCEFL. Twenty-four hours after transfection, cells were stimulated with IFN- ? and LPS for 4 h before nuclear extraction. The plus and minus signs indicate stimulation with IFN- ? LPS or not. FP, free probe. ( C ) Western blot analysis was performed with equal amounts of cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins isolated from IFN- ? and LPS-stimulated RAW264.7 cells transfected with pCEFL or c-Maf. Cyclin D1, a nuclear protein, was measured as a loading control for nuclear extracts. Note that the cytoplasmic extracts also displayed the presence of CD1, indicative of slight contamination. Data represent one of three independent experiments, with highly similar results. 