How Can We Make the Pain Go Away? Public Policies to Manage Pain at the End of Life The continued undertreatment of pain at the end of life is a substantive public health problem that has not been resolved through increased public awareness, the issuance of clinical guidance for providers, or expanded organizational commitments. In this forum, we illuminate the role of public policies in promoting pain management. We review federal and state policies and consider empirical evaluations that compared the quality of state policies and the factors that contributed to their formation. We resolve that any organized interest in improving end-of-life care should begin by focusing on the development and expansion of those state policies that support the provision of evidence-based medicine for reducing the amount of pain an individual experiences at the end of life. Although empirical research is needed to determine which particular aspects of state pain policy are most critical and how these policies can be implemented most effectively, any organized effort that advances state medical board activity or another state policy would appear to be making an important step toward making the pain at the end of life go away.  Focal Points for Future Research We have assumed that public health policies pertaining to pain management at the end of life provide the legal structure that shapes organizational procedures, clinical practices, and individual outcomes, and that the impact of these public policies may be positive or negative depending on the specific language and legal parameters of the particular policy. In support of this assumption, we have highlighted numerous case studies and deductive arguments ( Edmondson, 2006 ; Gilson et al., 2005 ; Haugen, 2000 ; Joranson et al., 2002 ). Our assumption also is supported by an emerging research literature that has used quantitative methodology (i.e., longitudinal designs, large samples, and statistical analyses that account for covariates and random effects) to tie other public health policies to specific clinical practices and individual outcomes ( Miller, 2005 ; Walker, 1989). Nonetheless, researchers should further illuminate the effects of public policies pertaining to pain management, and this forum could be a departure point for the development of empirical research that addresses two critical issues. First, policy implementation studies must determine which particular pain policies had their intended effect of improving patient outcomes at the end of life. In other words, research needs to identify the most critical policies for improving end-of-life care ( Kaufman et al., 2006 ). Second, given that the undertreatment of pain may be more of a problem than just outdated and scientifically flawed public policies ( National Consensus Project, 2004 ), researchers need to consider how covariates of the “best” policies (e.g., other pain policies, individual characteristics, provider behaviors, organizational policies, etc.) mitigate or moderate the effect on end-of-life care. Research also should illuminate the pathway of effect. Does a state policy that works through an organization (i.e., as an instrumental variable) differ from one that directly targets the patient and his or her provider (e.g., a public information and professional education campaign)? These certainly appear to be important topics. However, Spitz and Abramson (2005) cautioned that efforts to advance public polices, such as those discussed in this forum, should not necessarily wait on research results. Although research can inform discussions about what should or should not be done, we agree with Spitz and Abramson in that the inevitable lack of conclusiveness of any particular research study can contribute to the perpetuation of the status quo. If we conclude that advancements in public policy should not be made without a sufficient amount of induction, then the undertreatment of pain at the end of life will not go away any time soon.  Conclusion The continued undertreatment of pain at the end of life is a substantive public health problem that has not been resolved through increased public awareness, the issuance of clinical guidance for providers, or expanded organizational commitments. In this forum, we illuminated the role of public policies in promoting pain management. We reviewed federal and state policies and considered empirical evaluations concerning their quality and the factors that contributed to their formation. It is our assumption that any organized interest in improving end-of-life care should begin by focusing on the development and expansion of those state policies that support the provision of evidence-based medicine for reducing the amount of pain an individual experiences at the end of life. Although empirical research is needed to determine which particular aspects of state pain policy are most critical and how these policies can be implemented most effectively, any organized effort that advances state medical board activity or another state policy would appear to be making an important step toward making the pain at the end of life go away. 