A Novel Human Multidrug Resistance Gene MDR1 Variant G571A (G191R) Modulates Cancer Drug Resistance and Efflux Transport The human multidrug resistance gene MDR1 encodes a membrane-bound transporter P-glycoprotein (Pgp) that confers the drug resistance of cancer cells by mediating an ATP-dependent drug efflux transport. We and others have reported a number of functionally significant MDR1 variants, including G1199A and G1199T , that modulate cancer drug resistance and intracellular levels of antivirals. In this report, we describe a novel G571A variant of MDR1 detected in 6.4% of leukemia patients. Because this nucleotide modification gives rise to an amino acid change from Gly to Arg at the 191 amino acid position of Pgp, we have developed and characterized the functional affect of the G571A variant in stable, recombinant cells. Using six chemotherapeutic drugs, doxorubicin HCl, daunorubicin HCl, vinblastine sulfate, vincristine sulfate, taxanes (paclitaxel), and epipodophyllotoxin (etoposide, VP-16), we found that the MDR1 571A variant selectively reduced the degree of Pgp-mediated resistance in drug-dependent manner. Although there was a minimal effect on doxorubicin and daunorubicin, the MDR1 -dependent resistance on vinblastine, vincristine, paclitaxel, and etoposide was reduced by approximately 5-fold. The increased drug sensitivity in MDR1 571A , compared with MDR1 wt , paralleled the intracellular drug levels. These data suggest that individuals with this novel MDR1 variant, the 571A genotype, may be more sensitive to the specific anticancer drugs that are Pgp substrates.  Materials and Methods Chemicals and Drugs All chemotherapeutic agents used for this study, doxorubicin HCl, daunorubicin HCl, vinblastine sulfate, vincristine (VCR), paclitaxel, and etoposide, were obtained through the drug service of the University of Washington Medical Center. Each drug was diluted with culture medium to a wide range of concentration. The multidrug resistance protein inhibitor GF120918 (Elacridar) was kindly provided by GlaxoSmithKline (Cambridge, Middlesex, UK) ( Hyafil et al., 1993 ). Rhodamine 123 was from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Bodipy FL-vinblastine and paclitaxel (Tubulin Tracker green reagent), tissue culture media DMEM, trypsin-EDTA, and antibiotic solutions were supplied by Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA). Fetal bovine serum was obtained from HyClone Laboratories (Logan, UT). MDR1 antibody C219 was purchased from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA), and F4 antibody was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The monoclonal antibody MRK16 was from Kamiya Biomedical (Thousand Oaks, CA). The CellTiter-Glo luminescent cell viability assay kit was from Promega (Madison, WI). Other reagents were of analytical grades or higher. Cell Culture Recombinant HEK cells expressing MDR1 wt and MDR1 571A vectors were grown in complete media consisting of DMEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (HyClone Laboratories), 1% (v/v) antibiotic-antimycotic, and 1% (v/v) nonessential amino acid and grown at 37°C in the presence of 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator. Cells were periodically treated with Geneticin (G-418; Calbiochem) at 200 µg/ml for routine maintenance. Identification of <italic>MDR1 571</italic> Variation Samples were collected from patients 55 to 85 years old with confirmed MDS or AML by cytological or cytogenetic criteria recruited from the University of Washington Medical Center and by the Veterans Administration Puget Sound Health Care System according to approved protocols from the human subject review committee. Patients with an M3 subtype of AML were excluded from this study because of the variation of their therapy. Patients with recent exposure to a chemotherapeutic agent, low serum folate, or vitamin B12 were also excluded. The blood or bone marrow samples were collected, and RNA was extracted from the isolated peripheral blood mononuclear cell as described before ( Yang et al., 2002b ). RNAs were subjected into RT-PCR using human MDR1 -specific primer pairs, which cover the entire MDR1 cDNA (GenBank accession no. M14758) regions. The amplified cDNA was separated in agarose gel, and the gel slices containing the cDNA fragment were isolated. The cDNAs were extracted using a QIAGEN gel extraction kit (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA) following the supplier’s manual. The sequence of the extracted DNA was determined using the ABI automated DNA sequencer 370 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) in our DNA Sequencing and Gene Analysis center. Sequences were assembled using Sequencher software (Gene Codes Corporation, Ann Arbor, MI) or VectorNT software (Invitrogen) and compared with human MDR1 reference (Gen-Bank accession no. M14758). These data were verified with a genomic sequence of the region of interest. Generation of <italic>MDR1<sub>wt</sub></italic> and <italic>MDR1<sub>571A</sub></italic> Expression Vectors The generation of MDR1 expression plasmid had been reported in our laboratory as detailed previously ( Yang et al., 2002a , b ). The neomycin-resistant plasmid containing human MDR1 wild-type cDNA ( MDR1 wt ) was employed as a template to generate the MDR1 571A variant. A site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) was used for this purpose. The primer sequences were as follows: forward, 5?-GTTATTGG TGACAAAATT AGAATGTTCT TTCAGTC-3? and reverse, 5?-GACTGAAAGAACATTCTAATTTTGTCACCAATAAC-3?. The generated clones were screened by size exclusion and restriction enzyme digestion. The full length of the cDNA containing mutation clones was verified by DNA sequencing using our DNA sequence center facility (Big-Dye 3.0 Chemistry and an ABI Prism 377 DNA Sequencer; Applied Biosystems). Development and Characterization of Stable Recombinant HEK Cells Expressing Human <italic>MDR1<sub>wt</sub></italic> or <italic>MDR1<sub>571A</sub></italic> Variant The pcDNA3.1 vector and MDR wt and MDR1 571A plasmids were transfected into the mammalian HEK cells. In brief, HEK cells were seeded into a 24-well plate. Transfection was conducted when the cells reached approximately 90% confluence. The growth medium of the cells was replaced with serum-free medium (Opti-MEM; Invitrogen) for 30 min. The cells were then allowed to grow in a growth medium containing serum. At 24 h after transfection, cells from one or two wells were trypsinized and plated into a 100-mm Petri dish at a dilution of approximately 1:20 in a DMEM growth medium. At 48 h post-transfection, G-418 at 500 µg/ml was added. The medium containing G-418 was refreshed every 3 to 4 days for 3 to 4 weeks, and cells that survived under G-418 selection pressure were used subsequently for clone selection. Single cell colony was picked into a 12-well plate. Cells grown from the single colony were seeded into new 12-well plates, and rhodamine 123 (R123) uptake and efflux were conducted to select the polyclonal cells with high Pgp activities. The cells with high Pgp activity were further expanded and tested. Cells with high Pgp activity stable for at least three times for R123 uptake were stored and used for functional evaluation. Characterization of Pgp Expression by mRNA Quantitation Total RNA from HEK cells transfected and MDR1 wt and MDR1 571A variant were extracted using the Ultraspec total RNA isolation kit according to the manufacturer’s instruction (Biotecx Laboratories, Inc., Houston, TX). To compare the expression level, absolute quantitation of MDR1 mRNA transcripts in transfected cellular samples was performed using the ABI Prism 7900HT Detection System (Applied Biosystems). An MDR1 RNA standard was generated by in vitro transcription using the T7 promoter on the plasmid described previously ( Yang et al., 2002b ), and concentration was measured by absorbance at 260 nm and converted to the number of copies of MDR1 RNA by the mol. wt. A dilution series of the MDR1 RNA standard was used to generate a standard curve of the number of copies of MDR1 mRNA versus threshold cycle value. After RNA isolation, 1 µg of total RNA of each sample was subjected to RT. Fifty nanograms of total RNA was analyzed in quadruplicate to obtain a threshold cycle value and an estimation of the number of copies of MDR1 mRNA in recombinant HEK cells. To validate the assay, a housekeeping gene, hGUS , was detected at the same time to eliminate the sample variation. Characterization of Pgp Expression at the Protein Level Immunoblot analysis was used to detect protein expression. In brief, approximately 1 × 107 cells were pelleted and washed in PBS and lysed in a lysis buffer containing 1% Nonidet P40 and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Calbiochem). Protein concentration was measured by a bicinchoninic acid microplate assay protocol (Pierce Chemical, Rockford, IL), and all samples were diluted into the same concentration using the lysis buffer and mixed with a 5× loading buffer containing 0.1% SDS and ?-mercaptoethanol. Electrophoresis and transfer of membrane protein were done according to instructions for Mini-PROTEAN II Electrophoresis (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Proteins were transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (Millipore Corporation, Billerica, MA) and blocked with 5% nonfat milk in Tris-buffered saline/Tween 20 buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, 0.9% NaCl, 0.05% Tween 20, pH 7.6). Immunoblotting was performed with the anti-Pgp monoclonal antibody C219 or F4, followed by a secondary horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG. ECL plus reagents (GE Healthcare, Chalfont St. Giles, UK) were used as substrate, and blots were exposed to X-ray film for visualization of the protein bands. Cellular Localization of Bodipy-Labeled Vinblastine, Paclitaxel, and Doxorubicin in <italic>MDR1</italic> Recombinant Cells Control and recombinant MDR1 HEK cells (wild type and 571 variant) were seeded onto eight-cell chamber slides for 2 days at 37°C. Cells were briefly washed with PBS. Doxorubicin HCl (7 µM), bodipy FL-vin-blastine (1 µM), and paclitaxel (Tubulin Tracker green reagent, 1 µM) were added to the cell in duplicate in a chamber containing serum-free DMEM and incubated for 30 min. The untreated control wells were filled with the medium only. The cells that were grown in the glass slides were washed three times with ice-cold PBS and dried. They were analyzed using a fluorescence microscope (Zeiss Axiovert 200; Carl Zeiss GmbH, Jena, Germany), and the presented images were recorded under a fixed exposure and identical settings. For each treatment, at least 10 fields of the slides were viewed, and at least three photos were taken. The experiment was replicated twice. Evaluation of Cancer Drug Resistance The drug resistance of stable recombinant cells expressing MDR1 wt and MDR1 571A transfected was evaluated by measuring the cell viability after exposing them to a wide range of the selected substrates following our previous description ( Woodahl et al., 2004 ; Yang et al., 2004 ). In brief, the cells (control, MDR1 wt , MDR1 571A ) were seeded at 1 × 104 density/well in a 96-well plate format in a 100-µl culture medium overnight. Media were replaced with 100 µl of media containing a wide range of dilution of selected chemotherapeutic agents alone or with a Pgp inhibitor, GF120918. Each concentration of the drug was run in quadruplicate at least, or experiments were repeated at least twice. The culture was maintained at 37°C 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator for 72 h. Cell viability was measured with a CellTiter-Glo cell viability assay kit (Promega). Data from each quadruplicate was converted to the percentage of their controls with 0% inhibition at zero concentration of the drug and maximal inhibition at the highest concentration. IC50 values were obtained using SigmaPlot software. The relative resistance ratio was calculated comparing the IC50 value of recombinant MDR1 cells with that of control host cells. These data were replicated at least twice to validate the IC50 values. The variations experiments were less than 10%. Pgp-Mediated Efflux Transport Studies Using Rhodamin123 as a Substrate Cells were seeded into 24-well plates precoated with poly- d -lysine at 5 × 105/well and incubated for 3 days at 37°C until 95% confluence. Cells were washed briefly with Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline plus glucose containing medium (DPBSG), pH 7.2, and loaded with 0.5 ml of DPBSG or inhibitor for 10 min. The DPBSG or inhibitor was then replaced with 1 µM rhodamine 123 or rhodamine 123/inhibitor in DPBSG buffer for 30 min at 4°C. After moving the rhodamine123, 1 ml of DPBSG or DPBSG with inhibitor at 37°C was added into each well, and efflux was started in a water bath at 37°C. At the indicated time point, the cells were washed twice with ice-cold DPBSG. One percent Triton X-100 (0.5 ml) was added into each well. The amount of intracellular rhodamine123 was measured using a fluorometer (PerkinElmer Victor3V; PerkinElmer Life and Analytical Sciences, Waltham, MA) at ?ex = 485 nm and ?ex = 530 nm.  Chemicals and Drugs All chemotherapeutic agents used for this study, doxorubicin HCl, daunorubicin HCl, vinblastine sulfate, vincristine (VCR), paclitaxel, and etoposide, were obtained through the drug service of the University of Washington Medical Center. Each drug was diluted with culture medium to a wide range of concentration. The multidrug resistance protein inhibitor GF120918 (Elacridar) was kindly provided by GlaxoSmithKline (Cambridge, Middlesex, UK) ( Hyafil et al., 1993 ). Rhodamine 123 was from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Bodipy FL-vinblastine and paclitaxel (Tubulin Tracker green reagent), tissue culture media DMEM, trypsin-EDTA, and antibiotic solutions were supplied by Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA). Fetal bovine serum was obtained from HyClone Laboratories (Logan, UT). MDR1 antibody C219 was purchased from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA), and F4 antibody was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The monoclonal antibody MRK16 was from Kamiya Biomedical (Thousand Oaks, CA). The CellTiter-Glo luminescent cell viability assay kit was from Promega (Madison, WI). Other reagents were of analytical grades or higher.  Cell Culture Recombinant HEK cells expressing MDR1 wt and MDR1 571A vectors were grown in complete media consisting of DMEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (HyClone Laboratories), 1% (v/v) antibiotic-antimycotic, and 1% (v/v) nonessential amino acid and grown at 37°C in the presence of 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator. Cells were periodically treated with Geneticin (G-418; Calbiochem) at 200 µg/ml for routine maintenance.  Identification of <italic>MDR1 571</italic> Variation Samples were collected from patients 55 to 85 years old with confirmed MDS or AML by cytological or cytogenetic criteria recruited from the University of Washington Medical Center and by the Veterans Administration Puget Sound Health Care System according to approved protocols from the human subject review committee. Patients with an M3 subtype of AML were excluded from this study because of the variation of their therapy. Patients with recent exposure to a chemotherapeutic agent, low serum folate, or vitamin B12 were also excluded. The blood or bone marrow samples were collected, and RNA was extracted from the isolated peripheral blood mononuclear cell as described before ( Yang et al., 2002b ). RNAs were subjected into RT-PCR using human MDR1 -specific primer pairs, which cover the entire MDR1 cDNA (GenBank accession no. M14758) regions. The amplified cDNA was separated in agarose gel, and the gel slices containing the cDNA fragment were isolated. The cDNAs were extracted using a QIAGEN gel extraction kit (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA) following the supplier’s manual. The sequence of the extracted DNA was determined using the ABI automated DNA sequencer 370 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) in our DNA Sequencing and Gene Analysis center. Sequences were assembled using Sequencher software (Gene Codes Corporation, Ann Arbor, MI) or VectorNT software (Invitrogen) and compared with human MDR1 reference (Gen-Bank accession no. M14758). These data were verified with a genomic sequence of the region of interest.  Generation of <italic>MDR1<sub>wt</sub></italic> and <italic>MDR1<sub>571A</sub></italic> Expression Vectors The generation of MDR1 expression plasmid had been reported in our laboratory as detailed previously ( Yang et al., 2002a , b ). The neomycin-resistant plasmid containing human MDR1 wild-type cDNA ( MDR1 wt ) was employed as a template to generate the MDR1 571A variant. A site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) was used for this purpose. The primer sequences were as follows: forward, 5?-GTTATTGG TGACAAAATT AGAATGTTCT TTCAGTC-3? and reverse, 5?-GACTGAAAGAACATTCTAATTTTGTCACCAATAAC-3?. The generated clones were screened by size exclusion and restriction enzyme digestion. The full length of the cDNA containing mutation clones was verified by DNA sequencing using our DNA sequence center facility (Big-Dye 3.0 Chemistry and an ABI Prism 377 DNA Sequencer; Applied Biosystems).  Development and Characterization of Stable Recombinant HEK Cells Expressing Human <italic>MDR1<sub>wt</sub></italic> or <italic>MDR1<sub>571A</sub></italic> Variant The pcDNA3.1 vector and MDR wt and MDR1 571A plasmids were transfected into the mammalian HEK cells. In brief, HEK cells were seeded into a 24-well plate. Transfection was conducted when the cells reached approximately 90% confluence. The growth medium of the cells was replaced with serum-free medium (Opti-MEM; Invitrogen) for 30 min. The cells were then allowed to grow in a growth medium containing serum. At 24 h after transfection, cells from one or two wells were trypsinized and plated into a 100-mm Petri dish at a dilution of approximately 1:20 in a DMEM growth medium. At 48 h post-transfection, G-418 at 500 µg/ml was added. The medium containing G-418 was refreshed every 3 to 4 days for 3 to 4 weeks, and cells that survived under G-418 selection pressure were used subsequently for clone selection. Single cell colony was picked into a 12-well plate. Cells grown from the single colony were seeded into new 12-well plates, and rhodamine 123 (R123) uptake and efflux were conducted to select the polyclonal cells with high Pgp activities. The cells with high Pgp activity were further expanded and tested. Cells with high Pgp activity stable for at least three times for R123 uptake were stored and used for functional evaluation.  Characterization of Pgp Expression by mRNA Quantitation Total RNA from HEK cells transfected and MDR1 wt and MDR1 571A variant were extracted using the Ultraspec total RNA isolation kit according to the manufacturer’s instruction (Biotecx Laboratories, Inc., Houston, TX). To compare the expression level, absolute quantitation of MDR1 mRNA transcripts in transfected cellular samples was performed using the ABI Prism 7900HT Detection System (Applied Biosystems). An MDR1 RNA standard was generated by in vitro transcription using the T7 promoter on the plasmid described previously ( Yang et al., 2002b ), and concentration was measured by absorbance at 260 nm and converted to the number of copies of MDR1 RNA by the mol. wt. A dilution series of the MDR1 RNA standard was used to generate a standard curve of the number of copies of MDR1 mRNA versus threshold cycle value. After RNA isolation, 1 µg of total RNA of each sample was subjected to RT. Fifty nanograms of total RNA was analyzed in quadruplicate to obtain a threshold cycle value and an estimation of the number of copies of MDR1 mRNA in recombinant HEK cells. To validate the assay, a housekeeping gene, hGUS , was detected at the same time to eliminate the sample variation.  Characterization of Pgp Expression at the Protein Level Immunoblot analysis was used to detect protein expression. In brief, approximately 1 × 107 cells were pelleted and washed in PBS and lysed in a lysis buffer containing 1% Nonidet P40 and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Calbiochem). Protein concentration was measured by a bicinchoninic acid microplate assay protocol (Pierce Chemical, Rockford, IL), and all samples were diluted into the same concentration using the lysis buffer and mixed with a 5× loading buffer containing 0.1% SDS and ?-mercaptoethanol. Electrophoresis and transfer of membrane protein were done according to instructions for Mini-PROTEAN II Electrophoresis (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Proteins were transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (Millipore Corporation, Billerica, MA) and blocked with 5% nonfat milk in Tris-buffered saline/Tween 20 buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, 0.9% NaCl, 0.05% Tween 20, pH 7.6). Immunoblotting was performed with the anti-Pgp monoclonal antibody C219 or F4, followed by a secondary horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG. ECL plus reagents (GE Healthcare, Chalfont St. Giles, UK) were used as substrate, and blots were exposed to X-ray film for visualization of the protein bands.  Cellular Localization of Bodipy-Labeled Vinblastine, Paclitaxel, and Doxorubicin in <italic>MDR1</italic> Recombinant Cells Control and recombinant MDR1 HEK cells (wild type and 571 variant) were seeded onto eight-cell chamber slides for 2 days at 37°C. Cells were briefly washed with PBS. Doxorubicin HCl (7 µM), bodipy FL-vin-blastine (1 µM), and paclitaxel (Tubulin Tracker green reagent, 1 µM) were added to the cell in duplicate in a chamber containing serum-free DMEM and incubated for 30 min. The untreated control wells were filled with the medium only. The cells that were grown in the glass slides were washed three times with ice-cold PBS and dried. They were analyzed using a fluorescence microscope (Zeiss Axiovert 200; Carl Zeiss GmbH, Jena, Germany), and the presented images were recorded under a fixed exposure and identical settings. For each treatment, at least 10 fields of the slides were viewed, and at least three photos were taken. The experiment was replicated twice.  Evaluation of Cancer Drug Resistance The drug resistance of stable recombinant cells expressing MDR1 wt and MDR1 571A transfected was evaluated by measuring the cell viability after exposing them to a wide range of the selected substrates following our previous description ( Woodahl et al., 2004 ; Yang et al., 2004 ). In brief, the cells (control, MDR1 wt , MDR1 571A ) were seeded at 1 × 104 density/well in a 96-well plate format in a 100-µl culture medium overnight. Media were replaced with 100 µl of media containing a wide range of dilution of selected chemotherapeutic agents alone or with a Pgp inhibitor, GF120918. Each concentration of the drug was run in quadruplicate at least, or experiments were repeated at least twice. The culture was maintained at 37°C 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator for 72 h. Cell viability was measured with a CellTiter-Glo cell viability assay kit (Promega). Data from each quadruplicate was converted to the percentage of their controls with 0% inhibition at zero concentration of the drug and maximal inhibition at the highest concentration. IC50 values were obtained using SigmaPlot software. The relative resistance ratio was calculated comparing the IC50 value of recombinant MDR1 cells with that of control host cells. These data were replicated at least twice to validate the IC50 values. The variations experiments were less than 10%.  Pgp-Mediated Efflux Transport Studies Using Rhodamin123 as a Substrate Cells were seeded into 24-well plates precoated with poly- d -lysine at 5 × 105/well and incubated for 3 days at 37°C until 95% confluence. Cells were washed briefly with Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline plus glucose containing medium (DPBSG), pH 7.2, and loaded with 0.5 ml of DPBSG or inhibitor for 10 min. The DPBSG or inhibitor was then replaced with 1 µM rhodamine 123 or rhodamine 123/inhibitor in DPBSG buffer for 30 min at 4°C. After moving the rhodamine123, 1 ml of DPBSG or DPBSG with inhibitor at 37°C was added into each well, and efflux was started in a water bath at 37°C. At the indicated time point, the cells were washed twice with ice-cold DPBSG. One percent Triton X-100 (0.5 ml) was added into each well. The amount of intracellular rhodamine123 was measured using a fluorometer (PerkinElmer Victor3V; PerkinElmer Life and Analytical Sciences, Waltham, MA) at ?ex = 485 nm and ?ex = 530 nm.  Results A Novel MDR1 Variant, <italic>571 G?A</italic> Variant in Leukemia Patients As an ongoing project to explore the effects of MDR1 sequence variation in functional impact of Pgp, we collected mononuclear cells from leukemic patients undergoing bone marrow evaluation. We then sequenced the entire coding sequence of the cDNA derived from the RNA samples. These sequences were validated with direct sequence analysis of the genomic DNA for the respective regions. Of 78 samples, we found a novel variant in five subjects exhibiting the heterozygous genotype, G571G/A . The genotypic frequency was recorded at 6.4%, and the allelic frequency for the 571A was estimated to be 3.2% ( Table 1 ). A representative of the sequence chromatograph from patients showing the A/G overlapping is presented in Fig. 1 . The G?A transition at position 571 translates into an amino acid change from Gly to Arg at position 191 of the human MDR1 protein Pgp. Based on the predicted Pgp structure, it is mapped to exon 5 and predicted to be located within the third transmembrane domain. Such variation is likely to modulate the Pgp efflux transporter function. Hence, we developed stable, recombinant cells to evaluate functional significance of this novel MDR1 variation at cellular and functional levels. Development and Characterization of an <italic>MDR1</italic> Recombinant Cell Expressing <italic>G571A</italic> To evaluate the functional impact of the novel MDR1 variant, 571 G?A (191 Gly?Arg amino acid), we expressed it in a mammalian host, HEK cells. The stable recombinant HEK cells were selected with G-418 before full characterization with respect to the MDR1 sequence and protein expression. The function of the stable recombinant cells expressing G571A was compared with previously established recombinant HEK cells expressing MDR1 wild type (517G at the 191 amino acid position). By direct sequencing confirmation of the MDR1 DNA isolated from the stable recombinant HEK cells, we found that these cells faithfully retained the G571A variant with no other sequence modifications. Using fluorescence R123 efflux assay, we identified three to five clones that exhibited consistent Pgp functions for at least 2 months. The Pgp protein expression levels were evaluated by immunoblot analysis. As shown in Fig. 2 , the selected HEK recombinant cells expressing G571A exhibited comparable levels of Pgp protein and RNA transcript (based on mRNA quantitation) with the cells expressing wild-type MDR1 . Furthermore, immunofluorescent staining of the cells using the MDR1 monoclonal antibody F4 exhibited similar profile of Pgp expression for both in MDR1 wild type and G571A, and expression levels are significantly higher than those of the control cells (data not shown). Both MDR1 wild type and G571A exhibited similar molecular mass (~160 kDa) using Western immunoblot analysis ( Fig. 2 ). These cells were used for all subsequent functional analyses. Effects of <italic>G571A</italic> Variant on Pgp Efflux Function and Pgp-Dependent Drug Resistance To determine the effects of MDR1 571 G?A transition on Pgp transporter function, we first evaluated the intracellular concentration of HEK recombinant cells expressing either MDR1 wt or MDR1 571A . Expression of MDR1 in HEK host cells reduced the intracellular levels of a fluorescence substrate R123 by 37 and 33% in MDR1 wt and MDR1 571A variant, respectively ( Table 2 ). However, the differences in intracellular concentration of R123 between the recombinant HEK cells expressing MDR1 wt and MDR1 57A were not statistically significant. The reduction in intracellular R123 levels was due to Pgp expression because this function can be reversed with an established Pgp inhibitor, GF120918. In the presence of 1 µM GF120918, both Pgp-expressing cells retained R123 levels similar to that of Pgp-negative control cells ( Table 2 ). We next determined the effect of 571 G?A transition on cancer drug resistance and we compared cytotoxicity using six commonly used drugs that fall within four classes of chemotherapeutic agents that are known substrates of Pgp. HEK recombinant cells expressing MDR1 variants were exposed to these compounds at varying concentrations for 3 days. Cell survival was recorded and shown in Table 3 . We found that the expression of MDR1 wt or MDR1 571A conferred varying drug resistance to the HEK cells. The record range was from 10- to 150-fold for the drugs tested. For the two anthracyclines, doxorubicin and daunorubicin, insignificant differences were found between MDR1 wt - and MDR1 571A -expressing cells. However, effects of 571 G?A transition significantly altered the drug resistance profiles for vinblastine, vincristine, paclitaxel, and etoposide. The G?A transition slightly reduced the MDR1 resistance to vincristine and vinblastine. In contrast, recombinant MDR1 571A -expressing cells exhibited approximately 4-fold reductions in resistance to paclitaxel (IC50 = 382 versus 91 nM) and etoposide (2518 versus 568 nM) compared with MDR1 wt ( Table 3 ). None-theless, both the wild type and 571A variant of MDR1 conferred significant resistance to all tested drugs, compared with that of the Pgp-negative control ( Table 3 ). These data are reproducible and were replicated at least twice. Taken together, these data indicate that the G?A transition at the 571 nucleotide position of MDR1 with predicted Gly?Arg at 191 amino acid change seemed to reduce cancer drug resistance from nominal to approximately 5-fold for a selective subset of chemotherapeutic drugs commonly used for leukemia therapy. Effect of a Pgp Inhibitor on Reversing <italic>MDR1</italic>-Dependent Efflux Transport and Drug Resistance To further characterize the time course of Pgp efflux transport variations for the MDR1 571A variant and to verify the effect of Pgp, we employed GF120918 as a Pgp inhibitor ( Hyafil et al., 1993 ). GF120918 has been shown to be a potent inhibitor of Pgp but also inhibits breast cancer resistance protein. As the HEK host cell did not express a significant endogenous level of breast cancer resistance protein, GF120918 is used presently as a specific Pgp inhibitor. We proceeded to determine the time course of transport efflux in recombinant HEK cells expressing either MDR1 wt or MDR1 571A . The recombinant cells expressing MDR1 wt exhibited a faster decline to lower intracellular R123 concentrations compared with that of MDR1 571A , suggesting that Pgp derived from MDR1 571A is less efficient in efflux transport of this substrate ( Fig. 3 ). The time and the MDR1 dependent decline in R123 activity was Pgp dependent because the efflux activity was reversed by the presence of 1 µM GF120918. The GF120918 did not influence the time course of intracellular R123 in control host cells. We next determined whether the Pgp inhibitor GF120918 could reverse drug resistance in HEK cells expressing MDR1 wt or MDR1 571A . To do so, varying concentration of doxorubicin, vincristine, and paclitaxel were incubated with these cells in the presence or absence of 1 µM GF120918. Fifty percent effective inhibitory concentrations (IC50 values) were derived from a respective dose-response curve. As shown in Fig. 4 , the IC50 values for the three drugs were reduced significantly in the presence of GF120918 irrespective of whether the recombinant cell expressed MDR1 wt ( Fig. 4A ) or MDR1 571A ( Fig. 4B ). Taken together, these data suggest that both R123 efflux transports and higher IC50 values observed for cancer drugs in the recombinant cells expressing MDR1 wt or MDR1 571A are Pgp dependent. Differential Accumulation of Doxorubicin, Vinblastine, and Paclitaxel in the Recombinant <italic>MDR1</italic> Cells To evaluate whether the reduction in intracellular drug concentration is a potential mechanism of differences in IC50 values recorded for the wild type and 571A variant of MDR1 recombinant cells, we surveyed the intracellular localization and distribution of three fluorescence anticancer drugs. Doxorubicin (a fluorescent compound), bodipy fluorescent-labeled vinblastine, and paclitaxel (labeled with tubulin tracker green) were used for this purpose. All three compounds produce green fluorescence for evaluation of drug localization and distribution. After exposing the cells to each of the three compounds for 30 min at 37°C, they were recorded with a fluorescence microscope and photographed at fixed exposure parameters. As shown in Fig. 5 , doxorubicin, a DNA-interacting drug widely used in chemotherapy, exhibited a high degree of drug localization in the nucleus but did not seem to produce a differential staining pattern between the two MDR1 variants. Bodipy FL-vinblastine is a fluorescent analog of the vinblastine that inhibits cell proliferation by capping microtubule ends, whereas Paclitaxel bis-acetate provides green fluorescent staining of polymerized tubulin in living cells, specifically, paclitaxel binds to the ?-subunit of tubulin. Therefore, both compounds are good candidates for our staining purpose to visualize the drug uptake and distribution in the cells. For vinblastine and paclitaxel, fluorescence intensity of these two drugs in control cells was much higher than the two MDR1 recombinant cells. Paralleled with the differences in IC50 values, the green fluorescence for vinblastine and paclitaxel in 571A variant cells was some-what brighter than the MDR1 wild-type cells under identical imaging conditions, suggesting a more efficient efflux transport function in cells expressing MDR1 wt . Together, these results collected with the three fluorescent anticancer compounds in MDR1 recombinant cells suggest that variations in intracellular drug levels probably lead to reduced drug resistance in MDR1 571A , compared with MDR1 wt .  Results A Novel MDR1 Variant, <italic>571 G?A</italic> Variant in Leukemia Patients As an ongoing project to explore the effects of MDR1 sequence variation in functional impact of Pgp, we collected mononuclear cells from leukemic patients undergoing bone marrow evaluation. We then sequenced the entire coding sequence of the cDNA derived from the RNA samples. These sequences were validated with direct sequence analysis of the genomic DNA for the respective regions. Of 78 samples, we found a novel variant in five subjects exhibiting the heterozygous genotype, G571G/A . The genotypic frequency was recorded at 6.4%, and the allelic frequency for the 571A was estimated to be 3.2% ( Table 1 ). A representative of the sequence chromatograph from patients showing the A/G overlapping is presented in Fig. 1 . The G?A transition at position 571 translates into an amino acid change from Gly to Arg at position 191 of the human MDR1 protein Pgp. Based on the predicted Pgp structure, it is mapped to exon 5 and predicted to be located within the third transmembrane domain. Such variation is likely to modulate the Pgp efflux transporter function. Hence, we developed stable, recombinant cells to evaluate functional significance of this novel MDR1 variation at cellular and functional levels. Development and Characterization of an <italic>MDR1</italic> Recombinant Cell Expressing <italic>G571A</italic> To evaluate the functional impact of the novel MDR1 variant, 571 G?A (191 Gly?Arg amino acid), we expressed it in a mammalian host, HEK cells. The stable recombinant HEK cells were selected with G-418 before full characterization with respect to the MDR1 sequence and protein expression. The function of the stable recombinant cells expressing G571A was compared with previously established recombinant HEK cells expressing MDR1 wild type (517G at the 191 amino acid position). By direct sequencing confirmation of the MDR1 DNA isolated from the stable recombinant HEK cells, we found that these cells faithfully retained the G571A variant with no other sequence modifications. Using fluorescence R123 efflux assay, we identified three to five clones that exhibited consistent Pgp functions for at least 2 months. The Pgp protein expression levels were evaluated by immunoblot analysis. As shown in Fig. 2 , the selected HEK recombinant cells expressing G571A exhibited comparable levels of Pgp protein and RNA transcript (based on mRNA quantitation) with the cells expressing wild-type MDR1 . Furthermore, immunofluorescent staining of the cells using the MDR1 monoclonal antibody F4 exhibited similar profile of Pgp expression for both in MDR1 wild type and G571A, and expression levels are significantly higher than those of the control cells (data not shown). Both MDR1 wild type and G571A exhibited similar molecular mass (~160 kDa) using Western immunoblot analysis ( Fig. 2 ). These cells were used for all subsequent functional analyses. Effects of <italic>G571A</italic> Variant on Pgp Efflux Function and Pgp-Dependent Drug Resistance To determine the effects of MDR1 571 G?A transition on Pgp transporter function, we first evaluated the intracellular concentration of HEK recombinant cells expressing either MDR1 wt or MDR1 571A . Expression of MDR1 in HEK host cells reduced the intracellular levels of a fluorescence substrate R123 by 37 and 33% in MDR1 wt and MDR1 571A variant, respectively ( Table 2 ). However, the differences in intracellular concentration of R123 between the recombinant HEK cells expressing MDR1 wt and MDR1 57A were not statistically significant. The reduction in intracellular R123 levels was due to Pgp expression because this function can be reversed with an established Pgp inhibitor, GF120918. In the presence of 1 µM GF120918, both Pgp-expressing cells retained R123 levels similar to that of Pgp-negative control cells ( Table 2 ). We next determined the effect of 571 G?A transition on cancer drug resistance and we compared cytotoxicity using six commonly used drugs that fall within four classes of chemotherapeutic agents that are known substrates of Pgp. HEK recombinant cells expressing MDR1 variants were exposed to these compounds at varying concentrations for 3 days. Cell survival was recorded and shown in Table 3 . We found that the expression of MDR1 wt or MDR1 571A conferred varying drug resistance to the HEK cells. The record range was from 10- to 150-fold for the drugs tested. For the two anthracyclines, doxorubicin and daunorubicin, insignificant differences were found between MDR1 wt - and MDR1 571A -expressing cells. However, effects of 571 G?A transition significantly altered the drug resistance profiles for vinblastine, vincristine, paclitaxel, and etoposide. The G?A transition slightly reduced the MDR1 resistance to vincristine and vinblastine. In contrast, recombinant MDR1 571A -expressing cells exhibited approximately 4-fold reductions in resistance to paclitaxel (IC50 = 382 versus 91 nM) and etoposide (2518 versus 568 nM) compared with MDR1 wt ( Table 3 ). None-theless, both the wild type and 571A variant of MDR1 conferred significant resistance to all tested drugs, compared with that of the Pgp-negative control ( Table 3 ). These data are reproducible and were replicated at least twice. Taken together, these data indicate that the G?A transition at the 571 nucleotide position of MDR1 with predicted Gly?Arg at 191 amino acid change seemed to reduce cancer drug resistance from nominal to approximately 5-fold for a selective subset of chemotherapeutic drugs commonly used for leukemia therapy. Effect of a Pgp Inhibitor on Reversing <italic>MDR1</italic>-Dependent Efflux Transport and Drug Resistance To further characterize the time course of Pgp efflux transport variations for the MDR1 571A variant and to verify the effect of Pgp, we employed GF120918 as a Pgp inhibitor ( Hyafil et al., 1993 ). GF120918 has been shown to be a potent inhibitor of Pgp but also inhibits breast cancer resistance protein. As the HEK host cell did not express a significant endogenous level of breast cancer resistance protein, GF120918 is used presently as a specific Pgp inhibitor. We proceeded to determine the time course of transport efflux in recombinant HEK cells expressing either MDR1 wt or MDR1 571A . The recombinant cells expressing MDR1 wt exhibited a faster decline to lower intracellular R123 concentrations compared with that of MDR1 571A , suggesting that Pgp derived from MDR1 571A is less efficient in efflux transport of this substrate ( Fig. 3 ). The time and the MDR1 dependent decline in R123 activity was Pgp dependent because the efflux activity was reversed by the presence of 1 µM GF120918. The GF120918 did not influence the time course of intracellular R123 in control host cells. We next determined whether the Pgp inhibitor GF120918 could reverse drug resistance in HEK cells expressing MDR1 wt or MDR1 571A . To do so, varying concentration of doxorubicin, vincristine, and paclitaxel were incubated with these cells in the presence or absence of 1 µM GF120918. Fifty percent effective inhibitory concentrations (IC50 values) were derived from a respective dose-response curve. As shown in Fig. 4 , the IC50 values for the three drugs were reduced significantly in the presence of GF120918 irrespective of whether the recombinant cell expressed MDR1 wt ( Fig. 4A ) or MDR1 571A ( Fig. 4B ). Taken together, these data suggest that both R123 efflux transports and higher IC50 values observed for cancer drugs in the recombinant cells expressing MDR1 wt or MDR1 571A are Pgp dependent. Differential Accumulation of Doxorubicin, Vinblastine, and Paclitaxel in the Recombinant <italic>MDR1</italic> Cells To evaluate whether the reduction in intracellular drug concentration is a potential mechanism of differences in IC50 values recorded for the wild type and 571A variant of MDR1 recombinant cells, we surveyed the intracellular localization and distribution of three fluorescence anticancer drugs. Doxorubicin (a fluorescent compound), bodipy fluorescent-labeled vinblastine, and paclitaxel (labeled with tubulin tracker green) were used for this purpose. All three compounds produce green fluorescence for evaluation of drug localization and distribution. After exposing the cells to each of the three compounds for 30 min at 37°C, they were recorded with a fluorescence microscope and photographed at fixed exposure parameters. As shown in Fig. 5 , doxorubicin, a DNA-interacting drug widely used in chemotherapy, exhibited a high degree of drug localization in the nucleus but did not seem to produce a differential staining pattern between the two MDR1 variants. Bodipy FL-vinblastine is a fluorescent analog of the vinblastine that inhibits cell proliferation by capping microtubule ends, whereas Paclitaxel bis-acetate provides green fluorescent staining of polymerized tubulin in living cells, specifically, paclitaxel binds to the ?-subunit of tubulin. Therefore, both compounds are good candidates for our staining purpose to visualize the drug uptake and distribution in the cells. For vinblastine and paclitaxel, fluorescence intensity of these two drugs in control cells was much higher than the two MDR1 recombinant cells. Paralleled with the differences in IC50 values, the green fluorescence for vinblastine and paclitaxel in 571A variant cells was some-what brighter than the MDR1 wild-type cells under identical imaging conditions, suggesting a more efficient efflux transport function in cells expressing MDR1 wt . Together, these results collected with the three fluorescent anticancer compounds in MDR1 recombinant cells suggest that variations in intracellular drug levels probably lead to reduced drug resistance in MDR1 571A , compared with MDR1 wt .  A Novel MDR1 Variant, <italic>571 G?A</italic> Variant in Leukemia Patients As an ongoing project to explore the effects of MDR1 sequence variation in functional impact of Pgp, we collected mononuclear cells from leukemic patients undergoing bone marrow evaluation. We then sequenced the entire coding sequence of the cDNA derived from the RNA samples. These sequences were validated with direct sequence analysis of the genomic DNA for the respective regions. Of 78 samples, we found a novel variant in five subjects exhibiting the heterozygous genotype, G571G/A . The genotypic frequency was recorded at 6.4%, and the allelic frequency for the 571A was estimated to be 3.2% ( Table 1 ). A representative of the sequence chromatograph from patients showing the A/G overlapping is presented in Fig. 1 . The G?A transition at position 571 translates into an amino acid change from Gly to Arg at position 191 of the human MDR1 protein Pgp. Based on the predicted Pgp structure, it is mapped to exon 5 and predicted to be located within the third transmembrane domain. Such variation is likely to modulate the Pgp efflux transporter function. Hence, we developed stable, recombinant cells to evaluate functional significance of this novel MDR1 variation at cellular and functional levels.  A Novel MDR1 Variant, <italic>571 G?A</italic> Variant in Leukemia Patients As an ongoing project to explore the effects of MDR1 sequence variation in functional impact of Pgp, we collected mononuclear cells from leukemic patients undergoing bone marrow evaluation. We then sequenced the entire coding sequence of the cDNA derived from the RNA samples. These sequences were validated with direct sequence analysis of the genomic DNA for the respective regions. Of 78 samples, we found a novel variant in five subjects exhibiting the heterozygous genotype, G571G/A . The genotypic frequency was recorded at 6.4%, and the allelic frequency for the 571A was estimated to be 3.2% ( Table 1 ). A representative of the sequence chromatograph from patients showing the A/G overlapping is presented in Fig. 1 . The G?A transition at position 571 translates into an amino acid change from Gly to Arg at position 191 of the human MDR1 protein Pgp. Based on the predicted Pgp structure, it is mapped to exon 5 and predicted to be located within the third transmembrane domain. Such variation is likely to modulate the Pgp efflux transporter function. Hence, we developed stable, recombinant cells to evaluate functional significance of this novel MDR1 variation at cellular and functional levels.  Development and Characterization of an <italic>MDR1</italic> Recombinant Cell Expressing <italic>G571A</italic> To evaluate the functional impact of the novel MDR1 variant, 571 G?A (191 Gly?Arg amino acid), we expressed it in a mammalian host, HEK cells. The stable recombinant HEK cells were selected with G-418 before full characterization with respect to the MDR1 sequence and protein expression. The function of the stable recombinant cells expressing G571A was compared with previously established recombinant HEK cells expressing MDR1 wild type (517G at the 191 amino acid position). By direct sequencing confirmation of the MDR1 DNA isolated from the stable recombinant HEK cells, we found that these cells faithfully retained the G571A variant with no other sequence modifications. Using fluorescence R123 efflux assay, we identified three to five clones that exhibited consistent Pgp functions for at least 2 months. The Pgp protein expression levels were evaluated by immunoblot analysis. As shown in Fig. 2 , the selected HEK recombinant cells expressing G571A exhibited comparable levels of Pgp protein and RNA transcript (based on mRNA quantitation) with the cells expressing wild-type MDR1 . Furthermore, immunofluorescent staining of the cells using the MDR1 monoclonal antibody F4 exhibited similar profile of Pgp expression for both in MDR1 wild type and G571A, and expression levels are significantly higher than those of the control cells (data not shown). Both MDR1 wild type and G571A exhibited similar molecular mass (~160 kDa) using Western immunoblot analysis ( Fig. 2 ). These cells were used for all subsequent functional analyses.  Development and Characterization of an <italic>MDR1</italic> Recombinant Cell Expressing <italic>G571A</italic> To evaluate the functional impact of the novel MDR1 variant, 571 G?A (191 Gly?Arg amino acid), we expressed it in a mammalian host, HEK cells. The stable recombinant HEK cells were selected with G-418 before full characterization with respect to the MDR1 sequence and protein expression. The function of the stable recombinant cells expressing G571A was compared with previously established recombinant HEK cells expressing MDR1 wild type (517G at the 191 amino acid position). By direct sequencing confirmation of the MDR1 DNA isolated from the stable recombinant HEK cells, we found that these cells faithfully retained the G571A variant with no other sequence modifications. Using fluorescence R123 efflux assay, we identified three to five clones that exhibited consistent Pgp functions for at least 2 months. The Pgp protein expression levels were evaluated by immunoblot analysis. As shown in Fig. 2 , the selected HEK recombinant cells expressing G571A exhibited comparable levels of Pgp protein and RNA transcript (based on mRNA quantitation) with the cells expressing wild-type MDR1 . Furthermore, immunofluorescent staining of the cells using the MDR1 monoclonal antibody F4 exhibited similar profile of Pgp expression for both in MDR1 wild type and G571A, and expression levels are significantly higher than those of the control cells (data not shown). Both MDR1 wild type and G571A exhibited similar molecular mass (~160 kDa) using Western immunoblot analysis ( Fig. 2 ). These cells were used for all subsequent functional analyses.  Effects of <italic>G571A</italic> Variant on Pgp Efflux Function and Pgp-Dependent Drug Resistance To determine the effects of MDR1 571 G?A transition on Pgp transporter function, we first evaluated the intracellular concentration of HEK recombinant cells expressing either MDR1 wt or MDR1 571A . Expression of MDR1 in HEK host cells reduced the intracellular levels of a fluorescence substrate R123 by 37 and 33% in MDR1 wt and MDR1 571A variant, respectively ( Table 2 ). However, the differences in intracellular concentration of R123 between the recombinant HEK cells expressing MDR1 wt and MDR1 57A were not statistically significant. The reduction in intracellular R123 levels was due to Pgp expression because this function can be reversed with an established Pgp inhibitor, GF120918. In the presence of 1 µM GF120918, both Pgp-expressing cells retained R123 levels similar to that of Pgp-negative control cells ( Table 2 ). We next determined the effect of 571 G?A transition on cancer drug resistance and we compared cytotoxicity using six commonly used drugs that fall within four classes of chemotherapeutic agents that are known substrates of Pgp. HEK recombinant cells expressing MDR1 variants were exposed to these compounds at varying concentrations for 3 days. Cell survival was recorded and shown in Table 3 . We found that the expression of MDR1 wt or MDR1 571A conferred varying drug resistance to the HEK cells. The record range was from 10- to 150-fold for the drugs tested. For the two anthracyclines, doxorubicin and daunorubicin, insignificant differences were found between MDR1 wt - and MDR1 571A -expressing cells. However, effects of 571 G?A transition significantly altered the drug resistance profiles for vinblastine, vincristine, paclitaxel, and etoposide. The G?A transition slightly reduced the MDR1 resistance to vincristine and vinblastine. In contrast, recombinant MDR1 571A -expressing cells exhibited approximately 4-fold reductions in resistance to paclitaxel (IC50 = 382 versus 91 nM) and etoposide (2518 versus 568 nM) compared with MDR1 wt ( Table 3 ). None-theless, both the wild type and 571A variant of MDR1 conferred significant resistance to all tested drugs, compared with that of the Pgp-negative control ( Table 3 ). These data are reproducible and were replicated at least twice. Taken together, these data indicate that the G?A transition at the 571 nucleotide position of MDR1 with predicted Gly?Arg at 191 amino acid change seemed to reduce cancer drug resistance from nominal to approximately 5-fold for a selective subset of chemotherapeutic drugs commonly used for leukemia therapy.  Effects of <italic>G571A</italic> Variant on Pgp Efflux Function and Pgp-Dependent Drug Resistance To determine the effects of MDR1 571 G?A transition on Pgp transporter function, we first evaluated the intracellular concentration of HEK recombinant cells expressing either MDR1 wt or MDR1 571A . Expression of MDR1 in HEK host cells reduced the intracellular levels of a fluorescence substrate R123 by 37 and 33% in MDR1 wt and MDR1 571A variant, respectively ( Table 2 ). However, the differences in intracellular concentration of R123 between the recombinant HEK cells expressing MDR1 wt and MDR1 57A were not statistically significant. The reduction in intracellular R123 levels was due to Pgp expression because this function can be reversed with an established Pgp inhibitor, GF120918. In the presence of 1 µM GF120918, both Pgp-expressing cells retained R123 levels similar to that of Pgp-negative control cells ( Table 2 ). We next determined the effect of 571 G?A transition on cancer drug resistance and we compared cytotoxicity using six commonly used drugs that fall within four classes of chemotherapeutic agents that are known substrates of Pgp. HEK recombinant cells expressing MDR1 variants were exposed to these compounds at varying concentrations for 3 days. Cell survival was recorded and shown in Table 3 . We found that the expression of MDR1 wt or MDR1 571A conferred varying drug resistance to the HEK cells. The record range was from 10- to 150-fold for the drugs tested. For the two anthracyclines, doxorubicin and daunorubicin, insignificant differences were found between MDR1 wt - and MDR1 571A -expressing cells. However, effects of 571 G?A transition significantly altered the drug resistance profiles for vinblastine, vincristine, paclitaxel, and etoposide. The G?A transition slightly reduced the MDR1 resistance to vincristine and vinblastine. In contrast, recombinant MDR1 571A -expressing cells exhibited approximately 4-fold reductions in resistance to paclitaxel (IC50 = 382 versus 91 nM) and etoposide (2518 versus 568 nM) compared with MDR1 wt ( Table 3 ). None-theless, both the wild type and 571A variant of MDR1 conferred significant resistance to all tested drugs, compared with that of the Pgp-negative control ( Table 3 ). These data are reproducible and were replicated at least twice. Taken together, these data indicate that the G?A transition at the 571 nucleotide position of MDR1 with predicted Gly?Arg at 191 amino acid change seemed to reduce cancer drug resistance from nominal to approximately 5-fold for a selective subset of chemotherapeutic drugs commonly used for leukemia therapy.  Effect of a Pgp Inhibitor on Reversing <italic>MDR1</italic>-Dependent Efflux Transport and Drug Resistance To further characterize the time course of Pgp efflux transport variations for the MDR1 571A variant and to verify the effect of Pgp, we employed GF120918 as a Pgp inhibitor ( Hyafil et al., 1993 ). GF120918 has been shown to be a potent inhibitor of Pgp but also inhibits breast cancer resistance protein. As the HEK host cell did not express a significant endogenous level of breast cancer resistance protein, GF120918 is used presently as a specific Pgp inhibitor. We proceeded to determine the time course of transport efflux in recombinant HEK cells expressing either MDR1 wt or MDR1 571A . The recombinant cells expressing MDR1 wt exhibited a faster decline to lower intracellular R123 concentrations compared with that of MDR1 571A , suggesting that Pgp derived from MDR1 571A is less efficient in efflux transport of this substrate ( Fig. 3 ). The time and the MDR1 dependent decline in R123 activity was Pgp dependent because the efflux activity was reversed by the presence of 1 µM GF120918. The GF120918 did not influence the time course of intracellular R123 in control host cells. We next determined whether the Pgp inhibitor GF120918 could reverse drug resistance in HEK cells expressing MDR1 wt or MDR1 571A . To do so, varying concentration of doxorubicin, vincristine, and paclitaxel were incubated with these cells in the presence or absence of 1 µM GF120918. Fifty percent effective inhibitory concentrations (IC50 values) were derived from a respective dose-response curve. As shown in Fig. 4 , the IC50 values for the three drugs were reduced significantly in the presence of GF120918 irrespective of whether the recombinant cell expressed MDR1 wt ( Fig. 4A ) or MDR1 571A ( Fig. 4B ). Taken together, these data suggest that both R123 efflux transports and higher IC50 values observed for cancer drugs in the recombinant cells expressing MDR1 wt or MDR1 571A are Pgp dependent.  Effect of a Pgp Inhibitor on Reversing <italic>MDR1</italic>-Dependent Efflux Transport and Drug Resistance To further characterize the time course of Pgp efflux transport variations for the MDR1 571A variant and to verify the effect of Pgp, we employed GF120918 as a Pgp inhibitor ( Hyafil et al., 1993 ). GF120918 has been shown to be a potent inhibitor of Pgp but also inhibits breast cancer resistance protein. As the HEK host cell did not express a significant endogenous level of breast cancer resistance protein, GF120918 is used presently as a specific Pgp inhibitor. We proceeded to determine the time course of transport efflux in recombinant HEK cells expressing either MDR1 wt or MDR1 571A . The recombinant cells expressing MDR1 wt exhibited a faster decline to lower intracellular R123 concentrations compared with that of MDR1 571A , suggesting that Pgp derived from MDR1 571A is less efficient in efflux transport of this substrate ( Fig. 3 ). The time and the MDR1 dependent decline in R123 activity was Pgp dependent because the efflux activity was reversed by the presence of 1 µM GF120918. The GF120918 did not influence the time course of intracellular R123 in control host cells. We next determined whether the Pgp inhibitor GF120918 could reverse drug resistance in HEK cells expressing MDR1 wt or MDR1 571A . To do so, varying concentration of doxorubicin, vincristine, and paclitaxel were incubated with these cells in the presence or absence of 1 µM GF120918. Fifty percent effective inhibitory concentrations (IC50 values) were derived from a respective dose-response curve. As shown in Fig. 4 , the IC50 values for the three drugs were reduced significantly in the presence of GF120918 irrespective of whether the recombinant cell expressed MDR1 wt ( Fig. 4A ) or MDR1 571A ( Fig. 4B ). Taken together, these data suggest that both R123 efflux transports and higher IC50 values observed for cancer drugs in the recombinant cells expressing MDR1 wt or MDR1 571A are Pgp dependent.  Differential Accumulation of Doxorubicin, Vinblastine, and Paclitaxel in the Recombinant <italic>MDR1</italic> Cells To evaluate whether the reduction in intracellular drug concentration is a potential mechanism of differences in IC50 values recorded for the wild type and 571A variant of MDR1 recombinant cells, we surveyed the intracellular localization and distribution of three fluorescence anticancer drugs. Doxorubicin (a fluorescent compound), bodipy fluorescent-labeled vinblastine, and paclitaxel (labeled with tubulin tracker green) were used for this purpose. All three compounds produce green fluorescence for evaluation of drug localization and distribution. After exposing the cells to each of the three compounds for 30 min at 37°C, they were recorded with a fluorescence microscope and photographed at fixed exposure parameters. As shown in Fig. 5 , doxorubicin, a DNA-interacting drug widely used in chemotherapy, exhibited a high degree of drug localization in the nucleus but did not seem to produce a differential staining pattern between the two MDR1 variants. Bodipy FL-vinblastine is a fluorescent analog of the vinblastine that inhibits cell proliferation by capping microtubule ends, whereas Paclitaxel bis-acetate provides green fluorescent staining of polymerized tubulin in living cells, specifically, paclitaxel binds to the ?-subunit of tubulin. Therefore, both compounds are good candidates for our staining purpose to visualize the drug uptake and distribution in the cells. For vinblastine and paclitaxel, fluorescence intensity of these two drugs in control cells was much higher than the two MDR1 recombinant cells. Paralleled with the differences in IC50 values, the green fluorescence for vinblastine and paclitaxel in 571A variant cells was some-what brighter than the MDR1 wild-type cells under identical imaging conditions, suggesting a more efficient efflux transport function in cells expressing MDR1 wt . Together, these results collected with the three fluorescent anticancer compounds in MDR1 recombinant cells suggest that variations in intracellular drug levels probably lead to reduced drug resistance in MDR1 571A , compared with MDR1 wt .  Differential Accumulation of Doxorubicin, Vinblastine, and Paclitaxel in the Recombinant <italic>MDR1</italic> Cells To evaluate whether the reduction in intracellular drug concentration is a potential mechanism of differences in IC50 values recorded for the wild type and 571A variant of MDR1 recombinant cells, we surveyed the intracellular localization and distribution of three fluorescence anticancer drugs. Doxorubicin (a fluorescent compound), bodipy fluorescent-labeled vinblastine, and paclitaxel (labeled with tubulin tracker green) were used for this purpose. All three compounds produce green fluorescence for evaluation of drug localization and distribution. After exposing the cells to each of the three compounds for 30 min at 37°C, they were recorded with a fluorescence microscope and photographed at fixed exposure parameters. As shown in Fig. 5 , doxorubicin, a DNA-interacting drug widely used in chemotherapy, exhibited a high degree of drug localization in the nucleus but did not seem to produce a differential staining pattern between the two MDR1 variants. Bodipy FL-vinblastine is a fluorescent analog of the vinblastine that inhibits cell proliferation by capping microtubule ends, whereas Paclitaxel bis-acetate provides green fluorescent staining of polymerized tubulin in living cells, specifically, paclitaxel binds to the ?-subunit of tubulin. Therefore, both compounds are good candidates for our staining purpose to visualize the drug uptake and distribution in the cells. For vinblastine and paclitaxel, fluorescence intensity of these two drugs in control cells was much higher than the two MDR1 recombinant cells. Paralleled with the differences in IC50 values, the green fluorescence for vinblastine and paclitaxel in 571A variant cells was some-what brighter than the MDR1 wild-type cells under identical imaging conditions, suggesting a more efficient efflux transport function in cells expressing MDR1 wt . Together, these results collected with the three fluorescent anticancer compounds in MDR1 recombinant cells suggest that variations in intracellular drug levels probably lead to reduced drug resistance in MDR1 571A , compared with MDR1 wt .  Discussion As a continued effort to elucidate the pharmacogenetic impact of MDR1 sequence variations on the drug disposition and pharmacokinetics, we discovered a novel genetic variant G?A transition at 571 nucleotide position of MDR1 in humans. This genetic variation translates into a Gly?Arg transition at the 191 amino acid position of Pgp. This variant was identified as heterozygous in five of 78 leukemia patients, representing a 3.2% allelic frequency ( Table 1 ). Whether the same frequency exists in healthy subjects or patients with other types of diseases remains to be determined. With the aid of well characterized stable recombinant cells expressing MDR1 (191Gly) and the variant (191Arg), we found that both express a similar degree of functional Pgp on cell surfaces. Depending on the cancer drug tested, the variant seemed to be exhibit efflux transport and related drug resistance at equal or lower potency. Although the exact mechanism leading to substrate dependent variations is not clear for the Pgp transition at 191 Gly?Arg, it is possible that the net positive charge may contribute to the altered efflux of Pgp function. Amino acid 191 is mapped to the third transmembrane domain, where the added positive net charge may regulate the substrate affinity and transport. Although this is plausible, Arg in the same position may also alter overall conformation of Pgp leading to 4-to 5-fold IC50 reduction of vinblastine, vincristine, paclitaxel, and etoposide. However, in the absence of Pgp protein crystal, the conformational details at atomic levels remain elusive. Previous studies using site-directed mutagenesis to probe Pgp functions also found selective alterations of transport function for specific drug substrates ( Loo and Clarke, 1993a , b , 1994a , b ). It is generally believed that multiple binding domains in the drug-binding pocket exist for Pgp, which may account for the drug-specific alteration in Pgp efflux because of amino acid sequence variations ( Martin et al., 2000 ; Loo et al., 2003 ). The observed differential sensitivity to cytotoxic agents because of 571 G?A may be important in modulating the efficacy of chemotherapy. The cancer patients with MDR1 571A or 571A/G genotype will probably be more sensitive to vinblastine, vincristine, and paclitaxel and equally sensitive to doxorubicin or daunorubicin. However, subjects exhibiting MDR1 571A or 571A/G genotypes will also be more susceptible to dose-limiting toxicities because MDR1 is expressed widely in healthy cells and tissues, including those in gut mucosa, liver, and kidney, in drug clearance or elimination. This and other functional results could be used in the future to provide more effective drug selection and pharmacologic optimization in leukemia treatment and to overcome chemoresistance in other diseases. Our results imply that the patients with 571A may be more responsive to paclitaxel, etoposide, vincristine, or vinblastine than those with the wild-type 571G genotype. Reports in the literature are contradictory with regard to the influence of MDR1 polymorphisms (primarily G2677T and C3435T ) on Pgp expression and function at the cellular level. As described earlier, multiple binding domains may exist in Pgp, and variations in the amino acid sequence of the protein may alter binding and efflux of some drugs but not others. Thus, the selection of substrates may be important in assessing changes in Pgp activity and could explain some observed differences. In addition, some vectors carry unique membrane components and host cells that may influence the activity of Pgp. For example, retroviral vectors containing MDR1 variants at 2677, designed to express Ala893 or Ser893 in NIH-3T3 mouse embryonic cells, suggested that Ser893-expressing cells exhibited decreased digoxin accumulation than Ala893 cells, indicating enhanced Pgp efflux ( Kim et al., 2001b ). On the other hand, a vaccinia virus-based transient expression system of several MDR1 polymorphisms ( A61G, T307C, G1199A, G2677T , and G2995A ) in HeLa cells showed no difference in Pgp expression and efflux of various drugs ( Kimchi-Sarfaty et al., 2002 ). Some of these differences may be because of the transient protein expression system. The cells used to express the variant MDR1 genes can also have variable intrinsic transporters, many of which contribute to the efflux of Pgp substrates. The recombinant stable expression system we have developed to generate cell lines that continuously express MDR1 variants will be useful for study in detailing the complex interactions of MDR1 polymorphisms. We have now validated an expression system consisting of MDR1 mammalian expression vectors and host cells capable of reproducibly expressing Pgp variants. This strategy can be readily adapted to investigate other SNPs and haplotypes of MDR1 and provide insight into the functional significance on the more than 30 SNPs reported in the literature. For instance, the influence of C3435T may be evaluated to determine whether or not this synonymous polymorphism changes expression or activity of Pgp, with which it has been reported to be associated. In addition, the effect of MDR1 haplotypes can also be evaluated in this system because multiple SNPs can be expressed at once in the same plasmid. Multiple SNPs found on the same chromosome are assigned to a specific haplotype, and some attempts have been made to determine the role of MDR1 haplotypes in Pgp variability, but the data are still inconclusive ( Kim et al., 2001b ; Johne et al., 2002 ; Kroetz et al., 2003 ). Our expression system may be useful in sorting out the role of MDR1 haplotypes. By design, this continuous system focuses on genetic modifications in the coding region of MDR1 that alter the structure of Pgp. Other strategies specifically designed to evaluate the effects of promoter and intronic SNPs may be needed to address regulation of MDR1 expression. In summary, we report here a novel polymorphism of MDR1 G571A found in the leukemia patient. This MDR1 polymorphism confers moderate drug resistance to recombinant HEK cells but is less efficient than that of MDR1 wild type for selected drugs. Further studies to correlate the in vitro data with in vivo finding may help us to understand its clinical significance.  Discussion As a continued effort to elucidate the pharmacogenetic impact of MDR1 sequence variations on the drug disposition and pharmacokinetics, we discovered a novel genetic variant G?A transition at 571 nucleotide position of MDR1 in humans. This genetic variation translates into a Gly?Arg transition at the 191 amino acid position of Pgp. This variant was identified as heterozygous in five of 78 leukemia patients, representing a 3.2% allelic frequency ( Table 1 ). Whether the same frequency exists in healthy subjects or patients with other types of diseases remains to be determined. With the aid of well characterized stable recombinant cells expressing MDR1 (191Gly) and the variant (191Arg), we found that both express a similar degree of functional Pgp on cell surfaces. Depending on the cancer drug tested, the variant seemed to be exhibit efflux transport and related drug resistance at equal or lower potency. Although the exact mechanism leading to substrate dependent variations is not clear for the Pgp transition at 191 Gly?Arg, it is possible that the net positive charge may contribute to the altered efflux of Pgp function. Amino acid 191 is mapped to the third transmembrane domain, where the added positive net charge may regulate the substrate affinity and transport. Although this is plausible, Arg in the same position may also alter overall conformation of Pgp leading to 4-to 5-fold IC50 reduction of vinblastine, vincristine, paclitaxel, and etoposide. However, in the absence of Pgp protein crystal, the conformational details at atomic levels remain elusive. Previous studies using site-directed mutagenesis to probe Pgp functions also found selective alterations of transport function for specific drug substrates ( Loo and Clarke, 1993a , b , 1994a , b ). It is generally believed that multiple binding domains in the drug-binding pocket exist for Pgp, which may account for the drug-specific alteration in Pgp efflux because of amino acid sequence variations ( Martin et al., 2000 ; Loo et al., 2003 ). The observed differential sensitivity to cytotoxic agents because of 571 G?A may be important in modulating the efficacy of chemotherapy. The cancer patients with MDR1 571A or 571A/G genotype will probably be more sensitive to vinblastine, vincristine, and paclitaxel and equally sensitive to doxorubicin or daunorubicin. However, subjects exhibiting MDR1 571A or 571A/G genotypes will also be more susceptible to dose-limiting toxicities because MDR1 is expressed widely in healthy cells and tissues, including those in gut mucosa, liver, and kidney, in drug clearance or elimination. This and other functional results could be used in the future to provide more effective drug selection and pharmacologic optimization in leukemia treatment and to overcome chemoresistance in other diseases. Our results imply that the patients with 571A may be more responsive to paclitaxel, etoposide, vincristine, or vinblastine than those with the wild-type 571G genotype. Reports in the literature are contradictory with regard to the influence of MDR1 polymorphisms (primarily G2677T and C3435T ) on Pgp expression and function at the cellular level. As described earlier, multiple binding domains may exist in Pgp, and variations in the amino acid sequence of the protein may alter binding and efflux of some drugs but not others. Thus, the selection of substrates may be important in assessing changes in Pgp activity and could explain some observed differences. In addition, some vectors carry unique membrane components and host cells that may influence the activity of Pgp. For example, retroviral vectors containing MDR1 variants at 2677, designed to express Ala893 or Ser893 in NIH-3T3 mouse embryonic cells, suggested that Ser893-expressing cells exhibited decreased digoxin accumulation than Ala893 cells, indicating enhanced Pgp efflux ( Kim et al., 2001b ). On the other hand, a vaccinia virus-based transient expression system of several MDR1 polymorphisms ( A61G, T307C, G1199A, G2677T , and G2995A ) in HeLa cells showed no difference in Pgp expression and efflux of various drugs ( Kimchi-Sarfaty et al., 2002 ). Some of these differences may be because of the transient protein expression system. The cells used to express the variant MDR1 genes can also have variable intrinsic transporters, many of which contribute to the efflux of Pgp substrates. The recombinant stable expression system we have developed to generate cell lines that continuously express MDR1 variants will be useful for study in detailing the complex interactions of MDR1 polymorphisms. We have now validated an expression system consisting of MDR1 mammalian expression vectors and host cells capable of reproducibly expressing Pgp variants. This strategy can be readily adapted to investigate other SNPs and haplotypes of MDR1 and provide insight into the functional significance on the more than 30 SNPs reported in the literature. For instance, the influence of C3435T may be evaluated to determine whether or not this synonymous polymorphism changes expression or activity of Pgp, with which it has been reported to be associated. In addition, the effect of MDR1 haplotypes can also be evaluated in this system because multiple SNPs can be expressed at once in the same plasmid. Multiple SNPs found on the same chromosome are assigned to a specific haplotype, and some attempts have been made to determine the role of MDR1 haplotypes in Pgp variability, but the data are still inconclusive ( Kim et al., 2001b ; Johne et al., 2002 ; Kroetz et al., 2003 ). Our expression system may be useful in sorting out the role of MDR1 haplotypes. By design, this continuous system focuses on genetic modifications in the coding region of MDR1 that alter the structure of Pgp. Other strategies specifically designed to evaluate the effects of promoter and intronic SNPs may be needed to address regulation of MDR1 expression. In summary, we report here a novel polymorphism of MDR1 G571A found in the leukemia patient. This MDR1 polymorphism confers moderate drug resistance to recombinant HEK cells but is less efficient than that of MDR1 wild type for selected drugs. Further studies to correlate the in vitro data with in vivo finding may help us to understand its clinical significance. 