Overlapping gene expression profiles of cell migration and tumor invasion in human bladder cancer identify metallothionein E1 and nicotinamide N-methyltransferase as novel regulators of cell migration Cell migration is essential to cancer invasion and metastasis and is spatially and temporally integrated through transcriptionally dependent and independent mechanisms. Since cell migration is studied in vitro, it is important to identify genes that both drive cell migration and are biologically relevant in promoting invasion and metastasis in patients with cancer. Here, gene expression profiling and a high throughput cell migration system answers this question in human bladder cancer. In vitro migration rates of 40 microarray profiled human bladder cancer cell lines were measured by radial migration assay (RMA). Genes whose expression was either directly or inversely associated with cell migration rate were identified and subsequently evaluated for their association with cancer stage in 61 patients. This analysis identified genes known to be associated with cell invasion such as versican, and novel ones, including metallothionein E1 (MTE1) and nicotinamide N-methyltransferase (NNMT), whose expression correlated positively with cancer cell migration and tumor stage. Using loss of function analysis, we show that MTE1 and NNMT are necessary for cancer cell migration. These studies provide a general approach to identify the clinically relevant genes in cancer cell migration and mechanistically implicate two novel genes in this process in human bladder cancer.  INTRODUCTION Cell migration is an integrated multistep process that orchestrates embryonic morphogenesis, tissue repair and regeneration and drives disease progression in many diseases including cancer. Bladder cancer is common in the United States ( Jemal et al. , 2005 ) with an estimated 60,000 new cases in 2008. Despite successful treatment of non invasive disease, up to 30% eventually progress to muscle-invasive forms of the disease associated with a 50% mortality rate ( Stein et al. , 2001 ). Recent use of microarray technology has revolutionized our understanding of human cancer including insights into genes involved in tumorigenesis and metastasis ( Ramaswamy et al. , 2003 ), the discovery of tumor biomarkers ( Dyrskjot et al. , 2003 ; Liotta and Petricoin, 2000 ), the molecular classification of common neoplasms ( Su et al. , 2001 ) and the prediction of drug sensitivity ( Lee et al. , 2007 ). For example genes associated with metastasis either positively (metastasis promoter) ( Clark et al. , 2000 ) or negatively (metastasis suppressor) ( Gildea et al. , 2002 ) has been reported. By analyzing human melanoma cells on DNA microarrays, high expression of RhoC was identified to correlate with the metastatic phenotype. In animal experiments, RhoC enhanced metastasis when overexpressed, whereas its dominant-negative Rho inhibited metastasis ( Clark et al. , 2000 ). Others have shown that RhoC plays a critical role in tumour cell migration ( Faried et al. , 2006 ; Mukai et al. , 2006 ). Together, this data indicates that RhoC plays a role in both in vivo metastasis and cell migration. Similar tools were used to identify RhoGDI2 as a metastasis suppressor gene and inhibitor of EGF stimulated tumor cell migration ( Gildea et al. , 2002 ; Theodorescu et al. , 2004 ; Titus et al. , 2005 ). Given this demonstrated utility, use of this technology to identify key genes involved in cell migration appears feasible. In addition, identifying a subset of such genes that are also associated with cancer progression in patients would provide assurance of their biological relevance in human disease. Here we use genome wide expression profiling to define a “gene expression signature” of bladder cancer cell migration. We further evaluate the dependency of these signatures on different extracellular matrices upon which the cells are plated. With the goal of focusing only on those transcriptional networks that are relevant to human bladder cancer invasion, we further refine this migration signature with input of gene expression profiles derived from human cancer tissues and select only those genes which correlate with both cell migration and tumor stage. Once identified, we evaluate the mechanistic significance of these findings on cell migration using siRNA mediated mRNA depletion. Gene products causally related to cell migration are targets for anti-invasive therapies and candidate biomarkers for progression in patients.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Radial Migration Assay (RMA) Migration assays were performed using a 96-well monolayer radial migration assay ( Berens and Beaudry, 2004 ). Wells were either left uncoated or coated with 0.1% BSA, 10?g/ml laminin, 10?g/ml fibronectin or 10?g/ml collagen type IV in PBS for 1 hour at 37°C, rinsed three times in PBS, and then blocked with 0.1% BSA in PBS for 30 minutes at room temperature. Bladder cancer cell lines were plated at 3,000 cells/well and incubated for 6 hours to allow attachment. After attachment, the diameter of each cell population was measured (time 0) using an inverted microscope and image analysis software (Scion Image Corp, Frederick, MD) ( Figure 1A ). Cells were incubated for an additional 24 hours and second diameter measurements were taken. Migration speed is reported as the specific radial movement D2-D1 (?m/day) of the cell population. The migration assays were done in six replicates for each condition and were then carried out similarly in a repeat experiment one week later. Transwell, Time-lapse and Wound Migration Assays 253J Laval and SLT4 cell lines ( Nicholson et al. , 2004 ; Titus et al. , 2005 ) were maintained as described. 48 hours after siRNA transfection, cells were harvested, counted and resuspended in serum-free media. 5000 cells of 253J Laval or 10,000 cells of SLT4 were added in triplicate to the upper chambers of transwell filters (8.0 um pores, Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ) in 24 well tissue culture plates and the assay carried out as described ( Oxford et al. , 2005 ). For time lapse microscopy cells were prepared as for the transwell assay and assay carried out as described ( de Rooij et al. , 2005 ) with images captured every 2.5 minutes for 3 hours on a temperature controlled stage of a Nikon TE200 inverted microscope. For the wound healing assay, cells were seeded in 6 well plate and transfected with NNMT or MT1E siRNA oligonucleotides for 48 hours. Midline wounds were inflicted by a plastic pipette tip. Immediately after scratching and again after 12 hours, well images were evaluated and analyzed as described ( Gildea et al. , 2002 ). Transcriptional Profiling of Bladder Tumor Cell Lines and Human Bladder Cancers Human bladder-carcinoma derived cell lines, primary human bladder carcinoma tissues and normal bladder urothelium were profiled on HG-U133A GeneChip arrays (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA) as described ( Titus et al. , 2005 ). Further datasets of primary bladder cancer samples obtained from tumors of known pathological stages and grades as well as samples of normal urothelium were obtained from the literature ( Smith et al. , 2007 ). Image files were assessed for quality and artifacts and processed using Microarray Analysis Suite 5.0 (MAS 5.0, Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA) using a scaling factor of 200. Statistical Analysis of Human Bladder Cancer Cell Migration For each matrix type, we fitted a regression model where migration speed is the dependent variable, while cell line type is the independent variable ( Team, 2003 ). We used a ‘deviation’ contrast for the categorical variable representing the cell lines. Hence, the model estimates an overall average migration speed, and then compares speed of each cell line to it. This gives us a group of cell lines with migration speeds significantly higher than average (defined as rapid migrating cells), a group where speeds are significantly lower than average (defined as slow migrating cells), and a third group of insignificant speed difference from average. This method is suited to the situation where no external criterion is available for defining cutoffs for fast and slow speeds. Another advantage of this method is to eliminate noise introduced by borderline cell lines. Disadvantages include decreased sample size. The Student’s t-test was used to determine significant differences in comparisons between two groups. Two-tailed distribution and two-sample unequal variance were used to make comparisons. Identification and Network Analysis of Genes Associated with Cell Migration Speed and Tumor Stage We used the Bioconductor LPE library for analysis of gene expression ( www.bioconductor.org ). To discover differentially expressed genes, we computed the false discovery rate (FDR), and used the BH option for multiple comparison adjustments. We used two criteria to select genes: 1) fold change ? 3, and 2) statistical significance ? 0.01. We applied the above analysis and two criteria to two separate datasets: 1) gene expression of the cell migration experiment, and 2) gene expression associated with clinical stage of tumors. For the migration expression data, we located genes up- and down-regulated in slow versus fast groups defined as above within each matrix type. For the stage expression data we located genes up- and down-regulated in noninvasive (stage Ta and normal) versus invasive (stage ?T2) tumors. Then we selected genes that are: 1) overexpressed in fast migration group and in the invasive tumors; 2) genes that are overexpressed in the slow migration group and in non invasive cancers. Among such genes, we identified genes that are common in all the matrix types, versus ones that are specific to different types of matrices. To identify networks associated with cell migration, the data was explored with Ingenuity Systems pathways analysis software ( www.ingenuity.com ) as previously described ( Calvano et al. , 2005 ; Li et al. , 2006 ; Mayburd et al. , 2006 ). siRNA Mediated mRNA Depletion siRNA oligonucleotides (final concentration 100nM) transfection was conducted using Oligofectamine (Invitrogen, CA). The luciferase pGL2, two NNMT-specific siRNA oligonucleotides NNMT-A: GAAAGAGGCTGGCTACACA and NNMT-B: GAGGTGATCTCGCAAAGTT, two MT1E-specific siRNA oligonucleotides MT1E-A: ATAGAGCAGCCAGTTGCAG and MT1E-B: TGACTGCTTGTTCGTCTCA, were ordered from Dharmacon (Lafayette, CO). At 48 hours after the transfections, cells were subjected to RNA extraction using a RNeasy mini kit. RNA was reverse transcribed using the random primers of the ImPrompII kit (Promega, WI). The real-time PCR assay was conducted in iCycler IQTM real-time PCR Detection System following the manufacturer’s procedures (BioRad, CA). The fluorescent dye IQTM SYBR Green Supermix was used in PCR reaction (BioRad, CA). The sequences of the real time PCR primers are as follows (5? to 3?): NNMT-f1055: CCTTTGACTGGTCCCCAGTG, NNMT-r1155: CTGCTTGACCGCCTGTCTC; MT-IE-f102: GGCTCCATTCTGCTTTCCAA, MT-IE-r206: AGTGGCGCAAGAGCAGTTG; ?-actin-f-RT, CCAGATCATGTTTGAGACCTTCAAC, and ?-actin-r-RT: CCAGAGGCGTACAGGGATAGC. Cell proliferation assay 5 × 103 SLT4 or 253J Laval cells were incubated in each well of 24-well plates for siRNA transfection and evaluation of cell number. Alamar Blue was diluted 1 to 20 in the cell culture media, and fluorescence emission assessed at 4 hr after addition according to manufacturer protocol (Biosource, CA), on the designated days from siRNA transfection. Colorimetric evaluation was performed using a SPECTRA max spectrophotometer (Molecular Devices, CA) with 540 nm as excitation wavelength and 590 nm as emission wavelength as described ( Havaleshko et al. , 2007 ).  Radial Migration Assay (RMA) Migration assays were performed using a 96-well monolayer radial migration assay ( Berens and Beaudry, 2004 ). Wells were either left uncoated or coated with 0.1% BSA, 10?g/ml laminin, 10?g/ml fibronectin or 10?g/ml collagen type IV in PBS for 1 hour at 37°C, rinsed three times in PBS, and then blocked with 0.1% BSA in PBS for 30 minutes at room temperature. Bladder cancer cell lines were plated at 3,000 cells/well and incubated for 6 hours to allow attachment. After attachment, the diameter of each cell population was measured (time 0) using an inverted microscope and image analysis software (Scion Image Corp, Frederick, MD) ( Figure 1A ). Cells were incubated for an additional 24 hours and second diameter measurements were taken. Migration speed is reported as the specific radial movement D2-D1 (?m/day) of the cell population. The migration assays were done in six replicates for each condition and were then carried out similarly in a repeat experiment one week later.  Transwell, Time-lapse and Wound Migration Assays 253J Laval and SLT4 cell lines ( Nicholson et al. , 2004 ; Titus et al. , 2005 ) were maintained as described. 48 hours after siRNA transfection, cells were harvested, counted and resuspended in serum-free media. 5000 cells of 253J Laval or 10,000 cells of SLT4 were added in triplicate to the upper chambers of transwell filters (8.0 um pores, Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ) in 24 well tissue culture plates and the assay carried out as described ( Oxford et al. , 2005 ). For time lapse microscopy cells were prepared as for the transwell assay and assay carried out as described ( de Rooij et al. , 2005 ) with images captured every 2.5 minutes for 3 hours on a temperature controlled stage of a Nikon TE200 inverted microscope. For the wound healing assay, cells were seeded in 6 well plate and transfected with NNMT or MT1E siRNA oligonucleotides for 48 hours. Midline wounds were inflicted by a plastic pipette tip. Immediately after scratching and again after 12 hours, well images were evaluated and analyzed as described ( Gildea et al. , 2002 ).  Transcriptional Profiling of Bladder Tumor Cell Lines and Human Bladder Cancers Human bladder-carcinoma derived cell lines, primary human bladder carcinoma tissues and normal bladder urothelium were profiled on HG-U133A GeneChip arrays (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA) as described ( Titus et al. , 2005 ). Further datasets of primary bladder cancer samples obtained from tumors of known pathological stages and grades as well as samples of normal urothelium were obtained from the literature ( Smith et al. , 2007 ). Image files were assessed for quality and artifacts and processed using Microarray Analysis Suite 5.0 (MAS 5.0, Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA) using a scaling factor of 200.  Statistical Analysis of Human Bladder Cancer Cell Migration For each matrix type, we fitted a regression model where migration speed is the dependent variable, while cell line type is the independent variable ( Team, 2003 ). We used a ‘deviation’ contrast for the categorical variable representing the cell lines. Hence, the model estimates an overall average migration speed, and then compares speed of each cell line to it. This gives us a group of cell lines with migration speeds significantly higher than average (defined as rapid migrating cells), a group where speeds are significantly lower than average (defined as slow migrating cells), and a third group of insignificant speed difference from average. This method is suited to the situation where no external criterion is available for defining cutoffs for fast and slow speeds. Another advantage of this method is to eliminate noise introduced by borderline cell lines. Disadvantages include decreased sample size. The Student’s t-test was used to determine significant differences in comparisons between two groups. Two-tailed distribution and two-sample unequal variance were used to make comparisons.  Identification and Network Analysis of Genes Associated with Cell Migration Speed and Tumor Stage We used the Bioconductor LPE library for analysis of gene expression ( www.bioconductor.org ). To discover differentially expressed genes, we computed the false discovery rate (FDR), and used the BH option for multiple comparison adjustments. We used two criteria to select genes: 1) fold change ? 3, and 2) statistical significance ? 0.01. We applied the above analysis and two criteria to two separate datasets: 1) gene expression of the cell migration experiment, and 2) gene expression associated with clinical stage of tumors. For the migration expression data, we located genes up- and down-regulated in slow versus fast groups defined as above within each matrix type. For the stage expression data we located genes up- and down-regulated in noninvasive (stage Ta and normal) versus invasive (stage ?T2) tumors. Then we selected genes that are: 1) overexpressed in fast migration group and in the invasive tumors; 2) genes that are overexpressed in the slow migration group and in non invasive cancers. Among such genes, we identified genes that are common in all the matrix types, versus ones that are specific to different types of matrices. To identify networks associated with cell migration, the data was explored with Ingenuity Systems pathways analysis software ( www.ingenuity.com ) as previously described ( Calvano et al. , 2005 ; Li et al. , 2006 ; Mayburd et al. , 2006 ).  siRNA Mediated mRNA Depletion siRNA oligonucleotides (final concentration 100nM) transfection was conducted using Oligofectamine (Invitrogen, CA). The luciferase pGL2, two NNMT-specific siRNA oligonucleotides NNMT-A: GAAAGAGGCTGGCTACACA and NNMT-B: GAGGTGATCTCGCAAAGTT, two MT1E-specific siRNA oligonucleotides MT1E-A: ATAGAGCAGCCAGTTGCAG and MT1E-B: TGACTGCTTGTTCGTCTCA, were ordered from Dharmacon (Lafayette, CO). At 48 hours after the transfections, cells were subjected to RNA extraction using a RNeasy mini kit. RNA was reverse transcribed using the random primers of the ImPrompII kit (Promega, WI). The real-time PCR assay was conducted in iCycler IQTM real-time PCR Detection System following the manufacturer’s procedures (BioRad, CA). The fluorescent dye IQTM SYBR Green Supermix was used in PCR reaction (BioRad, CA). The sequences of the real time PCR primers are as follows (5? to 3?): NNMT-f1055: CCTTTGACTGGTCCCCAGTG, NNMT-r1155: CTGCTTGACCGCCTGTCTC; MT-IE-f102: GGCTCCATTCTGCTTTCCAA, MT-IE-r206: AGTGGCGCAAGAGCAGTTG; ?-actin-f-RT, CCAGATCATGTTTGAGACCTTCAAC, and ?-actin-r-RT: CCAGAGGCGTACAGGGATAGC.  Cell proliferation assay 5 × 103 SLT4 or 253J Laval cells were incubated in each well of 24-well plates for siRNA transfection and evaluation of cell number. Alamar Blue was diluted 1 to 20 in the cell culture media, and fluorescence emission assessed at 4 hr after addition according to manufacturer protocol (Biosource, CA), on the designated days from siRNA transfection. Colorimetric evaluation was performed using a SPECTRA max spectrophotometer (Molecular Devices, CA) with 540 nm as excitation wavelength and 590 nm as emission wavelength as described ( Havaleshko et al. , 2007 ).  Supplementary Material Supplement  RESULTS The type of extracellular matrix affects in vitro bladder cancer cell migration The radial migration assay was used to measure migration of bladder cancer cell lines. The average migration speeds of 40 human bladder cancer cells on different matrices were computed and summarized ( Table 1 ). The regression model was used to classify bladder cancer cell lines into 2 groups of cell lines: Group 1: rapidly migrating cells and Group 2: slow migrating cells as defined in materials and methods ( Table 1 ). Examination of rates of cell migration indicates a large baseline (i.e. glass) variation among the cell lines ( Figure 1B ). In addition, cells plated on fibronectin, laminin and collagen have enhanced cell migration compared to those cells grown on BSA, or glass, (p<0.05) ( Figure 1C ). Furthermore, among the 3 matrices, cells appear to move the fastest on collagen type 4 (p<0.01). Differences in baseline (intrinsic) migration speeds among the cell lines explain ~70% of the total variation observed, versus 4% explained by the matrix types (with both cell lines and matrix types being statistically significant terms in the model, p<0.001). Interestingly, cells with higher rates of migration on glass tend to be less sensitive to the effects of matrix for their migration ( Figure 1D ). Gene expression profiling of cancer cell migration and its relation cell matrix Oligonucleotide microarray profiling of the bladder cancer cell lines was used to determine the commonality and differences between expression profiles associated with cell migration on different matrices. To accomplish these goals we compared the gene expression profiles of cell line groups with fast or slow migration speeds on different matrices. With the criteria of expression fold changes ? 3 and statistical significance p-value ? 0.01, we determined that 236 gene probes were associated with migration rate on either control (glass) or specific matrices ( supplementary Table 1 ). A Venn diagram was used to classify the numbers of gene probes associated with migration rate on one or a combination of different matrices. 49 gene probes are commonly associated with migration rate on all five surfaces, while 3, 11 and 43 probes specifically depend on laminin, fibronectin and collagen IV matrices, respectively while 4 are specific to glass ( Figure 2A and supplementary Table 1 ). Results of Ingenuity® pathway analysis with probes either associated with migration on specific surfaces or all substrates are shown in Table 2 . When the 49 probes which were associated with migration rate on all five surfaces were examined, only one pathway, O-glycan Biosynthesis was found significant. In contrast, when the analysis was carried out on the probe sets that were associated with migration on specific surfaces, different pathways emerged. O-glycan Biosynthesis, Integrin signaling, eicosanoid signaling and Wnt/?-Catenin Signaling were the only significant pathways and given the multitude of pathways available, suggests that bladder cancer has a relatively restricted set of biochemical signaling pathways upon which migratory behaviors are dependent. Versican, NNMT and MT1E expression are associated with cell migration and tumor stages To select clinically relevant genes associated with cell migration, we evaluated the expression profiles of the genes discovered in the cell line migration assay as a function of tumor stage in human bladder cancer. We reasoned that a gene whose expression correlates with speed of migration in vitro is important for in vivo cancer invasion if such expression also correlates with tumor stage in human cancer. Microarray data from 15 normal urothelia, 25 superficial (Ta) and 21 invasive tumors of stage T2 and above was evaluated to determine which migration genes ( Figure 2A ) were associated with malignancy (normal vs. tumor) and progression (superficial vs. invasive tumor) ( supplementary Table 1 ). The rationale for carrying out both of these comparisons was that some genes may be important in conferring enhanced cell migration to cells upon transformation while others enhance this phenotype during tumor progression. The differentially expressed gene probes associated with both cell migration and tumor stages are shown in Table 3 . The elevated expression of versican (chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan 2) is shown to correlate not only to three types of matrix-dependent cell migration, but also tumor transformation and progression. Four genes, nicotinamide N-methyltransferase (NNMT), putative secreted protein XAG, ephrin-B2 and mesoderm specific transcript homolog (MEST) were associated with fibronectin and collagen IV dependent cell migration while also associated with tumor stage. Thirteen individual gene probes were involved in one matrix dependent cell migration while also implicated in tumor transformation or progression. In the case of the glass or BSA coated surface, metallothionein 1E (MT1E) and three other genes were found to associate with higher expression in fast migrating cell lines and transformation or progression in human tumor tissues. Evaluation of the literature also indicated that NNMT and MT1E expression is strongly associated with tumor stage in two other large studies in bladder cancer ( Figure 2B ). Furthermore, examination of the NNMT and MT1E expression levels across the 40 cell lines used in the study reveals no correlation between them ( Figure 2C ) suggesting these levels are regulated by different factors and that these genes are likely members of distinct pathways regulating to tumor progression. Taken together, given the novel association of NNMT and MT1E with tumor invasion and in vitro migration, these genes were selected for further study to determine if they have a mechanistic role in cell migration in vitro and in vivo. Depletion of NNMT affects chemotaxis and chemokinesis To investigate whether chemotaxis is regulated by NNMT we chose 253J laval human bladder cancer cells which have high NNMT expression. These cells migrate well toward 2% FBS media in the transwell migration chamber assay. We transiently transfected 253J laval cells with two NNMT-specific siRNA oligonucleotides NNMT-A and NNMT-B, and in view of the absence of commercially available or academic source of antibody, real-time RT-PCR analysis was used to confirm reduction of NNMT mRNA level for both NNMT-specific siRNA oligonucleotides ( Figure 3A ). The decrease of NNMT expression ranged from 86% to 90%, compared with non-specific luciferase knockdown. Importantly, both knockdowns of NNMT resulted in a significant decrease of chemotaxis responses to 2% serum media, compared with non-specific luciferase knockdown ( Figure. 3B ). To evaluate the role of NNMT in bladder cancer chemokinesis, we tracked the movement of individual cells using time-lapse microscopy. Tracked movements from all cells in randomly-selected fields of view were plotted ( Figure 3C ). The average distance traveled by cells from NNMT or luciferase knockdown was quantified ( Figure 3D ). In 3 hours, the average migration distance (11.3±6.3 um) of 21 cells with NNMT knockdown was considerably shorter than that (17.9±6.4 um) from 27 cells without NNMT depletion (p< 0.001). Knockdown of MT1E decreases cell migration in the wound healing assay A similar experiment to that for NNMT was carried out to test whether reduction of endogenous MT1E expression would affect serum chemotaxis in SLT4 human bladder cancer cells, which have high expression of MT1E. Despite successful knockdown of MT1E mRNA (no commercially available or academic source of antibody), no effect on transwell migration was seen (data not shown). Similarly, knockdown of MT1E in SLT4 cells did not affect chemokinesis (data not shown). We thus evaluated cell migration in the wound healing assay in response to depletion of MT1E and NNMT. SLT4 cells were transfected with siRNA’s to pGL2 as well as either of two oligos to MT1E (MT1E-A and MT1E-B). 48 hours after transfection, real-time RT-PCR analysis was used to evaluate reduction of MT1E mRNA level ( Figure 4A ). In parallel replica plates, we analyzed migration of cultured SLT4 cells in wound assays for an additional 12 hours. Comparison between starting wounds and wounds at 12 hours, indicated that MT1E-A and MT1E-B depletion results in decreased of wound healing of SLT4 cells ( Figure 4B,C ). Knockdown of NNMT or MT1E causes decreased cell proliferation To evaluate the impact of NNMT or MT1E depletion on growth, 5 × 103 SLT4 or 253J laval cells were plated in each well of 24-well plates and siRNA transfection carried out. Real-time PCR analysis was used to confirm reduction of NNMT and MT1E mRNA level and measurement of cell number evaluated over 4 days. As seen in Figure 5A , cell proliferation in 253J laval depleted of NNMT by both siRNA oligos was reduced compared to pGL2 knockdown control. At day 4 after the siRNA transfection, NNMT-A siRNA oligonucleotide decreased cell number by 24% (p=0.048) from luciferase controls, while NNMT-B oligonucleotide caused a decrease of cell number by 40% (p=0.019). MT1E siRNA knockdown in SLT4 cells also led to decreased cell proliferation in two independent experiments. In general, MT1E-A and MT1E-B siRNA oligonucleotides decreased SLT4 cell numbers by 21–25% four days after the siRNA oligonucleotide transfections for both MT1E-A and MT1E-B ( Figure 5B ). Stable depletion of both genes was attempted using shRNA but no cells with depleted levels were obtained (data not shown). We suspect, given the decreased proliferation, such cells would have been overgrown by cells without significant depletion of the genes, resulting in the observed phenotype.  RESULTS The type of extracellular matrix affects in vitro bladder cancer cell migration The radial migration assay was used to measure migration of bladder cancer cell lines. The average migration speeds of 40 human bladder cancer cells on different matrices were computed and summarized ( Table 1 ). The regression model was used to classify bladder cancer cell lines into 2 groups of cell lines: Group 1: rapidly migrating cells and Group 2: slow migrating cells as defined in materials and methods ( Table 1 ). Examination of rates of cell migration indicates a large baseline (i.e. glass) variation among the cell lines ( Figure 1B ). In addition, cells plated on fibronectin, laminin and collagen have enhanced cell migration compared to those cells grown on BSA, or glass, (p<0.05) ( Figure 1C ). Furthermore, among the 3 matrices, cells appear to move the fastest on collagen type 4 (p<0.01). Differences in baseline (intrinsic) migration speeds among the cell lines explain ~70% of the total variation observed, versus 4% explained by the matrix types (with both cell lines and matrix types being statistically significant terms in the model, p<0.001). Interestingly, cells with higher rates of migration on glass tend to be less sensitive to the effects of matrix for their migration ( Figure 1D ). Gene expression profiling of cancer cell migration and its relation cell matrix Oligonucleotide microarray profiling of the bladder cancer cell lines was used to determine the commonality and differences between expression profiles associated with cell migration on different matrices. To accomplish these goals we compared the gene expression profiles of cell line groups with fast or slow migration speeds on different matrices. With the criteria of expression fold changes ? 3 and statistical significance p-value ? 0.01, we determined that 236 gene probes were associated with migration rate on either control (glass) or specific matrices ( supplementary Table 1 ). A Venn diagram was used to classify the numbers of gene probes associated with migration rate on one or a combination of different matrices. 49 gene probes are commonly associated with migration rate on all five surfaces, while 3, 11 and 43 probes specifically depend on laminin, fibronectin and collagen IV matrices, respectively while 4 are specific to glass ( Figure 2A and supplementary Table 1 ). Results of Ingenuity® pathway analysis with probes either associated with migration on specific surfaces or all substrates are shown in Table 2 . When the 49 probes which were associated with migration rate on all five surfaces were examined, only one pathway, O-glycan Biosynthesis was found significant. In contrast, when the analysis was carried out on the probe sets that were associated with migration on specific surfaces, different pathways emerged. O-glycan Biosynthesis, Integrin signaling, eicosanoid signaling and Wnt/?-Catenin Signaling were the only significant pathways and given the multitude of pathways available, suggests that bladder cancer has a relatively restricted set of biochemical signaling pathways upon which migratory behaviors are dependent. Versican, NNMT and MT1E expression are associated with cell migration and tumor stages To select clinically relevant genes associated with cell migration, we evaluated the expression profiles of the genes discovered in the cell line migration assay as a function of tumor stage in human bladder cancer. We reasoned that a gene whose expression correlates with speed of migration in vitro is important for in vivo cancer invasion if such expression also correlates with tumor stage in human cancer. Microarray data from 15 normal urothelia, 25 superficial (Ta) and 21 invasive tumors of stage T2 and above was evaluated to determine which migration genes ( Figure 2A ) were associated with malignancy (normal vs. tumor) and progression (superficial vs. invasive tumor) ( supplementary Table 1 ). The rationale for carrying out both of these comparisons was that some genes may be important in conferring enhanced cell migration to cells upon transformation while others enhance this phenotype during tumor progression. The differentially expressed gene probes associated with both cell migration and tumor stages are shown in Table 3 . The elevated expression of versican (chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan 2) is shown to correlate not only to three types of matrix-dependent cell migration, but also tumor transformation and progression. Four genes, nicotinamide N-methyltransferase (NNMT), putative secreted protein XAG, ephrin-B2 and mesoderm specific transcript homolog (MEST) were associated with fibronectin and collagen IV dependent cell migration while also associated with tumor stage. Thirteen individual gene probes were involved in one matrix dependent cell migration while also implicated in tumor transformation or progression. In the case of the glass or BSA coated surface, metallothionein 1E (MT1E) and three other genes were found to associate with higher expression in fast migrating cell lines and transformation or progression in human tumor tissues. Evaluation of the literature also indicated that NNMT and MT1E expression is strongly associated with tumor stage in two other large studies in bladder cancer ( Figure 2B ). Furthermore, examination of the NNMT and MT1E expression levels across the 40 cell lines used in the study reveals no correlation between them ( Figure 2C ) suggesting these levels are regulated by different factors and that these genes are likely members of distinct pathways regulating to tumor progression. Taken together, given the novel association of NNMT and MT1E with tumor invasion and in vitro migration, these genes were selected for further study to determine if they have a mechanistic role in cell migration in vitro and in vivo. Depletion of NNMT affects chemotaxis and chemokinesis To investigate whether chemotaxis is regulated by NNMT we chose 253J laval human bladder cancer cells which have high NNMT expression. These cells migrate well toward 2% FBS media in the transwell migration chamber assay. We transiently transfected 253J laval cells with two NNMT-specific siRNA oligonucleotides NNMT-A and NNMT-B, and in view of the absence of commercially available or academic source of antibody, real-time RT-PCR analysis was used to confirm reduction of NNMT mRNA level for both NNMT-specific siRNA oligonucleotides ( Figure 3A ). The decrease of NNMT expression ranged from 86% to 90%, compared with non-specific luciferase knockdown. Importantly, both knockdowns of NNMT resulted in a significant decrease of chemotaxis responses to 2% serum media, compared with non-specific luciferase knockdown ( Figure. 3B ). To evaluate the role of NNMT in bladder cancer chemokinesis, we tracked the movement of individual cells using time-lapse microscopy. Tracked movements from all cells in randomly-selected fields of view were plotted ( Figure 3C ). The average distance traveled by cells from NNMT or luciferase knockdown was quantified ( Figure 3D ). In 3 hours, the average migration distance (11.3±6.3 um) of 21 cells with NNMT knockdown was considerably shorter than that (17.9±6.4 um) from 27 cells without NNMT depletion (p< 0.001). Knockdown of MT1E decreases cell migration in the wound healing assay A similar experiment to that for NNMT was carried out to test whether reduction of endogenous MT1E expression would affect serum chemotaxis in SLT4 human bladder cancer cells, which have high expression of MT1E. Despite successful knockdown of MT1E mRNA (no commercially available or academic source of antibody), no effect on transwell migration was seen (data not shown). Similarly, knockdown of MT1E in SLT4 cells did not affect chemokinesis (data not shown). We thus evaluated cell migration in the wound healing assay in response to depletion of MT1E and NNMT. SLT4 cells were transfected with siRNA’s to pGL2 as well as either of two oligos to MT1E (MT1E-A and MT1E-B). 48 hours after transfection, real-time RT-PCR analysis was used to evaluate reduction of MT1E mRNA level ( Figure 4A ). In parallel replica plates, we analyzed migration of cultured SLT4 cells in wound assays for an additional 12 hours. Comparison between starting wounds and wounds at 12 hours, indicated that MT1E-A and MT1E-B depletion results in decreased of wound healing of SLT4 cells ( Figure 4B,C ). Knockdown of NNMT or MT1E causes decreased cell proliferation To evaluate the impact of NNMT or MT1E depletion on growth, 5 × 103 SLT4 or 253J laval cells were plated in each well of 24-well plates and siRNA transfection carried out. Real-time PCR analysis was used to confirm reduction of NNMT and MT1E mRNA level and measurement of cell number evaluated over 4 days. As seen in Figure 5A , cell proliferation in 253J laval depleted of NNMT by both siRNA oligos was reduced compared to pGL2 knockdown control. At day 4 after the siRNA transfection, NNMT-A siRNA oligonucleotide decreased cell number by 24% (p=0.048) from luciferase controls, while NNMT-B oligonucleotide caused a decrease of cell number by 40% (p=0.019). MT1E siRNA knockdown in SLT4 cells also led to decreased cell proliferation in two independent experiments. In general, MT1E-A and MT1E-B siRNA oligonucleotides decreased SLT4 cell numbers by 21–25% four days after the siRNA oligonucleotide transfections for both MT1E-A and MT1E-B ( Figure 5B ). Stable depletion of both genes was attempted using shRNA but no cells with depleted levels were obtained (data not shown). We suspect, given the decreased proliferation, such cells would have been overgrown by cells without significant depletion of the genes, resulting in the observed phenotype.  The type of extracellular matrix affects in vitro bladder cancer cell migration The radial migration assay was used to measure migration of bladder cancer cell lines. The average migration speeds of 40 human bladder cancer cells on different matrices were computed and summarized ( Table 1 ). The regression model was used to classify bladder cancer cell lines into 2 groups of cell lines: Group 1: rapidly migrating cells and Group 2: slow migrating cells as defined in materials and methods ( Table 1 ). Examination of rates of cell migration indicates a large baseline (i.e. glass) variation among the cell lines ( Figure 1B ). In addition, cells plated on fibronectin, laminin and collagen have enhanced cell migration compared to those cells grown on BSA, or glass, (p<0.05) ( Figure 1C ). Furthermore, among the 3 matrices, cells appear to move the fastest on collagen type 4 (p<0.01). Differences in baseline (intrinsic) migration speeds among the cell lines explain ~70% of the total variation observed, versus 4% explained by the matrix types (with both cell lines and matrix types being statistically significant terms in the model, p<0.001). Interestingly, cells with higher rates of migration on glass tend to be less sensitive to the effects of matrix for their migration ( Figure 1D ).  The type of extracellular matrix affects in vitro bladder cancer cell migration The radial migration assay was used to measure migration of bladder cancer cell lines. The average migration speeds of 40 human bladder cancer cells on different matrices were computed and summarized ( Table 1 ). The regression model was used to classify bladder cancer cell lines into 2 groups of cell lines: Group 1: rapidly migrating cells and Group 2: slow migrating cells as defined in materials and methods ( Table 1 ). Examination of rates of cell migration indicates a large baseline (i.e. glass) variation among the cell lines ( Figure 1B ). In addition, cells plated on fibronectin, laminin and collagen have enhanced cell migration compared to those cells grown on BSA, or glass, (p<0.05) ( Figure 1C ). Furthermore, among the 3 matrices, cells appear to move the fastest on collagen type 4 (p<0.01). Differences in baseline (intrinsic) migration speeds among the cell lines explain ~70% of the total variation observed, versus 4% explained by the matrix types (with both cell lines and matrix types being statistically significant terms in the model, p<0.001). Interestingly, cells with higher rates of migration on glass tend to be less sensitive to the effects of matrix for their migration ( Figure 1D ).  Gene expression profiling of cancer cell migration and its relation cell matrix Oligonucleotide microarray profiling of the bladder cancer cell lines was used to determine the commonality and differences between expression profiles associated with cell migration on different matrices. To accomplish these goals we compared the gene expression profiles of cell line groups with fast or slow migration speeds on different matrices. With the criteria of expression fold changes ? 3 and statistical significance p-value ? 0.01, we determined that 236 gene probes were associated with migration rate on either control (glass) or specific matrices ( supplementary Table 1 ). A Venn diagram was used to classify the numbers of gene probes associated with migration rate on one or a combination of different matrices. 49 gene probes are commonly associated with migration rate on all five surfaces, while 3, 11 and 43 probes specifically depend on laminin, fibronectin and collagen IV matrices, respectively while 4 are specific to glass ( Figure 2A and supplementary Table 1 ). Results of Ingenuity® pathway analysis with probes either associated with migration on specific surfaces or all substrates are shown in Table 2 . When the 49 probes which were associated with migration rate on all five surfaces were examined, only one pathway, O-glycan Biosynthesis was found significant. In contrast, when the analysis was carried out on the probe sets that were associated with migration on specific surfaces, different pathways emerged. O-glycan Biosynthesis, Integrin signaling, eicosanoid signaling and Wnt/?-Catenin Signaling were the only significant pathways and given the multitude of pathways available, suggests that bladder cancer has a relatively restricted set of biochemical signaling pathways upon which migratory behaviors are dependent.  Gene expression profiling of cancer cell migration and its relation cell matrix Oligonucleotide microarray profiling of the bladder cancer cell lines was used to determine the commonality and differences between expression profiles associated with cell migration on different matrices. To accomplish these goals we compared the gene expression profiles of cell line groups with fast or slow migration speeds on different matrices. With the criteria of expression fold changes ? 3 and statistical significance p-value ? 0.01, we determined that 236 gene probes were associated with migration rate on either control (glass) or specific matrices ( supplementary Table 1 ). A Venn diagram was used to classify the numbers of gene probes associated with migration rate on one or a combination of different matrices. 49 gene probes are commonly associated with migration rate on all five surfaces, while 3, 11 and 43 probes specifically depend on laminin, fibronectin and collagen IV matrices, respectively while 4 are specific to glass ( Figure 2A and supplementary Table 1 ). Results of Ingenuity® pathway analysis with probes either associated with migration on specific surfaces or all substrates are shown in Table 2 . When the 49 probes which were associated with migration rate on all five surfaces were examined, only one pathway, O-glycan Biosynthesis was found significant. In contrast, when the analysis was carried out on the probe sets that were associated with migration on specific surfaces, different pathways emerged. O-glycan Biosynthesis, Integrin signaling, eicosanoid signaling and Wnt/?-Catenin Signaling were the only significant pathways and given the multitude of pathways available, suggests that bladder cancer has a relatively restricted set of biochemical signaling pathways upon which migratory behaviors are dependent.  Versican, NNMT and MT1E expression are associated with cell migration and tumor stages To select clinically relevant genes associated with cell migration, we evaluated the expression profiles of the genes discovered in the cell line migration assay as a function of tumor stage in human bladder cancer. We reasoned that a gene whose expression correlates with speed of migration in vitro is important for in vivo cancer invasion if such expression also correlates with tumor stage in human cancer. Microarray data from 15 normal urothelia, 25 superficial (Ta) and 21 invasive tumors of stage T2 and above was evaluated to determine which migration genes ( Figure 2A ) were associated with malignancy (normal vs. tumor) and progression (superficial vs. invasive tumor) ( supplementary Table 1 ). The rationale for carrying out both of these comparisons was that some genes may be important in conferring enhanced cell migration to cells upon transformation while others enhance this phenotype during tumor progression. The differentially expressed gene probes associated with both cell migration and tumor stages are shown in Table 3 . The elevated expression of versican (chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan 2) is shown to correlate not only to three types of matrix-dependent cell migration, but also tumor transformation and progression. Four genes, nicotinamide N-methyltransferase (NNMT), putative secreted protein XAG, ephrin-B2 and mesoderm specific transcript homolog (MEST) were associated with fibronectin and collagen IV dependent cell migration while also associated with tumor stage. Thirteen individual gene probes were involved in one matrix dependent cell migration while also implicated in tumor transformation or progression. In the case of the glass or BSA coated surface, metallothionein 1E (MT1E) and three other genes were found to associate with higher expression in fast migrating cell lines and transformation or progression in human tumor tissues. Evaluation of the literature also indicated that NNMT and MT1E expression is strongly associated with tumor stage in two other large studies in bladder cancer ( Figure 2B ). Furthermore, examination of the NNMT and MT1E expression levels across the 40 cell lines used in the study reveals no correlation between them ( Figure 2C ) suggesting these levels are regulated by different factors and that these genes are likely members of distinct pathways regulating to tumor progression. Taken together, given the novel association of NNMT and MT1E with tumor invasion and in vitro migration, these genes were selected for further study to determine if they have a mechanistic role in cell migration in vitro and in vivo.  Versican, NNMT and MT1E expression are associated with cell migration and tumor stages To select clinically relevant genes associated with cell migration, we evaluated the expression profiles of the genes discovered in the cell line migration assay as a function of tumor stage in human bladder cancer. We reasoned that a gene whose expression correlates with speed of migration in vitro is important for in vivo cancer invasion if such expression also correlates with tumor stage in human cancer. Microarray data from 15 normal urothelia, 25 superficial (Ta) and 21 invasive tumors of stage T2 and above was evaluated to determine which migration genes ( Figure 2A ) were associated with malignancy (normal vs. tumor) and progression (superficial vs. invasive tumor) ( supplementary Table 1 ). The rationale for carrying out both of these comparisons was that some genes may be important in conferring enhanced cell migration to cells upon transformation while others enhance this phenotype during tumor progression. The differentially expressed gene probes associated with both cell migration and tumor stages are shown in Table 3 . The elevated expression of versican (chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan 2) is shown to correlate not only to three types of matrix-dependent cell migration, but also tumor transformation and progression. Four genes, nicotinamide N-methyltransferase (NNMT), putative secreted protein XAG, ephrin-B2 and mesoderm specific transcript homolog (MEST) were associated with fibronectin and collagen IV dependent cell migration while also associated with tumor stage. Thirteen individual gene probes were involved in one matrix dependent cell migration while also implicated in tumor transformation or progression. In the case of the glass or BSA coated surface, metallothionein 1E (MT1E) and three other genes were found to associate with higher expression in fast migrating cell lines and transformation or progression in human tumor tissues. Evaluation of the literature also indicated that NNMT and MT1E expression is strongly associated with tumor stage in two other large studies in bladder cancer ( Figure 2B ). Furthermore, examination of the NNMT and MT1E expression levels across the 40 cell lines used in the study reveals no correlation between them ( Figure 2C ) suggesting these levels are regulated by different factors and that these genes are likely members of distinct pathways regulating to tumor progression. Taken together, given the novel association of NNMT and MT1E with tumor invasion and in vitro migration, these genes were selected for further study to determine if they have a mechanistic role in cell migration in vitro and in vivo.  Depletion of NNMT affects chemotaxis and chemokinesis To investigate whether chemotaxis is regulated by NNMT we chose 253J laval human bladder cancer cells which have high NNMT expression. These cells migrate well toward 2% FBS media in the transwell migration chamber assay. We transiently transfected 253J laval cells with two NNMT-specific siRNA oligonucleotides NNMT-A and NNMT-B, and in view of the absence of commercially available or academic source of antibody, real-time RT-PCR analysis was used to confirm reduction of NNMT mRNA level for both NNMT-specific siRNA oligonucleotides ( Figure 3A ). The decrease of NNMT expression ranged from 86% to 90%, compared with non-specific luciferase knockdown. Importantly, both knockdowns of NNMT resulted in a significant decrease of chemotaxis responses to 2% serum media, compared with non-specific luciferase knockdown ( Figure. 3B ). To evaluate the role of NNMT in bladder cancer chemokinesis, we tracked the movement of individual cells using time-lapse microscopy. Tracked movements from all cells in randomly-selected fields of view were plotted ( Figure 3C ). The average distance traveled by cells from NNMT or luciferase knockdown was quantified ( Figure 3D ). In 3 hours, the average migration distance (11.3±6.3 um) of 21 cells with NNMT knockdown was considerably shorter than that (17.9±6.4 um) from 27 cells without NNMT depletion (p< 0.001).  Depletion of NNMT affects chemotaxis and chemokinesis To investigate whether chemotaxis is regulated by NNMT we chose 253J laval human bladder cancer cells which have high NNMT expression. These cells migrate well toward 2% FBS media in the transwell migration chamber assay. We transiently transfected 253J laval cells with two NNMT-specific siRNA oligonucleotides NNMT-A and NNMT-B, and in view of the absence of commercially available or academic source of antibody, real-time RT-PCR analysis was used to confirm reduction of NNMT mRNA level for both NNMT-specific siRNA oligonucleotides ( Figure 3A ). The decrease of NNMT expression ranged from 86% to 90%, compared with non-specific luciferase knockdown. Importantly, both knockdowns of NNMT resulted in a significant decrease of chemotaxis responses to 2% serum media, compared with non-specific luciferase knockdown ( Figure. 3B ). To evaluate the role of NNMT in bladder cancer chemokinesis, we tracked the movement of individual cells using time-lapse microscopy. Tracked movements from all cells in randomly-selected fields of view were plotted ( Figure 3C ). The average distance traveled by cells from NNMT or luciferase knockdown was quantified ( Figure 3D ). In 3 hours, the average migration distance (11.3±6.3 um) of 21 cells with NNMT knockdown was considerably shorter than that (17.9±6.4 um) from 27 cells without NNMT depletion (p< 0.001).  Knockdown of MT1E decreases cell migration in the wound healing assay A similar experiment to that for NNMT was carried out to test whether reduction of endogenous MT1E expression would affect serum chemotaxis in SLT4 human bladder cancer cells, which have high expression of MT1E. Despite successful knockdown of MT1E mRNA (no commercially available or academic source of antibody), no effect on transwell migration was seen (data not shown). Similarly, knockdown of MT1E in SLT4 cells did not affect chemokinesis (data not shown). We thus evaluated cell migration in the wound healing assay in response to depletion of MT1E and NNMT. SLT4 cells were transfected with siRNA’s to pGL2 as well as either of two oligos to MT1E (MT1E-A and MT1E-B). 48 hours after transfection, real-time RT-PCR analysis was used to evaluate reduction of MT1E mRNA level ( Figure 4A ). In parallel replica plates, we analyzed migration of cultured SLT4 cells in wound assays for an additional 12 hours. Comparison between starting wounds and wounds at 12 hours, indicated that MT1E-A and MT1E-B depletion results in decreased of wound healing of SLT4 cells ( Figure 4B,C ).  Knockdown of MT1E decreases cell migration in the wound healing assay A similar experiment to that for NNMT was carried out to test whether reduction of endogenous MT1E expression would affect serum chemotaxis in SLT4 human bladder cancer cells, which have high expression of MT1E. Despite successful knockdown of MT1E mRNA (no commercially available or academic source of antibody), no effect on transwell migration was seen (data not shown). Similarly, knockdown of MT1E in SLT4 cells did not affect chemokinesis (data not shown). We thus evaluated cell migration in the wound healing assay in response to depletion of MT1E and NNMT. SLT4 cells were transfected with siRNA’s to pGL2 as well as either of two oligos to MT1E (MT1E-A and MT1E-B). 48 hours after transfection, real-time RT-PCR analysis was used to evaluate reduction of MT1E mRNA level ( Figure 4A ). In parallel replica plates, we analyzed migration of cultured SLT4 cells in wound assays for an additional 12 hours. Comparison between starting wounds and wounds at 12 hours, indicated that MT1E-A and MT1E-B depletion results in decreased of wound healing of SLT4 cells ( Figure 4B,C ).  Knockdown of NNMT or MT1E causes decreased cell proliferation To evaluate the impact of NNMT or MT1E depletion on growth, 5 × 103 SLT4 or 253J laval cells were plated in each well of 24-well plates and siRNA transfection carried out. Real-time PCR analysis was used to confirm reduction of NNMT and MT1E mRNA level and measurement of cell number evaluated over 4 days. As seen in Figure 5A , cell proliferation in 253J laval depleted of NNMT by both siRNA oligos was reduced compared to pGL2 knockdown control. At day 4 after the siRNA transfection, NNMT-A siRNA oligonucleotide decreased cell number by 24% (p=0.048) from luciferase controls, while NNMT-B oligonucleotide caused a decrease of cell number by 40% (p=0.019). MT1E siRNA knockdown in SLT4 cells also led to decreased cell proliferation in two independent experiments. In general, MT1E-A and MT1E-B siRNA oligonucleotides decreased SLT4 cell numbers by 21–25% four days after the siRNA oligonucleotide transfections for both MT1E-A and MT1E-B ( Figure 5B ). Stable depletion of both genes was attempted using shRNA but no cells with depleted levels were obtained (data not shown). We suspect, given the decreased proliferation, such cells would have been overgrown by cells without significant depletion of the genes, resulting in the observed phenotype.  Knockdown of NNMT or MT1E causes decreased cell proliferation To evaluate the impact of NNMT or MT1E depletion on growth, 5 × 103 SLT4 or 253J laval cells were plated in each well of 24-well plates and siRNA transfection carried out. Real-time PCR analysis was used to confirm reduction of NNMT and MT1E mRNA level and measurement of cell number evaluated over 4 days. As seen in Figure 5A , cell proliferation in 253J laval depleted of NNMT by both siRNA oligos was reduced compared to pGL2 knockdown control. At day 4 after the siRNA transfection, NNMT-A siRNA oligonucleotide decreased cell number by 24% (p=0.048) from luciferase controls, while NNMT-B oligonucleotide caused a decrease of cell number by 40% (p=0.019). MT1E siRNA knockdown in SLT4 cells also led to decreased cell proliferation in two independent experiments. In general, MT1E-A and MT1E-B siRNA oligonucleotides decreased SLT4 cell numbers by 21–25% four days after the siRNA oligonucleotide transfections for both MT1E-A and MT1E-B ( Figure 5B ). Stable depletion of both genes was attempted using shRNA but no cells with depleted levels were obtained (data not shown). We suspect, given the decreased proliferation, such cells would have been overgrown by cells without significant depletion of the genes, resulting in the observed phenotype.  DISCUSSION Bladder cancer can present either as a non-invasive or invasive lesion with up to 30% of the former progressing to invasiveness over time ( Witjes, 2006 ). Recently, gene expression profiles depicting bladder cancer progression have been assembled ( Dyrskjot et al. , 2003 ; Modlich et al. , 2004 ; Sanchez-Carbayo et al. , 2003 ; Thykjaer et al. , 2001 ). To the extent that in vitro cancer cell migration approximates some of the processes of in vivo tumor invasion, a better understanding of the gene expression changes associated with migration may assist in screening approaches to identify genes that underlie malignant invasion as well as supporting the discovery of drugs to control cancer invasion and metastasis. Here we report an initial step towards developing a molecular connection between in vitro migration and in vivo invasion. We anticipate that this will mature into a method to identify genes associated with cell migration that are also likely candidates involved in tumor invasion in patients with bladder cancer. Extension of this approach to other tumor types is also feasible. In the present report, we use bladder cancer as a model system to examine migration of 40 cancer cell lines on different extracellular matrices found in vivo and relate data from their gene expression profiling to migratory rate. Importantly, this work does not assume or depend on whether gene expression on plastic is representative of gene expression on the different matrices but uses these as reference for anchoring the migration phenotypes on different strata. Interestingly, differences in migration speeds among the cell lines are determined by both cell line and by matrix type with the largest contribution attributable to inherent features of the cell line. A dependency of migration on matrix type in bladder cancer cells has been also shown by others. For example, EJ cells (T24T), when grown on extracellular matrix (ECM) derived from ras transfected fibroblast cells, have a higher growth and motility rate than when grown on ECM derived from normal fibroblasts ( Gordon et al. , 1993 ). The increased cell migration results from up-regulation of type IV collagen mRNA expression in EJ cells grown on ECM derived from ras transfected fibroblasts. In our radial migration assay, collagen IV also considerably promotes cell migration of EJ (T24T) cell line. Computational pathway analysis of gene probes associated with matrix dependent cell migration on a relatively large scale for one tissue type can complement detailed work on individual cell lines. For example, our studies demonstrated that fibronectin-dependent migration of bladder cancer cells is associated with the ecosanoid and Wnt/?-Catenin signaling pathways while fibronectin was reported to stimulate the motility of invasive human bladder cancer T24 cells via PKC signal transduction pathways ( Margolis et al. , 1996 ). By virtue of using 40 cell lines and querying which genes associate with migration on all surfaces, this approach may identify gene products and signaling pathways that are generally relevant in human bladder cancer rather than being limited to specific matrix models. This notion is supported by finding that O-glycan Biosynthesis is the only pathway statistically correlated with the 49 probes associated with migration rate on all five surfaces. Interestingly, mucin-type glycoproteins carrying sialylated, fucosylated glycans are known to be metastasis-associated biomarkers ( Altevogt et al. , 1988 ; Kristiansen et al. , 2004 ). In fact, we have recently shown that one such molecule, CD24, a ligand for P-selectin ( Aigner et al. , 1997 ; Friederichs et al. , 2000 ), is both a biomarker for bladder cancer progression ( Smith et al. , 2006 ) as well as necessary for bladder cancer growth ( Smith et al. , 2006 ) in vitro. Furthermore, CD24 is a biomarker for metastasis in many common human cancers ( Smith et al. , 2006 ). Among our identified candidate migration/progression genes, versican, ephrin-B2 and E-cadherin are well known to be associated with tumor transformation and progression. We also identified E-cadherin and fibronectin 1 as biomarkers for both cell migration and tumor stage consistent with data from other microarrays ( Modlich et al. , 2004 ; Thykjaer et al. , 2001 ). Elevated levels of extracellular matrix versican are also predictive of poor prognosis in patients with prostate cancer, endometrial cancer and oral squamous cell carcinoma ( Kodama et al. , 2006 ; Pukkila et al. , 2006 ; Ricciardelli et al. , 1999 ). The G3 isoform of versican directly binds to fibronectin, complexing with VEGF, and enhances colony growth in soft agar and tumor growth and blood vessel formation in nude mice ( Zheng et al. , 2004 ). Our study is the first to identify N-methyltransferase (NNMT) and metallothionein (MT) 1E as contributors to bladder cancer migration in vitro while being associated with human tumor invasion in patients. NNMT has been identified as a novel serum marker for human colorectal cancers ( Roessler et al. , 2005 ) despite the fact that this protein is not predicted to be secreted but is considered to be restricted to the cytoplasmic compartment. Other authors report overexpression of NNMT in papillary thyroid cancer, renal carcinoma and gastric cancer ( Lim et al. , 2006 ; Roessler et al. , 2005 ; Xu et al. , 2003 ; Yao et al. , 2005 ). It is also interesting to note that NNMT works in a xenobiotic pathway to maintain homeostasis ( Aksoy et al. , 1995 ; Aksoy et al. , 1994 ) while metallothioneins (MTs) are small, cysteine-rich zinc binding proteins that are powerful antioxidants. In eight out of ten prediction models of toxicogenomics, MT1E is predicted to be involved in carcinogenic process ( van Delft et al. , 2005 ) and MT1E is predicted to be a biomarker in hepatocellular carcinoma ( Grate, 2005 ). Interestingly, the antioxidant Genistein can up-regulate transcription of MT1E ( Chung et al. , 2006 ). In addition to their roles in bladder cancer migration, depletion of NNMT and MT1E are also associated with decreased cell proliferation, making these proteins even more interesting targets for therapy. Interestingly, MT protein was also shown to be elevated in estrogen-receptor-negative breast cancer cell lines that express MT-1E mRNA suggesting a possible relationship between estrogen receptor status and MT-1E gene expression in human breast cancer ( Friedline et al. , 1998 ; Jin et al. , 2000 ). These data are also interesting since bladder cancer is regarded as a chemical carcinogenesis disease ( Jones et al. , 1992 ) and the present work is the first to link genes involved with detoxification to the migratory/invasive process. Hinting at such a relationship is the finding that chemical carcinogen derived murine bladder cancers are most likely to be invasive, and their gene expression profile is more closely related to that of invasive bladder cancer than noninvasive bladder cancer (Williams and Theodorescu, manuscript in preparation). Hence, further study of NNMT and MT1E may discover new links between chemical carcinogenesis and tumor progression in bladder cancer.  DISCUSSION Bladder cancer can present either as a non-invasive or invasive lesion with up to 30% of the former progressing to invasiveness over time ( Witjes, 2006 ). Recently, gene expression profiles depicting bladder cancer progression have been assembled ( Dyrskjot et al. , 2003 ; Modlich et al. , 2004 ; Sanchez-Carbayo et al. , 2003 ; Thykjaer et al. , 2001 ). To the extent that in vitro cancer cell migration approximates some of the processes of in vivo tumor invasion, a better understanding of the gene expression changes associated with migration may assist in screening approaches to identify genes that underlie malignant invasion as well as supporting the discovery of drugs to control cancer invasion and metastasis. Here we report an initial step towards developing a molecular connection between in vitro migration and in vivo invasion. We anticipate that this will mature into a method to identify genes associated with cell migration that are also likely candidates involved in tumor invasion in patients with bladder cancer. Extension of this approach to other tumor types is also feasible. In the present report, we use bladder cancer as a model system to examine migration of 40 cancer cell lines on different extracellular matrices found in vivo and relate data from their gene expression profiling to migratory rate. Importantly, this work does not assume or depend on whether gene expression on plastic is representative of gene expression on the different matrices but uses these as reference for anchoring the migration phenotypes on different strata. Interestingly, differences in migration speeds among the cell lines are determined by both cell line and by matrix type with the largest contribution attributable to inherent features of the cell line. A dependency of migration on matrix type in bladder cancer cells has been also shown by others. For example, EJ cells (T24T), when grown on extracellular matrix (ECM) derived from ras transfected fibroblast cells, have a higher growth and motility rate than when grown on ECM derived from normal fibroblasts ( Gordon et al. , 1993 ). The increased cell migration results from up-regulation of type IV collagen mRNA expression in EJ cells grown on ECM derived from ras transfected fibroblasts. In our radial migration assay, collagen IV also considerably promotes cell migration of EJ (T24T) cell line. Computational pathway analysis of gene probes associated with matrix dependent cell migration on a relatively large scale for one tissue type can complement detailed work on individual cell lines. For example, our studies demonstrated that fibronectin-dependent migration of bladder cancer cells is associated with the ecosanoid and Wnt/?-Catenin signaling pathways while fibronectin was reported to stimulate the motility of invasive human bladder cancer T24 cells via PKC signal transduction pathways ( Margolis et al. , 1996 ). By virtue of using 40 cell lines and querying which genes associate with migration on all surfaces, this approach may identify gene products and signaling pathways that are generally relevant in human bladder cancer rather than being limited to specific matrix models. This notion is supported by finding that O-glycan Biosynthesis is the only pathway statistically correlated with the 49 probes associated with migration rate on all five surfaces. Interestingly, mucin-type glycoproteins carrying sialylated, fucosylated glycans are known to be metastasis-associated biomarkers ( Altevogt et al. , 1988 ; Kristiansen et al. , 2004 ). In fact, we have recently shown that one such molecule, CD24, a ligand for P-selectin ( Aigner et al. , 1997 ; Friederichs et al. , 2000 ), is both a biomarker for bladder cancer progression ( Smith et al. , 2006 ) as well as necessary for bladder cancer growth ( Smith et al. , 2006 ) in vitro. Furthermore, CD24 is a biomarker for metastasis in many common human cancers ( Smith et al. , 2006 ). Among our identified candidate migration/progression genes, versican, ephrin-B2 and E-cadherin are well known to be associated with tumor transformation and progression. We also identified E-cadherin and fibronectin 1 as biomarkers for both cell migration and tumor stage consistent with data from other microarrays ( Modlich et al. , 2004 ; Thykjaer et al. , 2001 ). Elevated levels of extracellular matrix versican are also predictive of poor prognosis in patients with prostate cancer, endometrial cancer and oral squamous cell carcinoma ( Kodama et al. , 2006 ; Pukkila et al. , 2006 ; Ricciardelli et al. , 1999 ). The G3 isoform of versican directly binds to fibronectin, complexing with VEGF, and enhances colony growth in soft agar and tumor growth and blood vessel formation in nude mice ( Zheng et al. , 2004 ). Our study is the first to identify N-methyltransferase (NNMT) and metallothionein (MT) 1E as contributors to bladder cancer migration in vitro while being associated with human tumor invasion in patients. NNMT has been identified as a novel serum marker for human colorectal cancers ( Roessler et al. , 2005 ) despite the fact that this protein is not predicted to be secreted but is considered to be restricted to the cytoplasmic compartment. Other authors report overexpression of NNMT in papillary thyroid cancer, renal carcinoma and gastric cancer ( Lim et al. , 2006 ; Roessler et al. , 2005 ; Xu et al. , 2003 ; Yao et al. , 2005 ). It is also interesting to note that NNMT works in a xenobiotic pathway to maintain homeostasis ( Aksoy et al. , 1995 ; Aksoy et al. , 1994 ) while metallothioneins (MTs) are small, cysteine-rich zinc binding proteins that are powerful antioxidants. In eight out of ten prediction models of toxicogenomics, MT1E is predicted to be involved in carcinogenic process ( van Delft et al. , 2005 ) and MT1E is predicted to be a biomarker in hepatocellular carcinoma ( Grate, 2005 ). Interestingly, the antioxidant Genistein can up-regulate transcription of MT1E ( Chung et al. , 2006 ). In addition to their roles in bladder cancer migration, depletion of NNMT and MT1E are also associated with decreased cell proliferation, making these proteins even more interesting targets for therapy. Interestingly, MT protein was also shown to be elevated in estrogen-receptor-negative breast cancer cell lines that express MT-1E mRNA suggesting a possible relationship between estrogen receptor status and MT-1E gene expression in human breast cancer ( Friedline et al. , 1998 ; Jin et al. , 2000 ). These data are also interesting since bladder cancer is regarded as a chemical carcinogenesis disease ( Jones et al. , 1992 ) and the present work is the first to link genes involved with detoxification to the migratory/invasive process. Hinting at such a relationship is the finding that chemical carcinogen derived murine bladder cancers are most likely to be invasive, and their gene expression profile is more closely related to that of invasive bladder cancer than noninvasive bladder cancer (Williams and Theodorescu, manuscript in preparation). Hence, further study of NNMT and MT1E may discover new links between chemical carcinogenesis and tumor progression in bladder cancer. 