Classification of Depressive Disorders in DSM-V: Proposal for a Two-Dimension System The number of categories and specifiers for mood disorders has increased with each successive edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders (DSM) . Many of these categories and specifiers can be viewed as an effort to map the various permutations of severity and chronicity that characterize the depressive disorders. However, this has resulted in a system that is unnecessarily complex and unwieldy, and created problems with artificial distinctions between categories and artifactual comorbidity, and at the same time obscures what may be more fundamental distinctions. A potentially useful and more parsimonious approach to capturing much of the heterogeneity of depressive disorders is to classify the depressive disorders along two dimensions, one reflecting severity and the other chronicity. Considerations in the development of these dimensions are discussed, and a set of examples is presented. Although further research and discussion are needed to determine the optimal form of these dimensions, the next edition of the DSM should consider replacing many of the existing categories and specifiers for depressive disorders with the simpler approach of classifying depressive disorders using the two dimensions of severity and chronicity.  Conclusion The DSM-V provides an important opportunity to rethink how we conceptualize and classify mental disorders. A two-dimension system with severity and chronicity axes would simplify the classification of depressive disorders. It could incorporate virtually all the information in the MDD category, the MDD episode severity, recurrent, and chronic specifiers, the DD category, the longitudinal course specifier, and the appendix category of minor depressive disorder into just two codes or ratings (one on each axis). In addition, it has a number of further advantages, including recognizing subthreshold depressive conditions, which are currently relegated to the Appendix; eliminating the conceptual problem that supposedly “major” disorders such as MDD are often milder and less impairing than some ostensibly “minor” disorders such as DD ( Klein et al., 2000 ); eliminating or substantially reducing the problems of artificial distinctions between categories and artifactual comorbidity; encouraging clinicians to pay attention to longitudinal course, much as the introduction of Axis II in DSM-III forced clinicians to consider personality disorders; and emphasizing the distinction between episodic and chronic depressions, which is currently obscured by the balkanization of chronic depression into numerous categories and specifiers.  Tables Table 1 DSM-IV Depressive Disorders as a Function of Severity and Chronicity Severity Non-Chronic Chronic Moderate-Severe Non-Chronic Major Depressive Disorder Chronic Major Depressive Disorder Mild Minor Depressive Disorder Dysthymic Disorder Table 2 Example of Severity Dimension No or almost no symptoms Subthreshold (2–4 symptoms 1 ) Mild (5–6 symptoms plus mild impairment) Moderate (symptoms or functional impairment between mild and severe) Severe (8–9 symptoms and severe impairment) 1 Of the nine symptoms in DSM-IV MDD episode criterion B: depressed mood; loss of interest or pleasure; low energy or fatigue; sleep disturbance; appetite disturbance; psychomotor disturbance; decreased concentration or difficulty making decisions; inappropriate guilt or worthlessness; thoughts of death or suicidal ideation or behavior. Table 3 Example of Chronicity Dimension No significant subthreshold or full threshold period of depression Single episode of ? 2 years duration Recurrent episodes of ? 2 years duration with extended periods of full remission between episodes Chronic (> 2 years of depressive symptoms without extended periods of full remission) 