Magnitude and Correlates of Response Shift in Fatigue Ratings in Women Undergoing Adjuvant Therapy for Breast Cancer Fatigue is a common consequence of cancer chemotherapy (CT) and radiotherapy (RT). Investigation of the impact of cancer treatment on fatigue is compromised by a potential “response shift” in fatigue ratings, involving a recalibration of a respondent’s internal standard used to judge their current fatigue experience. Using a prospective, longitudinal research design, repeated assessments of most and average fatigue were obtained from women ( n =102) with early stage breast cancer receiving adjuvant CT and/or RT. Thentest ratings of fatigue were also obtained and used to index the presence of a response shift in fatigue ratings. Results suggested a clinically significant response shift in ratings of most and average fatigue of approximately one-half standard deviation. Multiple regression analyses suggested larger response shifts were associated with higher pretreatment fatigue ratings, receipt of CT, and lower fatigue catastrophizing. Most importantly, consideration of the observed response shift in fatigue ratings significantly altered the conclusions drawn regarding the magnitude and persistence of fatigue during and after adjuvant therapy for breast cancer.  Introduction Reports of increased fatigue and decreased energy level are common during treatment with adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy [ 1 – 3 ]. Some evidence suggests these symptoms can persist after completion of adjuvant therapy, with significant “off-treatment” fatigue frequently reported by cancer survivors [ 4 – 5 ]. Consequently, a critical question becomes whether and when fatigue levels return to what might be considered “normal” pre-treatment levels. While several different research designs can be used to address this question, use of a prospective and longitudinal research design is generally preferred. This design reduces error associated with cross-sectional and retrospective research designs and eliminates uncertainties associated with the quality of matching in case-control designs. Furthermore, longitudinal assessments foster a more dynamic view of the temporal trajectory of fatigue. However, the logic of the prospective, longitudinal research design is based on the assumption the instrument used to measure fatigue is identical at each assessment. Given fatigue’s subjective nature and the reliance upon self report in its assessment, it is unclear whether this assumption is met. Why is this so? While the instrument used to measure fatigue is identical at each point of assessment, the meaning or subjective perception of the response continuum along which fatigue reports are made using a given instrument might change over time. For example, the experience of unusually severe fatigue during adjuvant CT or RT can alter a cancer patient’s perspective regarding what “severe” fatigue represents or the meaning of “fatigue as bad as it could be.” Thus, a rating of “5” on a 10-point Likert scale assessing recent fatigue prior to initiation of adjuvant treatment may not be equivalent to a rating of “5” on the same Likert scale obtained after completion of adjuvant treatment. This phenomenon is known as a “response shift” [ 6 – 7 ]. The presence of a significant response shift in a longitudinal investigation of fatigue can substantially alter the conclusions drawn. When a response shift is present, longitudinal data that suggest “no change” in fatigue over time might actually mask a significant change in fatigue over time. Identification of factors associated with response shift size is also important as it fosters understanding of the processes which underlie this phenomenon and the conditions under which a response shift might be likely to occur. At minimum, one would expect the magnitude of response shift in fatigue ratings would be positively associated with a more extreme experience of fatigue between repeated assessments. In effect, the “high” end of the subjective fatigue response continuum is redefined by the respondent’s recent fatigue experience. Several different approaches have been used to detect the presence of a response shift [ 8 – 9 ]. A structural equation modeling approach (SEM) can be used to detect response shift when a multi-item inventory is used to assess the construct of interest [ 10 – 11 ]. The presence of a response shift is indicated by change in factor solutions and variance-covariance matrices over time. The anchor-recalibration approach can be used to detect response shift when a single-item rating scale is used to assess the construct of interest. Recalibration of the scale anchors (or endpoints) is measured directly by eliciting respondents’ ideas about the meaning of scale anchors and the position of pretest anchors relative to post-test anchors. Pretest ratings are then transformed to the post-test scale and a “recalibration free” change score can be calculated. Response shift is then defined as the difference between the original pretest and transformed pretest ratings [ 9 ]. The most common, best established, and least labor intensive approach to detecting response shift is the thentest approach [ 8 – 9 ]. This approach is similar to the anchor-recalibration approach as it is appropriate for assessing response shift on a single-item rating scale and results in a recalibration free change score. However, the thentest approach simply asks respondents to rerate their pretest level of some construct (i.e, the thentest) at the same time that post-test ratings are obtained. Response shift is then indexed as the difference between actual pretest ratings and thentest ratings obtained at the post-test assessment. Several studies have examined response shift in the study of fatigue in cancer patients. Each used the thentest approach to gauge extent of response shift [ 8 – 9 ]. Respondents completed one or more measures of fatigue or energy level prior to RT (i.e., pretest) and again after conclusion of RT (i.e., post-test) [ 12 – 14 ] or prior to surgery and again three months following surgery [ 9 ]. In addition, at the follow-up (i.e., post-test) assessment respondents completed the fatigue measures obtained at the pretest assessment a second time. This thentest represented a rerating of a respondent’s fatigue level at the pretest assessment. Comparison of the thentest and pretest fatigue ratings indexed the extent of response shift between the two occasions of assessment. Using this thentest approach, a response shift in the measurement of fatigue or energy level was found in three of four studies [ 12 – 14 ]. Use of conventional pre-post fatigue measures underestimated the negative impact of RT on fatigue and energy level. While demonstrating the potential for a response shift in the assessment of fatigue in cancer patients, this existing research is limited. No research has examined response shift in the CT setting. As CT is generally associated with more severe fatigue [ 1 , 15 ], one would expect the response shift phenomenon to be exacerbated in the CT setting. Furthermore, the three studies that examined response shift in the RT setting did not include any follow-up assessments of fatigue after the post-treatment assessment at the conclusion of RT. Finally, research has not examined whether the magnitude of response shift is associated with demographic, clinical, or psychological variables. Consequently, we do not know whether the magnitude of response shift varies as a function of the length of the period of retrospection in the production of thentest ratings, initial fatigue levels, psychological characteristics, such as the presence of a catastrophizing coping style [ 16 ], or the type of adjuvant treatment received. The present study examines the magnitude and correlates of response shift in the measurement of fatigue in women receiving adjuvant therapy for early stage breast cancer. We hypothesize consideration of conventional pretreatment, post-treatment and follow-up ratings of fatigue will significantly underestimate the impact of adjuvant therapy on fatigue. Furthermore, we hypothesize women receiving CT will demonstrate a larger response shift in fatigue ratings. Finally, building upon previous research linking a catastrophizing coping style to reports of greater fatigue magnitude [ 16 ], we will explore the link between fatigue catastrophizing and magnitude of any observed response shift.  Sample Characteristics The study sample consisted of 102 women enrolled at the UK ( n =26; 25%) and USF ( n =76; 75%) sites. Women were a mean age of 54.7 years at diagnosis (SD=10.6; range = 29–82), were predominantly white ( n =89; 87%) and married/partnered ( n =69; 68%). Education level was: ? high school ( n =30; 29%), some college ( n =30; 29%) and ? college baccalaureate degree ( n =42; 42%). Annual household income was: ? $19,999 ( n =11; 11%), $20,000 to $59,999 ( n =31; 30%), $60,000 to $99,999 ( n =36; 35%), and ? $100,000 ( n =17; 17%). Adjuvant therapy consisted of CT+RT ( n =42; 41%), CT only ( n =6; 6%), and RT only ( n =54; 53%). Surgical treatment consisted of lumpectomy ( n =90; 88%), mastectomy ( n =7; 7%), and double mastectomy or a combination of both lumpectomy and mastectomy ( n =5; 5%). Disease stage was Stage 0 ( n =18; 18%), Stage I ( n =45; 44%), Stage II ( n =36; 35%), and Stage IIIA ( n =3; 3%). Of the 102 women, 73 women completed the FSI-TT at the Post-Treatment One assessment at the end of either an initial course of RT ( n =54) or CT ( n =19). These 73 women comprise the CT or RT group. The mean days between the Pretreatment and Post-Treatment One assessments was 70.2 days (SD = 40.9; range = 22 to 202). Similarly, 39 women completed the FSI-TT at the Post-Treatment Two assessment. All of these women were treated with CT followed by RT and thus comprise the CT+RT group. Mean days between the Pretreatment and Post-Treatment Two assessments was 193.8 days (SD = 57.3; range = 115 to 364). (Ten women completed the FSI-TT at both the Post-Treatment One and Two assessments.)  Magnitude of Response Shift in Fatigue Ratings Mean FSI ratings of most and average fatigue at the Pretreatment, Post-Treatment One, and Post-Treatment Two assessments and mean ratings of most and average fatigue on the FSI-TT at the Post-Treatment One and Post-Treatment Two assessments are shown in Table 1 . For the CT or RT group, ratings of both most (paired t = 5.52; P < 0.001) and average (paired t = 3.18; P < 0.01) fatigue were significantly higher at the Post-Treatment One assessment, relative to the Pretreatment assessment. Similarly, for the CT+RT group, most (paired t = 2.52; P < 0.02) and average (paired t = 2.09; P < 0.05) fatigue ratings were significantly higher at the Post-Treatment Two assessment. For the CT or RT group, a significant response shift was evident for ratings of both most (mean = 1.6 scale units, paired t = 4.89; P < 0.001) and average fatigue (mean = 0.8 scale units; paired t = 3.43; P < 0.001). For the CT+RT group, a significant response shift was also evident for ratings of both most (mean = 1.6 scale units, paired t = 2.71; P < 0.01) and average fatigue (mean = 1.3 scale units; paired t = 3.27; P < 0.01). In all instances, the response shift was in the direction of reporting lower thentest ratings of fatigue experienced at the initiation of adjuvant therapy, relative to the real time FSI ratings of fatigue obtained at the Pretreatment assessment. To illustrate this general pattern of FSI and FSI-TT ratings, Figure 1 shows the data for most fatigue ratings for both the CT or RT and CT+RT groups.  Factors Associated With Magnitude of Response Shift in Fatigue Ratings Demographic, clinical, and psychosocial variables associated with magnitude of response shift in fatigue ratings at the Pretreatment One assessment in the CT or RT group ( n =73) were examined using multiple regression. Separate but parallel analyses were conducted using most and average fatigue ratings. Predictor variables included the appropriate FSI fatigue rating from the Pretreatment One assessment (e.g., FSI rating of most fatigue for analysis of response shift in most fatigue ratings), age, education, study site, number of days of retrospection involved in thentest ratings, disease stage, adjuvant therapy (CT or RT), breast surgery (lumpectomy or mastectomy) and FCS score. Results are shown in Table 2 . The nine predictor variables accounted for 64.0% of variance in response shift in FSI most fatigue ratings (multiple R= 0.800; df = 9, 63; F = 12.47; P < 0.001). A larger response shift in most fatigue ratings was associated with higher ratings of most fatigue at the Pretreatment assessment (beta = 0.73; P < 0.001), lumpectomy (beta = ?0.19; P < 0.05), chemotherapy (beta = 0.45; P < 0.01), and lower fatigue catastrophizing scores (beta = ?0.17; P < 0.05). The nine predictor variables accounted for 44.5% of variance in response shift in FSI average fatigue ratings (multiple R = 0.667; df = 9, 63; F = 5.62; P < 0.001). A larger response shift in average fatigue ratings was linked to higher ratings of average fatigue at the Pretreatment assessment (beta = 0.54; P < 0.001) and chemotherapy (beta = 0.51; P < 0.01). A similar pair of regression analyses were conducted to identify variables associated with magnitude of response shift in FSI fatigue ratings at the Post-Treatment One assessment in the CT+RT group ( n =39). Size of response shift between the Pretreatment and Post-Treatment Two assessments in most and average fatigue ratings served as dependent variables. Predictor variables included the appropriate FSI fatigue rating from the Pretreatment One assessment (e.g., FSI rating of most fatigue for analysis of response shift in most fatigue ratings), age, education, study site, number of days between the Pretreatment and Post-Treatment Two assessments, disease stage, surgery (lumpectomy or mastectomy) and FCS score. (Type of adjuvant therapy was not used as a predictor variable as all women in the CT+RT group received CT followed by RT.) Results are shown in Table 2 . The eight predictor variables accounted for 68.7% of variance in response shift in FSI most fatigue ratings (multiple R= 0.829; df = 8, 30; F = 8.24; P < 0.001). A larger response shift in FSI most fatigue ratings was associated with higher ratings of most fatigue at the Post-Treatment assessment (beta = 0.79; P < 0.001), younger age (beta = ?0.26; P =0.05), and lower fatigue catastrophizing scores (beta = ?0.29; P < 0.01). Similarly, the eight predictor variables accounted for 68.8% of the variance in response shift in FSI average fatigue ratings (multiple R = 0.829; df = 8, 30; F = 8.26; P < 0.001). Again, a larger response shift in FSI average fatigue ratings was associated with higher ratings of average fatigue at the Pretreatment assessment (beta = 0.80; P < 0.001) and lower fatigue catastrophizing scores (beta = ?0.26; P < 0.05).  Change in Fatigue Ratings Over Time A set of repeated measures analyses of variance was used to examine the temporal trajectory of fatigue ratings in women treated with RT only ( n =55). The dependent variables in the analyses were FSI ratings of most and average fatigue at the Pretreatment, Post-Treatment One, and two- and four-month follow-up assessments. Complete FSI data at all four points of assessment were available for 48 of 55 (87%) women treated with RT only. Significant main effects for time were evident for ratings of most (F (3, 45) = 9.36; P < 0.001) and average (F (3, 45) = 7.22; P < 0.001) fatigue. Post hoc simple difference contrasts were used to identify means that differed from the Pretreatment assessment mean. Ratings of most fatigue were significantly elevated, relative to the Pretreatment Assessment, at the Post-Treatment One and two- and four-month follow-up assessments (see Table 4 ). Ratings of average fatigue were elevated at only the Post-Treatment One and four-month follow-up assessments. A second set of repeated measures analyses was then conducted using thentest ratings of fatigue from the FSI-TT, obtained at the Post-Treatment One assessment, instead of fatigue ratings from the Pretreatment assessment. Significant main effects for time were evident for most (F (3, 45) = 17.81; P < 0.001) and average (F (3, 45) = 11.53; P < 0.001)) fatigue. Post hoc simple difference contrasts identified means that differed from the Pretreatment thentest mean. Ratings of both most and average fatigue were significantly elevated, relative to the Pretreatment Assessment, at the Post-Treatment One and two- and four-month follow-up assessments ( Table 4 ). To illustrate the general pattern of findings, the trajectory of FSI ratings of most fatigue is shown in Figure 2 , using both thentest and real time ratings of fatigue for the Pretreatment assessment. A similar set of analyses was conducted to examine the trajectory of fatigue in women treated with CT+RT ( n = 39). Complete FSI data at all five points of assessment (Pretreatment, Post-Treatment One, Post-Treatment Two, two-month follow-up, four-month follow-up) was available for 29 of 39 (74%) of women in the CT+RT group. A significant main effect for Time was found for ratings of most (F (4, 25) = 6.35; P < 0.01) and average fatigue (F (4, 25) = 5.46; P < 0.01). Post hoc simple difference contrasts revealed only Post-Treatment One ratings of most and average fatigue were elevated significantly from fatigue ratings at the Pretreatment assessment. Substitution of Pretreatment thentest ratings of fatigue obtained at the Post-Treatment Two assessment for real time ratings of fatigue obtained at the Pretreatment assessment also revealed significant main effects for Time for ratings of most (F (4, 25) = 9.08; P < 0.001) and average fatigue (F (4, 25) = 6.70; P < 0.01)). However, post hoc analyses now revealed most and average fatigue ratings were significantly elevated at the Post-Treatment One, Post-Treatment Two and two-month follow-up assessments. To illustrate the general pattern of findings, the trajectory of FSI ratings of most fatigue is shown in Figure 3 .  Methods Patients Participants were scheduled to receive adjuvant therapy after breast cancer diagnosis. Participants were recruited from two sites: the University of South Florida (USF) and the University of Kentucky (UK). Inclusion criteria were: 1) ? 18 years; 2) stage 0-IIIA breast cancer; and 3) scheduled to receive RT only, CT only, or CT+RT. Procedure Data were collected as part of a larger study of the physical and psychological effects of adjuvant therapy for breast cancer [ 1 , 15 – 17 ]. The larger study sought to identify the prevalence of these effects and track their temporal course through repeated assessments during and after adjuvant therapy. After IRB approval, potential participants were identified from clinic rosters followed by review of medical records and consultation with clinic staff to confirm eligibility. Participants were recruited during a clinic visit after breast surgery but prior to initiating adjuvant therapy. Study staff furnished study information and obtained written informed consent. A baseline assessment was then conducted. A Pretreatment assessment was conducted at the beginning of adjuvant therapy (either RT or CT). On completion of their initial course of adjuvant therapy (either RT or CT), women completed a Post-Treatment One assessment. Women receiving adjuvant therapy consisting of CT followed by RT completed a Post-treatment Two assessment at completion of RT. All women completed assessments two and four months following completion of all adjuvant therapy (i.e., two-month follow-up, four-month follow-up). At each study assessment, respondents completed self-report measures. At the baseline assessment all study measures were administered by written questionnaire. Because of variability in patient scheduling across and within study sites, measures at the Pretreatment, Post-Treatment One, Post-Treatment Two, and two- and four-month follow-up assessments were completed either by written questionnaire (in clinic or at home) or by a telephone interview. Information regarding stage of disease, surgery, and adjuvant therapy was obtained from medical records. Less than 5% of study eligible women declined participation. Study Measures Sociodemographic Information Information regarding age, race, partner status, and education was obtained at the baseline assessment. Fatigue Symptom Inventory (FSI) Frequency and severity of fatigue was assessed by the FSI [ 18 ]. The FSI includes items assessing “most” and “average” fatigue experienced during the past week. The FSI is thus a measure of recent, real time fatigue. For example, the FSI item assessing most fatigue was “Rate your level of fatigue on the day you felt most fatigued during the past week.” Ratings of most and average fatigue were obtained using an 11-point Likert scale with endpoints labeled “not at all fatigued” and “as fatigued as I could be.” The FSI was completed at the Pretreatment and all subsequent assessments. Fatigue Symptom Inventory – Thentest (FSI-TT) The FSI-TT is a modified form of the FSI designed to assess fatigue during the week prior to the initiation of adjuvant therapy. Use of a thentest approach is recommended to identify a response shift involving scale recalibration [ 8 ]. On the FSI-TT, the wording of the two FSI items assessing most and average fatigue was changed to refer to the week prior to the initiation of any adjuvant therapy (rather than the past week as in the original FSI). For example, the FSI-TT item assessing most fatigue in women in the RT group was “Rate your level of fatigue on the day you felt most fatigued during the week before you started radiotherapy.” Similarly, the FSI-TT item assessing most fatigue in women in the CT+RT group was “Rate your level of fatigue on the day you felt most fatigued during the week before you started chemotherapy.” Depending on type of adjuvant therapy received, the FSI-TT was completed at the Post-Treatment One (RT group) and/or Post-Treatment Two Assessments (CT+RT group). Fatigue Catastrophizing Scale (FCS) The tendency to engage in negative self-statements and thoughts regarding fatigue was assessed at the baseline assessment using the FCS [ 16 ]. A total score is calculated and coefficient alpha was 0.92. Data Analysis and Preparation The criterion for statistical significance was set at P < 0.05. As in prior research [ 13 – 14 ], response shift in FSI ratings of most and average fatigue was calculated by subtracting FSI-TT ratings of most and average fatigue experienced prior to the initiation of adjuvant therapy (obtained at the Post-Treatment One and Post-Treatment Two assessments) from FSI ratings of most and average fatigue obtained at the Pre-Treatment assessment. Positive response shift values for most and average fatigue thus represent a perceived lessening of the fatigue experienced during the week before initiation of adjuvant therapy on the FSI-TT relative to “real-time” ratings of most and average fatigue from the Pretreatment assessment.  Patients Participants were scheduled to receive adjuvant therapy after breast cancer diagnosis. Participants were recruited from two sites: the University of South Florida (USF) and the University of Kentucky (UK). Inclusion criteria were: 1) ? 18 years; 2) stage 0-IIIA breast cancer; and 3) scheduled to receive RT only, CT only, or CT+RT.  Procedure Data were collected as part of a larger study of the physical and psychological effects of adjuvant therapy for breast cancer [ 1 , 15 – 17 ]. The larger study sought to identify the prevalence of these effects and track their temporal course through repeated assessments during and after adjuvant therapy. After IRB approval, potential participants were identified from clinic rosters followed by review of medical records and consultation with clinic staff to confirm eligibility. Participants were recruited during a clinic visit after breast surgery but prior to initiating adjuvant therapy. Study staff furnished study information and obtained written informed consent. A baseline assessment was then conducted. A Pretreatment assessment was conducted at the beginning of adjuvant therapy (either RT or CT). On completion of their initial course of adjuvant therapy (either RT or CT), women completed a Post-Treatment One assessment. Women receiving adjuvant therapy consisting of CT followed by RT completed a Post-treatment Two assessment at completion of RT. All women completed assessments two and four months following completion of all adjuvant therapy (i.e., two-month follow-up, four-month follow-up). At each study assessment, respondents completed self-report measures. At the baseline assessment all study measures were administered by written questionnaire. Because of variability in patient scheduling across and within study sites, measures at the Pretreatment, Post-Treatment One, Post-Treatment Two, and two- and four-month follow-up assessments were completed either by written questionnaire (in clinic or at home) or by a telephone interview. Information regarding stage of disease, surgery, and adjuvant therapy was obtained from medical records. Less than 5% of study eligible women declined participation.  Study Measures Sociodemographic Information Information regarding age, race, partner status, and education was obtained at the baseline assessment. Fatigue Symptom Inventory (FSI) Frequency and severity of fatigue was assessed by the FSI [ 18 ]. The FSI includes items assessing “most” and “average” fatigue experienced during the past week. The FSI is thus a measure of recent, real time fatigue. For example, the FSI item assessing most fatigue was “Rate your level of fatigue on the day you felt most fatigued during the past week.” Ratings of most and average fatigue were obtained using an 11-point Likert scale with endpoints labeled “not at all fatigued” and “as fatigued as I could be.” The FSI was completed at the Pretreatment and all subsequent assessments. Fatigue Symptom Inventory – Thentest (FSI-TT) The FSI-TT is a modified form of the FSI designed to assess fatigue during the week prior to the initiation of adjuvant therapy. Use of a thentest approach is recommended to identify a response shift involving scale recalibration [ 8 ]. On the FSI-TT, the wording of the two FSI items assessing most and average fatigue was changed to refer to the week prior to the initiation of any adjuvant therapy (rather than the past week as in the original FSI). For example, the FSI-TT item assessing most fatigue in women in the RT group was “Rate your level of fatigue on the day you felt most fatigued during the week before you started radiotherapy.” Similarly, the FSI-TT item assessing most fatigue in women in the CT+RT group was “Rate your level of fatigue on the day you felt most fatigued during the week before you started chemotherapy.” Depending on type of adjuvant therapy received, the FSI-TT was completed at the Post-Treatment One (RT group) and/or Post-Treatment Two Assessments (CT+RT group). Fatigue Catastrophizing Scale (FCS) The tendency to engage in negative self-statements and thoughts regarding fatigue was assessed at the baseline assessment using the FCS [ 16 ]. A total score is calculated and coefficient alpha was 0.92.  Sociodemographic Information Information regarding age, race, partner status, and education was obtained at the baseline assessment.  Fatigue Symptom Inventory (FSI) Frequency and severity of fatigue was assessed by the FSI [ 18 ]. The FSI includes items assessing “most” and “average” fatigue experienced during the past week. The FSI is thus a measure of recent, real time fatigue. For example, the FSI item assessing most fatigue was “Rate your level of fatigue on the day you felt most fatigued during the past week.” Ratings of most and average fatigue were obtained using an 11-point Likert scale with endpoints labeled “not at all fatigued” and “as fatigued as I could be.” The FSI was completed at the Pretreatment and all subsequent assessments.  Fatigue Symptom Inventory – Thentest (FSI-TT) The FSI-TT is a modified form of the FSI designed to assess fatigue during the week prior to the initiation of adjuvant therapy. Use of a thentest approach is recommended to identify a response shift involving scale recalibration [ 8 ]. On the FSI-TT, the wording of the two FSI items assessing most and average fatigue was changed to refer to the week prior to the initiation of any adjuvant therapy (rather than the past week as in the original FSI). For example, the FSI-TT item assessing most fatigue in women in the RT group was “Rate your level of fatigue on the day you felt most fatigued during the week before you started radiotherapy.” Similarly, the FSI-TT item assessing most fatigue in women in the CT+RT group was “Rate your level of fatigue on the day you felt most fatigued during the week before you started chemotherapy.” Depending on type of adjuvant therapy received, the FSI-TT was completed at the Post-Treatment One (RT group) and/or Post-Treatment Two Assessments (CT+RT group).  Fatigue Catastrophizing Scale (FCS) The tendency to engage in negative self-statements and thoughts regarding fatigue was assessed at the baseline assessment using the FCS [ 16 ]. A total score is calculated and coefficient alpha was 0.92.  Data Analysis and Preparation The criterion for statistical significance was set at P < 0.05. As in prior research [ 13 – 14 ], response shift in FSI ratings of most and average fatigue was calculated by subtracting FSI-TT ratings of most and average fatigue experienced prior to the initiation of adjuvant therapy (obtained at the Post-Treatment One and Post-Treatment Two assessments) from FSI ratings of most and average fatigue obtained at the Pre-Treatment assessment. Positive response shift values for most and average fatigue thus represent a perceived lessening of the fatigue experienced during the week before initiation of adjuvant therapy on the FSI-TT relative to “real-time” ratings of most and average fatigue from the Pretreatment assessment.  Results Sample Characteristics The study sample consisted of 102 women enrolled at the UK ( n =26; 25%) and USF ( n =76; 75%) sites. Women were a mean age of 54.7 years at diagnosis (SD=10.6; range = 29–82), were predominantly white ( n =89; 87%) and married/partnered ( n =69; 68%). Education level was: ? high school ( n =30; 29%), some college ( n =30; 29%) and ? college baccalaureate degree ( n =42; 42%). Annual household income was: ? $19,999 ( n =11; 11%), $20,000 to $59,999 ( n =31; 30%), $60,000 to $99,999 ( n =36; 35%), and ? $100,000 ( n =17; 17%). Adjuvant therapy consisted of CT+RT ( n =42; 41%), CT only ( n =6; 6%), and RT only ( n =54; 53%). Surgical treatment consisted of lumpectomy ( n =90; 88%), mastectomy ( n =7; 7%), and double mastectomy or a combination of both lumpectomy and mastectomy ( n =5; 5%). Disease stage was Stage 0 ( n =18; 18%), Stage I ( n =45; 44%), Stage II ( n =36; 35%), and Stage IIIA ( n =3; 3%). Of the 102 women, 73 women completed the FSI-TT at the Post-Treatment One assessment at the end of either an initial course of RT ( n =54) or CT ( n =19). These 73 women comprise the CT or RT group. The mean days between the Pretreatment and Post-Treatment One assessments was 70.2 days (SD = 40.9; range = 22 to 202). Similarly, 39 women completed the FSI-TT at the Post-Treatment Two assessment. All of these women were treated with CT followed by RT and thus comprise the CT+RT group. Mean days between the Pretreatment and Post-Treatment Two assessments was 193.8 days (SD = 57.3; range = 115 to 364). (Ten women completed the FSI-TT at both the Post-Treatment One and Two assessments.) Magnitude of Response Shift in Fatigue Ratings Mean FSI ratings of most and average fatigue at the Pretreatment, Post-Treatment One, and Post-Treatment Two assessments and mean ratings of most and average fatigue on the FSI-TT at the Post-Treatment One and Post-Treatment Two assessments are shown in Table 1 . For the CT or RT group, ratings of both most (paired t = 5.52; P < 0.001) and average (paired t = 3.18; P < 0.01) fatigue were significantly higher at the Post-Treatment One assessment, relative to the Pretreatment assessment. Similarly, for the CT+RT group, most (paired t = 2.52; P < 0.02) and average (paired t = 2.09; P < 0.05) fatigue ratings were significantly higher at the Post-Treatment Two assessment. For the CT or RT group, a significant response shift was evident for ratings of both most (mean = 1.6 scale units, paired t = 4.89; P < 0.001) and average fatigue (mean = 0.8 scale units; paired t = 3.43; P < 0.001). For the CT+RT group, a significant response shift was also evident for ratings of both most (mean = 1.6 scale units, paired t = 2.71; P < 0.01) and average fatigue (mean = 1.3 scale units; paired t = 3.27; P < 0.01). In all instances, the response shift was in the direction of reporting lower thentest ratings of fatigue experienced at the initiation of adjuvant therapy, relative to the real time FSI ratings of fatigue obtained at the Pretreatment assessment. To illustrate this general pattern of FSI and FSI-TT ratings, Figure 1 shows the data for most fatigue ratings for both the CT or RT and CT+RT groups. Factors Associated With Magnitude of Response Shift in Fatigue Ratings Demographic, clinical, and psychosocial variables associated with magnitude of response shift in fatigue ratings at the Pretreatment One assessment in the CT or RT group ( n =73) were examined using multiple regression. Separate but parallel analyses were conducted using most and average fatigue ratings. Predictor variables included the appropriate FSI fatigue rating from the Pretreatment One assessment (e.g., FSI rating of most fatigue for analysis of response shift in most fatigue ratings), age, education, study site, number of days of retrospection involved in thentest ratings, disease stage, adjuvant therapy (CT or RT), breast surgery (lumpectomy or mastectomy) and FCS score. Results are shown in Table 2 . The nine predictor variables accounted for 64.0% of variance in response shift in FSI most fatigue ratings (multiple R= 0.800; df = 9, 63; F = 12.47; P < 0.001). A larger response shift in most fatigue ratings was associated with higher ratings of most fatigue at the Pretreatment assessment (beta = 0.73; P < 0.001), lumpectomy (beta = ?0.19; P < 0.05), chemotherapy (beta = 0.45; P < 0.01), and lower fatigue catastrophizing scores (beta = ?0.17; P < 0.05). The nine predictor variables accounted for 44.5% of variance in response shift in FSI average fatigue ratings (multiple R = 0.667; df = 9, 63; F = 5.62; P < 0.001). A larger response shift in average fatigue ratings was linked to higher ratings of average fatigue at the Pretreatment assessment (beta = 0.54; P < 0.001) and chemotherapy (beta = 0.51; P < 0.01). A similar pair of regression analyses were conducted to identify variables associated with magnitude of response shift in FSI fatigue ratings at the Post-Treatment One assessment in the CT+RT group ( n =39). Size of response shift between the Pretreatment and Post-Treatment Two assessments in most and average fatigue ratings served as dependent variables. Predictor variables included the appropriate FSI fatigue rating from the Pretreatment One assessment (e.g., FSI rating of most fatigue for analysis of response shift in most fatigue ratings), age, education, study site, number of days between the Pretreatment and Post-Treatment Two assessments, disease stage, surgery (lumpectomy or mastectomy) and FCS score. (Type of adjuvant therapy was not used as a predictor variable as all women in the CT+RT group received CT followed by RT.) Results are shown in Table 2 . The eight predictor variables accounted for 68.7% of variance in response shift in FSI most fatigue ratings (multiple R= 0.829; df = 8, 30; F = 8.24; P < 0.001). A larger response shift in FSI most fatigue ratings was associated with higher ratings of most fatigue at the Post-Treatment assessment (beta = 0.79; P < 0.001), younger age (beta = ?0.26; P =0.05), and lower fatigue catastrophizing scores (beta = ?0.29; P < 0.01). Similarly, the eight predictor variables accounted for 68.8% of the variance in response shift in FSI average fatigue ratings (multiple R = 0.829; df = 8, 30; F = 8.26; P < 0.001). Again, a larger response shift in FSI average fatigue ratings was associated with higher ratings of average fatigue at the Pretreatment assessment (beta = 0.80; P < 0.001) and lower fatigue catastrophizing scores (beta = ?0.26; P < 0.05). Change in Fatigue Ratings Over Time A set of repeated measures analyses of variance was used to examine the temporal trajectory of fatigue ratings in women treated with RT only ( n =55). The dependent variables in the analyses were FSI ratings of most and average fatigue at the Pretreatment, Post-Treatment One, and two- and four-month follow-up assessments. Complete FSI data at all four points of assessment were available for 48 of 55 (87%) women treated with RT only. Significant main effects for time were evident for ratings of most (F (3, 45) = 9.36; P < 0.001) and average (F (3, 45) = 7.22; P < 0.001) fatigue. Post hoc simple difference contrasts were used to identify means that differed from the Pretreatment assessment mean. Ratings of most fatigue were significantly elevated, relative to the Pretreatment Assessment, at the Post-Treatment One and two- and four-month follow-up assessments (see Table 4 ). Ratings of average fatigue were elevated at only the Post-Treatment One and four-month follow-up assessments. A second set of repeated measures analyses was then conducted using thentest ratings of fatigue from the FSI-TT, obtained at the Post-Treatment One assessment, instead of fatigue ratings from the Pretreatment assessment. Significant main effects for time were evident for most (F (3, 45) = 17.81; P < 0.001) and average (F (3, 45) = 11.53; P < 0.001)) fatigue. Post hoc simple difference contrasts identified means that differed from the Pretreatment thentest mean. Ratings of both most and average fatigue were significantly elevated, relative to the Pretreatment Assessment, at the Post-Treatment One and two- and four-month follow-up assessments ( Table 4 ). To illustrate the general pattern of findings, the trajectory of FSI ratings of most fatigue is shown in Figure 2 , using both thentest and real time ratings of fatigue for the Pretreatment assessment. A similar set of analyses was conducted to examine the trajectory of fatigue in women treated with CT+RT ( n = 39). Complete FSI data at all five points of assessment (Pretreatment, Post-Treatment One, Post-Treatment Two, two-month follow-up, four-month follow-up) was available for 29 of 39 (74%) of women in the CT+RT group. A significant main effect for Time was found for ratings of most (F (4, 25) = 6.35; P < 0.01) and average fatigue (F (4, 25) = 5.46; P < 0.01). Post hoc simple difference contrasts revealed only Post-Treatment One ratings of most and average fatigue were elevated significantly from fatigue ratings at the Pretreatment assessment. Substitution of Pretreatment thentest ratings of fatigue obtained at the Post-Treatment Two assessment for real time ratings of fatigue obtained at the Pretreatment assessment also revealed significant main effects for Time for ratings of most (F (4, 25) = 9.08; P < 0.001) and average fatigue (F (4, 25) = 6.70; P < 0.01)). However, post hoc analyses now revealed most and average fatigue ratings were significantly elevated at the Post-Treatment One, Post-Treatment Two and two-month follow-up assessments. To illustrate the general pattern of findings, the trajectory of FSI ratings of most fatigue is shown in Figure 3 .  Results Sample Characteristics The study sample consisted of 102 women enrolled at the UK ( n =26; 25%) and USF ( n =76; 75%) sites. Women were a mean age of 54.7 years at diagnosis (SD=10.6; range = 29–82), were predominantly white ( n =89; 87%) and married/partnered ( n =69; 68%). Education level was: ? high school ( n =30; 29%), some college ( n =30; 29%) and ? college baccalaureate degree ( n =42; 42%). Annual household income was: ? $19,999 ( n =11; 11%), $20,000 to $59,999 ( n =31; 30%), $60,000 to $99,999 ( n =36; 35%), and ? $100,000 ( n =17; 17%). Adjuvant therapy consisted of CT+RT ( n =42; 41%), CT only ( n =6; 6%), and RT only ( n =54; 53%). Surgical treatment consisted of lumpectomy ( n =90; 88%), mastectomy ( n =7; 7%), and double mastectomy or a combination of both lumpectomy and mastectomy ( n =5; 5%). Disease stage was Stage 0 ( n =18; 18%), Stage I ( n =45; 44%), Stage II ( n =36; 35%), and Stage IIIA ( n =3; 3%). Of the 102 women, 73 women completed the FSI-TT at the Post-Treatment One assessment at the end of either an initial course of RT ( n =54) or CT ( n =19). These 73 women comprise the CT or RT group. The mean days between the Pretreatment and Post-Treatment One assessments was 70.2 days (SD = 40.9; range = 22 to 202). Similarly, 39 women completed the FSI-TT at the Post-Treatment Two assessment. All of these women were treated with CT followed by RT and thus comprise the CT+RT group. Mean days between the Pretreatment and Post-Treatment Two assessments was 193.8 days (SD = 57.3; range = 115 to 364). (Ten women completed the FSI-TT at both the Post-Treatment One and Two assessments.) Magnitude of Response Shift in Fatigue Ratings Mean FSI ratings of most and average fatigue at the Pretreatment, Post-Treatment One, and Post-Treatment Two assessments and mean ratings of most and average fatigue on the FSI-TT at the Post-Treatment One and Post-Treatment Two assessments are shown in Table 1 . For the CT or RT group, ratings of both most (paired t = 5.52; P < 0.001) and average (paired t = 3.18; P < 0.01) fatigue were significantly higher at the Post-Treatment One assessment, relative to the Pretreatment assessment. Similarly, for the CT+RT group, most (paired t = 2.52; P < 0.02) and average (paired t = 2.09; P < 0.05) fatigue ratings were significantly higher at the Post-Treatment Two assessment. For the CT or RT group, a significant response shift was evident for ratings of both most (mean = 1.6 scale units, paired t = 4.89; P < 0.001) and average fatigue (mean = 0.8 scale units; paired t = 3.43; P < 0.001). For the CT+RT group, a significant response shift was also evident for ratings of both most (mean = 1.6 scale units, paired t = 2.71; P < 0.01) and average fatigue (mean = 1.3 scale units; paired t = 3.27; P < 0.01). In all instances, the response shift was in the direction of reporting lower thentest ratings of fatigue experienced at the initiation of adjuvant therapy, relative to the real time FSI ratings of fatigue obtained at the Pretreatment assessment. To illustrate this general pattern of FSI and FSI-TT ratings, Figure 1 shows the data for most fatigue ratings for both the CT or RT and CT+RT groups. Factors Associated With Magnitude of Response Shift in Fatigue Ratings Demographic, clinical, and psychosocial variables associated with magnitude of response shift in fatigue ratings at the Pretreatment One assessment in the CT or RT group ( n =73) were examined using multiple regression. Separate but parallel analyses were conducted using most and average fatigue ratings. Predictor variables included the appropriate FSI fatigue rating from the Pretreatment One assessment (e.g., FSI rating of most fatigue for analysis of response shift in most fatigue ratings), age, education, study site, number of days of retrospection involved in thentest ratings, disease stage, adjuvant therapy (CT or RT), breast surgery (lumpectomy or mastectomy) and FCS score. Results are shown in Table 2 . The nine predictor variables accounted for 64.0% of variance in response shift in FSI most fatigue ratings (multiple R= 0.800; df = 9, 63; F = 12.47; P < 0.001). A larger response shift in most fatigue ratings was associated with higher ratings of most fatigue at the Pretreatment assessment (beta = 0.73; P < 0.001), lumpectomy (beta = ?0.19; P < 0.05), chemotherapy (beta = 0.45; P < 0.01), and lower fatigue catastrophizing scores (beta = ?0.17; P < 0.05). The nine predictor variables accounted for 44.5% of variance in response shift in FSI average fatigue ratings (multiple R = 0.667; df = 9, 63; F = 5.62; P < 0.001). A larger response shift in average fatigue ratings was linked to higher ratings of average fatigue at the Pretreatment assessment (beta = 0.54; P < 0.001) and chemotherapy (beta = 0.51; P < 0.01). A similar pair of regression analyses were conducted to identify variables associated with magnitude of response shift in FSI fatigue ratings at the Post-Treatment One assessment in the CT+RT group ( n =39). Size of response shift between the Pretreatment and Post-Treatment Two assessments in most and average fatigue ratings served as dependent variables. Predictor variables included the appropriate FSI fatigue rating from the Pretreatment One assessment (e.g., FSI rating of most fatigue for analysis of response shift in most fatigue ratings), age, education, study site, number of days between the Pretreatment and Post-Treatment Two assessments, disease stage, surgery (lumpectomy or mastectomy) and FCS score. (Type of adjuvant therapy was not used as a predictor variable as all women in the CT+RT group received CT followed by RT.) Results are shown in Table 2 . The eight predictor variables accounted for 68.7% of variance in response shift in FSI most fatigue ratings (multiple R= 0.829; df = 8, 30; F = 8.24; P < 0.001). A larger response shift in FSI most fatigue ratings was associated with higher ratings of most fatigue at the Post-Treatment assessment (beta = 0.79; P < 0.001), younger age (beta = ?0.26; P =0.05), and lower fatigue catastrophizing scores (beta = ?0.29; P < 0.01). Similarly, the eight predictor variables accounted for 68.8% of the variance in response shift in FSI average fatigue ratings (multiple R = 0.829; df = 8, 30; F = 8.26; P < 0.001). Again, a larger response shift in FSI average fatigue ratings was associated with higher ratings of average fatigue at the Pretreatment assessment (beta = 0.80; P < 0.001) and lower fatigue catastrophizing scores (beta = ?0.26; P < 0.05). Change in Fatigue Ratings Over Time A set of repeated measures analyses of variance was used to examine the temporal trajectory of fatigue ratings in women treated with RT only ( n =55). The dependent variables in the analyses were FSI ratings of most and average fatigue at the Pretreatment, Post-Treatment One, and two- and four-month follow-up assessments. Complete FSI data at all four points of assessment were available for 48 of 55 (87%) women treated with RT only. Significant main effects for time were evident for ratings of most (F (3, 45) = 9.36; P < 0.001) and average (F (3, 45) = 7.22; P < 0.001) fatigue. Post hoc simple difference contrasts were used to identify means that differed from the Pretreatment assessment mean. Ratings of most fatigue were significantly elevated, relative to the Pretreatment Assessment, at the Post-Treatment One and two- and four-month follow-up assessments (see Table 4 ). Ratings of average fatigue were elevated at only the Post-Treatment One and four-month follow-up assessments. A second set of repeated measures analyses was then conducted using thentest ratings of fatigue from the FSI-TT, obtained at the Post-Treatment One assessment, instead of fatigue ratings from the Pretreatment assessment. Significant main effects for time were evident for most (F (3, 45) = 17.81; P < 0.001) and average (F (3, 45) = 11.53; P < 0.001)) fatigue. Post hoc simple difference contrasts identified means that differed from the Pretreatment thentest mean. Ratings of both most and average fatigue were significantly elevated, relative to the Pretreatment Assessment, at the Post-Treatment One and two- and four-month follow-up assessments ( Table 4 ). To illustrate the general pattern of findings, the trajectory of FSI ratings of most fatigue is shown in Figure 2 , using both thentest and real time ratings of fatigue for the Pretreatment assessment. A similar set of analyses was conducted to examine the trajectory of fatigue in women treated with CT+RT ( n = 39). Complete FSI data at all five points of assessment (Pretreatment, Post-Treatment One, Post-Treatment Two, two-month follow-up, four-month follow-up) was available for 29 of 39 (74%) of women in the CT+RT group. A significant main effect for Time was found for ratings of most (F (4, 25) = 6.35; P < 0.01) and average fatigue (F (4, 25) = 5.46; P < 0.01). Post hoc simple difference contrasts revealed only Post-Treatment One ratings of most and average fatigue were elevated significantly from fatigue ratings at the Pretreatment assessment. Substitution of Pretreatment thentest ratings of fatigue obtained at the Post-Treatment Two assessment for real time ratings of fatigue obtained at the Pretreatment assessment also revealed significant main effects for Time for ratings of most (F (4, 25) = 9.08; P < 0.001) and average fatigue (F (4, 25) = 6.70; P < 0.01)). However, post hoc analyses now revealed most and average fatigue ratings were significantly elevated at the Post-Treatment One, Post-Treatment Two and two-month follow-up assessments. To illustrate the general pattern of findings, the trajectory of FSI ratings of most fatigue is shown in Figure 3 .  Discussion Our results provide clear and convincing evidence for occurrence of a response shift in fatigue ratings in women treated for early stage breast cancer. Consistent with prior research [ 12 – 14 ], the experience of adjuvant therapy resulted in respondents retrospectively lowering their perception of the severity of the fatigue they experienced prior to the initiation of adjuvant therapy. After completing adjuvant RT or CT, therapies associated with the potential for inducing fatigue, respondents appeared to reflect on their pre-treatment status and conclude they were not as fatigued as they had thought at that time. In effect, the experience of adjuvant therapy caused them to recalibrate the internal standard used to evaluate their current level of fatigue. This is the essence of a “response shift.” Our identification of a response shift in fatigue ratings is not strictly an academic exercise. The observed response shift in most fatigue ratings of about 1.7 scale units in both the CT or RT and CT+RT groups represented an effect size of about 0.53 standard deviation (SD) units. Similarly, response shift for average fatigue ratings in the CT or RT group was 0.8 scale units and 1.3 scale units for the CT+RT group -- effect sizes of 0.35 SD and 0.52 SD, respectively. As effect sizes in the 0.33 to 0.50 SD range are considered clinically meaningful [ 19 ], the response shift in fatigue ratings we observed was both statistically and clinically significant. The clinical significance of our results is further illustrated when the temporal trajectory of fatigue ratings for the CT+RT group is considered ( Table 4 and top of Figure 3 ). When conventional, real time FSI ratings of most or average fatigue are considered, a significant main effect for time is evident. However, post hoc analyses indicate only fatigue ratings at the Post-Treatment One assessment are different from fatigue ratings at the Pretreatment assessment. Fatigue ratings at the Post-Treatment Two and two- and four-month follow-up assessments do not differ from pretreatment levels of fatigue. Based on these results, one would conclude that while CT causes a significant increase in fatigue, fatigue resolves quickly after conclusion of CT and is not significantly different from pretreatment levels at the conclusion of RT and at two- and four-month follow-ups. In fact, visual inspection of Figure 3 (at top) suggests fatigue at the four-month follow-up is lower than fatigue prior to initiation of adjuvant therapy! Notably, this conclusion is inconsistent with results of cross-sectional research suggesting fatigue may remain elevated for some time after completion of adjuvant therapy [ 4 – 5 , 20 ]. In contrast, when thentest ratings of most and average fatigue prior to initiation of adjuvant therapy are substituted in the longitudinal analyses ( Table 4 and bottom of Figure 3 ), the conclusion is markedly different. Now, post hoc analyses indicate fatigue remains elevated relative to pretreatment levels at the Post-Treatment Two and two-month follow-up assessments. These results are consistent with cross-sectional research suggesting fatigue can persist after completing adjuvant therapy [ 4 – 5 , 20 ]. Given demonstration of a response shift in fatigue ratings, it is natural to ask what factors account for variance in size of response shift evidenced. Results ( Tables 2 and 3 ) indicate higher real time fatigue ratings at the Pretreatment assessment are associated with larger response shifts. This is not surprising, given response shift size was determined by the decrease in fatigue ratings between real time and thentest fatigue ratings for the Pretreatment assessment. Furthermore, as hypothesized, larger response shifts were associated with receipt of CT. As CT is associated with greater “on-treatment” fatigue than RT [ 1 , 15 ], exposure to CT is more likely than RT to cause a respondent to revise their internal standard for judging current fatigue – thus increasing the size of a response shift. While study respondents certainly experienced fatigue prior to cancer diagnosis, it is likely that few respondents experienced fatigue of the magnitude often associated with adjuvant CT and/or RT. Simply speaking, the meaning of the FSI scale endpoint “as fatigued as I could be” is likely significantly altered after a full course of RT and/or CT. There was also some evidence to suggest greater fatigue catastrophizing was associated with smaller response shifts. Why this is so is unclear. We have previously found higher fatigue catastrophizing scores to be associated with higher fatigue severity scores among women receiving RT for early stage breast cancer [ 16 ]. In part, the inverse relationship between fatigue catastrophizing and size of response shift in fatigue ratings might be due to the tendency of those with catastrophizing tendencies to report higher fatigue ratings, in general, thus minimizing the potential for observing a response shift in their fatigue ratings. Alternatively, a tendency toward fatigue catastrophizing might reflect a more varied fatigue history, with more prior experience with fatigue levels at the higher end of the scale. If true, this would minimize the extent to which fatigue associated with adjuvant therapy would result in a recalibration of the internal standard used to judge fatigue, thus minimizing the potential for a response shift. Clearly, our results with regard to the relationship of fatigue catastrophizing and response shift magnitude are preliminary and require replication. However, these results are consistent with the notion that psychological factors play a role in the experience and assessment of fatigue [ 16 , 21 ]. Finally, response shift size was not associated with length of the period of retrospection involved in the thentest ratings of fatigue. So there was no evidence thentest ratings, and thus the size of response shift, were systematically biased as a function of when thentest ratings were obtained. Our results have clear methodological implications: When conducting repeated assessments of fatigue, researchers must be aware of the possibility of a response shift being present. Beyond fatigue, however, our results have implications for assessment of many important clinical outcomes in the oncology setting. While pain, nausea, and fatigue come to mind as clinical outcomes where response shifts are likely, any clinical outcome assessed by single or multiple items employing a Likert or Visual Analogue Scale format with subjectively defined endpoints is a candidate for a response shift. So, for example, researchers investigating the trajectory of QOL after cancer diagnosis and treatment need also be concerned about a response shift in QOL ratings [ 12 ]. So what is a researcher to do when confronted with the possibility of a response shift in the longitudinal assessment of fatigue or other clinical outcomes? Researchers should consider including a “thentest” assessment of each study participant’s initial status on that outcome [ 8 ]. This will enable identification of whether or not a response shift might have occurred as well as enable an estimate of its size. The longitudinal data could then be analyzed using both real time and thentest values at baseline and any differences in the results and conclusions noted. We recommend researchers consider one additional step as well. Thentest ratings are retrospective and thus subject to any random and systematic error associated with retrospective ratings. Consequently, respondents could also be asked to supplement their thentest rating with a direct assessment of whether their perception of the continuum underlying the outcome being assessed has been altered since the baseline assessment [ 12 , 14 ]. For example, they might be asked to indicate whether, in hindsight, they over- or underestimated the fatigue they experienced in their real time rating at baseline. They might also be asked to provide some estimate of the magnitude of this over- or underestimate. Through such triangulation procedures, a researcher should be able to confirm the occurrence of a response shift and estimate its magnitude. Our study has several limitations. First, our sample was very homogeneous with regard to race and ethnicity. Second, our sample size was relatively small, particularly for analyses involving the CT+RT subgroup. Consequently the power of some of our analyses was limited, making interpretation of some of our nonsignificant findings difficult. Finally, the set of psychosocial variables examined for their impact upon fatigue ratings was limited. While we suggest a response shift might account for our counterintuitive finding that fatigue ratings at the four-month follow-up assessment for the CT+RT group were actually lower than pretreatment fatigue ratings ( Table 4 and Figure 3 ), self-presentation motives could also contribute to this counterintuitive pattern of results [ 21 ]. According to this account, some patients may prefer to distance themselves from the image of a stereotypical cancer patient and present themselves (through their symptom ratings) as not suffering as a consequence of their treatment, as might be expected. Future research might examine the influence of such self-presentation motives in the assessment of fatigue or other self-reported symptoms. The concept of response shift was first introduced in the educational literature nearly 30 years ago [ 22 ]. Its application to the assessment of clinical outcomes, like fatigue, was recognized over a decade ago [ 6 ]. Nevertheless, understanding of the parameters and processes associated with response shifts in the assessment of fatigue and other important clinical outcomes is very limited. This is surprising given the potential clinical importance of the response shift phenomenon. In general, our data here suggest failure to consider the observed response shift in fatigue ratings would result in a significant underestimation of the impact of adjuvant therapy. This, in turn, would likely alter both the strategies used to manage fatigue in women undergoing adjuvant therapy for breast cancer as well as the discussion of costs and benefits associated with various therapeutic options during the treatment decision-making process. However, identification of response shifts in the longitudinal assessment of clinical outcomes poses a significant methodological challenge. This, understandably, is likely to make clinical researchers very uncomfortable and willing to “look the other way.” However, in doing so, researchers run the risk of drawing faulty conclusions regarding the trajectory of important clinical outcomes, with consequent implications for clinical management of these outcomes.  Discussion Our results provide clear and convincing evidence for occurrence of a response shift in fatigue ratings in women treated for early stage breast cancer. Consistent with prior research [ 12 – 14 ], the experience of adjuvant therapy resulted in respondents retrospectively lowering their perception of the severity of the fatigue they experienced prior to the initiation of adjuvant therapy. After completing adjuvant RT or CT, therapies associated with the potential for inducing fatigue, respondents appeared to reflect on their pre-treatment status and conclude they were not as fatigued as they had thought at that time. In effect, the experience of adjuvant therapy caused them to recalibrate the internal standard used to evaluate their current level of fatigue. This is the essence of a “response shift.” Our identification of a response shift in fatigue ratings is not strictly an academic exercise. The observed response shift in most fatigue ratings of about 1.7 scale units in both the CT or RT and CT+RT groups represented an effect size of about 0.53 standard deviation (SD) units. Similarly, response shift for average fatigue ratings in the CT or RT group was 0.8 scale units and 1.3 scale units for the CT+RT group -- effect sizes of 0.35 SD and 0.52 SD, respectively. As effect sizes in the 0.33 to 0.50 SD range are considered clinically meaningful [ 19 ], the response shift in fatigue ratings we observed was both statistically and clinically significant. The clinical significance of our results is further illustrated when the temporal trajectory of fatigue ratings for the CT+RT group is considered ( Table 4 and top of Figure 3 ). When conventional, real time FSI ratings of most or average fatigue are considered, a significant main effect for time is evident. However, post hoc analyses indicate only fatigue ratings at the Post-Treatment One assessment are different from fatigue ratings at the Pretreatment assessment. Fatigue ratings at the Post-Treatment Two and two- and four-month follow-up assessments do not differ from pretreatment levels of fatigue. Based on these results, one would conclude that while CT causes a significant increase in fatigue, fatigue resolves quickly after conclusion of CT and is not significantly different from pretreatment levels at the conclusion of RT and at two- and four-month follow-ups. In fact, visual inspection of Figure 3 (at top) suggests fatigue at the four-month follow-up is lower than fatigue prior to initiation of adjuvant therapy! Notably, this conclusion is inconsistent with results of cross-sectional research suggesting fatigue may remain elevated for some time after completion of adjuvant therapy [ 4 – 5 , 20 ]. In contrast, when thentest ratings of most and average fatigue prior to initiation of adjuvant therapy are substituted in the longitudinal analyses ( Table 4 and bottom of Figure 3 ), the conclusion is markedly different. Now, post hoc analyses indicate fatigue remains elevated relative to pretreatment levels at the Post-Treatment Two and two-month follow-up assessments. These results are consistent with cross-sectional research suggesting fatigue can persist after completing adjuvant therapy [ 4 – 5 , 20 ]. Given demonstration of a response shift in fatigue ratings, it is natural to ask what factors account for variance in size of response shift evidenced. Results ( Tables 2 and 3 ) indicate higher real time fatigue ratings at the Pretreatment assessment are associated with larger response shifts. This is not surprising, given response shift size was determined by the decrease in fatigue ratings between real time and thentest fatigue ratings for the Pretreatment assessment. Furthermore, as hypothesized, larger response shifts were associated with receipt of CT. As CT is associated with greater “on-treatment” fatigue than RT [ 1 , 15 ], exposure to CT is more likely than RT to cause a respondent to revise their internal standard for judging current fatigue – thus increasing the size of a response shift. While study respondents certainly experienced fatigue prior to cancer diagnosis, it is likely that few respondents experienced fatigue of the magnitude often associated with adjuvant CT and/or RT. Simply speaking, the meaning of the FSI scale endpoint “as fatigued as I could be” is likely significantly altered after a full course of RT and/or CT. There was also some evidence to suggest greater fatigue catastrophizing was associated with smaller response shifts. Why this is so is unclear. We have previously found higher fatigue catastrophizing scores to be associated with higher fatigue severity scores among women receiving RT for early stage breast cancer [ 16 ]. In part, the inverse relationship between fatigue catastrophizing and size of response shift in fatigue ratings might be due to the tendency of those with catastrophizing tendencies to report higher fatigue ratings, in general, thus minimizing the potential for observing a response shift in their fatigue ratings. Alternatively, a tendency toward fatigue catastrophizing might reflect a more varied fatigue history, with more prior experience with fatigue levels at the higher end of the scale. If true, this would minimize the extent to which fatigue associated with adjuvant therapy would result in a recalibration of the internal standard used to judge fatigue, thus minimizing the potential for a response shift. Clearly, our results with regard to the relationship of fatigue catastrophizing and response shift magnitude are preliminary and require replication. However, these results are consistent with the notion that psychological factors play a role in the experience and assessment of fatigue [ 16 , 21 ]. Finally, response shift size was not associated with length of the period of retrospection involved in the thentest ratings of fatigue. So there was no evidence thentest ratings, and thus the size of response shift, were systematically biased as a function of when thentest ratings were obtained. Our results have clear methodological implications: When conducting repeated assessments of fatigue, researchers must be aware of the possibility of a response shift being present. Beyond fatigue, however, our results have implications for assessment of many important clinical outcomes in the oncology setting. While pain, nausea, and fatigue come to mind as clinical outcomes where response shifts are likely, any clinical outcome assessed by single or multiple items employing a Likert or Visual Analogue Scale format with subjectively defined endpoints is a candidate for a response shift. So, for example, researchers investigating the trajectory of QOL after cancer diagnosis and treatment need also be concerned about a response shift in QOL ratings [ 12 ]. So what is a researcher to do when confronted with the possibility of a response shift in the longitudinal assessment of fatigue or other clinical outcomes? Researchers should consider including a “thentest” assessment of each study participant’s initial status on that outcome [ 8 ]. This will enable identification of whether or not a response shift might have occurred as well as enable an estimate of its size. The longitudinal data could then be analyzed using both real time and thentest values at baseline and any differences in the results and conclusions noted. We recommend researchers consider one additional step as well. Thentest ratings are retrospective and thus subject to any random and systematic error associated with retrospective ratings. Consequently, respondents could also be asked to supplement their thentest rating with a direct assessment of whether their perception of the continuum underlying the outcome being assessed has been altered since the baseline assessment [ 12 , 14 ]. For example, they might be asked to indicate whether, in hindsight, they over- or underestimated the fatigue they experienced in their real time rating at baseline. They might also be asked to provide some estimate of the magnitude of this over- or underestimate. Through such triangulation procedures, a researcher should be able to confirm the occurrence of a response shift and estimate its magnitude. Our study has several limitations. First, our sample was very homogeneous with regard to race and ethnicity. Second, our sample size was relatively small, particularly for analyses involving the CT+RT subgroup. Consequently the power of some of our analyses was limited, making interpretation of some of our nonsignificant findings difficult. Finally, the set of psychosocial variables examined for their impact upon fatigue ratings was limited. While we suggest a response shift might account for our counterintuitive finding that fatigue ratings at the four-month follow-up assessment for the CT+RT group were actually lower than pretreatment fatigue ratings ( Table 4 and Figure 3 ), self-presentation motives could also contribute to this counterintuitive pattern of results [ 21 ]. According to this account, some patients may prefer to distance themselves from the image of a stereotypical cancer patient and present themselves (through their symptom ratings) as not suffering as a consequence of their treatment, as might be expected. Future research might examine the influence of such self-presentation motives in the assessment of fatigue or other self-reported symptoms. The concept of response shift was first introduced in the educational literature nearly 30 years ago [ 22 ]. Its application to the assessment of clinical outcomes, like fatigue, was recognized over a decade ago [ 6 ]. Nevertheless, understanding of the parameters and processes associated with response shifts in the assessment of fatigue and other important clinical outcomes is very limited. This is surprising given the potential clinical importance of the response shift phenomenon. In general, our data here suggest failure to consider the observed response shift in fatigue ratings would result in a significant underestimation of the impact of adjuvant therapy. This, in turn, would likely alter both the strategies used to manage fatigue in women undergoing adjuvant therapy for breast cancer as well as the discussion of costs and benefits associated with various therapeutic options during the treatment decision-making process. However, identification of response shifts in the longitudinal assessment of clinical outcomes poses a significant methodological challenge. This, understandably, is likely to make clinical researchers very uncomfortable and willing to “look the other way.” However, in doing so, researchers run the risk of drawing faulty conclusions regarding the trajectory of important clinical outcomes, with consequent implications for clinical management of these outcomes.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 FSI and FSI-TT ratings of most fatigue for the CT or RT and CT+RT groups. Figure 2 Temporal trajectory of most fatigue in the CT or RT group. Figure 3 Temporal trajectory of most fatigue in the CT+RT group. Table 1 Means and Standard Deviations for FSI and FSI-TT Ratings from the Pretreatment, Post-Treatment One and Post-Treatment Two Assessments Most Fatigue Average Fatigue CT or RT Group ( n =73) a ?Pretreatment FSI 3.6 (3.2) g 2.5 (2.3) g ?Post-Treatment One FSI 5.3 (3.3) 3.8 (2.6) ?Post-Treatment One FSI-TT b 1.9 (2.3) g 1.7 (2.0) g ?Response Shift c 1.7 (2.9) i 0.8 (1.9) i CT+RT Group ( n =39) d ?Pretreatment FSI 4.2 (3.1) h 2.9 (2.5) h ?Post-Treatment Two FSI 5.7 (3.2) 4.0 (2.5) ?Post-Treatment Two FSI-TT e 2.5 (2.8) h 1.6 (1.9) h ?Response Shift f 1.7 (3.7) i 1.3 (2.4) i a Data collected at conclusion of initial course of adjuvant therapy, either CT or RT. b Thentest version of FSI completed after initial course of adjuvant therapy. c Pretreatment One FSI minus Post-Treatment One FSI-TT. d Data collected at conclusion of RT for women receiving CT+RT. e Thentest version of FSI completed at conclusion of RT for CT+RT group. f Pretreatment One FSI minus Post-Treatment Two FSI-TT. g P < 0.05 for paired t -test with Post-Treatment One rating. h P < 0.05 for paired t -test with Post-Treatment Two rating. i P < 0.05 for paired t -test comparison of Pretreatment and Post-Treatment FSI-TT ratings. Table 2 Multiple Regression Analysis of Magnitude of Response Shift in FSI Fatigue Ratings for the CT or RT Group ( n =73) Most Fatigue Average Fatigue Variable beta sr2 a beta sr2 Pretreatment One FSI Rating b 0.73 g 0.537 0.54 g 0.308 Age 0.01 0.004 0.04 0.002 Education ?0.01 0.000 0.00 0.000 Adjuvant Therapy c 0.45 h 0.131 0.51 h 0.108 Surgery d ?0.19 i 0.072 ?0.11 0.016 Disease Stage ?0.10 0.012 ?0.11 0.009 No. Days of Retrospection e ?0.19 0.035 ?0.29 0.054 Fatigue Catastrophizing Score ?0.17 i 0.057 ?0.14 0.026 Study Site f 0.10 0.011 0.07 0.003 Model Statistics: Multiple R 0.800 0.667 Multiple R2 0.640 0.445 F (9, 63) 12.47 g 5.62 g a Squared semi-partial correlation coefficient. b Most fatigue rating for analysis of response shift in most fatigue ratings and average fatigue rating for analysis of response shift in average fatigue ratings. c Coded as 1 = RT; 2 = CT. d Coded as 1 = lumpectomy; 2 = mastectomy or mastectomy + lumpectomy. e Days between Pretreatment and Post-Treatment One assessments. f Coded as 1=University of Kentucky; 2=Moffit Cancer Center (University of South Florida). g P ? 0.001. h P ? 0.01. i P ? 0.05. Table 3 Multiple Regression Analysis of Magnitude of Response Shift in FSI Fatigue Ratings for the CT+RT Group ( n =39) Most Fatigue Average Fatigue Variable beta sr2 a beta sr2 Pretreatment One FSI Rating b 0.79 g 0.601 0.80 g 0.615 Age ?0.26 h 0.158 ?0.21 0.108 Education ?0.04 0.004 ?0.10 0.024 Adjuvant Therapy c --- --- . Surgery d ?0.05 0.006 ?0.01 0.000 Disease Stage 0.03 0.002 0.08 0.012 No. Days of Retrospection e 0.03 0.002 0.07 0.011 Fatigue Catastrophizing Score ?0.29 i 0.183 ?0.26 h 0.162 Study Site f 0.16 0.061 0.19 0.084 Model Statistics: Multiple R 0.829 0.829 Multiple R2 0.687 0.688 F (8, 30) 8.24 g 8.26 g a Squared semi-partial correlation coefficient. b Most fatigue rating for analysis of response shift in most fatigue ratings and average fatigue rating for analysis of response shift in average fatigue ratings. c Coded as 1 = RT; 2 = CT. d Coded as 1 = lumpectomy; 2 = mastectomy or mastectomy + lumpectomy. e Days between Pretreatment and Post-Treatment Two assessments. f Coded as 1=University of Kentucky; 2=Moffit Cancer Center (University of South Florida). g P ? 0.001. h P ? 0.05. i P ? 0.01. Table 4 Means (Standard Deviations) for Most and Average Fatigue Ratings in Women Treated With RT or CT+RT. RT Only ( n =48) CT+RT ( n =29) Assessment Most Average Most Average Pretreatment 3.2 (3.1) 2.2 (2.2) 4.8 (3.1) 3.3 (2.5) Pretreatment Thentest a 1.9 (2.3) 1.7 (2.1) 3.1 (2.9) 2.1 (2.0) Post-Treatment One 4.9 (3.2) b , c 3.5 (2.8) b , c 6.7 (2.9) b , c 4.7 (2.3) b , c Post-Treatment Two ------ ------ 5.9 (2.7) c 3.9 (2.3) c Two-Month Follow-Up 4.2 (3.3) b , c 2.8 (2.6) c 4.9 (3.3) c 3.4 (2.5) c Four-Month Follow-Up 4.0 (3.0) b , c 2.9 (2.4) b , c 4.1 (2.9) 3.0 (2.0) a Thentest rating of fatigue for week prior to Pretreatment assessment. b Mean differs significantly ( P < 0.05) from mean at Pretreatment assessment. c Mean differs significantly ( P < 0.05) from Pretreatment thentest.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 FSI and FSI-TT ratings of most fatigue for the CT or RT and CT+RT groups. Figure 2 Temporal trajectory of most fatigue in the CT or RT group. Figure 3 Temporal trajectory of most fatigue in the CT+RT group. Table 1 Means and Standard Deviations for FSI and FSI-TT Ratings from the Pretreatment, Post-Treatment One and Post-Treatment Two Assessments Most Fatigue Average Fatigue CT or RT Group ( n =73) a ?Pretreatment FSI 3.6 (3.2) g 2.5 (2.3) g ?Post-Treatment One FSI 5.3 (3.3) 3.8 (2.6) ?Post-Treatment One FSI-TT b 1.9 (2.3) g 1.7 (2.0) g ?Response Shift c 1.7 (2.9) i 0.8 (1.9) i CT+RT Group ( n =39) d ?Pretreatment FSI 4.2 (3.1) h 2.9 (2.5) h ?Post-Treatment Two FSI 5.7 (3.2) 4.0 (2.5) ?Post-Treatment Two FSI-TT e 2.5 (2.8) h 1.6 (1.9) h ?Response Shift f 1.7 (3.7) i 1.3 (2.4) i a Data collected at conclusion of initial course of adjuvant therapy, either CT or RT. b Thentest version of FSI completed after initial course of adjuvant therapy. c Pretreatment One FSI minus Post-Treatment One FSI-TT. d Data collected at conclusion of RT for women receiving CT+RT. e Thentest version of FSI completed at conclusion of RT for CT+RT group. f Pretreatment One FSI minus Post-Treatment Two FSI-TT. g P < 0.05 for paired t -test with Post-Treatment One rating. h P < 0.05 for paired t -test with Post-Treatment Two rating. i P < 0.05 for paired t -test comparison of Pretreatment and Post-Treatment FSI-TT ratings. Table 2 Multiple Regression Analysis of Magnitude of Response Shift in FSI Fatigue Ratings for the CT or RT Group ( n =73) Most Fatigue Average Fatigue Variable beta sr2 a beta sr2 Pretreatment One FSI Rating b 0.73 g 0.537 0.54 g 0.308 Age 0.01 0.004 0.04 0.002 Education ?0.01 0.000 0.00 0.000 Adjuvant Therapy c 0.45 h 0.131 0.51 h 0.108 Surgery d ?0.19 i 0.072 ?0.11 0.016 Disease Stage ?0.10 0.012 ?0.11 0.009 No. Days of Retrospection e ?0.19 0.035 ?0.29 0.054 Fatigue Catastrophizing Score ?0.17 i 0.057 ?0.14 0.026 Study Site f 0.10 0.011 0.07 0.003 Model Statistics: Multiple R 0.800 0.667 Multiple R2 0.640 0.445 F (9, 63) 12.47 g 5.62 g a Squared semi-partial correlation coefficient. b Most fatigue rating for analysis of response shift in most fatigue ratings and average fatigue rating for analysis of response shift in average fatigue ratings. c Coded as 1 = RT; 2 = CT. d Coded as 1 = lumpectomy; 2 = mastectomy or mastectomy + lumpectomy. e Days between Pretreatment and Post-Treatment One assessments. f Coded as 1=University of Kentucky; 2=Moffit Cancer Center (University of South Florida). g P ? 0.001. h P ? 0.01. i P ? 0.05. Table 3 Multiple Regression Analysis of Magnitude of Response Shift in FSI Fatigue Ratings for the CT+RT Group ( n =39) Most Fatigue Average Fatigue Variable beta sr2 a beta sr2 Pretreatment One FSI Rating b 0.79 g 0.601 0.80 g 0.615 Age ?0.26 h 0.158 ?0.21 0.108 Education ?0.04 0.004 ?0.10 0.024 Adjuvant Therapy c --- --- . Surgery d ?0.05 0.006 ?0.01 0.000 Disease Stage 0.03 0.002 0.08 0.012 No. Days of Retrospection e 0.03 0.002 0.07 0.011 Fatigue Catastrophizing Score ?0.29 i 0.183 ?0.26 h 0.162 Study Site f 0.16 0.061 0.19 0.084 Model Statistics: Multiple R 0.829 0.829 Multiple R2 0.687 0.688 F (8, 30) 8.24 g 8.26 g a Squared semi-partial correlation coefficient. b Most fatigue rating for analysis of response shift in most fatigue ratings and average fatigue rating for analysis of response shift in average fatigue ratings. c Coded as 1 = RT; 2 = CT. d Coded as 1 = lumpectomy; 2 = mastectomy or mastectomy + lumpectomy. e Days between Pretreatment and Post-Treatment Two assessments. f Coded as 1=University of Kentucky; 2=Moffit Cancer Center (University of South Florida). g P ? 0.001. h P ? 0.05. i P ? 0.01. Table 4 Means (Standard Deviations) for Most and Average Fatigue Ratings in Women Treated With RT or CT+RT. RT Only ( n =48) CT+RT ( n =29) Assessment Most Average Most Average Pretreatment 3.2 (3.1) 2.2 (2.2) 4.8 (3.1) 3.3 (2.5) Pretreatment Thentest a 1.9 (2.3) 1.7 (2.1) 3.1 (2.9) 2.1 (2.0) Post-Treatment One 4.9 (3.2) b , c 3.5 (2.8) b , c 6.7 (2.9) b , c 4.7 (2.3) b , c Post-Treatment Two ------ ------ 5.9 (2.7) c 3.9 (2.3) c Two-Month Follow-Up 4.2 (3.3) b , c 2.8 (2.6) c 4.9 (3.3) c 3.4 (2.5) c Four-Month Follow-Up 4.0 (3.0) b , c 2.9 (2.4) b , c 4.1 (2.9) 3.0 (2.0) a Thentest rating of fatigue for week prior to Pretreatment assessment. b Mean differs significantly ( P < 0.05) from mean at Pretreatment assessment. c Mean differs significantly ( P < 0.05) from Pretreatment thentest. 