Biomarkers for Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia Progression Despite the fact that almost all men will develop symptoms associated with benign prostatic hyperplasia within their lifetimes, no molecular markers for the disease or its likelihood to progress have been established. A marker of this type could be used to stratify patients into subpopulations as well as to identify individuals whose disease is most likely to progress. Several molecular biomarkers have high potential to fulfill these needs, although none is currently approved for the clinical setting. The future does look promising as research to find novel biologic biomarkers is progressing while existing markers are optimized and validated for clinical use.  Conclusions With the increasing prevalence of BPH comes the demand for a molecular biomarker that can confidently identify and monitor disease progression [ 2 ]. Currently the IPSS is the most reliable tool for measuring BPH, but even this instrument has subjectivity and may not always accurately reflect the state of the disease. Studies have shown that women can have similar IPSS scores when compared with age-matched men [ 31 , 32 ]. Therefore, the IPSS can reliably identify LUTS but does not assist with diagnosing the cause as BPH or other potential causes of the symptoms, such as structural alteration of an aging detrusor or other urologic complications [ 31 ]. A molecular biomarker that could identify symptomatic BPH could lend insight into what a high IPSS may represent for an individual patient. Also, a marker with the ability to detect symptomatic BPH before the onset of LUTS may have the potential to prevent complications of the bladder caused by BPH, which often tend to be irreversible. Furthermore, a marker that could differentiate between symptomatic BPH and asymptomatic BPH would allow physicians to confidently treat patients with different levels of treatment aggression. An analysis of BPH treatments demonstrated that transurethral resection of the prostate is more cost-effective when medical therapy begins in patients younger than 70 years versus medical management (?1-adrenergic antagonists or 5-?-reductase inhibitors) [ 7 ]. With so many of the men to whom pharmaceutical treatments are administered eventually having to undergo transurethral resection or other minimally invasive surgical therapy, a marker that could assist physicians in making treatment decisions would also be economically beneficial. Ultimately, this would require a marker that monitors the progression of BPH and would provide additional benefit by acting as an internal monitor to guide treatment decisions. Currently, there is no biologic marker that can fulfill these necessities with assurance. Many of the markers highlighted in this review are promising, but few are ready for clinical utility. As new approaches to identifying molecular markers are proposed and older studies are validated, the need will remain strong for a molecular biomarker for BPH and progression of the disease. A disease this prevalent and one that makes such an economic impact requires a better diagnostic tool and means of monitoring than those currently in place. Although the lack of these tools contributes to the complexity and frustration associated with BPH, it is reassuring to see the amount of work going into accomplishing these goals and the potentially exciting biomarkers (ie, JM-27) that are on the horizon. 