Prolonged Survival and Reduced Renal Injury in MRL/lpr Mice Treated with a Novel Sphingosine-1-P Receptor Agonist Agonists of the type 1 sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor (S1P1) render lymphocytes unable to migrate along an S1P gradient, thereby causing sequestration in lymphoid organs. While the S1P agonist FTY720 prolongs the survival of organ allografts and blocks T-cell mediated autoimmune diseases in experimental models, it is a non-selective agonist of four out of five S1P receptors. A derivative compound, KRP-203, is a novel more selective agonist of the S1P1 receptor. In the present study, MRL/lpr mice were treated orally with KRP-203 or vehicle alone starting at 12 (prevention) or 16 (treatment) wks of age. Eighty percent of mice in the prevention group survived to 24 wks, compared to 50% of controls. There was less tubulointerstitial disease and 4- to 8- fold fewer infiltrating CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells ( p <0.05). Survival to 24 wks was 100% in the treatment group ( p =0.02), and these mice also had reduced proteinuria ( p =0.02). As expected, both groups had 6-fold reductions in circulating lymphocytes ( p =0.04). However, contrary to reports of shorter courses with S1P agonists, mice receiving 8–12 wks of KRP-203 had less adenopathy due primarily to 5- to 10-fold reductions in T-cells ( p <0.05). Treatment of lymphocytes from MRL/lpr mice with KRP-203 ex vivo enhanced cell death via apoptosis. These data indicate that KRP-203 is an effective agent in the attenuation of kidney injury in MRL/lpr mice, mediated in part by reductions in T-cell infiltrates.  Histologic Analysis As inflammatory kidney disease is the primary cause of death in MRL/lpr mice, renal histology was assessed at 24wks. As expected, kidneys from control mice had severe proliferative glomerulonephritis, chronic tubulointerstitial disease, and large perivascular infiltrates ( Figure 2 A,D,G ). Consistent with the model, most glomeruli were hypercellular with obliteration of capillary loops, focal segmental sclerosis, and occasional fibrocellular crescents. Immunofluorescent antibody staining for C3 and IgG showed the typical pattern with diffuse global staining of mesangium and capillary loops. There was interstitial fibrosis with diffuse infiltration of mononuclear cells, tubulitis, and focal tubular atrophy. Large and small vessels were also surrounded by large mononuclear cell infiltrates. Immunofluorescence staining showed that mononuclear infiltrates consisted mostly of CD4+ or CD8+ T-cells, with fewer CD11b+ monocytes/neutrophils and CD138+ plasma cells (data not shown). Mice in the prevention group had reduced histopathology scores. There were lower glomerular cellularity scores ( p = 0.06), and, unlike vehicle treated controls, none of the sections analyzed contained glomerular crescents ( Table 1 ). There was no difference in the degree or distribution of complement or immunoglobulin staining. However, there was significantly less tubulointerstitial disease ( Table 2 ) with preservation of tubular architecture ( Figure 2E ). Although there was an overall trend towards less vasculitis ( p = 0.29), there was substantial intra-group variability between mice. There was an 8-fold reduction in periglomerular CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells and there were also fewer T-cells in the interstitium. CD11b+ and CD138+ cells were present in numbers equivalent to kidneys from control mice (data not shown). Mice in the treatment group had intermediate histopathology scores. While there was a trend towards decreases in glomerular cellularity, the proportion of glomeruli with crescents, tubulointerstitial disease and the size of perivascular infiltrates ( Tables 1 and 2 ), none of these differences achieved statistical significance. Immunofluorescence revealed no difference in complement or immunoglobulin staining, but there were 50% fewer CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells around glomeruli and within the interstitium.  Renal Function Urine protein excretion increased in all mice from 8–16 wks of age. In the treatment group, therapy was associated with a significant reduction in proteinuria at 20 wks of age compared to controls (0.36 ± 0.03 mg/kg/day versus 0.55 ± 0.07 mg/kg/day, respectively p<0.05). In the prevention group, half the mice had a marked reduction in urinary protein excretion, but others did not (mean 0.42 ± 0.09 mg/kg/day). Serum creatinine measurements at 24wks showed equivalent levels in all three treatment groups: control 0.34 mg/dl ± 0.02, prevention 0.38 mg/dl ± 0.02, treatment 0.40 mg/dl ± 0.07.  Auto-antibodies All mice had elevated anti-double stranded DNA antibody titers compared to pooled serum from non-autoimmune mice. There was a modest reduction in anti-double stranded DNA antibody titers in treated mice and the effect seemed to correlate with duration of therapy ( Figure 3 ). This corresponded to less than a 4-fold reduction in end point titers. There were no detectable differences in isotype-specific titers (data not shown).  Leukocyte Analysis At 24wks, there was a significant decrease in both peripheral lymphocytes (6-fold) and monocytes (5-fold) in both the prevention and treatment groups compared to controls ( Figure 4 ). There were no significant differences in other leukocyte subsets or in the level of anemia. Mice in all three groups had equivalent platelet counts in the low normal range (0.3 to 0.7 million/?l). All mice had subjective adenopathy at 12wks of age, and this was observed to increase in mice from all three groups up to 16wks. After 8–12wks of therapy in the treatment and prevention groups respectively, there were decreases in lymph node size and splenocyte weight compared to control mice ( Figure 5 ). At 24wks there were 70% fewer lymph node cells in mice from the treatment group. This was due to reductions in all T-cell subsets ( Table 3 ), but the greatest difference was the 4-fold decrease in the CD4?CD8? T cell population in the lymph nodes ( p < 0.0001). The effect of KRP-203 therapy on reduced lymphocyte numbers was even more pronounced in mice from the prevention group. There were 5-fold decreases in CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells and 12-fold decreases in CD4?CD8? T-cells in the lymph nodes of mice from the prevention group. There was no difference in the numbers of CD4+CD25+ T-cells between groups. There were similar reductions in B-cells and neutrophils in the lymph nodes of mice in the prevention and treatment groups, but no difference in a numbers of CD11b+ cells (data not shown). Similar findings were found in the spleen. In order to assess potential mechanisms for the reduced lymphadenopathy seen in MRL/lpr mice treated with KRP-203, lymphocyte survival in ex vivo cultures was assessed after treatment with increasing doses of KRP-203 or vehicle control. Lymphocytes were isolated from axillary lymph nodes of young female MRL/lpr mice at 10wks of age. Nodes are moderately enlarged in mice at this age, and 90% of lymph node cells are T-cells with 5–10% CD4+, 5–10% CD8+, and 70–80% CD4?CD8? cells. After 24hrs unstimulated in media with serum, 80% of cells were viable by trypan blue exclusion or propidium iodide staining. Apoptosis was assessed by flow cytometry after immunostaining with annexin V ( Figure 6A ). Treatment with KRP-203 revealed a dose dependent increase in the proportion of cells staining positive for annexin V. Using 10mM KRP-203, a time course experiment revealed that 50% of cells were annexin V positive at 4hrs and nearly all cells were positive by 8hrs. Only twenty percent of untreated cells or cells treated with DMSO were annexin V positive at 8 or 24hrs. In order to determine whether there were any differences in KRP-203 induced apoptosis in specific T-cell populations, lymph node cells were exposed to drug for 8 hours. The percentage of Annexin V positive cells was similar in both the CD4+ and CD8+ subsets as compared to the entire CD3+ population ( Figure 6B ).  Results MRL mice that received vehicle only had 50% mortality by 24wks of age ( Figure 1 ). However, mice in the treatment group showed no mortality by 24wks ( p = 0.02). While there was a clear trend toward improved survival in the prevention group, this did not reach statistical significance. This was primarily due to the loss of two mice that died early in treatment; importantly, there were no further deaths in this group either as the mice aged. Dermatitis was variably present, and there was a modest improvement in groups treated with KRP-203. Mice in all groups had equivalent weight gains throughout the study. Histologic Analysis As inflammatory kidney disease is the primary cause of death in MRL/lpr mice, renal histology was assessed at 24wks. As expected, kidneys from control mice had severe proliferative glomerulonephritis, chronic tubulointerstitial disease, and large perivascular infiltrates ( Figure 2 A,D,G ). Consistent with the model, most glomeruli were hypercellular with obliteration of capillary loops, focal segmental sclerosis, and occasional fibrocellular crescents. Immunofluorescent antibody staining for C3 and IgG showed the typical pattern with diffuse global staining of mesangium and capillary loops. There was interstitial fibrosis with diffuse infiltration of mononuclear cells, tubulitis, and focal tubular atrophy. Large and small vessels were also surrounded by large mononuclear cell infiltrates. Immunofluorescence staining showed that mononuclear infiltrates consisted mostly of CD4+ or CD8+ T-cells, with fewer CD11b+ monocytes/neutrophils and CD138+ plasma cells (data not shown). Mice in the prevention group had reduced histopathology scores. There were lower glomerular cellularity scores ( p = 0.06), and, unlike vehicle treated controls, none of the sections analyzed contained glomerular crescents ( Table 1 ). There was no difference in the degree or distribution of complement or immunoglobulin staining. However, there was significantly less tubulointerstitial disease ( Table 2 ) with preservation of tubular architecture ( Figure 2E ). Although there was an overall trend towards less vasculitis ( p = 0.29), there was substantial intra-group variability between mice. There was an 8-fold reduction in periglomerular CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells and there were also fewer T-cells in the interstitium. CD11b+ and CD138+ cells were present in numbers equivalent to kidneys from control mice (data not shown). Mice in the treatment group had intermediate histopathology scores. While there was a trend towards decreases in glomerular cellularity, the proportion of glomeruli with crescents, tubulointerstitial disease and the size of perivascular infiltrates ( Tables 1 and 2 ), none of these differences achieved statistical significance. Immunofluorescence revealed no difference in complement or immunoglobulin staining, but there were 50% fewer CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells around glomeruli and within the interstitium. Renal Function Urine protein excretion increased in all mice from 8–16 wks of age. In the treatment group, therapy was associated with a significant reduction in proteinuria at 20 wks of age compared to controls (0.36 ± 0.03 mg/kg/day versus 0.55 ± 0.07 mg/kg/day, respectively p<0.05). In the prevention group, half the mice had a marked reduction in urinary protein excretion, but others did not (mean 0.42 ± 0.09 mg/kg/day). Serum creatinine measurements at 24wks showed equivalent levels in all three treatment groups: control 0.34 mg/dl ± 0.02, prevention 0.38 mg/dl ± 0.02, treatment 0.40 mg/dl ± 0.07. Auto-antibodies All mice had elevated anti-double stranded DNA antibody titers compared to pooled serum from non-autoimmune mice. There was a modest reduction in anti-double stranded DNA antibody titers in treated mice and the effect seemed to correlate with duration of therapy ( Figure 3 ). This corresponded to less than a 4-fold reduction in end point titers. There were no detectable differences in isotype-specific titers (data not shown). Leukocyte Analysis At 24wks, there was a significant decrease in both peripheral lymphocytes (6-fold) and monocytes (5-fold) in both the prevention and treatment groups compared to controls ( Figure 4 ). There were no significant differences in other leukocyte subsets or in the level of anemia. Mice in all three groups had equivalent platelet counts in the low normal range (0.3 to 0.7 million/?l). All mice had subjective adenopathy at 12wks of age, and this was observed to increase in mice from all three groups up to 16wks. After 8–12wks of therapy in the treatment and prevention groups respectively, there were decreases in lymph node size and splenocyte weight compared to control mice ( Figure 5 ). At 24wks there were 70% fewer lymph node cells in mice from the treatment group. This was due to reductions in all T-cell subsets ( Table 3 ), but the greatest difference was the 4-fold decrease in the CD4?CD8? T cell population in the lymph nodes ( p < 0.0001). The effect of KRP-203 therapy on reduced lymphocyte numbers was even more pronounced in mice from the prevention group. There were 5-fold decreases in CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells and 12-fold decreases in CD4?CD8? T-cells in the lymph nodes of mice from the prevention group. There was no difference in the numbers of CD4+CD25+ T-cells between groups. There were similar reductions in B-cells and neutrophils in the lymph nodes of mice in the prevention and treatment groups, but no difference in a numbers of CD11b+ cells (data not shown). Similar findings were found in the spleen. In order to assess potential mechanisms for the reduced lymphadenopathy seen in MRL/lpr mice treated with KRP-203, lymphocyte survival in ex vivo cultures was assessed after treatment with increasing doses of KRP-203 or vehicle control. Lymphocytes were isolated from axillary lymph nodes of young female MRL/lpr mice at 10wks of age. Nodes are moderately enlarged in mice at this age, and 90% of lymph node cells are T-cells with 5–10% CD4+, 5–10% CD8+, and 70–80% CD4?CD8? cells. After 24hrs unstimulated in media with serum, 80% of cells were viable by trypan blue exclusion or propidium iodide staining. Apoptosis was assessed by flow cytometry after immunostaining with annexin V ( Figure 6A ). Treatment with KRP-203 revealed a dose dependent increase in the proportion of cells staining positive for annexin V. Using 10mM KRP-203, a time course experiment revealed that 50% of cells were annexin V positive at 4hrs and nearly all cells were positive by 8hrs. Only twenty percent of untreated cells or cells treated with DMSO were annexin V positive at 8 or 24hrs. In order to determine whether there were any differences in KRP-203 induced apoptosis in specific T-cell populations, lymph node cells were exposed to drug for 8 hours. The percentage of Annexin V positive cells was similar in both the CD4+ and CD8+ subsets as compared to the entire CD3+ population ( Figure 6B ).  Results MRL mice that received vehicle only had 50% mortality by 24wks of age ( Figure 1 ). However, mice in the treatment group showed no mortality by 24wks ( p = 0.02). While there was a clear trend toward improved survival in the prevention group, this did not reach statistical significance. This was primarily due to the loss of two mice that died early in treatment; importantly, there were no further deaths in this group either as the mice aged. Dermatitis was variably present, and there was a modest improvement in groups treated with KRP-203. Mice in all groups had equivalent weight gains throughout the study. Histologic Analysis As inflammatory kidney disease is the primary cause of death in MRL/lpr mice, renal histology was assessed at 24wks. As expected, kidneys from control mice had severe proliferative glomerulonephritis, chronic tubulointerstitial disease, and large perivascular infiltrates ( Figure 2 A,D,G ). Consistent with the model, most glomeruli were hypercellular with obliteration of capillary loops, focal segmental sclerosis, and occasional fibrocellular crescents. Immunofluorescent antibody staining for C3 and IgG showed the typical pattern with diffuse global staining of mesangium and capillary loops. There was interstitial fibrosis with diffuse infiltration of mononuclear cells, tubulitis, and focal tubular atrophy. Large and small vessels were also surrounded by large mononuclear cell infiltrates. Immunofluorescence staining showed that mononuclear infiltrates consisted mostly of CD4+ or CD8+ T-cells, with fewer CD11b+ monocytes/neutrophils and CD138+ plasma cells (data not shown). Mice in the prevention group had reduced histopathology scores. There were lower glomerular cellularity scores ( p = 0.06), and, unlike vehicle treated controls, none of the sections analyzed contained glomerular crescents ( Table 1 ). There was no difference in the degree or distribution of complement or immunoglobulin staining. However, there was significantly less tubulointerstitial disease ( Table 2 ) with preservation of tubular architecture ( Figure 2E ). Although there was an overall trend towards less vasculitis ( p = 0.29), there was substantial intra-group variability between mice. There was an 8-fold reduction in periglomerular CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells and there were also fewer T-cells in the interstitium. CD11b+ and CD138+ cells were present in numbers equivalent to kidneys from control mice (data not shown). Mice in the treatment group had intermediate histopathology scores. While there was a trend towards decreases in glomerular cellularity, the proportion of glomeruli with crescents, tubulointerstitial disease and the size of perivascular infiltrates ( Tables 1 and 2 ), none of these differences achieved statistical significance. Immunofluorescence revealed no difference in complement or immunoglobulin staining, but there were 50% fewer CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells around glomeruli and within the interstitium. Renal Function Urine protein excretion increased in all mice from 8–16 wks of age. In the treatment group, therapy was associated with a significant reduction in proteinuria at 20 wks of age compared to controls (0.36 ± 0.03 mg/kg/day versus 0.55 ± 0.07 mg/kg/day, respectively p<0.05). In the prevention group, half the mice had a marked reduction in urinary protein excretion, but others did not (mean 0.42 ± 0.09 mg/kg/day). Serum creatinine measurements at 24wks showed equivalent levels in all three treatment groups: control 0.34 mg/dl ± 0.02, prevention 0.38 mg/dl ± 0.02, treatment 0.40 mg/dl ± 0.07. Auto-antibodies All mice had elevated anti-double stranded DNA antibody titers compared to pooled serum from non-autoimmune mice. There was a modest reduction in anti-double stranded DNA antibody titers in treated mice and the effect seemed to correlate with duration of therapy ( Figure 3 ). This corresponded to less than a 4-fold reduction in end point titers. There were no detectable differences in isotype-specific titers (data not shown). Leukocyte Analysis At 24wks, there was a significant decrease in both peripheral lymphocytes (6-fold) and monocytes (5-fold) in both the prevention and treatment groups compared to controls ( Figure 4 ). There were no significant differences in other leukocyte subsets or in the level of anemia. Mice in all three groups had equivalent platelet counts in the low normal range (0.3 to 0.7 million/?l). All mice had subjective adenopathy at 12wks of age, and this was observed to increase in mice from all three groups up to 16wks. After 8–12wks of therapy in the treatment and prevention groups respectively, there were decreases in lymph node size and splenocyte weight compared to control mice ( Figure 5 ). At 24wks there were 70% fewer lymph node cells in mice from the treatment group. This was due to reductions in all T-cell subsets ( Table 3 ), but the greatest difference was the 4-fold decrease in the CD4?CD8? T cell population in the lymph nodes ( p < 0.0001). The effect of KRP-203 therapy on reduced lymphocyte numbers was even more pronounced in mice from the prevention group. There were 5-fold decreases in CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells and 12-fold decreases in CD4?CD8? T-cells in the lymph nodes of mice from the prevention group. There was no difference in the numbers of CD4+CD25+ T-cells between groups. There were similar reductions in B-cells and neutrophils in the lymph nodes of mice in the prevention and treatment groups, but no difference in a numbers of CD11b+ cells (data not shown). Similar findings were found in the spleen. In order to assess potential mechanisms for the reduced lymphadenopathy seen in MRL/lpr mice treated with KRP-203, lymphocyte survival in ex vivo cultures was assessed after treatment with increasing doses of KRP-203 or vehicle control. Lymphocytes were isolated from axillary lymph nodes of young female MRL/lpr mice at 10wks of age. Nodes are moderately enlarged in mice at this age, and 90% of lymph node cells are T-cells with 5–10% CD4+, 5–10% CD8+, and 70–80% CD4?CD8? cells. After 24hrs unstimulated in media with serum, 80% of cells were viable by trypan blue exclusion or propidium iodide staining. Apoptosis was assessed by flow cytometry after immunostaining with annexin V ( Figure 6A ). Treatment with KRP-203 revealed a dose dependent increase in the proportion of cells staining positive for annexin V. Using 10mM KRP-203, a time course experiment revealed that 50% of cells were annexin V positive at 4hrs and nearly all cells were positive by 8hrs. Only twenty percent of untreated cells or cells treated with DMSO were annexin V positive at 8 or 24hrs. In order to determine whether there were any differences in KRP-203 induced apoptosis in specific T-cell populations, lymph node cells were exposed to drug for 8 hours. The percentage of Annexin V positive cells was similar in both the CD4+ and CD8+ subsets as compared to the entire CD3+ population ( Figure 6B ).  Discussion The present study shows that KRP-203 is effective in ameliorating chronic inflammatory nephritis in the MRL/lpr mouse. An eight week course of therapy starting after the mice show signs of systemic disease and renal involvement resulted in less proteinuria, reduced CD8+ cell infiltrates, and prolonged survival. Further benefit was seen with a longer duration of therapy starting earlier in the course of disease. Mice treated twelve weeks had even fewer circulating lymphocytes, reduced CD4+ and CD8+ cell infiltrates in the kidney, and less tubulointerstitial disease. These results are consistent with prior reports on the use of FTY720 in the MRL/lpr model [ 25 , 26 ]. Daily oral dosing with FTY720 at 1mg/kg/dose starting at 16wks of age and lasting two weeks led to prolonged survival, although renal function and kidney histopathology were not assessed. Nine of ten treated mice survived 38wks, compared to only 50% survival in untreated mice [ 25 ]. In another study, oral dosing with 2mg/kg/dose three times weekly starting at 16wks of age and continuing until 10 mo of age was compared to vehicle alone. Mice receiving FTY720 had prolonged survival, reduced anti-double stranded DNA antibody titers, and reduced IgG staining in glomeruli of kidneys [ 26 ]. This study adds to the evidence that S1P receptor agonists can inhibit disease in MRL/lpr mice. There were reduced lymphocyte infiltrates in the kidneys of KRP-203 treated mice: 8 wks of therapy resulted in fewer CD8+ T-cells in the kidney, and 12 wks of therapy resulted in reductions in both CD4+ and CD8+ T- cells, suggesting that this effect was dependent on the duration of therapy. In addition, the decreased inflammation in the prevention group was associated with reduced tubulointerstitial disease. Similar to Okazaki et al [ 26 ], KRP-203 therapy led to reductions in anti-double stranded DNA antibody titers. Unlike Okazaki et al , we found no differences in glomerular staining for IgG or complement. However, the reduced T-cell response in KRP-203 treated mice was associated with reduced proteinuria even without affecting the degree of IgG or C3 deposition. Baseline body weights, proteinuria measurements, and gross examination for adenopathy immediately after randomization revealed no differences between the groups. Twenty-four weeks was chosen as the time point for censuring the survival analysis, due to an expected 50% mortality in control group. As early mortality in MRL/lpr mice is primarily due to renal failure [ 2 ], death of the sickest mice in the control group may have reduced the power to detect differences in serum creatinine and glomerular injury scores. Despite this, statistically significant differences in several measurements of disease severity were identified. One important aspect of this study is the long duration of therapy, as opposed to the short courses described in most previous studies of KRP-203. Studies in rats looking at cardiovascular, hepatic, and renal effects of FTY720 used doses up to 5mg/kg/day for 21 days [ 27 ]. With activation by FTY720, S1P receptors are internalized and degraded, thereby resulting in a cell that loses responsiveness to gradients of S1P expression for chemotaxis [ 28 ]. Initial agonist effects can be mediated by G-protein activation, but with receptor down-regulation these effects should be short lived. Therefore, the effects of long term therapy with S1P agonists are likely to be the result of a loss of S1P receptor signaling. It is not known whether KRP-203 also down-regulates S1P1 after binding. However, this study showed that there were no obvious effects on growth or vitality after a 3 month course of therapy. The long term exposure to KRP-203 was associated with lymphopenia as well as reduced lymphocyte numbers in the spleen and lymph nodes. Lymphopenia has been seen in other studies with S1P agonists and is expected due to their effect on blocking egress from lymphoid organs. However, despite initial progressive adenopathy with KRP-203, there was ultimately a reduction in spleen and lymph node weights as well as a decrease in the absolute number of lymphocytes in these organs. The reduction was dependent on the duration of therapy, and involved all T-cell subsets, including CD4?CD8? T-cells, which specifically survive in the MRL/lpr mice because of their intrinsic defect in Fas-mediated apoptosis [ 29 ]. The mechanism responsible for lymphocyte depletion with long term therapy is unclear, although enhanced apoptosis via a Fas-independent pathway is a likely possibility. An apoptotic effect of S1p agonists on MRL/lpr lymphocytes has been described previously [ 25 , 26 ]. FTY720 has been reported to promote apoptosis in vitro , although the occurrence of this effect in vivo has been greatly debated [ 5 ]. Both KRP-203 and FTY720 are derivatives of sphingosine, a metabolite in phospholipid metabolism. Sphingosine and its parent molecule ceramide, have both been found to promote apoptosis via intracellular signaling [ 30 , 31 ]. FTY720 requires phosphorylation in vivo for effect, and the responsible enzyme is sphingosine kinase type 2 [ 32 ]. It is unclear if FTY720 or phosphorylated FTY720 serves as a substrate for other enzymes such as S1P phosphorylase or ceramide synthase that act on S1P and sphingosine respectively to generate ceramide. KRP-203 also requires phosphorylation to function [ 23 ], and it is assumed that this occurs in vivo by type 2 sphingosine kinase. Potential metabolites of FTY720 and KRP-203 could act directly as a second messenger to promote apoptosis, or alternatively they could indirectly act by modulating intracellular levels of sphingolipids. Furthermore, sphingosine and ceramide act downstream of Fas signaling [ 30 ], and so T-cells from Fas-deficient MRL/lpr mice could be especially sensitive to S1P agonist induced apoptosis. The largest decrease in peripheral T-cells was within the CD4? CD8? cell subset; while receptor expression on this cell population has not been confirmed , in vitro KRP-203 appeared to effect all T-cell populations uniformly. Alternatively, lymphocytes may die of neglect in the absence of persistent antigenic exposure. Previous studies have shown that FTY720 treatment results in the accumulation of macrophages in lymph nodes [ 33 ]. While reduced circulating monocytes were seen in KRP-203 treated mice, monocyte numbers within lymphoid tissue were not altered. It is unclear from the present study whether these monocytes are activated or not. If the antigen presenting cells in the lymphoid tissue of KPR-203 mice are not sufficiently activated, T-cells sequestered in nodes may be deprived of requisite co-stimulatory signals and thus have a heightened susceptibility to apoptotic death. However, apoptosis would have to occur in a Fas-independent manner. Other potential explanations for lymphocyte depletion in lymphoid organs of KRP-203 treated mice seem less likely. While polymorphonuclear cell infiltration of lymphoid organs has been reported in MRL/lpr mice treated with a 2wk course of FTY720 [ 25 ], lymph nodes from mice after long term KRP-203 therapy were not grossly necrotic, and these nodes contained fewer polys than nodes from control animals. There was no evidence of lymphocyte egress from lymphoid tissues back into the blood to explain the decreased adenopathy. Therefore, apoptosis seems to be the most likely mechanism. Due to the widespread distribution of S1P receptors, multiple cell types have been shown to respond to S1P agonists. In addition to effects on lymphocytes, drug effects on other cells could contribute to attenuation of disease in lupus or lupus-like diseases. In the current study, therapy with KRP-203 resulted in decreases in blood monocytes as well as lymphocytes. This could be an indirect effect due to changes in T-cell activation, or more likely a direct effect of KRP-203 on monocytes. Receptor expression has been detected on human monocytes and mouse macrophages, and exogenous S1P also mediates activation and chemotaxis of monocytes/macrophages [ 33 , 34 ]. In the kidney, rat mesangial cells express S1P2, S1P3, and to a lesser extent S1P1 and S1P5 [ 35 , 36 ]. S1P binding to S1P2 and S1P3 are required for PDGF induced mesangial cell proliferation [ 36 ]. Treatment of mesangial cells with S1P agonists in vitro up-regulates the activation of SMADs and the expression of collagen IV, CTGF, and TIM1 [ 17 ]. While typically this would lead to increased fibrosis, use of S1P agonists in an in vivo glomerulosclerosis model showed attenuation of disease [ 37 ]. Peters et al. treated animals after inducing a form of glomerular injury where lymphocyte infiltration is not typically seen, suggesting that attenuation of disease was due to loss of S1P signaling in mesangial cells, likely from receptor down-regulation. Although renal endothelial cells have not been examined, other types of vascular endothelial cells have been reported to express S1P1, S1P2, and S1P3 [ 38 ]. Endothelial cells respond to S1P agonists with co-localization of adhesion molecules in tight junctions [ 33 ]. These proteins control leukocyte migration across the endothelial barrier [ 12 ], perhaps contributing to reduced homing of lymphocytes from the blood into local sites of inflammation. The receptor subtypes responsible for these cellular responses are being elucidated, but the selectivity of KRP-203 should minimize non-lymphocyte effects. In conclusion, treatment with KRP-203 improved survival and reduced proteinuria in MRL/lpr mice. Earlier, more prolonged therapy was associated with reduced tubulointerstitial disease and fewer T-cell infiltrates in the kidneys of these mice. There is also an marked reduction in adenopathy and T-cell numbers in the spleen and lymph node, likely due to induction of Fas-independent apoptosis. This study supports the hypothesis that selective S1P1 agonists may benefit patients with lupus nephritis and other chronic cell-mediated autoimmune diseases.  Discussion The present study shows that KRP-203 is effective in ameliorating chronic inflammatory nephritis in the MRL/lpr mouse. An eight week course of therapy starting after the mice show signs of systemic disease and renal involvement resulted in less proteinuria, reduced CD8+ cell infiltrates, and prolonged survival. Further benefit was seen with a longer duration of therapy starting earlier in the course of disease. Mice treated twelve weeks had even fewer circulating lymphocytes, reduced CD4+ and CD8+ cell infiltrates in the kidney, and less tubulointerstitial disease. These results are consistent with prior reports on the use of FTY720 in the MRL/lpr model [ 25 , 26 ]. Daily oral dosing with FTY720 at 1mg/kg/dose starting at 16wks of age and lasting two weeks led to prolonged survival, although renal function and kidney histopathology were not assessed. Nine of ten treated mice survived 38wks, compared to only 50% survival in untreated mice [ 25 ]. In another study, oral dosing with 2mg/kg/dose three times weekly starting at 16wks of age and continuing until 10 mo of age was compared to vehicle alone. Mice receiving FTY720 had prolonged survival, reduced anti-double stranded DNA antibody titers, and reduced IgG staining in glomeruli of kidneys [ 26 ]. This study adds to the evidence that S1P receptor agonists can inhibit disease in MRL/lpr mice. There were reduced lymphocyte infiltrates in the kidneys of KRP-203 treated mice: 8 wks of therapy resulted in fewer CD8+ T-cells in the kidney, and 12 wks of therapy resulted in reductions in both CD4+ and CD8+ T- cells, suggesting that this effect was dependent on the duration of therapy. In addition, the decreased inflammation in the prevention group was associated with reduced tubulointerstitial disease. Similar to Okazaki et al [ 26 ], KRP-203 therapy led to reductions in anti-double stranded DNA antibody titers. Unlike Okazaki et al , we found no differences in glomerular staining for IgG or complement. However, the reduced T-cell response in KRP-203 treated mice was associated with reduced proteinuria even without affecting the degree of IgG or C3 deposition. Baseline body weights, proteinuria measurements, and gross examination for adenopathy immediately after randomization revealed no differences between the groups. Twenty-four weeks was chosen as the time point for censuring the survival analysis, due to an expected 50% mortality in control group. As early mortality in MRL/lpr mice is primarily due to renal failure [ 2 ], death of the sickest mice in the control group may have reduced the power to detect differences in serum creatinine and glomerular injury scores. Despite this, statistically significant differences in several measurements of disease severity were identified. One important aspect of this study is the long duration of therapy, as opposed to the short courses described in most previous studies of KRP-203. Studies in rats looking at cardiovascular, hepatic, and renal effects of FTY720 used doses up to 5mg/kg/day for 21 days [ 27 ]. With activation by FTY720, S1P receptors are internalized and degraded, thereby resulting in a cell that loses responsiveness to gradients of S1P expression for chemotaxis [ 28 ]. Initial agonist effects can be mediated by G-protein activation, but with receptor down-regulation these effects should be short lived. Therefore, the effects of long term therapy with S1P agonists are likely to be the result of a loss of S1P receptor signaling. It is not known whether KRP-203 also down-regulates S1P1 after binding. However, this study showed that there were no obvious effects on growth or vitality after a 3 month course of therapy. The long term exposure to KRP-203 was associated with lymphopenia as well as reduced lymphocyte numbers in the spleen and lymph nodes. Lymphopenia has been seen in other studies with S1P agonists and is expected due to their effect on blocking egress from lymphoid organs. However, despite initial progressive adenopathy with KRP-203, there was ultimately a reduction in spleen and lymph node weights as well as a decrease in the absolute number of lymphocytes in these organs. The reduction was dependent on the duration of therapy, and involved all T-cell subsets, including CD4?CD8? T-cells, which specifically survive in the MRL/lpr mice because of their intrinsic defect in Fas-mediated apoptosis [ 29 ]. The mechanism responsible for lymphocyte depletion with long term therapy is unclear, although enhanced apoptosis via a Fas-independent pathway is a likely possibility. An apoptotic effect of S1p agonists on MRL/lpr lymphocytes has been described previously [ 25 , 26 ]. FTY720 has been reported to promote apoptosis in vitro , although the occurrence of this effect in vivo has been greatly debated [ 5 ]. Both KRP-203 and FTY720 are derivatives of sphingosine, a metabolite in phospholipid metabolism. Sphingosine and its parent molecule ceramide, have both been found to promote apoptosis via intracellular signaling [ 30 , 31 ]. FTY720 requires phosphorylation in vivo for effect, and the responsible enzyme is sphingosine kinase type 2 [ 32 ]. It is unclear if FTY720 or phosphorylated FTY720 serves as a substrate for other enzymes such as S1P phosphorylase or ceramide synthase that act on S1P and sphingosine respectively to generate ceramide. KRP-203 also requires phosphorylation to function [ 23 ], and it is assumed that this occurs in vivo by type 2 sphingosine kinase. Potential metabolites of FTY720 and KRP-203 could act directly as a second messenger to promote apoptosis, or alternatively they could indirectly act by modulating intracellular levels of sphingolipids. Furthermore, sphingosine and ceramide act downstream of Fas signaling [ 30 ], and so T-cells from Fas-deficient MRL/lpr mice could be especially sensitive to S1P agonist induced apoptosis. The largest decrease in peripheral T-cells was within the CD4? CD8? cell subset; while receptor expression on this cell population has not been confirmed , in vitro KRP-203 appeared to effect all T-cell populations uniformly. Alternatively, lymphocytes may die of neglect in the absence of persistent antigenic exposure. Previous studies have shown that FTY720 treatment results in the accumulation of macrophages in lymph nodes [ 33 ]. While reduced circulating monocytes were seen in KRP-203 treated mice, monocyte numbers within lymphoid tissue were not altered. It is unclear from the present study whether these monocytes are activated or not. If the antigen presenting cells in the lymphoid tissue of KPR-203 mice are not sufficiently activated, T-cells sequestered in nodes may be deprived of requisite co-stimulatory signals and thus have a heightened susceptibility to apoptotic death. However, apoptosis would have to occur in a Fas-independent manner. Other potential explanations for lymphocyte depletion in lymphoid organs of KRP-203 treated mice seem less likely. While polymorphonuclear cell infiltration of lymphoid organs has been reported in MRL/lpr mice treated with a 2wk course of FTY720 [ 25 ], lymph nodes from mice after long term KRP-203 therapy were not grossly necrotic, and these nodes contained fewer polys than nodes from control animals. There was no evidence of lymphocyte egress from lymphoid tissues back into the blood to explain the decreased adenopathy. Therefore, apoptosis seems to be the most likely mechanism. Due to the widespread distribution of S1P receptors, multiple cell types have been shown to respond to S1P agonists. In addition to effects on lymphocytes, drug effects on other cells could contribute to attenuation of disease in lupus or lupus-like diseases. In the current study, therapy with KRP-203 resulted in decreases in blood monocytes as well as lymphocytes. This could be an indirect effect due to changes in T-cell activation, or more likely a direct effect of KRP-203 on monocytes. Receptor expression has been detected on human monocytes and mouse macrophages, and exogenous S1P also mediates activation and chemotaxis of monocytes/macrophages [ 33 , 34 ]. In the kidney, rat mesangial cells express S1P2, S1P3, and to a lesser extent S1P1 and S1P5 [ 35 , 36 ]. S1P binding to S1P2 and S1P3 are required for PDGF induced mesangial cell proliferation [ 36 ]. Treatment of mesangial cells with S1P agonists in vitro up-regulates the activation of SMADs and the expression of collagen IV, CTGF, and TIM1 [ 17 ]. While typically this would lead to increased fibrosis, use of S1P agonists in an in vivo glomerulosclerosis model showed attenuation of disease [ 37 ]. Peters et al. treated animals after inducing a form of glomerular injury where lymphocyte infiltration is not typically seen, suggesting that attenuation of disease was due to loss of S1P signaling in mesangial cells, likely from receptor down-regulation. Although renal endothelial cells have not been examined, other types of vascular endothelial cells have been reported to express S1P1, S1P2, and S1P3 [ 38 ]. Endothelial cells respond to S1P agonists with co-localization of adhesion molecules in tight junctions [ 33 ]. These proteins control leukocyte migration across the endothelial barrier [ 12 ], perhaps contributing to reduced homing of lymphocytes from the blood into local sites of inflammation. The receptor subtypes responsible for these cellular responses are being elucidated, but the selectivity of KRP-203 should minimize non-lymphocyte effects. In conclusion, treatment with KRP-203 improved survival and reduced proteinuria in MRL/lpr mice. Earlier, more prolonged therapy was associated with reduced tubulointerstitial disease and fewer T-cell infiltrates in the kidneys of these mice. There is also an marked reduction in adenopathy and T-cell numbers in the spleen and lymph node, likely due to induction of Fas-independent apoptosis. This study supports the hypothesis that selective S1P1 agonists may benefit patients with lupus nephritis and other chronic cell-mediated autoimmune diseases.  Methods Mice MRL/MpJ-Tnfrsf6 lpr mice (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME) were maintained in our animal colony on standard mouse chow. Only female mice were used in this study, as the disease phenotype is more severe in females. The study was approved by the University of Texas Health Science Center Animal Welfare Committee. Experimental Design KRP-203 was obtained from Kyorin Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan) and reconstituted in 0.5% methylcellulose (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) at 0.8mg/ml. Methylcellulose was used as the vehicle control. Female mice were randomly assigned to one of 3 groups at 12wks of age. Mice in the prevention group received KRP-203 at 6 mg/kg/dose three times per week by gavage from 12wks of age until 24 wks. Mice in the treatment group were dosed similarly but starting at 16wks of age. Mice in the control group received vehicle only by gavage three times per week starting at 12wks of age. Mice were monitored daily for signs of drug toxicity or disease exacerbations. Weights were obtained twice monthly and drug dosages were adjusted accordingly. Histologic Analysis Kidney tissue was fixed in PBS buffered 4% formalin, dehydrated and embedded in paraffin. Four micron sections were stained with Periodic Acid Schiff (PAS). Glomerular injury was graded in a blinded manner as follows, with a minimum of 20 glomeruli scored per animal; percentage of glomeruli containing cellular crescents, percentage of glomeruli with sclerosis involving >25% of the glomerular tuft, and degree of hypercellularity (0 to 3 scale). Tubulointerstitial disease was graded on a 0–3 scale as follows, with 10 high power fields (hpf) scored per animal: 0 - no cellular infiltrates with back to back tubules, no evidence of fibrosis; 1 -zero to 5 cells per hpf and minimal fibrosis; 2 - five to 10 cells/hpf with moderate fibrosis; and 3 ->10 cells/hpf with marked fibrosis. Immunostaining OCT embedded snap-frozen 4 micron sections of kidneys were used for direct staining with C3 (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH) and IgG specific antibodies (Zymed, South San Francisco, CA). Control staining was also performed using matched isotypes or IgG (data not shown). Staining was scored on a relative scale of 0–3 by two blinded reviewers for at least 10 glomeruli per mouse. Two-step indirect staining was performed for CD8 and CD4 using rat primary antibodies 53-6.7 and RM4-5 respectively (BD Pharmigen, San Jose, CA) with a FITC-conjugated donkey anti-rat secondary antibody (Jackson Immunoresearch, West Grove, PA). Quantitation of staining was graded based on the number of positive cells per glomerulus or per hpf for tubular infiltrates, with a minimum of 10 glomeruli or hpf per mouse examined. Renal Function Twenty-four hour urine collections were obtained from mice every four weeks and immediately prior to histologic analysis. Urinary protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and normalized for body weight. Blood was obtained by cardiac puncture and serum was collected after allowing blood to clot at 37°C for 1hr. Serum creatinine was determined using HPLC [ 39 ]. Leukocyte Analysis Blood was obtained by cardiac puncture at time of histologic analysis and placed in tubes containing EDTA. Complete blood cell counts were performed at M.D. Anderson Cancer Center veterinary core facility. Splenocytes and axillary lymph node cells were prepared from mechanical dissociation through 70-micron filters. Erythrocytes were eliminated via hypo-osmolar lysis. Leukocytes were washed and stained using directly conjugated antibodies and assessed by flow cytometry using the FACS Caliber (BD Biosciences). Antibodies were obtained from eBiosciences: rat anti-mouse CD4 (clone GK1.5), rat anti-mouse CD8 (53-6.7), hamster anti-mouse CD3 (145-2c11), rat anti-mouse CD11b (M1/70), rat anti-mouse B220 (RA3-6B2), and rat anti-mouse CD138 (281-2). Measurement of Antibodies Serum levels of antibodies reactive to double stranded DNA (dsDNA) were measured by ELISA, as described previously [ 40 ]. Apoptosis assay Lymphocytes were isolated from axillary lymph nodes of young 10–12wk old female MRL/lpr mice by mechanical dissociation and washing in sterile Hank’s balanced salt solution. 1 × 106 cells were plated in 1 ml complete RPMI medium with 10% fetal bovine serum in 24-well tissue culture dishes and incubated at 37 °C and 5% CO2. A stock solution of 10mM KRP-203 was made in DMSO and dilutions were made into RPMI. DMSO at the appropriate dilution was used as a negative control. Annexin V staining was performed using the apoptosis detection kit (BD Pharmingen) and cells were analyzed by flow cytometry. Histograms were generated using WinMDI software, version 2.9 (Scripps, San Diego, CA). For T-cell subset analysis, 2-color staining was performed using antibodies for CD3, CD4, or CD8 (BD Pharmingen). Statistics Analyses performed using Microsoft Excel and GraphPad Prism software. Survival data was tested by Kaplan Meyer analysis with significance determined by the log-rank test. Kruskal-Wallis test was used to compare other parameters.  Methods Mice MRL/MpJ-Tnfrsf6 lpr mice (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME) were maintained in our animal colony on standard mouse chow. Only female mice were used in this study, as the disease phenotype is more severe in females. The study was approved by the University of Texas Health Science Center Animal Welfare Committee. Experimental Design KRP-203 was obtained from Kyorin Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan) and reconstituted in 0.5% methylcellulose (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) at 0.8mg/ml. Methylcellulose was used as the vehicle control. Female mice were randomly assigned to one of 3 groups at 12wks of age. Mice in the prevention group received KRP-203 at 6 mg/kg/dose three times per week by gavage from 12wks of age until 24 wks. Mice in the treatment group were dosed similarly but starting at 16wks of age. Mice in the control group received vehicle only by gavage three times per week starting at 12wks of age. Mice were monitored daily for signs of drug toxicity or disease exacerbations. Weights were obtained twice monthly and drug dosages were adjusted accordingly. Histologic Analysis Kidney tissue was fixed in PBS buffered 4% formalin, dehydrated and embedded in paraffin. Four micron sections were stained with Periodic Acid Schiff (PAS). Glomerular injury was graded in a blinded manner as follows, with a minimum of 20 glomeruli scored per animal; percentage of glomeruli containing cellular crescents, percentage of glomeruli with sclerosis involving >25% of the glomerular tuft, and degree of hypercellularity (0 to 3 scale). Tubulointerstitial disease was graded on a 0–3 scale as follows, with 10 high power fields (hpf) scored per animal: 0 - no cellular infiltrates with back to back tubules, no evidence of fibrosis; 1 -zero to 5 cells per hpf and minimal fibrosis; 2 - five to 10 cells/hpf with moderate fibrosis; and 3 ->10 cells/hpf with marked fibrosis. Immunostaining OCT embedded snap-frozen 4 micron sections of kidneys were used for direct staining with C3 (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH) and IgG specific antibodies (Zymed, South San Francisco, CA). Control staining was also performed using matched isotypes or IgG (data not shown). Staining was scored on a relative scale of 0–3 by two blinded reviewers for at least 10 glomeruli per mouse. Two-step indirect staining was performed for CD8 and CD4 using rat primary antibodies 53-6.7 and RM4-5 respectively (BD Pharmigen, San Jose, CA) with a FITC-conjugated donkey anti-rat secondary antibody (Jackson Immunoresearch, West Grove, PA). Quantitation of staining was graded based on the number of positive cells per glomerulus or per hpf for tubular infiltrates, with a minimum of 10 glomeruli or hpf per mouse examined. Renal Function Twenty-four hour urine collections were obtained from mice every four weeks and immediately prior to histologic analysis. Urinary protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and normalized for body weight. Blood was obtained by cardiac puncture and serum was collected after allowing blood to clot at 37°C for 1hr. Serum creatinine was determined using HPLC [ 39 ]. Leukocyte Analysis Blood was obtained by cardiac puncture at time of histologic analysis and placed in tubes containing EDTA. Complete blood cell counts were performed at M.D. Anderson Cancer Center veterinary core facility. Splenocytes and axillary lymph node cells were prepared from mechanical dissociation through 70-micron filters. Erythrocytes were eliminated via hypo-osmolar lysis. Leukocytes were washed and stained using directly conjugated antibodies and assessed by flow cytometry using the FACS Caliber (BD Biosciences). Antibodies were obtained from eBiosciences: rat anti-mouse CD4 (clone GK1.5), rat anti-mouse CD8 (53-6.7), hamster anti-mouse CD3 (145-2c11), rat anti-mouse CD11b (M1/70), rat anti-mouse B220 (RA3-6B2), and rat anti-mouse CD138 (281-2). Measurement of Antibodies Serum levels of antibodies reactive to double stranded DNA (dsDNA) were measured by ELISA, as described previously [ 40 ]. Apoptosis assay Lymphocytes were isolated from axillary lymph nodes of young 10–12wk old female MRL/lpr mice by mechanical dissociation and washing in sterile Hank’s balanced salt solution. 1 × 106 cells were plated in 1 ml complete RPMI medium with 10% fetal bovine serum in 24-well tissue culture dishes and incubated at 37 °C and 5% CO2. A stock solution of 10mM KRP-203 was made in DMSO and dilutions were made into RPMI. DMSO at the appropriate dilution was used as a negative control. Annexin V staining was performed using the apoptosis detection kit (BD Pharmingen) and cells were analyzed by flow cytometry. Histograms were generated using WinMDI software, version 2.9 (Scripps, San Diego, CA). For T-cell subset analysis, 2-color staining was performed using antibodies for CD3, CD4, or CD8 (BD Pharmingen). Statistics Analyses performed using Microsoft Excel and GraphPad Prism software. Survival data was tested by Kaplan Meyer analysis with significance determined by the log-rank test. Kruskal-Wallis test was used to compare other parameters.  Mice MRL/MpJ-Tnfrsf6 lpr mice (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME) were maintained in our animal colony on standard mouse chow. Only female mice were used in this study, as the disease phenotype is more severe in females. The study was approved by the University of Texas Health Science Center Animal Welfare Committee.  Mice MRL/MpJ-Tnfrsf6 lpr mice (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME) were maintained in our animal colony on standard mouse chow. Only female mice were used in this study, as the disease phenotype is more severe in females. The study was approved by the University of Texas Health Science Center Animal Welfare Committee.  Experimental Design KRP-203 was obtained from Kyorin Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan) and reconstituted in 0.5% methylcellulose (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) at 0.8mg/ml. Methylcellulose was used as the vehicle control. Female mice were randomly assigned to one of 3 groups at 12wks of age. Mice in the prevention group received KRP-203 at 6 mg/kg/dose three times per week by gavage from 12wks of age until 24 wks. Mice in the treatment group were dosed similarly but starting at 16wks of age. Mice in the control group received vehicle only by gavage three times per week starting at 12wks of age. Mice were monitored daily for signs of drug toxicity or disease exacerbations. Weights were obtained twice monthly and drug dosages were adjusted accordingly.  Experimental Design KRP-203 was obtained from Kyorin Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan) and reconstituted in 0.5% methylcellulose (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) at 0.8mg/ml. Methylcellulose was used as the vehicle control. Female mice were randomly assigned to one of 3 groups at 12wks of age. Mice in the prevention group received KRP-203 at 6 mg/kg/dose three times per week by gavage from 12wks of age until 24 wks. Mice in the treatment group were dosed similarly but starting at 16wks of age. Mice in the control group received vehicle only by gavage three times per week starting at 12wks of age. Mice were monitored daily for signs of drug toxicity or disease exacerbations. Weights were obtained twice monthly and drug dosages were adjusted accordingly.  Histologic Analysis Kidney tissue was fixed in PBS buffered 4% formalin, dehydrated and embedded in paraffin. Four micron sections were stained with Periodic Acid Schiff (PAS). Glomerular injury was graded in a blinded manner as follows, with a minimum of 20 glomeruli scored per animal; percentage of glomeruli containing cellular crescents, percentage of glomeruli with sclerosis involving >25% of the glomerular tuft, and degree of hypercellularity (0 to 3 scale). Tubulointerstitial disease was graded on a 0–3 scale as follows, with 10 high power fields (hpf) scored per animal: 0 - no cellular infiltrates with back to back tubules, no evidence of fibrosis; 1 -zero to 5 cells per hpf and minimal fibrosis; 2 - five to 10 cells/hpf with moderate fibrosis; and 3 ->10 cells/hpf with marked fibrosis.  Histologic Analysis Kidney tissue was fixed in PBS buffered 4% formalin, dehydrated and embedded in paraffin. Four micron sections were stained with Periodic Acid Schiff (PAS). Glomerular injury was graded in a blinded manner as follows, with a minimum of 20 glomeruli scored per animal; percentage of glomeruli containing cellular crescents, percentage of glomeruli with sclerosis involving >25% of the glomerular tuft, and degree of hypercellularity (0 to 3 scale). Tubulointerstitial disease was graded on a 0–3 scale as follows, with 10 high power fields (hpf) scored per animal: 0 - no cellular infiltrates with back to back tubules, no evidence of fibrosis; 1 -zero to 5 cells per hpf and minimal fibrosis; 2 - five to 10 cells/hpf with moderate fibrosis; and 3 ->10 cells/hpf with marked fibrosis.  Immunostaining OCT embedded snap-frozen 4 micron sections of kidneys were used for direct staining with C3 (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH) and IgG specific antibodies (Zymed, South San Francisco, CA). Control staining was also performed using matched isotypes or IgG (data not shown). Staining was scored on a relative scale of 0–3 by two blinded reviewers for at least 10 glomeruli per mouse. Two-step indirect staining was performed for CD8 and CD4 using rat primary antibodies 53-6.7 and RM4-5 respectively (BD Pharmigen, San Jose, CA) with a FITC-conjugated donkey anti-rat secondary antibody (Jackson Immunoresearch, West Grove, PA). Quantitation of staining was graded based on the number of positive cells per glomerulus or per hpf for tubular infiltrates, with a minimum of 10 glomeruli or hpf per mouse examined.  Immunostaining OCT embedded snap-frozen 4 micron sections of kidneys were used for direct staining with C3 (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH) and IgG specific antibodies (Zymed, South San Francisco, CA). Control staining was also performed using matched isotypes or IgG (data not shown). Staining was scored on a relative scale of 0–3 by two blinded reviewers for at least 10 glomeruli per mouse. Two-step indirect staining was performed for CD8 and CD4 using rat primary antibodies 53-6.7 and RM4-5 respectively (BD Pharmigen, San Jose, CA) with a FITC-conjugated donkey anti-rat secondary antibody (Jackson Immunoresearch, West Grove, PA). Quantitation of staining was graded based on the number of positive cells per glomerulus or per hpf for tubular infiltrates, with a minimum of 10 glomeruli or hpf per mouse examined.  Renal Function Twenty-four hour urine collections were obtained from mice every four weeks and immediately prior to histologic analysis. Urinary protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and normalized for body weight. Blood was obtained by cardiac puncture and serum was collected after allowing blood to clot at 37°C for 1hr. Serum creatinine was determined using HPLC [ 39 ].  Renal Function Twenty-four hour urine collections were obtained from mice every four weeks and immediately prior to histologic analysis. Urinary protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and normalized for body weight. Blood was obtained by cardiac puncture and serum was collected after allowing blood to clot at 37°C for 1hr. Serum creatinine was determined using HPLC [ 39 ].  Leukocyte Analysis Blood was obtained by cardiac puncture at time of histologic analysis and placed in tubes containing EDTA. Complete blood cell counts were performed at M.D. Anderson Cancer Center veterinary core facility. Splenocytes and axillary lymph node cells were prepared from mechanical dissociation through 70-micron filters. Erythrocytes were eliminated via hypo-osmolar lysis. Leukocytes were washed and stained using directly conjugated antibodies and assessed by flow cytometry using the FACS Caliber (BD Biosciences). Antibodies were obtained from eBiosciences: rat anti-mouse CD4 (clone GK1.5), rat anti-mouse CD8 (53-6.7), hamster anti-mouse CD3 (145-2c11), rat anti-mouse CD11b (M1/70), rat anti-mouse B220 (RA3-6B2), and rat anti-mouse CD138 (281-2).  Leukocyte Analysis Blood was obtained by cardiac puncture at time of histologic analysis and placed in tubes containing EDTA. Complete blood cell counts were performed at M.D. Anderson Cancer Center veterinary core facility. Splenocytes and axillary lymph node cells were prepared from mechanical dissociation through 70-micron filters. Erythrocytes were eliminated via hypo-osmolar lysis. Leukocytes were washed and stained using directly conjugated antibodies and assessed by flow cytometry using the FACS Caliber (BD Biosciences). Antibodies were obtained from eBiosciences: rat anti-mouse CD4 (clone GK1.5), rat anti-mouse CD8 (53-6.7), hamster anti-mouse CD3 (145-2c11), rat anti-mouse CD11b (M1/70), rat anti-mouse B220 (RA3-6B2), and rat anti-mouse CD138 (281-2).  Measurement of Antibodies Serum levels of antibodies reactive to double stranded DNA (dsDNA) were measured by ELISA, as described previously [ 40 ].  Measurement of Antibodies Serum levels of antibodies reactive to double stranded DNA (dsDNA) were measured by ELISA, as described previously [ 40 ].  Apoptosis assay Lymphocytes were isolated from axillary lymph nodes of young 10–12wk old female MRL/lpr mice by mechanical dissociation and washing in sterile Hank’s balanced salt solution. 1 × 106 cells were plated in 1 ml complete RPMI medium with 10% fetal bovine serum in 24-well tissue culture dishes and incubated at 37 °C and 5% CO2. A stock solution of 10mM KRP-203 was made in DMSO and dilutions were made into RPMI. DMSO at the appropriate dilution was used as a negative control. Annexin V staining was performed using the apoptosis detection kit (BD Pharmingen) and cells were analyzed by flow cytometry. Histograms were generated using WinMDI software, version 2.9 (Scripps, San Diego, CA). For T-cell subset analysis, 2-color staining was performed using antibodies for CD3, CD4, or CD8 (BD Pharmingen).  Apoptosis assay Lymphocytes were isolated from axillary lymph nodes of young 10–12wk old female MRL/lpr mice by mechanical dissociation and washing in sterile Hank’s balanced salt solution. 1 × 106 cells were plated in 1 ml complete RPMI medium with 10% fetal bovine serum in 24-well tissue culture dishes and incubated at 37 °C and 5% CO2. A stock solution of 10mM KRP-203 was made in DMSO and dilutions were made into RPMI. DMSO at the appropriate dilution was used as a negative control. Annexin V staining was performed using the apoptosis detection kit (BD Pharmingen) and cells were analyzed by flow cytometry. Histograms were generated using WinMDI software, version 2.9 (Scripps, San Diego, CA). For T-cell subset analysis, 2-color staining was performed using antibodies for CD3, CD4, or CD8 (BD Pharmingen).  Statistics Analyses performed using Microsoft Excel and GraphPad Prism software. Survival data was tested by Kaplan Meyer analysis with significance determined by the log-rank test. Kruskal-Wallis test was used to compare other parameters.  Statistics Analyses performed using Microsoft Excel and GraphPad Prism software. Survival data was tested by Kaplan Meyer analysis with significance determined by the log-rank test. Kruskal-Wallis test was used to compare other parameters. 