Oncogenetic Tree Model of Somatic Mutations and DNA Methylation in Colon Tumors Our understanding of somatic alterations in colon cancer has evolved from a concept of a series of events taking place in a single sequence to a recognition of multiple pathways. An oncogenetic tree is a model intended to describe the pathways and sequence of somatic alterations in carcinogenesis without assuming that tumors will fall in mutually exclusive categories. We applied this model to data on colon tumor somatic alterations. Methods An oncogenetic tree model was built using data on mutations of TP53, KRAS2, APC , and BRAF genes, methylation at CpG sites of MLH1 and p16 genes, methylation in tumor (MINT) markers, and microsatellite instability (MSI) for 971 colon tumors from a population-based series. Results Oncogenetic tree analysis resulted in a reproducible tree with three branches. The model represents methylation of MINT markers as initiating a branch and predisposing to MSI, methylation of MHL1 and p16 , and BRAF mutation. APC mutation is the first alteration in an independent branch and is followed by TP53 mutation. KRAS2 mutation was placed a third independent branch, implying that it neither depends on, nor predisposes to, the other alterations. Individual tumors were observed to have alteration patterns representing every combination of one, two, or all three branches. Conclusions The oncogenetic tree model assumptions are appropriate for the observed heterogeneity of colon tumors, and the model produces a useful visual schematic of the sequence of events in pathways of colon carcinogenesis.  MATERIALS AND METHODS The oncogenetic tree model was applied to existing data on somatic alterations in a population-based series of colon cancer cases. Characteristics of the study subjects, associations between the somatic alterations and epidemiologic variables in this population, and pairwise relationships between some alterations have been reported elsewhere ( Samowitz et al., 2000 , 2001b , 2005 , 2007 ; Slattery et al., 2000a , 2000b , 2001a , 2001b , 2002 , 2007 ). The methods for determining subject eligibility, for obtaining tumor tissue, and for laboratory assays have been previously described and are summarized briefly below. Study Subjects and Characterization of Somatic Alterations Eligible subjects were individuals ages 30 to 79 years with a first diagnosis of colon cancer (ICD02 18.0 and 18.2–18.9) between October, 1991 and September, 1994; subjects were identified as cases for a population-based case-control study through the Utah Cancer Registry, the Northern California Cancer Registry, and the Sacramento Cancer Registry ( Slattery et al., 1997 , 2003 ). In northern California, the study population was restricted to members of the Kaiser Permanente Medical Care Program (KPMCP). This research was conducted in accordance with human subjects research protocols approved at each responsible institution. Tumors thought to be HNPCC-related, i.e. with a deleterious mutation detected in the germline DNA sequence of the MLH1 or MSH2 genes ( Samowitz et al., 2001a ), were excluded from the data set. Tumor Tissue and Laboratory Assays Archived, paraffin-embedded tumor material for eligible cases was obtained from hospitals in Utah and from KPMCP ( Slattery et al., 2000c ). Tumor tissue was microdissected from sections for DNA extraction. Of 1917 eligible cases, tumor tissue was obtained and useable DNA was extracted (i.e. at least one assay was successful) for 1539 or 80.3%. Microsatellite instability (MSI), mutations of the TP53, KRAS2, BRAF , and APC genes, and methylation of selected CpG sites were assayed for these samples as detailed in previous reports for this study population. Briefly, microsatellite instability (MSI) was evaluated by assaying for a panel of 10 tetranucleotide repeats ( Samowitz and Slattery, 1997a ), and for mutations in two poly-A mononucleotide repeats known to indicate MSI, the A10 region of the transforming growth factor beta type 2 gene ( TGF?RII ) ( Samowitz and Slattery, 1997b ), and BAT-26 ( Samowitz et al., 1999 ); instability was recognized by the length of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products, compared to normal DNA, when separated on polyacrylamide gels. Mutations in codons 12 and 13 of the KRAS2 gene were detected by PCR amplification and sequencing ( Samowitz et al., 2000 ). Mutations of exons and intron–exon boundaries of exons 5–8 of TP53 were detected by PCR amplification and single-strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) analysis followed by sequencing of DNA corresponding to abnormal bands from SSCP ( Samowitz et al., 2002 ). Methylation-specific PCR of sodium bisulfite-modified DNA was used to assay for methylation at CpG sites in promoter regions of the MLH1 and p16 (CDKN2A) genes, and at three non-gene MINT (methylated in tumor) sites, MINT1, MINT2, and MINT31, that are considered to be markers of CpG island methylation phenotype (CIMP) ( Samowitz et al., 2005 ). Methylation-specific PCR procedures included primers for both methylated and unmethylated products. Mutations of the adenomatous polyposis coli ( APC ) gene were detected, for a subset of 90 tumors, by PCR amplification and sequencing of the entire coding region of the gene ( Samowitz et al., 2007 ). Data Analysis Each tumor was categorized as positive or negative for each somatic alteration. For MSI, the majority of tumors were classified as MSI-positive or MSI-negative based on Bat-26 status; tumors which did not have a Bat-26 result were classified using TGF?RII ; tumors which had neither Bat-26 nor TGF?RII results were classified using the panel of 10 tetranucleotide repeats ( Slattery et al., 2000a ). A tumor was coded as having a TP53 mutation if any non-synonymous mutation in exons and intron–exon boundaries of exons 5–8 of TP53 was detected. KRAS2 was scored as mutated if any mutation was present in codons 12 or 13. APC mutation was scored as positive if a nonsense or out-of-frame insertion or deletion mutation was detected. Methylation at CpG sites in the promoter of the MLH1 gene or the p16 gene were categorized as present or absent and represented by a dichotomous variable for each gene. A single variable was used to indicate methylation at one or more of the MINT CpG sites because these non-gene sites had been selected as collective markers of a phenotype. The oncogenetic tree model requires that every variable be defined for each observation. Data from one or more DNA methylation assays were missing for n = 490 tumors. Insufficient quantity of DNA extracted from small tumors was often the limitation for methylation assays, and as a result small tumors are under-represented in the analysis. In addition, 37 cases were missing data for TP53 mutation, 65 missing KRAS2 mutation, 34 missing MSI, and 74 missing BRAF mutation. The remaining 971 cases were evaluated in the oncogenetic tree model. Pairwise correspondence between the seven alterations with complete data was evaluated by calculating the tetrachoric correlation coefficient, a measure appropriate for representing correlation between dichotomous variables ( Kraemer, 2006 ). Correlations with APC could not be calculated because the sample with APC data was non-representative. A primary oncogenetic tree model, n = 971, was developed based on data seven dichotomous variables: TP53 mutation, MINT methylation, KRAS2 mutation, p16 methylation, MLH1 methylation, MSI, and BRAF mutation. A second tree was developed for these seven alterations and, in addition, APC mutation. The second model was based on the n = 90 tumors with APC data and used weighting of observations to account for non-representativeness. Oncogenetic Tree Model An oncogenetic tree is a rooted directed tree with edges pointing away from the root ( Desper et al., 1999 ; Desper et al., 2000 ). The root presents the state of tissue with none of the measured somatic alterations. Each of the other nodes is associated with a particular somatic alteration. According to the oncogenetic tree model, for an alteration to occur in a particular tumor, all of the alterations corresponding to nodes that lie on the directed path from the root must be present in the tumor. Each edge is labeled by the “transition probability”, i.e. the conditional probability that a tumor will acquire the alteration at the next node away from the root, given that the alteration at the node proximal to the root is already present. When two edges emanate from the same node, neither of the alterations on the next node is required for the other to occur. Each tumor corresponds to a “subtree” of the oncogenetic tree containing all the alterations in the tumor. The method used to fit the oncogenetic tree is described in greater detail elsewhere ( Szabo and Boucher, 2002 ; Szabo and Boucher, 2008 ). The oncogenetic trees were constructed using a simple algorithm. The parent of each node was found by maximizing the weight function w ( v i , v j ) = log p i j p i ( p i + p j ) . If the true oncogenetic tree is not skewed, meaning that no excessively high positive correlations are observed between alterations on different branches, the algorithm is guaranteed to reconstruct the correct tree. The Desper model proceeds to a second stage, in which transition probabilities and false positive and false negative error probabilities are estimated by minimizing the error function Max i | O i – E i |, where O i represents the observed frequency of the i th alteration and E i represents the expected frequency of the i th alteration under the model. This stage of the model assumes that pairs of alterations may either be positively correlated or independent. Another approach is to directly estimate, from observed data, the probability for each alteration conditional on the proximal alteration. A nonparametric bootstrap resampling method was used to estimate the amount of sampling variability in the fitted tree. The bootstrap method samples from the rows of the data with replacement N times, where N is the size of the original sample. An oncogenetic tree is fit to the resampled data. We repeated the procedure M = 1000 times.  Study Subjects and Characterization of Somatic Alterations Eligible subjects were individuals ages 30 to 79 years with a first diagnosis of colon cancer (ICD02 18.0 and 18.2–18.9) between October, 1991 and September, 1994; subjects were identified as cases for a population-based case-control study through the Utah Cancer Registry, the Northern California Cancer Registry, and the Sacramento Cancer Registry ( Slattery et al., 1997 , 2003 ). In northern California, the study population was restricted to members of the Kaiser Permanente Medical Care Program (KPMCP). This research was conducted in accordance with human subjects research protocols approved at each responsible institution. Tumors thought to be HNPCC-related, i.e. with a deleterious mutation detected in the germline DNA sequence of the MLH1 or MSH2 genes ( Samowitz et al., 2001a ), were excluded from the data set.  Tumor Tissue and Laboratory Assays Archived, paraffin-embedded tumor material for eligible cases was obtained from hospitals in Utah and from KPMCP ( Slattery et al., 2000c ). Tumor tissue was microdissected from sections for DNA extraction. Of 1917 eligible cases, tumor tissue was obtained and useable DNA was extracted (i.e. at least one assay was successful) for 1539 or 80.3%. Microsatellite instability (MSI), mutations of the TP53, KRAS2, BRAF , and APC genes, and methylation of selected CpG sites were assayed for these samples as detailed in previous reports for this study population. Briefly, microsatellite instability (MSI) was evaluated by assaying for a panel of 10 tetranucleotide repeats ( Samowitz and Slattery, 1997a ), and for mutations in two poly-A mononucleotide repeats known to indicate MSI, the A10 region of the transforming growth factor beta type 2 gene ( TGF?RII ) ( Samowitz and Slattery, 1997b ), and BAT-26 ( Samowitz et al., 1999 ); instability was recognized by the length of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products, compared to normal DNA, when separated on polyacrylamide gels. Mutations in codons 12 and 13 of the KRAS2 gene were detected by PCR amplification and sequencing ( Samowitz et al., 2000 ). Mutations of exons and intron–exon boundaries of exons 5–8 of TP53 were detected by PCR amplification and single-strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) analysis followed by sequencing of DNA corresponding to abnormal bands from SSCP ( Samowitz et al., 2002 ). Methylation-specific PCR of sodium bisulfite-modified DNA was used to assay for methylation at CpG sites in promoter regions of the MLH1 and p16 (CDKN2A) genes, and at three non-gene MINT (methylated in tumor) sites, MINT1, MINT2, and MINT31, that are considered to be markers of CpG island methylation phenotype (CIMP) ( Samowitz et al., 2005 ). Methylation-specific PCR procedures included primers for both methylated and unmethylated products. Mutations of the adenomatous polyposis coli ( APC ) gene were detected, for a subset of 90 tumors, by PCR amplification and sequencing of the entire coding region of the gene ( Samowitz et al., 2007 ).  Data Analysis Each tumor was categorized as positive or negative for each somatic alteration. For MSI, the majority of tumors were classified as MSI-positive or MSI-negative based on Bat-26 status; tumors which did not have a Bat-26 result were classified using TGF?RII ; tumors which had neither Bat-26 nor TGF?RII results were classified using the panel of 10 tetranucleotide repeats ( Slattery et al., 2000a ). A tumor was coded as having a TP53 mutation if any non-synonymous mutation in exons and intron–exon boundaries of exons 5–8 of TP53 was detected. KRAS2 was scored as mutated if any mutation was present in codons 12 or 13. APC mutation was scored as positive if a nonsense or out-of-frame insertion or deletion mutation was detected. Methylation at CpG sites in the promoter of the MLH1 gene or the p16 gene were categorized as present or absent and represented by a dichotomous variable for each gene. A single variable was used to indicate methylation at one or more of the MINT CpG sites because these non-gene sites had been selected as collective markers of a phenotype. The oncogenetic tree model requires that every variable be defined for each observation. Data from one or more DNA methylation assays were missing for n = 490 tumors. Insufficient quantity of DNA extracted from small tumors was often the limitation for methylation assays, and as a result small tumors are under-represented in the analysis. In addition, 37 cases were missing data for TP53 mutation, 65 missing KRAS2 mutation, 34 missing MSI, and 74 missing BRAF mutation. The remaining 971 cases were evaluated in the oncogenetic tree model. Pairwise correspondence between the seven alterations with complete data was evaluated by calculating the tetrachoric correlation coefficient, a measure appropriate for representing correlation between dichotomous variables ( Kraemer, 2006 ). Correlations with APC could not be calculated because the sample with APC data was non-representative. A primary oncogenetic tree model, n = 971, was developed based on data seven dichotomous variables: TP53 mutation, MINT methylation, KRAS2 mutation, p16 methylation, MLH1 methylation, MSI, and BRAF mutation. A second tree was developed for these seven alterations and, in addition, APC mutation. The second model was based on the n = 90 tumors with APC data and used weighting of observations to account for non-representativeness.  Oncogenetic Tree Model An oncogenetic tree is a rooted directed tree with edges pointing away from the root ( Desper et al., 1999 ; Desper et al., 2000 ). The root presents the state of tissue with none of the measured somatic alterations. Each of the other nodes is associated with a particular somatic alteration. According to the oncogenetic tree model, for an alteration to occur in a particular tumor, all of the alterations corresponding to nodes that lie on the directed path from the root must be present in the tumor. Each edge is labeled by the “transition probability”, i.e. the conditional probability that a tumor will acquire the alteration at the next node away from the root, given that the alteration at the node proximal to the root is already present. When two edges emanate from the same node, neither of the alterations on the next node is required for the other to occur. Each tumor corresponds to a “subtree” of the oncogenetic tree containing all the alterations in the tumor. The method used to fit the oncogenetic tree is described in greater detail elsewhere ( Szabo and Boucher, 2002 ; Szabo and Boucher, 2008 ). The oncogenetic trees were constructed using a simple algorithm. The parent of each node was found by maximizing the weight function w ( v i , v j ) = log p i j p i ( p i + p j ) . If the true oncogenetic tree is not skewed, meaning that no excessively high positive correlations are observed between alterations on different branches, the algorithm is guaranteed to reconstruct the correct tree. The Desper model proceeds to a second stage, in which transition probabilities and false positive and false negative error probabilities are estimated by minimizing the error function Max i | O i – E i |, where O i represents the observed frequency of the i th alteration and E i represents the expected frequency of the i th alteration under the model. This stage of the model assumes that pairs of alterations may either be positively correlated or independent. Another approach is to directly estimate, from observed data, the probability for each alteration conditional on the proximal alteration. A nonparametric bootstrap resampling method was used to estimate the amount of sampling variability in the fitted tree. The bootstrap method samples from the rows of the data with replacement N times, where N is the size of the original sample. An oncogenetic tree is fit to the resampled data. We repeated the procedure M = 1000 times.  RESULTS Among the seven somatic alterations assayed for 971 tumors, the TP53 mutation was the most frequent and was detected in 47% of colon cancers. BRAF mutation was the least common, found in 9% ( Table 1 ). Pairwise tetrachoric correlations revealed both positive and negative relations among the seven somatic alterations ( Table 1 ). Methylation of MLH1 was highly correlated with MSI, ? = 0.93. BRAF mutation exhibited strong positive correlations, ? = 0.67 to 0.74, with each of four other somatic alterations: methylation of MINT markers, methylation of the p16 gene, methylation of the MLH1 gene, and MSI. The latter four alterations were mutually positively correlated. KRAS2 mutation was strongly negatively correlated with BRAF mutation, ? = ?0.72, and KRAS2 was negatively correlated with every other alteration except MINT methylation. TP53 mutation was negatively correlated with every other alteration examined, although the magnitude of the negative correlations with p16 methylation, MINT methylation, and KRAS2 were small. The negative correlations between some pairs of alterations violate an assumption used in calculating edge weights in the second stage of the Desper ( Desper et al., 1999 ) model. Therefore transition probabilities shown on the oncogenetic tree were based on observed data rather than the second-stage model. The oncogenetic tree resulting from these data showed three main branches departing from the root ( Figure 1 ). Figure 1 primarily presents information from the n = 971 model, shown in solid lines. The placement of APC in the model (dashed lines) is based on the n = 90 secondary model. KRAS2 mutation was located on one branch emanating from the root. The KRAS2 branch did not continue to any other alteration. A second branch led to APC mutation and continued to TP53 mutation. In the n = 971 model, without APC data, this branch led from the root directly to TP53 mutation. The APC-TP53 branch did not continue beyond the TP53 node. The third main branch emanating from the root led to methylation of MINT markers as a first node, then branched again to p16 methylation and MSI. The MSI sub-branch continued with high probability to MLH1 methylation and then to BRAF mutation. Because this main branch includes MINT and other DNA methylation variables, we will refer to it as the CIMP branch. In the 1000 replicate bootstrap resampling procedure for the primary, n = 971 tree, the original tree was replicated 462 times. Among trees represented at least 30 times from the 1000 resampled oncogenetic trees, all showed the same positions for KRAS2, TP53 , MINT, and p16 as seen in Figure 1 (solid lines). That is to say, KRAS2, TP53 , and MINT were always on three independent branches emanating from the root, and p16 was always a direct descendent of MINT. On all bootstrap trees, MSI, MLH1 , and BRAF were direct or indirect descendents of MINT. In the second most frequent tree in the bootstrap resampling, n = 206, BRAF descended from p16 rather than from MSI. Other configurations of BRAF, p16 , and MSI were observed in less frequent trees. We examined the combinations of alterations present in individual tumors to consider what subtrees of the main tree were represented. The subtrees were based on 7 alterations (omitting APC ). No tumor had all seven of the alterations. The nine most frequent subtrees account for the alteration patterns observed in 75% of tumors ( Figure 2 ). Subtrees containing alterations from only one of each of the three main branches were observed, as were subtrees with all possible combinations of two main branches, and subtrees with alterations from all three main branches. A subtree containing TP53 mutation, with no alterations from the other two branches, was the most common subtree, accounting for 19.6% of tumors. The next most common subtrees, in order, represent the 13.2% of tumors that had none of the 7 alterations examined, 7.6% with KRAS2 mutation only, 7.4% with KRAS2 and MINT methylation, 6.5% with TP53 and KRAS2 , and 5.9% with MINT methylation only. If an alteration that the model places farther from the root was present in a tumor but one or more alterations proximal to the root on the same branch was not detected, the pattern of alterations does not form a subtree consistent with the main tree. Combinations of alterations inconsistent with the main tree were observed in 108 of 971 tumors (11%). Many of these, n = 49, had one or more alterations in the CIMP branch but without the first alteration in that pathway, MINT methylation. Another group of tumors, n = 41, had a BRAF mutation but did not have MSI.  RESULTS Among the seven somatic alterations assayed for 971 tumors, the TP53 mutation was the most frequent and was detected in 47% of colon cancers. BRAF mutation was the least common, found in 9% ( Table 1 ). Pairwise tetrachoric correlations revealed both positive and negative relations among the seven somatic alterations ( Table 1 ). Methylation of MLH1 was highly correlated with MSI, ? = 0.93. BRAF mutation exhibited strong positive correlations, ? = 0.67 to 0.74, with each of four other somatic alterations: methylation of MINT markers, methylation of the p16 gene, methylation of the MLH1 gene, and MSI. The latter four alterations were mutually positively correlated. KRAS2 mutation was strongly negatively correlated with BRAF mutation, ? = ?0.72, and KRAS2 was negatively correlated with every other alteration except MINT methylation. TP53 mutation was negatively correlated with every other alteration examined, although the magnitude of the negative correlations with p16 methylation, MINT methylation, and KRAS2 were small. The negative correlations between some pairs of alterations violate an assumption used in calculating edge weights in the second stage of the Desper ( Desper et al., 1999 ) model. Therefore transition probabilities shown on the oncogenetic tree were based on observed data rather than the second-stage model. The oncogenetic tree resulting from these data showed three main branches departing from the root ( Figure 1 ). Figure 1 primarily presents information from the n = 971 model, shown in solid lines. The placement of APC in the model (dashed lines) is based on the n = 90 secondary model. KRAS2 mutation was located on one branch emanating from the root. The KRAS2 branch did not continue to any other alteration. A second branch led to APC mutation and continued to TP53 mutation. In the n = 971 model, without APC data, this branch led from the root directly to TP53 mutation. The APC-TP53 branch did not continue beyond the TP53 node. The third main branch emanating from the root led to methylation of MINT markers as a first node, then branched again to p16 methylation and MSI. The MSI sub-branch continued with high probability to MLH1 methylation and then to BRAF mutation. Because this main branch includes MINT and other DNA methylation variables, we will refer to it as the CIMP branch. In the 1000 replicate bootstrap resampling procedure for the primary, n = 971 tree, the original tree was replicated 462 times. Among trees represented at least 30 times from the 1000 resampled oncogenetic trees, all showed the same positions for KRAS2, TP53 , MINT, and p16 as seen in Figure 1 (solid lines). That is to say, KRAS2, TP53 , and MINT were always on three independent branches emanating from the root, and p16 was always a direct descendent of MINT. On all bootstrap trees, MSI, MLH1 , and BRAF were direct or indirect descendents of MINT. In the second most frequent tree in the bootstrap resampling, n = 206, BRAF descended from p16 rather than from MSI. Other configurations of BRAF, p16 , and MSI were observed in less frequent trees. We examined the combinations of alterations present in individual tumors to consider what subtrees of the main tree were represented. The subtrees were based on 7 alterations (omitting APC ). No tumor had all seven of the alterations. The nine most frequent subtrees account for the alteration patterns observed in 75% of tumors ( Figure 2 ). Subtrees containing alterations from only one of each of the three main branches were observed, as were subtrees with all possible combinations of two main branches, and subtrees with alterations from all three main branches. A subtree containing TP53 mutation, with no alterations from the other two branches, was the most common subtree, accounting for 19.6% of tumors. The next most common subtrees, in order, represent the 13.2% of tumors that had none of the 7 alterations examined, 7.6% with KRAS2 mutation only, 7.4% with KRAS2 and MINT methylation, 6.5% with TP53 and KRAS2 , and 5.9% with MINT methylation only. If an alteration that the model places farther from the root was present in a tumor but one or more alterations proximal to the root on the same branch was not detected, the pattern of alterations does not form a subtree consistent with the main tree. Combinations of alterations inconsistent with the main tree were observed in 108 of 971 tumors (11%). Many of these, n = 49, had one or more alterations in the CIMP branch but without the first alteration in that pathway, MINT methylation. Another group of tumors, n = 41, had a BRAF mutation but did not have MSI.  DISCUSSION We applied an oncogenetic tree model to data representing somatic alterations in colon cancer. The resulting model showed three main branches. The branch leading to KRAS2 and terminating at that node indicates that, according to this model, KRAS2 mutations do not depend on or predispose to any of the other somatic alterations for which data were available. The interpretation of the APC-TP53 branch, based on the oncogenetic tree assumptions, is that APC alteration occurs before, and as a precondition for, TP53 . The structure of the third branch is consistent with a mechanism in which CIMP, indicated here by MINT markers, is initiated before, and is a precondition for, MSI, which is usually accompanied by MLH1 methylation. BRAF mutation appears farther from the root on the same branch, characterizing it as a later and less frequent event in the CIMP pathway. p16 methylation may be present in tumors with the CIMP pathway but its presence does not predispose to or depend on MSI. The tree model of the sequence and interdependence of these alterations can be regarded as robust, because bootstrap resampling of the large data set reliably reproduced the three major pathways. The oncogenetic tree structure was drawn based on an algorithm applied to colon cancer somatic alteration data, and does not represent any a priori groupings of alterations. The resulting model is consistent with existing concepts of pathways of colon tumorigenesis, e.g. that APC mutation is an early event and predisposes to other alterations ( Fearon and Vogelstein, 1990 ), and that epigenetic changes predispose to certain genetic changes ( Baylin and Ohm, 2006 ). A departure from early colon cancer models is that APC is not represented as predisposing to KRAS2 mutation. APC mutation and KRAS2 mutation were positively related in this data set when considered in a pairwise comparison, as previously reported ( Samowitz et al., 2007 ), but both APC and KRAS2 are negatively correlated with BRAF mutation; apparently when BRAF is taken into account in a separate pathway, occurrence of KRAS2 mutation does not appear to be conditional on APC mutation. The independence of the APC branch from both the KRAS2 and the CIMP/MSI/ BRAF branches is in keeping with the more recent concept that some tumors containing MSI and BRAF mutations, or KRAS2 mutations, develop from hyperplastic polyps and are distinct from those that develop from APC -mutated adenomatous polyps ( O'Brien et al., 2006 ; Jass, 2007 ). Obtaining complete data on APC mutational status is problematic because of the large size of the gene, and therefore a data gap exists in this and other data sets; additional data on APC mutation in relation to KRAS2 and BRAF mutations in sporadic tumors would be of interest to better understand these relationships. In the CIMP branch, MSI appears nearer to the root than MLH1 methylation. This is inconsistent with the accepted sequence of events in which suppression of MLH1 expression disrupts mismatch repair and leads to MSI. MSI is thought to be dependent on MLH1 methylation in the majority of MSI-positive tumors, but MSI can also occur in the absence of MLH1 methylation. Of the 117 MSI positive tumors in this data set, 27 (23%) were not methylated at MLH1 . (Another study reported that 34% of MSI positive tumors were unmethylated at MLH1 ( de Vogel et al., 2008 ).) MSI tumors without MLH1 methylation represent alternative pathways to MSI, including HNPCC cases and an uncommon pathway in which MSI occurs independently of MLH1 methylation and CIMP ( Samowitz et al., 2005 ). Tumors identified as HNPCC-related ( Samowitz et al., 2001a ) were omitted from this data set, but HNPCC patients whose inherited defect was not detected by sequencing of MLH1 and MSH2 exons would be unrecognized. The empirically derived oncogenetic tree model interprets the 27 MSI positive, MLH1 methylation negative tumors as indicating that MSI can occur independently of MLH1 methylation and places MSI before MLH1 methylation in the pathway. The complexity of multiple pathways to MSI can not be taken into account by the model. The novel aspect of the oncogenetic tree model applied to colon cancer is that the model's goal is to define pathways rather than categories of tumors. This distinguishes it from classification tree analysis of tumor data. A recent classification tree analysis applied to colon tumor alterations resulted in a useful model, and overall similarities to our results can be noted, e.g. clustering of CIMP characteristics, with or without MSI and BRAF mutations, and relative independence of TP53 and KRAS2 mutations from CIMP ( Shen et al., 2007 ). The oncogenetic tree model assumes that pathways shown as diverging are independent and may or may not co-occur in the same tumor. Subtrees of the oncogenetic model represented by individual tumors were diverse, with every possible combination of one, two, or all three of the main branches represented. Thus the observed heterogeneity of the individual tumors is suited to the oncogenetic tree model assumption that pathways may occur together or separately in a tumor. The presence of distinct pathways that are present in different combinations fits well with the conceptual model that in order to become a tumor a cell must develop a set of "acquired capabilities" ( Hanahan and Weinberg, 2000 ). Hanahan and Weinberg proposed that there would be several possible gene defects that could result in a cell acquiring the phenotype for each capability. It is interesting to note that among the subtrees in our data set that exhibited alterations in only one of the three main branches, that branch was most commonly the pathway including a mutation of TP53 , an alteration which is thought to contribute to several of the acquired capabilities. A subtree with the CIMP branch alone was less frequent than subtrees with a combination of CIMP pathway and TP53 or KRAS2 alteration. An interpretation of this subtree pattern is that epigenetic alterations contribute to the carcinogenetic process but require additional genetic alterations to confer complementary capabilities. Desper's model assumed that alterations in oncogenesis would only be positively related or independent. In the data from these colon tumors, negative correlations were observed. This departure from the model assumptions has no effect on development of the tree structure, which is non-parametric, but has implications for the estimation of transition probabilities. Because the model assumption was not met, we presented transition probabilities based on observed data rather than on the second stage of the oncogenetic tree model. Negative correlations are unexpected if taken at face value, i.e. as indicating that presence of one alteration prevented another. However, tumor tissue does not represent all alterations that occurred in colon cells, but only those combinations of alterations that resulted in tumors. Negative correlations can be explained by a selection process. For example, KRAS2 and BRAF mutations do probably occur independently in many cells, most of which never become tumors. These mutational events would be rare in the underlying cell populations, and the probability of a cell having both would be small. The normal functions of the KRAS2 and BRAF gene products fall in the same biological pathway, and therefore it seems plausible that one or the other of these mutations, but not both, are needed to confer a certain acquired capability, i.e. to compromise the normal signaling mechanism. Selection of cells with one of these mutations, in the presence of additional alterations, including ones not assayed in our data set, to develop into tumors would result in the observed high frequency, and apparent negative correlation, of the two mutations among tumors. Our analysis is based on a relatively small number of somatic alterations characterized in a large set of tumors. This is in contrast to current research using array methods, which result in data sets with large numbers of genes represented (e.g. data reported by Wood et al.( Wood et al., 2007 )), but typically for small numbers of tumors. For our population-based study, paraffin-embedded, preserved tissue was the only available source of tumor DNA. The limited quantity and fragmented nature of DNA extracted from paraffin placed limitations on the number and types of alterations that could be investigated. APC mutational status has not been characterized in the entire data set due to limitations of resources and of quantity of DNA for each tumor. We previously reported that 71.5% of CIMP-low, microsatellite stable tumors contained an APC mutation ( Samowitz et al., 2007 ). Therefore it is probable that most tumors in subtrees 1 and 2 in Figure 2 , showing TP53 mutation only or showing none of the seven alterations that were assessed for the complete data set, do have APC mutations. Another potential limitation of the data is that alterations may have been missed. As has been discussed in previous reports on this study population ( Samowitz et al., 2000 , 2002 , 2005 , 2007 ), the estimated prevalence of these alterations has differed among studies in the literature. Differences may be related to selection of the study population as well as to differences in methods for detecting alterations. TP53 mutation in our study population was somewhat more frequent than in another large study ( Soong et al., 2000 ) but very similar in frequency to other reports ( Borresen-Dale et al., 1998 ; Kahlenberg et al., 2000 ). Methylation markers used to define CIMP have differed across studies; the fraction that was determined to be CIMP high in our population is similar to that in other large studies ( Hawkins et al., 2002 ; van Rijnsoever et al., 2002 ). The 33% prevalence of mutations in KRAS2 this study population is lower than in some studies, particularly compared to studies that sequenced additional regions of the gene beyond codons 12 and 13 ( Breivik et al., 1994 ; Wadler et al., 1997 ; Ahnen et al., 1998 ; Andreyev et al., 1998 ; Hardingham et al., 1998 ). The prevalence of BRAF mutations is somewhat lower than what was observed in sporadic tumors in one study ( Kambara et al., 2004 ) but higher than reported by another ( Deng et al., 2004 ). The proportion of colon tumors carrying APC mutations in the present study is essentially identical to the 60% originally reported by Powell et al. ( Powell et al., 1992 ). The methods used to detect mutations or methylation in DNA extracted from paraffin-embedded material are unlikely to indicate an alteration if none in fact is present, but it is possible that an assay could find no alteration when one actually was present. A false negative could be present if the mutation was a large deletion, if a normal allele was amplified but PCR failed for the mutated allele, or if a mutation was outside the region of the gene assayed. The reliability of the model on resampling indicates that the overall model structure is correct, even in the presence of false negative data points. The 11% of individual tumors with alteration patterns inconsistent with the main tree may be evidence that the model assumption that an alteration farther from the root is always dependent on the proximal alteration in the same branch above is overly strict. However, most tumors did form subtrees consistent with the main tree, so that even with this strict assumption, the model is useful. Some of the 49 tumors with no methylation in MINT markers but positive for other alterations in the CIMP branch may represent false negative results from the methylation assay, but they also may be cases of departure from the preferred sequence, a situation acknowledged by Fearon and Vogelstein ( Fearon and Vogelstein, 1990 ). The 41 tumors with BRAF mutation but without evidence of MSI are notable; given that there were only 109 tumors with BRAF mutation in overall dataset, it seems likely that these 41 do not represent laboratory errors but instead an indicate alternative pathway not accounted for by the strict model assumption that each alteration appears only once in the tree. The assumption that each alteration will appear once also does not allow the alternative pathways of MLH1 followed by MSI vs. MSI independent of MLH1 to appear in the schematic. However, given the type of data used in the present example, presence and absence of alterations measured at one undetermined time, this simplifying assumption is necessary, and does result in a model that is consistent with the patterns of alterations in the majority of tumors. Future useful extensions of oncogenetic tree modeling approach would be to incorporate stage at diagnosis data when reconstructing the sequence of events, and to allow missing data for individual alterations. Oncogenetic tree models could be applied to other somatic alteration data sets, and for comparisons of trees and subtrees for different tumor sites or subsites. The oncogenetic tree approach provides an explanatory model that describes a biologically plausible sequence of events for the major pathways of colon carcinogenesis, fits the heterogeneity of colon cancer well, and presents a useful visual representation of the pathways.  DISCUSSION We applied an oncogenetic tree model to data representing somatic alterations in colon cancer. The resulting model showed three main branches. The branch leading to KRAS2 and terminating at that node indicates that, according to this model, KRAS2 mutations do not depend on or predispose to any of the other somatic alterations for which data were available. The interpretation of the APC-TP53 branch, based on the oncogenetic tree assumptions, is that APC alteration occurs before, and as a precondition for, TP53 . The structure of the third branch is consistent with a mechanism in which CIMP, indicated here by MINT markers, is initiated before, and is a precondition for, MSI, which is usually accompanied by MLH1 methylation. BRAF mutation appears farther from the root on the same branch, characterizing it as a later and less frequent event in the CIMP pathway. p16 methylation may be present in tumors with the CIMP pathway but its presence does not predispose to or depend on MSI. The tree model of the sequence and interdependence of these alterations can be regarded as robust, because bootstrap resampling of the large data set reliably reproduced the three major pathways. The oncogenetic tree structure was drawn based on an algorithm applied to colon cancer somatic alteration data, and does not represent any a priori groupings of alterations. The resulting model is consistent with existing concepts of pathways of colon tumorigenesis, e.g. that APC mutation is an early event and predisposes to other alterations ( Fearon and Vogelstein, 1990 ), and that epigenetic changes predispose to certain genetic changes ( Baylin and Ohm, 2006 ). A departure from early colon cancer models is that APC is not represented as predisposing to KRAS2 mutation. APC mutation and KRAS2 mutation were positively related in this data set when considered in a pairwise comparison, as previously reported ( Samowitz et al., 2007 ), but both APC and KRAS2 are negatively correlated with BRAF mutation; apparently when BRAF is taken into account in a separate pathway, occurrence of KRAS2 mutation does not appear to be conditional on APC mutation. The independence of the APC branch from both the KRAS2 and the CIMP/MSI/ BRAF branches is in keeping with the more recent concept that some tumors containing MSI and BRAF mutations, or KRAS2 mutations, develop from hyperplastic polyps and are distinct from those that develop from APC -mutated adenomatous polyps ( O'Brien et al., 2006 ; Jass, 2007 ). Obtaining complete data on APC mutational status is problematic because of the large size of the gene, and therefore a data gap exists in this and other data sets; additional data on APC mutation in relation to KRAS2 and BRAF mutations in sporadic tumors would be of interest to better understand these relationships. In the CIMP branch, MSI appears nearer to the root than MLH1 methylation. This is inconsistent with the accepted sequence of events in which suppression of MLH1 expression disrupts mismatch repair and leads to MSI. MSI is thought to be dependent on MLH1 methylation in the majority of MSI-positive tumors, but MSI can also occur in the absence of MLH1 methylation. Of the 117 MSI positive tumors in this data set, 27 (23%) were not methylated at MLH1 . (Another study reported that 34% of MSI positive tumors were unmethylated at MLH1 ( de Vogel et al., 2008 ).) MSI tumors without MLH1 methylation represent alternative pathways to MSI, including HNPCC cases and an uncommon pathway in which MSI occurs independently of MLH1 methylation and CIMP ( Samowitz et al., 2005 ). Tumors identified as HNPCC-related ( Samowitz et al., 2001a ) were omitted from this data set, but HNPCC patients whose inherited defect was not detected by sequencing of MLH1 and MSH2 exons would be unrecognized. The empirically derived oncogenetic tree model interprets the 27 MSI positive, MLH1 methylation negative tumors as indicating that MSI can occur independently of MLH1 methylation and places MSI before MLH1 methylation in the pathway. The complexity of multiple pathways to MSI can not be taken into account by the model. The novel aspect of the oncogenetic tree model applied to colon cancer is that the model's goal is to define pathways rather than categories of tumors. This distinguishes it from classification tree analysis of tumor data. A recent classification tree analysis applied to colon tumor alterations resulted in a useful model, and overall similarities to our results can be noted, e.g. clustering of CIMP characteristics, with or without MSI and BRAF mutations, and relative independence of TP53 and KRAS2 mutations from CIMP ( Shen et al., 2007 ). The oncogenetic tree model assumes that pathways shown as diverging are independent and may or may not co-occur in the same tumor. Subtrees of the oncogenetic model represented by individual tumors were diverse, with every possible combination of one, two, or all three of the main branches represented. Thus the observed heterogeneity of the individual tumors is suited to the oncogenetic tree model assumption that pathways may occur together or separately in a tumor. The presence of distinct pathways that are present in different combinations fits well with the conceptual model that in order to become a tumor a cell must develop a set of "acquired capabilities" ( Hanahan and Weinberg, 2000 ). Hanahan and Weinberg proposed that there would be several possible gene defects that could result in a cell acquiring the phenotype for each capability. It is interesting to note that among the subtrees in our data set that exhibited alterations in only one of the three main branches, that branch was most commonly the pathway including a mutation of TP53 , an alteration which is thought to contribute to several of the acquired capabilities. A subtree with the CIMP branch alone was less frequent than subtrees with a combination of CIMP pathway and TP53 or KRAS2 alteration. An interpretation of this subtree pattern is that epigenetic alterations contribute to the carcinogenetic process but require additional genetic alterations to confer complementary capabilities. Desper's model assumed that alterations in oncogenesis would only be positively related or independent. In the data from these colon tumors, negative correlations were observed. This departure from the model assumptions has no effect on development of the tree structure, which is non-parametric, but has implications for the estimation of transition probabilities. Because the model assumption was not met, we presented transition probabilities based on observed data rather than on the second stage of the oncogenetic tree model. Negative correlations are unexpected if taken at face value, i.e. as indicating that presence of one alteration prevented another. However, tumor tissue does not represent all alterations that occurred in colon cells, but only those combinations of alterations that resulted in tumors. Negative correlations can be explained by a selection process. For example, KRAS2 and BRAF mutations do probably occur independently in many cells, most of which never become tumors. These mutational events would be rare in the underlying cell populations, and the probability of a cell having both would be small. The normal functions of the KRAS2 and BRAF gene products fall in the same biological pathway, and therefore it seems plausible that one or the other of these mutations, but not both, are needed to confer a certain acquired capability, i.e. to compromise the normal signaling mechanism. Selection of cells with one of these mutations, in the presence of additional alterations, including ones not assayed in our data set, to develop into tumors would result in the observed high frequency, and apparent negative correlation, of the two mutations among tumors. Our analysis is based on a relatively small number of somatic alterations characterized in a large set of tumors. This is in contrast to current research using array methods, which result in data sets with large numbers of genes represented (e.g. data reported by Wood et al.( Wood et al., 2007 )), but typically for small numbers of tumors. For our population-based study, paraffin-embedded, preserved tissue was the only available source of tumor DNA. The limited quantity and fragmented nature of DNA extracted from paraffin placed limitations on the number and types of alterations that could be investigated. APC mutational status has not been characterized in the entire data set due to limitations of resources and of quantity of DNA for each tumor. We previously reported that 71.5% of CIMP-low, microsatellite stable tumors contained an APC mutation ( Samowitz et al., 2007 ). Therefore it is probable that most tumors in subtrees 1 and 2 in Figure 2 , showing TP53 mutation only or showing none of the seven alterations that were assessed for the complete data set, do have APC mutations. Another potential limitation of the data is that alterations may have been missed. As has been discussed in previous reports on this study population ( Samowitz et al., 2000 , 2002 , 2005 , 2007 ), the estimated prevalence of these alterations has differed among studies in the literature. Differences may be related to selection of the study population as well as to differences in methods for detecting alterations. TP53 mutation in our study population was somewhat more frequent than in another large study ( Soong et al., 2000 ) but very similar in frequency to other reports ( Borresen-Dale et al., 1998 ; Kahlenberg et al., 2000 ). Methylation markers used to define CIMP have differed across studies; the fraction that was determined to be CIMP high in our population is similar to that in other large studies ( Hawkins et al., 2002 ; van Rijnsoever et al., 2002 ). The 33% prevalence of mutations in KRAS2 this study population is lower than in some studies, particularly compared to studies that sequenced additional regions of the gene beyond codons 12 and 13 ( Breivik et al., 1994 ; Wadler et al., 1997 ; Ahnen et al., 1998 ; Andreyev et al., 1998 ; Hardingham et al., 1998 ). The prevalence of BRAF mutations is somewhat lower than what was observed in sporadic tumors in one study ( Kambara et al., 2004 ) but higher than reported by another ( Deng et al., 2004 ). The proportion of colon tumors carrying APC mutations in the present study is essentially identical to the 60% originally reported by Powell et al. ( Powell et al., 1992 ). The methods used to detect mutations or methylation in DNA extracted from paraffin-embedded material are unlikely to indicate an alteration if none in fact is present, but it is possible that an assay could find no alteration when one actually was present. A false negative could be present if the mutation was a large deletion, if a normal allele was amplified but PCR failed for the mutated allele, or if a mutation was outside the region of the gene assayed. The reliability of the model on resampling indicates that the overall model structure is correct, even in the presence of false negative data points. The 11% of individual tumors with alteration patterns inconsistent with the main tree may be evidence that the model assumption that an alteration farther from the root is always dependent on the proximal alteration in the same branch above is overly strict. However, most tumors did form subtrees consistent with the main tree, so that even with this strict assumption, the model is useful. Some of the 49 tumors with no methylation in MINT markers but positive for other alterations in the CIMP branch may represent false negative results from the methylation assay, but they also may be cases of departure from the preferred sequence, a situation acknowledged by Fearon and Vogelstein ( Fearon and Vogelstein, 1990 ). The 41 tumors with BRAF mutation but without evidence of MSI are notable; given that there were only 109 tumors with BRAF mutation in overall dataset, it seems likely that these 41 do not represent laboratory errors but instead an indicate alternative pathway not accounted for by the strict model assumption that each alteration appears only once in the tree. The assumption that each alteration will appear once also does not allow the alternative pathways of MLH1 followed by MSI vs. MSI independent of MLH1 to appear in the schematic. However, given the type of data used in the present example, presence and absence of alterations measured at one undetermined time, this simplifying assumption is necessary, and does result in a model that is consistent with the patterns of alterations in the majority of tumors. Future useful extensions of oncogenetic tree modeling approach would be to incorporate stage at diagnosis data when reconstructing the sequence of events, and to allow missing data for individual alterations. Oncogenetic tree models could be applied to other somatic alteration data sets, and for comparisons of trees and subtrees for different tumor sites or subsites. The oncogenetic tree approach provides an explanatory model that describes a biologically plausible sequence of events for the major pathways of colon carcinogenesis, fits the heterogeneity of colon cancer well, and presents a useful visual representation of the pathways. 