New Imaging Approaches for Understanding Lung Cancer Response to Treatment The survival rate for lung cancer patients has barely improved over the past 30 years. New evaluation benchmarks for cancer response are needed to test therapy agents in a cost-effective and timely manner. From recent work, it is evident that primary lung cancers are very complex structures containing not only cancerous cells but also fibrotic and inflammatory cells and necrotic tissue. A greater understanding of the three-dimensional structure of primary lung cancer is emerging, allowing for the first time an appreciation of how this biomass is represented in medical imaging data. It is only through a greater understanding of the lung cancer biomass that we can define rational and early-response measures, including specific cellular responses such as cancer cell death or growth inhibition. In doing so, we can define response metrics that will shorten new drug discovery times and reduce costs, allowing for the evaluation of many more agents with therapeutic potential.  CONCLUSION It is clear that the lung cancer biomass remains poorly understood in terms of structure as well as function. Emerging technologies through MDCT, optical imaging, and their synergistic combination are being developed, refined, standardized, and implemented in the clinical setting to advance understanding of the lung cancer biomass. This will significantly impact the diagnosis and the rapid assessment of response to therapy of any detected potential lung cancer. To fully integrate these new methods into this clinical information decision tree, correlation to the pathology within the biomass is fundamental—and for the first time is now also achievable. The combination of new methods and the associated new knowledge outlined in this article will have a significant impact on new drug discovery, important for altering lung cancer outcomes. Changes in the requirements for the assessment of drug effects are also needed at the regulatory level to fully capitalize on these developments. The personalization of health-care delivery based on imaging modalities in lung cancer is certainly technically within reach and will be a welcome addition to further discovery in lung cancer. 