Opiates, immune system, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, and nonhuman primate model Both human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and illicit drug addiction remain major health problems not only in the United States but all over globe. The effect of drug addiction on HIV/AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) has been somewhat underexplored. However, in United States more than one fourth of HIV-positive individuals are injection drug users. Opiates are known to negatively affect the immune system, and therefore may have deleterious effects on progression of disease among HIV-infected individuals. This review discusses the effects of opiates on immune system as well as its effect on HIV replication and AIDS progression. In addition, the effects of opiates on disease progression in non-human primate model of AIDS is presented with at least one possible reason for rapid disease progression in multi-virus the challenge model.  Conclusions This model demonstrates the multiple effects that morphine may have on both the host and the virus and raises possible relationships between the rapid pathogenesis in the morphine cohort and the role of viral evolution. Virus evolution is driven by replication, immune selection, viral recombination, and cellular and tissue compartmentalization effects. The model clearly shows that morphine dependence impairs the immune response, increases viral replication and raises set-point in both plasma and CSF, and promotes rapid progression and death in 50% of infected animals. Neuropathology appears more severe, with higher CSF viral loads and neuroAIDS in two thirds of rapid progressors ( Kumar et al , 2004 , 2006 ). Interestingly, analysis of mutation type in tat CSF sequences showed the possible influence of morphine on point mutation preference ( Noel et al , 2006a ), even though our studies with nef in plasma suggested that recombination rates are independent of morphine ( Noel et al , 2006b ). Thus it appears that morphine affects the viral-host dynamics at multiple levels that may drive evolution (immune pressure, immune cell coreceptor expression, viral replication rate, point mutation), but is still selective in that it does not appear to influence viral recombination, which is also critical for evolution and disease pathogenesis. Drug abuse is a critical element of the HIV/AIDS epidemic, yet from epidemiological studies in humans, it remains difficult to determine the role of drugs of abuse in altering immune parameters and viral-host interactions. These data are critically relevant to clinical management of HIV, as drug abuse in infected populations will impact on treatment and vaccine approaches. There are very interesting scientific questions that remain as well. For example, morphine may directly alter the mutation rate or preference directly at the cellular level. Morphine may affect viral compartmentalization and some of these influences may differ for the various viral genes. These are important questions that will help us to better understand the relationships between the virus and host cells in the various risk groups in the human population. 