Metabolomics-Based Methods for Early Disease Diagnostics: A Review The emerging field of “metabolomics,” in which a large number of small molecule metabolites from body fluids or tissues are detected quantitatively in a single step, promises immense potential for early diagnosis, therapy monitoring and for understanding the pathogenesis of many diseases. Metabolomics methods are mostly focused on the information rich analytical techniques of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and mass spectrometry (MS). Analysis of the data from these high-resolution methods using advanced chemometric approaches provides a powerful platform for translational and clinical research, and diagnostic applications. In this review, the current trends and recent advances in NMR- and MS-based metabolomics are described with a focus on the development of advanced NMR and MS methods, improved multivariate statistical data analysis and recent applications in the area of cancer, diabetes, inborn errors of metabolism, and cardiovascular diseases.  Expert Commentary In metabolomics multi-component measurements are primarily focused on the information rich analytical techniques of MS and NMR spectroscopy. Analysis of the complex data from these methods using advanced multivariate statistics provides a powerful platform for diagnostic applications, as well as for translational and clinical research. During the past several years numerous developments have taken place in the field including a variety of advances in the analytical methods for high throughput measurements, improved statistical approaches for classifying samples based on subtle changes, and applications in the area of disease diagnosis and toxicity assessment. Today, MS methods provide high sensitivity, however reproducibility is still a concern, as is the unique identification of unknown and interesting metabolites. NMR methods allow the identification and quantification of metabolites down to µM limits facilitated by cryogenic probes, micro-coil NMR and isotope labeling, however, spectral complexity is still a problem due to the high degree of signal overlap. Numerous multivariate statistical methods are readily available due to their incorporation into user-friendly software packages. These advancements combined with the recently developed databases of human metabolites and metabolic information, and the vast body of metabolic pathway information currently available greatly benefit the metabolomics field. A majority of metabolomics studies have focused on using a single analytical method, NMR spectroscopy or MS. Given the complexity of the biological systems, it will be more prudent to exploit both methods in parallel, at least in the developmental stages of the field, to derive more meaningful information on metabolic variations in health and disease. The high reproducibility of NMR and high sensitivity of MS provide both supplementary and complementary data important for biomarker identification and validation. Combined multivariate analysis of data from NMR and MS will provide information which is more useful and important than using a single approach.  Five year view There has been an explosive growth in both NMR- and MS-based metabolomics studies and applications, with a number of these being applied to assess important diseases. Metabolomics-based methods will likely have significant clinical diagnostic utility for numerous inborn errors of metabolism owing to the fact that, generally, such diseases exhibit massive metabolic disturbances. Risk assessment of cardiovascular diseases using NMR-based metabolomics is potentially highly promising because the abundant lipoproteins can be easily detected by NMR thus avoiding the often tedious separation procedures. In fact, NMR spectroscopy is already being applied for individual risk assessments. The addition of MS-based metabolomics approaches might well improve the diagnostic accuracy and utility. Currently, metabolomics applications to diseases such as cancer and diabetes have provided better insights in to the altered metabolic pathways and the disease pathogenesis. However, for applications in early diagnosis the technology is still in its evolutionary stages. Factors such as diet, age, gender, lifestyle, drugs and environment contribute immensely to human bio-complexity, and identification of subtle metabolic variations associated with early cancer or diabetes pathogenesis is a great challenge. Further studies focused on the deconvolution of such confounding effects are required. In general, NMR detects relatively highly concentrated metabolites, and it is generally thought to lack sufficient sensitivity to detect low concentration, more specific early biomarkers. Although the latest technological advancements have demonstrated a dramatic reduction in the detection limit of NMR using pure substances, such methods are still not considered high throughput for routine biological samples analysis. Combining the latest advancements in NMR methods and targeted metabolic profiling using sensitivity enhanced approaches such as isotope labeling or others may achieve a breakthrough in biomarker detection. While MS is intrinsically highly sensitive capable of detecting early biomarkers, problems with reproducibility arising from the chromatography of biofluids and factors such as matrix effects and/or ion suppression still present considerable challenges. However, in light of recent methodological improvements in both NMR and MS, as well as multivariate statistical methods, it can be envisaged that metabolomics will emerge as a sensitive and convenient approach for early disease diagnoses. The five year outlook for metabolomics is very strong given the rapid developments in the field, as well as the important lessons learned from early studies in the genomics and proteomics fields. 