Patients with Epstein Barr virus positive lymphomas have decreased CD4 + T cell responses to the viral nuclear antigen 1 Epstein Barr virus (EBV) causes lymphomas in immune competent and, at increased frequencies, in immune compromised patients. In the presence of an intact immune system, EBV associated lymphomas express in most cases only three or fewer EBV antigens at the protein level, always including the nuclear antigen 1 of EBV (EBNA1). EBNA1 is a prominent target for EBV specific CD4+ T cell and humoral immune responses in healthy EBV carriers. Here we demonstrate that patients with EBV associated lymphomas, primarily Hodgkin's lymphoma, lack detectable EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell responses and have slightly altered EBNA1 specific antibody titers at diagnosis. In contrast, the majority of EBV negative lymphoma patients had detectable IFN? expression and proliferation by CD4+ T cells in response to EBNA1, and carry EBNA1 specific immunoglobulins at levels similar to healthy virus carriers. Other EBV antigens, which were not present in the tumors, were recognized in less EBV positive, than negative lymphoma patients, but detectable responses reached similar CD8+ T cell frequencies in both cohorts. Patients with EBV positive and negative lymphomas did not differ in T cell responses in influenza specific CD4+ T cell proliferation and in antibody titers against tetanus toxoid. These data suggest a selective loss of EBNA1 specific immune control in EBV associated lymphoma patients, which should be targeted for immunotherapy of these malignancies.  Introduction Epstein Barr virus is a human ?-herpesvirus that persistently infects more than 90% of the adult human population 1 . It causes tumors of epithelial and B cells origin, and readily transforms human B cells in vitro 2 . However, the majority of EBV carriers likely controls their infection with this tumor virus by T cell mediated immune responses. This is indicated by the increased incidence of EBV associated malignancies in immune suppressed patients. The efficacy of EBV specific T cell immunity is also documented by adoptive T cell therapy against virus induced lymphomas utilizing in vitro expanded EBV specific T cell lines 3 . In contrast to EBV associated lymphomas in immune suppressed individuals, Hodgkin's lymphoma (HL) is the most frequent EBV associated lymphoma of immune competent patients in the western world, and about 40% of these cases are associated with EBV 4 . Like all EBV associated malignancies that develop in the presence of a functional immune system, HL expresses only a subset of EBV antigens, of which only the nuclear antigen 1 of EBV (EBNA1) is frequently recognized by T cells in healthy EBV carriers 5 . We hypothesized that an absence of EBNA1 specific immunity could predispose individuals to develop EBV-positive lymphomas. Here, we show that patients with EBV-positive, but not EBV-negative, lymphomas consistently lack detectable CD4+ T cell immune responses to EBNA1.  Materials and Methods Patient samples Lymphoma patients were identified by their primary oncologists at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and referred to our study at the time of diagnosis. After patients provided informed consent to participate (conducted with Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and The Rockefeller University IRB approved policies and consent forms), patients were asked to provide blood samples to evaluate their immune responses to EBV antigens and other control antigens. Patient inclusion criteria were defined as any stable male or female pediatric or adult patient with a new diagnosis of lymphoma. Only patients with a prior history of immune suppressive therapies, underlying immune deficiencies (heritable or infectious etiologies), and patients too ill to participate were excluded. Eighteen patient samples were obtained through the Children's Oncology Group (COG) Hodgkin Study Section. The COG samples were obtained at diagnosis and included plasma and frozen PBMC (when available). Culture medium Culture medium RPMI 1640 (GIBCO, Grand Island, NY) was supplemented with 5% pooled human serum (PHS, Mediatech, Herndon, VA), and 20 ?g/ml of gentamicin (Bio Whittaker, Walkersville, MD). Peptide preparation Peptides were synthesized in collaboration with the Proteomics Resource Center, Rockefeller University as previously described 6 . Collection and preparation of peripheral blood The Rockefeller University Internal Review Board approved this study. After patients were identified by their primary oncologists, the research study was described and discussed. After patients provided informed consent, whole blood was collected via venipuncture under sterile conditions while following universal precautions. Blood volumes were collected as the lesser of two, 50ml or 2ml/kg. Blood was collected into heparinized vacutainers (BD Vacutainer, Franklin Lakes, NJ) or heparinized syringes. An aliquot was immediately used for the whole blood intracellular cytokine assay (this assay was not possible to conduct on the patient samples from COG). The remaining volume, when available (often not available with pediatric patients), was used for PBMC isolation. PBMCs were separated by density gradient centrifugation on Ficoll-Hypaque (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Piscatway, NJ). PBMCs were depleted of platelets by several washing steps in PBS, and then resuspended in RPMI. PBMCs from healthy volunteers were prepared in the same manner. EBER in situ-hybridization In situ hybridization for Epstein Barr virus (EBV) was performed on formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue sections emplyoing the Bond Max Autostainer (Vision Biosystems, Mount Waverley, Australia). Following baking and deparaffinization, the slides were incubated with Bond Enzyme (Vision Biosystems) for 15 minutes after which the fluorescein-labeled EBER probe (Vision Biosystems) was applied. Following incubation with the EBER probe, the tissue sections were incubated with a mouse anti-fluorescein antibody for 25 minutes, post-primary for 15 minutes and polymer for 25 minutes (Bond Polymer Refine Detection System; Vision Biosystems) followed by colorimetric development with diaminobenzidine (DAB; Vision Biosystems). EBNA1, VCA and Tetanus toxoid ELISA assays EBNA1 and VCA specific antibodies were quantified from human plasma by EBNA1 and VCA ELISA assays according to the manufacturer's instructions (Sigma/Diamedix; Miami, FL). Plasma samples from volunteers were diluted at 1:20 and 1:10 and run in triplicates. EBNA1 and IgG subclass titers were assessed by evaluating plasma samples from patients and volunteers at serial dilutions from 1:25 to 1:3200. After plotting of the absorption values, the point of inflection was calculated to determine the immunoglobulin titer. Whole blood intracellular cytokine assay Aliquots of 500 ?l of fresh whole blood were placed into 15ml snap-top round-bottom polypropylene tubes (Falcon, BD Labware, Bedford, MA) for a 6 hour incubation at 37°C in 5% CO2. Each reaction was carried out in the presence of 1 ?g/ml of costimulatory monoclonal antibodies to CD28 and CD49d (BD Biosciences, Immunocytometry Systems, San Jose, CA). Each tube also included 10 ?g/ml of Brefeldin A (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). CD4+ T cell positive controls included 750 ng (1.5 ?g/ml) of Staphylococcal Enterotoxin B (SEB) or influenza A strain Aichi/68 (Charles River Laboratories, North Franklin, CT) at a concentration of 106 HAU/ml. In addition, nonameric CD8+ T cell epitopes of HCMV and EBV (noted as CMV and EBV in figures) of the CEF peptide mixture 7 were used as peptide controls at a concentration of 1?M. The EBNA1 peptide mixture consisted of 51 overlapping peptides and was added to a final concentration 3.5 ?M per peptide per reaction. The used EBNA1 peptide library of 15mers overlapping by 10 amino acids, encoding for the immunogenic C-terminal domain (aa400?641) of the protein, was previously described in 6 . After the 6 hour incubation, 2 ?l of 0.5M EDTA was added to each aliquot, and the samples were gently mixed and left at room temperature for 5 minutes. Finally, each sample received 4.5 ml of FACS lysing buffer (BD Imunocytometry Systems), and each sample was vigorously vortexed for 5 seconds and left at room temperature for 10 minutes prior to storage at ?80°C overnight. Samples were thawed at room temperature, and transferred to FACS tubes. After centrifugation, cells were re-suspended in 500 ?l of permeabilization solution (0.1% BSA, 0.1% saponin, in PBS), and remained at room temperature for 10 minutes. Permeabilization solution was decanted after a second centrifugation, and the cells were stained with mouse anti-human, directly fluorochrome-labeled antibodies for 10 minutes at room temperature. Assays were divided into duplicates or triplicates, and stained with: IL-2-FITC, IFN?-PE, CD3-PerCp, CD4-APC or CD8-APC (all antibodies from BD Pharmingen, San Diego, CA). Cells were washed with permeabilization solution and re-suspended in 200 ?l of FACS buffer solution (0.1% Sodium Azide in PBS). The samples were analyzed on a FACScalibur flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). Over one million events or 3×105 lymphocytes could be analyzed from each sample. After gating on lymphocytes based on size, CD4+CD3+ T cells were analyzed for expression of IFN? or IL-2. Expression of greater than ten IFN?+ T cells above twice the frequency observed to background defined a positive response. Approximately 2×105 CD4+ T cells were evaluated for IFN? expression per reaction. Gates to identify IFN? or IL-2 positive cells were determined by comparison to mouse isotype controls of IgG1-PE and IgG2b-FITC for IFN?-PE and IL-2-FITC respectively. Proliferation assay by CFSE dilution When enough patient blood was available, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated from blood samples via density centrifugation. Fresh or frozen PBMCs were washed in PBS and incubated at 37°C in 0.3 ?M CFSE (carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester; Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) in PBS at a concentration of 107 cells per ml for 10 minutes. Cells were washed in PBS and resuspended in 5% PHS with 1 ?g/ml of costimulatory monoclonal antibodies to CD28 and CD49d at a concentration of 1.7×106 cells per ml. PBMCs were distributed at one ml or 1.7×106 cells per well into 48-well plates. Known CD8+ T cell epitopes of HCMV and EBV (noted as CMV and EBV in figures) of the CEF peptide mixture 7 were used as controls at a concentration of 1?M. Additional positive controls included Staphylococcus enterotoxin B (SEB) (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) at a final concentration of 125 ng/ml, and infection of PBMCs with influenza A strain Aichi/68 (Charles River Laboratories, North Franklin, CT). Influenza A infection was achieved by resuspending PBMCs in RPMI at 107 cells per ml with 50,000 HAU/ml of influenza A for one hour at 37°C. After infection, cells were washed in RPMI and resuspended in 5% PHS for the six day proliferation. EBNA1 peptides were brought to a final concentration of 3.5 ?M of each peptide per well. The used EBNA1 peptide library of 15mers overlapping by 10 amino acids, encoding for the immunogenic C-terminal domain (aa400?641) of the protein, was previously described in 6 . At the conclusion of six day incubations at 37°C and 5% CO2, cells were harvested and washed once in PBS and stained with directly fluorochrome-labeled antibodies against CD3-PE, CD8-PerCP, CD4-APC (all BD Pharmingen, San Diego, CA) for 10 minutes at room temperature. The cells were washed once with PBS and re-suspended in 200 ?l FACS buffer (0.01% Sodium Azide in PBS) prior to FACS analysis. The samples were analyzed on the FACScalibur flow cytometer gating on lymphocytes based on size. CD3+CD4+ T cells were gated for analysis of proliferation of CD4+ T cells. In addition, proliferating CD4+CD62L+ central memory T cells were evaluated in some experiments. Proliferating cells were analyzed with the FlowJo® (Tree Star, Ashland, OR) software. Cytokine concentrations were determined from proliferation assay supernatants by Luminex technology according to the manufacturer's recommendations (Biosource, Camarillo, CA). Luminex assay Cell supernatants from day 6 proliferation assay cultures were analyzed for 10 cytokines using the Protein Multiplex Immunoassay kit (Biosource International) as per the manufacturer's protocol. In brief, Multiplex beads (Biosource) were vortexed and sonicated for 30 s, and 25 ?l was added to each well and washed two times with wash buffer. The samples were diluted 1:2 with assay diluent and loaded onto a Multiscreen BV 96-well filter plate (Millipore) with 50 ?l of incubation buffer already added to each well. Serial dilutions of cytokine standards were prepared in parallel and added to the plate. Samples were then incubated on a plate shaker at 600 rpm in the dark at room temperature for 2 h. The plate was applied to a Multiscreen Vacuum Manifold (Millipore) and washed twice with 200 ?l of wash buffer. 100 ?l of biotinylated anti–human Multi-Cytokine Reporter (Biosource International) was added to each well. The plate was incubated on a plate shaker at 600 rpm in the dark at room temperature for 1 h. The plate was applied to a Multiscreen Vacuum Manifold (Millipore) and washed twice with 200 ?l of wash buffer. Streptavidin-phycoerythrin was diluted 1:10 in wash buffer, and 100 ?l was added directly to each well. The plate was incubated on a plate shaker at 600 rpm in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. The plate was then applied to the vacuum manifold, washed twice, and each well was resuspended in 100 ?l wash buffer and shaken for 1 min. The assay plate was then transferred to the Bio-Plex Luminex 100 XYP instrument (Millipore) for analysis. Cytokine concentrations were calculated using Bio-Plex Manager 3.0 software with a 5-parameter curve-fitting algorithm applied for standard curve calculations. Statistical analysis Statistical analyses were performed with the paired two-tailed Student t-test. The p value of significant differences is reported. Plotted data represent mean plus standard deviation (SD), unless otherwise stated.  Patient samples Lymphoma patients were identified by their primary oncologists at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and referred to our study at the time of diagnosis. After patients provided informed consent to participate (conducted with Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and The Rockefeller University IRB approved policies and consent forms), patients were asked to provide blood samples to evaluate their immune responses to EBV antigens and other control antigens. Patient inclusion criteria were defined as any stable male or female pediatric or adult patient with a new diagnosis of lymphoma. Only patients with a prior history of immune suppressive therapies, underlying immune deficiencies (heritable or infectious etiologies), and patients too ill to participate were excluded. Eighteen patient samples were obtained through the Children's Oncology Group (COG) Hodgkin Study Section. The COG samples were obtained at diagnosis and included plasma and frozen PBMC (when available).  Culture medium Culture medium RPMI 1640 (GIBCO, Grand Island, NY) was supplemented with 5% pooled human serum (PHS, Mediatech, Herndon, VA), and 20 ?g/ml of gentamicin (Bio Whittaker, Walkersville, MD).  Peptide preparation Peptides were synthesized in collaboration with the Proteomics Resource Center, Rockefeller University as previously described 6 .  Collection and preparation of peripheral blood The Rockefeller University Internal Review Board approved this study. After patients were identified by their primary oncologists, the research study was described and discussed. After patients provided informed consent, whole blood was collected via venipuncture under sterile conditions while following universal precautions. Blood volumes were collected as the lesser of two, 50ml or 2ml/kg. Blood was collected into heparinized vacutainers (BD Vacutainer, Franklin Lakes, NJ) or heparinized syringes. An aliquot was immediately used for the whole blood intracellular cytokine assay (this assay was not possible to conduct on the patient samples from COG). The remaining volume, when available (often not available with pediatric patients), was used for PBMC isolation. PBMCs were separated by density gradient centrifugation on Ficoll-Hypaque (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Piscatway, NJ). PBMCs were depleted of platelets by several washing steps in PBS, and then resuspended in RPMI. PBMCs from healthy volunteers were prepared in the same manner.  EBER in situ-hybridization In situ hybridization for Epstein Barr virus (EBV) was performed on formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue sections emplyoing the Bond Max Autostainer (Vision Biosystems, Mount Waverley, Australia). Following baking and deparaffinization, the slides were incubated with Bond Enzyme (Vision Biosystems) for 15 minutes after which the fluorescein-labeled EBER probe (Vision Biosystems) was applied. Following incubation with the EBER probe, the tissue sections were incubated with a mouse anti-fluorescein antibody for 25 minutes, post-primary for 15 minutes and polymer for 25 minutes (Bond Polymer Refine Detection System; Vision Biosystems) followed by colorimetric development with diaminobenzidine (DAB; Vision Biosystems).  EBNA1, VCA and Tetanus toxoid ELISA assays EBNA1 and VCA specific antibodies were quantified from human plasma by EBNA1 and VCA ELISA assays according to the manufacturer's instructions (Sigma/Diamedix; Miami, FL). Plasma samples from volunteers were diluted at 1:20 and 1:10 and run in triplicates. EBNA1 and IgG subclass titers were assessed by evaluating plasma samples from patients and volunteers at serial dilutions from 1:25 to 1:3200. After plotting of the absorption values, the point of inflection was calculated to determine the immunoglobulin titer.  Whole blood intracellular cytokine assay Aliquots of 500 ?l of fresh whole blood were placed into 15ml snap-top round-bottom polypropylene tubes (Falcon, BD Labware, Bedford, MA) for a 6 hour incubation at 37°C in 5% CO2. Each reaction was carried out in the presence of 1 ?g/ml of costimulatory monoclonal antibodies to CD28 and CD49d (BD Biosciences, Immunocytometry Systems, San Jose, CA). Each tube also included 10 ?g/ml of Brefeldin A (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). CD4+ T cell positive controls included 750 ng (1.5 ?g/ml) of Staphylococcal Enterotoxin B (SEB) or influenza A strain Aichi/68 (Charles River Laboratories, North Franklin, CT) at a concentration of 106 HAU/ml. In addition, nonameric CD8+ T cell epitopes of HCMV and EBV (noted as CMV and EBV in figures) of the CEF peptide mixture 7 were used as peptide controls at a concentration of 1?M. The EBNA1 peptide mixture consisted of 51 overlapping peptides and was added to a final concentration 3.5 ?M per peptide per reaction. The used EBNA1 peptide library of 15mers overlapping by 10 amino acids, encoding for the immunogenic C-terminal domain (aa400?641) of the protein, was previously described in 6 . After the 6 hour incubation, 2 ?l of 0.5M EDTA was added to each aliquot, and the samples were gently mixed and left at room temperature for 5 minutes. Finally, each sample received 4.5 ml of FACS lysing buffer (BD Imunocytometry Systems), and each sample was vigorously vortexed for 5 seconds and left at room temperature for 10 minutes prior to storage at ?80°C overnight. Samples were thawed at room temperature, and transferred to FACS tubes. After centrifugation, cells were re-suspended in 500 ?l of permeabilization solution (0.1% BSA, 0.1% saponin, in PBS), and remained at room temperature for 10 minutes. Permeabilization solution was decanted after a second centrifugation, and the cells were stained with mouse anti-human, directly fluorochrome-labeled antibodies for 10 minutes at room temperature. Assays were divided into duplicates or triplicates, and stained with: IL-2-FITC, IFN?-PE, CD3-PerCp, CD4-APC or CD8-APC (all antibodies from BD Pharmingen, San Diego, CA). Cells were washed with permeabilization solution and re-suspended in 200 ?l of FACS buffer solution (0.1% Sodium Azide in PBS). The samples were analyzed on a FACScalibur flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). Over one million events or 3×105 lymphocytes could be analyzed from each sample. After gating on lymphocytes based on size, CD4+CD3+ T cells were analyzed for expression of IFN? or IL-2. Expression of greater than ten IFN?+ T cells above twice the frequency observed to background defined a positive response. Approximately 2×105 CD4+ T cells were evaluated for IFN? expression per reaction. Gates to identify IFN? or IL-2 positive cells were determined by comparison to mouse isotype controls of IgG1-PE and IgG2b-FITC for IFN?-PE and IL-2-FITC respectively.  Proliferation assay by CFSE dilution When enough patient blood was available, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated from blood samples via density centrifugation. Fresh or frozen PBMCs were washed in PBS and incubated at 37°C in 0.3 ?M CFSE (carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester; Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) in PBS at a concentration of 107 cells per ml for 10 minutes. Cells were washed in PBS and resuspended in 5% PHS with 1 ?g/ml of costimulatory monoclonal antibodies to CD28 and CD49d at a concentration of 1.7×106 cells per ml. PBMCs were distributed at one ml or 1.7×106 cells per well into 48-well plates. Known CD8+ T cell epitopes of HCMV and EBV (noted as CMV and EBV in figures) of the CEF peptide mixture 7 were used as controls at a concentration of 1?M. Additional positive controls included Staphylococcus enterotoxin B (SEB) (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) at a final concentration of 125 ng/ml, and infection of PBMCs with influenza A strain Aichi/68 (Charles River Laboratories, North Franklin, CT). Influenza A infection was achieved by resuspending PBMCs in RPMI at 107 cells per ml with 50,000 HAU/ml of influenza A for one hour at 37°C. After infection, cells were washed in RPMI and resuspended in 5% PHS for the six day proliferation. EBNA1 peptides were brought to a final concentration of 3.5 ?M of each peptide per well. The used EBNA1 peptide library of 15mers overlapping by 10 amino acids, encoding for the immunogenic C-terminal domain (aa400?641) of the protein, was previously described in 6 . At the conclusion of six day incubations at 37°C and 5% CO2, cells were harvested and washed once in PBS and stained with directly fluorochrome-labeled antibodies against CD3-PE, CD8-PerCP, CD4-APC (all BD Pharmingen, San Diego, CA) for 10 minutes at room temperature. The cells were washed once with PBS and re-suspended in 200 ?l FACS buffer (0.01% Sodium Azide in PBS) prior to FACS analysis. The samples were analyzed on the FACScalibur flow cytometer gating on lymphocytes based on size. CD3+CD4+ T cells were gated for analysis of proliferation of CD4+ T cells. In addition, proliferating CD4+CD62L+ central memory T cells were evaluated in some experiments. Proliferating cells were analyzed with the FlowJo® (Tree Star, Ashland, OR) software. Cytokine concentrations were determined from proliferation assay supernatants by Luminex technology according to the manufacturer's recommendations (Biosource, Camarillo, CA).  Luminex assay Cell supernatants from day 6 proliferation assay cultures were analyzed for 10 cytokines using the Protein Multiplex Immunoassay kit (Biosource International) as per the manufacturer's protocol. In brief, Multiplex beads (Biosource) were vortexed and sonicated for 30 s, and 25 ?l was added to each well and washed two times with wash buffer. The samples were diluted 1:2 with assay diluent and loaded onto a Multiscreen BV 96-well filter plate (Millipore) with 50 ?l of incubation buffer already added to each well. Serial dilutions of cytokine standards were prepared in parallel and added to the plate. Samples were then incubated on a plate shaker at 600 rpm in the dark at room temperature for 2 h. The plate was applied to a Multiscreen Vacuum Manifold (Millipore) and washed twice with 200 ?l of wash buffer. 100 ?l of biotinylated anti–human Multi-Cytokine Reporter (Biosource International) was added to each well. The plate was incubated on a plate shaker at 600 rpm in the dark at room temperature for 1 h. The plate was applied to a Multiscreen Vacuum Manifold (Millipore) and washed twice with 200 ?l of wash buffer. Streptavidin-phycoerythrin was diluted 1:10 in wash buffer, and 100 ?l was added directly to each well. The plate was incubated on a plate shaker at 600 rpm in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. The plate was then applied to the vacuum manifold, washed twice, and each well was resuspended in 100 ?l wash buffer and shaken for 1 min. The assay plate was then transferred to the Bio-Plex Luminex 100 XYP instrument (Millipore) for analysis. Cytokine concentrations were calculated using Bio-Plex Manager 3.0 software with a 5-parameter curve-fitting algorithm applied for standard curve calculations.  Statistical analysis Statistical analyses were performed with the paired two-tailed Student t-test. The p value of significant differences is reported. Plotted data represent mean plus standard deviation (SD), unless otherwise stated.  Results Lack of detectable EBNA1 specific IFN-? responses by CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells in EBV positive lymphoma patients In this study, immune responses of forty-four lymphoma patients with no apparent immune deficiencies were evaluated at diagnosis (Table 1). The patient cohort included pediatric and adult patients consisting of 18 males and 26 females (age range: 7 to 73 years old; mean of 32.2 years). Routine baseline studies indicated that all patients were immune competent with normal erythrocyte, leukocyte and lymphocyte counts (data not shown). All patients were serologically EBV-positive by EBNA1 and/or viral capsid antigen (VCA) specific ELISA assays, and nineteen of these patients had EBV-positive lymphomas, as determined by in situ hybridization for non-translated EBV-encoded RNAs (EBERs) in lymphoma biopsies (data not shown). The remaining twenty-five patients had EBV-negative lymphomas. Of the EBV-positive lymphomas seventeen, and of the EBV-negative thirteen were HL, in both groups mainly of nodular sclerosing histology. More than 75% of healthy EBV carriers possess EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell responses 6 , 8 - 11 , and EBNA1 protein expression is maintained in all EBV-associated malignancies 12 . In contrast, T cell responses against the other EBV antigens expressed in HL, namely the latent membrane proteins LMP1 and LMP2, are detectable in less than 20% and 50% of healthy EBV carriers, respectively 9 , 13 . Therefore, we analyzed if the frequent EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell responses would differ between patients with EBV-positive and EBV-negative lymphomas. EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells from peripheral blood can be identified by the production of IFN? and proliferation (CFSE dilution) in response to an overlapping peptide mixture covering the C-terminal domain of the protein 6 . Both for intracellular IFN? staining and proliferation a positive responding patient was defined as having frequencies of responding CD4+ T cells of at least 2-fold over background and consisting of at least 10 responding cells. Only patient samples that responded to the positive control Staphylococcus enterotoxin B (SEB), as a measure of T cell reactivity preservation during sample collection and transport, were included in the analysis, which led to the exclusion of all COG samples from intracellular IFN? staining and nine of 18 from proliferation assays (Table 1). Most patients with EBV-negative lymphomas (10 of 17 or 59% of tested patients) were identified as carriers of EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells by intracellular IFN? staining ( Figure 1 ). These patients had an average of 0.027% (with a range of 0.01% to 0.046%) of EBNA1 specific among all circulating CD4+ T cells. Although this response was more common among healthy volunteers (18 of 20 or 90%) 6 the patient cohort was statistically indistinguishable (average of 0.027% with a range of 0.008% to 0.053% among all circulating CD4+ T cells; student paired t-test p= 0.35) from this previously described cohort of healthy EBV-carriers in the frequency of EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells. In contrast, none of the nine patients with EBV positive lymphomas, whose immune responses could be tested in fresh blood samples, had detectable EBNA1 specific IFN? producing CD4+ T cells. Compared to healthy EBV carriers and patients with EBV-negative lymphomas, the lack of a detectable EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell response from the tested patients with EBV-positive lymphomas was statistically significant (both p< 0.001) ( Figure 1 ). Importantly, when only comparing HL, EBNA1 specific IFN? producing CD4+ T cells were detected in none of seven EBV-positive, but four of five EBV-negative patients (Table 1, and Supplemental Figures 1 and 3 ). To show that this cohort of patients had intact cell-mediated immune responses to other EBV antigens, we analyzed previously described CD8+ T cell responses against dominant MHC class I ligands of EBV antigens, which are not present in Hodgkin Reed Sternberg cells of HL 7 . Positive responses of similar magnitude to these ligands were observed in 3 of 9 (33%) patients with EBV-positive lymphomas (range of 0.041% to 1.39% among all circulating CD8+ T cells), 11 of 17 (65%) patients with EBV negative lymphomas (range of 0.046% to 1.66% among all circulating CD8+ T cells) and 14 of 20 (70%) individuals of a previously described cohort of EBV carriers (range of 0.028% to 1.21% among all circulating CD8+ T cells) 6 . Therefore, CD8+ T cell responses against these other EBV antigens were detected at similar frequencies, but less frequently in EBV positive than negative lymphoma patients. These data indicate that unlike patients with EBV negative lymphomas and healthy volunteers, the patients with EBV positive lymphomas had no detectable EBNA1 specific effector memory CD4+ T cells, which rapidly produce IFN? in response to the immunodominant C-terminal domain of EBNA1. Loss of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell proliferation to EBNA1 in EBV positive lymphoma patients To identify the presence of smaller populations of central memory and non-Th1 polarized EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells that may have gone undetected in our intracellular cytokine staining assay, proliferation assays were conducted, whenever patient blood samples were of sufficient volume for additional tests. Confirming our findings with the intracellular IFN? staining assay, none of the eight tested patients with EBV-positive lymphomas had any detectable EBNA1 specific proliferation. However, 13 out of 16 (81%) EBV-negative lymphoma patients exhibited an average proliferation of EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells 6-fold greater than background proliferation (range 2.25 to 30 fold). While the frequencies of proliferating EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells varied between patients with EBV negative lymphomas, the difference in proliferation between EBV positive and negative lymphoma patients was statistically significant (p < 0.001). Again, patients with EBV-negative lymphomas were virtually indistinguishable from healthy individuals ( Figure 2 ). When focusing on HL, none of seven EBV-positive, but five of seven EBV-negative patients demonstrated EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell proliferation (Table 1, and Supplemental Figures 2 and 4 ). In 3 EBV-positive and 6 EBV negative lymphoma patients, we performed Luminex analysis for IL-1?, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IFN?, GM-CSF and TNF-? from the supernatants of 6 day proliferation assays. While more GM-CSF and IL-6 was produced in response to EBNA1 in cultures from EBV-negative than from EBV-positive patients, this difference did not reach statistical significance ( Supplemental Figure 5 ). In addition, Th2 cytokines such as IL-4 and IL-5 were not produced at detectable amounts (data not shown). Similarly, no signals for IL-1?, IL-2, IL-8, IL-10, IFN? and TNF-? were detected (data now shown). Combining intracellular cytokine and proliferation assays, none out of 12 EBV-positive, but 15 out of 23 (65%) EBV-negative lymphoma patients, who could be tested for cellular immune responses in at least one of the assays, showed EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell responses. In the other 7 EBV-positive and 2 EBV-negative lymphoma patients of the COG samples group T cell responses against the positive control SEB could not be detected, probably due to poor T cell recovery from the cryopreserved PBMCs, and, therefore, the EBNA1 specific T cell responses could not be interpreted. Importantly, none of ten EBV-positive, but nine of eleven EBV-negative HL patients had detectable EBNA1 specific IFN? production or proliferation by CD4+ T cells ( Supplemental Figures 1 - 4 ). In addition, 3 out of 3 EBV-positive (100%) and 9 out of 12 EBV-negative (75%) lymphoma patients demonstrated influenza specific CD4+ T cell responses either by intracellular cytokine staining or proliferation. The lack of both CD4+ T cell IFN? production and CD4+ T cell proliferation in response to EBNA1 in the face of EBNA1 positive serology and EBV positive lymphomas prompted a more thorough evaluation of these patients’ EBNA1 specific immunoglobulin titers. EBNA1 specific IgG4 in some EBV positive lymphoma patients Plasma samples from each patient and twenty healthy EBV-carriers were evaluated for the quantification of IgG subclass titers ( Figure 3A ). Every healthy EBV-carrier had detectable EBNA1-specific IgG1 titers (range 1:62 to 1:840 with a mean of 1:344). Only one healthy volunteer had a detectable IgG2 titer (1:470). Among the lymphoma patients, 19 of 25 (76%) of the patients with EBV negative lymphomas, and 17 of 19 (89%) of the patients with EBV positive lymphomas had detectable EBNA1 specific IgG titers with IgG1 as the most commonly detected immunoglobulin isotype (with average titers of 1:504 and 1:338, respectively). While there was no significant difference between IgG1?4 titers between EBV-negative lymphoma patients and healthy virus carriers, the patient cohort of EBV-positive lymphoma patients contained one patient, which had only an EBNA1 specific IgG2 titer, and four patients, which had detectable IgG4 titers (titers ranged from 1:210 to 1:700, mean of 1:462; p<0.005), the latter being associated with Th2 polarized immune responses 14 , 15 . Although the patient populations differed with lower IgG1 and occasional IgG4 titers in the anti-EBNA1 antibody responses, there were no appreciable differences seen when their plasma samples were assessed for anti-tetanus toxoid titers ( Figure 3B ). Therefore, most lymphoma patients in this study maintained EBNA1 specific humoral immune responses, primarily mediated through IgG1 antibodies. However, 21% of tested EBV-positive, but none of the EBV-negative Hodgkin's lymphoma patients had developed EBNA1 specific IgG4 responses in addition.  Results Lack of detectable EBNA1 specific IFN-? responses by CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells in EBV positive lymphoma patients In this study, immune responses of forty-four lymphoma patients with no apparent immune deficiencies were evaluated at diagnosis (Table 1). The patient cohort included pediatric and adult patients consisting of 18 males and 26 females (age range: 7 to 73 years old; mean of 32.2 years). Routine baseline studies indicated that all patients were immune competent with normal erythrocyte, leukocyte and lymphocyte counts (data not shown). All patients were serologically EBV-positive by EBNA1 and/or viral capsid antigen (VCA) specific ELISA assays, and nineteen of these patients had EBV-positive lymphomas, as determined by in situ hybridization for non-translated EBV-encoded RNAs (EBERs) in lymphoma biopsies (data not shown). The remaining twenty-five patients had EBV-negative lymphomas. Of the EBV-positive lymphomas seventeen, and of the EBV-negative thirteen were HL, in both groups mainly of nodular sclerosing histology. More than 75% of healthy EBV carriers possess EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell responses 6 , 8 - 11 , and EBNA1 protein expression is maintained in all EBV-associated malignancies 12 . In contrast, T cell responses against the other EBV antigens expressed in HL, namely the latent membrane proteins LMP1 and LMP2, are detectable in less than 20% and 50% of healthy EBV carriers, respectively 9 , 13 . Therefore, we analyzed if the frequent EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell responses would differ between patients with EBV-positive and EBV-negative lymphomas. EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells from peripheral blood can be identified by the production of IFN? and proliferation (CFSE dilution) in response to an overlapping peptide mixture covering the C-terminal domain of the protein 6 . Both for intracellular IFN? staining and proliferation a positive responding patient was defined as having frequencies of responding CD4+ T cells of at least 2-fold over background and consisting of at least 10 responding cells. Only patient samples that responded to the positive control Staphylococcus enterotoxin B (SEB), as a measure of T cell reactivity preservation during sample collection and transport, were included in the analysis, which led to the exclusion of all COG samples from intracellular IFN? staining and nine of 18 from proliferation assays (Table 1). Most patients with EBV-negative lymphomas (10 of 17 or 59% of tested patients) were identified as carriers of EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells by intracellular IFN? staining ( Figure 1 ). These patients had an average of 0.027% (with a range of 0.01% to 0.046%) of EBNA1 specific among all circulating CD4+ T cells. Although this response was more common among healthy volunteers (18 of 20 or 90%) 6 the patient cohort was statistically indistinguishable (average of 0.027% with a range of 0.008% to 0.053% among all circulating CD4+ T cells; student paired t-test p= 0.35) from this previously described cohort of healthy EBV-carriers in the frequency of EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells. In contrast, none of the nine patients with EBV positive lymphomas, whose immune responses could be tested in fresh blood samples, had detectable EBNA1 specific IFN? producing CD4+ T cells. Compared to healthy EBV carriers and patients with EBV-negative lymphomas, the lack of a detectable EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell response from the tested patients with EBV-positive lymphomas was statistically significant (both p< 0.001) ( Figure 1 ). Importantly, when only comparing HL, EBNA1 specific IFN? producing CD4+ T cells were detected in none of seven EBV-positive, but four of five EBV-negative patients (Table 1, and Supplemental Figures 1 and 3 ). To show that this cohort of patients had intact cell-mediated immune responses to other EBV antigens, we analyzed previously described CD8+ T cell responses against dominant MHC class I ligands of EBV antigens, which are not present in Hodgkin Reed Sternberg cells of HL 7 . Positive responses of similar magnitude to these ligands were observed in 3 of 9 (33%) patients with EBV-positive lymphomas (range of 0.041% to 1.39% among all circulating CD8+ T cells), 11 of 17 (65%) patients with EBV negative lymphomas (range of 0.046% to 1.66% among all circulating CD8+ T cells) and 14 of 20 (70%) individuals of a previously described cohort of EBV carriers (range of 0.028% to 1.21% among all circulating CD8+ T cells) 6 . Therefore, CD8+ T cell responses against these other EBV antigens were detected at similar frequencies, but less frequently in EBV positive than negative lymphoma patients. These data indicate that unlike patients with EBV negative lymphomas and healthy volunteers, the patients with EBV positive lymphomas had no detectable EBNA1 specific effector memory CD4+ T cells, which rapidly produce IFN? in response to the immunodominant C-terminal domain of EBNA1. Loss of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell proliferation to EBNA1 in EBV positive lymphoma patients To identify the presence of smaller populations of central memory and non-Th1 polarized EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells that may have gone undetected in our intracellular cytokine staining assay, proliferation assays were conducted, whenever patient blood samples were of sufficient volume for additional tests. Confirming our findings with the intracellular IFN? staining assay, none of the eight tested patients with EBV-positive lymphomas had any detectable EBNA1 specific proliferation. However, 13 out of 16 (81%) EBV-negative lymphoma patients exhibited an average proliferation of EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells 6-fold greater than background proliferation (range 2.25 to 30 fold). While the frequencies of proliferating EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells varied between patients with EBV negative lymphomas, the difference in proliferation between EBV positive and negative lymphoma patients was statistically significant (p < 0.001). Again, patients with EBV-negative lymphomas were virtually indistinguishable from healthy individuals ( Figure 2 ). When focusing on HL, none of seven EBV-positive, but five of seven EBV-negative patients demonstrated EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell proliferation (Table 1, and Supplemental Figures 2 and 4 ). In 3 EBV-positive and 6 EBV negative lymphoma patients, we performed Luminex analysis for IL-1?, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IFN?, GM-CSF and TNF-? from the supernatants of 6 day proliferation assays. While more GM-CSF and IL-6 was produced in response to EBNA1 in cultures from EBV-negative than from EBV-positive patients, this difference did not reach statistical significance ( Supplemental Figure 5 ). In addition, Th2 cytokines such as IL-4 and IL-5 were not produced at detectable amounts (data not shown). Similarly, no signals for IL-1?, IL-2, IL-8, IL-10, IFN? and TNF-? were detected (data now shown). Combining intracellular cytokine and proliferation assays, none out of 12 EBV-positive, but 15 out of 23 (65%) EBV-negative lymphoma patients, who could be tested for cellular immune responses in at least one of the assays, showed EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell responses. In the other 7 EBV-positive and 2 EBV-negative lymphoma patients of the COG samples group T cell responses against the positive control SEB could not be detected, probably due to poor T cell recovery from the cryopreserved PBMCs, and, therefore, the EBNA1 specific T cell responses could not be interpreted. Importantly, none of ten EBV-positive, but nine of eleven EBV-negative HL patients had detectable EBNA1 specific IFN? production or proliferation by CD4+ T cells ( Supplemental Figures 1 - 4 ). In addition, 3 out of 3 EBV-positive (100%) and 9 out of 12 EBV-negative (75%) lymphoma patients demonstrated influenza specific CD4+ T cell responses either by intracellular cytokine staining or proliferation. The lack of both CD4+ T cell IFN? production and CD4+ T cell proliferation in response to EBNA1 in the face of EBNA1 positive serology and EBV positive lymphomas prompted a more thorough evaluation of these patients’ EBNA1 specific immunoglobulin titers. EBNA1 specific IgG4 in some EBV positive lymphoma patients Plasma samples from each patient and twenty healthy EBV-carriers were evaluated for the quantification of IgG subclass titers ( Figure 3A ). Every healthy EBV-carrier had detectable EBNA1-specific IgG1 titers (range 1:62 to 1:840 with a mean of 1:344). Only one healthy volunteer had a detectable IgG2 titer (1:470). Among the lymphoma patients, 19 of 25 (76%) of the patients with EBV negative lymphomas, and 17 of 19 (89%) of the patients with EBV positive lymphomas had detectable EBNA1 specific IgG titers with IgG1 as the most commonly detected immunoglobulin isotype (with average titers of 1:504 and 1:338, respectively). While there was no significant difference between IgG1?4 titers between EBV-negative lymphoma patients and healthy virus carriers, the patient cohort of EBV-positive lymphoma patients contained one patient, which had only an EBNA1 specific IgG2 titer, and four patients, which had detectable IgG4 titers (titers ranged from 1:210 to 1:700, mean of 1:462; p<0.005), the latter being associated with Th2 polarized immune responses 14 , 15 . Although the patient populations differed with lower IgG1 and occasional IgG4 titers in the anti-EBNA1 antibody responses, there were no appreciable differences seen when their plasma samples were assessed for anti-tetanus toxoid titers ( Figure 3B ). Therefore, most lymphoma patients in this study maintained EBNA1 specific humoral immune responses, primarily mediated through IgG1 antibodies. However, 21% of tested EBV-positive, but none of the EBV-negative Hodgkin's lymphoma patients had developed EBNA1 specific IgG4 responses in addition.  Lack of detectable EBNA1 specific IFN-? responses by CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells in EBV positive lymphoma patients In this study, immune responses of forty-four lymphoma patients with no apparent immune deficiencies were evaluated at diagnosis (Table 1). The patient cohort included pediatric and adult patients consisting of 18 males and 26 females (age range: 7 to 73 years old; mean of 32.2 years). Routine baseline studies indicated that all patients were immune competent with normal erythrocyte, leukocyte and lymphocyte counts (data not shown). All patients were serologically EBV-positive by EBNA1 and/or viral capsid antigen (VCA) specific ELISA assays, and nineteen of these patients had EBV-positive lymphomas, as determined by in situ hybridization for non-translated EBV-encoded RNAs (EBERs) in lymphoma biopsies (data not shown). The remaining twenty-five patients had EBV-negative lymphomas. Of the EBV-positive lymphomas seventeen, and of the EBV-negative thirteen were HL, in both groups mainly of nodular sclerosing histology. More than 75% of healthy EBV carriers possess EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell responses 6 , 8 - 11 , and EBNA1 protein expression is maintained in all EBV-associated malignancies 12 . In contrast, T cell responses against the other EBV antigens expressed in HL, namely the latent membrane proteins LMP1 and LMP2, are detectable in less than 20% and 50% of healthy EBV carriers, respectively 9 , 13 . Therefore, we analyzed if the frequent EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell responses would differ between patients with EBV-positive and EBV-negative lymphomas. EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells from peripheral blood can be identified by the production of IFN? and proliferation (CFSE dilution) in response to an overlapping peptide mixture covering the C-terminal domain of the protein 6 . Both for intracellular IFN? staining and proliferation a positive responding patient was defined as having frequencies of responding CD4+ T cells of at least 2-fold over background and consisting of at least 10 responding cells. Only patient samples that responded to the positive control Staphylococcus enterotoxin B (SEB), as a measure of T cell reactivity preservation during sample collection and transport, were included in the analysis, which led to the exclusion of all COG samples from intracellular IFN? staining and nine of 18 from proliferation assays (Table 1). Most patients with EBV-negative lymphomas (10 of 17 or 59% of tested patients) were identified as carriers of EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells by intracellular IFN? staining ( Figure 1 ). These patients had an average of 0.027% (with a range of 0.01% to 0.046%) of EBNA1 specific among all circulating CD4+ T cells. Although this response was more common among healthy volunteers (18 of 20 or 90%) 6 the patient cohort was statistically indistinguishable (average of 0.027% with a range of 0.008% to 0.053% among all circulating CD4+ T cells; student paired t-test p= 0.35) from this previously described cohort of healthy EBV-carriers in the frequency of EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells. In contrast, none of the nine patients with EBV positive lymphomas, whose immune responses could be tested in fresh blood samples, had detectable EBNA1 specific IFN? producing CD4+ T cells. Compared to healthy EBV carriers and patients with EBV-negative lymphomas, the lack of a detectable EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell response from the tested patients with EBV-positive lymphomas was statistically significant (both p< 0.001) ( Figure 1 ). Importantly, when only comparing HL, EBNA1 specific IFN? producing CD4+ T cells were detected in none of seven EBV-positive, but four of five EBV-negative patients (Table 1, and Supplemental Figures 1 and 3 ). To show that this cohort of patients had intact cell-mediated immune responses to other EBV antigens, we analyzed previously described CD8+ T cell responses against dominant MHC class I ligands of EBV antigens, which are not present in Hodgkin Reed Sternberg cells of HL 7 . Positive responses of similar magnitude to these ligands were observed in 3 of 9 (33%) patients with EBV-positive lymphomas (range of 0.041% to 1.39% among all circulating CD8+ T cells), 11 of 17 (65%) patients with EBV negative lymphomas (range of 0.046% to 1.66% among all circulating CD8+ T cells) and 14 of 20 (70%) individuals of a previously described cohort of EBV carriers (range of 0.028% to 1.21% among all circulating CD8+ T cells) 6 . Therefore, CD8+ T cell responses against these other EBV antigens were detected at similar frequencies, but less frequently in EBV positive than negative lymphoma patients. These data indicate that unlike patients with EBV negative lymphomas and healthy volunteers, the patients with EBV positive lymphomas had no detectable EBNA1 specific effector memory CD4+ T cells, which rapidly produce IFN? in response to the immunodominant C-terminal domain of EBNA1.  Lack of detectable EBNA1 specific IFN-? responses by CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells in EBV positive lymphoma patients In this study, immune responses of forty-four lymphoma patients with no apparent immune deficiencies were evaluated at diagnosis (Table 1). The patient cohort included pediatric and adult patients consisting of 18 males and 26 females (age range: 7 to 73 years old; mean of 32.2 years). Routine baseline studies indicated that all patients were immune competent with normal erythrocyte, leukocyte and lymphocyte counts (data not shown). All patients were serologically EBV-positive by EBNA1 and/or viral capsid antigen (VCA) specific ELISA assays, and nineteen of these patients had EBV-positive lymphomas, as determined by in situ hybridization for non-translated EBV-encoded RNAs (EBERs) in lymphoma biopsies (data not shown). The remaining twenty-five patients had EBV-negative lymphomas. Of the EBV-positive lymphomas seventeen, and of the EBV-negative thirteen were HL, in both groups mainly of nodular sclerosing histology. More than 75% of healthy EBV carriers possess EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell responses 6 , 8 - 11 , and EBNA1 protein expression is maintained in all EBV-associated malignancies 12 . In contrast, T cell responses against the other EBV antigens expressed in HL, namely the latent membrane proteins LMP1 and LMP2, are detectable in less than 20% and 50% of healthy EBV carriers, respectively 9 , 13 . Therefore, we analyzed if the frequent EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell responses would differ between patients with EBV-positive and EBV-negative lymphomas. EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells from peripheral blood can be identified by the production of IFN? and proliferation (CFSE dilution) in response to an overlapping peptide mixture covering the C-terminal domain of the protein 6 . Both for intracellular IFN? staining and proliferation a positive responding patient was defined as having frequencies of responding CD4+ T cells of at least 2-fold over background and consisting of at least 10 responding cells. Only patient samples that responded to the positive control Staphylococcus enterotoxin B (SEB), as a measure of T cell reactivity preservation during sample collection and transport, were included in the analysis, which led to the exclusion of all COG samples from intracellular IFN? staining and nine of 18 from proliferation assays (Table 1). Most patients with EBV-negative lymphomas (10 of 17 or 59% of tested patients) were identified as carriers of EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells by intracellular IFN? staining ( Figure 1 ). These patients had an average of 0.027% (with a range of 0.01% to 0.046%) of EBNA1 specific among all circulating CD4+ T cells. Although this response was more common among healthy volunteers (18 of 20 or 90%) 6 the patient cohort was statistically indistinguishable (average of 0.027% with a range of 0.008% to 0.053% among all circulating CD4+ T cells; student paired t-test p= 0.35) from this previously described cohort of healthy EBV-carriers in the frequency of EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells. In contrast, none of the nine patients with EBV positive lymphomas, whose immune responses could be tested in fresh blood samples, had detectable EBNA1 specific IFN? producing CD4+ T cells. Compared to healthy EBV carriers and patients with EBV-negative lymphomas, the lack of a detectable EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell response from the tested patients with EBV-positive lymphomas was statistically significant (both p< 0.001) ( Figure 1 ). Importantly, when only comparing HL, EBNA1 specific IFN? producing CD4+ T cells were detected in none of seven EBV-positive, but four of five EBV-negative patients (Table 1, and Supplemental Figures 1 and 3 ). To show that this cohort of patients had intact cell-mediated immune responses to other EBV antigens, we analyzed previously described CD8+ T cell responses against dominant MHC class I ligands of EBV antigens, which are not present in Hodgkin Reed Sternberg cells of HL 7 . Positive responses of similar magnitude to these ligands were observed in 3 of 9 (33%) patients with EBV-positive lymphomas (range of 0.041% to 1.39% among all circulating CD8+ T cells), 11 of 17 (65%) patients with EBV negative lymphomas (range of 0.046% to 1.66% among all circulating CD8+ T cells) and 14 of 20 (70%) individuals of a previously described cohort of EBV carriers (range of 0.028% to 1.21% among all circulating CD8+ T cells) 6 . Therefore, CD8+ T cell responses against these other EBV antigens were detected at similar frequencies, but less frequently in EBV positive than negative lymphoma patients. These data indicate that unlike patients with EBV negative lymphomas and healthy volunteers, the patients with EBV positive lymphomas had no detectable EBNA1 specific effector memory CD4+ T cells, which rapidly produce IFN? in response to the immunodominant C-terminal domain of EBNA1.  Loss of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell proliferation to EBNA1 in EBV positive lymphoma patients To identify the presence of smaller populations of central memory and non-Th1 polarized EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells that may have gone undetected in our intracellular cytokine staining assay, proliferation assays were conducted, whenever patient blood samples were of sufficient volume for additional tests. Confirming our findings with the intracellular IFN? staining assay, none of the eight tested patients with EBV-positive lymphomas had any detectable EBNA1 specific proliferation. However, 13 out of 16 (81%) EBV-negative lymphoma patients exhibited an average proliferation of EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells 6-fold greater than background proliferation (range 2.25 to 30 fold). While the frequencies of proliferating EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells varied between patients with EBV negative lymphomas, the difference in proliferation between EBV positive and negative lymphoma patients was statistically significant (p < 0.001). Again, patients with EBV-negative lymphomas were virtually indistinguishable from healthy individuals ( Figure 2 ). When focusing on HL, none of seven EBV-positive, but five of seven EBV-negative patients demonstrated EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell proliferation (Table 1, and Supplemental Figures 2 and 4 ). In 3 EBV-positive and 6 EBV negative lymphoma patients, we performed Luminex analysis for IL-1?, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IFN?, GM-CSF and TNF-? from the supernatants of 6 day proliferation assays. While more GM-CSF and IL-6 was produced in response to EBNA1 in cultures from EBV-negative than from EBV-positive patients, this difference did not reach statistical significance ( Supplemental Figure 5 ). In addition, Th2 cytokines such as IL-4 and IL-5 were not produced at detectable amounts (data not shown). Similarly, no signals for IL-1?, IL-2, IL-8, IL-10, IFN? and TNF-? were detected (data now shown). Combining intracellular cytokine and proliferation assays, none out of 12 EBV-positive, but 15 out of 23 (65%) EBV-negative lymphoma patients, who could be tested for cellular immune responses in at least one of the assays, showed EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell responses. In the other 7 EBV-positive and 2 EBV-negative lymphoma patients of the COG samples group T cell responses against the positive control SEB could not be detected, probably due to poor T cell recovery from the cryopreserved PBMCs, and, therefore, the EBNA1 specific T cell responses could not be interpreted. Importantly, none of ten EBV-positive, but nine of eleven EBV-negative HL patients had detectable EBNA1 specific IFN? production or proliferation by CD4+ T cells ( Supplemental Figures 1 - 4 ). In addition, 3 out of 3 EBV-positive (100%) and 9 out of 12 EBV-negative (75%) lymphoma patients demonstrated influenza specific CD4+ T cell responses either by intracellular cytokine staining or proliferation. The lack of both CD4+ T cell IFN? production and CD4+ T cell proliferation in response to EBNA1 in the face of EBNA1 positive serology and EBV positive lymphomas prompted a more thorough evaluation of these patients’ EBNA1 specific immunoglobulin titers.  Loss of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell proliferation to EBNA1 in EBV positive lymphoma patients To identify the presence of smaller populations of central memory and non-Th1 polarized EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells that may have gone undetected in our intracellular cytokine staining assay, proliferation assays were conducted, whenever patient blood samples were of sufficient volume for additional tests. Confirming our findings with the intracellular IFN? staining assay, none of the eight tested patients with EBV-positive lymphomas had any detectable EBNA1 specific proliferation. However, 13 out of 16 (81%) EBV-negative lymphoma patients exhibited an average proliferation of EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells 6-fold greater than background proliferation (range 2.25 to 30 fold). While the frequencies of proliferating EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells varied between patients with EBV negative lymphomas, the difference in proliferation between EBV positive and negative lymphoma patients was statistically significant (p < 0.001). Again, patients with EBV-negative lymphomas were virtually indistinguishable from healthy individuals ( Figure 2 ). When focusing on HL, none of seven EBV-positive, but five of seven EBV-negative patients demonstrated EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell proliferation (Table 1, and Supplemental Figures 2 and 4 ). In 3 EBV-positive and 6 EBV negative lymphoma patients, we performed Luminex analysis for IL-1?, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IFN?, GM-CSF and TNF-? from the supernatants of 6 day proliferation assays. While more GM-CSF and IL-6 was produced in response to EBNA1 in cultures from EBV-negative than from EBV-positive patients, this difference did not reach statistical significance ( Supplemental Figure 5 ). In addition, Th2 cytokines such as IL-4 and IL-5 were not produced at detectable amounts (data not shown). Similarly, no signals for IL-1?, IL-2, IL-8, IL-10, IFN? and TNF-? were detected (data now shown). Combining intracellular cytokine and proliferation assays, none out of 12 EBV-positive, but 15 out of 23 (65%) EBV-negative lymphoma patients, who could be tested for cellular immune responses in at least one of the assays, showed EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell responses. In the other 7 EBV-positive and 2 EBV-negative lymphoma patients of the COG samples group T cell responses against the positive control SEB could not be detected, probably due to poor T cell recovery from the cryopreserved PBMCs, and, therefore, the EBNA1 specific T cell responses could not be interpreted. Importantly, none of ten EBV-positive, but nine of eleven EBV-negative HL patients had detectable EBNA1 specific IFN? production or proliferation by CD4+ T cells ( Supplemental Figures 1 - 4 ). In addition, 3 out of 3 EBV-positive (100%) and 9 out of 12 EBV-negative (75%) lymphoma patients demonstrated influenza specific CD4+ T cell responses either by intracellular cytokine staining or proliferation. The lack of both CD4+ T cell IFN? production and CD4+ T cell proliferation in response to EBNA1 in the face of EBNA1 positive serology and EBV positive lymphomas prompted a more thorough evaluation of these patients’ EBNA1 specific immunoglobulin titers.  EBNA1 specific IgG4 in some EBV positive lymphoma patients Plasma samples from each patient and twenty healthy EBV-carriers were evaluated for the quantification of IgG subclass titers ( Figure 3A ). Every healthy EBV-carrier had detectable EBNA1-specific IgG1 titers (range 1:62 to 1:840 with a mean of 1:344). Only one healthy volunteer had a detectable IgG2 titer (1:470). Among the lymphoma patients, 19 of 25 (76%) of the patients with EBV negative lymphomas, and 17 of 19 (89%) of the patients with EBV positive lymphomas had detectable EBNA1 specific IgG titers with IgG1 as the most commonly detected immunoglobulin isotype (with average titers of 1:504 and 1:338, respectively). While there was no significant difference between IgG1?4 titers between EBV-negative lymphoma patients and healthy virus carriers, the patient cohort of EBV-positive lymphoma patients contained one patient, which had only an EBNA1 specific IgG2 titer, and four patients, which had detectable IgG4 titers (titers ranged from 1:210 to 1:700, mean of 1:462; p<0.005), the latter being associated with Th2 polarized immune responses 14 , 15 . Although the patient populations differed with lower IgG1 and occasional IgG4 titers in the anti-EBNA1 antibody responses, there were no appreciable differences seen when their plasma samples were assessed for anti-tetanus toxoid titers ( Figure 3B ). Therefore, most lymphoma patients in this study maintained EBNA1 specific humoral immune responses, primarily mediated through IgG1 antibodies. However, 21% of tested EBV-positive, but none of the EBV-negative Hodgkin's lymphoma patients had developed EBNA1 specific IgG4 responses in addition.  EBNA1 specific IgG4 in some EBV positive lymphoma patients Plasma samples from each patient and twenty healthy EBV-carriers were evaluated for the quantification of IgG subclass titers ( Figure 3A ). Every healthy EBV-carrier had detectable EBNA1-specific IgG1 titers (range 1:62 to 1:840 with a mean of 1:344). Only one healthy volunteer had a detectable IgG2 titer (1:470). Among the lymphoma patients, 19 of 25 (76%) of the patients with EBV negative lymphomas, and 17 of 19 (89%) of the patients with EBV positive lymphomas had detectable EBNA1 specific IgG titers with IgG1 as the most commonly detected immunoglobulin isotype (with average titers of 1:504 and 1:338, respectively). While there was no significant difference between IgG1?4 titers between EBV-negative lymphoma patients and healthy virus carriers, the patient cohort of EBV-positive lymphoma patients contained one patient, which had only an EBNA1 specific IgG2 titer, and four patients, which had detectable IgG4 titers (titers ranged from 1:210 to 1:700, mean of 1:462; p<0.005), the latter being associated with Th2 polarized immune responses 14 , 15 . Although the patient populations differed with lower IgG1 and occasional IgG4 titers in the anti-EBNA1 antibody responses, there were no appreciable differences seen when their plasma samples were assessed for anti-tetanus toxoid titers ( Figure 3B ). Therefore, most lymphoma patients in this study maintained EBNA1 specific humoral immune responses, primarily mediated through IgG1 antibodies. However, 21% of tested EBV-positive, but none of the EBV-negative Hodgkin's lymphoma patients had developed EBNA1 specific IgG4 responses in addition.  Discussion General immune suppression promotes the emergence of lymphoproliferative disease, expressing numerous EBV antigens. Our study suggests that immune competent individuals may only be susceptible to EBV positive lymphomas, if they lack immune responses to the most frequently recognized target of CD4+ T cell responses among HL associated antigens, namely towards EBNA1. Loss of the CD4+ T cell response to the limited group of EBV antigens present in EBV associated lymphomas might be especially dangerous, since helper T cells orchestrate adaptive immune responses and are required to maintain CD8+ T cell functionality 16 , in addition to their direct antiviral functions 17 . Therefore, CD8+ T cell responses against for example the latent membrane protein 2 (LMP2), which is also expressed in HL, might not be able to keep EBV's transformation potential in check without CD4+ T cell help. Vulnerability to EBV associated tumorigenesis by decreased EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell responses might exist prior to Hodgkin's lymphoma development or be induced by immune suppressive mechanisms of the tumor cells themselves. Alternatively, these T cells could be depleted from the periphery by homing to the tumor tissue without being able to clear the lymphoma at these sites. The presence of EBNA1 specific antibody responses suggests that EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell help was present during the primary immune response to EBV, but then might have been lost or diminished below the detection limit of the assays used in this study, during or prior to tumorigenesis. In addition, a subset of individuals that acquire EBV by symptomatic EBV infection called infectious mononucleosis (IM) have been described to lack EBNA1 specific antibody responses 18 , and IM confers a fourfold higher risk to develop HL with a median incubation time of four years after IM resolution 19 . This might indicate that a subset of IM patients acquire EBV without developing EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell responses, predisposing them to develop HL. While Th2 associated EBNA1 specific IgG4 responses were observed in some EBV-positive Hodgkin's lymphoma patients, the very same patients did not demonstrate EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell proliferation nor was there a significant increase in Th2 associated cytokines in the supernatants of these proliferation assays as measured by Luminex. This argues against skewing of the EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell response from protective Th1 polarization to tumor growth promoting Th2 polarization 10 , 20 as a general pathomechanism in Hodgkin's lymphoma. In some patients (20%), however, which later developed EBV-positive lymphomas, Th2 polarized T cells specific for EBNA1 might have been present, and then lost prior or during tumorigenesis, as indicated by the persisting IgG4 antibodies and lack of CD4+ T cell proliferation to this antigen. Therefore, our data suggest general loss of EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell control as a predisposing or promoting factor for the development of EBV-positive Hodgkin's lymphoma in the majority of patients. An initially diminished immune response to EBNA1, combined with immune evasion strategies by Hodgkin Reed Sternberg cells, like IL-13 21 and galectin-1 production 22 , as well as regulatory T cell induction 23 , 24 , might have allowed the tumor to escape EBV specific immune control in lymphoma patients. Similar to our findings in HL, endemic Burkitt's lymphoma patients seem to have decreased EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell responses in the presence of intact humoral immune responses to EBNA1 (Ann Moormann, personal communication). In addition to EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell loss in spontaneous EBV-positive Hodgkin's and Burkitt's lymphomas, two independent groups reported that selective EBV specific CD4+ T cell depletion by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), even after recovery of total CD4+ T cell numbers under antiretroviral therapy (ART), predisposed and accompanied EBV associated non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) 25 and CNS lymphoma 26 . Interestingly, primarily loss of EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells, even when CD4+ T cell responses against the lytic antigen BZLF1 recovered under ART, was associated with NHL development 25 . Consistent with a hole in EBV specific immune control, rather than the general loss of immune responses against this virus in HIV infected individuals, EBV viral load, also established at a new setpoint during HIV infection, was stable and not predictive for EBV associate lymphoma development 27 . Our studies together with previously published information on HIV associated EBV positive malignancies suggest that selective loss of EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell control is associated with EBV positive lymphoma development, but the mechanism behind this loss remains unclear. Regardless of the cause of diminished EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell responses in EBV positive lymphoma patients, our study suggests that immunotherapeutic strategies should be developed to stimulate this arm of EBV specific immune control. In addition, it should be considered to develop EBNA1 based vaccines, which could be used to prevent the symptomatic EBV infection IM, as well as the increased risk to develop HL following IM 19 .  Discussion General immune suppression promotes the emergence of lymphoproliferative disease, expressing numerous EBV antigens. Our study suggests that immune competent individuals may only be susceptible to EBV positive lymphomas, if they lack immune responses to the most frequently recognized target of CD4+ T cell responses among HL associated antigens, namely towards EBNA1. Loss of the CD4+ T cell response to the limited group of EBV antigens present in EBV associated lymphomas might be especially dangerous, since helper T cells orchestrate adaptive immune responses and are required to maintain CD8+ T cell functionality 16 , in addition to their direct antiviral functions 17 . Therefore, CD8+ T cell responses against for example the latent membrane protein 2 (LMP2), which is also expressed in HL, might not be able to keep EBV's transformation potential in check without CD4+ T cell help. Vulnerability to EBV associated tumorigenesis by decreased EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell responses might exist prior to Hodgkin's lymphoma development or be induced by immune suppressive mechanisms of the tumor cells themselves. Alternatively, these T cells could be depleted from the periphery by homing to the tumor tissue without being able to clear the lymphoma at these sites. The presence of EBNA1 specific antibody responses suggests that EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell help was present during the primary immune response to EBV, but then might have been lost or diminished below the detection limit of the assays used in this study, during or prior to tumorigenesis. In addition, a subset of individuals that acquire EBV by symptomatic EBV infection called infectious mononucleosis (IM) have been described to lack EBNA1 specific antibody responses 18 , and IM confers a fourfold higher risk to develop HL with a median incubation time of four years after IM resolution 19 . This might indicate that a subset of IM patients acquire EBV without developing EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell responses, predisposing them to develop HL. While Th2 associated EBNA1 specific IgG4 responses were observed in some EBV-positive Hodgkin's lymphoma patients, the very same patients did not demonstrate EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell proliferation nor was there a significant increase in Th2 associated cytokines in the supernatants of these proliferation assays as measured by Luminex. This argues against skewing of the EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell response from protective Th1 polarization to tumor growth promoting Th2 polarization 10 , 20 as a general pathomechanism in Hodgkin's lymphoma. In some patients (20%), however, which later developed EBV-positive lymphomas, Th2 polarized T cells specific for EBNA1 might have been present, and then lost prior or during tumorigenesis, as indicated by the persisting IgG4 antibodies and lack of CD4+ T cell proliferation to this antigen. Therefore, our data suggest general loss of EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell control as a predisposing or promoting factor for the development of EBV-positive Hodgkin's lymphoma in the majority of patients. An initially diminished immune response to EBNA1, combined with immune evasion strategies by Hodgkin Reed Sternberg cells, like IL-13 21 and galectin-1 production 22 , as well as regulatory T cell induction 23 , 24 , might have allowed the tumor to escape EBV specific immune control in lymphoma patients. Similar to our findings in HL, endemic Burkitt's lymphoma patients seem to have decreased EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell responses in the presence of intact humoral immune responses to EBNA1 (Ann Moormann, personal communication). In addition to EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell loss in spontaneous EBV-positive Hodgkin's and Burkitt's lymphomas, two independent groups reported that selective EBV specific CD4+ T cell depletion by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), even after recovery of total CD4+ T cell numbers under antiretroviral therapy (ART), predisposed and accompanied EBV associated non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) 25 and CNS lymphoma 26 . Interestingly, primarily loss of EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells, even when CD4+ T cell responses against the lytic antigen BZLF1 recovered under ART, was associated with NHL development 25 . Consistent with a hole in EBV specific immune control, rather than the general loss of immune responses against this virus in HIV infected individuals, EBV viral load, also established at a new setpoint during HIV infection, was stable and not predictive for EBV associate lymphoma development 27 . Our studies together with previously published information on HIV associated EBV positive malignancies suggest that selective loss of EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell control is associated with EBV positive lymphoma development, but the mechanism behind this loss remains unclear. Regardless of the cause of diminished EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cell responses in EBV positive lymphoma patients, our study suggests that immunotherapeutic strategies should be developed to stimulate this arm of EBV specific immune control. In addition, it should be considered to develop EBNA1 based vaccines, which could be used to prevent the symptomatic EBV infection IM, as well as the increased risk to develop HL following IM 19 .  Supplementary Material 1 2 3 4 5  Supplementary Material 1 2 3 4 5  Figures and Tables Figure 1 EBNA1 specific CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell production of IFN? among patients and healthy volunteers EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells were analyzed by intracellular IFN? staining. CD4+ T cell responses in response to Medium (no stimulus), Staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB), influenza A viral particle infection (FLU), and EBNA1 peptides (EBNA1) are shown. A. Whole blood assay after gating on lymphocytes, based on size, and on CD4+ T cells. The frequency of IFN?+CD4+ T cells is indicated. CD4+ cells (x-axis) and intracellular cytokine staining for INF? (y-axis) are depicted. The top row represents detected IFN? responses from one of twenty EBV-positive carriers. The second row represents an EBV-seronegative individual. The third row represents one of 17 EBV-seropositive patients with EBER-negative lymphomas and the bottom row is representative of one of 9 patients with an EBER positive lymphoma. Gates for IFN? positive cells are based on isotype controls. B. Graph depicting the average frequency of CD4+ T cell production of IFN? in response to the indicated antigens HCMV derived CD8+ T cell epitopes (CMV) was used as an additional negative control. Figure 2 EBNA1 specific CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell proliferation among patients and healthy volunteers EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells were analyzed by CFSE proliferation assays. CD4+ T cell responses in response to Medium (no stimulus), Staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB), influenza A viral particle infection (FLU), and EBNA1 peptides (EBNA1) are shown. CFSE dilution, or proliferation, was determined after gating on lymphocytes, based on size. The frequency of CFSE dilute (proliferating) CD4+ T cells is indicated. Intensity of CFSE (x-axis) and CD4+ cells (y-axis) are depicted. The top row represents proliferation responses from one out of twenty EBV-positive carriers, samples from an EBV-seronegative individual are shown in the second row. The third row represents one of 16 EBV-seropositive patients with EBER-negative lymphomas and the bottom row is representative of one of 8 patients with an EBER positive lymphoma. Gates for CFSE dilute or proliferating cells are shown. Figure 3 Immunoglobulin titers to EBNA1 and tetanus toxoid among patients and healthy carriers Average immunoglobulin G isotype titers from the healthy and patient cohorts are shown in this figure. A. Average immunoglobulin titers to EBNA1 are compared from 20 healthy EBV carriers, 25 EBV-seropositive patients with EBER-negative lymphomas and 19 patients with EBER positive lymphomas. Ratios of patients or volunteers with positive or detectable titers are outlined in table below graph. Although all three cohorts had similar IgG1, IgG2 and IgG3 titers, only patients from the EBV positive lymphoma cohort had a detectable EBNA1 specific IgG4 titer. This was statistically significant compared to both healthy and EBV-negative lympohoma cohorts (p < 0.005). B. Average immunoglobulin titers to tetanus toxoid are compared from 12 healthy EBV-seropositive volunteers, 25 EBV-seropositive patients with EBER-negative lymphomas and 19 patients with EBER positive lymphomas. Ratios of patients or volunteers with positive or detectable titers are outlined in table below graph. All three cohorts had similar IgG1, IgG2, IgG3 and IgG4 titers, Table 1A Summary of Patients with EBER-positive lymhomas Immunoglobulins to EBNA1 IFN? Production in response to: Proliferation of CD4+ T cells in response to: Patient: AGE: SEX: Diagnosis Histology IgG1 IgG4 EBNA1 CD4+ T cells FLU CD4+ T cells EBV peptides CD8+ T cells EBNA1 FLU RU501 60 F Hodgkin Mixed Cellularity POS NEG NEG n.d. POS NEG n.d. RU503 30 M NK/T-cell Lymphoma n.a. POS NEG NEG n.d. POS NEG n.d. RU505 22 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG NEG n.d. NEG NEG n.d. RU516 42 M Hodgkin n.a. POS POS NEG n.d. NEG NEG POS RU538 16 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG NEG POS NEG NEG POS RU509 43 M Diffuse Large B cell n.a. POS NEG NEG n.d. NEG n.d. ‡ n.d. RU514 19 M Hodgkin Mixed Cellularity POS NEG NEG n.d. POS n.d. n.d. RU515 n/a F Hodgkin n.a. POS POS NEG n.d. NEG n.d. n.d. RU555 27 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG NEG POS NEG n.d. n.d. COG187 12 M Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis NEG NEG n.d. † n.d. n.d. NEG n.d. COG136 11 M Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. NEG n.d. COG198 15 M Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS POS n.d. n.d. n.d. NEG n.d. COG579 13 M Hodgkin lymphocyte rich POS NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. § n.d. COG291 15 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis NEG NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. COG584 13 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS POS n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. COG615 9 F Hodgkin Mixed Cellularity POS NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. COG334 7 M Hodgkin Mixed Cellularity POS NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. COG580 7 F Hodgkin Interfollicular POS NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. COG038 12 M Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. 20.72 10M/9F 17 of 19 4 of 19 0 of 9 2 of 2 3 of 9 0 of 8 2 of 2 n.a. = not available, n.d. = not determined, POS = positive result, NEG = Negative result. † = Intracellular cytokine staining could not be done on frozen samples; this assay only works shortly after blood draws (28). ‡ = Proliferation assays were not done on patients who could not provide 50ml of blood. § = Frozen samples that did not show proliferation to positive controls (SEB) were excluded from this table. Table 1B Summary of Patients with EBER-negative lymhomas Immunoglobulins to EBNA1 IFN? Production in response to: Proliferation of CD4+ T cells in response to: Patient: AGE: SEX: Diagnosis Histology IgG1 IgG4 EBNA1 CD4+ T cells FLU CD4+ T cells EBV peptides CD8+ T cells EBNA1 FLU RU511 61 M Diffuse Large B cell n.a. POS NEG POS n.d. POS POS n.d. RU518 65 F Marginal zone Lymp n.a. POS NEG POS n.d NEG POS POS RU520 54 M Follicular lymphoma grade 1 POS NEG NEG n.d. POS POS NEG RU529 73 F Diffuse Large B cell n.a. POS NEG POS POS POS POS POS RU530 36 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG POS POS POS NEG NEG RU532 59 M Follicular lymphoma grade I/III NEG NEG POS POS POS POS POS RU537 72 F Follicular lymphoma grade II POS NEG NEG NEG POS POS POS RU539 51 F Follicular lymphoma grade I POS NEG NEG POS NEG NEG NEG RU541 49 M Follicular lymphoma grade I/III POS NEG NEG POS POS POS POS RU544 72 F Follicular lymphoma grade 1/2 POS NEG NEG POS POS POS POS RU506 45 M Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG POS n.d. POS n.d. ‡ n.d. RU521 73 F Follicular lymphoma grade 1 POS NEG POS n.d POS n.d. n.d. RU522 44 F Follicular lymphoma grade 2 POS NEG POS n.d. POS n.d. n.d. RU525 15 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG POS n.d NEG n.d. n.d. RU542 63 F MALT n.a. POS NEG NEG NEG NEG n.d. n.d. RU545 48 F Hodgkin lymphocyte rich POS NEG POS NEG NEG n.d. n.d. RU552 17 M Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis NEG NEG NEG POS NEG n.d. n.d. COG216 13 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis NEG NEG n.d. † n.d. n.d. POS n.d. COG264 16 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. POS n.d. COG134 18 M Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis NEG NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. POS n.d. COG443 14 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. POS n.d. COG339 15 M Hodgkin Mixed cellularity POS NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. POS n.d. COG186 18 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis NEG NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. NEG n.d. COG114 15 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. § n.d. COG816 13 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis NEG NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. 40.76 8M/17F 19 of 25 0 of 25 10 of 17 7 of 10 11 of 17 13 of 16 6 of 9 n.a. = not available, n.d. = not determined, POS = positive result, NEG = Negative result. † = Intracellular cytokine staining could not be done on frozen samples; this assay only works shortly after blood draws (28). ‡ = Proliferation assays were not done on patients who could not provide 50ml of blood. § = Frozen samples that did not show proliferation to positive controls (SEB) were excluded from this table.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 EBNA1 specific CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell production of IFN? among patients and healthy volunteers EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells were analyzed by intracellular IFN? staining. CD4+ T cell responses in response to Medium (no stimulus), Staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB), influenza A viral particle infection (FLU), and EBNA1 peptides (EBNA1) are shown. A. Whole blood assay after gating on lymphocytes, based on size, and on CD4+ T cells. The frequency of IFN?+CD4+ T cells is indicated. CD4+ cells (x-axis) and intracellular cytokine staining for INF? (y-axis) are depicted. The top row represents detected IFN? responses from one of twenty EBV-positive carriers. The second row represents an EBV-seronegative individual. The third row represents one of 17 EBV-seropositive patients with EBER-negative lymphomas and the bottom row is representative of one of 9 patients with an EBER positive lymphoma. Gates for IFN? positive cells are based on isotype controls. B. Graph depicting the average frequency of CD4+ T cell production of IFN? in response to the indicated antigens HCMV derived CD8+ T cell epitopes (CMV) was used as an additional negative control. Figure 2 EBNA1 specific CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell proliferation among patients and healthy volunteers EBNA1 specific CD4+ T cells were analyzed by CFSE proliferation assays. CD4+ T cell responses in response to Medium (no stimulus), Staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB), influenza A viral particle infection (FLU), and EBNA1 peptides (EBNA1) are shown. CFSE dilution, or proliferation, was determined after gating on lymphocytes, based on size. The frequency of CFSE dilute (proliferating) CD4+ T cells is indicated. Intensity of CFSE (x-axis) and CD4+ cells (y-axis) are depicted. The top row represents proliferation responses from one out of twenty EBV-positive carriers, samples from an EBV-seronegative individual are shown in the second row. The third row represents one of 16 EBV-seropositive patients with EBER-negative lymphomas and the bottom row is representative of one of 8 patients with an EBER positive lymphoma. Gates for CFSE dilute or proliferating cells are shown. Figure 3 Immunoglobulin titers to EBNA1 and tetanus toxoid among patients and healthy carriers Average immunoglobulin G isotype titers from the healthy and patient cohorts are shown in this figure. A. Average immunoglobulin titers to EBNA1 are compared from 20 healthy EBV carriers, 25 EBV-seropositive patients with EBER-negative lymphomas and 19 patients with EBER positive lymphomas. Ratios of patients or volunteers with positive or detectable titers are outlined in table below graph. Although all three cohorts had similar IgG1, IgG2 and IgG3 titers, only patients from the EBV positive lymphoma cohort had a detectable EBNA1 specific IgG4 titer. This was statistically significant compared to both healthy and EBV-negative lympohoma cohorts (p < 0.005). B. Average immunoglobulin titers to tetanus toxoid are compared from 12 healthy EBV-seropositive volunteers, 25 EBV-seropositive patients with EBER-negative lymphomas and 19 patients with EBER positive lymphomas. Ratios of patients or volunteers with positive or detectable titers are outlined in table below graph. All three cohorts had similar IgG1, IgG2, IgG3 and IgG4 titers, Table 1A Summary of Patients with EBER-positive lymhomas Immunoglobulins to EBNA1 IFN? Production in response to: Proliferation of CD4+ T cells in response to: Patient: AGE: SEX: Diagnosis Histology IgG1 IgG4 EBNA1 CD4+ T cells FLU CD4+ T cells EBV peptides CD8+ T cells EBNA1 FLU RU501 60 F Hodgkin Mixed Cellularity POS NEG NEG n.d. POS NEG n.d. RU503 30 M NK/T-cell Lymphoma n.a. POS NEG NEG n.d. POS NEG n.d. RU505 22 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG NEG n.d. NEG NEG n.d. RU516 42 M Hodgkin n.a. POS POS NEG n.d. NEG NEG POS RU538 16 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG NEG POS NEG NEG POS RU509 43 M Diffuse Large B cell n.a. POS NEG NEG n.d. NEG n.d. ‡ n.d. RU514 19 M Hodgkin Mixed Cellularity POS NEG NEG n.d. POS n.d. n.d. RU515 n/a F Hodgkin n.a. POS POS NEG n.d. NEG n.d. n.d. RU555 27 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG NEG POS NEG n.d. n.d. COG187 12 M Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis NEG NEG n.d. † n.d. n.d. NEG n.d. COG136 11 M Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. NEG n.d. COG198 15 M Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS POS n.d. n.d. n.d. NEG n.d. COG579 13 M Hodgkin lymphocyte rich POS NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. § n.d. COG291 15 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis NEG NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. COG584 13 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS POS n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. COG615 9 F Hodgkin Mixed Cellularity POS NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. COG334 7 M Hodgkin Mixed Cellularity POS NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. COG580 7 F Hodgkin Interfollicular POS NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. COG038 12 M Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. 20.72 10M/9F 17 of 19 4 of 19 0 of 9 2 of 2 3 of 9 0 of 8 2 of 2 n.a. = not available, n.d. = not determined, POS = positive result, NEG = Negative result. † = Intracellular cytokine staining could not be done on frozen samples; this assay only works shortly after blood draws (28). ‡ = Proliferation assays were not done on patients who could not provide 50ml of blood. § = Frozen samples that did not show proliferation to positive controls (SEB) were excluded from this table. Table 1B Summary of Patients with EBER-negative lymhomas Immunoglobulins to EBNA1 IFN? Production in response to: Proliferation of CD4+ T cells in response to: Patient: AGE: SEX: Diagnosis Histology IgG1 IgG4 EBNA1 CD4+ T cells FLU CD4+ T cells EBV peptides CD8+ T cells EBNA1 FLU RU511 61 M Diffuse Large B cell n.a. POS NEG POS n.d. POS POS n.d. RU518 65 F Marginal zone Lymp n.a. POS NEG POS n.d NEG POS POS RU520 54 M Follicular lymphoma grade 1 POS NEG NEG n.d. POS POS NEG RU529 73 F Diffuse Large B cell n.a. POS NEG POS POS POS POS POS RU530 36 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG POS POS POS NEG NEG RU532 59 M Follicular lymphoma grade I/III NEG NEG POS POS POS POS POS RU537 72 F Follicular lymphoma grade II POS NEG NEG NEG POS POS POS RU539 51 F Follicular lymphoma grade I POS NEG NEG POS NEG NEG NEG RU541 49 M Follicular lymphoma grade I/III POS NEG NEG POS POS POS POS RU544 72 F Follicular lymphoma grade 1/2 POS NEG NEG POS POS POS POS RU506 45 M Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG POS n.d. POS n.d. ‡ n.d. RU521 73 F Follicular lymphoma grade 1 POS NEG POS n.d POS n.d. n.d. RU522 44 F Follicular lymphoma grade 2 POS NEG POS n.d. POS n.d. n.d. RU525 15 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG POS n.d NEG n.d. n.d. RU542 63 F MALT n.a. POS NEG NEG NEG NEG n.d. n.d. RU545 48 F Hodgkin lymphocyte rich POS NEG POS NEG NEG n.d. n.d. RU552 17 M Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis NEG NEG NEG POS NEG n.d. n.d. COG216 13 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis NEG NEG n.d. † n.d. n.d. POS n.d. COG264 16 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. POS n.d. COG134 18 M Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis NEG NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. POS n.d. COG443 14 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. POS n.d. COG339 15 M Hodgkin Mixed cellularity POS NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. POS n.d. COG186 18 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis NEG NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. NEG n.d. COG114 15 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis POS NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. § n.d. COG816 13 F Hodgkin Nod. Sclerosis NEG NEG n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. 40.76 8M/17F 19 of 25 0 of 25 10 of 17 7 of 10 11 of 17 13 of 16 6 of 9 n.a. = not available, n.d. = not determined, POS = positive result, NEG = Negative result. † = Intracellular cytokine staining could not be done on frozen samples; this assay only works shortly after blood draws (28). ‡ = Proliferation assays were not done on patients who could not provide 50ml of blood. § = Frozen samples that did not show proliferation to positive controls (SEB) were excluded from this table. 