DNA vaccines: ready for prime time? Since the discovery, over a decade and a half ago, that genetically engineered DNA can be delivered in vaccine form and elicit an immune response, there has been much progress in understanding the basic biology of this platform. A large amount of data has been generated in preclinical model systems, and more sustained cellular responses and more consistent antibody responses are being observed in the clinic. Four DNA vaccine products have recently been approved, all in the area of veterinary medicine. These results suggest a productive future for this technology as more optimized constructs, better trial designs and improved platforms are being brought into the clinic.  Conclusions It has been more than 16 years since DNA vaccines stepped into the scientific limelight. During this time DNA vaccine technologies have generated great deal of excitement as well as disappointment. This situation, however, is similar to the development of a different breakthrough technology platform, that of monoclonal antibodies. More than 20 years elapsed between Kohler and Millstein”s pioneering report of hybridoma technology 163 to the commercialization of the first human therapeutic antibody product. New technologies seem to be simple and straightforward but, as illustrated in this Review, they are deceptively so. An initial idea is transformed into a workable platform only through subtle and gradual improvements. In this regard it is clear that, after several years of frustration, the DNA platform is back on a productive path. In fact, as shown in BOX 2 , the DNA platform represents almost one quarter of all gene therapy vector systems under clinical evaluation. This opinion is strengthened by recent licenses in the area of animal health and by the improvements in immune potency reported in the non-human primate model systems. However, the next 2 years of clinical testing of new and more complex DNA vaccines will be pivotal for either generating a true clinical success based on immune potency, or for telling us that we still have much further to go. Previous clinical disappointments highlight the likelihood that complexity in DNA vaccine design — including better and improved formulations, better delivery technologies, enhanced plasmid and delivery approaches, and more judicious clinical implementation — will be a staple for the continued enhancement of this platform. The further advancement of the DNA platform will continue to be an exciting and highly productive adventure that illustrates the best in academic creativity and translational science. Its success will be built on a high level of cooperation between industry, the regulatory authorities, funding by non-governmental organizations, the public and academicians. 