Recent progress on normal and malignant pancreatic stem/progenitor cell research: therapeutic implications for the treatment of type 1 or 2 diabetes mellitus and aggressive pancreatic cancer Recent progress on pancreatic stem/progenitor cell research has revealed that the putative multipotent pancreatic stem/progenitor cells and/or more committed beta cell precursors may persist in the pancreatic gland in adult life. The presence of immature pancreatic cells with stem cell-like properties offers the possibility of stimulating their in vivo expansion and differentiation or to use their ex vivo expanded progenies for beta cell replacement-based therapies for type 1 or 2 diabetes mellitus in humans. In addition, the transplantation of either insulin-producing beta cells derived from embryonic, fetal and other tissue-resident adult stem/progenitor cells or genetically modified adult stem/progenitor cells may also constitute alternative promising therapies for treating diabetic patients. The genetic and/or epigenetic alterations in putative pancreatic adult stem/progenitor cells and/or their early progenies may, however, contribute to their acquisition of a dysfunctional behaviour as well as their malignant transformation into pancreatic cancer stem/progenitor cells. More particularly, the activation of distinct tumorigenic signalling cascades, including the hedgehog, epidermal growth factor–epidermal growth factor receptor (EGF–EGFR) system, wingless ligand (Wnt)/?-catenin and/or stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1)–CXC chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) pathways may play a major role in the sustained growth, survival, metastasis and/or drug resistance of pancreatic cancer stem/progenitor cells and their further differentiated progenies. The combination of drugs that target the oncogenic elements in pancreatic cancer stem/progenitor cells and their microenvironment, with the conventional chemotherapeutic regimens, could represent promising therapeutic strategies. These novel targeted therapies should lead to the development of more effective treatments of locally advanced and metastatic pancreatic cancers, which remain incurable with current therapies.  CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH Recent progress in research on normal and malignant pancreatic stem/progenitor cells indicates their potential implications in the maintenance of tissue homeostatic state under physiological conditions as well as in the development of pancreatic disorders such as aggressive and recurrent PDAs. These recent advancements support the feasibility of stimulating these immature cells or more committed beta cell precursors in vivo or to transplant their further differentiated progenies after their ex vivo expansion for the beta cell replacement therapies for treating type 1 or 2 diabetes mellitus. Moreover, embryonic, fetal, placental and adult stem/cell progenitors resident in other adult tissues may also constitute alternative sources of beta cells for treating patients who have diabetes. In addition, the molecular targeting of the pancreatic cancer stem/progenitor cells and/or their early progenies endowed with a self-renewal potential and their local microenvironment may also constitute a promising approach for improving the current clinical treatments against aggressive and recurrent PDAs. Further research is necessary to more precisely establish the gene expression patterns of normal and malignant pancreatic stem/progenitor cell progenies and putative beta cell precursors versus their differentiated progenies in order to identify the specific biomarker patterns as well as the molecular mechanisms that may regulate their biological behaviour in vivo and/or after their ex vivo expansion. The identification of the specific intrinsic factors that govern the decision between the self-renewal versus differentiation of normal and malignant pancreatic stem/progenitor cells as well as the influence of the extracellular signals from their local microenvironment “niche” on their behaviour is notably of immense interest for the design of new therapeutic strategies. These future studies should lead to the identification of specific growth factors, cytokines and/or chemokines and host cells that control the expansion and commitment of these immature cells into the specific differentiated pancreatic cell lineages in physiological and pathological conditions. Further characterisation of cancer cells with stem cell-like properties isolated from PDA tissue specimens of patients at different early and late stages or established pancreatic cell lines is also necessary to establish new in vitro and in vivo cell models more relevant to pancreas carcinogenesis and disease progression. These new cell models could be used to estimate the cytotoxic effects of drugs such as hedgehog and EGFR inhibitors on the SP cell fraction or pancreatic cancer stem/progenitor cells with the stem cell-like properties isolated from PDA specimens or well-established pancreatic cancer cell lines is also of therapeutic interest. Hence, the establishment of the specific properties of normal versus malignant pancreatic stem/progenitor cells is essential for the successful formulation of stem cellbased therapeutic approaches that could be translated into treatment and even a cure for diabetes patients as well as the patients with locally advanced and metastatic PDAs, which remain incurable with the current conventional therapies in the clinics.  Figures Figure 1 Schematic representation of the pancreatic gland showing the anatomical localisation of putative pancreatic stem/progenitor cells (PSCs) and beta cell precursors, and stem-cell based therapies for type 1 or 2 diabetes mellitus. The scheme shows the localisation of putative pancreatic stem/progenitor cells within the ductal structure, exocrine acini and putative beta cell precursors found in a region near or within the endocrine islets of Langerhans. The complete loss or gradual destruction of islet beta cells in type 1 or 2 diabetes mellitus, respectively, and stem cell-based therapies for the beta cell replacement are also illustrated. Figure 2 Proposed model of the molecular events associated with the pancreatic duct epithelium regeneration via putative adult pancreatic stem/progenitor cells (PSCs) after tissue injury and cancer initiation and progression through their malignant transformation. This scheme shows the asymmetric division of adult pancreatic duct stem/progenitor cells into transit-amplifying (TA)/intermediate cells expressing the epithelial, acinar and/or endocrine-like markers. In turn, TA cells may regenerate the bulk mass of further differentiated pancreatic epithelial cells within the exocrine compartment during pancreatic tissue repair after severe injury. Moreover, the possibility that TA cells may also give rise through environment-mediated populational asymmetry to the exocrine acinar and/or endocrine cell precursors is also indicated. The malignant transformation of putative pancreatic duct stem/progenitor cells into tumorigenic and migrating pancreatic cancer stem/progenitor cells, which may be induced through the sustained activation of distinct tumorigenic cascades such as hedgehog, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and wingless ligand (Wnt/?-catenin) during cancer progression, and more particularly during the epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) programme is also illustrated. EPC, endothelial progenitor cell. Figure 3 Scheme showing the novel therapeutic strategies against locally advanced and/or metastatic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDAs) by targeting different oncogenic cascades signalling elements in pancreatic cancer cells. The cytotoxic agents acting as the potent inhibitors of the tumorigenic cascades including the selective inhibitors of the epidermal growth factor–epidermal growth factor receptor (EGF–EGFR) system (gefitinib, erlotinib and CI1033), smoothened hedgehog signalling element (cyclopamine), Notch (?-secretase inhibitor), ATP-binding cassette (ABC) multidrug transporter inhibitor, CXC chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) antagonist and monoclonal antibody (mAb) directed against CXCR4, mucin, integrin or Wnt ligand are also indicated. Moreover, growth inhibitory and apoptotic effects induced by the current chemotherapeutic drug, gemcitabine, are illustrated. CDK, cyclin-dependent kinase; Cyt c, cytochrome c, Fzd, frizzled receptor; MAPKs, mitogen-activated protein kinases; MEK, extracellular signal-related kinase kinase; MMPs, matrix metalloproteinases; NBD, nucleotide binding domain; SMO, smoothened; uPA, urokinase plasminogen activator; VEGF, vascular epidermal growth factor; Wnt, wingless ligand. 