The Translational Research Working Group Developmental Pathway for Anticancer Agents (Drugs or Biologics) The Translational Research Working Group (TRWG) was created as a national initiative to evaluate the current status of the National Cancer Institute’s investment in translational research and envision its future. The TRWG conceptualized translational research as a set of six developmental processes or pathways focused on various clinical goals. One of those pathways describes the development of agents—both small molecules and biologics—for the treatment and prevention of cancer. The Agents Developmental Pathway was conceived not as a comprehensive description of the corresponding real-world processes, but rather as a tool designed to facilitate movement of an agent through the translational process to the point where it can begin definitive clinical testing. This article presents the Agents Developmental Pathway and discusses key challenges associated with the processes described.  Conclusion Emerging insights into the molecular pathogenesis of human cancers have ushered in a new era of treatment that selectively targets the phenotypic consequences of somatic genome alterations. The discovery and development of molecularly targeted drugs has benefited from, and will continue to require, translational research strategies and methods. To better understand the processes by which anticancer drugs reach human clinical trials, a formal Agents Developmental Pathway has been constructed, starting with a molecular target and culminating in a phase I/II clinical trial. The Pathway captures key decision points, such as target validation and credentialing, and emphasizes the parallel development of specific agents and supporting tools needed to test new treatments efficiently in human studies. With the Agents Developmental Pathway as a general guide, translational researchers will be able to better traverse the complex terrain of drug development and, hopefully, improve the speed and efficiency of the process and the probability of success. 