?-Amyloid Deposition and Functional Impairment in the Retina of the APPswe/PS1?E9 Transgenic Mouse Model of Alzheimer’s Disease Purpose To determine whether ?-amyloid (A?) deposition affects the structure and function of the retina of the APPswe/PS1?E9 transgenic (tg) mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Methods Retinas from 12–19 month-old APPswe/PS1?E9 tg and age-matched non-transgenic (ntg) littermates were single or double stained with thioflavine-S and antibodies against A?, glial fibrilar acidic protein (GFAP), microglial marker F4/80, choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) and syntaxin 1. Quantification of thioflavine-S positive plaques and retinal layer thickness was analyzed semi-quantitatively, whereas microglial cell size and levels of F4/80 immunoreactivity were evaluated using a densitometry program. Scotopic electroretinogram (ERG) recording was used to investigate retinal physiology in these mice. Results Thioflavine-S positive plaques appeared at 12 months in the retinas of APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice with the majority of plaques in the outer and inner plexiform (IPL) layers. Plaques were embedded in the IPL strata displaying syntaxin 1 and ChAT. The number and size of the plaques in the retina increased with age. Plaques appeared earlier and in greater numbers in females than in male tg littermate mice. Microglial activity was significantly increased in the retinas of APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice. Although we did not detect neuronal degeneration in the retina, ERG recordings revealed a significant reduction in the amplitudes of a and b waves in aged APPswe/PS1?E9 tg compared to ntg littermates. Conclusions The present findings suggest that A? deposition disrupts retinal structure and may contribute to the visual deficits seen in aged APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice. Whether A? is involved in other forms of age-related retinal dysfunction is unclear.  MATERIAL AND METHODS Transgenic mice We used a total of 31 animals, consisting of 14 middle-aged (12–16 months; 8 male and 9 female) and 2 old female (19–21 months) heterozygous tg mice harboring FAD-linked mutant APPswe/PS1?E9 27 , 33 – 35 and 11 age-matched middle-aged (12–16 months; 4 male and 7 female) and 2 old female (19–21 months) non-transgenic (ntg) littermate mice. Old APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice were not used for plaque counts or ERG recording due to their limited number. The APPswe/PS1?E9 doubly heterozygous transgenic mice were obtained by crossing heterozygotes of single APPswe transgenic, C3-3, and PS1?E9 transgenic mice, S-9 derived from breeding pairs provided by Dr. Sangram Sisodia (University of Chicago, IL). The APPswe transgenic mice express human amyloid precursor protein (APP) 695 carrying mutations (K595N, M596L) linked to Swedish FAD pedigrees (APPswe) via the mouse prion promoter. 27 , 33 – 35 The PS1?E9 transgenic mice express mutant presenilin 1 with deletion of exon9 under the control of the same mouse prion promoter. 36 All animals were housed in an air-conditioned room and maintained on a 12:12 hour light-dark cycle. Food and water were available ad libitum . Animal care and procedures were conducted according to the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. Tissue preparation and thioflavine-S staining All mice were perfused transcardially with ice-cold 0.9% sodium chloride (NaCl), followed by 4% paraformaldehyde and 0.1% glutaraldehyde in a 0.1 M phosphate buffer solution. Eyes were rapidly removed, placed in the same fixative for 12 hours at 4°C, and cryoprotected in 30% sucrose in PBS at 4°C. Eyes were embedded in OCT Compound (Tissue Tek, Torrance, CA) and serially sectioned across the entire eye-ball on a cryostat (Leica CM3050, Germany) at 18–20 ?m thickness. Three sets of sections were collected, mounted on slides (Superfrost Plus, Fisher, Pittsburgh, PA) and stored at ?70°C. For plaque detecting and counting, a full set of the slides throughout the entire eye was stained with thioflavine-S (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). Briefly, sections were air-dried, defatted with chloroform-ethanol (1:1), followed by rehydration with a graded series of ethanol. We then stained the sections with 0.1% aqueous thioflavine-S for 10 minutes at room temperature, differentiated in 80% ethanol. After several distilled water rinses, the slides were cover-slipped with an aqueous mounting medium (Biomeda Corp, Foster City, CA). Plaques throughout the entire retina were counted using a Zeiss Axioplan2 fluorescent microscope by an observer blinded to age, gender and genotype of the samples. Antibody Immunostaining Immunofluorescence was used to visualize A?, GFAP, choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) and syntaxin 1 profiles in the retina of APPswe/PS13E9 tg and ntg mice. Retinal sections were stained using a monoclonal antiserum against human A?(10D5, 1:1000 dilution; a gift of Elan Pharmaceutics, San Francisco, CA), rabbit polyclonal antibody against bovine GFAP, an intermediate filament protein (1:2000 dilution; DAKO, Denmark), goat anti-ChAT antibody (1:200 dilution; Millipore, Billerica, MA) and a monoclonal antiserum against syntaxin 1 (HPC-1; 1:1000 dilution) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). The secondary antibodies, donkey anti-mouse or anti-rabbit Cy3-conjugated were used at dilution 1:300, while donkey anti-goat Cy2-conjugated were used at a 1:200 concentration (Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs, West Grove, PA). Microglia were stained using the macrophage marker F4/80 antigen (1:5000 dilution; Serotec, Raleigh, NY), visualized by the avidin-biotin method, using a biotinylated rabbit anti-rat mouse secondary antibody (1:200; Vector Laboratories, CA) and reacted with the chromogen diaminobenzidine (DAB; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and intensified with nickel.29 Selected sections were co-stained with thioflavine-S after immunostaining with antibodies against A?, GFAP or syntaxin 1, or dual immunostained for A? and ChAT. Immuohistochemical controls consisted of the deletion of the each primary antibody resulting in absence of immunolabeling. As a positive control, brain sections containing the hippocampus from this double mutant mouse were processed for the immunofluorescent demonstration of A? and thioflavine-S using the procedure described above. Electroretinogram (ERG) Scotopic ERGs were recorded in 12 middle-aged APPswe/PS1?E9 tg and 7 age-matched ntg littermate mice. Prior to testing, all mice were dark-adapted overnight, then anesthetized i.p with a mixture of ketamine/xylazine (80mg/kg/16mg/kg) in PBS. Pupil dilation was induced by the application of a 1% tropicamide and 2.5% phenylephrine HCl solution (Accutone, Pen Malvern, PA). A Dawson-Trick-Litzkow plus electrode (Diagnosys LLC, Littleton, MA) was placed in contact with the corneal surface. Needle reference and needle ground electrodes were subcutaneously attached to the cheek and tail, respectively. ERG recordings were performed using an EPIC-4000 system (LKC, Technologies Inc., Gaitherburg, MD). Prior to the light flash, a 5–10s baseline reading was obtained to determine background noise levels. Then the animal was stimulated with white light flashes at two constant intensities presented in the order of 0.008 cd/m2s (?25 dB) and 2.5 cd/m2s (0dB). 25 sweeps (256 ms/sweep with 5 sec intervals) were averaged to obtain a single ERG recording. At least 3 recordings were acquired from each eye and intensity. The following components of the ERG recordings were analyzed: 1) the amplitude of the a wave: measured from baseline to peak; 2) the amplitude of the b wave: measured from the a wave through to the b wave peak; 3) latency: the time from onset of the stimulus to the beginning of a wave; 4) implicit time: the time from onset of stimulus to peak of b wave. Analysis of the thickness of the nuclear layers of the retina At least three retinal sections from each animal cut in the same horizontal angle across the optic nerves were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). The numbers of layers of the nuclei in the inner and outer nuclear layers and the ganglion cell layer were manually counted in a comparable retinal area (~ 200 um peripheral to the optic nerve) by an observer blinded to age, sex and genotype of the samples. Optical density of retinal microglia Comparable retinal sections of APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice (n=9) and ntg littermates (n=5) (12–16 months) were immunostained with the microglial marker, anti-F4/80 antibody. Quantification of relative optical density (OD) levels of F4/80 antigen immunoreactivity of microglia cell body and proximal processes in the retina were performed using a densitometry software program (Image 1.60, Scion 1.6. Scion Image System), as previously described. 29 Briefly, a circular area of 512 ?m2 (~25.5 ?m in diameter) with the microglial cell body in the center was measured to determine OD ( Fig. 4 ). To determine the final OD, background ODs consisting of five measurements from retinal areas devoid of micorglial staining were averaged and subtracted from at least 10 randomly-selected microglial profiles from each animal ( Fig. 4 ). In addition, microglial cell body size was determined using the same software program described above. Statistical analysis Data obtained from plaque counting, the measurement of the thickness of the retinal nuclear layers and the optical density measurements as well as ERG recordings from APPswe/PS1?E9 tg and ntg control mice were compared using a Student’s t test (Sigma-Stat 3.0 Aspire Software International, Leesburg, VA). The level of statistical significance was set at 0.05 (two-sided). Values were graphically represented as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM) with Sigma-Plot 10 (Aspire Software International, Leesburg, VA).  Transgenic mice We used a total of 31 animals, consisting of 14 middle-aged (12–16 months; 8 male and 9 female) and 2 old female (19–21 months) heterozygous tg mice harboring FAD-linked mutant APPswe/PS1?E9 27 , 33 – 35 and 11 age-matched middle-aged (12–16 months; 4 male and 7 female) and 2 old female (19–21 months) non-transgenic (ntg) littermate mice. Old APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice were not used for plaque counts or ERG recording due to their limited number. The APPswe/PS1?E9 doubly heterozygous transgenic mice were obtained by crossing heterozygotes of single APPswe transgenic, C3-3, and PS1?E9 transgenic mice, S-9 derived from breeding pairs provided by Dr. Sangram Sisodia (University of Chicago, IL). The APPswe transgenic mice express human amyloid precursor protein (APP) 695 carrying mutations (K595N, M596L) linked to Swedish FAD pedigrees (APPswe) via the mouse prion promoter. 27 , 33 – 35 The PS1?E9 transgenic mice express mutant presenilin 1 with deletion of exon9 under the control of the same mouse prion promoter. 36 All animals were housed in an air-conditioned room and maintained on a 12:12 hour light-dark cycle. Food and water were available ad libitum . Animal care and procedures were conducted according to the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.  Tissue preparation and thioflavine-S staining All mice were perfused transcardially with ice-cold 0.9% sodium chloride (NaCl), followed by 4% paraformaldehyde and 0.1% glutaraldehyde in a 0.1 M phosphate buffer solution. Eyes were rapidly removed, placed in the same fixative for 12 hours at 4°C, and cryoprotected in 30% sucrose in PBS at 4°C. Eyes were embedded in OCT Compound (Tissue Tek, Torrance, CA) and serially sectioned across the entire eye-ball on a cryostat (Leica CM3050, Germany) at 18–20 ?m thickness. Three sets of sections were collected, mounted on slides (Superfrost Plus, Fisher, Pittsburgh, PA) and stored at ?70°C. For plaque detecting and counting, a full set of the slides throughout the entire eye was stained with thioflavine-S (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). Briefly, sections were air-dried, defatted with chloroform-ethanol (1:1), followed by rehydration with a graded series of ethanol. We then stained the sections with 0.1% aqueous thioflavine-S for 10 minutes at room temperature, differentiated in 80% ethanol. After several distilled water rinses, the slides were cover-slipped with an aqueous mounting medium (Biomeda Corp, Foster City, CA). Plaques throughout the entire retina were counted using a Zeiss Axioplan2 fluorescent microscope by an observer blinded to age, gender and genotype of the samples.  Antibody Immunostaining Immunofluorescence was used to visualize A?, GFAP, choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) and syntaxin 1 profiles in the retina of APPswe/PS13E9 tg and ntg mice. Retinal sections were stained using a monoclonal antiserum against human A?(10D5, 1:1000 dilution; a gift of Elan Pharmaceutics, San Francisco, CA), rabbit polyclonal antibody against bovine GFAP, an intermediate filament protein (1:2000 dilution; DAKO, Denmark), goat anti-ChAT antibody (1:200 dilution; Millipore, Billerica, MA) and a monoclonal antiserum against syntaxin 1 (HPC-1; 1:1000 dilution) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). The secondary antibodies, donkey anti-mouse or anti-rabbit Cy3-conjugated were used at dilution 1:300, while donkey anti-goat Cy2-conjugated were used at a 1:200 concentration (Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs, West Grove, PA). Microglia were stained using the macrophage marker F4/80 antigen (1:5000 dilution; Serotec, Raleigh, NY), visualized by the avidin-biotin method, using a biotinylated rabbit anti-rat mouse secondary antibody (1:200; Vector Laboratories, CA) and reacted with the chromogen diaminobenzidine (DAB; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and intensified with nickel.29 Selected sections were co-stained with thioflavine-S after immunostaining with antibodies against A?, GFAP or syntaxin 1, or dual immunostained for A? and ChAT. Immuohistochemical controls consisted of the deletion of the each primary antibody resulting in absence of immunolabeling. As a positive control, brain sections containing the hippocampus from this double mutant mouse were processed for the immunofluorescent demonstration of A? and thioflavine-S using the procedure described above.  Electroretinogram (ERG) Scotopic ERGs were recorded in 12 middle-aged APPswe/PS1?E9 tg and 7 age-matched ntg littermate mice. Prior to testing, all mice were dark-adapted overnight, then anesthetized i.p with a mixture of ketamine/xylazine (80mg/kg/16mg/kg) in PBS. Pupil dilation was induced by the application of a 1% tropicamide and 2.5% phenylephrine HCl solution (Accutone, Pen Malvern, PA). A Dawson-Trick-Litzkow plus electrode (Diagnosys LLC, Littleton, MA) was placed in contact with the corneal surface. Needle reference and needle ground electrodes were subcutaneously attached to the cheek and tail, respectively. ERG recordings were performed using an EPIC-4000 system (LKC, Technologies Inc., Gaitherburg, MD). Prior to the light flash, a 5–10s baseline reading was obtained to determine background noise levels. Then the animal was stimulated with white light flashes at two constant intensities presented in the order of 0.008 cd/m2s (?25 dB) and 2.5 cd/m2s (0dB). 25 sweeps (256 ms/sweep with 5 sec intervals) were averaged to obtain a single ERG recording. At least 3 recordings were acquired from each eye and intensity. The following components of the ERG recordings were analyzed: 1) the amplitude of the a wave: measured from baseline to peak; 2) the amplitude of the b wave: measured from the a wave through to the b wave peak; 3) latency: the time from onset of the stimulus to the beginning of a wave; 4) implicit time: the time from onset of stimulus to peak of b wave.  Analysis of the thickness of the nuclear layers of the retina At least three retinal sections from each animal cut in the same horizontal angle across the optic nerves were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). The numbers of layers of the nuclei in the inner and outer nuclear layers and the ganglion cell layer were manually counted in a comparable retinal area (~ 200 um peripheral to the optic nerve) by an observer blinded to age, sex and genotype of the samples.  Optical density of retinal microglia Comparable retinal sections of APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice (n=9) and ntg littermates (n=5) (12–16 months) were immunostained with the microglial marker, anti-F4/80 antibody. Quantification of relative optical density (OD) levels of F4/80 antigen immunoreactivity of microglia cell body and proximal processes in the retina were performed using a densitometry software program (Image 1.60, Scion 1.6. Scion Image System), as previously described. 29 Briefly, a circular area of 512 ?m2 (~25.5 ?m in diameter) with the microglial cell body in the center was measured to determine OD ( Fig. 4 ). To determine the final OD, background ODs consisting of five measurements from retinal areas devoid of micorglial staining were averaged and subtracted from at least 10 randomly-selected microglial profiles from each animal ( Fig. 4 ). In addition, microglial cell body size was determined using the same software program described above.  Statistical analysis Data obtained from plaque counting, the measurement of the thickness of the retinal nuclear layers and the optical density measurements as well as ERG recordings from APPswe/PS1?E9 tg and ntg control mice were compared using a Student’s t test (Sigma-Stat 3.0 Aspire Software International, Leesburg, VA). The level of statistical significance was set at 0.05 (two-sided). Values were graphically represented as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM) with Sigma-Plot 10 (Aspire Software International, Leesburg, VA).  RESULTS Retinal A? plaque deposition is age and gender dependent in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice At the time points examined in the present study, thioflavine-S positive plaques were first observed in the retinas of 12 months old APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice ( Fig. 1A ), while plaques were not seen in their ntg litermate mice ( Fig. 1C ). Virtually all thioflavine-S positive plaques co-labeled with A? immunoreactivity ( Fig. 1D–I ). The majority of retinal thioflavine-S positive plaques displayed radial branches with a small central core ( Fig. 1D–I ). The size of the thioflavine-S plaques in the retina ranged between 5–20 ?m. The larger plaques were mainly seen at 15–16 months of age in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice ( Fig. 1B ). At these ages, the total number of plaques was about 20-fold greater than in 12–14 month old APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice ( Fig. 2A ). Similar plaque pathology was seen in the brain of these double mutant mice ( Fig. 1J–L ). Most of the plaques were located in the inner and outer plexiform layers (IPL and OPL) of the retina, with ~41% of plaques located in the OPL and ~34.7% in the INL, respectively ( Figs. 1 and 2C ). The plexiform layers mainly consist of the fibers and synapses of the retinal neurons. This location is consistent with the observation that synaptically released A? accumulates and aggregates as extracellular plaque deposits. 28 A? plaque deposition in the retina appeared earlier in female than male APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice, supporting previous results showing gender differences in brain plaque deposition in APP over-expressing mice. 37 Plaques were first detected in the IPL and/or OPL in 12 month-old female tg mice ( Figs. 1A and 2B ), while no plaques were observed in male tg mice until 13 months of age. At 12–14 months of age, 25% of the males, while 33% of the female tg mice displayed plaques, whereas at 15–16 months of age 100% of female and 75% of male mutant mice showed plaques in the retina. Retinal A? plaques disrupt neuropil organization in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice To examine whether A? plaques alters the retinal structure of tg mice, sections were immunovisualized using syntaxin 1 and ChAT. Syntaxin 1 is a membrane associated SNAP receptor protein involved in membrane fusion and synaptic transmission, which stains the processes and presynaptic terminals of the amacrine cells in the IPL ( Fig. 3A–C ). 38 ChAT is a marker for cholinergic amacine cells and their processes in the INL and ganglion cell layer (GCL). Within the IPL, cholinergic dendritic processes are organized in two strata ( Fig. 3D–F ). Double fluorescence staining for thioflavine-S and syntaxin 1 revealed that plaques disrupted the distribution of syntaxin 1 positive processes within the IPL of aged (19–20 months) APPswe/PS1?E9 mice ( Fig. 3A–C ). In addition, dual immunohistochemical staining for thioflavine-S and ChAT revealed that some A? deposits were embedded within the IPL cholinergic bands, possibly disturbing this ChAT dendritic network ( Fig. 3D–F ). Retinal plaque deposition is accompanied by microglia activation in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice To evaluate glial activity in response to A? deposition we performed immunostaining with antibodies against GFAP and the microglial marker, F4/80, 39 in the retinas of middle-aged APPswe/PS1?E9 tg compared to age-matched ntg mice. Fluorescent microscopy revealed a similar pattern of GFAP immunoreactivity restricted to the distal portion of Müller cells and astrocytes in both mutant and ntg mice independent of age and gender. GFAP immunoreactive profiles failed to co-localize with either thioflavine-S or A? positive staining (data not shown). However, qualitative evaluation revealed greater microglia activity in mutant compared to age-matched ntg mice at any age examined ( Fig. 4 ). In addition, microglia processes in the retinas of tg mice were thicker and displayed a “dendritic-like” appearance compared to those seen in ntg mice ( Fig. 4a and b ). Optical density measurements of F4/80 immunoreactive microglia revealed a significant increase in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg compared to age-matched ntg mice ( Fig. 4C ; Student’s t-test, p= 0.023), while the size of the microglial cell bodies were unchanged between mutant and ntg mice (data not shown). Retinal functional deficits without neuronal cell loss in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice To examine whether A? deposition affects the cellular laminar organization of the retina, tissue from tg and ntg mice was stained with hematoxylin and eosin. We did not observe significant differences in the average thickness of the nuclear layers of the retina between 12–16 months old APPswe/PS1?E9 tg and ntg littermates (Student’s t-test, p>0.05. data not shown), suggesting that there was no obvious neuronal cell loss in the tg mouse retinas. To evaluate the functional integrity of the retinas of APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice, we performed scotopic ERG testing on dark-adapted, 12–16 month-old APPswe/PS1?E9 tg and age-matched ntg mice. Although we did not detect a significant difference in the latency or implicit time between tg and ntg mice, the amplitudes of both a (p=0.041) and b waves (p=0.039) were significantly decreased in 12–16 month-old tg (n=9) compared to ntg mice (n=5) ( Fig. 5 ) when tested at the lower light intensity of 0.008 cd/m2s, but not at 2.5 cd/m2s.  RESULTS Retinal A? plaque deposition is age and gender dependent in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice At the time points examined in the present study, thioflavine-S positive plaques were first observed in the retinas of 12 months old APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice ( Fig. 1A ), while plaques were not seen in their ntg litermate mice ( Fig. 1C ). Virtually all thioflavine-S positive plaques co-labeled with A? immunoreactivity ( Fig. 1D–I ). The majority of retinal thioflavine-S positive plaques displayed radial branches with a small central core ( Fig. 1D–I ). The size of the thioflavine-S plaques in the retina ranged between 5–20 ?m. The larger plaques were mainly seen at 15–16 months of age in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice ( Fig. 1B ). At these ages, the total number of plaques was about 20-fold greater than in 12–14 month old APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice ( Fig. 2A ). Similar plaque pathology was seen in the brain of these double mutant mice ( Fig. 1J–L ). Most of the plaques were located in the inner and outer plexiform layers (IPL and OPL) of the retina, with ~41% of plaques located in the OPL and ~34.7% in the INL, respectively ( Figs. 1 and 2C ). The plexiform layers mainly consist of the fibers and synapses of the retinal neurons. This location is consistent with the observation that synaptically released A? accumulates and aggregates as extracellular plaque deposits. 28 A? plaque deposition in the retina appeared earlier in female than male APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice, supporting previous results showing gender differences in brain plaque deposition in APP over-expressing mice. 37 Plaques were first detected in the IPL and/or OPL in 12 month-old female tg mice ( Figs. 1A and 2B ), while no plaques were observed in male tg mice until 13 months of age. At 12–14 months of age, 25% of the males, while 33% of the female tg mice displayed plaques, whereas at 15–16 months of age 100% of female and 75% of male mutant mice showed plaques in the retina. Retinal A? plaques disrupt neuropil organization in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice To examine whether A? plaques alters the retinal structure of tg mice, sections were immunovisualized using syntaxin 1 and ChAT. Syntaxin 1 is a membrane associated SNAP receptor protein involved in membrane fusion and synaptic transmission, which stains the processes and presynaptic terminals of the amacrine cells in the IPL ( Fig. 3A–C ). 38 ChAT is a marker for cholinergic amacine cells and their processes in the INL and ganglion cell layer (GCL). Within the IPL, cholinergic dendritic processes are organized in two strata ( Fig. 3D–F ). Double fluorescence staining for thioflavine-S and syntaxin 1 revealed that plaques disrupted the distribution of syntaxin 1 positive processes within the IPL of aged (19–20 months) APPswe/PS1?E9 mice ( Fig. 3A–C ). In addition, dual immunohistochemical staining for thioflavine-S and ChAT revealed that some A? deposits were embedded within the IPL cholinergic bands, possibly disturbing this ChAT dendritic network ( Fig. 3D–F ). Retinal plaque deposition is accompanied by microglia activation in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice To evaluate glial activity in response to A? deposition we performed immunostaining with antibodies against GFAP and the microglial marker, F4/80, 39 in the retinas of middle-aged APPswe/PS1?E9 tg compared to age-matched ntg mice. Fluorescent microscopy revealed a similar pattern of GFAP immunoreactivity restricted to the distal portion of Müller cells and astrocytes in both mutant and ntg mice independent of age and gender. GFAP immunoreactive profiles failed to co-localize with either thioflavine-S or A? positive staining (data not shown). However, qualitative evaluation revealed greater microglia activity in mutant compared to age-matched ntg mice at any age examined ( Fig. 4 ). In addition, microglia processes in the retinas of tg mice were thicker and displayed a “dendritic-like” appearance compared to those seen in ntg mice ( Fig. 4a and b ). Optical density measurements of F4/80 immunoreactive microglia revealed a significant increase in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg compared to age-matched ntg mice ( Fig. 4C ; Student’s t-test, p= 0.023), while the size of the microglial cell bodies were unchanged between mutant and ntg mice (data not shown). Retinal functional deficits without neuronal cell loss in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice To examine whether A? deposition affects the cellular laminar organization of the retina, tissue from tg and ntg mice was stained with hematoxylin and eosin. We did not observe significant differences in the average thickness of the nuclear layers of the retina between 12–16 months old APPswe/PS1?E9 tg and ntg littermates (Student’s t-test, p>0.05. data not shown), suggesting that there was no obvious neuronal cell loss in the tg mouse retinas. To evaluate the functional integrity of the retinas of APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice, we performed scotopic ERG testing on dark-adapted, 12–16 month-old APPswe/PS1?E9 tg and age-matched ntg mice. Although we did not detect a significant difference in the latency or implicit time between tg and ntg mice, the amplitudes of both a (p=0.041) and b waves (p=0.039) were significantly decreased in 12–16 month-old tg (n=9) compared to ntg mice (n=5) ( Fig. 5 ) when tested at the lower light intensity of 0.008 cd/m2s, but not at 2.5 cd/m2s.  Retinal A? plaque deposition is age and gender dependent in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice At the time points examined in the present study, thioflavine-S positive plaques were first observed in the retinas of 12 months old APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice ( Fig. 1A ), while plaques were not seen in their ntg litermate mice ( Fig. 1C ). Virtually all thioflavine-S positive plaques co-labeled with A? immunoreactivity ( Fig. 1D–I ). The majority of retinal thioflavine-S positive plaques displayed radial branches with a small central core ( Fig. 1D–I ). The size of the thioflavine-S plaques in the retina ranged between 5–20 ?m. The larger plaques were mainly seen at 15–16 months of age in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice ( Fig. 1B ). At these ages, the total number of plaques was about 20-fold greater than in 12–14 month old APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice ( Fig. 2A ). Similar plaque pathology was seen in the brain of these double mutant mice ( Fig. 1J–L ). Most of the plaques were located in the inner and outer plexiform layers (IPL and OPL) of the retina, with ~41% of plaques located in the OPL and ~34.7% in the INL, respectively ( Figs. 1 and 2C ). The plexiform layers mainly consist of the fibers and synapses of the retinal neurons. This location is consistent with the observation that synaptically released A? accumulates and aggregates as extracellular plaque deposits. 28 A? plaque deposition in the retina appeared earlier in female than male APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice, supporting previous results showing gender differences in brain plaque deposition in APP over-expressing mice. 37 Plaques were first detected in the IPL and/or OPL in 12 month-old female tg mice ( Figs. 1A and 2B ), while no plaques were observed in male tg mice until 13 months of age. At 12–14 months of age, 25% of the males, while 33% of the female tg mice displayed plaques, whereas at 15–16 months of age 100% of female and 75% of male mutant mice showed plaques in the retina.  Retinal A? plaque deposition is age and gender dependent in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice At the time points examined in the present study, thioflavine-S positive plaques were first observed in the retinas of 12 months old APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice ( Fig. 1A ), while plaques were not seen in their ntg litermate mice ( Fig. 1C ). Virtually all thioflavine-S positive plaques co-labeled with A? immunoreactivity ( Fig. 1D–I ). The majority of retinal thioflavine-S positive plaques displayed radial branches with a small central core ( Fig. 1D–I ). The size of the thioflavine-S plaques in the retina ranged between 5–20 ?m. The larger plaques were mainly seen at 15–16 months of age in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice ( Fig. 1B ). At these ages, the total number of plaques was about 20-fold greater than in 12–14 month old APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice ( Fig. 2A ). Similar plaque pathology was seen in the brain of these double mutant mice ( Fig. 1J–L ). Most of the plaques were located in the inner and outer plexiform layers (IPL and OPL) of the retina, with ~41% of plaques located in the OPL and ~34.7% in the INL, respectively ( Figs. 1 and 2C ). The plexiform layers mainly consist of the fibers and synapses of the retinal neurons. This location is consistent with the observation that synaptically released A? accumulates and aggregates as extracellular plaque deposits. 28 A? plaque deposition in the retina appeared earlier in female than male APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice, supporting previous results showing gender differences in brain plaque deposition in APP over-expressing mice. 37 Plaques were first detected in the IPL and/or OPL in 12 month-old female tg mice ( Figs. 1A and 2B ), while no plaques were observed in male tg mice until 13 months of age. At 12–14 months of age, 25% of the males, while 33% of the female tg mice displayed plaques, whereas at 15–16 months of age 100% of female and 75% of male mutant mice showed plaques in the retina.  Retinal A? plaques disrupt neuropil organization in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice To examine whether A? plaques alters the retinal structure of tg mice, sections were immunovisualized using syntaxin 1 and ChAT. Syntaxin 1 is a membrane associated SNAP receptor protein involved in membrane fusion and synaptic transmission, which stains the processes and presynaptic terminals of the amacrine cells in the IPL ( Fig. 3A–C ). 38 ChAT is a marker for cholinergic amacine cells and their processes in the INL and ganglion cell layer (GCL). Within the IPL, cholinergic dendritic processes are organized in two strata ( Fig. 3D–F ). Double fluorescence staining for thioflavine-S and syntaxin 1 revealed that plaques disrupted the distribution of syntaxin 1 positive processes within the IPL of aged (19–20 months) APPswe/PS1?E9 mice ( Fig. 3A–C ). In addition, dual immunohistochemical staining for thioflavine-S and ChAT revealed that some A? deposits were embedded within the IPL cholinergic bands, possibly disturbing this ChAT dendritic network ( Fig. 3D–F ).  Retinal A? plaques disrupt neuropil organization in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice To examine whether A? plaques alters the retinal structure of tg mice, sections were immunovisualized using syntaxin 1 and ChAT. Syntaxin 1 is a membrane associated SNAP receptor protein involved in membrane fusion and synaptic transmission, which stains the processes and presynaptic terminals of the amacrine cells in the IPL ( Fig. 3A–C ). 38 ChAT is a marker for cholinergic amacine cells and their processes in the INL and ganglion cell layer (GCL). Within the IPL, cholinergic dendritic processes are organized in two strata ( Fig. 3D–F ). Double fluorescence staining for thioflavine-S and syntaxin 1 revealed that plaques disrupted the distribution of syntaxin 1 positive processes within the IPL of aged (19–20 months) APPswe/PS1?E9 mice ( Fig. 3A–C ). In addition, dual immunohistochemical staining for thioflavine-S and ChAT revealed that some A? deposits were embedded within the IPL cholinergic bands, possibly disturbing this ChAT dendritic network ( Fig. 3D–F ).  Retinal plaque deposition is accompanied by microglia activation in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice To evaluate glial activity in response to A? deposition we performed immunostaining with antibodies against GFAP and the microglial marker, F4/80, 39 in the retinas of middle-aged APPswe/PS1?E9 tg compared to age-matched ntg mice. Fluorescent microscopy revealed a similar pattern of GFAP immunoreactivity restricted to the distal portion of Müller cells and astrocytes in both mutant and ntg mice independent of age and gender. GFAP immunoreactive profiles failed to co-localize with either thioflavine-S or A? positive staining (data not shown). However, qualitative evaluation revealed greater microglia activity in mutant compared to age-matched ntg mice at any age examined ( Fig. 4 ). In addition, microglia processes in the retinas of tg mice were thicker and displayed a “dendritic-like” appearance compared to those seen in ntg mice ( Fig. 4a and b ). Optical density measurements of F4/80 immunoreactive microglia revealed a significant increase in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg compared to age-matched ntg mice ( Fig. 4C ; Student’s t-test, p= 0.023), while the size of the microglial cell bodies were unchanged between mutant and ntg mice (data not shown).  Retinal plaque deposition is accompanied by microglia activation in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice To evaluate glial activity in response to A? deposition we performed immunostaining with antibodies against GFAP and the microglial marker, F4/80, 39 in the retinas of middle-aged APPswe/PS1?E9 tg compared to age-matched ntg mice. Fluorescent microscopy revealed a similar pattern of GFAP immunoreactivity restricted to the distal portion of Müller cells and astrocytes in both mutant and ntg mice independent of age and gender. GFAP immunoreactive profiles failed to co-localize with either thioflavine-S or A? positive staining (data not shown). However, qualitative evaluation revealed greater microglia activity in mutant compared to age-matched ntg mice at any age examined ( Fig. 4 ). In addition, microglia processes in the retinas of tg mice were thicker and displayed a “dendritic-like” appearance compared to those seen in ntg mice ( Fig. 4a and b ). Optical density measurements of F4/80 immunoreactive microglia revealed a significant increase in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg compared to age-matched ntg mice ( Fig. 4C ; Student’s t-test, p= 0.023), while the size of the microglial cell bodies were unchanged between mutant and ntg mice (data not shown).  Retinal functional deficits without neuronal cell loss in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice To examine whether A? deposition affects the cellular laminar organization of the retina, tissue from tg and ntg mice was stained with hematoxylin and eosin. We did not observe significant differences in the average thickness of the nuclear layers of the retina between 12–16 months old APPswe/PS1?E9 tg and ntg littermates (Student’s t-test, p>0.05. data not shown), suggesting that there was no obvious neuronal cell loss in the tg mouse retinas. To evaluate the functional integrity of the retinas of APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice, we performed scotopic ERG testing on dark-adapted, 12–16 month-old APPswe/PS1?E9 tg and age-matched ntg mice. Although we did not detect a significant difference in the latency or implicit time between tg and ntg mice, the amplitudes of both a (p=0.041) and b waves (p=0.039) were significantly decreased in 12–16 month-old tg (n=9) compared to ntg mice (n=5) ( Fig. 5 ) when tested at the lower light intensity of 0.008 cd/m2s, but not at 2.5 cd/m2s.  Retinal functional deficits without neuronal cell loss in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice To examine whether A? deposition affects the cellular laminar organization of the retina, tissue from tg and ntg mice was stained with hematoxylin and eosin. We did not observe significant differences in the average thickness of the nuclear layers of the retina between 12–16 months old APPswe/PS1?E9 tg and ntg littermates (Student’s t-test, p>0.05. data not shown), suggesting that there was no obvious neuronal cell loss in the tg mouse retinas. To evaluate the functional integrity of the retinas of APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice, we performed scotopic ERG testing on dark-adapted, 12–16 month-old APPswe/PS1?E9 tg and age-matched ntg mice. Although we did not detect a significant difference in the latency or implicit time between tg and ntg mice, the amplitudes of both a (p=0.041) and b waves (p=0.039) were significantly decreased in 12–16 month-old tg (n=9) compared to ntg mice (n=5) ( Fig. 5 ) when tested at the lower light intensity of 0.008 cd/m2s, but not at 2.5 cd/m2s.  DISCUSSION The present study revealed, for the first time, the formation of A? plaques in the retinas of APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice, which exhibit a similar chemical phenotype to those observed in the brains of these mice. 27 , 30 Unlike the brain of these double tg mice, where A? plaques are seen as early as 2–6 months, 28 – 30 retinal plaque first appear between 12–13 months of age. Although there was no obvious neuronal cell loss in the retina based on retinal layer thickness, the increase in microglial activity, plaques formation and ERG deficits suggests that A? deposition may contribute to the disruption of the normal function(s) of the retina, possibly by a combination of neuronal dysfunction and altered synaptic transmission. Interestingly, A? plaques in the retina displayed a unique pattern with most of the plaques in the inner and outer plexiform layers. The plexiform layers of the retina contain the dendrites and axons of retinal neurons suggesting that, similar to the brain of these transgenic mice, APP/A? proteins may be anterogradely transported and released at synaptic sites to accumulate as extracellular deposits. 28 , 40 Studies in other APP over-expressing tg mice have shown that A? deposits alter axonal geometry, synapses and induce dystrophic neurites. 30 , 41 – 43 ,68 In this regard, we found that A? deposits disrupted the neuropil of IPL containing syntaxin 1 and ChAT immunoreactivity in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice. The functional consequences of A? lesions in the plexiform layers of the retina of this tg mouse are unknown. Interestingly, cholinergic amacrine cells with their extensive dendritic trees found within the IPL are thought modulate the information flow from cone bipolar cells to ganglion cells and mediate directional selectivity. 44 , 45 Therefore, it is possible that A? deposition affects retinal neuronal transmission as indicated by defective ERG activity in APPswe/PS1?E9 mice. In the retina of the APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice, we observed a significant increase in microglial activity detected by the pan-macrophage marker, F4/80 39 compared to ntg littermates. The presence of activated microglia and astrocytes surrounding A? plaques is a major neuropathological feature of AD and is also seen in the brain of mice over-expressing APP. 46 – 49 Activated microglia are considered a sensor for pathological events in the CNS and occurs early in the retina of mice with retinal degeneration. 50 – 53 . Activated microglia may trigger an inflammatory response 48 and may be involved in the clearance or turnover of A? deposition in the retina as in the AD brain. 28 , 54 This response may contribute to the ERG functional defects seen in these mutant mice. Although cell loss was not evident in the retina, scotopic ERG testing revealed significant reductions in amplitudes of both a and b wave at lower light intensity (0.008 cd/m2s) in 12–16 month APPswe/PS1?E9 tg compared with age-matched ntg littermates. Scotopic ERG recordings, at low light intensity, are most sensitive in detecting rod photoreceptor function, 55 which constitute about 95% of the photoreceptors in mouse retina.67 The a wave is mainly a result of the activity of rod photoreceptors, while the b wave arises largely from the activity of bipolar cells and other interneurons. The present results suggest that, despite the preservation of retinal neurons, ERG dysfunction is most likely the result of A? deposition in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice. The observation of a functional defect without concomitant cell loss in the retina is similar to preservation of neurons within the brain of the APPswe/PS1?E9 29 , 30 and other APP tg mice. 26 Although there are no reports of amyloid deposits in the retinas of AD patients, A? plaques and neurofibrillary tangles appear in both the primary and visual association cortex in AD patients. 9 – 13 Functionally, these lesions are associated with an abnormal flash visual evoked potential (FVEP) 7 , 9 indicative of geniculo-cortical pathway activation. 55 However, deficits were not seen in the flicker ERG (FERG), which reflects the functional integrity of the outer retina in AD patients. 9 On the other hand, abnormalities in pattern ERG (PERG), indicative of retinal ganglion cell function occur in AD 14 , 15 , 56 , 57 , suggesting that PERG dysfunction reflects ganglion cell impairment in AD as opposed to a decrease in the amplitude of the a and b waves detected by scotopic ERG, which implicates rod photoreceptor and interneuron dysregulation in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice. These discrepancies may be a result of the differences in gene expression and cellular location of mutant APP and/or PS1 proteins between the AD patients and the APPswe/PS1?E9 tg model. 27 , 33 , 34 The APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice carry mutant forms of two of the most important FAD-linked genes, 27 , 33 , 34 while FAD patients usually carry only one of the mutant alleles of one of the genes or none of these alleles. In summary, A? plaques, gliosis, and functional impairment occur in the retina of aged APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice. Since the retina is more accessible than the brain, the application of multiphoton microscopy to follow plaque formation in the retina in vivo 58 may provide greater insight into the mechanisms of plaque formation and the role(s) of A? in retinal dysfunction in AD mouse models. Our results also underscore the need to investigate the A? biosynthesis pathways in other age-related retinal disorders such as age-related macular degeneration. 59 – 62  DISCUSSION The present study revealed, for the first time, the formation of A? plaques in the retinas of APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice, which exhibit a similar chemical phenotype to those observed in the brains of these mice. 27 , 30 Unlike the brain of these double tg mice, where A? plaques are seen as early as 2–6 months, 28 – 30 retinal plaque first appear between 12–13 months of age. Although there was no obvious neuronal cell loss in the retina based on retinal layer thickness, the increase in microglial activity, plaques formation and ERG deficits suggests that A? deposition may contribute to the disruption of the normal function(s) of the retina, possibly by a combination of neuronal dysfunction and altered synaptic transmission. Interestingly, A? plaques in the retina displayed a unique pattern with most of the plaques in the inner and outer plexiform layers. The plexiform layers of the retina contain the dendrites and axons of retinal neurons suggesting that, similar to the brain of these transgenic mice, APP/A? proteins may be anterogradely transported and released at synaptic sites to accumulate as extracellular deposits. 28 , 40 Studies in other APP over-expressing tg mice have shown that A? deposits alter axonal geometry, synapses and induce dystrophic neurites. 30 , 41 – 43 ,68 In this regard, we found that A? deposits disrupted the neuropil of IPL containing syntaxin 1 and ChAT immunoreactivity in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice. The functional consequences of A? lesions in the plexiform layers of the retina of this tg mouse are unknown. Interestingly, cholinergic amacrine cells with their extensive dendritic trees found within the IPL are thought modulate the information flow from cone bipolar cells to ganglion cells and mediate directional selectivity. 44 , 45 Therefore, it is possible that A? deposition affects retinal neuronal transmission as indicated by defective ERG activity in APPswe/PS1?E9 mice. In the retina of the APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice, we observed a significant increase in microglial activity detected by the pan-macrophage marker, F4/80 39 compared to ntg littermates. The presence of activated microglia and astrocytes surrounding A? plaques is a major neuropathological feature of AD and is also seen in the brain of mice over-expressing APP. 46 – 49 Activated microglia are considered a sensor for pathological events in the CNS and occurs early in the retina of mice with retinal degeneration. 50 – 53 . Activated microglia may trigger an inflammatory response 48 and may be involved in the clearance or turnover of A? deposition in the retina as in the AD brain. 28 , 54 This response may contribute to the ERG functional defects seen in these mutant mice. Although cell loss was not evident in the retina, scotopic ERG testing revealed significant reductions in amplitudes of both a and b wave at lower light intensity (0.008 cd/m2s) in 12–16 month APPswe/PS1?E9 tg compared with age-matched ntg littermates. Scotopic ERG recordings, at low light intensity, are most sensitive in detecting rod photoreceptor function, 55 which constitute about 95% of the photoreceptors in mouse retina.67 The a wave is mainly a result of the activity of rod photoreceptors, while the b wave arises largely from the activity of bipolar cells and other interneurons. The present results suggest that, despite the preservation of retinal neurons, ERG dysfunction is most likely the result of A? deposition in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice. The observation of a functional defect without concomitant cell loss in the retina is similar to preservation of neurons within the brain of the APPswe/PS1?E9 29 , 30 and other APP tg mice. 26 Although there are no reports of amyloid deposits in the retinas of AD patients, A? plaques and neurofibrillary tangles appear in both the primary and visual association cortex in AD patients. 9 – 13 Functionally, these lesions are associated with an abnormal flash visual evoked potential (FVEP) 7 , 9 indicative of geniculo-cortical pathway activation. 55 However, deficits were not seen in the flicker ERG (FERG), which reflects the functional integrity of the outer retina in AD patients. 9 On the other hand, abnormalities in pattern ERG (PERG), indicative of retinal ganglion cell function occur in AD 14 , 15 , 56 , 57 , suggesting that PERG dysfunction reflects ganglion cell impairment in AD as opposed to a decrease in the amplitude of the a and b waves detected by scotopic ERG, which implicates rod photoreceptor and interneuron dysregulation in APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice. These discrepancies may be a result of the differences in gene expression and cellular location of mutant APP and/or PS1 proteins between the AD patients and the APPswe/PS1?E9 tg model. 27 , 33 , 34 The APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice carry mutant forms of two of the most important FAD-linked genes, 27 , 33 , 34 while FAD patients usually carry only one of the mutant alleles of one of the genes or none of these alleles. In summary, A? plaques, gliosis, and functional impairment occur in the retina of aged APPswe/PS1?E9 tg mice. Since the retina is more accessible than the brain, the application of multiphoton microscopy to follow plaque formation in the retina in vivo 58 may provide greater insight into the mechanisms of plaque formation and the role(s) of A? in retinal dysfunction in AD mouse models. Our results also underscore the need to investigate the A? biosynthesis pathways in other age-related retinal disorders such as age-related macular degeneration. 59 – 62 