Soluble monomeric EphrinA1 is released from tumor cells and is a functional ligand for the EphA2 receptor The ephrinA1 ligand exerts antioncogenic effects in tumor cells through activation and downregulation of the EphA2 receptor and has been described as a membrane-anchored protein requiring clustering for function. However, while investigating the ephrinA1/EphA2 system in the pathobiology of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), we uncovered that ephrinA1 is released from GBM and breast adenocarcinoma cells as a soluble, monomeric protein and is a functional form of the ligand in this state. Conditioned media containing a soluble monomer of ephrinA1 caused EphA2 internalization and downregulation, dramatic alteration of cell morphology and suppression of the Ras–MAPK pathway. Moreover, soluble monomeric ephrinA1 was functional in a physiological context, eliciting collapse of embryonic neuronal growth cones. We also found that ephrinA1 is cleaved from the plasma membrane of GBM cells, an event which involves the action of a metalloprotease. Thus, the ephrinA1 ligand can, indeed, function as a soluble monomer and may act in a paracrine manner on the EphA2 receptor without the need for juxtacrine interactions. These findings have important implications for further deciphering the function of these proteins in pathology and physiology, as well as for the design of ephrinA1-based EphA2-targeted antitumor therapeutics.  Introduction The ephrins comprise a family of ligands for the Eph receptor tyrosine kinases that have been characterized as glycosyl phosphatidyl inositol (GPI)-anchored (ephrinA) or transmembrane (ephrinB) cell surface proteins ( Davis et al. , 1994 ). Ephrins have important functions in the developing central nervous system ( Drescher et al. , 1995 ; Nakamoto et al. , 1996 ; Knoll and Drescher, 2002 ; Rashid et al. , 2005 ) and in the formation and organization of the vasculature ( McBride and Ruiz, 1998 ; Wang et al. , 1998 ). Ephrin/Ephs have also been implicated in the development and progression of malignancy. Specifically, the EphA2 receptor is overexpressed and functionally important in solid tumors of the breast ( Zelinski et al. , 2001 ; Wu et al. , 2004 ), prostate ( Walker-Daniels et al. , 1999 ; Zeng et al. , 2003 ), ovary ( Thaker et al. , 2004 ) and several others ( Kinch and Carles-Kinch, 2003 ). We have found that EphA2 is abundantly and specifically overexpressed in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), the most common adult primary malignant brain tumor of dismal prognosis ( Wykosky et al. , 2005 ). EphrinA1, a ligand for EphA2, is present at low levels in GBM ( Wykosky et al. , 2005 ) and possesses tumor-suppressing properties in this and other solid tumors ( Noblitt et al. , 2004 ; Duxbury et al. , 2004b ; Guo et al. , 2006 ). A similar pattern of differential ephrinA1/EphA2 expression was found in breast cancer cells ( Macrae et al. , 2005 ). Interestingly, ephrinA1 is also present in the vasculature of some tumors ( Ogawa et al. , 2000 ) and was shown to have a critical function in inducing tumor angiogenesis through EphA2 expressed on endothelial cells ( Brantley-Sieders et al. , 2006 ). EphrinA1 was originally identified as a tumor necrosis factor-?-inducible gene product in endothelial cells, and the C terminus has high structural similarity to proteins that undergo GPI-linkage to the plasma membrane ( Ferguson and Williams, 1988 ; Holzman et al. , 1990 ). However, it was only later demonstrated that the ligand exists as a GPI-anchored protein by its ability to be released upon treatment with phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C (PI-PLC) ( Shao et al. , 1995 ). In addition, soluble ephrinA1 induced tyrosine phosphorylation of the EphA5 receptor only when artificially clustered by antibodies ( Davis et al. , 1994 ). These observations, coupled with structural studies on some specific ephrin/Eph complexes ( Himanen et al. , 2001 ; Toth et al. , 2001 ), gave rise to the notion that ephrin-mediated activation of Eph receptors requires cell–cell contact or oligomerization of soluble ephrins, for example, in the form of fusion ephrin-IgG-Fc proteins ( Stein et al. , 1998 ). Hence, membrane-anchored ephrinA1 is widely considered the endogenous, functional form of the ligand ( Beckmann et al. , 1994 ; Xu and Wilkinson, 1997 ; Kullander and Klein, 2002 ; Pasquale, 2005 ). The important physiological functions of ephrinA1 thus appear to be largely dependent on cell–cell contact ( Pandey et al. , 1995 ; Daniel et al. , 1996 ; McBride and Ruiz, 1998 ; Cheng et al. , 2002 ; Marquardt et al. , 2005 ). On the basis of our previous findings that ephrinA1 elicits a tumor-suppressing function in GBM, we became interested in exploring the form of ephrinA1, which exerts an antioncogenic effect. We are providing the first direct evidence that ephrinA1 is released from tumor cells as a soluble monomer that is capable of eliciting cellular responses in cancer cells that are not dependent on juxtacrine interactions.  Materials and methods Cell lines and cell culture U-251MG, SNB-19, A-172MG, U-373MG and SK-Br-3 were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA, USA) and grown as recommended by the manufacturer. ZR-75-1 cells were obtained from the Cell and Virus Vector Core Laboratory at Wake Forest University, and T47D cells were a generous gift from Dr Darren Seals (Wake Forest); both were grown in RPMI with 10% fetal bovine serum. Transfection experiments DNA (5 ?g; ephrinA1 pcDNA, His-ephrinA1 pcDNA or empty vector control) was transfected into cells growing in Opti-MEM (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) using LipofectAMINE 2000 (Invitrogen). After 24 h, Opti-MEM was replaced with growth medium containing 20% fetal bovine serum. After 24 h, cells were split into 100 mm2 dishes and geneticin (800 ?g/ml) was added to select clones. Individual clones were isolated and maintained in growth medium containing 200 ?g/ml geneticin. Western blotting and immunoprecipitation Western blotting was performed as previously described ( Wykosky et al. , 2005 ). Primary antibodies included rabbit polyclonal anti-EphrinA1 (1:200) and anti-EphA5 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), anti-EphA3 (1 ?g/ml) (Zymed, S. San Francisco, CA, USA), mouse monoclonal anti-EphA2 clone D7 (1:1000), anti-phosphotyrosine clone PY20 (1:1000), and anti-?-actin (1:50 000) (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA), rabbit polyclonal anti-phospho-Erk (1:1000) and anti-total-Erk (1:1000) (Cell Signaling Technology Inc., Danvers, MA, USA). EphA2 immunoprecipitation was performed as previously described ( Wykosky et al. , 2005 ). Immunoprecipitates were stored at ?80 °C until separated by SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis for western blotting. Immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy Immunofluorescent staining was performed as described previously ( Wykosky et al. , 2005 ). Primary antibodies anti-EphA2 (1:100) or anti-ephrinA1 (1:100) were incubated overnight at 4 °C. Secondary antibodies included donkey anti-rabbit rhodamine (1:200) (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories Inc., West Grove, PA, USA) or goat anti-mouse IgG Oregon Green (1:200) (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA). Nuclei were visualized by staining with TO-PRO-3 iodide (1:1000) (Molecular Probes). Slides were mounted with Gel-Mount (Biomeda Corp., Foster City, CA, USA). Confocal microscopy analysis was performed using a Zeiss LSM 510 Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope with a × 63 lens, and images were processed with Zeiss LSM Image Browser software. Anchorage-independent growth assay Cells (2 × 103) were plated in six-well dishes in growth medium plus 0.35% Agar (Difco, Lawrence, KS, USA), on a base layer of growth medium plus 0.5% Agar. A volume of 1 ?g/ml ephrinA1-Fc (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA) added to cells was replenished with fresh media after 3 days. Colonies were counted and photographed at low power after 14 days. Clusters of colonies greater than ~50 cells were counted in 10 random fields at low power; each experimental condition or cell line was assayed in triplicate. Proliferation assay A total of 1000 cells were plated in a 96-well plate in quadruplicate for each cell line. After 48 h in culture, proliferation was measured using a colorimetric MTS (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium, inner salt)/PMS (phenazine methasulfate) cell proliferation assay as recommended by the manufacturer (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Cells were incubated with the MTS/PMS dye for 2–4 h, and absorbance was measured at 490 nm using a microplate reader. Migration assay Wounds were made in a confluent monolayer of cells with a sterile 200 ?l tip and growth media containing monomeric or dimeric ephrinA1-Fc (1 ?g/ml) was added. Phase contrast-microscopy pictures were taken of the same field at 0, 8 and 24 h. Distance of the wound in ? m was measured in five places for each of three wounds for each treatment or cell type at each time point using ImagePro Plus software, and the percent wound closure over 24 h was calculated for graphical representation. Conditioned media Conditioned media was collected from subconfluent monolayers, centrifuged for 5 min at 1000 r.p.m., and supernatant used immediately to treat cells or for western blotting or stored at ?20 °C until use. For treatment of cells with conditioned media, cells were seeded, grown overnight and the normal growth media was replaced with conditioned media (undiluted unless otherwise indicated) for the indicated times. For treatment of cells with SK-Br-3 conditioned media, media was concentrated 5 × before use with 10 000 MWCO Amicon Ultra centrifugal filter devices (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Gel filtration analysis A volume of 250 ml of conditioned media was collected from serum-starved (48 h) subconfluent monolayers of U-251 [ ephrinA1 ](+) 12 cells, concentrated to ~1 ml and phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) buffer-exchanged. The media was loaded by FPLC onto a HiPrep 16/60 Sephacryl S-200 gel filtration column (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA) precalibrated with conalbumin, ovalbumin, carbonic anhydrase and ribonuclease A from the protein gel filtration calibration kit (GE Healthcare). EphrinA1-conditioned media individual fractions were collected and western blotted and ephrinA1-containing fractions were pooled and concentrated. EphrinA1-Fc homodimer reduction to a monomer A concentration of 10 m m DTT (Acros Organics, Morris Plains, NJ, USA) was added to ephrinA1-Fc or IgG1 isotype control for 15 min at 37 °C. A concentration of 20 m m Iodoacetamide (IA) (Sigma) was added at room temperature for 20 min. A concentration of 10 m m DTT was added again for 15 min at 37 °C. Reduced products were purified using Spin-OUT 12 000 Micro columns (Chemicon, Temecula, CA, USA). Neuronal growth cone experiments Primary neuronal cultures were prepared from the cortical lobes of embryonic day 18 Sprague–Dawley rat embryos as previously described ( Turner et al. , 2002 ). EphrinA1-Fc, PBS or IgG1 isotype control was added to cells 48 h into culture and incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. Cells were fixed, permeabilized and stained with rhodamine-phalloidin (Invitrogen) for 20 min at room temperature, washed, and coverslips were mounted onto glass slides using Vectashield Hard Set mounting media containing DAPI (Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA, USA). Images were captured using an Olympus IX70 Inverted System Microscope (Olympus, Melville, NY, USA) and Hamamatsu digital camera (Hamamatsu City, Japan) with IPLab 3.6.4 software (Scanalytics Inc., Fairfax, VA, USA). Image-Pro Plus v.5.1 software was used for image analysis. Collapsed growth cones (CGC) were categorized as having a shrunken lamellipodia with no filopodia, and counts were normalized to the number of DAPI-stained nuclei in the same field (CGC/DAPI). Biotinylation of plasma membrane proteins and streptavidin immunoprecipitation Cells were plated in 150 mm round dishes, grown until 95% confluent and collected using a cell scraper. Cells were pelleted, resuspended in 10 ml PBS and pelleted again. Pellet was resuspended in a final volume of 500 ?l PBS and transferred to a microfuge tube. NHS-PEO4 Biotin No-Weigh 2 mg per vial (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) was prepared by resuspending in 170 ?l ultrapure water. A volume of 80 ?l of biotin was added to each cell suspension and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. Cells were washed three times with 1 ml PBS/100 m m glycine. Pellet was resuspended in 540 ?l RIPA protease inhibitor cocktail, incubated on ice for 30 min and lysate collected after centrifugation at 10 000 r.p.m. for 10 min. Biotinylated lysate was stored at ?80 °C until use for immunoprecipitation with streptavidin. Immobilized streptavidin (Pierce) was washed with PBS/0.1% SDS three times, and ~500 ?l biotinylated lysate was added to 100 ?l packed beads. Reaction mixture was incubated at room temperature on a rotator for 1 h, after which beads were washed five times with 500 ?l PBS/0.1% SDS. Beads were resuspended in 50 ?l 3 × SDS sample buffer, heated at 100 °C for 5 min and centrifuged for 5 min at 1000 r.p.m. Supernatant was collected and stored at ?80 °C until used. PI-PLC treatment A total of 400 000 cells were plated in 60 mm round dishes and grown overnight. Adherent cells were washed twice with PBS, and 0.5 U/ml of PI-PLC (MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, CA, USA) was added. Cells were incubated with or without PI-PLC for 20 min at 4 °C on rocker, then buffer was collected from each plate and stored to assay for released proteins. Cells were then washed twice more with PBS and replenished with fresh growth media. Factor XA cleavage Recombinant ephrinA1-Fc and ephrinA5-Fc (R&D systems) were cleaved at a site in the peptidyl linker between the ligand and Fc using a Factor Xa cleavage/capture kit as per manufacturer’s instructions (Novagen, San Diego, CA, USA). Fc fragments were captured by incubating the reaction mixture with Protein G Sepharose FF (Sigma) at 4 °C for 48 h. Protease inhibitor experiments After 24 h in culture, media from subconfluent U-251 [ ephrinA1 ](+) cells in 60 mm dishes was replaced with fresh growth media plus 25 ? m GM-6001 (BioMol International, Plymouth Meeting, PA, USA) or an equal volume of dimethylsulfoxide. After 18 h, conditioned media samples were collected. Real-time PCR U-251MG cells were treated with PBS, ephrinA1-Fc (R&D Systems) or monomeric ephrinA1 isolated by Factor XA cleavage. RNA was obtained using the RNeasy Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). A quantity of 850 ng of total RNA was used to prepare cDNA with the High Capacity RNA to cDNA Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The EphA2 transcript levels were studied with real-time quantitative PCR based on the TaqMan methodology using 7000 real-time PCR system (Applied Biosystems). Gene Expression Assays (Applied Biosystems) were used to quantify the target and control genes. These assays are mixtures of an unlabeled PCR primer and a Taqman MGB probe (6-FAM) at the 5? end with a non-fluorescent quencher at the 3? end, designed over an exon–exon boundary to specifically detect cDNA sequences. The assay identification numbers of the selected genes are Hs171656_m1 for EphA2 and Hs99999903_m1 for ?-actin. The expression of ?-actin was used to normalize the cDNA template. A quantity of 40 ng of cDNA, universal Taq-Man PCR master mix (Applied Biosystems) and Gene Expression Assay primers were combined in a final volume of 25 ?l. The amplification reactions, in triplicate, were performed as follows, using a 7500 real-time PCR system according to the manufacturer’s instructions: 95 °C for 10 min followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s, 60 °C for 1 min. Data were analysed by the comparative CT method. Statistical analyses Statistical significance was determined by one-way analysis of variance. If P <0.05, Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test was used to determine pairwise significance in all cases with the exception of the neuronal growth cone analysis, in which Neuman–Keuls post hoc testing was used. Error bars represent mean ± s.e.m.  Cell lines and cell culture U-251MG, SNB-19, A-172MG, U-373MG and SK-Br-3 were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA, USA) and grown as recommended by the manufacturer. ZR-75-1 cells were obtained from the Cell and Virus Vector Core Laboratory at Wake Forest University, and T47D cells were a generous gift from Dr Darren Seals (Wake Forest); both were grown in RPMI with 10% fetal bovine serum.  Transfection experiments DNA (5 ?g; ephrinA1 pcDNA, His-ephrinA1 pcDNA or empty vector control) was transfected into cells growing in Opti-MEM (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) using LipofectAMINE 2000 (Invitrogen). After 24 h, Opti-MEM was replaced with growth medium containing 20% fetal bovine serum. After 24 h, cells were split into 100 mm2 dishes and geneticin (800 ?g/ml) was added to select clones. Individual clones were isolated and maintained in growth medium containing 200 ?g/ml geneticin.  Western blotting and immunoprecipitation Western blotting was performed as previously described ( Wykosky et al. , 2005 ). Primary antibodies included rabbit polyclonal anti-EphrinA1 (1:200) and anti-EphA5 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), anti-EphA3 (1 ?g/ml) (Zymed, S. San Francisco, CA, USA), mouse monoclonal anti-EphA2 clone D7 (1:1000), anti-phosphotyrosine clone PY20 (1:1000), and anti-?-actin (1:50 000) (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA), rabbit polyclonal anti-phospho-Erk (1:1000) and anti-total-Erk (1:1000) (Cell Signaling Technology Inc., Danvers, MA, USA). EphA2 immunoprecipitation was performed as previously described ( Wykosky et al. , 2005 ). Immunoprecipitates were stored at ?80 °C until separated by SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis for western blotting.  Immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy Immunofluorescent staining was performed as described previously ( Wykosky et al. , 2005 ). Primary antibodies anti-EphA2 (1:100) or anti-ephrinA1 (1:100) were incubated overnight at 4 °C. Secondary antibodies included donkey anti-rabbit rhodamine (1:200) (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories Inc., West Grove, PA, USA) or goat anti-mouse IgG Oregon Green (1:200) (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA). Nuclei were visualized by staining with TO-PRO-3 iodide (1:1000) (Molecular Probes). Slides were mounted with Gel-Mount (Biomeda Corp., Foster City, CA, USA). Confocal microscopy analysis was performed using a Zeiss LSM 510 Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope with a × 63 lens, and images were processed with Zeiss LSM Image Browser software.  Anchorage-independent growth assay Cells (2 × 103) were plated in six-well dishes in growth medium plus 0.35% Agar (Difco, Lawrence, KS, USA), on a base layer of growth medium plus 0.5% Agar. A volume of 1 ?g/ml ephrinA1-Fc (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA) added to cells was replenished with fresh media after 3 days. Colonies were counted and photographed at low power after 14 days. Clusters of colonies greater than ~50 cells were counted in 10 random fields at low power; each experimental condition or cell line was assayed in triplicate.  Proliferation assay A total of 1000 cells were plated in a 96-well plate in quadruplicate for each cell line. After 48 h in culture, proliferation was measured using a colorimetric MTS (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium, inner salt)/PMS (phenazine methasulfate) cell proliferation assay as recommended by the manufacturer (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Cells were incubated with the MTS/PMS dye for 2–4 h, and absorbance was measured at 490 nm using a microplate reader.  Migration assay Wounds were made in a confluent monolayer of cells with a sterile 200 ?l tip and growth media containing monomeric or dimeric ephrinA1-Fc (1 ?g/ml) was added. Phase contrast-microscopy pictures were taken of the same field at 0, 8 and 24 h. Distance of the wound in ? m was measured in five places for each of three wounds for each treatment or cell type at each time point using ImagePro Plus software, and the percent wound closure over 24 h was calculated for graphical representation.  Conditioned media Conditioned media was collected from subconfluent monolayers, centrifuged for 5 min at 1000 r.p.m., and supernatant used immediately to treat cells or for western blotting or stored at ?20 °C until use. For treatment of cells with conditioned media, cells were seeded, grown overnight and the normal growth media was replaced with conditioned media (undiluted unless otherwise indicated) for the indicated times. For treatment of cells with SK-Br-3 conditioned media, media was concentrated 5 × before use with 10 000 MWCO Amicon Ultra centrifugal filter devices (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA).  Gel filtration analysis A volume of 250 ml of conditioned media was collected from serum-starved (48 h) subconfluent monolayers of U-251 [ ephrinA1 ](+) 12 cells, concentrated to ~1 ml and phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) buffer-exchanged. The media was loaded by FPLC onto a HiPrep 16/60 Sephacryl S-200 gel filtration column (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA) precalibrated with conalbumin, ovalbumin, carbonic anhydrase and ribonuclease A from the protein gel filtration calibration kit (GE Healthcare). EphrinA1-conditioned media individual fractions were collected and western blotted and ephrinA1-containing fractions were pooled and concentrated.  EphrinA1-Fc homodimer reduction to a monomer A concentration of 10 m m DTT (Acros Organics, Morris Plains, NJ, USA) was added to ephrinA1-Fc or IgG1 isotype control for 15 min at 37 °C. A concentration of 20 m m Iodoacetamide (IA) (Sigma) was added at room temperature for 20 min. A concentration of 10 m m DTT was added again for 15 min at 37 °C. Reduced products were purified using Spin-OUT 12 000 Micro columns (Chemicon, Temecula, CA, USA).  Neuronal growth cone experiments Primary neuronal cultures were prepared from the cortical lobes of embryonic day 18 Sprague–Dawley rat embryos as previously described ( Turner et al. , 2002 ). EphrinA1-Fc, PBS or IgG1 isotype control was added to cells 48 h into culture and incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. Cells were fixed, permeabilized and stained with rhodamine-phalloidin (Invitrogen) for 20 min at room temperature, washed, and coverslips were mounted onto glass slides using Vectashield Hard Set mounting media containing DAPI (Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA, USA). Images were captured using an Olympus IX70 Inverted System Microscope (Olympus, Melville, NY, USA) and Hamamatsu digital camera (Hamamatsu City, Japan) with IPLab 3.6.4 software (Scanalytics Inc., Fairfax, VA, USA). Image-Pro Plus v.5.1 software was used for image analysis. Collapsed growth cones (CGC) were categorized as having a shrunken lamellipodia with no filopodia, and counts were normalized to the number of DAPI-stained nuclei in the same field (CGC/DAPI).  Biotinylation of plasma membrane proteins and streptavidin immunoprecipitation Cells were plated in 150 mm round dishes, grown until 95% confluent and collected using a cell scraper. Cells were pelleted, resuspended in 10 ml PBS and pelleted again. Pellet was resuspended in a final volume of 500 ?l PBS and transferred to a microfuge tube. NHS-PEO4 Biotin No-Weigh 2 mg per vial (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) was prepared by resuspending in 170 ?l ultrapure water. A volume of 80 ?l of biotin was added to each cell suspension and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. Cells were washed three times with 1 ml PBS/100 m m glycine. Pellet was resuspended in 540 ?l RIPA protease inhibitor cocktail, incubated on ice for 30 min and lysate collected after centrifugation at 10 000 r.p.m. for 10 min. Biotinylated lysate was stored at ?80 °C until use for immunoprecipitation with streptavidin. Immobilized streptavidin (Pierce) was washed with PBS/0.1% SDS three times, and ~500 ?l biotinylated lysate was added to 100 ?l packed beads. Reaction mixture was incubated at room temperature on a rotator for 1 h, after which beads were washed five times with 500 ?l PBS/0.1% SDS. Beads were resuspended in 50 ?l 3 × SDS sample buffer, heated at 100 °C for 5 min and centrifuged for 5 min at 1000 r.p.m. Supernatant was collected and stored at ?80 °C until used.  PI-PLC treatment A total of 400 000 cells were plated in 60 mm round dishes and grown overnight. Adherent cells were washed twice with PBS, and 0.5 U/ml of PI-PLC (MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, CA, USA) was added. Cells were incubated with or without PI-PLC for 20 min at 4 °C on rocker, then buffer was collected from each plate and stored to assay for released proteins. Cells were then washed twice more with PBS and replenished with fresh growth media.  Factor XA cleavage Recombinant ephrinA1-Fc and ephrinA5-Fc (R&D systems) were cleaved at a site in the peptidyl linker between the ligand and Fc using a Factor Xa cleavage/capture kit as per manufacturer’s instructions (Novagen, San Diego, CA, USA). Fc fragments were captured by incubating the reaction mixture with Protein G Sepharose FF (Sigma) at 4 °C for 48 h.  Protease inhibitor experiments After 24 h in culture, media from subconfluent U-251 [ ephrinA1 ](+) cells in 60 mm dishes was replaced with fresh growth media plus 25 ? m GM-6001 (BioMol International, Plymouth Meeting, PA, USA) or an equal volume of dimethylsulfoxide. After 18 h, conditioned media samples were collected.  Real-time PCR U-251MG cells were treated with PBS, ephrinA1-Fc (R&D Systems) or monomeric ephrinA1 isolated by Factor XA cleavage. RNA was obtained using the RNeasy Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). A quantity of 850 ng of total RNA was used to prepare cDNA with the High Capacity RNA to cDNA Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The EphA2 transcript levels were studied with real-time quantitative PCR based on the TaqMan methodology using 7000 real-time PCR system (Applied Biosystems). Gene Expression Assays (Applied Biosystems) were used to quantify the target and control genes. These assays are mixtures of an unlabeled PCR primer and a Taqman MGB probe (6-FAM) at the 5? end with a non-fluorescent quencher at the 3? end, designed over an exon–exon boundary to specifically detect cDNA sequences. The assay identification numbers of the selected genes are Hs171656_m1 for EphA2 and Hs99999903_m1 for ?-actin. The expression of ?-actin was used to normalize the cDNA template. A quantity of 40 ng of cDNA, universal Taq-Man PCR master mix (Applied Biosystems) and Gene Expression Assay primers were combined in a final volume of 25 ?l. The amplification reactions, in triplicate, were performed as follows, using a 7500 real-time PCR system according to the manufacturer’s instructions: 95 °C for 10 min followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s, 60 °C for 1 min. Data were analysed by the comparative CT method.  Statistical analyses Statistical significance was determined by one-way analysis of variance. If P <0.05, Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test was used to determine pairwise significance in all cases with the exception of the neuronal growth cone analysis, in which Neuman–Keuls post hoc testing was used. Error bars represent mean ± s.e.m.  Supplementary Material Supplemental data  Results EphrinA1 overexpression downregulates EphA2 and suppresses malignant properties of GBM cells U-251MG GBM cells, which naturally overexpress EphA2 with low levels of ephrinA1, were transfected with full-length human ephrinA1 . [ ephrinA1 ](+) clones 4, 7 and 12 exhibited a dramatic decrease in EphA2 protein when compared to controls ( Figure 1a ). Breast cancer cells that endogenously overexpress ephrinA1 had similarly low levels of EphA2 ( Figure 1a ). These findings were confirmed using confocal microscopy ( Figure 1b ). Hence, overexpression of ectopic ephrinA1 coincides with a marked decrease in EphA2 protein in GBM cells. We next investigated possible functional consequences of ectopic ephrinA1 in GBM cells. U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells exhibited a significant defect in both migration and proliferation compared to controls ( Figures 1c and d ). Moreover, overexpression of ephrinA1 conferred a marked reduction in anchorage-independent growth similar to that observed upon treatment with ephrinA1-Fc, a soluble recombinant homodimeric ligand ( Figure 1e ). Thus, U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells exhibit downregulation of EphA2 and suppression of several of the malignant properties of GBM cells. EphrinA1 is released from GBM and breast cancer cells as a soluble monomeric protein Next, to investigate whether the decreased levels of EphA2 found in confluent monolayers of U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) and SK-Br-3 cells ( Figure 1a ) are dependent on cell–cell contact, cells were plated at low or high density ( Supplementary Figure 1 ). To our surprise, the downregulation of EphA2 persisted in cells plated at low density ( Figure 2a ), indicating that ectopically and endogenously overexpressed ephrinA1 elicits downregulation of EphA2 that is not dependent on extensive cell–cell contact. This finding prompted us to hypothesize that ephrinA1 is released into the media of these cells in a functional form. Thus, we examined the presence of ephrinA1 in conditioned media. Immunoreactive ephrinA1 was abundant in U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+), SK-Br-3, T47D and ZR-75-1 cell media, but not in controls ( Figure 2b ). We also performed western blotting under non-reducing conditions, in which we still detected only a single 25-kDa immunoreactive band corresponding to ephrinA1 ( Figure 2c ). In addition to being present in whole cell lysates and in the media, some of the protein was also localized to the plasma membrane. Immunoreactive ephrinA1 was readily detected in biotinylated plasma membrane proteins and had a molecular weight slightly larger than its counterparts both in the media and lysates; a difference in size is likely because of the addition of biotin ( Figure 2d ). The release of ephrinA1 into the media was time-dependent ( Figure 2e ). To determine the exact form of soluble ephrinA1, gel filtration chromatography was performed using media from U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells. A single ~25 kDa ephrinA1 immunoreactive protein was found in the fractions at 62 through 67 ml ( Figure 2f ). The predicted molecular mass of ephrinA1 was 29 772 kDa. Importantly, no dimeric or oligomeric forms of the protein were detected. Thus, soluble ephrinA1 released from GBM cells exists in a monomeric form. Soluble, monomeric ephrinA1 induces internalization and downregulation of EphA2 We next demonstrated that EphA2 was profoundly downregulated in U-251MG and A-172MG GBM cells treated with ephrinA1-conditioned media obtained from either U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells or SK-Br-3 cells ( Figures 3a and b ). The magnitude of EphA2 downregulation was similar when compared to homodimeric ephrinA1-Fc ( Figure 3c ). EphA2 remained suppressed for at least 24 h in the presence of ligands ( Figure 3c ). Interestingly, ephA2 gene expression also prominently decreased in response to 2 h treatment with homodimeric ephrinA1-Fc or a monomer of ephrinA1 generated by factor XA cleavage of ephrinA1-Fc, and then rebounded to slightly over control levels after 24 h ( Figure 3d ). To study in more detail the fate of EphA2 in response to soluble monomeric ephrinA1, parental U-251MG cells were treated with ephrinA1-conditioned media or ephrinA1-Fc and examined by confocal microscopy. EphA2 was localized to the plasma membrane in non-treated cells ( Figure 3e ; 0 h). EphrinA1-conditioned media treatment caused EphA2 to internalize and relocate from the plasma membrane to the cytoplasmic and perinuclear regions of cells after 2 h, followed by a gradual decrease in the receptor level at 4 and 8 h ( Figure 3e ). By 24 h, little detectable EphA2 protein remained, which was also the case in cells treated with ephrinA1-Fc ( Figure 3e ). Functional effects of soluble monomeric ephrinA1 in GBM cells and embryonic neurons Next, we explored the ability of soluble monomeric ephrinA1 to elicit cell rounding ( Miao et al. , 2000 ). Cells treated with conditioned media from three different U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) clones became distinctly rounded, retracting most or all processes within 2 h of treatment ( Figure 4a and Supplementary Figure 2A ). We also transfected U-251MG cells with N-terminal 6-histidine-tagged ephrinA1 (His-ephrinA1). His-ephrinA1 was released as a monomer from these cells and isolated from the media through Ni2+ affinity chromatography ( Supplementary Figure 2B ). Treatment of U-251MG cells with His-ephrinA1 monomer resulted in a change in cell morphology identical to that observed in response to ephrinA1-conditioned media. Dimeric ephrinA1-Fc was shown to suppress signaling through the Ras–MAPK pathway and to cause attenuation of growth factor-induced phosphorylation of ERK ( Miao et al. , 2001 ; Macrae et al. , 2005 ; Guo et al. , 2006 ). We found that 10 min following treatment with empty vector-conditioned media ( Figure 4b , top), there was a profound increase in ERK phosphorylation, but this effect was abolished in cells treated with ephrinA1-conditioned media ( Figure 4b , bottom). The stimulation of ERK phosphorylation is likely a result of growth factors present in the conditioned media, and suppression of this increase when ephrinA1 is present supports the ability of a soluble monomer of ephrinA1 to engage in a functional interaction with EphA2. We did observe a transient increase in phosphorylated ERK in response to ephrinA1-conditioned media at 4 h, which may be because of the fact that at this time point, the majority of EphA2 has already internalized and downregulated ( Figures 3c and e ), reflecting a temporary suppression of ERK phosphorylation ( Figures 4b and c ). We next investigated the effect of a soluble monomer of ephrinA1 on the collapse of embryonic neuronal growth cones. E.18 rat cortical neurons were treated with purified monomeric ephrinA1 or dimeric ephrinA1-Fc, and both significantly induced neuronal growth cone collapse ( Figure 4c ). Staining for EphA2 revealed that these cells do, indeed, express the receptor ( Supplementary Figure 2D ). We observed a similar potent increase in the number of collapsed growth cones in response to treatment of neurons with ephrinA1-conditioned media and not with control-conditioned media (data not shown). EphrinA1-Fc is biologically functional both as homodimer and monomer To examine whether homodimeric ephrinA1-Fc can function in a monomeric form, ephrinA1-Fc was reduced and alkylated ( Debinski et al. , 1992 ) ( Figure 5a ). Dimeric and monomeric ephrinA1-Fc induced tyrosine phosphorylation of EphA2 ( Figure 5b ). Furthermore, treatment of U-251MG cells with either form of ephrinA1-Fc resulted in cell rounding and loss of polarity ( Supplementary Figure 3 ). Dimeric and monomeric ephrinA1-Fc were very effective in inhibiting the migration of U-251MG cells ( Figure 5c ). We also compared the effect of dimeric and monomeric ephrinA1-Fc in eliciting neuronal growth cone collapse. Treatment with ephrinA1-Fc in both forms resulted in a significant increase in collapsed neuronal growth cones ( Figure 5d ). Specificity of the monomeric ephrin–Eph interaction It is not known whether other monomeric ephrins can functionally interact with EphA2 or whether monomeric ephrinA1 can interact with other EphA receptors. Thus, monomeric ephrinA1 and ephrinA5 were generated by cleaving off the Fc fragments from ephrinA1-Fc and ephrinA5-Fc, respectively ( Figure 6a ). Homodimeric ephrinA1-Fc and ephrinA5-Fc downregulated EphA2 as expected ( Figure 6b ). The monomeric cleavage products (ephrinA1-cl and ephrinA5-cl) downregulated EphA2 as well ( Figure 6b ). We also tested the ability of dimeric and monomeric ephrinA1 to induce downregulation of other EphA receptors. In SNB-19 cells, treatment with ephrinA1-Fc marginally induced downregulation of EphA5 compared to EphA2, whereas monomeric ephrinA1-cl appeared to have no effect on EphA5, but did induce downregulation of EphA2 ( Figure 6c ). Interestingly, in U-373MG cells, EphA3 and EphA2 were both downregulated in response to treatment with either ephrinA1-Fc or ephrinA1-cl ( Figure 6c ). U-373MG cells express lower levels of EphA2 than SNB-19 and U-251MG cells ( Wykosky et al. , 2007 ). Thus, the ability of monomeric ephrinA1 to functionally interact with other EphA receptors may depend on the specific preference of binding such that when less EphA2 is available, the ligand interacts with other EphA receptors more efficiently. Mechanism of ephrinA1 release from GBM cells We next investigated the mechanism whereby monomeric ephrinA1 is released from GBM cells. Treatment of U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells with PI-PLC resulted in the release of ephrinA1, confirming that ephrinA1 is a GPI-anchored protein in these cells ( Figure 7a ; +PI-PLC). However, ephrinA1 naturally released from U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells was smaller by ~2–3 kDa than that released by PI-PLC ( Figure 7a ). Furthermore, the amount of ephrinA1 released from cells that had previously been treated with PI-PLC to release GPI-anchored proteins was considerably less than those that had not ( Figure 7a ). To examine protease(s) that may be involved in the cleavage of ephrinA1, U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells were grown in the presence or absence of GM-6001, a broad-spectrum, specific inhibitor of metalloproteases. GM-6001 diminished the release of soluble monomeric ephrinA1 from U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells compared to treatment with vehicle ( Figure 7b ), indicating that enzyme of this class is involved in the cleavage and release of ephrinA1.  Results EphrinA1 overexpression downregulates EphA2 and suppresses malignant properties of GBM cells U-251MG GBM cells, which naturally overexpress EphA2 with low levels of ephrinA1, were transfected with full-length human ephrinA1 . [ ephrinA1 ](+) clones 4, 7 and 12 exhibited a dramatic decrease in EphA2 protein when compared to controls ( Figure 1a ). Breast cancer cells that endogenously overexpress ephrinA1 had similarly low levels of EphA2 ( Figure 1a ). These findings were confirmed using confocal microscopy ( Figure 1b ). Hence, overexpression of ectopic ephrinA1 coincides with a marked decrease in EphA2 protein in GBM cells. We next investigated possible functional consequences of ectopic ephrinA1 in GBM cells. U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells exhibited a significant defect in both migration and proliferation compared to controls ( Figures 1c and d ). Moreover, overexpression of ephrinA1 conferred a marked reduction in anchorage-independent growth similar to that observed upon treatment with ephrinA1-Fc, a soluble recombinant homodimeric ligand ( Figure 1e ). Thus, U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells exhibit downregulation of EphA2 and suppression of several of the malignant properties of GBM cells. EphrinA1 is released from GBM and breast cancer cells as a soluble monomeric protein Next, to investigate whether the decreased levels of EphA2 found in confluent monolayers of U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) and SK-Br-3 cells ( Figure 1a ) are dependent on cell–cell contact, cells were plated at low or high density ( Supplementary Figure 1 ). To our surprise, the downregulation of EphA2 persisted in cells plated at low density ( Figure 2a ), indicating that ectopically and endogenously overexpressed ephrinA1 elicits downregulation of EphA2 that is not dependent on extensive cell–cell contact. This finding prompted us to hypothesize that ephrinA1 is released into the media of these cells in a functional form. Thus, we examined the presence of ephrinA1 in conditioned media. Immunoreactive ephrinA1 was abundant in U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+), SK-Br-3, T47D and ZR-75-1 cell media, but not in controls ( Figure 2b ). We also performed western blotting under non-reducing conditions, in which we still detected only a single 25-kDa immunoreactive band corresponding to ephrinA1 ( Figure 2c ). In addition to being present in whole cell lysates and in the media, some of the protein was also localized to the plasma membrane. Immunoreactive ephrinA1 was readily detected in biotinylated plasma membrane proteins and had a molecular weight slightly larger than its counterparts both in the media and lysates; a difference in size is likely because of the addition of biotin ( Figure 2d ). The release of ephrinA1 into the media was time-dependent ( Figure 2e ). To determine the exact form of soluble ephrinA1, gel filtration chromatography was performed using media from U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells. A single ~25 kDa ephrinA1 immunoreactive protein was found in the fractions at 62 through 67 ml ( Figure 2f ). The predicted molecular mass of ephrinA1 was 29 772 kDa. Importantly, no dimeric or oligomeric forms of the protein were detected. Thus, soluble ephrinA1 released from GBM cells exists in a monomeric form. Soluble, monomeric ephrinA1 induces internalization and downregulation of EphA2 We next demonstrated that EphA2 was profoundly downregulated in U-251MG and A-172MG GBM cells treated with ephrinA1-conditioned media obtained from either U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells or SK-Br-3 cells ( Figures 3a and b ). The magnitude of EphA2 downregulation was similar when compared to homodimeric ephrinA1-Fc ( Figure 3c ). EphA2 remained suppressed for at least 24 h in the presence of ligands ( Figure 3c ). Interestingly, ephA2 gene expression also prominently decreased in response to 2 h treatment with homodimeric ephrinA1-Fc or a monomer of ephrinA1 generated by factor XA cleavage of ephrinA1-Fc, and then rebounded to slightly over control levels after 24 h ( Figure 3d ). To study in more detail the fate of EphA2 in response to soluble monomeric ephrinA1, parental U-251MG cells were treated with ephrinA1-conditioned media or ephrinA1-Fc and examined by confocal microscopy. EphA2 was localized to the plasma membrane in non-treated cells ( Figure 3e ; 0 h). EphrinA1-conditioned media treatment caused EphA2 to internalize and relocate from the plasma membrane to the cytoplasmic and perinuclear regions of cells after 2 h, followed by a gradual decrease in the receptor level at 4 and 8 h ( Figure 3e ). By 24 h, little detectable EphA2 protein remained, which was also the case in cells treated with ephrinA1-Fc ( Figure 3e ). Functional effects of soluble monomeric ephrinA1 in GBM cells and embryonic neurons Next, we explored the ability of soluble monomeric ephrinA1 to elicit cell rounding ( Miao et al. , 2000 ). Cells treated with conditioned media from three different U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) clones became distinctly rounded, retracting most or all processes within 2 h of treatment ( Figure 4a and Supplementary Figure 2A ). We also transfected U-251MG cells with N-terminal 6-histidine-tagged ephrinA1 (His-ephrinA1). His-ephrinA1 was released as a monomer from these cells and isolated from the media through Ni2+ affinity chromatography ( Supplementary Figure 2B ). Treatment of U-251MG cells with His-ephrinA1 monomer resulted in a change in cell morphology identical to that observed in response to ephrinA1-conditioned media. Dimeric ephrinA1-Fc was shown to suppress signaling through the Ras–MAPK pathway and to cause attenuation of growth factor-induced phosphorylation of ERK ( Miao et al. , 2001 ; Macrae et al. , 2005 ; Guo et al. , 2006 ). We found that 10 min following treatment with empty vector-conditioned media ( Figure 4b , top), there was a profound increase in ERK phosphorylation, but this effect was abolished in cells treated with ephrinA1-conditioned media ( Figure 4b , bottom). The stimulation of ERK phosphorylation is likely a result of growth factors present in the conditioned media, and suppression of this increase when ephrinA1 is present supports the ability of a soluble monomer of ephrinA1 to engage in a functional interaction with EphA2. We did observe a transient increase in phosphorylated ERK in response to ephrinA1-conditioned media at 4 h, which may be because of the fact that at this time point, the majority of EphA2 has already internalized and downregulated ( Figures 3c and e ), reflecting a temporary suppression of ERK phosphorylation ( Figures 4b and c ). We next investigated the effect of a soluble monomer of ephrinA1 on the collapse of embryonic neuronal growth cones. E.18 rat cortical neurons were treated with purified monomeric ephrinA1 or dimeric ephrinA1-Fc, and both significantly induced neuronal growth cone collapse ( Figure 4c ). Staining for EphA2 revealed that these cells do, indeed, express the receptor ( Supplementary Figure 2D ). We observed a similar potent increase in the number of collapsed growth cones in response to treatment of neurons with ephrinA1-conditioned media and not with control-conditioned media (data not shown). EphrinA1-Fc is biologically functional both as homodimer and monomer To examine whether homodimeric ephrinA1-Fc can function in a monomeric form, ephrinA1-Fc was reduced and alkylated ( Debinski et al. , 1992 ) ( Figure 5a ). Dimeric and monomeric ephrinA1-Fc induced tyrosine phosphorylation of EphA2 ( Figure 5b ). Furthermore, treatment of U-251MG cells with either form of ephrinA1-Fc resulted in cell rounding and loss of polarity ( Supplementary Figure 3 ). Dimeric and monomeric ephrinA1-Fc were very effective in inhibiting the migration of U-251MG cells ( Figure 5c ). We also compared the effect of dimeric and monomeric ephrinA1-Fc in eliciting neuronal growth cone collapse. Treatment with ephrinA1-Fc in both forms resulted in a significant increase in collapsed neuronal growth cones ( Figure 5d ). Specificity of the monomeric ephrin–Eph interaction It is not known whether other monomeric ephrins can functionally interact with EphA2 or whether monomeric ephrinA1 can interact with other EphA receptors. Thus, monomeric ephrinA1 and ephrinA5 were generated by cleaving off the Fc fragments from ephrinA1-Fc and ephrinA5-Fc, respectively ( Figure 6a ). Homodimeric ephrinA1-Fc and ephrinA5-Fc downregulated EphA2 as expected ( Figure 6b ). The monomeric cleavage products (ephrinA1-cl and ephrinA5-cl) downregulated EphA2 as well ( Figure 6b ). We also tested the ability of dimeric and monomeric ephrinA1 to induce downregulation of other EphA receptors. In SNB-19 cells, treatment with ephrinA1-Fc marginally induced downregulation of EphA5 compared to EphA2, whereas monomeric ephrinA1-cl appeared to have no effect on EphA5, but did induce downregulation of EphA2 ( Figure 6c ). Interestingly, in U-373MG cells, EphA3 and EphA2 were both downregulated in response to treatment with either ephrinA1-Fc or ephrinA1-cl ( Figure 6c ). U-373MG cells express lower levels of EphA2 than SNB-19 and U-251MG cells ( Wykosky et al. , 2007 ). Thus, the ability of monomeric ephrinA1 to functionally interact with other EphA receptors may depend on the specific preference of binding such that when less EphA2 is available, the ligand interacts with other EphA receptors more efficiently. Mechanism of ephrinA1 release from GBM cells We next investigated the mechanism whereby monomeric ephrinA1 is released from GBM cells. Treatment of U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells with PI-PLC resulted in the release of ephrinA1, confirming that ephrinA1 is a GPI-anchored protein in these cells ( Figure 7a ; +PI-PLC). However, ephrinA1 naturally released from U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells was smaller by ~2–3 kDa than that released by PI-PLC ( Figure 7a ). Furthermore, the amount of ephrinA1 released from cells that had previously been treated with PI-PLC to release GPI-anchored proteins was considerably less than those that had not ( Figure 7a ). To examine protease(s) that may be involved in the cleavage of ephrinA1, U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells were grown in the presence or absence of GM-6001, a broad-spectrum, specific inhibitor of metalloproteases. GM-6001 diminished the release of soluble monomeric ephrinA1 from U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells compared to treatment with vehicle ( Figure 7b ), indicating that enzyme of this class is involved in the cleavage and release of ephrinA1.  EphrinA1 overexpression downregulates EphA2 and suppresses malignant properties of GBM cells U-251MG GBM cells, which naturally overexpress EphA2 with low levels of ephrinA1, were transfected with full-length human ephrinA1 . [ ephrinA1 ](+) clones 4, 7 and 12 exhibited a dramatic decrease in EphA2 protein when compared to controls ( Figure 1a ). Breast cancer cells that endogenously overexpress ephrinA1 had similarly low levels of EphA2 ( Figure 1a ). These findings were confirmed using confocal microscopy ( Figure 1b ). Hence, overexpression of ectopic ephrinA1 coincides with a marked decrease in EphA2 protein in GBM cells. We next investigated possible functional consequences of ectopic ephrinA1 in GBM cells. U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells exhibited a significant defect in both migration and proliferation compared to controls ( Figures 1c and d ). Moreover, overexpression of ephrinA1 conferred a marked reduction in anchorage-independent growth similar to that observed upon treatment with ephrinA1-Fc, a soluble recombinant homodimeric ligand ( Figure 1e ). Thus, U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells exhibit downregulation of EphA2 and suppression of several of the malignant properties of GBM cells.  EphrinA1 overexpression downregulates EphA2 and suppresses malignant properties of GBM cells U-251MG GBM cells, which naturally overexpress EphA2 with low levels of ephrinA1, were transfected with full-length human ephrinA1 . [ ephrinA1 ](+) clones 4, 7 and 12 exhibited a dramatic decrease in EphA2 protein when compared to controls ( Figure 1a ). Breast cancer cells that endogenously overexpress ephrinA1 had similarly low levels of EphA2 ( Figure 1a ). These findings were confirmed using confocal microscopy ( Figure 1b ). Hence, overexpression of ectopic ephrinA1 coincides with a marked decrease in EphA2 protein in GBM cells. We next investigated possible functional consequences of ectopic ephrinA1 in GBM cells. U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells exhibited a significant defect in both migration and proliferation compared to controls ( Figures 1c and d ). Moreover, overexpression of ephrinA1 conferred a marked reduction in anchorage-independent growth similar to that observed upon treatment with ephrinA1-Fc, a soluble recombinant homodimeric ligand ( Figure 1e ). Thus, U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells exhibit downregulation of EphA2 and suppression of several of the malignant properties of GBM cells.  EphrinA1 is released from GBM and breast cancer cells as a soluble monomeric protein Next, to investigate whether the decreased levels of EphA2 found in confluent monolayers of U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) and SK-Br-3 cells ( Figure 1a ) are dependent on cell–cell contact, cells were plated at low or high density ( Supplementary Figure 1 ). To our surprise, the downregulation of EphA2 persisted in cells plated at low density ( Figure 2a ), indicating that ectopically and endogenously overexpressed ephrinA1 elicits downregulation of EphA2 that is not dependent on extensive cell–cell contact. This finding prompted us to hypothesize that ephrinA1 is released into the media of these cells in a functional form. Thus, we examined the presence of ephrinA1 in conditioned media. Immunoreactive ephrinA1 was abundant in U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+), SK-Br-3, T47D and ZR-75-1 cell media, but not in controls ( Figure 2b ). We also performed western blotting under non-reducing conditions, in which we still detected only a single 25-kDa immunoreactive band corresponding to ephrinA1 ( Figure 2c ). In addition to being present in whole cell lysates and in the media, some of the protein was also localized to the plasma membrane. Immunoreactive ephrinA1 was readily detected in biotinylated plasma membrane proteins and had a molecular weight slightly larger than its counterparts both in the media and lysates; a difference in size is likely because of the addition of biotin ( Figure 2d ). The release of ephrinA1 into the media was time-dependent ( Figure 2e ). To determine the exact form of soluble ephrinA1, gel filtration chromatography was performed using media from U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells. A single ~25 kDa ephrinA1 immunoreactive protein was found in the fractions at 62 through 67 ml ( Figure 2f ). The predicted molecular mass of ephrinA1 was 29 772 kDa. Importantly, no dimeric or oligomeric forms of the protein were detected. Thus, soluble ephrinA1 released from GBM cells exists in a monomeric form.  EphrinA1 is released from GBM and breast cancer cells as a soluble monomeric protein Next, to investigate whether the decreased levels of EphA2 found in confluent monolayers of U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) and SK-Br-3 cells ( Figure 1a ) are dependent on cell–cell contact, cells were plated at low or high density ( Supplementary Figure 1 ). To our surprise, the downregulation of EphA2 persisted in cells plated at low density ( Figure 2a ), indicating that ectopically and endogenously overexpressed ephrinA1 elicits downregulation of EphA2 that is not dependent on extensive cell–cell contact. This finding prompted us to hypothesize that ephrinA1 is released into the media of these cells in a functional form. Thus, we examined the presence of ephrinA1 in conditioned media. Immunoreactive ephrinA1 was abundant in U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+), SK-Br-3, T47D and ZR-75-1 cell media, but not in controls ( Figure 2b ). We also performed western blotting under non-reducing conditions, in which we still detected only a single 25-kDa immunoreactive band corresponding to ephrinA1 ( Figure 2c ). In addition to being present in whole cell lysates and in the media, some of the protein was also localized to the plasma membrane. Immunoreactive ephrinA1 was readily detected in biotinylated plasma membrane proteins and had a molecular weight slightly larger than its counterparts both in the media and lysates; a difference in size is likely because of the addition of biotin ( Figure 2d ). The release of ephrinA1 into the media was time-dependent ( Figure 2e ). To determine the exact form of soluble ephrinA1, gel filtration chromatography was performed using media from U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells. A single ~25 kDa ephrinA1 immunoreactive protein was found in the fractions at 62 through 67 ml ( Figure 2f ). The predicted molecular mass of ephrinA1 was 29 772 kDa. Importantly, no dimeric or oligomeric forms of the protein were detected. Thus, soluble ephrinA1 released from GBM cells exists in a monomeric form.  Soluble, monomeric ephrinA1 induces internalization and downregulation of EphA2 We next demonstrated that EphA2 was profoundly downregulated in U-251MG and A-172MG GBM cells treated with ephrinA1-conditioned media obtained from either U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells or SK-Br-3 cells ( Figures 3a and b ). The magnitude of EphA2 downregulation was similar when compared to homodimeric ephrinA1-Fc ( Figure 3c ). EphA2 remained suppressed for at least 24 h in the presence of ligands ( Figure 3c ). Interestingly, ephA2 gene expression also prominently decreased in response to 2 h treatment with homodimeric ephrinA1-Fc or a monomer of ephrinA1 generated by factor XA cleavage of ephrinA1-Fc, and then rebounded to slightly over control levels after 24 h ( Figure 3d ). To study in more detail the fate of EphA2 in response to soluble monomeric ephrinA1, parental U-251MG cells were treated with ephrinA1-conditioned media or ephrinA1-Fc and examined by confocal microscopy. EphA2 was localized to the plasma membrane in non-treated cells ( Figure 3e ; 0 h). EphrinA1-conditioned media treatment caused EphA2 to internalize and relocate from the plasma membrane to the cytoplasmic and perinuclear regions of cells after 2 h, followed by a gradual decrease in the receptor level at 4 and 8 h ( Figure 3e ). By 24 h, little detectable EphA2 protein remained, which was also the case in cells treated with ephrinA1-Fc ( Figure 3e ).  Soluble, monomeric ephrinA1 induces internalization and downregulation of EphA2 We next demonstrated that EphA2 was profoundly downregulated in U-251MG and A-172MG GBM cells treated with ephrinA1-conditioned media obtained from either U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells or SK-Br-3 cells ( Figures 3a and b ). The magnitude of EphA2 downregulation was similar when compared to homodimeric ephrinA1-Fc ( Figure 3c ). EphA2 remained suppressed for at least 24 h in the presence of ligands ( Figure 3c ). Interestingly, ephA2 gene expression also prominently decreased in response to 2 h treatment with homodimeric ephrinA1-Fc or a monomer of ephrinA1 generated by factor XA cleavage of ephrinA1-Fc, and then rebounded to slightly over control levels after 24 h ( Figure 3d ). To study in more detail the fate of EphA2 in response to soluble monomeric ephrinA1, parental U-251MG cells were treated with ephrinA1-conditioned media or ephrinA1-Fc and examined by confocal microscopy. EphA2 was localized to the plasma membrane in non-treated cells ( Figure 3e ; 0 h). EphrinA1-conditioned media treatment caused EphA2 to internalize and relocate from the plasma membrane to the cytoplasmic and perinuclear regions of cells after 2 h, followed by a gradual decrease in the receptor level at 4 and 8 h ( Figure 3e ). By 24 h, little detectable EphA2 protein remained, which was also the case in cells treated with ephrinA1-Fc ( Figure 3e ).  Functional effects of soluble monomeric ephrinA1 in GBM cells and embryonic neurons Next, we explored the ability of soluble monomeric ephrinA1 to elicit cell rounding ( Miao et al. , 2000 ). Cells treated with conditioned media from three different U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) clones became distinctly rounded, retracting most or all processes within 2 h of treatment ( Figure 4a and Supplementary Figure 2A ). We also transfected U-251MG cells with N-terminal 6-histidine-tagged ephrinA1 (His-ephrinA1). His-ephrinA1 was released as a monomer from these cells and isolated from the media through Ni2+ affinity chromatography ( Supplementary Figure 2B ). Treatment of U-251MG cells with His-ephrinA1 monomer resulted in a change in cell morphology identical to that observed in response to ephrinA1-conditioned media. Dimeric ephrinA1-Fc was shown to suppress signaling through the Ras–MAPK pathway and to cause attenuation of growth factor-induced phosphorylation of ERK ( Miao et al. , 2001 ; Macrae et al. , 2005 ; Guo et al. , 2006 ). We found that 10 min following treatment with empty vector-conditioned media ( Figure 4b , top), there was a profound increase in ERK phosphorylation, but this effect was abolished in cells treated with ephrinA1-conditioned media ( Figure 4b , bottom). The stimulation of ERK phosphorylation is likely a result of growth factors present in the conditioned media, and suppression of this increase when ephrinA1 is present supports the ability of a soluble monomer of ephrinA1 to engage in a functional interaction with EphA2. We did observe a transient increase in phosphorylated ERK in response to ephrinA1-conditioned media at 4 h, which may be because of the fact that at this time point, the majority of EphA2 has already internalized and downregulated ( Figures 3c and e ), reflecting a temporary suppression of ERK phosphorylation ( Figures 4b and c ). We next investigated the effect of a soluble monomer of ephrinA1 on the collapse of embryonic neuronal growth cones. E.18 rat cortical neurons were treated with purified monomeric ephrinA1 or dimeric ephrinA1-Fc, and both significantly induced neuronal growth cone collapse ( Figure 4c ). Staining for EphA2 revealed that these cells do, indeed, express the receptor ( Supplementary Figure 2D ). We observed a similar potent increase in the number of collapsed growth cones in response to treatment of neurons with ephrinA1-conditioned media and not with control-conditioned media (data not shown).  Functional effects of soluble monomeric ephrinA1 in GBM cells and embryonic neurons Next, we explored the ability of soluble monomeric ephrinA1 to elicit cell rounding ( Miao et al. , 2000 ). Cells treated with conditioned media from three different U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) clones became distinctly rounded, retracting most or all processes within 2 h of treatment ( Figure 4a and Supplementary Figure 2A ). We also transfected U-251MG cells with N-terminal 6-histidine-tagged ephrinA1 (His-ephrinA1). His-ephrinA1 was released as a monomer from these cells and isolated from the media through Ni2+ affinity chromatography ( Supplementary Figure 2B ). Treatment of U-251MG cells with His-ephrinA1 monomer resulted in a change in cell morphology identical to that observed in response to ephrinA1-conditioned media. Dimeric ephrinA1-Fc was shown to suppress signaling through the Ras–MAPK pathway and to cause attenuation of growth factor-induced phosphorylation of ERK ( Miao et al. , 2001 ; Macrae et al. , 2005 ; Guo et al. , 2006 ). We found that 10 min following treatment with empty vector-conditioned media ( Figure 4b , top), there was a profound increase in ERK phosphorylation, but this effect was abolished in cells treated with ephrinA1-conditioned media ( Figure 4b , bottom). The stimulation of ERK phosphorylation is likely a result of growth factors present in the conditioned media, and suppression of this increase when ephrinA1 is present supports the ability of a soluble monomer of ephrinA1 to engage in a functional interaction with EphA2. We did observe a transient increase in phosphorylated ERK in response to ephrinA1-conditioned media at 4 h, which may be because of the fact that at this time point, the majority of EphA2 has already internalized and downregulated ( Figures 3c and e ), reflecting a temporary suppression of ERK phosphorylation ( Figures 4b and c ). We next investigated the effect of a soluble monomer of ephrinA1 on the collapse of embryonic neuronal growth cones. E.18 rat cortical neurons were treated with purified monomeric ephrinA1 or dimeric ephrinA1-Fc, and both significantly induced neuronal growth cone collapse ( Figure 4c ). Staining for EphA2 revealed that these cells do, indeed, express the receptor ( Supplementary Figure 2D ). We observed a similar potent increase in the number of collapsed growth cones in response to treatment of neurons with ephrinA1-conditioned media and not with control-conditioned media (data not shown).  EphrinA1-Fc is biologically functional both as homodimer and monomer To examine whether homodimeric ephrinA1-Fc can function in a monomeric form, ephrinA1-Fc was reduced and alkylated ( Debinski et al. , 1992 ) ( Figure 5a ). Dimeric and monomeric ephrinA1-Fc induced tyrosine phosphorylation of EphA2 ( Figure 5b ). Furthermore, treatment of U-251MG cells with either form of ephrinA1-Fc resulted in cell rounding and loss of polarity ( Supplementary Figure 3 ). Dimeric and monomeric ephrinA1-Fc were very effective in inhibiting the migration of U-251MG cells ( Figure 5c ). We also compared the effect of dimeric and monomeric ephrinA1-Fc in eliciting neuronal growth cone collapse. Treatment with ephrinA1-Fc in both forms resulted in a significant increase in collapsed neuronal growth cones ( Figure 5d ).  EphrinA1-Fc is biologically functional both as homodimer and monomer To examine whether homodimeric ephrinA1-Fc can function in a monomeric form, ephrinA1-Fc was reduced and alkylated ( Debinski et al. , 1992 ) ( Figure 5a ). Dimeric and monomeric ephrinA1-Fc induced tyrosine phosphorylation of EphA2 ( Figure 5b ). Furthermore, treatment of U-251MG cells with either form of ephrinA1-Fc resulted in cell rounding and loss of polarity ( Supplementary Figure 3 ). Dimeric and monomeric ephrinA1-Fc were very effective in inhibiting the migration of U-251MG cells ( Figure 5c ). We also compared the effect of dimeric and monomeric ephrinA1-Fc in eliciting neuronal growth cone collapse. Treatment with ephrinA1-Fc in both forms resulted in a significant increase in collapsed neuronal growth cones ( Figure 5d ).  Specificity of the monomeric ephrin–Eph interaction It is not known whether other monomeric ephrins can functionally interact with EphA2 or whether monomeric ephrinA1 can interact with other EphA receptors. Thus, monomeric ephrinA1 and ephrinA5 were generated by cleaving off the Fc fragments from ephrinA1-Fc and ephrinA5-Fc, respectively ( Figure 6a ). Homodimeric ephrinA1-Fc and ephrinA5-Fc downregulated EphA2 as expected ( Figure 6b ). The monomeric cleavage products (ephrinA1-cl and ephrinA5-cl) downregulated EphA2 as well ( Figure 6b ). We also tested the ability of dimeric and monomeric ephrinA1 to induce downregulation of other EphA receptors. In SNB-19 cells, treatment with ephrinA1-Fc marginally induced downregulation of EphA5 compared to EphA2, whereas monomeric ephrinA1-cl appeared to have no effect on EphA5, but did induce downregulation of EphA2 ( Figure 6c ). Interestingly, in U-373MG cells, EphA3 and EphA2 were both downregulated in response to treatment with either ephrinA1-Fc or ephrinA1-cl ( Figure 6c ). U-373MG cells express lower levels of EphA2 than SNB-19 and U-251MG cells ( Wykosky et al. , 2007 ). Thus, the ability of monomeric ephrinA1 to functionally interact with other EphA receptors may depend on the specific preference of binding such that when less EphA2 is available, the ligand interacts with other EphA receptors more efficiently.  Specificity of the monomeric ephrin–Eph interaction It is not known whether other monomeric ephrins can functionally interact with EphA2 or whether monomeric ephrinA1 can interact with other EphA receptors. Thus, monomeric ephrinA1 and ephrinA5 were generated by cleaving off the Fc fragments from ephrinA1-Fc and ephrinA5-Fc, respectively ( Figure 6a ). Homodimeric ephrinA1-Fc and ephrinA5-Fc downregulated EphA2 as expected ( Figure 6b ). The monomeric cleavage products (ephrinA1-cl and ephrinA5-cl) downregulated EphA2 as well ( Figure 6b ). We also tested the ability of dimeric and monomeric ephrinA1 to induce downregulation of other EphA receptors. In SNB-19 cells, treatment with ephrinA1-Fc marginally induced downregulation of EphA5 compared to EphA2, whereas monomeric ephrinA1-cl appeared to have no effect on EphA5, but did induce downregulation of EphA2 ( Figure 6c ). Interestingly, in U-373MG cells, EphA3 and EphA2 were both downregulated in response to treatment with either ephrinA1-Fc or ephrinA1-cl ( Figure 6c ). U-373MG cells express lower levels of EphA2 than SNB-19 and U-251MG cells ( Wykosky et al. , 2007 ). Thus, the ability of monomeric ephrinA1 to functionally interact with other EphA receptors may depend on the specific preference of binding such that when less EphA2 is available, the ligand interacts with other EphA receptors more efficiently.  Mechanism of ephrinA1 release from GBM cells We next investigated the mechanism whereby monomeric ephrinA1 is released from GBM cells. Treatment of U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells with PI-PLC resulted in the release of ephrinA1, confirming that ephrinA1 is a GPI-anchored protein in these cells ( Figure 7a ; +PI-PLC). However, ephrinA1 naturally released from U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells was smaller by ~2–3 kDa than that released by PI-PLC ( Figure 7a ). Furthermore, the amount of ephrinA1 released from cells that had previously been treated with PI-PLC to release GPI-anchored proteins was considerably less than those that had not ( Figure 7a ). To examine protease(s) that may be involved in the cleavage of ephrinA1, U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells were grown in the presence or absence of GM-6001, a broad-spectrum, specific inhibitor of metalloproteases. GM-6001 diminished the release of soluble monomeric ephrinA1 from U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells compared to treatment with vehicle ( Figure 7b ), indicating that enzyme of this class is involved in the cleavage and release of ephrinA1.  Mechanism of ephrinA1 release from GBM cells We next investigated the mechanism whereby monomeric ephrinA1 is released from GBM cells. Treatment of U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells with PI-PLC resulted in the release of ephrinA1, confirming that ephrinA1 is a GPI-anchored protein in these cells ( Figure 7a ; +PI-PLC). However, ephrinA1 naturally released from U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells was smaller by ~2–3 kDa than that released by PI-PLC ( Figure 7a ). Furthermore, the amount of ephrinA1 released from cells that had previously been treated with PI-PLC to release GPI-anchored proteins was considerably less than those that had not ( Figure 7a ). To examine protease(s) that may be involved in the cleavage of ephrinA1, U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells were grown in the presence or absence of GM-6001, a broad-spectrum, specific inhibitor of metalloproteases. GM-6001 diminished the release of soluble monomeric ephrinA1 from U-251[ ephrinA1 ](+) cells compared to treatment with vehicle ( Figure 7b ), indicating that enzyme of this class is involved in the cleavage and release of ephrinA1.  Discussion We have uncovered that ephrinA1, a ligand for the EphA2 receptor, is released as a functional, soluble, monomeric protein by proteolytic cleavage from the plasma membrane of cancer cells. Soluble monomeric ephrinA1 induces downregulation of EphA2, elicits profound changes in cancer cell morphology, attenuates serum-induced phosphorylation of ERK and impairs cell migration and anchorage-independent growth. In addition, a monomer of ephrinA1-Fc has the same effects on EphA2 and downstream oncogenic processes as its homodimeric counterpart. These data reveal that soluble, monomeric ephrinA1 is a functional ligand for EphA2 in GBM and likely to exist in such a form in other cancers. Moreover, monomeric ephrinA1 effectively augments neuronal growth cone collapse, suggesting that a soluble form of the ligand may be involved in modulating physiological processes as well. EphrinA1 as a recombinant dimeric Fc-fusion protein (ephrinA1-Fc) induces phosphorylation and downregulation of the EphA2 oncoprotein ( Carles-Kinch et al. , 2002 ; Walker-Daniels et al. , 2002 ; Duxbury et al. , 2004a ; Wykosky et al. , 2005 ). The notion that Ephs and ephrins may not, in fact, require the formation of oligomeric complexes has recent precedence in a study which found that ephrinA5 can engage in a functional interaction with the EphB2 receptor in a 1:1 heterodimeric complex, both in crystal structures and in solution ( Himanen et al. , 2004 ). Interestingly, it represents one of the few known instances of cross-talk between A and B class Ephs and ephrins, which was in fact cited as a possible explanation for the existence of the unexpected, functional 1:1 receptor/ligand complex ( Himanen et al. , 2004 ). Our findings demonstrate for the first time that ephrins have functional functions as soluble, monomeric factors in activating Ephs of their own class during cancer maintenance and/or progression as well as normal developmental/physiological processes. In support of this finding, 12-amino acid ephrinA1-mimetic peptides have the capacity to bind and activate EphA2 ( Koolpe et al. , 2002 ). Moreover, another ephrin ligand, ephrinA4, has been found to be released by activated B lymphocytes ( Aasheim et al. , 2000 ). Our experiments with ephrinA1 purified from conditioned media, and homodimeric ephrinA1-Fc reduced to a monomer, and the Factor XA cleavage product documented the functional activity of this ligand as a soluble protein not requiring covalent dimerization or oligomerization for function. This suggests that the ligand is capable of interacting with EphA2 in a manner that is not totally dependent on juxtacrine interactions. Moreover, our results demonstrating that soluble monomeric ephrinA1 is effective in eliciting collapse of neuronal growth cones support a role for this form of the protein in physiology, as ephrinA1-induced growth cone collapse during embryonic development has been previously documented ( Meima et al. , 1997 ). We found that the monomeric ephrinA5 induced downregulation of EphA2 in GBM cells. Furthermore, monomeric ephrinA1 downregulated other EphA receptors, but only in U-373MG cells. In fact, we also observed a decreased ability of the dimeric ephrinA1-Fc to induce downregulation of EphA5 in SNB-19 cells, but this ligand efficiently induced downregulation of EphA3 in U-373MG cells. Thus, the ability of monomeric ephrinA1 to functionally interact with other EphA receptors may depend on the specific preference of binding such that when less EphA2 is available, the ligand interacts with other EphA receptors. Autocrine and paracrine factors released by normal brain cells and acting on tumor cells have a crucial function in tumor development, prognosis and response to therapies ( Hoelzinger et al. , 2007 ). We present evidence that ephrinA1 may be one such factor, as it is expressed in the normal brain tissue ( Wykosky et al. , 2005 ). It is also possible that soluble ephrinA1 is released from tumor cells in response to specific angiogenic cues in the tumor microenvironment, many of which induce the expression of metalloproteases ( Zucker et al. , 1998 ; VanMeter et al. , 2001 ; Sweeney et al. , 2002 ; Chakraborti et al. , 2003 ; Zhang et al. , 2006 ), which we have shown to be involved in the cleavage and release of ephrinA1. The exact metalloprotease(s) involved in the cleavage of this protein and the potential involvement of proteases of other classes warrants further investigation, but likely candidates are those within the ADAM family of metalloprotease enzymes. These enzymes are involved in the ectodomain shedding of many cell surface proteins ( Lee et al. , 2003 ; Higashiyama and Nanba, 2005 ; Huovila et al. , 2005 ; Sanderson et al. , 2006 ). ADAM-10 has been implicated in the cleavage of ephrinA2 as a way of terminating the ephrinA2–EphA3 interaction between two cells ( Hattori et al. , 2000 ). We have documented for the first time that soluble, monomeric ephrinA1 is a functional ligand for EphA2 in GBM and modulates processes relevant to the progression of malignancy as well as central nervous system development. Furthermore, we have shown that ephrinA1 is not dependent on juxtacrine interactions and can function in a paracrine manner. These findings will aid in deciphering the function of ephrinA1 and EphA2 in solid tumor progression. In addition, they will facilitate the design and allow for a wider application of ephrinA1-based therapeutics targeting the EphA2 receptor involving, among others, the use of simplified soluble recombinant proteins/peptides and viral gene therapy.  Discussion We have uncovered that ephrinA1, a ligand for the EphA2 receptor, is released as a functional, soluble, monomeric protein by proteolytic cleavage from the plasma membrane of cancer cells. Soluble monomeric ephrinA1 induces downregulation of EphA2, elicits profound changes in cancer cell morphology, attenuates serum-induced phosphorylation of ERK and impairs cell migration and anchorage-independent growth. In addition, a monomer of ephrinA1-Fc has the same effects on EphA2 and downstream oncogenic processes as its homodimeric counterpart. These data reveal that soluble, monomeric ephrinA1 is a functional ligand for EphA2 in GBM and likely to exist in such a form in other cancers. Moreover, monomeric ephrinA1 effectively augments neuronal growth cone collapse, suggesting that a soluble form of the ligand may be involved in modulating physiological processes as well. EphrinA1 as a recombinant dimeric Fc-fusion protein (ephrinA1-Fc) induces phosphorylation and downregulation of the EphA2 oncoprotein ( Carles-Kinch et al. , 2002 ; Walker-Daniels et al. , 2002 ; Duxbury et al. , 2004a ; Wykosky et al. , 2005 ). The notion that Ephs and ephrins may not, in fact, require the formation of oligomeric complexes has recent precedence in a study which found that ephrinA5 can engage in a functional interaction with the EphB2 receptor in a 1:1 heterodimeric complex, both in crystal structures and in solution ( Himanen et al. , 2004 ). Interestingly, it represents one of the few known instances of cross-talk between A and B class Ephs and ephrins, which was in fact cited as a possible explanation for the existence of the unexpected, functional 1:1 receptor/ligand complex ( Himanen et al. , 2004 ). Our findings demonstrate for the first time that ephrins have functional functions as soluble, monomeric factors in activating Ephs of their own class during cancer maintenance and/or progression as well as normal developmental/physiological processes. In support of this finding, 12-amino acid ephrinA1-mimetic peptides have the capacity to bind and activate EphA2 ( Koolpe et al. , 2002 ). Moreover, another ephrin ligand, ephrinA4, has been found to be released by activated B lymphocytes ( Aasheim et al. , 2000 ). Our experiments with ephrinA1 purified from conditioned media, and homodimeric ephrinA1-Fc reduced to a monomer, and the Factor XA cleavage product documented the functional activity of this ligand as a soluble protein not requiring covalent dimerization or oligomerization for function. This suggests that the ligand is capable of interacting with EphA2 in a manner that is not totally dependent on juxtacrine interactions. Moreover, our results demonstrating that soluble monomeric ephrinA1 is effective in eliciting collapse of neuronal growth cones support a role for this form of the protein in physiology, as ephrinA1-induced growth cone collapse during embryonic development has been previously documented ( Meima et al. , 1997 ). We found that the monomeric ephrinA5 induced downregulation of EphA2 in GBM cells. Furthermore, monomeric ephrinA1 downregulated other EphA receptors, but only in U-373MG cells. In fact, we also observed a decreased ability of the dimeric ephrinA1-Fc to induce downregulation of EphA5 in SNB-19 cells, but this ligand efficiently induced downregulation of EphA3 in U-373MG cells. Thus, the ability of monomeric ephrinA1 to functionally interact with other EphA receptors may depend on the specific preference of binding such that when less EphA2 is available, the ligand interacts with other EphA receptors. Autocrine and paracrine factors released by normal brain cells and acting on tumor cells have a crucial function in tumor development, prognosis and response to therapies ( Hoelzinger et al. , 2007 ). We present evidence that ephrinA1 may be one such factor, as it is expressed in the normal brain tissue ( Wykosky et al. , 2005 ). It is also possible that soluble ephrinA1 is released from tumor cells in response to specific angiogenic cues in the tumor microenvironment, many of which induce the expression of metalloproteases ( Zucker et al. , 1998 ; VanMeter et al. , 2001 ; Sweeney et al. , 2002 ; Chakraborti et al. , 2003 ; Zhang et al. , 2006 ), which we have shown to be involved in the cleavage and release of ephrinA1. The exact metalloprotease(s) involved in the cleavage of this protein and the potential involvement of proteases of other classes warrants further investigation, but likely candidates are those within the ADAM family of metalloprotease enzymes. These enzymes are involved in the ectodomain shedding of many cell surface proteins ( Lee et al. , 2003 ; Higashiyama and Nanba, 2005 ; Huovila et al. , 2005 ; Sanderson et al. , 2006 ). ADAM-10 has been implicated in the cleavage of ephrinA2 as a way of terminating the ephrinA2–EphA3 interaction between two cells ( Hattori et al. , 2000 ). We have documented for the first time that soluble, monomeric ephrinA1 is a functional ligand for EphA2 in GBM and modulates processes relevant to the progression of malignancy as well as central nervous system development. Furthermore, we have shown that ephrinA1 is not dependent on juxtacrine interactions and can function in a paracrine manner. These findings will aid in deciphering the function of ephrinA1 and EphA2 in solid tumor progression. In addition, they will facilitate the design and allow for a wider application of ephrinA1-based therapeutics targeting the EphA2 receptor involving, among others, the use of simplified soluble recombinant proteins/peptides and viral gene therapy. 