The Type IV Mucolipidosis-Associated Protein TRPML1 is an Endo-lysosomal Iron Release Channel TRPML1 (mucolipin-1/MCOLN1) is predicted to be an intracellular late endosomal and lysosomal ion channel protein belonging to the mucolipin subfamily of Transient Receptor Potential (TRP) proteins 1 – 3 . Mutations in the human TRPML1 gene cause mucolipidosis type IV disease (ML4) 4 , 5 . ML4 patients exhibit motor impairment, mental retardation, retinal degeneration, and iron-deficiency anemia. Since aberrant iron metabolism may cause neural and retinal degeneration 6 , 7 , it may be a primary cause of ML4 phenotypes. In most mammalian cells, release of iron from endosomes and lysosomes following iron uptake via endocytosis of Fe3+-bound transferrin receptors 6 , or following lysosomal degradation of ferritin-Fe complexes and autophagic ingestion of iron-containing macromolecules 6 , 8 , is the major source of cellular iron. The Divalent Metal Transporter protein (DMT1) is the only endosomal Fe2+ transporter currently known and is highly expressed in erythroid precursors 6 , 9 , but genetic studies suggest the existence of a DMT1-independent endosomal/lysosomal Fe2+ transport protein 9 . Here, by measuring radiolabeled iron uptake, monitoring the levels of cytosolic and intra-lysosomal iron and directly patch-clamping the late endosomal/lysosomal membrane, we show that TRPML1 functions as a Fe2+ permeable channel in late endosomes and lysosomes. ML4 mutations are shown to impair TRPML1’s ability to permeate Fe2+ at varying degrees, which correlate well with the disease severity. A comparison of TRPML1?/? ML4 and control skin fibroblasts showed a reduction of cytosolic Fe2+ levels, an increase of intra-lysosomal Fe2+ levels, and an accumulation of lipofuscin-like molecules in TRPML1?/? cells. We propose that TRPML1 mediates a mechanism by which Fe2+ is released from late endosomes/lysosomes. Our results suggest that impaired iron transport may contribute to both hematological and degenerative symptoms of ML4 patients. 