Characterizing and optimizing immune responses to leukaemia antigens after allogeneic stem cell transplantation Allogeneic stem cell transplantation remains a curative treatment for haematological malignancies resistant to other treatment approaches through the unique graft-versus-leukaemia effect (GvL). However, the lack of specificity of this response results in the targeting of normal tissue, and the morbidity and mortality associated with graft-versus-host disease (GvHD). Further improvements in exploiting the GvL effect to prevent relapse in high-risk leukaemias while minimizing toxicity have focused on the use of targeted anti-leukaemic immunotherapy. These strategies include the use of vaccines against minor histocompatibility antigens (HA-1, HA-2 and H-Y) and leukaemia-specific antigens (proteinase 3, Wilms’ tumour 1 and BCR-ABL), and the adoptive transfer of leukaemia-specific T cells. The unique post-transplant milieu, which is characterized by lymphopenia, regulatory T-cell depletion and the release of growth factors, offers the opportunity to promote the expansion of engrafted T cells and enhance the specific GvL response. Techniques to reduce regulatory T-cell control over T-cell responses to leukaemia antigens could further enhance GvL reactivity. Finally, these approaches to increase GvL effects would be facilitated by transplant approaches to deplete GvHD alloresponses selectively while preserving GvL reactivity.  CONCLUSIONS Allogeneic SCT continues to play a unique role in achieving cure of haematological malignancies that are otherwise resistant to treatment. However, as alternative treatment approaches continue to improve, and increasing numbers of older patients present with leukaemia, the challenge to cure more resistant malignancies with SCT will increase. Allogeneic SCT is least effective against high-risk leukaemias, and current manipulations of conditioning regimens, post-transplant immunosuppression and donor lymphocyte infusions have probably reached their capacity to deliver GvL. To improve the ‘natural’ GvL reactivity of allogeneic SCT, it will be necessary to adopt new targeted treatments to further boost GvL specifically; such approaches include the use of leukaemia vaccines and the adoptive transfer of leukaemia-specific T cells. Such boosting strategies would be made more efficient if transplants could be performed after selective depletion of T cells responsible for GvHD. This would allow vaccines and leukaemia-specific T cells to be given soon after transplant without the immunosuppression normally required to prevent GvHD. Selective depletion is under clinical development as an ex-vivo manoeuvere to deplete donor T cells of unwanted alloreactivity. 118 A similar approach, where T cells destined to cause GvHD contain a viral tyrosine kinase suicide gene permitting their removal in vivo by ganciclovir, is also undergoing clinical trials. 119 Both techniques could remove the need for post-transplant immunosuppression. Once successfully assembled into a combined transplant strategy, these novel techniques promise to significantly reduce the risk of leukaemia relapse after SCT. 