MicroRNA alterations in Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma MicroRNAs (mirs) are small non-coding RNA molecules (~22 nucleotides) that regulate post-transcriptional gene expression. Currently, there has not been a comprehensive study of their role in primary HNSCC. To determine the role of mirs in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), we screened for altered microRNA expression in HNSCC primary tissue and cell lines. We then further tested the functional impact of alterations of specific mirs. An initial screening of 4 primary HNSCC, 4 normal mucosal controls and 4 HNSCC cell lines were analyzed for mature microRNA expression by microarray. Significance was determined using Significance Analysis of Microarrays (SAM). Nine microRNAs were found by SAM to be up-regulated or down-regulated in tumor tissue including mir-21,let-7,18,29c,142-3p,155,146b (over-expressed) and 494 (under-expressed). Mir-21 was validated by qRT-PCR. Functional validation by growth assays was performed, further validating mir-21 . Transfection of mir-21 into JHU-011 and JHU-012 cell lines showed a 39% increase in cell growth at 72 hrs relative to controls (p<.05). Transfection of the inhibitor into JHU-O12 cell lines showed a 92% decrease in cell growth relative to controls at 72hrs (p<.05). In addition, flow cytometry analysis of JHU-012 cells 48 hrs after mir-21 inhibitor transfection showed a statistically significantly increase in cytochrome c release and increased apoptosis. These differentially expressed microRNAs may be of interest as potential novel oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes in HNSCC. Mir-21 is a putative oncogenic microRNA in head and neck cancer.  Introduction In 2004, 28,260 new cases of oral cavity and pharynx cancer and 20,260 new cases of larynx cancer were diagnosed in the United States, resulting in 7,230 and 3,830 deaths, respectively 6 , 7 . Despite significant advances in surgery and radiotherapy over the last decades, the 5-year survival rates of HNSCC patients have been improved only moderately in part due to the relatively high local recurrence rate. To further improve patient outcomes better biomarkers and therapeutic agents are necessary. Molecular and cellular biology is a promising field of study that may lead to the discovery of novel biomarkers and novel therapeutic targets. The study of microRNA and its role in the molecular biology of human diseases has been an area of intense research. With the discovery of microRNA (mir) molecules in Caenorhabditis elegans in 1993, a novel method of gene expression regulation was revealed 1 . Once mirs were discovered in the human genome, significant interest in their role in human disease was generated. Mirs are small non-coding RNA molecules (~22 nucleotides) that regulate post-transcriptional gene expression 2 by relatively non-specific binding to the 3'-untranslated region of mRNA. The result is that a single mir may regulate the expression of several genes. It has been proposed that over one third of all protein-coding genes 3 are under translational control by mirs. Mirs are involved in a variety of cellular processes, including the regulation of cellular differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis that play a role in cancer development 4 . Several previous studies have established that increased or decreased mir expression plays a critical role in carcinogenesis and cancer biology 5 . Other studies have demonstrated that there is a unique mir signature for certain cancer types 5 . In our study, we evaluate the microRNA expression signature of HNSCC versus normal tissue. We discover nine differentially expressed mirs. Of the nine, we select two for further study, mir-21 and mir-494 , one that is over expressed in cancer (and well reported) and the other under expressed, respectively. Mir-21 has been previously identified as a putative oncogene in glioblastomas, pancreatic and breast cancer 8 – 11 . Additionally, it has been proposed that mir-21 is involved in regulating bcl-2 and tropomyosin-1 expression 8 , 12 . Here we demonstrate that mir-21 is not only over expressed HNSCC but also we demonstrate functional significance and show that transfection of mimics of mir-21 can enhance cell growth and inhibiting it can decrease cell proliferation. In addition, we provide further evidence that mir-21 exerts a growth advantage in HNSCC by decreasing cytochrome c release.  Methods Human tissue samples All human HNSCC tissue samples and normal mucosal tissues were obtained and used according to the policies of the JHMI institutional review board. Surgical specimens were obtained from patients who underwent surgery at John Hopkins Hospital. All specimens were quick-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at ?80 °C until processing. Microdissection of frozen tumor tissue was performed to assure that greater than 75% of tissue contained HNSCC. Microdissection and determination of tumor versus normal tissue was performed by a head and neck pathologist. A total of 4 normal tissues and 4 cancer tissues were obtained for the initial microRNA microarray analysis and initial 2-step RT-PCR validation. The 4 normal tissues consisted of tissues obtained from patients that underwent uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP) for sleep apnea. These UPPP patients were collected under a protocol that required their demographics to be de-identified and therefore no demographic data can be reported. The 4 cancer tissues consisted of 4 stage IV SCC (2BOT, 1 Laryngeal, 1 Tonsillar), all patients were Caucasian, 2 were male and 2 were female, average was 54 years old. For the larger validation study by 2-step RT-PCR, 27 tumor tissues and 8 normal mucosal samples from patients without cancer were collected; this tissue set was a separate tumor and normal set from the initial screen. The population consisted of 22 Caucasian, 1 Asian, and 5 African Americans. The average age was 47.4 years old. The gender data was skewed towards males with 4 females and 24 males in the study. The site distribution for HNSCC in the validation cohort consisted of 12 oropharyngeal, 7 oral cavity, 6 laryngeal, and 2 hypopharyngeal tumors. Cell lines and culturing conditions Cell lines were developed from primary HNSCC in the Division of Head and Neck Cancer Research, at the Johns Hopkins University (Baltimore, MD). Cell lines were derived from the following sites: larynx (JHU-O11), neck node metastasis (JHU-012), pharynx (FaDu), and base of tongue (JHU-019). OKF6 cell lines are a minimally transformed oral keratinocyte line donated by Dr. Jim Rheinwald, Department of Dermatology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Skin Disease Research Center. The head and neck cancer cell lines were cultured in RPMI-1640 media supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin, while the OKF6-Tert1 cells were grown in keratinocyte serum-free medium (Gibco) supplemented with bovine pituitary extract (25 ug/ml), calcium chloride (0.4 mM), epidermal growth factor (0.2 ng/ml), and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin and filtered through 0.2 um pore-size sterilization filter. All media components were obtained from Gibco Invitrogen Corporation (Carlsbad, CA). Cell growth conditions were maintained at 37 degrees Celsius in an atmosphere of 5% carbon dioxide and 95% relative humidity. MicroRNA array Total RNA extraction from human tissue samples and cell lines were performed using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Northern blots were performed to assure that the quality of RNA was adequate. On a denaturing gel, the extracted RNA was run to see that two bright distinct bands, representing the 28S and 18S ribosomal species, were found. This assured that the RNA lacked DNA contamination and that the RNA was not degraded, both of which could confound the array results. MicroRNA arrays were performed by Genosensor Corporation (Tempe, AZ) that contained 646 mature and pre-microRNAs. Only the 314 validated and mature sequences on their chip were used in the analysis. The arrays run were GenoExplorerTM microRNA chip, the probe sets are based on Sanger's miRBASE version 8.2. All 314 probesets were used to evaluate the differences between tumor and non-tumor tissue. Positive and negative controls include U6, 5S rRNA, and tRNAs, which also served as loading controls. Each sample was run in triplicate. The microarray results were normalized to the 5S rRNA signal intensitySignificance analysis of microarrays was performed to determine differential microRNA expression. A q-value or FDR was set at 0% to determine significant genes. An image of the SAM analysis plot is shown in supplementary figure 3 as well as the hierarchal clustering image in supplementary figure 4 . The average microRNA expression in normal tissue versus tumor tissue was determined using the Mann Whitney U-test and t-test using STATA version 9. Validation of miRNA array results by QRT-PCR For validation of differential expression, the microRNAs were subjected to quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (2-step RT-PCR) as per the manufacturers (Applied Biosystems) manual. The kits used for analysis were: TaqMan® MicroRNA Assay Kit TaqMan® hsa-mir-21 part number 4373090, MicroRNA Assay Kit, TaqMan® hsa-mir-494 part number 4395476, TaqMan® MicroRNA Assay Kit TaqMan® U47 (a small RNA control recommended by Applied Biosystems) part number 4380911, MicroRNA Reverse Transcription Kit, 200 reactions part number 4366596, and the TaqMan® Gene Expression Master Mix, 1-Pack (1 × 5 mL) part number 4369016. The reaction conditions were followed according to the manufacturer's manual which in summary was: 50 degress Celsius for 2min, 95 degrees Celsius for 10 minutes and then 40 cycles of 95 degrees Celsius for 15 seconds and 60 degrees Celsius for 1 minute with a sample volume of 20 ul. The expression was normalized to the U47 expression (gene ID 26802). The expression level was determined by the following process: the average Ct of the U47 control was determined. This averaged value was then used to normalize the samples Ct. The normalized value was for each sample was then averaged. This value was then entered into this formula =10^(normalized average value/?3.5). The average microRNA expression in normal tissue versus tumor tissue was determined using the Mann Whitney U-test. Further analysis was done for mir-21 using a cut-off determined by using the highest expressing case of the normal tissue samples. Mimic and Inhibitor Transfection Mimics, inhibitors and negative controls were purchased from Dharmacon (Lafayette, Colorado). The mir-21 mimic (C-300014-01) and inhibitor (I-300014-01), mir-494 mimic (C-300248-01) and miRNA inhibitor (I-300248-01), miRIDIAN microRNA Inhibitor Negative Control #1 (IN-001000-01) and miRIDIAN microRNA Mimic Negative Control #1 (CN-001000-01) were all purchased from Dharmacon. The negative controls are based on C. elegans miRNA. The mimic control corresponds to cel-miR-67 and the inhibitor control corresponds to cel-miR-239b. These negative controls have been analyzed by BLAST against all human, mouse, and rat genomic sequences and miRNA sequences in the miRBase sequence database. These molecules have identical design and modifications as miRIDIAN microRNA mimics and inhibitors that are known to target mRNA. Cells were transfected using LipofectAMINE 2000 reagent (Invitrogen) 24 hours after plating. Transfection complexes were prepared according to the manufacturer's instructions and added directly to the cells. The concentrations of reagents for a 6 well plate were as follows: 100pmol of the mimic, inhibitor or control were used in a volume of 500ul serum free media with 5ul of Lipofectamine 2000 reagent. The transfection medium was replaced 24hrs hours post-transfection with their respective growth media. Identical concentrations of reagents, cellular confluency and cell growth conditions were used for the control experiments. Each experiment was performed independently at least three times and in triplicate. Representative data is shown in the figures. Cell proliferation assay Cells were plated at a confluency of 20–30 percent per well of a 6 well plate. Growth was assayed at 24, 48, and 72 hours by ATCC MTT cell proliferation assay (Manassas, Virginia). The standard manufacturer protocol was followed. Absorbance readings were determined by a fluorescence plate reader at 570 and 650 nm wavelengths. All samples were run in triplicate. Average readings were reported with standard error. The plate reader used was a SpectraMax M2e Microplate reader purchased from Molecular Devices (Sunnyvale, California). Apoptosis analysis by Flow Cytometry The induction of apoptosis was examined using flow cytometry to measure the levels of detectable phosphatidylserine on the outer membrane of apoptotic cells 48 hrs after transfection of mir-21 Inhibitor purchased from Dharmacon (Lafayette, Colorado). Apoptosis and cell death were analyzed by an Annexin V/7-AAD flow cytometric assay. The cells were washed twice with cold PBS and resuspended at 100ul Annexin V binding buffer. Cells were protected from light and incubated at room temperature for 15 min with 5 ?l of FITC conjugated Annexin-V (BD Biosciences, USA) and 5?l of 7-AAD (BD Biosciences) and then analyzed by flow cytometry immediately. Flow cytometry analysis was performed using a FACScan flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson) by analyzing 10,000 events for cell viability. Cells were gated for analysis by a combination of forward scatter channel (FSC) and side scatter channel (SSC). All gating for the controls and samples were identical. Representative flow and gating is shown in supplementary figure 1 . The plots were divided into quadrants and the region in the lower left were considered viable and the other quadrants were classified as early apoptosis, late apoptosis and necrotic. All experiments were run in duplicate. The data analysis was performed using Cell-Quest software (Becton Dickinson). Cytochrome C release by Flow Cytometry Cytochrome C release was detected using flow cytometry and a CalbioChem Innocyte flow cytometric cytochrome c release kit (Darmastadt, Germany) which selectively permeabilized the plasma membrane without injuring the mitochondrial membrane. Induction of release was at 0 and 48hrs after transfection of mir-21 Inhibitor purchased from Dharmacon (Lafayette, Colorado). Cells were washed in PBS and centrifuged. We resuspended the cell pellets in 300 ?l Permeabilization Buffer. Suspension was then incubated for 10 min on ice. Next, the cells were fixed by adding 300?l 8% paraformaldehyde in PBS directly to the tubes. After fixation, the cells were incubated for 20 min at room temperature. After incubation, the cells were washed by adding 1 ml 1× Wash Buffer 3 times and centrifuged. Then the cells were resuspended in 250 ?l Blocking Buffer and incubated for 1hr at room temperature. Afterwards, 250 ?l Anti-Cytochrome C WS was added and incubated for 1hr at room temperature. Then the cells were washed with the wash buffer. Next, 500 ?l Anti-IgG FITC WS was added to the cells and incubate for 1 hr at room temperature in the dark. The cells were washed again with 1× Wash Buffer. Finally, the cells were resuspended in 500 ?l Wash Buffer. Flow cytometry analysis was performed using a FACScan flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson) by analyzing 10,000 events. Cells were gated for analysis by a combination of forward scatter channel (FSC) and side scatter channel (SSC). All gating for the controls were exactly the same as the samples. Each experiment was replicated independently; representative flow is shown in supplementary figure 1 . All experiments were run in triplicate. The data analysis was performed using Cell-Quest software (Becton Dickinson).  Human tissue samples All human HNSCC tissue samples and normal mucosal tissues were obtained and used according to the policies of the JHMI institutional review board. Surgical specimens were obtained from patients who underwent surgery at John Hopkins Hospital. All specimens were quick-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at ?80 °C until processing. Microdissection of frozen tumor tissue was performed to assure that greater than 75% of tissue contained HNSCC. Microdissection and determination of tumor versus normal tissue was performed by a head and neck pathologist. A total of 4 normal tissues and 4 cancer tissues were obtained for the initial microRNA microarray analysis and initial 2-step RT-PCR validation. The 4 normal tissues consisted of tissues obtained from patients that underwent uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP) for sleep apnea. These UPPP patients were collected under a protocol that required their demographics to be de-identified and therefore no demographic data can be reported. The 4 cancer tissues consisted of 4 stage IV SCC (2BOT, 1 Laryngeal, 1 Tonsillar), all patients were Caucasian, 2 were male and 2 were female, average was 54 years old. For the larger validation study by 2-step RT-PCR, 27 tumor tissues and 8 normal mucosal samples from patients without cancer were collected; this tissue set was a separate tumor and normal set from the initial screen. The population consisted of 22 Caucasian, 1 Asian, and 5 African Americans. The average age was 47.4 years old. The gender data was skewed towards males with 4 females and 24 males in the study. The site distribution for HNSCC in the validation cohort consisted of 12 oropharyngeal, 7 oral cavity, 6 laryngeal, and 2 hypopharyngeal tumors.  Cell lines and culturing conditions Cell lines were developed from primary HNSCC in the Division of Head and Neck Cancer Research, at the Johns Hopkins University (Baltimore, MD). Cell lines were derived from the following sites: larynx (JHU-O11), neck node metastasis (JHU-012), pharynx (FaDu), and base of tongue (JHU-019). OKF6 cell lines are a minimally transformed oral keratinocyte line donated by Dr. Jim Rheinwald, Department of Dermatology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Skin Disease Research Center. The head and neck cancer cell lines were cultured in RPMI-1640 media supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin, while the OKF6-Tert1 cells were grown in keratinocyte serum-free medium (Gibco) supplemented with bovine pituitary extract (25 ug/ml), calcium chloride (0.4 mM), epidermal growth factor (0.2 ng/ml), and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin and filtered through 0.2 um pore-size sterilization filter. All media components were obtained from Gibco Invitrogen Corporation (Carlsbad, CA). Cell growth conditions were maintained at 37 degrees Celsius in an atmosphere of 5% carbon dioxide and 95% relative humidity.  MicroRNA array Total RNA extraction from human tissue samples and cell lines were performed using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Northern blots were performed to assure that the quality of RNA was adequate. On a denaturing gel, the extracted RNA was run to see that two bright distinct bands, representing the 28S and 18S ribosomal species, were found. This assured that the RNA lacked DNA contamination and that the RNA was not degraded, both of which could confound the array results. MicroRNA arrays were performed by Genosensor Corporation (Tempe, AZ) that contained 646 mature and pre-microRNAs. Only the 314 validated and mature sequences on their chip were used in the analysis. The arrays run were GenoExplorerTM microRNA chip, the probe sets are based on Sanger's miRBASE version 8.2. All 314 probesets were used to evaluate the differences between tumor and non-tumor tissue. Positive and negative controls include U6, 5S rRNA, and tRNAs, which also served as loading controls. Each sample was run in triplicate. The microarray results were normalized to the 5S rRNA signal intensitySignificance analysis of microarrays was performed to determine differential microRNA expression. A q-value or FDR was set at 0% to determine significant genes. An image of the SAM analysis plot is shown in supplementary figure 3 as well as the hierarchal clustering image in supplementary figure 4 . The average microRNA expression in normal tissue versus tumor tissue was determined using the Mann Whitney U-test and t-test using STATA version 9.  Validation of miRNA array results by QRT-PCR For validation of differential expression, the microRNAs were subjected to quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (2-step RT-PCR) as per the manufacturers (Applied Biosystems) manual. The kits used for analysis were: TaqMan® MicroRNA Assay Kit TaqMan® hsa-mir-21 part number 4373090, MicroRNA Assay Kit, TaqMan® hsa-mir-494 part number 4395476, TaqMan® MicroRNA Assay Kit TaqMan® U47 (a small RNA control recommended by Applied Biosystems) part number 4380911, MicroRNA Reverse Transcription Kit, 200 reactions part number 4366596, and the TaqMan® Gene Expression Master Mix, 1-Pack (1 × 5 mL) part number 4369016. The reaction conditions were followed according to the manufacturer's manual which in summary was: 50 degress Celsius for 2min, 95 degrees Celsius for 10 minutes and then 40 cycles of 95 degrees Celsius for 15 seconds and 60 degrees Celsius for 1 minute with a sample volume of 20 ul. The expression was normalized to the U47 expression (gene ID 26802). The expression level was determined by the following process: the average Ct of the U47 control was determined. This averaged value was then used to normalize the samples Ct. The normalized value was for each sample was then averaged. This value was then entered into this formula =10^(normalized average value/?3.5). The average microRNA expression in normal tissue versus tumor tissue was determined using the Mann Whitney U-test. Further analysis was done for mir-21 using a cut-off determined by using the highest expressing case of the normal tissue samples.  Mimic and Inhibitor Transfection Mimics, inhibitors and negative controls were purchased from Dharmacon (Lafayette, Colorado). The mir-21 mimic (C-300014-01) and inhibitor (I-300014-01), mir-494 mimic (C-300248-01) and miRNA inhibitor (I-300248-01), miRIDIAN microRNA Inhibitor Negative Control #1 (IN-001000-01) and miRIDIAN microRNA Mimic Negative Control #1 (CN-001000-01) were all purchased from Dharmacon. The negative controls are based on C. elegans miRNA. The mimic control corresponds to cel-miR-67 and the inhibitor control corresponds to cel-miR-239b. These negative controls have been analyzed by BLAST against all human, mouse, and rat genomic sequences and miRNA sequences in the miRBase sequence database. These molecules have identical design and modifications as miRIDIAN microRNA mimics and inhibitors that are known to target mRNA. Cells were transfected using LipofectAMINE 2000 reagent (Invitrogen) 24 hours after plating. Transfection complexes were prepared according to the manufacturer's instructions and added directly to the cells. The concentrations of reagents for a 6 well plate were as follows: 100pmol of the mimic, inhibitor or control were used in a volume of 500ul serum free media with 5ul of Lipofectamine 2000 reagent. The transfection medium was replaced 24hrs hours post-transfection with their respective growth media. Identical concentrations of reagents, cellular confluency and cell growth conditions were used for the control experiments. Each experiment was performed independently at least three times and in triplicate. Representative data is shown in the figures.  Cell proliferation assay Cells were plated at a confluency of 20–30 percent per well of a 6 well plate. Growth was assayed at 24, 48, and 72 hours by ATCC MTT cell proliferation assay (Manassas, Virginia). The standard manufacturer protocol was followed. Absorbance readings were determined by a fluorescence plate reader at 570 and 650 nm wavelengths. All samples were run in triplicate. Average readings were reported with standard error. The plate reader used was a SpectraMax M2e Microplate reader purchased from Molecular Devices (Sunnyvale, California).  Apoptosis analysis by Flow Cytometry The induction of apoptosis was examined using flow cytometry to measure the levels of detectable phosphatidylserine on the outer membrane of apoptotic cells 48 hrs after transfection of mir-21 Inhibitor purchased from Dharmacon (Lafayette, Colorado). Apoptosis and cell death were analyzed by an Annexin V/7-AAD flow cytometric assay. The cells were washed twice with cold PBS and resuspended at 100ul Annexin V binding buffer. Cells were protected from light and incubated at room temperature for 15 min with 5 ?l of FITC conjugated Annexin-V (BD Biosciences, USA) and 5?l of 7-AAD (BD Biosciences) and then analyzed by flow cytometry immediately. Flow cytometry analysis was performed using a FACScan flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson) by analyzing 10,000 events for cell viability. Cells were gated for analysis by a combination of forward scatter channel (FSC) and side scatter channel (SSC). All gating for the controls and samples were identical. Representative flow and gating is shown in supplementary figure 1 . The plots were divided into quadrants and the region in the lower left were considered viable and the other quadrants were classified as early apoptosis, late apoptosis and necrotic. All experiments were run in duplicate. The data analysis was performed using Cell-Quest software (Becton Dickinson).  Cytochrome C release by Flow Cytometry Cytochrome C release was detected using flow cytometry and a CalbioChem Innocyte flow cytometric cytochrome c release kit (Darmastadt, Germany) which selectively permeabilized the plasma membrane without injuring the mitochondrial membrane. Induction of release was at 0 and 48hrs after transfection of mir-21 Inhibitor purchased from Dharmacon (Lafayette, Colorado). Cells were washed in PBS and centrifuged. We resuspended the cell pellets in 300 ?l Permeabilization Buffer. Suspension was then incubated for 10 min on ice. Next, the cells were fixed by adding 300?l 8% paraformaldehyde in PBS directly to the tubes. After fixation, the cells were incubated for 20 min at room temperature. After incubation, the cells were washed by adding 1 ml 1× Wash Buffer 3 times and centrifuged. Then the cells were resuspended in 250 ?l Blocking Buffer and incubated for 1hr at room temperature. Afterwards, 250 ?l Anti-Cytochrome C WS was added and incubated for 1hr at room temperature. Then the cells were washed with the wash buffer. Next, 500 ?l Anti-IgG FITC WS was added to the cells and incubate for 1 hr at room temperature in the dark. The cells were washed again with 1× Wash Buffer. Finally, the cells were resuspended in 500 ?l Wash Buffer. Flow cytometry analysis was performed using a FACScan flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson) by analyzing 10,000 events. Cells were gated for analysis by a combination of forward scatter channel (FSC) and side scatter channel (SSC). All gating for the controls were exactly the same as the samples. Each experiment was replicated independently; representative flow is shown in supplementary figure 1 . All experiments were run in triplicate. The data analysis was performed using Cell-Quest software (Becton Dickinson).  Results MicroRNAs are significantly differentially expressed in HNSCC tissues and cell lines RNA was extracted from 4 patients with HNSCC and 4 normal tissues (tissues obtained from patients who underwent UPPP for non-cancer indications). Concurrently, RNA was extracted from four head and neck cancer cell lines and one normal oral keratinocyte cell line. The RNA purity was confirmed by Northern blot to be of adequate quality and underwent microRNA expression array analysis by Genosensor (Tempe, AZ). The Genosensor array is able to identify ~300 mature human microRNAs and determine expression levels of both mature and pre-cursor mirs. For this study we only examined the mature mirs. The microarray results were normalized to the 5S rRNA signal intensity and then analyzed using SAM. The threshold FDR or q-value was determined to be 0% ( supplementary figure 3 ). Several mirs were found to be differentially expressed, a comprehensive list can be found in Table 1 . Once the FDR threshold had been set to zero, the most significantly differentially expressed mirs were: mir-21, let-7, 18, 29c, 142-3p, 155, 146b (over expressed in cancer) and 494 (under expressed in cancer) ( Table1 and Fig.1 ). An image of the SAM analysis plot is shown in supplementary figure 3 as well as the hierarchal clustering image which is shown in supplementary figure 4 . These results were then compared to our cell line data. Mir-494 had expression differences that correlated with primary tissue data ( Fig.1d ). Also of interest is the finding that mir-21 is significantly upregulated ( Fig.1e ). It has been reported in the literature as being over-expressed in several different cancers. Mir-21 was found to be expressed at a greater level in tumor tissue in 100% cases when using the greatest expression level in normal tissue as a threshold for tumor tissues. The mean signal from 4 normal tissues microarray was 0.097 (SD = .088). The mean signal from 4 tumor tissues was .70 (SD = .21). The p-value associated with this difference was 0.02 by the Mann-Whitney U-test. This correlated to a 7.24 fold difference in expression ( Fig.1a ). To validate the results of the microarray we analyzed the tissue using 2-Step RT PCR after RNA extraction. The results confirmed the findings of the microarray. The mean expression level of 4 normal samples was .0035 (SD=.004) and 4 tumor tissues was .015 (SD=.005) with a p-value = 0.04 calculated by the Mann Whitney U-test ( Fig.1c ). Conversely, the mean expression of mir-494 was 3.18 (SD=.2) in the 4 normal tissues and .98 (SD=.63) in the 4 tumor tissues ( Fig1b ). This difference correlated to a p-value of .02, calculated by the Mann Whitney U-test. Validation of MicroRNA Expression in Tumor Tissue versus Normal Tissue Of the nine differentially expressed microRNAs, we selected the top statistical target from the over-expressed microRNA ( mir-21 ) and the only under-expressed microRNA ( mir-494 ) for further study and validation. In addition to being the top statistical targets, mir-21 is well reported in the literature and mir-494 is a microRNA that has not been previously reported. We then evaluated their expression level in a larger tissue cohort of HNSCC. RNA was extracted from twenty seven HNSCC primary tissues and eight controls for analysis by 2 Step RT Quantitative PCR. Significant expression differences noted for Mir-21 and mir-494 ( Table 2 ). We also performed subsite analysis to determine if there were tissue specific differences between subsites, however none of these yielded any statistical significance. The average expression of mir-21 in our tumor cohort was 71.6 (SE = 48.9) compared to the normal cohort which was .44 (SE = .057) (p=.0003) ( Fig.2a ). However, Mir- 494 which was significantly under-expressed in smaller the tumor cohort showed very significant over-expression when validated in a larger cohort. The average expression by the 2-Step RT-PCR of was .0017 (SE=0.0016) while the normal samples averaged an expression of zero (p=.0041) ( Fig.2b ). The expression of mir-494 in normal tissues showed no amplification at greater than 45 cycles and therefore were called “zero.” Also of interest is that Mir-21 is over-expressed in 25 of 27 tumors when using the highest expressing normal tissue as a cutoff ( Fig.2a ). Mir-21 and mir-494 expression levels were normalized to U47 expression. MicroRNA mimics modulate cell growth in vitro In other cancer models, mir-21 has been shown to modulate growth and apoptosis when transfected into cell lines. To evaluate the overall functional significance, of differentially expressed mirs on HNSCC cells, we transfected mimics and inhibitors into cancer cell lines and evaluated their growth. Mir-21 and 494 both showed an ability to modulate cellular proliferation when transfected into cancer cell lines ( Fig.3a–e ). Transfection of mir-494 showed a statistically significantly decrease growth of cells relative to controls in JHU-012 by 61.7% ( Fig.3a ). Meanwhile, inhibition of mir-494 was able to demonstrate a statistically significantly but modest increase in growth of cells relative to controls in JHU-012 by 14.3% ( Fig.3b ). Transfection of mir-21 mimics into multiple cell lines (JHU-011 and JHU-012) showed statistically significantly increased growth of cells relative to controls ( Fig.3c–d ). With regard to the JHU-011 cell line, the mir-21 mimics had 38.8% more cells by MTT at 3 days than transfected controls ( Fig.3c ). JHU-012 cells transfected with mir-21 mimics had the most dramatic growth enhancement with 44.2% more cells at 3 days by MTT when compared to cells transfected with negative controls ( Fig.3d ). In addition, JHU-011 which has a high endogenous expression of mir-21 ( fig 1e ) relative to JHU-012 ( fig 1e ) had a modest decreased augmentation of growth after transfection of mir-21 when compared to transfection of mir-21 into JHU-012. To determine whether mir-21 was solely growth promoting, we inhibited mir-21 via transfected inhibitors purchased from Dharmacon. Interestingly, we found a 64.9% decrease in cell number when comparing JHU-012 cells transfected with mir-21 inhibitors to 012 cells transfected with scrambled negative inhibitor controls ( Fig.3e ). This result therefore suggests that increased mir-21 may play a role in the growth advantage of HNSCC. It also supports the possibility that mir-21 targets tumor suppressor genes and has an anti-apoptotic effect on cellular function. Inhibiting mir-21 increases cell apoptosis and cytochrome c release After demonstrating that mir-21 can confer a growth advantage when transfected into cells lines, our interest turned to the pathways in which mir-21 effect. First we determined that the cells were indeed undergoing an apoptotic death. 48 hours after transfection with mir-21 inhibitors we evaluated Annexin-V staining. We found that there was a significant difference in the percentage of viable cells between transfected scrambled controls and transfected mir-21 inhibitors ( Fig.4a ). Though this difference was modest we examined cytochrome c release after transfection of mir-21 inhibitors. Cytochrome C release is a late event apoptosis and is signals the initiation of the apoptosome. 48 hours after transfection we noted an increase in cytochrome c release when compared to cells transfected with scrambled inhibitor controls ( Fig.4b ).  Results MicroRNAs are significantly differentially expressed in HNSCC tissues and cell lines RNA was extracted from 4 patients with HNSCC and 4 normal tissues (tissues obtained from patients who underwent UPPP for non-cancer indications). Concurrently, RNA was extracted from four head and neck cancer cell lines and one normal oral keratinocyte cell line. The RNA purity was confirmed by Northern blot to be of adequate quality and underwent microRNA expression array analysis by Genosensor (Tempe, AZ). The Genosensor array is able to identify ~300 mature human microRNAs and determine expression levels of both mature and pre-cursor mirs. For this study we only examined the mature mirs. The microarray results were normalized to the 5S rRNA signal intensity and then analyzed using SAM. The threshold FDR or q-value was determined to be 0% ( supplementary figure 3 ). Several mirs were found to be differentially expressed, a comprehensive list can be found in Table 1 . Once the FDR threshold had been set to zero, the most significantly differentially expressed mirs were: mir-21, let-7, 18, 29c, 142-3p, 155, 146b (over expressed in cancer) and 494 (under expressed in cancer) ( Table1 and Fig.1 ). An image of the SAM analysis plot is shown in supplementary figure 3 as well as the hierarchal clustering image which is shown in supplementary figure 4 . These results were then compared to our cell line data. Mir-494 had expression differences that correlated with primary tissue data ( Fig.1d ). Also of interest is the finding that mir-21 is significantly upregulated ( Fig.1e ). It has been reported in the literature as being over-expressed in several different cancers. Mir-21 was found to be expressed at a greater level in tumor tissue in 100% cases when using the greatest expression level in normal tissue as a threshold for tumor tissues. The mean signal from 4 normal tissues microarray was 0.097 (SD = .088). The mean signal from 4 tumor tissues was .70 (SD = .21). The p-value associated with this difference was 0.02 by the Mann-Whitney U-test. This correlated to a 7.24 fold difference in expression ( Fig.1a ). To validate the results of the microarray we analyzed the tissue using 2-Step RT PCR after RNA extraction. The results confirmed the findings of the microarray. The mean expression level of 4 normal samples was .0035 (SD=.004) and 4 tumor tissues was .015 (SD=.005) with a p-value = 0.04 calculated by the Mann Whitney U-test ( Fig.1c ). Conversely, the mean expression of mir-494 was 3.18 (SD=.2) in the 4 normal tissues and .98 (SD=.63) in the 4 tumor tissues ( Fig1b ). This difference correlated to a p-value of .02, calculated by the Mann Whitney U-test. Validation of MicroRNA Expression in Tumor Tissue versus Normal Tissue Of the nine differentially expressed microRNAs, we selected the top statistical target from the over-expressed microRNA ( mir-21 ) and the only under-expressed microRNA ( mir-494 ) for further study and validation. In addition to being the top statistical targets, mir-21 is well reported in the literature and mir-494 is a microRNA that has not been previously reported. We then evaluated their expression level in a larger tissue cohort of HNSCC. RNA was extracted from twenty seven HNSCC primary tissues and eight controls for analysis by 2 Step RT Quantitative PCR. Significant expression differences noted for Mir-21 and mir-494 ( Table 2 ). We also performed subsite analysis to determine if there were tissue specific differences between subsites, however none of these yielded any statistical significance. The average expression of mir-21 in our tumor cohort was 71.6 (SE = 48.9) compared to the normal cohort which was .44 (SE = .057) (p=.0003) ( Fig.2a ). However, Mir- 494 which was significantly under-expressed in smaller the tumor cohort showed very significant over-expression when validated in a larger cohort. The average expression by the 2-Step RT-PCR of was .0017 (SE=0.0016) while the normal samples averaged an expression of zero (p=.0041) ( Fig.2b ). The expression of mir-494 in normal tissues showed no amplification at greater than 45 cycles and therefore were called “zero.” Also of interest is that Mir-21 is over-expressed in 25 of 27 tumors when using the highest expressing normal tissue as a cutoff ( Fig.2a ). Mir-21 and mir-494 expression levels were normalized to U47 expression. MicroRNA mimics modulate cell growth in vitro In other cancer models, mir-21 has been shown to modulate growth and apoptosis when transfected into cell lines. To evaluate the overall functional significance, of differentially expressed mirs on HNSCC cells, we transfected mimics and inhibitors into cancer cell lines and evaluated their growth. Mir-21 and 494 both showed an ability to modulate cellular proliferation when transfected into cancer cell lines ( Fig.3a–e ). Transfection of mir-494 showed a statistically significantly decrease growth of cells relative to controls in JHU-012 by 61.7% ( Fig.3a ). Meanwhile, inhibition of mir-494 was able to demonstrate a statistically significantly but modest increase in growth of cells relative to controls in JHU-012 by 14.3% ( Fig.3b ). Transfection of mir-21 mimics into multiple cell lines (JHU-011 and JHU-012) showed statistically significantly increased growth of cells relative to controls ( Fig.3c–d ). With regard to the JHU-011 cell line, the mir-21 mimics had 38.8% more cells by MTT at 3 days than transfected controls ( Fig.3c ). JHU-012 cells transfected with mir-21 mimics had the most dramatic growth enhancement with 44.2% more cells at 3 days by MTT when compared to cells transfected with negative controls ( Fig.3d ). In addition, JHU-011 which has a high endogenous expression of mir-21 ( fig 1e ) relative to JHU-012 ( fig 1e ) had a modest decreased augmentation of growth after transfection of mir-21 when compared to transfection of mir-21 into JHU-012. To determine whether mir-21 was solely growth promoting, we inhibited mir-21 via transfected inhibitors purchased from Dharmacon. Interestingly, we found a 64.9% decrease in cell number when comparing JHU-012 cells transfected with mir-21 inhibitors to 012 cells transfected with scrambled negative inhibitor controls ( Fig.3e ). This result therefore suggests that increased mir-21 may play a role in the growth advantage of HNSCC. It also supports the possibility that mir-21 targets tumor suppressor genes and has an anti-apoptotic effect on cellular function. Inhibiting mir-21 increases cell apoptosis and cytochrome c release After demonstrating that mir-21 can confer a growth advantage when transfected into cells lines, our interest turned to the pathways in which mir-21 effect. First we determined that the cells were indeed undergoing an apoptotic death. 48 hours after transfection with mir-21 inhibitors we evaluated Annexin-V staining. We found that there was a significant difference in the percentage of viable cells between transfected scrambled controls and transfected mir-21 inhibitors ( Fig.4a ). Though this difference was modest we examined cytochrome c release after transfection of mir-21 inhibitors. Cytochrome C release is a late event apoptosis and is signals the initiation of the apoptosome. 48 hours after transfection we noted an increase in cytochrome c release when compared to cells transfected with scrambled inhibitor controls ( Fig.4b ).  MicroRNAs are significantly differentially expressed in HNSCC tissues and cell lines RNA was extracted from 4 patients with HNSCC and 4 normal tissues (tissues obtained from patients who underwent UPPP for non-cancer indications). Concurrently, RNA was extracted from four head and neck cancer cell lines and one normal oral keratinocyte cell line. The RNA purity was confirmed by Northern blot to be of adequate quality and underwent microRNA expression array analysis by Genosensor (Tempe, AZ). The Genosensor array is able to identify ~300 mature human microRNAs and determine expression levels of both mature and pre-cursor mirs. For this study we only examined the mature mirs. The microarray results were normalized to the 5S rRNA signal intensity and then analyzed using SAM. The threshold FDR or q-value was determined to be 0% ( supplementary figure 3 ). Several mirs were found to be differentially expressed, a comprehensive list can be found in Table 1 . Once the FDR threshold had been set to zero, the most significantly differentially expressed mirs were: mir-21, let-7, 18, 29c, 142-3p, 155, 146b (over expressed in cancer) and 494 (under expressed in cancer) ( Table1 and Fig.1 ). An image of the SAM analysis plot is shown in supplementary figure 3 as well as the hierarchal clustering image which is shown in supplementary figure 4 . These results were then compared to our cell line data. Mir-494 had expression differences that correlated with primary tissue data ( Fig.1d ). Also of interest is the finding that mir-21 is significantly upregulated ( Fig.1e ). It has been reported in the literature as being over-expressed in several different cancers. Mir-21 was found to be expressed at a greater level in tumor tissue in 100% cases when using the greatest expression level in normal tissue as a threshold for tumor tissues. The mean signal from 4 normal tissues microarray was 0.097 (SD = .088). The mean signal from 4 tumor tissues was .70 (SD = .21). The p-value associated with this difference was 0.02 by the Mann-Whitney U-test. This correlated to a 7.24 fold difference in expression ( Fig.1a ). To validate the results of the microarray we analyzed the tissue using 2-Step RT PCR after RNA extraction. The results confirmed the findings of the microarray. The mean expression level of 4 normal samples was .0035 (SD=.004) and 4 tumor tissues was .015 (SD=.005) with a p-value = 0.04 calculated by the Mann Whitney U-test ( Fig.1c ). Conversely, the mean expression of mir-494 was 3.18 (SD=.2) in the 4 normal tissues and .98 (SD=.63) in the 4 tumor tissues ( Fig1b ). This difference correlated to a p-value of .02, calculated by the Mann Whitney U-test.  MicroRNAs are significantly differentially expressed in HNSCC tissues and cell lines RNA was extracted from 4 patients with HNSCC and 4 normal tissues (tissues obtained from patients who underwent UPPP for non-cancer indications). Concurrently, RNA was extracted from four head and neck cancer cell lines and one normal oral keratinocyte cell line. The RNA purity was confirmed by Northern blot to be of adequate quality and underwent microRNA expression array analysis by Genosensor (Tempe, AZ). The Genosensor array is able to identify ~300 mature human microRNAs and determine expression levels of both mature and pre-cursor mirs. For this study we only examined the mature mirs. The microarray results were normalized to the 5S rRNA signal intensity and then analyzed using SAM. The threshold FDR or q-value was determined to be 0% ( supplementary figure 3 ). Several mirs were found to be differentially expressed, a comprehensive list can be found in Table 1 . Once the FDR threshold had been set to zero, the most significantly differentially expressed mirs were: mir-21, let-7, 18, 29c, 142-3p, 155, 146b (over expressed in cancer) and 494 (under expressed in cancer) ( Table1 and Fig.1 ). An image of the SAM analysis plot is shown in supplementary figure 3 as well as the hierarchal clustering image which is shown in supplementary figure 4 . These results were then compared to our cell line data. Mir-494 had expression differences that correlated with primary tissue data ( Fig.1d ). Also of interest is the finding that mir-21 is significantly upregulated ( Fig.1e ). It has been reported in the literature as being over-expressed in several different cancers. Mir-21 was found to be expressed at a greater level in tumor tissue in 100% cases when using the greatest expression level in normal tissue as a threshold for tumor tissues. The mean signal from 4 normal tissues microarray was 0.097 (SD = .088). The mean signal from 4 tumor tissues was .70 (SD = .21). The p-value associated with this difference was 0.02 by the Mann-Whitney U-test. This correlated to a 7.24 fold difference in expression ( Fig.1a ). To validate the results of the microarray we analyzed the tissue using 2-Step RT PCR after RNA extraction. The results confirmed the findings of the microarray. The mean expression level of 4 normal samples was .0035 (SD=.004) and 4 tumor tissues was .015 (SD=.005) with a p-value = 0.04 calculated by the Mann Whitney U-test ( Fig.1c ). Conversely, the mean expression of mir-494 was 3.18 (SD=.2) in the 4 normal tissues and .98 (SD=.63) in the 4 tumor tissues ( Fig1b ). This difference correlated to a p-value of .02, calculated by the Mann Whitney U-test.  Validation of MicroRNA Expression in Tumor Tissue versus Normal Tissue Of the nine differentially expressed microRNAs, we selected the top statistical target from the over-expressed microRNA ( mir-21 ) and the only under-expressed microRNA ( mir-494 ) for further study and validation. In addition to being the top statistical targets, mir-21 is well reported in the literature and mir-494 is a microRNA that has not been previously reported. We then evaluated their expression level in a larger tissue cohort of HNSCC. RNA was extracted from twenty seven HNSCC primary tissues and eight controls for analysis by 2 Step RT Quantitative PCR. Significant expression differences noted for Mir-21 and mir-494 ( Table 2 ). We also performed subsite analysis to determine if there were tissue specific differences between subsites, however none of these yielded any statistical significance. The average expression of mir-21 in our tumor cohort was 71.6 (SE = 48.9) compared to the normal cohort which was .44 (SE = .057) (p=.0003) ( Fig.2a ). However, Mir- 494 which was significantly under-expressed in smaller the tumor cohort showed very significant over-expression when validated in a larger cohort. The average expression by the 2-Step RT-PCR of was .0017 (SE=0.0016) while the normal samples averaged an expression of zero (p=.0041) ( Fig.2b ). The expression of mir-494 in normal tissues showed no amplification at greater than 45 cycles and therefore were called “zero.” Also of interest is that Mir-21 is over-expressed in 25 of 27 tumors when using the highest expressing normal tissue as a cutoff ( Fig.2a ). Mir-21 and mir-494 expression levels were normalized to U47 expression.  Validation of MicroRNA Expression in Tumor Tissue versus Normal Tissue Of the nine differentially expressed microRNAs, we selected the top statistical target from the over-expressed microRNA ( mir-21 ) and the only under-expressed microRNA ( mir-494 ) for further study and validation. In addition to being the top statistical targets, mir-21 is well reported in the literature and mir-494 is a microRNA that has not been previously reported. We then evaluated their expression level in a larger tissue cohort of HNSCC. RNA was extracted from twenty seven HNSCC primary tissues and eight controls for analysis by 2 Step RT Quantitative PCR. Significant expression differences noted for Mir-21 and mir-494 ( Table 2 ). We also performed subsite analysis to determine if there were tissue specific differences between subsites, however none of these yielded any statistical significance. The average expression of mir-21 in our tumor cohort was 71.6 (SE = 48.9) compared to the normal cohort which was .44 (SE = .057) (p=.0003) ( Fig.2a ). However, Mir- 494 which was significantly under-expressed in smaller the tumor cohort showed very significant over-expression when validated in a larger cohort. The average expression by the 2-Step RT-PCR of was .0017 (SE=0.0016) while the normal samples averaged an expression of zero (p=.0041) ( Fig.2b ). The expression of mir-494 in normal tissues showed no amplification at greater than 45 cycles and therefore were called “zero.” Also of interest is that Mir-21 is over-expressed in 25 of 27 tumors when using the highest expressing normal tissue as a cutoff ( Fig.2a ). Mir-21 and mir-494 expression levels were normalized to U47 expression.  MicroRNA mimics modulate cell growth in vitro In other cancer models, mir-21 has been shown to modulate growth and apoptosis when transfected into cell lines. To evaluate the overall functional significance, of differentially expressed mirs on HNSCC cells, we transfected mimics and inhibitors into cancer cell lines and evaluated their growth. Mir-21 and 494 both showed an ability to modulate cellular proliferation when transfected into cancer cell lines ( Fig.3a–e ). Transfection of mir-494 showed a statistically significantly decrease growth of cells relative to controls in JHU-012 by 61.7% ( Fig.3a ). Meanwhile, inhibition of mir-494 was able to demonstrate a statistically significantly but modest increase in growth of cells relative to controls in JHU-012 by 14.3% ( Fig.3b ). Transfection of mir-21 mimics into multiple cell lines (JHU-011 and JHU-012) showed statistically significantly increased growth of cells relative to controls ( Fig.3c–d ). With regard to the JHU-011 cell line, the mir-21 mimics had 38.8% more cells by MTT at 3 days than transfected controls ( Fig.3c ). JHU-012 cells transfected with mir-21 mimics had the most dramatic growth enhancement with 44.2% more cells at 3 days by MTT when compared to cells transfected with negative controls ( Fig.3d ). In addition, JHU-011 which has a high endogenous expression of mir-21 ( fig 1e ) relative to JHU-012 ( fig 1e ) had a modest decreased augmentation of growth after transfection of mir-21 when compared to transfection of mir-21 into JHU-012. To determine whether mir-21 was solely growth promoting, we inhibited mir-21 via transfected inhibitors purchased from Dharmacon. Interestingly, we found a 64.9% decrease in cell number when comparing JHU-012 cells transfected with mir-21 inhibitors to 012 cells transfected with scrambled negative inhibitor controls ( Fig.3e ). This result therefore suggests that increased mir-21 may play a role in the growth advantage of HNSCC. It also supports the possibility that mir-21 targets tumor suppressor genes and has an anti-apoptotic effect on cellular function.  MicroRNA mimics modulate cell growth in vitro In other cancer models, mir-21 has been shown to modulate growth and apoptosis when transfected into cell lines. To evaluate the overall functional significance, of differentially expressed mirs on HNSCC cells, we transfected mimics and inhibitors into cancer cell lines and evaluated their growth. Mir-21 and 494 both showed an ability to modulate cellular proliferation when transfected into cancer cell lines ( Fig.3a–e ). Transfection of mir-494 showed a statistically significantly decrease growth of cells relative to controls in JHU-012 by 61.7% ( Fig.3a ). Meanwhile, inhibition of mir-494 was able to demonstrate a statistically significantly but modest increase in growth of cells relative to controls in JHU-012 by 14.3% ( Fig.3b ). Transfection of mir-21 mimics into multiple cell lines (JHU-011 and JHU-012) showed statistically significantly increased growth of cells relative to controls ( Fig.3c–d ). With regard to the JHU-011 cell line, the mir-21 mimics had 38.8% more cells by MTT at 3 days than transfected controls ( Fig.3c ). JHU-012 cells transfected with mir-21 mimics had the most dramatic growth enhancement with 44.2% more cells at 3 days by MTT when compared to cells transfected with negative controls ( Fig.3d ). In addition, JHU-011 which has a high endogenous expression of mir-21 ( fig 1e ) relative to JHU-012 ( fig 1e ) had a modest decreased augmentation of growth after transfection of mir-21 when compared to transfection of mir-21 into JHU-012. To determine whether mir-21 was solely growth promoting, we inhibited mir-21 via transfected inhibitors purchased from Dharmacon. Interestingly, we found a 64.9% decrease in cell number when comparing JHU-012 cells transfected with mir-21 inhibitors to 012 cells transfected with scrambled negative inhibitor controls ( Fig.3e ). This result therefore suggests that increased mir-21 may play a role in the growth advantage of HNSCC. It also supports the possibility that mir-21 targets tumor suppressor genes and has an anti-apoptotic effect on cellular function.  Inhibiting mir-21 increases cell apoptosis and cytochrome c release After demonstrating that mir-21 can confer a growth advantage when transfected into cells lines, our interest turned to the pathways in which mir-21 effect. First we determined that the cells were indeed undergoing an apoptotic death. 48 hours after transfection with mir-21 inhibitors we evaluated Annexin-V staining. We found that there was a significant difference in the percentage of viable cells between transfected scrambled controls and transfected mir-21 inhibitors ( Fig.4a ). Though this difference was modest we examined cytochrome c release after transfection of mir-21 inhibitors. Cytochrome C release is a late event apoptosis and is signals the initiation of the apoptosome. 48 hours after transfection we noted an increase in cytochrome c release when compared to cells transfected with scrambled inhibitor controls ( Fig.4b ).  Inhibiting mir-21 increases cell apoptosis and cytochrome c release After demonstrating that mir-21 can confer a growth advantage when transfected into cells lines, our interest turned to the pathways in which mir-21 effect. First we determined that the cells were indeed undergoing an apoptotic death. 48 hours after transfection with mir-21 inhibitors we evaluated Annexin-V staining. We found that there was a significant difference in the percentage of viable cells between transfected scrambled controls and transfected mir-21 inhibitors ( Fig.4a ). Though this difference was modest we examined cytochrome c release after transfection of mir-21 inhibitors. Cytochrome C release is a late event apoptosis and is signals the initiation of the apoptosome. 48 hours after transfection we noted an increase in cytochrome c release when compared to cells transfected with scrambled inhibitor controls ( Fig.4b ).  Discussion MicroRNA has recently been an area of interest for a variety of human diseases including cancer. The expression profiles have been established for many different cancers and seem to be unique to each cancer 5 . However, no study has been done to evaluate the role of microRNAs in HNSCC in primary tissue with correlation to cell line studies. This study is the first to examine the role of microRNAs in HNSCC in primary tissue as well as identify a specific microRNA alteration in head and neck squamous cell cancer, Mir-494 . Furthermore, we are able to demonstrate that the downstream targets of mir-21 are likely genes that directly or indirectly relate to the apoptotic pathway. Mir-21 has been examined in several areas of molecular biology in addition to cancer biology 8 , 9 , 13 . Mir-21 has been implicated in: CLL, lung adenocarcinoma, breast carcinoma, pancreatic cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma, papillary thyroid carcinoma, glioblastoma, t-cell differentiation, ovarian cancer, 5-FU resistance, cervical carcinoma, multiple myeloma, B-cell lymphoma, uterine leiomyomas, chromosomal instability and even hypertrophic heart muscles and vascular formation 9 , 14 – 28 . One of the inherent difficulties in studying all microRNAs is their nonspecific binding, for example, the Miranda algorithm predicts 1130 targets for mir-21 alone while other methods, including target scan and pictar, predict 186 and 175, respectively. Instead of pursuing long list of predicted downstream targets, we sought to identify microRNAs of importance by identifying those that could modulate growth when transfected into cell lines. We selected two targets for study and showed that transfection affected cell growth. Mir-21 has a been studied as a putative oncogene and anti-apoptotic agent. Zhu et al proposed that mir-21 exerts some of its oncogenic effects through TPM-1 regulation 12 . Si et al proposed that mir-21 is able to decrease cell death though association with bcl-2 8 . In addition, Chan et al proposed that caspase activation occurred with knockdown of mir-21 9 . Interestingly, other studies have shown that there is no association with other apoptosis related proteins such as p53, PUMA, FasL and CDC25A. Still, other studies have shown that Mir-21 is involved in invasion and metastasis. Meng et al propose that mir-21 works through PTEN signaling in hepatocellular cancer to modulate matrix metalloproteases-2 and matrix metalloproteases-9 24 . Lastly, Loffler et al proposed that in multiple myeloma, mir-21 acts via control of a Stat3 mediated pathway 22 . Since it was previously shown that caspase activation occurs after knockdown of mir-21 9 , we decided to further study the role of mir-21 in the apoptotic pathway. Since caspase activation follows the release of cytochrome c, we studied the release of cytochrome c in response to mir-21 knockdown. We demonstrate that cytochrome c release is decreased after mir-21 inhibition. This finding, in conjunction with our transfection data, which shows that inhibition of mir-21 has a modest effect on cell growth, suggests that the down stream targets of mir-21 are unlikely the major tumor suppressor genes that have been well studied. If the major tumor suppressor genes are involved, a much more significant effect would be expected. However, it is unclear whether mir-21 is able to directly affect or indirectly affect the release of cytochrome c and the subsequent apoptosis. It is likely that mir-21 inhibits several mRNAs that then lead to a cascade of events that prevent apoptosis and increase cellular proliferation. Therefore, the next step is to determine which mRNA mir-21 target directly. Much less study has been dedicated to mir-494 . A recent search revealed no reports of mir-494 being involved in human disease. Of interest is that mir-494 is located at chromosome 14q32.31, which is a region that was reported as being deleted in HNSCC. This loss was also correlated with a three-fold increased risk of death 29 . This is an interesting finding, since mir-494 was found to be under-expressed in cancer by microarray. Even though our microarray data supports mir-494 as being under-expressed in cancer, our RT-PCR validation did not confirm this. This discrepancy can be due to several factors. First, it may be possible that our initial cohort of 4 normal tissue samples and 4 tumor tissue samples was not representative. The selected normal samples may have been endogenously high expressers when compared to the larger cohort of normal tissues. Second, it may be related to the tissue specific nature of expression of this microRNA. All the normal tissues used for this study were UPPP, but the tumor samples were derived from various sites and subsites within the head and neck. If normal tissue for each site and subsite was used as a control, it is possible that mir-494 expression may be under-expressed in the corresponding cancer tissues. Thirdly, this may also illustrate the limitation of array based studies and supports the need for RT-PCR validation of any target. In summary, after the first microRNA profiling of HNSCC in human tissue, we were able to identify mir-21 and mir-494 as possible biomarkers for HNSCC. They both showed corresponding dysregulation in cell lines and an ability to modulate cell growth when transfected into cancer cell lines. Furthermore, mir-21 knockdown was able to increase cytochrome c release in cancer lines. This provides further evidence that one of mir-21 's role in carcinogenesis is via the apoptotic pathway. Further study is necessary for their use as diagnostic tests, prognostic significance or possible therapeutic targets.  Discussion MicroRNA has recently been an area of interest for a variety of human diseases including cancer. The expression profiles have been established for many different cancers and seem to be unique to each cancer 5 . However, no study has been done to evaluate the role of microRNAs in HNSCC in primary tissue with correlation to cell line studies. This study is the first to examine the role of microRNAs in HNSCC in primary tissue as well as identify a specific microRNA alteration in head and neck squamous cell cancer, Mir-494 . Furthermore, we are able to demonstrate that the downstream targets of mir-21 are likely genes that directly or indirectly relate to the apoptotic pathway. Mir-21 has been examined in several areas of molecular biology in addition to cancer biology 8 , 9 , 13 . Mir-21 has been implicated in: CLL, lung adenocarcinoma, breast carcinoma, pancreatic cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma, papillary thyroid carcinoma, glioblastoma, t-cell differentiation, ovarian cancer, 5-FU resistance, cervical carcinoma, multiple myeloma, B-cell lymphoma, uterine leiomyomas, chromosomal instability and even hypertrophic heart muscles and vascular formation 9 , 14 – 28 . One of the inherent difficulties in studying all microRNAs is their nonspecific binding, for example, the Miranda algorithm predicts 1130 targets for mir-21 alone while other methods, including target scan and pictar, predict 186 and 175, respectively. Instead of pursuing long list of predicted downstream targets, we sought to identify microRNAs of importance by identifying those that could modulate growth when transfected into cell lines. We selected two targets for study and showed that transfection affected cell growth. Mir-21 has a been studied as a putative oncogene and anti-apoptotic agent. Zhu et al proposed that mir-21 exerts some of its oncogenic effects through TPM-1 regulation 12 . Si et al proposed that mir-21 is able to decrease cell death though association with bcl-2 8 . In addition, Chan et al proposed that caspase activation occurred with knockdown of mir-21 9 . Interestingly, other studies have shown that there is no association with other apoptosis related proteins such as p53, PUMA, FasL and CDC25A. Still, other studies have shown that Mir-21 is involved in invasion and metastasis. Meng et al propose that mir-21 works through PTEN signaling in hepatocellular cancer to modulate matrix metalloproteases-2 and matrix metalloproteases-9 24 . Lastly, Loffler et al proposed that in multiple myeloma, mir-21 acts via control of a Stat3 mediated pathway 22 . Since it was previously shown that caspase activation occurs after knockdown of mir-21 9 , we decided to further study the role of mir-21 in the apoptotic pathway. Since caspase activation follows the release of cytochrome c, we studied the release of cytochrome c in response to mir-21 knockdown. We demonstrate that cytochrome c release is decreased after mir-21 inhibition. This finding, in conjunction with our transfection data, which shows that inhibition of mir-21 has a modest effect on cell growth, suggests that the down stream targets of mir-21 are unlikely the major tumor suppressor genes that have been well studied. If the major tumor suppressor genes are involved, a much more significant effect would be expected. However, it is unclear whether mir-21 is able to directly affect or indirectly affect the release of cytochrome c and the subsequent apoptosis. It is likely that mir-21 inhibits several mRNAs that then lead to a cascade of events that prevent apoptosis and increase cellular proliferation. Therefore, the next step is to determine which mRNA mir-21 target directly. Much less study has been dedicated to mir-494 . A recent search revealed no reports of mir-494 being involved in human disease. Of interest is that mir-494 is located at chromosome 14q32.31, which is a region that was reported as being deleted in HNSCC. This loss was also correlated with a three-fold increased risk of death 29 . This is an interesting finding, since mir-494 was found to be under-expressed in cancer by microarray. Even though our microarray data supports mir-494 as being under-expressed in cancer, our RT-PCR validation did not confirm this. This discrepancy can be due to several factors. First, it may be possible that our initial cohort of 4 normal tissue samples and 4 tumor tissue samples was not representative. The selected normal samples may have been endogenously high expressers when compared to the larger cohort of normal tissues. Second, it may be related to the tissue specific nature of expression of this microRNA. All the normal tissues used for this study were UPPP, but the tumor samples were derived from various sites and subsites within the head and neck. If normal tissue for each site and subsite was used as a control, it is possible that mir-494 expression may be under-expressed in the corresponding cancer tissues. Thirdly, this may also illustrate the limitation of array based studies and supports the need for RT-PCR validation of any target. In summary, after the first microRNA profiling of HNSCC in human tissue, we were able to identify mir-21 and mir-494 as possible biomarkers for HNSCC. They both showed corresponding dysregulation in cell lines and an ability to modulate cell growth when transfected into cancer cell lines. Furthermore, mir-21 knockdown was able to increase cytochrome c release in cancer lines. This provides further evidence that one of mir-21 's role in carcinogenesis is via the apoptotic pathway. Further study is necessary for their use as diagnostic tests, prognostic significance or possible therapeutic targets.  Supplementary Material Supplementary Figure 1 Representative Flow Cytometry Plots Annexin-FITC/PI for cellular viability. The scatter plot and the fluorescence plot are shown for each sample. Gating for samples were determined by the single color stains Annexin-FITC and PI. Gates for control and samples were identical as shown. (A) JHU-012 cells stained with Annexin-FITC only. (B) JHU-012 cells stained with PI only. (C) JHU-012 cells stained with Annexin-FITC and PI. This sample was used to set the threshold for viability. (D) JHU-012 cells transfected with negative control. (E) JHU-012 cells transfected with mir-21 inhibitor Supplementary Figure 2 Representative Flow Cytometry Plots for Cytochrome C. The scatter plot and the fluorescence plot are shown for each sample. Gating for samples was determined by JHU-012 cells that were completely untreated (no transfection or treatment performed). Gates for the negative control and samples were identical as shown. (A) JHU-012 control cells stained with cytochrome c specific antibody. (B) JHU-012 control cells treated with transfection agent only, stained with cytochrome c specific antibody. (C) JHU-012 cells transfected with negative control stained with cytochrome c specific antibody. (D) JHU-012 cells transfected with Mir-21 inhibitor stained with cytochrome c specific antibody. Supplementary Figure 3 SAM analysis plot of microarray data. Supplementary Figure 4 Hierarchal clustering of normalized microRNA microarray expression data.  Supplementary Material Supplementary Figure 1 Representative Flow Cytometry Plots Annexin-FITC/PI for cellular viability. The scatter plot and the fluorescence plot are shown for each sample. Gating for samples were determined by the single color stains Annexin-FITC and PI. Gates for control and samples were identical as shown. (A) JHU-012 cells stained with Annexin-FITC only. (B) JHU-012 cells stained with PI only. (C) JHU-012 cells stained with Annexin-FITC and PI. This sample was used to set the threshold for viability. (D) JHU-012 cells transfected with negative control. (E) JHU-012 cells transfected with mir-21 inhibitor Supplementary Figure 2 Representative Flow Cytometry Plots for Cytochrome C. The scatter plot and the fluorescence plot are shown for each sample. Gating for samples was determined by JHU-012 cells that were completely untreated (no transfection or treatment performed). Gates for the negative control and samples were identical as shown. (A) JHU-012 control cells stained with cytochrome c specific antibody. (B) JHU-012 control cells treated with transfection agent only, stained with cytochrome c specific antibody. (C) JHU-012 cells transfected with negative control stained with cytochrome c specific antibody. (D) JHU-012 cells transfected with Mir-21 inhibitor stained with cytochrome c specific antibody. Supplementary Figure 3 SAM analysis plot of microarray data. Supplementary Figure 4 Hierarchal clustering of normalized microRNA microarray expression data. 