Inhibition of Calcitonin Gene-Related Peptide Function: A Promising Strategy for Treating Migraine The neuropeptide calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) is implicated in the underlying pathology of migraine. Serum levels of CGRP, which are elevated during a migraine attack, have been reported to return to normal with alleviation of pain. In addition, CGRP administration has been shown to cause a migraine-like headache in susceptible individuals. Importantly, CGRP receptors are found on many cell types within the trigeminovascular system that are thought to play important roles in controlling inflammatory and nociceptive processes. Based on these findings, it was proposed that blockage of CGRP receptor function and, hence, the physiological effects of CGRP would be effective in aborting a migraine attack. This review will summarize key preclinical data that support the therapeutic potential of using CGRP receptor antagonists or molecules that bind CGRP within the context of current neurovascular theories on migraine pathology.  CONCLUSION Based on experimental and clinical studies, CGRP is believed to play an important role in the generation of pain during migraine attacks. CGRP receptor antagonists would be expected to block CGRP-mediated cellular events at the level of cerebral blood vessels, dura, ganglion, and second-order neurons since functional CGRP receptors are expressed by cell types in these regions of the trigeminovascular system. Although the non-peptide CGRP receptor antagonist olcegepant was shown to be effective in treatment of migraine, its formulation requires that it be administered intravenously, which greatly reduces its use as a frontline anti-migraine therapy. However, the therapeutic potential of the oral formulations of non-peptide CGRP receptor antagonists appears quite promising given the recent results of the phase II clinical trial with MK-0974. It was encouraging to see that this compound was effective in treating migraine but only minor side effects were noted with no vasoconstrictor events reported. It will be equally exciting to see how well other oral CGRP receptor antagonists currently in development as well as molecules that bind CGRP and inhibit its function perform in clinical studies. Finally, since CGRP levels are also elevated in cluster headache, 8 , 10 , 79 it is likely that blocking CGRP receptor function would also be beneficial in treating this severe form of headache. 