The von Hippel-Lindau Gene Turning Discovery Into Therapy Mutations or aberrations of the von Hippel-Lindau gene are responsible for the hereditary neoplastic syndrome that bears the same name, as well as for the majority of sporadic clear cell renal cell carcinomas. The discovery of this gene and subsequent clarification of its mechanism of action have led to a series of targeted treatments for advanced kidney cancer and have dramatically changed how we manage this disease. The discovery of the VHL gene is a prime example of how discoveries at the bench can inform and revolutionize therapeutics at the bedside. In this review, the authors trace this illuminating tale, from the cloning of the VHL gene, to elucidating its biologic function, to the development of novel therapeutics that have dramatically changed the paradigm of managing advanced renal cell carcinoma.  Conclusions The discovery of the VHL gene has, therefore, taken a discouraging and desperate situation in which there were essentially only 2 agents routinely used in the management of metastatic ccRCC (high-dose IL-2 and IFN?) and opened the door to an expanding menu of therapeutic options. We have gone from a frustrating predicament in which >80% of patients did not respond to any of the available agents to one in which we have a menu of proven agents that can arrest the progression of disease and substantially improve overall survival, even in high-risk metastatic ccRCC patients. Despite these remarkable therapeutic discoveries and encouraging clinical results, the overwhelming majority of patients with metastatic RCC will still die to their disease. Thus, although these successes are encouraging and provide hope for our patients with ccRCC, we cannot afford to be complacent. This sobering reminder should serve as a stimulus for continued scientific discovery as we continue to expand our understanding of the tumor biology and subsequent development of more effective targeted therapies. The intense study of the VHL/HIF signaling axis continues with the expectation that new agents will follow from the 3 newly approved compounds. The cloning of VHL and subsequent elucidation of its central role in ccRCC has opened up a brand new door into the inner workings of this malignancy and is now rapidly expanding the options for patients with this difficult disease. The trail that was blazed by pioneering researchers, dating back more than 30 years now, is an instructive tale on the value and necessity of studying the basic mechanisms underlying the biology of malignant tumors. The recent progress in managing advanced RCC over the last several years can be directly traced to the early, groundbreaking work that led to the cloning of the gene. This represents, therefore, a gratifying example of taking discoveries at the bench, and turning them into new therapeutics at the bedside. In addition, it must be kept in mind that it took many years and multiple investigators to first clone the VHL gene over 10 years ago. In the last decade, molecular biology and cloning techniques have advanced so rapidly that what previously took years to accomplish now takes only months, or sometimes even weeks. The pace of discovery is accelerating faster and faster (see Fig. 2 ). It is hoped that, in so doing, more of the discoveries at the laboratory bench will become bedside therapies for many people around the world who suffer every day from the ravages of advanced malignancies.  Figures FIGURE 1 Normal biology of the VHL-HIF axis in the setting of ( A ) normoxia and ( B ) hypoxia. In normoxic conditions, HIF? is hydroxylated on specific proline residues by prolyl-hydroxylases. VHL acts as the sensor for these hydroxylated proline residues as part of the VHL-E3 ubiquitin ligase. This polyubiquitinates HIF? and marks it for degradation by the proteasome. In hypoxic conditions (or in the presence of aberrant VHL), HIF? is allowed to accumulate in the cell. ( C ) It associates with HIF?, and this complex translocates to the nucleus and acts as a transcription factor binding to hypoxia response elements and up-regulating oxygen sensitive genes. These include vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), transforming growth factor alpha (TGF?), glucose transporter-1 (GLUT1), carbonic anhydrase IX (CA-IX), erythropoietin (EPO), and others. Examples of certain ligands’ receptors are given, including VEGF receptor (VEGFR), PDGF receptor (PDGFR), and the receptor for TNF?, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Shown is the downstream signaling for 1 of these receptors, VEGFR, including through the PI3 kinase (PI3K)/AKT/mTOR, p38 MAP kinase (p38MAPK), and RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK pathways. Examples of agents that impact on this cascade are given, and where they act on the pathway is shown. FIGURE 2 This timeline graphically illustrates key events that led to discovery of the VHL gene, subsequent elucidation of its biology, and development of therapeutics for clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). 