White Matter Tauopathy with Globular Glial Inclusions: A Distinct Sporadic Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration Frontotemporal lobar degenerations are a group of disorders characterized by circumscribed degeneration of the frontal and temporal lobes and diverse histopathological features. We report clinical, neuropathological, ultrastructural, biochemical and genetic data on seven individuals with a four-repeat (4R) tauopathy characterized by the presence of globular glial inclusions (GGIs) in brain white matter. Clinical manifestations were compatible with the behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and included motor neuron symptoms; there was prominent neuronal loss in the frontal and temporal cortex, subiculum and amygdala. The surrounding white matter showed abundant GGIs composed of abnormal filaments present mostly in oligodendrocytes. The severity of white matter tau abnormalities correlated with a reduction in myelin and axons and with microglial activation. Western blotting of sarkosyl-insoluble tau demonstrated the presence of two major tau bands of 64 and 68 kDa. No mutations in the microtubule-associated protein tau ( MAPT ) gene were detected in two affected individuals. We propose that 4R tau-immunoreactive GGIs are the neuropathologic hallmark of a distinct sporadic tauopathy with variable clinical presentations that include FTD and occasionally upper motor neuron disease. This type of tauopathy with GGIs expands the group of neurodegenerative disorders in which oligodendroglial pathology predominates, beyond the synucleinopathy multiple system atrophy disorders.  INTRODUCTION Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) comprises a group of disorders with diverse histopathological abnormalities that are associated with circumscribed degeneration of the frontal and temporal cortex ( 1 ). Patients with FTLD may present with frontotemporal dementia (FTD) characterized by progressive deterioration in behavior, personality and cognition that is often associated with language dysfunction ( 2 ). Some individuals may present with semantic dementia or progressive non-fluent aphasia ( 3 ). Parkinsonism or motor neuron disease may also be observed ( 4 ). Neuropathologically, these disorders can be associated with abnormal inclusions made of the microtubule-associated protein tau in neurons or in both neurons and glial cells ( 5 ). In cases of FTLD with tau-negative, ?-synuclein-negative, ubiquitin-positive inclusions, neuronal changes may harbor the TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) ( 6 , 7 ); in addition, disease forms with ?-internexin-positive inclusions or none of these may occur ( 1 ). Both sporadic and genetic forms of FTLD have been described. Genetic forms have been associated with mutations in the microtubule associated protein tau ( MAPT ) ( 8 – 10 ), valosin-containing protein ( 11 ), charged multivesicular body 2b ( 12 ), progranulin ( 13 , 14 ) and TDP-43 genes ( 15 – 17 ). Sporadic tauopathies include Pick disease (PiD), corticobasal degeneration (CBD), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), argyrophilic grain disease (AGD) and neurofibrillary tangle dementia ( 18 ). Classification is based on the cellular and anatomical distribution of tau-immunoreactive structures, the ultrastructure of tau filaments and the isoform profile of pathological tau bands. Two haplotypes (H1/H2) in MAPT , including two major ancestral H1 haplotypes, may influence the phenotype ( 19 , 20 ). There have been some reports of atypical variants of tauopathies that cannot be classified into known disease categories ( 21 – 28 ). Here, we describe seven cases with a uniform neuropathological phenotype characterized by the presence of predominantly white matter globular glial inclusions (GGIs) consisting of four-repeat (4R) tau, thereby expanding the spectrum of tauopathies.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Subjects The archive of the Department of Neuropathology of the National Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Budapest, Hungary, consists of approximately 10,000 cases with a wide variety of neuropsychiatric diseases. The present study was initiated by one of the authors (G.G.K.) who examined brain autopsies in this Institute between 2003 and 2007. During this period, dementia had been diagnosed in 35% of all autopsied patients (n = 1,129). Among dementia cases, 6% had FTLD. The primary objective was to identify cases for research on FTLD. As a first approach, based on the medical documentation, one of the authors (KM) selected cases in which PiD or unclassifiable neurodegenerative disease with frontotemporal atrophy had been diagnosed based on medical documentation and after the neuropathological examination; current terminology of FTLD had not been defined at this time. Sixty cases from 1966 to 2006 were identified. Using immunohistochemistry for tau and ubiquitin, several anatomical regions from each case were studied; we describe seven of these cases in the present study. Clinical information on the patients was obtained by retrospective examination of clinical records and for one case (case 6) by interviewing family members. Periods of available clinical documentation of patients ranged between 2 and 10 years. The study was approved by the Local Ethical Committee. Neuropathology For all seven cases, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded blocks of several brain regions, including frontal, anterior cingulate, temporal, parietal and occipital cortex, basal ganglia, thalamus, hippocampus, amygdala, brainstem and cerebellum were available. The spinal cord had been collected from one case (case 7). Seven-?m sections were stained using hematoxylin and eosin, Luxol fast blue-periodic acid Schiff (PAS), Congo red, thioflavin S, and modified Bielschowsky and Gallyas silver stains. Immunohistochemistry was carried out using the following antibodies against tau: monoclonal AT8 (1:200, Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, pS202/pT205), AT100 (pT212/pS214/pT217), AT180 (pT231), AT270 (pT181), HT7 (159–163) (all 1:500, Innogenetics, Antwerp, Belgium), 12E8 (1:500, Elan Pharmaceuticals, South San Francisco, CA, pS262/S356), anti-4R tau (RD4, 1:200, Upstate, Charlottesville, VA) and anti-3R tau (RD3, 1:2,000, Upstate). Additional monoclonal antibodies used were: anti-?-amyloid (1:100, Novocastra Lab. Ltd. Newcastle, UK), anti-TDP-43 (1:2,000, Abnova Corp. Taipei, Taiwan), anti-CD68 (1:1,000, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), anti-HLA-DR (1:100, Dako), anti-myelin proteolipid protein (PLP, 1:500, Serotec, Kidlington, Oxford, UK), anti-amyloid precursor protein (APP, 1:500, Millipore/Chemicon, Billerica, MA), anti-phosphorylated neurofilament (SMI-31, 1:2,500, Covance, Berkeley, CA) and anti-?-synuclein (1:10,000, clone 4D6, Signet, Dedham, MA). The following polyclonal antibodies were used: anti-ubiquitin (1:200, Dako), anti-p62 (guinea pig, 1:4,000, Progen Biotechnik GmBh, Heidelberg, Germany), anti-glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP, 1:3,000, Dako), anti-myelin basic protein (MBP, 1:200, Dako), anti-TDP-43 (1:100, ProteinTech Group, Chicago, Il), and anti-?-B-crystallin (1:500, Novocastra). As a secondary detection system, the Envision kit (Dako) was used with diaminobenzidine as the chromogen. Genetics Genomic DNA was extracted from blood (in cases 6 and 7) and formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded brain tissue (in cases 1–4) using standard protocols ( 29 ). Analysis of the MAPT exons and flanking intronic regions was carried out as described ( 10 ). Standard amplification reactions were done using 50 ng of genomic DNA and examined by agarose gel electrophoresis. The amplification reactions were treated with ExoSap-IT (USB, Cleveland, OH) to remove unincorporated primers and nucleotides. Asymmetric amplification using the DTCS quick start kit (Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA) was performed and the products loaded onto a CEQ 8000 GeXP Genetic Analysis System (Beckman Coulter). DNA sequences were compared with the published MAPT sequence ( www.ncib.nlm.nih.gov ). The haplotype status was determined by examining the sequences in which the polymorphisms resided. For the DNA extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue, haplotypes were determined by assessing single nucleotide polymorphisms in exons 1 and 9 using previously described primers ( 30 ). Amplification products were digested with AluI (exon 1) or MspI (exon 9) and analyzed on a 2% agarose gel. ApoE genotyping was performed as described ( 31 ). Biochemistry Frozen tissue samples of amygdala and hippocampus (with subiculum and hippocampal white matter) from case 7 were used for sarkosyl extraction, as described ( 32 ). Sarkosyl-insoluble material was run on 10% Tris/glycine gels and blotted onto polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes. The blots were incubated with anti-tau antibodies 133 (against the amino-terminus, 1:1,000), 134 (against the carboxy-terminus, 1:5,000), AT8 (1:1,000) or PS422 (pS422, 1:500) for 1 h at room temperature and developed using enhanced chemiluminescence (GE Healthcare). Electron Microscopy For ultrastructural analysis of inclusions, small samples of affected temporal white matter obtained by needle biopsy from the paraffin block of case 6 were deparaffinized, fixed in glutaraldehyde and embedded in epoxy resin. Ultrathin sections of 80 to 90 nm were analyzed with a Zeiss electron microscope. Aliquots of the sarkosyl-insoluble dispersed filament preparations from amygdala and hippocampus of case 7 were processed for immunoelectron microscopy, as described ( 33 ). Micrographs were recorded on a Philips EM208S microscope at a nominal magnification of x40,000. Antibodies 134, AT100 and PS422 were used at 1:100.  Subjects The archive of the Department of Neuropathology of the National Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Budapest, Hungary, consists of approximately 10,000 cases with a wide variety of neuropsychiatric diseases. The present study was initiated by one of the authors (G.G.K.) who examined brain autopsies in this Institute between 2003 and 2007. During this period, dementia had been diagnosed in 35% of all autopsied patients (n = 1,129). Among dementia cases, 6% had FTLD. The primary objective was to identify cases for research on FTLD. As a first approach, based on the medical documentation, one of the authors (KM) selected cases in which PiD or unclassifiable neurodegenerative disease with frontotemporal atrophy had been diagnosed based on medical documentation and after the neuropathological examination; current terminology of FTLD had not been defined at this time. Sixty cases from 1966 to 2006 were identified. Using immunohistochemistry for tau and ubiquitin, several anatomical regions from each case were studied; we describe seven of these cases in the present study. Clinical information on the patients was obtained by retrospective examination of clinical records and for one case (case 6) by interviewing family members. Periods of available clinical documentation of patients ranged between 2 and 10 years. The study was approved by the Local Ethical Committee.  Neuropathology For all seven cases, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded blocks of several brain regions, including frontal, anterior cingulate, temporal, parietal and occipital cortex, basal ganglia, thalamus, hippocampus, amygdala, brainstem and cerebellum were available. The spinal cord had been collected from one case (case 7). Seven-?m sections were stained using hematoxylin and eosin, Luxol fast blue-periodic acid Schiff (PAS), Congo red, thioflavin S, and modified Bielschowsky and Gallyas silver stains. Immunohistochemistry was carried out using the following antibodies against tau: monoclonal AT8 (1:200, Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, pS202/pT205), AT100 (pT212/pS214/pT217), AT180 (pT231), AT270 (pT181), HT7 (159–163) (all 1:500, Innogenetics, Antwerp, Belgium), 12E8 (1:500, Elan Pharmaceuticals, South San Francisco, CA, pS262/S356), anti-4R tau (RD4, 1:200, Upstate, Charlottesville, VA) and anti-3R tau (RD3, 1:2,000, Upstate). Additional monoclonal antibodies used were: anti-?-amyloid (1:100, Novocastra Lab. Ltd. Newcastle, UK), anti-TDP-43 (1:2,000, Abnova Corp. Taipei, Taiwan), anti-CD68 (1:1,000, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), anti-HLA-DR (1:100, Dako), anti-myelin proteolipid protein (PLP, 1:500, Serotec, Kidlington, Oxford, UK), anti-amyloid precursor protein (APP, 1:500, Millipore/Chemicon, Billerica, MA), anti-phosphorylated neurofilament (SMI-31, 1:2,500, Covance, Berkeley, CA) and anti-?-synuclein (1:10,000, clone 4D6, Signet, Dedham, MA). The following polyclonal antibodies were used: anti-ubiquitin (1:200, Dako), anti-p62 (guinea pig, 1:4,000, Progen Biotechnik GmBh, Heidelberg, Germany), anti-glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP, 1:3,000, Dako), anti-myelin basic protein (MBP, 1:200, Dako), anti-TDP-43 (1:100, ProteinTech Group, Chicago, Il), and anti-?-B-crystallin (1:500, Novocastra). As a secondary detection system, the Envision kit (Dako) was used with diaminobenzidine as the chromogen.  Genetics Genomic DNA was extracted from blood (in cases 6 and 7) and formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded brain tissue (in cases 1–4) using standard protocols ( 29 ). Analysis of the MAPT exons and flanking intronic regions was carried out as described ( 10 ). Standard amplification reactions were done using 50 ng of genomic DNA and examined by agarose gel electrophoresis. The amplification reactions were treated with ExoSap-IT (USB, Cleveland, OH) to remove unincorporated primers and nucleotides. Asymmetric amplification using the DTCS quick start kit (Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA) was performed and the products loaded onto a CEQ 8000 GeXP Genetic Analysis System (Beckman Coulter). DNA sequences were compared with the published MAPT sequence ( www.ncib.nlm.nih.gov ). The haplotype status was determined by examining the sequences in which the polymorphisms resided. For the DNA extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue, haplotypes were determined by assessing single nucleotide polymorphisms in exons 1 and 9 using previously described primers ( 30 ). Amplification products were digested with AluI (exon 1) or MspI (exon 9) and analyzed on a 2% agarose gel. ApoE genotyping was performed as described ( 31 ).  Biochemistry Frozen tissue samples of amygdala and hippocampus (with subiculum and hippocampal white matter) from case 7 were used for sarkosyl extraction, as described ( 32 ). Sarkosyl-insoluble material was run on 10% Tris/glycine gels and blotted onto polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes. The blots were incubated with anti-tau antibodies 133 (against the amino-terminus, 1:1,000), 134 (against the carboxy-terminus, 1:5,000), AT8 (1:1,000) or PS422 (pS422, 1:500) for 1 h at room temperature and developed using enhanced chemiluminescence (GE Healthcare).  Electron Microscopy For ultrastructural analysis of inclusions, small samples of affected temporal white matter obtained by needle biopsy from the paraffin block of case 6 were deparaffinized, fixed in glutaraldehyde and embedded in epoxy resin. Ultrathin sections of 80 to 90 nm were analyzed with a Zeiss electron microscope. Aliquots of the sarkosyl-insoluble dispersed filament preparations from amygdala and hippocampus of case 7 were processed for immunoelectron microscopy, as described ( 33 ). Micrographs were recorded on a Philips EM208S microscope at a nominal magnification of x40,000. Antibodies 134, AT100 and PS422 were used at 1:100.  RESULTS Summary of Clinical Data Age at death of the seven individuals investigated here ranged from 63 to 81 years (average = 76 years). Social withdrawal was reported in 4 individuals, anxiety and early forgetfulness in 5 and disorientation in 4 ( Table 1 ). Behavioral changes were noted in 6 cases and speech disorder in 4. Alterations in circadian rhythm were present in 2 individuals and hyperphagia in 1. In addition to dementia (5 cases), rigidity (2 cases), upper motor neuron symptoms (4 cases), some in the form of supranuclear facial palsy (2 cases), bilateral Babinski sign (1 case) and hemiparesis (1 case), were also observed in advanced stages. Akinetic mutism was described in 2 individuals. Neither corticobasal syndrome nor gaze palsy was observed. Overall, clinical features were compatible with the frontal variant of FTD. Neuropathology Histopathology and Immunohistochemistry All brains studied showed frontotemporal atrophy. It was mild in case 7, moderate in case 6 and severe in cases 1–5 ( Fig. 1a, b ). The atrophy was asymmetric (left > right) in cases 2, 3, and 4 ( Fig. 1c, d ). Lacunar (case 5) and territorial (cases 4 and 6) infarcts were also observed. Common histopathological features ( Table 2 ) comprised spongiosis in the superficial layers of the frontal cortex ( Fig. 2a ), neuronal cell loss ( Fig. 2b ) and ballooned neurons, showing diffuse cytoplasmic immunoreactivity for ?-B-crystallin in frontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex and amygdala (not shown). Reduction of myelin and, less extensively, axons, along with microglial activation, correlated with the severity of white matter tau pathology ( Fig. 2c–m ). In severely affected areas, macrophages were present ( Fig. 2n ). APP-immunoreactive axonal swellings ( Fig. 2j inset) were rare. Alterations in myelin staining were demonstrated in a hemispheric section ( Fig. 3 ). Early stage neurofibrillary degeneration (Braak stage II in three cases and Braak stage III in one case) ( 34 ), diffuse ?-amyloid-immunoreactive and sparse argyrophilic neuritic plaques were also seen ( Table 2 ); however, none of these cases fulfilled neuropathological criteria for definite Alzheimer disease ( 35 ). Argyrophilic grains were detected in the transentorhinal region in case 6. TDP-43-immunoreactive pathological changes were absent, but granular immunostaining of nuclei was noted. A few ?-synuclein-immunoreactive Lewy-bodies were observed in the substantia nigra of case 7. Immunohistochemistry for Tau The most prominent alteration was the presence of abundant tau-immunoreactive GGIs, along with non-argyrophilic grains and a few argyrophilic threads, predominantly in white matter ( Fig. 4a ). Fewer GGIs were present in gray matter ( Fig. 4b ). Typical oligodendroglial coiled bodies were only rarely observed. Astrocytes in gray matter were immunoreactive for antibody RD4. Grey matter astrocytes showed prominent non-argyrophilic dot-like immunopositivity in the proximal segments of branching processes, with a star-like appearance, reminiscent of tufted astrocytes; thus, they are called 'tufted-like astrocytes” ( Fig. 4c ). Typical argyrophilic tufted astrocytes as seen in progressive supranuclear palsy were only rarely observed. Pretangle-type staining ( Fig. 4d ) and occasional spherical cytoplasmic inclusions immunoreactive for RD4 but not RD3 were observed in neurons ( Fig. 4e ). Anti-RD3 immunolabelled occasional neurofibrillary tangles and sparse neuropil threads. Globose neurofibrillary tangles and astrocytic plaques were not present. Characterization of Globular Glial Inclusions The diameter of GGIs ranged between 8 and 20 ?m (usually 1.5–3.0 times larger than oligodendroglial nuclei). They were closely associated with oligodendroglial and some astroglial nuclei. Their shape was mainly globular, but half-moon and conical shapes were also noted. GGIs could be identified using H&E staining but were much more evident with tau immunostaining. They are argyrophilic and, although the Gallyas method yielded superior results, they could be detected with other silver impregnation techniques, including Bielschowsky; they were ubiquitin-immunoreactive and positive for p62. GGIs were strongly 4R tau-immunoreactive and could also be stained using a panel of phosphorylation-dependent anti-tau antibodies. Antibody HT7 gave only weak staining. These results are illustrated in Figure 5 . By electron microscopy, GGIs comprised granular material and haphazardly oriented filaments of 8 to 9 nm in diameter ( Fig. 6 ). Anatomical Distribution Neuronal loss was observed in the frontal, temporal and anterior cingulate cortex, amygdala and, in particular, the subiculum ( Table 3 ; Fig. 4f–k ). The basal nucleus of Meynert and the basal ganglia were only mildly affected; there was some nerve cell loss in the substantia nigra ( Fig. 4l ). No significant nerve cell loss was present in the subthalamic nucleus. Tau pathology was more widespread than nerve cell loss ( Table 3 ). While spherical cytoplasmic neuronal inclusions were restricted to the frontal and temporal cortex as well as the hippocampal CA1 subregion, pretangles were observed in most regions investigated, including the dentate gyrus, the substantia nigra, the amygdala, the basal ganglia, the thalamus and many brainstem nuclei ( Fig. 4m–o ). The spinal cord of case 7 was devoid of tau pathology. GGIs were numerous in peri-amygdaloid, peri-hippocampal and frontal white matter ( Table 3 ). Differences in the numbers of GGIs were noted between cases without overt dementia (case 7) compared to those with prominent clinical symptoms, (cases 1–5) ( Fig. 4p–s ). Additional brain areas such as the occipital white matter were affected in cases with dementia. Accumulation of GGIs was prominent at the cortical-white matter junctions ( Fig. 4t ). The internal capsule (mainly its anterior part), the cerebral peduncle (mainly its medial segment), the descending tracts of the pontine basis (mainly their upper segments), the corpus callosum, the anterior commissure and the thalamic fascicles consistently showed GGIs ( Fig. 4u–x ). They were infrequent in the medullary pyramid and absent from the oculomotor and hypoglossal cranial nerves and the optic chiasm. In the two individuals who did not exhibit overt dementia (cases 6 and 7), GGIs were observed mainly in the amygdala and in the hippocampal and frontobasal white matter; they were sparse in the interconnecting tracts. Tufted-like astrocytes were present mainly in frontal, cingulate and temporal cortex, as well as in amygdala, basal ganglia and thalamus ( Table 3 ). Summary of the Neuropathological Findings The following features were characteristic: 1) Neuronal loss predominantly in frontal and temporal cortex, subiculum, and amygdala. 2) Prominent involvement of the surrounding white matter with abundant globular, glia-associated, phospho-tau and 4R tau-immunoreactive inclusions (GGIs) composed of abnormal filaments. Less severe but consistent involvement of the interconnecting (corpus callosum, anterior commissure) and frontopontine tracts, with only mildly affected corticospinal tracts. 3) Correlation of the severity of white matter tau pathology with a reduction in myelin and axonal density, accompanied by microglial activation. 4) Presence of phospho-tau and 4R tau-immunoreactive neuronal cytoplasmic spherical inclusions and pretangles. And 5) Dot-like phospho-tau and 4R tau-immunoreactivity in astrocytic processes (tufted-like astrocytes) and a few argyrophilic tufted astrocytes. Biochemistry and Electron Microscopy Sarkosyl-insoluble tau was prepared from the amygdala and hippocampal formation of case 7. By immunoelectron microscopy, tau filaments were Alzheimer-type paired helical and straight filaments (PHFs and SFs) ( Fig. 7a ). They were decorated with anti-tau antibodies 134, AT100 and PS422. By Western blotting of sarkosyl-insoluble tau, phosphorylation-independent (133 and 134) and phosphorylation-dependent anti-tau antibodies identified two major pathological tau bands of 64 and 68 kDa, with a minor tau band of 72 kDa being visible in the amygdala sample ( Fig. 7b ). Genetic Analysis No mutations were found in the exons and adjoining intronic regions of MAPT in cases 6 and 7. The H1/H1 genotype was found in four cases (cases 1, 4, 6 and 7). Cases 2 and 3 could not be analyzed due to the poor quality of the DNA extracted from paraffin embedded tissue. The ApoE ?3/?3 genotype was observed in six samples ( Table 1 ).  RESULTS Summary of Clinical Data Age at death of the seven individuals investigated here ranged from 63 to 81 years (average = 76 years). Social withdrawal was reported in 4 individuals, anxiety and early forgetfulness in 5 and disorientation in 4 ( Table 1 ). Behavioral changes were noted in 6 cases and speech disorder in 4. Alterations in circadian rhythm were present in 2 individuals and hyperphagia in 1. In addition to dementia (5 cases), rigidity (2 cases), upper motor neuron symptoms (4 cases), some in the form of supranuclear facial palsy (2 cases), bilateral Babinski sign (1 case) and hemiparesis (1 case), were also observed in advanced stages. Akinetic mutism was described in 2 individuals. Neither corticobasal syndrome nor gaze palsy was observed. Overall, clinical features were compatible with the frontal variant of FTD. Neuropathology Histopathology and Immunohistochemistry All brains studied showed frontotemporal atrophy. It was mild in case 7, moderate in case 6 and severe in cases 1–5 ( Fig. 1a, b ). The atrophy was asymmetric (left > right) in cases 2, 3, and 4 ( Fig. 1c, d ). Lacunar (case 5) and territorial (cases 4 and 6) infarcts were also observed. Common histopathological features ( Table 2 ) comprised spongiosis in the superficial layers of the frontal cortex ( Fig. 2a ), neuronal cell loss ( Fig. 2b ) and ballooned neurons, showing diffuse cytoplasmic immunoreactivity for ?-B-crystallin in frontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex and amygdala (not shown). Reduction of myelin and, less extensively, axons, along with microglial activation, correlated with the severity of white matter tau pathology ( Fig. 2c–m ). In severely affected areas, macrophages were present ( Fig. 2n ). APP-immunoreactive axonal swellings ( Fig. 2j inset) were rare. Alterations in myelin staining were demonstrated in a hemispheric section ( Fig. 3 ). Early stage neurofibrillary degeneration (Braak stage II in three cases and Braak stage III in one case) ( 34 ), diffuse ?-amyloid-immunoreactive and sparse argyrophilic neuritic plaques were also seen ( Table 2 ); however, none of these cases fulfilled neuropathological criteria for definite Alzheimer disease ( 35 ). Argyrophilic grains were detected in the transentorhinal region in case 6. TDP-43-immunoreactive pathological changes were absent, but granular immunostaining of nuclei was noted. A few ?-synuclein-immunoreactive Lewy-bodies were observed in the substantia nigra of case 7. Immunohistochemistry for Tau The most prominent alteration was the presence of abundant tau-immunoreactive GGIs, along with non-argyrophilic grains and a few argyrophilic threads, predominantly in white matter ( Fig. 4a ). Fewer GGIs were present in gray matter ( Fig. 4b ). Typical oligodendroglial coiled bodies were only rarely observed. Astrocytes in gray matter were immunoreactive for antibody RD4. Grey matter astrocytes showed prominent non-argyrophilic dot-like immunopositivity in the proximal segments of branching processes, with a star-like appearance, reminiscent of tufted astrocytes; thus, they are called 'tufted-like astrocytes” ( Fig. 4c ). Typical argyrophilic tufted astrocytes as seen in progressive supranuclear palsy were only rarely observed. Pretangle-type staining ( Fig. 4d ) and occasional spherical cytoplasmic inclusions immunoreactive for RD4 but not RD3 were observed in neurons ( Fig. 4e ). Anti-RD3 immunolabelled occasional neurofibrillary tangles and sparse neuropil threads. Globose neurofibrillary tangles and astrocytic plaques were not present. Characterization of Globular Glial Inclusions The diameter of GGIs ranged between 8 and 20 ?m (usually 1.5–3.0 times larger than oligodendroglial nuclei). They were closely associated with oligodendroglial and some astroglial nuclei. Their shape was mainly globular, but half-moon and conical shapes were also noted. GGIs could be identified using H&E staining but were much more evident with tau immunostaining. They are argyrophilic and, although the Gallyas method yielded superior results, they could be detected with other silver impregnation techniques, including Bielschowsky; they were ubiquitin-immunoreactive and positive for p62. GGIs were strongly 4R tau-immunoreactive and could also be stained using a panel of phosphorylation-dependent anti-tau antibodies. Antibody HT7 gave only weak staining. These results are illustrated in Figure 5 . By electron microscopy, GGIs comprised granular material and haphazardly oriented filaments of 8 to 9 nm in diameter ( Fig. 6 ). Anatomical Distribution Neuronal loss was observed in the frontal, temporal and anterior cingulate cortex, amygdala and, in particular, the subiculum ( Table 3 ; Fig. 4f–k ). The basal nucleus of Meynert and the basal ganglia were only mildly affected; there was some nerve cell loss in the substantia nigra ( Fig. 4l ). No significant nerve cell loss was present in the subthalamic nucleus. Tau pathology was more widespread than nerve cell loss ( Table 3 ). While spherical cytoplasmic neuronal inclusions were restricted to the frontal and temporal cortex as well as the hippocampal CA1 subregion, pretangles were observed in most regions investigated, including the dentate gyrus, the substantia nigra, the amygdala, the basal ganglia, the thalamus and many brainstem nuclei ( Fig. 4m–o ). The spinal cord of case 7 was devoid of tau pathology. GGIs were numerous in peri-amygdaloid, peri-hippocampal and frontal white matter ( Table 3 ). Differences in the numbers of GGIs were noted between cases without overt dementia (case 7) compared to those with prominent clinical symptoms, (cases 1–5) ( Fig. 4p–s ). Additional brain areas such as the occipital white matter were affected in cases with dementia. Accumulation of GGIs was prominent at the cortical-white matter junctions ( Fig. 4t ). The internal capsule (mainly its anterior part), the cerebral peduncle (mainly its medial segment), the descending tracts of the pontine basis (mainly their upper segments), the corpus callosum, the anterior commissure and the thalamic fascicles consistently showed GGIs ( Fig. 4u–x ). They were infrequent in the medullary pyramid and absent from the oculomotor and hypoglossal cranial nerves and the optic chiasm. In the two individuals who did not exhibit overt dementia (cases 6 and 7), GGIs were observed mainly in the amygdala and in the hippocampal and frontobasal white matter; they were sparse in the interconnecting tracts. Tufted-like astrocytes were present mainly in frontal, cingulate and temporal cortex, as well as in amygdala, basal ganglia and thalamus ( Table 3 ). Summary of the Neuropathological Findings The following features were characteristic: 1) Neuronal loss predominantly in frontal and temporal cortex, subiculum, and amygdala. 2) Prominent involvement of the surrounding white matter with abundant globular, glia-associated, phospho-tau and 4R tau-immunoreactive inclusions (GGIs) composed of abnormal filaments. Less severe but consistent involvement of the interconnecting (corpus callosum, anterior commissure) and frontopontine tracts, with only mildly affected corticospinal tracts. 3) Correlation of the severity of white matter tau pathology with a reduction in myelin and axonal density, accompanied by microglial activation. 4) Presence of phospho-tau and 4R tau-immunoreactive neuronal cytoplasmic spherical inclusions and pretangles. And 5) Dot-like phospho-tau and 4R tau-immunoreactivity in astrocytic processes (tufted-like astrocytes) and a few argyrophilic tufted astrocytes. Biochemistry and Electron Microscopy Sarkosyl-insoluble tau was prepared from the amygdala and hippocampal formation of case 7. By immunoelectron microscopy, tau filaments were Alzheimer-type paired helical and straight filaments (PHFs and SFs) ( Fig. 7a ). They were decorated with anti-tau antibodies 134, AT100 and PS422. By Western blotting of sarkosyl-insoluble tau, phosphorylation-independent (133 and 134) and phosphorylation-dependent anti-tau antibodies identified two major pathological tau bands of 64 and 68 kDa, with a minor tau band of 72 kDa being visible in the amygdala sample ( Fig. 7b ). Genetic Analysis No mutations were found in the exons and adjoining intronic regions of MAPT in cases 6 and 7. The H1/H1 genotype was found in four cases (cases 1, 4, 6 and 7). Cases 2 and 3 could not be analyzed due to the poor quality of the DNA extracted from paraffin embedded tissue. The ApoE ?3/?3 genotype was observed in six samples ( Table 1 ).  Summary of Clinical Data Age at death of the seven individuals investigated here ranged from 63 to 81 years (average = 76 years). Social withdrawal was reported in 4 individuals, anxiety and early forgetfulness in 5 and disorientation in 4 ( Table 1 ). Behavioral changes were noted in 6 cases and speech disorder in 4. Alterations in circadian rhythm were present in 2 individuals and hyperphagia in 1. In addition to dementia (5 cases), rigidity (2 cases), upper motor neuron symptoms (4 cases), some in the form of supranuclear facial palsy (2 cases), bilateral Babinski sign (1 case) and hemiparesis (1 case), were also observed in advanced stages. Akinetic mutism was described in 2 individuals. Neither corticobasal syndrome nor gaze palsy was observed. Overall, clinical features were compatible with the frontal variant of FTD.  Summary of Clinical Data Age at death of the seven individuals investigated here ranged from 63 to 81 years (average = 76 years). Social withdrawal was reported in 4 individuals, anxiety and early forgetfulness in 5 and disorientation in 4 ( Table 1 ). Behavioral changes were noted in 6 cases and speech disorder in 4. Alterations in circadian rhythm were present in 2 individuals and hyperphagia in 1. In addition to dementia (5 cases), rigidity (2 cases), upper motor neuron symptoms (4 cases), some in the form of supranuclear facial palsy (2 cases), bilateral Babinski sign (1 case) and hemiparesis (1 case), were also observed in advanced stages. Akinetic mutism was described in 2 individuals. Neither corticobasal syndrome nor gaze palsy was observed. Overall, clinical features were compatible with the frontal variant of FTD.  Neuropathology Histopathology and Immunohistochemistry All brains studied showed frontotemporal atrophy. It was mild in case 7, moderate in case 6 and severe in cases 1–5 ( Fig. 1a, b ). The atrophy was asymmetric (left > right) in cases 2, 3, and 4 ( Fig. 1c, d ). Lacunar (case 5) and territorial (cases 4 and 6) infarcts were also observed. Common histopathological features ( Table 2 ) comprised spongiosis in the superficial layers of the frontal cortex ( Fig. 2a ), neuronal cell loss ( Fig. 2b ) and ballooned neurons, showing diffuse cytoplasmic immunoreactivity for ?-B-crystallin in frontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex and amygdala (not shown). Reduction of myelin and, less extensively, axons, along with microglial activation, correlated with the severity of white matter tau pathology ( Fig. 2c–m ). In severely affected areas, macrophages were present ( Fig. 2n ). APP-immunoreactive axonal swellings ( Fig. 2j inset) were rare. Alterations in myelin staining were demonstrated in a hemispheric section ( Fig. 3 ). Early stage neurofibrillary degeneration (Braak stage II in three cases and Braak stage III in one case) ( 34 ), diffuse ?-amyloid-immunoreactive and sparse argyrophilic neuritic plaques were also seen ( Table 2 ); however, none of these cases fulfilled neuropathological criteria for definite Alzheimer disease ( 35 ). Argyrophilic grains were detected in the transentorhinal region in case 6. TDP-43-immunoreactive pathological changes were absent, but granular immunostaining of nuclei was noted. A few ?-synuclein-immunoreactive Lewy-bodies were observed in the substantia nigra of case 7.  Neuropathology Histopathology and Immunohistochemistry All brains studied showed frontotemporal atrophy. It was mild in case 7, moderate in case 6 and severe in cases 1–5 ( Fig. 1a, b ). The atrophy was asymmetric (left > right) in cases 2, 3, and 4 ( Fig. 1c, d ). Lacunar (case 5) and territorial (cases 4 and 6) infarcts were also observed. Common histopathological features ( Table 2 ) comprised spongiosis in the superficial layers of the frontal cortex ( Fig. 2a ), neuronal cell loss ( Fig. 2b ) and ballooned neurons, showing diffuse cytoplasmic immunoreactivity for ?-B-crystallin in frontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex and amygdala (not shown). Reduction of myelin and, less extensively, axons, along with microglial activation, correlated with the severity of white matter tau pathology ( Fig. 2c–m ). In severely affected areas, macrophages were present ( Fig. 2n ). APP-immunoreactive axonal swellings ( Fig. 2j inset) were rare. Alterations in myelin staining were demonstrated in a hemispheric section ( Fig. 3 ). Early stage neurofibrillary degeneration (Braak stage II in three cases and Braak stage III in one case) ( 34 ), diffuse ?-amyloid-immunoreactive and sparse argyrophilic neuritic plaques were also seen ( Table 2 ); however, none of these cases fulfilled neuropathological criteria for definite Alzheimer disease ( 35 ). Argyrophilic grains were detected in the transentorhinal region in case 6. TDP-43-immunoreactive pathological changes were absent, but granular immunostaining of nuclei was noted. A few ?-synuclein-immunoreactive Lewy-bodies were observed in the substantia nigra of case 7.  Histopathology and Immunohistochemistry All brains studied showed frontotemporal atrophy. It was mild in case 7, moderate in case 6 and severe in cases 1–5 ( Fig. 1a, b ). The atrophy was asymmetric (left > right) in cases 2, 3, and 4 ( Fig. 1c, d ). Lacunar (case 5) and territorial (cases 4 and 6) infarcts were also observed. Common histopathological features ( Table 2 ) comprised spongiosis in the superficial layers of the frontal cortex ( Fig. 2a ), neuronal cell loss ( Fig. 2b ) and ballooned neurons, showing diffuse cytoplasmic immunoreactivity for ?-B-crystallin in frontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex and amygdala (not shown). Reduction of myelin and, less extensively, axons, along with microglial activation, correlated with the severity of white matter tau pathology ( Fig. 2c–m ). In severely affected areas, macrophages were present ( Fig. 2n ). APP-immunoreactive axonal swellings ( Fig. 2j inset) were rare. Alterations in myelin staining were demonstrated in a hemispheric section ( Fig. 3 ). Early stage neurofibrillary degeneration (Braak stage II in three cases and Braak stage III in one case) ( 34 ), diffuse ?-amyloid-immunoreactive and sparse argyrophilic neuritic plaques were also seen ( Table 2 ); however, none of these cases fulfilled neuropathological criteria for definite Alzheimer disease ( 35 ). Argyrophilic grains were detected in the transentorhinal region in case 6. TDP-43-immunoreactive pathological changes were absent, but granular immunostaining of nuclei was noted. A few ?-synuclein-immunoreactive Lewy-bodies were observed in the substantia nigra of case 7.  Histopathology and Immunohistochemistry All brains studied showed frontotemporal atrophy. It was mild in case 7, moderate in case 6 and severe in cases 1–5 ( Fig. 1a, b ). The atrophy was asymmetric (left > right) in cases 2, 3, and 4 ( Fig. 1c, d ). Lacunar (case 5) and territorial (cases 4 and 6) infarcts were also observed. Common histopathological features ( Table 2 ) comprised spongiosis in the superficial layers of the frontal cortex ( Fig. 2a ), neuronal cell loss ( Fig. 2b ) and ballooned neurons, showing diffuse cytoplasmic immunoreactivity for ?-B-crystallin in frontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex and amygdala (not shown). Reduction of myelin and, less extensively, axons, along with microglial activation, correlated with the severity of white matter tau pathology ( Fig. 2c–m ). In severely affected areas, macrophages were present ( Fig. 2n ). APP-immunoreactive axonal swellings ( Fig. 2j inset) were rare. Alterations in myelin staining were demonstrated in a hemispheric section ( Fig. 3 ). Early stage neurofibrillary degeneration (Braak stage II in three cases and Braak stage III in one case) ( 34 ), diffuse ?-amyloid-immunoreactive and sparse argyrophilic neuritic plaques were also seen ( Table 2 ); however, none of these cases fulfilled neuropathological criteria for definite Alzheimer disease ( 35 ). Argyrophilic grains were detected in the transentorhinal region in case 6. TDP-43-immunoreactive pathological changes were absent, but granular immunostaining of nuclei was noted. A few ?-synuclein-immunoreactive Lewy-bodies were observed in the substantia nigra of case 7.  Immunohistochemistry for Tau The most prominent alteration was the presence of abundant tau-immunoreactive GGIs, along with non-argyrophilic grains and a few argyrophilic threads, predominantly in white matter ( Fig. 4a ). Fewer GGIs were present in gray matter ( Fig. 4b ). Typical oligodendroglial coiled bodies were only rarely observed. Astrocytes in gray matter were immunoreactive for antibody RD4. Grey matter astrocytes showed prominent non-argyrophilic dot-like immunopositivity in the proximal segments of branching processes, with a star-like appearance, reminiscent of tufted astrocytes; thus, they are called 'tufted-like astrocytes” ( Fig. 4c ). Typical argyrophilic tufted astrocytes as seen in progressive supranuclear palsy were only rarely observed. Pretangle-type staining ( Fig. 4d ) and occasional spherical cytoplasmic inclusions immunoreactive for RD4 but not RD3 were observed in neurons ( Fig. 4e ). Anti-RD3 immunolabelled occasional neurofibrillary tangles and sparse neuropil threads. Globose neurofibrillary tangles and astrocytic plaques were not present.  Immunohistochemistry for Tau The most prominent alteration was the presence of abundant tau-immunoreactive GGIs, along with non-argyrophilic grains and a few argyrophilic threads, predominantly in white matter ( Fig. 4a ). Fewer GGIs were present in gray matter ( Fig. 4b ). Typical oligodendroglial coiled bodies were only rarely observed. Astrocytes in gray matter were immunoreactive for antibody RD4. Grey matter astrocytes showed prominent non-argyrophilic dot-like immunopositivity in the proximal segments of branching processes, with a star-like appearance, reminiscent of tufted astrocytes; thus, they are called 'tufted-like astrocytes” ( Fig. 4c ). Typical argyrophilic tufted astrocytes as seen in progressive supranuclear palsy were only rarely observed. Pretangle-type staining ( Fig. 4d ) and occasional spherical cytoplasmic inclusions immunoreactive for RD4 but not RD3 were observed in neurons ( Fig. 4e ). Anti-RD3 immunolabelled occasional neurofibrillary tangles and sparse neuropil threads. Globose neurofibrillary tangles and astrocytic plaques were not present.  Characterization of Globular Glial Inclusions The diameter of GGIs ranged between 8 and 20 ?m (usually 1.5–3.0 times larger than oligodendroglial nuclei). They were closely associated with oligodendroglial and some astroglial nuclei. Their shape was mainly globular, but half-moon and conical shapes were also noted. GGIs could be identified using H&E staining but were much more evident with tau immunostaining. They are argyrophilic and, although the Gallyas method yielded superior results, they could be detected with other silver impregnation techniques, including Bielschowsky; they were ubiquitin-immunoreactive and positive for p62. GGIs were strongly 4R tau-immunoreactive and could also be stained using a panel of phosphorylation-dependent anti-tau antibodies. Antibody HT7 gave only weak staining. These results are illustrated in Figure 5 . By electron microscopy, GGIs comprised granular material and haphazardly oriented filaments of 8 to 9 nm in diameter ( Fig. 6 ).  Characterization of Globular Glial Inclusions The diameter of GGIs ranged between 8 and 20 ?m (usually 1.5–3.0 times larger than oligodendroglial nuclei). They were closely associated with oligodendroglial and some astroglial nuclei. Their shape was mainly globular, but half-moon and conical shapes were also noted. GGIs could be identified using H&E staining but were much more evident with tau immunostaining. They are argyrophilic and, although the Gallyas method yielded superior results, they could be detected with other silver impregnation techniques, including Bielschowsky; they were ubiquitin-immunoreactive and positive for p62. GGIs were strongly 4R tau-immunoreactive and could also be stained using a panel of phosphorylation-dependent anti-tau antibodies. Antibody HT7 gave only weak staining. These results are illustrated in Figure 5 . By electron microscopy, GGIs comprised granular material and haphazardly oriented filaments of 8 to 9 nm in diameter ( Fig. 6 ).  Anatomical Distribution Neuronal loss was observed in the frontal, temporal and anterior cingulate cortex, amygdala and, in particular, the subiculum ( Table 3 ; Fig. 4f–k ). The basal nucleus of Meynert and the basal ganglia were only mildly affected; there was some nerve cell loss in the substantia nigra ( Fig. 4l ). No significant nerve cell loss was present in the subthalamic nucleus. Tau pathology was more widespread than nerve cell loss ( Table 3 ). While spherical cytoplasmic neuronal inclusions were restricted to the frontal and temporal cortex as well as the hippocampal CA1 subregion, pretangles were observed in most regions investigated, including the dentate gyrus, the substantia nigra, the amygdala, the basal ganglia, the thalamus and many brainstem nuclei ( Fig. 4m–o ). The spinal cord of case 7 was devoid of tau pathology. GGIs were numerous in peri-amygdaloid, peri-hippocampal and frontal white matter ( Table 3 ). Differences in the numbers of GGIs were noted between cases without overt dementia (case 7) compared to those with prominent clinical symptoms, (cases 1–5) ( Fig. 4p–s ). Additional brain areas such as the occipital white matter were affected in cases with dementia. Accumulation of GGIs was prominent at the cortical-white matter junctions ( Fig. 4t ). The internal capsule (mainly its anterior part), the cerebral peduncle (mainly its medial segment), the descending tracts of the pontine basis (mainly their upper segments), the corpus callosum, the anterior commissure and the thalamic fascicles consistently showed GGIs ( Fig. 4u–x ). They were infrequent in the medullary pyramid and absent from the oculomotor and hypoglossal cranial nerves and the optic chiasm. In the two individuals who did not exhibit overt dementia (cases 6 and 7), GGIs were observed mainly in the amygdala and in the hippocampal and frontobasal white matter; they were sparse in the interconnecting tracts. Tufted-like astrocytes were present mainly in frontal, cingulate and temporal cortex, as well as in amygdala, basal ganglia and thalamus ( Table 3 ).  Anatomical Distribution Neuronal loss was observed in the frontal, temporal and anterior cingulate cortex, amygdala and, in particular, the subiculum ( Table 3 ; Fig. 4f–k ). The basal nucleus of Meynert and the basal ganglia were only mildly affected; there was some nerve cell loss in the substantia nigra ( Fig. 4l ). No significant nerve cell loss was present in the subthalamic nucleus. Tau pathology was more widespread than nerve cell loss ( Table 3 ). While spherical cytoplasmic neuronal inclusions were restricted to the frontal and temporal cortex as well as the hippocampal CA1 subregion, pretangles were observed in most regions investigated, including the dentate gyrus, the substantia nigra, the amygdala, the basal ganglia, the thalamus and many brainstem nuclei ( Fig. 4m–o ). The spinal cord of case 7 was devoid of tau pathology. GGIs were numerous in peri-amygdaloid, peri-hippocampal and frontal white matter ( Table 3 ). Differences in the numbers of GGIs were noted between cases without overt dementia (case 7) compared to those with prominent clinical symptoms, (cases 1–5) ( Fig. 4p–s ). Additional brain areas such as the occipital white matter were affected in cases with dementia. Accumulation of GGIs was prominent at the cortical-white matter junctions ( Fig. 4t ). The internal capsule (mainly its anterior part), the cerebral peduncle (mainly its medial segment), the descending tracts of the pontine basis (mainly their upper segments), the corpus callosum, the anterior commissure and the thalamic fascicles consistently showed GGIs ( Fig. 4u–x ). They were infrequent in the medullary pyramid and absent from the oculomotor and hypoglossal cranial nerves and the optic chiasm. In the two individuals who did not exhibit overt dementia (cases 6 and 7), GGIs were observed mainly in the amygdala and in the hippocampal and frontobasal white matter; they were sparse in the interconnecting tracts. Tufted-like astrocytes were present mainly in frontal, cingulate and temporal cortex, as well as in amygdala, basal ganglia and thalamus ( Table 3 ).  Summary of the Neuropathological Findings The following features were characteristic: 1) Neuronal loss predominantly in frontal and temporal cortex, subiculum, and amygdala. 2) Prominent involvement of the surrounding white matter with abundant globular, glia-associated, phospho-tau and 4R tau-immunoreactive inclusions (GGIs) composed of abnormal filaments. Less severe but consistent involvement of the interconnecting (corpus callosum, anterior commissure) and frontopontine tracts, with only mildly affected corticospinal tracts. 3) Correlation of the severity of white matter tau pathology with a reduction in myelin and axonal density, accompanied by microglial activation. 4) Presence of phospho-tau and 4R tau-immunoreactive neuronal cytoplasmic spherical inclusions and pretangles. And 5) Dot-like phospho-tau and 4R tau-immunoreactivity in astrocytic processes (tufted-like astrocytes) and a few argyrophilic tufted astrocytes.  Summary of the Neuropathological Findings The following features were characteristic: 1) Neuronal loss predominantly in frontal and temporal cortex, subiculum, and amygdala. 2) Prominent involvement of the surrounding white matter with abundant globular, glia-associated, phospho-tau and 4R tau-immunoreactive inclusions (GGIs) composed of abnormal filaments. Less severe but consistent involvement of the interconnecting (corpus callosum, anterior commissure) and frontopontine tracts, with only mildly affected corticospinal tracts. 3) Correlation of the severity of white matter tau pathology with a reduction in myelin and axonal density, accompanied by microglial activation. 4) Presence of phospho-tau and 4R tau-immunoreactive neuronal cytoplasmic spherical inclusions and pretangles. And 5) Dot-like phospho-tau and 4R tau-immunoreactivity in astrocytic processes (tufted-like astrocytes) and a few argyrophilic tufted astrocytes.  Biochemistry and Electron Microscopy Sarkosyl-insoluble tau was prepared from the amygdala and hippocampal formation of case 7. By immunoelectron microscopy, tau filaments were Alzheimer-type paired helical and straight filaments (PHFs and SFs) ( Fig. 7a ). They were decorated with anti-tau antibodies 134, AT100 and PS422. By Western blotting of sarkosyl-insoluble tau, phosphorylation-independent (133 and 134) and phosphorylation-dependent anti-tau antibodies identified two major pathological tau bands of 64 and 68 kDa, with a minor tau band of 72 kDa being visible in the amygdala sample ( Fig. 7b ).  Biochemistry and Electron Microscopy Sarkosyl-insoluble tau was prepared from the amygdala and hippocampal formation of case 7. By immunoelectron microscopy, tau filaments were Alzheimer-type paired helical and straight filaments (PHFs and SFs) ( Fig. 7a ). They were decorated with anti-tau antibodies 134, AT100 and PS422. By Western blotting of sarkosyl-insoluble tau, phosphorylation-independent (133 and 134) and phosphorylation-dependent anti-tau antibodies identified two major pathological tau bands of 64 and 68 kDa, with a minor tau band of 72 kDa being visible in the amygdala sample ( Fig. 7b ).  Genetic Analysis No mutations were found in the exons and adjoining intronic regions of MAPT in cases 6 and 7. The H1/H1 genotype was found in four cases (cases 1, 4, 6 and 7). Cases 2 and 3 could not be analyzed due to the poor quality of the DNA extracted from paraffin embedded tissue. The ApoE ?3/?3 genotype was observed in six samples ( Table 1 ).  Genetic Analysis No mutations were found in the exons and adjoining intronic regions of MAPT in cases 6 and 7. The H1/H1 genotype was found in four cases (cases 1, 4, 6 and 7). Cases 2 and 3 could not be analyzed due to the poor quality of the DNA extracted from paraffin embedded tissue. The ApoE ?3/?3 genotype was observed in six samples ( Table 1 ).  DISCUSSION We report seven cases with the behavioral variant of FTD and a uniform and distinct neuropathological phenotype characterized by the presence of predominantly white matter GGIs composed of 4R tau. The neuropathological features, in particular the presence of GGIs, the anatomical pattern of neuronal loss including the sparing of basal ganglia, subthalamic nucleus and brainstem nuclei, the lack of globose tangles, astrocytic plaques and argyrophilic grains, as well as the rarity of oligodendroglial coiled bodies and thread-like tau immunoreactivity do not fit into current morphological criteria for sporadic 4R tauopathies such as AGD, CBD and PSP ( 36 ). Lack of 3R immunoreactivity in GGIs and in spherical cytoplasmic neuronal inclusions and the presence of 64 and 68 kDa bands by Western blotting distinguish our cases from PiD ( 37 , 38 ). Based on the presence of GGIs, our cases are also distinct from atypical variants of PSP and CBD ( 23 , 26 , 28 ), from sporadic 4R tauopathy with FTLD, parkinsonism and motor neuron disease ( 27 ), and from the recently described tauopathy with massive involvement of white matter, all of which lack GGIs ( 39 ). Although they are described as globe-shaped, the tau-positive fine granules in white matter in the parkinsonism-dementia complex of Guam are also different ( 40 ). They are composed of 4R tau but are smaller (3 to 6 ?m) than GGIs and permeated by round structures of 20 to 30 nm diameter ( 40 ). So-called oligodendroglial microtubular masses have been described in PiD; however, unlike GGIs, they are glial inclusions that are curved and thread-like ( 41 ). By immunoelectron microscopy, sarkosyl-insoluble tau from case 7 contained Alzheimer-type PHFs and SFs, despite the presence of major 64 and 68 kDa pathological tau bands by Western blotting in the same sample. It is well established that the presence of the latter is indicative of 4R tau ( 18 ), in agreement with the immunohistochemical findings. In contrast, PHFs and SFs in Alzheimer disease are made of both 3R and 4R tau ( 32 , 42 ). Therefore, the present findings extend the morphological spectrum of filaments made of 4R tau. In 2001, Bigio et al reported a case of a sporadic multiple system 4R tauopathy with dementia ( 21 ). They described dense, globular glial inclusions in the white matter and lower cortex with similar staining properties to those described herein. These structures also contained filaments with a diameter of 9 to 10 nm. Interestingly, the authors also observed PHF-like filaments in addition to the straight filaments in their ultrastructural evaluation of oligodendroglial inclusions. The density of those inclusions, however, was much lower than in our cases. In 2003, Powers et al described a sporadic case of white matter-dominant tauopathy ( 24 ). There, the extent of pathology, staining properties and ultrastructural characteristics of the inclusions described were comparable to those in our cases. In contrast to our results, however, the inclusions were negative with antibody 12E8. Powers et al also noted an inverse correlation between the number of glial inclusions and white matter damage. In the same year, Ferrer et al reported a case with primary progressive aphasia ( 25 ). Similar to our and Powers' cases, FTLD and a reduction in white matter volume were described. GGI-like structures with comparable staining properties, including phosphorylation of S262 in tau and a Western blot pattern of two pathological tau bands of 64 and 68 kDa, were demonstrated. The reportedly mainly astrocytic, tau-immunoreactive globules observed in the white matter by Berry et al in a case of progressive aphasia ( 22 ) were also reminiscent of GGIs. A comparison of all these case reports with our observations is summarized in Table 4 . Although there is some difference between the described details (e.g. on astrocytic tau pathology) or examinations performed, there is considerable agreement among these studies. In addition, in 1998, Molina et al described unusual argyrophilic and phospho-tau immunopositive glial inclusions in a temporal lobe biopsy specimen from a patient with progressive aphasia ( 43 ). They demonstrated perinuclear ring- or sickle-shaped glial inclusions, as well as small, tau-immunoreactive globules. The clinical symptoms in our cases were compatible with a diagnosis of the frontal lobe variant of FTD ( 2 ). Withdrawal and akinetic mutism reflected the involvement of anterior cingulate/medial frontal lobe, while development of speech dysfunction indicated the spread of neuronal loss to lateral frontal and insular cortices. In other individuals, orbitobasal (ventromedial) frontal lobe dysfunction dominated, including disinhibition and socially inappropriate behavior ( 2 ). In the aforementioned case reports with inclusions resembling GGIs, similar clinical features, including anxiety, hyperphagia, memory decline and aphasia, were reported ( 21 , 22 , 24 , 25 , 43 ). The lack of gaze palsy, corticobasal syndrome or prominent parkinsonism was notable. Josephs et al recently reported 12 cases of atypical PSP with corticospinal tract degeneration showing symptoms of motor neuron disease with extrapyramidal features ( 44 ). Neuropathologically, these cases exhibited numerous GGIs in the white matter. We also noted GGIs in the internal capsule, cerebral peduncle, descending tracts in the pontine base and, to a lesser degree, in corticospinal fibers including the medullary pyramids. Caution is needed in interpreting the less prominent upper motor neuron symptoms in our cases because of the retrospective analysis of archived material and the presence of brain infarcts. Together with the previous case reports, our observations suggest the existence of a spectrum of clinical syndromes associated with the presence of mainly white matter GGIs. It comprises the behavioral variant of FTD, progressive non-fluent aphasia, and upper motor neuron disease with extrapyramidal features. Whether yet unknown genetic or epigenetic factors may contribute to the observed differences in anatomical distribution and severity merits further studies. The present study is not an epidemiological study and thus the exact incidence of this disorder cannot be defined. The cases represent a rare form of FTLD and may be found when archival cases with the diagnosis of PiD or unclassifiable tauopathy are re-evaluated. In our cohort, cases 1 to 5 had been conventionally diagnosed as PiD based on the presence of ballooned neurons and occasional globular cytoplasmic neuronal inclusions, spongiosis of the superficial layers in the frontal region, and prominent frontotemporal atrophy. Cases 6 and 7 were evaluated using immunohistochemistry and had been diagnosed as unclassifiable tauopathy with globular glial inclusions. In our series, overt dementia was absent in two cases: one patient died of an ischemic stroke (case 6) and one of a myocardial infarct (case 7). Since these patients exhibited forgetfulness and some behavioral alterations, however, it is tempting to speculate that their distribution of GGIs represents brain regions that are affected early in the course of the disease, including the white matter in medial frontal and frontobasal lobes, hippocampal formation and amygdala. Nerve cell loss was extensive in subiculum and amygdala. In cases with more prominent clinical symptoms and dementia, the number of GGIs increased in the aforementioned areas, in parallel with spread to interconnecting and descending white matter tracts and, to a lesser degree, posterior lobe regions. Our cases with sporadic tauopathy were homozygous for the H1 MAPT haplotype and the ApoE ? 3 allele. Homozygosity of H1 predisposes to PSP and CBD, but does not influence the biochemical or neuropathological phenotype of PSP ( 45 ). Current evidence indicates that the ApoE genotype is not a significant risk factor for FTLD associated with pathological tau ( 1 ). The strength of the present study lies in its systematic and comprehensive neuropathological evaluation of a small case series. It is limited by the retrospective nature of clinical data collection and the lack of neuroradiological documentation. It remains to be seen whether the reduction in myelin and axonal density ( Figs. 2 , 3 ) that characterizes disorders with GGIs ( 24 , 25 , 44 ) gives rise to a specific signature on neuroimaging. Some of the neuropathological features reported here are reminiscent of multiple system atrophy (MSA). Thus, the morphology of hyperphosphorylated tau immunopositive GGIs may be reminiscent of ?-synuclein immunoreactive Papp-Lantos bodies (also known as glial cytoplasmic inclusions) ( 46 ). Furthermore, MSA is characterized by the loss of myelin, in conjunction with microglial cell activation ( 47 ). In addition, cases of MSA where frontal and temporal lobes were mostly affected have been described ( 48 – 50 ). However, unlike the cases described here, MSA is a synucleinopathy with the abnormal filamentous inclusions being made of ?-synuclein ( 51 , 52 ). Therefore, the tauopathy with GGIs extends the group of neurodegenerative disorders in which oligodendroglial pathology predominates beyond the synucleinopathy MSA. Similar to cases of MSA with “minimal change” ( 53 ), our least affected cases also showed more abundant white matter GGIs than nerve cell loss in affected areas. In summary, in conjunction with case reports from the literature ( 21 , 24 , 25 , 44 ), the seven cases detailed here indicate that the sporadic tauopathy with GGIs is a distinct neuropathological entity associated with sporadic FTLD. Clinically, it is associated with a spectrum of clinical syndromes, including FTD and corticospinal degeneration.  DISCUSSION We report seven cases with the behavioral variant of FTD and a uniform and distinct neuropathological phenotype characterized by the presence of predominantly white matter GGIs composed of 4R tau. The neuropathological features, in particular the presence of GGIs, the anatomical pattern of neuronal loss including the sparing of basal ganglia, subthalamic nucleus and brainstem nuclei, the lack of globose tangles, astrocytic plaques and argyrophilic grains, as well as the rarity of oligodendroglial coiled bodies and thread-like tau immunoreactivity do not fit into current morphological criteria for sporadic 4R tauopathies such as AGD, CBD and PSP ( 36 ). Lack of 3R immunoreactivity in GGIs and in spherical cytoplasmic neuronal inclusions and the presence of 64 and 68 kDa bands by Western blotting distinguish our cases from PiD ( 37 , 38 ). Based on the presence of GGIs, our cases are also distinct from atypical variants of PSP and CBD ( 23 , 26 , 28 ), from sporadic 4R tauopathy with FTLD, parkinsonism and motor neuron disease ( 27 ), and from the recently described tauopathy with massive involvement of white matter, all of which lack GGIs ( 39 ). Although they are described as globe-shaped, the tau-positive fine granules in white matter in the parkinsonism-dementia complex of Guam are also different ( 40 ). They are composed of 4R tau but are smaller (3 to 6 ?m) than GGIs and permeated by round structures of 20 to 30 nm diameter ( 40 ). So-called oligodendroglial microtubular masses have been described in PiD; however, unlike GGIs, they are glial inclusions that are curved and thread-like ( 41 ). By immunoelectron microscopy, sarkosyl-insoluble tau from case 7 contained Alzheimer-type PHFs and SFs, despite the presence of major 64 and 68 kDa pathological tau bands by Western blotting in the same sample. It is well established that the presence of the latter is indicative of 4R tau ( 18 ), in agreement with the immunohistochemical findings. In contrast, PHFs and SFs in Alzheimer disease are made of both 3R and 4R tau ( 32 , 42 ). Therefore, the present findings extend the morphological spectrum of filaments made of 4R tau. In 2001, Bigio et al reported a case of a sporadic multiple system 4R tauopathy with dementia ( 21 ). They described dense, globular glial inclusions in the white matter and lower cortex with similar staining properties to those described herein. These structures also contained filaments with a diameter of 9 to 10 nm. Interestingly, the authors also observed PHF-like filaments in addition to the straight filaments in their ultrastructural evaluation of oligodendroglial inclusions. The density of those inclusions, however, was much lower than in our cases. In 2003, Powers et al described a sporadic case of white matter-dominant tauopathy ( 24 ). There, the extent of pathology, staining properties and ultrastructural characteristics of the inclusions described were comparable to those in our cases. In contrast to our results, however, the inclusions were negative with antibody 12E8. Powers et al also noted an inverse correlation between the number of glial inclusions and white matter damage. In the same year, Ferrer et al reported a case with primary progressive aphasia ( 25 ). Similar to our and Powers' cases, FTLD and a reduction in white matter volume were described. GGI-like structures with comparable staining properties, including phosphorylation of S262 in tau and a Western blot pattern of two pathological tau bands of 64 and 68 kDa, were demonstrated. The reportedly mainly astrocytic, tau-immunoreactive globules observed in the white matter by Berry et al in a case of progressive aphasia ( 22 ) were also reminiscent of GGIs. A comparison of all these case reports with our observations is summarized in Table 4 . Although there is some difference between the described details (e.g. on astrocytic tau pathology) or examinations performed, there is considerable agreement among these studies. In addition, in 1998, Molina et al described unusual argyrophilic and phospho-tau immunopositive glial inclusions in a temporal lobe biopsy specimen from a patient with progressive aphasia ( 43 ). They demonstrated perinuclear ring- or sickle-shaped glial inclusions, as well as small, tau-immunoreactive globules. The clinical symptoms in our cases were compatible with a diagnosis of the frontal lobe variant of FTD ( 2 ). Withdrawal and akinetic mutism reflected the involvement of anterior cingulate/medial frontal lobe, while development of speech dysfunction indicated the spread of neuronal loss to lateral frontal and insular cortices. In other individuals, orbitobasal (ventromedial) frontal lobe dysfunction dominated, including disinhibition and socially inappropriate behavior ( 2 ). In the aforementioned case reports with inclusions resembling GGIs, similar clinical features, including anxiety, hyperphagia, memory decline and aphasia, were reported ( 21 , 22 , 24 , 25 , 43 ). The lack of gaze palsy, corticobasal syndrome or prominent parkinsonism was notable. Josephs et al recently reported 12 cases of atypical PSP with corticospinal tract degeneration showing symptoms of motor neuron disease with extrapyramidal features ( 44 ). Neuropathologically, these cases exhibited numerous GGIs in the white matter. We also noted GGIs in the internal capsule, cerebral peduncle, descending tracts in the pontine base and, to a lesser degree, in corticospinal fibers including the medullary pyramids. Caution is needed in interpreting the less prominent upper motor neuron symptoms in our cases because of the retrospective analysis of archived material and the presence of brain infarcts. Together with the previous case reports, our observations suggest the existence of a spectrum of clinical syndromes associated with the presence of mainly white matter GGIs. It comprises the behavioral variant of FTD, progressive non-fluent aphasia, and upper motor neuron disease with extrapyramidal features. Whether yet unknown genetic or epigenetic factors may contribute to the observed differences in anatomical distribution and severity merits further studies. The present study is not an epidemiological study and thus the exact incidence of this disorder cannot be defined. The cases represent a rare form of FTLD and may be found when archival cases with the diagnosis of PiD or unclassifiable tauopathy are re-evaluated. In our cohort, cases 1 to 5 had been conventionally diagnosed as PiD based on the presence of ballooned neurons and occasional globular cytoplasmic neuronal inclusions, spongiosis of the superficial layers in the frontal region, and prominent frontotemporal atrophy. Cases 6 and 7 were evaluated using immunohistochemistry and had been diagnosed as unclassifiable tauopathy with globular glial inclusions. In our series, overt dementia was absent in two cases: one patient died of an ischemic stroke (case 6) and one of a myocardial infarct (case 7). Since these patients exhibited forgetfulness and some behavioral alterations, however, it is tempting to speculate that their distribution of GGIs represents brain regions that are affected early in the course of the disease, including the white matter in medial frontal and frontobasal lobes, hippocampal formation and amygdala. Nerve cell loss was extensive in subiculum and amygdala. In cases with more prominent clinical symptoms and dementia, the number of GGIs increased in the aforementioned areas, in parallel with spread to interconnecting and descending white matter tracts and, to a lesser degree, posterior lobe regions. Our cases with sporadic tauopathy were homozygous for the H1 MAPT haplotype and the ApoE ? 3 allele. Homozygosity of H1 predisposes to PSP and CBD, but does not influence the biochemical or neuropathological phenotype of PSP ( 45 ). Current evidence indicates that the ApoE genotype is not a significant risk factor for FTLD associated with pathological tau ( 1 ). The strength of the present study lies in its systematic and comprehensive neuropathological evaluation of a small case series. It is limited by the retrospective nature of clinical data collection and the lack of neuroradiological documentation. It remains to be seen whether the reduction in myelin and axonal density ( Figs. 2 , 3 ) that characterizes disorders with GGIs ( 24 , 25 , 44 ) gives rise to a specific signature on neuroimaging. Some of the neuropathological features reported here are reminiscent of multiple system atrophy (MSA). Thus, the morphology of hyperphosphorylated tau immunopositive GGIs may be reminiscent of ?-synuclein immunoreactive Papp-Lantos bodies (also known as glial cytoplasmic inclusions) ( 46 ). Furthermore, MSA is characterized by the loss of myelin, in conjunction with microglial cell activation ( 47 ). In addition, cases of MSA where frontal and temporal lobes were mostly affected have been described ( 48 – 50 ). However, unlike the cases described here, MSA is a synucleinopathy with the abnormal filamentous inclusions being made of ?-synuclein ( 51 , 52 ). Therefore, the tauopathy with GGIs extends the group of neurodegenerative disorders in which oligodendroglial pathology predominates beyond the synucleinopathy MSA. Similar to cases of MSA with “minimal change” ( 53 ), our least affected cases also showed more abundant white matter GGIs than nerve cell loss in affected areas. In summary, in conjunction with case reports from the literature ( 21 , 24 , 25 , 44 ), the seven cases detailed here indicate that the sporadic tauopathy with GGIs is a distinct neuropathological entity associated with sporadic FTLD. Clinically, it is associated with a spectrum of clinical syndromes, including FTD and corticospinal degeneration.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Macroscopic overview of representative brains. Note the prominent frontotemporal atrophy in case 1 ( a, b ) and the asymmetric atrophy (left > right) in case 3 ( c, d ). Scanned original photographs from 1966 (case 1) and 1975 (case 3). Figure 2 Common histopathological features in individuals with frontotemporal lobar degeneration associated with abundant white matter tau pathology. Spongiosis in the superficial layers of the frontal cortex ( a , H&E). Neuronal loss and gliosis in the frontal cortex ( b , H&E). Comparison of areas with few ( c, e, f, i, k, l ) and abundant ( d , g, h, j, m, n ) tau-immunoreactive globules in white matter ( c, d, upper inset). The areas are evaluated using Luxol-PAS staining ( c, d ), anti-myelin basic protein ( e, g, MBP), anti-proteolipid protein ( f, h, PLP), anti-neurofilament ( i, j, SMI-31) and anti-microglia/macrophage ( k, m, HLA-DR and l, n , CD68) immunostaining. Note the reduction in myelin density, along with the activation of microglia and the appearance of macrophages, along with increasing tau pathology. Using anti-APP immunohistochemistry ( i, j upper inset), we observed axonal swellings in the white matter of affected areas ( j , upper inset). Scale bar in a indicates 200 ?m for a , 100 ?m for b , 50 ?m for c–n , and 75 ?m for insets. Figure 3 Hemispheric section (middle part of image) of the frontobasal cortex (gyrus rectus and orbital gyrus) at the level of the frontal portion of the lateral ventricles stained with Luxol-fast blue. Note that the region indicated by the arrowhead shows loss of myelin (left upper panel) and numerous tau immunoreactive globular glial inclusions (left lower panel) compared to the region indicated by the double arrowheads, which shows relatively preserved myelin staining (right upper panel) and only a few tau-immunoreactive globular glial inclusions (right lower panel). Figure 4 Tau-immunoreactive structures and anatomical distribution of neuropathological changes in individuals with frontotemporal lobar degeneration associated with tau-immunopositive globular glial inclusions. The most prominent alteration is the presence of globular glial tau immunoreactivity, together with grain-like structures, predominantly in white matter ( a ) and, to a lesser extent, also in grey matter ( b ). Abundant ramified astrocytes ( c ) showing immunoreactivity with antibody RD4 (right upper inset) are observed in grey matter. Neuronal tau immunoreactivity consists mainly of diffuse cytoplasmic pretangle-type staining ( d ) and occasional neuronal spherical cytoplasmic inclusions ( e ) that are immunoreactive with RD4 (left upper inset), but not with RD3 (right upper inset). In cases with short disease duration ( f ) and cases with long disease duration ( i ), neurons are relatively preserved in the CA1 subregion (indicated with *, enlarged in g and j ), while neuronal loss and gliosis are prominent in the subiculum (indicated with **, enlarged in h and k ). The substantia nigra shows a mild degree of neuronal loss and extracellular neuromelanin ( l ) and mainly diffuse neuronal cytoplasmic tau immunoreactivity ( m ). Prominent tau-immunoreactive grains, threads, neuronal pretangles and globular glial inclusions are present in the amygdala ( n ). There are occasional pretangles in locus coeruleus (enlarged in lower inset) ( o ). The amount of globular glial tau immunoreactivity increases when comparing a case in the early stages ( p and r , case 7) with a case of longer disease duration ( q and s , case 4), as exemplified in the hippocampus ( p, q ) and parahippocampal region ( r, s ). Globular glial tau inclusions are prominent at the border between cortex and white matter ( t , frontal). Descending tracts in the pontine basis ( u ), corpus callosum ( v ), anterior commissure ( w ), frontobasal-subaccumbens white matter and internal capsule ( x ) also consistently show globular glial inclusions. Scale bar in a indicates 60?m for a–d, n ; 10 ?m for e and all insets; 500?m for f, i, o–s, v–x ; 25 ?m for g, h, j, k; and 250 ?m for t, u . Figure 5 Characterization of globular glial inclusions. H&E ( a ), PAS ( b ), Gallyas ( c ), Bielschowsky ( d, Biels) and Thioflavin ( e, Thiofl) stains and immunohistochemistry for p62 ( f ), ubiquitin ( g, Ubiq), neurofilament-SMI-31 ( h ), Tau-AT8 ( i ), Tau-AT100 ( j ), Tau-AT180 ( k ), Tau-AT270 ( l ), Tau-12E8 ( m ), Tau-HT7 ( n ), Tau-RD4 ( o ), and Tau-RD3 ( p ). Scale bar in a indicates 10 ?m for a–h ; and 100 ?m for i–p . Figure 6 Ultrastructure of a representative white matter oligodendroglia-associated globular inclusion. Note the haphazardly oriented filaments. Scale bars: a : 0.4 ?m b : 0.15 ?m. Figure 7 Immunoelectron microscopy and immunoblotting of sarkosyl-insoluble tau from amygdala (A) and hippocampal formation (H) of case number 7. ( a) Paired helical filaments (counting from the left, panels 1, 3 and 5) and straight filaments (panels 2, 4 and 6) decorated with anti-tau antibodies 134, AT100 and PS422. Scale bar, 100 nm. ( b) Immunoblots using anti-tau antibodies 133, 134, AT8 and PS422 show the presence of strong tau bands of 64 and 68 kDa molecular mass. Table 1 Summary of clinical and genetic data of seven individuals affected by frontotemporal lobar degeneration with abundant white matter globular glial tau pathology. Case Case 1 Case 2 Case 3 Case 4 Case 5 Case 6 Case 7 Gender F M M F F F M Age at death 63 66 76 78 71 81 76 Year of death 1966 1972 1975 1982 1983 2003 2006 Cause of death BPN, PYN BPN BPN BPN BPN, UREM BPN AMI Documented disease duration (years) > 2 10 > 5 > 2 10 3 ND Reason of admission to Hospital Behavioral changes, bulimia, disorientation (lost in city) Forgetfulness,progress ive aphasia Forgetfulness,progres sive aphasia, self neglect, wandering Withdrawal, behavioral change Behavioral change, repeated penalty for stealing, lack of cooperation Acute infarct in RMCA territory FSHD, anxiety attacks, depression Withdrawal ND ND + + - + + Anxiety ND ND + + + + + Speech disorder + + + + - - - Behavioral change + + + + + + - Early forgetfulness + + + ND - + + Disorientation + + + ND + - - Rigidity + - + - - - - Dementia + + + + + - - UMN symptoms + + + - - + - Remarks Akinetic mutism, cachexia Transient delirant states, epileptic seizures * - Transient delirant states Inappropriate laughing, transient anxiety states Before the admission: withdrawn, change of circadian rhythm FSHD known for decades (no muscle biopsy) MAPT mutation NA NA NA NA NA None None H1/H2 haplotype H1/H1 NA NA H1/H1 NA H1/H1 H1/H1 ApoE ?3/?3 ?3/?3 NA ?3/?3 ?3/?3 ?3/?3 ?3/?3 Abbreviations: BPN, bronchopneumonia; PYN, pyelonephritis; UREM, uremia; AMI, acute myocardial infarct; R MCA, right middle cerebral artery; FSHD, facio-scapulo-humeral dystrophy; ND, not documented; UMN, upper motor neuron; NA, not available +, yes -, no F, female M, male * Grand mal seizures. Table 2 Summary of neuropathological alterations of seven individuals affected by frontotemporal lobar degeneration in addition to abundant white matter globular glial tau immunoreactivity* Case / Neuropathological changes Case 1 Case 2 Case 3 Case 4 Case 5 Case 6 Case 7 Brain weight (g) 1000 1220 1000 1150 960 1150 1300 Frontotemporal atrophy + + + + + + + Superficial spongiosis + + + + + + - Ballooned neurons + + + + + + - Non-argyrophilic Tau IR grains + + + + + + + Spheric neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions + + + + + + + Occasional tufted astrocytes + + + + + + + Diffuse neuronal cytoplasmic Tau IR + + + + + + + Neuritic plaques - - Sparse Sparse - Moderate - Neurofibrillary tangles (Braak stage)( 34 ) - - +(II) +(II) - +(III) +(II) Brain infarct - - - +(T) +(L) +(T) - Abbreviations. IR, immunoreactivity; T, territorial (medial cerebral artery); L, lacunar in basal ganglia. + indicates present - indicates absent. Table 3 Anatomic distribution of neuronal loss and tau immunoreactivities Grey Matter White Matter Region Neuronal loss Neuronal Tau IR Astrocytic Tau IR Region WM Globular Tau IR Frontal +++ ++ ++ Frontobasal +++ Temporal +++ ++ ++ Dorsolateral frontal ++ Cingulate ++ ++ ++ Inferior temporal +++ Parietal - ± ± Medial temporal ++ Occipital - ± - Superior temporal ++ Entorhinal ± ++ ± Cingulate ++ Dentate gyrus ± ++ - Parietal + CA1 + +++ ± Occipital + CA2/3 ± +++ - Hippocampal +++ Subiculum +++ ++ - Periamygdaloid +++ Amygdala ++ +++ ++ Subaccumbens +++ Caudate + + + Thalamic fascicles ++ Putamen + + + Internal capsule * ++ Accumbens + + + Corpus callosum ++ Globus pallidus ± + - Anterior commissure ++ Med-Thalamus + + + Cerebral peduncle ** ++ Basal Nucleus ± + - Pontine/Descending ++ Substantia nigra + + - Pontine/Transverse ± Raphe Nuclei + + - Pyramid ± Locus coeruleus + + - Cerebellar peduncles ± Pontine Nuclei - ± - Cerebellum ± Inferior Olive ± - - Spinal cord - Dentate Nucleus - - - Cranial nerves - Cerebellar Cortex - - - Optic chiasm - -, no ±, occasional/mild/few +, consistent/mild/few ++, consistent/moderate +++, consistent/severe/abundant. “Occasional” indicates that only cases with progressed clinical symptoms show these changes, “consistent” indicates that all cases exhibit these alterations). * Mainly anterior limb ** mainly medial segment. Table 4 Pathologic, biochemical and clinical features of sporadic tauopathies with globular glial inclusions (GGI-T) in the present and previous reports Feature/Disease GGI-T sMST sFTD LWMT sMST PSP & CSD CBD PSP AGD PiD GGI Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No No * Number of cases 7 1 1 1 1 12 Many Many Many Many GGI / Localization OG>AS OG AS OG>AS OG OG No No No OG GGI / Size (?m) 8–20 6–10 ~6 8–10 6–8 NA No No No NA Coiled bodies Yes/Rare No NA No Yes/Rare Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Astrocytic tau Tufted-like (dot-like in branches) Tufted-like Globules in the cytoplasm Thorny NA Tufted Plaque Tufted Branch ed Ramified H1/H2 haplotype H1/H1 H1/H2 NA H1/H1 NA NA H1/H1 H1/H1 H1/H2 H1/H2 GGI/ Ultrastructure Haphazardly oriented SF Dense SF aggregates, PHF-like filaments, fingerprint-like bodies Dense SF aggregates Haphazardly oriented SF NA Filaments Twisted tubules Tubular profiles SF or tubules NA Tau F /Ultrastructure SF, PHF NA NA NA NA SF TR, SF SF SF SF, TF Glia filaments/diameter (nm) 8–9 SF: 9–10 Rare SF and PHF-like: 20–30 20 10 NA 15–18 15–25 13–28 10–13 NA Tau blot (kDa) 64, 68 64, 68 NA NA 64, 68 NA 64, 68 64, 68 64, 68 60–64 3R/4R tau isoforms 4R 4R NA NA NA 4R 4R 4R 4R 3R>4R Clinical phenotype FLS, SpD FLS FLS SpD SpD, PS UMN, EP CBS, PS, SpD PS, EMD, FLS FLS FLS, SpD Reference Present cases ( 21 ) ( 22 ) ( 24 ) ( 25 ) ( 44 ) ( 36 ) ( 36 ) ( 36 ) ( 36 ) Comparison of pathology, ultrastructure, biochemistry, and clinical phenotype in sporadic tauopathy with globular glial inclusions (GGI-T) of this series and earlier single case reports reporting globular glial inclusions (sMST: sporadic multiple system tauopathy, sFTD: sporadic frontotemporal dementia, LWMT: leukoencephalopathy with white matter tauopathy), corticobasal degeneration (CBD), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) with corticospinal degeneration (CSD), argyrophilic grain disease (AGD), and frontotemporal lobar degeneration with Pick bodies (PiD). OG: oligodendroglia; AS: astrocyte; SF: straight filament; PHF: paired helical filaments; TR: Twisted ribbon; TF: Twisted filament; F: filament; NA: data not available; FLS: frontal lobe symptoms; SpD: speech disorder; PS: parkinson syndrome; EMD: eye movement disorder; CBS: corticobasal syndrome, UMN: upper motor neuron symptoms, EP: extrapyramidal features. * Rare spherical inclusions in glial cells are also reported ( 36 ).  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Macroscopic overview of representative brains. Note the prominent frontotemporal atrophy in case 1 ( a, b ) and the asymmetric atrophy (left > right) in case 3 ( c, d ). Scanned original photographs from 1966 (case 1) and 1975 (case 3). Figure 2 Common histopathological features in individuals with frontotemporal lobar degeneration associated with abundant white matter tau pathology. Spongiosis in the superficial layers of the frontal cortex ( a , H&E). Neuronal loss and gliosis in the frontal cortex ( b , H&E). Comparison of areas with few ( c, e, f, i, k, l ) and abundant ( d , g, h, j, m, n ) tau-immunoreactive globules in white matter ( c, d, upper inset). The areas are evaluated using Luxol-PAS staining ( c, d ), anti-myelin basic protein ( e, g, MBP), anti-proteolipid protein ( f, h, PLP), anti-neurofilament ( i, j, SMI-31) and anti-microglia/macrophage ( k, m, HLA-DR and l, n , CD68) immunostaining. Note the reduction in myelin density, along with the activation of microglia and the appearance of macrophages, along with increasing tau pathology. Using anti-APP immunohistochemistry ( i, j upper inset), we observed axonal swellings in the white matter of affected areas ( j , upper inset). Scale bar in a indicates 200 ?m for a , 100 ?m for b , 50 ?m for c–n , and 75 ?m for insets. Figure 3 Hemispheric section (middle part of image) of the frontobasal cortex (gyrus rectus and orbital gyrus) at the level of the frontal portion of the lateral ventricles stained with Luxol-fast blue. Note that the region indicated by the arrowhead shows loss of myelin (left upper panel) and numerous tau immunoreactive globular glial inclusions (left lower panel) compared to the region indicated by the double arrowheads, which shows relatively preserved myelin staining (right upper panel) and only a few tau-immunoreactive globular glial inclusions (right lower panel). Figure 4 Tau-immunoreactive structures and anatomical distribution of neuropathological changes in individuals with frontotemporal lobar degeneration associated with tau-immunopositive globular glial inclusions. The most prominent alteration is the presence of globular glial tau immunoreactivity, together with grain-like structures, predominantly in white matter ( a ) and, to a lesser extent, also in grey matter ( b ). Abundant ramified astrocytes ( c ) showing immunoreactivity with antibody RD4 (right upper inset) are observed in grey matter. Neuronal tau immunoreactivity consists mainly of diffuse cytoplasmic pretangle-type staining ( d ) and occasional neuronal spherical cytoplasmic inclusions ( e ) that are immunoreactive with RD4 (left upper inset), but not with RD3 (right upper inset). In cases with short disease duration ( f ) and cases with long disease duration ( i ), neurons are relatively preserved in the CA1 subregion (indicated with *, enlarged in g and j ), while neuronal loss and gliosis are prominent in the subiculum (indicated with **, enlarged in h and k ). The substantia nigra shows a mild degree of neuronal loss and extracellular neuromelanin ( l ) and mainly diffuse neuronal cytoplasmic tau immunoreactivity ( m ). Prominent tau-immunoreactive grains, threads, neuronal pretangles and globular glial inclusions are present in the amygdala ( n ). There are occasional pretangles in locus coeruleus (enlarged in lower inset) ( o ). The amount of globular glial tau immunoreactivity increases when comparing a case in the early stages ( p and r , case 7) with a case of longer disease duration ( q and s , case 4), as exemplified in the hippocampus ( p, q ) and parahippocampal region ( r, s ). Globular glial tau inclusions are prominent at the border between cortex and white matter ( t , frontal). Descending tracts in the pontine basis ( u ), corpus callosum ( v ), anterior commissure ( w ), frontobasal-subaccumbens white matter and internal capsule ( x ) also consistently show globular glial inclusions. Scale bar in a indicates 60?m for a–d, n ; 10 ?m for e and all insets; 500?m for f, i, o–s, v–x ; 25 ?m for g, h, j, k; and 250 ?m for t, u . Figure 5 Characterization of globular glial inclusions. H&E ( a ), PAS ( b ), Gallyas ( c ), Bielschowsky ( d, Biels) and Thioflavin ( e, Thiofl) stains and immunohistochemistry for p62 ( f ), ubiquitin ( g, Ubiq), neurofilament-SMI-31 ( h ), Tau-AT8 ( i ), Tau-AT100 ( j ), Tau-AT180 ( k ), Tau-AT270 ( l ), Tau-12E8 ( m ), Tau-HT7 ( n ), Tau-RD4 ( o ), and Tau-RD3 ( p ). Scale bar in a indicates 10 ?m for a–h ; and 100 ?m for i–p . Figure 6 Ultrastructure of a representative white matter oligodendroglia-associated globular inclusion. Note the haphazardly oriented filaments. Scale bars: a : 0.4 ?m b : 0.15 ?m. Figure 7 Immunoelectron microscopy and immunoblotting of sarkosyl-insoluble tau from amygdala (A) and hippocampal formation (H) of case number 7. ( a) Paired helical filaments (counting from the left, panels 1, 3 and 5) and straight filaments (panels 2, 4 and 6) decorated with anti-tau antibodies 134, AT100 and PS422. Scale bar, 100 nm. ( b) Immunoblots using anti-tau antibodies 133, 134, AT8 and PS422 show the presence of strong tau bands of 64 and 68 kDa molecular mass. Table 1 Summary of clinical and genetic data of seven individuals affected by frontotemporal lobar degeneration with abundant white matter globular glial tau pathology. Case Case 1 Case 2 Case 3 Case 4 Case 5 Case 6 Case 7 Gender F M M F F F M Age at death 63 66 76 78 71 81 76 Year of death 1966 1972 1975 1982 1983 2003 2006 Cause of death BPN, PYN BPN BPN BPN BPN, UREM BPN AMI Documented disease duration (years) > 2 10 > 5 > 2 10 3 ND Reason of admission to Hospital Behavioral changes, bulimia, disorientation (lost in city) Forgetfulness,progress ive aphasia Forgetfulness,progres sive aphasia, self neglect, wandering Withdrawal, behavioral change Behavioral change, repeated penalty for stealing, lack of cooperation Acute infarct in RMCA territory FSHD, anxiety attacks, depression Withdrawal ND ND + + - + + Anxiety ND ND + + + + + Speech disorder + + + + - - - Behavioral change + + + + + + - Early forgetfulness + + + ND - + + Disorientation + + + ND + - - Rigidity + - + - - - - Dementia + + + + + - - UMN symptoms + + + - - + - Remarks Akinetic mutism, cachexia Transient delirant states, epileptic seizures * - Transient delirant states Inappropriate laughing, transient anxiety states Before the admission: withdrawn, change of circadian rhythm FSHD known for decades (no muscle biopsy) MAPT mutation NA NA NA NA NA None None H1/H2 haplotype H1/H1 NA NA H1/H1 NA H1/H1 H1/H1 ApoE ?3/?3 ?3/?3 NA ?3/?3 ?3/?3 ?3/?3 ?3/?3 Abbreviations: BPN, bronchopneumonia; PYN, pyelonephritis; UREM, uremia; AMI, acute myocardial infarct; R MCA, right middle cerebral artery; FSHD, facio-scapulo-humeral dystrophy; ND, not documented; UMN, upper motor neuron; NA, not available +, yes -, no F, female M, male * Grand mal seizures. Table 2 Summary of neuropathological alterations of seven individuals affected by frontotemporal lobar degeneration in addition to abundant white matter globular glial tau immunoreactivity* Case / Neuropathological changes Case 1 Case 2 Case 3 Case 4 Case 5 Case 6 Case 7 Brain weight (g) 1000 1220 1000 1150 960 1150 1300 Frontotemporal atrophy + + + + + + + Superficial spongiosis + + + + + + - Ballooned neurons + + + + + + - Non-argyrophilic Tau IR grains + + + + + + + Spheric neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions + + + + + + + Occasional tufted astrocytes + + + + + + + Diffuse neuronal cytoplasmic Tau IR + + + + + + + Neuritic plaques - - Sparse Sparse - Moderate - Neurofibrillary tangles (Braak stage)( 34 ) - - +(II) +(II) - +(III) +(II) Brain infarct - - - +(T) +(L) +(T) - Abbreviations. IR, immunoreactivity; T, territorial (medial cerebral artery); L, lacunar in basal ganglia. + indicates present - indicates absent. Table 3 Anatomic distribution of neuronal loss and tau immunoreactivities Grey Matter White Matter Region Neuronal loss Neuronal Tau IR Astrocytic Tau IR Region WM Globular Tau IR Frontal +++ ++ ++ Frontobasal +++ Temporal +++ ++ ++ Dorsolateral frontal ++ Cingulate ++ ++ ++ Inferior temporal +++ Parietal - ± ± Medial temporal ++ Occipital - ± - Superior temporal ++ Entorhinal ± ++ ± Cingulate ++ Dentate gyrus ± ++ - Parietal + CA1 + +++ ± Occipital + CA2/3 ± +++ - Hippocampal +++ Subiculum +++ ++ - Periamygdaloid +++ Amygdala ++ +++ ++ Subaccumbens +++ Caudate + + + Thalamic fascicles ++ Putamen + + + Internal capsule * ++ Accumbens + + + Corpus callosum ++ Globus pallidus ± + - Anterior commissure ++ Med-Thalamus + + + Cerebral peduncle ** ++ Basal Nucleus ± + - Pontine/Descending ++ Substantia nigra + + - Pontine/Transverse ± Raphe Nuclei + + - Pyramid ± Locus coeruleus + + - Cerebellar peduncles ± Pontine Nuclei - ± - Cerebellum ± Inferior Olive ± - - Spinal cord - Dentate Nucleus - - - Cranial nerves - Cerebellar Cortex - - - Optic chiasm - -, no ±, occasional/mild/few +, consistent/mild/few ++, consistent/moderate +++, consistent/severe/abundant. “Occasional” indicates that only cases with progressed clinical symptoms show these changes, “consistent” indicates that all cases exhibit these alterations). * Mainly anterior limb ** mainly medial segment. Table 4 Pathologic, biochemical and clinical features of sporadic tauopathies with globular glial inclusions (GGI-T) in the present and previous reports Feature/Disease GGI-T sMST sFTD LWMT sMST PSP & CSD CBD PSP AGD PiD GGI Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No No * Number of cases 7 1 1 1 1 12 Many Many Many Many GGI / Localization OG>AS OG AS OG>AS OG OG No No No OG GGI / Size (?m) 8–20 6–10 ~6 8–10 6–8 NA No No No NA Coiled bodies Yes/Rare No NA No Yes/Rare Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Astrocytic tau Tufted-like (dot-like in branches) Tufted-like Globules in the cytoplasm Thorny NA Tufted Plaque Tufted Branch ed Ramified H1/H2 haplotype H1/H1 H1/H2 NA H1/H1 NA NA H1/H1 H1/H1 H1/H2 H1/H2 GGI/ Ultrastructure Haphazardly oriented SF Dense SF aggregates, PHF-like filaments, fingerprint-like bodies Dense SF aggregates Haphazardly oriented SF NA Filaments Twisted tubules Tubular profiles SF or tubules NA Tau F /Ultrastructure SF, PHF NA NA NA NA SF TR, SF SF SF SF, TF Glia filaments/diameter (nm) 8–9 SF: 9–10 Rare SF and PHF-like: 20–30 20 10 NA 15–18 15–25 13–28 10–13 NA Tau blot (kDa) 64, 68 64, 68 NA NA 64, 68 NA 64, 68 64, 68 64, 68 60–64 3R/4R tau isoforms 4R 4R NA NA NA 4R 4R 4R 4R 3R>4R Clinical phenotype FLS, SpD FLS FLS SpD SpD, PS UMN, EP CBS, PS, SpD PS, EMD, FLS FLS FLS, SpD Reference Present cases ( 21 ) ( 22 ) ( 24 ) ( 25 ) ( 44 ) ( 36 ) ( 36 ) ( 36 ) ( 36 ) Comparison of pathology, ultrastructure, biochemistry, and clinical phenotype in sporadic tauopathy with globular glial inclusions (GGI-T) of this series and earlier single case reports reporting globular glial inclusions (sMST: sporadic multiple system tauopathy, sFTD: sporadic frontotemporal dementia, LWMT: leukoencephalopathy with white matter tauopathy), corticobasal degeneration (CBD), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) with corticospinal degeneration (CSD), argyrophilic grain disease (AGD), and frontotemporal lobar degeneration with Pick bodies (PiD). OG: oligodendroglia; AS: astrocyte; SF: straight filament; PHF: paired helical filaments; TR: Twisted ribbon; TF: Twisted filament; F: filament; NA: data not available; FLS: frontal lobe symptoms; SpD: speech disorder; PS: parkinson syndrome; EMD: eye movement disorder; CBS: corticobasal syndrome, UMN: upper motor neuron symptoms, EP: extrapyramidal features. * Rare spherical inclusions in glial cells are also reported ( 36 ). 