CART peptides: regulators of body weight, reward and other functions Over the past decade or so, CART (cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript) peptides have emerged as major neurotransmitters and hormones. CART peptides are widely distributed in the CNS and are involved in regulating many processes, including food intake and the maintenance of body weight, reward and endocrine functions. Recent studies have produced a wealth of information about the location, regulation, processing and functions of CART peptides, but additional studies aimed at elucidating the physiological effects of the peptides and at characterizing the CART receptor(s) are needed to take advantage of possible therapeutic applications.  CART in the regulation of body weight Early findings Soon after the discovery of CART peptides 1 - 3 , it was suggested that they were involved in food intake. This suggestion was based on the distribution of CART peptides in the brain 24 , namely in regions that included the arcuate nucleus, the lateral hypothalamus, the paraventricular nucleus (PvN) and the nucleus accumbens 14 , 24 , all of which have a role in the regulation of food intake. In addition, CART mRNA and peptides have been demonstrated to be present in peripheral feeding-relevant regions 36 - 40 . Lambert et al . 41 , 42 showed that, in rats, intracerebro-ventricular (ICv) administration of CART peptide fragments decreased food intake, and ICv administration of antibodies directed against CART peptide increased feeding. Moreover, CART-peptide-containing cell bodies in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus were found to be surrounded by neuropeptide Y (NPY)-immunoreactive nerve terminals, suggesting that there is an interaction between CART peptides and NPY, a peptide that stimulates feeding. Importantly, it was demonstrated by Kristensen and co-workers 43 that, in addition to the anorectic effects of CART peptides, CART mRNA in the arcuate nucleus was decreased in food-deprived animals, and intraperitoneal administration of leptin increased CART mRNA levels in the arcuate nucleus. Moreover, in animals with disrupted leptin signalling, CART mRNA was nearly absent in the arcuate nucleus 43 . These and other core observations 44 stimulated many additional studies on the involvement of the CART system in the regulation of feeding and body weight. Effects of CART peptides on feeding and energy regulation in animal studies CART peptides and their effects have been found in feeding-relevant parts of the brain, as noted above. CART peptides were also demonstrated to be present in the gut 20 - 22 , 36 - 40 and in vagal nerves 45 , 46 , which have a role in feeding. Moreover, ICv and intra-cisternal injection of CART 55–102 inhibited gastric-acid secretion and gastric emptying 47 - 50 . Injection of CART peptide into the nucleus accumbens resulted in inhibition of feeding 51 , indicating that this region, which has high levels of endogenous CART peptides, might be involved in the CART system’s anorexigenic effects. Activating serotonin-4 receptors in the nucleus accumbens increased CART mRNA levels and reduced the drive to eat, whereas reducing CART peptide levels in food-deprived mice by administering short interfering RNAs against CART mRNA abolished the anorectic effects of a serotonin-4 receptor agonist 52 . Knock down of CART mRNA also reduced the anorectic effect of MDMA (3,4-methylenedioxy- N -methyl-amphetamine), suggesting that CART peptides in the nucleus accumbens mediate the appetite-suppressing effect of MDMA 52 . It was also shown that injection of CART 55–102 into the lateral ventricles resulted in increased c-Fos levels in feeding areas of the brain 26 , suggesting a physiological action of CART peptides in these areas. Moreover, chronic (10-day) ICv administration of CART peptide inhibited food intake 53 . Mice that lacked the CART gene ( CARTPT ?/? mice) gained body weight 54 - 56 , and viral delivery of CART mRNA through the ICv cannulae suppressed weight gain in diet-induced obese rats 57 . However, not all studies of CARTPT ?/? mice are in agreement 58 . This lack of agreement could be due to varying genetic backgrounds in the various groups of CARTPT ?/? mice, or to other differences. Aside from the contradictions in studies with CARTPT ?/? mice, there is abundant evidence in animal studies that CART peptides can directly regulate body weight and feeding. There is also evidence that CART peptides interact with other factors that affect body weight, feeding and energy expenditure (see also Box 1 ). For example, as mentioned above, CART might mediate the effects of serotonin-4 receptor activation on food intake 52 . Second, CART is colocalized with melanocyte stimulating hormone (MSH) 59 - 63 , an inhibitor of food intake, in the rat arcuate nucleus. Third, CART mRNA levels in the rat arcuate nucleus were increased by administration of leptin 64 , and leptin receptors were found on CART-peptide-containing cells in the arcuate nucleus and other hypothalamic regions 65 , indicating that CART peptides might be mediators of leptin effects in these hypothalamic areas. Recent data suggest that glucocorticoids might modulate the interaction between CART and leptin 66 . Fourth, there is evidence for an interaction between CART and the endocannabinoid system. The endocannabinoid anandamide increases appetite by activating Cb1 receptors, whereas Cb1 receptor antagonists inhibit food intake. Treating wild-type mice with a Cb1 receptor agonist increased CART peptide levels in the nucleus accumbens, and the Cb1 antagonist rimonabant had no effect on feeding in CARTPT ?/? mice 67 , suggesting that CART is involved in the orexigenic effects of anandamide 67 . Fifth, CART peptides are expressed in arcuate neurons that project to the PvN and regulate the release of thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) 68 - 70 . TRH-containing neurons in the PvN in turn regulate the release of thyroid-stimulating hormone from the pituitary, which exerts an effect on energy homeostasis by increasing heat generation in brown adipose tissue and muscle. Thus, by regulating TRH release, CART peptides can influence the pituitary–thyroid axis, with a resultant effect on energy expenditure. Finally, injection of CART 55–102 into the rat PvN or arcuate nucleus increases the expression of the mRNA for uncoupling protein, again relating CART peptides to energy expenditure 71 , 72 . These examples show that, even though there are a number of seemingly disparate mechanisms involved in feeding, CART peptides are implicated in many of them. Effects of CART peptides on body weight and energy metabolism in humans Animal studies are strongly indicative of a role for CART peptides in feeding behaviour, and the results from studies in humans strongly support this idea. For example, obese members of an Italian family had a missense mutation (leu34Phe) in their CART gene 73 . This missense mutation led to a CART peptide deficiency in the sera 74 . expression of the mutated cDNA in AtT20 cells resulted in decreased CART peptide levels compared with levels in cells that expressed the wild-type cDNA 75 . Moreover, expression of the mutated proCART in AtT20 cells showed that it was mis-sorted, poorly processed and secreted 74 ( FIG. 3 ). Thus, the missense mutation had cellular effects that reduced CART peptide levels and affected the cellular distribution of CART peptide. A different study of over 500 subjects 76 showed that the 5? region of the CART gene was highly polymorphic, and that a polymorphism at ?156 kb (that is, at a site that is in linkage disequilibrium with the CART gene) might associate with obesity. Another study in several hundred French subjects, some of whom were morbidly obese, identified a single-nucleotide polymorphism in the CART gene (-3608T>C) that might contribute to the genetic risk for obesity 77 . It was recently suggested that the CART peptides might be involved in lipid metabolism and artherogenesis 78 , and that CART peptides might influence fat distribution 79 and contribute to dyslipidaemia 80 . viewed collectively, these studies are quite supportive of a role for CART in regulating feeding and body weight in humans. However, not all polymorphisms in the CART gene are associated with obesity 81 - 83 , perhaps because not all of them would be expected to alter the peptide structure and functional activity. Some problematic results Some experimental findings do not obviously support the idea that CART peptides affect body weight and are anorexigenic. For example, in rats, ICv injection of CART peptide reduced the intake of a liquid diet if the peptide reached the fourth ventricle 84 ; however, the effects of the peptide (in this region) were not specific to nutrients but rather produced a conditioned taste aversion. Thus, CART peptide effects on food intake might be secondary to the production of such an aversive state. Also, ICv administration of CART peptide altered licking patterns, suggesting an effect on motor control of eating 85 , 86 , and high doses of ICv peptides can result in seizures 87 . It is possible that the motor and anxiogenic actions of CART peptides could produce some of these effects on feeding and body weight (see below). Moreover, it was reported that injection of CART peptide into discrete hypothalamic nuclei resulted in increased, rather than decreased, food intake 72 , 88 . Thus, although the evidence that CART peptides are anorexigenic is strong, some inconsistent observations need to be resolved or clarified. In summary, CART peptides seem to have anorexi-genic effects, although the site(s) and mechanisms of these effects are not yet fully known. The literature indicates that there could be many sites and mechanisms. because most published experiments have involved increasing CART peptide levels by injection, studies with CART depletion or CART receptor blockers are needed. As CART peptides have a major impact on body weight in humans and animals, the CART system is important for understanding obesity and is a promising target for anti-obesity drug development 35 .  CART in the regulation of body weight Early findings Soon after the discovery of CART peptides 1 - 3 , it was suggested that they were involved in food intake. This suggestion was based on the distribution of CART peptides in the brain 24 , namely in regions that included the arcuate nucleus, the lateral hypothalamus, the paraventricular nucleus (PvN) and the nucleus accumbens 14 , 24 , all of which have a role in the regulation of food intake. In addition, CART mRNA and peptides have been demonstrated to be present in peripheral feeding-relevant regions 36 - 40 . Lambert et al . 41 , 42 showed that, in rats, intracerebro-ventricular (ICv) administration of CART peptide fragments decreased food intake, and ICv administration of antibodies directed against CART peptide increased feeding. Moreover, CART-peptide-containing cell bodies in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus were found to be surrounded by neuropeptide Y (NPY)-immunoreactive nerve terminals, suggesting that there is an interaction between CART peptides and NPY, a peptide that stimulates feeding. Importantly, it was demonstrated by Kristensen and co-workers 43 that, in addition to the anorectic effects of CART peptides, CART mRNA in the arcuate nucleus was decreased in food-deprived animals, and intraperitoneal administration of leptin increased CART mRNA levels in the arcuate nucleus. Moreover, in animals with disrupted leptin signalling, CART mRNA was nearly absent in the arcuate nucleus 43 . These and other core observations 44 stimulated many additional studies on the involvement of the CART system in the regulation of feeding and body weight. Effects of CART peptides on feeding and energy regulation in animal studies CART peptides and their effects have been found in feeding-relevant parts of the brain, as noted above. CART peptides were also demonstrated to be present in the gut 20 - 22 , 36 - 40 and in vagal nerves 45 , 46 , which have a role in feeding. Moreover, ICv and intra-cisternal injection of CART 55–102 inhibited gastric-acid secretion and gastric emptying 47 - 50 . Injection of CART peptide into the nucleus accumbens resulted in inhibition of feeding 51 , indicating that this region, which has high levels of endogenous CART peptides, might be involved in the CART system’s anorexigenic effects. Activating serotonin-4 receptors in the nucleus accumbens increased CART mRNA levels and reduced the drive to eat, whereas reducing CART peptide levels in food-deprived mice by administering short interfering RNAs against CART mRNA abolished the anorectic effects of a serotonin-4 receptor agonist 52 . Knock down of CART mRNA also reduced the anorectic effect of MDMA (3,4-methylenedioxy- N -methyl-amphetamine), suggesting that CART peptides in the nucleus accumbens mediate the appetite-suppressing effect of MDMA 52 . It was also shown that injection of CART 55–102 into the lateral ventricles resulted in increased c-Fos levels in feeding areas of the brain 26 , suggesting a physiological action of CART peptides in these areas. Moreover, chronic (10-day) ICv administration of CART peptide inhibited food intake 53 . Mice that lacked the CART gene ( CARTPT ?/? mice) gained body weight 54 - 56 , and viral delivery of CART mRNA through the ICv cannulae suppressed weight gain in diet-induced obese rats 57 . However, not all studies of CARTPT ?/? mice are in agreement 58 . This lack of agreement could be due to varying genetic backgrounds in the various groups of CARTPT ?/? mice, or to other differences. Aside from the contradictions in studies with CARTPT ?/? mice, there is abundant evidence in animal studies that CART peptides can directly regulate body weight and feeding. There is also evidence that CART peptides interact with other factors that affect body weight, feeding and energy expenditure (see also Box 1 ). For example, as mentioned above, CART might mediate the effects of serotonin-4 receptor activation on food intake 52 . Second, CART is colocalized with melanocyte stimulating hormone (MSH) 59 - 63 , an inhibitor of food intake, in the rat arcuate nucleus. Third, CART mRNA levels in the rat arcuate nucleus were increased by administration of leptin 64 , and leptin receptors were found on CART-peptide-containing cells in the arcuate nucleus and other hypothalamic regions 65 , indicating that CART peptides might be mediators of leptin effects in these hypothalamic areas. Recent data suggest that glucocorticoids might modulate the interaction between CART and leptin 66 . Fourth, there is evidence for an interaction between CART and the endocannabinoid system. The endocannabinoid anandamide increases appetite by activating Cb1 receptors, whereas Cb1 receptor antagonists inhibit food intake. Treating wild-type mice with a Cb1 receptor agonist increased CART peptide levels in the nucleus accumbens, and the Cb1 antagonist rimonabant had no effect on feeding in CARTPT ?/? mice 67 , suggesting that CART is involved in the orexigenic effects of anandamide 67 . Fifth, CART peptides are expressed in arcuate neurons that project to the PvN and regulate the release of thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) 68 - 70 . TRH-containing neurons in the PvN in turn regulate the release of thyroid-stimulating hormone from the pituitary, which exerts an effect on energy homeostasis by increasing heat generation in brown adipose tissue and muscle. Thus, by regulating TRH release, CART peptides can influence the pituitary–thyroid axis, with a resultant effect on energy expenditure. Finally, injection of CART 55–102 into the rat PvN or arcuate nucleus increases the expression of the mRNA for uncoupling protein, again relating CART peptides to energy expenditure 71 , 72 . These examples show that, even though there are a number of seemingly disparate mechanisms involved in feeding, CART peptides are implicated in many of them. Effects of CART peptides on body weight and energy metabolism in humans Animal studies are strongly indicative of a role for CART peptides in feeding behaviour, and the results from studies in humans strongly support this idea. For example, obese members of an Italian family had a missense mutation (leu34Phe) in their CART gene 73 . This missense mutation led to a CART peptide deficiency in the sera 74 . expression of the mutated cDNA in AtT20 cells resulted in decreased CART peptide levels compared with levels in cells that expressed the wild-type cDNA 75 . Moreover, expression of the mutated proCART in AtT20 cells showed that it was mis-sorted, poorly processed and secreted 74 ( FIG. 3 ). Thus, the missense mutation had cellular effects that reduced CART peptide levels and affected the cellular distribution of CART peptide. A different study of over 500 subjects 76 showed that the 5? region of the CART gene was highly polymorphic, and that a polymorphism at ?156 kb (that is, at a site that is in linkage disequilibrium with the CART gene) might associate with obesity. Another study in several hundred French subjects, some of whom were morbidly obese, identified a single-nucleotide polymorphism in the CART gene (-3608T>C) that might contribute to the genetic risk for obesity 77 . It was recently suggested that the CART peptides might be involved in lipid metabolism and artherogenesis 78 , and that CART peptides might influence fat distribution 79 and contribute to dyslipidaemia 80 . viewed collectively, these studies are quite supportive of a role for CART in regulating feeding and body weight in humans. However, not all polymorphisms in the CART gene are associated with obesity 81 - 83 , perhaps because not all of them would be expected to alter the peptide structure and functional activity. Some problematic results Some experimental findings do not obviously support the idea that CART peptides affect body weight and are anorexigenic. For example, in rats, ICv injection of CART peptide reduced the intake of a liquid diet if the peptide reached the fourth ventricle 84 ; however, the effects of the peptide (in this region) were not specific to nutrients but rather produced a conditioned taste aversion. Thus, CART peptide effects on food intake might be secondary to the production of such an aversive state. Also, ICv administration of CART peptide altered licking patterns, suggesting an effect on motor control of eating 85 , 86 , and high doses of ICv peptides can result in seizures 87 . It is possible that the motor and anxiogenic actions of CART peptides could produce some of these effects on feeding and body weight (see below). Moreover, it was reported that injection of CART peptide into discrete hypothalamic nuclei resulted in increased, rather than decreased, food intake 72 , 88 . Thus, although the evidence that CART peptides are anorexigenic is strong, some inconsistent observations need to be resolved or clarified. In summary, CART peptides seem to have anorexi-genic effects, although the site(s) and mechanisms of these effects are not yet fully known. The literature indicates that there could be many sites and mechanisms. because most published experiments have involved increasing CART peptide levels by injection, studies with CART depletion or CART receptor blockers are needed. As CART peptides have a major impact on body weight in humans and animals, the CART system is important for understanding obesity and is a promising target for anti-obesity drug development 35 .  Early findings Soon after the discovery of CART peptides 1 - 3 , it was suggested that they were involved in food intake. This suggestion was based on the distribution of CART peptides in the brain 24 , namely in regions that included the arcuate nucleus, the lateral hypothalamus, the paraventricular nucleus (PvN) and the nucleus accumbens 14 , 24 , all of which have a role in the regulation of food intake. In addition, CART mRNA and peptides have been demonstrated to be present in peripheral feeding-relevant regions 36 - 40 . Lambert et al . 41 , 42 showed that, in rats, intracerebro-ventricular (ICv) administration of CART peptide fragments decreased food intake, and ICv administration of antibodies directed against CART peptide increased feeding. Moreover, CART-peptide-containing cell bodies in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus were found to be surrounded by neuropeptide Y (NPY)-immunoreactive nerve terminals, suggesting that there is an interaction between CART peptides and NPY, a peptide that stimulates feeding. Importantly, it was demonstrated by Kristensen and co-workers 43 that, in addition to the anorectic effects of CART peptides, CART mRNA in the arcuate nucleus was decreased in food-deprived animals, and intraperitoneal administration of leptin increased CART mRNA levels in the arcuate nucleus. Moreover, in animals with disrupted leptin signalling, CART mRNA was nearly absent in the arcuate nucleus 43 . These and other core observations 44 stimulated many additional studies on the involvement of the CART system in the regulation of feeding and body weight.  Early findings Soon after the discovery of CART peptides 1 - 3 , it was suggested that they were involved in food intake. This suggestion was based on the distribution of CART peptides in the brain 24 , namely in regions that included the arcuate nucleus, the lateral hypothalamus, the paraventricular nucleus (PvN) and the nucleus accumbens 14 , 24 , all of which have a role in the regulation of food intake. In addition, CART mRNA and peptides have been demonstrated to be present in peripheral feeding-relevant regions 36 - 40 . Lambert et al . 41 , 42 showed that, in rats, intracerebro-ventricular (ICv) administration of CART peptide fragments decreased food intake, and ICv administration of antibodies directed against CART peptide increased feeding. Moreover, CART-peptide-containing cell bodies in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus were found to be surrounded by neuropeptide Y (NPY)-immunoreactive nerve terminals, suggesting that there is an interaction between CART peptides and NPY, a peptide that stimulates feeding. Importantly, it was demonstrated by Kristensen and co-workers 43 that, in addition to the anorectic effects of CART peptides, CART mRNA in the arcuate nucleus was decreased in food-deprived animals, and intraperitoneal administration of leptin increased CART mRNA levels in the arcuate nucleus. Moreover, in animals with disrupted leptin signalling, CART mRNA was nearly absent in the arcuate nucleus 43 . These and other core observations 44 stimulated many additional studies on the involvement of the CART system in the regulation of feeding and body weight.  Effects of CART peptides on feeding and energy regulation in animal studies CART peptides and their effects have been found in feeding-relevant parts of the brain, as noted above. CART peptides were also demonstrated to be present in the gut 20 - 22 , 36 - 40 and in vagal nerves 45 , 46 , which have a role in feeding. Moreover, ICv and intra-cisternal injection of CART 55–102 inhibited gastric-acid secretion and gastric emptying 47 - 50 . Injection of CART peptide into the nucleus accumbens resulted in inhibition of feeding 51 , indicating that this region, which has high levels of endogenous CART peptides, might be involved in the CART system’s anorexigenic effects. Activating serotonin-4 receptors in the nucleus accumbens increased CART mRNA levels and reduced the drive to eat, whereas reducing CART peptide levels in food-deprived mice by administering short interfering RNAs against CART mRNA abolished the anorectic effects of a serotonin-4 receptor agonist 52 . Knock down of CART mRNA also reduced the anorectic effect of MDMA (3,4-methylenedioxy- N -methyl-amphetamine), suggesting that CART peptides in the nucleus accumbens mediate the appetite-suppressing effect of MDMA 52 . It was also shown that injection of CART 55–102 into the lateral ventricles resulted in increased c-Fos levels in feeding areas of the brain 26 , suggesting a physiological action of CART peptides in these areas. Moreover, chronic (10-day) ICv administration of CART peptide inhibited food intake 53 . Mice that lacked the CART gene ( CARTPT ?/? mice) gained body weight 54 - 56 , and viral delivery of CART mRNA through the ICv cannulae suppressed weight gain in diet-induced obese rats 57 . However, not all studies of CARTPT ?/? mice are in agreement 58 . This lack of agreement could be due to varying genetic backgrounds in the various groups of CARTPT ?/? mice, or to other differences. Aside from the contradictions in studies with CARTPT ?/? mice, there is abundant evidence in animal studies that CART peptides can directly regulate body weight and feeding. There is also evidence that CART peptides interact with other factors that affect body weight, feeding and energy expenditure (see also Box 1 ). For example, as mentioned above, CART might mediate the effects of serotonin-4 receptor activation on food intake 52 . Second, CART is colocalized with melanocyte stimulating hormone (MSH) 59 - 63 , an inhibitor of food intake, in the rat arcuate nucleus. Third, CART mRNA levels in the rat arcuate nucleus were increased by administration of leptin 64 , and leptin receptors were found on CART-peptide-containing cells in the arcuate nucleus and other hypothalamic regions 65 , indicating that CART peptides might be mediators of leptin effects in these hypothalamic areas. Recent data suggest that glucocorticoids might modulate the interaction between CART and leptin 66 . Fourth, there is evidence for an interaction between CART and the endocannabinoid system. The endocannabinoid anandamide increases appetite by activating Cb1 receptors, whereas Cb1 receptor antagonists inhibit food intake. Treating wild-type mice with a Cb1 receptor agonist increased CART peptide levels in the nucleus accumbens, and the Cb1 antagonist rimonabant had no effect on feeding in CARTPT ?/? mice 67 , suggesting that CART is involved in the orexigenic effects of anandamide 67 . Fifth, CART peptides are expressed in arcuate neurons that project to the PvN and regulate the release of thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) 68 - 70 . TRH-containing neurons in the PvN in turn regulate the release of thyroid-stimulating hormone from the pituitary, which exerts an effect on energy homeostasis by increasing heat generation in brown adipose tissue and muscle. Thus, by regulating TRH release, CART peptides can influence the pituitary–thyroid axis, with a resultant effect on energy expenditure. Finally, injection of CART 55–102 into the rat PvN or arcuate nucleus increases the expression of the mRNA for uncoupling protein, again relating CART peptides to energy expenditure 71 , 72 . These examples show that, even though there are a number of seemingly disparate mechanisms involved in feeding, CART peptides are implicated in many of them.  Effects of CART peptides on feeding and energy regulation in animal studies CART peptides and their effects have been found in feeding-relevant parts of the brain, as noted above. CART peptides were also demonstrated to be present in the gut 20 - 22 , 36 - 40 and in vagal nerves 45 , 46 , which have a role in feeding. Moreover, ICv and intra-cisternal injection of CART 55–102 inhibited gastric-acid secretion and gastric emptying 47 - 50 . Injection of CART peptide into the nucleus accumbens resulted in inhibition of feeding 51 , indicating that this region, which has high levels of endogenous CART peptides, might be involved in the CART system’s anorexigenic effects. Activating serotonin-4 receptors in the nucleus accumbens increased CART mRNA levels and reduced the drive to eat, whereas reducing CART peptide levels in food-deprived mice by administering short interfering RNAs against CART mRNA abolished the anorectic effects of a serotonin-4 receptor agonist 52 . Knock down of CART mRNA also reduced the anorectic effect of MDMA (3,4-methylenedioxy- N -methyl-amphetamine), suggesting that CART peptides in the nucleus accumbens mediate the appetite-suppressing effect of MDMA 52 . It was also shown that injection of CART 55–102 into the lateral ventricles resulted in increased c-Fos levels in feeding areas of the brain 26 , suggesting a physiological action of CART peptides in these areas. Moreover, chronic (10-day) ICv administration of CART peptide inhibited food intake 53 . Mice that lacked the CART gene ( CARTPT ?/? mice) gained body weight 54 - 56 , and viral delivery of CART mRNA through the ICv cannulae suppressed weight gain in diet-induced obese rats 57 . However, not all studies of CARTPT ?/? mice are in agreement 58 . This lack of agreement could be due to varying genetic backgrounds in the various groups of CARTPT ?/? mice, or to other differences. Aside from the contradictions in studies with CARTPT ?/? mice, there is abundant evidence in animal studies that CART peptides can directly regulate body weight and feeding. There is also evidence that CART peptides interact with other factors that affect body weight, feeding and energy expenditure (see also Box 1 ). For example, as mentioned above, CART might mediate the effects of serotonin-4 receptor activation on food intake 52 . Second, CART is colocalized with melanocyte stimulating hormone (MSH) 59 - 63 , an inhibitor of food intake, in the rat arcuate nucleus. Third, CART mRNA levels in the rat arcuate nucleus were increased by administration of leptin 64 , and leptin receptors were found on CART-peptide-containing cells in the arcuate nucleus and other hypothalamic regions 65 , indicating that CART peptides might be mediators of leptin effects in these hypothalamic areas. Recent data suggest that glucocorticoids might modulate the interaction between CART and leptin 66 . Fourth, there is evidence for an interaction between CART and the endocannabinoid system. The endocannabinoid anandamide increases appetite by activating Cb1 receptors, whereas Cb1 receptor antagonists inhibit food intake. Treating wild-type mice with a Cb1 receptor agonist increased CART peptide levels in the nucleus accumbens, and the Cb1 antagonist rimonabant had no effect on feeding in CARTPT ?/? mice 67 , suggesting that CART is involved in the orexigenic effects of anandamide 67 . Fifth, CART peptides are expressed in arcuate neurons that project to the PvN and regulate the release of thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) 68 - 70 . TRH-containing neurons in the PvN in turn regulate the release of thyroid-stimulating hormone from the pituitary, which exerts an effect on energy homeostasis by increasing heat generation in brown adipose tissue and muscle. Thus, by regulating TRH release, CART peptides can influence the pituitary–thyroid axis, with a resultant effect on energy expenditure. Finally, injection of CART 55–102 into the rat PvN or arcuate nucleus increases the expression of the mRNA for uncoupling protein, again relating CART peptides to energy expenditure 71 , 72 . These examples show that, even though there are a number of seemingly disparate mechanisms involved in feeding, CART peptides are implicated in many of them.  Effects of CART peptides on body weight and energy metabolism in humans Animal studies are strongly indicative of a role for CART peptides in feeding behaviour, and the results from studies in humans strongly support this idea. For example, obese members of an Italian family had a missense mutation (leu34Phe) in their CART gene 73 . This missense mutation led to a CART peptide deficiency in the sera 74 . expression of the mutated cDNA in AtT20 cells resulted in decreased CART peptide levels compared with levels in cells that expressed the wild-type cDNA 75 . Moreover, expression of the mutated proCART in AtT20 cells showed that it was mis-sorted, poorly processed and secreted 74 ( FIG. 3 ). Thus, the missense mutation had cellular effects that reduced CART peptide levels and affected the cellular distribution of CART peptide. A different study of over 500 subjects 76 showed that the 5? region of the CART gene was highly polymorphic, and that a polymorphism at ?156 kb (that is, at a site that is in linkage disequilibrium with the CART gene) might associate with obesity. Another study in several hundred French subjects, some of whom were morbidly obese, identified a single-nucleotide polymorphism in the CART gene (-3608T>C) that might contribute to the genetic risk for obesity 77 . It was recently suggested that the CART peptides might be involved in lipid metabolism and artherogenesis 78 , and that CART peptides might influence fat distribution 79 and contribute to dyslipidaemia 80 . viewed collectively, these studies are quite supportive of a role for CART in regulating feeding and body weight in humans. However, not all polymorphisms in the CART gene are associated with obesity 81 - 83 , perhaps because not all of them would be expected to alter the peptide structure and functional activity.  Effects of CART peptides on body weight and energy metabolism in humans Animal studies are strongly indicative of a role for CART peptides in feeding behaviour, and the results from studies in humans strongly support this idea. For example, obese members of an Italian family had a missense mutation (leu34Phe) in their CART gene 73 . This missense mutation led to a CART peptide deficiency in the sera 74 . expression of the mutated cDNA in AtT20 cells resulted in decreased CART peptide levels compared with levels in cells that expressed the wild-type cDNA 75 . Moreover, expression of the mutated proCART in AtT20 cells showed that it was mis-sorted, poorly processed and secreted 74 ( FIG. 3 ). Thus, the missense mutation had cellular effects that reduced CART peptide levels and affected the cellular distribution of CART peptide. A different study of over 500 subjects 76 showed that the 5? region of the CART gene was highly polymorphic, and that a polymorphism at ?156 kb (that is, at a site that is in linkage disequilibrium with the CART gene) might associate with obesity. Another study in several hundred French subjects, some of whom were morbidly obese, identified a single-nucleotide polymorphism in the CART gene (-3608T>C) that might contribute to the genetic risk for obesity 77 . It was recently suggested that the CART peptides might be involved in lipid metabolism and artherogenesis 78 , and that CART peptides might influence fat distribution 79 and contribute to dyslipidaemia 80 . viewed collectively, these studies are quite supportive of a role for CART in regulating feeding and body weight in humans. However, not all polymorphisms in the CART gene are associated with obesity 81 - 83 , perhaps because not all of them would be expected to alter the peptide structure and functional activity.  Some problematic results Some experimental findings do not obviously support the idea that CART peptides affect body weight and are anorexigenic. For example, in rats, ICv injection of CART peptide reduced the intake of a liquid diet if the peptide reached the fourth ventricle 84 ; however, the effects of the peptide (in this region) were not specific to nutrients but rather produced a conditioned taste aversion. Thus, CART peptide effects on food intake might be secondary to the production of such an aversive state. Also, ICv administration of CART peptide altered licking patterns, suggesting an effect on motor control of eating 85 , 86 , and high doses of ICv peptides can result in seizures 87 . It is possible that the motor and anxiogenic actions of CART peptides could produce some of these effects on feeding and body weight (see below). Moreover, it was reported that injection of CART peptide into discrete hypothalamic nuclei resulted in increased, rather than decreased, food intake 72 , 88 . Thus, although the evidence that CART peptides are anorexigenic is strong, some inconsistent observations need to be resolved or clarified. In summary, CART peptides seem to have anorexi-genic effects, although the site(s) and mechanisms of these effects are not yet fully known. The literature indicates that there could be many sites and mechanisms. because most published experiments have involved increasing CART peptide levels by injection, studies with CART depletion or CART receptor blockers are needed. As CART peptides have a major impact on body weight in humans and animals, the CART system is important for understanding obesity and is a promising target for anti-obesity drug development 35 .  Some problematic results Some experimental findings do not obviously support the idea that CART peptides affect body weight and are anorexigenic. For example, in rats, ICv injection of CART peptide reduced the intake of a liquid diet if the peptide reached the fourth ventricle 84 ; however, the effects of the peptide (in this region) were not specific to nutrients but rather produced a conditioned taste aversion. Thus, CART peptide effects on food intake might be secondary to the production of such an aversive state. Also, ICv administration of CART peptide altered licking patterns, suggesting an effect on motor control of eating 85 , 86 , and high doses of ICv peptides can result in seizures 87 . It is possible that the motor and anxiogenic actions of CART peptides could produce some of these effects on feeding and body weight (see below). Moreover, it was reported that injection of CART peptide into discrete hypothalamic nuclei resulted in increased, rather than decreased, food intake 72 , 88 . Thus, although the evidence that CART peptides are anorexigenic is strong, some inconsistent observations need to be resolved or clarified. In summary, CART peptides seem to have anorexi-genic effects, although the site(s) and mechanisms of these effects are not yet fully known. The literature indicates that there could be many sites and mechanisms. because most published experiments have involved increasing CART peptide levels by injection, studies with CART depletion or CART receptor blockers are needed. As CART peptides have a major impact on body weight in humans and animals, the CART system is important for understanding obesity and is a promising target for anti-obesity drug development 35 .  The CART system and addiction Drug abuse is a significant problem, and much progress has been made in identifying the mechanisms and neuronal substrates of addiction. There is substantial evidence connecting the CART system and drug abuse. In post-mortem tissues from human victims of cocaine overdose, CART mRNA levels were increased in the nucleus accumbens and decreased in the ventral tegmen-tal area (VTA) 89 , 90 . Also, in a Korean population, an association was found between a polymorphism in intron 1 of the CART gene and alcoholism, but not between this polymorphism and bipolar disorder or schizophrenia 91 . Psychostimulants activate CART-peptide-containing neurons in the nucleus accumbens When initial studies showed an upregulation of CART gene transcription in the striatum after acute injections of either cocaine or amphetamine 1 , the assumption was that the CART system was involved in the action of psychostimulants. More recently it was shown that administration of methamphetamine, MDMA or ethanol also increases CART mRNA levels in the nucleus accumbens 52 , 92 , 93 . Some studies had difficulty reproducing the original findings with cocaine or amphetamine 94 - 96 , but elevations in CART mRNA were again found when higher dosages were given or repeated dosing was used 97 - 99 . It was subsequently shown that acute cocaine administration after injection of forskolin, which activates adenylyl cyclase, did increase CART levels 96 , suggesting that a preliminary activation of CART gene expression makes it more responsive to upregulation by psychostimulants. Recently it was shown that acute administration of cocaine increased the number of CART-peptide-expressing cells in the nucleus accumbens that stained for c-Fos 100 ; this finding supports the notion that cocaine activates CART-peptide-expressing neurons in the nucleus accumbens, even though cocaine does not reliably alter CART peptide levels. The finding also suggests that changes in CART peptide levels per se might not be the best indicator of a role for the CART system in some process. Drugs can affect many neurons without necessarily causing a change in the levels of neurotransmitters, because the neurotransmitters can be replaced, at least in the short term, by synthesis (see REF. 100 for discussion). Taken together, these data indicate that CART-peptide-containing neurons in the nucleus accumbens are activated by acute administration of psychostimulants. The CART system and mesolimbic dopamine Additional data support the idea that CART-peptide-containing neurons in the ventral striatum are activated by psycho-stimulants. Psychostimulants increase dopamine levels in the synaptic cleft and in extra-neuronal spaces, and it has been shown that there are dopamine receptors on CART-peptide-containing neurons 101 - 103 . Also, CART neurons in the nucleus accumbens receive nerve terminals that stain positive for tyrosine hydroxylase, which implies that there is a direct dopaminergic input to CART-peptide-containing cells 16 - 17 . Interestingly, there is also evidence for a reciprocal CART peptide input to dopamine neurons in the ventral midbrain 104 - 106 . Some CART peptide is also found in the medial prefrontal cortex, and cocaine self-administration transiently increases CART gene transcription in this region, indicating that CART peptides might be involved in tolerance and dependence in this region as well 107 . Given that CART neurons in the nucleus accumbens are indirectly activated by psychostimulants through dopamine, the functional effects of CART peptides become the next issue. For this discussion, we will restrict our attention to the role of CART peptides in the nucleus accumbens, for which significant data exist. The first observation was that injections of CART 55–102 alone into the nucleus accumbens had no observable effect on the animals’ locomotor activity. Although intra-accumbal injections of dopamine or amphetamine increased locomotor activity as expected, co-injection of these compounds with CART peptide resulted in a relative reduction in the locomotor activity 108 , 109 . Thus, CART peptide blunted the locomotor-activating effects of the stimulants. Another paper showed that intra-accumbal injection of CART peptide inhibited the expression of behavioural sensitization that is normally induced by amphetamine administration 110 . Furthermore, a recent paper indicates that CART peptide reduces the rewarding effects of cocaine in drug self-administration studies 111 . FIGURE 4 shows that the break point, a reflection of how hard animals are willing to work for a cocaine injection — and sometimes considered a measure of reward — is dose-responsively reduced when CART peptide is injected into the nucleus accumbens 111 . Cocaine administration elevates dopamine levels and therefore increases the activity that is associated with elevated dopamine levels; CART peptides in the nucleus accumbens might act to blunt the effects of dopamine. These findings suggest that CART peptides have a homeostatic function in the nucleus accumbens. It is postulated that as dopamine levels rise after the administration of psychostimulants, CART systems are activated to reduce or control the functional effects of the rise in dopamine (although the mechanisms and specificity of the CART effect are not yet clear). This hypothesis is interesting from a functional point of view, but also from the point of view of using the CART system as a target for developing medications for psychostimulant abuse.  The CART system and addiction Drug abuse is a significant problem, and much progress has been made in identifying the mechanisms and neuronal substrates of addiction. There is substantial evidence connecting the CART system and drug abuse. In post-mortem tissues from human victims of cocaine overdose, CART mRNA levels were increased in the nucleus accumbens and decreased in the ventral tegmen-tal area (VTA) 89 , 90 . Also, in a Korean population, an association was found between a polymorphism in intron 1 of the CART gene and alcoholism, but not between this polymorphism and bipolar disorder or schizophrenia 91 . Psychostimulants activate CART-peptide-containing neurons in the nucleus accumbens When initial studies showed an upregulation of CART gene transcription in the striatum after acute injections of either cocaine or amphetamine 1 , the assumption was that the CART system was involved in the action of psychostimulants. More recently it was shown that administration of methamphetamine, MDMA or ethanol also increases CART mRNA levels in the nucleus accumbens 52 , 92 , 93 . Some studies had difficulty reproducing the original findings with cocaine or amphetamine 94 - 96 , but elevations in CART mRNA were again found when higher dosages were given or repeated dosing was used 97 - 99 . It was subsequently shown that acute cocaine administration after injection of forskolin, which activates adenylyl cyclase, did increase CART levels 96 , suggesting that a preliminary activation of CART gene expression makes it more responsive to upregulation by psychostimulants. Recently it was shown that acute administration of cocaine increased the number of CART-peptide-expressing cells in the nucleus accumbens that stained for c-Fos 100 ; this finding supports the notion that cocaine activates CART-peptide-expressing neurons in the nucleus accumbens, even though cocaine does not reliably alter CART peptide levels. The finding also suggests that changes in CART peptide levels per se might not be the best indicator of a role for the CART system in some process. Drugs can affect many neurons without necessarily causing a change in the levels of neurotransmitters, because the neurotransmitters can be replaced, at least in the short term, by synthesis (see REF. 100 for discussion). Taken together, these data indicate that CART-peptide-containing neurons in the nucleus accumbens are activated by acute administration of psychostimulants. The CART system and mesolimbic dopamine Additional data support the idea that CART-peptide-containing neurons in the ventral striatum are activated by psycho-stimulants. Psychostimulants increase dopamine levels in the synaptic cleft and in extra-neuronal spaces, and it has been shown that there are dopamine receptors on CART-peptide-containing neurons 101 - 103 . Also, CART neurons in the nucleus accumbens receive nerve terminals that stain positive for tyrosine hydroxylase, which implies that there is a direct dopaminergic input to CART-peptide-containing cells 16 - 17 . Interestingly, there is also evidence for a reciprocal CART peptide input to dopamine neurons in the ventral midbrain 104 - 106 . Some CART peptide is also found in the medial prefrontal cortex, and cocaine self-administration transiently increases CART gene transcription in this region, indicating that CART peptides might be involved in tolerance and dependence in this region as well 107 . Given that CART neurons in the nucleus accumbens are indirectly activated by psychostimulants through dopamine, the functional effects of CART peptides become the next issue. For this discussion, we will restrict our attention to the role of CART peptides in the nucleus accumbens, for which significant data exist. The first observation was that injections of CART 55–102 alone into the nucleus accumbens had no observable effect on the animals’ locomotor activity. Although intra-accumbal injections of dopamine or amphetamine increased locomotor activity as expected, co-injection of these compounds with CART peptide resulted in a relative reduction in the locomotor activity 108 , 109 . Thus, CART peptide blunted the locomotor-activating effects of the stimulants. Another paper showed that intra-accumbal injection of CART peptide inhibited the expression of behavioural sensitization that is normally induced by amphetamine administration 110 . Furthermore, a recent paper indicates that CART peptide reduces the rewarding effects of cocaine in drug self-administration studies 111 . FIGURE 4 shows that the break point, a reflection of how hard animals are willing to work for a cocaine injection — and sometimes considered a measure of reward — is dose-responsively reduced when CART peptide is injected into the nucleus accumbens 111 . Cocaine administration elevates dopamine levels and therefore increases the activity that is associated with elevated dopamine levels; CART peptides in the nucleus accumbens might act to blunt the effects of dopamine. These findings suggest that CART peptides have a homeostatic function in the nucleus accumbens. It is postulated that as dopamine levels rise after the administration of psychostimulants, CART systems are activated to reduce or control the functional effects of the rise in dopamine (although the mechanisms and specificity of the CART effect are not yet clear). This hypothesis is interesting from a functional point of view, but also from the point of view of using the CART system as a target for developing medications for psychostimulant abuse.  Psychostimulants activate CART-peptide-containing neurons in the nucleus accumbens When initial studies showed an upregulation of CART gene transcription in the striatum after acute injections of either cocaine or amphetamine 1 , the assumption was that the CART system was involved in the action of psychostimulants. More recently it was shown that administration of methamphetamine, MDMA or ethanol also increases CART mRNA levels in the nucleus accumbens 52 , 92 , 93 . Some studies had difficulty reproducing the original findings with cocaine or amphetamine 94 - 96 , but elevations in CART mRNA were again found when higher dosages were given or repeated dosing was used 97 - 99 . It was subsequently shown that acute cocaine administration after injection of forskolin, which activates adenylyl cyclase, did increase CART levels 96 , suggesting that a preliminary activation of CART gene expression makes it more responsive to upregulation by psychostimulants. Recently it was shown that acute administration of cocaine increased the number of CART-peptide-expressing cells in the nucleus accumbens that stained for c-Fos 100 ; this finding supports the notion that cocaine activates CART-peptide-expressing neurons in the nucleus accumbens, even though cocaine does not reliably alter CART peptide levels. The finding also suggests that changes in CART peptide levels per se might not be the best indicator of a role for the CART system in some process. Drugs can affect many neurons without necessarily causing a change in the levels of neurotransmitters, because the neurotransmitters can be replaced, at least in the short term, by synthesis (see REF. 100 for discussion). Taken together, these data indicate that CART-peptide-containing neurons in the nucleus accumbens are activated by acute administration of psychostimulants.  Psychostimulants activate CART-peptide-containing neurons in the nucleus accumbens When initial studies showed an upregulation of CART gene transcription in the striatum after acute injections of either cocaine or amphetamine 1 , the assumption was that the CART system was involved in the action of psychostimulants. More recently it was shown that administration of methamphetamine, MDMA or ethanol also increases CART mRNA levels in the nucleus accumbens 52 , 92 , 93 . Some studies had difficulty reproducing the original findings with cocaine or amphetamine 94 - 96 , but elevations in CART mRNA were again found when higher dosages were given or repeated dosing was used 97 - 99 . It was subsequently shown that acute cocaine administration after injection of forskolin, which activates adenylyl cyclase, did increase CART levels 96 , suggesting that a preliminary activation of CART gene expression makes it more responsive to upregulation by psychostimulants. Recently it was shown that acute administration of cocaine increased the number of CART-peptide-expressing cells in the nucleus accumbens that stained for c-Fos 100 ; this finding supports the notion that cocaine activates CART-peptide-expressing neurons in the nucleus accumbens, even though cocaine does not reliably alter CART peptide levels. The finding also suggests that changes in CART peptide levels per se might not be the best indicator of a role for the CART system in some process. Drugs can affect many neurons without necessarily causing a change in the levels of neurotransmitters, because the neurotransmitters can be replaced, at least in the short term, by synthesis (see REF. 100 for discussion). Taken together, these data indicate that CART-peptide-containing neurons in the nucleus accumbens are activated by acute administration of psychostimulants.  The CART system and mesolimbic dopamine Additional data support the idea that CART-peptide-containing neurons in the ventral striatum are activated by psycho-stimulants. Psychostimulants increase dopamine levels in the synaptic cleft and in extra-neuronal spaces, and it has been shown that there are dopamine receptors on CART-peptide-containing neurons 101 - 103 . Also, CART neurons in the nucleus accumbens receive nerve terminals that stain positive for tyrosine hydroxylase, which implies that there is a direct dopaminergic input to CART-peptide-containing cells 16 - 17 . Interestingly, there is also evidence for a reciprocal CART peptide input to dopamine neurons in the ventral midbrain 104 - 106 . Some CART peptide is also found in the medial prefrontal cortex, and cocaine self-administration transiently increases CART gene transcription in this region, indicating that CART peptides might be involved in tolerance and dependence in this region as well 107 . Given that CART neurons in the nucleus accumbens are indirectly activated by psychostimulants through dopamine, the functional effects of CART peptides become the next issue. For this discussion, we will restrict our attention to the role of CART peptides in the nucleus accumbens, for which significant data exist. The first observation was that injections of CART 55–102 alone into the nucleus accumbens had no observable effect on the animals’ locomotor activity. Although intra-accumbal injections of dopamine or amphetamine increased locomotor activity as expected, co-injection of these compounds with CART peptide resulted in a relative reduction in the locomotor activity 108 , 109 . Thus, CART peptide blunted the locomotor-activating effects of the stimulants. Another paper showed that intra-accumbal injection of CART peptide inhibited the expression of behavioural sensitization that is normally induced by amphetamine administration 110 . Furthermore, a recent paper indicates that CART peptide reduces the rewarding effects of cocaine in drug self-administration studies 111 . FIGURE 4 shows that the break point, a reflection of how hard animals are willing to work for a cocaine injection — and sometimes considered a measure of reward — is dose-responsively reduced when CART peptide is injected into the nucleus accumbens 111 . Cocaine administration elevates dopamine levels and therefore increases the activity that is associated with elevated dopamine levels; CART peptides in the nucleus accumbens might act to blunt the effects of dopamine. These findings suggest that CART peptides have a homeostatic function in the nucleus accumbens. It is postulated that as dopamine levels rise after the administration of psychostimulants, CART systems are activated to reduce or control the functional effects of the rise in dopamine (although the mechanisms and specificity of the CART effect are not yet clear). This hypothesis is interesting from a functional point of view, but also from the point of view of using the CART system as a target for developing medications for psychostimulant abuse.  The CART system and mesolimbic dopamine Additional data support the idea that CART-peptide-containing neurons in the ventral striatum are activated by psycho-stimulants. Psychostimulants increase dopamine levels in the synaptic cleft and in extra-neuronal spaces, and it has been shown that there are dopamine receptors on CART-peptide-containing neurons 101 - 103 . Also, CART neurons in the nucleus accumbens receive nerve terminals that stain positive for tyrosine hydroxylase, which implies that there is a direct dopaminergic input to CART-peptide-containing cells 16 - 17 . Interestingly, there is also evidence for a reciprocal CART peptide input to dopamine neurons in the ventral midbrain 104 - 106 . Some CART peptide is also found in the medial prefrontal cortex, and cocaine self-administration transiently increases CART gene transcription in this region, indicating that CART peptides might be involved in tolerance and dependence in this region as well 107 . Given that CART neurons in the nucleus accumbens are indirectly activated by psychostimulants through dopamine, the functional effects of CART peptides become the next issue. For this discussion, we will restrict our attention to the role of CART peptides in the nucleus accumbens, for which significant data exist. The first observation was that injections of CART 55–102 alone into the nucleus accumbens had no observable effect on the animals’ locomotor activity. Although intra-accumbal injections of dopamine or amphetamine increased locomotor activity as expected, co-injection of these compounds with CART peptide resulted in a relative reduction in the locomotor activity 108 , 109 . Thus, CART peptide blunted the locomotor-activating effects of the stimulants. Another paper showed that intra-accumbal injection of CART peptide inhibited the expression of behavioural sensitization that is normally induced by amphetamine administration 110 . Furthermore, a recent paper indicates that CART peptide reduces the rewarding effects of cocaine in drug self-administration studies 111 . FIGURE 4 shows that the break point, a reflection of how hard animals are willing to work for a cocaine injection — and sometimes considered a measure of reward — is dose-responsively reduced when CART peptide is injected into the nucleus accumbens 111 . Cocaine administration elevates dopamine levels and therefore increases the activity that is associated with elevated dopamine levels; CART peptides in the nucleus accumbens might act to blunt the effects of dopamine. These findings suggest that CART peptides have a homeostatic function in the nucleus accumbens. It is postulated that as dopamine levels rise after the administration of psychostimulants, CART systems are activated to reduce or control the functional effects of the rise in dopamine (although the mechanisms and specificity of the CART effect are not yet clear). This hypothesis is interesting from a functional point of view, but also from the point of view of using the CART system as a target for developing medications for psychostimulant abuse.  Endocrine regulation CART peptides are present in each of the three components of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis 24 , 112 and in portal blood 23 . Application of CART 55–102 to hypothalamic explants stimulated the release of corticotropin-releasing hormone, TRH and NPY, and reduced the release of alpha-MSH 113 . These early findings suggested that CART peptide can regulate hormone release, and much work has investigated its effects on prolactin secretion. In dispersed anterior pituitary cells, prolactin release was suppressed by administration of CART peptide 114 . In another study, CART peptide had no effect by itself on prolactin release from anterior pituitary cell cultures, but it did inhibit TRH-induced prolactin release 115 . Moreover, ICV injection of CART peptide increased prolactin and growth hormone levels in the blood, as did intravenous administration of CART peptide, although at later time points 116 . Another report found that CART peptides in the anterior pituitary were localized mainly in lactotrophs, and in the posterior pituitary with oxytocin-containing cells; CART mRNA was significantly increased in the anterior pituitary and supraoptic nuclei of lactating rats, suggesting a feedback regulation of lactation on CART mRNA levels 117 . Thus, the basic findings suggest a role for CART peptide in regulating the release of prolactin and other hormones from the pituitary, although the exact mechanisms are currently unknown and might prove to be controversial 118 .  Endocrine regulation CART peptides are present in each of the three components of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis 24 , 112 and in portal blood 23 . Application of CART 55–102 to hypothalamic explants stimulated the release of corticotropin-releasing hormone, TRH and NPY, and reduced the release of alpha-MSH 113 . These early findings suggested that CART peptide can regulate hormone release, and much work has investigated its effects on prolactin secretion. In dispersed anterior pituitary cells, prolactin release was suppressed by administration of CART peptide 114 . In another study, CART peptide had no effect by itself on prolactin release from anterior pituitary cell cultures, but it did inhibit TRH-induced prolactin release 115 . Moreover, ICV injection of CART peptide increased prolactin and growth hormone levels in the blood, as did intravenous administration of CART peptide, although at later time points 116 . Another report found that CART peptides in the anterior pituitary were localized mainly in lactotrophs, and in the posterior pituitary with oxytocin-containing cells; CART mRNA was significantly increased in the anterior pituitary and supraoptic nuclei of lactating rats, suggesting a feedback regulation of lactation on CART mRNA levels 117 . Thus, the basic findings suggest a role for CART peptide in regulating the release of prolactin and other hormones from the pituitary, although the exact mechanisms are currently unknown and might prove to be controversial 118 .  The CART system and stress CART peptide and mRNA are present at many levels of the HPA axis and in other ‘stress-related’ areas, including the arcuate nucleus, the PvN, the pituitary, the medullary C1 adrenaline-containing cells, the intermediolateral cell column of the spinal cord, and the adrenal medulla 1 , 14 , 18 , 23 , 24 , 63 , 112 , 119 - 124 ( FIG. 5 ). It is somewhat remarkable that the CART system is present at all of these levels. As expected from its localization, the CART system has been functionally implicated in stress. CART peptides are released into the pituitary portal blood after hypotensive stress 23 ; this important finding in rats indicates that CART peptides could function as releasing factors, and there is other evidence for this (see the section on endocrine regulation). ICv injection of CART 55–102 resulted in c-Fos elevations in rat PvN neurons, particularly in the corticotrophin-releasing factor (CRF)-containing neurons, suggesting that CART peptides in the hypothalamus have a modulating role on CRF release 125 , 126 . Furthermore, ICv administration of CART peptide elevated plasma levels of adrenocorticotropic hormone and corticosterone 113 . Experiments have suggested that there might be a mutual interaction between elements of the HPA axis and CART peptides. Adrenalectomy reduced the number of CART-peptide-expressing neurons in the PVN and mediobasal hypothalamus, and glucocorticoid replacement partially reversed the reduction 125 , 127 - 129 ( FIG. 5 ). Moreover, CRF administration increased CART mRNA levels in CATH.a cells (a locus coeruleus-like cell line) in culture and increased the release of CART peptide from rat anterior pituitary segments 12 , 130 . Nitric oxide, a regulator of stress responses, colocalizes with CART peptides in some neurons in the rat hypothalamus 131 . Intraperitoneal injection of corticosterone enhanced blood CART peptide levels, and this was prevented by injection of metyrapone (an inhibitor of corticosterone synthesis) 132 , suggesting a role for corticosterone in CART-peptide expression and/or release. However, chronic (14-day) administration of corticosterone in drinking water decreased CART peptide levels in the blood and pituitary of rats 130 . Together, these findings suggest that there is an interaction between corticosterone and CART peptides. In light of these data, it is important to establish the effects of whole-animal stress on CART peptides. It has already been noted that hypotensive stress resulted in increases in CART peptide levels in portal blood 23 . Inflammation induced by administration of bacterial lipopolysaccharides, which are known activators of the HPA axis, increased CART mRNA levels in the hypothalamus of rats 133 . Further, chronic (20-day) cold stress in rats increased CART mRNA levels in the arcuate nucleus, again suggesting a role for CART peptides in energy expenditure and thermogenesis 134 . exposing male rats to forced swimming also increased CART peptide levels in the PvN 135 . In addition, acute and chronic restraint stress increased CART mRNA levels in the hippocampus and amygdala 136 and, conversely, adrenalectomy reduced CART levels in the hippocampal dentate gyrus — an effect that was reversed by corticosterone replacement. It is clear that CART peptides are associated with stress and HPA axis activity; the current challenge is to elucidate the precise involvement and effects of CART peptides in this axis. The CART system in anxiety and depression There is evidence for an involvement of CART peptides in anxiety-like behaviour. CART peptides are expressed in several parts of the limbic system, which is thought to have a role in regulating emotion. These regions include the central and basomedial nuclei of the amygdala, the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, and the hippocampus 1 , 14 . It was reported that, in rats and mice, ICv injection of small CART peptide fragments increased anxiety-like behaviour in the elevated plus maze 137 . The authors suggested that CART might be an anxiety/arousal peptide and that some of its other physiological effects might be secondary to this role. In another study, ICv administration of CART 55–102, but not CART 62–102, increased anxiety-like behaviour as measured in the elevated plus maze and in a social-interaction test 138 , and the effects were reduced by anxiolytic drugs such as diazepam. The different results for the two active CART peptides are compatible with the idea that there might be more than one CART receptor. Taken together, the evidence suggests that CART peptides have a role in the anxiety-like behaviours that are measured in these animal models, and possible mechanisms of these effects have been discussed 139 . Another potentially relevant study 140 found that CART peptides were elevated in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with Huntington’s disease; anxiety is a major feature of this disease. CART peptide and mRNA are present in brain regions that are associated with depression, including the hippocampus, the locus coeruleus, parts of the midbrain raphe nuclei, the amygdala and the hypothalamus 1 , 14 . Recently it was shown that CART mRNA is downregulated in the frontal cortex of rats that have been subjected to a chronic mild-stress paradigm, an animal model of depression 141 . The CART system’s suggested connection to depression in humans derives from a study of an Italian family with early-onset obesity and a missense mutation in the CART gene 142 . Just as obesity co-segregated with the mutation among the family members, high levels of both anxiety and depression were found in family members with the mutation 73 . Although the number of subjects in this study was low, the results are intriguing. It is as yet unclear whether the anxiety and depression are consequences of other problems arising from the mutation, or whether they are a more direct consequence of the lack of CART peptide.  The CART system and stress CART peptide and mRNA are present at many levels of the HPA axis and in other ‘stress-related’ areas, including the arcuate nucleus, the PvN, the pituitary, the medullary C1 adrenaline-containing cells, the intermediolateral cell column of the spinal cord, and the adrenal medulla 1 , 14 , 18 , 23 , 24 , 63 , 112 , 119 - 124 ( FIG. 5 ). It is somewhat remarkable that the CART system is present at all of these levels. As expected from its localization, the CART system has been functionally implicated in stress. CART peptides are released into the pituitary portal blood after hypotensive stress 23 ; this important finding in rats indicates that CART peptides could function as releasing factors, and there is other evidence for this (see the section on endocrine regulation). ICv injection of CART 55–102 resulted in c-Fos elevations in rat PvN neurons, particularly in the corticotrophin-releasing factor (CRF)-containing neurons, suggesting that CART peptides in the hypothalamus have a modulating role on CRF release 125 , 126 . Furthermore, ICv administration of CART peptide elevated plasma levels of adrenocorticotropic hormone and corticosterone 113 . Experiments have suggested that there might be a mutual interaction between elements of the HPA axis and CART peptides. Adrenalectomy reduced the number of CART-peptide-expressing neurons in the PVN and mediobasal hypothalamus, and glucocorticoid replacement partially reversed the reduction 125 , 127 - 129 ( FIG. 5 ). Moreover, CRF administration increased CART mRNA levels in CATH.a cells (a locus coeruleus-like cell line) in culture and increased the release of CART peptide from rat anterior pituitary segments 12 , 130 . Nitric oxide, a regulator of stress responses, colocalizes with CART peptides in some neurons in the rat hypothalamus 131 . Intraperitoneal injection of corticosterone enhanced blood CART peptide levels, and this was prevented by injection of metyrapone (an inhibitor of corticosterone synthesis) 132 , suggesting a role for corticosterone in CART-peptide expression and/or release. However, chronic (14-day) administration of corticosterone in drinking water decreased CART peptide levels in the blood and pituitary of rats 130 . Together, these findings suggest that there is an interaction between corticosterone and CART peptides. In light of these data, it is important to establish the effects of whole-animal stress on CART peptides. It has already been noted that hypotensive stress resulted in increases in CART peptide levels in portal blood 23 . Inflammation induced by administration of bacterial lipopolysaccharides, which are known activators of the HPA axis, increased CART mRNA levels in the hypothalamus of rats 133 . Further, chronic (20-day) cold stress in rats increased CART mRNA levels in the arcuate nucleus, again suggesting a role for CART peptides in energy expenditure and thermogenesis 134 . exposing male rats to forced swimming also increased CART peptide levels in the PvN 135 . In addition, acute and chronic restraint stress increased CART mRNA levels in the hippocampus and amygdala 136 and, conversely, adrenalectomy reduced CART levels in the hippocampal dentate gyrus — an effect that was reversed by corticosterone replacement. It is clear that CART peptides are associated with stress and HPA axis activity; the current challenge is to elucidate the precise involvement and effects of CART peptides in this axis. The CART system in anxiety and depression There is evidence for an involvement of CART peptides in anxiety-like behaviour. CART peptides are expressed in several parts of the limbic system, which is thought to have a role in regulating emotion. These regions include the central and basomedial nuclei of the amygdala, the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, and the hippocampus 1 , 14 . It was reported that, in rats and mice, ICv injection of small CART peptide fragments increased anxiety-like behaviour in the elevated plus maze 137 . The authors suggested that CART might be an anxiety/arousal peptide and that some of its other physiological effects might be secondary to this role. In another study, ICv administration of CART 55–102, but not CART 62–102, increased anxiety-like behaviour as measured in the elevated plus maze and in a social-interaction test 138 , and the effects were reduced by anxiolytic drugs such as diazepam. The different results for the two active CART peptides are compatible with the idea that there might be more than one CART receptor. Taken together, the evidence suggests that CART peptides have a role in the anxiety-like behaviours that are measured in these animal models, and possible mechanisms of these effects have been discussed 139 . Another potentially relevant study 140 found that CART peptides were elevated in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with Huntington’s disease; anxiety is a major feature of this disease. CART peptide and mRNA are present in brain regions that are associated with depression, including the hippocampus, the locus coeruleus, parts of the midbrain raphe nuclei, the amygdala and the hypothalamus 1 , 14 . Recently it was shown that CART mRNA is downregulated in the frontal cortex of rats that have been subjected to a chronic mild-stress paradigm, an animal model of depression 141 . The CART system’s suggested connection to depression in humans derives from a study of an Italian family with early-onset obesity and a missense mutation in the CART gene 142 . Just as obesity co-segregated with the mutation among the family members, high levels of both anxiety and depression were found in family members with the mutation 73 . Although the number of subjects in this study was low, the results are intriguing. It is as yet unclear whether the anxiety and depression are consequences of other problems arising from the mutation, or whether they are a more direct consequence of the lack of CART peptide.  The CART system in anxiety and depression There is evidence for an involvement of CART peptides in anxiety-like behaviour. CART peptides are expressed in several parts of the limbic system, which is thought to have a role in regulating emotion. These regions include the central and basomedial nuclei of the amygdala, the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, and the hippocampus 1 , 14 . It was reported that, in rats and mice, ICv injection of small CART peptide fragments increased anxiety-like behaviour in the elevated plus maze 137 . The authors suggested that CART might be an anxiety/arousal peptide and that some of its other physiological effects might be secondary to this role. In another study, ICv administration of CART 55–102, but not CART 62–102, increased anxiety-like behaviour as measured in the elevated plus maze and in a social-interaction test 138 , and the effects were reduced by anxiolytic drugs such as diazepam. The different results for the two active CART peptides are compatible with the idea that there might be more than one CART receptor. Taken together, the evidence suggests that CART peptides have a role in the anxiety-like behaviours that are measured in these animal models, and possible mechanisms of these effects have been discussed 139 . Another potentially relevant study 140 found that CART peptides were elevated in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with Huntington’s disease; anxiety is a major feature of this disease. CART peptide and mRNA are present in brain regions that are associated with depression, including the hippocampus, the locus coeruleus, parts of the midbrain raphe nuclei, the amygdala and the hypothalamus 1 , 14 . Recently it was shown that CART mRNA is downregulated in the frontal cortex of rats that have been subjected to a chronic mild-stress paradigm, an animal model of depression 141 . The CART system’s suggested connection to depression in humans derives from a study of an Italian family with early-onset obesity and a missense mutation in the CART gene 142 . Just as obesity co-segregated with the mutation among the family members, high levels of both anxiety and depression were found in family members with the mutation 73 . Although the number of subjects in this study was low, the results are intriguing. It is as yet unclear whether the anxiety and depression are consequences of other problems arising from the mutation, or whether they are a more direct consequence of the lack of CART peptide.  The CART system in anxiety and depression There is evidence for an involvement of CART peptides in anxiety-like behaviour. CART peptides are expressed in several parts of the limbic system, which is thought to have a role in regulating emotion. These regions include the central and basomedial nuclei of the amygdala, the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, and the hippocampus 1 , 14 . It was reported that, in rats and mice, ICv injection of small CART peptide fragments increased anxiety-like behaviour in the elevated plus maze 137 . The authors suggested that CART might be an anxiety/arousal peptide and that some of its other physiological effects might be secondary to this role. In another study, ICv administration of CART 55–102, but not CART 62–102, increased anxiety-like behaviour as measured in the elevated plus maze and in a social-interaction test 138 , and the effects were reduced by anxiolytic drugs such as diazepam. The different results for the two active CART peptides are compatible with the idea that there might be more than one CART receptor. Taken together, the evidence suggests that CART peptides have a role in the anxiety-like behaviours that are measured in these animal models, and possible mechanisms of these effects have been discussed 139 . Another potentially relevant study 140 found that CART peptides were elevated in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with Huntington’s disease; anxiety is a major feature of this disease. CART peptide and mRNA are present in brain regions that are associated with depression, including the hippocampus, the locus coeruleus, parts of the midbrain raphe nuclei, the amygdala and the hypothalamus 1 , 14 . Recently it was shown that CART mRNA is downregulated in the frontal cortex of rats that have been subjected to a chronic mild-stress paradigm, an animal model of depression 141 . The CART system’s suggested connection to depression in humans derives from a study of an Italian family with early-onset obesity and a missense mutation in the CART gene 142 . Just as obesity co-segregated with the mutation among the family members, high levels of both anxiety and depression were found in family members with the mutation 73 . Although the number of subjects in this study was low, the results are intriguing. It is as yet unclear whether the anxiety and depression are consequences of other problems arising from the mutation, or whether they are a more direct consequence of the lack of CART peptide.  Additional functions of the CART system CART peptide immunoreactivity has been observed in areas that are associated with cardiovascular control in rats, including the intermediolateral cell column of the spinal cord, portions of the rostral ventrolateral medulla and the intracardiac ganglia 1 , 14 , 121 , 143 - 145 . Moreover, after drug-induced hypotension approximately half of the CART-peptide-containing neurons stained positive for c-Fos in spinal cord segments T5–T13, suggesting the possibility of a role for CART in cardiovascular regulation. ICv injections of CART 55–102 in conscious rabbits increased mean arterial pressure and renal-nerve activity, presumably by altering sympatho-adrenal outflow 146 , and similar effects of CART peptides have been found in studies of anaesthetized rats 147 . because the cardiovascular effects occurred in experimental conditions that also resulted in inhibition of food intake, it has been speculated that there might be a relationship between the regulation of cardiovascular function and energy expenditure. More recently, CART peptide has been shown to evoke a long-lasting and dose-dependent constriction of isolated brain cerebral arterioles; these effects were dependent on endothelin A receptors 148 . Additional studies will be needed to investigate these possible mechanisms and to determine whether and how they apply to humans. CART peptides are involved in a number of additional physiological processes. A series of studies have implicated CART peptides in pain 14 , 149 - 153 . CART peptides are antinociceptive in the formalin test 149 and can reverse the hyperalgesia and allodynia in a model of chronic neuropathic pain 153 . bone remodelling also involves hypothalamic CART peptides 154 , 155 , and the CART system is now considered to be part of the new field of neuroskeletal biology 156 . CART peptides also have neurotrophic and neuroprotective properties 157 - 159 , and a few papers suggest that CART peptides play a part in CNS development 55 , 160 - 162 .  Additional functions of the CART system CART peptide immunoreactivity has been observed in areas that are associated with cardiovascular control in rats, including the intermediolateral cell column of the spinal cord, portions of the rostral ventrolateral medulla and the intracardiac ganglia 1 , 14 , 121 , 143 - 145 . Moreover, after drug-induced hypotension approximately half of the CART-peptide-containing neurons stained positive for c-Fos in spinal cord segments T5–T13, suggesting the possibility of a role for CART in cardiovascular regulation. ICv injections of CART 55–102 in conscious rabbits increased mean arterial pressure and renal-nerve activity, presumably by altering sympatho-adrenal outflow 146 , and similar effects of CART peptides have been found in studies of anaesthetized rats 147 . because the cardiovascular effects occurred in experimental conditions that also resulted in inhibition of food intake, it has been speculated that there might be a relationship between the regulation of cardiovascular function and energy expenditure. More recently, CART peptide has been shown to evoke a long-lasting and dose-dependent constriction of isolated brain cerebral arterioles; these effects were dependent on endothelin A receptors 148 . Additional studies will be needed to investigate these possible mechanisms and to determine whether and how they apply to humans. CART peptides are involved in a number of additional physiological processes. A series of studies have implicated CART peptides in pain 14 , 149 - 153 . CART peptides are antinociceptive in the formalin test 149 and can reverse the hyperalgesia and allodynia in a model of chronic neuropathic pain 153 . bone remodelling also involves hypothalamic CART peptides 154 , 155 , and the CART system is now considered to be part of the new field of neuroskeletal biology 156 . CART peptides also have neurotrophic and neuroprotective properties 157 - 159 , and a few papers suggest that CART peptides play a part in CNS development 55 , 160 - 162 .  Conclusions and future perspectives Although CART peptides were named after the experimental condition in which they were discovered, it is now fully appreciated that CART is not only involved in the actions of cocaine and amphetamines. Indeed, CART peptides are widely (but discretely) localized throughout the CNS and periphery, and it is therefore not surprising that they seem to be involved in a number of physiological processes. Many active substances like acetylcholine or NPY have multiple functions, again at least partly because they are widely distributed throughout the body. It is therefore difficult to espouse a single role for CART and premature to attempt to list all of the roles of CART peptides. At the moment our plates are full unravelling the CART system’s many physiological roles and mechanisms of action, and understanding the constituents of the system, such as the CART-peptide receptor(s). The CART system might well function in conjunction with other active substances. CART peptides colocalize with many other active substances within cells, and it seems unlikely that they regulate many of the processes discussed above by themselves. For example, food intake is known to be regulated by tens of different neurotransmitters and hormones 163 - 166 . Nevertheless, it seems clear that the CART system is an important component of the regulation of feeding, body weight and energy expenditure. Although there has been much research on the localization, processing and expression of CART peptides, the current frontiers are to further elucidate their physiological roles and to identify, clone and study the receptor(s) for CART peptides. Identifying the receptor(s) might facilitate screening for small-molecule agonists and antagonists, which in turn will be useful tools for additional studies of CART-peptide functions and mechanisms.  Conclusions and future perspectives Although CART peptides were named after the experimental condition in which they were discovered, it is now fully appreciated that CART is not only involved in the actions of cocaine and amphetamines. Indeed, CART peptides are widely (but discretely) localized throughout the CNS and periphery, and it is therefore not surprising that they seem to be involved in a number of physiological processes. Many active substances like acetylcholine or NPY have multiple functions, again at least partly because they are widely distributed throughout the body. It is therefore difficult to espouse a single role for CART and premature to attempt to list all of the roles of CART peptides. At the moment our plates are full unravelling the CART system’s many physiological roles and mechanisms of action, and understanding the constituents of the system, such as the CART-peptide receptor(s). The CART system might well function in conjunction with other active substances. CART peptides colocalize with many other active substances within cells, and it seems unlikely that they regulate many of the processes discussed above by themselves. For example, food intake is known to be regulated by tens of different neurotransmitters and hormones 163 - 166 . Nevertheless, it seems clear that the CART system is an important component of the regulation of feeding, body weight and energy expenditure. Although there has been much research on the localization, processing and expression of CART peptides, the current frontiers are to further elucidate their physiological roles and to identify, clone and study the receptor(s) for CART peptides. Identifying the receptor(s) might facilitate screening for small-molecule agonists and antagonists, which in turn will be useful tools for additional studies of CART-peptide functions and mechanisms. 