Human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cells are both targets and effectors for the angiogenic cytokine, VEGF Former vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) - head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) studies have focused on VEGF’s contributions toward tumor-associated angiogenesis. Previously, we have shown that HNSCC cells produce high levels of VEGF. We therefore hypothesized that VEGF serves a biphasic role i.e. proangiogenic and protumorigenic in HNSCC pathogenesis. Western blots confirmed the presence of VEGF’s primary mitogenic receptors, VEGFR-2/KDR and VEGFR-1/Flt-1 in cultured HNSCC cells. Subsequent studies evaluated VEGF’s effects on HNSCC intracellular signaling, mitogenesis, invasive capacities and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) activities. Introduction of hr VEGF165 initiated ROS-mediated intracellular signaling, resulting in kinase activation and phosphorylation of KDR and Erk1/2. As high endogenous VEGF production rendered HNSCC cells refractory to exogenous VEGF’s mitogenic effects, siRNA was employed, inhibiting endogenous VEGF production for up to 96h. Relative to transfection vector matched controls, siRNA treated HNSCC cells showed a significant decrease in proliferation at both 30nM and 50nM siRNA doses. Addition of exogenous hr VEGF165 (30ng/ml and 50ng/ml) to siRNA-silenced HNSCC cells resulted in dose-dependent increases in cell proliferation. Cell invasion assays showed VEGF is a potent HNSCC chemoattractant and demonstrated that VEGF pretreatment enhanced invasiveness of HNSCC cells. Conditioned media from VEGF challenged HNSCC cells showed a moderate increase in gelatinase activity. Our results demonstrate, for the first time, that HNSCC cells are both targets and effectors for VEGF. These data introduce the prospect that VEGF targeted therapy has the potential to fulfill both anti-angiogenic and anti-tumorigenic functions.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell Culture Three human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines (SCC4, SCC9, and SCC15), derived from squamous cell carcinomas of the tongue, were obtained from the American Type Cell Culture (ATCC, Manassas, VA). For expansion, cells were cultured in DMEM/F-12 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (GIBCO, Grand Island, NY) at 37°C, 5% CO2. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECp, Cascade Biologics, Portland, OR) were cultured in Medium 200 supplemented with LSGS (Cascade Biologics, Portland, OR) at 37°C, 5% CO2. In order to investigate VEGF-specific cellular effects, serum free medium was used in selected experiments as described. Western Blot Analysis HUVECs or HNSCC cells which had undergone 24 h sera deprivation, were incubated with (20 min incubation) or without human recombinant VEGF165 ( hr VEGF165, R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) in fresh sera free medium. The cell monolayers were then washed with ice cold PBS and lysed with M-PER mammalian protein extraction reagent (Pierce, Rockford, IL) with 1X protease inhibitor cocktail or 1X phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Pierce, Rockford, IL). Total protein concentrations were detected by Bio-Rad protein assay (Hercules, CA). Samples containing equivalent amounts of protein were then separated by SDS-PAGE on 6% or 10% acrylaminde/bis gels, and transferred to Hybond-P PVDF membranes (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ). Electrophoresis duration was prolonged in experiments investigating KDR isoforms to achieve a distinctive separation at high molecular range. Immunoblotting was conducted using standard methods. Proteins were visualized using the enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) system (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ) followed by exposure to CL-Xposure films (Kodak, Rochester, NY). The antibodies and working dilutions were as follows: Flk-1/KDR mouse monoclonal antibody (1:200 dilution, Santa Cruz, CA), Flt-1 rabbit polyclonal antibody (1:200, Abcam), phosphorylated Flk-1/KDR (Tyr951) rabbit polyclonal antibody (1:200, Santa Cruz, CA), Erk1/2 (p44/42) mouse monoclonal antibody(1:2000, Cell Signaling Tec., Boston, MA), and phosphor-Erk1/2 (phospho-p44/42) polyclonal rabbit antibody (1:1000, Cell Signaling Tec., Boston, MA). Kodak 1D3 image analysis software (Kodak, Rochester, NY) was employed to perform densitometry analyses. Data were normalized relative to protein levels of ?-actin, which was probed by a mouse monoclonal antibody (1:1000, Santa Cruz, CA). Detection of Intracellular Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) HNSCC cells (1×104/chamber) were seeded on Lab-Tek chamber slides (Nalge Nunc Int. Naperville, IL) in serum free DMEM/F12 medium (base medium) and were incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2 for 24 h. The conditioned media were removed, followed by addition of fresh base medium with PBS (negative control), 0.1mM H2O2 (positive control) or two doses of hr VEGF165 (30ng/ml and 50ng/ml). Chamber slides were incubated at 37°C for 15 min. Cells were then treated with 10µM of reactive oxygen species detecting probe CM-H2 DCFDA (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) and incubated for an additional 5 min. Generation of intracellular reactive oxygen species was observed with an Olympus fluorescence microscope. SiRNA Transfection Pre-designed siRNA against VEGF and FAM™-Labeled GAPDH siRNA were purchased from Ambion Inc. (Austin, TX). The sense sequence for VEGF siRNA is: 5’-GGAGGAGGGCAGAAUCAUCtt-3’ and the antisense sequence is: 5’- GAUGAUUCUGCCCUCCUCCtt-3’. The siRNA was mixed with the transfection agent SiPORT Neo FX (Ambion, Austin, TX) 10 min before pre-coating the culture plates at a final concentration of 30nM or 50nM. HNSCC cells were then seeded at 3×104 cells/well in the siRNA pre-coated 24-well plates. 30nM GAPDH siRNA was used as the positive control, and 2µl/well of the transfection agent Neo FX alone was used as the negative control. Transfected cells were incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2, for 24 h. The conditioned media of each well was then collected for VEGF ELISA analyses or replaced by serum free DMEM/F-12 base medium with or without VEGF for the cell proliferation assay, according to the experimental plan. Enzyme-Linked ImmunoSorbent Assay Samples of the conditioned medium obtained at 24, 48, 72, and 96 h after siRNA transfection were analyzed by ELISA (Human VEGF DuoSet ELISA Development Kit, R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) to determine the concentration of VEGF protein secreted by HUVEC and HNSCC cells. Results are expressed as pg/104 cells with cell numbers determined as described in the following section. VEGF Induced Cell Proliferation Twenty four hours after siRNA transfection, HNSCC cells were stimulated with 0 (control), 30ng/ml, or 50ng/ml hr VEGF165 in fresh serum free base medium. Every 24 h, conditioned media were removed, followed by addition of fresh base media with the appropriate treatment to the 24-well plates. Each experimental group had at least 4 replicate wells. HUVECs were used as positive controls to validate hr VEGF165’s mitogenic activity. Cell numbers were determined using the MTT (methylthiazoyltetrazolium chloride) assay (CellTiter Non-Radioactive Cell Proliferation Assay, Promega, Madison, WI). Cell harvest time points were: 0, 24, 48, and 72 h after hr VEGF165 stimulation. A matched cell line specific standard curve was run concurrently with each assay. Cell Invasion Assay Following 24 h sera deprivation, conditioned media were removed and HNSCC cells were incubated with fresh serum free base medium (negative control), 10% FBS supplemented base medium (positive control), or pretreated with 100ng/ml hr VEGF165 for an additional 24 h prior to the cell invasion assay (InnoCyte cell invasion kit, Calbiochem, San Diego, CA). Cells (4 ×104/well) were then seeded in the upper chambers with fresh serum free base medium. 10% FBS or 100ng/ml hr VEGF165 were added to selected lower chambers as chemoattractants. The invasion plates were then incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2 for 48 h. A standard curve consisting of cell line matched cells was run concurrently with each assay for determination of invaded cells. MMP2 and MMP9 Zymography Twenty four hours sera deprived HNSCC cells (1×107) were grown in fresh sera free base medium with or without 100ng/ml hr VEGF165 for an additional 24 h. Conditioned media were then collected and clarified by cold centrifugation at 1000g for 10 min. Sample media with or without 2 h pre-incubation of the pro-MMP activator paminophenylmercuric acetate (APMA, 1mM, Calbiochem, San Diego, CA) were separated by a 7.5% non-reducing SDS-PAGE gel copolymerized with 0.1% gelatin. The gelatinolytic activities were analyzed as described previously [ Pei et al., 2006 ]. Densitometry analysis was performed by Kodak 1D3 image analysis software. Statistical Analysis siRNA and cell invasion data were analyzed by one way ANOVA followed by Tukey-Kramer multiple comparisons test. Analysis of the cell proliferation data were conducted using the unpaired t test. Graphpad InStat 3 (Graphpad Software Inc., San Diego, CA) software was employed for the statistical analyses. The level of significance was established at p<0.05.  Cell Culture Three human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines (SCC4, SCC9, and SCC15), derived from squamous cell carcinomas of the tongue, were obtained from the American Type Cell Culture (ATCC, Manassas, VA). For expansion, cells were cultured in DMEM/F-12 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (GIBCO, Grand Island, NY) at 37°C, 5% CO2. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECp, Cascade Biologics, Portland, OR) were cultured in Medium 200 supplemented with LSGS (Cascade Biologics, Portland, OR) at 37°C, 5% CO2. In order to investigate VEGF-specific cellular effects, serum free medium was used in selected experiments as described.  Western Blot Analysis HUVECs or HNSCC cells which had undergone 24 h sera deprivation, were incubated with (20 min incubation) or without human recombinant VEGF165 ( hr VEGF165, R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) in fresh sera free medium. The cell monolayers were then washed with ice cold PBS and lysed with M-PER mammalian protein extraction reagent (Pierce, Rockford, IL) with 1X protease inhibitor cocktail or 1X phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Pierce, Rockford, IL). Total protein concentrations were detected by Bio-Rad protein assay (Hercules, CA). Samples containing equivalent amounts of protein were then separated by SDS-PAGE on 6% or 10% acrylaminde/bis gels, and transferred to Hybond-P PVDF membranes (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ). Electrophoresis duration was prolonged in experiments investigating KDR isoforms to achieve a distinctive separation at high molecular range. Immunoblotting was conducted using standard methods. Proteins were visualized using the enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) system (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ) followed by exposure to CL-Xposure films (Kodak, Rochester, NY). The antibodies and working dilutions were as follows: Flk-1/KDR mouse monoclonal antibody (1:200 dilution, Santa Cruz, CA), Flt-1 rabbit polyclonal antibody (1:200, Abcam), phosphorylated Flk-1/KDR (Tyr951) rabbit polyclonal antibody (1:200, Santa Cruz, CA), Erk1/2 (p44/42) mouse monoclonal antibody(1:2000, Cell Signaling Tec., Boston, MA), and phosphor-Erk1/2 (phospho-p44/42) polyclonal rabbit antibody (1:1000, Cell Signaling Tec., Boston, MA). Kodak 1D3 image analysis software (Kodak, Rochester, NY) was employed to perform densitometry analyses. Data were normalized relative to protein levels of ?-actin, which was probed by a mouse monoclonal antibody (1:1000, Santa Cruz, CA).  Detection of Intracellular Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) HNSCC cells (1×104/chamber) were seeded on Lab-Tek chamber slides (Nalge Nunc Int. Naperville, IL) in serum free DMEM/F12 medium (base medium) and were incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2 for 24 h. The conditioned media were removed, followed by addition of fresh base medium with PBS (negative control), 0.1mM H2O2 (positive control) or two doses of hr VEGF165 (30ng/ml and 50ng/ml). Chamber slides were incubated at 37°C for 15 min. Cells were then treated with 10µM of reactive oxygen species detecting probe CM-H2 DCFDA (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) and incubated for an additional 5 min. Generation of intracellular reactive oxygen species was observed with an Olympus fluorescence microscope.  SiRNA Transfection Pre-designed siRNA against VEGF and FAM™-Labeled GAPDH siRNA were purchased from Ambion Inc. (Austin, TX). The sense sequence for VEGF siRNA is: 5’-GGAGGAGGGCAGAAUCAUCtt-3’ and the antisense sequence is: 5’- GAUGAUUCUGCCCUCCUCCtt-3’. The siRNA was mixed with the transfection agent SiPORT Neo FX (Ambion, Austin, TX) 10 min before pre-coating the culture plates at a final concentration of 30nM or 50nM. HNSCC cells were then seeded at 3×104 cells/well in the siRNA pre-coated 24-well plates. 30nM GAPDH siRNA was used as the positive control, and 2µl/well of the transfection agent Neo FX alone was used as the negative control. Transfected cells were incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2, for 24 h. The conditioned media of each well was then collected for VEGF ELISA analyses or replaced by serum free DMEM/F-12 base medium with or without VEGF for the cell proliferation assay, according to the experimental plan.  Enzyme-Linked ImmunoSorbent Assay Samples of the conditioned medium obtained at 24, 48, 72, and 96 h after siRNA transfection were analyzed by ELISA (Human VEGF DuoSet ELISA Development Kit, R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) to determine the concentration of VEGF protein secreted by HUVEC and HNSCC cells. Results are expressed as pg/104 cells with cell numbers determined as described in the following section.  VEGF Induced Cell Proliferation Twenty four hours after siRNA transfection, HNSCC cells were stimulated with 0 (control), 30ng/ml, or 50ng/ml hr VEGF165 in fresh serum free base medium. Every 24 h, conditioned media were removed, followed by addition of fresh base media with the appropriate treatment to the 24-well plates. Each experimental group had at least 4 replicate wells. HUVECs were used as positive controls to validate hr VEGF165’s mitogenic activity. Cell numbers were determined using the MTT (methylthiazoyltetrazolium chloride) assay (CellTiter Non-Radioactive Cell Proliferation Assay, Promega, Madison, WI). Cell harvest time points were: 0, 24, 48, and 72 h after hr VEGF165 stimulation. A matched cell line specific standard curve was run concurrently with each assay.  Cell Invasion Assay Following 24 h sera deprivation, conditioned media were removed and HNSCC cells were incubated with fresh serum free base medium (negative control), 10% FBS supplemented base medium (positive control), or pretreated with 100ng/ml hr VEGF165 for an additional 24 h prior to the cell invasion assay (InnoCyte cell invasion kit, Calbiochem, San Diego, CA). Cells (4 ×104/well) were then seeded in the upper chambers with fresh serum free base medium. 10% FBS or 100ng/ml hr VEGF165 were added to selected lower chambers as chemoattractants. The invasion plates were then incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2 for 48 h. A standard curve consisting of cell line matched cells was run concurrently with each assay for determination of invaded cells.  MMP2 and MMP9 Zymography Twenty four hours sera deprived HNSCC cells (1×107) were grown in fresh sera free base medium with or without 100ng/ml hr VEGF165 for an additional 24 h. Conditioned media were then collected and clarified by cold centrifugation at 1000g for 10 min. Sample media with or without 2 h pre-incubation of the pro-MMP activator paminophenylmercuric acetate (APMA, 1mM, Calbiochem, San Diego, CA) were separated by a 7.5% non-reducing SDS-PAGE gel copolymerized with 0.1% gelatin. The gelatinolytic activities were analyzed as described previously [ Pei et al., 2006 ]. Densitometry analysis was performed by Kodak 1D3 image analysis software.  Statistical Analysis siRNA and cell invasion data were analyzed by one way ANOVA followed by Tukey-Kramer multiple comparisons test. Analysis of the cell proliferation data were conducted using the unpaired t test. Graphpad InStat 3 (Graphpad Software Inc., San Diego, CA) software was employed for the statistical analyses. The level of significance was established at p<0.05.  RESULTS Cultured HNSCC cells retain VEGFR-2/KDR and VEGFR-1/Flt-1 The primary translational product of KDR is a 150 kDa immature protein. During post-translational processing, KDR protein is rapidly glycosylated to a 200 kDa intermediate form. The functional mature KDR is a fully glycosylated cross-membrane protein with a molecular weight of 230 kDa [ Takahashi and Shibuya, 1997 ]. Western blots conducted on three HNSCC cell lines demonstrated the presence of KDR (both immature and intermediate forms) and Flt-1. Relative to HNSCC cells, HUVECs were found to contain higher levels of the immature KDR (150kDa) protein. One HNSCC cell line (SCC4) demonstrated higher levels of Flt-1 compared to HUVECs ( Figs. 1A and 1B ). <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> increases phosphorylated levels of KDR and Erk1/2 in HNSCC cells Introduction of hr VEGF165 (100ng/ml) to HNSCC cells increased phosphorylated levels of KDR relative to the PBS matched negative controls in every cell line evaluated ( Fig. 2A ). Increased phosphorylated Erk1/2 levels were also observed in two of three HNSCC cell lines (SCC4 and SCC9) in response to VEGF stimulation ( Fig. 2C ). In contrast, SCC15 cells showed high baseline levels of phosporylated Erk1/2 and demonstrated a decrease in Erk1/2 phosphorylation following VEGF introduction ( Fig. 2C ). Densitometry analyses revealed cell line specific differences in phosphorylation ratios of KDR and Erk1/2 following VEGF challenge ( Figs. 2B, 2D and 2E ). Of all cell lines evaluated, SCC4 was unique with regard to the high extent of VEGF-mediated kinase activation. Addition of <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> initiates intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation in HNSCC cells Recent studies show that VEGF induces rapid increase in the intracellular generation of reactive oxygen species via activation of VEGFR-2/KDR in endothelial cells [ Colavitti et al., 2002 ]. We have asked whether VEGF has a similar effect on epithelial origin HNSCC cells. Our data revealed that VEGF induced comparable fluorescence intensities as the positive control H2O2 in all HNSCC cell lines. ( Fig. 3 ) <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> increases HUVECs cell proliferation To confirm the functional activity of hr VEGF165, we first evaluated its mitogenic effects on HUVECs which are established as VEGF target cells [ Kanno et al., 2000 ]. Introduction of hr VEGF165 to HUVECs significantly increased cell proliferation compared to the control HUVECs which received base medium only ( Fig. 4A ). Based on the preliminary experiments to optimize the effective doses of hr VEGF165 (data not shown), we selected two VEGF doses, 30ng/ml and 50ng/ml, to be used in the subsequent HNSCC cell proliferation studies. Endogenous VEGF production renders HNSCC cells refractory to exogenous VEGF As we previously reported, HNSCC cells produce and secrete abundant endogenous VEGF [ Rodrigo et al., 2006 ]. Accordingly, our results showed introduction of hr VEGF165 to HNSCC cultures did not promote cell proliferation ( Fig. 4B ). These data suggested that high endogenous VEGF production minimized the effects of exogenous VEGF. Pre-designed siRNA against VEGF successfully inhibited endogenous VEGF production in HNSCC cells HNSCC cells were successfully transfected with the FAM-labeled siRNA (>95%) with assistance of a lipid-based transfection agent, NeoFX ( Figs. 5A and 5B ), and the fluorescence signal of siRNA sustained for more than 96 h. We then transfected the HNSCC cells with pre-designed VEGF siRNA, and determined the amount of VEGF protein (ELISA) per 104 cells (MTT assay), 24, 48, 72, and 96 h after transfection. VEGF production was significantly suppressed by siRNA in all three HNSCC cell lines, and the most prominent inhibition effect was obtained at 48 h (up to 53.5% inhibition) following transfection. Though the silencing effect diminished over time due to cell proliferation, VEGF inhibition remained ?45.9% at 96 h after transfection ( Fig. 4C ). Blocking VEGF expression decreases HNSCC cell proliferation Relative to the negative control group which received the empty transfection vector alone, cell proliferation was significantly decreased in VEGF silenced HNSCC cells ( Fig. 4D ). The greatest suppression of cell growth was observed 96h after siRNA transfection (22.2% and 23.5%, respectively, for the 30nM and 50nM groups). <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> promotes cell proliferation of VEGF-silenced HNSCC cells A significant dose-dependent increase in siRNA silenced HNSCC cells was observed upon VEGF treatment. Both the amount of siRNA transfected and the amount of VEGF introduced subsequently affected HNSCC proliferation. As can be appreciated in Figs. 5C and 5D , the greatest increase in HNSCC cell growth was observed in cells that received 50nM siRNA + 50mg/ml VEGF. In all groups, hr VEGF165’s pro-proliferative effects on VEGF-silenced HNSCC cells increased over time. VEGF is comparable or superior to 10% FBS as an HNSCC cellular chemoattractant In this component of the study, we explored the role of hr VEGF165 in HNSCC cell migration and invasion through a synthetic basement membrane. Our data demonstrate that 100ng/ml hr VEGF165 exerted equivalent or greater chemoattractive effect relative to 10% FBS in all three HNSCC cell lines ( Fig. 6 ). Also apparent from the data depicted in Figure 6 is the marked heterogeneity among the three tested HNSCC cell lines with regard to invasive capacity. Prior exposure to <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> enhances HNSCC cell invasiveness in two HNSCC cell lines Two HNSCC cell lines (SCC4 and SCC15) demonstrated significantly increased invasive capacity following a 24h 100ng/ml hr VEGF165 pretreatment with VEGF as the chemoattractant relative to all other groups (negative control, 10% FBS chemoattractant, 10% FBS pretreatment plus 10% FBS chemoattractant, and 100ng/ml VEGF chemoattractant alone) ( Fig. 6 ). Cell invasion was increased by 118.8% and 89.6% respectively in SCC4 and SCC15 cells, compared with the group that received VEGF only as a chemoattractant ( Fig. 6 ). <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> modestly increases gelatinases release by HNSCC cells To explore potential mechanisms whereby VEGF enhances HNSCC invasiveness, we evaluated the release of the basement membrane degrading gelatinases MMP2 and MMP9 (Matrix Metalloproteinases) in conditioned media following VEGF stimulation. Gelatin zymography results showed a cell line associated release pattern of both latent and active MMP2 and MMP9 ( Fig. 7A and 7C ). As would be anticipated, introduction of APMA resulted in significant conversion of pro-MMPs to their respective activated isoforms ( Figs. 7A and 7C ). Release of the latent pro-MMP2 was increased by 4.30% and 8.54% in SCC4 and SCC15 respectively after 24h VEGF treatment. VEGF’s modulation of pro-MMP9 release was cell line dependent, as VEGF increased SCC15 pro-MMP9 by 5.60% while decreased its release by 3.66% in SCC4 ( Figs. 7B and 7D ).  RESULTS Cultured HNSCC cells retain VEGFR-2/KDR and VEGFR-1/Flt-1 The primary translational product of KDR is a 150 kDa immature protein. During post-translational processing, KDR protein is rapidly glycosylated to a 200 kDa intermediate form. The functional mature KDR is a fully glycosylated cross-membrane protein with a molecular weight of 230 kDa [ Takahashi and Shibuya, 1997 ]. Western blots conducted on three HNSCC cell lines demonstrated the presence of KDR (both immature and intermediate forms) and Flt-1. Relative to HNSCC cells, HUVECs were found to contain higher levels of the immature KDR (150kDa) protein. One HNSCC cell line (SCC4) demonstrated higher levels of Flt-1 compared to HUVECs ( Figs. 1A and 1B ). <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> increases phosphorylated levels of KDR and Erk1/2 in HNSCC cells Introduction of hr VEGF165 (100ng/ml) to HNSCC cells increased phosphorylated levels of KDR relative to the PBS matched negative controls in every cell line evaluated ( Fig. 2A ). Increased phosphorylated Erk1/2 levels were also observed in two of three HNSCC cell lines (SCC4 and SCC9) in response to VEGF stimulation ( Fig. 2C ). In contrast, SCC15 cells showed high baseline levels of phosporylated Erk1/2 and demonstrated a decrease in Erk1/2 phosphorylation following VEGF introduction ( Fig. 2C ). Densitometry analyses revealed cell line specific differences in phosphorylation ratios of KDR and Erk1/2 following VEGF challenge ( Figs. 2B, 2D and 2E ). Of all cell lines evaluated, SCC4 was unique with regard to the high extent of VEGF-mediated kinase activation. Addition of <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> initiates intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation in HNSCC cells Recent studies show that VEGF induces rapid increase in the intracellular generation of reactive oxygen species via activation of VEGFR-2/KDR in endothelial cells [ Colavitti et al., 2002 ]. We have asked whether VEGF has a similar effect on epithelial origin HNSCC cells. Our data revealed that VEGF induced comparable fluorescence intensities as the positive control H2O2 in all HNSCC cell lines. ( Fig. 3 ) <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> increases HUVECs cell proliferation To confirm the functional activity of hr VEGF165, we first evaluated its mitogenic effects on HUVECs which are established as VEGF target cells [ Kanno et al., 2000 ]. Introduction of hr VEGF165 to HUVECs significantly increased cell proliferation compared to the control HUVECs which received base medium only ( Fig. 4A ). Based on the preliminary experiments to optimize the effective doses of hr VEGF165 (data not shown), we selected two VEGF doses, 30ng/ml and 50ng/ml, to be used in the subsequent HNSCC cell proliferation studies. Endogenous VEGF production renders HNSCC cells refractory to exogenous VEGF As we previously reported, HNSCC cells produce and secrete abundant endogenous VEGF [ Rodrigo et al., 2006 ]. Accordingly, our results showed introduction of hr VEGF165 to HNSCC cultures did not promote cell proliferation ( Fig. 4B ). These data suggested that high endogenous VEGF production minimized the effects of exogenous VEGF. Pre-designed siRNA against VEGF successfully inhibited endogenous VEGF production in HNSCC cells HNSCC cells were successfully transfected with the FAM-labeled siRNA (>95%) with assistance of a lipid-based transfection agent, NeoFX ( Figs. 5A and 5B ), and the fluorescence signal of siRNA sustained for more than 96 h. We then transfected the HNSCC cells with pre-designed VEGF siRNA, and determined the amount of VEGF protein (ELISA) per 104 cells (MTT assay), 24, 48, 72, and 96 h after transfection. VEGF production was significantly suppressed by siRNA in all three HNSCC cell lines, and the most prominent inhibition effect was obtained at 48 h (up to 53.5% inhibition) following transfection. Though the silencing effect diminished over time due to cell proliferation, VEGF inhibition remained ?45.9% at 96 h after transfection ( Fig. 4C ). Blocking VEGF expression decreases HNSCC cell proliferation Relative to the negative control group which received the empty transfection vector alone, cell proliferation was significantly decreased in VEGF silenced HNSCC cells ( Fig. 4D ). The greatest suppression of cell growth was observed 96h after siRNA transfection (22.2% and 23.5%, respectively, for the 30nM and 50nM groups). <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> promotes cell proliferation of VEGF-silenced HNSCC cells A significant dose-dependent increase in siRNA silenced HNSCC cells was observed upon VEGF treatment. Both the amount of siRNA transfected and the amount of VEGF introduced subsequently affected HNSCC proliferation. As can be appreciated in Figs. 5C and 5D , the greatest increase in HNSCC cell growth was observed in cells that received 50nM siRNA + 50mg/ml VEGF. In all groups, hr VEGF165’s pro-proliferative effects on VEGF-silenced HNSCC cells increased over time. VEGF is comparable or superior to 10% FBS as an HNSCC cellular chemoattractant In this component of the study, we explored the role of hr VEGF165 in HNSCC cell migration and invasion through a synthetic basement membrane. Our data demonstrate that 100ng/ml hr VEGF165 exerted equivalent or greater chemoattractive effect relative to 10% FBS in all three HNSCC cell lines ( Fig. 6 ). Also apparent from the data depicted in Figure 6 is the marked heterogeneity among the three tested HNSCC cell lines with regard to invasive capacity. Prior exposure to <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> enhances HNSCC cell invasiveness in two HNSCC cell lines Two HNSCC cell lines (SCC4 and SCC15) demonstrated significantly increased invasive capacity following a 24h 100ng/ml hr VEGF165 pretreatment with VEGF as the chemoattractant relative to all other groups (negative control, 10% FBS chemoattractant, 10% FBS pretreatment plus 10% FBS chemoattractant, and 100ng/ml VEGF chemoattractant alone) ( Fig. 6 ). Cell invasion was increased by 118.8% and 89.6% respectively in SCC4 and SCC15 cells, compared with the group that received VEGF only as a chemoattractant ( Fig. 6 ). <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> modestly increases gelatinases release by HNSCC cells To explore potential mechanisms whereby VEGF enhances HNSCC invasiveness, we evaluated the release of the basement membrane degrading gelatinases MMP2 and MMP9 (Matrix Metalloproteinases) in conditioned media following VEGF stimulation. Gelatin zymography results showed a cell line associated release pattern of both latent and active MMP2 and MMP9 ( Fig. 7A and 7C ). As would be anticipated, introduction of APMA resulted in significant conversion of pro-MMPs to their respective activated isoforms ( Figs. 7A and 7C ). Release of the latent pro-MMP2 was increased by 4.30% and 8.54% in SCC4 and SCC15 respectively after 24h VEGF treatment. VEGF’s modulation of pro-MMP9 release was cell line dependent, as VEGF increased SCC15 pro-MMP9 by 5.60% while decreased its release by 3.66% in SCC4 ( Figs. 7B and 7D ).  Cultured HNSCC cells retain VEGFR-2/KDR and VEGFR-1/Flt-1 The primary translational product of KDR is a 150 kDa immature protein. During post-translational processing, KDR protein is rapidly glycosylated to a 200 kDa intermediate form. The functional mature KDR is a fully glycosylated cross-membrane protein with a molecular weight of 230 kDa [ Takahashi and Shibuya, 1997 ]. Western blots conducted on three HNSCC cell lines demonstrated the presence of KDR (both immature and intermediate forms) and Flt-1. Relative to HNSCC cells, HUVECs were found to contain higher levels of the immature KDR (150kDa) protein. One HNSCC cell line (SCC4) demonstrated higher levels of Flt-1 compared to HUVECs ( Figs. 1A and 1B ).  Cultured HNSCC cells retain VEGFR-2/KDR and VEGFR-1/Flt-1 The primary translational product of KDR is a 150 kDa immature protein. During post-translational processing, KDR protein is rapidly glycosylated to a 200 kDa intermediate form. The functional mature KDR is a fully glycosylated cross-membrane protein with a molecular weight of 230 kDa [ Takahashi and Shibuya, 1997 ]. Western blots conducted on three HNSCC cell lines demonstrated the presence of KDR (both immature and intermediate forms) and Flt-1. Relative to HNSCC cells, HUVECs were found to contain higher levels of the immature KDR (150kDa) protein. One HNSCC cell line (SCC4) demonstrated higher levels of Flt-1 compared to HUVECs ( Figs. 1A and 1B ).  <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> increases phosphorylated levels of KDR and Erk1/2 in HNSCC cells Introduction of hr VEGF165 (100ng/ml) to HNSCC cells increased phosphorylated levels of KDR relative to the PBS matched negative controls in every cell line evaluated ( Fig. 2A ). Increased phosphorylated Erk1/2 levels were also observed in two of three HNSCC cell lines (SCC4 and SCC9) in response to VEGF stimulation ( Fig. 2C ). In contrast, SCC15 cells showed high baseline levels of phosporylated Erk1/2 and demonstrated a decrease in Erk1/2 phosphorylation following VEGF introduction ( Fig. 2C ). Densitometry analyses revealed cell line specific differences in phosphorylation ratios of KDR and Erk1/2 following VEGF challenge ( Figs. 2B, 2D and 2E ). Of all cell lines evaluated, SCC4 was unique with regard to the high extent of VEGF-mediated kinase activation.  <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> increases phosphorylated levels of KDR and Erk1/2 in HNSCC cells Introduction of hr VEGF165 (100ng/ml) to HNSCC cells increased phosphorylated levels of KDR relative to the PBS matched negative controls in every cell line evaluated ( Fig. 2A ). Increased phosphorylated Erk1/2 levels were also observed in two of three HNSCC cell lines (SCC4 and SCC9) in response to VEGF stimulation ( Fig. 2C ). In contrast, SCC15 cells showed high baseline levels of phosporylated Erk1/2 and demonstrated a decrease in Erk1/2 phosphorylation following VEGF introduction ( Fig. 2C ). Densitometry analyses revealed cell line specific differences in phosphorylation ratios of KDR and Erk1/2 following VEGF challenge ( Figs. 2B, 2D and 2E ). Of all cell lines evaluated, SCC4 was unique with regard to the high extent of VEGF-mediated kinase activation.  Addition of <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> initiates intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation in HNSCC cells Recent studies show that VEGF induces rapid increase in the intracellular generation of reactive oxygen species via activation of VEGFR-2/KDR in endothelial cells [ Colavitti et al., 2002 ]. We have asked whether VEGF has a similar effect on epithelial origin HNSCC cells. Our data revealed that VEGF induced comparable fluorescence intensities as the positive control H2O2 in all HNSCC cell lines. ( Fig. 3 )  Addition of <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> initiates intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation in HNSCC cells Recent studies show that VEGF induces rapid increase in the intracellular generation of reactive oxygen species via activation of VEGFR-2/KDR in endothelial cells [ Colavitti et al., 2002 ]. We have asked whether VEGF has a similar effect on epithelial origin HNSCC cells. Our data revealed that VEGF induced comparable fluorescence intensities as the positive control H2O2 in all HNSCC cell lines. ( Fig. 3 )  <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> increases HUVECs cell proliferation To confirm the functional activity of hr VEGF165, we first evaluated its mitogenic effects on HUVECs which are established as VEGF target cells [ Kanno et al., 2000 ]. Introduction of hr VEGF165 to HUVECs significantly increased cell proliferation compared to the control HUVECs which received base medium only ( Fig. 4A ). Based on the preliminary experiments to optimize the effective doses of hr VEGF165 (data not shown), we selected two VEGF doses, 30ng/ml and 50ng/ml, to be used in the subsequent HNSCC cell proliferation studies.  <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> increases HUVECs cell proliferation To confirm the functional activity of hr VEGF165, we first evaluated its mitogenic effects on HUVECs which are established as VEGF target cells [ Kanno et al., 2000 ]. Introduction of hr VEGF165 to HUVECs significantly increased cell proliferation compared to the control HUVECs which received base medium only ( Fig. 4A ). Based on the preliminary experiments to optimize the effective doses of hr VEGF165 (data not shown), we selected two VEGF doses, 30ng/ml and 50ng/ml, to be used in the subsequent HNSCC cell proliferation studies.  Endogenous VEGF production renders HNSCC cells refractory to exogenous VEGF As we previously reported, HNSCC cells produce and secrete abundant endogenous VEGF [ Rodrigo et al., 2006 ]. Accordingly, our results showed introduction of hr VEGF165 to HNSCC cultures did not promote cell proliferation ( Fig. 4B ). These data suggested that high endogenous VEGF production minimized the effects of exogenous VEGF.  Endogenous VEGF production renders HNSCC cells refractory to exogenous VEGF As we previously reported, HNSCC cells produce and secrete abundant endogenous VEGF [ Rodrigo et al., 2006 ]. Accordingly, our results showed introduction of hr VEGF165 to HNSCC cultures did not promote cell proliferation ( Fig. 4B ). These data suggested that high endogenous VEGF production minimized the effects of exogenous VEGF.  Pre-designed siRNA against VEGF successfully inhibited endogenous VEGF production in HNSCC cells HNSCC cells were successfully transfected with the FAM-labeled siRNA (>95%) with assistance of a lipid-based transfection agent, NeoFX ( Figs. 5A and 5B ), and the fluorescence signal of siRNA sustained for more than 96 h. We then transfected the HNSCC cells with pre-designed VEGF siRNA, and determined the amount of VEGF protein (ELISA) per 104 cells (MTT assay), 24, 48, 72, and 96 h after transfection. VEGF production was significantly suppressed by siRNA in all three HNSCC cell lines, and the most prominent inhibition effect was obtained at 48 h (up to 53.5% inhibition) following transfection. Though the silencing effect diminished over time due to cell proliferation, VEGF inhibition remained ?45.9% at 96 h after transfection ( Fig. 4C ).  Pre-designed siRNA against VEGF successfully inhibited endogenous VEGF production in HNSCC cells HNSCC cells were successfully transfected with the FAM-labeled siRNA (>95%) with assistance of a lipid-based transfection agent, NeoFX ( Figs. 5A and 5B ), and the fluorescence signal of siRNA sustained for more than 96 h. We then transfected the HNSCC cells with pre-designed VEGF siRNA, and determined the amount of VEGF protein (ELISA) per 104 cells (MTT assay), 24, 48, 72, and 96 h after transfection. VEGF production was significantly suppressed by siRNA in all three HNSCC cell lines, and the most prominent inhibition effect was obtained at 48 h (up to 53.5% inhibition) following transfection. Though the silencing effect diminished over time due to cell proliferation, VEGF inhibition remained ?45.9% at 96 h after transfection ( Fig. 4C ).  Blocking VEGF expression decreases HNSCC cell proliferation Relative to the negative control group which received the empty transfection vector alone, cell proliferation was significantly decreased in VEGF silenced HNSCC cells ( Fig. 4D ). The greatest suppression of cell growth was observed 96h after siRNA transfection (22.2% and 23.5%, respectively, for the 30nM and 50nM groups).  Blocking VEGF expression decreases HNSCC cell proliferation Relative to the negative control group which received the empty transfection vector alone, cell proliferation was significantly decreased in VEGF silenced HNSCC cells ( Fig. 4D ). The greatest suppression of cell growth was observed 96h after siRNA transfection (22.2% and 23.5%, respectively, for the 30nM and 50nM groups).  <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> promotes cell proliferation of VEGF-silenced HNSCC cells A significant dose-dependent increase in siRNA silenced HNSCC cells was observed upon VEGF treatment. Both the amount of siRNA transfected and the amount of VEGF introduced subsequently affected HNSCC proliferation. As can be appreciated in Figs. 5C and 5D , the greatest increase in HNSCC cell growth was observed in cells that received 50nM siRNA + 50mg/ml VEGF. In all groups, hr VEGF165’s pro-proliferative effects on VEGF-silenced HNSCC cells increased over time.  <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> promotes cell proliferation of VEGF-silenced HNSCC cells A significant dose-dependent increase in siRNA silenced HNSCC cells was observed upon VEGF treatment. Both the amount of siRNA transfected and the amount of VEGF introduced subsequently affected HNSCC proliferation. As can be appreciated in Figs. 5C and 5D , the greatest increase in HNSCC cell growth was observed in cells that received 50nM siRNA + 50mg/ml VEGF. In all groups, hr VEGF165’s pro-proliferative effects on VEGF-silenced HNSCC cells increased over time.  VEGF is comparable or superior to 10% FBS as an HNSCC cellular chemoattractant In this component of the study, we explored the role of hr VEGF165 in HNSCC cell migration and invasion through a synthetic basement membrane. Our data demonstrate that 100ng/ml hr VEGF165 exerted equivalent or greater chemoattractive effect relative to 10% FBS in all three HNSCC cell lines ( Fig. 6 ). Also apparent from the data depicted in Figure 6 is the marked heterogeneity among the three tested HNSCC cell lines with regard to invasive capacity.  VEGF is comparable or superior to 10% FBS as an HNSCC cellular chemoattractant In this component of the study, we explored the role of hr VEGF165 in HNSCC cell migration and invasion through a synthetic basement membrane. Our data demonstrate that 100ng/ml hr VEGF165 exerted equivalent or greater chemoattractive effect relative to 10% FBS in all three HNSCC cell lines ( Fig. 6 ). Also apparent from the data depicted in Figure 6 is the marked heterogeneity among the three tested HNSCC cell lines with regard to invasive capacity.  Prior exposure to <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> enhances HNSCC cell invasiveness in two HNSCC cell lines Two HNSCC cell lines (SCC4 and SCC15) demonstrated significantly increased invasive capacity following a 24h 100ng/ml hr VEGF165 pretreatment with VEGF as the chemoattractant relative to all other groups (negative control, 10% FBS chemoattractant, 10% FBS pretreatment plus 10% FBS chemoattractant, and 100ng/ml VEGF chemoattractant alone) ( Fig. 6 ). Cell invasion was increased by 118.8% and 89.6% respectively in SCC4 and SCC15 cells, compared with the group that received VEGF only as a chemoattractant ( Fig. 6 ).  Prior exposure to <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> enhances HNSCC cell invasiveness in two HNSCC cell lines Two HNSCC cell lines (SCC4 and SCC15) demonstrated significantly increased invasive capacity following a 24h 100ng/ml hr VEGF165 pretreatment with VEGF as the chemoattractant relative to all other groups (negative control, 10% FBS chemoattractant, 10% FBS pretreatment plus 10% FBS chemoattractant, and 100ng/ml VEGF chemoattractant alone) ( Fig. 6 ). Cell invasion was increased by 118.8% and 89.6% respectively in SCC4 and SCC15 cells, compared with the group that received VEGF only as a chemoattractant ( Fig. 6 ).  <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> modestly increases gelatinases release by HNSCC cells To explore potential mechanisms whereby VEGF enhances HNSCC invasiveness, we evaluated the release of the basement membrane degrading gelatinases MMP2 and MMP9 (Matrix Metalloproteinases) in conditioned media following VEGF stimulation. Gelatin zymography results showed a cell line associated release pattern of both latent and active MMP2 and MMP9 ( Fig. 7A and 7C ). As would be anticipated, introduction of APMA resulted in significant conversion of pro-MMPs to their respective activated isoforms ( Figs. 7A and 7C ). Release of the latent pro-MMP2 was increased by 4.30% and 8.54% in SCC4 and SCC15 respectively after 24h VEGF treatment. VEGF’s modulation of pro-MMP9 release was cell line dependent, as VEGF increased SCC15 pro-MMP9 by 5.60% while decreased its release by 3.66% in SCC4 ( Figs. 7B and 7D ).  <italic>hr</italic>VEGF<sub>165</sub> modestly increases gelatinases release by HNSCC cells To explore potential mechanisms whereby VEGF enhances HNSCC invasiveness, we evaluated the release of the basement membrane degrading gelatinases MMP2 and MMP9 (Matrix Metalloproteinases) in conditioned media following VEGF stimulation. Gelatin zymography results showed a cell line associated release pattern of both latent and active MMP2 and MMP9 ( Fig. 7A and 7C ). As would be anticipated, introduction of APMA resulted in significant conversion of pro-MMPs to their respective activated isoforms ( Figs. 7A and 7C ). Release of the latent pro-MMP2 was increased by 4.30% and 8.54% in SCC4 and SCC15 respectively after 24h VEGF treatment. VEGF’s modulation of pro-MMP9 release was cell line dependent, as VEGF increased SCC15 pro-MMP9 by 5.60% while decreased its release by 3.66% in SCC4 ( Figs. 7B and 7D ).  DISCUSSION The assumption of mesenchymal phenotypic properties via the EMT by carcinomas enhances cell invasion and facilitates cancer progression [ Thiery et al., 1999 ; Christiansen et al., 2006 ; Gotzmann et al., 2004 ; Chung et al., 2006 ]. Our lab previously reported that the angiostatic agent, endostatin, which was presumed to target endothelial cells, also significantly inhibited HNSCC cell migration and invasion [ Wilson et al., 2003 ]. Similarly, in this current study, we demonstrated that HNSCC cells exhibit an “endothelioid” phenotype, as these cells serve as both effectors and targets of VEGF. Our data, in conjunction with clinical evidence which shows retention of VEGF receptors in HNSCC tumors [ Kyzas et al., 2005 ; Lalla et al., 2003 ], imply that a plasticity in the HNSCC phenotype underlies, at least in part, its aberrant progression, invasion and metastasis. Due to its multifaceted biologic functions, VEGF is regarded as an important tumor promoter [ Folkman, 1992 ]. Doses of VEGF used in this study, which ranged from 30ng/ml to 100ng/ml (approximately 1.5nM to 5nM), were selected based on the results of our preliminary experiments. hr VEGF165 (293-VE/CF, R&D, same as used in this current study) has been shown to have a wide bioactivity range [0.05nM to 250nM (1ng/ml to 5000ng/ml)] with a maximum effect at 25nM (500ng/ml) on HUVECs, as reported by Pan et al. [2007] . The delineation of KDR and Flt-1’s distinctive roles in VEGF signaling in cancer cells remains elusive. Studies employing breast cancer cells revealed that both KDR and Flt-1 may have the potential to activate downstream kinases in the VEGF intracellular signaling cascade [ Lee et al., 2007 ; Wu et al., 2006 ; Huh et al., 2005 ; Weigand et al., 2005 ]. Our data demonstrated that SCC4 cells, which have highest level of Flt-1 and greatest levels of KDR activation, are also most responsive to VEGF in the cell invasion assay. These data strongly imply a potential co-contributory role for Flt-1 in conjunction with KDR towards augmentation of the HNSCC cellular aggressive, invasive phenotype. Studies are ongoing to further characterize this VEGF-associated signaling mechanism in HNSCC cells. Furthermore, we speculate that the high “baseline” phosphorylated Erk1/2 in non-siRNA silenced SCC15 cells reflects endogenous VEGF production rendering these cells relatively refractory to signaling induction by exogenous VEGF. The contribution of ROS as intracellular signaling mediators is an area of intense investigation [ Finkel, 1998 ; Rhee et al., 2000 ]. Introduction of VEGF induces intracellular ROS generation in endothelial cells [ Colavitti et al., 2002 ]. Reciprocally, intracellular levels of ROS may also regulate VEGF expression [ Xia et al., 2007 ]. Our data, which show VEGF initiated comparable ROS generation in HNSCC cells as H2O2, imply that ROS function in the VEGF receptor(s)-mediated signaling pathway(s) in HNSCC cells. Our results showed that HNSCC cell proliferation was significantly decreased by VEGF siRNA silencing; implying the presence of an autocrine-paracrine VEGF growth loop. Similarly, down-regulation of VEGF expression also induced apoptosis and decreased cell proliferation in some breast cancer cell lines [ Lee et al., 2007 ; Weigand et al., 2005 ]. Furthermore, once endogenous HNSCC VEGF production was reduced by siRNA, a dose dependent, exogenous VEGF-mediated increase in cell proliferation occurred. While statistically significant, the actual percentage changes in cell proliferation induced by VEGF were relatively modest, which likely reflects the contribution of multiple growth factors in HNSCC cell proliferation. These findings suggest that in addition to its angiogenic function, VEGF fulfills other roles by maintaining proliferation, enhancing survival, and increasing invasion of carcinomas. VEGF was found to have similar or greater chemoattractant efficacy as 10% FBS in all HNSCC cell lines evaluated. Pretreatment with VEGF increased the abilities of 2 of 3 HNSCC cell lines to invade a synthetic basement membrane. Gelatin zymograghy, however, did not demonstrate the anticipated comparable increase of the basement membrane degrading gelatinases MMP-2 or MMP-9. These data imply that VEGF pretreatment may concurrently up-regulate additional enzymes such as the membrane-bound metalloproteinases (MT-MMPs), which are critical for invasion of basement membranes and have been revealed to be expressed in HNSCC cells and tumors [ Bassi et al., 2003 ]. The complexity of the parameters that affect HNSCC invasion were demonstrated by previous investigations from our lab [ Pei et al., 2006 ; Wilson et al., 2003 ]. While N-acctylcysteine-mediated inhibition of gelatinase activation and function suppressed HNSCC invasion [ Pei et al., 2006 ], introduction of a tropomysin binding agent (endostatin) [ Wilson et al., 2003 ] was necessary to maximally inhibit HNSCC invasive capacity. Based on our previous and current findings, we speculate that VEGF’s pro-invasive effects reflect upregulation of multiple, complementary functions including augmentation of basement membrane invasion and enhancement of cell motility, necessary for cell invasion. Consequently, studies to assess VEGF’s effects on HNSCC gene expression profiles are ongoing. Interestingly, unlike the cell proliferation assay, non-siRNA treated HNSCC cells exhibited significantly increased intracellular signaling and invasiveness in response to exogenous VEGF. We propose two possible reasons for these findings. Firstly, due to the short duration (<30min) of the signaling assays, there is insufficient time for accumulation of endogenous VEGF to render these cells refractory to exogenous VEGF. Secondly, as VEGF’s chemoattractive and mitogenic roles are distinct; the corresponding signaling pathways are likely different. In conclusion, our results demonstrate that in addition to its paracrine function essential for tumor-associated angiogenesis, VEGF also plays an important autocrine function by directly enhancing HNSCC cell mitogenesis and invasiveness. These data introduce the prospect that agents which interfere with HNSCC VEGF production and responsiveness could have a biphasic therapeutic effect by concurrently reducing angiogenesis and HNSCC tumorigenesis.  DISCUSSION The assumption of mesenchymal phenotypic properties via the EMT by carcinomas enhances cell invasion and facilitates cancer progression [ Thiery et al., 1999 ; Christiansen et al., 2006 ; Gotzmann et al., 2004 ; Chung et al., 2006 ]. Our lab previously reported that the angiostatic agent, endostatin, which was presumed to target endothelial cells, also significantly inhibited HNSCC cell migration and invasion [ Wilson et al., 2003 ]. Similarly, in this current study, we demonstrated that HNSCC cells exhibit an “endothelioid” phenotype, as these cells serve as both effectors and targets of VEGF. Our data, in conjunction with clinical evidence which shows retention of VEGF receptors in HNSCC tumors [ Kyzas et al., 2005 ; Lalla et al., 2003 ], imply that a plasticity in the HNSCC phenotype underlies, at least in part, its aberrant progression, invasion and metastasis. Due to its multifaceted biologic functions, VEGF is regarded as an important tumor promoter [ Folkman, 1992 ]. Doses of VEGF used in this study, which ranged from 30ng/ml to 100ng/ml (approximately 1.5nM to 5nM), were selected based on the results of our preliminary experiments. hr VEGF165 (293-VE/CF, R&D, same as used in this current study) has been shown to have a wide bioactivity range [0.05nM to 250nM (1ng/ml to 5000ng/ml)] with a maximum effect at 25nM (500ng/ml) on HUVECs, as reported by Pan et al. [2007] . The delineation of KDR and Flt-1’s distinctive roles in VEGF signaling in cancer cells remains elusive. Studies employing breast cancer cells revealed that both KDR and Flt-1 may have the potential to activate downstream kinases in the VEGF intracellular signaling cascade [ Lee et al., 2007 ; Wu et al., 2006 ; Huh et al., 2005 ; Weigand et al., 2005 ]. Our data demonstrated that SCC4 cells, which have highest level of Flt-1 and greatest levels of KDR activation, are also most responsive to VEGF in the cell invasion assay. These data strongly imply a potential co-contributory role for Flt-1 in conjunction with KDR towards augmentation of the HNSCC cellular aggressive, invasive phenotype. Studies are ongoing to further characterize this VEGF-associated signaling mechanism in HNSCC cells. Furthermore, we speculate that the high “baseline” phosphorylated Erk1/2 in non-siRNA silenced SCC15 cells reflects endogenous VEGF production rendering these cells relatively refractory to signaling induction by exogenous VEGF. The contribution of ROS as intracellular signaling mediators is an area of intense investigation [ Finkel, 1998 ; Rhee et al., 2000 ]. Introduction of VEGF induces intracellular ROS generation in endothelial cells [ Colavitti et al., 2002 ]. Reciprocally, intracellular levels of ROS may also regulate VEGF expression [ Xia et al., 2007 ]. Our data, which show VEGF initiated comparable ROS generation in HNSCC cells as H2O2, imply that ROS function in the VEGF receptor(s)-mediated signaling pathway(s) in HNSCC cells. Our results showed that HNSCC cell proliferation was significantly decreased by VEGF siRNA silencing; implying the presence of an autocrine-paracrine VEGF growth loop. Similarly, down-regulation of VEGF expression also induced apoptosis and decreased cell proliferation in some breast cancer cell lines [ Lee et al., 2007 ; Weigand et al., 2005 ]. Furthermore, once endogenous HNSCC VEGF production was reduced by siRNA, a dose dependent, exogenous VEGF-mediated increase in cell proliferation occurred. While statistically significant, the actual percentage changes in cell proliferation induced by VEGF were relatively modest, which likely reflects the contribution of multiple growth factors in HNSCC cell proliferation. These findings suggest that in addition to its angiogenic function, VEGF fulfills other roles by maintaining proliferation, enhancing survival, and increasing invasion of carcinomas. VEGF was found to have similar or greater chemoattractant efficacy as 10% FBS in all HNSCC cell lines evaluated. Pretreatment with VEGF increased the abilities of 2 of 3 HNSCC cell lines to invade a synthetic basement membrane. Gelatin zymograghy, however, did not demonstrate the anticipated comparable increase of the basement membrane degrading gelatinases MMP-2 or MMP-9. These data imply that VEGF pretreatment may concurrently up-regulate additional enzymes such as the membrane-bound metalloproteinases (MT-MMPs), which are critical for invasion of basement membranes and have been revealed to be expressed in HNSCC cells and tumors [ Bassi et al., 2003 ]. The complexity of the parameters that affect HNSCC invasion were demonstrated by previous investigations from our lab [ Pei et al., 2006 ; Wilson et al., 2003 ]. While N-acctylcysteine-mediated inhibition of gelatinase activation and function suppressed HNSCC invasion [ Pei et al., 2006 ], introduction of a tropomysin binding agent (endostatin) [ Wilson et al., 2003 ] was necessary to maximally inhibit HNSCC invasive capacity. Based on our previous and current findings, we speculate that VEGF’s pro-invasive effects reflect upregulation of multiple, complementary functions including augmentation of basement membrane invasion and enhancement of cell motility, necessary for cell invasion. Consequently, studies to assess VEGF’s effects on HNSCC gene expression profiles are ongoing. Interestingly, unlike the cell proliferation assay, non-siRNA treated HNSCC cells exhibited significantly increased intracellular signaling and invasiveness in response to exogenous VEGF. We propose two possible reasons for these findings. Firstly, due to the short duration (<30min) of the signaling assays, there is insufficient time for accumulation of endogenous VEGF to render these cells refractory to exogenous VEGF. Secondly, as VEGF’s chemoattractive and mitogenic roles are distinct; the corresponding signaling pathways are likely different. In conclusion, our results demonstrate that in addition to its paracrine function essential for tumor-associated angiogenesis, VEGF also plays an important autocrine function by directly enhancing HNSCC cell mitogenesis and invasiveness. These data introduce the prospect that agents which interfere with HNSCC VEGF production and responsiveness could have a biphasic therapeutic effect by concurrently reducing angiogenesis and HNSCC tumorigenesis.  Figures Fig. 1 Cultured HNSCC cells retain possession of VEGFR-2/KDR and VEGFR-1/Flt-1. A and B : Three HNSCC cell lines, SCC4, SCC9, and SCC15, were screened for the cytoplasmic production of KDR and Flt-1 proteins by Western Blot. HUVECs were included as the positive control. Fig. 2 VEGF induced phosphorylation of KDR and Erk1/2 in cultured HNSCC cells. A and C : HUVECs and 24h serum deprived HNSCC cells were challenged with PBS (negative control) or 100ng/ml VEGF for 20min in serum free media. Western Blot analyses were then conducted to determine phosphorylated and total levels of KDR and Erk1/2. hr VEGF165 activated intracellular kinases, resulting in increased phosphorylated ratios of KDR and Erk1/2. Densitometry analyses results were demonstrated in panels B , D and E , respectively. Fig. 3 Introduction of hr VEGF165 initiated release of intracellular reactive oxygen species. HNSCC cells were seeded on chamber slides and incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2 for 24 h in serum-free medium. 0.2mM H2O2 (positive control) , 30ng/ml hr VEGF165 or equal volume of PBS (negative control) were then added to the chambers and incubated for 15 min, followed by 5 min staining of 10µM CM-H2 DCFDA. Increases in fluorescence intensities reflect intracellular probe oxidation. Fig. 4 Endogenous VEGF renders HNSCC cells refractory to exogenous VEGF. A : Human umbilical vascular endothelial cells (HUVECs) served as positive control in this study to validate hr VEGF165‘s functional activity. Experimental groups were treated with hr VEGF165 containing medium versus control group received base medium alone. B : Serum deprived non-siRNA-silenced HNSCC cells were challenged with fresh hr VEGF165 every 24 h. Control group received serum free base medium only. C : HNSCC cells were transfected with different concentrations (0, 30nM and 50nM) of anti-VEGF siRNA and incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2. ELISA and MTT assay were performed every 24 h after transfection to determine the amount of VEGF production (presented as pictogram per 104 cells) in the conditioned medium. Values were then normalized to the percentage of negative control for comparisons. D : Impact of VEGF silencing on HNSCC cell proliferation. [Data collected from three HNSCC cell lines, mean ± SE, n=12. *=p<0.05; †=p<0.01; ‡=p<0.001, compared with the control group (Tukey-Kramer multiple comparisons test)] Fig. 5 Human recombinant VEGF165 promoted HNSCC cell proliferation following suppression of endogenous VEGF production. A and B : HNSCC cells were successfully transfected with NeoFX /FAM-labeled siRNA (72 h after transfection, 200X). C : Serum deprived HNSCC cells were pre-treated with 30nM siRNA to inhibit the endogenous VEGF production 24 h prior to exogenous hr VEGF165 stimulation. D : HNSCC cells were pre-treated with 50nM siRNA. Cell proliferation was determined using the MTT assay. Data of cell numbers from three HNSCC cell lines were normalized to percentage of control group and combined for statistic analysis (mean ± SE, n=20). *=p<0.05. (Unpaired t test) Fig. 6 hr VEGF165 is a potent chemoattractant for HNSCC cells. Five experimental groups for each cell line were included in the cell invasion assay: 1), Negative control, 72 h serum deprived HNSCC cells in the insert chamber with SF medium in the lower chamber; 2), Positive control, 72 h serum deprived cells with SF medium+ 10% FBS in the lower chamber serving as chemoattractant; 3), Positive control, 48 h serum deprived and 24 h 10% FBS pretreated cells with 10% FBS chemoattractant; 4), 72 h serum deprived cells with 100ng/ml VEGF chemoattractant; 5), 48 h serum deprived and 24 h 100ng/ml VEGF pretreated cells with 100ng/ml VEGF chemoattractant. Invaded cell numbers were determined after 48 h incubation relative to a cell line matched standard curve (mean ± SE, n=4 for each group. *=p<0.05, **=p<0.01, †=p<0.001, Tukey-Kramer multiple comparisons test). Fig. 7 Treatment of HNSCC cells with hr VEGF165 modestly increased gelatinase release. A and C : HNSCC cells (SCC4 and SCC15) were serum deprived for 48 h followed by fresh treatment of serum-free medium with or without presence of 100ng/ml VEGF for 24 h. In selected groups, the conditioned media were pre-incubated with the pro-MMP activator, APMA, for 2 h. Gelatin zymography were then conducted to demonstrate released gelatinases (MMP2 and MMP9) levels in the conditioned media. B and D : Densitometry analyses were performed using Kodak 1D3 image analysis software.  Figures Fig. 1 Cultured HNSCC cells retain possession of VEGFR-2/KDR and VEGFR-1/Flt-1. A and B : Three HNSCC cell lines, SCC4, SCC9, and SCC15, were screened for the cytoplasmic production of KDR and Flt-1 proteins by Western Blot. HUVECs were included as the positive control. Fig. 2 VEGF induced phosphorylation of KDR and Erk1/2 in cultured HNSCC cells. A and C : HUVECs and 24h serum deprived HNSCC cells were challenged with PBS (negative control) or 100ng/ml VEGF for 20min in serum free media. Western Blot analyses were then conducted to determine phosphorylated and total levels of KDR and Erk1/2. hr VEGF165 activated intracellular kinases, resulting in increased phosphorylated ratios of KDR and Erk1/2. Densitometry analyses results were demonstrated in panels B , D and E , respectively. Fig. 3 Introduction of hr VEGF165 initiated release of intracellular reactive oxygen species. HNSCC cells were seeded on chamber slides and incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2 for 24 h in serum-free medium. 0.2mM H2O2 (positive control) , 30ng/ml hr VEGF165 or equal volume of PBS (negative control) were then added to the chambers and incubated for 15 min, followed by 5 min staining of 10µM CM-H2 DCFDA. Increases in fluorescence intensities reflect intracellular probe oxidation. Fig. 4 Endogenous VEGF renders HNSCC cells refractory to exogenous VEGF. A : Human umbilical vascular endothelial cells (HUVECs) served as positive control in this study to validate hr VEGF165‘s functional activity. Experimental groups were treated with hr VEGF165 containing medium versus control group received base medium alone. B : Serum deprived non-siRNA-silenced HNSCC cells were challenged with fresh hr VEGF165 every 24 h. Control group received serum free base medium only. C : HNSCC cells were transfected with different concentrations (0, 30nM and 50nM) of anti-VEGF siRNA and incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2. ELISA and MTT assay were performed every 24 h after transfection to determine the amount of VEGF production (presented as pictogram per 104 cells) in the conditioned medium. Values were then normalized to the percentage of negative control for comparisons. D : Impact of VEGF silencing on HNSCC cell proliferation. [Data collected from three HNSCC cell lines, mean ± SE, n=12. *=p<0.05; †=p<0.01; ‡=p<0.001, compared with the control group (Tukey-Kramer multiple comparisons test)] Fig. 5 Human recombinant VEGF165 promoted HNSCC cell proliferation following suppression of endogenous VEGF production. A and B : HNSCC cells were successfully transfected with NeoFX /FAM-labeled siRNA (72 h after transfection, 200X). C : Serum deprived HNSCC cells were pre-treated with 30nM siRNA to inhibit the endogenous VEGF production 24 h prior to exogenous hr VEGF165 stimulation. D : HNSCC cells were pre-treated with 50nM siRNA. Cell proliferation was determined using the MTT assay. Data of cell numbers from three HNSCC cell lines were normalized to percentage of control group and combined for statistic analysis (mean ± SE, n=20). *=p<0.05. (Unpaired t test) Fig. 6 hr VEGF165 is a potent chemoattractant for HNSCC cells. Five experimental groups for each cell line were included in the cell invasion assay: 1), Negative control, 72 h serum deprived HNSCC cells in the insert chamber with SF medium in the lower chamber; 2), Positive control, 72 h serum deprived cells with SF medium+ 10% FBS in the lower chamber serving as chemoattractant; 3), Positive control, 48 h serum deprived and 24 h 10% FBS pretreated cells with 10% FBS chemoattractant; 4), 72 h serum deprived cells with 100ng/ml VEGF chemoattractant; 5), 48 h serum deprived and 24 h 100ng/ml VEGF pretreated cells with 100ng/ml VEGF chemoattractant. Invaded cell numbers were determined after 48 h incubation relative to a cell line matched standard curve (mean ± SE, n=4 for each group. *=p<0.05, **=p<0.01, †=p<0.001, Tukey-Kramer multiple comparisons test). Fig. 7 Treatment of HNSCC cells with hr VEGF165 modestly increased gelatinase release. A and C : HNSCC cells (SCC4 and SCC15) were serum deprived for 48 h followed by fresh treatment of serum-free medium with or without presence of 100ng/ml VEGF for 24 h. In selected groups, the conditioned media were pre-incubated with the pro-MMP activator, APMA, for 2 h. Gelatin zymography were then conducted to demonstrate released gelatinases (MMP2 and MMP9) levels in the conditioned media. B and D : Densitometry analyses were performed using Kodak 1D3 image analysis software. 