NFAT-Dependent Excitation–Transcription Coupling in Heart  Step 4: Looking Back, Examination of the Results Obtained The findings of Xiao et al 1 and Qi et al 2 are important because they establish, for the first time, a well-defined signaling pathway for the rate-dependent regulation of Cav1.2 and Kv4.3 expression in atrial and ventricular myocytes. However, the importance of these findings goes beyond these particular experimental conditions. Note that previous studies suggested a causal relationship between calcineurin/NFAT signal activation and the expression of specific voltage-gated ion channels in mouse ventricular myocytes. 14 , 15 Yet, the role of this signaling pathway is not limited to cardiac myocytes. In smooth muscle, NFATc3 activation decreased expression of Kv2.1 15 , 16 and the ? 1 subunit of large conductance Ca2+- activated K+ channels 17 during the development of hypertension. Together with the work of Xiao et al 1 and Qi et al 2 in canine atrial and ventricular myocytes, these studies support the provocative hypothesis that activation of NFATc3 may be a general mechanistic point of convergence among stimuli that regulate expression of voltage-gated ion channels in the cardiovascular system. As with any good study, the impact of the work Xiao et al 1 and Qi et al 2 is not limited to the questions they answered, but the questions they raised. For example, whereas Xiao et al, 1 as well as others, 14 , 15 have linked NFAT activation to down-regulation of Kv4.3 in adult ventricular myocytes, a recent study suggests that NFAT could upregulate Kv4 channels in neonatal ventricular myocytes. 18 How could these seemingly contradictory findings be reconciled? One possibility is that NFAT associates with other transcription factors and binding partners, and whether NFAT upregulate or downregulate the expression of specific genes would depend on the molecular identity of the proteins this transcription factor associates with. Another question brought up by the work of Qi et al 2 is why does NFATc3/c4 activation decreases Cav1.2 in atrial but not in ventricular myocytes? Future studies should address these important issues. In addition to inducing Kv4.3 and Cav1.2 channel down-regulation, activation of calcineurin/NFAT signaling causes hypertrophy. 19 Inhibition of calcineurin decreases ventricular hypertrophy by up to 40% after myocardial infarction. 20 , 21 In contrast, Xiao et al 1 and Qi et al 2 suggest that preventing calcineurin and NFAT activation completely prevents rate-dependent I to and I Ca remodeling. Given that calcineurin/NFAT inhibition only partially blocks the development of hypertrophy, whereas I to and I Ca downregulation is completely prevented, it is intriguing to speculate that there may be less redundancy in the pathways leading to Kv4.3 and Cav1.2 downregulation in atrial and ventricular myocytes. Let us end by highlighting a central tenet in the problem-solving approach of Polya: that analyzing how others solved a particular problem could help answering new questions in the future. With this in mind, the work by Xiao et al 1 and Qi et al 2 forms part of the emerging field of excitation-transcription coupling. 22 The approaches and concepts developed by Xiao et al 1 and Qi et al 2 represent an important contribution to this field and, if one is to follow the advice of Polya, should help to unravel and clearly define signaling pathways responsible for the regulation of the expression and function of voltage-gated ion channels in excitable cells under physiological and pathophysiological conditions.  Step 4: Looking Back, Examination of the Results Obtained The findings of Xiao et al 1 and Qi et al 2 are important because they establish, for the first time, a well-defined signaling pathway for the rate-dependent regulation of Cav1.2 and Kv4.3 expression in atrial and ventricular myocytes. However, the importance of these findings goes beyond these particular experimental conditions. Note that previous studies suggested a causal relationship between calcineurin/NFAT signal activation and the expression of specific voltage-gated ion channels in mouse ventricular myocytes. 14 , 15 Yet, the role of this signaling pathway is not limited to cardiac myocytes. In smooth muscle, NFATc3 activation decreased expression of Kv2.1 15 , 16 and the ? 1 subunit of large conductance Ca2+- activated K+ channels 17 during the development of hypertension. Together with the work of Xiao et al 1 and Qi et al 2 in canine atrial and ventricular myocytes, these studies support the provocative hypothesis that activation of NFATc3 may be a general mechanistic point of convergence among stimuli that regulate expression of voltage-gated ion channels in the cardiovascular system. As with any good study, the impact of the work Xiao et al 1 and Qi et al 2 is not limited to the questions they answered, but the questions they raised. For example, whereas Xiao et al, 1 as well as others, 14 , 15 have linked NFAT activation to down-regulation of Kv4.3 in adult ventricular myocytes, a recent study suggests that NFAT could upregulate Kv4 channels in neonatal ventricular myocytes. 18 How could these seemingly contradictory findings be reconciled? One possibility is that NFAT associates with other transcription factors and binding partners, and whether NFAT upregulate or downregulate the expression of specific genes would depend on the molecular identity of the proteins this transcription factor associates with. Another question brought up by the work of Qi et al 2 is why does NFATc3/c4 activation decreases Cav1.2 in atrial but not in ventricular myocytes? Future studies should address these important issues. In addition to inducing Kv4.3 and Cav1.2 channel down-regulation, activation of calcineurin/NFAT signaling causes hypertrophy. 19 Inhibition of calcineurin decreases ventricular hypertrophy by up to 40% after myocardial infarction. 20 , 21 In contrast, Xiao et al 1 and Qi et al 2 suggest that preventing calcineurin and NFAT activation completely prevents rate-dependent I to and I Ca remodeling. Given that calcineurin/NFAT inhibition only partially blocks the development of hypertrophy, whereas I to and I Ca downregulation is completely prevented, it is intriguing to speculate that there may be less redundancy in the pathways leading to Kv4.3 and Cav1.2 downregulation in atrial and ventricular myocytes. Let us end by highlighting a central tenet in the problem-solving approach of Polya: that analyzing how others solved a particular problem could help answering new questions in the future. With this in mind, the work by Xiao et al 1 and Qi et al 2 forms part of the emerging field of excitation-transcription coupling. 22 The approaches and concepts developed by Xiao et al 1 and Qi et al 2 represent an important contribution to this field and, if one is to follow the advice of Polya, should help to unravel and clearly define signaling pathways responsible for the regulation of the expression and function of voltage-gated ion channels in excitable cells under physiological and pathophysiological conditions. 