Undifferentiated Carcinoma with Osteoclastic Giant Cells (UCOCGC) of the pancreas associated with the Familial Atypical Multiple Mole Melanoma syndrome (FAMMM) The Familial Atypical Multiple Mole Melanoma (FAMMM) syndrome is caused by a germline mutation of p16 . More than 90% of the sporadic pancreatic carcinomas contain genetic alterations that inactivate p16 . Patients with the FAMMM syndrome have an increased risk of developing pancreatic cancer. Ductal adenocarcinoma is the most common cancer of the pancreas and the one encountered in patients with FAMMM syndrome. Undifferentiated carcinoma with osteoclastic giant cells, also referred to as UCOCGC of the pancreas, is a rare variant of pancreatic cancer. An UCOCGC of the pancreas associated with FAMMM syndrome is described in this report. Molecular analysis confirmed a germline p16- Leiden deletion in the UCOCGC, accompanied by somatic loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of the second p16 allele, and absence of p16 protein expression in the neoplastic cells. It is the first case reported and it provides additional evidence that UCOCGC can be considered as a variant of conventional ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.  Discussion The FAMMM syndrome is characterized by the familial segregation of multiple melanomas and atypical precursor nevi and can be caused by germline mutations of the p16 tumor suppressor gene. 2 - 4 Carriers of this germline mutation are not only at risk for melanomas and its precursors, but they also have a significantly increased risk of pancreatic carcinoma. 3 , 4 The 20- to 34-fold higher risk of pancreatic cancer in FAMMM patients translates into a 10- 20% risk of developing pancreatic cancer by the age of 70 years. This is not surprising, since the large majority of sporadic (non-syndromic) pancreatic adenocarcinomas harbor acquired p16 gene mutations, leading to loss of function of this tumor suppressor. 6 , 7 , 9 , 13 FAMMM family members with a specific 19 bp deletion of p16 , the so called p16-Leiden deletion, have an estimated risk of almost 20% of developing pancreatic cancer by the age of 75 years. 2 Pancreatic cancers that are encountered in association with the FAMMM syndrome are typically conventional ductal adenocarcinomas, although unusual cases of adenosquamous and neuroendocrine carcinoma have been reported. 2 , 12 The UCOCGC of the pancreas is considered a rare variant of ductal adenocarcinomas, characterized by the presence of reactive multinucleated osteoclast like giant cells. Accumulating evidence suggests that UCOCGCs are undifferentiated ductal carcinomas arising from precursor ductal lesions. 1 In addition to morphologic observations, this hypothesis is supported by immunolabeling for the p53 protein which reveals abnormal accumulation of the protein only in the undifferentiated cells. The osteoclast-like giant cells do not accumulate the p53 protein, suggesting that they are TP53 gene wild-type. Interestingly, we have previously shown that the non-neoplastic multinucleated osteoclast like giant cells can phagocytose degraded neoplastic cells, and, as a result, some of these non-neoplastic cells contain phagocytosed mutant KRAS2 genes. KRAS2 gene analysis was used in the current case to arrive at the proper diagnosis. 11 It is at the same time yet another example of the great value of molecular DNA analysis as an adjunct to conventional microscopy. To our knowledge this is the first case of UCOCGC of the pancreas in a patient from a family with FAMMM syndrome. DNA analysis of the neoplasm and normal tissue in the resection specimen confirmed the expected 19 bp deletion typical for the p16-Leiden deletion, accompanied by LOH of the remaining wild-type allele. Accordingly, p16 immunohistochemistry was negative in the neoplastic cells consistent with loss of function of the protein product. By contrast, the osteoclast-like giant cells in this case showed intact labelling for the p16 protein, further supporting the hypothesis that these are non-neoplastic reactive cells. The loss of the wild-type p16 allele in this case supports the contention that the UCOCGC of the pancreas in this patient was causally related to the underlying FAMMM syndrome and not a coincidence. Indirectly, the case therefore also shows that it appears indeed legitimate to consider UCOCGC of the pancreas as a variant of ductal adenocarcinoma.  Discussion The FAMMM syndrome is characterized by the familial segregation of multiple melanomas and atypical precursor nevi and can be caused by germline mutations of the p16 tumor suppressor gene. 2 - 4 Carriers of this germline mutation are not only at risk for melanomas and its precursors, but they also have a significantly increased risk of pancreatic carcinoma. 3 , 4 The 20- to 34-fold higher risk of pancreatic cancer in FAMMM patients translates into a 10- 20% risk of developing pancreatic cancer by the age of 70 years. This is not surprising, since the large majority of sporadic (non-syndromic) pancreatic adenocarcinomas harbor acquired p16 gene mutations, leading to loss of function of this tumor suppressor. 6 , 7 , 9 , 13 FAMMM family members with a specific 19 bp deletion of p16 , the so called p16-Leiden deletion, have an estimated risk of almost 20% of developing pancreatic cancer by the age of 75 years. 2 Pancreatic cancers that are encountered in association with the FAMMM syndrome are typically conventional ductal adenocarcinomas, although unusual cases of adenosquamous and neuroendocrine carcinoma have been reported. 2 , 12 The UCOCGC of the pancreas is considered a rare variant of ductal adenocarcinomas, characterized by the presence of reactive multinucleated osteoclast like giant cells. Accumulating evidence suggests that UCOCGCs are undifferentiated ductal carcinomas arising from precursor ductal lesions. 1 In addition to morphologic observations, this hypothesis is supported by immunolabeling for the p53 protein which reveals abnormal accumulation of the protein only in the undifferentiated cells. The osteoclast-like giant cells do not accumulate the p53 protein, suggesting that they are TP53 gene wild-type. Interestingly, we have previously shown that the non-neoplastic multinucleated osteoclast like giant cells can phagocytose degraded neoplastic cells, and, as a result, some of these non-neoplastic cells contain phagocytosed mutant KRAS2 genes. KRAS2 gene analysis was used in the current case to arrive at the proper diagnosis. 11 It is at the same time yet another example of the great value of molecular DNA analysis as an adjunct to conventional microscopy. To our knowledge this is the first case of UCOCGC of the pancreas in a patient from a family with FAMMM syndrome. DNA analysis of the neoplasm and normal tissue in the resection specimen confirmed the expected 19 bp deletion typical for the p16-Leiden deletion, accompanied by LOH of the remaining wild-type allele. Accordingly, p16 immunohistochemistry was negative in the neoplastic cells consistent with loss of function of the protein product. By contrast, the osteoclast-like giant cells in this case showed intact labelling for the p16 protein, further supporting the hypothesis that these are non-neoplastic reactive cells. The loss of the wild-type p16 allele in this case supports the contention that the UCOCGC of the pancreas in this patient was causally related to the underlying FAMMM syndrome and not a coincidence. Indirectly, the case therefore also shows that it appears indeed legitimate to consider UCOCGC of the pancreas as a variant of ductal adenocarcinoma.  Figures 1A , endoscopic view ampullary lesion (arrow); 1B , H&E endoscopic biopsy with osteoclast-like multinucleated giant cells (200X); 1C , sequence analysis KRAS2 codon 12 mutation; 1D , immunohistochemistry pankeratin and CD68 (inset). 2A , gross specimen ampulla with stent; 2B , cross section tumor pancreatic head; 2C , H&E tumor resection specimen and immunohistochemistry for p16 (tumor cells have no nuclear expression, multinucleated giant cells are positive); 2D , p16-Leiden deletion (arrow, 19 bp shift) and LOH remaining wild-type allele (quotient ratios peak height 1.69).  Figures 1A , endoscopic view ampullary lesion (arrow); 1B , H&E endoscopic biopsy with osteoclast-like multinucleated giant cells (200X); 1C , sequence analysis KRAS2 codon 12 mutation; 1D , immunohistochemistry pankeratin and CD68 (inset). 2A , gross specimen ampulla with stent; 2B , cross section tumor pancreatic head; 2C , H&E tumor resection specimen and immunohistochemistry for p16 (tumor cells have no nuclear expression, multinucleated giant cells are positive); 2D , p16-Leiden deletion (arrow, 19 bp shift) and LOH remaining wild-type allele (quotient ratios peak height 1.69). 