Induced pluripotent stem cells generated without viral integration Pluripotent stem cells have been generated from mouse and human somatic cells by viral expression of the transcription factors Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc. A major limitation of this technology is the use of potentially harmful genome-integrating viruses. Here, we generate mouse induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS) from fibroblasts and liver cells by using non-integrating adenoviruses transiently expressing Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc. These adenoviral iPS (Adeno-iPS) cells show DNA demethylation characteristic of reprogrammed cells, express endogenous pluripotency genes, form teratomas, and contribute to multiple tissues, including the germline, in chimeric mice. Our results show that insertional mutagenesis is not required for in vitro reprogramming. Adenoviral reprogramming may provide an improved method for generating and studying patient-specific stem cells and for comparing embryonic stem (ES) cells and iPS cells.  Materials and Methods Adenoviral vectors and infection For the cloning of adenoviral vectors, EcoRI fragments containing the respective cDNAs for c-myc (constitutively active human T58A variant), Klf4 , Oct4 and Sox2 were integrated into the EcoRI site of pHIHG-Ad2. A fragment containing the cDNA sequence was isolated from the resulting plasmids by MfeI/PacI digestion and used for electroporation of BJ5183 cells together with linearized vector pAd-ClaI. Correct clones were identified by HindIII digestion. Viral constructs were transfected into 293A cells, and viral particles purified by two cycles of CsCl gradient and titered by optical absorbance ( 1 ). Fetal liver cells and fibroblasts that carried the Oct4 IND allele were infected with adenoviruses expressing c-myc, Klf4 and Sox2 at MOIs specified in the text for 1 hour at 37°C, 5% CO2. This was followed by two washes with PBS and continued culture in the appropriate culture medium (see below) containing doxycycline at a concentration of 1 ?g/ml. The media was changed every 2–3 days and doxycycline was withdrawn at the times indicated in Supplemental Figure 8 . Hepatocytes that did not carry the Oct4 IND allele were infected with adenoviruses expressing all four reprogramming factors (c-myc, Klf4, Oct4 and Sox2) at MOIs between 1–4. After infection and washing, cells were cultured in media lacking doxycycline. Isolation of primary cells Adherent fetal liver cultures were established as previously described ( 2 ). Briefly, embryos were harvested at embryonic day E13.5 and livers dissected, washed with HBSS and incubated for 10–15 minutes at 37°C in 0.2% collagenase IV (Invitrogen), 1mM EDTA and 1mM MgCl2. Single-cell suspensions were prepared by repetitive pipetting and filtering through a 40 ?m cell strainer. Cells were resuspended in DMEM containing 10% FBS, 10ng/ml EGF, 10 ng/ml bFGF, 20 ng/ml TGF?, 0.5 ?g/ml insulin and 40 ng/ml HGF and plated onto collagen I-treated culture plates (Becton Dickinson). Adult hepatocytes were isolated from 2–4 month-old mice by two-step collagenase perfusion protocol using Blendzyme 3 (Roche) ( 3 ). The perfused and isolated liver was freed of gall bladder and connective tissue and digested for 5–7 minutes. Digestion was stopped by addition of ice-cold DMEM containing FBS, followed by mechanically shearing of the liver capsule to release the dissociated cells. The resulting cell suspension was passed through a 100 ?m cell strainer and centrifuged at 600 rpm for 1 minute. The pellet was considered as the hepatocyte preparation. Hepatocytes were cultured in DMEM containing 10% FBS, 10?7 dexamethasone, 10 ng/ml EGF, 0.5 ?g/ml insulin on collage I-treated plates. Fibroblast cultures from tail-tip biopsies of neonatal mice were established as previously described ( 4 ). Southern blot analysis 15 ?g (for cDNA Southern blot) or 30 ?g (for whole vector Southern blot) of genomic DNA was digested with BamHI, separated on a 1% agarose gel and blotted onto HybondXL membrane (Amersham Biosciences). For cDNA blots, probes were prepared by digesting retroviral pMX vectors containing the four reprogramming cDNAs ( 5 ) with NcoI/BamHI (for c-myc) or EcoRI (for Klf4, Oct4 and Sox2). For the whole vector blot, pAd-Oct4 was digested with BamHI. Individual fragments <10kb, with the exception of the fragment containing exclusively Oct4 cDNA sequences, were purified using the QIAGEN gel purification. Labeling with 32P-?-dCTP was done using the Prime-It® II Random Labeling Kit (Stratagene) following the manufacturer’s instructions. PCR analyses PCR reactions to test for adenoviral integrations were set up using 100 ng of genomic DNA isolated from Adeno iPS clones or 1 pg of the four different adenoviral vector plasmid DNAs (corresponding to the equivalent of 1 integration per genome sequence) using the primers described in Supplemental Table 2 . The PCR reaction consisted of 30 cycles of 95°C for 30 seconds, 62°C for 45 seconds and 72°C for 30 seconds. The products were resolved on a 2% agarose gel. PCR analyses of the ROSA26 locus were set up with 100 ng of genomic DNA using the primers rosa1 (5?-AAA GTC GCT CTG AGT TGT TAT-3), rosa2 (5?-GCG AAG AGT TTG TCC TCA ACC-3?) and rosa3 (5?-GGA GCG GGA GAA ATG GAT ATG-3). The PCR reaction consisted of 30 cycles of 94°C for 30 seconds, 60°C for 30 seconds and 72°C for 60 seconds. Teratoma formation iPS cells were harvested by trypsinization, preplated onto untreated culture plates to remove feeders and differentiated cells and injected into the flanks of NOD/SCID mice, using ~5 million cells per injection. Mice were sacrificed 3 weeks later, teratomas isolated and processed for histological analysis. Production of chimeric mice Female BDF1 mice were superovulated with PMS and hCG and mated to BDF1 stud males. Zygotes were isolated from females with a vaginal plug 24 hour after hCG injection. After 3 days of in vitro culture in KSOM media, blastocysts were identified, injected with iPS cells and transferred into pseudopregnant recipient females. In some cases, the iPS cells were labeled with a lentivirus constitutively expressing the red-fluorescent reporter gene tdTomato prior to blastocyst injections ( 6 ). Pups were delivered by Cesarean section at embryonic day E19.5 and nurtured by foster mothers. Newborn chimeras generated with tdTomato-labeled iPS cells were sacrificed, fixed overnight in 1.5% paraformaldehyde (PFA), equilibrated in 30% sucrose solution and frozen in OCT compound. 10 ?m sections were prepared on a cryostat and visualized on a Leica DMI400B inverted fluorescence microscope using RFP and brightfield channels. To determine germline contribution, chimeric mice were mated with hormone-primed BDF1 females. Blastocysts were flushed from the uterus and visualized under a fluorescence microscope using GFP and brightfield channels. Immunofluorescence analysis iPS cells were cultured on pretreated cover slips, fixed with 4% PFA and permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100. Cells were then stained with primary antibodies against mOct4 (Santa Cruz, sc-8628), mSox2 (Chemicon, AB5603), HA (Abcam, ab18181, for c-myc detection) and FLAG (Sigma, F1804, for Klf4 detection) followed by staining with the respective secondary antibodies conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 or Alexa Fluor 546 (Invitrogen). Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (Invitrogen). Cells were imaged using a Leica DMI4000B inverted fluorescence microscope equipped with a Leica DFC350FX camera. Images were processed and analyzed using Adobe Photoshop software. RNA isolation and real-time quantitative PCR analysis RNA was isolated from cells using the TriPure reagent (Roche) followed by RNA clean up with the RNeasy Minikit (Qiagen). cDNA was produced with the First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Roche). Real-time quantitative PCR reactions were set up in triplicates with the Brilliant II SYBR Green QPCR Master Mix (Stratagene) and run on a Mx3000P QPCR System (Stratagene). Primer sequences are listed in Supplemental Table 3 . Bisulfite sequencing Bisulfite treatment of DNA was performed with the EpiTect Bisulfite Kit (Qiagen) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Oct4 and Nanog promoter regions were amplified as previously described ( 7 ). Amplified PCR products were purified by using gel filtration columns, cloned into the pCR4-TOPO vector (Invitrogen), and sequenced with M13 forward and reverse primers.  Adenoviral vectors and infection For the cloning of adenoviral vectors, EcoRI fragments containing the respective cDNAs for c-myc (constitutively active human T58A variant), Klf4 , Oct4 and Sox2 were integrated into the EcoRI site of pHIHG-Ad2. A fragment containing the cDNA sequence was isolated from the resulting plasmids by MfeI/PacI digestion and used for electroporation of BJ5183 cells together with linearized vector pAd-ClaI. Correct clones were identified by HindIII digestion. Viral constructs were transfected into 293A cells, and viral particles purified by two cycles of CsCl gradient and titered by optical absorbance ( 1 ). Fetal liver cells and fibroblasts that carried the Oct4 IND allele were infected with adenoviruses expressing c-myc, Klf4 and Sox2 at MOIs specified in the text for 1 hour at 37°C, 5% CO2. This was followed by two washes with PBS and continued culture in the appropriate culture medium (see below) containing doxycycline at a concentration of 1 ?g/ml. The media was changed every 2–3 days and doxycycline was withdrawn at the times indicated in Supplemental Figure 8 . Hepatocytes that did not carry the Oct4 IND allele were infected with adenoviruses expressing all four reprogramming factors (c-myc, Klf4, Oct4 and Sox2) at MOIs between 1–4. After infection and washing, cells were cultured in media lacking doxycycline.  Isolation of primary cells Adherent fetal liver cultures were established as previously described ( 2 ). Briefly, embryos were harvested at embryonic day E13.5 and livers dissected, washed with HBSS and incubated for 10–15 minutes at 37°C in 0.2% collagenase IV (Invitrogen), 1mM EDTA and 1mM MgCl2. Single-cell suspensions were prepared by repetitive pipetting and filtering through a 40 ?m cell strainer. Cells were resuspended in DMEM containing 10% FBS, 10ng/ml EGF, 10 ng/ml bFGF, 20 ng/ml TGF?, 0.5 ?g/ml insulin and 40 ng/ml HGF and plated onto collagen I-treated culture plates (Becton Dickinson). Adult hepatocytes were isolated from 2–4 month-old mice by two-step collagenase perfusion protocol using Blendzyme 3 (Roche) ( 3 ). The perfused and isolated liver was freed of gall bladder and connective tissue and digested for 5–7 minutes. Digestion was stopped by addition of ice-cold DMEM containing FBS, followed by mechanically shearing of the liver capsule to release the dissociated cells. The resulting cell suspension was passed through a 100 ?m cell strainer and centrifuged at 600 rpm for 1 minute. The pellet was considered as the hepatocyte preparation. Hepatocytes were cultured in DMEM containing 10% FBS, 10?7 dexamethasone, 10 ng/ml EGF, 0.5 ?g/ml insulin on collage I-treated plates. Fibroblast cultures from tail-tip biopsies of neonatal mice were established as previously described ( 4 ).  Southern blot analysis 15 ?g (for cDNA Southern blot) or 30 ?g (for whole vector Southern blot) of genomic DNA was digested with BamHI, separated on a 1% agarose gel and blotted onto HybondXL membrane (Amersham Biosciences). For cDNA blots, probes were prepared by digesting retroviral pMX vectors containing the four reprogramming cDNAs ( 5 ) with NcoI/BamHI (for c-myc) or EcoRI (for Klf4, Oct4 and Sox2). For the whole vector blot, pAd-Oct4 was digested with BamHI. Individual fragments <10kb, with the exception of the fragment containing exclusively Oct4 cDNA sequences, were purified using the QIAGEN gel purification. Labeling with 32P-?-dCTP was done using the Prime-It® II Random Labeling Kit (Stratagene) following the manufacturer’s instructions.  PCR analyses PCR reactions to test for adenoviral integrations were set up using 100 ng of genomic DNA isolated from Adeno iPS clones or 1 pg of the four different adenoviral vector plasmid DNAs (corresponding to the equivalent of 1 integration per genome sequence) using the primers described in Supplemental Table 2 . The PCR reaction consisted of 30 cycles of 95°C for 30 seconds, 62°C for 45 seconds and 72°C for 30 seconds. The products were resolved on a 2% agarose gel. PCR analyses of the ROSA26 locus were set up with 100 ng of genomic DNA using the primers rosa1 (5?-AAA GTC GCT CTG AGT TGT TAT-3), rosa2 (5?-GCG AAG AGT TTG TCC TCA ACC-3?) and rosa3 (5?-GGA GCG GGA GAA ATG GAT ATG-3). The PCR reaction consisted of 30 cycles of 94°C for 30 seconds, 60°C for 30 seconds and 72°C for 60 seconds.  Teratoma formation iPS cells were harvested by trypsinization, preplated onto untreated culture plates to remove feeders and differentiated cells and injected into the flanks of NOD/SCID mice, using ~5 million cells per injection. Mice were sacrificed 3 weeks later, teratomas isolated and processed for histological analysis.  Production of chimeric mice Female BDF1 mice were superovulated with PMS and hCG and mated to BDF1 stud males. Zygotes were isolated from females with a vaginal plug 24 hour after hCG injection. After 3 days of in vitro culture in KSOM media, blastocysts were identified, injected with iPS cells and transferred into pseudopregnant recipient females. In some cases, the iPS cells were labeled with a lentivirus constitutively expressing the red-fluorescent reporter gene tdTomato prior to blastocyst injections ( 6 ). Pups were delivered by Cesarean section at embryonic day E19.5 and nurtured by foster mothers. Newborn chimeras generated with tdTomato-labeled iPS cells were sacrificed, fixed overnight in 1.5% paraformaldehyde (PFA), equilibrated in 30% sucrose solution and frozen in OCT compound. 10 ?m sections were prepared on a cryostat and visualized on a Leica DMI400B inverted fluorescence microscope using RFP and brightfield channels. To determine germline contribution, chimeric mice were mated with hormone-primed BDF1 females. Blastocysts were flushed from the uterus and visualized under a fluorescence microscope using GFP and brightfield channels.  Immunofluorescence analysis iPS cells were cultured on pretreated cover slips, fixed with 4% PFA and permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100. Cells were then stained with primary antibodies against mOct4 (Santa Cruz, sc-8628), mSox2 (Chemicon, AB5603), HA (Abcam, ab18181, for c-myc detection) and FLAG (Sigma, F1804, for Klf4 detection) followed by staining with the respective secondary antibodies conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 or Alexa Fluor 546 (Invitrogen). Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (Invitrogen). Cells were imaged using a Leica DMI4000B inverted fluorescence microscope equipped with a Leica DFC350FX camera. Images were processed and analyzed using Adobe Photoshop software.  RNA isolation and real-time quantitative PCR analysis RNA was isolated from cells using the TriPure reagent (Roche) followed by RNA clean up with the RNeasy Minikit (Qiagen). cDNA was produced with the First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Roche). Real-time quantitative PCR reactions were set up in triplicates with the Brilliant II SYBR Green QPCR Master Mix (Stratagene) and run on a Mx3000P QPCR System (Stratagene). Primer sequences are listed in Supplemental Table 3 .  Bisulfite sequencing Bisulfite treatment of DNA was performed with the EpiTect Bisulfite Kit (Qiagen) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Oct4 and Nanog promoter regions were amplified as previously described ( 7 ). Amplified PCR products were purified by using gel filtration columns, cloned into the pCR4-TOPO vector (Invitrogen), and sequenced with M13 forward and reverse primers.  Supplementary Material 