Screening for EphB signaling effectors using SILAC with a linear ion trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer Eph receptors play important roles in development, neural plasticity and cancer. We used an Orbitrap mass spectrometer and Stable Isotope Labeling by Amino Acids in Cell Culture (SILAC) to identify and quantify 204 proteins with significantly changed abundance in anti-phosphotyrosine immunoprecipitates after ephrinB1-Fc stimulation. More than half of all known effectors downstream of EphB receptors were identified in this study, as well as numerous novel candidates for EphB signaling.  Introduction Erythropoietin-producing hepatocellular carcinoma (Eph) receptors form the largest family of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). There are 16 Eph genes in vertebrate genomes and 14 of them are found in mammals 1 , 2 . Eph receptors are transmembrane proteins with conserved extra- and intracellular domains. The Eph family receptors are divided into two classes, EphA and EphB receptors, based on similarities in their extracellular domains and binding preference for either glycosylphosphatidylinositol linked ephrinA ligands or transmembrane ephrinB ligands. Activation of Eph receptors generally leads to cytoskeleton rearrangement in the cell. However, recent studies have shown that Eph signaling can have diverse cellular effects in addition to changes in cytoskeleton dynamics depending on the cellular contexts 1 . First identified as key regulators of axon guidance during development, Eph receptors have been found to play important roles in tissue patterning, angiogenesis, cell morphogenesis, neural plasticity and cancer 1 . Despite intensive studies over the last 20 years leading to more than 2000 publications in Pubmed, Eph signaling is still of a great research interest and new effectors and mechanisms continue to be discovered frequently. Quantitative proteomics by stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) has quickly become a major tool for high throughput screening analysis for signaling pathways in recent years 3 . Particularly, in combination with anti-phosphotyrosine (pY) immunoprecipitation (IP), SILAC has shown great promise for the investigation of signaling pathways downstream of RTKs 4 – 6 . In these studies, cells are first metabolically labeled with light or heavy amino acids during cell culture. After labeling, in one cell population the RTK is activated to trigger tyrosine phosphorylation of downstream effectors. Then the lysates of the stimulated and the control cells are combined for anti-pY IP to pull down pY proteins together with their tight binding partners. The IPed proteins are then identified and quantified by MS and the relative abundance of the light and heavy versions of a protein is used to indicate whether the protein participates in the RTK pathway or not. In a previous study, we used SILAC and quadrupole time-of-flight (QTOF) mass spectrometry (MS) to look for effectors in the EphB signaling pathway 7 . In that study, 46 out of 127 identified proteins were found to have changed abundance in pY IPs upon EphB receptor activation. Recently, the hybrid linear ion trap-Orbitrap (LTQ-Orbitrap™) mass spectrometer has demonstrated great utility in proteomic research 8 – 13 . With high speed and sensitivity in tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) mode by the linear ion trap, this instrument has been used to identify many more proteins from complex peptide mixtures than a QTOF instrument using data-dependent switching to and from MS/MS 14 . Moreover, the high resolution of the Orbitrap can increase the accuracy of peptide quantitation. In this study, we have repeated the SILAC experiment using an LTQ-Orbitrap with the aim of identify more candidate effectors in the EphB pathway.  Materials and Methods Cell Culture and Cell Stimulation Metabolic labeling and stimulation of cells were performed as previously described 7 . Briefly, ten 10 cm plates (approximately 108 total cells)/condition NG108 cells (mouse neuroblastoma × rat glioma hybrid) stably overexpressing EphB2 receptor 15 were differentially labeled in medium containing either normal or 13 C6 lysine and 13 C6 arginine (Cambridge Isotope Labs, Andover, MA). After five cell divisions to ensure nearly complete metabolic labeling, the cells were serum starved for 24 h. One cell population was treated with 2 ?g/mL ephrinB1-Fc (Sigma-Aldrich) aggregated with anti-Fc IgG (Jackson Immunoresearch) for 45 min while the other population was treated with anti-Fc IgG aggregated Fc as a control. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing 1% Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris, pH8, 0.2mM EDTA, 2 mM Na3VO4, 2mM NaF, and protease inhibitors (Complete tablet; Roche, Mannheim, Germany). Immunoprecipitation (IP) and SDS-PAGE The “light” and “heavy” lysates were mixed in a 1:1 ratio (v:v) and incubated with agarose-conjugated anti-pY antibody PY99 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) for 4 h, and the beads were washed 4 times with lysis buffer. Precipitated proteins were eluted with a low pH buffer (pH2) containing 0.2% TFA/1% SDS. The eluates were neutralized with 1M NH4HCO3 and separated by SDS-PAGE on a 7.5% Tris-HCl gel (Bio-rad). The gel was stained with Coomassie Blue and the gel lanes were cut horizontally into 10 sections for in-gel tryptic digestion. In-gel Digestion Gel bands were cut into small pieces and destained in 25 mM NH4HCO3/50% acetonitrile, dehydrated with acetonitrile and dried. Then the gel pieces were rehydrated with 12.5 ng/?l trypsin solution in 25 mM NH4HCO3 and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted twice with 5% formic acid/50% acetonitrile followed by a final extraction with acetonitrile. Samples were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation to dryness and redissolved with 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid before further analysis. Liquid Chromatography (LC)-MS/MS An LTQ-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-ESI source (Jamie Hill Instrument Services) was used for all LC-MS/MS analyses. A Nano-Acquity UPLC system (Waters) equipped with a 100-?m × 15-cm reverse phase column (Symmetry C18, Waters) was coupled directly to the ion trap instrument via a 10-?m-inner diameter PicoTip™ nanoelectrospray emitter (New Objective). Samples were loaded onto a trap column (180 ?m × 2 cm Symmetry C18, Waters) with 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 4 min at 5 ?l/min. After sample loading, the flow rate was reduced to 0.4 ?l/min and directed through the analytical column, and peptides were eluted by a gradient of 6–40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 120 min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode with one 60,000 resolution MS survey scan by the Orbitrap and up to five concurrent MS/MS scans in the LTQ for the five most intense peaks selected from each survey scan. Automatic gain control was set to 500,000 for Orbitrap survey scans and 10,000 for LTQ MS/MS scans. Survey scans were acquired in profile mode and MS/MS scans were acquired in centroid mode. Mascot generic format files were generated from the raw data using DTASuperCharge (version 1.01) and Bioworks (version 3.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for database searching. Protein Identification and Quantitation Mascot software (version 2.1.0, Matrix Science, London, UK) was used for database searching. An IPI database containing mouse and rat protein sequences (downloaded January 01, 2007) was used. Peptide mass tolerance was 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was 0.6 Da, trypsin specificity was applied with a maximum of one missed cleavage, and variable modifications were 13C6 Lys, 13C6 Arg, oxidation of methionine, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. To estimate the false positive rate for protein identification, a decoy database was created by reversing the protein sequences of the original database. Based on the decoy database search results, three filters for protein identification were applied: (1) Peptide score threshold was 20. (2) Protein score threshold was 40. (3) Each protein was identified based on at least two unique peptide sequences. The estimated false positive rate based on the decoy database search was 0.3%. To merge the SILAC results of multiple gel fractions from the same sample preparation, all the identified peptide sequences from different gel fractions were combined and searched against the same IPI protein database to obtain the protein matches. Proteins identified based on the same set of peptides were grouped and reported as a single protein match. Proteins that were likely introduced during sample preparation were excluded from the reported protein list. These proteins included keratins and trypsin (from in-gel digestion), immunoglobins (from the PY99 antibody and Fc fusion protein), ephrinB1 (the stimulating ligand), ferritin, and serum albumin (from cell culture media). SILAC quantitation was carried out using the open source software MSQuant (version 1.4.2a13) developed by Peter Mortensen and Matthias Mann at the University of Southern Denmark. The XIC intensities of the heavy and light peptides were measured, with the results verified by manual inspection of the MS spectra. The SILAC ratios of proteins were calculated by comparing the summed XIC intensities of all matched light peptides with those of the heavy peptides. As a loading control, a small volume of the combined lysates was subjected to in-gel digestion, LC-MS/MS analysis and the identified proteins were also quantified. The average ratio for all quantified proteins was used as a correction for ratios of proteins identified from the IP. Phosphorylation Analysis Phosphopeptides were identified using Mascot. All matched MS/MS spectra were inspected manually. In cases where there were multiple possibilities for the localization of the phosphates on the peptide, a simple statistical model 16 was used to calculate a score (Ascore) based on the number of matching ions for each possible localization using only the site determining ions 17 . We used an Ascore threshold of 19, which has been estimated to correspond to 99.5% confidence in site localization 17 . In addition, the results were filtered based on the intensity of the peak corresponding to the neutral loss of phosphoric acid (98 Da) from the precursor ion: The assignment was rejected if the peptide did not contain pS or pT and the intensity of the neutral loss peak was larger than 50% of the base peak. Western Blotting Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to PVDF membranes. Membranes were blocked with Tris buffered saline with Tween 20 containing 2% bovine serum albumin, incubated with the corresponding primary and horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), and visualized with ECL (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL). Anti-Hrs 18 and anti-STAM2 19 were kind gifts from Dr. Harald Stenmark. Anti-IRS2, anti-Erbin, PY99-HRP (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-SASH1 (Abnova, Taiwan) and anti-EphB4 (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) antibodies were used as indicated by the manufacturers.  Cell Culture and Cell Stimulation Metabolic labeling and stimulation of cells were performed as previously described 7 . Briefly, ten 10 cm plates (approximately 108 total cells)/condition NG108 cells (mouse neuroblastoma × rat glioma hybrid) stably overexpressing EphB2 receptor 15 were differentially labeled in medium containing either normal or 13 C6 lysine and 13 C6 arginine (Cambridge Isotope Labs, Andover, MA). After five cell divisions to ensure nearly complete metabolic labeling, the cells were serum starved for 24 h. One cell population was treated with 2 ?g/mL ephrinB1-Fc (Sigma-Aldrich) aggregated with anti-Fc IgG (Jackson Immunoresearch) for 45 min while the other population was treated with anti-Fc IgG aggregated Fc as a control. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing 1% Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris, pH8, 0.2mM EDTA, 2 mM Na3VO4, 2mM NaF, and protease inhibitors (Complete tablet; Roche, Mannheim, Germany).  Immunoprecipitation (IP) and SDS-PAGE The “light” and “heavy” lysates were mixed in a 1:1 ratio (v:v) and incubated with agarose-conjugated anti-pY antibody PY99 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) for 4 h, and the beads were washed 4 times with lysis buffer. Precipitated proteins were eluted with a low pH buffer (pH2) containing 0.2% TFA/1% SDS. The eluates were neutralized with 1M NH4HCO3 and separated by SDS-PAGE on a 7.5% Tris-HCl gel (Bio-rad). The gel was stained with Coomassie Blue and the gel lanes were cut horizontally into 10 sections for in-gel tryptic digestion.  In-gel Digestion Gel bands were cut into small pieces and destained in 25 mM NH4HCO3/50% acetonitrile, dehydrated with acetonitrile and dried. Then the gel pieces were rehydrated with 12.5 ng/?l trypsin solution in 25 mM NH4HCO3 and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted twice with 5% formic acid/50% acetonitrile followed by a final extraction with acetonitrile. Samples were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation to dryness and redissolved with 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid before further analysis.  Liquid Chromatography (LC)-MS/MS An LTQ-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-ESI source (Jamie Hill Instrument Services) was used for all LC-MS/MS analyses. A Nano-Acquity UPLC system (Waters) equipped with a 100-?m × 15-cm reverse phase column (Symmetry C18, Waters) was coupled directly to the ion trap instrument via a 10-?m-inner diameter PicoTip™ nanoelectrospray emitter (New Objective). Samples were loaded onto a trap column (180 ?m × 2 cm Symmetry C18, Waters) with 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 4 min at 5 ?l/min. After sample loading, the flow rate was reduced to 0.4 ?l/min and directed through the analytical column, and peptides were eluted by a gradient of 6–40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 120 min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode with one 60,000 resolution MS survey scan by the Orbitrap and up to five concurrent MS/MS scans in the LTQ for the five most intense peaks selected from each survey scan. Automatic gain control was set to 500,000 for Orbitrap survey scans and 10,000 for LTQ MS/MS scans. Survey scans were acquired in profile mode and MS/MS scans were acquired in centroid mode. Mascot generic format files were generated from the raw data using DTASuperCharge (version 1.01) and Bioworks (version 3.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for database searching.  Protein Identification and Quantitation Mascot software (version 2.1.0, Matrix Science, London, UK) was used for database searching. An IPI database containing mouse and rat protein sequences (downloaded January 01, 2007) was used. Peptide mass tolerance was 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was 0.6 Da, trypsin specificity was applied with a maximum of one missed cleavage, and variable modifications were 13C6 Lys, 13C6 Arg, oxidation of methionine, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. To estimate the false positive rate for protein identification, a decoy database was created by reversing the protein sequences of the original database. Based on the decoy database search results, three filters for protein identification were applied: (1) Peptide score threshold was 20. (2) Protein score threshold was 40. (3) Each protein was identified based on at least two unique peptide sequences. The estimated false positive rate based on the decoy database search was 0.3%. To merge the SILAC results of multiple gel fractions from the same sample preparation, all the identified peptide sequences from different gel fractions were combined and searched against the same IPI protein database to obtain the protein matches. Proteins identified based on the same set of peptides were grouped and reported as a single protein match. Proteins that were likely introduced during sample preparation were excluded from the reported protein list. These proteins included keratins and trypsin (from in-gel digestion), immunoglobins (from the PY99 antibody and Fc fusion protein), ephrinB1 (the stimulating ligand), ferritin, and serum albumin (from cell culture media). SILAC quantitation was carried out using the open source software MSQuant (version 1.4.2a13) developed by Peter Mortensen and Matthias Mann at the University of Southern Denmark. The XIC intensities of the heavy and light peptides were measured, with the results verified by manual inspection of the MS spectra. The SILAC ratios of proteins were calculated by comparing the summed XIC intensities of all matched light peptides with those of the heavy peptides. As a loading control, a small volume of the combined lysates was subjected to in-gel digestion, LC-MS/MS analysis and the identified proteins were also quantified. The average ratio for all quantified proteins was used as a correction for ratios of proteins identified from the IP.  Phosphorylation Analysis Phosphopeptides were identified using Mascot. All matched MS/MS spectra were inspected manually. In cases where there were multiple possibilities for the localization of the phosphates on the peptide, a simple statistical model 16 was used to calculate a score (Ascore) based on the number of matching ions for each possible localization using only the site determining ions 17 . We used an Ascore threshold of 19, which has been estimated to correspond to 99.5% confidence in site localization 17 . In addition, the results were filtered based on the intensity of the peak corresponding to the neutral loss of phosphoric acid (98 Da) from the precursor ion: The assignment was rejected if the peptide did not contain pS or pT and the intensity of the neutral loss peak was larger than 50% of the base peak.  Western Blotting Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to PVDF membranes. Membranes were blocked with Tris buffered saline with Tween 20 containing 2% bovine serum albumin, incubated with the corresponding primary and horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), and visualized with ECL (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL). Anti-Hrs 18 and anti-STAM2 19 were kind gifts from Dr. Harald Stenmark. Anti-IRS2, anti-Erbin, PY99-HRP (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-SASH1 (Abnova, Taiwan) and anti-EphB4 (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) antibodies were used as indicated by the manufacturers.  Results and Discussion Protein Identification and SILAC Quantitation To screen for effectors in the EphB signaling pathway, we used a SILAC strategy that we employed in a previous study 7 . Briefly, two populations of NG108-EphB2 cells (NG108 cells that stably overexpress the EphB2 receptor) were differentially SILAC labeled with 13C6 Lys / 13C6 Arg or 12C6 Lys / 12C6 Arg. One cell population was treated with clustered ephrinB1-Fc to activate the EphB2 receptor while the other (control) population was treated with clustered Fc. After cell lysis, equal volumes of the two lysates were combined for anti-pY IP. Anti-pY Western blotting using the lysates and pY IPs indicated that several proteins were tyrosine phosphorylated after ligand stimulation ( Figure 1 ). The IPed proteins were separated into 10 fractions using SDS-PAGE. Each fraction was digested with trypsin and analyzed by LC-MS with a hybrid LTQ-Orbitrap MS spectrometer for protein identification and quantitation. Coomassie staining of the gel before in-gel digestion revealed a faint haze of blue staining, but the gel contained insufficient protein for visualization of individual proteins (data not shown). Two SILAC replicates (biological replicates) were carried out, in which 683 and 532 proteins were identified respectively. Figure 2A shows the number of protein identifications in the two replicates. Of the 804 proteins identified in the two SILAC replicates, 777 (672 from replicate 1 and 513 from replicate 2, 408 from both) were quantified and 27 were not able to be confidently quantified due to poor MS spectral quality ( Figure 2B ). The protein ratios from the two individual replicates were consistent ( Figure 3 ). A list of the 777 quantified proteins is shown in Supporting Information Table 1 . 204 proteins increased at least 1.5-fold in abundance in pY IP after ephrinB1 stimulation and 12 showed at least 1.5-fold decreased abundance. To further remove from the protein list redundancy caused by orthologous proteins from mouse and rat, proteins corresponding to the same gene name were clustered into a single entry. After clustering, 194 proteins showed at least 1.5-fold increased ratios and 10 showed decreased ratios. Table 1 lists the proteins with changed ratios. Western Blotting Verification To further verify the SILAC result from the MS analysis, Western Blotting was carried out for five proteins with changed ratios whose antibodies were available. These proteins include: Hrs, STAM2, Erbin, IRS-2 and SASH1. None of these proteins have been previously reported to participate in Eph signaling except in our previous SILAC study 7 that found Hrs, STAM2, IRS-2 and SASH1. As shown in Figure 4 , the Western blotting results for all the selected proteins were consistent with the corresponding SILAC ratios. The NG108-EphB2 cell line has been used frequently in previous studies of ephrin/Eph signaling 15 , 20 – 25 . We have observed from our previous SILAC study 7 that the NG108-EphB2 cells express endogenous EphB4 and EphB3 receptors and upon ephrinB1 stimulation these receptors are activated along with EphB2. This observation was confirmed in this study. To verify that EphB receptors other than EphB2 are expressed in NG108 cells, wild type NG108 cells were treated with ephrinB1 using the same procedure as the SILAC experiment. Lysates and pY IPs were probed with anti-EphB4 and anti-pY antibodies. The anti-EphB4 blot ( Figure 4 ) indicates that EphB4 is expressed in wild type NG108 cells and can be tyrosine phosphorylated upon ligand treatment. The anti-pY blot on the lysates and pY IPs did not show detectable difference between the control and stimulated cells due to interference from basal signals (data not shown), suggesting the effect of Eph signaling in wile type NG108 cells is much subtler than in the NG108-EphB2 cells. Based on these new findings, care should be taken when using NG108 cell lines for Eph signaling studies as well as interpreting results from previous studies in which these cell lines were used. Phosphorylation Sites The SILAC experiment identified 128 unique phosphopeptide sequences using Mascot. Because most of these phosphopeptides contain multiple serine/threonine/tyrosine residues, we tried to localize the phosphorylation sites using a simple statistical model for matching site-determining ions in the MS/MS spectra 16 , 17 . Using this model, we localized 116 phosphorylation sites (38 pS, 12 pT and 66 pY) on 115 peptides. To determine how many of the identified phosphorylation sites are novel, the Swiss-prot knowledgebase (downloaded September 03, 2007) and datasets of phosphorylation sites from several major large scale proteomics studies 26 – 30 were searched using in-house written Perl scripts. 67 of the 116 localized phosphorylation sites were not found in these databases ( Supporting Information Table 2 ). The annotated MS/MS spectra of all identified phosphopeptides are included in Supporting Information File1 and File2 . File1 contains spectra of phosphopeptides whose phosphorylation sites were localized by Ascores. File2 contains spectra of phosphopeptides whose phosphorylation sites could not be localized by Ascores. For these peptides, the phosphorylation sites corresponding to the best Ascores were used to annotate the fragment ions in the spectra. All the identified phosphopeptides together with their Ascores are listed in Supporting Information Table 2 . It is possible that the phosphotyrosine sites on proteins with ratio changes are regulated by the EphB activity, but due to the fact that almost all phosphoproteins have multiple phosphorylation sites, a protein ratio change from anti-pY IP cannot be attributed to the change of a specific pY site. A quantitative experiment that does not involve pY protein IP (for example, phosphopeptide enrichment after digestion of the whole cell lysate) would be needed to confirm the link between specific pY sites and EphB signaling. Comparison between the LTQ-Orbitrap results and previous QTOF results Previously we have carried out a similar SILAC study using an older QTOF instrument (Micromass, QTOF-Micro, installed in 2003) 7 . Figure 2B and 2C show a comparison of the numbers of protein identifications and phosphopeptide identifications in the two studies. Using approximately the same number of cells, the LTQ-Orbitrap analysis identified 5 times more proteins and 10 times more phosphopeptides than the QTOF Micro. This is largely attributed to the high sensitivity and sequencing speed afforded by the LTQ-Orbitrap as has been documented by previous studies 10 , 14 . When considering these results, it should be kept in mind that the Orbitrap SILAC experiment was performed twice, while the QTOF experiment was performed once, which would slightly exaggerate the difference in number of proteins quantified. 95 of the 127 proteins that were identified in the QTOF experiment were identified and quantified in the Orbitrap study. Supporting Information Figure 1 shows the protein ratios measured by the QTOF and the Orbitrap. While the majority of these proteins have consistent ratios in the two studies, we did observe that 13 of the 95 proteins changed by more than 1.5-fold in one experiment but not the other. These proteins are listed in Supporting Information Table 3 . However for most of these proteins the two ratios are close to the cutoff ratio of 1.5. A summary comparison of the proteins identified in both Orbitrap experiments as well as the previous QTOF study is shown in Supporting Information Table 4 . Differences in SILAC ratios between the two studies can be attributed to two major reasons. First, although the same protocol for cell culture and treatment was used, the two experiments were performed more than two years apart and the intensities of Eph activation may have been slightly different in the two studies (biological variation). For example the protein Intersectin, which is a known effector downstream of EphB 31 , has a SILAC ratio of 0.99 in the QTOF study and 2.0 in the Orbitrap study. Second, the QTOF Micro and Orbitrap instruments have different dynamic ranges for quantitation. It was observed that the SILAC ratios measured by the Orbitrap were generally more dramatic than the ratio from the QTOF ( Supporting Information Figure 1 ). We attribute this to the high dynamic range of Orbitrap 32 . Due to the different detection principles employed, the two instruments have quite different characteristics of spectral noise. As shown in Figure 5 , the Orbitrap spectrum has lower background signal than the QTOF spectrum. When the peak intensity is low the background can contribute considerably to the ratio obtained by automated SILAC quantitation. Comprehensiveness of the Screen An extensive literature search using Pubmed found 42 key signaling proteins that are known to be close EphB binding partners or regulated by activation of EphB receptors ( Supporting Information Table 5 ). 24 of these were identified in this study, and 17 of the 24 proteins had SILAC pY IP abundance changes of 1.5 or more. Seven proteins had pY IP abundance changes upon ephrin stimulation of less than 1.5-fold, but for most of them the directions of the subtle ratio changes were consistent with previous studies, such as PI3K, Grb2 and MAPK. The fact that more than half of all known effectors in EphB signaling were identified in this single study suggested the power of the strategy and the comprehensiveness of the screen. These known effectors only account for a small proportion (~10%) of the proteins with changed ratios identified in this study, suggesting many more novel candidates may participate in EphB signaling with their roles yet to be characterized. The reasons why many known effectors were not identified in this screen may include: (1) Eph signaling has versatile functions. Many known effectors and signaling effects are only observed in specific cell types and cellular contexts, for example, the NMDA receptor in neurons 33 and ZAP70 in T cells 34 . (2) The known effectors are based on studies on any of the 6 EphB receptors while only three of them (EphB2, EphB3 and EphB4) are known to be expressed in the cell line that was used in this study. (3) It has been shown that different intensities of Eph signaling can produce very different cellular effects 1 . Therefore regulation of effectors is dependent on intensity of Eph receptor activation, which is in turn dependent on level of receptor expression and concentration/affinity of stimulating ligands etc. (4) Different effectors may have different time courses of activation and the activation of specific effectors may only be observed at a specific time point. (5) Some effectors may not contain tyrosine phosphorylation sites or have low binding affinity/stoichiometry to other effectors. (6) Some effectors, for example, Src family kinases including Src, Fyn and Yes, are tyrosine phosphorylated at different sites both when activated and inhibited 35 . In this case the overall protein phosphorylation level, i.e. the SILAC ratio, might not reflect the level of activation. (7) The amounts of the effector proteins, in the context of the other proteins being analyzed, were below the detection limit of the mass spectrometer. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis We performed a GO analysis of the quantified proteins using a commercial tool from ProteinCenter™ (Proxeon) for annotating and comparing protein datasets. The quantified proteins were first classified into two groups: proteins with ratio changes and proteins without ratio changes. GO analysis was performed for both groups using biological processes, cellular components and molecular functions classifications ( Figure 6 ). In theory, all proteins with changed ratios were pulled down in pY IPs due to specific binding and are specific to EphB signaling. Pulldown of proteins with no ratio changes could be due to either specific (some tyrosine phosphorylated proteins do not change their phosphorylation status after Eph activation) or non-specific binding during IP. Therefore enrichment of a specific GO annotation in one group can indicate a general difference between the Eph signaling specific/non-specific proteins or pY IP specific/non-specific proteins. The GO cellular components analysis ( Figure 6A ) shows that proteins from ribosome, nucleus, mitochondrion, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) are enriched in the unchanged protein group, suggesting that a considerable number of non-specific binding proteins from the pY IP came from these organelles. GO molecular functions analysis ( Figure 6B ) shows more nucleic acid/nucleotide binding proteins in the unchanged protein group, which also suggests the nucleus and ribosome as major sources of non-specific binding proteins. This implies that more vigorous clarification of lysate before pY IP, e.g. centrifugation at higher speed or for longer time, which can better remove these organelles, may reduce IP background and promote identification of more specific target proteins. Another observation is that membrane proteins are enriched in the changed groups, suggesting significant Eph signaling occurs on the cellular membrane. From the GO molecular functions/biological processes analysis ( Figure 6B and 6C ), proteins in the categories of cell communication and signal transduction are enriched in the changed proteins, while proteins in the categories of metabolism and structural activity are enriched in the non-changed proteins. This is consistent with the established notion that the SILAC strategy we employed is an effective way to identify specific signaling target proteins from a background of non-specific interactions, which might be expected to be dominated by highly abundant housekeeping/structural proteins. In all three GO analyses, the unannotated proteins are more enriched in the regulated proteins category, suggesting that many of the proteins with changed SILAC ratios have not been well studied. Domain Analysis The presence of conserved structural domains in a protein can suggest particular functions for the protein. Therefore domain analysis can be used as a preliminary search for potential protein groups with specific functions or interactions in a signaling pathway. The cross-reference files for the IPI mouse and rat protein databases were searched to obtain the Pfam domain annotations for the all quantified proteins ( Supporting Information Table 1 ). For the proteins with changed SILAC ratios upon ephrinB1 stimulation (shown in Figure 7 ), it is clear that several specific domains are overrepresented: (1) SH3 (including SH3_1 and SH3_2), PH, CH and RhoGAP domains are known to be indicative of a protein involved in signal transduction related to cytoskeletal organization, which is consistent with the consensus that cytoskeleton rearrangement is one major outcome of EphB signaling. (2) SH2 domains, which are important regulatory modules of tyrosine phosphorylation-dependent signaling cascades, are also overrepresented. (3) The EphB receptor has a PDZ binding motif at the C-terminus and is known to bind to PDZ-domain containing proteins including Syntenin, Afadin, and Grip1. All these proteins were identified in this SILAC study as proteins with changed ratios. In addition, nine proteins with changed SILAC ratios were found to contain PDZ domains, which are possible novel binding partners of EphB receptors through their PDZ domains. (4) UIM and VHS domains are also overrepresented, suggesting many effectors may be involved in vesicular trafficking / protein degradation triggered by ubiquitination of Eph receptors. Biological Implications of the Novel Candidate Effectors Of the proteins found to be involved in EphB signaling in this study but not our previous study, we validated Erbin by Western blotting ( Fig. 4 ). Lending further support to the validity of our results, nine of the proteins found in this but not our previous study have been reported by others to be involved in ephrin signaling. These proteins include Intersectin 31 , PI3K 36 – 39 , Shc 40 , Vav2 41 , Cbl 42 , Syntenin 43 , Grip1 44 , Grb2 40 , and Sos1 20 . In addition, in-silico protein function and interaction analysis was performed by feeding the list of proteins of changed SILAC ratios into Ingenuity Pathways Analysis software (Ingenuity Systems, http://www.ingenuity.com ), which searches existing literature and interaction databases (including Ingenuity curated findings, BIND, BIOGRID, DIP, INTACT, Interactome studies, MINT and MIPS, all downloaded 07/08/2008) for protein interaction and regulation networks. 98 of the 204 proteins with changed SILAC ratios could be assigned to a single interaction network based on previously reported direct protein-protein binding ( Supporting Information Figure 2 ), thus supporting the ability of our screen to find functionally related proteins. The software was also able to classify the proteins into eleven major signaling networks (each network included a minimum of 10 proteins from our list of proteins that change in response to ephrinB addition) with relatively independent functions ( Supporting Information Figure 3 ). These networks are mainly involved in regulation of cell morphology, cellular assembly and organization as well as development, which are consistent with known functions of EphB signaling. The same analysis was also carried out for the 46 proteins with changed SILAC ratios found in the QTOF analysis, which resulted in only two networks with 10 or more members from the list of changing proteins ( Supporting Information Figure 3 ). It was noted that a considerable number of candidate effectors from the current study, which were missing in the previous QTOF analysis, were assigned into networks that participate in protein synthesis, indicating gene translation is quickly activated in response to EphB receptor activation. Another novel group of networks are involved in cell death and growth/proliferation, which is in line with the emerging discovery that Eph receptors play important roles in cancer. 1 Compared to the QTOF study, the much improved pY proteome coverage by the Orbitrap analysis greatly facilitated pathway analysis of EphB signaling.  Protein Identification and SILAC Quantitation To screen for effectors in the EphB signaling pathway, we used a SILAC strategy that we employed in a previous study 7 . Briefly, two populations of NG108-EphB2 cells (NG108 cells that stably overexpress the EphB2 receptor) were differentially SILAC labeled with 13C6 Lys / 13C6 Arg or 12C6 Lys / 12C6 Arg. One cell population was treated with clustered ephrinB1-Fc to activate the EphB2 receptor while the other (control) population was treated with clustered Fc. After cell lysis, equal volumes of the two lysates were combined for anti-pY IP. Anti-pY Western blotting using the lysates and pY IPs indicated that several proteins were tyrosine phosphorylated after ligand stimulation ( Figure 1 ). The IPed proteins were separated into 10 fractions using SDS-PAGE. Each fraction was digested with trypsin and analyzed by LC-MS with a hybrid LTQ-Orbitrap MS spectrometer for protein identification and quantitation. Coomassie staining of the gel before in-gel digestion revealed a faint haze of blue staining, but the gel contained insufficient protein for visualization of individual proteins (data not shown). Two SILAC replicates (biological replicates) were carried out, in which 683 and 532 proteins were identified respectively. Figure 2A shows the number of protein identifications in the two replicates. Of the 804 proteins identified in the two SILAC replicates, 777 (672 from replicate 1 and 513 from replicate 2, 408 from both) were quantified and 27 were not able to be confidently quantified due to poor MS spectral quality ( Figure 2B ). The protein ratios from the two individual replicates were consistent ( Figure 3 ). A list of the 777 quantified proteins is shown in Supporting Information Table 1 . 204 proteins increased at least 1.5-fold in abundance in pY IP after ephrinB1 stimulation and 12 showed at least 1.5-fold decreased abundance. To further remove from the protein list redundancy caused by orthologous proteins from mouse and rat, proteins corresponding to the same gene name were clustered into a single entry. After clustering, 194 proteins showed at least 1.5-fold increased ratios and 10 showed decreased ratios. Table 1 lists the proteins with changed ratios.  Western Blotting Verification To further verify the SILAC result from the MS analysis, Western Blotting was carried out for five proteins with changed ratios whose antibodies were available. These proteins include: Hrs, STAM2, Erbin, IRS-2 and SASH1. None of these proteins have been previously reported to participate in Eph signaling except in our previous SILAC study 7 that found Hrs, STAM2, IRS-2 and SASH1. As shown in Figure 4 , the Western blotting results for all the selected proteins were consistent with the corresponding SILAC ratios. The NG108-EphB2 cell line has been used frequently in previous studies of ephrin/Eph signaling 15 , 20 – 25 . We have observed from our previous SILAC study 7 that the NG108-EphB2 cells express endogenous EphB4 and EphB3 receptors and upon ephrinB1 stimulation these receptors are activated along with EphB2. This observation was confirmed in this study. To verify that EphB receptors other than EphB2 are expressed in NG108 cells, wild type NG108 cells were treated with ephrinB1 using the same procedure as the SILAC experiment. Lysates and pY IPs were probed with anti-EphB4 and anti-pY antibodies. The anti-EphB4 blot ( Figure 4 ) indicates that EphB4 is expressed in wild type NG108 cells and can be tyrosine phosphorylated upon ligand treatment. The anti-pY blot on the lysates and pY IPs did not show detectable difference between the control and stimulated cells due to interference from basal signals (data not shown), suggesting the effect of Eph signaling in wile type NG108 cells is much subtler than in the NG108-EphB2 cells. Based on these new findings, care should be taken when using NG108 cell lines for Eph signaling studies as well as interpreting results from previous studies in which these cell lines were used.  Phosphorylation Sites The SILAC experiment identified 128 unique phosphopeptide sequences using Mascot. Because most of these phosphopeptides contain multiple serine/threonine/tyrosine residues, we tried to localize the phosphorylation sites using a simple statistical model for matching site-determining ions in the MS/MS spectra 16 , 17 . Using this model, we localized 116 phosphorylation sites (38 pS, 12 pT and 66 pY) on 115 peptides. To determine how many of the identified phosphorylation sites are novel, the Swiss-prot knowledgebase (downloaded September 03, 2007) and datasets of phosphorylation sites from several major large scale proteomics studies 26 – 30 were searched using in-house written Perl scripts. 67 of the 116 localized phosphorylation sites were not found in these databases ( Supporting Information Table 2 ). The annotated MS/MS spectra of all identified phosphopeptides are included in Supporting Information File1 and File2 . File1 contains spectra of phosphopeptides whose phosphorylation sites were localized by Ascores. File2 contains spectra of phosphopeptides whose phosphorylation sites could not be localized by Ascores. For these peptides, the phosphorylation sites corresponding to the best Ascores were used to annotate the fragment ions in the spectra. All the identified phosphopeptides together with their Ascores are listed in Supporting Information Table 2 . It is possible that the phosphotyrosine sites on proteins with ratio changes are regulated by the EphB activity, but due to the fact that almost all phosphoproteins have multiple phosphorylation sites, a protein ratio change from anti-pY IP cannot be attributed to the change of a specific pY site. A quantitative experiment that does not involve pY protein IP (for example, phosphopeptide enrichment after digestion of the whole cell lysate) would be needed to confirm the link between specific pY sites and EphB signaling.  Comparison between the LTQ-Orbitrap results and previous QTOF results Previously we have carried out a similar SILAC study using an older QTOF instrument (Micromass, QTOF-Micro, installed in 2003) 7 . Figure 2B and 2C show a comparison of the numbers of protein identifications and phosphopeptide identifications in the two studies. Using approximately the same number of cells, the LTQ-Orbitrap analysis identified 5 times more proteins and 10 times more phosphopeptides than the QTOF Micro. This is largely attributed to the high sensitivity and sequencing speed afforded by the LTQ-Orbitrap as has been documented by previous studies 10 , 14 . When considering these results, it should be kept in mind that the Orbitrap SILAC experiment was performed twice, while the QTOF experiment was performed once, which would slightly exaggerate the difference in number of proteins quantified. 95 of the 127 proteins that were identified in the QTOF experiment were identified and quantified in the Orbitrap study. Supporting Information Figure 1 shows the protein ratios measured by the QTOF and the Orbitrap. While the majority of these proteins have consistent ratios in the two studies, we did observe that 13 of the 95 proteins changed by more than 1.5-fold in one experiment but not the other. These proteins are listed in Supporting Information Table 3 . However for most of these proteins the two ratios are close to the cutoff ratio of 1.5. A summary comparison of the proteins identified in both Orbitrap experiments as well as the previous QTOF study is shown in Supporting Information Table 4 . Differences in SILAC ratios between the two studies can be attributed to two major reasons. First, although the same protocol for cell culture and treatment was used, the two experiments were performed more than two years apart and the intensities of Eph activation may have been slightly different in the two studies (biological variation). For example the protein Intersectin, which is a known effector downstream of EphB 31 , has a SILAC ratio of 0.99 in the QTOF study and 2.0 in the Orbitrap study. Second, the QTOF Micro and Orbitrap instruments have different dynamic ranges for quantitation. It was observed that the SILAC ratios measured by the Orbitrap were generally more dramatic than the ratio from the QTOF ( Supporting Information Figure 1 ). We attribute this to the high dynamic range of Orbitrap 32 . Due to the different detection principles employed, the two instruments have quite different characteristics of spectral noise. As shown in Figure 5 , the Orbitrap spectrum has lower background signal than the QTOF spectrum. When the peak intensity is low the background can contribute considerably to the ratio obtained by automated SILAC quantitation.  Comprehensiveness of the Screen An extensive literature search using Pubmed found 42 key signaling proteins that are known to be close EphB binding partners or regulated by activation of EphB receptors ( Supporting Information Table 5 ). 24 of these were identified in this study, and 17 of the 24 proteins had SILAC pY IP abundance changes of 1.5 or more. Seven proteins had pY IP abundance changes upon ephrin stimulation of less than 1.5-fold, but for most of them the directions of the subtle ratio changes were consistent with previous studies, such as PI3K, Grb2 and MAPK. The fact that more than half of all known effectors in EphB signaling were identified in this single study suggested the power of the strategy and the comprehensiveness of the screen. These known effectors only account for a small proportion (~10%) of the proteins with changed ratios identified in this study, suggesting many more novel candidates may participate in EphB signaling with their roles yet to be characterized. The reasons why many known effectors were not identified in this screen may include: (1) Eph signaling has versatile functions. Many known effectors and signaling effects are only observed in specific cell types and cellular contexts, for example, the NMDA receptor in neurons 33 and ZAP70 in T cells 34 . (2) The known effectors are based on studies on any of the 6 EphB receptors while only three of them (EphB2, EphB3 and EphB4) are known to be expressed in the cell line that was used in this study. (3) It has been shown that different intensities of Eph signaling can produce very different cellular effects 1 . Therefore regulation of effectors is dependent on intensity of Eph receptor activation, which is in turn dependent on level of receptor expression and concentration/affinity of stimulating ligands etc. (4) Different effectors may have different time courses of activation and the activation of specific effectors may only be observed at a specific time point. (5) Some effectors may not contain tyrosine phosphorylation sites or have low binding affinity/stoichiometry to other effectors. (6) Some effectors, for example, Src family kinases including Src, Fyn and Yes, are tyrosine phosphorylated at different sites both when activated and inhibited 35 . In this case the overall protein phosphorylation level, i.e. the SILAC ratio, might not reflect the level of activation. (7) The amounts of the effector proteins, in the context of the other proteins being analyzed, were below the detection limit of the mass spectrometer.  Gene Ontology (GO) analysis We performed a GO analysis of the quantified proteins using a commercial tool from ProteinCenter™ (Proxeon) for annotating and comparing protein datasets. The quantified proteins were first classified into two groups: proteins with ratio changes and proteins without ratio changes. GO analysis was performed for both groups using biological processes, cellular components and molecular functions classifications ( Figure 6 ). In theory, all proteins with changed ratios were pulled down in pY IPs due to specific binding and are specific to EphB signaling. Pulldown of proteins with no ratio changes could be due to either specific (some tyrosine phosphorylated proteins do not change their phosphorylation status after Eph activation) or non-specific binding during IP. Therefore enrichment of a specific GO annotation in one group can indicate a general difference between the Eph signaling specific/non-specific proteins or pY IP specific/non-specific proteins. The GO cellular components analysis ( Figure 6A ) shows that proteins from ribosome, nucleus, mitochondrion, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) are enriched in the unchanged protein group, suggesting that a considerable number of non-specific binding proteins from the pY IP came from these organelles. GO molecular functions analysis ( Figure 6B ) shows more nucleic acid/nucleotide binding proteins in the unchanged protein group, which also suggests the nucleus and ribosome as major sources of non-specific binding proteins. This implies that more vigorous clarification of lysate before pY IP, e.g. centrifugation at higher speed or for longer time, which can better remove these organelles, may reduce IP background and promote identification of more specific target proteins. Another observation is that membrane proteins are enriched in the changed groups, suggesting significant Eph signaling occurs on the cellular membrane. From the GO molecular functions/biological processes analysis ( Figure 6B and 6C ), proteins in the categories of cell communication and signal transduction are enriched in the changed proteins, while proteins in the categories of metabolism and structural activity are enriched in the non-changed proteins. This is consistent with the established notion that the SILAC strategy we employed is an effective way to identify specific signaling target proteins from a background of non-specific interactions, which might be expected to be dominated by highly abundant housekeeping/structural proteins. In all three GO analyses, the unannotated proteins are more enriched in the regulated proteins category, suggesting that many of the proteins with changed SILAC ratios have not been well studied.  Domain Analysis The presence of conserved structural domains in a protein can suggest particular functions for the protein. Therefore domain analysis can be used as a preliminary search for potential protein groups with specific functions or interactions in a signaling pathway. The cross-reference files for the IPI mouse and rat protein databases were searched to obtain the Pfam domain annotations for the all quantified proteins ( Supporting Information Table 1 ). For the proteins with changed SILAC ratios upon ephrinB1 stimulation (shown in Figure 7 ), it is clear that several specific domains are overrepresented: (1) SH3 (including SH3_1 and SH3_2), PH, CH and RhoGAP domains are known to be indicative of a protein involved in signal transduction related to cytoskeletal organization, which is consistent with the consensus that cytoskeleton rearrangement is one major outcome of EphB signaling. (2) SH2 domains, which are important regulatory modules of tyrosine phosphorylation-dependent signaling cascades, are also overrepresented. (3) The EphB receptor has a PDZ binding motif at the C-terminus and is known to bind to PDZ-domain containing proteins including Syntenin, Afadin, and Grip1. All these proteins were identified in this SILAC study as proteins with changed ratios. In addition, nine proteins with changed SILAC ratios were found to contain PDZ domains, which are possible novel binding partners of EphB receptors through their PDZ domains. (4) UIM and VHS domains are also overrepresented, suggesting many effectors may be involved in vesicular trafficking / protein degradation triggered by ubiquitination of Eph receptors.  Biological Implications of the Novel Candidate Effectors Of the proteins found to be involved in EphB signaling in this study but not our previous study, we validated Erbin by Western blotting ( Fig. 4 ). Lending further support to the validity of our results, nine of the proteins found in this but not our previous study have been reported by others to be involved in ephrin signaling. These proteins include Intersectin 31 , PI3K 36 – 39 , Shc 40 , Vav2 41 , Cbl 42 , Syntenin 43 , Grip1 44 , Grb2 40 , and Sos1 20 . In addition, in-silico protein function and interaction analysis was performed by feeding the list of proteins of changed SILAC ratios into Ingenuity Pathways Analysis software (Ingenuity Systems, http://www.ingenuity.com ), which searches existing literature and interaction databases (including Ingenuity curated findings, BIND, BIOGRID, DIP, INTACT, Interactome studies, MINT and MIPS, all downloaded 07/08/2008) for protein interaction and regulation networks. 98 of the 204 proteins with changed SILAC ratios could be assigned to a single interaction network based on previously reported direct protein-protein binding ( Supporting Information Figure 2 ), thus supporting the ability of our screen to find functionally related proteins. The software was also able to classify the proteins into eleven major signaling networks (each network included a minimum of 10 proteins from our list of proteins that change in response to ephrinB addition) with relatively independent functions ( Supporting Information Figure 3 ). These networks are mainly involved in regulation of cell morphology, cellular assembly and organization as well as development, which are consistent with known functions of EphB signaling. The same analysis was also carried out for the 46 proteins with changed SILAC ratios found in the QTOF analysis, which resulted in only two networks with 10 or more members from the list of changing proteins ( Supporting Information Figure 3 ). It was noted that a considerable number of candidate effectors from the current study, which were missing in the previous QTOF analysis, were assigned into networks that participate in protein synthesis, indicating gene translation is quickly activated in response to EphB receptor activation. Another novel group of networks are involved in cell death and growth/proliferation, which is in line with the emerging discovery that Eph receptors play important roles in cancer. 1 Compared to the QTOF study, the much improved pY proteome coverage by the Orbitrap analysis greatly facilitated pathway analysis of EphB signaling.  Conclusions We have used SILAC and LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometry to screen for novel effector proteins in the EphB signaling pathway. A considerable proportion of the tyrosine phosphoproteome was identified and quantified, allowing for a global view of the changes of a huge signaling network in response to EphB receptor activation. This study revealed an unprecedented large number of candidate effectors, which will greatly accelerate the achievement of our goal of a more complete understanding of the EphB signaling pathway.  Supplementary Material 10_si_010 1_si_001 2_si_002 3_si_003 4_si_004 5_si_005 6_si_006 7_si_007 8_si_008 9_si_009  Figures and Table Figure 1 Tyrosine phosphorylation detected by anti-pY Western blotting of proteins in NG108 cell lysates and pY immunoprecipitates after ephrinB1 treatment. NG108-EphB2 cells were treated for 45 minutes with anti-Fc IgG aggregated ephrinB1-Fc or with anti-Fc IgG aggregated Fc as a control as indicated in the Materials and Methods. Total cell lysates and pY IPs were probed with PY99-HRP. Numbers to the left of the gel show MW × 10?3 based on protein MW standards. Figure 2 Identification of SILAC proteins and phosphopeptides from anti-pY IPs. (A) Venn diagram depicting the overlap in proteins identified in the two SILAC replicates by LTQ-Orbitrap. (B) Venn diagram depicting the overlap in proteins quantified in this study by Orbitrap and a previous study using a QTOF Micro mass spectrometer 7 . (C) Venn diagram depicting the overlap in phosphopeptides identified in this study by Orbitrap and the previous study using QTOF. Figure 3 SILAC protein ratios from the two SILAC replicates. 672 proteins from replicate 1 and 513 from replicate 2 were quantified. In total 777 proteins were quantified, and 408 of them were quantified in both replicates. Figure 4 Western blotting analysis of selected candidate effector proteins Cells were cultured and stimulated with ephrinB1 in the same way as in the SILAC experiments. The whole cell lysates and anti-pY IPs were probed with the indicated antibodies. For the EphB4 receptor, wild type NG108 cells were used. For all other proteins, NG108-EphB2 cells were used. Figure 5 Measurement of SILAC peptide ratios using LTQ-Orbitrap and QTOF Micro mass spectrometers. The identified peptide (LLVDNQGLSGR) was from SAM and SH3 domain-containing protein 1 (SASH1, IPI00338954). The peptide ratio was calculated as the sum of intensities of the first three isotopic peaks of the light peptide over the sum of the heavy peptide peak intensities. The arrow in each panel indicates the monoisotopic peak for the heavy peptide. Figure 6 GO analysis of proteins with changed and unchanged SILAC ratios. All quantified proteins were classified into two groups: proteins with ratio changes less than 1.5 fold (unchanged) and proteins without ratio changes greater 1.5 (changed). GO analysis was performed for both groups on cellular components (A), molecular functions (B) and biological processes (C). Figure 7 Domain analysis for proteins with SILAC ratio changes Domain information was obtained from the Pfam annotation in the IPI cross-reference files. Domains that occur in at least 5 (out of 204) proteins are included in the figure. The occurrence of all domains in the combined IPI mouse and rat database is used as a control. Table 1 Proteins with at least a 1.5 Change in Protein Abundance between Anti-phosphotyrosine Immunoprecipitates from ephrinB1-Stimulated and Unstimulated NG108-EphB2 Cells a No. accession protein name mean ratio Rep. 1 CV Rep. 2 CV CV (reps 1,2) Known EphB effector? 1 IPI00319843 Beclin-1 509 no 2 IPI00109667 nicotinamide nucleotide adenylyltransferase 1 255 no 3 IPI00222366 sterile alpha motif domain containing 5 107 76 1 37 no 4 IPI00556823 protein kinase, AMP-activated, alpha 1 catalytic subunit 106 no 5 IPI00752269 novel protein (possible orthologue of human Src homology 2 domain containing F (SHF)) 76 54 3 23 no 6 IPI00330102 folliculin interacting protein 1 73 7 no 7 IPI00115056 trafficking protein particle complex 3 58 33 no 8 IPI00309259 partitioning-defective protein 3 homolog isoform 3 58 18 38 20 no 9 IPI00416163 unnamed protein product 55 21 38 16 yes 10 IPI00354665 apoptosis-stimulating protein of p53, 1 52 51 6 57 no 11 IPI00408219 N-chimaerin 49 33 19 24 no 12 IPI00749688 PREDICTED: similar to MGC114619 protein 46 15 36 28 no 13 IPI00331766 putative C3orf6 protein 45 10 19 38 no 14 IPI00127232 glutamate receptor interacting protein 1 isoform 1 39 8 31 36 yes 44 15 IPI00338954 SAM and SH3 domain-containing protein 1 36 20 26 8 no 16 IPI00361275 PREDICTED: similar to TPR domain, ankyrin-repeat and coiled-coil-containing 35 16 no 17 IPI00213347 afadin 33 22 22 0 yes 24 18 IPI00473693 Isoform 1 of Plakophilin-4 32 21 no 19 IPI00753111 PREDICTED: similar to Afadin (Af-6 protein) 30 22 18 3 yes 24 20 IPI00359621 hypothetical protein LOC307833 30 13 no 21 IPI00761456 chimerin (chimaerin) 2 29 8 19 17 no 22 IPI00454039 Protein LAP2 (Erbb2-interacting protein) (Erbin) 27 12 16 2 no 23 IPI00125855 protein kinase C, delta 26 3 no 24 IPI00468418 signal transducing adaptor molecule2 (STAM2) 26 8 19 15 no 25 IPI00108870 Eph receptor B2 26 11 17 13 yes 26 IPI00565852 PREDICTED: similar to Eph receptor B3 25 12 15 3 yes 27 IPI00408892 RAB7, member RAS oncogene family 21 7 15 14 no 28 IPI00421832 dermcidin precursor 21 4 17 18 no 29 IPI00471127 Cdc42 effector protein 1 (Binder of Rho GTPases 5) 20 4 13 9 no 30 IPI00124742 eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4H 19 7 6 4 no 31 IPI00322033 target of myb1-like 2 isoform a 19 9 11 4 no 32 IPI00367930 PREDICTED: similar to Erbb2 interacting protein isoform 1 19 10 no 33 IPI00125534 Docking protein 1 (Downstream of tyrosine kinase 1) (p62(dok)) 18 10 8 0 yes 15 34 IPI00316623 catenin, delta 1 isoform 2 18 7 no 35 IPI00420753 PREDICTED: similar to SHB adaptor protein B 18 12 8 2 no 36 IPI00312067 inositol polyphosphate phosphatase-like 1, isoform CRA_c 18 9 6 1 yes 45 37 IPI00315187 UPF0404 protein C11orf59 homolog 16 2 5 7 no 38 IPI00343984 coiled-coil domain containing 85B 16 8 no 39 IPI00187275 Carnitine deficiency-associated gene expressed in ventricle 3 16 2 5 15 no 40 IPI00202691 cancer susceptibility candidate 3 15 8 no 41 IPI00136475 Leucine-rich repeats and immunoglobulin-like domains protein 1 precursor (LIG-1) 14 7 no 42 IPI00331568 HGF-regulated tyrosine kinase substrate (Hrs) 14 6 6 1 no 43 IPI00153241 vacuolar protein sorting 37C 13 2 11 no 44 IPI00228877 connector enhancer of kinase suppressor of Ras 2 13 6 no 45 IPI00379844 Insulin receptor substrate 2 (IRS-2) 12 6 7 1 no 46 IPI00132135 midline 2 12 6 no 47 IPI00124298 Rho GTPase activating protein 5 12 6 no 48 IPI00366801 YTH domain family 2 12 4 no 49 IPI00134881 LIM domain-containing protein 1 11 4 no 50 IPI00323349 Tight junction protein ZO-2 11 4 4 4 no 51 IPI00137731 unnamed protein product 11 6 4 3 no 52 IPI00347255 Protein KIAA1688 11 7 2 8 no 53 IPI00336844 epsin 2 10 4 no 54 IPI00135971 tight junction protein 1 10 5 6 3 no 55 IPI00223987 leucyl/cystinyl aminopeptidase 10 4 4 4 no 56 IPI00364933 similar to signal transducing adaptor molecule 1 (STAM1) 9.9 5.0 3.7 1.4 no 57 IPI00130621 RAS p21 protein activator 1 9.6 1.4 3.4 1.9 yes 15 58 IPI00660894 E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase CBL-B 9.5 3.8 no 59 IPI00229955 Ras association (RalGDS/AF-6) domain family 8 9.3 5.8 no 60 IPI00110435 nischarin 9.3 2.6 4.2 1.6 no 61 IPI00120433 SH2B adapter protein 2 8.9 2.7 2.0 1.1 no 62 IPI00480842 hypothetical protein LOC684097 8.6 2.4 no 63 IPI00221581 Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4B (eIF-4B) 8.5 2.7 4.6 2.4 no 64 IPI00765594 non-catalytic region of tyrosine kinase adaptor protein 1 (predicted), isoform CRA_a 8.5 4.0 3.7 1.7 yes 15 65 IPI00119809 lectin, galactoside-binding, soluble, 3 binding protein 8.3 3.9 no 66 IPI00363834 PREDICTED: similar to pleckstrin homology domain containing, family A member 6 8.2 3.0 2.8 2.9 no 67 IPI00121319 LIM only protein HLP 7.6 1.1 2.4 0.0 no 68 IPI00117375 syndecan binding protein isoform 1 (syntenin) 7.4 0.9 4.7 4.3 yes 43 69 IPI00123505 Synaptophysin 6.9 0.6 no 70 IPI00116554 protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 11 6.6 3.8 1.6 4.1 yes 46 71 IPI00154012 ubiquitin specific peptidase 15 6.5 3.0 1.4 2.9 no 72 IPI00128454 seizure related 6 homolog like 2 6.5 0.3 1.2 2.1 no 73 IPI00130185 protein phosphatase 1, catalytic subunit, alpha 6.4 1.4 2.5 1.8 no 74 IPI00133679 hypothetical protein LOC73711 6.2 0.5 0.9 0.0 no 75 IPI00117944 tumor susceptibility gene 101 protein 6.2 1.8 0.7 2.2 no 76 IPI00205566 calponin 3, acidic 6.0 no 77 IPI00229392 Ras-related GTP binding A 6.0 0.5 1.3 2.6 no 78 IPI00229434 tumor protein p53 binding protein, 2 5.9 3.5 no 79 IPI00323590 E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase CBL 5.8 1.4 1.3 0.2 yes 42 80 IPI00136618 toll interacting protein 5.7 1.1 1.1 no 81 IPI00272559 Vav2 protein 5.6 1.1 yes 41 82 IPI00381394 filamin C, gamma 5.5 1.9 2.4 0.5 no 83 IPI00133591 vacuolar protein sorting 28 5.5 0.8 no 84 IPI00308222 drebrin-like 5.5 1.0 2.0 0.1 no 85 IPI00227149 YTH domain family protein 3 5.4 1.7 1.3 0.2 no 86 IPI00272148 Cytohesin-3 5.4 1.0 1.2 0.4 no 87 IPI00132604 unnamed protein product 5.2 2.1 0.6 3.0 no 88 IPI00153207 unnamed protein product 5.2 0.1 2.8 2.2 no 89 IPI00325146 annexin A2 5.2 3.2 no 90 IPI00130883 Putative RNA-binding protein 3 (RNA-binding motif protein 3) 5.1 0.9 no 91 IPI00323483 programmed cell death 6 interacting protein 4.9 1.8 0.6 0.6 no 92 IPI00454019 unnamed protein product 4.9 1.5 no 93 IPI00458001 ataxin 2-like, isoform CRA_g 4.8 0.9 1.3 0.3 no 94 IPI00231715 protein phosphatase 1 gamma2 4.8 2.0 no 95 IPI00130115 Vesicle transport through interaction with t-SNAREs homolog 1B 4.8 2.4 0.6 1.6 no 96 IPI00626620 SEC24 related gene family, member C (S. cerevisiae), isoform CRA_b 4.8 1.3 no 97 IPI00230035 ATP-dependent RNA helicase DDX3X 4.4 0.7 1.9 1.4 no 98 IPI00553792 Isoform 2 of Caskin-1 4.4 2.0 no 99 IPI00114332 ribosomal protein S6 kinase polypeptide 1 4.3 1.2 no 100 IPI00132322 Trafficking protein particle complex subunit 5 4.1 1.0 no 101 IPI00402900 Isoform 1 of Engulfment and cell motility protein 2 4.1 0.5 no 102 IPI00222107 FERM domain containing 4A 4.0 0.5 0.4 0.3 no 103 IPI00264501 phosphatidylinositol-binding clathrin assembly protein 3.9 0.9 no 104 IPI00114613 Cdc42 binding protein kinase beta 3.9 1.2 0.3 0.8 no 105 IPI00331016 SEC24 related gene family, member B 3.8 0.6 1.0 1.1 no 106 IPI00420553 Serine/threonine-protein kinase TAO2 3.8 no 107 IPI00330862 Ezrin 3.7 1.0 1.1 0.7 no 108 IPI00221494 Lipoma-preferred partner homolog 3.7 0.1 no 109 IPI00313841 ATPase, H+ transporting, V0 subunit D isoform 1 3.7 0.6 0.9 no 110 IPI00118899 actinin alpha 4 3.7 0.6 1.0 0.3 no 111 IPI00380817 breakpoint cluster region homolog 3.6 0.0 no 112 IPI00223070 dedicator of cytokinesis 4 3.6 1.0 0.9 0.1 no 113 IPI00458995 polyubiquitin C 3.5 0.1 1.7 0.6 no 114 IPI00313275 Sorting nexin-9 3.5 0.7 0.4 0.3 no 115 IPI00132462 cytotoxic granule-associated RNA binding protein 1 3.3 0.0 0.8 0.6 no 116 IPI00206710 pleckstrin homology, Sec7 and coiled/coil domains 2 3.2 0.9 no 117 IPI00154057 protocadherin 1 3.2 0.7 0.8 0.2 no 118 IPI00380436 actinin, alpha 1 3.2 0.6 0.6 0.3 no 119 IPI00110247 TBC1 domain family member 15 3.0 0.5 no 120 IPI00464282 Hbs1-like (S. cerevisiae), isoform CRA_b 2.9 1.0 no 121 IPI00368041 similar to DNA-directed RNA polymerase II largest subunit 2.8 0.1 no 122 IPI00109334 Proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase FER (p94-FER) (c-FER) 2.8 0.2 0.0 no 123 IPI00226727 Isoform 2 of Discs large homolog 2 2.8 0.6 0.9 0.0 no 124 IPI00189519 Histone H3.3 2.7 no 125 IPI00108150 Rho-associated protein kinase 2 (p164 ROCK-2) 2.7 0.6 no 126 IPI00117159 phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, regulatory subunit, polypeptide 2.7 0.8 0.4 0.3 yes 39 127 IPI00120923 Vacuolar protein sorting 16 2.6 no 128 IPI00380814 target of myb1 homolog 2.6 0.4 no 129 IPI00124753 misshapen-like kinase 1 isoform 2 2.6 0.5 0.8 0.0 no 130 IPI00380108 transmembrane protein 1 2.6 0.0 no 131 IPI00136498 lin 7 homolog c 2.6 0.3 no 132 IPI00558156 61 kDa protein 2.6 0.3 0.4 0.0 no 133 IPI00204923 ubiquitin specific peptidase 9, X chromosome 2.5 1.0 no 134 IPI00109932 DEAD (Asp-Glu-Ala-Asp) box polypeptide 6 2.5 0.4 no 135 IPI00123313 ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1, Chr X 2.5 0.6 no 136 IPI00123349 SEC23A 2.4 0.3 0.3 0.2 no 137 IPI00130423 Growth factor receptor bound protein 2-associated protein 2 2.4 0.3 no 138 IPI00462445 E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase NEDD4 2.3 0.9 0.1 0.2 no 139 IPI00133024 1110059P08Rik protein 2.2 0.6 no 140 IPI00114948 interferon induced transmembrane protein 2 2.2 0.3 0.4 0.3 no 141 IPI00457533 ubiquitin-associated protein 2 2.2 0.2 0.1 0.2 no 142 IPI00229895 dispatched homolog 2 2.2 no 143 IPI00331579 synaptogyrin 3 2.2 0.1 no 144 IPI00123292 Isoform 2 of Far upstream element-binding protein 1 2.2 0.3 no 145 IPI00226563 tweety homolog 3 (Drosophila), isoform CRA_a 2.1 0.5 0.3 0.2 no 146 IPI00329998 Histone cluster 1, H4h 2.1 0.2 0.2 0.0 no 147 IPI00116697 RAB6A, member RAS oncogene family 2.1 0.7 0.7 0.2 no 148 IPI00676192 latrophilin 2 2.1 no 149 IPI00111416 syntaxin 12 2.1 0.3 0.4 0.5 no 150 IPI00223253 heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K 2.1 0.2 1.0 0.6 no 151 IPI00380824 MKIAA0144 protein 2.0 0.1 0.4 0.1 no 152 IPI00408378 Isoform 2 of 14-3-3 protein theta 2.0 0.3 0.4 0.0 no 153 IPI00762547 Isoform 1 of Intersectin-2 2.0 0.2 0.6 0.2 yes 31 154 IPI00322492 Ewing sarcoma homolog 2.0 0.1 0.3 0.5 no 155 IPI00360064 PREDICTED: similar to Son of sevenless homolog 1 2.0 0.5 yes 20 156 IPI00133428 protease (prosome, macropain) 26S subunit, ATPase 1 2.0 no 157 IPI00312527 Crmp1 protein 1.9 0.5 0.4 0.1 no 158 IPI00109375 Poliovirus receptor-related protein 2 precursor 1.9 0.2 no 159 IPI00125778 Transgelin-2 1.9 0.2 no 160 IPI00117039 Tyrosine-protein kinase ABL2 1.9 0.2 0.1 0.0 no 161 IPI00116112 Dynactin subunit 2 1.9 0.2 no 162 IPI00515195 eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4, gamma 1 isoform b 1.9 0.4 no 163 IPI00309413 non-catalytic region of tyrosine kinase adaptor protein 2 1.9 0.4 0.3 0.1 no 164 IPI00622847 Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins A2/B1 1.9 0.2 0.2 0.4 no 165 IPI00221796 poly(rC) binding protein 2, isoform CRA_a 1.9 0.5 no 166 IPI00372054 PEF protein with a long N-terminal hydrophobic domain 1.9 no 167 IPI00135887 transmembrane protein 106B, isoform CRA_b 1.8 0.2 no 168 IPI00136917 Tyrosine-protein kinase-protein kinase SgK269 1.8 0.3 no 169 IPI00365284 eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4 gamma, 3 1.8 no 170 IPI00125298 SHC-transforming protein 1 1.8 0.3 0.2 0.0 yes 40 171 IPI00420185 Epidermal growth factor receptor substrate 15-like 1 1.8 0.4 0.1 0.2 no 172 IPI00415402 Syntaxin-binding protein 1 1.8 0.4 no 173 IPI00463573 eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 subunit 6 interacting protein 1.8 0.2 no 174 IPI00116966 Asparagine synthetase 1.8 0.3 no 175 IPI00226275 WD repeat domain 26 1.7 0.1 no 176 IPI00406118 NS1-associated protein 1 isoform 2 1.7 0.3 0.0 0.1 no 177 IPI00553633 cullin 7 1.7 0.3 no 178 IPI00129417 heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein D-like 1.7 0.1 0.2 no 179 IPI00227392 14-3-3 protein eta 1.7 0.2 0.5 0.3 no 180 IPI00470095 G protein-coupled receptor kinase-interactor 1 1.7 0.3 0.1 0.1 no 181 IPI00114401 emerin 1.6 0.3 0.5 no 182 IPI00128202 eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3, subunit 3 (gamma) 1.6 0.1 no 183 IPI00308162 solute carrier family 25 (mitochondrial carrier, Aralar), member 12 1.6 0.4 no 184 IPI00280250 SH3 and PX domains 2A 1.6 no 185 IPI00321647 eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3, subunit 8 1.6 0.1 0.1 0.1 no 186 IPI00118384 14-3-3 protein epsilon (14-3-3E) 1.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 no 187 IPI00230704 betaPix-c 1.5 0.1 no 188 IPI00229548 Solute carrier family 1 (neutral amino acid transporter), member 5 1.5 0.1 no 189 IPI00331334 Bcl-2-binding protein Bis 1.5 0.0 0.0 0.1 no 190 IPI00230707 14-3-3 protein gamma 1.5 0.2 0.1 0.0 no 191 IPI00114560 Ras-related protein Rab-1A 1.5 0.0 0.1 0.2 no 192 IPI00131329 Sorting nexin-18 1.5 0.1 no 193 IPI00116498 tyrosine 3-monooxygenase/tryptophan 5-monooxygenase activation protein, zeta polypeptide 1.5 0.1 0.1 0.0 no 194 IPI00362014 Tln1 protein 1.5 no 195 IPI00230445 peripherin 0.68 0.04 0.09 0.13 no 196 IPI00331738 52 kDa Ro protein 0.67 0.03 0.07 0.08 no 197 IPI00222801 Neuronal proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase Src 0.67 0.12 no 198 IPI00117821 Breast cancer anti-estrogen resistance protein 1 (p130cas) 0.66 0.05 0.07 0.02 yes 47 199 IPI00113563 Focal adhesion kinase 1 (FADK 1) (pp125FAK) 0.64 0.06 0.05 0.02 yes 47 , 48 200 IPI00135965 Alpha-internexin 0.57 0.04 no 201 IPI00137970 SH2 domain containing 3C 0.55 0.05 0.04 0.01 yes 49 202 IPI00223751 Rho GTPase activating protein 12 isoform 1 0.52 0.05 0.05 0.01 no 203 IPI00330231 Rap guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) 1 isoform 3 0.52 0.05 no 204 IPI00111258 unnamed protein product 0.46 0.04 0.04 0.01 no a for proteins identified based on the same set of peptides, only one protein is shown in this table for each protein group. More detailed information about each protein group is included in Supporting Information Table 1 . 