Pretreatment with the Gram-positive Bacterial Cell Wall Molecule Peptidoglycan Improves Bacterial Clearance and Decreases Inflammation and Mortality in Mice Challenged with Staphylococcus aureus Objective To determine whether tolerance and enhancement of innate immune function can be induced by the gram-positive cell wall component peptidoglycan (PGN). Design Controlled, in vivo laboratory study Subjects Male mice, 8-12 wks (C57BL6/J; C3H/HeJ; B6.129-Tlr2tm1kir/J) Interventions Mice were given intraperitoneal injections of 1mg PGN on 2 consecutive days. Mice were then challenged with an intravenous injection of live S. aureus (1 × 108 colony-forming units) 2 days after the second pretreatment. Measurements and Main Results Mice pretreated with PGN had diminished plasma concentrations of TNF? and IFN? in response to the bacterial challenge when compared to untreated controls. Plasma IL-10 after bacterial challenge was higher in PGN-pretreated mice than in controls. Clearance of bacteria after the Staphylococcal challenge was improved in mice pretreated with PGN, and mortality in response to a subsequent Staphylococcus challenge was significantly attenuated. PGN pretreatment of mice lacking intact TLR4 signaling (C3H/HeJ) or TLR2 signaling (TLR2 Knockouts) had similar effects on plasma cytokine balance, bacterial clearance, and mortality. Conclusions Exposure to peptidoglycan significantly attenuated inflammation and enhanced bacterial clearance after a subsequent challenge with Staphylococcus aureus . These results show that exposure to Gram-positive bacterial cell wall components can induce tolerance and enhance innate immune function and neither TLR2 nor TLR4 are necessary for this phenomenon. Further, although the altered cytokine balance is similar to that seen in septic patients, induced tolerance differs importantly from the clinical scenario of sepsis in that bacterial clearance and survival are improved compared to normal control animals.  Introduction Endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide, LPS) is a molecule found in the cell wall of Gram negative bacteria. Injection of endotoxin initiates a dramatic proinflammatory response that, if untreated, can result in profound hemodynamic derangements and may even progress to shock and death. Interestingly, animals that survive a sublethal exposure to endotoxin are resistant to subsequent challenges with normally lethal doses of LPS during the first few days following the initial exposure ( 1 ). Further, exposure to endotoxin may confer resistance to inflammation and injury induced by other challenges including myocardial infarction ( 2 , 3 ), neural ischemia ( 4 , 5 ), and gastric insults ( 6 , 7 ). Although the cytokine profile in LPS tolerant animals is similar to that seen in septic patients, innate immune function in the LPS tolerant state actually seems improved in that bacterial clearance is enhanced and mortality is suppressed after a Gram-negative bacterial challenge ( 8 ). We have previously shown that LPS pretreatment not only diminishes the inflammatory response but also appears to enhance the effectiveness of the innate immune system to clear both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacterial challenges ( 9 - 11 ). Although Gram-negative bacteria have historically been a major cause of sepsis in clinical patients, the incidence of Gram-positive bacterial sepsis has risen significantly over the last decade. During the same time, investigators have advanced our understanding of the process employed by innate immune cells to detect, and react to, a myriad of microbial organisms. It is now known that innate detection of offending microorganisms is dependent upon recognition of a small number of molecules that are common to broad classifications of microorganisms. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and other receptors mediate the inflammatory effects and innate immune function in response to invading microorganisms. For example, Gram-negative bacteria are detected, at least in part, by the presence of LPS which elicits an innate immune response through TLR4 ( 12 , 13 ). In light of the recent findings that different receptors are activated by gram-positive bacterial molecules when compared to activation by gram-negative bacterial molecules, we were curious to extend our recent findings on bacterial clearance after tolerance induction. During an infection, it is likely that multiple receptors are activated by different bacterial molecules. How the host responds to different bacterial ligands and how prior exposures may influence responses to infection are basic questions that may ultimately provide insight into the pathogenesis of sepsis. We were interested in determining if tolerance could be induced by molecules from the cell wall of Gram-positive bacteria and, if so, whether this tolerant state would also be associated with an enhanced innate immune function after a live bacterial challenge. The aim of this study was to determine if peptidoglycan (PGN) could induce tolerance to a subsequent Gram-positive bacterial challenge. We pretreated mice with PGN and studied the response of the mice to a subsequent challenge with live Staphylococcus aureus , a bacterium frequently associated with nosocomial infections and a major pathogen in critically ill patients ( 14 ).  Materials and Methods Tolerance Model Male, 6-8 week old wild type C57BL/6J, C3H/HeJ, and TLR2 Knockout (B6.129-Tlr2tm1kir/J) mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). Mice were housed in a monitored, light-dark cycled environment and provided with standard lab chow and water ad libitum . Peptidoglycan (PGN), derived from Staphylococccus aureus , was purchased from Sigma Chemical (St. Louis, MO). Mice were injected with PGN (1mg in 0.1ml of saline i.p.) once daily for 2 consecutive days. Control mice received normal saline (0.1 ml) in the same regimen. All mice were injected at the same time each morning. All studies were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at the University of Texas Medical Branch and met National Institutes of Health guidelines for the use of experimental animals in research. <italic>Staphylococcus</italic>-induced challenge Staphylococcus aureus (strain 14458, American Type Culture Collection, Rockville, MD) was inoculated into nutrient broth and allowed to replicate overnight in a shaking incubator at 37°C. The resulting bacterial culture was washed with 10ml of sterile 0.9% saline. Viable numbers of colony-forming units (cfu) were determined by plating serial dilutions overnight on nutrient agar. Bacteria were suspended in sterile 0.9% saline at a final concentration of 1 × 109 cfu/ml. Mice were challenged with 0.1ml of this suspension (1 × 108 cfu; i.v.) 2 days after the second dose of PGN. Bacterial Clearance The mice were sacrificed under isoflurane 6 hours after intravenous injection of Staphylococcus aureus . Spleen and liver samples were aseptically excised, weighed and homogenized in sterile saline using sterile tissue grinders. Serial dilutions of tissue homogenates were plated on nutrient agar and incubated overnight at 37°C. Bacterial colony-forming units were counted to assess bacterial burden. Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) Blood samples were collected 6 hours after the Staphylococcus challenge and plasma cytokine concentrations were measured by ELISA. IFN-?, IL-10, and TNF? ELISA kits (eBiosciences, San Diego, CA) were used to measure cytokine concentrations in plasma according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, standards or experimental samples were added to 96-well plates coated with monoclonal antibody against the cytokine of interest and incubated for 2 hours. After washing, horseradish peroxidase-conjugated, cytokine-specific antibody was added to each well, incubated for 2 hours, and washed. Substrate solution (TMB, Sigma Chemical, St. Louis, MO) was added and incubated for 30 minutes, and the reaction was terminated by the addition of stop solution (2N H2SO4). Cytokine concentrations were determined by measuring optical density at 450 nM using a microtiter plate reader (Dynatech Laboratories, Chantilly, VA). Data Analysis Results are presented as mean ± SEM. Sample data comparing 2 groups were analyzed by unpaired t test while data from multiple groups were analyzed by ANOVA and post-hoc Tukey’s test. Survival curves were analyzed by log-rank test. A value of p<0.05 was considered statistically significant.  Tolerance Model Male, 6-8 week old wild type C57BL/6J, C3H/HeJ, and TLR2 Knockout (B6.129-Tlr2tm1kir/J) mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). Mice were housed in a monitored, light-dark cycled environment and provided with standard lab chow and water ad libitum . Peptidoglycan (PGN), derived from Staphylococccus aureus , was purchased from Sigma Chemical (St. Louis, MO). Mice were injected with PGN (1mg in 0.1ml of saline i.p.) once daily for 2 consecutive days. Control mice received normal saline (0.1 ml) in the same regimen. All mice were injected at the same time each morning. All studies were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at the University of Texas Medical Branch and met National Institutes of Health guidelines for the use of experimental animals in research.  <italic>Staphylococcus</italic>-induced challenge Staphylococcus aureus (strain 14458, American Type Culture Collection, Rockville, MD) was inoculated into nutrient broth and allowed to replicate overnight in a shaking incubator at 37°C. The resulting bacterial culture was washed with 10ml of sterile 0.9% saline. Viable numbers of colony-forming units (cfu) were determined by plating serial dilutions overnight on nutrient agar. Bacteria were suspended in sterile 0.9% saline at a final concentration of 1 × 109 cfu/ml. Mice were challenged with 0.1ml of this suspension (1 × 108 cfu; i.v.) 2 days after the second dose of PGN.  Bacterial Clearance The mice were sacrificed under isoflurane 6 hours after intravenous injection of Staphylococcus aureus . Spleen and liver samples were aseptically excised, weighed and homogenized in sterile saline using sterile tissue grinders. Serial dilutions of tissue homogenates were plated on nutrient agar and incubated overnight at 37°C. Bacterial colony-forming units were counted to assess bacterial burden.  Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) Blood samples were collected 6 hours after the Staphylococcus challenge and plasma cytokine concentrations were measured by ELISA. IFN-?, IL-10, and TNF? ELISA kits (eBiosciences, San Diego, CA) were used to measure cytokine concentrations in plasma according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, standards or experimental samples were added to 96-well plates coated with monoclonal antibody against the cytokine of interest and incubated for 2 hours. After washing, horseradish peroxidase-conjugated, cytokine-specific antibody was added to each well, incubated for 2 hours, and washed. Substrate solution (TMB, Sigma Chemical, St. Louis, MO) was added and incubated for 30 minutes, and the reaction was terminated by the addition of stop solution (2N H2SO4). Cytokine concentrations were determined by measuring optical density at 450 nM using a microtiter plate reader (Dynatech Laboratories, Chantilly, VA).  Data Analysis Results are presented as mean ± SEM. Sample data comparing 2 groups were analyzed by unpaired t test while data from multiple groups were analyzed by ANOVA and post-hoc Tukey’s test. Survival curves were analyzed by log-rank test. A value of p<0.05 was considered statistically significant.  Results Pretreatment with peptidoglycan (PGN) induced a cytokine response but suppressed the inflammatory response to subsequent bacterial challenge Pretreatment of mice with PGN resulted in elevated plasma concentrations of TNF? and IL-10, but not IFN?, at 6 hours after injection ( Table 1 ). In the absence of further challenge, these cytokines were not detectable 48 hours later. However, mice challenged with S. aureus 48 hours after pretreatment with PGN had suppressed IFN? (p<0.05) and TNF? (p<.01) and increased IL-10 (p<.001) responses when compared to saline pre-treated control mice ( Figure 1 ). Pretreatment with peptidoglycan was associated with enhanced bacterial clearance and improved survival in response to a <italic>Staphylococcus aureus</italic> challenge To test the immunological significance of PGN pretreatment and the effect of the altered cytokine profile in response to S. aureus challenge, bacterial clearance was studied in mice that were challenged with S. aureus 48 hours after pretreatment with PGN. Mice pretreated with PGN had 3-fold lower concentrations of bacterial colony-forming units in spleen (p<0.01) and about 50% lower cfu in liver (p<0.01) tissues when compared to saline-treated control animals ( Figure 2 ). To further determine the immunological consequences of the effects of pretreatment with PGN, survival was observed for 7 days in mice after challenge with a highly lethal inoculum of S. aureus . Only 2 of 10 mice pretreated with PGN died during the observation period, compared to 80% mortality in control mice by day 5 (p=.011) ( Figure 3 ). PGN-induced tolerance and enhancement of innate immune function was independent of signaling through the TLR4 receptor To test whether TLR4 signaling was necessary for the effects of PGN pretreatment and to verify that the effects of PGN pretreatment were not due to LPS contamination, C3H/HeJ mice were pretreated with PGN 48 hours prior to a challenge with S. aureus , and sacrificed 6 hr later for sample collection. As was demonstrated in wild-type C57BL/6 mice, pretreatment of C3H/HeJ mice with PGN was associated with diminished induction of IFN? (p<0.01) and TNF? (p<0.001) in response to the S. aureus challenge when compared to saline-pretreated C3H/HeJ mice ( Figure 4 ). The plasma IL-10 response to the Staphylococcus challenge was higher, but not statistically different in mice pretreated with PGN compared to saline-pretreated controls ( Figure 4 ). Similarly, bacterial counts in spleen tissues were lower in mice pretreated with PGN when compared to saline-pretreated controls (p<0.01 in both HeJ and OuJ), although liver bacterial counts were not significantly different ( Figure 5 ). PGN-pretreated C3H/HeJ (p=0.0327) and C3H/HeOuJ (p=.0128) mice also had a higher percentage of survival after S. aureus challenge when compared to saline-pretreated control mice ( Figure 6 ). The effects of PGN-pretreatment on plasma cytokine profile, bacterial clearance, and mortality results were similar to those seen in the C57BL6 mice described and also similar to results observed in C3H/HeOuJ mice, which do not have the point mutation and thus have intact TLR4 signaling. PGN-induced tolerance and enhancement of innate immune function was independent of signaling through the TLR2 receptor To test whether TLR2 signaling was necessary for the effects of PGN pretreatment, TLR2 knockout mice were pretreated with PGN 48 hours prior to a challenge with S. aureus , and sacrificed 6 hrs later for sample collection. As was demonstrated in wild-type mice, pretreatment of TLR2 knockout mice with PGN was associated with diminished plasma concentrations of IFN? (p<0.05) and TNF? (p<0.001) in response to a Staphylococcus aureus challenge when compared to saline-pretreated control mice ( Figure 7 ). The plasma IL-10 response to a Staphylcoccus challenge was higher in TLR2 KO mice pretreated with PGN when compared to saline-pretreated controls (p<0.05) ( Figure 7 ). Similarly, bacterial counts in spleens were significantly lower in TLR2 KO mice pretreated with PGN when compared to mice pretreated with saline (p<0.001) ( Figure 8 ). PGN-pretreated TLR2-/- mice also had a higher percentage of survival after S. aureus challenge when compared to saline-pretreated control mice (p=.0128) ( Figure 9 ) and these results were similar to those observed in the background strain C57BL6 mice ( Figure 3 ).  Results Pretreatment with peptidoglycan (PGN) induced a cytokine response but suppressed the inflammatory response to subsequent bacterial challenge Pretreatment of mice with PGN resulted in elevated plasma concentrations of TNF? and IL-10, but not IFN?, at 6 hours after injection ( Table 1 ). In the absence of further challenge, these cytokines were not detectable 48 hours later. However, mice challenged with S. aureus 48 hours after pretreatment with PGN had suppressed IFN? (p<0.05) and TNF? (p<.01) and increased IL-10 (p<.001) responses when compared to saline pre-treated control mice ( Figure 1 ). Pretreatment with peptidoglycan was associated with enhanced bacterial clearance and improved survival in response to a <italic>Staphylococcus aureus</italic> challenge To test the immunological significance of PGN pretreatment and the effect of the altered cytokine profile in response to S. aureus challenge, bacterial clearance was studied in mice that were challenged with S. aureus 48 hours after pretreatment with PGN. Mice pretreated with PGN had 3-fold lower concentrations of bacterial colony-forming units in spleen (p<0.01) and about 50% lower cfu in liver (p<0.01) tissues when compared to saline-treated control animals ( Figure 2 ). To further determine the immunological consequences of the effects of pretreatment with PGN, survival was observed for 7 days in mice after challenge with a highly lethal inoculum of S. aureus . Only 2 of 10 mice pretreated with PGN died during the observation period, compared to 80% mortality in control mice by day 5 (p=.011) ( Figure 3 ). PGN-induced tolerance and enhancement of innate immune function was independent of signaling through the TLR4 receptor To test whether TLR4 signaling was necessary for the effects of PGN pretreatment and to verify that the effects of PGN pretreatment were not due to LPS contamination, C3H/HeJ mice were pretreated with PGN 48 hours prior to a challenge with S. aureus , and sacrificed 6 hr later for sample collection. As was demonstrated in wild-type C57BL/6 mice, pretreatment of C3H/HeJ mice with PGN was associated with diminished induction of IFN? (p<0.01) and TNF? (p<0.001) in response to the S. aureus challenge when compared to saline-pretreated C3H/HeJ mice ( Figure 4 ). The plasma IL-10 response to the Staphylococcus challenge was higher, but not statistically different in mice pretreated with PGN compared to saline-pretreated controls ( Figure 4 ). Similarly, bacterial counts in spleen tissues were lower in mice pretreated with PGN when compared to saline-pretreated controls (p<0.01 in both HeJ and OuJ), although liver bacterial counts were not significantly different ( Figure 5 ). PGN-pretreated C3H/HeJ (p=0.0327) and C3H/HeOuJ (p=.0128) mice also had a higher percentage of survival after S. aureus challenge when compared to saline-pretreated control mice ( Figure 6 ). The effects of PGN-pretreatment on plasma cytokine profile, bacterial clearance, and mortality results were similar to those seen in the C57BL6 mice described and also similar to results observed in C3H/HeOuJ mice, which do not have the point mutation and thus have intact TLR4 signaling. PGN-induced tolerance and enhancement of innate immune function was independent of signaling through the TLR2 receptor To test whether TLR2 signaling was necessary for the effects of PGN pretreatment, TLR2 knockout mice were pretreated with PGN 48 hours prior to a challenge with S. aureus , and sacrificed 6 hrs later for sample collection. As was demonstrated in wild-type mice, pretreatment of TLR2 knockout mice with PGN was associated with diminished plasma concentrations of IFN? (p<0.05) and TNF? (p<0.001) in response to a Staphylococcus aureus challenge when compared to saline-pretreated control mice ( Figure 7 ). The plasma IL-10 response to a Staphylcoccus challenge was higher in TLR2 KO mice pretreated with PGN when compared to saline-pretreated controls (p<0.05) ( Figure 7 ). Similarly, bacterial counts in spleens were significantly lower in TLR2 KO mice pretreated with PGN when compared to mice pretreated with saline (p<0.001) ( Figure 8 ). PGN-pretreated TLR2-/- mice also had a higher percentage of survival after S. aureus challenge when compared to saline-pretreated control mice (p=.0128) ( Figure 9 ) and these results were similar to those observed in the background strain C57BL6 mice ( Figure 3 ).  Pretreatment with peptidoglycan (PGN) induced a cytokine response but suppressed the inflammatory response to subsequent bacterial challenge Pretreatment of mice with PGN resulted in elevated plasma concentrations of TNF? and IL-10, but not IFN?, at 6 hours after injection ( Table 1 ). In the absence of further challenge, these cytokines were not detectable 48 hours later. However, mice challenged with S. aureus 48 hours after pretreatment with PGN had suppressed IFN? (p<0.05) and TNF? (p<.01) and increased IL-10 (p<.001) responses when compared to saline pre-treated control mice ( Figure 1 ).  Pretreatment with peptidoglycan (PGN) induced a cytokine response but suppressed the inflammatory response to subsequent bacterial challenge Pretreatment of mice with PGN resulted in elevated plasma concentrations of TNF? and IL-10, but not IFN?, at 6 hours after injection ( Table 1 ). In the absence of further challenge, these cytokines were not detectable 48 hours later. However, mice challenged with S. aureus 48 hours after pretreatment with PGN had suppressed IFN? (p<0.05) and TNF? (p<.01) and increased IL-10 (p<.001) responses when compared to saline pre-treated control mice ( Figure 1 ).  Pretreatment with peptidoglycan was associated with enhanced bacterial clearance and improved survival in response to a <italic>Staphylococcus aureus</italic> challenge To test the immunological significance of PGN pretreatment and the effect of the altered cytokine profile in response to S. aureus challenge, bacterial clearance was studied in mice that were challenged with S. aureus 48 hours after pretreatment with PGN. Mice pretreated with PGN had 3-fold lower concentrations of bacterial colony-forming units in spleen (p<0.01) and about 50% lower cfu in liver (p<0.01) tissues when compared to saline-treated control animals ( Figure 2 ). To further determine the immunological consequences of the effects of pretreatment with PGN, survival was observed for 7 days in mice after challenge with a highly lethal inoculum of S. aureus . Only 2 of 10 mice pretreated with PGN died during the observation period, compared to 80% mortality in control mice by day 5 (p=.011) ( Figure 3 ).  Pretreatment with peptidoglycan was associated with enhanced bacterial clearance and improved survival in response to a <italic>Staphylococcus aureus</italic> challenge To test the immunological significance of PGN pretreatment and the effect of the altered cytokine profile in response to S. aureus challenge, bacterial clearance was studied in mice that were challenged with S. aureus 48 hours after pretreatment with PGN. Mice pretreated with PGN had 3-fold lower concentrations of bacterial colony-forming units in spleen (p<0.01) and about 50% lower cfu in liver (p<0.01) tissues when compared to saline-treated control animals ( Figure 2 ). To further determine the immunological consequences of the effects of pretreatment with PGN, survival was observed for 7 days in mice after challenge with a highly lethal inoculum of S. aureus . Only 2 of 10 mice pretreated with PGN died during the observation period, compared to 80% mortality in control mice by day 5 (p=.011) ( Figure 3 ).  PGN-induced tolerance and enhancement of innate immune function was independent of signaling through the TLR4 receptor To test whether TLR4 signaling was necessary for the effects of PGN pretreatment and to verify that the effects of PGN pretreatment were not due to LPS contamination, C3H/HeJ mice were pretreated with PGN 48 hours prior to a challenge with S. aureus , and sacrificed 6 hr later for sample collection. As was demonstrated in wild-type C57BL/6 mice, pretreatment of C3H/HeJ mice with PGN was associated with diminished induction of IFN? (p<0.01) and TNF? (p<0.001) in response to the S. aureus challenge when compared to saline-pretreated C3H/HeJ mice ( Figure 4 ). The plasma IL-10 response to the Staphylococcus challenge was higher, but not statistically different in mice pretreated with PGN compared to saline-pretreated controls ( Figure 4 ). Similarly, bacterial counts in spleen tissues were lower in mice pretreated with PGN when compared to saline-pretreated controls (p<0.01 in both HeJ and OuJ), although liver bacterial counts were not significantly different ( Figure 5 ). PGN-pretreated C3H/HeJ (p=0.0327) and C3H/HeOuJ (p=.0128) mice also had a higher percentage of survival after S. aureus challenge when compared to saline-pretreated control mice ( Figure 6 ). The effects of PGN-pretreatment on plasma cytokine profile, bacterial clearance, and mortality results were similar to those seen in the C57BL6 mice described and also similar to results observed in C3H/HeOuJ mice, which do not have the point mutation and thus have intact TLR4 signaling.  PGN-induced tolerance and enhancement of innate immune function was independent of signaling through the TLR4 receptor To test whether TLR4 signaling was necessary for the effects of PGN pretreatment and to verify that the effects of PGN pretreatment were not due to LPS contamination, C3H/HeJ mice were pretreated with PGN 48 hours prior to a challenge with S. aureus , and sacrificed 6 hr later for sample collection. As was demonstrated in wild-type C57BL/6 mice, pretreatment of C3H/HeJ mice with PGN was associated with diminished induction of IFN? (p<0.01) and TNF? (p<0.001) in response to the S. aureus challenge when compared to saline-pretreated C3H/HeJ mice ( Figure 4 ). The plasma IL-10 response to the Staphylococcus challenge was higher, but not statistically different in mice pretreated with PGN compared to saline-pretreated controls ( Figure 4 ). Similarly, bacterial counts in spleen tissues were lower in mice pretreated with PGN when compared to saline-pretreated controls (p<0.01 in both HeJ and OuJ), although liver bacterial counts were not significantly different ( Figure 5 ). PGN-pretreated C3H/HeJ (p=0.0327) and C3H/HeOuJ (p=.0128) mice also had a higher percentage of survival after S. aureus challenge when compared to saline-pretreated control mice ( Figure 6 ). The effects of PGN-pretreatment on plasma cytokine profile, bacterial clearance, and mortality results were similar to those seen in the C57BL6 mice described and also similar to results observed in C3H/HeOuJ mice, which do not have the point mutation and thus have intact TLR4 signaling.  PGN-induced tolerance and enhancement of innate immune function was independent of signaling through the TLR2 receptor To test whether TLR2 signaling was necessary for the effects of PGN pretreatment, TLR2 knockout mice were pretreated with PGN 48 hours prior to a challenge with S. aureus , and sacrificed 6 hrs later for sample collection. As was demonstrated in wild-type mice, pretreatment of TLR2 knockout mice with PGN was associated with diminished plasma concentrations of IFN? (p<0.05) and TNF? (p<0.001) in response to a Staphylococcus aureus challenge when compared to saline-pretreated control mice ( Figure 7 ). The plasma IL-10 response to a Staphylcoccus challenge was higher in TLR2 KO mice pretreated with PGN when compared to saline-pretreated controls (p<0.05) ( Figure 7 ). Similarly, bacterial counts in spleens were significantly lower in TLR2 KO mice pretreated with PGN when compared to mice pretreated with saline (p<0.001) ( Figure 8 ). PGN-pretreated TLR2-/- mice also had a higher percentage of survival after S. aureus challenge when compared to saline-pretreated control mice (p=.0128) ( Figure 9 ) and these results were similar to those observed in the background strain C57BL6 mice ( Figure 3 ).  PGN-induced tolerance and enhancement of innate immune function was independent of signaling through the TLR2 receptor To test whether TLR2 signaling was necessary for the effects of PGN pretreatment, TLR2 knockout mice were pretreated with PGN 48 hours prior to a challenge with S. aureus , and sacrificed 6 hrs later for sample collection. As was demonstrated in wild-type mice, pretreatment of TLR2 knockout mice with PGN was associated with diminished plasma concentrations of IFN? (p<0.05) and TNF? (p<0.001) in response to a Staphylococcus aureus challenge when compared to saline-pretreated control mice ( Figure 7 ). The plasma IL-10 response to a Staphylcoccus challenge was higher in TLR2 KO mice pretreated with PGN when compared to saline-pretreated controls (p<0.05) ( Figure 7 ). Similarly, bacterial counts in spleens were significantly lower in TLR2 KO mice pretreated with PGN when compared to mice pretreated with saline (p<0.001) ( Figure 8 ). PGN-pretreated TLR2-/- mice also had a higher percentage of survival after S. aureus challenge when compared to saline-pretreated control mice (p=.0128) ( Figure 9 ) and these results were similar to those observed in the background strain C57BL6 mice ( Figure 3 ).  Discussion These studies demonstrate that, similar to LPS from Gram-negative bacteria, peptidoglycan from the cell wall of Gram-positive bacteria can reduce inflammation and enhance innate immune function in mice in response to a subsequent bacterial challenge. In the present study, tolerance was manifested by a diminished proinflammatory cytokine (TNF?) response; diminished Th1 cytokine response (IFN?); and an increased Th2 cytokine response (IL-10). Despite the predominant Th2 response to the Staphylococcus aureus challenge, tolerant animals demonstrated enhanced bacterial clearance and greatly attenuated mortality after the S. aureus challenge. Neither TLR2 nor TLR4 signaling were necessary for these effects and the results in LPS-resistant C3H/HeJ mice suggested that the tolerance induction was not a result of LPS contamination of the peptidoglycan (PGN). LPS tolerance was first described in 1947 by Beeson who noted that consecutive administrations of fractionated bacterial suspensions to rabbits were associated with progressively diminished physiologic responses ( 15 ). Since these observations, LPS has been reported to induce tolerance to a variety of other stimuli and injuries, including tolerance to CpG DNA ( 16 ), TNF? and IL-1? ( 17 ), ethanol intoxication ( 18 ) and an attenuation of inflammation and injury after a variety of ischemic insults ( 2 - 7 ). Similarly, tolerance to LPS has been described to occur after a variety of other pretreatments, including cytokines ( 17 , 19 ), heat shock proteins ( 20 , 21 ), and other bacterial peptides including lipoproteins and lipoteichoic acid ( 22 - 24 ). In the last few decades, a number of studies of tolerance have been conducted with isolated cells. In vivo study of tolerance induction offers an advantage over in vitro or ex vivo studies in that a functional immune endpoint (bacterial clearance) can be studied directly. Further, different cell types and origins have had conflicting results in cell culture under the same experimental conditions ( 25 ). Tolerance to components of gram-positive bacterial cell walls has not been studied as extensively as tolerance induced by LPS. In cell culture, exposure of macrophages to either lipoteichoic acid (LTA) or PGN results in suppression of cytokine release after restimulation with the same molecule ( 24 , 26 ). In the case of LTA, tolerance induction was dependent upon TLR2 ( 24 ). In animal models, pretreatment with LTA reduced cardiac injury induced by ischemia/reperfusion similar to the protection provided by pretreatment with LPS ( 27 ). There are few studies of gram-positive tolerance induction and subsequent effects on innate immune function. Ausobsky et al tested muramyl dipeptide, a component of peptidoglycan, in an in vivo model and reported an attenuation of mortality after challenge with Klebsiella ( 28 ). O’Brien et al demonstrated tolerance and enhanced clearance of a Gram-negative bacterial challenge in mice pretreated with bacterial lipoprotein, a molecule that can be derived from both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria ( 29 ). Recognition of microbial organisms is the first step in host defense. The role of the innate immune system is to recognize a vast number of different pathogens and to distinguish them from self. Lipoteichoic acid, peptidoglycan, and other bacterial molecules such as LPS of gram-negative bacteria are highly conserved across broad classes of bacteria and, as such, provide the innate immune system with an efficient method for detection of a diverse multitude of microbial organisms. A consequence of the interaction of these pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) with Toll-like receptors on macrophages, monocytes, and neutrophils is up-regulation of inflammatory gene expression and subsequent release of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. Both TLR2 and the alternative innate immune receptor NOD2 have been described as required for a full response to Staphylococcus aureus ( 30 , 31 ), although our study seems to demonstrate that neither TLR2 knockout nor TLR4 deficient (HeJ) control mice cleared the bacterial challenge as efficiently as the wild-type control mice. Further, both TLR2 knockout and TLR4 deficient mice had a more pronounced TNF? and IFN? cytokine response when compared to their respective wild-type groups suggesting that TLR2 and TLR4 signaling may play a role in the regulation of those cytokines. While it is not surprising that a defect in TLR2 signaling would be associated with increased susceptibility to a Gram positive bacterial infection ( 32 ), it is not clear why the C3H/HeJ mice had worse bacterial clearance and mortality compared to the OuJ control mice groups. The point mutation involving the TLR4 receptor renders mice more susceptible to Gram negative bacterial infections ( 33 ) but previous investigations in C3H/HeJ mice have not reported an increased susceptibility to Staphylococcus aureus compared to C3H strains with intact TLR4 signaling. During the course of these studies, we attempted to minimize variability by purchasing both strains at the same time from the same vendor; housing under the same conditions, and infecting and sampling the mice at the same time. It is possible that additional genetic drift has occurred between these 2 C3H strains since their separation in the 1960’s that either renders the HeJ mice more susceptible or the OuJ mice less susceptible to Staphylococcus . Nevertheless, PGN administration effectively enhanced innate immune function in both TLR2-/- and HeJ mice when compared to saline-treated TLR2-/- or HeJ mice, suggesting that the enhancement of immune function occurred through mechanisms other than TLR2 and TLR4 signaling. This may have involved activity downstream of NOD-2 receptor activation. Peptidoglycan, consisting of glycan strands cross-linked by peptides, is the major component of the cell wall of gram-positive bacteria. Detection and activation of immune cells in response to PGN is not only through TLR2 but also through alternate pattern recognition receptors including NOD1 and NOD2, CD14, and a family of peptidoglycan recognition proteins (PGRP’s) ( 34 ). Other investigators have demonstrated that additional receptors, such as C5aR, contribute significantly to the immune response of TLR2 knockout mice to S. aureus ( 35 ) and it remains possible that the mechanism of PGN-induced tolerance worked through these as well. Other components of gram-positive bacteria include lipoteichoic acid which is a polymer anchored in the outer cytoplasmic membrane by a lipid moiety and, as such, is the Gram-positive bacterial equivalent to LPS from Gram-negative bacteria. LPS-binding protein and CD14 facilitate recognition of lipoteichoic acid, although cell stimulation occurs through TLR2 rather than TLR4 ( 36 , 37 ). We have tested lipoteichoic acid in experiments similar to those in this report and found that tolerance induction did occur although not as strongly compared to that induced by PGN (unpublished observations). It was interesting to note that although lack of TLR2 or TLR4 signaling appeared to be associated with diminished ability to clear bacteria in untreated mice, neither was necessary for the induction of tolerance and enhancement of bacterial clearance. How tolerance induction exerts a positive effect on bacterial clearance is not entirely clear. The number of phagocytic cells is increased after tolerance induction, and surface expression of complement receptor 3 and Fc?III/IIR have been shown to be increased on cells from tolerant animals ( 23 ). Both of those molecules have roles in phagocytosis, so tolerance enhancement of bacterial clearance may be due to increased numbers and activity of phagocytic cells. Recent work confirms that phagocytosis is significantly improved after induction of tolerance by LPS ( 38 ). The clinical relevance of tolerance induction is unclear. Septic patients often have anti-inflammatory cytokine profiles, and ex-vivo stimulation of leukocytes from septic patients has demonstrated suppression of the inflammatory response. Sepsis due to Gram-positive infections has been associated with a lesser degree of macrophage hyporesponsiveness to inflammatory stimuli than that seen in patients with Gram-negative sepsis ( 39 ). Our previous work combined with the present study demonstrates that pretreatment of mice with either Gram-negative or Gram-positive molecules results in a diminished proinflammatory response to a subsequent bacterial challenge. At the same time, however, we observed enhanced innate immune function as manifested by accelerated bacterial clearance and decreased mortality and thus induced tolerance differs significantly from clinical cases of sepsis. Whether this occurs as a natural phenomenon, ie, whether there are groups of patients that suffer minor injuries or infections that are followed by a period of enhanced bacterial resistance is unknown. Regardless, from a clinical standpoint understanding the mechanism of LPS tolerance is of obvious interest because reduction of the proinflammatory response may have important benefits, especially if it can be achieved while maintaining or even enhancing the innate immune clearance of pathogenic organisms.  Discussion These studies demonstrate that, similar to LPS from Gram-negative bacteria, peptidoglycan from the cell wall of Gram-positive bacteria can reduce inflammation and enhance innate immune function in mice in response to a subsequent bacterial challenge. In the present study, tolerance was manifested by a diminished proinflammatory cytokine (TNF?) response; diminished Th1 cytokine response (IFN?); and an increased Th2 cytokine response (IL-10). Despite the predominant Th2 response to the Staphylococcus aureus challenge, tolerant animals demonstrated enhanced bacterial clearance and greatly attenuated mortality after the S. aureus challenge. Neither TLR2 nor TLR4 signaling were necessary for these effects and the results in LPS-resistant C3H/HeJ mice suggested that the tolerance induction was not a result of LPS contamination of the peptidoglycan (PGN). LPS tolerance was first described in 1947 by Beeson who noted that consecutive administrations of fractionated bacterial suspensions to rabbits were associated with progressively diminished physiologic responses ( 15 ). Since these observations, LPS has been reported to induce tolerance to a variety of other stimuli and injuries, including tolerance to CpG DNA ( 16 ), TNF? and IL-1? ( 17 ), ethanol intoxication ( 18 ) and an attenuation of inflammation and injury after a variety of ischemic insults ( 2 - 7 ). Similarly, tolerance to LPS has been described to occur after a variety of other pretreatments, including cytokines ( 17 , 19 ), heat shock proteins ( 20 , 21 ), and other bacterial peptides including lipoproteins and lipoteichoic acid ( 22 - 24 ). In the last few decades, a number of studies of tolerance have been conducted with isolated cells. In vivo study of tolerance induction offers an advantage over in vitro or ex vivo studies in that a functional immune endpoint (bacterial clearance) can be studied directly. Further, different cell types and origins have had conflicting results in cell culture under the same experimental conditions ( 25 ). Tolerance to components of gram-positive bacterial cell walls has not been studied as extensively as tolerance induced by LPS. In cell culture, exposure of macrophages to either lipoteichoic acid (LTA) or PGN results in suppression of cytokine release after restimulation with the same molecule ( 24 , 26 ). In the case of LTA, tolerance induction was dependent upon TLR2 ( 24 ). In animal models, pretreatment with LTA reduced cardiac injury induced by ischemia/reperfusion similar to the protection provided by pretreatment with LPS ( 27 ). There are few studies of gram-positive tolerance induction and subsequent effects on innate immune function. Ausobsky et al tested muramyl dipeptide, a component of peptidoglycan, in an in vivo model and reported an attenuation of mortality after challenge with Klebsiella ( 28 ). O’Brien et al demonstrated tolerance and enhanced clearance of a Gram-negative bacterial challenge in mice pretreated with bacterial lipoprotein, a molecule that can be derived from both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria ( 29 ). Recognition of microbial organisms is the first step in host defense. The role of the innate immune system is to recognize a vast number of different pathogens and to distinguish them from self. Lipoteichoic acid, peptidoglycan, and other bacterial molecules such as LPS of gram-negative bacteria are highly conserved across broad classes of bacteria and, as such, provide the innate immune system with an efficient method for detection of a diverse multitude of microbial organisms. A consequence of the interaction of these pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) with Toll-like receptors on macrophages, monocytes, and neutrophils is up-regulation of inflammatory gene expression and subsequent release of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. Both TLR2 and the alternative innate immune receptor NOD2 have been described as required for a full response to Staphylococcus aureus ( 30 , 31 ), although our study seems to demonstrate that neither TLR2 knockout nor TLR4 deficient (HeJ) control mice cleared the bacterial challenge as efficiently as the wild-type control mice. Further, both TLR2 knockout and TLR4 deficient mice had a more pronounced TNF? and IFN? cytokine response when compared to their respective wild-type groups suggesting that TLR2 and TLR4 signaling may play a role in the regulation of those cytokines. While it is not surprising that a defect in TLR2 signaling would be associated with increased susceptibility to a Gram positive bacterial infection ( 32 ), it is not clear why the C3H/HeJ mice had worse bacterial clearance and mortality compared to the OuJ control mice groups. The point mutation involving the TLR4 receptor renders mice more susceptible to Gram negative bacterial infections ( 33 ) but previous investigations in C3H/HeJ mice have not reported an increased susceptibility to Staphylococcus aureus compared to C3H strains with intact TLR4 signaling. During the course of these studies, we attempted to minimize variability by purchasing both strains at the same time from the same vendor; housing under the same conditions, and infecting and sampling the mice at the same time. It is possible that additional genetic drift has occurred between these 2 C3H strains since their separation in the 1960’s that either renders the HeJ mice more susceptible or the OuJ mice less susceptible to Staphylococcus . Nevertheless, PGN administration effectively enhanced innate immune function in both TLR2-/- and HeJ mice when compared to saline-treated TLR2-/- or HeJ mice, suggesting that the enhancement of immune function occurred through mechanisms other than TLR2 and TLR4 signaling. This may have involved activity downstream of NOD-2 receptor activation. Peptidoglycan, consisting of glycan strands cross-linked by peptides, is the major component of the cell wall of gram-positive bacteria. Detection and activation of immune cells in response to PGN is not only through TLR2 but also through alternate pattern recognition receptors including NOD1 and NOD2, CD14, and a family of peptidoglycan recognition proteins (PGRP’s) ( 34 ). Other investigators have demonstrated that additional receptors, such as C5aR, contribute significantly to the immune response of TLR2 knockout mice to S. aureus ( 35 ) and it remains possible that the mechanism of PGN-induced tolerance worked through these as well. Other components of gram-positive bacteria include lipoteichoic acid which is a polymer anchored in the outer cytoplasmic membrane by a lipid moiety and, as such, is the Gram-positive bacterial equivalent to LPS from Gram-negative bacteria. LPS-binding protein and CD14 facilitate recognition of lipoteichoic acid, although cell stimulation occurs through TLR2 rather than TLR4 ( 36 , 37 ). We have tested lipoteichoic acid in experiments similar to those in this report and found that tolerance induction did occur although not as strongly compared to that induced by PGN (unpublished observations). It was interesting to note that although lack of TLR2 or TLR4 signaling appeared to be associated with diminished ability to clear bacteria in untreated mice, neither was necessary for the induction of tolerance and enhancement of bacterial clearance. How tolerance induction exerts a positive effect on bacterial clearance is not entirely clear. The number of phagocytic cells is increased after tolerance induction, and surface expression of complement receptor 3 and Fc?III/IIR have been shown to be increased on cells from tolerant animals ( 23 ). Both of those molecules have roles in phagocytosis, so tolerance enhancement of bacterial clearance may be due to increased numbers and activity of phagocytic cells. Recent work confirms that phagocytosis is significantly improved after induction of tolerance by LPS ( 38 ). The clinical relevance of tolerance induction is unclear. Septic patients often have anti-inflammatory cytokine profiles, and ex-vivo stimulation of leukocytes from septic patients has demonstrated suppression of the inflammatory response. Sepsis due to Gram-positive infections has been associated with a lesser degree of macrophage hyporesponsiveness to inflammatory stimuli than that seen in patients with Gram-negative sepsis ( 39 ). Our previous work combined with the present study demonstrates that pretreatment of mice with either Gram-negative or Gram-positive molecules results in a diminished proinflammatory response to a subsequent bacterial challenge. At the same time, however, we observed enhanced innate immune function as manifested by accelerated bacterial clearance and decreased mortality and thus induced tolerance differs significantly from clinical cases of sepsis. Whether this occurs as a natural phenomenon, ie, whether there are groups of patients that suffer minor injuries or infections that are followed by a period of enhanced bacterial resistance is unknown. Regardless, from a clinical standpoint understanding the mechanism of LPS tolerance is of obvious interest because reduction of the proinflammatory response may have important benefits, especially if it can be achieved while maintaining or even enhancing the innate immune clearance of pathogenic organisms.  Conclusions Exposure to peptidoglycan derived from the cell wall of gram-positive bacteria diminished the proinflammatory response but enhanced the innate immune response of mice to subsequent live bacterial challenges.  Figures and Table Figure 1 Mice were pretreated with peptidoglycan (PGN). The mice were subsequently challenged with live Staphylococcus aureus . Plasma samples were collected from the mice 6 hours later. Pretreatment with PGN was associated with decreased induction of IFN? and TNF? and higher induction of IL-10 after S. aureus challenge when compared to the control mice (* indicates p < 0.05 vs control, N = 5 per group). Figure 2 Mice were pretreated PGN and subsequently challenged with live S. aureus . The mice were sacrificed 6 hours later. Pretreatment with PGN was associated with significantly lower bacterial cfu’s in spleen and liver homogenates when compared to the controls (* indicates p < 0.05 vs control, N = 8 per group) Figure 3 Mice were pretreated with PGN prior to challenge with live S. aureus . The mice were observed for mortality for 7 days after the challenge. Mice that were pretreated had significantly better survival after the S. aureus challenge than control mice. (p < 0.05, N = 10 per group) Figure 4 C3H/HeJ (TLR4 mutation) and C3H/HeOuJ (TLR4 intact) mice were pretreated with PGN prior to challenge with live S. aureus . Plasma samples were collected from the mice 6 hours later. Mice that were pretreated had significantly lower plasma concentrations of TNF? and IFN? and higher plasma concentrations of IL-10 than control mice (* indicates p < 0.05, N = 5-8 per group). Figure 5 C3H/HeJ (TLR4 mutation) and C3H/HeOuJ (TLR4 intact) mice were pretreated with PGN prior to challenge with live S. aureus . The mice were sacrificed 6 hours later. Mice that were pretreated had significantly decreased numbers of bacterial-forming colonies in spleen tissue homogenates when compared to control mice (* indicates p < 0.05, N = 5 per group). Figure 6 C3H/HeJ (TLR4 mutation) and C3H/HeOuJ (TLR4 intact) mice were pretreated with PGN prior to challenge with live S. aureus . The mice were observed for mortality for 7 days after the challenge. Mice that were pretreated had significantly better survival after the S. aureus challenge than control mice. (p < 0.05, N = 10-11 per group) Figure 7 TLR2 Knockout and wild-type mice were pretreated with PGN prior to challenge with live S. aureus . Plasma samples were collected from the mice 6 hours later. Mice that were pretreated had lower plasma concentrations of IFN? and TNF? and higher plasma concentrations of IL-10 than control mice (*indicates p < 0.05, N = 5-8 per group for IFN? and TNF?; 3-5 per group for IL-10). Figure 8 TLR2 Knockout and wild-type mice were pretreated with PGN prior to challenge with live S. aureus . The mice were sacrificed 6 hours later. Mice that were pretreated with PGN had decreased numbers of bacteria in spleen homogenates and diminished bacterial colonies in liver homogenates (* indicates p < 0.05, N = 8 per group). Figure 9 TLR2 Knockout mice were pretreated with PGN prior to challenge with live S. aureus . The mice were observed for mortality for 7 days after the challenge. Mice that were pretreated had significantly better survival after the S. aureus challenge than control mice. (p < 0.05, N = 5 per group) Table I Cytokine induction at 6 & 48 hours after i.p. injection of peptidoglycan or saline (control). IFN? (pg/ml) IL-10 (pg/ml) TNF? (pg/ml) Control N.D. N.D. N.D. PGN — 6hrs N.D. 418 ± 135 123 ± 44 PGN — 48hrs N.D. N.D. N.D. Data shown are Mean ± SEM. N.D. = None detected. Lower limit of detection for the IFN? assay was 8 pg/ml.; 30 pg/ml for the IL-10 assay; and 8 pg/ml for the TNF? assay. 