The G Protein–Coupled Receptor G2A: Involvement in Hepatic Lipid Metabolism and Gallstone Formation in Mice The G2A receptor is a member of the ovarian cancer G protein– coupled receptor 1 family of stress-inducible G protein– coupled receptors. In this study, we examined the hepatobiliary effects of loss of function of G2A in mice fed either a chow or lithogenic diet. G2A-deficient (G2A?/?) mice fed chow had a 25% reduction in biliary phosphatidylcholine content, reduced hepatic gene expression of the phosphatidylcholine transporter adenosine triphosphate– binding cassette B4, and an 8-fold increase in expression of the nuclear receptor liver X receptor (LXR). Despite the increased expression of LXR, transcription of several LXR target genes was reduced. G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet had rapid gallstone formation, an increased cholesterol saturation index, a 2.5-fold increase in farnesoid X receptor expression, a 5-fold increase in LXR expression, and a 90% reduction in cholesterol 7 ? -hydroxylase expression in comparison with wild-type mice. There were no changes in gallbladder volume. Conclusion These data demonstrate that the G2A receptor is important for hepatobiliary bile salt, cholesterol, and phospholipid homeostasis and for the pathogenesis of cholesterol gallstone formation.  Materials and Methods Reagents Phospholipids B and cholesterol E kits were purchased from Wako Chemicals USA (Richmond, VA), and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primers were from Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA). NuPAGE 4%–12% denaturing gels and 3-( N -morpholino)propane sulfonic acid running and transfer buffers were from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA). Mouse anti-LXR, anti-FXR, and anti-CYP7A1 antibodies were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). Horseradish peroxidase (HRP)– conjugated anti-mouse and anti-rabbit secondary antibodies came from Amersham Biosciences UK, Ltd. (Little Chalfont, Buckinghamshire, England). The liquid alanine aminotransferase (ALT) reagent set was from Pointe Scientific (Canton, MI), and the bile acid and alkaline phosphatase kits were from Wako Pure Chemical Industries (Richmond, VA). Mice C57BL/6 mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME). G2A?/? mice were generated by Witte and colleagues 20 and backcrossed for 14 generations onto the C57BL/6 strain. C57BL/6 and G2A?/? mice were maintained on rodent chow or fed a lithogenic diet containing 15.8% fat cocoa butter, 1.25% cholesterol, and 1.25% sodium cholate (Harlan #TD90221) for up to 1 week. All experiments were performed on female mice between 8 and 12 weeks of age following a 4-hour fast. All animal studies were performed according to approved guidelines of the University of Virginia or Northwestern University Animal Care and Use Committee according to criteria outlined in “Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals” from the National Institutes of Health. Sample Collection Mice were euthanized according to approved guidelines of the University of Virginia or Northwestern University Animal Care and Use Committee, bile was collected, and crystal analysis was immediately performed. Blood was collected via right ventricle heart puncture with a 25-gauge needle coated with 0.5 M ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) for plasma analysis. The liver was harvested and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen for protein and RNA isolation. Quantitative Real-Time PCR Total cellular RNA was obtained from livers with the RNAEasy kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The RNA was treated with DNAse I at room temperature for 10 minutes. The reaction was stopped by the addition of EDTA. Reverse transcription of 1 ? g of total RNA was performed in a total volume of 30 ? L with iScript RT (Bio-Rad) and random hexamers. For quantitative PCR analysis of nuclear receptor and transporter messenger RNA (mRNA) expression, complementary DNA was obtained as described previously and was diluted 1:8; 4 ? L of this dilution was used for each PCR reaction. Reagents from the Bio-Rad real-time PCR kit containing SYBR Green were used for quantitative PCR reactions. The primers were as follows: for murine Fxr , 5?-AGC-GAAGGGCGTGAC-3? (forward) and 5?-TTC-CGTTTTCTCCCTGCAAA-3? (reverse); for Lxr? , 5?-GATAGGGTTGGAGTCAGCA-3? (forward) and 5?-GGAGCGCCTGTTACACTGTT-3? (reverse); for Shp , 5?-GGAGGCCTTGGATGTCCTAG-3? (forward) and 5?-AGCCTCCTGTTGCAGGTGTG-3? (reverse); for Abcb4 , 5?-GGCTGAGATGGATCTTGAG-3? (forward) and 5?-CCTTGGTTGCTGATGCTG-3? (reverse); for Abcb11 , 5?-CCTTCAACCAGAACATGACAAA-3?(forward) and 5?-CCTAGGATAAGGACAGCCACAC-3? (reverse); for Abcg5 , 5?-TGGATCCAACACCTCTAT-GCTAAA-3? (forward), 5?-GGATCCAACACCTCTAT-GCTAAA-3? (reverse), and 5?-GGCAGGTTTTCTC-GATGAACTG-3? (reverse); for Abcg8 , 5?-TGCCCAC-CTTCCACATGTC-3? (forward) and 5?-ATGAAGC-CGGCAGTAAGGTAGA-3? (reverse); for Cyp7A1 , 5?-AGCAACTAAACAACCTGCCAGTACTA-3? (forward) and 5?-GTCCGGATATTCAAGGATGCA-3? (reverse); and for G2A ( Gpr132 ), 5?-GGTGAAACGCA-GGTAGTGGT-3? (forward) and 5?-CTGGTGGTGGT-GTACAGTGC-3? (reverse). The primers for murine cyclophilin were 5?-TGGAGAGCACCAAGACAGACA-3? (forward) and 5?-TGCCGGAGTCGACAATGAT-3? (reverse). The PCR conditions were 95°C for 10 minutes and 95°C for 4 minutes, followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 15 seconds, 55°C for 30 seconds, and 72°C for 30 seconds and a final extension at 81°C for 15 seconds. Data were analyzed and presented on the basis of the relative expression method. 21 The formula for this calculation was as follows: Relative expression = 2 ? ( S ? C T ? C ? C T ) where ?CT is the difference in the threshold cycle between the gene of interest (that is, Fxr ) and the housekeeping gene (cyclophilin), S is the G2A?/? mouse, and C is the C57BL/6J control mouse. Immunoblotting For the detection of CYP7A1 and G2A, liver tissue was lysed in a buffer containing 20 mM trishydroxymethylaminomethane– hydrochloric acid (Tris-HCl; pH 7.5), 2 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 5 mM ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid, 2 mM EDTA, and protease inhibitors. After centrifugation, the cytosol extract supernatant was collected, and the resulting pellet was resuspended in a 1× Nonidet P40 (NP40)–radio immunoprecipitation assay lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 10 mM NaF, 2 mM Na3VO4, and protease inhibitors. After centrifugation, the membrane extract supernatant was collected. One hundred micrograms of cytosolic protein (CYP7A1) and 150 ? g of membrane protein (G2A) were analyzed by 4%–12% sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in a 3-( N -morpholino)propane sulfonic acid running buffer and transferred to nitrocellulose. Pierce Blocker BLOTTO in trishydroxymethylaminomethane-buffered saline was used as a blocking agent. Membranes were probed with a 1:1000 dilution of CYP7A1 antibody (Santa Cruz) and a 1:1000 dilution of G2A antibody. A 1:2000 dilution of anti-rabbit immunoglobulin G (IgG)–HRP (Amersham) was used as a secondary antibody for the detection of Cyp7a1, and a 1:4000 dilution of anti-mouse IgG-HRP (Amersham) was used as a secondary antibody for the detection of G2A. Blots were stripped and reprobed with 1:2000 extracellular signal-regulated kinase and 1:4000 anti-mouse IgG-HRP secondary antibody. For the detection of nuclear receptors, nuclear and cytosolic extracts were collected from whole liver tissue from C57BL/6J and G2A?/? mice with the NE-PER kit (Pierce) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Immunoblotting was performed as previously described. Anti-FXR and LXR antibodies were used at a 1:200 dilution. HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Amersham) was used at a 1:2000 dilution. Histopathologic Analysis Gallbladders were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight and then transferred to 70% ethanol prior to routine processing and staining with hematoxylin and eosin at the University of Virginia Research Histology Core. Blind analysis of the histology was conducted by an investigator (R.M.G.) as well as a gastrointestinal pathologist. Analysis of Bile, Plasma, and Gallstone Formation Bile salt analysis was performed with high-performance liquid chromatography and the method of Armstrong and Carey as previously described. 22 Hydrophobicity indices were calculated with the method of Heumann. 23 Phospholipid and cholesterol contents were measured with the phospholipids B and cholesterol E kits (Wako) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Serum ALT, alkaline phosphatase, and bile acid contents were measured with the liquid ALT kit (Pointe Scientific), the AKT kit (Wako), and the total bile acid kit (Wako) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. We measured the gall-bladder volume by weighing the whole gallbladder and its contents and equating the gallbladder weight with the gallbladder volume. 24 , 25 Gallstones were defined as macroscopically visible stones, whereas crystals were defined with polarizing light microscopy. Statistical Analyses Data for all experiments were analyzed with the StatView 6.0 software program. Comparisons between groups were performed with one-way analysis of variance methods. Data are graphically represented as the mean ± standard error, and each mean consists of three experiments performed in triplicate with eight mice per group (unless otherwise specified in the figure legends). Comparisons between groups and tests of interactions were made under the assumption of a two-factor analysis, with the interaction term testing each main effect and with the residual error testing the interaction. All comparisons were made with Fisher’s least significant difference procedure, so that multiple comparisons were made at the 0.05 level only if the overall F test from the analysis of variance was significant at P < 0.05.  Reagents Phospholipids B and cholesterol E kits were purchased from Wako Chemicals USA (Richmond, VA), and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primers were from Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA). NuPAGE 4%–12% denaturing gels and 3-( N -morpholino)propane sulfonic acid running and transfer buffers were from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA). Mouse anti-LXR, anti-FXR, and anti-CYP7A1 antibodies were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). Horseradish peroxidase (HRP)– conjugated anti-mouse and anti-rabbit secondary antibodies came from Amersham Biosciences UK, Ltd. (Little Chalfont, Buckinghamshire, England). The liquid alanine aminotransferase (ALT) reagent set was from Pointe Scientific (Canton, MI), and the bile acid and alkaline phosphatase kits were from Wako Pure Chemical Industries (Richmond, VA).  Mice C57BL/6 mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME). G2A?/? mice were generated by Witte and colleagues 20 and backcrossed for 14 generations onto the C57BL/6 strain. C57BL/6 and G2A?/? mice were maintained on rodent chow or fed a lithogenic diet containing 15.8% fat cocoa butter, 1.25% cholesterol, and 1.25% sodium cholate (Harlan #TD90221) for up to 1 week. All experiments were performed on female mice between 8 and 12 weeks of age following a 4-hour fast. All animal studies were performed according to approved guidelines of the University of Virginia or Northwestern University Animal Care and Use Committee according to criteria outlined in “Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals” from the National Institutes of Health.  Sample Collection Mice were euthanized according to approved guidelines of the University of Virginia or Northwestern University Animal Care and Use Committee, bile was collected, and crystal analysis was immediately performed. Blood was collected via right ventricle heart puncture with a 25-gauge needle coated with 0.5 M ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) for plasma analysis. The liver was harvested and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen for protein and RNA isolation.  Quantitative Real-Time PCR Total cellular RNA was obtained from livers with the RNAEasy kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The RNA was treated with DNAse I at room temperature for 10 minutes. The reaction was stopped by the addition of EDTA. Reverse transcription of 1 ? g of total RNA was performed in a total volume of 30 ? L with iScript RT (Bio-Rad) and random hexamers. For quantitative PCR analysis of nuclear receptor and transporter messenger RNA (mRNA) expression, complementary DNA was obtained as described previously and was diluted 1:8; 4 ? L of this dilution was used for each PCR reaction. Reagents from the Bio-Rad real-time PCR kit containing SYBR Green were used for quantitative PCR reactions. The primers were as follows: for murine Fxr , 5?-AGC-GAAGGGCGTGAC-3? (forward) and 5?-TTC-CGTTTTCTCCCTGCAAA-3? (reverse); for Lxr? , 5?-GATAGGGTTGGAGTCAGCA-3? (forward) and 5?-GGAGCGCCTGTTACACTGTT-3? (reverse); for Shp , 5?-GGAGGCCTTGGATGTCCTAG-3? (forward) and 5?-AGCCTCCTGTTGCAGGTGTG-3? (reverse); for Abcb4 , 5?-GGCTGAGATGGATCTTGAG-3? (forward) and 5?-CCTTGGTTGCTGATGCTG-3? (reverse); for Abcb11 , 5?-CCTTCAACCAGAACATGACAAA-3?(forward) and 5?-CCTAGGATAAGGACAGCCACAC-3? (reverse); for Abcg5 , 5?-TGGATCCAACACCTCTAT-GCTAAA-3? (forward), 5?-GGATCCAACACCTCTAT-GCTAAA-3? (reverse), and 5?-GGCAGGTTTTCTC-GATGAACTG-3? (reverse); for Abcg8 , 5?-TGCCCAC-CTTCCACATGTC-3? (forward) and 5?-ATGAAGC-CGGCAGTAAGGTAGA-3? (reverse); for Cyp7A1 , 5?-AGCAACTAAACAACCTGCCAGTACTA-3? (forward) and 5?-GTCCGGATATTCAAGGATGCA-3? (reverse); and for G2A ( Gpr132 ), 5?-GGTGAAACGCA-GGTAGTGGT-3? (forward) and 5?-CTGGTGGTGGT-GTACAGTGC-3? (reverse). The primers for murine cyclophilin were 5?-TGGAGAGCACCAAGACAGACA-3? (forward) and 5?-TGCCGGAGTCGACAATGAT-3? (reverse). The PCR conditions were 95°C for 10 minutes and 95°C for 4 minutes, followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 15 seconds, 55°C for 30 seconds, and 72°C for 30 seconds and a final extension at 81°C for 15 seconds. Data were analyzed and presented on the basis of the relative expression method. 21 The formula for this calculation was as follows: Relative expression = 2 ? ( S ? C T ? C ? C T ) where ?CT is the difference in the threshold cycle between the gene of interest (that is, Fxr ) and the housekeeping gene (cyclophilin), S is the G2A?/? mouse, and C is the C57BL/6J control mouse.  Immunoblotting For the detection of CYP7A1 and G2A, liver tissue was lysed in a buffer containing 20 mM trishydroxymethylaminomethane– hydrochloric acid (Tris-HCl; pH 7.5), 2 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 5 mM ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid, 2 mM EDTA, and protease inhibitors. After centrifugation, the cytosol extract supernatant was collected, and the resulting pellet was resuspended in a 1× Nonidet P40 (NP40)–radio immunoprecipitation assay lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 10 mM NaF, 2 mM Na3VO4, and protease inhibitors. After centrifugation, the membrane extract supernatant was collected. One hundred micrograms of cytosolic protein (CYP7A1) and 150 ? g of membrane protein (G2A) were analyzed by 4%–12% sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in a 3-( N -morpholino)propane sulfonic acid running buffer and transferred to nitrocellulose. Pierce Blocker BLOTTO in trishydroxymethylaminomethane-buffered saline was used as a blocking agent. Membranes were probed with a 1:1000 dilution of CYP7A1 antibody (Santa Cruz) and a 1:1000 dilution of G2A antibody. A 1:2000 dilution of anti-rabbit immunoglobulin G (IgG)–HRP (Amersham) was used as a secondary antibody for the detection of Cyp7a1, and a 1:4000 dilution of anti-mouse IgG-HRP (Amersham) was used as a secondary antibody for the detection of G2A. Blots were stripped and reprobed with 1:2000 extracellular signal-regulated kinase and 1:4000 anti-mouse IgG-HRP secondary antibody. For the detection of nuclear receptors, nuclear and cytosolic extracts were collected from whole liver tissue from C57BL/6J and G2A?/? mice with the NE-PER kit (Pierce) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Immunoblotting was performed as previously described. Anti-FXR and LXR antibodies were used at a 1:200 dilution. HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Amersham) was used at a 1:2000 dilution.  Histopathologic Analysis Gallbladders were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight and then transferred to 70% ethanol prior to routine processing and staining with hematoxylin and eosin at the University of Virginia Research Histology Core. Blind analysis of the histology was conducted by an investigator (R.M.G.) as well as a gastrointestinal pathologist.  Analysis of Bile, Plasma, and Gallstone Formation Bile salt analysis was performed with high-performance liquid chromatography and the method of Armstrong and Carey as previously described. 22 Hydrophobicity indices were calculated with the method of Heumann. 23 Phospholipid and cholesterol contents were measured with the phospholipids B and cholesterol E kits (Wako) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Serum ALT, alkaline phosphatase, and bile acid contents were measured with the liquid ALT kit (Pointe Scientific), the AKT kit (Wako), and the total bile acid kit (Wako) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. We measured the gall-bladder volume by weighing the whole gallbladder and its contents and equating the gallbladder weight with the gallbladder volume. 24 , 25 Gallstones were defined as macroscopically visible stones, whereas crystals were defined with polarizing light microscopy.  Statistical Analyses Data for all experiments were analyzed with the StatView 6.0 software program. Comparisons between groups were performed with one-way analysis of variance methods. Data are graphically represented as the mean ± standard error, and each mean consists of three experiments performed in triplicate with eight mice per group (unless otherwise specified in the figure legends). Comparisons between groups and tests of interactions were made under the assumption of a two-factor analysis, with the interaction term testing each main effect and with the residual error testing the interaction. All comparisons were made with Fisher’s least significant difference procedure, so that multiple comparisons were made at the 0.05 level only if the overall F test from the analysis of variance was significant at P < 0.05.  Results Recent studies suggest a role for the G2A receptor in modulating atherosclerosis, and we thus wanted to determine if G2A is important in regulating hepatobiliary lipid physiology. 9 , 10 We initially measured G2A mRNA expression in the livers and gallbladders of wild-type C57BL/6J mice and G2A?/? mice. G2A mRNA and protein were highly expressed in the livers of C57BL/6J mice, and there was minimal expression of G2A mRNA and protein in the gallbladder ( Fig. 1 ). We analyzed the bile from wild-type and G2A?/? mice in order to determine the bile salt, phosphatidylcholine, and cholesterol concentrations. There were no significant changes in bile salt and cholesterol levels in bile of G2A?/? mice ( Fig. 2 ). However, G2A?/? mice fed chow had a significant 25% decrease in gallbladder biliary phosphatidylcholine content ( Fig. 2 ). In order to determine whether this reduction in phosphatidylcholine was associated with a reduced expression of the hepatic canalicular phosphatidylcholine flippase, ABCB4, we performed quantitative PCR on liver samples of wild-type and G2A?/? mice. We found that hepatic expression of ABCB4 was reduced approximately 50% in G2A?/? mice, and this was consistent with our observation of reduced phosphatidylcholine content in bile ( Fig. 3 ). Expression of the bile salt transporter ABCB11 was also reduced in G2A?/? mice, although this did not result in diminished biliary bile salt content. Expression of the sterol transporter ABCG5/ABCG8 was similar in both wild-type and G2A?/? mice, consistent with the similar cholesterol levels in their bile ( Fig. 3 ). The presence of phosphatidylcholine in bile promotes micelle formation and cholesterol solubilization, which prevents the development of cholesterol gallstones. Thus, we fed the mice a lithogenic diet containing cholic acid and cholesterol for either 4 or 7 days in order to determine if they were susceptible to cholesterol gallstone formation. We found that G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet for 4 days showed evidence of cholesterol crystals in bile when viewed with polarizing microscopy but showed no macroscopically visible gallstones. After 7 days on a lithogenic diet, G2A?/? mice developed gallstones ( Table 1 ). Wild-type C57BL/6J mice fed a lithogenic diet and both strains of mice fed chow (0 day) failed to develop either crystals or gallstones. Gallbladder volumes were similar in both strains of mice at baseline and after 4 and 7 days on the diet (data not shown). The G2A?/? mice had large, stone-filled gallbladders after 20 weeks (data not shown). Furthermore, there were no differences in hematoxylineosin gallbladder histology in the G2A?/? mice fed either diet compared to control mice ( Fig. 4 ). Most significantly, G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet for 1 week had a greater than 50% reduction of bile salt concentrations in their bile in comparison with wild-type mice ( P < 0.001; Fig. 5 ). Additionally, G2A?/? mice had a 30% reduction in cholesterol content and a 25% reduction in phospholipid content in the bile in comparison with wild-type mice ( Fig. 5 ). Table 2 illustrates the biliary lipid concentrations of gallbladder bile from G2A?/? and wild-type mice fed a chow or lithogenic diet. On the lithogenic diet, G2A?/? mice had an increase in their cholesterol saturation index (CSI; Table 2 ) with an approximately 50% reduction in the concentration of bile salts in gallbladder bile ( Table 3 ). The CSI was 1.77 in G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet versus 1.16 in wild-type mice. The CSIs of mice fed a chow diet were similar in the wild-type and G2A?/? mice, being 0.51 and 0.48, respectively. These same data are also graphically depicted on a phase diagram ( Fig. 6 ). Table 3 demonstrates that lithogenic diet feeding shifts the bile salt hydrophobicity index by a similar degree in both strains of mice and shows that there was not a strain-specific difference in the bile salt hydrophobicity when the mice were fed either diet. In order to define the mechanisms responsible for the alterations in hepatobiliary lipid metabolism in G2A?/? mice, we examined the expression of LXR and FXR as well as their downstream target genes. We observed a 50% decrease in hepatic Fxr in chow-fed G2A?/? mice, without any change in the expression of its immediate downstream target gene Shp ( Fig. 7 ). We observed an 8-fold increase in hepatic gene expression and nuclear protein expression of LXR in G2A?/? mice with respect to wild-type mice fed chow ( P < 0.001; Fig. 7 ). Because these nuclear receptors are major regulators of CYP7A1, we also measured its expression. Despite significant changes in LXR and FXR expression in G2A?/? mice, Cyp7a1 expression was increased less than 2-fold ( Fig. 7 ). In addition, despite the dramatic increase in LXR expression, expression of several LXR downstream target genes was reduced in G2A?/? mice compared to wild-type mice ( Table 4 ). This strongly suggests that LXR-mediated signaling is impaired in the G2A?/? mice. When fed a lithogenic diet for 7 days, G2A?/? mice manifested a dramatic activation of the FXR-SHP pathway, with 2.5- and 4.5-fold increases in Fxr and Shp expression ( Fig. 8 ). Expression of Abcb11 , which is a downstream target of the FXR-SHP pathway, was also increased 5-fold ( Fig. 9 ). Consistent with SHP activation, Cyp7a1 gene expression (which is repressed by SHP) was also markedly reduced ( Fig. 8 ). In addition, expression of LXR continued to be increased approximately 5-fold ( Fig. 8 ); however, expression of the LXR-responsive genes was similar in the G2A?/? and wild-type mice ( Table 4 ). The lithogenic diet contains high concentrations of cholic acid and cholesterol and may have hepatotoxic effects, including hepatic steatosis. The C57BL/6 strain is susceptible to the hepatotoxic effects of the diet. 25 Serum alkaline transferase and alkaline phosphatase levels were similar at baseline, although 7 days of lithogenic diet feeding resulted in a slight elevation of serum alkaline phosphatase levels in G2A?/? mice ( Table 5 ). The serum bile acid concentrations were significantly elevated after 7 days on the lithogenic diet in G2A?/? mice, with a trend toward an increase in wild-type mice ( Table 5 ). These findings are suggestive of a mildly cholestatic phenotype. Taken together, these results suggest that G2A?/? mice have impaired hepatobiliary lipid metabolism, which contributes to the development of cholesterol gallstone disease.  Results Recent studies suggest a role for the G2A receptor in modulating atherosclerosis, and we thus wanted to determine if G2A is important in regulating hepatobiliary lipid physiology. 9 , 10 We initially measured G2A mRNA expression in the livers and gallbladders of wild-type C57BL/6J mice and G2A?/? mice. G2A mRNA and protein were highly expressed in the livers of C57BL/6J mice, and there was minimal expression of G2A mRNA and protein in the gallbladder ( Fig. 1 ). We analyzed the bile from wild-type and G2A?/? mice in order to determine the bile salt, phosphatidylcholine, and cholesterol concentrations. There were no significant changes in bile salt and cholesterol levels in bile of G2A?/? mice ( Fig. 2 ). However, G2A?/? mice fed chow had a significant 25% decrease in gallbladder biliary phosphatidylcholine content ( Fig. 2 ). In order to determine whether this reduction in phosphatidylcholine was associated with a reduced expression of the hepatic canalicular phosphatidylcholine flippase, ABCB4, we performed quantitative PCR on liver samples of wild-type and G2A?/? mice. We found that hepatic expression of ABCB4 was reduced approximately 50% in G2A?/? mice, and this was consistent with our observation of reduced phosphatidylcholine content in bile ( Fig. 3 ). Expression of the bile salt transporter ABCB11 was also reduced in G2A?/? mice, although this did not result in diminished biliary bile salt content. Expression of the sterol transporter ABCG5/ABCG8 was similar in both wild-type and G2A?/? mice, consistent with the similar cholesterol levels in their bile ( Fig. 3 ). The presence of phosphatidylcholine in bile promotes micelle formation and cholesterol solubilization, which prevents the development of cholesterol gallstones. Thus, we fed the mice a lithogenic diet containing cholic acid and cholesterol for either 4 or 7 days in order to determine if they were susceptible to cholesterol gallstone formation. We found that G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet for 4 days showed evidence of cholesterol crystals in bile when viewed with polarizing microscopy but showed no macroscopically visible gallstones. After 7 days on a lithogenic diet, G2A?/? mice developed gallstones ( Table 1 ). Wild-type C57BL/6J mice fed a lithogenic diet and both strains of mice fed chow (0 day) failed to develop either crystals or gallstones. Gallbladder volumes were similar in both strains of mice at baseline and after 4 and 7 days on the diet (data not shown). The G2A?/? mice had large, stone-filled gallbladders after 20 weeks (data not shown). Furthermore, there were no differences in hematoxylineosin gallbladder histology in the G2A?/? mice fed either diet compared to control mice ( Fig. 4 ). Most significantly, G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet for 1 week had a greater than 50% reduction of bile salt concentrations in their bile in comparison with wild-type mice ( P < 0.001; Fig. 5 ). Additionally, G2A?/? mice had a 30% reduction in cholesterol content and a 25% reduction in phospholipid content in the bile in comparison with wild-type mice ( Fig. 5 ). Table 2 illustrates the biliary lipid concentrations of gallbladder bile from G2A?/? and wild-type mice fed a chow or lithogenic diet. On the lithogenic diet, G2A?/? mice had an increase in their cholesterol saturation index (CSI; Table 2 ) with an approximately 50% reduction in the concentration of bile salts in gallbladder bile ( Table 3 ). The CSI was 1.77 in G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet versus 1.16 in wild-type mice. The CSIs of mice fed a chow diet were similar in the wild-type and G2A?/? mice, being 0.51 and 0.48, respectively. These same data are also graphically depicted on a phase diagram ( Fig. 6 ). Table 3 demonstrates that lithogenic diet feeding shifts the bile salt hydrophobicity index by a similar degree in both strains of mice and shows that there was not a strain-specific difference in the bile salt hydrophobicity when the mice were fed either diet. In order to define the mechanisms responsible for the alterations in hepatobiliary lipid metabolism in G2A?/? mice, we examined the expression of LXR and FXR as well as their downstream target genes. We observed a 50% decrease in hepatic Fxr in chow-fed G2A?/? mice, without any change in the expression of its immediate downstream target gene Shp ( Fig. 7 ). We observed an 8-fold increase in hepatic gene expression and nuclear protein expression of LXR in G2A?/? mice with respect to wild-type mice fed chow ( P < 0.001; Fig. 7 ). Because these nuclear receptors are major regulators of CYP7A1, we also measured its expression. Despite significant changes in LXR and FXR expression in G2A?/? mice, Cyp7a1 expression was increased less than 2-fold ( Fig. 7 ). In addition, despite the dramatic increase in LXR expression, expression of several LXR downstream target genes was reduced in G2A?/? mice compared to wild-type mice ( Table 4 ). This strongly suggests that LXR-mediated signaling is impaired in the G2A?/? mice. When fed a lithogenic diet for 7 days, G2A?/? mice manifested a dramatic activation of the FXR-SHP pathway, with 2.5- and 4.5-fold increases in Fxr and Shp expression ( Fig. 8 ). Expression of Abcb11 , which is a downstream target of the FXR-SHP pathway, was also increased 5-fold ( Fig. 9 ). Consistent with SHP activation, Cyp7a1 gene expression (which is repressed by SHP) was also markedly reduced ( Fig. 8 ). In addition, expression of LXR continued to be increased approximately 5-fold ( Fig. 8 ); however, expression of the LXR-responsive genes was similar in the G2A?/? and wild-type mice ( Table 4 ). The lithogenic diet contains high concentrations of cholic acid and cholesterol and may have hepatotoxic effects, including hepatic steatosis. The C57BL/6 strain is susceptible to the hepatotoxic effects of the diet. 25 Serum alkaline transferase and alkaline phosphatase levels were similar at baseline, although 7 days of lithogenic diet feeding resulted in a slight elevation of serum alkaline phosphatase levels in G2A?/? mice ( Table 5 ). The serum bile acid concentrations were significantly elevated after 7 days on the lithogenic diet in G2A?/? mice, with a trend toward an increase in wild-type mice ( Table 5 ). These findings are suggestive of a mildly cholestatic phenotype. Taken together, these results suggest that G2A?/? mice have impaired hepatobiliary lipid metabolism, which contributes to the development of cholesterol gallstone disease.  Discussion The function of the G protein– coupled receptor G2A remains poorly understood. Despite prior data suggesting that the ligand for the G2A receptor is lysophosphatidylcholine, the natural ligand for G2A remains unknown. In the current study, we demonstrate that G2A is important for modulating the hepatic signaling pathways involved in cholesterol, bile acid, and phospholipid homeostasis. The gallbladder bile of chow-fed G2A?/? mice has significantly lower phosphatidylcholine content compared to that of wild-type mice. Consistent with this finding, expression of the phosphatidylcholine transporter Abcb4 was reduced by 50% in G2A?/? mice. Although the bile from chow-fed G2A?/? mice lacked liquid crystals and gallstones, G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet for 7 days developed cholesterol gallstones, an unusual finding even in highly susceptible mouse strains ( Table 1 ). In fact, cholesterol crystals were present in the bile of G2A?/? mice after 4 days of lithogenic dietary feeding. In contrast, neither crystals nor gallstones were present in wild-type mice fed the lithogenic diet for 1 week. This rapid formation of cholesterol crystals and gallstones in the bile of G2A?/? mice strongly supports the pathophysiologic role of G2A in hepatobiliary lipid metabolism. We demonstrate that G2A is highly expressed in the liver, with lower levels of expression in the gallbladder ( Fig. 1 ). In addition, gallbladder volumes did not differ between G2A?/? and control mice at baseline or during the first week on the lithogenic diet when cholesterol gallstones formed. Gallbladder histology was also similar in both strains. This indicates that abnormalities of the gallbladder are unlikely to be primarily responsible for the susceptibility of G2A?/? mice to cholelithiasis. Gallstones and gallbladder volumes were large after 20 weeks on the lithogenic diet (data not shown), although this is likely to be a secondary phenomenon. When mice were fed a lithogenic diet, the CSI of both strains increased above 1.0; however, the CSI of G2A?/? mice increased to a greater degree ( Table 2 and Fig. 6 ). The bile salt hydrophobicity indices for G2A?/? and wild-type mice are similar, and thus bile salt hydrophobicity cannot account for the differences in gallstone susceptibility. Furthermore, we observed significant changes in the expression of hepatic biliary lipid metabolic and transporter genes in G2A?/? mice fed either chow or the lithogenic diet. Taken together, these findings strongly suggest that this pathophysiologic abnormality of gallstone formation is due to abnormalities of hepatic gene expression and function. Recent data indicate that FGF15/19 may be an important regulator of these genes in addition to SHP, and these signaling pathways may potentially interact with the G2A signaling pathway. 13 Future studies analyzing bile flow and biliary lipid output are necessary in order to fully address the phenotype as biliary lipid concentrations do not necessarily reflect hepatic lipid secretion and metabolism. The lithogenic diet containing both cholic acid and cholesterol is a well-established diet for studying the pathogenesis and genetics of murine gallstone formation. Many hepatic genes, including Cyp7a1 , are reciprocally regulated by bile salts via the FXR-SHP pathway and by oxysterols via the LXR pathway. When fed a lithogenic diet, G2A?/? mice rapidly developed cholesterol gallstones associated with an increase of the CSI. This occurred predominately because of markedly lower bile salt concentrations in the G2A?/? bile, with a resultant decrease in the total lipid content. In fact, the molar percentage of cholesterol and phosphatidylcholine both increase substantially on the lithogenic diet, largely because of the marked reduction of bile salts. With respect to the unexpected finding that the total lipid content in the bile of G2A?/? mice was reduced by lithogenic diet feeding, this may be due to aberrant LXR and FXR signaling in the G2A?/? mice. Follow-up in vitro and in vivo experiments will be necessary to fully understand how G2A affects hepatic lipid metabolism. In addition, intracellular trafficking of hepatic lipid transporters may be affected by G2A deficiency, and changes in gene expression may not always correlate with transporter function. Chow-fed G2A?/? mice have reduced expression of many downstream target genes of the hepatic LXR signaling pathway. This reduced gene expression occurs even though Lxr expression is increased approximately 8-fold in the G2A?/? mice compared to wild-type mice. These data suggest that G2A is an important mediator or cofactor in the LXR-oxysterol signaling pathway, and loss of function of G2A results in attenuated LXR-mediated signaling. The G2A?/? mice have similar bile salt species, bile hydrophobicity indices, and FXR– bile salt ligands (taurochenodeoxycholate and taurodeoxycholate) in comparison with wild-type mice, with a resultant similar level of SHP activation. This suggests that basal FXR signaling may be normal in G2A?/? mice. However, we cannot completely rule out abnormalities of FXR signaling in G2A?/? mice in the current study as the FXR pathway shows significant activation in G2A?/? mice when they are fed a lithogenic diet. G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet had 4.5-fold higher levels of ABCB11 expression than wild-type mice. However, despite increased expression of Abcb11 in G2A?/? mice, the absolute and relative bile salt concentrations in bile were decreased, whereas plasma bile salt concentrations were elevated. In order to fully explain this observation, further studies on biliary lipid secretion are necessary. The mild cholestasis observed in G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet may be due to relatively impaired biliary bile acid secretion and efflux of bile acids into the portal circulation during cholestasis. 26 Additionally, this phenotype may result from altered enterohepatic cycling of bile salts or from increased bile salt–independent bile flow resulting in more dilute bile. Finally, immunologic factors have recently been shown to be important in the pathogenesis of gallstones, and G2A may alter gallstone-susceptibility because of its effect on lymphocyte or macrophage function. 27 When G2A?/? mice are placed on a lithogenic diet for 1 week, gene expression of Cyp7a1 , the rate-limiting enzyme of the major bile synthetic pathway, is reduced by over 90%. This enzyme is reciprocally regulated by LXR and FXR, which are both induced in G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet. Activation of the LXR signaling pathway is a potent inducer of CYP7A1; however, it has been shown the effects of FXR activation on CYP7A1 expression are dominant over those of LXR. 28 A 2.5-fold up-regulation of hepatic FXR expression was observed in G2A?/? mice compared to controls. This led to the relative increase in SHP expression and may explain in part the marked suppression of gene expression of Cyp7a1 . As expected, the FXR bile salt ligand taurodeoxycholate increased 5- to 10-fold in both strains of mice fed a lithogenic diet because this diet contains cholic acid, with a resultant increase in the hydrophobicity index. In fact, the absolute and relative increases of the FXR-agonist bile salts (taurodeoxycholate and taurochenodeoxycholate) induced by lithogenic diet feeding are actually lower in G2A?/? mice compared to wild-type mice. Thus, the reduced Cyp7a1 expression in G2A?/? mice with respect to wild-type mice cannot be explained solely by an increase in endogenous bile salt FXR-agonist ligands. In addition to regulation by FXR and LXR, CYP7A1 is also regulated by hormones including FGF15/19 29 as well as hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 ? , which can directly bind the promoter and mediate repression of Cyp7a1 transcription. 30 The lithogenic diet is potentially toxic to the liver, largely because of the presence of cholic acid. The toxic effects of the lithogenic diet are more prevalent in long-term feeding studies, whereas in the current study, we fed this diet to the mice for only 1 week. In order to assess whether there were significant hepatotoxic effects of the lithogenic diet, we measured serum alkaline transferase and alkaline phosphatase levels. There were no differences between wild-type and G2A?/? mice fed a chow diet, nor were there any differences in alkaline phosphatase levels in lithogenic diet–fed mice. However, there was a trend toward increased serum alkaline phosphatase in G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet ( Table 5 ). In addition, feeding the lithogenic diet (which contains cholic acid) increased serum bile acids in both strains of mice, but to a greater degree in G2A?/? mice. G2A?/? mice had markedly lower bile salt concentrations in their bile in comparison with wild-type mice, and thus biliary bile salt secretion was likely reduced (although bile salt secretion rates were not directly measured). Combined, these observations suggest a relative cholestasis in G2A?/? mice. Thus, it is possible that some of the metabolic effects noted in the G2A?/? mice were due to the development of mild cholestasis resulting from the administration of the lithogenic diet. The fact that G2A expression regulates gallstone formation raises the interesting possibility that G2A may be a lithogenic ( Lith ) gene. In humans, the G2A gene (GPR132) is located on chromosome 14, and in mice, the G2A gene ( Gpr132 ) is on chromosome 12. To date, no known Lith loci on these 2 chromosomes have been identified. However, several genes involved in bile acid metabolism are now being identified as Lith genes or are located near known Lith loci. Recently, a significant quantitative trait locus associated with cholelithiasis on chromosome 10 ( Lith7 ) was discovered and identified as Nr1h4, the gene that encodes FXR. 31 Additionally, certain genes associated with gallstone formation that do not coincide directly with Lith loci have recently been identified. For example, the mouse Abcb4 gene is located near two known Lith loci on chromosome 5 ( Lith13 and Lith17 ). 32 Therefore, although the G2A gene does not colocalize with known Lith loci, its putative role in lipid and bile acid homeostasis may still affect susceptibility to cholesterol gallstone disease. The concept of G protein– coupled receptors regulating bile acid metabolism and cholesterol gallstone formation was recently described when Tgr5 (also known as Gpbar1 ) was identified as a bile acid receptor. 19 Gpbar1 -deficient mice are resistant to the formation of cholesterol gallstones. 19 Although both G2A?/? and Gpbar1-deficient mice appear to have an impact on cholesterol gallstone formation, Gpbar1 has been shown to be responsive to bile acids, 19 whereas there are no prior data on G2A. The finding that G2A expression regulates gallstone formation raises the interesting possibility that G2A may be a Lith gene. In conclusion, we have described a previously unknown function for G2A in hepatobiliary lipid metabolism and secretion. G2A is highly expressed in the liver, and targeted deletion of G2A in mice results in markedly altered hepatobiliary lipid metabolism and enhanced susceptibility to cholesterol gallstone formation. Hepatic LXR and FXR expression and activation of the downstream target genes are also affected in the G2A?/? mice. These data indicate that G2A may have an important role in hepatobiliary lipid metabolism, and this may be a novel drug target for regulation of cholesterol and bile acid metabolism.  Discussion The function of the G protein– coupled receptor G2A remains poorly understood. Despite prior data suggesting that the ligand for the G2A receptor is lysophosphatidylcholine, the natural ligand for G2A remains unknown. In the current study, we demonstrate that G2A is important for modulating the hepatic signaling pathways involved in cholesterol, bile acid, and phospholipid homeostasis. The gallbladder bile of chow-fed G2A?/? mice has significantly lower phosphatidylcholine content compared to that of wild-type mice. Consistent with this finding, expression of the phosphatidylcholine transporter Abcb4 was reduced by 50% in G2A?/? mice. Although the bile from chow-fed G2A?/? mice lacked liquid crystals and gallstones, G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet for 7 days developed cholesterol gallstones, an unusual finding even in highly susceptible mouse strains ( Table 1 ). In fact, cholesterol crystals were present in the bile of G2A?/? mice after 4 days of lithogenic dietary feeding. In contrast, neither crystals nor gallstones were present in wild-type mice fed the lithogenic diet for 1 week. This rapid formation of cholesterol crystals and gallstones in the bile of G2A?/? mice strongly supports the pathophysiologic role of G2A in hepatobiliary lipid metabolism. We demonstrate that G2A is highly expressed in the liver, with lower levels of expression in the gallbladder ( Fig. 1 ). In addition, gallbladder volumes did not differ between G2A?/? and control mice at baseline or during the first week on the lithogenic diet when cholesterol gallstones formed. Gallbladder histology was also similar in both strains. This indicates that abnormalities of the gallbladder are unlikely to be primarily responsible for the susceptibility of G2A?/? mice to cholelithiasis. Gallstones and gallbladder volumes were large after 20 weeks on the lithogenic diet (data not shown), although this is likely to be a secondary phenomenon. When mice were fed a lithogenic diet, the CSI of both strains increased above 1.0; however, the CSI of G2A?/? mice increased to a greater degree ( Table 2 and Fig. 6 ). The bile salt hydrophobicity indices for G2A?/? and wild-type mice are similar, and thus bile salt hydrophobicity cannot account for the differences in gallstone susceptibility. Furthermore, we observed significant changes in the expression of hepatic biliary lipid metabolic and transporter genes in G2A?/? mice fed either chow or the lithogenic diet. Taken together, these findings strongly suggest that this pathophysiologic abnormality of gallstone formation is due to abnormalities of hepatic gene expression and function. Recent data indicate that FGF15/19 may be an important regulator of these genes in addition to SHP, and these signaling pathways may potentially interact with the G2A signaling pathway. 13 Future studies analyzing bile flow and biliary lipid output are necessary in order to fully address the phenotype as biliary lipid concentrations do not necessarily reflect hepatic lipid secretion and metabolism. The lithogenic diet containing both cholic acid and cholesterol is a well-established diet for studying the pathogenesis and genetics of murine gallstone formation. Many hepatic genes, including Cyp7a1 , are reciprocally regulated by bile salts via the FXR-SHP pathway and by oxysterols via the LXR pathway. When fed a lithogenic diet, G2A?/? mice rapidly developed cholesterol gallstones associated with an increase of the CSI. This occurred predominately because of markedly lower bile salt concentrations in the G2A?/? bile, with a resultant decrease in the total lipid content. In fact, the molar percentage of cholesterol and phosphatidylcholine both increase substantially on the lithogenic diet, largely because of the marked reduction of bile salts. With respect to the unexpected finding that the total lipid content in the bile of G2A?/? mice was reduced by lithogenic diet feeding, this may be due to aberrant LXR and FXR signaling in the G2A?/? mice. Follow-up in vitro and in vivo experiments will be necessary to fully understand how G2A affects hepatic lipid metabolism. In addition, intracellular trafficking of hepatic lipid transporters may be affected by G2A deficiency, and changes in gene expression may not always correlate with transporter function. Chow-fed G2A?/? mice have reduced expression of many downstream target genes of the hepatic LXR signaling pathway. This reduced gene expression occurs even though Lxr expression is increased approximately 8-fold in the G2A?/? mice compared to wild-type mice. These data suggest that G2A is an important mediator or cofactor in the LXR-oxysterol signaling pathway, and loss of function of G2A results in attenuated LXR-mediated signaling. The G2A?/? mice have similar bile salt species, bile hydrophobicity indices, and FXR– bile salt ligands (taurochenodeoxycholate and taurodeoxycholate) in comparison with wild-type mice, with a resultant similar level of SHP activation. This suggests that basal FXR signaling may be normal in G2A?/? mice. However, we cannot completely rule out abnormalities of FXR signaling in G2A?/? mice in the current study as the FXR pathway shows significant activation in G2A?/? mice when they are fed a lithogenic diet. G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet had 4.5-fold higher levels of ABCB11 expression than wild-type mice. However, despite increased expression of Abcb11 in G2A?/? mice, the absolute and relative bile salt concentrations in bile were decreased, whereas plasma bile salt concentrations were elevated. In order to fully explain this observation, further studies on biliary lipid secretion are necessary. The mild cholestasis observed in G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet may be due to relatively impaired biliary bile acid secretion and efflux of bile acids into the portal circulation during cholestasis. 26 Additionally, this phenotype may result from altered enterohepatic cycling of bile salts or from increased bile salt–independent bile flow resulting in more dilute bile. Finally, immunologic factors have recently been shown to be important in the pathogenesis of gallstones, and G2A may alter gallstone-susceptibility because of its effect on lymphocyte or macrophage function. 27 When G2A?/? mice are placed on a lithogenic diet for 1 week, gene expression of Cyp7a1 , the rate-limiting enzyme of the major bile synthetic pathway, is reduced by over 90%. This enzyme is reciprocally regulated by LXR and FXR, which are both induced in G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet. Activation of the LXR signaling pathway is a potent inducer of CYP7A1; however, it has been shown the effects of FXR activation on CYP7A1 expression are dominant over those of LXR. 28 A 2.5-fold up-regulation of hepatic FXR expression was observed in G2A?/? mice compared to controls. This led to the relative increase in SHP expression and may explain in part the marked suppression of gene expression of Cyp7a1 . As expected, the FXR bile salt ligand taurodeoxycholate increased 5- to 10-fold in both strains of mice fed a lithogenic diet because this diet contains cholic acid, with a resultant increase in the hydrophobicity index. In fact, the absolute and relative increases of the FXR-agonist bile salts (taurodeoxycholate and taurochenodeoxycholate) induced by lithogenic diet feeding are actually lower in G2A?/? mice compared to wild-type mice. Thus, the reduced Cyp7a1 expression in G2A?/? mice with respect to wild-type mice cannot be explained solely by an increase in endogenous bile salt FXR-agonist ligands. In addition to regulation by FXR and LXR, CYP7A1 is also regulated by hormones including FGF15/19 29 as well as hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 ? , which can directly bind the promoter and mediate repression of Cyp7a1 transcription. 30 The lithogenic diet is potentially toxic to the liver, largely because of the presence of cholic acid. The toxic effects of the lithogenic diet are more prevalent in long-term feeding studies, whereas in the current study, we fed this diet to the mice for only 1 week. In order to assess whether there were significant hepatotoxic effects of the lithogenic diet, we measured serum alkaline transferase and alkaline phosphatase levels. There were no differences between wild-type and G2A?/? mice fed a chow diet, nor were there any differences in alkaline phosphatase levels in lithogenic diet–fed mice. However, there was a trend toward increased serum alkaline phosphatase in G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet ( Table 5 ). In addition, feeding the lithogenic diet (which contains cholic acid) increased serum bile acids in both strains of mice, but to a greater degree in G2A?/? mice. G2A?/? mice had markedly lower bile salt concentrations in their bile in comparison with wild-type mice, and thus biliary bile salt secretion was likely reduced (although bile salt secretion rates were not directly measured). Combined, these observations suggest a relative cholestasis in G2A?/? mice. Thus, it is possible that some of the metabolic effects noted in the G2A?/? mice were due to the development of mild cholestasis resulting from the administration of the lithogenic diet. The fact that G2A expression regulates gallstone formation raises the interesting possibility that G2A may be a lithogenic ( Lith ) gene. In humans, the G2A gene (GPR132) is located on chromosome 14, and in mice, the G2A gene ( Gpr132 ) is on chromosome 12. To date, no known Lith loci on these 2 chromosomes have been identified. However, several genes involved in bile acid metabolism are now being identified as Lith genes or are located near known Lith loci. Recently, a significant quantitative trait locus associated with cholelithiasis on chromosome 10 ( Lith7 ) was discovered and identified as Nr1h4, the gene that encodes FXR. 31 Additionally, certain genes associated with gallstone formation that do not coincide directly with Lith loci have recently been identified. For example, the mouse Abcb4 gene is located near two known Lith loci on chromosome 5 ( Lith13 and Lith17 ). 32 Therefore, although the G2A gene does not colocalize with known Lith loci, its putative role in lipid and bile acid homeostasis may still affect susceptibility to cholesterol gallstone disease. The concept of G protein– coupled receptors regulating bile acid metabolism and cholesterol gallstone formation was recently described when Tgr5 (also known as Gpbar1 ) was identified as a bile acid receptor. 19 Gpbar1 -deficient mice are resistant to the formation of cholesterol gallstones. 19 Although both G2A?/? and Gpbar1-deficient mice appear to have an impact on cholesterol gallstone formation, Gpbar1 has been shown to be responsive to bile acids, 19 whereas there are no prior data on G2A. The finding that G2A expression regulates gallstone formation raises the interesting possibility that G2A may be a Lith gene. In conclusion, we have described a previously unknown function for G2A in hepatobiliary lipid metabolism and secretion. G2A is highly expressed in the liver, and targeted deletion of G2A in mice results in markedly altered hepatobiliary lipid metabolism and enhanced susceptibility to cholesterol gallstone formation. Hepatic LXR and FXR expression and activation of the downstream target genes are also affected in the G2A?/? mice. These data indicate that G2A may have an important role in hepatobiliary lipid metabolism, and this may be a novel drug target for regulation of cholesterol and bile acid metabolism.  Figures and Tables Fig. 1 Gene and protein expression of G2A mRNA in tissues from C57BL/6J mice. (A) Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis was performed on mRNA isolated from several tissues of C57BL/6J mice. G2A mRNA was abundantly expressed in the livers of C57BL/6J mice. (B) Immunoblotting was performed on protein isolated from the livers and gallbladders of C57BL/6J mice. G2A protein was highly expressed in the livers of C57BL/6J mice, whereas expression was barely detectable in the gallbladders. mRNA, messenger RNA. Fig. 2 G2A?/? mice fed chow have reduced phospholipid content in bile. Bile was harvested from B6 and G2A?/? mice fed chow. (A,B) Total BS and total cholesterol levels were quantified in bile. There were no significant changes observed in BS or cholesterol between wild-type and G2A?/? mice fed chow. (C) The phospholipid concentration in bile decreased 25% in G2A?/? mice compared to B6 mice. * P = 0.01 versus B6 mice; n = 10 mice per group. B6, C57BL/6J; BS, bile salts; G2A?/?, G2A-deficient. Fig. 3 ABCB4 and ABCB11 expression is reduced in G2A?/? mice fed chow. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis was performed on RNA isolated from livers of female B6 and G2A?/? mice. ABCB4 mRNA expression was reduced approximately 50% and ABCB11 expression was reduced 30% in G2A?/? mice compared to B6 mice. n = 10 mice per group; * P = 0.0004, ** P = 0.003 versus B6 mice. ABC, adenosine triphosphate– binding cassette; B6, C57BL/6J; G2A?/?, G2A-deficient. Fig. 4 Histology of gallbladders from B6 and G2A?/? mice fed chow or a lithogenic diet for 7 days: (A) B6 mice fed chow, (B) G2A?/? mice fed chow, (C) B6 mice fed the lithogenic diet for 7 days, and (D) G2A?/? mice fed the lithogenic diet for 7 days. Gallbladders were harvested from mice, and paraffin sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Representative sections at 10× and 40× magnifications are shown. B6, C57BL/6J; G2A?/?, G2A-deficient. Fig. 5 G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet have reduced lipid content in gallbladder bile. Bile was harvested from B6 mice and G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet for 1 week. Lipid contents in bile were measured as described in the Materials and Methods section. (A) The bile salt concentration in gallbladder bile was decreased by 45% in G2A?/? mice compared to B6 mice. (B) The gallbladder bile cholesterol concentration was 30% lower in G2A?/? mice compared to B6 mice. (C) The biliary phospholipid concentration decreased 25% in G2A?/? mice compared to B6 mice. n = 7 mice per group; * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.0001 versus B6 mice. B6, C57BL/6J; G2A?/?, G2A-deficient. Fig. 6 Phase diagram of biliary lipids in G2A?/? and wild-type mice fed chow or a lithogenic diet for 7 days. The data from Table 4 are presented as a phase diagram. The mean cholesterol saturation index of gallbladder bile in the lithogenic diet–fed mice was above 1.0 but was greater in G2A?/? mice, and this was consistent with the increased susceptibility to gallstone formation. Abbreviation: G2A?/?, G2A-deficient. Fig. 7 Changes in expression of genes regulating bile acid metabolism in G2A?/? mice fed chow. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis was performed on RNA from livers of female B6 and G2A?/? mice. n = 10 mice per group (performed in triplicate for mRNA expression). (A) Expression patterns of nuclear receptor mRNA show no change in expression of SHP, decreased expression of FXR, and increased expression of LXR in G2A?/? mice compared to B6 mice. (B) Expression patterns of CYP7A1 show increased expression in G2A?/? mice compared to B6 mice. * P < 0.01, ** P < 0.001 versus B6 mice. (C) Hepatic proteins were isolated from G2A?/? and B6 mice and analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis for FXR, LXR, and CYP7A1 protein expression. Representative gels of four pooled samples per group are shown. Erk1/2 was run as a control for gel loading. B6, C57BL/6J; CYP7A1, cholesterol 7 ? -hydroxylase; Erk1/2, extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2; FXR, farnesoid X receptor; G2A?/?, G2A-deficient; LXR, liver X receptor; mRNA, messenger RNA; SHP, small heterodimer partner. Fig. 8 Changes in gene expression of nuclear receptors and enzymes involved in bile acid metabolism in G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet. RNA and protein were isolated from livers of female B6 and G2A?/? mice fed a 1-week lithogenic diet. (A) Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis was performed on liver RNA. n = 8 mice (performed in triplicate for mRNA analysis). Expression patterns of nuclear receptor mRNA show increased expression of FXR, SHP, and LXR in G2A?/? mice compared to B6 mice. ** P < 0.001 versus B6 mice. (B) Expression patterns of CYP7A1 mRNA show reduced expression in G2A?/? mice compared to B6 mice. * P < 0.0001. (C) Hepatic proteins were isolated from G2A?/? and B6 mice and analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis for FXR, LXR, and CYP7A1 protein expression (n = 1 mouse per group). Erk1/2 was run as a control for gel loading. Representative gels are shown. B6, C57BL/6J; CYP7A1, cholesterol 7 ? -hydroxylase; Erk1/2, extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2; FXR, farnesoid X receptor; G2A?/?, G2A-deficient; LXR, liver X receptor; mRNA, messenger RNA; SHP, small heterodimer partner. Fig. 9 Changes in gene expression of ABC transporters in G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet. RNA was isolated from livers of female B6 and G2A?/? mice fed a 1-week lithogenic diet and analyzed with quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. n = 10 mice per group. ABCB11 expression was significantly increased in G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet. * P < 0.002 versus B6 mice. ABC, adenosine triphosphate– binding cassette; B6, C57BL/6J; G2A?/?, G2A-deficient. Table 1 Cholesterol Crystal and Gallstone Formation in C57BL/6J and G2A?/? Mice Gallbladder Size (mL) Crystals Gallstones Chow ?C57BL/6J 13.7 ± 2.5 0/3 0/3 ?G2A?/? 14.0 ± 2.0 0/3 0/3 Lithogenio, 4 days, ?C57BL/6J 32.8 ± 8.2 * 0/4 0/4 ?G2A?/? 38.3 ± 7.6 * 3/3 0/3 Lithogenic, 7 days ?C57BL/6J 27.0 ± 15.1 0/5 0/5 ?G2A?/? 21.3 ± 4.2 * 4/4 4/4 The data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation; n = 3–5. Abbreviation: G2A?/?, G2A-deficient. * P < 0.05 versus chow-fed diet. Table 2 Biliary Compositions and CSIs of C57BL/6J and G2A?/? Mice Bile Salt (mol %) Cholesterol (mol %) Phospholipid (mol %) TLC (g/dL) Max Ch Sol CSI Chow ?C57BL/6J 90.8 1.94 7.22 15.30 4.09 0.48 ?G2A?/? 91.8 2.04 6.14 13.75 4.00 0.51 Lithogenic, 7 days ?C57BL/6J 89.4 4.90 5.72 18.08 4.22 1.16 ?G2A?/? 82.6 7.38 10.05 8.29 4.18 1.77 Abbreviations: CSI, cholesterol saturation index; G2A?/?, G2A-deficient; Max Ch Sol, maximum cholesterol solubility; TLC, total lipid content. Table 3 Biliary Bile Salt Compositions and Hydrophobicity Indices of C57BL/6J and G2A?/? Mice % TMC % TUDC % TC % TCDC % TDC HI Total Bile Salt (mM) Chow ?C57BL/6J 38.1 ± 3.5 § 1.0 ± 0.2 * , § 57.9 ± 4.2 § 1.6 ± 0.8 † 1.4 ± 0.7 § ?0.29 ± 0.03 § 258 ± 8 ?G2A?/? 41.9 ± 6.0 § 1.3 ± 0.3 § 53.8 ± 6.0 § 1.0 ± 0.5 § 1.9 ± 0.8 § ?0.32 ± 0.05 § 235 ± 50 § Lithogenic ?C57BL/6J 7.6 ± 1.7 † 0.1 ± 0.2 74.0 ± 8.2 * 0.3 ± 0.3 18.1 ± 9.5 0.05 ± 0.07 304 ± 54 † ?G2A?/? 3.2 ± 1.1 0.0 ± 0.0 85.4 ± 6.0 0.1 ± 0.1 11.4 ± 5.6 0.04 ± 0.03 127 ± 69 The data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation; n = 5–9. * Effect of strain ( P < 0.05); † Effect of strain ( P < 0.01); ‡ Effect of diet ( P < 0.05); § Effect of diet ( P < 0.01); Abbreviations: G2A?/?, G2A-deficient; HI, hydrophobicity index; TC, taurocholate; TCDC, taurochenodeoxycholate; TDC, taurodeoxycholate; TMC, tauromuricholic acid; TUDC, tauroursodeoxycholate. Table 4 Liver X Receptor Target Gene Expression in the Liver Target Gene Relative Expression Chow Diet 1-Week Lithogenic Diet B6 G2A?/? B6 G2A?/? ABCA1 1.0 ± .08 0.5 ± .07 † 1.0 ± .09 0.9 ± .05 ABCG1 1.1 ± .1 0.3 ± .1 * 0.8 ± .1 0.8 ± .1 SREBP-1a 1.0 ± .08 0.5 ± .06 * 1.0 ± .1 1.4 ± .1 * SREBP-1c 1.1 ± .2 0.7 ± .08 * 1.2 ± .3 1.3 ± .2 SREBP-2 1.0 ± .07 0.5 ± .08 0.9 ± .1 2.1 ± .3 † ApoE 1.1 ± .1 0.8 ± .05 1.0 ± .1 0.7 ± .2 HMG-CoA Synthase 1.1 ± .1 0.7 ± .07 1.1 ± .1 1.9 ± .2 * HMG-CoA Reductase 1.0 ± .08 0.9 ± .08 1.1 ± .2 1.5 ± .2 FAS 1.1 ± .7 0.7 ± .1 1.1 ± .2 1.8 ± .3 * The data are expressed as mean ± standard error of the mean; n = 8 mice per group (performed in triplicate). The expression was calculated as described in the Materials and Methods section. Abbreviations: ABC, adenosine triphosphate-binding cassette; ApoE, apolipoprotein E; G2A?/?, G2A-deficient; HMG-CoA, 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-coenzyme A; SREBP, sterol regulatory element binding protein. * P ? 0.01. † P < 0.0001. Table 5 Plasma Analysis for C57BL/6J and G2A?/? Mice Strain ALP Activity (Units/mL) ALT Activity (IU/L) Bile Acids ( ? mol/L) Chow C57BL/6J 80.3 ± 4.2 12.0 ± 1.5 5.1 ± 1.1 G2A?/? 82.9 ± 3.4 16.8 ± 2.7 7.5 ± 1.4 Lithogenic, 7 days C57BL/6J 74.1 ± 3.8 27.6 ± 3.4 27.9 ± 10.6 G2A?/? 91.5 ± 7.6 36.0 ± 6.3 79.4 ± 16.1 * Abbreviations: ALP, alkaline phosphatase; ALT; alanine aminotransferase; G2A?/?, G2A-deficient. * P < 0.001.  Figures and Tables Fig. 1 Gene and protein expression of G2A mRNA in tissues from C57BL/6J mice. (A) Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis was performed on mRNA isolated from several tissues of C57BL/6J mice. G2A mRNA was abundantly expressed in the livers of C57BL/6J mice. (B) Immunoblotting was performed on protein isolated from the livers and gallbladders of C57BL/6J mice. G2A protein was highly expressed in the livers of C57BL/6J mice, whereas expression was barely detectable in the gallbladders. mRNA, messenger RNA. Fig. 2 G2A?/? mice fed chow have reduced phospholipid content in bile. Bile was harvested from B6 and G2A?/? mice fed chow. (A,B) Total BS and total cholesterol levels were quantified in bile. There were no significant changes observed in BS or cholesterol between wild-type and G2A?/? mice fed chow. (C) The phospholipid concentration in bile decreased 25% in G2A?/? mice compared to B6 mice. * P = 0.01 versus B6 mice; n = 10 mice per group. B6, C57BL/6J; BS, bile salts; G2A?/?, G2A-deficient. Fig. 3 ABCB4 and ABCB11 expression is reduced in G2A?/? mice fed chow. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis was performed on RNA isolated from livers of female B6 and G2A?/? mice. ABCB4 mRNA expression was reduced approximately 50% and ABCB11 expression was reduced 30% in G2A?/? mice compared to B6 mice. n = 10 mice per group; * P = 0.0004, ** P = 0.003 versus B6 mice. ABC, adenosine triphosphate– binding cassette; B6, C57BL/6J; G2A?/?, G2A-deficient. Fig. 4 Histology of gallbladders from B6 and G2A?/? mice fed chow or a lithogenic diet for 7 days: (A) B6 mice fed chow, (B) G2A?/? mice fed chow, (C) B6 mice fed the lithogenic diet for 7 days, and (D) G2A?/? mice fed the lithogenic diet for 7 days. Gallbladders were harvested from mice, and paraffin sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Representative sections at 10× and 40× magnifications are shown. B6, C57BL/6J; G2A?/?, G2A-deficient. Fig. 5 G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet have reduced lipid content in gallbladder bile. Bile was harvested from B6 mice and G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet for 1 week. Lipid contents in bile were measured as described in the Materials and Methods section. (A) The bile salt concentration in gallbladder bile was decreased by 45% in G2A?/? mice compared to B6 mice. (B) The gallbladder bile cholesterol concentration was 30% lower in G2A?/? mice compared to B6 mice. (C) The biliary phospholipid concentration decreased 25% in G2A?/? mice compared to B6 mice. n = 7 mice per group; * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.0001 versus B6 mice. B6, C57BL/6J; G2A?/?, G2A-deficient. Fig. 6 Phase diagram of biliary lipids in G2A?/? and wild-type mice fed chow or a lithogenic diet for 7 days. The data from Table 4 are presented as a phase diagram. The mean cholesterol saturation index of gallbladder bile in the lithogenic diet–fed mice was above 1.0 but was greater in G2A?/? mice, and this was consistent with the increased susceptibility to gallstone formation. Abbreviation: G2A?/?, G2A-deficient. Fig. 7 Changes in expression of genes regulating bile acid metabolism in G2A?/? mice fed chow. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis was performed on RNA from livers of female B6 and G2A?/? mice. n = 10 mice per group (performed in triplicate for mRNA expression). (A) Expression patterns of nuclear receptor mRNA show no change in expression of SHP, decreased expression of FXR, and increased expression of LXR in G2A?/? mice compared to B6 mice. (B) Expression patterns of CYP7A1 show increased expression in G2A?/? mice compared to B6 mice. * P < 0.01, ** P < 0.001 versus B6 mice. (C) Hepatic proteins were isolated from G2A?/? and B6 mice and analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis for FXR, LXR, and CYP7A1 protein expression. Representative gels of four pooled samples per group are shown. Erk1/2 was run as a control for gel loading. B6, C57BL/6J; CYP7A1, cholesterol 7 ? -hydroxylase; Erk1/2, extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2; FXR, farnesoid X receptor; G2A?/?, G2A-deficient; LXR, liver X receptor; mRNA, messenger RNA; SHP, small heterodimer partner. Fig. 8 Changes in gene expression of nuclear receptors and enzymes involved in bile acid metabolism in G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet. RNA and protein were isolated from livers of female B6 and G2A?/? mice fed a 1-week lithogenic diet. (A) Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis was performed on liver RNA. n = 8 mice (performed in triplicate for mRNA analysis). Expression patterns of nuclear receptor mRNA show increased expression of FXR, SHP, and LXR in G2A?/? mice compared to B6 mice. ** P < 0.001 versus B6 mice. (B) Expression patterns of CYP7A1 mRNA show reduced expression in G2A?/? mice compared to B6 mice. * P < 0.0001. (C) Hepatic proteins were isolated from G2A?/? and B6 mice and analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis for FXR, LXR, and CYP7A1 protein expression (n = 1 mouse per group). Erk1/2 was run as a control for gel loading. Representative gels are shown. B6, C57BL/6J; CYP7A1, cholesterol 7 ? -hydroxylase; Erk1/2, extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2; FXR, farnesoid X receptor; G2A?/?, G2A-deficient; LXR, liver X receptor; mRNA, messenger RNA; SHP, small heterodimer partner. Fig. 9 Changes in gene expression of ABC transporters in G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet. RNA was isolated from livers of female B6 and G2A?/? mice fed a 1-week lithogenic diet and analyzed with quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. n = 10 mice per group. ABCB11 expression was significantly increased in G2A?/? mice fed a lithogenic diet. * P < 0.002 versus B6 mice. ABC, adenosine triphosphate– binding cassette; B6, C57BL/6J; G2A?/?, G2A-deficient. Table 1 Cholesterol Crystal and Gallstone Formation in C57BL/6J and G2A?/? Mice Gallbladder Size (mL) Crystals Gallstones Chow ?C57BL/6J 13.7 ± 2.5 0/3 0/3 ?G2A?/? 14.0 ± 2.0 0/3 0/3 Lithogenio, 4 days, ?C57BL/6J 32.8 ± 8.2 * 0/4 0/4 ?G2A?/? 38.3 ± 7.6 * 3/3 0/3 Lithogenic, 7 days ?C57BL/6J 27.0 ± 15.1 0/5 0/5 ?G2A?/? 21.3 ± 4.2 * 4/4 4/4 The data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation; n = 3–5. Abbreviation: G2A?/?, G2A-deficient. * P < 0.05 versus chow-fed diet. Table 2 Biliary Compositions and CSIs of C57BL/6J and G2A?/? Mice Bile Salt (mol %) Cholesterol (mol %) Phospholipid (mol %) TLC (g/dL) Max Ch Sol CSI Chow ?C57BL/6J 90.8 1.94 7.22 15.30 4.09 0.48 ?G2A?/? 91.8 2.04 6.14 13.75 4.00 0.51 Lithogenic, 7 days ?C57BL/6J 89.4 4.90 5.72 18.08 4.22 1.16 ?G2A?/? 82.6 7.38 10.05 8.29 4.18 1.77 Abbreviations: CSI, cholesterol saturation index; G2A?/?, G2A-deficient; Max Ch Sol, maximum cholesterol solubility; TLC, total lipid content. Table 3 Biliary Bile Salt Compositions and Hydrophobicity Indices of C57BL/6J and G2A?/? Mice % TMC % TUDC % TC % TCDC % TDC HI Total Bile Salt (mM) Chow ?C57BL/6J 38.1 ± 3.5 § 1.0 ± 0.2 * , § 57.9 ± 4.2 § 1.6 ± 0.8 † 1.4 ± 0.7 § ?0.29 ± 0.03 § 258 ± 8 ?G2A?/? 41.9 ± 6.0 § 1.3 ± 0.3 § 53.8 ± 6.0 § 1.0 ± 0.5 § 1.9 ± 0.8 § ?0.32 ± 0.05 § 235 ± 50 § Lithogenic ?C57BL/6J 7.6 ± 1.7 † 0.1 ± 0.2 74.0 ± 8.2 * 0.3 ± 0.3 18.1 ± 9.5 0.05 ± 0.07 304 ± 54 † ?G2A?/? 3.2 ± 1.1 0.0 ± 0.0 85.4 ± 6.0 0.1 ± 0.1 11.4 ± 5.6 0.04 ± 0.03 127 ± 69 The data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation; n = 5–9. * Effect of strain ( P < 0.05); † Effect of strain ( P < 0.01); ‡ Effect of diet ( P < 0.05); § Effect of diet ( P < 0.01); Abbreviations: G2A?/?, G2A-deficient; HI, hydrophobicity index; TC, taurocholate; TCDC, taurochenodeoxycholate; TDC, taurodeoxycholate; TMC, tauromuricholic acid; TUDC, tauroursodeoxycholate. Table 4 Liver X Receptor Target Gene Expression in the Liver Target Gene Relative Expression Chow Diet 1-Week Lithogenic Diet B6 G2A?/? B6 G2A?/? ABCA1 1.0 ± .08 0.5 ± .07 † 1.0 ± .09 0.9 ± .05 ABCG1 1.1 ± .1 0.3 ± .1 * 0.8 ± .1 0.8 ± .1 SREBP-1a 1.0 ± .08 0.5 ± .06 * 1.0 ± .1 1.4 ± .1 * SREBP-1c 1.1 ± .2 0.7 ± .08 * 1.2 ± .3 1.3 ± .2 SREBP-2 1.0 ± .07 0.5 ± .08 0.9 ± .1 2.1 ± .3 † ApoE 1.1 ± .1 0.8 ± .05 1.0 ± .1 0.7 ± .2 HMG-CoA Synthase 1.1 ± .1 0.7 ± .07 1.1 ± .1 1.9 ± .2 * HMG-CoA Reductase 1.0 ± .08 0.9 ± .08 1.1 ± .2 1.5 ± .2 FAS 1.1 ± .7 0.7 ± .1 1.1 ± .2 1.8 ± .3 * The data are expressed as mean ± standard error of the mean; n = 8 mice per group (performed in triplicate). The expression was calculated as described in the Materials and Methods section. Abbreviations: ABC, adenosine triphosphate-binding cassette; ApoE, apolipoprotein E; G2A?/?, G2A-deficient; HMG-CoA, 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-coenzyme A; SREBP, sterol regulatory element binding protein. * P ? 0.01. † P < 0.0001. Table 5 Plasma Analysis for C57BL/6J and G2A?/? Mice Strain ALP Activity (Units/mL) ALT Activity (IU/L) Bile Acids ( ? mol/L) Chow C57BL/6J 80.3 ± 4.2 12.0 ± 1.5 5.1 ± 1.1 G2A?/? 82.9 ± 3.4 16.8 ± 2.7 7.5 ± 1.4 Lithogenic, 7 days C57BL/6J 74.1 ± 3.8 27.6 ± 3.4 27.9 ± 10.6 G2A?/? 91.5 ± 7.6 36.0 ± 6.3 79.4 ± 16.1 * Abbreviations: ALP, alkaline phosphatase; ALT; alanine aminotransferase; G2A?/?, G2A-deficient. * P < 0.001. 