Viral Respiratory Infection and the Link to Asthma Viral respiratory infections are closely associated with wheezing illnesses and exacerbations of asthma throughout childhood, and yet there are a number of remaining questions pertaining to the specific nature of this relationship. Infection with an expanding list of respiratory viruses is an important cause of acute wheezing in infancy, and viruses are detected in most exacerbations of asthma throughout childhood. Furthermore, infants who develop severe viral respiratory infections are more likely to have asthma later in childhood. There has been progress in understanding the pathogenesis of viral respiratory illnesses, and this has led to new insights into how these processes might differ in asthma. Several host factors, including respiratory allergy and virus-induced interferon responses, modify the risk of virus-induced wheezing. In the absence of effective antiviral therapies, treatment of virus-induced wheezing and exacerbations of asthma can be challenging, and studies evaluating current treatment strategies are reviewed. Understanding the host-pathogen interactions that determine the severity of respiratory illnesses and long-term sequelae is likely to be of great help in identifying at-risk individuals, and in designing new and more effective treatments.  CONCLUSIONS Viral infections are important causes of wheezing illnesses in children of all ages, and progress is being made toward understanding the mechanisms by which viruses can cause acute wheezing, and perhaps even more importantly, how severe viral infections adversely affect long-term lung development and physiology. Once these mechanisms are established, it may be possible to identify with greater certainly children who are at the greatest risk for wheezing with viral infections, or those children whose virus-induced wheezing is a preface to asthma. This would represent an important step forward in that preventive therapy could be focused to the groups with the greatest need. Of course, the other rationale for identifying pathogenic mechanisms of virus-induced wheeze is to identify targets for novel therapeutic strategies. Standard therapy for asthma is not satisfactory in that efficacy is low during respiratory infections, and in the case of systemic corticosteroids, side effects can be significant. The evidence that asthma may be associated with a defective immune response to viruses (as well as allergens) also could lead to novel therapeutic strategies. Infancy seems to be a time during which the immune response is rapidly developing, and this process appears to be responsive to environmental stimuli. Future goals include the development of new treatments to enhance or supplement antiviral responses in infancy to treat acute wheezing episodes, and perhaps reduce the risk of subsequent asthma. 