GENETIC ASSOCIATION ANALYSIS OF COPY NUMBER VARIATION (CNVs) IN HUMAN DISEASE PATHOGENESIS Structural genetic variation, including copy number variation (CNV), constitutes a substantial fraction of total genetic variability and the importance of structural genetic variants in modulating human disease is increasingly being recognized. Early successes in identifying disease-associated CNVs via a candidate gene approach mandate that future disease association studies need to include structural genetic variation. Such analyses should not rely on previously developed methodologies that were designed to evaluate single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Instead, development of novel technical, statistical, and epidemiologic methods will be necessary to optimally capture this newly-appreciated form of genetic variation in a meaningful manner.  Statistical challenges in analysis of CNV associations with human disease Genetic epidemiology of CNVs is still in its infancy - so too are the statistical methods for the analysis of CNV association with disease. As discussed above, genotyping platforms vary in their signal-to-noise ratio and also in their ability to define precise CNV genotypes (i.e. discrete copy-number). Current CNV typing technologies produce quantitative measures meant to reflect total DNA amount in a given sample. In contrast to SNP genotyping, oftentimes the distribution of these measurements is continuous, making it difficult to accurately estimate DNA copy number. Currently only a small fraction of the known CNVs are genotypable. Two main statistical methodologies can be employed for CNV analyses, and they differ in their need for precise CNV quantification. The first involves a two-step procedure, based on first inferring the underlying genotype and then performing a regular test of association [ 40 , 41 ]. Because it depends on “genotypable” markers, this class of statistical methodologies is currently only applicable to a limited number of CNVs. Also, it is not immediately clear how the uncertainty of CNV genotype calling should be incorporated in the analysis; when raw measurements show a continuous distribution, forcibly classifying them into discrete copy number classes ( e.g. gain, no change, or loss) may result in the loss of substantial information and statistical power relative to the raw measurements [ 42 ] (see also Figure 1 ). The second methodology bypasses the genotype calling step and instead, directly analyzes the intensity measurements which are thought to reflect the true underlying copy number. This strategy has been advocated in several recent papers [ 30 , 42 ]. For case-control designs, classical statistical methods (e.g. parametric (t-tests), non-parametric (Mann-Whitney U test) etc.) can be employed. Also, some of the methods that are already available for SNP genotype data can potentially be adapted to the analysis of signal intensity data (e.g. population stratification methods such as Eigenstrat, [ 43 ]). For family-based study designs, a method extending family-based tests (FBATs) [ 44 , 45 ] to deal with copy number variation has recently been proposed [ 46 ]. Like the FBAT method for SNP data, CNV-FBAT is based on the covariance between offspring trait and offspring CNV data (adjusted for the parental CNV data), where the CNV data here are represented by the normalized signal intensity measurements. The robustness properties of the genotype FBAT-approach are maintained and previously developed FBAT extensions (including FBATs for time-to-onset, multivariate FBATs, and FBAT-testing strategies) can be directly transferred to the analysis of CNVs [ 44 ]. This methodology has the advantage of using as much data as possible, without affecting power in a significant way. However, while signal intensity-based CNV data provide valuable information and can be used directly to perform association tests, knowing the true underlying genotype is important for validating the association signal and providing further insight into the biological mechanisms by which a CNV influences the disease. Failure to correct for biases in data collection or processing prior to performing the association test may result in spurious associations with either of the statistical approaches. Therefore, it is mandatory that disease associations be verified using alternate technologies and/or independent datasets. This potential problem may be accentuated with the case-control design, which depends on selection of a suitable control sample. As discussed above, the control sample needs to come from a comparable population, with nearly identical DNA quality, preparation, and handling among samples in the case and control populations. Family-based designs can alleviate some of these problems, as the parents and other family members of the proband act as well-matched controls. However, care needs to be taken that samples from family members are collected and evaluated under similar conditions as the proband. A further advantage of family-based study designs is their potential for discriminating between de novo and inherited CNVs, once an association between a CNV and a phenotype has been established.  Epidemiologic challenges in the design of CNV-based association studies The novelty of studying CNV should not obscure the need for meticulous attention to epidemiologic study design. CNV association studies should employ the same rigorous standards that have been used in conventional SNP-based genetic epidemiology studies. These include assurance of adequate sample size to detect modest genetic effects, appropriate adjustment of significance thresholds to adjust for multiple comparison testing, provision of evidence for reproducible association in independent populations, and rigorous assessment and adjustment for population stratification. This latter point warrants elaboration. Like SNPs, most common CNVs are shared between populations and follow frequency distributions reminiscent of other forms of genetic variation [ 28 ]. However, like SNPs, some CNVs demonstrate notable between-population differences in allele frequency distribution (representing ~11% of the variance in between population differences) [ 28 ]. As a consequence, CNV-association studies, like SNP-association studies, are susceptible to bias from population stratification, whereby spurious genetic association could be observed between marker and trait simply due to differing ancestral composition (and hence genotype frequency distribution) between cases and controls [ 28 , 47 ]. There are several methods for addressing population stratification, including stringent sampling of cases and controls from homogenous ancestral groups, use of family-based designs, and via analytic methods (including sequential screening for and quantifying population stratification using random sets of markers with subsequent adjustment of association test statistics by the degree of observed stratification [ 48 ]).  Conclusions The study of structural genetic variation in human diseases is a new and rapidly evolving field. The main limitations of this field of study relate to the lack of technological and statistical tools dedicated to these efforts, and reliance on the “hammers” developed for the study of SNPs. Over the next few years, a much more thorough understanding of the extent and precise location of copy number variation will likely be available as new platforms become available to accurately capture CNV information. This will allow us to more comprehensively understand the role of these genetic variants in the pathogenesis of human diseases. However, in addition to the development of better CNV genotyping platforms, we stress that rigorous attention to study design and statistical analysis is critical so as not to relive past experiences of early disease association studies that yielded “unreplicable” and all too often false-positive results. Whenever possible, initial reports of CNV-disease association should include independent evidence of replication in other studies and populations. Generating such data will frequently require collaboration between research groups, and may include sharing of DNA samples given the current technical challenges of CNV genotyping and operator-dependence of quantitative genotyping assays like qPCR. Despite the many obstacles yet to be overcome, we foresee CNVs quickly taking their place alongside SNPs in genetic epidemiology studies. Once identified, these loci can then be evaluated experimentally using animal models that recapitulate the disease-associated molecular defect ( e.g., knock-out mice for CNV losses and over-expressing transgenic models for CNV gains) and the development of specific molecular therapeutics, ultimately leading to novel therapies for our most common diseases.  Figure and Table Figure 1 Raw copy number measurements vs. CNV calls for a CNV showing a continuous distribution Shown in this figure, on the left side, is the association between a normally distributed, simulated phenotype and the intensity measurements at a single SNP position within a known copy-number variable region on chromosome 21 using a dataset of approximately 1200 individuals (CAMP study [ 53 ]). On the right side, the association between the same phenotype and the CNV calls (loss/no change) is shown. Losses were detected using a local false discovery rate (locFDR) approach [ 54 ], applied to the intensity measurements. As can be observed, for CNVs showing a continuous intensity distribution, forcibly classifying the raw measurements into discrete calls may result in loss of power compared to the original measurements, as illustrated by the drop in the R^2 value (the square of the correlation coefficient). Table 1 Replicated associations of DNA copy number variants with common complex disease Locus CNV Frequency Clinical phenotype CNV type Risk estimate (Odds Ratio) Comments CCL3L1 [ 9 , 11 ] 10–20% HIV/AIDS susceptibility [ 9 ] Deletion 0.67–0.90 CCL3L1 inhibits HIV cellular entry [ 49 ] Higher CCL3L1 number increases CCL3L1 expression [ 49 ] Rheumatoid Arthritis [ 11 ] Gain: >2 1.34 FCGR3B [ 10 ] Deletion: ~25% Gain: ~15% Systemic Autoimmune disease Deletion 1.58–2.56 * CNV associated with glomerulonephritis in rats and humans [ 51 ] C4[ 12 ] ~40% Systemic Lupus Erythematosis Deletion Absence: 5.27 Carrier: 1.61 Gains: 0.57 > 75% of C4 or C1 deletion carriers have SLE-like disease [ 12 ] Strongest SLE genetic risk factor thus far in blacks [ 52 ] DEFB4 [ 33 , 34 ] 2–12 copies (median 4) Colonic Crohn Disease [ 33 ] Loss: <4 copies 3.06 ? number associated with ? mucosal gene expression. [ 33 ] Psoriasis [ 34 ] Gain: >5 copies 1.69 GSTM1 [ 13 – 16 ] Up to 50% Asthma, lung function, allergic response Deletion 1.59–1.89 Potent antioxidant. Deletion related to many adverse asthma-related outcomes (see text). * FCGR3B demonstrates phenotypic pleotropy: OR for lupus 2.21; for Wegener’s Granulomatosis 1.58–2.46; for microscopic polyangiitis 2.56. 