Chronic Granulomatous Disease as a Risk Factor for Autoimmune Disease Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is characterized by recurrent infections and granuloma formation. In addition, we have observed a number of diverse autoimmune conditions in our CGD population, suggesting that patients with CGD are at an elevated risk for development of autoimmune (AI) disorders. In this report, we describe antiphospholipid syndrome (aPL), recurrent pericardial effusion, juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), IgA nephropathy, cutaneous lupus erythematosus, and autoimmune pulmonary disease in the setting of CGD. The presence and type of autoimmune disease has important treatment implications for patients with CGD.  LABORATORY AND OTHER TESTING/PROCEDURES The diagnosis of CGD in each case was confirmed by dihydrorhodamine 123 (DHR) assay, Western blot, and in all but patient #4 (p47 deficiency), confirmed with genomic sequencing mutation analysis. Laboratory and other testing specific for each case has been described above.  DISCUSSION OF PATHOGENESIS There is an increasing awareness of autoimmune phenomena in primary immunodeficiencies (PID), particularly PID associated with lymphoid and humoral defects 19 . The most frequently described immune-related inflammatory disorders in CGD are inflammatory bowel disease and lupus erythematosus. CGD-associated colitis is clinically and histologically similar to Crohn’s disease, but appears distinct from the typical granulomatous lesions causing obstruction in the gastrointestinal and urogenital system 6 . Discoid lupus is most commonly reported in female carriers of X-linked CGD, although it has been described in CGD patients as well 9 , 20 . Isolated case reports of other immune-mediated phenomena in CGD patients include systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 4 , 21 , autoimmune thrombocytopenia 22 , idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura 23 , rheumatoid arthritis 3 , eosinophilic cystitis 24 , IgA nephropathy 14 , sarcoidosis 2 and celiac disease coexisting with pulmonary hemosiderosis 25 . Classically, the definition of an autoimmune disease requires the detection of an autoimmune response (autoantibody or cell-mediated), the identification of a corresponding autoantigen, and induction of such response and disease in experimental animals 26 . However, more recently, there has been a broadening list of parameters for diagnosis of an autoimmune disorder 27 , in particular, the inclusion of clinical response to immunosuppression as a diagnostic criterion. The most consistent feature of the cases presented here, with the exception of case #6, is the remarkable response to immunosuppressive therapy. Also striking, is the relative rarity of these conditions in the general population, particularly in childhood. In CGD patients followed by our clinic, thirteen have an AI disorder, comprising over 10% of our cohort. This does not include patients who have inflammatory bowel disease, which is not uncommon in CGD patients, occurring in some 30 percent of the patients followed at NIH 6 . Given that our program receives referrals of patients with more complex problems associated with their CGD, it is possible that our patient population may not be representative of the general clinical immunology community. It would be of great value to ascertain the prevalence of autoimmune manifestations in CGD from all available registry databases that track CGD patients. We believe that these autoimmune disorders are not simply part of the inflammatory ‘spectrum’ seen in CGD, as these unusual presentations are outside the range of what is commonly seen in this disease. Nor are they isolated phenomena coincidentally observed in CGD patients, but rather, the new hypothesis that we propose is that patients with CGD are at increased risk of developing any of a large spectrum of known and unknown types of specific autoimmune diseases. The type of autoimmune disease that develops likely has a specific genetic basis or susceptibility risk, and/or environmental triggers. Iatrogenic factors that could impact on development or exacerbation of autoimmunity include trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, itraconazole, or IFN-?. In this context, we propose that CGD patients who satisfy established diagnostic criteria for a specific autoimmune disease such as IgA nephropathy, sarcoidosis, lupus erythematosus, or juvenile idiopathic arthritis actually have these disorders and are not just a mirror phenotype that represents part of the spectrum of CGD inflammation. Furthermore, when viewed from this paradigm it provides a basis for viewing the recurrent thrombosis or antiphospholipid syndrome (patient #1), the recurrent pericardial effusion syndrome (patient #2), or the recurrent aphthous ulcers with fluctuating pulmonary infiltrates (patient #6) as autoimmune diseases which respond to immunosuppressive therapy.  DISCUSSION OF PATHOGENESIS There is an increasing awareness of autoimmune phenomena in primary immunodeficiencies (PID), particularly PID associated with lymphoid and humoral defects 19 . The most frequently described immune-related inflammatory disorders in CGD are inflammatory bowel disease and lupus erythematosus. CGD-associated colitis is clinically and histologically similar to Crohn’s disease, but appears distinct from the typical granulomatous lesions causing obstruction in the gastrointestinal and urogenital system 6 . Discoid lupus is most commonly reported in female carriers of X-linked CGD, although it has been described in CGD patients as well 9 , 20 . Isolated case reports of other immune-mediated phenomena in CGD patients include systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 4 , 21 , autoimmune thrombocytopenia 22 , idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura 23 , rheumatoid arthritis 3 , eosinophilic cystitis 24 , IgA nephropathy 14 , sarcoidosis 2 and celiac disease coexisting with pulmonary hemosiderosis 25 . Classically, the definition of an autoimmune disease requires the detection of an autoimmune response (autoantibody or cell-mediated), the identification of a corresponding autoantigen, and induction of such response and disease in experimental animals 26 . However, more recently, there has been a broadening list of parameters for diagnosis of an autoimmune disorder 27 , in particular, the inclusion of clinical response to immunosuppression as a diagnostic criterion. The most consistent feature of the cases presented here, with the exception of case #6, is the remarkable response to immunosuppressive therapy. Also striking, is the relative rarity of these conditions in the general population, particularly in childhood. In CGD patients followed by our clinic, thirteen have an AI disorder, comprising over 10% of our cohort. This does not include patients who have inflammatory bowel disease, which is not uncommon in CGD patients, occurring in some 30 percent of the patients followed at NIH 6 . Given that our program receives referrals of patients with more complex problems associated with their CGD, it is possible that our patient population may not be representative of the general clinical immunology community. It would be of great value to ascertain the prevalence of autoimmune manifestations in CGD from all available registry databases that track CGD patients. We believe that these autoimmune disorders are not simply part of the inflammatory ‘spectrum’ seen in CGD, as these unusual presentations are outside the range of what is commonly seen in this disease. Nor are they isolated phenomena coincidentally observed in CGD patients, but rather, the new hypothesis that we propose is that patients with CGD are at increased risk of developing any of a large spectrum of known and unknown types of specific autoimmune diseases. The type of autoimmune disease that develops likely has a specific genetic basis or susceptibility risk, and/or environmental triggers. Iatrogenic factors that could impact on development or exacerbation of autoimmunity include trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, itraconazole, or IFN-?. In this context, we propose that CGD patients who satisfy established diagnostic criteria for a specific autoimmune disease such as IgA nephropathy, sarcoidosis, lupus erythematosus, or juvenile idiopathic arthritis actually have these disorders and are not just a mirror phenotype that represents part of the spectrum of CGD inflammation. Furthermore, when viewed from this paradigm it provides a basis for viewing the recurrent thrombosis or antiphospholipid syndrome (patient #1), the recurrent pericardial effusion syndrome (patient #2), or the recurrent aphthous ulcers with fluctuating pulmonary infiltrates (patient #6) as autoimmune diseases which respond to immunosuppressive therapy.  FINAL DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT-MANAGEMENT PLAN Chronic granulomatous disease acquired its original nomenclature from the signature pathognomonic clinical feature of this disorder, the widespread multi-organ occurrence of characteristic multinucleated giant cell granulomas. When these are manifested in and around hollow organs such as in the gastrointestinal or genitourinary systems, it causes pyloric/small bowel obstruction and ureter/bladder outlet obstruction which are rapidly steroid responsive. Another generalized manifestation of this exuberant granuloma forming process includes impairment of wound healing that paradoxically is improved with steroids. Furthermore, studies in CGD knockout mice of both the gp91phox deficient X-linked or p47phox-deficient autosomal recessive varieties, have demonstrated that inhalation of sterilized non-viable Aspergillus spores can cause acute pulmonary decompensation from rapid granuloma formation that is not seen in normal mice 28 , 29 , and injection of a sterile stimulus of inflammation into the peritoneum of CGD mice elicits a robust cellular inflammation response that is an order of magnitude greater than seen with normal mice 1 . Recent studies have demonstrated that CGD patient neutrophils have delayed apoptosis associated with diminished production of anti-inflammatory mediators relative to normal neutrophils, providing another mechanism by which inflammation in CGD is prolonged with impaired resolution 30 . Heretofore, the prevailing paradigm has been that all manifestations of inflammation in CGD are just extremes in the spectrum of CGD granuloma formation, including uncommon presentations as well as those which fulfill specific diagnostic criteria for well characterized autoimmune disorders. Some types of inflammation, such as those characteristic of Crohn’s-like inflammatory bowel disease in its most mild and low-dose steroid responsive form, occur with such high frequency in CGD patients (more than 20–30% of patients) that under the prevailing paradigm this inflammatory bowel disease has been viewed as part of the CGD granuloma spectrum. However, a subset of CGD patients with inflammatory bowel disease have severe Crohn’s-like colonic disease associated with extensive bloody diarrhea, strictures and fistula formation. It is not clear whether these patients actually have Crohn’s disease triggered by CGD, or have a CGD-specific process. Recently, it has been shown that T lymphocytes exhibit a very small burst production of reactive oxygen products in response to mitogen stimulus, and that a portion of this burst is missing in mouse and human CGD T lymphocytes 31 . In the murine CGD model, CD4+ T lymphocytes have a strong bias toward a Th1 pattern of cytokine production when differentiated to an effector phenotype 31 , and when challenged with pulmonary aspergillosis, led to excessive inflammation and a dominant production of IL17 32 . This further raises the possibility that CGD is a risk factor in the development of Th1 types of autoimmune diseases. While some long term medications that CGD patients receive, in particular IFN?, may influence this risk, data from CGD mouse models not on medications has undeniably demonstrated that CGD is associated with excessive inflammation. Our current study lacks the statistical power to address the potential contribution of any particular medication on the development of autoimmunity in CGD. We hypothesize that all CGD patients are at significantly increased risk of developing autoimmune disease, but that the actual expression of a particular autoimmune disease is likely due to a combination of familial genotype and environmental exposure factors. The new paradigm we propose is that manifestations of autoimmune diseases in CGD which meet established diagnostic criteria for a particular autoimmune disease, be regarded as such and not solely regarded as being only part of a broad spectrum of granuloma formation associated with CGD. This has important therapeutic implications in that, in addition to corticosteroid therapy, appropriate steroid-sparing therapies for that autoimmune disease should also be initiated to treat the disease pathology. Without this paradigm shift there seem to be significant barriers to consideration of the use of potent steroids and steroid-sparing immunosuppressant therapy such as anti-TNF? agents, methotrexate, azathioprine or even cyclosporine A or tacrolimus in CGD because of the fear that the increased risk of infection in a CGD patient would outweigh the potential benefits. While there probably is an increased infection risk associated with use of potent non-steroidal anti-inflammation agents in CGD patients, those CGD patients with autoimmune disease that do not respond to prednisone or who require more than low dose alternate day prednisone for symptom control should be considered for treatment with non-steroidal agents with established and known efficacy in treatment of the specific autoimmune disorder, albeit with close clinical monitoring.  FINAL DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT-MANAGEMENT PLAN Chronic granulomatous disease acquired its original nomenclature from the signature pathognomonic clinical feature of this disorder, the widespread multi-organ occurrence of characteristic multinucleated giant cell granulomas. When these are manifested in and around hollow organs such as in the gastrointestinal or genitourinary systems, it causes pyloric/small bowel obstruction and ureter/bladder outlet obstruction which are rapidly steroid responsive. Another generalized manifestation of this exuberant granuloma forming process includes impairment of wound healing that paradoxically is improved with steroids. Furthermore, studies in CGD knockout mice of both the gp91phox deficient X-linked or p47phox-deficient autosomal recessive varieties, have demonstrated that inhalation of sterilized non-viable Aspergillus spores can cause acute pulmonary decompensation from rapid granuloma formation that is not seen in normal mice 28 , 29 , and injection of a sterile stimulus of inflammation into the peritoneum of CGD mice elicits a robust cellular inflammation response that is an order of magnitude greater than seen with normal mice 1 . Recent studies have demonstrated that CGD patient neutrophils have delayed apoptosis associated with diminished production of anti-inflammatory mediators relative to normal neutrophils, providing another mechanism by which inflammation in CGD is prolonged with impaired resolution 30 . Heretofore, the prevailing paradigm has been that all manifestations of inflammation in CGD are just extremes in the spectrum of CGD granuloma formation, including uncommon presentations as well as those which fulfill specific diagnostic criteria for well characterized autoimmune disorders. Some types of inflammation, such as those characteristic of Crohn’s-like inflammatory bowel disease in its most mild and low-dose steroid responsive form, occur with such high frequency in CGD patients (more than 20–30% of patients) that under the prevailing paradigm this inflammatory bowel disease has been viewed as part of the CGD granuloma spectrum. However, a subset of CGD patients with inflammatory bowel disease have severe Crohn’s-like colonic disease associated with extensive bloody diarrhea, strictures and fistula formation. It is not clear whether these patients actually have Crohn’s disease triggered by CGD, or have a CGD-specific process. Recently, it has been shown that T lymphocytes exhibit a very small burst production of reactive oxygen products in response to mitogen stimulus, and that a portion of this burst is missing in mouse and human CGD T lymphocytes 31 . In the murine CGD model, CD4+ T lymphocytes have a strong bias toward a Th1 pattern of cytokine production when differentiated to an effector phenotype 31 , and when challenged with pulmonary aspergillosis, led to excessive inflammation and a dominant production of IL17 32 . This further raises the possibility that CGD is a risk factor in the development of Th1 types of autoimmune diseases. While some long term medications that CGD patients receive, in particular IFN?, may influence this risk, data from CGD mouse models not on medications has undeniably demonstrated that CGD is associated with excessive inflammation. Our current study lacks the statistical power to address the potential contribution of any particular medication on the development of autoimmunity in CGD. We hypothesize that all CGD patients are at significantly increased risk of developing autoimmune disease, but that the actual expression of a particular autoimmune disease is likely due to a combination of familial genotype and environmental exposure factors. The new paradigm we propose is that manifestations of autoimmune diseases in CGD which meet established diagnostic criteria for a particular autoimmune disease, be regarded as such and not solely regarded as being only part of a broad spectrum of granuloma formation associated with CGD. This has important therapeutic implications in that, in addition to corticosteroid therapy, appropriate steroid-sparing therapies for that autoimmune disease should also be initiated to treat the disease pathology. Without this paradigm shift there seem to be significant barriers to consideration of the use of potent steroids and steroid-sparing immunosuppressant therapy such as anti-TNF? agents, methotrexate, azathioprine or even cyclosporine A or tacrolimus in CGD because of the fear that the increased risk of infection in a CGD patient would outweigh the potential benefits. While there probably is an increased infection risk associated with use of potent non-steroidal anti-inflammation agents in CGD patients, those CGD patients with autoimmune disease that do not respond to prednisone or who require more than low dose alternate day prednisone for symptom control should be considered for treatment with non-steroidal agents with established and known efficacy in treatment of the specific autoimmune disorder, albeit with close clinical monitoring.  SUMMARY Although infections and granuloma formation are undoubtedly the most common manifestations in CGD patients, there is a significant subset of CGD patients who experience a broad variety of autoimmune diseases, which respond well to immunosuppressive therapy. To explain the diversity of autoimmune disorders observed in CGD patients, we suspect that CGD might itself serve as a genetic cofactor, which lowers the threshold for overt phenotypic development of autoimmunity, and where the particular type of autoimmune disease manifested is dictated by the genetic and/or environmental background. This is a new paradigm that will require additional observational input with statistical assessment, but it has specific implications for clinical management. Maintaining a high index of suspicion for autoimmune disorders in patients with CGD will minimize unnecessary invasive procedures, and allow early institution of appropriate therapy to control inflammation and reduce risks of long-term complications. Furthermore, reporting of additional cases will allow for identification of common patterns of disease and will held direct appropriate studies and eventually lead to a better understanding of the pathogenesis of autoimmune disorders in patients with CGD.  CLNICAL PEARLS Autoimmune diseases should be considered early in the differential diagnosis of CGD patients, particularly in the absence of identifiable microbial pathogens Supportive laboratory parameters should be actively sought for, for example, serological markers of autoantibodies, RF, and serum angiotensin converting enzyme Despite the immune-compromised state of CGD patients, though it may appear paradoxical, prednisone and/or other immunosuppressive drugs are often beneficial or necessary in these autoimmune conditions and appropriate therapy should be not be withheld because of concern over risk of infection.  Figures Figure 1 A magnetic resonance angiogram of the brain revealing filling defects (white arrows) due to extensive intracerebral venous thrombosis. Figure 2 An enlarged cardiac silhouette on chest X-ray due to massive pericardial effusion confirmed on chest CT. Figure 3 Arcuate and annular plaques with central clearing on the chest of patient 5; malar erythema and focal plaque on the right cheek. Figure 4 Chest CTs illustrating the fluctuating, circumscribed, rim-enhancing pulmonary infiltrates seen in Patient 6 and others. 