Using Gene Transcription Patterns (Bar Coding Scans) to Guide Wound Debridement and Healing PURPOSE To acquaint wound care practitioners with new information related to debridement of chronic wounds. TARGET AUDIENCE This continuing education activity is intended for physicians and nurses with an interest in wound care. OBJECTIVES After reading this article and taking this test, the reader should be able to: Explain the role of keratinocytes in wound healing. Discuss new research findings on the physiological differences between healing and nonhealing wounds. Identify implications of the new research for debridement of chronic wounds.  IMPLICATIONS FOR CLINICAL PRACTICE These studies can assist clinicians as they readily identify the stalled rounded wound edge versus the healing edge of cells capable of advancing. Clearly, the nonmigrating thickened wound edge at location A needs to be debrided to facilitate wound bed preparation and wound healing ( Figure 6 ). The goal of surgical/sharp debridement is to remove the abnormal keratinocytes at location A while sparing the keratinocytes at location B, which are still capable of movement and stimulation, thus triggering the cells to commit to healing ( Figure 4 ). The question is: What area should be debrided? As debridement progresses and the nonhealing edge is removed, the part of the wound edge is reached that contains cells capable of migration and participating in wound healing. The clinician’s challenge is how to identify this region and determine the proper debridement margin? The ideal road map for debridement would be an easily seen visible line of demarcation between the migrating and nonmigrating cells. Research has shown that the color patterns of gene expression of the wound edges at locations A and B are very different from each other. This means that during the debridement procedure, one can identify the specific bar code of the location before and after debridement, thus determining if the extent of debridement was sufficient. In practical terms, the clinicians may have a tool (a road map) to guide the debridement. In removing a cancer, the surgeon resects until “negative margins” are achieved as defined by pathology. Similarly, wound surgeons of the future may debride using the wound bar code until a “margin of response” is reached 18 : the margin at which the cells left behind after debridement can respond to the body’s endogenous wound healing signals and migrate as programmed. This margin is clinically identified by soft tissue. Although debridement of surrounding soft tissue may cause the ulcer to appear larger, these cells are typically impaired. A clear margin or border of debridement would also maximize the efficacy of advanced topical wound healing treatments by minimizing the number of cells unable to respond to the therapy. In summary, by generating the gene expression profiles of the specific wound region by creating a simple color pattern, gene tree (analogous to how a blue dye is positive for pregnancy test), one can quickly identify from which region of the wound the biopsy originates and how well the wound was debrided.  IMPLICATIONS FOR CLINICAL PRACTICE These studies can assist clinicians as they readily identify the stalled rounded wound edge versus the healing edge of cells capable of advancing. Clearly, the nonmigrating thickened wound edge at location A needs to be debrided to facilitate wound bed preparation and wound healing ( Figure 6 ). The goal of surgical/sharp debridement is to remove the abnormal keratinocytes at location A while sparing the keratinocytes at location B, which are still capable of movement and stimulation, thus triggering the cells to commit to healing ( Figure 4 ). The question is: What area should be debrided? As debridement progresses and the nonhealing edge is removed, the part of the wound edge is reached that contains cells capable of migration and participating in wound healing. The clinician’s challenge is how to identify this region and determine the proper debridement margin? The ideal road map for debridement would be an easily seen visible line of demarcation between the migrating and nonmigrating cells. Research has shown that the color patterns of gene expression of the wound edges at locations A and B are very different from each other. This means that during the debridement procedure, one can identify the specific bar code of the location before and after debridement, thus determining if the extent of debridement was sufficient. In practical terms, the clinicians may have a tool (a road map) to guide the debridement. In removing a cancer, the surgeon resects until “negative margins” are achieved as defined by pathology. Similarly, wound surgeons of the future may debride using the wound bar code until a “margin of response” is reached 18 : the margin at which the cells left behind after debridement can respond to the body’s endogenous wound healing signals and migrate as programmed. This margin is clinically identified by soft tissue. Although debridement of surrounding soft tissue may cause the ulcer to appear larger, these cells are typically impaired. A clear margin or border of debridement would also maximize the efficacy of advanced topical wound healing treatments by minimizing the number of cells unable to respond to the therapy. In summary, by generating the gene expression profiles of the specific wound region by creating a simple color pattern, gene tree (analogous to how a blue dye is positive for pregnancy test), one can quickly identify from which region of the wound the biopsy originates and how well the wound was debrided.  CONCLUSIONS Even with current treatment protocols, this new knowledge can be used to maximize the effect of current technology. At present, generating a wound bar code is an expensive and time-consuming procedure. It takes a minimum of 3 days to “develop” the bar code picture. Development of this technology will shorten the time and decrease the cost of wound management. So, just as an airline boarding pass is quickly scanned, the chronic stalled wound edge can be scanned in the operating room, speeding its journey to healing.  Figures Figure 1 KERATINOCYTE TOPOGRAPHY IN A WOUND A typical diabetic ulcer is shown. Arrows indicate specific wound locations: Wound bed = location C; nonhealing edge = location A; healing edge = location B. Figure 2 HISTOLOGY OF WOUND EDGE Histopathology of nonhealing edge (left) reveals thick cornified layer (stratum corneum) and thick, hyperproliferative epidermis. Section of normal skin (right) is shown for comparison. Figure 3 MOLECULAR MARKERS OF CHRONIC WOUNDS C-myc is a pathogenic marker of chronic wounds. 10 Immunohistochemistry is showing positive staining with c-myc–specific antibody of the nuclei of the biopsy from a patient with chronic wound (top), whereas there is no c-myc staining in biopsy of normal skin (bottom). Figure 4 BIOLOGICALLY BASED MARGINS OF DEBRIDEMENT Digital photograph of a neuropathic plantar foot ulcer in a patient with diabetes. The solid black lines indicate nonhealing edge (location A, indicated by black arrows). Two outer circles (broken lines) indicate 2 possible margins of debridement, the presumed location B or healing-edge of the wound. At this edge, keratinocytes have the ability to migrate and participate in the wound healing process. Figure 5 WOUND BAR CODE Histology and gene expression profiles obtained from biopsies from a patient with venous ulcer are shown for 3 locations: nonhealing edge (location A), healing edge (location B), and normal skin. Specific gene expression pattern is detected from each of the locations, indicating that it can be used to determine the subpopulation of cells within the wound. Colors indicate the degree of regulation of specific genes. Figure 6 WOUND BAR CODE LOCATION Debridement aims at removal of cells from location A, thus exposing cells from location B exposed to wound healing stimuli. 