Internalized Heterosexism among HIV-Positive Gay-Identified Men: Implications for HIV Prevention and Care Internalized heterosexism (IH), or the internalization of societal anti-homosexual attitudes, has been consistently linked to depression and low self-esteem among gay men, and inconclusively associated with substance use and sexual risk in gay and bisexual men. Using structural equation modeling, a model framed in Social Action Theory was tested in which IH is associated with HIV transmission risk and poor adherence to HIV antiretroviral therapy (ART) through the mechanisms of negative affect and stimulant use. Data from a sample of 465 gay-identified men interviewed as part of an HIV risk reduction behavioral trial were used to test the fit of the model. Results supported the hypothesized model in which IH was associated with unprotected receptive (but not insertive) anal intercourse with HIV-negative or unknown HIV status partners, and with ART non-adherence indirectly via increased negative affect and more regular stimulant use. The model accounted for 15% of the variance in unprotected receptive anal intercourse (URAI) and 17% of the variance in ART non-adherence. Findings support the potential utility of addressing IH in HIV prevention and treatment with HIV-positive gay men.  Method Participants HIV-positive individuals in the San Francisco Bay Area were screened for recruitment into the Healthy Living Project, a behavioral prevention trial of a comprehensive cognitive-behavioral sexual risk reduction intervention ( HLP, 2007 ). Recruitment and screening of potential respondents were undertaken in community agencies and medical clinics serving HIV-positive persons. Respondents were at least 18 years of age, and provided written informed consent and medical documentation of HIV infection. Participants were excluded if they did not complete the interview for any reason. Such reasons included fatigue, voluntary withdrawal, and evidence of substantial confusion or disorientation, consistent with psychosis or severe neuropsychological impairment, as determined subjectively by senior project staff. For the current analysis, only respondents were included who reported homosexual/gay orientation in response to the following assessment item: “Do you now identify as: heterosexual/straight, homosexual/gay, bisexual, not sure, or other (choose one).” The sample consisted of 465 men with documented HIV infection who identified as exclusively gay/homosexual. The majority of participants were Caucasian (62%), but a substantial minority were African American (17%) or Hispanic/Latino (10%). The mean age was 41.5 ( SD = 8.3) years, and participants had been diagnosed with HIV for an average of 9.2 ( SD = 5.0) years. The sample was largely well-educated with 76% having completed at least some college. Approximately 71% (n = 328) of participants were currently prescribed ART. Table 1 provides demographic and other relevant descriptive information for this sample. Overview of Assessment Procedures The data reported in this paper are from the baseline interview that served as screening determination for Healthy Living Project of biological males who reported an exclusively homosexual orientation. All procedures were approved by the University of California, San Francisco Committee on Human Research. Interviews were conducted in private offices over a period of 2–4 hours with regular breaks to minimize respondent fatigue. All data used in these analyses were collected prior to exposure to intervention procedures. Procedures involved Audio Computer Assisted Self-Interviewing (ACASI) and Computer Assisted Personal Interviewing (CAPI) using the Questionnaire Development System by Nova Research Company. ACASI allows respondents to listen to items via headphones while reading items on a computer monitor and to enter responses directly into the computer. This approach has been proposed as an effective method of decreasing social desirability and thereby enhancing veracity of self-report ( Gribble, Miller, Rogers, & Turner, 1999 ; Turner et al., 1998 ). With CAPI, an interviewer reads items from a computer and enters responses directly into the computer. Respondents were compensated US$50 for completing the interview. Interviewer Training and Quality Assurance Interviewers were trained with the use of a detailed assessment manual, practice with the computer programs, participation in an intensive 3-day training program, and review and certification of audiotaped interviews with standardized criteria. Interviews were audiotaped and a systematic sample was reviewed for protocol adherence with feedback and correction provided to interviewers on a regular basis. Measures Demographics/background Detailed background and demographic questions assessed respondent age, race/ethnicity, sexual orientation, education, employment status, and self-reported T-helper (CD4+) count and viral load. Internalized heterosexism (IH) IH was assessed via four items modified from prior studies of IH ( Nungesser, 1983 ; Shidlo, 1994 ): “I am glad to be gay” (reverse scored); “I wish I were heterosexual”; “Whenever I think a lot about being gay, I feel critical about myself”; and “Homosexuality is not as satisfying as heterosexuality.” Reponses were selected among 6 Likert-type scale choices ranging from “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree” with higher scores indicating higher internalized heterosexism (current sample alpha = .77). Substance use Participants rated the frequency of alcohol and substance use during the past three months using the following responses: never, less than once a month, once a month, 2–3 times a month, once a week, 2–3 times per week, 4–6 times per week, once a day, more than once a day. For the current analysis, the focus is on stimulant use given the prevalence among gay men ( Shoptaw, 2006 ) and the evidence of the role of stimulants in HIV risk behaviors ( Schwarcz et al., 2007 ). Participants who reported using cocaine, crack, or methamphetamine 2–3 times per week or more were categorized as regular users (1) versus those who used once a week or less (0). Negative Affect Negative affect describes a broad dimension of affect that is composed of several correlated, yet distinct, negative emotional states (e.g., anger, anxiety, sadness, disgust, contempt, etc.). In the present investigation, an indication of the presence of negative affect was measured using four separate instruments that tapped into discrete, negative emotional states which are consistent with the construct of negative affect. Cohen’s Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) was administered as an indicator of negative affect ( Cohen, Kamarck, & Mermelstein, 1983 ). The 10 item version, consisting of a series of statements, assesses the degree to which a person describes situations as stressful. A total score was used by summing ratings on a 5-point scale (current sample alpha = .83). The State form of the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) ( Spielberger, Gorsuch, Lushene, Vagg, & Jacobs, 1983 ) is a self-report measure of state and trait anxiety by perceived feelings of tension and apprehension. The STAI includes 20 items rated on 4-point scales. The summary measure is calculated as the sum of the ten positive items minus the sum of the ten negative items plus a value of 50 (current sample alpha = .84 for positive items and alpha = .91 for negative items). The 21-item Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) assesses the severity of somatic, affective, cognitive, and behavioral symptoms of depression during the past week ( Beck & Steer, 1984 ). The BDI is reliable and has demonstrated good concurrent validity with the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression. To control for confounds between HIV-related symptoms and somatic symptoms of depression, the 13-item BDI-Affective subscale (current sample alpha = .87) was used for the present investigation ( Kalichman, Rompa, & Cage, 2000 ). Anger/burnout was assessed by a scale developed in studies of HIV coping ( Chesney, Folkman, & Chambers, 1996 ). This 16 item scale (current sample alpha = .94) is based on the anger and fatigue scales of the Profile of Mood States ( McNair, Lorr, & Droppleman, 1981 ). Respondents are asked to indicate on a five point scale (from not at all to extremely) how much they had been feeling drained, enraged, irritated etc. in the past 30 days. In prior research, HIV+ participants who attended coping intervention programs showed longer decreases in burnout than did control group participants. Antiretroviral medication adherence Self-reported ART adherence was assessed over a three-day period using an adherence survey developed for use in AIDS Clinical Trials ( Chesney et al., 2000 ). Respondents indicated how many pills they had missed during each of the previous three days. This measure has been used widely with diverse samples. For the present study, percent adherence was calculated based on number of pills actually taken divided by number of pills prescribed. Respondents were classified as having achieved less than 90% adherence (1) versus 90% or higher adherence (0), consistent with current literature on minimum levels of adherence to achieve HIV viral suppression and clinical benefit ( Garcia de Olalla et al., 2002 ; Paterson et al., 2000 ). HIV transmission risk Participants were asked via ACASI about specific sexual acts and whether condoms were used with each sexual partner over the prior three months. Of particular interest in the current analyses was the occurrence of transmission risk acts: unprotected insertive anal intercourse (UIAI) or receptive anal intercourse (URAI) acts with HIV-negative or status unknown partners in which neither party used a condom. UIAI and URAI were examined separately because prior investigations have highlighted the potential benefit in understanding specific sex risk acts ( Schwarcz et al., 2007 ). Details of the calculation of transmission risk acts are provided elsewhere ( HLP, 2007 ). Participants reporting any UIAI with at risk partners (1) were compared to those who reported none (0). Similarly, individuals reporting any URAI with at risk partners (1) were compared to those who reported none (0). Statistical Analyses We began with an exploratory factor analysis (EFA) to determine the structure of the 4 items measuring internalized heterosexism. Because an examination of the distributions for these items indicated that they were positively skewed, we conducted the EFA using MPlus ( Muthen & Muthen, 2004b ). By using MPlus we were able to treat items as ordered categorical indicators using the weighted least squares-mean and variance-adjusted estimator. We interpreted the results of this EFA by examining the number of eignvalues that were greater than one, the degree to which items loaded strongly (.60 or higher) on a single factor with promax rotation, and whether the root mean residual (RMR) was less than .05 ( McDonald, 1985 ). Finally, we conducted a multiple linear regression analysis to examine race/ethnicity, age, education, and relationship status as correlates of the composite score(s) of IH. We used structural equation modeling to investigate if poorer affect regulation and increased stimulant use mediated the effect of IH on HIV transmission risk and ART non-adherence. A major strength of structural equation modeling is that it allows one to use latent variables with multiple categorical and/or continuous indicators for constructs to partial out measurement error. Specifying mediating variables as a latent variables also removes any bias in the analysis that arises from lack of perfect reliability of observed mediators, being that measurement error in the mediating variable can weaken statistical power of the tests of the indirect effects ( Hoyle & Kenny, 1999 ). Also, structural equation modeling enables one to examine the associations among multiple independent and dependent variables in the model simultaneously as well as obtain indices of global model fit. For the present investigation, we utilized multiple indices of model fit: comparative fit index (CFI) values greater than .95, root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) values less than .06, and weighted root-mean-square residual (WRMR) values less than .90 ( Hu & Bentler, 1998 ). Although a non-significant chi-square (?2) is also generally indicative of better model fit, this statistic may not be as reliable given the large sample size for the present investigation. Thus, we examined if the ratio of the ?2 to degrees of freedom (?2/df) was less than three ( Kline, 1998 ). Because the present investigation utilized a categorical mediating variable (i.e., stimulant use) and examined categorical outcomes (HIV transmission risk and ART non-adherence), we used the weighted least squares-mean and variance-adjusted estimator with the theta parameterization ( Muthen & Muthen, 2004a ).  Participants HIV-positive individuals in the San Francisco Bay Area were screened for recruitment into the Healthy Living Project, a behavioral prevention trial of a comprehensive cognitive-behavioral sexual risk reduction intervention ( HLP, 2007 ). Recruitment and screening of potential respondents were undertaken in community agencies and medical clinics serving HIV-positive persons. Respondents were at least 18 years of age, and provided written informed consent and medical documentation of HIV infection. Participants were excluded if they did not complete the interview for any reason. Such reasons included fatigue, voluntary withdrawal, and evidence of substantial confusion or disorientation, consistent with psychosis or severe neuropsychological impairment, as determined subjectively by senior project staff. For the current analysis, only respondents were included who reported homosexual/gay orientation in response to the following assessment item: “Do you now identify as: heterosexual/straight, homosexual/gay, bisexual, not sure, or other (choose one).” The sample consisted of 465 men with documented HIV infection who identified as exclusively gay/homosexual. The majority of participants were Caucasian (62%), but a substantial minority were African American (17%) or Hispanic/Latino (10%). The mean age was 41.5 ( SD = 8.3) years, and participants had been diagnosed with HIV for an average of 9.2 ( SD = 5.0) years. The sample was largely well-educated with 76% having completed at least some college. Approximately 71% (n = 328) of participants were currently prescribed ART. Table 1 provides demographic and other relevant descriptive information for this sample.  Overview of Assessment Procedures The data reported in this paper are from the baseline interview that served as screening determination for Healthy Living Project of biological males who reported an exclusively homosexual orientation. All procedures were approved by the University of California, San Francisco Committee on Human Research. Interviews were conducted in private offices over a period of 2–4 hours with regular breaks to minimize respondent fatigue. All data used in these analyses were collected prior to exposure to intervention procedures. Procedures involved Audio Computer Assisted Self-Interviewing (ACASI) and Computer Assisted Personal Interviewing (CAPI) using the Questionnaire Development System by Nova Research Company. ACASI allows respondents to listen to items via headphones while reading items on a computer monitor and to enter responses directly into the computer. This approach has been proposed as an effective method of decreasing social desirability and thereby enhancing veracity of self-report ( Gribble, Miller, Rogers, & Turner, 1999 ; Turner et al., 1998 ). With CAPI, an interviewer reads items from a computer and enters responses directly into the computer. Respondents were compensated US$50 for completing the interview.  Interviewer Training and Quality Assurance Interviewers were trained with the use of a detailed assessment manual, practice with the computer programs, participation in an intensive 3-day training program, and review and certification of audiotaped interviews with standardized criteria. Interviews were audiotaped and a systematic sample was reviewed for protocol adherence with feedback and correction provided to interviewers on a regular basis.  Measures Demographics/background Detailed background and demographic questions assessed respondent age, race/ethnicity, sexual orientation, education, employment status, and self-reported T-helper (CD4+) count and viral load. Internalized heterosexism (IH) IH was assessed via four items modified from prior studies of IH ( Nungesser, 1983 ; Shidlo, 1994 ): “I am glad to be gay” (reverse scored); “I wish I were heterosexual”; “Whenever I think a lot about being gay, I feel critical about myself”; and “Homosexuality is not as satisfying as heterosexuality.” Reponses were selected among 6 Likert-type scale choices ranging from “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree” with higher scores indicating higher internalized heterosexism (current sample alpha = .77). Substance use Participants rated the frequency of alcohol and substance use during the past three months using the following responses: never, less than once a month, once a month, 2–3 times a month, once a week, 2–3 times per week, 4–6 times per week, once a day, more than once a day. For the current analysis, the focus is on stimulant use given the prevalence among gay men ( Shoptaw, 2006 ) and the evidence of the role of stimulants in HIV risk behaviors ( Schwarcz et al., 2007 ). Participants who reported using cocaine, crack, or methamphetamine 2–3 times per week or more were categorized as regular users (1) versus those who used once a week or less (0). Negative Affect Negative affect describes a broad dimension of affect that is composed of several correlated, yet distinct, negative emotional states (e.g., anger, anxiety, sadness, disgust, contempt, etc.). In the present investigation, an indication of the presence of negative affect was measured using four separate instruments that tapped into discrete, negative emotional states which are consistent with the construct of negative affect. Cohen’s Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) was administered as an indicator of negative affect ( Cohen, Kamarck, & Mermelstein, 1983 ). The 10 item version, consisting of a series of statements, assesses the degree to which a person describes situations as stressful. A total score was used by summing ratings on a 5-point scale (current sample alpha = .83). The State form of the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) ( Spielberger, Gorsuch, Lushene, Vagg, & Jacobs, 1983 ) is a self-report measure of state and trait anxiety by perceived feelings of tension and apprehension. The STAI includes 20 items rated on 4-point scales. The summary measure is calculated as the sum of the ten positive items minus the sum of the ten negative items plus a value of 50 (current sample alpha = .84 for positive items and alpha = .91 for negative items). The 21-item Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) assesses the severity of somatic, affective, cognitive, and behavioral symptoms of depression during the past week ( Beck & Steer, 1984 ). The BDI is reliable and has demonstrated good concurrent validity with the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression. To control for confounds between HIV-related symptoms and somatic symptoms of depression, the 13-item BDI-Affective subscale (current sample alpha = .87) was used for the present investigation ( Kalichman, Rompa, & Cage, 2000 ). Anger/burnout was assessed by a scale developed in studies of HIV coping ( Chesney, Folkman, & Chambers, 1996 ). This 16 item scale (current sample alpha = .94) is based on the anger and fatigue scales of the Profile of Mood States ( McNair, Lorr, & Droppleman, 1981 ). Respondents are asked to indicate on a five point scale (from not at all to extremely) how much they had been feeling drained, enraged, irritated etc. in the past 30 days. In prior research, HIV+ participants who attended coping intervention programs showed longer decreases in burnout than did control group participants. Antiretroviral medication adherence Self-reported ART adherence was assessed over a three-day period using an adherence survey developed for use in AIDS Clinical Trials ( Chesney et al., 2000 ). Respondents indicated how many pills they had missed during each of the previous three days. This measure has been used widely with diverse samples. For the present study, percent adherence was calculated based on number of pills actually taken divided by number of pills prescribed. Respondents were classified as having achieved less than 90% adherence (1) versus 90% or higher adherence (0), consistent with current literature on minimum levels of adherence to achieve HIV viral suppression and clinical benefit ( Garcia de Olalla et al., 2002 ; Paterson et al., 2000 ). HIV transmission risk Participants were asked via ACASI about specific sexual acts and whether condoms were used with each sexual partner over the prior three months. Of particular interest in the current analyses was the occurrence of transmission risk acts: unprotected insertive anal intercourse (UIAI) or receptive anal intercourse (URAI) acts with HIV-negative or status unknown partners in which neither party used a condom. UIAI and URAI were examined separately because prior investigations have highlighted the potential benefit in understanding specific sex risk acts ( Schwarcz et al., 2007 ). Details of the calculation of transmission risk acts are provided elsewhere ( HLP, 2007 ). Participants reporting any UIAI with at risk partners (1) were compared to those who reported none (0). Similarly, individuals reporting any URAI with at risk partners (1) were compared to those who reported none (0).  Demographics/background Detailed background and demographic questions assessed respondent age, race/ethnicity, sexual orientation, education, employment status, and self-reported T-helper (CD4+) count and viral load.  Internalized heterosexism (IH) IH was assessed via four items modified from prior studies of IH ( Nungesser, 1983 ; Shidlo, 1994 ): “I am glad to be gay” (reverse scored); “I wish I were heterosexual”; “Whenever I think a lot about being gay, I feel critical about myself”; and “Homosexuality is not as satisfying as heterosexuality.” Reponses were selected among 6 Likert-type scale choices ranging from “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree” with higher scores indicating higher internalized heterosexism (current sample alpha = .77).  Substance use Participants rated the frequency of alcohol and substance use during the past three months using the following responses: never, less than once a month, once a month, 2–3 times a month, once a week, 2–3 times per week, 4–6 times per week, once a day, more than once a day. For the current analysis, the focus is on stimulant use given the prevalence among gay men ( Shoptaw, 2006 ) and the evidence of the role of stimulants in HIV risk behaviors ( Schwarcz et al., 2007 ). Participants who reported using cocaine, crack, or methamphetamine 2–3 times per week or more were categorized as regular users (1) versus those who used once a week or less (0).  Negative Affect Negative affect describes a broad dimension of affect that is composed of several correlated, yet distinct, negative emotional states (e.g., anger, anxiety, sadness, disgust, contempt, etc.). In the present investigation, an indication of the presence of negative affect was measured using four separate instruments that tapped into discrete, negative emotional states which are consistent with the construct of negative affect. Cohen’s Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) was administered as an indicator of negative affect ( Cohen, Kamarck, & Mermelstein, 1983 ). The 10 item version, consisting of a series of statements, assesses the degree to which a person describes situations as stressful. A total score was used by summing ratings on a 5-point scale (current sample alpha = .83). The State form of the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) ( Spielberger, Gorsuch, Lushene, Vagg, & Jacobs, 1983 ) is a self-report measure of state and trait anxiety by perceived feelings of tension and apprehension. The STAI includes 20 items rated on 4-point scales. The summary measure is calculated as the sum of the ten positive items minus the sum of the ten negative items plus a value of 50 (current sample alpha = .84 for positive items and alpha = .91 for negative items). The 21-item Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) assesses the severity of somatic, affective, cognitive, and behavioral symptoms of depression during the past week ( Beck & Steer, 1984 ). The BDI is reliable and has demonstrated good concurrent validity with the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression. To control for confounds between HIV-related symptoms and somatic symptoms of depression, the 13-item BDI-Affective subscale (current sample alpha = .87) was used for the present investigation ( Kalichman, Rompa, & Cage, 2000 ). Anger/burnout was assessed by a scale developed in studies of HIV coping ( Chesney, Folkman, & Chambers, 1996 ). This 16 item scale (current sample alpha = .94) is based on the anger and fatigue scales of the Profile of Mood States ( McNair, Lorr, & Droppleman, 1981 ). Respondents are asked to indicate on a five point scale (from not at all to extremely) how much they had been feeling drained, enraged, irritated etc. in the past 30 days. In prior research, HIV+ participants who attended coping intervention programs showed longer decreases in burnout than did control group participants.  Antiretroviral medication adherence Self-reported ART adherence was assessed over a three-day period using an adherence survey developed for use in AIDS Clinical Trials ( Chesney et al., 2000 ). Respondents indicated how many pills they had missed during each of the previous three days. This measure has been used widely with diverse samples. For the present study, percent adherence was calculated based on number of pills actually taken divided by number of pills prescribed. Respondents were classified as having achieved less than 90% adherence (1) versus 90% or higher adherence (0), consistent with current literature on minimum levels of adherence to achieve HIV viral suppression and clinical benefit ( Garcia de Olalla et al., 2002 ; Paterson et al., 2000 ).  HIV transmission risk Participants were asked via ACASI about specific sexual acts and whether condoms were used with each sexual partner over the prior three months. Of particular interest in the current analyses was the occurrence of transmission risk acts: unprotected insertive anal intercourse (UIAI) or receptive anal intercourse (URAI) acts with HIV-negative or status unknown partners in which neither party used a condom. UIAI and URAI were examined separately because prior investigations have highlighted the potential benefit in understanding specific sex risk acts ( Schwarcz et al., 2007 ). Details of the calculation of transmission risk acts are provided elsewhere ( HLP, 2007 ). Participants reporting any UIAI with at risk partners (1) were compared to those who reported none (0). Similarly, individuals reporting any URAI with at risk partners (1) were compared to those who reported none (0).  Statistical Analyses We began with an exploratory factor analysis (EFA) to determine the structure of the 4 items measuring internalized heterosexism. Because an examination of the distributions for these items indicated that they were positively skewed, we conducted the EFA using MPlus ( Muthen & Muthen, 2004b ). By using MPlus we were able to treat items as ordered categorical indicators using the weighted least squares-mean and variance-adjusted estimator. We interpreted the results of this EFA by examining the number of eignvalues that were greater than one, the degree to which items loaded strongly (.60 or higher) on a single factor with promax rotation, and whether the root mean residual (RMR) was less than .05 ( McDonald, 1985 ). Finally, we conducted a multiple linear regression analysis to examine race/ethnicity, age, education, and relationship status as correlates of the composite score(s) of IH. We used structural equation modeling to investigate if poorer affect regulation and increased stimulant use mediated the effect of IH on HIV transmission risk and ART non-adherence. A major strength of structural equation modeling is that it allows one to use latent variables with multiple categorical and/or continuous indicators for constructs to partial out measurement error. Specifying mediating variables as a latent variables also removes any bias in the analysis that arises from lack of perfect reliability of observed mediators, being that measurement error in the mediating variable can weaken statistical power of the tests of the indirect effects ( Hoyle & Kenny, 1999 ). Also, structural equation modeling enables one to examine the associations among multiple independent and dependent variables in the model simultaneously as well as obtain indices of global model fit. For the present investigation, we utilized multiple indices of model fit: comparative fit index (CFI) values greater than .95, root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) values less than .06, and weighted root-mean-square residual (WRMR) values less than .90 ( Hu & Bentler, 1998 ). Although a non-significant chi-square (?2) is also generally indicative of better model fit, this statistic may not be as reliable given the large sample size for the present investigation. Thus, we examined if the ratio of the ?2 to degrees of freedom (?2/df) was less than three ( Kline, 1998 ). Because the present investigation utilized a categorical mediating variable (i.e., stimulant use) and examined categorical outcomes (HIV transmission risk and ART non-adherence), we used the weighted least squares-mean and variance-adjusted estimator with the theta parameterization ( Muthen & Muthen, 2004a ).  Results The EFA extracted one factor with an eignvalue greater than one. This factor (eignvalue = 2.84) included all four items for IH. All items appeared to load well on this single factor (range: .69 – .86), and there were no cross-loadings for any item. The model appeared to be a good fit for the data (RMR = .02). Using a composite score of all four items, we determined there were no race/ethnic or age differences in IH ( p > .20) and individuals in a primary relationship reported similar levels of IH compared to those who were single ( p >.10). However, individuals who attended at least some college ( M = 7.18; SD = 4.12) reported significantly lower IH when compared to those did not attend college ( M = 8.46; SD = 5.00; B = ?.12, t = ?2.53, p = .012). We then tested the hybrid structural equation model examining the correlates of IH as a single factor with all four items as indicators. We began by testing the hypothesized model to examine HIV transmission risk as the receptive partner (URAI). The overall fit statistics were within recommended ranges, suggesting good fit (?2 (20, N = 465) = 33.67, p < .05; ?2/df = 1.68; CFI = .98; RMSEA = .0.38; WRMR = .65). However, we noted that negative affect was not significantly associated with URAI ( ? = .13, t = 1.16, p > .20). Removing this path did not result in significant changes in model fit (?2 (19, N = 465) = 31.41, p < .05; ?2/df = 1.65; CFI = .98; RMSEA = .0.37; WRMR = .68). As shown in Figure 2 , higher IH was associated with increased negative affect ( ? = .48, t = 10.26, p < .01). Elevated negative affect was, in turn, associated with an increased likelihood of reporting regular stimulant use ( ? = .26, t = 3.12, p < .01) and ART non-adherence ( ? = .22, t = 2.44, p < .05). Regular stimulant use was associated with an increased likelihood of reporting URAI ( ? = .39, t = 2.85, p < .01) and ART non-adherence ( ? = .29, t = 2.04, p < .05). Elevated IH was indirectly associated with an increased risk of reporting URAI (Total Indirect Effect: ? = .05, t = 2.14, p < .05) and ART non-adherence (Total Indirect Effect: ? = .14, t = 3.56, p < .01). When we examined HIV transmission risk as the insertive partner (UIAI), the model continued to be an adequate fit (?2 (21, N = 465) = 29.46, p > .10;?2/df = 1.40; CFI = .99; RMSEA = .029; WRMR = .62). However, stimulant use ( ? = .16, t = 1.11, p > .20) was not associated with UIAI. The total indirect of IH on UIAI was also not significant ( ? = .02, t =1.02, p > .30). Finally, we examined a model that included education as another important contextual factor that may account for the observed relationships. Including education as a correlate of IH, negative affect, stimulant use, URAI, and ART non-adherence did not change the pattern of results. The more parsimonious model excluding education is reported (See Figure 2 ).  Results The EFA extracted one factor with an eignvalue greater than one. This factor (eignvalue = 2.84) included all four items for IH. All items appeared to load well on this single factor (range: .69 – .86), and there were no cross-loadings for any item. The model appeared to be a good fit for the data (RMR = .02). Using a composite score of all four items, we determined there were no race/ethnic or age differences in IH ( p > .20) and individuals in a primary relationship reported similar levels of IH compared to those who were single ( p >.10). However, individuals who attended at least some college ( M = 7.18; SD = 4.12) reported significantly lower IH when compared to those did not attend college ( M = 8.46; SD = 5.00; B = ?.12, t = ?2.53, p = .012). We then tested the hybrid structural equation model examining the correlates of IH as a single factor with all four items as indicators. We began by testing the hypothesized model to examine HIV transmission risk as the receptive partner (URAI). The overall fit statistics were within recommended ranges, suggesting good fit (?2 (20, N = 465) = 33.67, p < .05; ?2/df = 1.68; CFI = .98; RMSEA = .0.38; WRMR = .65). However, we noted that negative affect was not significantly associated with URAI ( ? = .13, t = 1.16, p > .20). Removing this path did not result in significant changes in model fit (?2 (19, N = 465) = 31.41, p < .05; ?2/df = 1.65; CFI = .98; RMSEA = .0.37; WRMR = .68). As shown in Figure 2 , higher IH was associated with increased negative affect ( ? = .48, t = 10.26, p < .01). Elevated negative affect was, in turn, associated with an increased likelihood of reporting regular stimulant use ( ? = .26, t = 3.12, p < .01) and ART non-adherence ( ? = .22, t = 2.44, p < .05). Regular stimulant use was associated with an increased likelihood of reporting URAI ( ? = .39, t = 2.85, p < .01) and ART non-adherence ( ? = .29, t = 2.04, p < .05). Elevated IH was indirectly associated with an increased risk of reporting URAI (Total Indirect Effect: ? = .05, t = 2.14, p < .05) and ART non-adherence (Total Indirect Effect: ? = .14, t = 3.56, p < .01). When we examined HIV transmission risk as the insertive partner (UIAI), the model continued to be an adequate fit (?2 (21, N = 465) = 29.46, p > .10;?2/df = 1.40; CFI = .99; RMSEA = .029; WRMR = .62). However, stimulant use ( ? = .16, t = 1.11, p > .20) was not associated with UIAI. The total indirect of IH on UIAI was also not significant ( ? = .02, t =1.02, p > .30). Finally, we examined a model that included education as another important contextual factor that may account for the observed relationships. Including education as a correlate of IH, negative affect, stimulant use, URAI, and ART non-adherence did not change the pattern of results. The more parsimonious model excluding education is reported (See Figure 2 ).  Discussion The present findings support a model in which internalized heterosexism appears to be linked to greater HIV transmission risk and non-adherence to HIV medications indirectly via increased negative affect and more regular stimulant use. These findings are unique in the focus on identifying potential pathways between IH and an increased risk of infecting others with HIV, and with the increased likelihood of poor disease management through non-adherence to prescribed medications. The finding that IH is related to increased negative affect is consistent with prior work linking IH and depression. The association of IH with stimulant use is important given the increased rates of methamphetamine use among gay men and the implication of such use in fueling the HIV epidemic in communities of gay and bisexual men ( Shoptaw, 2006 ). There have been mixed findings in the literature investigating the relationship between negative affect and HIV sexual risk behaviors ( Crepaz & Marks, 2001 ; Walch & Rudolph, 2006 ). The current study identifies substance use, in particular stimulant use, as a potentially important mechanism through which negative affect can indirectly affect HIV transmission risk behavior. Taking into account this indirect effect may help clarify the inconsistency in prior work relating negative affect and sexual risk. Although the current study did not measure avoidant coping, substance use is often framed as a form of avoidant coping in the stress and coping literature ( Collins et al., 2001 ). Stimulant use as a strategy to cope with HIV and IH is consistent with prior findings that linked IH with avoidant coping ( Nicholson & Long, 1990 ). It may be that those with higher levels of IH use stimulants during sex as a means of avoiding negative thoughts and attitudes about their sexual orientation. Such a hypothesis could be examined in future investigations by assessing the rates of stimulant use during sexual encounters versus rates of use in other contexts. The influence of IH may be especially relevant when men seek to engage in sexual activities that are exclusively associated with gay men, possibly increasing the perceived need to use stimulants to engage in receptive anal intercourse. This is supported by the finding that stimulant use was uniquely associated with HIV transmission risk to others when the respondent was the receptive partner. While the causal effect of the pathways investigated in this study cannot be determined by the present cross-sectional data, the current theoretically-informed model offers possible avenues for intervention. From an intervention development perspective, the current findings identify IH as a contextual issue that may be amenable to psychological treatment. In fact, there is a clear recognition of the importance of social stigmatization and IH in the guidelines for clinical therapeutic work with gay men ( APA, 2000 ). The guidelines suggested by the American Psychological Association include recommendations that “Psychologists strive to understand the ways in which social stigmatization (i.e., prejudice, discrimination, and violence) poses risks to the mental health and well-being of lesbian, gay, and bisexual clients,” (Guideline 3, p. 1442) and that “Psychologists strive to understand how inaccurate or prejudicial views of homosexuality or bisexuality may affect the client’s presentation in treatment and the therapeutic process” (Guideline 4, p. 1443). In implementing these guidelines, the incorporation of cognitive-behavioral techniques to challenge heterosexist beliefs has been identified as a strategy when working with gay men in psychotherapeutic settings ( LaSala, 2006 ; Safren, Hollander, Hart, & Heimberg, 2001 ). Other approaches such as Gay Affirmative Therapy ( Langdridge, 2007 ), Affirmative Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy ( Balsam, Martell, & Safren, 2006 ) and Acceptance and Commitment Therapy ( Hayes, Luoma, Bond, Masuda, & Lillis, 2006 ), all of which involve addressing negative beliefs about one’s sexuality, may have a positive impact on HIV transmission and disease self-management among gay men living with HIV. Incorporating intervention content targeting the reduction of IH may further enhance the efficacy of demonstrated coping interventions with HIV-positive gay and bisexual men ( Antoni et al., 2006 ; Carrico et al., 2006 ; Chesney, Chambers, Taylor, Johnson, & Folkman, 2003 ). Such intervention content may include problem solving about productive disclosure of sexual orientation and HIV status, identifying and accessing support resources in the gay community, and specific techniques such as identifying and modifying cognitive antecedents related to IH that trigger affective states such as depression. Further, the current findings suggest potential applications for addressing and reducing IH in the context of substance abuse treatment, in particular for the pervasive problem of stimulant abuse in the gay community. Although not available in the current data, it is likely that HIV-related stigma is a construct related to IH that may help understand the current findings. HIV stigma has been shown to be associated with sexual risk ( Timberlake & Sigurdson, 2007 ) and as potentially resulting in poorer adherence to care and poorer psychological well being among HIV-positive samples ( Chesney & Smith, 1999 ; Rao et al., 2007 ; Ware et al., 2006 ). The “double stigma” of being gay and HIV-positive creates further challenges for intervention ( Grossman, 1991 ). Future studies that address the relationship between IH and HIV stigma are needed to clarify their relative impact or potentially interactive effects. In the current sample, IH was linked to unprotected receptive anal intercourse but not unprotected insertive anal intercourse, the behavior with greater associated HIV transmission risk. Prior research by Hart and colleagues (2003) found that men higher in IH were more likely to identify as “tops” or the insertive partner in anal sex rather than “bottoms” (the receptive partner); therefore it is possible that men identifying as tops may engage in insertive anal sex more freely and without self-reproach. It is also plausible that individuals who are high in IH attempt to directly attenuate their inhibitions by using stimulants. This provides sufficient disinhibition such that they can engage in receptive anal sex without experiencing these negative cognitions about the self or negative emotions (e.g., shame). Other factors may be useful in contextualizing the current findings. Previous work among gay men in the San Francisco area has also found a relationship of URAI and methamphetamine use ( Schwarcz et al., 2007 ), possibly a result of erectile dysfunction that can accompany use of this substance. It is possible that accounting for the use of erectile dysfunction medications, which has been increasing in tandem with stimulant use among gay men, may clarify this relationship. Unfortunately, use of erectile dysfunction medications was not assessed in the current study. Alternatively, this pattern may be a result of sero-sorting ( Mao et al., 2006 ), in which individuals take into account a partner’s likely serostatus when deciding in which sexual behaviors to engage, or sero-positioning, in which individuals select sexual acts or roles (such as receptive) in an attempt to reduce risk of infection/transmission. It is unclear how IH might relate to the stimulant-erectile dysfunction drug connection or to the occurrence of sero-sorting and sero-positioning. Regardless of the explanation, unprotected receptive anal intercourse with an HIV-negative or unknown status partner still carries risk of infection to the uninfected partner, thus creating a public health concern. Further, URAI puts the HIV-positive man at risk of sexually transmitted infections that can speed the progression of HIV disease ( Palacios et al., 2007 ). Finally, because it was indirectly associated with lower levels of ART adherence and increased likelihood of transmission risk, IH may be associated with a heightened risk for transmitting ART-resistant virus, which may limit treatment options for newly infected persons ( Colfax et al., 2007 ). An SAT framework allowed for the specification of IH as a contextual variable relating to these priority outcomes through the self regulatory mechanisms of negative affect and stimulant use. SAT may be better suited than other individual-level models of health behavior because it allows for the consideration of larger contextual factors and their relation to self-regulatory processes on the outcomes, or health states of interest. The current investigation, with its emphasis on IH is perhaps only a sample of the possible SAT models that could address HIV-related outcomes. For instance, future investigations framed in SAT may also incorporate other societal factors as racism, social class differences, HIV-related stigma, and perceived societal values related to masculinity. Likewise, the SAT framework invites greater exploration of regulatory factors that may mediate the effects of these environmental variables on HIV-related outcomes. For example, the current findings suggest the importance of disinhibition (which was not directly assessed in the current study), which hypothetically is achieved via substance use in the current sample. Such a potential effect requires a more thorough investigation. It is plausible that other regulatory factors may also be at work, such avoidant coping, the seeking of anonymous sexual activities, no-disclosure of HIV-status, and delayed HIV testing and seeking of care. Further, different classes of drugs with different psychoactive effects may have different roles in such models and thus may have varied implications for intervention. Overall, the current analyses demonstrate that an SAT framework offers a broad foundation for exploring multiple facets of health behaviors in HIV and other contexts. There are limitations of note in the current study. To minimize biases associated with self-report, validated measures of adherence and sexual risk behavior were used via ACASI interviewing, thereby removing the interviewer’s presence and minimizing social desirability bias. Further, because IH was not a primary focus of the parent study from which the data were extracted, the measure was not as comprehensive as that used in other investigations. The study was conducted only with HIV-positive persons, and the IH measure was only administered to men who selected “gay/homosexual” as their sexual orientation. Including HIV-negative men and/or those who identified as bisexual or heterosexual (but reported same sex activity) may have revealed different rates of IH and divergent patterns of findings. The assessment of sexual orientation used in the current study did not take into account the complexity of the construct ( Savin-Williams & Ream, 2007 ), and the assessment of alcohol use did not sufficiently distinguish between moderate, heavy and binge drinking and was not adequate to include in the model. Given that there was no formal evaluation of cognitive functioning, it is also possible that cognitive impairment confounds the results. The specific selection of measures for inclusion in the SEM was guided by prior research, SAT, and the availability and quality of the data. The current analyses combined state and trait indicators of negative affect, which may not fully capture the construct of negative affect. Other models posing alternative causal pathways and including other environmental and regulatory variables may yield disparate results. Finally, the use of cross-sectional data with a non-probability sample precludes causal inferences and limits generalizations that can be made from these findings. Experimental and intervention research designs are clearly needed to examine the potentially causal effects of IH on psychological well-being, substance use, HIV transmission risk, and ART adherence. Future research efforts should engage in selective, theory-driven investigations of ethnicity, age, HIV-status, and HIV stigma as potential moderators of the effects of IH. In the present study, it was observed that individuals who had at least some college reported significantly lower levels of IH when compared to those who never attended. It could be that attending college provides individuals with an opportunity to explore their sexual identity and challenge negative societal attitudes about LGB persons. However, it is also plausible that higher levels of education are a marker for socio-economic status, which has been shown to confer a variety of health benefits ( Adler et al., 1994 ). This should be examined in future investigations. Although the present findings did not reveal differences in IH by race and ethnicity, such differences have been observed in other samples ( O’Leary, Fisher, Purcell, Spikes, & Gomez, 2007 ) and this provides a rationale for examining group differences in the rates and relationships of IH with outcomes such as sexual risk and treatment adherence. In summary, the current data support a model framed in SAT in which higher internalized heterosexism may result in greater risk of transmitting HIV to others and in poorer self management of HIV disease via the regulatory mechanisms of increased negative affect and more regular stimulant use. These findings offer potential avenues for intervention and underscore the importance of IH in the HIV epidemic among gay men.  Discussion The present findings support a model in which internalized heterosexism appears to be linked to greater HIV transmission risk and non-adherence to HIV medications indirectly via increased negative affect and more regular stimulant use. These findings are unique in the focus on identifying potential pathways between IH and an increased risk of infecting others with HIV, and with the increased likelihood of poor disease management through non-adherence to prescribed medications. The finding that IH is related to increased negative affect is consistent with prior work linking IH and depression. The association of IH with stimulant use is important given the increased rates of methamphetamine use among gay men and the implication of such use in fueling the HIV epidemic in communities of gay and bisexual men ( Shoptaw, 2006 ). There have been mixed findings in the literature investigating the relationship between negative affect and HIV sexual risk behaviors ( Crepaz & Marks, 2001 ; Walch & Rudolph, 2006 ). The current study identifies substance use, in particular stimulant use, as a potentially important mechanism through which negative affect can indirectly affect HIV transmission risk behavior. Taking into account this indirect effect may help clarify the inconsistency in prior work relating negative affect and sexual risk. Although the current study did not measure avoidant coping, substance use is often framed as a form of avoidant coping in the stress and coping literature ( Collins et al., 2001 ). Stimulant use as a strategy to cope with HIV and IH is consistent with prior findings that linked IH with avoidant coping ( Nicholson & Long, 1990 ). It may be that those with higher levels of IH use stimulants during sex as a means of avoiding negative thoughts and attitudes about their sexual orientation. Such a hypothesis could be examined in future investigations by assessing the rates of stimulant use during sexual encounters versus rates of use in other contexts. The influence of IH may be especially relevant when men seek to engage in sexual activities that are exclusively associated with gay men, possibly increasing the perceived need to use stimulants to engage in receptive anal intercourse. This is supported by the finding that stimulant use was uniquely associated with HIV transmission risk to others when the respondent was the receptive partner. While the causal effect of the pathways investigated in this study cannot be determined by the present cross-sectional data, the current theoretically-informed model offers possible avenues for intervention. From an intervention development perspective, the current findings identify IH as a contextual issue that may be amenable to psychological treatment. In fact, there is a clear recognition of the importance of social stigmatization and IH in the guidelines for clinical therapeutic work with gay men ( APA, 2000 ). The guidelines suggested by the American Psychological Association include recommendations that “Psychologists strive to understand the ways in which social stigmatization (i.e., prejudice, discrimination, and violence) poses risks to the mental health and well-being of lesbian, gay, and bisexual clients,” (Guideline 3, p. 1442) and that “Psychologists strive to understand how inaccurate or prejudicial views of homosexuality or bisexuality may affect the client’s presentation in treatment and the therapeutic process” (Guideline 4, p. 1443). In implementing these guidelines, the incorporation of cognitive-behavioral techniques to challenge heterosexist beliefs has been identified as a strategy when working with gay men in psychotherapeutic settings ( LaSala, 2006 ; Safren, Hollander, Hart, & Heimberg, 2001 ). Other approaches such as Gay Affirmative Therapy ( Langdridge, 2007 ), Affirmative Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy ( Balsam, Martell, & Safren, 2006 ) and Acceptance and Commitment Therapy ( Hayes, Luoma, Bond, Masuda, & Lillis, 2006 ), all of which involve addressing negative beliefs about one’s sexuality, may have a positive impact on HIV transmission and disease self-management among gay men living with HIV. Incorporating intervention content targeting the reduction of IH may further enhance the efficacy of demonstrated coping interventions with HIV-positive gay and bisexual men ( Antoni et al., 2006 ; Carrico et al., 2006 ; Chesney, Chambers, Taylor, Johnson, & Folkman, 2003 ). Such intervention content may include problem solving about productive disclosure of sexual orientation and HIV status, identifying and accessing support resources in the gay community, and specific techniques such as identifying and modifying cognitive antecedents related to IH that trigger affective states such as depression. Further, the current findings suggest potential applications for addressing and reducing IH in the context of substance abuse treatment, in particular for the pervasive problem of stimulant abuse in the gay community. Although not available in the current data, it is likely that HIV-related stigma is a construct related to IH that may help understand the current findings. HIV stigma has been shown to be associated with sexual risk ( Timberlake & Sigurdson, 2007 ) and as potentially resulting in poorer adherence to care and poorer psychological well being among HIV-positive samples ( Chesney & Smith, 1999 ; Rao et al., 2007 ; Ware et al., 2006 ). The “double stigma” of being gay and HIV-positive creates further challenges for intervention ( Grossman, 1991 ). Future studies that address the relationship between IH and HIV stigma are needed to clarify their relative impact or potentially interactive effects. In the current sample, IH was linked to unprotected receptive anal intercourse but not unprotected insertive anal intercourse, the behavior with greater associated HIV transmission risk. Prior research by Hart and colleagues (2003) found that men higher in IH were more likely to identify as “tops” or the insertive partner in anal sex rather than “bottoms” (the receptive partner); therefore it is possible that men identifying as tops may engage in insertive anal sex more freely and without self-reproach. It is also plausible that individuals who are high in IH attempt to directly attenuate their inhibitions by using stimulants. This provides sufficient disinhibition such that they can engage in receptive anal sex without experiencing these negative cognitions about the self or negative emotions (e.g., shame). Other factors may be useful in contextualizing the current findings. Previous work among gay men in the San Francisco area has also found a relationship of URAI and methamphetamine use ( Schwarcz et al., 2007 ), possibly a result of erectile dysfunction that can accompany use of this substance. It is possible that accounting for the use of erectile dysfunction medications, which has been increasing in tandem with stimulant use among gay men, may clarify this relationship. Unfortunately, use of erectile dysfunction medications was not assessed in the current study. Alternatively, this pattern may be a result of sero-sorting ( Mao et al., 2006 ), in which individuals take into account a partner’s likely serostatus when deciding in which sexual behaviors to engage, or sero-positioning, in which individuals select sexual acts or roles (such as receptive) in an attempt to reduce risk of infection/transmission. It is unclear how IH might relate to the stimulant-erectile dysfunction drug connection or to the occurrence of sero-sorting and sero-positioning. Regardless of the explanation, unprotected receptive anal intercourse with an HIV-negative or unknown status partner still carries risk of infection to the uninfected partner, thus creating a public health concern. Further, URAI puts the HIV-positive man at risk of sexually transmitted infections that can speed the progression of HIV disease ( Palacios et al., 2007 ). Finally, because it was indirectly associated with lower levels of ART adherence and increased likelihood of transmission risk, IH may be associated with a heightened risk for transmitting ART-resistant virus, which may limit treatment options for newly infected persons ( Colfax et al., 2007 ). An SAT framework allowed for the specification of IH as a contextual variable relating to these priority outcomes through the self regulatory mechanisms of negative affect and stimulant use. SAT may be better suited than other individual-level models of health behavior because it allows for the consideration of larger contextual factors and their relation to self-regulatory processes on the outcomes, or health states of interest. The current investigation, with its emphasis on IH is perhaps only a sample of the possible SAT models that could address HIV-related outcomes. For instance, future investigations framed in SAT may also incorporate other societal factors as racism, social class differences, HIV-related stigma, and perceived societal values related to masculinity. Likewise, the SAT framework invites greater exploration of regulatory factors that may mediate the effects of these environmental variables on HIV-related outcomes. For example, the current findings suggest the importance of disinhibition (which was not directly assessed in the current study), which hypothetically is achieved via substance use in the current sample. Such a potential effect requires a more thorough investigation. It is plausible that other regulatory factors may also be at work, such avoidant coping, the seeking of anonymous sexual activities, no-disclosure of HIV-status, and delayed HIV testing and seeking of care. Further, different classes of drugs with different psychoactive effects may have different roles in such models and thus may have varied implications for intervention. Overall, the current analyses demonstrate that an SAT framework offers a broad foundation for exploring multiple facets of health behaviors in HIV and other contexts. There are limitations of note in the current study. To minimize biases associated with self-report, validated measures of adherence and sexual risk behavior were used via ACASI interviewing, thereby removing the interviewer’s presence and minimizing social desirability bias. Further, because IH was not a primary focus of the parent study from which the data were extracted, the measure was not as comprehensive as that used in other investigations. The study was conducted only with HIV-positive persons, and the IH measure was only administered to men who selected “gay/homosexual” as their sexual orientation. Including HIV-negative men and/or those who identified as bisexual or heterosexual (but reported same sex activity) may have revealed different rates of IH and divergent patterns of findings. The assessment of sexual orientation used in the current study did not take into account the complexity of the construct ( Savin-Williams & Ream, 2007 ), and the assessment of alcohol use did not sufficiently distinguish between moderate, heavy and binge drinking and was not adequate to include in the model. Given that there was no formal evaluation of cognitive functioning, it is also possible that cognitive impairment confounds the results. The specific selection of measures for inclusion in the SEM was guided by prior research, SAT, and the availability and quality of the data. The current analyses combined state and trait indicators of negative affect, which may not fully capture the construct of negative affect. Other models posing alternative causal pathways and including other environmental and regulatory variables may yield disparate results. Finally, the use of cross-sectional data with a non-probability sample precludes causal inferences and limits generalizations that can be made from these findings. Experimental and intervention research designs are clearly needed to examine the potentially causal effects of IH on psychological well-being, substance use, HIV transmission risk, and ART adherence. Future research efforts should engage in selective, theory-driven investigations of ethnicity, age, HIV-status, and HIV stigma as potential moderators of the effects of IH. In the present study, it was observed that individuals who had at least some college reported significantly lower levels of IH when compared to those who never attended. It could be that attending college provides individuals with an opportunity to explore their sexual identity and challenge negative societal attitudes about LGB persons. However, it is also plausible that higher levels of education are a marker for socio-economic status, which has been shown to confer a variety of health benefits ( Adler et al., 1994 ). This should be examined in future investigations. Although the present findings did not reveal differences in IH by race and ethnicity, such differences have been observed in other samples ( O’Leary, Fisher, Purcell, Spikes, & Gomez, 2007 ) and this provides a rationale for examining group differences in the rates and relationships of IH with outcomes such as sexual risk and treatment adherence. In summary, the current data support a model framed in SAT in which higher internalized heterosexism may result in greater risk of transmitting HIV to others and in poorer self management of HIV disease via the regulatory mechanisms of increased negative affect and more regular stimulant use. These findings offer potential avenues for intervention and underscore the importance of IH in the HIV epidemic among gay men.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Conceptual Model based in SAT of the Associations of Internalized Heterosexism with Negative Affect, Stimulant Use, and HIV Transmission and ART Non-Adherence. Figure 2 Hybrid structural equation model examining the pathways whereby internalized heterosexism (IH) relates to an increased likelihood of HIV transmission risk behavior as the receptive partner (URAI) and non-adherence to anti-retroviral therapy. The model accounted for 15% of the variance in URAI and 17% of the variance in non-adherence to anti-retroviral therapy. (* p < .05 ** p <01). Table 1 Participant Characteristics Variable n % of sample Race and Ethnicity ?Black/African American 81 17.5 ?Hispanic/Latino 48 10.4 ?Asian/Pacific Islander 10 2.2 ?Native American/Alaskan Native 12 2.6 ?Non-Hispanic White 288 62.1 ?Multi-Racial/Multi-Cultural 25 5.4 Employment Status ?Working (Full-Time or Part-Time) 222 47.7 ?Not Working 243 52.3 Education ?< High School 30 6.5 ?High School 82 17.6 ?Some College 186 40.0 ?College Graduate or Greater 167 35.9 Currently in a Primary Relationship 147 31.7 Homeless (Past Year) 41 8.8 CD4+ Count < 200 (Self Report) 80 17.2 Undetectable HIV Viral Load (Self Report) 174 37.4 Regular Stimulant Use 39 8.4 URAI with HIV-/unknown partners 26 5.6 UIAI with HIV-/unknown partners 65 14.0 Less than 90% adherence 94 20.2 Table 2 Intercorrelations among indicators of internalized heterosexism, negative affect, stimulant use, HIV transmission risk, and ART adherence. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 IH Q1 2. IH Q2 .57 ** 3. IH Q3 .46 ** .43 ** 4. IH Q4 .50 ** .48 ** .44 ** 5. BDI-Affective .27 ** .24 ** .33 ** .24 ** 6. PSS .23 ** .22 ** .24 ** .22 ** .69 ** 7. STAI .25 ** .18 ** .25 ** .27 ** .58 ** .62 ** 8. Anger/Burnout .23 ** .21 ** .28 ** .18 ** .64 ** .78 ** .60 ** 9. Stimulant Use .03 .05 .12 ** .05 .12 * .10 * .07 .07 10. < 90% Adherence .07 .11 * .15 ** .04 .22 ** .13 * .16 ** .17 ** .11 * 11. URAI .07 .06 .02 .16 ** .07 .04 .03 .08 .06 .11 * 12. UIAI .01 .01 .10 * ?.02 .09 * .03 .02 .05 .03 ?.04 .25 ** * p ? .05 ** p < .01. IH = internalized heterosexism; PSS = Perceived Stress Scale; STAI = State Trait Anxiety Inventory; URAI = unprotected receptive anal intercourse; UIAI = unprotected insertive anal intercourse.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Conceptual Model based in SAT of the Associations of Internalized Heterosexism with Negative Affect, Stimulant Use, and HIV Transmission and ART Non-Adherence. Figure 2 Hybrid structural equation model examining the pathways whereby internalized heterosexism (IH) relates to an increased likelihood of HIV transmission risk behavior as the receptive partner (URAI) and non-adherence to anti-retroviral therapy. The model accounted for 15% of the variance in URAI and 17% of the variance in non-adherence to anti-retroviral therapy. (* p < .05 ** p <01). Table 1 Participant Characteristics Variable n % of sample Race and Ethnicity ?Black/African American 81 17.5 ?Hispanic/Latino 48 10.4 ?Asian/Pacific Islander 10 2.2 ?Native American/Alaskan Native 12 2.6 ?Non-Hispanic White 288 62.1 ?Multi-Racial/Multi-Cultural 25 5.4 Employment Status ?Working (Full-Time or Part-Time) 222 47.7 ?Not Working 243 52.3 Education ?< High School 30 6.5 ?High School 82 17.6 ?Some College 186 40.0 ?College Graduate or Greater 167 35.9 Currently in a Primary Relationship 147 31.7 Homeless (Past Year) 41 8.8 CD4+ Count < 200 (Self Report) 80 17.2 Undetectable HIV Viral Load (Self Report) 174 37.4 Regular Stimulant Use 39 8.4 URAI with HIV-/unknown partners 26 5.6 UIAI with HIV-/unknown partners 65 14.0 Less than 90% adherence 94 20.2 Table 2 Intercorrelations among indicators of internalized heterosexism, negative affect, stimulant use, HIV transmission risk, and ART adherence. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 IH Q1 2. IH Q2 .57 ** 3. IH Q3 .46 ** .43 ** 4. IH Q4 .50 ** .48 ** .44 ** 5. BDI-Affective .27 ** .24 ** .33 ** .24 ** 6. PSS .23 ** .22 ** .24 ** .22 ** .69 ** 7. STAI .25 ** .18 ** .25 ** .27 ** .58 ** .62 ** 8. Anger/Burnout .23 ** .21 ** .28 ** .18 ** .64 ** .78 ** .60 ** 9. Stimulant Use .03 .05 .12 ** .05 .12 * .10 * .07 .07 10. < 90% Adherence .07 .11 * .15 ** .04 .22 ** .13 * .16 ** .17 ** .11 * 11. URAI .07 .06 .02 .16 ** .07 .04 .03 .08 .06 .11 * 12. UIAI .01 .01 .10 * ?.02 .09 * .03 .02 .05 .03 ?.04 .25 ** * p ? .05 ** p < .01. IH = internalized heterosexism; PSS = Perceived Stress Scale; STAI = State Trait Anxiety Inventory; URAI = unprotected receptive anal intercourse; UIAI = unprotected insertive anal intercourse. 