Common Factors in Effective HIV Prevention Programs We propose a set of common factors in evidence-based interventions (EBI) for HIV prevention, which cut across theoretical models of behavior change. Three existing literatures support this agenda: (1) Common factors in psychotherapy; (2) core elements from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention EBIs; and (3) component analyses of EBI. To stimulate discussion among prevention researchers, we propose a set of common factors at the highest level of abstraction that describe what all effective programs do: (1) establish a framework to understand behavior change; (2) convey issue-specific and population-specific information necessary for healthy actions; (3) build cognitive, affective, and behavioral self-management skills; (4) address environmental barriers to implementing health behaviors; and (5) provide tools to develop ongoing social and community support for healthy actions. A focus on common factors will enhance research on new HIV prevention interventions, encourage collaboration among researchers, provide guidelines for adapting EBI, and simplify and speed the adoption of EBI for providers.  Conclusion Understanding the common factors in effective HIV prevention interventions informs the identification of robust factors in prevention design across target populations, prevention researchers’ academic disciplines, and theories of change. Designers of effective HIV prevention interventions share more in common than they typically acknowledge. While researchers may be working with different underlying theories, most successful EBI have translated these theories into a strikingly similar set of intervention practices: the common factors. We believe that most effective prevention programs are instantiations of these common factors. It is helpful to consider them as case studies in implementation of these common factors, not as inviolate programs which cannot be touched, lest their effectiveness be stripped away. As a field, we need to move away from the idea that dissemination of effective interventions necessitates a slavish devotion to the exact replication of specific programs at the level of a sequence of activities. The “level” at which replication with fidelity is needed requires substantially more research. There are at least five levels: (1) activity sequences; (2) best practices or processes; (3) behavioral rules or principles; (4) components; and (5) factors. Other researchers may identify a different level needed for replication with fidelity. For researchers, we believe that the identification of common factors will help promote cooperation and coherence in the field. Basing interventions on different models of behavior change has the unfortunate result of dividing the field into theoretically oriented camps. While certainly the divide between AIDS Risk Reduction Model and Social Learning Theory is not nearly as contentious as what psychotherapy sees in the gulf between Cognitive Behavior Therapy and Psychodynamic Therapy, a move toward common factors would assist greater collaboration. If the emphasis moves toward outcomes and what common factors lead to preventive outcomes, theoretical orientations become the basis of fruitful discussions of variables relevant to behavior change. The identification of common factors does not obviate the possibility that some behavior change models or specific intervention protocols contribute additional variables that effect behavior change above and beyond the common factors. Rather, we suggest that common factors are likely the source of a great deal of the positive change seen across EBI. Once a base is established, more innovative theories, interventions, and practices may emerge. Rather than focusing on relatively small differences between similar programs, true innovation may emerge. In particular, the possibilities created by dramatic technological breakthroughs in internet networking, embedded sensing, drug discovery, and the creation of computerized multi-media transformative experiences may then stimulate paradigm shifts in behavioral interventions. Moving beyond the specific nature of EBI activities toward common factors will help focus new research in the field of HIV prevention. As new interventions are developed for new risk groups or new techniques are developed for existing risk groups, researchers will have a strong base of necessary components identified by the common factors. This should reduce the number of unsuccessful intervention trials and increase the effectiveness of the new programs. As of now, the field has no such set of necessary components, yet we would argue that interventionists who have repeatedly designed and tested successful programs implicitly employ the common factors we have identified here. Moreover, a greater degree of experimentation with multiple modes of delivery and new delivery technologies—those that recognize the common factors while allowing for adaptation in other areas as needed—can lead to broader dissemination of HIV EBI. Perhaps the greatest potential benefit of the common factors is to providers of HIV prevention services, not researchers. The HIV pandemic is a moving target and we have not achieved our prevention goals. After two decades of effective intervention design, it should not take years to get new programs into the field or to address evolving needs of risk groups. Current practices for the dissemination and adaptation of EBI rely on a complex set of logic models and a locked step sequence of repeat testing, adaptation, and implementation. These practices presuppose a level of expertise unavailable to many community-based organizations who do not have the time or funding to invest in the capacities necessary to ensure adaptation with fidelity of a specific intervention to a new target population. These common factors may help transform the adaptation process of EBI. Local tailoring may allow each provider and community to retain the common factors of an EBI while adapting the program to local conditions. We have argued that effective EBI must: (1) establish a framework to understand behavior change; (2) convey issue-specific or population specific information; (3) build cognitive, affective, and behavioral self-management skills; (4) address environmental barriers to implementing new behaviors; and (5) provide tools to develop ongoing social and community support. Rather than being a definitive list, we hope this list stimulates discussion and research. Research may identify the robustness of common factors; meta-analysis would be a logical first step, but randomized control trials are also needed. If these common factors or a revised list reflect the robust components in EBI, a new generation of EBI will emerge that may focus on a very different research agenda: continuous quality improvement for adaptation, effectiveness, and diffusion of interventions by providers in real-world settings ( Rapkin and Trickett 2005 ).  Table Table 1 Core elements in five evidence-based interventions for HIV prevention from the centers for disease control and prevention’s dissemination of evidence-based interventions program Video opportunities for innovative condom education (voices/voces); O’Donnell et al. 1998 ?Viewing culturally-specific videos portraying condom negotiation ?Conducting small group skill-building sessions to work on overcoming barriers to condom use ?Educating program participants about different types of condoms and their features ?Distributing samples of condoms identified by participants as best meeting their needs Street Smart; Rotheram-Borus et al. 1991 ?Enhancing affective and cognitive awareness, expression, and control ?Teaching HIV/AIDS risk hierarchy and its personal application ?Identifying personal triggers, using peer support and small group skills-building sessions ?Building participant’s skills in problem solving, personal assertiveness, and HIV/AIDS harm reduction Popular Opinion Leader (POL); Kelly et al. 1997 ?Intervention is directed to an identifiable target population in well-defined community venues and where the population’s size can be estimated ?Ethnographic techniques are systematically used to identify segments of the target population and to identify those persons who are most popular, well-liked, and trusted by others in each population segment ?Over the life of the program, 15% of the target population size found in intervention venues are trained as POLs ?The program teaches POLs skills for initiating HIV risk reduction messages to friends and acquaintances ?The training program teaches POLs characteristics of effective behavior change communication messages targeting risk-related attitudes, norms, intentions, and self-efficacy. In conversations, POLs personally endorse the benefits of safer behavior and recommend practical steps needed to implement change ?Groups of POLs meeting together weekly in sessions that use instruction, facilitator modeling, and extensive role play exercises to help POLs refine their skills and gain confidence in delivering effective HIV prevention messages to others. Groups are small enough to provide extensive practice opportunities for all POLs to shape their communication skills and create comfort in delivering conversational messages ?POL’s set goals to engage in risk reduction conversations with friends and acquaintances in the target population between weekly sessions ?POL’s conversational outcomes are reviewed, discussed, and reinforced at subsequent training sessions ?Logos, symbols, or other devices are used as ‘conversation starters’ between POLs and others Mpowerment; Kegeles et al. 1996 ?Recruit and maintain a core group of 12 to 20 young gay and bisexual men to design and carry out project activities ?Recruit volunteers to help deliver services and to make important decisions about the program ?Use project coordinators to oversee project activities ?Establish a dedicated project space where many of the project activities can be held ?Conduct formal outreach, including educational activities and social events ?Conduct informal outreach to influence behavior change ?Convene peer-led, 1-time discussion groups (M-groups) ?Conduct a publicity campaign about the project within the community Real AIDS Prevention Project (RAPP); Lauby et al. 2000 ?Conducting community outreach using peer volunteers ?Having one-on-one, safer sex discussions based on the client’s stage of readiness to change ?Using printed stories about community members and safer sex decisions (role model stories) ?Obtaining program support from community organizations and businesses ?Sponsoring small group activities, such as safer sex parties and presentations 