Functional Neuroimaging of Spike-Wave Seizures Generalized spike-wave seizures are typically brief events associated with dynamic changes in brain physiology, metabolism, and behavior. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) provides a relatively high spatio-temporal resolution method for imaging cortical-subcortical network activity during spike-wave seizures. Patients with spike-wave seizures often have episodes of staring and unresponsiveness which interfere with normal behavior. Results from human fMRI studies suggest that spike-wave seizures disrupt specific networks in the thalamus and fronto-parietal association cortex which are critical for normal attentive consciousness. However, the neuronal activity underlying imaging changes seen during fMRI is not well understood, particularly in abnormal conditions such as seizures. Animal models have begun to provide important fundamental insights into the neuronal basis for fMRI changes during spike-wave activity. Work from these models including both fMRI and direct neuronal recordings suggest that, like in humans, specific cortical-subcortical networks are involved in spike-wave, while other regions are spared. Regions showing fMRI increases demonstrate correlated increases in neuronal activity in animal models. The mechanisms of fMRI decreases in spike-wave will require further investigation. A better understanding of the specific brain regions involved in generating spike-wave seizures may help guide efforts to develop targeted therapies aimed at preventing or reversing abnormal excitability in these brain regions, ultimately leading to a cure for this disorder.  Human fMRI studies of spike-wave Attempts to identify BOLD changes in humans associated with SWD have yielded fascinating, though confusing, and sometimes contradictory results. Human studies to date have investigated patients with a broad spectrum of epileptic disorders, ages, and treatments. These studies have attempted to localize those brain regions associated with SWD while teasing apart the significance and meaning of the BOLD signal increases and decreases observed in their analyses. There remain many important unanswered questions regarding both human SWD as well as the physiological and neurological underpinnings of the BOLD signal. More extensive experimentation, in both human and animal models, is required. We will now discuss BOLD fMRI changes in specific anatomical regions during human SWD. Cortical BOLD changes The importance of the cortex in SWD generation and maintenance has been widely shown in animal models [ 2 , 18 , 23 ]. Human fMRI experiments have reported cortical BOLD signal change to be predominately negative during SWD although positive changes have also been documented. Negative BOLD changes in the cortex during SWD have drawn the most intense scrutiny and speculation regarding their role in the clinical manifestations of absence seizures. Experiments have shown deactivations ranging from nearly the entire cortex [ 25 ] to smaller subsets of the cortex [ 28 , 63 – 67 ] though the meaning of cortical BOLD decreases during SWD remains unknown. Experimenters have seen bilateral decreased BOLD signal change in the anterior and posterior interhemispheric regions, lateral frontal and parietal association cortices, and the posterior cingulate/retrosplenial/precuneus areas [ 25 , 28 , 63 – 65 , 67 , 68 ]. Several investigators [ 63 , 66 , 69 ] have noted the similarity between the BOLD deactivation pattern generated by SWD and those areas that characterize normal brain activity [ 70 ]. While much work has been done to pinpoint cortical decreases associated with SWD, variable results have been found and further study is necessary. Reports of positive cortical changes in BOLD signal during SWD are less consistent and less pronounced than negative changes. Activations have been found in the bilateral precentral sulci [ 64 ], mesial frontal cortex, bilateral insula [ 69 ], bilateral motor cortex [ 65 ], occipital cortex, and inferior parietal cortex [ 66 ]. Most of these studies have reported variable fMRI increases in the lateral frontal and parietal cortical regions [ 28 , 68 ]. The variation and lack of consistency seen in labeling positive cortical BOLD changes suggests additional study is necessary. Thalamic BOLD changes Like the cortex, the thalamus has long been implicated in SWD generation and maintenance [ 2 , 18 , 23 , 71 ]. Human BOLD studies, especially those implementing continuous EEG-fMRI, have consistently found bilateral thalamic increases [ 25 , 26 , 28 , 63 , 65 , 66 , 68 ] though some studies have also found thalamic decreases [ 26 , 63 ]. Some investigators have attempted to differentiate the BOLD signal changes in different thalamic nuclei, but the currently available spatial resolution of fMRI as well as the image processing necessary for analysis does not necessarily allow it [ 26 ]. Thalamic activity is, at times, seen only at higher field strengths (3T) [ 66 ] and continued advances in fMRI technology may reveal more information regarding the thalamus’ metabolic activity during SWD. Basal ganglia, cerebellum, and brainstem BOLD changes outside of the cortex and thalamus have been reported, though these changes have received much less attention, and some studies have chosen to focus solely on the corticothalamic network [ 67 ]. Increases in the cerebellum have been found [ 63 , 69 ] as have increases (probably artifactual) in the lateral ventricles [ 69 ] and white matter tracts associated with the thalamus [ 65 ]. Cerebellar activity during SWD has been previously noted [ 72 , 73 ], but the cerebellum’s role has not yet been defined. Decreases have also been found in the basal ganglia [ 25 , 28 , 68 ]. The importance of the basal ganglia and the brainstem in absence epilepsy has been demonstrated in animal models [ 74 – 77 ] and human patients [ 78 , 79 ]. Currently, little emphasis has been placed on BOLD signal changes outside the thalamocortical network, but this is an area worthy of further study. Discussion of human fMRI studies of spike-wave SWD is a rhythm that arises out of normal brain circuitry and physiology but is a distortion of normal mechanisms [ 2 ]. It affects specific circuits in the brain while sparing others. Structures that are affected by spike-and-wave discharge are the same networks that are important for normal oscillations, and the involvement of these structures interrupts normal brain activity. Much attention has been paid to the possible connection between the behavioral deficits seen in absence seizures and the cortical deactivations seen in human BOLD studies [ 69 ]. This should not lead investigators to ignore prominent BOLD changes in subcortical structures or BOLD increases in the cortex. fMRI increases in the thalamus have been observed repeatedly, but the mechanism that drives the BOLD changes is as yet unknown. Are the BOLD increases in the thalamus due to increased activity of excitatory or inhibitory neurons? Are neurons firing more or less in the thalamus during SWD? Thalamic decreases remain unexplained (as do the mechanism that underlies all BOLD decreases in SWD). It has also been suggested that SWD may be generated by more than one mechanism, which might explain the varied cortical BOLD signal changes [ 25 , 67 ]. Finally, the relatively consistent BOLD changes seen in the thalamus, fronto-parietal cortex, and posterior cingulate/retrosplenial/precuneus ( Fig. 3 ) areas may represent an important functional network in SWD generation. Cortical fMRI increases have not been given the same attention as cortical decreases in SWD. The possible role of these regions in SWD generation and behavioral deficits warrants further investigation. One author suggested the variability in cortical signal might have less to do with SWD generation and more to do with the normal baseline activity of each individual [ 66 ]. If SWD leads to an interruption of normal activity, then baseline activity would dictate which cortical areas showed increases and decreases [ 69 ]. Limitations of human studies to date Attempts to localize SWD using BOLD fMRI have produced inconsistent results. Studies have been limited by heterogeneous patient populations (e.g. age, medication, diagnosis, seizure activity) (reviewed in [ 66 ]). As has already been noted, stronger field strengths have allowed researchers to find signal changes that were not apparent at lower field strengths, and continued advances in fMRI research techniques may reveal a more consistent pattern of significant fMRI signal changes. Furthermore, while several researchers have connected their fMRI data with the behavioral deficits often associated with absence seizures, simultaneous behavioral testing may allow researchers to understand the relationship between fMRI changes and behavioral changes [ 28 , 68 ]. Thus, it will be critical in further studies to directly link fMRI signal changes with behavioral deficits. Finally, techniques to date have not necessarily differentiated BOLD activity based on seizure duration. CBF and brain metabolism may differ in brief SWD as opposed to in prolonged seizures or absence status epilepticus. Furthermore, fMRI signal changes and the spatial heterogeneity of SWD amplitude in different brain regions based on EEG (or MEG) have not yet been correlated.  Human fMRI studies of spike-wave Attempts to identify BOLD changes in humans associated with SWD have yielded fascinating, though confusing, and sometimes contradictory results. Human studies to date have investigated patients with a broad spectrum of epileptic disorders, ages, and treatments. These studies have attempted to localize those brain regions associated with SWD while teasing apart the significance and meaning of the BOLD signal increases and decreases observed in their analyses. There remain many important unanswered questions regarding both human SWD as well as the physiological and neurological underpinnings of the BOLD signal. More extensive experimentation, in both human and animal models, is required. We will now discuss BOLD fMRI changes in specific anatomical regions during human SWD. Cortical BOLD changes The importance of the cortex in SWD generation and maintenance has been widely shown in animal models [ 2 , 18 , 23 ]. Human fMRI experiments have reported cortical BOLD signal change to be predominately negative during SWD although positive changes have also been documented. Negative BOLD changes in the cortex during SWD have drawn the most intense scrutiny and speculation regarding their role in the clinical manifestations of absence seizures. Experiments have shown deactivations ranging from nearly the entire cortex [ 25 ] to smaller subsets of the cortex [ 28 , 63 – 67 ] though the meaning of cortical BOLD decreases during SWD remains unknown. Experimenters have seen bilateral decreased BOLD signal change in the anterior and posterior interhemispheric regions, lateral frontal and parietal association cortices, and the posterior cingulate/retrosplenial/precuneus areas [ 25 , 28 , 63 – 65 , 67 , 68 ]. Several investigators [ 63 , 66 , 69 ] have noted the similarity between the BOLD deactivation pattern generated by SWD and those areas that characterize normal brain activity [ 70 ]. While much work has been done to pinpoint cortical decreases associated with SWD, variable results have been found and further study is necessary. Reports of positive cortical changes in BOLD signal during SWD are less consistent and less pronounced than negative changes. Activations have been found in the bilateral precentral sulci [ 64 ], mesial frontal cortex, bilateral insula [ 69 ], bilateral motor cortex [ 65 ], occipital cortex, and inferior parietal cortex [ 66 ]. Most of these studies have reported variable fMRI increases in the lateral frontal and parietal cortical regions [ 28 , 68 ]. The variation and lack of consistency seen in labeling positive cortical BOLD changes suggests additional study is necessary. Thalamic BOLD changes Like the cortex, the thalamus has long been implicated in SWD generation and maintenance [ 2 , 18 , 23 , 71 ]. Human BOLD studies, especially those implementing continuous EEG-fMRI, have consistently found bilateral thalamic increases [ 25 , 26 , 28 , 63 , 65 , 66 , 68 ] though some studies have also found thalamic decreases [ 26 , 63 ]. Some investigators have attempted to differentiate the BOLD signal changes in different thalamic nuclei, but the currently available spatial resolution of fMRI as well as the image processing necessary for analysis does not necessarily allow it [ 26 ]. Thalamic activity is, at times, seen only at higher field strengths (3T) [ 66 ] and continued advances in fMRI technology may reveal more information regarding the thalamus’ metabolic activity during SWD. Basal ganglia, cerebellum, and brainstem BOLD changes outside of the cortex and thalamus have been reported, though these changes have received much less attention, and some studies have chosen to focus solely on the corticothalamic network [ 67 ]. Increases in the cerebellum have been found [ 63 , 69 ] as have increases (probably artifactual) in the lateral ventricles [ 69 ] and white matter tracts associated with the thalamus [ 65 ]. Cerebellar activity during SWD has been previously noted [ 72 , 73 ], but the cerebellum’s role has not yet been defined. Decreases have also been found in the basal ganglia [ 25 , 28 , 68 ]. The importance of the basal ganglia and the brainstem in absence epilepsy has been demonstrated in animal models [ 74 – 77 ] and human patients [ 78 , 79 ]. Currently, little emphasis has been placed on BOLD signal changes outside the thalamocortical network, but this is an area worthy of further study. Discussion of human fMRI studies of spike-wave SWD is a rhythm that arises out of normal brain circuitry and physiology but is a distortion of normal mechanisms [ 2 ]. It affects specific circuits in the brain while sparing others. Structures that are affected by spike-and-wave discharge are the same networks that are important for normal oscillations, and the involvement of these structures interrupts normal brain activity. Much attention has been paid to the possible connection between the behavioral deficits seen in absence seizures and the cortical deactivations seen in human BOLD studies [ 69 ]. This should not lead investigators to ignore prominent BOLD changes in subcortical structures or BOLD increases in the cortex. fMRI increases in the thalamus have been observed repeatedly, but the mechanism that drives the BOLD changes is as yet unknown. Are the BOLD increases in the thalamus due to increased activity of excitatory or inhibitory neurons? Are neurons firing more or less in the thalamus during SWD? Thalamic decreases remain unexplained (as do the mechanism that underlies all BOLD decreases in SWD). It has also been suggested that SWD may be generated by more than one mechanism, which might explain the varied cortical BOLD signal changes [ 25 , 67 ]. Finally, the relatively consistent BOLD changes seen in the thalamus, fronto-parietal cortex, and posterior cingulate/retrosplenial/precuneus ( Fig. 3 ) areas may represent an important functional network in SWD generation. Cortical fMRI increases have not been given the same attention as cortical decreases in SWD. The possible role of these regions in SWD generation and behavioral deficits warrants further investigation. One author suggested the variability in cortical signal might have less to do with SWD generation and more to do with the normal baseline activity of each individual [ 66 ]. If SWD leads to an interruption of normal activity, then baseline activity would dictate which cortical areas showed increases and decreases [ 69 ]. Limitations of human studies to date Attempts to localize SWD using BOLD fMRI have produced inconsistent results. Studies have been limited by heterogeneous patient populations (e.g. age, medication, diagnosis, seizure activity) (reviewed in [ 66 ]). As has already been noted, stronger field strengths have allowed researchers to find signal changes that were not apparent at lower field strengths, and continued advances in fMRI research techniques may reveal a more consistent pattern of significant fMRI signal changes. Furthermore, while several researchers have connected their fMRI data with the behavioral deficits often associated with absence seizures, simultaneous behavioral testing may allow researchers to understand the relationship between fMRI changes and behavioral changes [ 28 , 68 ]. Thus, it will be critical in further studies to directly link fMRI signal changes with behavioral deficits. Finally, techniques to date have not necessarily differentiated BOLD activity based on seizure duration. CBF and brain metabolism may differ in brief SWD as opposed to in prolonged seizures or absence status epilepticus. Furthermore, fMRI signal changes and the spatial heterogeneity of SWD amplitude in different brain regions based on EEG (or MEG) have not yet been correlated.  Cortical BOLD changes The importance of the cortex in SWD generation and maintenance has been widely shown in animal models [ 2 , 18 , 23 ]. Human fMRI experiments have reported cortical BOLD signal change to be predominately negative during SWD although positive changes have also been documented. Negative BOLD changes in the cortex during SWD have drawn the most intense scrutiny and speculation regarding their role in the clinical manifestations of absence seizures. Experiments have shown deactivations ranging from nearly the entire cortex [ 25 ] to smaller subsets of the cortex [ 28 , 63 – 67 ] though the meaning of cortical BOLD decreases during SWD remains unknown. Experimenters have seen bilateral decreased BOLD signal change in the anterior and posterior interhemispheric regions, lateral frontal and parietal association cortices, and the posterior cingulate/retrosplenial/precuneus areas [ 25 , 28 , 63 – 65 , 67 , 68 ]. Several investigators [ 63 , 66 , 69 ] have noted the similarity between the BOLD deactivation pattern generated by SWD and those areas that characterize normal brain activity [ 70 ]. While much work has been done to pinpoint cortical decreases associated with SWD, variable results have been found and further study is necessary. Reports of positive cortical changes in BOLD signal during SWD are less consistent and less pronounced than negative changes. Activations have been found in the bilateral precentral sulci [ 64 ], mesial frontal cortex, bilateral insula [ 69 ], bilateral motor cortex [ 65 ], occipital cortex, and inferior parietal cortex [ 66 ]. Most of these studies have reported variable fMRI increases in the lateral frontal and parietal cortical regions [ 28 , 68 ]. The variation and lack of consistency seen in labeling positive cortical BOLD changes suggests additional study is necessary.  Cortical BOLD changes The importance of the cortex in SWD generation and maintenance has been widely shown in animal models [ 2 , 18 , 23 ]. Human fMRI experiments have reported cortical BOLD signal change to be predominately negative during SWD although positive changes have also been documented. Negative BOLD changes in the cortex during SWD have drawn the most intense scrutiny and speculation regarding their role in the clinical manifestations of absence seizures. Experiments have shown deactivations ranging from nearly the entire cortex [ 25 ] to smaller subsets of the cortex [ 28 , 63 – 67 ] though the meaning of cortical BOLD decreases during SWD remains unknown. Experimenters have seen bilateral decreased BOLD signal change in the anterior and posterior interhemispheric regions, lateral frontal and parietal association cortices, and the posterior cingulate/retrosplenial/precuneus areas [ 25 , 28 , 63 – 65 , 67 , 68 ]. Several investigators [ 63 , 66 , 69 ] have noted the similarity between the BOLD deactivation pattern generated by SWD and those areas that characterize normal brain activity [ 70 ]. While much work has been done to pinpoint cortical decreases associated with SWD, variable results have been found and further study is necessary. Reports of positive cortical changes in BOLD signal during SWD are less consistent and less pronounced than negative changes. Activations have been found in the bilateral precentral sulci [ 64 ], mesial frontal cortex, bilateral insula [ 69 ], bilateral motor cortex [ 65 ], occipital cortex, and inferior parietal cortex [ 66 ]. Most of these studies have reported variable fMRI increases in the lateral frontal and parietal cortical regions [ 28 , 68 ]. The variation and lack of consistency seen in labeling positive cortical BOLD changes suggests additional study is necessary.  Thalamic BOLD changes Like the cortex, the thalamus has long been implicated in SWD generation and maintenance [ 2 , 18 , 23 , 71 ]. Human BOLD studies, especially those implementing continuous EEG-fMRI, have consistently found bilateral thalamic increases [ 25 , 26 , 28 , 63 , 65 , 66 , 68 ] though some studies have also found thalamic decreases [ 26 , 63 ]. Some investigators have attempted to differentiate the BOLD signal changes in different thalamic nuclei, but the currently available spatial resolution of fMRI as well as the image processing necessary for analysis does not necessarily allow it [ 26 ]. Thalamic activity is, at times, seen only at higher field strengths (3T) [ 66 ] and continued advances in fMRI technology may reveal more information regarding the thalamus’ metabolic activity during SWD.  Thalamic BOLD changes Like the cortex, the thalamus has long been implicated in SWD generation and maintenance [ 2 , 18 , 23 , 71 ]. Human BOLD studies, especially those implementing continuous EEG-fMRI, have consistently found bilateral thalamic increases [ 25 , 26 , 28 , 63 , 65 , 66 , 68 ] though some studies have also found thalamic decreases [ 26 , 63 ]. Some investigators have attempted to differentiate the BOLD signal changes in different thalamic nuclei, but the currently available spatial resolution of fMRI as well as the image processing necessary for analysis does not necessarily allow it [ 26 ]. Thalamic activity is, at times, seen only at higher field strengths (3T) [ 66 ] and continued advances in fMRI technology may reveal more information regarding the thalamus’ metabolic activity during SWD.  Basal ganglia, cerebellum, and brainstem BOLD changes outside of the cortex and thalamus have been reported, though these changes have received much less attention, and some studies have chosen to focus solely on the corticothalamic network [ 67 ]. Increases in the cerebellum have been found [ 63 , 69 ] as have increases (probably artifactual) in the lateral ventricles [ 69 ] and white matter tracts associated with the thalamus [ 65 ]. Cerebellar activity during SWD has been previously noted [ 72 , 73 ], but the cerebellum’s role has not yet been defined. Decreases have also been found in the basal ganglia [ 25 , 28 , 68 ]. The importance of the basal ganglia and the brainstem in absence epilepsy has been demonstrated in animal models [ 74 – 77 ] and human patients [ 78 , 79 ]. Currently, little emphasis has been placed on BOLD signal changes outside the thalamocortical network, but this is an area worthy of further study.  Basal ganglia, cerebellum, and brainstem BOLD changes outside of the cortex and thalamus have been reported, though these changes have received much less attention, and some studies have chosen to focus solely on the corticothalamic network [ 67 ]. Increases in the cerebellum have been found [ 63 , 69 ] as have increases (probably artifactual) in the lateral ventricles [ 69 ] and white matter tracts associated with the thalamus [ 65 ]. Cerebellar activity during SWD has been previously noted [ 72 , 73 ], but the cerebellum’s role has not yet been defined. Decreases have also been found in the basal ganglia [ 25 , 28 , 68 ]. The importance of the basal ganglia and the brainstem in absence epilepsy has been demonstrated in animal models [ 74 – 77 ] and human patients [ 78 , 79 ]. Currently, little emphasis has been placed on BOLD signal changes outside the thalamocortical network, but this is an area worthy of further study.  Discussion of human fMRI studies of spike-wave SWD is a rhythm that arises out of normal brain circuitry and physiology but is a distortion of normal mechanisms [ 2 ]. It affects specific circuits in the brain while sparing others. Structures that are affected by spike-and-wave discharge are the same networks that are important for normal oscillations, and the involvement of these structures interrupts normal brain activity. Much attention has been paid to the possible connection between the behavioral deficits seen in absence seizures and the cortical deactivations seen in human BOLD studies [ 69 ]. This should not lead investigators to ignore prominent BOLD changes in subcortical structures or BOLD increases in the cortex. fMRI increases in the thalamus have been observed repeatedly, but the mechanism that drives the BOLD changes is as yet unknown. Are the BOLD increases in the thalamus due to increased activity of excitatory or inhibitory neurons? Are neurons firing more or less in the thalamus during SWD? Thalamic decreases remain unexplained (as do the mechanism that underlies all BOLD decreases in SWD). It has also been suggested that SWD may be generated by more than one mechanism, which might explain the varied cortical BOLD signal changes [ 25 , 67 ]. Finally, the relatively consistent BOLD changes seen in the thalamus, fronto-parietal cortex, and posterior cingulate/retrosplenial/precuneus ( Fig. 3 ) areas may represent an important functional network in SWD generation. Cortical fMRI increases have not been given the same attention as cortical decreases in SWD. The possible role of these regions in SWD generation and behavioral deficits warrants further investigation. One author suggested the variability in cortical signal might have less to do with SWD generation and more to do with the normal baseline activity of each individual [ 66 ]. If SWD leads to an interruption of normal activity, then baseline activity would dictate which cortical areas showed increases and decreases [ 69 ].  Discussion of human fMRI studies of spike-wave SWD is a rhythm that arises out of normal brain circuitry and physiology but is a distortion of normal mechanisms [ 2 ]. It affects specific circuits in the brain while sparing others. Structures that are affected by spike-and-wave discharge are the same networks that are important for normal oscillations, and the involvement of these structures interrupts normal brain activity. Much attention has been paid to the possible connection between the behavioral deficits seen in absence seizures and the cortical deactivations seen in human BOLD studies [ 69 ]. This should not lead investigators to ignore prominent BOLD changes in subcortical structures or BOLD increases in the cortex. fMRI increases in the thalamus have been observed repeatedly, but the mechanism that drives the BOLD changes is as yet unknown. Are the BOLD increases in the thalamus due to increased activity of excitatory or inhibitory neurons? Are neurons firing more or less in the thalamus during SWD? Thalamic decreases remain unexplained (as do the mechanism that underlies all BOLD decreases in SWD). It has also been suggested that SWD may be generated by more than one mechanism, which might explain the varied cortical BOLD signal changes [ 25 , 67 ]. Finally, the relatively consistent BOLD changes seen in the thalamus, fronto-parietal cortex, and posterior cingulate/retrosplenial/precuneus ( Fig. 3 ) areas may represent an important functional network in SWD generation. Cortical fMRI increases have not been given the same attention as cortical decreases in SWD. The possible role of these regions in SWD generation and behavioral deficits warrants further investigation. One author suggested the variability in cortical signal might have less to do with SWD generation and more to do with the normal baseline activity of each individual [ 66 ]. If SWD leads to an interruption of normal activity, then baseline activity would dictate which cortical areas showed increases and decreases [ 69 ].  Limitations of human studies to date Attempts to localize SWD using BOLD fMRI have produced inconsistent results. Studies have been limited by heterogeneous patient populations (e.g. age, medication, diagnosis, seizure activity) (reviewed in [ 66 ]). As has already been noted, stronger field strengths have allowed researchers to find signal changes that were not apparent at lower field strengths, and continued advances in fMRI research techniques may reveal a more consistent pattern of significant fMRI signal changes. Furthermore, while several researchers have connected their fMRI data with the behavioral deficits often associated with absence seizures, simultaneous behavioral testing may allow researchers to understand the relationship between fMRI changes and behavioral changes [ 28 , 68 ]. Thus, it will be critical in further studies to directly link fMRI signal changes with behavioral deficits. Finally, techniques to date have not necessarily differentiated BOLD activity based on seizure duration. CBF and brain metabolism may differ in brief SWD as opposed to in prolonged seizures or absence status epilepticus. Furthermore, fMRI signal changes and the spatial heterogeneity of SWD amplitude in different brain regions based on EEG (or MEG) have not yet been correlated.  Limitations of human studies to date Attempts to localize SWD using BOLD fMRI have produced inconsistent results. Studies have been limited by heterogeneous patient populations (e.g. age, medication, diagnosis, seizure activity) (reviewed in [ 66 ]). As has already been noted, stronger field strengths have allowed researchers to find signal changes that were not apparent at lower field strengths, and continued advances in fMRI research techniques may reveal a more consistent pattern of significant fMRI signal changes. Furthermore, while several researchers have connected their fMRI data with the behavioral deficits often associated with absence seizures, simultaneous behavioral testing may allow researchers to understand the relationship between fMRI changes and behavioral changes [ 28 , 68 ]. Thus, it will be critical in further studies to directly link fMRI signal changes with behavioral deficits. Finally, techniques to date have not necessarily differentiated BOLD activity based on seizure duration. CBF and brain metabolism may differ in brief SWD as opposed to in prolonged seizures or absence status epilepticus. Furthermore, fMRI signal changes and the spatial heterogeneity of SWD amplitude in different brain regions based on EEG (or MEG) have not yet been correlated.  Animal fMRI studies of spike-wave Animal studies are vital companions to human studies and provide advantages for studying epilepsy and conducting fMRI experiments. Animal models of epilepsy often allow investigators to control seizure type, frequency and onset, which enable the collection of the most consistent and reproducible data possible. Animals may be restrained and/or anesthetized to reduce movement artifact, and animal models make possible the study of fMRI and its neural correlates by allowing direct study of neural activity using combined imaging, electrophysiological measurements with microelectrodes and other techniques [ 14 , 15 , 55 , 56 , 80 ]. Tissue collected from specific brain regions identified by animal fMRI studies may uncover the molecular mechanisms giving rise to seizure susceptibility in those regions. Of course, animal models of epilepsy are limited in that they are models. Results from animal models must be analyzed with the understanding that human and animal physiologies are crucially different. For example, SWD have a faster frequency in rodent models (7–8 Hz) than in humans (3–4 Hz), and SWD persist in adulthood in rodents, while they usually disappear in adolescence in humans. Other difficulties and technical challenges arise from the high magnetic field strength used to image small animals, including difficulty in obtaining simultaneous EEG during fMRI recordings [ 15 , 81 ], the sensitivity of imaging signals to movement artifact, and magnetic susceptibility artifact often found at air-tissue interfaces. Anesthesia, if used, must be chosen with care. Anesthetic agents may suppress seizure activity or alter cerebral hemodynamics, introducing a confounding factor in fMRI analysis. While under anesthesia or otherwise, systemic physiology should be monitored in ventilated animals during fMRI studies. Changes in blood pressure and pCO2 may confound imaging results. Ideally, SWD seizures should be imaged in animals without anesthesia [ 81 , 82 ]. However, this is a technical challenge due to the extensive animal training required to habituate them to the recording procedures [ 83 , 84 ]. Human experiments have left many unanswered questions about the meaning of SWD-induced fMRI signal increases and decreases. It is hoped that accurate animal models may answer these questions by elucidating the relationships between the fMRI signal changes, underlying neuronal activity, and molecular mechanisms (Blumenfeld 2005b). The main animal models of SWD studied with fMRI to date include spontaneous seizures in rat SWD models, and chemically induced seizures using gamma-butyrolactone (GBL). WAG/Rij Prominent animal models of SWD include spontaneous seizures seen in Wistar AlbinoGlaxo rats of Rijswijk (WAG/Rij). WAG/Rij rats have spontaneous SWD and are an established model of human absence epilepsy [ 85 ]. As in human data, there has been some inconsistency in reported BOLD signal changes during SWD. Some experimental data of fMRI recordings during spontaneous SWD activity in WAG/Rij rats have revealed no significantly negative BOLD changes associated with SWDs [ 86 ]. The same experiment showed widespread increases in the thalamus and in the cortex. No significant changes were found in the hippocampus [ 86 ]. A second group utilizing continuous EEG-fMRI found increased BOLD signal change in several regions of the cortex and subcortical structures, without major fMRI decreases ( Fig. 4 ) [ 15 ]. Increases were seen in the somatosensory cotex, motor cortex, thalamus, basal ganglia, hippocampus, and brainstem (tectum and tegmental nuclei) and were mostly bilaterally and symmetrically distributed [ 15 ]. More recent studies with a higher field (9.4T) system detected both fMRI increases as well as decreases in specific brain regions in the same rodent model [ 87 ]. fMRI decreases were seen mainly in the basal ganglia and hippocampus, but were also occasionally present in small regions of the neocortex [ 87 ]. Although absence epilepsy is considered a generalized seizure disorder, fMRI and electrical recordings of SWD have found that focal anterior regions of the brain were most intensively involved, while other brain regions remained relatively quiet ( Figs. 2 , 4 ) [ 13 – 15 ]. Studies in rodent models have revealed focal abnormalities in voltage gated channel expression which may be related to epileptogenesis in this form of epilepsy [ 27 , 88 ]. The ability to non-invasively image focal network involvement may ultimately lead to a better understanding of mechanisms in specific brain regions crucial for generation of SWD in both animal models and human patients. GBL rat model GBL is a precursor of ?-hydroxybutryate and produces robust SWDs in rats, resembling petit mal status epilepticus [ 82 , 89 ]. There is evidence that anesthesia limits the BOLD signal change in GBL-induced SWD [ 82 ] but awake animals have yielded interesting BOLD fMRI data. GBL-induced SWDs showed widespread negative changes in the cortex while also showing positive changes in the somatosensory and parietal cortices. The thalamus showed only significant positive BOLD changes. While these findings in some ways resemble reported changes during human SWD, important differences include the frequency of the discharges (6–7 Hz in GBL rat model vs. 3–4 Hz in human) and their duration (continuous status epilepticus in rat GBL model vs. brief episodes in human). The GBL has some advantages compared to spontaneous rodent seizure models, since GBL-induced seizures are robust and long lasting, however, the spontaneous seizure models have the advantage of producing brief seizure episodes more similar to typical seizure durations in humans. GBL monkey model GBL seizures have also been studied in non-human primates. Advantages of primate models of SWD include SWD activity more closely resembling human SWD. Marmoset monkeys demonstrate 3 Hz SWD activity, which is more comparable to human SWD activity. Widespread increases were seen throughout cortical and subcortical structures including the thalamus and hippocampus. Unlike in GBL-induced seizures in rats, no significant negative BOLD changes were seen although changes in the hippocampus and the anterior cingulate were only seen during shorter time points. As in the rat model, GBL-induced seizures in monkeys most closely resembles status epilepticus [ 90 ]. Discussion of animal studies of spike-wave It is not yet clear why human fMRI studies of SWD show a mix of cortical increases and prominent decreases while animal models with brief episodes of SWD show mainly cortical increases. Similarly, it is unclear why prolonged SWD causes mainly BOLD increases in the monkey GBL model, but both increases and decreases in the rat GBL model. Some of this may reflect a lack of understanding of the fundamental mechanisms of fMRI increases and decreases during seizures. Direct recordings of neuronal activity, which can be performed in animal models ( Figure 5 ), may provide a way to unravel the complex relationships between neuronal activity patterns and BOLD fMRI. Studies performed so far in WAG/Rij rats have demonstrated that regions with fMRI increases during SWD (e.g. barrel somatosensory cortex, S1BF, Figure 4 ) exhibit increases in neuronal firing and CBF during SWD ( Figure 5 ). Meanwhile, regions with no fMRI signal changes during SWD (e.g. primary visual cortex, V1M, Figure 4 ) show no changes in neuronal firing or CBF ( Figure 5 ). Further studies will be needed, particularly in regions showing fMRI decreases, to more fully understand these phenomena.  Animal fMRI studies of spike-wave Animal studies are vital companions to human studies and provide advantages for studying epilepsy and conducting fMRI experiments. Animal models of epilepsy often allow investigators to control seizure type, frequency and onset, which enable the collection of the most consistent and reproducible data possible. Animals may be restrained and/or anesthetized to reduce movement artifact, and animal models make possible the study of fMRI and its neural correlates by allowing direct study of neural activity using combined imaging, electrophysiological measurements with microelectrodes and other techniques [ 14 , 15 , 55 , 56 , 80 ]. Tissue collected from specific brain regions identified by animal fMRI studies may uncover the molecular mechanisms giving rise to seizure susceptibility in those regions. Of course, animal models of epilepsy are limited in that they are models. Results from animal models must be analyzed with the understanding that human and animal physiologies are crucially different. For example, SWD have a faster frequency in rodent models (7–8 Hz) than in humans (3–4 Hz), and SWD persist in adulthood in rodents, while they usually disappear in adolescence in humans. Other difficulties and technical challenges arise from the high magnetic field strength used to image small animals, including difficulty in obtaining simultaneous EEG during fMRI recordings [ 15 , 81 ], the sensitivity of imaging signals to movement artifact, and magnetic susceptibility artifact often found at air-tissue interfaces. Anesthesia, if used, must be chosen with care. Anesthetic agents may suppress seizure activity or alter cerebral hemodynamics, introducing a confounding factor in fMRI analysis. While under anesthesia or otherwise, systemic physiology should be monitored in ventilated animals during fMRI studies. Changes in blood pressure and pCO2 may confound imaging results. Ideally, SWD seizures should be imaged in animals without anesthesia [ 81 , 82 ]. However, this is a technical challenge due to the extensive animal training required to habituate them to the recording procedures [ 83 , 84 ]. Human experiments have left many unanswered questions about the meaning of SWD-induced fMRI signal increases and decreases. It is hoped that accurate animal models may answer these questions by elucidating the relationships between the fMRI signal changes, underlying neuronal activity, and molecular mechanisms (Blumenfeld 2005b). The main animal models of SWD studied with fMRI to date include spontaneous seizures in rat SWD models, and chemically induced seizures using gamma-butyrolactone (GBL). WAG/Rij Prominent animal models of SWD include spontaneous seizures seen in Wistar AlbinoGlaxo rats of Rijswijk (WAG/Rij). WAG/Rij rats have spontaneous SWD and are an established model of human absence epilepsy [ 85 ]. As in human data, there has been some inconsistency in reported BOLD signal changes during SWD. Some experimental data of fMRI recordings during spontaneous SWD activity in WAG/Rij rats have revealed no significantly negative BOLD changes associated with SWDs [ 86 ]. The same experiment showed widespread increases in the thalamus and in the cortex. No significant changes were found in the hippocampus [ 86 ]. A second group utilizing continuous EEG-fMRI found increased BOLD signal change in several regions of the cortex and subcortical structures, without major fMRI decreases ( Fig. 4 ) [ 15 ]. Increases were seen in the somatosensory cotex, motor cortex, thalamus, basal ganglia, hippocampus, and brainstem (tectum and tegmental nuclei) and were mostly bilaterally and symmetrically distributed [ 15 ]. More recent studies with a higher field (9.4T) system detected both fMRI increases as well as decreases in specific brain regions in the same rodent model [ 87 ]. fMRI decreases were seen mainly in the basal ganglia and hippocampus, but were also occasionally present in small regions of the neocortex [ 87 ]. Although absence epilepsy is considered a generalized seizure disorder, fMRI and electrical recordings of SWD have found that focal anterior regions of the brain were most intensively involved, while other brain regions remained relatively quiet ( Figs. 2 , 4 ) [ 13 – 15 ]. Studies in rodent models have revealed focal abnormalities in voltage gated channel expression which may be related to epileptogenesis in this form of epilepsy [ 27 , 88 ]. The ability to non-invasively image focal network involvement may ultimately lead to a better understanding of mechanisms in specific brain regions crucial for generation of SWD in both animal models and human patients. GBL rat model GBL is a precursor of ?-hydroxybutryate and produces robust SWDs in rats, resembling petit mal status epilepticus [ 82 , 89 ]. There is evidence that anesthesia limits the BOLD signal change in GBL-induced SWD [ 82 ] but awake animals have yielded interesting BOLD fMRI data. GBL-induced SWDs showed widespread negative changes in the cortex while also showing positive changes in the somatosensory and parietal cortices. The thalamus showed only significant positive BOLD changes. While these findings in some ways resemble reported changes during human SWD, important differences include the frequency of the discharges (6–7 Hz in GBL rat model vs. 3–4 Hz in human) and their duration (continuous status epilepticus in rat GBL model vs. brief episodes in human). The GBL has some advantages compared to spontaneous rodent seizure models, since GBL-induced seizures are robust and long lasting, however, the spontaneous seizure models have the advantage of producing brief seizure episodes more similar to typical seizure durations in humans. GBL monkey model GBL seizures have also been studied in non-human primates. Advantages of primate models of SWD include SWD activity more closely resembling human SWD. Marmoset monkeys demonstrate 3 Hz SWD activity, which is more comparable to human SWD activity. Widespread increases were seen throughout cortical and subcortical structures including the thalamus and hippocampus. Unlike in GBL-induced seizures in rats, no significant negative BOLD changes were seen although changes in the hippocampus and the anterior cingulate were only seen during shorter time points. As in the rat model, GBL-induced seizures in monkeys most closely resembles status epilepticus [ 90 ]. Discussion of animal studies of spike-wave It is not yet clear why human fMRI studies of SWD show a mix of cortical increases and prominent decreases while animal models with brief episodes of SWD show mainly cortical increases. Similarly, it is unclear why prolonged SWD causes mainly BOLD increases in the monkey GBL model, but both increases and decreases in the rat GBL model. Some of this may reflect a lack of understanding of the fundamental mechanisms of fMRI increases and decreases during seizures. Direct recordings of neuronal activity, which can be performed in animal models ( Figure 5 ), may provide a way to unravel the complex relationships between neuronal activity patterns and BOLD fMRI. Studies performed so far in WAG/Rij rats have demonstrated that regions with fMRI increases during SWD (e.g. barrel somatosensory cortex, S1BF, Figure 4 ) exhibit increases in neuronal firing and CBF during SWD ( Figure 5 ). Meanwhile, regions with no fMRI signal changes during SWD (e.g. primary visual cortex, V1M, Figure 4 ) show no changes in neuronal firing or CBF ( Figure 5 ). Further studies will be needed, particularly in regions showing fMRI decreases, to more fully understand these phenomena.  WAG/Rij Prominent animal models of SWD include spontaneous seizures seen in Wistar AlbinoGlaxo rats of Rijswijk (WAG/Rij). WAG/Rij rats have spontaneous SWD and are an established model of human absence epilepsy [ 85 ]. As in human data, there has been some inconsistency in reported BOLD signal changes during SWD. Some experimental data of fMRI recordings during spontaneous SWD activity in WAG/Rij rats have revealed no significantly negative BOLD changes associated with SWDs [ 86 ]. The same experiment showed widespread increases in the thalamus and in the cortex. No significant changes were found in the hippocampus [ 86 ]. A second group utilizing continuous EEG-fMRI found increased BOLD signal change in several regions of the cortex and subcortical structures, without major fMRI decreases ( Fig. 4 ) [ 15 ]. Increases were seen in the somatosensory cotex, motor cortex, thalamus, basal ganglia, hippocampus, and brainstem (tectum and tegmental nuclei) and were mostly bilaterally and symmetrically distributed [ 15 ]. More recent studies with a higher field (9.4T) system detected both fMRI increases as well as decreases in specific brain regions in the same rodent model [ 87 ]. fMRI decreases were seen mainly in the basal ganglia and hippocampus, but were also occasionally present in small regions of the neocortex [ 87 ]. Although absence epilepsy is considered a generalized seizure disorder, fMRI and electrical recordings of SWD have found that focal anterior regions of the brain were most intensively involved, while other brain regions remained relatively quiet ( Figs. 2 , 4 ) [ 13 – 15 ]. Studies in rodent models have revealed focal abnormalities in voltage gated channel expression which may be related to epileptogenesis in this form of epilepsy [ 27 , 88 ]. The ability to non-invasively image focal network involvement may ultimately lead to a better understanding of mechanisms in specific brain regions crucial for generation of SWD in both animal models and human patients.  WAG/Rij Prominent animal models of SWD include spontaneous seizures seen in Wistar AlbinoGlaxo rats of Rijswijk (WAG/Rij). WAG/Rij rats have spontaneous SWD and are an established model of human absence epilepsy [ 85 ]. As in human data, there has been some inconsistency in reported BOLD signal changes during SWD. Some experimental data of fMRI recordings during spontaneous SWD activity in WAG/Rij rats have revealed no significantly negative BOLD changes associated with SWDs [ 86 ]. The same experiment showed widespread increases in the thalamus and in the cortex. No significant changes were found in the hippocampus [ 86 ]. A second group utilizing continuous EEG-fMRI found increased BOLD signal change in several regions of the cortex and subcortical structures, without major fMRI decreases ( Fig. 4 ) [ 15 ]. Increases were seen in the somatosensory cotex, motor cortex, thalamus, basal ganglia, hippocampus, and brainstem (tectum and tegmental nuclei) and were mostly bilaterally and symmetrically distributed [ 15 ]. More recent studies with a higher field (9.4T) system detected both fMRI increases as well as decreases in specific brain regions in the same rodent model [ 87 ]. fMRI decreases were seen mainly in the basal ganglia and hippocampus, but were also occasionally present in small regions of the neocortex [ 87 ]. Although absence epilepsy is considered a generalized seizure disorder, fMRI and electrical recordings of SWD have found that focal anterior regions of the brain were most intensively involved, while other brain regions remained relatively quiet ( Figs. 2 , 4 ) [ 13 – 15 ]. Studies in rodent models have revealed focal abnormalities in voltage gated channel expression which may be related to epileptogenesis in this form of epilepsy [ 27 , 88 ]. The ability to non-invasively image focal network involvement may ultimately lead to a better understanding of mechanisms in specific brain regions crucial for generation of SWD in both animal models and human patients.  GBL rat model GBL is a precursor of ?-hydroxybutryate and produces robust SWDs in rats, resembling petit mal status epilepticus [ 82 , 89 ]. There is evidence that anesthesia limits the BOLD signal change in GBL-induced SWD [ 82 ] but awake animals have yielded interesting BOLD fMRI data. GBL-induced SWDs showed widespread negative changes in the cortex while also showing positive changes in the somatosensory and parietal cortices. The thalamus showed only significant positive BOLD changes. While these findings in some ways resemble reported changes during human SWD, important differences include the frequency of the discharges (6–7 Hz in GBL rat model vs. 3–4 Hz in human) and their duration (continuous status epilepticus in rat GBL model vs. brief episodes in human). The GBL has some advantages compared to spontaneous rodent seizure models, since GBL-induced seizures are robust and long lasting, however, the spontaneous seizure models have the advantage of producing brief seizure episodes more similar to typical seizure durations in humans.  GBL rat model GBL is a precursor of ?-hydroxybutryate and produces robust SWDs in rats, resembling petit mal status epilepticus [ 82 , 89 ]. There is evidence that anesthesia limits the BOLD signal change in GBL-induced SWD [ 82 ] but awake animals have yielded interesting BOLD fMRI data. GBL-induced SWDs showed widespread negative changes in the cortex while also showing positive changes in the somatosensory and parietal cortices. The thalamus showed only significant positive BOLD changes. While these findings in some ways resemble reported changes during human SWD, important differences include the frequency of the discharges (6–7 Hz in GBL rat model vs. 3–4 Hz in human) and their duration (continuous status epilepticus in rat GBL model vs. brief episodes in human). The GBL has some advantages compared to spontaneous rodent seizure models, since GBL-induced seizures are robust and long lasting, however, the spontaneous seizure models have the advantage of producing brief seizure episodes more similar to typical seizure durations in humans.  GBL monkey model GBL seizures have also been studied in non-human primates. Advantages of primate models of SWD include SWD activity more closely resembling human SWD. Marmoset monkeys demonstrate 3 Hz SWD activity, which is more comparable to human SWD activity. Widespread increases were seen throughout cortical and subcortical structures including the thalamus and hippocampus. Unlike in GBL-induced seizures in rats, no significant negative BOLD changes were seen although changes in the hippocampus and the anterior cingulate were only seen during shorter time points. As in the rat model, GBL-induced seizures in monkeys most closely resembles status epilepticus [ 90 ].  GBL monkey model GBL seizures have also been studied in non-human primates. Advantages of primate models of SWD include SWD activity more closely resembling human SWD. Marmoset monkeys demonstrate 3 Hz SWD activity, which is more comparable to human SWD activity. Widespread increases were seen throughout cortical and subcortical structures including the thalamus and hippocampus. Unlike in GBL-induced seizures in rats, no significant negative BOLD changes were seen although changes in the hippocampus and the anterior cingulate were only seen during shorter time points. As in the rat model, GBL-induced seizures in monkeys most closely resembles status epilepticus [ 90 ].  Discussion of animal studies of spike-wave It is not yet clear why human fMRI studies of SWD show a mix of cortical increases and prominent decreases while animal models with brief episodes of SWD show mainly cortical increases. Similarly, it is unclear why prolonged SWD causes mainly BOLD increases in the monkey GBL model, but both increases and decreases in the rat GBL model. Some of this may reflect a lack of understanding of the fundamental mechanisms of fMRI increases and decreases during seizures. Direct recordings of neuronal activity, which can be performed in animal models ( Figure 5 ), may provide a way to unravel the complex relationships between neuronal activity patterns and BOLD fMRI. Studies performed so far in WAG/Rij rats have demonstrated that regions with fMRI increases during SWD (e.g. barrel somatosensory cortex, S1BF, Figure 4 ) exhibit increases in neuronal firing and CBF during SWD ( Figure 5 ). Meanwhile, regions with no fMRI signal changes during SWD (e.g. primary visual cortex, V1M, Figure 4 ) show no changes in neuronal firing or CBF ( Figure 5 ). Further studies will be needed, particularly in regions showing fMRI decreases, to more fully understand these phenomena.  Discussion of animal studies of spike-wave It is not yet clear why human fMRI studies of SWD show a mix of cortical increases and prominent decreases while animal models with brief episodes of SWD show mainly cortical increases. Similarly, it is unclear why prolonged SWD causes mainly BOLD increases in the monkey GBL model, but both increases and decreases in the rat GBL model. Some of this may reflect a lack of understanding of the fundamental mechanisms of fMRI increases and decreases during seizures. Direct recordings of neuronal activity, which can be performed in animal models ( Figure 5 ), may provide a way to unravel the complex relationships between neuronal activity patterns and BOLD fMRI. Studies performed so far in WAG/Rij rats have demonstrated that regions with fMRI increases during SWD (e.g. barrel somatosensory cortex, S1BF, Figure 4 ) exhibit increases in neuronal firing and CBF during SWD ( Figure 5 ). Meanwhile, regions with no fMRI signal changes during SWD (e.g. primary visual cortex, V1M, Figure 4 ) show no changes in neuronal firing or CBF ( Figure 5 ). Further studies will be needed, particularly in regions showing fMRI decreases, to more fully understand these phenomena.  Possible mechanisms of fMRI decreases during seizures From the above discussion, it follows that BOLD fMRI increases during SWD most likely reflect focal increases in neuronal activity. However, the mechanisms of BOLD decreases during SWD and other forms of seizure activity are not well understood. Possible mechanisms of BOLD fMRI decreases include: ( 1 ) A primarily vascular mechanism , where blood supply decreases in specific brain regions during seizures. Primary causes of decreased blood flow could include ( 1A ) vasospasm or ( 1B ) vascular steal . Excessive decreases in local blood flow will decrease net oxygenation, leading to a decrease in BOLD. Significant decreases in oxygenation (hypoxia) could also secondarily cause some reduction in neuronal activity ( Figure 2C ). ( 2 ) A primarily neural mechanism where cortical neuronal activity decreases in specific brain regions during seizures. If neurovascular coupling is normal, reduced neuronal activity usually leads to an excessive reduction in blood flow ( Figure 2C ), again causing a net decrease in oxygenation, and a decrease in the BOLD signal. A primary decrease in neuronal activity could occur in several ways: ( 2A ) Decreased neuronal activity in regions spared by seizures. While seizures cause neuronal activity to increase in regions intensely involved in epileptic activity, network effect may cause neuronal activity to decrease in other regions of the brain which are not directly involved in the seizure. This could occur either through ( 2Ai ) active inhibition, or ( 2Aii ) reduced excitation in these regions. Examples of decreased neuronal activity and CBF have been observed while studying cortical brain regions spared by partial seizures in both animal models (Englot and Blumenfeld 2007; unpublished data), and in humans [ 5 , 6 ]; ( 2B ) Decreased neuronal activity in regions involved by seizures. A second primarily neural mechanism may occur in which some cortical regions which are involved in seizures could, nevertheless, show reduced neuronal activity. While seizure activity is generally thought to increase neuronal activity, SWD is associated with an alternating pattern, between increases in neuronal activity during the spike component, and decreases in neuronal activity during the wave [ 91 ]. It is possible that some brain regions may have subtle changes in intensity of firing during the spike or changes in duration of neuronal silence during the wave, which could lead to a mean decrease in neuronal activity during SWD, as discussed previously [ 2 , 92 ]. ( 3 ) Altered neuro-vascular coupling . In this mechanism, unlike those above, the primary event is an increase in neuronal activity during seizures. However, this increase in neuronal activity is met by an inadequate increase in blood flow to match metabolic demands, leading to a BOLD fMRI decrease ( Figure 2D ). Note that in this mechanism blood flow can increase (unlike Figure 2D ); the main point is that the blood flow increase is inadequate. An example of this mechanism has recently been observed in a rodent model, where BOLD decreases in the hippocampus accompany intense seizure activity in the same region [ 61 ]. There are two main possibilities to explain abnormal neurovascular coupling during seizures: ( 3A ) Intense neuronal activity could overwhelm neurovascular coupling . In this mechanism, sudden extreme increases in neuronal energy consumption could exceed the capacity of neurovascular coupling mechanisms to deliver adequate oxygen. ( 3B ) Dysregulation of the neurovascular coupling cascade. In this mechanism, the inherent signaling cascade underlying neurovascular coupling could be altered acutely or chronically by seizures (or other causes), leading to an abnormal blunted response to neuronal activity changes. Which of the above mechanisms are involved in BOLD fMRI decreases during SWD in both humans and animal models remains to be determined by further investigations.  Possible mechanisms of fMRI decreases during seizures From the above discussion, it follows that BOLD fMRI increases during SWD most likely reflect focal increases in neuronal activity. However, the mechanisms of BOLD decreases during SWD and other forms of seizure activity are not well understood. Possible mechanisms of BOLD fMRI decreases include: ( 1 ) A primarily vascular mechanism , where blood supply decreases in specific brain regions during seizures. Primary causes of decreased blood flow could include ( 1A ) vasospasm or ( 1B ) vascular steal . Excessive decreases in local blood flow will decrease net oxygenation, leading to a decrease in BOLD. Significant decreases in oxygenation (hypoxia) could also secondarily cause some reduction in neuronal activity ( Figure 2C ). ( 2 ) A primarily neural mechanism where cortical neuronal activity decreases in specific brain regions during seizures. If neurovascular coupling is normal, reduced neuronal activity usually leads to an excessive reduction in blood flow ( Figure 2C ), again causing a net decrease in oxygenation, and a decrease in the BOLD signal. A primary decrease in neuronal activity could occur in several ways: ( 2A ) Decreased neuronal activity in regions spared by seizures. While seizures cause neuronal activity to increase in regions intensely involved in epileptic activity, network effect may cause neuronal activity to decrease in other regions of the brain which are not directly involved in the seizure. This could occur either through ( 2Ai ) active inhibition, or ( 2Aii ) reduced excitation in these regions. Examples of decreased neuronal activity and CBF have been observed while studying cortical brain regions spared by partial seizures in both animal models (Englot and Blumenfeld 2007; unpublished data), and in humans [ 5 , 6 ]; ( 2B ) Decreased neuronal activity in regions involved by seizures. A second primarily neural mechanism may occur in which some cortical regions which are involved in seizures could, nevertheless, show reduced neuronal activity. While seizure activity is generally thought to increase neuronal activity, SWD is associated with an alternating pattern, between increases in neuronal activity during the spike component, and decreases in neuronal activity during the wave [ 91 ]. It is possible that some brain regions may have subtle changes in intensity of firing during the spike or changes in duration of neuronal silence during the wave, which could lead to a mean decrease in neuronal activity during SWD, as discussed previously [ 2 , 92 ]. ( 3 ) Altered neuro-vascular coupling . In this mechanism, unlike those above, the primary event is an increase in neuronal activity during seizures. However, this increase in neuronal activity is met by an inadequate increase in blood flow to match metabolic demands, leading to a BOLD fMRI decrease ( Figure 2D ). Note that in this mechanism blood flow can increase (unlike Figure 2D ); the main point is that the blood flow increase is inadequate. An example of this mechanism has recently been observed in a rodent model, where BOLD decreases in the hippocampus accompany intense seizure activity in the same region [ 61 ]. There are two main possibilities to explain abnormal neurovascular coupling during seizures: ( 3A ) Intense neuronal activity could overwhelm neurovascular coupling . In this mechanism, sudden extreme increases in neuronal energy consumption could exceed the capacity of neurovascular coupling mechanisms to deliver adequate oxygen. ( 3B ) Dysregulation of the neurovascular coupling cascade. In this mechanism, the inherent signaling cascade underlying neurovascular coupling could be altered acutely or chronically by seizures (or other causes), leading to an abnormal blunted response to neuronal activity changes. Which of the above mechanisms are involved in BOLD fMRI decreases during SWD in both humans and animal models remains to be determined by further investigations.  Discussion and future directions We have seen that fMRI during SWD in both humans and animal models can provide important information about abnormal network behavior during generalized seizures. Studies so far, have revealed focal bilateral increases in the fronto-parietal cortex and thalamus, decreases in other specific cortical regions, and decreases in the basal ganglia. These investigations support the concept that “generalized” spike-wave seizures, in fact, arise from focal network dysfunction in specific regions of cortical-subcortical networks. Many important questions remain, which should be addressed by future studies. For example, do seizure in which consciousness is impaired differ from those in which consciousness is spared? Is the difference based on the brain regions involved? Are there different molecular mechanisms causing specific regions but not others to be involved during seizures? How do the circuit mechanisms differ for regions involved or spared by seizures? Is the impaired brain function and behavior during seizures caused by abnormally increased activity, abnormally decreased activity, or both? There remains much to learn about spike-and-wave discharges through the use of fMRI. Behavioral tests in both humans and animals must be added to simultaneous EEG-fMRI in order to fully correlate behavioral deficits with the anatomy of fMRI signal changes [ 68 ]. More sophisticated analytic techniques must be developed in order to explore the fMRI time-course, as well as to better correlate the electrophysiology data with the hemodynamic response measured by fMRI data. Long-range network changes can be further investigated using resting functional connectivity studies or the fMRI signals, and using technology such as diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). Numerous measurements, including CBF, CBV, and CMRO2 have yet to be undertaken in human patients or animal models to more fully understand the fundamental neuroenergetics of SWD. fMRI investigation of additional rat, mouse, and feline models of SWD [ 23 , 93 , 94 ] can also provide a more general understanding of SWD mechanisms. Finally, these techniques should be applied to understand developmental changes that occur during the development of epilepsy. Neuroimaging has the potential to provide a safe, non-invasive biomarker for epileptogenesis and its prevention, and could ultimately be used as a way to monitor the success of treatments aimed at suppressing spike-wave development [ 27 ]. Much exciting research remains to be done using fMRI to investigate the unknowns of spike-and-wave discharges and epilepsy in the future.  Discussion and future directions We have seen that fMRI during SWD in both humans and animal models can provide important information about abnormal network behavior during generalized seizures. Studies so far, have revealed focal bilateral increases in the fronto-parietal cortex and thalamus, decreases in other specific cortical regions, and decreases in the basal ganglia. These investigations support the concept that “generalized” spike-wave seizures, in fact, arise from focal network dysfunction in specific regions of cortical-subcortical networks. Many important questions remain, which should be addressed by future studies. For example, do seizure in which consciousness is impaired differ from those in which consciousness is spared? Is the difference based on the brain regions involved? Are there different molecular mechanisms causing specific regions but not others to be involved during seizures? How do the circuit mechanisms differ for regions involved or spared by seizures? Is the impaired brain function and behavior during seizures caused by abnormally increased activity, abnormally decreased activity, or both? There remains much to learn about spike-and-wave discharges through the use of fMRI. Behavioral tests in both humans and animals must be added to simultaneous EEG-fMRI in order to fully correlate behavioral deficits with the anatomy of fMRI signal changes [ 68 ]. More sophisticated analytic techniques must be developed in order to explore the fMRI time-course, as well as to better correlate the electrophysiology data with the hemodynamic response measured by fMRI data. Long-range network changes can be further investigated using resting functional connectivity studies or the fMRI signals, and using technology such as diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). Numerous measurements, including CBF, CBV, and CMRO2 have yet to be undertaken in human patients or animal models to more fully understand the fundamental neuroenergetics of SWD. fMRI investigation of additional rat, mouse, and feline models of SWD [ 23 , 93 , 94 ] can also provide a more general understanding of SWD mechanisms. Finally, these techniques should be applied to understand developmental changes that occur during the development of epilepsy. Neuroimaging has the potential to provide a safe, non-invasive biomarker for epileptogenesis and its prevention, and could ultimately be used as a way to monitor the success of treatments aimed at suppressing spike-wave development [ 27 ]. Much exciting research remains to be done using fMRI to investigate the unknowns of spike-and-wave discharges and epilepsy in the future. 