Tachycardia-induced early afterdepolarizations: insights into potential ionic mechanisms from computer simulations Although early afterdepolarizations (EADs) are classically thought to occur at slow heart rates, mounting evidence suggests that EADs may also occur at rapid heart rates produced by tachyarrhythmias, due to Ca overload of the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) leading to spontaneous SR Ca release. We hypothesized that the mechanism of tachycardia-induced EADs depends on the spatial and temporal morphology of spontaneous SR Ca release, and tested this hypothesis in computer simulations using a ventricular action potential mathematical model. Using two previously suggested spontaneous release morphologies, we found two distinct tachycardia-induced EAD mechanisms: one mechanistically similar to bradycardia-induced EADs, the other to delayed afterdepolarizations (DADs).  1. Introduction Life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias, resulting from abnormal electrical activity in tissue, have been the subject of numerous clinical, physiological, and computational studies. The propagation of electrical excitation in tissue is determined in many respects by processes in individual cells. In particular, the appearance of cellular early afterdepolarizations (EADs) and delayed afterdepolarizations (DADs) are though to exert great influence on electrical behavior at the tissue level. EADs induced by rapid pacing rates, such as those rates associated with ventricular tachycardia, may facilitate the development of more pathological arrhythmias, such as torsades des pointes or ventricular fibrillation. EADs have classically been described as occurring during bradycardia, under conditions of reduced repolarization reserve caused by drugs [ 1 – 3 ], ion channel mutations [ 4 , 5 ], remodeling of ion channels [ 6 ], or electrolyte abnormalities such as hypokalemia [ 7 ]. These bradycardia-induced EADs are generally thought to be due to reduced repolarization reserve allowing regenerative reactivation of the L-type Ca current ( I Ca,L ) in a voltage ( V ) window within which partial activation and incomplete inactivation of I Ca,L overlap [ 8 ]. As I Ca,L reactivates and initiates the EAD upstroke, it secondarily causes a corresponding cytosolic Ca ( Ca i ) aftertransient just after the EAD upstroke, mediated by I Ca,L –gated Ca-induced Ca release (CICR) from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). In this case, the EAD upstroke occurs before the Ca i aftertransient. EADs of this type have been termed early EADs [ 9 ], since they tend to occur during the plateau phase of the action potential (AP). However, EADs have also been observed at rapid heart rates (tachycardia), both in experiments [ 10 ] and computer simulations [ 11 – 13 ]. Experimental evidence has suggested [ 14 , 15 ] that these EADs may be generated by spontaneous (i.e. non- I Ca,L gated) release of Ca from the SR occurring during the repolarization phase. In this mechanism, the Ca i aftertransient occurs first due to SR and cytoplasmic Ca overload triggering spontaneous release, which secondarily triggers the corresponding EAD upstroke by activating inward Ca-sensitive currents to produce a transient inward current ( I ti ). This is similar to the classic mechanism of DADs, but with spontaneous release occurring during systole (repolarization) instead of diastole [ 16 ]. EADs of this type have been termed late EADs [ 9 ], since they tend to occur during late repolarization phase, with a lower takeoff potential than early EADs. Spontaneous SR Ca release is caused by local SR Ca release events that propagate through the cytoplasm as Ca waves [ 17 , 18 ], suggesting that different patterns of local release may facilitate different global spontaneous release morphology and timing. We hypothesize that the mechanism of tachycardia-induced EADs may depend on the spatial and temporal patterns of spontaneous release waves. To test this hypothesis, we performed computer simulation of the ventricular AP using a mathematical model [ 19 ]. In this model, spontaneous SR Ca release is represented using a modified Hodgkin-Huxley type equation for gating processes. The parameters responsible for spontaneous release kinetics, amplitude, and timing in the AP cycle can be modified to produce a spectrum of patterns. We studied two different patterns, which correspond to two physiologically plausible situations. The first is a low peak amplitude, long duration spontaneous release event [ 19 ] that represents spontaneous release initiated at a single site which then propagates slowly through the remainder of the cell. The second is a high amplitude, short duration spontaneous release event [ 20 ] that represents spontaneous release initiated near-simultaneously at multiple sites, so that the Ca waves originating at each site rapidly fuse together, abbreviating the duration and increasing the summated amplitude of global Ca release transient. We found that the mechanism of tachycardia-induced EADs depended on the spontaneous release characteristics. We observed two types of tachycardia-induced EADs, one produced by each spontaneous release pattern, when our model was altered to simulate long QT 1 (LQT1) syndrome. One type of tachycardia-induced EAD, mechanistically similar to early EADs, was associated with the low amplitude, long duration spontaneous release starting during late diastole just before the AP upstroke. The other type, mechanistically similar to late EADs, was caused by the high amplitude, short duration spontaneous release occurring during systole. We compare these mechanisms to experimental findings and discuss their possible relationships to long QT syndromes (LQTS), as well as to catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) syndromes. Our results provide insights into the potential ionic mechanisms governing the interplay between spontaneous release, DADs and EADs, which may have important implications for the initiation [ 21 ] and perpetuation [ 11 – 13 ] of tachyarrhythmias in cardiac tissue.  2. Methods In the present study, we utilized the Chudin model of the guinea pig ventricular AP [ 19 ]. An AP model does not consider the spatially distributed properties of a real cardiac myocyte, instead averaging cell-wide characteristics. The Chudin model incorporates several properties of Ca dynamics that have been observed in physiological experiments: graded CICR gated by I Ca,L [ 22 ], prevention of complete SR depletion during normal CICR [ 23 ], accumulation of Ca in the cytosol ( Ca i ) and Ca in the junctional SR ( Ca jsr ) during high-frequency stimulation [ 24 ], and spontaneous release (denoted in the model as the Ca2+ ion flux J spon ) dependent on Ca overload concentrations in both the SR and cytosol [ 25 ]. This model has since been modified [ 26 ] to reproduce Ca alternans by reformulating CICR as a time dependent process with a steep dependence on Ca jsr (see Shiferaw et al. [ 27 ]), while leaving unchanged the above mentioned Ca dynamics properties (for details see Appendix ). The Chudin model was chosen because it can reproduce different J spon wave morphologies, such as those suggested in previous simulations [ 19 , 20 ], by modifying J spon parameter values. The equation for J spon in the Chudin model is: (Eq. 1) J spon = G spon p ( C a jsr ? C a i ) G spon = 60 ms?1 is the spontaneous release channel conductance. The gate variable p can be considered the probability of J spon occurrence. It is described by a Hodgkin-Huxley type differential equation, though dependent on Ca i and Ca jsr rather than V. Ca jsr - Ca i , the Ca2+ gradient between the JSR and cytosol, is the chemical driving force. The differential equation describing the gate variable p is: (Eq. 2) d p d t = p ? ? p ? p (Eq. 3) ? p = ? 1 + ? 2 ( 1 ? p ? ) ? p , the time constant of variable p , effectively determines the duration of a J spon event. If ? p is increased (by increasing parameters ? 1 and ? 2 ), the duration of J spon events also increases. p ?, the steady state value of p , is a bilinear approximation of a Hodgkin-Huxley type sigmoidal function of two variables ( Ca i and Ca jsr ), explicitly defined by the following equation (and illustrated in Fig. 1 A ): (Eq. 4) p ? = { 0 , i f region I C a jsr ? K 1 K 3 ? K 1 , i f region I I ( a ) ( C a i ? K 2 K 4 ? K 2 ) ( C a jsr ? K 1 K 3 ? K 1 ) , i f region I I ( b ) C a i ? K 2 K 4 ? K 2 , i f region I I ( c ) 1 , i f region III If either Ca jsr or Ca i are below the lower thresholds set by parameters K1 and K2 , respectively, then p ? = 0 (see Fig. 1 A , region I). If both Ca jsr and Ca i exceed the lower thresholds K1 and K2 , but either fails to exceed the upper threshold set by parameters K3 and K4 , respectively, then p ? is approximated by a linear function of Ca jsr and Ca i (see Fig. 1 A , region II). If both Ca jsr and Ca i exceed the upper thresholds K3 and K4 , then p ? = 1 (see Fig. 1 A , region III). K1 and K2 are the threshold for a J spon event to occur. The J spon threshold effectively determines the timing of the onset of J spon events in the AP cycle. During phase 3 and 4 of a normal AP, Ca jsr is increasing and Ca i is decreasing. Thus, to make J spon start earlier in the AP cycle, K1 (the Ca jsr threshold) should be decreased and K2 (the Ca i threshold) should be increased. Table 1 presents the two pairs of K1 and K2 values used in the present study: one pair that leads to J spon events starting during diastole (temporally outside the AP) and the other that leads to J spon events during systole (during the AP). The differences ( K3 - K1 ) and ( K4 - K2 ) effectively determine the amplitude of a J spon event. If either of the differences are reduced (either by increasing the lower thresholds K1 and K2 , or decreasing the upper thresholds K3 and K4 ), then the slope of the p ? function and p ? itself are increased, leading to higher-amplitude J spon events. A desired J spon morphology can be obtained by setting the desired duration (choosing the appropriate value of ? p ) and amplitude (choosing appropriate values of K3 - K1 and K4 - K2 ). Table 2 describes the J spon morphology for two different sets of parameter values used in the AP model for the present study. The first set of parameter values produces relatively low amplitude, long duration J spon events (see Fig. 1 Bii ), as in [ 19 ]. In the second set of parameter values, ? p is an order of magnitude smaller than in the original, while the differences ( K3 - K1 ) and ( K4 - K2 ) are at least an order of magnitude larger. Thus, it produces high amplitude, short duration J spon events (see Fig. 1 Bi ), as in [ 20 ]. The total Ca in an average release was conserved between morphologies. By first selecting the timing of the J spon onset in the AP cycle from Table 1 (setting the values of K1 and K2 ), and then selecting a J spon morphology from Table 2 (setting the values of ? p , K3 , and K4 ), we obtained four different J spon events to study: low amplitude, long duration J spon during diastole; low amplitude, long duration J spon during systole; high amplitude, short duration J spon during diastole; and high amplitude, short duration J spon during systole. The appearance of EADs under conditions of tachycardia in the Chudin AP model was contingent on several factors. The AP model itself needed to be altered to simulate LQT1, which was accomplished by reducing the slow component of the delayed rectifier K current ( I Ks ) by 54%. This reduces outward current during repolarization, reducing repolarization reserve and prolonging AP duration (APD). With this modification, we induced J spon and EADs by rapid pacing, applying an external stimulus at a high frequency (6.25 Hz, or basic cycle length 160 ms, similar to the rapid pacing rates experienced by individual cells during tachyarrhythmias) to induce Ca accumulation in the cytosol and SR and leading to the appearance of J spon . The train of periodic stimuli was stopped when d V /d t became positive during repolarization (indicating a potential EAD). Otherwise, the next stimulus would be large enough to elicit a new AP that would overwhelm the potential EAD. Computer simulations were performed on a desktop computer. The ordinary differential equations were numerically integrated using an explicit Euler method. The time step was dynamically adaptive to rapid changes in V , varying between 0.005 and 0.1 ms. Reducing the time step to 0.0005 ms did not significantly alter the results.  3. Results 3.1 Rapid pacing induces spontaneous release Pacing the AP model at a rapid rate causes accumulation of both Ca i and Ca jsr . Eventually, Ca i and Ca jsr reach overload conditions, triggering J spon . The number of paced beats necessary to cause the first J spon event depends primarily on the pacing rate; faster rates cause faster Ca accumulation and hence J spon occurs sooner. J spon temporarily drains Ca jsr , but accumulation resumes with subsequent paced beats and J spon continues to occur with a period that depends primarily on the pacing rate. J spon influences the AP by increasing Ca i and altering Ca-sensitive membrane currents such as I Ca,L, I NaCaX and I ns,Ca . As we will show, the induction of EADs by J spon is determined by the J spon morphology and timing of the J spon onset in the AP cycle. 3.2 “Early” EADs caused by a low amplitude, long duration J<sub>spon</sub> during diastole When the AP model with the low amplitude, long duration J spon during diastole (see Methods and Tables 1 and 2 ) is paced at a rate of 160 ms, J spon occurs after approximately 2.4 s (see Fig. 2 A , trace of J spon ). The J spon onset starts in late diastole just before the start of the new AP cycle (see Fig. 2 A , vertical dotted line labeled “ J spon onset” illustrates relative timing of J spon onset and AP upstroke). J spon continues through the AP, augmenting the Ca i transient (see Fig. 2 A , compare the results with J spon , solid trace, and the results with J spon manually prevented, dashed trace). Increased Ca i potentiates Ca-sensitive inward repolarization currents such as I NaCaX and the Ca-activated nonselective cation current ( I ns,Ca ), reducing repolarization reserve enough to produce an overt EAD (see Fig. 2 A , trace of V ). If the diastolic J spon is manually prevented, no EAD occurs (see Fig. 2 A , dashed traces). To determine which current carries the depolarizing charge of the EAD upstroke, we examine the rate of change of the membrane ionic currents immediately before the EAD upstroke ( Table 3 , row ? i,EAD ). The candidate currents are all those reducing repolarization reserve during this time, either increasing inward currents or decreasing outward currents. In either case, the rate of change will be negative, since convention dictates inward currents as negative and outward currents as positive. Four such currents reduce repolarization reserve immediately before the EAD upstroke: increasing inward current I Ca,L and decreasing outward currents I Ks , I Kr (the rapid component of the delayed rectifier K current), and I p(Ca) (the sarcolemmal Ca2+ pump current). These candidates can be narrowed down by comparing their rates of change to the rates of change they exhibit during the same phase of repolarization of an AP without an EAD ( Table 3 , row ? i, noEAD ). Of the four, only I Ca,L is reducing repolarization reserve more in the EAD case than in the case with no EAD, indicated by the negative value in row ? i,EAD ; ? ? i, noEAD of Table 3 . Therefore, we conclude I Ca,L is the current responsible for the EAD upstroke (as in early EADs). I NaCaX and I ns,Ca are not causing the EAD upstroke themselves, though they are producing inward current during that time ( Table 3 , row ? i,EAD ). Rather, sustained J spon through the AP potentiates I NaCaX and I ns,Ca , contributing to the initial delay of repolarization that then allows I Ca,L reactivation to cause the EAD upstroke. Examining the EAD closely (see Fig. 2 B ) confirms the role of I Ca,L as depolarizing charge carrier and determines the relative timing of the EAD upstroke and Ca i aftertransient. At time t = 2.500 s, we find that V is decreasing (d V /d t < 0), the Ca i transient is declining (d( Ca i )/d t < 0), and I Ca,L is decreasing (d(| I Ca,L |)/d t < 0), indicating normal repolarization. We then find that I Ca,L reactivation (d(| I Ca,L |)/d t > 0) occurs at time t 1 = 2.505 s, the EAD upstroke (d V /d t > 0) occurs next at time t 2 = 2.538 s, and the Ca i aftertransient (d( Ca i )/d t > 0) occurs last at time t 3 = 2.593 s. Suppressing I Ca,L reactivation, by manually enforcing a monotonic decrease of | I Ca,L | beginning at t = 2.500 s, eliminates the EAD and Ca i aftertransient. The underlying cause of the I Ca,L reactivation is the disparity of the time constants for the activation gate variable, d , and the inactivation gate variable, f , as described by Zeng et al. [ 28 ]. During repolarization of an AP with no EAD, the I Ca,L current decreases to 0 as d decreases to 0, closing the activation gate. Meanwhile, f increases to represent recovery from inactivation. When the balance of the currents is altered via J spon and amplified inward Ca-sensitive currents, the AP temporarily enters a long plateau region where V is virtually constant. Since the time constant of d is approximately 50 times faster than the time constant of f for this range of V , d approaches its steady value much faster. V has become virtually constant and so d becomes virtually constant, but f continues to increase since it is slower to reach its steady state. Hence, the product df begins to increase and I Ca,L reactivation occurs. Low amplitude, long duration J spon occurring during systole or early diastole causes neither EADs nor DADs (as shown later in Fig. 4 ). The ensuing AP is too delayed for J spon to affect repolarization reserve and produce I Ca,L reactivation, and the low amplitude does not release Ca2+ fast enough to cause a Ca i aftertransient via I ti . Instead, repolarization proceeds as normal. 3.3 “Late” EADs caused by high amplitude, short duration J<sub>spon</sub> during systole The AP model was modified to generate a high amplitude, short duration J spon , as in [ 20 ] (see Methods and Tables 1 and 2 ). When paced at a rate of 160 ms, J spon occurs during systole after approximately 1.6 s (see Fig. 3 A , solid traces). Both an EAD and a Ca i aftertransient occur in conjunction with the J spon , as well as I Ca,L reactivation. If the J spon event is manually prevented during simulation, no EAD occurs (see Fig. 3 A , dashed traces). To determine the mechanism by which J spon causes the EAD, we examined the timing of the EAD closely (see Fig. 3 B ). At time t = 1.650 s, repolarization is proceeding normally. Then, at time t 1 = 1.660 s, J spon occurs. The Ca i aftertransient (d( Ca i )/d t > 0) immediately begins, and the magnitude of I NaCaX immediately begins to increase at an accelerated rate. Only later, at time t 2 = 1.676 s, do the EAD upstroke and I Ca,L reactivation occur. In this case, the EAD is caused by I NaCaX (as in late EADs) and I Ca,L reactivation is a secondary effect. Fig. 3 shows that the accelerated I NaCaX increase is in response to the systolic J spon , contributing to a transient inward current ( I ti ). To determine what other currents may contribute to I ti , we compare the rate of change of the membrane ionic currents immediately before the EAD upstroke to their rate of change during the same phase of repolarization of an AP without an EAD (see Table 4 ), in the same manner as we did in the previous case. Along with I NaCaX , I ns,Ca is the only other current (disregarding the strictly V -dependent currents) reducing repolarization reserve more in the EAD case than the non-EAD case. A high amplitude, short duration J spon occurring during diastole after the final paced AP is capable of causing a DAD via the same I ti -mediated mechanism. Depending on the size of J spon , the DAD may exceed membrane excitation threshold and trigger a new AP. High amplitude, short duration J spon occurring during diastole just before the final paced AP can cause neither an EAD nor DAD. There is not enough time for a DAD to occur, since the arrival of the next stimulus interrupts it and produces a full AP. I Ca,L reactivation does not occur and cause an EAD on the ensuing AP, since the short duration of the J spon prevents it from maintaining the potentiated Ca-sensitive inward currents through the repolarization phase. A summary of the general findings for different J spon formulations and timings of the J spon onset in the AP cycle is presented in Fig. 4 .  3. Results 3.1 Rapid pacing induces spontaneous release Pacing the AP model at a rapid rate causes accumulation of both Ca i and Ca jsr . Eventually, Ca i and Ca jsr reach overload conditions, triggering J spon . The number of paced beats necessary to cause the first J spon event depends primarily on the pacing rate; faster rates cause faster Ca accumulation and hence J spon occurs sooner. J spon temporarily drains Ca jsr , but accumulation resumes with subsequent paced beats and J spon continues to occur with a period that depends primarily on the pacing rate. J spon influences the AP by increasing Ca i and altering Ca-sensitive membrane currents such as I Ca,L, I NaCaX and I ns,Ca . As we will show, the induction of EADs by J spon is determined by the J spon morphology and timing of the J spon onset in the AP cycle. 3.2 “Early” EADs caused by a low amplitude, long duration J<sub>spon</sub> during diastole When the AP model with the low amplitude, long duration J spon during diastole (see Methods and Tables 1 and 2 ) is paced at a rate of 160 ms, J spon occurs after approximately 2.4 s (see Fig. 2 A , trace of J spon ). The J spon onset starts in late diastole just before the start of the new AP cycle (see Fig. 2 A , vertical dotted line labeled “ J spon onset” illustrates relative timing of J spon onset and AP upstroke). J spon continues through the AP, augmenting the Ca i transient (see Fig. 2 A , compare the results with J spon , solid trace, and the results with J spon manually prevented, dashed trace). Increased Ca i potentiates Ca-sensitive inward repolarization currents such as I NaCaX and the Ca-activated nonselective cation current ( I ns,Ca ), reducing repolarization reserve enough to produce an overt EAD (see Fig. 2 A , trace of V ). If the diastolic J spon is manually prevented, no EAD occurs (see Fig. 2 A , dashed traces). To determine which current carries the depolarizing charge of the EAD upstroke, we examine the rate of change of the membrane ionic currents immediately before the EAD upstroke ( Table 3 , row ? i,EAD ). The candidate currents are all those reducing repolarization reserve during this time, either increasing inward currents or decreasing outward currents. In either case, the rate of change will be negative, since convention dictates inward currents as negative and outward currents as positive. Four such currents reduce repolarization reserve immediately before the EAD upstroke: increasing inward current I Ca,L and decreasing outward currents I Ks , I Kr (the rapid component of the delayed rectifier K current), and I p(Ca) (the sarcolemmal Ca2+ pump current). These candidates can be narrowed down by comparing their rates of change to the rates of change they exhibit during the same phase of repolarization of an AP without an EAD ( Table 3 , row ? i, noEAD ). Of the four, only I Ca,L is reducing repolarization reserve more in the EAD case than in the case with no EAD, indicated by the negative value in row ? i,EAD ; ? ? i, noEAD of Table 3 . Therefore, we conclude I Ca,L is the current responsible for the EAD upstroke (as in early EADs). I NaCaX and I ns,Ca are not causing the EAD upstroke themselves, though they are producing inward current during that time ( Table 3 , row ? i,EAD ). Rather, sustained J spon through the AP potentiates I NaCaX and I ns,Ca , contributing to the initial delay of repolarization that then allows I Ca,L reactivation to cause the EAD upstroke. Examining the EAD closely (see Fig. 2 B ) confirms the role of I Ca,L as depolarizing charge carrier and determines the relative timing of the EAD upstroke and Ca i aftertransient. At time t = 2.500 s, we find that V is decreasing (d V /d t < 0), the Ca i transient is declining (d( Ca i )/d t < 0), and I Ca,L is decreasing (d(| I Ca,L |)/d t < 0), indicating normal repolarization. We then find that I Ca,L reactivation (d(| I Ca,L |)/d t > 0) occurs at time t 1 = 2.505 s, the EAD upstroke (d V /d t > 0) occurs next at time t 2 = 2.538 s, and the Ca i aftertransient (d( Ca i )/d t > 0) occurs last at time t 3 = 2.593 s. Suppressing I Ca,L reactivation, by manually enforcing a monotonic decrease of | I Ca,L | beginning at t = 2.500 s, eliminates the EAD and Ca i aftertransient. The underlying cause of the I Ca,L reactivation is the disparity of the time constants for the activation gate variable, d , and the inactivation gate variable, f , as described by Zeng et al. [ 28 ]. During repolarization of an AP with no EAD, the I Ca,L current decreases to 0 as d decreases to 0, closing the activation gate. Meanwhile, f increases to represent recovery from inactivation. When the balance of the currents is altered via J spon and amplified inward Ca-sensitive currents, the AP temporarily enters a long plateau region where V is virtually constant. Since the time constant of d is approximately 50 times faster than the time constant of f for this range of V , d approaches its steady value much faster. V has become virtually constant and so d becomes virtually constant, but f continues to increase since it is slower to reach its steady state. Hence, the product df begins to increase and I Ca,L reactivation occurs. Low amplitude, long duration J spon occurring during systole or early diastole causes neither EADs nor DADs (as shown later in Fig. 4 ). The ensuing AP is too delayed for J spon to affect repolarization reserve and produce I Ca,L reactivation, and the low amplitude does not release Ca2+ fast enough to cause a Ca i aftertransient via I ti . Instead, repolarization proceeds as normal. 3.3 “Late” EADs caused by high amplitude, short duration J<sub>spon</sub> during systole The AP model was modified to generate a high amplitude, short duration J spon , as in [ 20 ] (see Methods and Tables 1 and 2 ). When paced at a rate of 160 ms, J spon occurs during systole after approximately 1.6 s (see Fig. 3 A , solid traces). Both an EAD and a Ca i aftertransient occur in conjunction with the J spon , as well as I Ca,L reactivation. If the J spon event is manually prevented during simulation, no EAD occurs (see Fig. 3 A , dashed traces). To determine the mechanism by which J spon causes the EAD, we examined the timing of the EAD closely (see Fig. 3 B ). At time t = 1.650 s, repolarization is proceeding normally. Then, at time t 1 = 1.660 s, J spon occurs. The Ca i aftertransient (d( Ca i )/d t > 0) immediately begins, and the magnitude of I NaCaX immediately begins to increase at an accelerated rate. Only later, at time t 2 = 1.676 s, do the EAD upstroke and I Ca,L reactivation occur. In this case, the EAD is caused by I NaCaX (as in late EADs) and I Ca,L reactivation is a secondary effect. Fig. 3 shows that the accelerated I NaCaX increase is in response to the systolic J spon , contributing to a transient inward current ( I ti ). To determine what other currents may contribute to I ti , we compare the rate of change of the membrane ionic currents immediately before the EAD upstroke to their rate of change during the same phase of repolarization of an AP without an EAD (see Table 4 ), in the same manner as we did in the previous case. Along with I NaCaX , I ns,Ca is the only other current (disregarding the strictly V -dependent currents) reducing repolarization reserve more in the EAD case than the non-EAD case. A high amplitude, short duration J spon occurring during diastole after the final paced AP is capable of causing a DAD via the same I ti -mediated mechanism. Depending on the size of J spon , the DAD may exceed membrane excitation threshold and trigger a new AP. High amplitude, short duration J spon occurring during diastole just before the final paced AP can cause neither an EAD nor DAD. There is not enough time for a DAD to occur, since the arrival of the next stimulus interrupts it and produces a full AP. I Ca,L reactivation does not occur and cause an EAD on the ensuing AP, since the short duration of the J spon prevents it from maintaining the potentiated Ca-sensitive inward currents through the repolarization phase. A summary of the general findings for different J spon formulations and timings of the J spon onset in the AP cycle is presented in Fig. 4 .  3.1 Rapid pacing induces spontaneous release Pacing the AP model at a rapid rate causes accumulation of both Ca i and Ca jsr . Eventually, Ca i and Ca jsr reach overload conditions, triggering J spon . The number of paced beats necessary to cause the first J spon event depends primarily on the pacing rate; faster rates cause faster Ca accumulation and hence J spon occurs sooner. J spon temporarily drains Ca jsr , but accumulation resumes with subsequent paced beats and J spon continues to occur with a period that depends primarily on the pacing rate. J spon influences the AP by increasing Ca i and altering Ca-sensitive membrane currents such as I Ca,L, I NaCaX and I ns,Ca . As we will show, the induction of EADs by J spon is determined by the J spon morphology and timing of the J spon onset in the AP cycle.  3.1 Rapid pacing induces spontaneous release Pacing the AP model at a rapid rate causes accumulation of both Ca i and Ca jsr . Eventually, Ca i and Ca jsr reach overload conditions, triggering J spon . The number of paced beats necessary to cause the first J spon event depends primarily on the pacing rate; faster rates cause faster Ca accumulation and hence J spon occurs sooner. J spon temporarily drains Ca jsr , but accumulation resumes with subsequent paced beats and J spon continues to occur with a period that depends primarily on the pacing rate. J spon influences the AP by increasing Ca i and altering Ca-sensitive membrane currents such as I Ca,L, I NaCaX and I ns,Ca . As we will show, the induction of EADs by J spon is determined by the J spon morphology and timing of the J spon onset in the AP cycle.  3.2 “Early” EADs caused by a low amplitude, long duration J<sub>spon</sub> during diastole When the AP model with the low amplitude, long duration J spon during diastole (see Methods and Tables 1 and 2 ) is paced at a rate of 160 ms, J spon occurs after approximately 2.4 s (see Fig. 2 A , trace of J spon ). The J spon onset starts in late diastole just before the start of the new AP cycle (see Fig. 2 A , vertical dotted line labeled “ J spon onset” illustrates relative timing of J spon onset and AP upstroke). J spon continues through the AP, augmenting the Ca i transient (see Fig. 2 A , compare the results with J spon , solid trace, and the results with J spon manually prevented, dashed trace). Increased Ca i potentiates Ca-sensitive inward repolarization currents such as I NaCaX and the Ca-activated nonselective cation current ( I ns,Ca ), reducing repolarization reserve enough to produce an overt EAD (see Fig. 2 A , trace of V ). If the diastolic J spon is manually prevented, no EAD occurs (see Fig. 2 A , dashed traces). To determine which current carries the depolarizing charge of the EAD upstroke, we examine the rate of change of the membrane ionic currents immediately before the EAD upstroke ( Table 3 , row ? i,EAD ). The candidate currents are all those reducing repolarization reserve during this time, either increasing inward currents or decreasing outward currents. In either case, the rate of change will be negative, since convention dictates inward currents as negative and outward currents as positive. Four such currents reduce repolarization reserve immediately before the EAD upstroke: increasing inward current I Ca,L and decreasing outward currents I Ks , I Kr (the rapid component of the delayed rectifier K current), and I p(Ca) (the sarcolemmal Ca2+ pump current). These candidates can be narrowed down by comparing their rates of change to the rates of change they exhibit during the same phase of repolarization of an AP without an EAD ( Table 3 , row ? i, noEAD ). Of the four, only I Ca,L is reducing repolarization reserve more in the EAD case than in the case with no EAD, indicated by the negative value in row ? i,EAD ; ? ? i, noEAD of Table 3 . Therefore, we conclude I Ca,L is the current responsible for the EAD upstroke (as in early EADs). I NaCaX and I ns,Ca are not causing the EAD upstroke themselves, though they are producing inward current during that time ( Table 3 , row ? i,EAD ). Rather, sustained J spon through the AP potentiates I NaCaX and I ns,Ca , contributing to the initial delay of repolarization that then allows I Ca,L reactivation to cause the EAD upstroke. Examining the EAD closely (see Fig. 2 B ) confirms the role of I Ca,L as depolarizing charge carrier and determines the relative timing of the EAD upstroke and Ca i aftertransient. At time t = 2.500 s, we find that V is decreasing (d V /d t < 0), the Ca i transient is declining (d( Ca i )/d t < 0), and I Ca,L is decreasing (d(| I Ca,L |)/d t < 0), indicating normal repolarization. We then find that I Ca,L reactivation (d(| I Ca,L |)/d t > 0) occurs at time t 1 = 2.505 s, the EAD upstroke (d V /d t > 0) occurs next at time t 2 = 2.538 s, and the Ca i aftertransient (d( Ca i )/d t > 0) occurs last at time t 3 = 2.593 s. Suppressing I Ca,L reactivation, by manually enforcing a monotonic decrease of | I Ca,L | beginning at t = 2.500 s, eliminates the EAD and Ca i aftertransient. The underlying cause of the I Ca,L reactivation is the disparity of the time constants for the activation gate variable, d , and the inactivation gate variable, f , as described by Zeng et al. [ 28 ]. During repolarization of an AP with no EAD, the I Ca,L current decreases to 0 as d decreases to 0, closing the activation gate. Meanwhile, f increases to represent recovery from inactivation. When the balance of the currents is altered via J spon and amplified inward Ca-sensitive currents, the AP temporarily enters a long plateau region where V is virtually constant. Since the time constant of d is approximately 50 times faster than the time constant of f for this range of V , d approaches its steady value much faster. V has become virtually constant and so d becomes virtually constant, but f continues to increase since it is slower to reach its steady state. Hence, the product df begins to increase and I Ca,L reactivation occurs. Low amplitude, long duration J spon occurring during systole or early diastole causes neither EADs nor DADs (as shown later in Fig. 4 ). The ensuing AP is too delayed for J spon to affect repolarization reserve and produce I Ca,L reactivation, and the low amplitude does not release Ca2+ fast enough to cause a Ca i aftertransient via I ti . Instead, repolarization proceeds as normal.  3.2 “Early” EADs caused by a low amplitude, long duration J<sub>spon</sub> during diastole When the AP model with the low amplitude, long duration J spon during diastole (see Methods and Tables 1 and 2 ) is paced at a rate of 160 ms, J spon occurs after approximately 2.4 s (see Fig. 2 A , trace of J spon ). The J spon onset starts in late diastole just before the start of the new AP cycle (see Fig. 2 A , vertical dotted line labeled “ J spon onset” illustrates relative timing of J spon onset and AP upstroke). J spon continues through the AP, augmenting the Ca i transient (see Fig. 2 A , compare the results with J spon , solid trace, and the results with J spon manually prevented, dashed trace). Increased Ca i potentiates Ca-sensitive inward repolarization currents such as I NaCaX and the Ca-activated nonselective cation current ( I ns,Ca ), reducing repolarization reserve enough to produce an overt EAD (see Fig. 2 A , trace of V ). If the diastolic J spon is manually prevented, no EAD occurs (see Fig. 2 A , dashed traces). To determine which current carries the depolarizing charge of the EAD upstroke, we examine the rate of change of the membrane ionic currents immediately before the EAD upstroke ( Table 3 , row ? i,EAD ). The candidate currents are all those reducing repolarization reserve during this time, either increasing inward currents or decreasing outward currents. In either case, the rate of change will be negative, since convention dictates inward currents as negative and outward currents as positive. Four such currents reduce repolarization reserve immediately before the EAD upstroke: increasing inward current I Ca,L and decreasing outward currents I Ks , I Kr (the rapid component of the delayed rectifier K current), and I p(Ca) (the sarcolemmal Ca2+ pump current). These candidates can be narrowed down by comparing their rates of change to the rates of change they exhibit during the same phase of repolarization of an AP without an EAD ( Table 3 , row ? i, noEAD ). Of the four, only I Ca,L is reducing repolarization reserve more in the EAD case than in the case with no EAD, indicated by the negative value in row ? i,EAD ; ? ? i, noEAD of Table 3 . Therefore, we conclude I Ca,L is the current responsible for the EAD upstroke (as in early EADs). I NaCaX and I ns,Ca are not causing the EAD upstroke themselves, though they are producing inward current during that time ( Table 3 , row ? i,EAD ). Rather, sustained J spon through the AP potentiates I NaCaX and I ns,Ca , contributing to the initial delay of repolarization that then allows I Ca,L reactivation to cause the EAD upstroke. Examining the EAD closely (see Fig. 2 B ) confirms the role of I Ca,L as depolarizing charge carrier and determines the relative timing of the EAD upstroke and Ca i aftertransient. At time t = 2.500 s, we find that V is decreasing (d V /d t < 0), the Ca i transient is declining (d( Ca i )/d t < 0), and I Ca,L is decreasing (d(| I Ca,L |)/d t < 0), indicating normal repolarization. We then find that I Ca,L reactivation (d(| I Ca,L |)/d t > 0) occurs at time t 1 = 2.505 s, the EAD upstroke (d V /d t > 0) occurs next at time t 2 = 2.538 s, and the Ca i aftertransient (d( Ca i )/d t > 0) occurs last at time t 3 = 2.593 s. Suppressing I Ca,L reactivation, by manually enforcing a monotonic decrease of | I Ca,L | beginning at t = 2.500 s, eliminates the EAD and Ca i aftertransient. The underlying cause of the I Ca,L reactivation is the disparity of the time constants for the activation gate variable, d , and the inactivation gate variable, f , as described by Zeng et al. [ 28 ]. During repolarization of an AP with no EAD, the I Ca,L current decreases to 0 as d decreases to 0, closing the activation gate. Meanwhile, f increases to represent recovery from inactivation. When the balance of the currents is altered via J spon and amplified inward Ca-sensitive currents, the AP temporarily enters a long plateau region where V is virtually constant. Since the time constant of d is approximately 50 times faster than the time constant of f for this range of V , d approaches its steady value much faster. V has become virtually constant and so d becomes virtually constant, but f continues to increase since it is slower to reach its steady state. Hence, the product df begins to increase and I Ca,L reactivation occurs. Low amplitude, long duration J spon occurring during systole or early diastole causes neither EADs nor DADs (as shown later in Fig. 4 ). The ensuing AP is too delayed for J spon to affect repolarization reserve and produce I Ca,L reactivation, and the low amplitude does not release Ca2+ fast enough to cause a Ca i aftertransient via I ti . Instead, repolarization proceeds as normal.  3.3 “Late” EADs caused by high amplitude, short duration J<sub>spon</sub> during systole The AP model was modified to generate a high amplitude, short duration J spon , as in [ 20 ] (see Methods and Tables 1 and 2 ). When paced at a rate of 160 ms, J spon occurs during systole after approximately 1.6 s (see Fig. 3 A , solid traces). Both an EAD and a Ca i aftertransient occur in conjunction with the J spon , as well as I Ca,L reactivation. If the J spon event is manually prevented during simulation, no EAD occurs (see Fig. 3 A , dashed traces). To determine the mechanism by which J spon causes the EAD, we examined the timing of the EAD closely (see Fig. 3 B ). At time t = 1.650 s, repolarization is proceeding normally. Then, at time t 1 = 1.660 s, J spon occurs. The Ca i aftertransient (d( Ca i )/d t > 0) immediately begins, and the magnitude of I NaCaX immediately begins to increase at an accelerated rate. Only later, at time t 2 = 1.676 s, do the EAD upstroke and I Ca,L reactivation occur. In this case, the EAD is caused by I NaCaX (as in late EADs) and I Ca,L reactivation is a secondary effect. Fig. 3 shows that the accelerated I NaCaX increase is in response to the systolic J spon , contributing to a transient inward current ( I ti ). To determine what other currents may contribute to I ti , we compare the rate of change of the membrane ionic currents immediately before the EAD upstroke to their rate of change during the same phase of repolarization of an AP without an EAD (see Table 4 ), in the same manner as we did in the previous case. Along with I NaCaX , I ns,Ca is the only other current (disregarding the strictly V -dependent currents) reducing repolarization reserve more in the EAD case than the non-EAD case. A high amplitude, short duration J spon occurring during diastole after the final paced AP is capable of causing a DAD via the same I ti -mediated mechanism. Depending on the size of J spon , the DAD may exceed membrane excitation threshold and trigger a new AP. High amplitude, short duration J spon occurring during diastole just before the final paced AP can cause neither an EAD nor DAD. There is not enough time for a DAD to occur, since the arrival of the next stimulus interrupts it and produces a full AP. I Ca,L reactivation does not occur and cause an EAD on the ensuing AP, since the short duration of the J spon prevents it from maintaining the potentiated Ca-sensitive inward currents through the repolarization phase. A summary of the general findings for different J spon formulations and timings of the J spon onset in the AP cycle is presented in Fig. 4 .  3.3 “Late” EADs caused by high amplitude, short duration J<sub>spon</sub> during systole The AP model was modified to generate a high amplitude, short duration J spon , as in [ 20 ] (see Methods and Tables 1 and 2 ). When paced at a rate of 160 ms, J spon occurs during systole after approximately 1.6 s (see Fig. 3 A , solid traces). Both an EAD and a Ca i aftertransient occur in conjunction with the J spon , as well as I Ca,L reactivation. If the J spon event is manually prevented during simulation, no EAD occurs (see Fig. 3 A , dashed traces). To determine the mechanism by which J spon causes the EAD, we examined the timing of the EAD closely (see Fig. 3 B ). At time t = 1.650 s, repolarization is proceeding normally. Then, at time t 1 = 1.660 s, J spon occurs. The Ca i aftertransient (d( Ca i )/d t > 0) immediately begins, and the magnitude of I NaCaX immediately begins to increase at an accelerated rate. Only later, at time t 2 = 1.676 s, do the EAD upstroke and I Ca,L reactivation occur. In this case, the EAD is caused by I NaCaX (as in late EADs) and I Ca,L reactivation is a secondary effect. Fig. 3 shows that the accelerated I NaCaX increase is in response to the systolic J spon , contributing to a transient inward current ( I ti ). To determine what other currents may contribute to I ti , we compare the rate of change of the membrane ionic currents immediately before the EAD upstroke to their rate of change during the same phase of repolarization of an AP without an EAD (see Table 4 ), in the same manner as we did in the previous case. Along with I NaCaX , I ns,Ca is the only other current (disregarding the strictly V -dependent currents) reducing repolarization reserve more in the EAD case than the non-EAD case. A high amplitude, short duration J spon occurring during diastole after the final paced AP is capable of causing a DAD via the same I ti -mediated mechanism. Depending on the size of J spon , the DAD may exceed membrane excitation threshold and trigger a new AP. High amplitude, short duration J spon occurring during diastole just before the final paced AP can cause neither an EAD nor DAD. There is not enough time for a DAD to occur, since the arrival of the next stimulus interrupts it and produces a full AP. I Ca,L reactivation does not occur and cause an EAD on the ensuing AP, since the short duration of the J spon prevents it from maintaining the potentiated Ca-sensitive inward currents through the repolarization phase. A summary of the general findings for different J spon formulations and timings of the J spon onset in the AP cycle is presented in Fig. 4 .  4. Discussion and Conclusions EADs and DADs are widely believed to act as triggers in the initiation of tachyarrhythmias [ 16 ]. We have shown in our previous computer simulation studies how EADs may potentially sustain and exacerbate already established tachyarrhythmias [ 11 – 13 ]. Despite these important roles, the exact mechanism of EADs, particularly those occurring during tachyarrhythmias, is not known in detail. While spontaneous release is believed to cause EADs and DADs occurring at fast pacing rates [ 10 ], a lack of physiological data for the processes underlying spontaneous release prevents a full understanding of this mechanism. Mathematical modeling and computer simulation allow us to explore the effect of different predicted patterns of spontaneous release on tachycardia-induced EADs and delineate possible underlying cellular mechanisms. The results, discussed below, provide a framework for future experimental investigation to determine the physiological mechanisms relating spontaneous release characteristics to EADs, DADs, and triggered activity. Expanding our knowledge about mechanisms at the cellular level may help us better understand arrhythmias at the tissue-level (particularly ventricular fibrillation and defibrillation processes). 4.1 Two types of tachycardia-induced EADs: early and late As described in [ 17 , 18 ], spontaneous release in cardiac myocytes results from localized SR Ca release, originating in one or several regions of the cell due to Ca overload conditions, which then propagates via CICR as a Ca wave throughout the remainder of the cytoplasm. We replicate two spontaneous Ca wave morphologies suggested by existing AP models [ 19 , 20 ]. These morphologies may phenomenologically represent possible types of propagating Ca waves in a cell. A low amplitude, long duration J spon [ 19 ] may correspond to a Ca wave originating from a single site in the cell, that then propagates slowly (0.1–0.5 mm/s [ 24 ]) to the rest of the cell. A high amplitude, short duration J spon [ 20 ] may correspond to a Ca wave originating near-simultaneously from multiple sites in the cell, that then more rapidly reaches the rest of the cell. By adjusting the timing of these J spon morphologies, we identified two distinct mechanisms for tachycardia-induced EADs ( Fig. 4 ). In the first case, low amplitude, long duration J spon starting during late diastole could cause an EAD on the ensuing AP. The EAD upstroke was caused by I Ca,L reactivation and preceded the Ca i aftertransient; these have been termed early EADs. To create an EAD, the late diastolic timing of this type of J spon event was critical. If J spon occurred earlier in diastole or during systole, it never caused a frank EAD, although it could influence APD. Moreover, the low peak amplitude of J spon was insufficient to cause a measurable DAD. In the second case, high amplitude, short duration J spon during systole could immediately cause an EAD on the same AP. The Ca i aftertransient preceded the EAD upstroke, which was caused by I ti ; these have been termed late EADs. When this type of J spon event occurred during diastole, it could cause a DAD via the same mechanism. Depending on the size of J spon , the DAD could exceed cell membrane excitation threshold and trigger a new AP. 4.2 Role of repolarization reserve Fig. 5 presents a flowchart illustrating the similarities and differences between the mechanisms of bradycardia-induced EADs, DADs, and our two types of tachycardia-induced EADs. While EADs are known to occur under conditions of reduced repolarization reserve, such as the various LQT syndromes, they usually require further reduction of repolarization reserve via rate-dependent mechanisms. Under conditions of bradycardia, repolarization reserve is reduced by more complete deactivation of outward K currents during long diastolic intervals [ 29 ]. Under conditions of tachycardia, we found that repolarization reserve is reduced by larger Ca-sensitive inward currents during the AP plateau, which in this model is caused by a larger overall Ca i transient when the J spon -triggered release summated with the AP-triggered, I CaL -gated CICR. It is possible that a smaller summated Ca i transient, resulting from a differently timed pre-release of SR Ca by J spon, could also reduce repolarization reserve during the subsequent AP by reducing Ca-induced inactivation of I Ca,L and thereby cause an EAD. However, we did not simulate this case. In either the case of a larger or smaller overall Ca i transient, the key element is that the J spon induced alteration of the Ca i transient causes a reduction in repolarization reserve during the subsequent AP, allowing I Ca,L reactivation to induce a n early EAD. In both the bradycardia- and tachycardia-induced cases, reduced repolarization reserve facilitates reactivation of I Ca,L and appearance of an EAD. Both these bradycardia- and tachycardia-induced EADs can be considered early EADs, though the mechanisms causing reduced repolarization reserve are different. If a high amplitude, short duration J spon is delivered in late diastole, the diastolic peak does not persist long enough to amplify the Ca-sensitive currents during the repolarization phase of the ensuing AP, and an I Ca,L reactivation-induced EAD cannot occur. However, as presented in Fig. 5 , the large J spon Ca flux can instantaneously produce a Ca i aftertransient and I ti that causes an afterdepolarization. Depending on the timing of the J spon event, the afterdepolarization may be a late EAD (if occurring during systole) or a DAD (if occurring during diastole). 4.3 Spontaneous release generating paired DADs and EADs A shared spontaneous release-dependent mechanism for EADs and DADs has been suggested by both Priori et al. [ 30 ] and Volders et al. [ 14 ]. These groups found that the ?-adrenergic agonist isoproterenol could induce both EADs and DADs in the same myocyte. In particular, they found that EADs and DADs could be associated with the same AP: a “late-coupled” DAD could occur just before (and often be interrupted by) the upstroke of a paced AP that then exhibited an EAD. An obvious mechanism would be two separate J spon events, one J spon peak occurring in diastole and the second in systole. However, our results suggest a more interesting alternative, which depends on an intermediate pattern of spontaneous release between the extremes of the low amplitude, long duration J spon and the high amplitude, short duration J spon . If we amplify the peak of the long duration J spon to an intermediate value between our high and low amplitude cases, a J spon event starting in late diastole is now sufficient to induce a DAD, and the elevation in Ca i persists long enough to reduce repolarization reserve and cause an early EAD in the subsequent AP ( Fig. 6 A ), reproducing late-coupled DADs similar to those observed in the physiological experiments [ 14 , 30 ]. A single J spon event starting in diastole explaining both the DAD and EAD may be more plausible, as two separate J spon events occurring so temporally close to one another may be unlikely. Amplifying the J spon peak further, but still considerably smaller than the high amplitude case, we observe a DAD that itself triggers an AP with an early EAD ( Fig. 6 B ), reproducing another phenomenon observed in the data of Priori et al. [ 30 ]. Thus, our simulation results can reproduce (see Fig. 6 ) observed physiological phenomena [ 14 , 30 ] and suggest alternative, more parsimonious explanations. 4.5 Limitations and clinical implications Although computer modeling is a powerful tool for predicting and identifying novel cardiac arrhythmia mechanisms, the relationship to real cardiac arrhythmias cannot be established without solid experimental confirmation. In particular, it will be especially important to establish direct relationships between Ca phenomena in spatially distributed cardiac cells and the phenomena observed with our spatially averaged AP model. However, it is encouraging that our simulations have replicated a number of experimentally observed afterdepolarization phenomena [ 14 , 30 ]. Further work will be necessary to determine whether both EAD mechanisms are physiologically relevant. Until the development of required physiological imaging technology, our results based on previously introduced spontaneous release morphologies may be considered mathematical modeling predictions. In the mean time, as a preliminary speculation, it might hypothesized that when excitation-contraction features are relatively normal, such as in LQTS, spontaneous release may be more likely to occur in diastole when the luminal SR Ca content is highest and ryanodine receptor excitability is most recovered, favoring the early EAD mechanism. Conversely, when excitation-contraction coupling exhibits accelerated recovery of ryanodine receptor excitability, such as in CPVT syndromes and heart failure [ 31 ], spontaneous release during systole may become more likely, promoting the late EAD mechanism, especially if spontaneous release were initiated from multiple sites. Arrhythmias in LQT1 are potentiated by sympathetic stimulation [ 32 ]. In our previous simulation studies we found that although EADs occurred during reentry in LQT1 tissue, they were not able to induce triggered activity unless paired with a moderate increase in sympathetic tone [ 12 ]. The increased sympathetic tone potentiates Ca cycling, acceleration Ca accumulation and leading to more powerful J spon and consequently more powerful EADs [ 33 ]. In the present study we simulated LQT1, but our previous tissue simulations strongly suggest these results are generalizable to a number of physiologically relevant conditions. The appearance of tachycardia-induced early EADs during reentrant tachycardia was shown for both simulated LQT1 (caused by reduced I Ks ) and LQT2 (caused by reduced I Kr ), with qualitatively similar effects on wave propagation [ 12 ]. We would expect the same results in virtually any ionic model with reduced repolarization reserve and uninhibited Ca cycling, whether due to reduced K current (LQT1,2), incomplete Na current inactivation (LQT3), or increased sensitivity of inward repolarization currents to elevated Ca i [ 13 ]. We have also shown in tissue studies that our results are generalizable to different cell types. The true myocardium is heterogeneous with respect to repolarization reserve and Ca cycling, both transmurally and base-to-apex [ 34 – 36 ]. We have shown in transmurally heterogeneous 3-dimensional tissue studies that regions of relatively reduced repolarization reserve (such as mid-myocardial M-cells) were more prone to our tachycardia-induced early EADs [ 33 ]. In our AP model, all ion channel gating processes were represented with a Hodgkin-Huxley type formulation of independent gating variables. A Markovian approach to gating processes introduces interdependent gate variables (channel state probabilities), allowing physiologically realistic representations of individual ion channel gating proteins and direct simulation of channel protein mutations. Markovian representations of several important cardiac ion channels have been introduced in previous studies [ 4 , 37 ]. We chose not to use Markovian models because they require a significant increase in computational complexity. Furthermore, our experience has shown that introducing Markovian representations for single channels alters the quantitative results for the channel, but does not change the qualitative behaviors [ 38 ].  4. Discussion and Conclusions EADs and DADs are widely believed to act as triggers in the initiation of tachyarrhythmias [ 16 ]. We have shown in our previous computer simulation studies how EADs may potentially sustain and exacerbate already established tachyarrhythmias [ 11 – 13 ]. Despite these important roles, the exact mechanism of EADs, particularly those occurring during tachyarrhythmias, is not known in detail. While spontaneous release is believed to cause EADs and DADs occurring at fast pacing rates [ 10 ], a lack of physiological data for the processes underlying spontaneous release prevents a full understanding of this mechanism. Mathematical modeling and computer simulation allow us to explore the effect of different predicted patterns of spontaneous release on tachycardia-induced EADs and delineate possible underlying cellular mechanisms. The results, discussed below, provide a framework for future experimental investigation to determine the physiological mechanisms relating spontaneous release characteristics to EADs, DADs, and triggered activity. Expanding our knowledge about mechanisms at the cellular level may help us better understand arrhythmias at the tissue-level (particularly ventricular fibrillation and defibrillation processes). 4.1 Two types of tachycardia-induced EADs: early and late As described in [ 17 , 18 ], spontaneous release in cardiac myocytes results from localized SR Ca release, originating in one or several regions of the cell due to Ca overload conditions, which then propagates via CICR as a Ca wave throughout the remainder of the cytoplasm. We replicate two spontaneous Ca wave morphologies suggested by existing AP models [ 19 , 20 ]. These morphologies may phenomenologically represent possible types of propagating Ca waves in a cell. A low amplitude, long duration J spon [ 19 ] may correspond to a Ca wave originating from a single site in the cell, that then propagates slowly (0.1–0.5 mm/s [ 24 ]) to the rest of the cell. A high amplitude, short duration J spon [ 20 ] may correspond to a Ca wave originating near-simultaneously from multiple sites in the cell, that then more rapidly reaches the rest of the cell. By adjusting the timing of these J spon morphologies, we identified two distinct mechanisms for tachycardia-induced EADs ( Fig. 4 ). In the first case, low amplitude, long duration J spon starting during late diastole could cause an EAD on the ensuing AP. The EAD upstroke was caused by I Ca,L reactivation and preceded the Ca i aftertransient; these have been termed early EADs. To create an EAD, the late diastolic timing of this type of J spon event was critical. If J spon occurred earlier in diastole or during systole, it never caused a frank EAD, although it could influence APD. Moreover, the low peak amplitude of J spon was insufficient to cause a measurable DAD. In the second case, high amplitude, short duration J spon during systole could immediately cause an EAD on the same AP. The Ca i aftertransient preceded the EAD upstroke, which was caused by I ti ; these have been termed late EADs. When this type of J spon event occurred during diastole, it could cause a DAD via the same mechanism. Depending on the size of J spon , the DAD could exceed cell membrane excitation threshold and trigger a new AP. 4.2 Role of repolarization reserve Fig. 5 presents a flowchart illustrating the similarities and differences between the mechanisms of bradycardia-induced EADs, DADs, and our two types of tachycardia-induced EADs. While EADs are known to occur under conditions of reduced repolarization reserve, such as the various LQT syndromes, they usually require further reduction of repolarization reserve via rate-dependent mechanisms. Under conditions of bradycardia, repolarization reserve is reduced by more complete deactivation of outward K currents during long diastolic intervals [ 29 ]. Under conditions of tachycardia, we found that repolarization reserve is reduced by larger Ca-sensitive inward currents during the AP plateau, which in this model is caused by a larger overall Ca i transient when the J spon -triggered release summated with the AP-triggered, I CaL -gated CICR. It is possible that a smaller summated Ca i transient, resulting from a differently timed pre-release of SR Ca by J spon, could also reduce repolarization reserve during the subsequent AP by reducing Ca-induced inactivation of I Ca,L and thereby cause an EAD. However, we did not simulate this case. In either the case of a larger or smaller overall Ca i transient, the key element is that the J spon induced alteration of the Ca i transient causes a reduction in repolarization reserve during the subsequent AP, allowing I Ca,L reactivation to induce a n early EAD. In both the bradycardia- and tachycardia-induced cases, reduced repolarization reserve facilitates reactivation of I Ca,L and appearance of an EAD. Both these bradycardia- and tachycardia-induced EADs can be considered early EADs, though the mechanisms causing reduced repolarization reserve are different. If a high amplitude, short duration J spon is delivered in late diastole, the diastolic peak does not persist long enough to amplify the Ca-sensitive currents during the repolarization phase of the ensuing AP, and an I Ca,L reactivation-induced EAD cannot occur. However, as presented in Fig. 5 , the large J spon Ca flux can instantaneously produce a Ca i aftertransient and I ti that causes an afterdepolarization. Depending on the timing of the J spon event, the afterdepolarization may be a late EAD (if occurring during systole) or a DAD (if occurring during diastole). 4.3 Spontaneous release generating paired DADs and EADs A shared spontaneous release-dependent mechanism for EADs and DADs has been suggested by both Priori et al. [ 30 ] and Volders et al. [ 14 ]. These groups found that the ?-adrenergic agonist isoproterenol could induce both EADs and DADs in the same myocyte. In particular, they found that EADs and DADs could be associated with the same AP: a “late-coupled” DAD could occur just before (and often be interrupted by) the upstroke of a paced AP that then exhibited an EAD. An obvious mechanism would be two separate J spon events, one J spon peak occurring in diastole and the second in systole. However, our results suggest a more interesting alternative, which depends on an intermediate pattern of spontaneous release between the extremes of the low amplitude, long duration J spon and the high amplitude, short duration J spon . If we amplify the peak of the long duration J spon to an intermediate value between our high and low amplitude cases, a J spon event starting in late diastole is now sufficient to induce a DAD, and the elevation in Ca i persists long enough to reduce repolarization reserve and cause an early EAD in the subsequent AP ( Fig. 6 A ), reproducing late-coupled DADs similar to those observed in the physiological experiments [ 14 , 30 ]. A single J spon event starting in diastole explaining both the DAD and EAD may be more plausible, as two separate J spon events occurring so temporally close to one another may be unlikely. Amplifying the J spon peak further, but still considerably smaller than the high amplitude case, we observe a DAD that itself triggers an AP with an early EAD ( Fig. 6 B ), reproducing another phenomenon observed in the data of Priori et al. [ 30 ]. Thus, our simulation results can reproduce (see Fig. 6 ) observed physiological phenomena [ 14 , 30 ] and suggest alternative, more parsimonious explanations. 4.5 Limitations and clinical implications Although computer modeling is a powerful tool for predicting and identifying novel cardiac arrhythmia mechanisms, the relationship to real cardiac arrhythmias cannot be established without solid experimental confirmation. In particular, it will be especially important to establish direct relationships between Ca phenomena in spatially distributed cardiac cells and the phenomena observed with our spatially averaged AP model. However, it is encouraging that our simulations have replicated a number of experimentally observed afterdepolarization phenomena [ 14 , 30 ]. Further work will be necessary to determine whether both EAD mechanisms are physiologically relevant. Until the development of required physiological imaging technology, our results based on previously introduced spontaneous release morphologies may be considered mathematical modeling predictions. In the mean time, as a preliminary speculation, it might hypothesized that when excitation-contraction features are relatively normal, such as in LQTS, spontaneous release may be more likely to occur in diastole when the luminal SR Ca content is highest and ryanodine receptor excitability is most recovered, favoring the early EAD mechanism. Conversely, when excitation-contraction coupling exhibits accelerated recovery of ryanodine receptor excitability, such as in CPVT syndromes and heart failure [ 31 ], spontaneous release during systole may become more likely, promoting the late EAD mechanism, especially if spontaneous release were initiated from multiple sites. Arrhythmias in LQT1 are potentiated by sympathetic stimulation [ 32 ]. In our previous simulation studies we found that although EADs occurred during reentry in LQT1 tissue, they were not able to induce triggered activity unless paired with a moderate increase in sympathetic tone [ 12 ]. The increased sympathetic tone potentiates Ca cycling, acceleration Ca accumulation and leading to more powerful J spon and consequently more powerful EADs [ 33 ]. In the present study we simulated LQT1, but our previous tissue simulations strongly suggest these results are generalizable to a number of physiologically relevant conditions. The appearance of tachycardia-induced early EADs during reentrant tachycardia was shown for both simulated LQT1 (caused by reduced I Ks ) and LQT2 (caused by reduced I Kr ), with qualitatively similar effects on wave propagation [ 12 ]. We would expect the same results in virtually any ionic model with reduced repolarization reserve and uninhibited Ca cycling, whether due to reduced K current (LQT1,2), incomplete Na current inactivation (LQT3), or increased sensitivity of inward repolarization currents to elevated Ca i [ 13 ]. We have also shown in tissue studies that our results are generalizable to different cell types. The true myocardium is heterogeneous with respect to repolarization reserve and Ca cycling, both transmurally and base-to-apex [ 34 – 36 ]. We have shown in transmurally heterogeneous 3-dimensional tissue studies that regions of relatively reduced repolarization reserve (such as mid-myocardial M-cells) were more prone to our tachycardia-induced early EADs [ 33 ]. In our AP model, all ion channel gating processes were represented with a Hodgkin-Huxley type formulation of independent gating variables. A Markovian approach to gating processes introduces interdependent gate variables (channel state probabilities), allowing physiologically realistic representations of individual ion channel gating proteins and direct simulation of channel protein mutations. Markovian representations of several important cardiac ion channels have been introduced in previous studies [ 4 , 37 ]. We chose not to use Markovian models because they require a significant increase in computational complexity. Furthermore, our experience has shown that introducing Markovian representations for single channels alters the quantitative results for the channel, but does not change the qualitative behaviors [ 38 ].  4.1 Two types of tachycardia-induced EADs: early and late As described in [ 17 , 18 ], spontaneous release in cardiac myocytes results from localized SR Ca release, originating in one or several regions of the cell due to Ca overload conditions, which then propagates via CICR as a Ca wave throughout the remainder of the cytoplasm. We replicate two spontaneous Ca wave morphologies suggested by existing AP models [ 19 , 20 ]. These morphologies may phenomenologically represent possible types of propagating Ca waves in a cell. A low amplitude, long duration J spon [ 19 ] may correspond to a Ca wave originating from a single site in the cell, that then propagates slowly (0.1–0.5 mm/s [ 24 ]) to the rest of the cell. A high amplitude, short duration J spon [ 20 ] may correspond to a Ca wave originating near-simultaneously from multiple sites in the cell, that then more rapidly reaches the rest of the cell. By adjusting the timing of these J spon morphologies, we identified two distinct mechanisms for tachycardia-induced EADs ( Fig. 4 ). In the first case, low amplitude, long duration J spon starting during late diastole could cause an EAD on the ensuing AP. The EAD upstroke was caused by I Ca,L reactivation and preceded the Ca i aftertransient; these have been termed early EADs. To create an EAD, the late diastolic timing of this type of J spon event was critical. If J spon occurred earlier in diastole or during systole, it never caused a frank EAD, although it could influence APD. Moreover, the low peak amplitude of J spon was insufficient to cause a measurable DAD. In the second case, high amplitude, short duration J spon during systole could immediately cause an EAD on the same AP. The Ca i aftertransient preceded the EAD upstroke, which was caused by I ti ; these have been termed late EADs. When this type of J spon event occurred during diastole, it could cause a DAD via the same mechanism. Depending on the size of J spon , the DAD could exceed cell membrane excitation threshold and trigger a new AP.  4.1 Two types of tachycardia-induced EADs: early and late As described in [ 17 , 18 ], spontaneous release in cardiac myocytes results from localized SR Ca release, originating in one or several regions of the cell due to Ca overload conditions, which then propagates via CICR as a Ca wave throughout the remainder of the cytoplasm. We replicate two spontaneous Ca wave morphologies suggested by existing AP models [ 19 , 20 ]. These morphologies may phenomenologically represent possible types of propagating Ca waves in a cell. A low amplitude, long duration J spon [ 19 ] may correspond to a Ca wave originating from a single site in the cell, that then propagates slowly (0.1–0.5 mm/s [ 24 ]) to the rest of the cell. A high amplitude, short duration J spon [ 20 ] may correspond to a Ca wave originating near-simultaneously from multiple sites in the cell, that then more rapidly reaches the rest of the cell. By adjusting the timing of these J spon morphologies, we identified two distinct mechanisms for tachycardia-induced EADs ( Fig. 4 ). In the first case, low amplitude, long duration J spon starting during late diastole could cause an EAD on the ensuing AP. The EAD upstroke was caused by I Ca,L reactivation and preceded the Ca i aftertransient; these have been termed early EADs. To create an EAD, the late diastolic timing of this type of J spon event was critical. If J spon occurred earlier in diastole or during systole, it never caused a frank EAD, although it could influence APD. Moreover, the low peak amplitude of J spon was insufficient to cause a measurable DAD. In the second case, high amplitude, short duration J spon during systole could immediately cause an EAD on the same AP. The Ca i aftertransient preceded the EAD upstroke, which was caused by I ti ; these have been termed late EADs. When this type of J spon event occurred during diastole, it could cause a DAD via the same mechanism. Depending on the size of J spon , the DAD could exceed cell membrane excitation threshold and trigger a new AP.  4.2 Role of repolarization reserve Fig. 5 presents a flowchart illustrating the similarities and differences between the mechanisms of bradycardia-induced EADs, DADs, and our two types of tachycardia-induced EADs. While EADs are known to occur under conditions of reduced repolarization reserve, such as the various LQT syndromes, they usually require further reduction of repolarization reserve via rate-dependent mechanisms. Under conditions of bradycardia, repolarization reserve is reduced by more complete deactivation of outward K currents during long diastolic intervals [ 29 ]. Under conditions of tachycardia, we found that repolarization reserve is reduced by larger Ca-sensitive inward currents during the AP plateau, which in this model is caused by a larger overall Ca i transient when the J spon -triggered release summated with the AP-triggered, I CaL -gated CICR. It is possible that a smaller summated Ca i transient, resulting from a differently timed pre-release of SR Ca by J spon, could also reduce repolarization reserve during the subsequent AP by reducing Ca-induced inactivation of I Ca,L and thereby cause an EAD. However, we did not simulate this case. In either the case of a larger or smaller overall Ca i transient, the key element is that the J spon induced alteration of the Ca i transient causes a reduction in repolarization reserve during the subsequent AP, allowing I Ca,L reactivation to induce a n early EAD. In both the bradycardia- and tachycardia-induced cases, reduced repolarization reserve facilitates reactivation of I Ca,L and appearance of an EAD. Both these bradycardia- and tachycardia-induced EADs can be considered early EADs, though the mechanisms causing reduced repolarization reserve are different. If a high amplitude, short duration J spon is delivered in late diastole, the diastolic peak does not persist long enough to amplify the Ca-sensitive currents during the repolarization phase of the ensuing AP, and an I Ca,L reactivation-induced EAD cannot occur. However, as presented in Fig. 5 , the large J spon Ca flux can instantaneously produce a Ca i aftertransient and I ti that causes an afterdepolarization. Depending on the timing of the J spon event, the afterdepolarization may be a late EAD (if occurring during systole) or a DAD (if occurring during diastole).  4.2 Role of repolarization reserve Fig. 5 presents a flowchart illustrating the similarities and differences between the mechanisms of bradycardia-induced EADs, DADs, and our two types of tachycardia-induced EADs. While EADs are known to occur under conditions of reduced repolarization reserve, such as the various LQT syndromes, they usually require further reduction of repolarization reserve via rate-dependent mechanisms. Under conditions of bradycardia, repolarization reserve is reduced by more complete deactivation of outward K currents during long diastolic intervals [ 29 ]. Under conditions of tachycardia, we found that repolarization reserve is reduced by larger Ca-sensitive inward currents during the AP plateau, which in this model is caused by a larger overall Ca i transient when the J spon -triggered release summated with the AP-triggered, I CaL -gated CICR. It is possible that a smaller summated Ca i transient, resulting from a differently timed pre-release of SR Ca by J spon, could also reduce repolarization reserve during the subsequent AP by reducing Ca-induced inactivation of I Ca,L and thereby cause an EAD. However, we did not simulate this case. In either the case of a larger or smaller overall Ca i transient, the key element is that the J spon induced alteration of the Ca i transient causes a reduction in repolarization reserve during the subsequent AP, allowing I Ca,L reactivation to induce a n early EAD. In both the bradycardia- and tachycardia-induced cases, reduced repolarization reserve facilitates reactivation of I Ca,L and appearance of an EAD. Both these bradycardia- and tachycardia-induced EADs can be considered early EADs, though the mechanisms causing reduced repolarization reserve are different. If a high amplitude, short duration J spon is delivered in late diastole, the diastolic peak does not persist long enough to amplify the Ca-sensitive currents during the repolarization phase of the ensuing AP, and an I Ca,L reactivation-induced EAD cannot occur. However, as presented in Fig. 5 , the large J spon Ca flux can instantaneously produce a Ca i aftertransient and I ti that causes an afterdepolarization. Depending on the timing of the J spon event, the afterdepolarization may be a late EAD (if occurring during systole) or a DAD (if occurring during diastole).  4.3 Spontaneous release generating paired DADs and EADs A shared spontaneous release-dependent mechanism for EADs and DADs has been suggested by both Priori et al. [ 30 ] and Volders et al. [ 14 ]. These groups found that the ?-adrenergic agonist isoproterenol could induce both EADs and DADs in the same myocyte. In particular, they found that EADs and DADs could be associated with the same AP: a “late-coupled” DAD could occur just before (and often be interrupted by) the upstroke of a paced AP that then exhibited an EAD. An obvious mechanism would be two separate J spon events, one J spon peak occurring in diastole and the second in systole. However, our results suggest a more interesting alternative, which depends on an intermediate pattern of spontaneous release between the extremes of the low amplitude, long duration J spon and the high amplitude, short duration J spon . If we amplify the peak of the long duration J spon to an intermediate value between our high and low amplitude cases, a J spon event starting in late diastole is now sufficient to induce a DAD, and the elevation in Ca i persists long enough to reduce repolarization reserve and cause an early EAD in the subsequent AP ( Fig. 6 A ), reproducing late-coupled DADs similar to those observed in the physiological experiments [ 14 , 30 ]. A single J spon event starting in diastole explaining both the DAD and EAD may be more plausible, as two separate J spon events occurring so temporally close to one another may be unlikely. Amplifying the J spon peak further, but still considerably smaller than the high amplitude case, we observe a DAD that itself triggers an AP with an early EAD ( Fig. 6 B ), reproducing another phenomenon observed in the data of Priori et al. [ 30 ]. Thus, our simulation results can reproduce (see Fig. 6 ) observed physiological phenomena [ 14 , 30 ] and suggest alternative, more parsimonious explanations.  4.3 Spontaneous release generating paired DADs and EADs A shared spontaneous release-dependent mechanism for EADs and DADs has been suggested by both Priori et al. [ 30 ] and Volders et al. [ 14 ]. These groups found that the ?-adrenergic agonist isoproterenol could induce both EADs and DADs in the same myocyte. In particular, they found that EADs and DADs could be associated with the same AP: a “late-coupled” DAD could occur just before (and often be interrupted by) the upstroke of a paced AP that then exhibited an EAD. An obvious mechanism would be two separate J spon events, one J spon peak occurring in diastole and the second in systole. However, our results suggest a more interesting alternative, which depends on an intermediate pattern of spontaneous release between the extremes of the low amplitude, long duration J spon and the high amplitude, short duration J spon . If we amplify the peak of the long duration J spon to an intermediate value between our high and low amplitude cases, a J spon event starting in late diastole is now sufficient to induce a DAD, and the elevation in Ca i persists long enough to reduce repolarization reserve and cause an early EAD in the subsequent AP ( Fig. 6 A ), reproducing late-coupled DADs similar to those observed in the physiological experiments [ 14 , 30 ]. A single J spon event starting in diastole explaining both the DAD and EAD may be more plausible, as two separate J spon events occurring so temporally close to one another may be unlikely. Amplifying the J spon peak further, but still considerably smaller than the high amplitude case, we observe a DAD that itself triggers an AP with an early EAD ( Fig. 6 B ), reproducing another phenomenon observed in the data of Priori et al. [ 30 ]. Thus, our simulation results can reproduce (see Fig. 6 ) observed physiological phenomena [ 14 , 30 ] and suggest alternative, more parsimonious explanations.  4.5 Limitations and clinical implications Although computer modeling is a powerful tool for predicting and identifying novel cardiac arrhythmia mechanisms, the relationship to real cardiac arrhythmias cannot be established without solid experimental confirmation. In particular, it will be especially important to establish direct relationships between Ca phenomena in spatially distributed cardiac cells and the phenomena observed with our spatially averaged AP model. However, it is encouraging that our simulations have replicated a number of experimentally observed afterdepolarization phenomena [ 14 , 30 ]. Further work will be necessary to determine whether both EAD mechanisms are physiologically relevant. Until the development of required physiological imaging technology, our results based on previously introduced spontaneous release morphologies may be considered mathematical modeling predictions. In the mean time, as a preliminary speculation, it might hypothesized that when excitation-contraction features are relatively normal, such as in LQTS, spontaneous release may be more likely to occur in diastole when the luminal SR Ca content is highest and ryanodine receptor excitability is most recovered, favoring the early EAD mechanism. Conversely, when excitation-contraction coupling exhibits accelerated recovery of ryanodine receptor excitability, such as in CPVT syndromes and heart failure [ 31 ], spontaneous release during systole may become more likely, promoting the late EAD mechanism, especially if spontaneous release were initiated from multiple sites. Arrhythmias in LQT1 are potentiated by sympathetic stimulation [ 32 ]. In our previous simulation studies we found that although EADs occurred during reentry in LQT1 tissue, they were not able to induce triggered activity unless paired with a moderate increase in sympathetic tone [ 12 ]. The increased sympathetic tone potentiates Ca cycling, acceleration Ca accumulation and leading to more powerful J spon and consequently more powerful EADs [ 33 ]. In the present study we simulated LQT1, but our previous tissue simulations strongly suggest these results are generalizable to a number of physiologically relevant conditions. The appearance of tachycardia-induced early EADs during reentrant tachycardia was shown for both simulated LQT1 (caused by reduced I Ks ) and LQT2 (caused by reduced I Kr ), with qualitatively similar effects on wave propagation [ 12 ]. We would expect the same results in virtually any ionic model with reduced repolarization reserve and uninhibited Ca cycling, whether due to reduced K current (LQT1,2), incomplete Na current inactivation (LQT3), or increased sensitivity of inward repolarization currents to elevated Ca i [ 13 ]. We have also shown in tissue studies that our results are generalizable to different cell types. The true myocardium is heterogeneous with respect to repolarization reserve and Ca cycling, both transmurally and base-to-apex [ 34 – 36 ]. We have shown in transmurally heterogeneous 3-dimensional tissue studies that regions of relatively reduced repolarization reserve (such as mid-myocardial M-cells) were more prone to our tachycardia-induced early EADs [ 33 ]. In our AP model, all ion channel gating processes were represented with a Hodgkin-Huxley type formulation of independent gating variables. A Markovian approach to gating processes introduces interdependent gate variables (channel state probabilities), allowing physiologically realistic representations of individual ion channel gating proteins and direct simulation of channel protein mutations. Markovian representations of several important cardiac ion channels have been introduced in previous studies [ 4 , 37 ]. We chose not to use Markovian models because they require a significant increase in computational complexity. Furthermore, our experience has shown that introducing Markovian representations for single channels alters the quantitative results for the channel, but does not change the qualitative behaviors [ 38 ].  4.5 Limitations and clinical implications Although computer modeling is a powerful tool for predicting and identifying novel cardiac arrhythmia mechanisms, the relationship to real cardiac arrhythmias cannot be established without solid experimental confirmation. In particular, it will be especially important to establish direct relationships between Ca phenomena in spatially distributed cardiac cells and the phenomena observed with our spatially averaged AP model. However, it is encouraging that our simulations have replicated a number of experimentally observed afterdepolarization phenomena [ 14 , 30 ]. Further work will be necessary to determine whether both EAD mechanisms are physiologically relevant. Until the development of required physiological imaging technology, our results based on previously introduced spontaneous release morphologies may be considered mathematical modeling predictions. In the mean time, as a preliminary speculation, it might hypothesized that when excitation-contraction features are relatively normal, such as in LQTS, spontaneous release may be more likely to occur in diastole when the luminal SR Ca content is highest and ryanodine receptor excitability is most recovered, favoring the early EAD mechanism. Conversely, when excitation-contraction coupling exhibits accelerated recovery of ryanodine receptor excitability, such as in CPVT syndromes and heart failure [ 31 ], spontaneous release during systole may become more likely, promoting the late EAD mechanism, especially if spontaneous release were initiated from multiple sites. Arrhythmias in LQT1 are potentiated by sympathetic stimulation [ 32 ]. In our previous simulation studies we found that although EADs occurred during reentry in LQT1 tissue, they were not able to induce triggered activity unless paired with a moderate increase in sympathetic tone [ 12 ]. The increased sympathetic tone potentiates Ca cycling, acceleration Ca accumulation and leading to more powerful J spon and consequently more powerful EADs [ 33 ]. In the present study we simulated LQT1, but our previous tissue simulations strongly suggest these results are generalizable to a number of physiologically relevant conditions. The appearance of tachycardia-induced early EADs during reentrant tachycardia was shown for both simulated LQT1 (caused by reduced I Ks ) and LQT2 (caused by reduced I Kr ), with qualitatively similar effects on wave propagation [ 12 ]. We would expect the same results in virtually any ionic model with reduced repolarization reserve and uninhibited Ca cycling, whether due to reduced K current (LQT1,2), incomplete Na current inactivation (LQT3), or increased sensitivity of inward repolarization currents to elevated Ca i [ 13 ]. We have also shown in tissue studies that our results are generalizable to different cell types. The true myocardium is heterogeneous with respect to repolarization reserve and Ca cycling, both transmurally and base-to-apex [ 34 – 36 ]. We have shown in transmurally heterogeneous 3-dimensional tissue studies that regions of relatively reduced repolarization reserve (such as mid-myocardial M-cells) were more prone to our tachycardia-induced early EADs [ 33 ]. In our AP model, all ion channel gating processes were represented with a Hodgkin-Huxley type formulation of independent gating variables. A Markovian approach to gating processes introduces interdependent gate variables (channel state probabilities), allowing physiologically realistic representations of individual ion channel gating proteins and direct simulation of channel protein mutations. Markovian representations of several important cardiac ion channels have been introduced in previous studies [ 4 , 37 ]. We chose not to use Markovian models because they require a significant increase in computational complexity. Furthermore, our experience has shown that introducing Markovian representations for single channels alters the quantitative results for the channel, but does not change the qualitative behaviors [ 38 ].  5. Summary Early afterdepolarizations (EADs) are thought to be an important cause of ventricular arrhythmias in genetic channelopathies, drug reactions, and heart failure. Classically observed at slow heart rates, EADs can also be induced by rapid heart rates, exacerbated by conditions promoting Ca overload in the SR and cytoplasm, and subsequent spontaneous release. To explore possible underlying ionic mechanisms of these EADs, we performed computer simulations using a ventricular action potential mathematical model. We determined how changing model parameters, replicating patterns of spontaneous release amplitude and timing suggested by previous studies, affected EAD formation. We found that: 1) During tachycardia, spontaneous SR Ca release can generate both EADs and DADs. Depending on the morphology and timing of spontaneous release, EADs can be produced via two distinct mechanisms that previously have been termed early and late. 2) Early EADs are caused by low amplitude, long duration spontaneous release starting in late diastole just before the ensuing paced AP. The EAD upstroke is generated by reactivation of window I Ca,L , mechanistically similar to bradycardia-induced EADs. 3) Late EADs are more likely to be caused by high amplitude, short duration spontaneous release occurring in systole. The EAD upstroke is generated by a spontaneous release-induced transient inward current (carried by I NaCaX and I ns,Ca ), mechanistically similar to DADs. 4) A single medium amplitude, long duration spontaneous release starting in late diastole can produce both a DAD and an early EAD on the subsequent paced AP. Increasing spontaneous release amplitude slightly further can produce a DAD that triggers an AP that then exhibits an early EAD. These results coincide with experimental data and suggest a novel explanation. 