DEMETHYLATING AGENTS IN MYELOID MALIGNANCIES Purpose of Review Two demethylating agents are approved in myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS): 5-azacitidine and 5-aza-2?-deoxycitidine (decitabine). These drugs are structurally related and induce DNA hypomethylation. Aberrant DNA methylation is associated with gene silencing. It is proposed that hypomethylating agents work by inducing re-expression of epigenetically silenced genes. Here, we provide an up-to-date summary of the clinical experience with these drugs. Recent Findings 5-azacitidine and decitabine were approved in the US based on clinical responses but no effect on survival was documented. Recent results from a phase III study have indicated that treatment of patients with higher-risk MDS with 5-azacitidine results in significant improvement in overall survival. Results of a randomized survival study of decitabine should be available in 2007. Reports of combination epigenetic therapies (a hypomethylating agent with a histone deacetylase inhibitor) indicate that these have significant activity in patients with MDS/AML. Randomized studies are testing the concept that the combinations are superior to single agent therapy. Summary Demethylating agents are the standard of care for patients with higher-risk MDS and the only agents known to improve the natural history of MDS. Further work in new combination therapies may result in further advances in the care of patients with MDS.  Conclusion The development of the hypomethylating agents have resulted in the first group of therapies to provide a clear and consistent benefit to patients with MDS. It is possible that this could also translate into a benefit in AML, other leukemias and potential solid tumors and lymphomas. Although the data with 5-azacitidine on survival 5** is probably one of the most important in MDS, it is obvious that we are far from the results obtained with the tyrosine kinase inhibitors in CML. It is expected that more active compounds with more clinical activity will translate into greater survival benefits. Therefore the development of new more potent hypomethylating agents is of importance. Oral formulations 37 are under development but their pharmacokinetic characteristics need to be fully understood. Perhaps the development of new more potent histone deacetylase inhibitors and their combinations could improve on the therapeutic activity of these forms of epigenetic therapy. 