Assessment of Cancer-Related Fatigue: Role of the Oncology Nurse in Translating NCCN Assessment Guidelines into Practice Despite the availability of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network’s (NCCN) evidence-based practice guidelines for the assessment and management of Cancer-Related Fatigue (CRF), assessment of CRF still is not routinely performed at many institutions and oncology practice settings. Numerous patient-, provider-, and system-related barriers exist that hinder the translation of these guidelines into practice by oncology nurses and other health care providers. Oncology nurses can play vital roles in decreasing these barriers to promote the translation of these guidelines into practice to insure that CRF is routinely assessed, managed, and documented. This article briefly reviews the NCCN CRF guidelines for CRF assessment and discusses many of the common barriers that exist that hinder the translation of the CRF guidelines into practice settings. Current assessment/screening and measurement scales validated in patients with cancer are highlighted, and case studies reflect the vital roles that oncology nurses can play in the assessment, documentation, and ongoing monitoring of a patient with CRF.  Case Studies Fatigue Case Study #1 Carol was seen in your practice setting in October 2006. A review of her history reveals that: She is a 35-year-old African American woman with stage IV bilateral adenocarcinoma of the breast metastatic to the lung that she discovered through self-detection in December 2005. Her tumor is ER/PR negative, HER-2/neu positive. In February 2006, she underwent a modified radical mastectomy of the right breast and a skin-sparing mastectomy of the left breast. Postsurgical pathology revealed only one node was involved. Her tumor was staged as T3N1. She was referred to medical oncology for adjuvant therapy. A CT scan done prior to the start of her chemotherapy initiation found a pulmonary nodule. In March 2006, Carol began adjuvant treatment with doxorubicin hydrochloride/cyclophosphamide (Adriamycin/Cytoxan) X 4 cycles. In June 2006, her regimen was changed to docetaxel/trastuzumab (Taxotere/Herceptin) X 12 cycles. After 1 cycle, Carol developed a neutropenic fever and was hospitalized for 14 days. In August 2006, she again was hospitalized for C. difficile infection with diarrhea and bloody stool. In October 2006, she was referred to the Barriers study and agreed to participate. At that time, she had received 6 cycles of docetaxel/trastuzumab. Question #1: From a fatigue standpoint, what do you want to assess first? Assess for the presence of comorbidities Assess for the presence of anemia Determine if she has any pain, insomnia, nutritional problems, or emotional distress Determine her current activity pattern Ask Carol about her level of fatigue severity The preferred response is e. Ask Carol about her level of fatigue severity. Your first priority should be to screen for the presence of fatigue and determine its severity on a 0–10 NRS. Carol rates her fatigue as a “7” on a 0 to 10 scale. Question #2: How do you now proceed in your fatigue assessment? Since Carol has severe fatigue, conduct a more in-depth fatigue assessment (onset, pattern, duration, change over time, associated and alleviating factors, and interference with functioning) and assess for any patient-related fatigue barriers she may have. She tells you that she wasn’t aware that fatigue could be managed. She thought that she just had to learn to live with it as it is an expected side effect of her treatment. You then perform a focused history and physical examination, consider her disease and treatment status (ie, stage IV, on active treatment), perform a review of systems, and assess the “Gang of 7” (ie, pain, emotional distress [anxiety, depression], sleep disturbance, anemia, nutrition, activity level, and comorbidities). Your workup, history, physical, and review of systems is negative except for her lack of physical activity and taking 3 to 4 naps per day that last 2 to 3 hours. You counsel her to begin to use walking as a form of exercise and counsel her to keep her naps short in order to maintain nighttime sleep patterns. After talking with Carol and her physician, supportive care referrals for occupational therapy (OT) and physical therapy (PT) are initiated as is an order for an as-needed sleep medication. In October 2006, Carol underwent a wedge resection to remove her pulmonary nodule, and later in November, she was started on trastuzumab every 3 weeks for a year. Her fatigue levels gradually decreased from 7 to 6 to 4 over the course of 3 months, as she continued her walking program. Fatigue Case Study #2 Lydia is an 83 year old Filipino woman originally diagnosed with stage I left breast cancer in 2004 that was discovered through routine mammography. In October 2004, she underwent a left breast segmentectomy. The tumor was ER/PR positive, HER 2/neu negative, so her postsurgical staging was T1aN0. She was started on letrozole (Femora) for the breast cancer. In October 2006, she was referred to your practice and to the Barriers study and agreed to participate. At that time, she had been on letrozole for 2 years. Question #1: From a fatigue standpoint, what do you want to assess first? Assess for the presence of comorbidities Assess for the presence of anemia Determine if she has any pain, insomnia, nutritional problems, or emotional distress Determine her current activity pattern Ask Lydia about her level of fatigue severity The preferred response is e. Ask Lydia about her level of fatigue severity. Lydia rates her fatigue at a “5” level on a 0 to 10 scale. Since Lydia has moderate fatigue, conduct an in-depth fatigue assessment (onset, pattern, duration, change over time, associated and alleviating factors, and interference with functioning), perform a focused history, physical examination, review systems and medications, and consider her disease and treatment status (ie, stage IV, on letrozole). You assess the “Gang of 7” (ie, pain, emotional distress [anxiety, depression], sleep disturbance, anemia, nutrition, activity level, and comorbidities). Based on your workup, you discover that she has several comorbidities (gastroesophageal reflux disease, osteoarthritis, hypertension, congestive heart failure, and hypothyroidism). For these she is on pantoprazole (Protonix), amlodipine (Norvasc), candesartan (Atacand), and levothyroxine (Synthroid). She states that she is pretty much confined to a wheelchair because of her arthritis and is taking celecoxib (Celebrex) for related pain. She has no evidence of anemia, insomnia, or nutritionally related problems. In assessing patient-related barriers, Lydia tells you that she has limited physical activity secondary to her arthritis (wheelchair bound). Her primary caregiver is her daughter who is a nurse. The daughter tells you that she encourages her mother to get out of the wheelchair, as her mother doesn’t need it all the time, but it is challenging to get her mother to do this. Her mother is very attached to her wheelchair and would rather not aggravate her osteoarthritis by moving around. A consultation and referral was initiated to Lydia’s outside physician regarding her arthritis treatment, inactivity, and pain management. A recommendation to consider a supportive care referral for OT and PT was included to determine appropriate wheelchair exercises that could be performed. Follow-up at 1 and 3 months thereafter revealed that her fatigue was remaining stable at a moderate level (ie, 4 to 5 on a 0 to 10 scale). In summary, there are a number of CRF Web sites that oncology nurses can access for educational materials about CRF for themselves and their patients (see Table 6). By using these and other resources, oncology nurses can play significant roles in the translation of the CRF NCCN’s evidence-based practice guidelines into their practice settings. The important thing to remember is “just do it!”  Fatigue Case Study #1 Carol was seen in your practice setting in October 2006. A review of her history reveals that: She is a 35-year-old African American woman with stage IV bilateral adenocarcinoma of the breast metastatic to the lung that she discovered through self-detection in December 2005. Her tumor is ER/PR negative, HER-2/neu positive. In February 2006, she underwent a modified radical mastectomy of the right breast and a skin-sparing mastectomy of the left breast. Postsurgical pathology revealed only one node was involved. Her tumor was staged as T3N1. She was referred to medical oncology for adjuvant therapy. A CT scan done prior to the start of her chemotherapy initiation found a pulmonary nodule. In March 2006, Carol began adjuvant treatment with doxorubicin hydrochloride/cyclophosphamide (Adriamycin/Cytoxan) X 4 cycles. In June 2006, her regimen was changed to docetaxel/trastuzumab (Taxotere/Herceptin) X 12 cycles. After 1 cycle, Carol developed a neutropenic fever and was hospitalized for 14 days. In August 2006, she again was hospitalized for C. difficile infection with diarrhea and bloody stool. In October 2006, she was referred to the Barriers study and agreed to participate. At that time, she had received 6 cycles of docetaxel/trastuzumab. Question #1: From a fatigue standpoint, what do you want to assess first? Assess for the presence of comorbidities Assess for the presence of anemia Determine if she has any pain, insomnia, nutritional problems, or emotional distress Determine her current activity pattern Ask Carol about her level of fatigue severity The preferred response is e. Ask Carol about her level of fatigue severity. Your first priority should be to screen for the presence of fatigue and determine its severity on a 0–10 NRS. Carol rates her fatigue as a “7” on a 0 to 10 scale. Question #2: How do you now proceed in your fatigue assessment? Since Carol has severe fatigue, conduct a more in-depth fatigue assessment (onset, pattern, duration, change over time, associated and alleviating factors, and interference with functioning) and assess for any patient-related fatigue barriers she may have. She tells you that she wasn’t aware that fatigue could be managed. She thought that she just had to learn to live with it as it is an expected side effect of her treatment. You then perform a focused history and physical examination, consider her disease and treatment status (ie, stage IV, on active treatment), perform a review of systems, and assess the “Gang of 7” (ie, pain, emotional distress [anxiety, depression], sleep disturbance, anemia, nutrition, activity level, and comorbidities). Your workup, history, physical, and review of systems is negative except for her lack of physical activity and taking 3 to 4 naps per day that last 2 to 3 hours. You counsel her to begin to use walking as a form of exercise and counsel her to keep her naps short in order to maintain nighttime sleep patterns. After talking with Carol and her physician, supportive care referrals for occupational therapy (OT) and physical therapy (PT) are initiated as is an order for an as-needed sleep medication. In October 2006, Carol underwent a wedge resection to remove her pulmonary nodule, and later in November, she was started on trastuzumab every 3 weeks for a year. Her fatigue levels gradually decreased from 7 to 6 to 4 over the course of 3 months, as she continued her walking program.  Fatigue Case Study #2 Lydia is an 83 year old Filipino woman originally diagnosed with stage I left breast cancer in 2004 that was discovered through routine mammography. In October 2004, she underwent a left breast segmentectomy. The tumor was ER/PR positive, HER 2/neu negative, so her postsurgical staging was T1aN0. She was started on letrozole (Femora) for the breast cancer. In October 2006, she was referred to your practice and to the Barriers study and agreed to participate. At that time, she had been on letrozole for 2 years. Question #1: From a fatigue standpoint, what do you want to assess first? Assess for the presence of comorbidities Assess for the presence of anemia Determine if she has any pain, insomnia, nutritional problems, or emotional distress Determine her current activity pattern Ask Lydia about her level of fatigue severity The preferred response is e. Ask Lydia about her level of fatigue severity. Lydia rates her fatigue at a “5” level on a 0 to 10 scale. Since Lydia has moderate fatigue, conduct an in-depth fatigue assessment (onset, pattern, duration, change over time, associated and alleviating factors, and interference with functioning), perform a focused history, physical examination, review systems and medications, and consider her disease and treatment status (ie, stage IV, on letrozole). You assess the “Gang of 7” (ie, pain, emotional distress [anxiety, depression], sleep disturbance, anemia, nutrition, activity level, and comorbidities). Based on your workup, you discover that she has several comorbidities (gastroesophageal reflux disease, osteoarthritis, hypertension, congestive heart failure, and hypothyroidism). For these she is on pantoprazole (Protonix), amlodipine (Norvasc), candesartan (Atacand), and levothyroxine (Synthroid). She states that she is pretty much confined to a wheelchair because of her arthritis and is taking celecoxib (Celebrex) for related pain. She has no evidence of anemia, insomnia, or nutritionally related problems. In assessing patient-related barriers, Lydia tells you that she has limited physical activity secondary to her arthritis (wheelchair bound). Her primary caregiver is her daughter who is a nurse. The daughter tells you that she encourages her mother to get out of the wheelchair, as her mother doesn’t need it all the time, but it is challenging to get her mother to do this. Her mother is very attached to her wheelchair and would rather not aggravate her osteoarthritis by moving around. A consultation and referral was initiated to Lydia’s outside physician regarding her arthritis treatment, inactivity, and pain management. A recommendation to consider a supportive care referral for OT and PT was included to determine appropriate wheelchair exercises that could be performed. Follow-up at 1 and 3 months thereafter revealed that her fatigue was remaining stable at a moderate level (ie, 4 to 5 on a 0 to 10 scale). In summary, there are a number of CRF Web sites that oncology nurses can access for educational materials about CRF for themselves and their patients (see Table 6). By using these and other resources, oncology nurses can play significant roles in the translation of the CRF NCCN’s evidence-based practice guidelines into their practice settings. The important thing to remember is “just do it!” 