Pulmonary rehabilitation in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: A call for continued investigation ? Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a devastating disease that afflicts patients with relentlessly progressive shortness of breath [Joint Statement of the American Thoracic Society and the European Respiratory Society. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: diagnosis and treatment. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000; 161 :646–64 1 ]. Despite nearly 30 years of intense investigation, effective therapy for IPF remains elusive; median survival rates have stubbornly remained less than five years from the time of diagnosis [Bjoraker JA, Ryu JH, Edwin MK, Meyers J, Tazelaar H, Schroeder D, et al. Prognostic significance of histopathologic subsets in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998; 157 :199–203 2 , Flaherty KR, Thwaite E, Kazerooni EA, Gross B, Toews GB, Colby TV, et al. Radiological versus histological diagnosis in UIP and NSIP: survival implications. Thorax 2003; 58 :143–48 3 ], and no medical therapy has been proved to be in any way effective for the treatment of this disease. Without medications that help IPF patients live longer, an important question to ask is whether there are interventions that might allow these people to live better —to be more active; to experience less dyspnea, less depression, less anxiety; to possess a greater sense of control over their disease; and to have better quality of life. Pulmonary rehabilitation helps to accomplish many of these goals in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and emerging data suggest that it may do the same for patients with IPF.  Conclusion Like COPD, IPF is a devastating disease that leads to significant physical, functional, and emotional sequelae. Although conventional pharmacotherapy has proved to be widely unsuccessful in benefiting IPF patients, pulmonary rehabilitation may hold promise for making impacts in areas that are most important to patients. Future research should aim to answer whether and how PR might benefit IPF patients; to define the features associated with maximal benefit from PR; to identify barriers to maximal benefit and ensure that interventions targeting these barriers are in place prior to IPF patients enrolling in PR—an intervention that appears to currently hold the most promise for improving IPF patients’ lives on multiple important fronts. 