Progressive Encephalopathy in a Child With Cerebral Folate Deficiency Syndrome Cerebral folate deficiency syndrome, a recently recognized cause of developmental delay, regression, and seizures, is associated with autoantibodies against folate receptors. A female child with developmental delay and a history of seizures who presented with seizures and unexplained coma is reported. Extensive testing to evaluate the patient’s coma and subsequent developmental regression were unrevealing until the results of her cerebrospinal fluid neurotransmitter analysis returned. These showed low levels of methyltetrahydrofolate, the active metabolite of folate in the cerebrospinal fluid; subsequently, elevated titers of autoantibodies against folate receptors were found. Despite treatment with folinic acid, she developed intractable epilepsy and severe developmental delay.  Discussion This report describes a child with a progressive encephalopathy and intractable epilepsy. The patient did have a preceding history of mild developmental delay and prior seizures, but her presentation was remarkable for her prolonged unexplained coma. Despite extensive investigations during her initial admission, no explanation for her seizures or coma was found until the results of her CSF neurotransmitter analysis returned. The patient was diagnosed with cerebral folate deficiency syndrome based on low CSF levels of 5-methyltetrahydrofolate, the central nervous system metabolite of folate, and the presence of autoantibodies in the blood against folate receptors. Folate is actively transported from the blood to the CSF and brain by folate receptors, and the antibodies presumably inhibit transport of folate, leading to decreased CSF levels. Cerebral folate deficiency syndrome has been reported in 30 patients. 2 , 7 , 8 Typical symptoms include irritability, developmental delay or regression, hypotonia and ataxia, seizures, and dyskinesias. 6 Magnetic resonance imaging findings are variable between patients. Cerebellar atrophy has been reported in 3 of 20 patients with cerebral folate deficiency syndrome 2 although cerebellar symptoms are reported in nearly all patients. In some patients, no MRI changes were noted, 2 , 7 , 8 whereas in other cases, moderate demyelination or supratentorial or infratentorial atrophy was found. 2 The etiology of cerebral folate deficiency syndrome is unknown, and it is unknown whether it is primarily genetic or is autoimmune with an interaction with environmental triggers. Some support for the latter hypothesis has been shown by a reduction in the titer of folate receptor autoantibodies by adoption of a milk-free diet. 9 Marked responses to treatment with folinic acid have been reported, 2 , 6 – 8 and it has been suggested that starting treatment at an earlier age may be associated with an improved response. 2 Treatment with immunomodulatory agents has not been reported. This case underlines the importance of CSF neuro-transmitter analysis in cases of unexplained coma, intractable epilepsy, or episodic progressive developmental regression. Correct and timely diagnosis is important because of the potentially treatable nature of this disorder. 6 – 8 Starting folinic acid therapy immediately at diagnosis may be necessary to prevent irreversible central nervous system sequelae. Unfortunately, our case suggests that folinic acid treatment, even when started early, may not be an adequate treatment for all patients.  Discussion This report describes a child with a progressive encephalopathy and intractable epilepsy. The patient did have a preceding history of mild developmental delay and prior seizures, but her presentation was remarkable for her prolonged unexplained coma. Despite extensive investigations during her initial admission, no explanation for her seizures or coma was found until the results of her CSF neurotransmitter analysis returned. The patient was diagnosed with cerebral folate deficiency syndrome based on low CSF levels of 5-methyltetrahydrofolate, the central nervous system metabolite of folate, and the presence of autoantibodies in the blood against folate receptors. Folate is actively transported from the blood to the CSF and brain by folate receptors, and the antibodies presumably inhibit transport of folate, leading to decreased CSF levels. Cerebral folate deficiency syndrome has been reported in 30 patients. 2 , 7 , 8 Typical symptoms include irritability, developmental delay or regression, hypotonia and ataxia, seizures, and dyskinesias. 6 Magnetic resonance imaging findings are variable between patients. Cerebellar atrophy has been reported in 3 of 20 patients with cerebral folate deficiency syndrome 2 although cerebellar symptoms are reported in nearly all patients. In some patients, no MRI changes were noted, 2 , 7 , 8 whereas in other cases, moderate demyelination or supratentorial or infratentorial atrophy was found. 2 The etiology of cerebral folate deficiency syndrome is unknown, and it is unknown whether it is primarily genetic or is autoimmune with an interaction with environmental triggers. Some support for the latter hypothesis has been shown by a reduction in the titer of folate receptor autoantibodies by adoption of a milk-free diet. 9 Marked responses to treatment with folinic acid have been reported, 2 , 6 – 8 and it has been suggested that starting treatment at an earlier age may be associated with an improved response. 2 Treatment with immunomodulatory agents has not been reported. This case underlines the importance of CSF neuro-transmitter analysis in cases of unexplained coma, intractable epilepsy, or episodic progressive developmental regression. Correct and timely diagnosis is important because of the potentially treatable nature of this disorder. 6 – 8 Starting folinic acid therapy immediately at diagnosis may be necessary to prevent irreversible central nervous system sequelae. Unfortunately, our case suggests that folinic acid treatment, even when started early, may not be an adequate treatment for all patients. 