Cancer Outcomes Research in a Rural Area: A Multi-Institution Partnership Model Whereas, most cancer research data come from high-profile academic centers, little is known about the outcomes of cancer care in rural communities. We summarize the experience of building a multi-institution partnership to develop a cancer outcomes research infrastructure in Southwest Georgia (SWGA), a primarily rural 33-county area with over 700,000 residents. The partnership includes eight institutions: the Emory University in Atlanta, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the Georgia Comprehensive Center Registry (the Registry), the Southwest Georgia Cancer Coalition (the Coalition), and the four community cancer centers located within the SWGA region. The practical application of the partnership model, its organizational structure, and lessons learned are presented using two specific examples: a study evaluating treatment decisions and quality of life among prostate cancer patients, and a study of treatment discontinuation among prostate, breast, lung, and colorectal cancer patients. Our partnership model allowed us to (1) use the Coalition as a link between Atlanta-based researchers and local community; (2) collaborate with the area cancer centers on day-to-day study activities; (3) involve the Registry personnel and resources to identify eligible cancer cases and to perform data collection; and (4) raise community awareness and sense of study ownership through media announcements organized by the Coalition. All of the above activities were performed in consultation with the funding institution (CDC) and its project directors who oversee several other studies addressing similar research questions throughout the country. Our partnership model may provide a useful framework for cancer outcomes research projects in rural communities.  Discussion Our case studies demonstrate a workable model for engaging state and federal public health agencies, academia, local health care institutions, and the community in a long-term research partnership to study cancer outcomes in rural Georgia. In this model, each of the partners plays a unique role that allows addressing scientific, logistical, cultural, and economic obstacles that cannot be overcome by any single institution. The state Cancer Registry allows rapid identification of new cases for prospective follow up and selection of existing cases for retrospective studies. Availability of regional coordinators and trained abstractors facilitates efficient data collection and transfer enhanced by the already-established relationships between the registry and the hospitals. The use of existing protocols and software minimizes the time required to develop data collection tools for new studies. Despite its strengths, the Cancer Registry does not have sufficient funds or personnel to conduct original hypothesis-driven research. The expertise of the Emory faculty includes nearly all aspects of a successful scientific project including proposal writing, study design, day-to-day study management, data analysis, and reporting. Nevertheless, much of Emory’s population-based cancer outcomes research in Georgia has been conducted within metropolitan Atlanta, and without a local partner, such as the SWGA Cancer Coalition, obtaining cooperation of local physicians and successful recruitment and retention of participants in Southwest Georgia presents a challenge. The Coalition’s active involvement in research projects greatly increases the likelihood of obtaining support and collaboration of the community leaders, including local politicians, health care providers, educators, and members of the faith community. Moreover, by serving as a link between Emory-based researchers, SWGA hospitals and local investigators (project managers, interviewers and abstractors), the Coalition ensures a more effective use of funding. The Coalition’s mission includes providing opportunities for residents of SWGA to participate in research studies; however, the Coalition lacks expertise to lead federally-funded studies. Access to such studies requires collaborations with Emory and other academic centers. Both studies reported in this communication were conceptualized and funded by CDC as part of the strategic plan to involve communities as partners in research; and in both research projects, SWGA was only one of several funded sites. For the prostate cancer quality of life study (Study I) other funded sites included Seattle, WA, Los Angeles, CA, Charleston, SC, and San Antonio, TX; whereas, the counterparts for the treatment discontinuation study (Study II) included Birmingham AL, and Seattle, WA. Thus, the benefits of CDC involvement extend beyond funding. Perhaps as importantly, CDC leadership identifies gaps in research and allows addressing similar research questions in diverse geographic areas and in different populations. Partnerships similar to ours have been described previously. For example, the National Cancer Institute initiated the development of the Special Populations Network (SPN) program, a nationwide initiative that included several independent yet coordinated projects [ 18 ]. At the present time the existing projects involve such diverse populations as New York City immigrants [ 19 ]; the Asian-American communities in Boston, New York, Houston, Seattle, California and Hawaii [ 20 ]; the Native American and Alaska Natives in Western and Midwestern states and Alaska [ 21 ]; and the underserved communities in Maryland [ 22 , 23 ]. The one SPN project that involves a population, which is geographically and demographically most similar to ours, is the Deep South Network (DSN), which includes selected rural and urban areas in Mississippi and Alabama [ 24 ]. After five years of operation, the DSN has been reported to be effective in raising cancer awareness, improving education and outreach to the target population, and increasing the use of cancer screening services [ 25 ]. Although the SWGA Partnership and the Deep South Network have a number of similarities, the two projects are also different in several respects. First, unlike the DSN, the SWGA Partnership did not develop as an externally funded infrastructure-building project. Rather, it evolved out of necessity, driven by specific research needs and using already existing organizations united by common interests. Second, while the main focus of DSN is on African-American populations living in selected communities, the SWGA Partnership is focused on a large well-defined geographic area with a population comprised of about 60% whites and 40% blacks. Finally, the initial DSN activities involved education and outreach whereas, the SWGA Partnership developed in the context of clinical outcomes research. The methodological differences notwithstanding, both the DSN and the SWGA Partnership serve the common cause of eliminating cancer disparities. Both the CDC and the NCI continue to identify the reduction of cancer-related health disparities and a better understanding of cancer outcomes in different populations, as priorities for the near future [ 26 , 27 ]. These priorities require lasting partnerships that involve members of academia, the government, and local communities, and such partnerships must maintain a sense of mutual trust. Our experience and the experience of others provide a framework for future studies and public health interventions in underserved areas.  Discussion Our case studies demonstrate a workable model for engaging state and federal public health agencies, academia, local health care institutions, and the community in a long-term research partnership to study cancer outcomes in rural Georgia. In this model, each of the partners plays a unique role that allows addressing scientific, logistical, cultural, and economic obstacles that cannot be overcome by any single institution. The state Cancer Registry allows rapid identification of new cases for prospective follow up and selection of existing cases for retrospective studies. Availability of regional coordinators and trained abstractors facilitates efficient data collection and transfer enhanced by the already-established relationships between the registry and the hospitals. The use of existing protocols and software minimizes the time required to develop data collection tools for new studies. Despite its strengths, the Cancer Registry does not have sufficient funds or personnel to conduct original hypothesis-driven research. The expertise of the Emory faculty includes nearly all aspects of a successful scientific project including proposal writing, study design, day-to-day study management, data analysis, and reporting. Nevertheless, much of Emory’s population-based cancer outcomes research in Georgia has been conducted within metropolitan Atlanta, and without a local partner, such as the SWGA Cancer Coalition, obtaining cooperation of local physicians and successful recruitment and retention of participants in Southwest Georgia presents a challenge. The Coalition’s active involvement in research projects greatly increases the likelihood of obtaining support and collaboration of the community leaders, including local politicians, health care providers, educators, and members of the faith community. Moreover, by serving as a link between Emory-based researchers, SWGA hospitals and local investigators (project managers, interviewers and abstractors), the Coalition ensures a more effective use of funding. The Coalition’s mission includes providing opportunities for residents of SWGA to participate in research studies; however, the Coalition lacks expertise to lead federally-funded studies. Access to such studies requires collaborations with Emory and other academic centers. Both studies reported in this communication were conceptualized and funded by CDC as part of the strategic plan to involve communities as partners in research; and in both research projects, SWGA was only one of several funded sites. For the prostate cancer quality of life study (Study I) other funded sites included Seattle, WA, Los Angeles, CA, Charleston, SC, and San Antonio, TX; whereas, the counterparts for the treatment discontinuation study (Study II) included Birmingham AL, and Seattle, WA. Thus, the benefits of CDC involvement extend beyond funding. Perhaps as importantly, CDC leadership identifies gaps in research and allows addressing similar research questions in diverse geographic areas and in different populations. Partnerships similar to ours have been described previously. For example, the National Cancer Institute initiated the development of the Special Populations Network (SPN) program, a nationwide initiative that included several independent yet coordinated projects [ 18 ]. At the present time the existing projects involve such diverse populations as New York City immigrants [ 19 ]; the Asian-American communities in Boston, New York, Houston, Seattle, California and Hawaii [ 20 ]; the Native American and Alaska Natives in Western and Midwestern states and Alaska [ 21 ]; and the underserved communities in Maryland [ 22 , 23 ]. The one SPN project that involves a population, which is geographically and demographically most similar to ours, is the Deep South Network (DSN), which includes selected rural and urban areas in Mississippi and Alabama [ 24 ]. After five years of operation, the DSN has been reported to be effective in raising cancer awareness, improving education and outreach to the target population, and increasing the use of cancer screening services [ 25 ]. Although the SWGA Partnership and the Deep South Network have a number of similarities, the two projects are also different in several respects. First, unlike the DSN, the SWGA Partnership did not develop as an externally funded infrastructure-building project. Rather, it evolved out of necessity, driven by specific research needs and using already existing organizations united by common interests. Second, while the main focus of DSN is on African-American populations living in selected communities, the SWGA Partnership is focused on a large well-defined geographic area with a population comprised of about 60% whites and 40% blacks. Finally, the initial DSN activities involved education and outreach whereas, the SWGA Partnership developed in the context of clinical outcomes research. The methodological differences notwithstanding, both the DSN and the SWGA Partnership serve the common cause of eliminating cancer disparities. Both the CDC and the NCI continue to identify the reduction of cancer-related health disparities and a better understanding of cancer outcomes in different populations, as priorities for the near future [ 26 , 27 ]. These priorities require lasting partnerships that involve members of academia, the government, and local communities, and such partnerships must maintain a sense of mutual trust. Our experience and the experience of others provide a framework for future studies and public health interventions in underserved areas. 