Case Studies in Cardiac Dysfunction After Acute Aneurysmal Subarachnoid Hemorrhage Patients with acute aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) often present with more than just neurological compromise. A wide spectrum of complicating cardiopulmonary abnormalities have been documented in patients with acute SAH, presenting additional challenges to the healthcare providers who attempt to treat and stabilize these patients. The patients described in this article presented with both acute aneurysmal SAH and cardiopulmonary compromise. Education and further research on this connection is needed to provide optimal care and outcomes for this vulnerable population. Nurses play a key role in balancing the critical and diverse needs of patients presenting with these symptoms.  Discussion These cases serve as exemplars of the types of cardiac dysfunction that frequently accompany aneurysmal SAH (at our institution, we identified a 33% incidence of cardiac dysfunction following SAH, with arrhythmias and pulmonary edema as the most common complications [ Crago et al., 2004 ]). No universally accepted explanation of the link between aneurysmal SAH and cardiac dysfunction currently exists. Ongoing investigations are examining causal factors and outcomes for cardiac dysfunction in this patient population. Zaroff and colleagues (2006) suggest that genetic predisposition may play a role in identifying patients at risk for related cardiac dysfunction. The authors found that certain genetic combinations (polymorphisms of the adrenoceptors ?-1, ?-2, and ?-adrenoreceptors, which may affect cardiac responsiveness to catecholamines) resulted in a 10–15-fold increase in the likelihood of developing major cardiac dysfunction following SAH ( Zaroff et al., 2006 ). Similarly, it would seem logical that those with preexisting cardiac disease would have increased vulnerability to this kind of catecholamine surge, although a link between preexisting cardiac disease and the presence of cardiac dysfunction following SAH has not been established in our work (Crago et al.). A commonly accepted theory suggests that a catecholamine surge occurs at the time of the aneurysm rupture, setting off a cascade of events that includes cardiopulmonary compromise. However, the exact catecholamine(s) responsible for initiating this sequence of events has not been identified, and the events that cause catecholamines to be released during or after an initial insult of an SAH remain unclear. Regardless of initiating factors, the catecholamine surge is thought to stimulate a sympathetic storm ( Parr, 1996 ). A sympathetic storm occurs when a rapid increase in ICP (such as that which occurs following aneurysm rupture) triggers a catecholamine surge. The sympathetic storm is manifested by episodic alterations in body temperature, blood pressure, heart and respiratory rate, pupil size, and level of consciousness coinciding with hyperhydrosis, excessive salivation, and extensor posturing ( Young, Finn, Pellegrini, Soloaga, & Bruetman, 2006 ). After these physiologic alterations begin, the patient is at risk for cardiopulmonary dysfunction. Unfortunately, clinical management for patients with SAH often includes maintaining systolic BP under 120 mm Hg to prevent further rupture of the unsecured aneurysm during the period of time before the repair. Some theorize this therapy may increase the risk to cardiac muscle by preventing much needed oxygen from perfusing the heart ( Parr, 1996 ). Regardless of the cause, cardiopulmonary dysfunction may manifest in several ways. Troponin elevation, a sensitive and widely accepted marker of cardiac injury, has been associated with an increased risk of cardiopulmonary complications following SAH, as well as an increased risk for delayed cerebral ischemia and poor functional outcome at discharge ( Naidech et al., 2005 ). Elevated cardiac troponin I (cTnI) values have been noted frequently in intracranial hemorrhage and are independently associated with higher in-hospital mortality ( Hays & Diringer, 2006 ). Cardiopulmonary dysfunction also may manifest following SAH as abnormal ECG readings that may show bradycardia, cardiac output prolongation, diffuse S-T changes, and ventricular ectopy ( Zaroff, Rordorf, Newell, Ogilvy, & Levinson, 1999 ). All of this article’s case study subjects had early and significantly elevated troponin, creatine phosphokinase (CPK), and CPKMB levels as well as abnormal ECG readings. Elevated laboratory values and abnormal ECG readings often signal the time at which transthoracic ECHO should be performed to fully evaluate the extent of myocardial dysfunction. This test typically reveals areas of ischemia and dilation of the heart and evaluates heart function by determining EF and wall motion. In each of the case studies presented here, patients underwent ECHO evaluation, which demonstrated varying degrees of inadequate cardiac function. Inadequate cardiac function in this situation often is referred to as “stunned myocardium” and describes low cardiac output that initially occurs after SAH and then resolves ( Donaldson & Pritz, 2001 ). Interestingly, despite the incidence of cardiopulmonary dysfunction in persons with SAH, it is rare to find actual coronary artery disease (Donaldson & Pritz). Cardiopulmonary dysfunction is just one of many complications that may occur following SAH. Patients with a ruptured aneurysm are at increased risk for vasospasm, pneumonia, and skin breakdown. M. M., for example, demonstrated indications of septic shock, increased cardiac output, positive blood cultures, and decreased blood pressure, but also had evidence of myocardial ischemia with ECG and enzyme changes ( Bernardini & DeShaies, 2001 ). In patients with SAH, the complication of primary concern to neuroscience practitioners is vasospasm, which can extend the hospitalization period following an “uncomplicated” SAH beyond 2 weeks ( Kosty, 2005 ; Urbaniak, Merchant, Amin-Hanjani, & Roitberg, 2007 ). Some theorize that patients who experience cardiac complications are at greater risk for cerebral vasospasm ( Lee et al., 2006 ), although the cause for this relationship is unknown. Regardless, cardiopulmonary dysfunction complicates the treatment of vasospasm because medications that treat cerebral vasospasm can worsen cardiopulmonary dysfunction and vice versa. Vasopressors, for example, are known to elevate heart rate and cause vasoconstriction. This may cause increased workload or oxygen demand on an already irritated myocardial muscle. Using HHH therapy for vasospasm becomes increasingly difficult or impossible if there is continued pulmonary vascular congestion or low cardiac output (Kosty). On the other side, hypoperfusion from cardiopulmonary function affects the brain’s ability to maintain tissue perfusion necessary to prevent additional damage to an already acutely injured cerebrum ( Yarlagadda et al., 2006 ). The challenge for neuroscience practitioners is to concomitantly manage cerebral and cardiopulmonary conditions, optimizing blood flow to tissue in one area without administering treatment that will decrease perfusion in the other. The challenge for neuroscience practitioners is to concomitantly manage cerebral and cardiopulmonary conditions, optimizing blood flow to tissue in one area without administering treatment that will decrease perfusion in the other.  Discussion These cases serve as exemplars of the types of cardiac dysfunction that frequently accompany aneurysmal SAH (at our institution, we identified a 33% incidence of cardiac dysfunction following SAH, with arrhythmias and pulmonary edema as the most common complications [ Crago et al., 2004 ]). No universally accepted explanation of the link between aneurysmal SAH and cardiac dysfunction currently exists. Ongoing investigations are examining causal factors and outcomes for cardiac dysfunction in this patient population. Zaroff and colleagues (2006) suggest that genetic predisposition may play a role in identifying patients at risk for related cardiac dysfunction. The authors found that certain genetic combinations (polymorphisms of the adrenoceptors ?-1, ?-2, and ?-adrenoreceptors, which may affect cardiac responsiveness to catecholamines) resulted in a 10–15-fold increase in the likelihood of developing major cardiac dysfunction following SAH ( Zaroff et al., 2006 ). Similarly, it would seem logical that those with preexisting cardiac disease would have increased vulnerability to this kind of catecholamine surge, although a link between preexisting cardiac disease and the presence of cardiac dysfunction following SAH has not been established in our work (Crago et al.). A commonly accepted theory suggests that a catecholamine surge occurs at the time of the aneurysm rupture, setting off a cascade of events that includes cardiopulmonary compromise. However, the exact catecholamine(s) responsible for initiating this sequence of events has not been identified, and the events that cause catecholamines to be released during or after an initial insult of an SAH remain unclear. Regardless of initiating factors, the catecholamine surge is thought to stimulate a sympathetic storm ( Parr, 1996 ). A sympathetic storm occurs when a rapid increase in ICP (such as that which occurs following aneurysm rupture) triggers a catecholamine surge. The sympathetic storm is manifested by episodic alterations in body temperature, blood pressure, heart and respiratory rate, pupil size, and level of consciousness coinciding with hyperhydrosis, excessive salivation, and extensor posturing ( Young, Finn, Pellegrini, Soloaga, & Bruetman, 2006 ). After these physiologic alterations begin, the patient is at risk for cardiopulmonary dysfunction. Unfortunately, clinical management for patients with SAH often includes maintaining systolic BP under 120 mm Hg to prevent further rupture of the unsecured aneurysm during the period of time before the repair. Some theorize this therapy may increase the risk to cardiac muscle by preventing much needed oxygen from perfusing the heart ( Parr, 1996 ). Regardless of the cause, cardiopulmonary dysfunction may manifest in several ways. Troponin elevation, a sensitive and widely accepted marker of cardiac injury, has been associated with an increased risk of cardiopulmonary complications following SAH, as well as an increased risk for delayed cerebral ischemia and poor functional outcome at discharge ( Naidech et al., 2005 ). Elevated cardiac troponin I (cTnI) values have been noted frequently in intracranial hemorrhage and are independently associated with higher in-hospital mortality ( Hays & Diringer, 2006 ). Cardiopulmonary dysfunction also may manifest following SAH as abnormal ECG readings that may show bradycardia, cardiac output prolongation, diffuse S-T changes, and ventricular ectopy ( Zaroff, Rordorf, Newell, Ogilvy, & Levinson, 1999 ). All of this article’s case study subjects had early and significantly elevated troponin, creatine phosphokinase (CPK), and CPKMB levels as well as abnormal ECG readings. Elevated laboratory values and abnormal ECG readings often signal the time at which transthoracic ECHO should be performed to fully evaluate the extent of myocardial dysfunction. This test typically reveals areas of ischemia and dilation of the heart and evaluates heart function by determining EF and wall motion. In each of the case studies presented here, patients underwent ECHO evaluation, which demonstrated varying degrees of inadequate cardiac function. Inadequate cardiac function in this situation often is referred to as “stunned myocardium” and describes low cardiac output that initially occurs after SAH and then resolves ( Donaldson & Pritz, 2001 ). Interestingly, despite the incidence of cardiopulmonary dysfunction in persons with SAH, it is rare to find actual coronary artery disease (Donaldson & Pritz). Cardiopulmonary dysfunction is just one of many complications that may occur following SAH. Patients with a ruptured aneurysm are at increased risk for vasospasm, pneumonia, and skin breakdown. M. M., for example, demonstrated indications of septic shock, increased cardiac output, positive blood cultures, and decreased blood pressure, but also had evidence of myocardial ischemia with ECG and enzyme changes ( Bernardini & DeShaies, 2001 ). In patients with SAH, the complication of primary concern to neuroscience practitioners is vasospasm, which can extend the hospitalization period following an “uncomplicated” SAH beyond 2 weeks ( Kosty, 2005 ; Urbaniak, Merchant, Amin-Hanjani, & Roitberg, 2007 ). Some theorize that patients who experience cardiac complications are at greater risk for cerebral vasospasm ( Lee et al., 2006 ), although the cause for this relationship is unknown. Regardless, cardiopulmonary dysfunction complicates the treatment of vasospasm because medications that treat cerebral vasospasm can worsen cardiopulmonary dysfunction and vice versa. Vasopressors, for example, are known to elevate heart rate and cause vasoconstriction. This may cause increased workload or oxygen demand on an already irritated myocardial muscle. Using HHH therapy for vasospasm becomes increasingly difficult or impossible if there is continued pulmonary vascular congestion or low cardiac output (Kosty). On the other side, hypoperfusion from cardiopulmonary function affects the brain’s ability to maintain tissue perfusion necessary to prevent additional damage to an already acutely injured cerebrum ( Yarlagadda et al., 2006 ). The challenge for neuroscience practitioners is to concomitantly manage cerebral and cardiopulmonary conditions, optimizing blood flow to tissue in one area without administering treatment that will decrease perfusion in the other. The challenge for neuroscience practitioners is to concomitantly manage cerebral and cardiopulmonary conditions, optimizing blood flow to tissue in one area without administering treatment that will decrease perfusion in the other.  Nursing Implications As these cases illustrate, a multitude of complications can occur after an aneurysm ruptures. The presence of these complications often prolongs the length of hospitalization ( Brouwers, 1989 ; Urbaniak et al., 2007 ). The three women featured in this article’s case studies had nearly twice the normal hospital length of stay for SAH. None experienced a quick resolution of their cardiac dysfunction. Complications such as cardiopulmonary dysfunction often are considered “nonneurologic” and, consequently, a secondary priority; yet changes to heart and lung function often are initiated by an aneurysm rupture and their course and treatment can complicate efforts to preserve neurologic function. Nurses are in a prime position to understand how the initial cerebral insult affects multiple physiologic systems and organize and implement interventions that are designed to improve overall physical function and maximize neurologic and other system outcomes. The first step in this process is to recognize that cardiopulmonary dysfunction can be a common and often serious complication following aneurysmal SAH. The ability to identify this complication is made more difficult because risk factors are few. The patients in this series were at different decades of life and none had a history of cardiac disease before their SAH. For this reason, nurses should suspect patients admitted with aneurysmal SAH may exhibit cardiopulmonary dysfunction regardless of their risk status and use lab and ECG results as well as vital signs to trend actual or potential cardiopulmonary compromise. Once a nurse is aware of the potential for this complication, it is vital to know which diagnostic tests are most efficient and accurate in identifying the existence and extent of cardiopulmonary dysfunction. Positive findings on initial tests and changes in a patient’s clinical condition can help guide clinicians to order further testing, such as ECHOs, as needed. In addition, nurses should pay attention to heart rhythm, pulmonary status, intake and output, and ICP because increased ICP can potentiate more catecholamine release, furthering cardiac damage ( Parr, 1996 ). Finally, nurses should recognize that it is uncommon for patients to have the symptoms typically associated with acute myocardial ischemia such as chest pain and shortness of breath. Consequently, preliminary tests of cardiac dysfunction, such as cardiac enzymes, ECG, and chest X rays, should be considered for early evaluation. A high index of suspicion on the part of the nurse is crucial in preventing secondary cardiac damage. Any change in a patient’s cardiovascular status should be quickly reported. Nurses should be prepared for additional cardiac monitoring and medications that concomitantly prevent arrhythmias or augment cardiac output and assure adequate cerebral blood flow. Treatment must be titrated so medications that decrease cardiopulmonary dysfunction do not interfere with treatment for vasospasm; administering diuretics to treat acute pulmonary edema, for example, could result in lowering CVP to a level that puts patients at risk for vasospasm ( Strippler et al., 2006 ). Psychological support also is important for the families of patients who sustain SAH ( von Vogelsang, Wengstrom, & Forsberg, 2004 ). SAH rehabilitation is long and strenuous and may be more so if cardiac complications increase length of stay. When complications arise, recovery for patients and families becomes more difficult. Nurses need to anticipate these challenges and follow up with the appropriate ancillary staff. Education on cardiac dysfunction after SAH is important for families and patients, especially regarding the additional monitoring required to evaluate full cardiac recovery after discharge ( Dunleavy, Finck, Overstreet, & Presciutti, 2005 ).  Nursing Implications As these cases illustrate, a multitude of complications can occur after an aneurysm ruptures. The presence of these complications often prolongs the length of hospitalization ( Brouwers, 1989 ; Urbaniak et al., 2007 ). The three women featured in this article’s case studies had nearly twice the normal hospital length of stay for SAH. None experienced a quick resolution of their cardiac dysfunction. Complications such as cardiopulmonary dysfunction often are considered “nonneurologic” and, consequently, a secondary priority; yet changes to heart and lung function often are initiated by an aneurysm rupture and their course and treatment can complicate efforts to preserve neurologic function. Nurses are in a prime position to understand how the initial cerebral insult affects multiple physiologic systems and organize and implement interventions that are designed to improve overall physical function and maximize neurologic and other system outcomes. The first step in this process is to recognize that cardiopulmonary dysfunction can be a common and often serious complication following aneurysmal SAH. The ability to identify this complication is made more difficult because risk factors are few. The patients in this series were at different decades of life and none had a history of cardiac disease before their SAH. For this reason, nurses should suspect patients admitted with aneurysmal SAH may exhibit cardiopulmonary dysfunction regardless of their risk status and use lab and ECG results as well as vital signs to trend actual or potential cardiopulmonary compromise. Once a nurse is aware of the potential for this complication, it is vital to know which diagnostic tests are most efficient and accurate in identifying the existence and extent of cardiopulmonary dysfunction. Positive findings on initial tests and changes in a patient’s clinical condition can help guide clinicians to order further testing, such as ECHOs, as needed. In addition, nurses should pay attention to heart rhythm, pulmonary status, intake and output, and ICP because increased ICP can potentiate more catecholamine release, furthering cardiac damage ( Parr, 1996 ). Finally, nurses should recognize that it is uncommon for patients to have the symptoms typically associated with acute myocardial ischemia such as chest pain and shortness of breath. Consequently, preliminary tests of cardiac dysfunction, such as cardiac enzymes, ECG, and chest X rays, should be considered for early evaluation. A high index of suspicion on the part of the nurse is crucial in preventing secondary cardiac damage. Any change in a patient’s cardiovascular status should be quickly reported. Nurses should be prepared for additional cardiac monitoring and medications that concomitantly prevent arrhythmias or augment cardiac output and assure adequate cerebral blood flow. Treatment must be titrated so medications that decrease cardiopulmonary dysfunction do not interfere with treatment for vasospasm; administering diuretics to treat acute pulmonary edema, for example, could result in lowering CVP to a level that puts patients at risk for vasospasm ( Strippler et al., 2006 ). Psychological support also is important for the families of patients who sustain SAH ( von Vogelsang, Wengstrom, & Forsberg, 2004 ). SAH rehabilitation is long and strenuous and may be more so if cardiac complications increase length of stay. When complications arise, recovery for patients and families becomes more difficult. Nurses need to anticipate these challenges and follow up with the appropriate ancillary staff. Education on cardiac dysfunction after SAH is important for families and patients, especially regarding the additional monitoring required to evaluate full cardiac recovery after discharge ( Dunleavy, Finck, Overstreet, & Presciutti, 2005 ).  Summary The patients included in these case studies represent a subset of patients who experience cardiac dysfunction following SAH and the challenges such patients present to clinicians in the NVICU. Fortunately, the patients presented here experienced good outcomes from neurological and cardiac standpoints. Patients with SAH with profound cardiac dysfunction may not be as fortunate and may not recover. Perhaps through diligence as clinicians, we can improve the potential for positive outcomes for acute SAH patients with cardiovascular compromise ( Crago et al., 2004 ).  Summary The patients included in these case studies represent a subset of patients who experience cardiac dysfunction following SAH and the challenges such patients present to clinicians in the NVICU. Fortunately, the patients presented here experienced good outcomes from neurological and cardiac standpoints. Patients with SAH with profound cardiac dysfunction may not be as fortunate and may not recover. Perhaps through diligence as clinicians, we can improve the potential for positive outcomes for acute SAH patients with cardiovascular compromise ( Crago et al., 2004 ). 