Induction of arginase II by intestinal epithelium promotes the uptake of L-arginine from the lumen of C. parvum infected porcine ileum Objectives To determine the specific transport system activities and expression of transporter genes responsible for uptake of L-arginine from the lumen of normal and C. parvum infected neonatal porcine ileum and the influence of L-arginine catabolic pathways on L-arginine uptake. Methods Intact sheets of ileal mucosa from control and C. parvum infected neonatal piglets were mounted in Ussing chambers and the uptake of 14C-L-arginine was determined under initial rate conditions and in the presence of transport system-selective inhibitors. Epithelial expression of L-arginine transporter genes was quantified by real time RT-PCR. L-arginine catabolic enzyme expression was examined by immunoblotting epithelial lysates for arginase I and II. The role of intracellular catabolism in promoting uptake of L-arginine was determined by pharmacological inhibition of NOS and arginase activities. Results C. parvum infected ileum transported L-arginine at rates equivalent to uninfected epithelium despite profound villous atrophy. This was attributed to enhanced uptake of L-arginine by individual epithelial cells in the infection. There were no differences in L-arginine transport system activities (y+ and B0,+) or level of transporter gene expression (CAT-1, CAT-2A, and ATB0,+) between uninfected and C. parvum infected epithelial cells. However, infected epithelia had induced expression of the L-arginine hydrolytic enzyme arginase II and lower concentrations of L-arginine. Further, transport of L-arginine by the infected epithelium was significantly inhibited by pharmacological blockade of arginase. Conclusions Intracellular catabolism by arginase II, the induction of which has not been previously described for intestinal epithelium, facilitates uptake of L-arginine by infected epithelium using transport systems that do not differ from that of uninfected cells. Induction of arginase II may limit NO synthesis by competing with NOS for utilization of L-arginine or promote use of L-arginine for the synthesis of reparative polyamines.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Animals Experimental animals were 1-day-old crossbred piglets obtained from the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences. Piglets were placed into infected or control isolation facilities and fed a liquid diet (Advance Liqui-Wean, Milk Specialties, Dundee, IL; 8.52 g/kg dry matter L-arginine) hourly by an automated delivery system. An inoculum of 108 C. parvum oocysts (Bunch Grass Farm, Troy ID) was given to piglets by orogastric tube at 3 days of age. Piglets were studied on days 3–5 of infection, a time period shown to correspond to peak epithelial infection ( 28 ). Piglets were anesthetized with ketamine (15 mg/kg) and xylazine (0.5 mg/kg) given IM and then euthanized with sodium pentobarbital given intracardiac. Sections of ileum, beginning 5 cm above the ileocecal junction, were then immediately taken for ex vivo studies. For each piglet, a section of ileum was fixed in formalin, paraffin-embedded, sectioned at 7 ?m, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin for examination by light microscopy. All studies were approved by the North Carolina State University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. High Performance Liquid Chromatography Mucosal samples were obtained by opening the ileum lengthwise, rinsing out the luminal content with cold Ringer’s solution, scraping the mucosa off of the seromuscular layers over ice using a glass microscope slide and freezing at ?20°C. Blood was obtained from anesthetized piglets by cardiocentesis. After centrifugation at 2000 × g for 5-min, serum was frozen at ?20°C. Mucosal scrapings and serum samples were shipped on dry ice to the laboratory of Dr. Guoyao Wu, Texas A & M University for analysis of L-arginine content by HPLC. <sup>14</sup>C-labeled L-arginine uptake studies in intact ileal mucosa A 20-cm segment of ileum from each piglet was removed from the abdomen, opened along the anti-mesenteric border in an oxygenated Ringer’s solution, and the seromuscular layers removed. Mucosal sheets were mounted in each of six 1.13 cm2 aperture Ussing chambers and bathed on both surfaces with a Ringer’s solution containing glucose (10 mM serosal) and mannitol (10 mM mucosal). Solutions were oxygenated and circulated by gas-lift (95% O2-5% CO2) and maintained at 37°C by water-jacketed reservoirs. After a 60-min incubation period, 14C-L-arginine (5 mM; 0.2?Ci/ml) was added to the mucosal reservoir of five chambers while the sixth served as a negative control (or “blank”). At 3, 5, 10, 15, and 30-min after addition of 14C-arginine, a chamber was removed, flushed with cold Ringer’s solution and the epithelium and lamina propria scraped into 1ml of ice cold 1N NaOH. Acetic acid was added to normalize the pH of each sample and radioactivity was counted in a liquid scintillation counter. CPM per pmol L-arginine was determined for each chamber by counting the radioactivity of a sample withdrawn from the mucosal reservoir. The concentration of L-arginine was chosen on the basis of its physiological effects on migration of razor-wounded porcine intestinal epithelial cells and bile salt injured porcine ileal mucosa ( 29 , 30 ) and its comparability to high-physiologic concentrations of L-arginine measured in the intestinal lumen of neonatal piglets ( 31 ). <sup>14</sup>C-labeled L-arginine uptake studies in epithelial cells Sheets of ileal mucosa (2.5-cm2) were obtained from control and infected piglets at peak infection (day 3–5) and denuded of villous epithelium by immersion and agitation in an oxygenated citrate-phosphate buffer containing (mmol/L): NaCl 137, KCl 2.7, Na2HPO4 8.0, KH2PO4 1.5 EDTA 30, and glucose 2.5 for 30-min at 37°C ( 32 ). Exfoliated cells were filtered (100 ?m nylon cell strainer), pelleted at 400 × g, resuspended and separated from the intraepithelial lymphocytes (IEL) by centrifugation at 600 × g for 20-min through a discontinuous 25%/40% Percoll gradient as described for the selective recovery of intestinal epithelial cells by a number of investigators ( 33 – 35 ). Cell viability was assessed by trypan blue exclusion. Epithelial cells at a concentration of 1 × 106 live cells/ml were incubated at 37°C for 30-min in each assay solution in order to deplete intracellular ARG and trans -stimulation of ARG transport ( 36 – 39 ). Cells were then treated with defined concentrations of L-arginine (0.1, 0.5, 2.5 or 12.5 mM) (2 uCi 14C-labeled ARG/reaction; Amersham). At 30s, 1, 2 and 3-min after addition of ARG, duplicate samples were removed and transport activity terminated by washing 3 times in ice-cold PBS. After the final wash, cells were resuspended in 1 N NaOH to lyse cells and release isotope. Acetic acid was added to normalize the pH of each sample and radioactivity was counted in a liquid scintillation counter. Transport rate of 14C-arginine was determined by linear regression analysis and expressed as pmole of amino acid per 106 cells per minute. Prior studies have demonstrated that 3H-arginine uptake is linear and metabolism of arginine is negligible over the chosen time period ( 36 – 39 ). Identity of L-arginine transport system activities To determine the identity of the cationic amino acid transport system(s) present on luminal epithelium of the ileum, control and infected mucosae were incubated in Ussing chambers for 60-min in the presence of transport system-selective inhibitors followed by addition of 250 ?M ARG (2 ?Ci 14C-ARG) to the mucosal reservoir for 10-min duration. Preliminary studies determined that L-arginine uptake remains linear over this period of time. Sample processing and counts were performed as aforementioned. For these studies the relative contributions of each carrier system were distinguished by each of the following uptake assay conditions: 1) normal Ringer’s solution, 2) Na+-free Ringer’s solution (mmol/L: d-glucamine Cl 130.1, KCl 3.4, CaCl2 1.2, MgCl2 0.7, K2SO4 1.3, KH2PO4 0.3, Choline HCO3 24), 3) normal Ringer’s solution + L-leucine (10 mM), and 4) Na+-free Ringer’s solution + L-alanine (10 mM). Table 1 indicates the method used to estimate the relative contribution of each transport activity (adapted from ( 40 )). Expression analysis CAT-1, CAT-2A, CAT-2B, and ATB<sup>0,+</sup> mRNA Ileal epithelial cells were exfoliated from the mucosa of control and C. parvum infected piglets (day 3–5 of infection), filtered (100 ?m nylon cell strainer), pelleted at 400 × g, resuspended and separated from the intraepithelial lymphocytes (IEL) by centrifugation at 600 × g for 20-min through a discontinuous 25%/40% Percoll gradient, and frozen at ?20°C in RLT buffer. Approximately 30 mg of each sample was homogenized (QIAshredder; Qiagen) and total RNA extracted using an RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) with on-column DNAse digestion (RNA-free DNase; Qiagen). Total RNA was reverse transcribed with random hexamers (Applied Biosystems) using an Invitrogen RT kit with Superscript II reverse transcriptase. RNA integrity and cDNA production were verified by electrophoresis of RNA and PCR of the housekeeping gene cyclophilin (AY008846). Real-time PCR was be performed using a BioRad iCycler in a 15 ?l reaction volume with 50 nM of each primer, 60 ng cDNA and 2X SYBR Green Mastermix Kit (Applied Biosystems). To ensure amplification of only cDNA and not genomic sequences, primers were designed to amplify across intron-exon junctions as predicted by comparison of mRNA and gene sequence data ( Table 2 ). PCR products were analyzed by gel electrophoresis with ethidium bromide and their identity confirmed by size, melting temperature and gene sequencing (University of North Carolina Automated Sequencing Facility). Positive controls included normal porcine liver (CAT-2A) and ConA + IL-2 stimulated porcine peripheral blood T-lymphocytes (CAT-2B)( 41 ). Negative controls included porcine genomic DNA, no template, and RNA only (no RT). Immunoblotting of intestinal epithelial protein for arginase I, and arginase II For demonstration of arginase I and arginase II protein expression, ileal epithelial cells were exfoliated from the mucosa of control and C. parvum infected piglets (day 3–5 of infection) as previously described ( 11 ), frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at ?80°C. Samples were thawed on ice in RIPA buffer (0.15M NaCl, 50 mM Tris [pH 7.2], 1% deoxycholic acid, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS) containing bestatin, leupeptin, aprotinin, sodium orthovanadate and phenyl-methyl sulfonyl fluoride. This mixture was sonicated and centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 10-min at 4°C. The supernatants were saved and their protein concentration determined (Dc protein assay, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Samples of equal protein concentration were suspended in 2X-SDS-PAGE sample buffer, boiled for 4-min and loaded in SDS-polyacrylamide gels. Equal protein loading was confirmed by Coomassie blue staining of gels after electrophoretic separation of proteins. Electrophoresis was carried out and proteins were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (Hybond ECL, Amersham Life Science, Birmingham, UK) using an electroblotting mini-transfer apparatus. Membranes were blocked overnight in Tris-buffered saline plus 0.05% Tween-20 (TBST) and 5% powdered milk, BSA, or StartingBlock (Pierce). Membranes were incubated in primary antibody (mouse anti-arginase I 1:1000 [BD Pharmingen] or rabbit anti-arginase II 1:200 [Santa Cruz Biotechnology]). After washing three times each with TBST, the membranes were incubated for 45-min with horseradish peroxidase conjugated secondary antibody (1:5,000 – 1:10,000 Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc.). After washing three additional times for 5-min each with TBST, the membranes were developed for visualization of protein by addition of enhanced chemiluminescence reagent. Positive controls for arginase I and II expression included protein lysates of porcine liver and kidney, respectively. Immunofluorescence microscopy Samples of ileal mucosa were embedded in optimal cutting temperature medium, frozen in liquid N2, and sectioned at 5 ?m thickness. Sections were fixed in 100% ethanol at ?20°C for 30-min and rinsed with PBS containing 1.2 mM CaCl2 at pH = 7.4 (PBS+). Sections were treated with blocking buffer (consisting of PBS+, 1% BSA and 2% goat serum) for 1-hr, followed by incubation with polyclonal rabbit anti-human arginase II antibody (1:100), or isotype control antibody in blocking buffer for 1–2-hrs at RT. Sections were rinsed in PBS+ (4 times for 5-min each) followed by incubation with goat anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibody-Cy3 conjugate (1:100 in blocking buffer) for 30-min at RT in the dark. Sections were rinsed in PBS+ (4 times for 5-min each), coverslipped with mounting media containing DAPI (Vectashield), and imaged using an epifluorescence microscope. Effect of nitric oxide synthase and arginase inhibitors on uptake of <sup>14</sup>C-arginine To determine the effect of NOS and arginase activity on intestinal epithelial uptake rate of L-arginine, control and infected ileal mucosae were incubated in Ussing chambers for 60-min in the presence of serosally-applied L-NAME (10 mM) or di-fluoro-methyl-ornithine (DFMO; 10 mM) followed by addition of 2.5 mM ARG (2 ?Ci 14C-ARG) to the mucosal reservoir. Ten minutes after addition of 14C-arginine, the chamber was removed, flushed with cold Ringer’s solution and the epithelium and lamina propria scraped into 1ml of ice cold 1N NaOH. Acetic acid was added to normalize the pH of each sample and radioactivity was counted in a liquid scintillation counter. Statistical Analysis Data are reported as mean ± SE. For all analyses, P ? 0.05 was considered significant. All data were tested for normality and equal variance using a statistical software package (SigmaStat, Jandel Scientific, San Rafael, CA). Normally distributed data were analyzed using an ANOVA or Student’s t-test while non-parametric data were analyzed using a Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA on ranks or Mann-Whitney rank sum test where appropriate. Number of pigs receiving treatment = n.  Animals Experimental animals were 1-day-old crossbred piglets obtained from the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences. Piglets were placed into infected or control isolation facilities and fed a liquid diet (Advance Liqui-Wean, Milk Specialties, Dundee, IL; 8.52 g/kg dry matter L-arginine) hourly by an automated delivery system. An inoculum of 108 C. parvum oocysts (Bunch Grass Farm, Troy ID) was given to piglets by orogastric tube at 3 days of age. Piglets were studied on days 3–5 of infection, a time period shown to correspond to peak epithelial infection ( 28 ). Piglets were anesthetized with ketamine (15 mg/kg) and xylazine (0.5 mg/kg) given IM and then euthanized with sodium pentobarbital given intracardiac. Sections of ileum, beginning 5 cm above the ileocecal junction, were then immediately taken for ex vivo studies. For each piglet, a section of ileum was fixed in formalin, paraffin-embedded, sectioned at 7 ?m, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin for examination by light microscopy. All studies were approved by the North Carolina State University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.  High Performance Liquid Chromatography Mucosal samples were obtained by opening the ileum lengthwise, rinsing out the luminal content with cold Ringer’s solution, scraping the mucosa off of the seromuscular layers over ice using a glass microscope slide and freezing at ?20°C. Blood was obtained from anesthetized piglets by cardiocentesis. After centrifugation at 2000 × g for 5-min, serum was frozen at ?20°C. Mucosal scrapings and serum samples were shipped on dry ice to the laboratory of Dr. Guoyao Wu, Texas A & M University for analysis of L-arginine content by HPLC.  <sup>14</sup>C-labeled L-arginine uptake studies in intact ileal mucosa A 20-cm segment of ileum from each piglet was removed from the abdomen, opened along the anti-mesenteric border in an oxygenated Ringer’s solution, and the seromuscular layers removed. Mucosal sheets were mounted in each of six 1.13 cm2 aperture Ussing chambers and bathed on both surfaces with a Ringer’s solution containing glucose (10 mM serosal) and mannitol (10 mM mucosal). Solutions were oxygenated and circulated by gas-lift (95% O2-5% CO2) and maintained at 37°C by water-jacketed reservoirs. After a 60-min incubation period, 14C-L-arginine (5 mM; 0.2?Ci/ml) was added to the mucosal reservoir of five chambers while the sixth served as a negative control (or “blank”). At 3, 5, 10, 15, and 30-min after addition of 14C-arginine, a chamber was removed, flushed with cold Ringer’s solution and the epithelium and lamina propria scraped into 1ml of ice cold 1N NaOH. Acetic acid was added to normalize the pH of each sample and radioactivity was counted in a liquid scintillation counter. CPM per pmol L-arginine was determined for each chamber by counting the radioactivity of a sample withdrawn from the mucosal reservoir. The concentration of L-arginine was chosen on the basis of its physiological effects on migration of razor-wounded porcine intestinal epithelial cells and bile salt injured porcine ileal mucosa ( 29 , 30 ) and its comparability to high-physiologic concentrations of L-arginine measured in the intestinal lumen of neonatal piglets ( 31 ).  <sup>14</sup>C-labeled L-arginine uptake studies in epithelial cells Sheets of ileal mucosa (2.5-cm2) were obtained from control and infected piglets at peak infection (day 3–5) and denuded of villous epithelium by immersion and agitation in an oxygenated citrate-phosphate buffer containing (mmol/L): NaCl 137, KCl 2.7, Na2HPO4 8.0, KH2PO4 1.5 EDTA 30, and glucose 2.5 for 30-min at 37°C ( 32 ). Exfoliated cells were filtered (100 ?m nylon cell strainer), pelleted at 400 × g, resuspended and separated from the intraepithelial lymphocytes (IEL) by centrifugation at 600 × g for 20-min through a discontinuous 25%/40% Percoll gradient as described for the selective recovery of intestinal epithelial cells by a number of investigators ( 33 – 35 ). Cell viability was assessed by trypan blue exclusion. Epithelial cells at a concentration of 1 × 106 live cells/ml were incubated at 37°C for 30-min in each assay solution in order to deplete intracellular ARG and trans -stimulation of ARG transport ( 36 – 39 ). Cells were then treated with defined concentrations of L-arginine (0.1, 0.5, 2.5 or 12.5 mM) (2 uCi 14C-labeled ARG/reaction; Amersham). At 30s, 1, 2 and 3-min after addition of ARG, duplicate samples were removed and transport activity terminated by washing 3 times in ice-cold PBS. After the final wash, cells were resuspended in 1 N NaOH to lyse cells and release isotope. Acetic acid was added to normalize the pH of each sample and radioactivity was counted in a liquid scintillation counter. Transport rate of 14C-arginine was determined by linear regression analysis and expressed as pmole of amino acid per 106 cells per minute. Prior studies have demonstrated that 3H-arginine uptake is linear and metabolism of arginine is negligible over the chosen time period ( 36 – 39 ).  Identity of L-arginine transport system activities To determine the identity of the cationic amino acid transport system(s) present on luminal epithelium of the ileum, control and infected mucosae were incubated in Ussing chambers for 60-min in the presence of transport system-selective inhibitors followed by addition of 250 ?M ARG (2 ?Ci 14C-ARG) to the mucosal reservoir for 10-min duration. Preliminary studies determined that L-arginine uptake remains linear over this period of time. Sample processing and counts were performed as aforementioned. For these studies the relative contributions of each carrier system were distinguished by each of the following uptake assay conditions: 1) normal Ringer’s solution, 2) Na+-free Ringer’s solution (mmol/L: d-glucamine Cl 130.1, KCl 3.4, CaCl2 1.2, MgCl2 0.7, K2SO4 1.3, KH2PO4 0.3, Choline HCO3 24), 3) normal Ringer’s solution + L-leucine (10 mM), and 4) Na+-free Ringer’s solution + L-alanine (10 mM). Table 1 indicates the method used to estimate the relative contribution of each transport activity (adapted from ( 40 )).  Expression analysis CAT-1, CAT-2A, CAT-2B, and ATB<sup>0,+</sup> mRNA Ileal epithelial cells were exfoliated from the mucosa of control and C. parvum infected piglets (day 3–5 of infection), filtered (100 ?m nylon cell strainer), pelleted at 400 × g, resuspended and separated from the intraepithelial lymphocytes (IEL) by centrifugation at 600 × g for 20-min through a discontinuous 25%/40% Percoll gradient, and frozen at ?20°C in RLT buffer. Approximately 30 mg of each sample was homogenized (QIAshredder; Qiagen) and total RNA extracted using an RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) with on-column DNAse digestion (RNA-free DNase; Qiagen). Total RNA was reverse transcribed with random hexamers (Applied Biosystems) using an Invitrogen RT kit with Superscript II reverse transcriptase. RNA integrity and cDNA production were verified by electrophoresis of RNA and PCR of the housekeeping gene cyclophilin (AY008846). Real-time PCR was be performed using a BioRad iCycler in a 15 ?l reaction volume with 50 nM of each primer, 60 ng cDNA and 2X SYBR Green Mastermix Kit (Applied Biosystems). To ensure amplification of only cDNA and not genomic sequences, primers were designed to amplify across intron-exon junctions as predicted by comparison of mRNA and gene sequence data ( Table 2 ). PCR products were analyzed by gel electrophoresis with ethidium bromide and their identity confirmed by size, melting temperature and gene sequencing (University of North Carolina Automated Sequencing Facility). Positive controls included normal porcine liver (CAT-2A) and ConA + IL-2 stimulated porcine peripheral blood T-lymphocytes (CAT-2B)( 41 ). Negative controls included porcine genomic DNA, no template, and RNA only (no RT).  Immunoblotting of intestinal epithelial protein for arginase I, and arginase II For demonstration of arginase I and arginase II protein expression, ileal epithelial cells were exfoliated from the mucosa of control and C. parvum infected piglets (day 3–5 of infection) as previously described ( 11 ), frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at ?80°C. Samples were thawed on ice in RIPA buffer (0.15M NaCl, 50 mM Tris [pH 7.2], 1% deoxycholic acid, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS) containing bestatin, leupeptin, aprotinin, sodium orthovanadate and phenyl-methyl sulfonyl fluoride. This mixture was sonicated and centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 10-min at 4°C. The supernatants were saved and their protein concentration determined (Dc protein assay, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Samples of equal protein concentration were suspended in 2X-SDS-PAGE sample buffer, boiled for 4-min and loaded in SDS-polyacrylamide gels. Equal protein loading was confirmed by Coomassie blue staining of gels after electrophoretic separation of proteins. Electrophoresis was carried out and proteins were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (Hybond ECL, Amersham Life Science, Birmingham, UK) using an electroblotting mini-transfer apparatus. Membranes were blocked overnight in Tris-buffered saline plus 0.05% Tween-20 (TBST) and 5% powdered milk, BSA, or StartingBlock (Pierce). Membranes were incubated in primary antibody (mouse anti-arginase I 1:1000 [BD Pharmingen] or rabbit anti-arginase II 1:200 [Santa Cruz Biotechnology]). After washing three times each with TBST, the membranes were incubated for 45-min with horseradish peroxidase conjugated secondary antibody (1:5,000 – 1:10,000 Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc.). After washing three additional times for 5-min each with TBST, the membranes were developed for visualization of protein by addition of enhanced chemiluminescence reagent. Positive controls for arginase I and II expression included protein lysates of porcine liver and kidney, respectively.  Immunofluorescence microscopy Samples of ileal mucosa were embedded in optimal cutting temperature medium, frozen in liquid N2, and sectioned at 5 ?m thickness. Sections were fixed in 100% ethanol at ?20°C for 30-min and rinsed with PBS containing 1.2 mM CaCl2 at pH = 7.4 (PBS+). Sections were treated with blocking buffer (consisting of PBS+, 1% BSA and 2% goat serum) for 1-hr, followed by incubation with polyclonal rabbit anti-human arginase II antibody (1:100), or isotype control antibody in blocking buffer for 1–2-hrs at RT. Sections were rinsed in PBS+ (4 times for 5-min each) followed by incubation with goat anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibody-Cy3 conjugate (1:100 in blocking buffer) for 30-min at RT in the dark. Sections were rinsed in PBS+ (4 times for 5-min each), coverslipped with mounting media containing DAPI (Vectashield), and imaged using an epifluorescence microscope.  Effect of nitric oxide synthase and arginase inhibitors on uptake of <sup>14</sup>C-arginine To determine the effect of NOS and arginase activity on intestinal epithelial uptake rate of L-arginine, control and infected ileal mucosae were incubated in Ussing chambers for 60-min in the presence of serosally-applied L-NAME (10 mM) or di-fluoro-methyl-ornithine (DFMO; 10 mM) followed by addition of 2.5 mM ARG (2 ?Ci 14C-ARG) to the mucosal reservoir. Ten minutes after addition of 14C-arginine, the chamber was removed, flushed with cold Ringer’s solution and the epithelium and lamina propria scraped into 1ml of ice cold 1N NaOH. Acetic acid was added to normalize the pH of each sample and radioactivity was counted in a liquid scintillation counter.  Statistical Analysis Data are reported as mean ± SE. For all analyses, P ? 0.05 was considered significant. All data were tested for normality and equal variance using a statistical software package (SigmaStat, Jandel Scientific, San Rafael, CA). Normally distributed data were analyzed using an ANOVA or Student’s t-test while non-parametric data were analyzed using a Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA on ranks or Mann-Whitney rank sum test where appropriate. Number of pigs receiving treatment = n.  RESULTS Uptake of L-arginine from the lumen of the ileum is preserved in C. parvum infection To determine the ability of C. parvum infected intestinal epithelium to transport L-arginine when presented to the lumen of the gut, sheets of ileal mucosa from uninfected control and C. parvum infected piglets were incubated in Ussing chambers in the presence of 5 mM L-arginine (0.2 ?Ci 14C-labeled-L-arginine per ml) added to the luminal reservoir for durations of 3, 5, 10, 15 and 30-minutes. On the basis of serosal surface area (i.e. the aperture of the Ussing chamber) uptake of 14C-labeled-L-arginine by control and C. parvum infected mucosa was nearly identical ( Figure 1 ). All infected piglets used in the study had severe villous atrophy and organisms present in villous enterocytes, whereas control piglets had normal villous architecture with no evidence of infection. Equivalent rates of uptake were observed despite a substantial difference in mucosal surface area between control and infected intestine ( Figure 2 ). Epithelial cells isolated from C. parvum infected piglets have increased transport rate of L-arginine To determine if equivalent uptake of L-arginine by control and atrophic, C. parvum infected epithelium could be attributed to enhanced transport by individual epithelial cells, uptake of 14C-labeled L-arginine by epithelial cells isolated from the ileum of control and infected piglets was measured under initial rate conditions. Transport rate of L-arginine was significantly greater in C. parvum infected epithelial cells compared to uninfected control epithelial cells ( Figure 3 ). Luminal uptake of L-arginine from the ileum of control and C. parvum infected piglets is mediated by transport systems y<sup>+</sup> and B<sup>0,+</sup> Cellular transport of L-arginine can be mediated by the kinetically-defined systems y+, y+L, b0,+ and B0,+. To determine the identity of the amino acid transport activities present in control and C. parvum infected epithelium in vivo, in situ uptake of 14C-arginine by mucosal epithelium was performed in Ussing chambers in the presence of transport system-selective inhibitors as outlined in Table 1 . These studies were performed with a low dose of L-arginine (250 ?M; 0.2 ?Ci/ml) to ensure sufficient inhibitory effects of competing amino acids. The identity and percent contribution of L-arginine transport system activities present were not significantly different between uninfected control and C. parvum infected epithelium and were attributed predominantly to systems y+ and B0,+ ( Figure 4 ). C. parvum infected mucosa express CAT-1, CAT-2A, scant CAT-2B, and ATB<sup>0,+</sup> transporter transcripts To determine if an increase in the expression of genes encoding the proteins responsible for activity of system y+ or B0,+ were responsible for increased L-arginine uptake by intestinal epithelium of C. parvum -infected piglets, we designed primers for the specific amplification of system y+ (CAT-1, CAT-2A, CAT-2B), and system B0,+ (ATB0,+) transporter protein genes. Levels of mRNA expression were compared between control and infected piglets using real-time RT-PCR. There were no differences in expression of cationic amino acid-specific or ATB0,+ transporters between control and C. parvum infected piglets. The ubiquitously expressed transporter, CAT-1 and ATB0,+, were present in greatest abundance. CAT-2A mRNA was detected in lesser amounts, while CAT-2B was detected only at very low levels ( Table 3 ). RT-PCR products for CAT-1, CAT-2B, CAT-2A, and ATB0,+ shared 100% sequence identity with corresponding mRNA sequences in Genbank ( Table 2 ). Therefore, increased L-arginine transport by C. parvum infected epithelium could not be attributed to an increase in expression of genes responsible for y+ or B0,+ transport activities. C. parvum infection is associated with cellular L-arginine deficiency An enhanced uptake of L-arginine, in the absence of changes in transporter gene expression, has been demonstrated in alveolar macrophages to be mediated by intracellular consumption of L-arginine by nitric oxide synthase ( 42 ). We therefore surmised that in C. parvum infected epithelium, intracellular catabolism of L-arginine may promote an enhanced uptake of L-arginine. To determine whether or not cellular concentrations of L-arginine where consistent with consumption of L-arginine in the infection, we examined the L-arginine content of ileal mucosa from control and C. parvum infected piglets. In infected animals, ileal mucosal L-arginine concentrations were significantly lower than that of uninfected animals (nmol/gram = 1440 ± 72 uninfected control; 951 ± 31 C. parvum, n = 5 each; *** P < 0.001, One-way ANOVA). Further, reduced cellular concentrations of L-arginine in the infection could not be attributed to serum deficiency as there were no significant differences in serum concentration of L-arginine between uninfected control and C. parvum infected piglets (?M = 75 ± 18 uninfected control; 94 ± 18 C. parvum, n = 5 each). C. parvum infection induces expression of arginase II by intestinal epithelium in vivo Key enzymes mediating catabolism of L-arginine are nitric oxide synthase and arginase. While we have previously shown that iNOS is intensely expressed by C. parvum infected epithelium in vivo, ( 11 , 43 ) arginase expression has not been previously explored. Expression of arginase is reportedly negligible in intestinal epithelium of neonates ( 31 , 44 ). To determine whether or not expression of arginase by the intestinal epithelium could be induced by C. parvum infection and thereby contribute to L-arginine catabolism, intestinal epithelial protein lysates from control and C. parvum infected piglets were immunoblotted for arginase I and II expression. Arginase I was not expressed by intestinal epithelial cells from either uninfected or infected piglets. Arginase II expression was similarly negligible in uninfected piglets, but strongly induced by intestinal epithelium from piglets infected with C. parvum . To determine the location of arginase II expression along the crypt-villus axis in C. parvum infection, immunofluorescence was performed to localize arginase II expression. In C. parvum infected ileum, arginase II expression was observed in both villous and crypt epithelium ( Figure 5 ). Enhanced uptake of L-arginine by the ileum of C. parvum infected piglets is mediated by arginase To determine the contribution of NOS and arginase to uptake of L-arginine from the lumen of the intestine, sheets of ileal mucosa from uninfected control and C. parvum infected piglets were incubated in Ussing chambers with a NOS inhibitor (L-NAME, 10 mM) or arginase inhibitor (DFMO, 10 mM) for 1-hour prior to determination of L-arginine uptake rate (2.5 mM; 0.2 ?Ci 14C-labeled-L-arginine per ml). Inhibition of NOS had no effect on uptake rate of L-arginine by either control or infected ileum. In contrast, inhibition of arginase significantly decreased the uptake of L-arginine by C. parvum infected, but not uninfected ileum, as is consistent with arginase II induction by infected and not control epithelium ( Figure 6 ).  RESULTS Uptake of L-arginine from the lumen of the ileum is preserved in C. parvum infection To determine the ability of C. parvum infected intestinal epithelium to transport L-arginine when presented to the lumen of the gut, sheets of ileal mucosa from uninfected control and C. parvum infected piglets were incubated in Ussing chambers in the presence of 5 mM L-arginine (0.2 ?Ci 14C-labeled-L-arginine per ml) added to the luminal reservoir for durations of 3, 5, 10, 15 and 30-minutes. On the basis of serosal surface area (i.e. the aperture of the Ussing chamber) uptake of 14C-labeled-L-arginine by control and C. parvum infected mucosa was nearly identical ( Figure 1 ). All infected piglets used in the study had severe villous atrophy and organisms present in villous enterocytes, whereas control piglets had normal villous architecture with no evidence of infection. Equivalent rates of uptake were observed despite a substantial difference in mucosal surface area between control and infected intestine ( Figure 2 ). Epithelial cells isolated from C. parvum infected piglets have increased transport rate of L-arginine To determine if equivalent uptake of L-arginine by control and atrophic, C. parvum infected epithelium could be attributed to enhanced transport by individual epithelial cells, uptake of 14C-labeled L-arginine by epithelial cells isolated from the ileum of control and infected piglets was measured under initial rate conditions. Transport rate of L-arginine was significantly greater in C. parvum infected epithelial cells compared to uninfected control epithelial cells ( Figure 3 ). Luminal uptake of L-arginine from the ileum of control and C. parvum infected piglets is mediated by transport systems y<sup>+</sup> and B<sup>0,+</sup> Cellular transport of L-arginine can be mediated by the kinetically-defined systems y+, y+L, b0,+ and B0,+. To determine the identity of the amino acid transport activities present in control and C. parvum infected epithelium in vivo, in situ uptake of 14C-arginine by mucosal epithelium was performed in Ussing chambers in the presence of transport system-selective inhibitors as outlined in Table 1 . These studies were performed with a low dose of L-arginine (250 ?M; 0.2 ?Ci/ml) to ensure sufficient inhibitory effects of competing amino acids. The identity and percent contribution of L-arginine transport system activities present were not significantly different between uninfected control and C. parvum infected epithelium and were attributed predominantly to systems y+ and B0,+ ( Figure 4 ). C. parvum infected mucosa express CAT-1, CAT-2A, scant CAT-2B, and ATB<sup>0,+</sup> transporter transcripts To determine if an increase in the expression of genes encoding the proteins responsible for activity of system y+ or B0,+ were responsible for increased L-arginine uptake by intestinal epithelium of C. parvum -infected piglets, we designed primers for the specific amplification of system y+ (CAT-1, CAT-2A, CAT-2B), and system B0,+ (ATB0,+) transporter protein genes. Levels of mRNA expression were compared between control and infected piglets using real-time RT-PCR. There were no differences in expression of cationic amino acid-specific or ATB0,+ transporters between control and C. parvum infected piglets. The ubiquitously expressed transporter, CAT-1 and ATB0,+, were present in greatest abundance. CAT-2A mRNA was detected in lesser amounts, while CAT-2B was detected only at very low levels ( Table 3 ). RT-PCR products for CAT-1, CAT-2B, CAT-2A, and ATB0,+ shared 100% sequence identity with corresponding mRNA sequences in Genbank ( Table 2 ). Therefore, increased L-arginine transport by C. parvum infected epithelium could not be attributed to an increase in expression of genes responsible for y+ or B0,+ transport activities. C. parvum infection is associated with cellular L-arginine deficiency An enhanced uptake of L-arginine, in the absence of changes in transporter gene expression, has been demonstrated in alveolar macrophages to be mediated by intracellular consumption of L-arginine by nitric oxide synthase ( 42 ). We therefore surmised that in C. parvum infected epithelium, intracellular catabolism of L-arginine may promote an enhanced uptake of L-arginine. To determine whether or not cellular concentrations of L-arginine where consistent with consumption of L-arginine in the infection, we examined the L-arginine content of ileal mucosa from control and C. parvum infected piglets. In infected animals, ileal mucosal L-arginine concentrations were significantly lower than that of uninfected animals (nmol/gram = 1440 ± 72 uninfected control; 951 ± 31 C. parvum, n = 5 each; *** P < 0.001, One-way ANOVA). Further, reduced cellular concentrations of L-arginine in the infection could not be attributed to serum deficiency as there were no significant differences in serum concentration of L-arginine between uninfected control and C. parvum infected piglets (?M = 75 ± 18 uninfected control; 94 ± 18 C. parvum, n = 5 each). C. parvum infection induces expression of arginase II by intestinal epithelium in vivo Key enzymes mediating catabolism of L-arginine are nitric oxide synthase and arginase. While we have previously shown that iNOS is intensely expressed by C. parvum infected epithelium in vivo, ( 11 , 43 ) arginase expression has not been previously explored. Expression of arginase is reportedly negligible in intestinal epithelium of neonates ( 31 , 44 ). To determine whether or not expression of arginase by the intestinal epithelium could be induced by C. parvum infection and thereby contribute to L-arginine catabolism, intestinal epithelial protein lysates from control and C. parvum infected piglets were immunoblotted for arginase I and II expression. Arginase I was not expressed by intestinal epithelial cells from either uninfected or infected piglets. Arginase II expression was similarly negligible in uninfected piglets, but strongly induced by intestinal epithelium from piglets infected with C. parvum . To determine the location of arginase II expression along the crypt-villus axis in C. parvum infection, immunofluorescence was performed to localize arginase II expression. In C. parvum infected ileum, arginase II expression was observed in both villous and crypt epithelium ( Figure 5 ). Enhanced uptake of L-arginine by the ileum of C. parvum infected piglets is mediated by arginase To determine the contribution of NOS and arginase to uptake of L-arginine from the lumen of the intestine, sheets of ileal mucosa from uninfected control and C. parvum infected piglets were incubated in Ussing chambers with a NOS inhibitor (L-NAME, 10 mM) or arginase inhibitor (DFMO, 10 mM) for 1-hour prior to determination of L-arginine uptake rate (2.5 mM; 0.2 ?Ci 14C-labeled-L-arginine per ml). Inhibition of NOS had no effect on uptake rate of L-arginine by either control or infected ileum. In contrast, inhibition of arginase significantly decreased the uptake of L-arginine by C. parvum infected, but not uninfected ileum, as is consistent with arginase II induction by infected and not control epithelium ( Figure 6 ).  Uptake of L-arginine from the lumen of the ileum is preserved in C. parvum infection To determine the ability of C. parvum infected intestinal epithelium to transport L-arginine when presented to the lumen of the gut, sheets of ileal mucosa from uninfected control and C. parvum infected piglets were incubated in Ussing chambers in the presence of 5 mM L-arginine (0.2 ?Ci 14C-labeled-L-arginine per ml) added to the luminal reservoir for durations of 3, 5, 10, 15 and 30-minutes. On the basis of serosal surface area (i.e. the aperture of the Ussing chamber) uptake of 14C-labeled-L-arginine by control and C. parvum infected mucosa was nearly identical ( Figure 1 ). All infected piglets used in the study had severe villous atrophy and organisms present in villous enterocytes, whereas control piglets had normal villous architecture with no evidence of infection. Equivalent rates of uptake were observed despite a substantial difference in mucosal surface area between control and infected intestine ( Figure 2 ).  Uptake of L-arginine from the lumen of the ileum is preserved in C. parvum infection To determine the ability of C. parvum infected intestinal epithelium to transport L-arginine when presented to the lumen of the gut, sheets of ileal mucosa from uninfected control and C. parvum infected piglets were incubated in Ussing chambers in the presence of 5 mM L-arginine (0.2 ?Ci 14C-labeled-L-arginine per ml) added to the luminal reservoir for durations of 3, 5, 10, 15 and 30-minutes. On the basis of serosal surface area (i.e. the aperture of the Ussing chamber) uptake of 14C-labeled-L-arginine by control and C. parvum infected mucosa was nearly identical ( Figure 1 ). All infected piglets used in the study had severe villous atrophy and organisms present in villous enterocytes, whereas control piglets had normal villous architecture with no evidence of infection. Equivalent rates of uptake were observed despite a substantial difference in mucosal surface area between control and infected intestine ( Figure 2 ).  Epithelial cells isolated from C. parvum infected piglets have increased transport rate of L-arginine To determine if equivalent uptake of L-arginine by control and atrophic, C. parvum infected epithelium could be attributed to enhanced transport by individual epithelial cells, uptake of 14C-labeled L-arginine by epithelial cells isolated from the ileum of control and infected piglets was measured under initial rate conditions. Transport rate of L-arginine was significantly greater in C. parvum infected epithelial cells compared to uninfected control epithelial cells ( Figure 3 ).  Epithelial cells isolated from C. parvum infected piglets have increased transport rate of L-arginine To determine if equivalent uptake of L-arginine by control and atrophic, C. parvum infected epithelium could be attributed to enhanced transport by individual epithelial cells, uptake of 14C-labeled L-arginine by epithelial cells isolated from the ileum of control and infected piglets was measured under initial rate conditions. Transport rate of L-arginine was significantly greater in C. parvum infected epithelial cells compared to uninfected control epithelial cells ( Figure 3 ).  Luminal uptake of L-arginine from the ileum of control and C. parvum infected piglets is mediated by transport systems y<sup>+</sup> and B<sup>0,+</sup> Cellular transport of L-arginine can be mediated by the kinetically-defined systems y+, y+L, b0,+ and B0,+. To determine the identity of the amino acid transport activities present in control and C. parvum infected epithelium in vivo, in situ uptake of 14C-arginine by mucosal epithelium was performed in Ussing chambers in the presence of transport system-selective inhibitors as outlined in Table 1 . These studies were performed with a low dose of L-arginine (250 ?M; 0.2 ?Ci/ml) to ensure sufficient inhibitory effects of competing amino acids. The identity and percent contribution of L-arginine transport system activities present were not significantly different between uninfected control and C. parvum infected epithelium and were attributed predominantly to systems y+ and B0,+ ( Figure 4 ).  Luminal uptake of L-arginine from the ileum of control and C. parvum infected piglets is mediated by transport systems y<sup>+</sup> and B<sup>0,+</sup> Cellular transport of L-arginine can be mediated by the kinetically-defined systems y+, y+L, b0,+ and B0,+. To determine the identity of the amino acid transport activities present in control and C. parvum infected epithelium in vivo, in situ uptake of 14C-arginine by mucosal epithelium was performed in Ussing chambers in the presence of transport system-selective inhibitors as outlined in Table 1 . These studies were performed with a low dose of L-arginine (250 ?M; 0.2 ?Ci/ml) to ensure sufficient inhibitory effects of competing amino acids. The identity and percent contribution of L-arginine transport system activities present were not significantly different between uninfected control and C. parvum infected epithelium and were attributed predominantly to systems y+ and B0,+ ( Figure 4 ).  C. parvum infected mucosa express CAT-1, CAT-2A, scant CAT-2B, and ATB<sup>0,+</sup> transporter transcripts To determine if an increase in the expression of genes encoding the proteins responsible for activity of system y+ or B0,+ were responsible for increased L-arginine uptake by intestinal epithelium of C. parvum -infected piglets, we designed primers for the specific amplification of system y+ (CAT-1, CAT-2A, CAT-2B), and system B0,+ (ATB0,+) transporter protein genes. Levels of mRNA expression were compared between control and infected piglets using real-time RT-PCR. There were no differences in expression of cationic amino acid-specific or ATB0,+ transporters between control and C. parvum infected piglets. The ubiquitously expressed transporter, CAT-1 and ATB0,+, were present in greatest abundance. CAT-2A mRNA was detected in lesser amounts, while CAT-2B was detected only at very low levels ( Table 3 ). RT-PCR products for CAT-1, CAT-2B, CAT-2A, and ATB0,+ shared 100% sequence identity with corresponding mRNA sequences in Genbank ( Table 2 ). Therefore, increased L-arginine transport by C. parvum infected epithelium could not be attributed to an increase in expression of genes responsible for y+ or B0,+ transport activities.  C. parvum infected mucosa express CAT-1, CAT-2A, scant CAT-2B, and ATB<sup>0,+</sup> transporter transcripts To determine if an increase in the expression of genes encoding the proteins responsible for activity of system y+ or B0,+ were responsible for increased L-arginine uptake by intestinal epithelium of C. parvum -infected piglets, we designed primers for the specific amplification of system y+ (CAT-1, CAT-2A, CAT-2B), and system B0,+ (ATB0,+) transporter protein genes. Levels of mRNA expression were compared between control and infected piglets using real-time RT-PCR. There were no differences in expression of cationic amino acid-specific or ATB0,+ transporters between control and C. parvum infected piglets. The ubiquitously expressed transporter, CAT-1 and ATB0,+, were present in greatest abundance. CAT-2A mRNA was detected in lesser amounts, while CAT-2B was detected only at very low levels ( Table 3 ). RT-PCR products for CAT-1, CAT-2B, CAT-2A, and ATB0,+ shared 100% sequence identity with corresponding mRNA sequences in Genbank ( Table 2 ). Therefore, increased L-arginine transport by C. parvum infected epithelium could not be attributed to an increase in expression of genes responsible for y+ or B0,+ transport activities.  C. parvum infection is associated with cellular L-arginine deficiency An enhanced uptake of L-arginine, in the absence of changes in transporter gene expression, has been demonstrated in alveolar macrophages to be mediated by intracellular consumption of L-arginine by nitric oxide synthase ( 42 ). We therefore surmised that in C. parvum infected epithelium, intracellular catabolism of L-arginine may promote an enhanced uptake of L-arginine. To determine whether or not cellular concentrations of L-arginine where consistent with consumption of L-arginine in the infection, we examined the L-arginine content of ileal mucosa from control and C. parvum infected piglets. In infected animals, ileal mucosal L-arginine concentrations were significantly lower than that of uninfected animals (nmol/gram = 1440 ± 72 uninfected control; 951 ± 31 C. parvum, n = 5 each; *** P < 0.001, One-way ANOVA). Further, reduced cellular concentrations of L-arginine in the infection could not be attributed to serum deficiency as there were no significant differences in serum concentration of L-arginine between uninfected control and C. parvum infected piglets (?M = 75 ± 18 uninfected control; 94 ± 18 C. parvum, n = 5 each).  C. parvum infection is associated with cellular L-arginine deficiency An enhanced uptake of L-arginine, in the absence of changes in transporter gene expression, has been demonstrated in alveolar macrophages to be mediated by intracellular consumption of L-arginine by nitric oxide synthase ( 42 ). We therefore surmised that in C. parvum infected epithelium, intracellular catabolism of L-arginine may promote an enhanced uptake of L-arginine. To determine whether or not cellular concentrations of L-arginine where consistent with consumption of L-arginine in the infection, we examined the L-arginine content of ileal mucosa from control and C. parvum infected piglets. In infected animals, ileal mucosal L-arginine concentrations were significantly lower than that of uninfected animals (nmol/gram = 1440 ± 72 uninfected control; 951 ± 31 C. parvum, n = 5 each; *** P < 0.001, One-way ANOVA). Further, reduced cellular concentrations of L-arginine in the infection could not be attributed to serum deficiency as there were no significant differences in serum concentration of L-arginine between uninfected control and C. parvum infected piglets (?M = 75 ± 18 uninfected control; 94 ± 18 C. parvum, n = 5 each).  C. parvum infection induces expression of arginase II by intestinal epithelium in vivo Key enzymes mediating catabolism of L-arginine are nitric oxide synthase and arginase. While we have previously shown that iNOS is intensely expressed by C. parvum infected epithelium in vivo, ( 11 , 43 ) arginase expression has not been previously explored. Expression of arginase is reportedly negligible in intestinal epithelium of neonates ( 31 , 44 ). To determine whether or not expression of arginase by the intestinal epithelium could be induced by C. parvum infection and thereby contribute to L-arginine catabolism, intestinal epithelial protein lysates from control and C. parvum infected piglets were immunoblotted for arginase I and II expression. Arginase I was not expressed by intestinal epithelial cells from either uninfected or infected piglets. Arginase II expression was similarly negligible in uninfected piglets, but strongly induced by intestinal epithelium from piglets infected with C. parvum . To determine the location of arginase II expression along the crypt-villus axis in C. parvum infection, immunofluorescence was performed to localize arginase II expression. In C. parvum infected ileum, arginase II expression was observed in both villous and crypt epithelium ( Figure 5 ).  C. parvum infection induces expression of arginase II by intestinal epithelium in vivo Key enzymes mediating catabolism of L-arginine are nitric oxide synthase and arginase. While we have previously shown that iNOS is intensely expressed by C. parvum infected epithelium in vivo, ( 11 , 43 ) arginase expression has not been previously explored. Expression of arginase is reportedly negligible in intestinal epithelium of neonates ( 31 , 44 ). To determine whether or not expression of arginase by the intestinal epithelium could be induced by C. parvum infection and thereby contribute to L-arginine catabolism, intestinal epithelial protein lysates from control and C. parvum infected piglets were immunoblotted for arginase I and II expression. Arginase I was not expressed by intestinal epithelial cells from either uninfected or infected piglets. Arginase II expression was similarly negligible in uninfected piglets, but strongly induced by intestinal epithelium from piglets infected with C. parvum . To determine the location of arginase II expression along the crypt-villus axis in C. parvum infection, immunofluorescence was performed to localize arginase II expression. In C. parvum infected ileum, arginase II expression was observed in both villous and crypt epithelium ( Figure 5 ).  Enhanced uptake of L-arginine by the ileum of C. parvum infected piglets is mediated by arginase To determine the contribution of NOS and arginase to uptake of L-arginine from the lumen of the intestine, sheets of ileal mucosa from uninfected control and C. parvum infected piglets were incubated in Ussing chambers with a NOS inhibitor (L-NAME, 10 mM) or arginase inhibitor (DFMO, 10 mM) for 1-hour prior to determination of L-arginine uptake rate (2.5 mM; 0.2 ?Ci 14C-labeled-L-arginine per ml). Inhibition of NOS had no effect on uptake rate of L-arginine by either control or infected ileum. In contrast, inhibition of arginase significantly decreased the uptake of L-arginine by C. parvum infected, but not uninfected ileum, as is consistent with arginase II induction by infected and not control epithelium ( Figure 6 ).  Enhanced uptake of L-arginine by the ileum of C. parvum infected piglets is mediated by arginase To determine the contribution of NOS and arginase to uptake of L-arginine from the lumen of the intestine, sheets of ileal mucosa from uninfected control and C. parvum infected piglets were incubated in Ussing chambers with a NOS inhibitor (L-NAME, 10 mM) or arginase inhibitor (DFMO, 10 mM) for 1-hour prior to determination of L-arginine uptake rate (2.5 mM; 0.2 ?Ci 14C-labeled-L-arginine per ml). Inhibition of NOS had no effect on uptake rate of L-arginine by either control or infected ileum. In contrast, inhibition of arginase significantly decreased the uptake of L-arginine by C. parvum infected, but not uninfected ileum, as is consistent with arginase II induction by infected and not control epithelium ( Figure 6 ).  DISCUSSION The ability of the neonatal gut to transport L-arginine from the lumen of the intestine has important implications for the efficacy of enteral L-arginine to correct deficiency states and/or promote intestinal epithelial defense and repair. In the present studies, we used intact sheets of intestinal mucosa mounted in Ussing chambers and exposed to luminal L-arginine to identify transport systems y+ and B0,+ as mediators of L-arginine uptake by neonatal ileum. Further, these same transport activities were preserved in C. parvum infected ileum despite the presence of severe villous atrophy. Most reports on the identity of transport system activities in intestinal epithelium are consistent with system y+ transport by the apical membrane ( 45 ), although findings vary considerably depending on species, location along the length of the GI tract, and between the apical and basolateral membranes. Likewise, system B0,+ has been identified as a luminal transport mechanism of intestinal epithelium in a number of species ( 46 – 49 ), although previously reported to be absent in weaned pigs ( 50 ). In contrast, the presence of system B0,+ activity in neonatal piglet intestinal epithelium, as described here, may reflect age-dependent modulation of system B0,+ activity as has been demonstrated in response to dietary and growth factors ( 45 , 51 ). Indeed, in the present study fully half of L-arginine transport by neonatal piglet epithelium was dependent on the presence of Na+, a characteristic uniquely ascribed to transport of L-arginine by system B0,+. Recently, genes encoding the proteins responsible for the activity of system y+ and B0,+ have been cloned and designated as the cationic amino acid-specific transporters (CAT-1, -2A, -2B, -3 and -4) ( 18 – 22 ) and ATB0,+ ( 23 ), respectively. CAT-3 and –4 have not been described for intestinal epithelium. In the present study we identified expression of the system y+ and B0,+ transporter genes CAT-1, CAT-2A, and ATB0,+ at comparable levels in intestinal epithelium from both control and C. parvum infected piglets. CAT-1 is a ubiquitously expressed transporter (except in liver)( 52 ) for which transcripts have been previously identified in murine intestine and CaCo-2 cells ( 53 , 54 ). CAT-2A is primarily expressed in liver and skeletal muscle ( 18 ) and was reportedly absent in studies of murine intestine and CaCo-2 cells ( 53 , 54 ). Our studies are the first to demonstrate expression of CAT-2A by intestinal epithelium. Finally, while expression of CAT-2B is co-induced with iNOS in a variety of non-epithelial cell and tissue types ( 24 , 26 , 27 , 38 ), only scant CAT-2B transcripts were amplified from intestinal epithelium in the present study. Preservation of L-arginine transporter expression by the infected epithelium was somewhat unexpected given the severity of villous atrophy caused by C. parvum . However, other laboratories have demonstrated normal or increased expression of ASC ( 55 ) and PepT1 transporters ( 56 ) in cryptosporidiosis, suggesting that the infected epithelium remains capable of sustained expression of nutrient transporters despite a high rate of cellular turnover. This may be attributed in part to compensatory induction of transporter expression by crypt epithelium as has been described for ASC ( 55 ). A lack of specific antibodies for identification of L-arginine transport proteins precluded studies to locate their expression along the crypt-villus axis in the present study. In addition to preserving the expression of L-arginine transporter genes, individual epithelial cells isolated from the infected mucosa exhibited an increased uptake rate of L-arginine. We did not perform detailed studies of specific transport system activities in epithelial cells after their isolation from the mucosa because the length required of these studies adversely affected cell survival and precluded study of luminal transport mechanisms by disrupting epithelial cell polarity. Our observation that C. parvum infected mucosa had significantly lower cellular concentrations of L-arginine despite normal serum concentrations led us to surmise that intracellular consumption of L-arginine may promote facilitated transport by the infected epithelium. The two major pathways for intracellular consumption of L-arginine are conversion by NOS to nitric oxide and L-citrulline and hydrolyzation by arginase to urea and L-ornithine. We and others have shown that C. parvum infection results in epithelial induction iNOS ( 11 , 12 ) and a significant effect of iNOS activity on transport rate of L-arginine has been shown in some studies ( 42 ), but not in others ( 57 ). On the other hand, arginase is normally absent in intestinal epithelial cells prior to weaning ( 31 ), at which time cortisol-induced expression of arginase becomes a major pathway for L-arginine degradation ( 44 ). The studies reported here are the first to demonstrate induction of arginase II by intestinal epithelium in response to infection in vivo. Induction of arginase could not be attributed to early weaning alone ( 58 ) as arginase expression was not observed in identically weaned, formula-fed littermates who were not infected with C. parvum . A definitive role of arginase in promoting increased uptake of L-arginine by the infected epithelium was demonstrated by pharmacological studies wherein the uptake of L-arginine was significantly inhibited by treatment with the L-ornithine analogue DFMO, but not the NOS inhibitor L-NAME. Although arginase activity promoted uptake of L-arginine by C. parvum infected epithelium, its contribution to total absorption was only modest; accounting for ~25% of cellular L-arginine uptake ( Figure 6 ). DFMO was chosen for use in these studies due to its lack of effects on iNOS activity and potent inhibitory effects on cellular arginase activity at concentrations that do not interfere with L-arginine uptake mechanisms ( 59 ). While DFMO is also an inhibitor of ornithine decarboxylase activity, and therefore polyamine synthesis, the time required for depletion of intracellular polyamines (up to 6-days) ( 60 ) greatly exceeds the short duration of use in these studies (1-hr). Co-induction of arginase II and iNOS by intestinal epithelium has not been previously reported. At low concentrations of L-arginine, arginase and iNOS compete at similar rates for consumption of the amino acid ( 61 ). Therefore, sufficient quantities of arginase can limit the availability of L-arginine for nitric oxide synthesis ( 62 , 63 ). Nitric oxide has been shown by ourselves and others, to decrease epithelial parasitism in vivo and inhibit excystation and viability of C. parvum sporozoites in vitro ( 11 – 13 ). In models of infection caused by Giardia lamblia , Helicobacter pylori , and Trypanosoma brucei , consumption of L-arginine by pathogen-derived arginase or arginase induced within the host, inhibits nitric oxide synthesis in favor of pathogen survival ( 64 – 66 ). On the other hand, arginase may protect host epithelium from deleterious effects of sustained overproduction of nitric oxide. In addition, arginase mediates the conversion of L-arginine to L-ornithine, a key substrate for synthesis of polyamines. Polyamines play key reparative roles in promoting epithelial cell proliferation and restitution ( 60 , 67 ). In mice infected with Citrobacter rodentium infection, induction of arginase I ameliorates colitis by enhancing the synthesis of polyamines ( 68 ). In the present study, apparently greater expression of arginase II within hyperplastic crypts, rather than villous epithelium (where parasites and iNOS expression predominate) suggests that arginase II may promote polyamine synthesis in direct support of enhanced epithelial cell replacement and restitution, rather than serving as a primary competitor for nitric oxide synthesis. However, whether or not arginase II expression by intestinal epithelium in C. parvum infection limits nitric oxide synthesis or confers a survival advantage to the host or parasite is unclear. These questions will need to be answered with in vivo studies, where the effect of arginase on synthesis of nitric oxide and polyamines, epithelial repair and barrier function, and parasite and host survival can be ascertained ( 11 ).  DISCUSSION The ability of the neonatal gut to transport L-arginine from the lumen of the intestine has important implications for the efficacy of enteral L-arginine to correct deficiency states and/or promote intestinal epithelial defense and repair. In the present studies, we used intact sheets of intestinal mucosa mounted in Ussing chambers and exposed to luminal L-arginine to identify transport systems y+ and B0,+ as mediators of L-arginine uptake by neonatal ileum. Further, these same transport activities were preserved in C. parvum infected ileum despite the presence of severe villous atrophy. Most reports on the identity of transport system activities in intestinal epithelium are consistent with system y+ transport by the apical membrane ( 45 ), although findings vary considerably depending on species, location along the length of the GI tract, and between the apical and basolateral membranes. Likewise, system B0,+ has been identified as a luminal transport mechanism of intestinal epithelium in a number of species ( 46 – 49 ), although previously reported to be absent in weaned pigs ( 50 ). In contrast, the presence of system B0,+ activity in neonatal piglet intestinal epithelium, as described here, may reflect age-dependent modulation of system B0,+ activity as has been demonstrated in response to dietary and growth factors ( 45 , 51 ). Indeed, in the present study fully half of L-arginine transport by neonatal piglet epithelium was dependent on the presence of Na+, a characteristic uniquely ascribed to transport of L-arginine by system B0,+. Recently, genes encoding the proteins responsible for the activity of system y+ and B0,+ have been cloned and designated as the cationic amino acid-specific transporters (CAT-1, -2A, -2B, -3 and -4) ( 18 – 22 ) and ATB0,+ ( 23 ), respectively. CAT-3 and –4 have not been described for intestinal epithelium. In the present study we identified expression of the system y+ and B0,+ transporter genes CAT-1, CAT-2A, and ATB0,+ at comparable levels in intestinal epithelium from both control and C. parvum infected piglets. CAT-1 is a ubiquitously expressed transporter (except in liver)( 52 ) for which transcripts have been previously identified in murine intestine and CaCo-2 cells ( 53 , 54 ). CAT-2A is primarily expressed in liver and skeletal muscle ( 18 ) and was reportedly absent in studies of murine intestine and CaCo-2 cells ( 53 , 54 ). Our studies are the first to demonstrate expression of CAT-2A by intestinal epithelium. Finally, while expression of CAT-2B is co-induced with iNOS in a variety of non-epithelial cell and tissue types ( 24 , 26 , 27 , 38 ), only scant CAT-2B transcripts were amplified from intestinal epithelium in the present study. Preservation of L-arginine transporter expression by the infected epithelium was somewhat unexpected given the severity of villous atrophy caused by C. parvum . However, other laboratories have demonstrated normal or increased expression of ASC ( 55 ) and PepT1 transporters ( 56 ) in cryptosporidiosis, suggesting that the infected epithelium remains capable of sustained expression of nutrient transporters despite a high rate of cellular turnover. This may be attributed in part to compensatory induction of transporter expression by crypt epithelium as has been described for ASC ( 55 ). A lack of specific antibodies for identification of L-arginine transport proteins precluded studies to locate their expression along the crypt-villus axis in the present study. In addition to preserving the expression of L-arginine transporter genes, individual epithelial cells isolated from the infected mucosa exhibited an increased uptake rate of L-arginine. We did not perform detailed studies of specific transport system activities in epithelial cells after their isolation from the mucosa because the length required of these studies adversely affected cell survival and precluded study of luminal transport mechanisms by disrupting epithelial cell polarity. Our observation that C. parvum infected mucosa had significantly lower cellular concentrations of L-arginine despite normal serum concentrations led us to surmise that intracellular consumption of L-arginine may promote facilitated transport by the infected epithelium. The two major pathways for intracellular consumption of L-arginine are conversion by NOS to nitric oxide and L-citrulline and hydrolyzation by arginase to urea and L-ornithine. We and others have shown that C. parvum infection results in epithelial induction iNOS ( 11 , 12 ) and a significant effect of iNOS activity on transport rate of L-arginine has been shown in some studies ( 42 ), but not in others ( 57 ). On the other hand, arginase is normally absent in intestinal epithelial cells prior to weaning ( 31 ), at which time cortisol-induced expression of arginase becomes a major pathway for L-arginine degradation ( 44 ). The studies reported here are the first to demonstrate induction of arginase II by intestinal epithelium in response to infection in vivo. Induction of arginase could not be attributed to early weaning alone ( 58 ) as arginase expression was not observed in identically weaned, formula-fed littermates who were not infected with C. parvum . A definitive role of arginase in promoting increased uptake of L-arginine by the infected epithelium was demonstrated by pharmacological studies wherein the uptake of L-arginine was significantly inhibited by treatment with the L-ornithine analogue DFMO, but not the NOS inhibitor L-NAME. Although arginase activity promoted uptake of L-arginine by C. parvum infected epithelium, its contribution to total absorption was only modest; accounting for ~25% of cellular L-arginine uptake ( Figure 6 ). DFMO was chosen for use in these studies due to its lack of effects on iNOS activity and potent inhibitory effects on cellular arginase activity at concentrations that do not interfere with L-arginine uptake mechanisms ( 59 ). While DFMO is also an inhibitor of ornithine decarboxylase activity, and therefore polyamine synthesis, the time required for depletion of intracellular polyamines (up to 6-days) ( 60 ) greatly exceeds the short duration of use in these studies (1-hr). Co-induction of arginase II and iNOS by intestinal epithelium has not been previously reported. At low concentrations of L-arginine, arginase and iNOS compete at similar rates for consumption of the amino acid ( 61 ). Therefore, sufficient quantities of arginase can limit the availability of L-arginine for nitric oxide synthesis ( 62 , 63 ). Nitric oxide has been shown by ourselves and others, to decrease epithelial parasitism in vivo and inhibit excystation and viability of C. parvum sporozoites in vitro ( 11 – 13 ). In models of infection caused by Giardia lamblia , Helicobacter pylori , and Trypanosoma brucei , consumption of L-arginine by pathogen-derived arginase or arginase induced within the host, inhibits nitric oxide synthesis in favor of pathogen survival ( 64 – 66 ). On the other hand, arginase may protect host epithelium from deleterious effects of sustained overproduction of nitric oxide. In addition, arginase mediates the conversion of L-arginine to L-ornithine, a key substrate for synthesis of polyamines. Polyamines play key reparative roles in promoting epithelial cell proliferation and restitution ( 60 , 67 ). In mice infected with Citrobacter rodentium infection, induction of arginase I ameliorates colitis by enhancing the synthesis of polyamines ( 68 ). In the present study, apparently greater expression of arginase II within hyperplastic crypts, rather than villous epithelium (where parasites and iNOS expression predominate) suggests that arginase II may promote polyamine synthesis in direct support of enhanced epithelial cell replacement and restitution, rather than serving as a primary competitor for nitric oxide synthesis. However, whether or not arginase II expression by intestinal epithelium in C. parvum infection limits nitric oxide synthesis or confers a survival advantage to the host or parasite is unclear. These questions will need to be answered with in vivo studies, where the effect of arginase on synthesis of nitric oxide and polyamines, epithelial repair and barrier function, and parasite and host survival can be ascertained ( 11 ). 