Regulation of Cerebral Cortical Size And Neuron Number by Fibroblast Growth Factors: Implications For Autism Increased brain size is common in children with autism spectrum disorders. Here we propose that an increased number of cortical excitatory neurons may underlie the increased brain volume, minicolumn pathology and excessive network excitability, leading to sensory hyper-reactivity and seizures, which are often found in autism. We suggest that Fibroblast Growth Factors (FGF), a family of genes that regulate cortical size and connectivity, may be responsible for these developmental alterations. Studies in animal models suggest that mutations in FGF genes lead to altered cortical volume, excitatory cortical neuron number, minicolum pathology, hyperactivity and social deficits. Thus, many risk factors may converge upon FGF-regulated pathogenetic pathways, which alter excitatory/inhibitory balance and cortical modular architecture, and predispose to autism spectrum disorders.  Conclusions and Future directions In line with the genetic heterogeneity of ASD, there are likely to be many genetic determinants of the excitatory/inhibitory imbalance in the brain. The contributions of an exuberance of pyramidal neurons is in accordance with some of the symptoms and difficulties of patients with ASD. The excitatory overactivity may cause disruptions in cortical rhythms and seizures. Interestingly, seizures are found in approximately 30% of children with ASD, indicating that cortical development must be disrupted in ways that eventually alter the excitatory/inhibitory balance. Depending on the regional extent of this phenomenon, exuberant pyramidal neuron number and connectivity may cause noisy neuronal processing, or impaired long-range interactions among cortical areas and cortical-subcortical regions, which in turn may lead to diverse symptoms such as decreased attentional focus to socially relevant situations, inability to process global features, language deficit, perseveration, and poor impulse control. Future research will reveal whether the exuberance in neuron number is more prominent in certain regions of the cortex and how it may lead to different forms of autism. In conclusion, in autistic children, the balance between growth and regression critically important to brain development may be biased in favor of growth, particularly in the first year of life. A dysregulation in amount or timing of FGF gene expression may conceivably be responsible in some patients for aberrantly regulated brain growth and altered ratio of different neuronal subtypes, ultimately resulting in altered cortical modularity and connectivity. A clarification of their potential role in this syndrome may lay the foundations for understanding how aberrant brain growth could be treated or reversed.  Figures Figure 1 Schematic outline of the generation of cortical neurons during embryogenesis. A, radial glial progenitor cells spanning the entire cortical wall (yellow) undergo sequential divisions, generating at each step neuronal progenitors that further divide in the SVZ and populate a specific cortical layer. B, the number of divisions that the SVZ progenitors undergo will amplify the number of cortical neurons generated for a specific cortical layer. Figure 2 Neuronal circuitry in a cortical column within the cerebral cortex. Excitatory neurons in green, axons in brown and dendrites in black. Afferent fibers from thalamus in blue. Stellate neurons in layer 4 receive thalamic input and rely it to other neuronal dendrites within the column. Pyramidal neurons in layer 6 and 5 project to thalamus and brainstem or spinal cord, respectively (long-range projections). Pyramidal neurons in layer 3 project to near-by cortical areas. Figure 3 A single microinjection of the growth factor Fgf2 (about 75 ng) in the ventricles of rat embryos will induce an increased cerebral cortical size (A), an increased cellular density within the cerebral cortex (B), and an increased number of glutamate-containing neurons in the cortex (C). B shows cresyl violet staining in cortex and C stereological quantification of glutamate- or GABA-immunoreactive cortical neurons in the adult rat neocortex. For more details, see Vaccarino et al, Nature Neuroscience (1999)2:246–253. Figure 4 Coronal sections illustrating MAP2 immunostaining in cingulate and medial prefrontal (mPF) regions of the mouse cerebral cortex. Left, wild type mice; right, mice lacking the Fgfr2 gene in radial glial cells (Fgfr2 cKO). Note the bundles of apical dendrites putatively arising from distinct cortical columns. The intercolumn distance (red arrows) appears to be greater in the Fgfr2 cKO. 