Development of a Partial Balint's Syndrome in a Congenitally Deaf Patient Presenting as Pseudo-Aphasia We present a 56 year-old, right-handed, congenitally deaf, female who exhibited a partial Balint's syndrome accompanied by positive visual phenomena restricted to her lower right visual quadrant (e.g., color band, transient unformed visual hallucinations). Balint's syndrome is characterized by a triad of visuo-ocular symptoms that typically occur following bilateral parieto-occipital lobe lesions. These symptoms include the inability to perceive simultaneous events in one's visual field (simultanagnosia), an inability to fixate and follow an object with one's eyes (optic apraxia), and an impairment of target pointing under visual guidance (optic ataxia). Our patient exhibited simultanagnosia, optic ataxia, left visual-field neglect, and impairment of all complex visual-spatial tasks, yet demonstrated normal visual acuity, intact visual-fields, and an otherwise normal neurocognitive profile. The patient's visuo-ocular symptoms were noticed while she was participating in rehabilitation for a small right pontine stroke. White matter changes involving both occipital lobes had been incidentally noted on the CT scan revealing the pontine infarction. As the patient relied upon sign language and reading ability for communication, these visuo-perceptual limitations hindered her ability to interact with others and gave the appearance of aphasia. We discuss the technical challenges of assessing a patient with significant barriers to communication (e.g., the need for a non-standardized approach, a lack of normative data for such special populations), while pointing out the substantial contributions that can be made by going beyond the standard neuropsychological test batteries.  Discussion This case highlights a rare visual syndrome which is complicated by congenital deafness experienced by the patient. In addition to providing insight into the underlying neural substrates of this syndrome, this case provides an opportunity to explore a variety of clinical issues in neuropsychological assessment. Evaluation of a deaf patient relying upon sign language as their primary means of communication requires creativity and modification of standard test administration procedures, and appears akin to testing a patient in a second language. Moreover, combining auditory limitations with a disturbance of visual processing eliminated our ability to communicate with this woman through writing and compounded the need to modify existing procedures as well as to create new tasks to get at certain cognitive abilities. The patient's special needs in this area raise ethical issues regarding the assessment of patients for whom communication issues pose a potential barrier to performing a valid assessment (e.g., use of interpreters, translation of test materials, availability of appropriate normative data). We believe that this case demonstrates that useful data can be obtained even when such limitations appear substantial, as highlighted by our ability to rule-out a possible aphasia experienced by this individual while establishing her more primary visuo-ocular (perceptual) deficits. Behavioral results and neuroimaging data suggest that our patient experienced a partial Balint's syndrome resulting from damage to her bilateral superior occipital lobes and adjacent white matter (dorsal stream “where” pathway). There is likely some involvement of the posterior parietal lobe (i.e., the angular gyrus, portions of the superior parietal lobule) bilaterally, as several studies suggest that this region is critical in producing this constellation of symptoms ( Coslett & Saffran, 1991 ; Kerkhoff, 2001 ; Rafal, 1997 ). Our patient exhibited both simultanagnosia and optic ataxia (misreaching and impaired movements under visual guidance). The absence of optic apraxia suggests that at least some connections with the prefrontal cortex were spared. However, the presence of left hemispatial neglect suggests that the lesion in the right hemisphere may encroach upon the temporoparietal junction based upon common findings observed in similar cases ( Kerkhoff, 2001 ; Rafal, 1997 ). The etiology underlying the white matter changes believed to be responsible for the onset of visual disturbance is uncertain. However, it is possible that the patient experienced an unrecognized hypotensive episode or that these changes and her pontine infarction shared a common cause. Given that the patient is congenitally deaf and relies upon sign language to communicate, her experience of visual dysfunction hindered her ability to recognize signs made by others. Both her partial left visual-field neglect and simultanagnosia would be expected to contribute to limitations in processing visual input. Her problem with communication was initially interpreted by the patient's family and hospital staff as evidence of possible aphasia. In actuality, however, the patient demonstrated no evidence of language disturbance. The positive visual phenomena experienced by the patient may have resulted from electrical disruption caused by the patient's vascular abnormalities. Visual illusions are known to frequently result from electrical stimulation, lesion occurrence, and seizure activity involving the occipital cortex ( Adams et al., 1997 ). Visual illusions may present as distortions of form, size, movement, or color. Similarly, lesions involving the occipital lobe are associated with elementary visual hallucinations. Elementary visual hallucinations include flashes of light, colors, stars, and geometric forms that can be stationary or moving. It is assumed that these phenomena resolved as the brain returned to a more normalized metabolic and electrical status. To our knowledge, there are no previously published reports of Balint's syndrome experienced by a deaf patient. However, there have a number of studies over the years exploring co-existing visual and auditory deficits in various developmental syndromes and neurological conditions, and their impact on the development of communication skills ( Nikolopoulos, Lioumi, Stamataki, & O'Donoghue, 2006 ). Causes of co-occurring deafness and ophthalmic disorders have included congenital infections (e.g., rubella, syphilis, cytomegalovirus, and toxoplasmosis), syndromic disorders (e.g., Moebius Complex, fetal alcohol syndrome), genetic conditions (Alport's syndrome, Usher syndrome), and a variety of injuries (e.g., such as those associated with a premature birth). The visual deficits associated with these conditions include blindness, visual acuity problems, or strabismus (misalignment of the visual axes of one's eyes) among others. In many of these cases, it has been clear that co-existing deafness and visual deficits can hinder language development and communication. Correction of visual defects in these individuals, whenever possible, can contribute to improved communication ability. Little research exists regarding potential impact of rehabilitation upon the visual defects associated with Balint's syndrome ( Perez, Tunkel, Lachmann, & Nagler, 1996 ). A few case study presentations have suggested that some improvement can be observed when Balint's patients are provided with visuo-perceptual training and functional strategies provided in their natural environment ( Gillen & Dutton, 2003 ; Rosselli, Ardila, & Beltran, 2001 ). While our patient reportedly improved over time, she did not undergo formal testing to verify the extent and nature of her recovery. This patient's combination of deficits posed a significant assessment challenge. Areas of caution included a lack of standardized norms for special populations, obvious communication barriers, and the difficulty involved in maintaining a valid and reliable approach when unable to conduct an evaluation in a standard procedural fashion. Many of these variables are common to conducting neuropsychological evaluations with patients for whom English is not their native language and for those with significant motor and/or sensory deficits. In recent years, much has been written about practicing within the scope of our abilities, pointing out that a grave disservice can be done to our patients when we fail to appreciate these limitations ( Boone, Victor, Wen, Razani, & Ponton, 2007 ; i Fortuny & Mullaney, 1998 ). For example, we can underestimate an individual's neurocognitive and functional capacity due to problems communicating our questions and test instructions accurately. Nevertheless, we believe that the current assessment demonstrates that some very useful data can still be obtained as long as potential assessment limitations are readily and transparently acknowledged. For example, although we clearly demonstrated the nature of the patient's visuo-perceptual deficits and her intact language functioning, we would have had difficulty providing a valid evaluation of her IQ. It was particularly difficult to query her about verbal knowledge, as her visuo-perceptual limitations made it troublesome to convey and clarify some questions (i.e., she had difficulty reading text as well as responding to sign language and finger spelling). This case study also highlights the need to sometimes push beyond our standardized test batteries in order to explore unusual symptom presentations. While the backbone of neuropsychology is the application of standardized assessment procedures to the study of brain functions, situations do arise that call for approach modifications in order to obtain useful data. The ability to devise and implement atypical assessment strategies requires a strong knowledge of brain-behavior relationships (including both common and unusual neurological syndromes), and the ability to break complex neurocognitive tasks into their component parts. Much of the modern focus on forensic applications to neuropsychology discourage variation from the standardized battery approach, yet in cases such as this one, a standard assessment would likely have missed the essential features of this patient's syndrome. Of course, even when departing from a standard battery, systematic, rigorous standards can yet be applied to the administration of an experimental measure. Specialized techniques to assess some of these more unusual deficits can be discovered through a careful literature search, including a review of some of our common assessment texts. Likewise, consultation with other neuropsychologists or related professionals who have specific expertise in an area relevant to an unusual presentation is extremely helpful (e.g., in this case, this included colleagues with expertise in seizure disorders, visual processing and related neurologic phenomena, neuroimaging, stroke, and communication issues with the congenitally deaf). On a related note, as we develop novel test strategies, an effort to make these available to our colleagues should be undertaken as well. Finally, this case highlights the contributions that neuropsychology can make in the assessment of acute behavioral or emotional changes as they occur in the setting of neurological or general medical treatment facilities. While this is also the domain of the behavioral neurologist, there are many settings where such professionals are lacking. Likewise, we can often provide complimentary data to such providers, adding a degree of quantification to what might otherwise be a qualitative judgment. This is another area where neuropsychology can make substantial contributions with real impact on patient care that is often overlooked despite a definite heritage in this arena (e.g., see the pioneering work of A. R. Luria, A. Benton).  Discussion This case highlights a rare visual syndrome which is complicated by congenital deafness experienced by the patient. In addition to providing insight into the underlying neural substrates of this syndrome, this case provides an opportunity to explore a variety of clinical issues in neuropsychological assessment. Evaluation of a deaf patient relying upon sign language as their primary means of communication requires creativity and modification of standard test administration procedures, and appears akin to testing a patient in a second language. Moreover, combining auditory limitations with a disturbance of visual processing eliminated our ability to communicate with this woman through writing and compounded the need to modify existing procedures as well as to create new tasks to get at certain cognitive abilities. The patient's special needs in this area raise ethical issues regarding the assessment of patients for whom communication issues pose a potential barrier to performing a valid assessment (e.g., use of interpreters, translation of test materials, availability of appropriate normative data). We believe that this case demonstrates that useful data can be obtained even when such limitations appear substantial, as highlighted by our ability to rule-out a possible aphasia experienced by this individual while establishing her more primary visuo-ocular (perceptual) deficits. Behavioral results and neuroimaging data suggest that our patient experienced a partial Balint's syndrome resulting from damage to her bilateral superior occipital lobes and adjacent white matter (dorsal stream “where” pathway). There is likely some involvement of the posterior parietal lobe (i.e., the angular gyrus, portions of the superior parietal lobule) bilaterally, as several studies suggest that this region is critical in producing this constellation of symptoms ( Coslett & Saffran, 1991 ; Kerkhoff, 2001 ; Rafal, 1997 ). Our patient exhibited both simultanagnosia and optic ataxia (misreaching and impaired movements under visual guidance). The absence of optic apraxia suggests that at least some connections with the prefrontal cortex were spared. However, the presence of left hemispatial neglect suggests that the lesion in the right hemisphere may encroach upon the temporoparietal junction based upon common findings observed in similar cases ( Kerkhoff, 2001 ; Rafal, 1997 ). The etiology underlying the white matter changes believed to be responsible for the onset of visual disturbance is uncertain. However, it is possible that the patient experienced an unrecognized hypotensive episode or that these changes and her pontine infarction shared a common cause. Given that the patient is congenitally deaf and relies upon sign language to communicate, her experience of visual dysfunction hindered her ability to recognize signs made by others. Both her partial left visual-field neglect and simultanagnosia would be expected to contribute to limitations in processing visual input. Her problem with communication was initially interpreted by the patient's family and hospital staff as evidence of possible aphasia. In actuality, however, the patient demonstrated no evidence of language disturbance. The positive visual phenomena experienced by the patient may have resulted from electrical disruption caused by the patient's vascular abnormalities. Visual illusions are known to frequently result from electrical stimulation, lesion occurrence, and seizure activity involving the occipital cortex ( Adams et al., 1997 ). Visual illusions may present as distortions of form, size, movement, or color. Similarly, lesions involving the occipital lobe are associated with elementary visual hallucinations. Elementary visual hallucinations include flashes of light, colors, stars, and geometric forms that can be stationary or moving. It is assumed that these phenomena resolved as the brain returned to a more normalized metabolic and electrical status. To our knowledge, there are no previously published reports of Balint's syndrome experienced by a deaf patient. However, there have a number of studies over the years exploring co-existing visual and auditory deficits in various developmental syndromes and neurological conditions, and their impact on the development of communication skills ( Nikolopoulos, Lioumi, Stamataki, & O'Donoghue, 2006 ). Causes of co-occurring deafness and ophthalmic disorders have included congenital infections (e.g., rubella, syphilis, cytomegalovirus, and toxoplasmosis), syndromic disorders (e.g., Moebius Complex, fetal alcohol syndrome), genetic conditions (Alport's syndrome, Usher syndrome), and a variety of injuries (e.g., such as those associated with a premature birth). The visual deficits associated with these conditions include blindness, visual acuity problems, or strabismus (misalignment of the visual axes of one's eyes) among others. In many of these cases, it has been clear that co-existing deafness and visual deficits can hinder language development and communication. Correction of visual defects in these individuals, whenever possible, can contribute to improved communication ability. Little research exists regarding potential impact of rehabilitation upon the visual defects associated with Balint's syndrome ( Perez, Tunkel, Lachmann, & Nagler, 1996 ). A few case study presentations have suggested that some improvement can be observed when Balint's patients are provided with visuo-perceptual training and functional strategies provided in their natural environment ( Gillen & Dutton, 2003 ; Rosselli, Ardila, & Beltran, 2001 ). While our patient reportedly improved over time, she did not undergo formal testing to verify the extent and nature of her recovery. This patient's combination of deficits posed a significant assessment challenge. Areas of caution included a lack of standardized norms for special populations, obvious communication barriers, and the difficulty involved in maintaining a valid and reliable approach when unable to conduct an evaluation in a standard procedural fashion. Many of these variables are common to conducting neuropsychological evaluations with patients for whom English is not their native language and for those with significant motor and/or sensory deficits. In recent years, much has been written about practicing within the scope of our abilities, pointing out that a grave disservice can be done to our patients when we fail to appreciate these limitations ( Boone, Victor, Wen, Razani, & Ponton, 2007 ; i Fortuny & Mullaney, 1998 ). For example, we can underestimate an individual's neurocognitive and functional capacity due to problems communicating our questions and test instructions accurately. Nevertheless, we believe that the current assessment demonstrates that some very useful data can still be obtained as long as potential assessment limitations are readily and transparently acknowledged. For example, although we clearly demonstrated the nature of the patient's visuo-perceptual deficits and her intact language functioning, we would have had difficulty providing a valid evaluation of her IQ. It was particularly difficult to query her about verbal knowledge, as her visuo-perceptual limitations made it troublesome to convey and clarify some questions (i.e., she had difficulty reading text as well as responding to sign language and finger spelling). This case study also highlights the need to sometimes push beyond our standardized test batteries in order to explore unusual symptom presentations. While the backbone of neuropsychology is the application of standardized assessment procedures to the study of brain functions, situations do arise that call for approach modifications in order to obtain useful data. The ability to devise and implement atypical assessment strategies requires a strong knowledge of brain-behavior relationships (including both common and unusual neurological syndromes), and the ability to break complex neurocognitive tasks into their component parts. Much of the modern focus on forensic applications to neuropsychology discourage variation from the standardized battery approach, yet in cases such as this one, a standard assessment would likely have missed the essential features of this patient's syndrome. Of course, even when departing from a standard battery, systematic, rigorous standards can yet be applied to the administration of an experimental measure. Specialized techniques to assess some of these more unusual deficits can be discovered through a careful literature search, including a review of some of our common assessment texts. Likewise, consultation with other neuropsychologists or related professionals who have specific expertise in an area relevant to an unusual presentation is extremely helpful (e.g., in this case, this included colleagues with expertise in seizure disorders, visual processing and related neurologic phenomena, neuroimaging, stroke, and communication issues with the congenitally deaf). On a related note, as we develop novel test strategies, an effort to make these available to our colleagues should be undertaken as well. Finally, this case highlights the contributions that neuropsychology can make in the assessment of acute behavioral or emotional changes as they occur in the setting of neurological or general medical treatment facilities. While this is also the domain of the behavioral neurologist, there are many settings where such professionals are lacking. Likewise, we can often provide complimentary data to such providers, adding a degree of quantification to what might otherwise be a qualitative judgment. This is another area where neuropsychology can make substantial contributions with real impact on patient care that is often overlooked despite a definite heritage in this arena (e.g., see the pioneering work of A. R. Luria, A. Benton).  Figures and Table Figure 1 This is a sample of one of several test items used to assess the patient's ability to estimate the spatial relationship between pictured objects. She was instructed on this task to indicate which of the two figures is higher. Figure 2 This represents the patient's attempt to circle all letter “A's” pictured on a sheet of letters. On her first attempt she identified only two of the six target letters. She identified one additional target when prompted to scan again. However, she missed a number of target letters, particularly those that were larger in size. Figure 3 This is a volumetric tracing of the bilateral lesions on the available CT slices on which they were present. The lesion foci correspond to approximately +/? 35, ?40, and +25 mm in Talairach coordinates. Figure 4 Depiction of the 3 CT scan slices from Figure 3 on a healthy adult brain normalized to Talairach space. Table 1 Scores obtained on both formal and qualitative neurocognitive measures administered. Tests Administered Scale Score or Raw Score Performance Rating WMS-III General Orientation 13/14 Normal Boston Naming Test 55/60 Average Oral Trailmaking Test – Part A 5.5 seconds Average Oral Trailmaking Test – Part B 26.3 seconds Average WAIS-III Arithmetic SS = 8 Average WMS-III Spatial Span SS = 3 Impaired Visual Acuity (modified Snellen Eye Chart) 20/20 Normal Drawing a Circle/Placing Dot in Center Not able to perform task Impaired Judgment of Line Orientation Test 4/30 Impaired Judging the Relative Spatial Relationship between objects Patient missed greater than 80% of test items Impaired WAIS-III Block Design SS = 3 Impaired WMS-III Faces I – Immediate Recall SS = 7 Low Average WMS-III Faces II – Delayed Recall SS = 8 Average WMS-III Logical Memory I – Immediate Recall SS = 9 Average WMS-III Logical Memory II– Delayed Recall SS = 10 Average WAIS-III Information SS = 12 High Average WAIS-III Similarities SS = 9 Average WAIS-III Comprehension SS = 8 Average Beck Depression Inventory 10/30 Mildly Depressed Note. The Snellen eye chart was modified by exposing only a single letter at a time. Otherwise, the patient would become fixated on only a single letter. WMS-III = Wechsler Memory Scale (3rd Edition); WAIS-III = Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (3rd Edition).  Figures and Table Figure 1 This is a sample of one of several test items used to assess the patient's ability to estimate the spatial relationship between pictured objects. She was instructed on this task to indicate which of the two figures is higher. Figure 2 This represents the patient's attempt to circle all letter “A's” pictured on a sheet of letters. On her first attempt she identified only two of the six target letters. She identified one additional target when prompted to scan again. However, she missed a number of target letters, particularly those that were larger in size. Figure 3 This is a volumetric tracing of the bilateral lesions on the available CT slices on which they were present. The lesion foci correspond to approximately +/? 35, ?40, and +25 mm in Talairach coordinates. Figure 4 Depiction of the 3 CT scan slices from Figure 3 on a healthy adult brain normalized to Talairach space. Table 1 Scores obtained on both formal and qualitative neurocognitive measures administered. Tests Administered Scale Score or Raw Score Performance Rating WMS-III General Orientation 13/14 Normal Boston Naming Test 55/60 Average Oral Trailmaking Test – Part A 5.5 seconds Average Oral Trailmaking Test – Part B 26.3 seconds Average WAIS-III Arithmetic SS = 8 Average WMS-III Spatial Span SS = 3 Impaired Visual Acuity (modified Snellen Eye Chart) 20/20 Normal Drawing a Circle/Placing Dot in Center Not able to perform task Impaired Judgment of Line Orientation Test 4/30 Impaired Judging the Relative Spatial Relationship between objects Patient missed greater than 80% of test items Impaired WAIS-III Block Design SS = 3 Impaired WMS-III Faces I – Immediate Recall SS = 7 Low Average WMS-III Faces II – Delayed Recall SS = 8 Average WMS-III Logical Memory I – Immediate Recall SS = 9 Average WMS-III Logical Memory II– Delayed Recall SS = 10 Average WAIS-III Information SS = 12 High Average WAIS-III Similarities SS = 9 Average WAIS-III Comprehension SS = 8 Average Beck Depression Inventory 10/30 Mildly Depressed Note. The Snellen eye chart was modified by exposing only a single letter at a time. Otherwise, the patient would become fixated on only a single letter. WMS-III = Wechsler Memory Scale (3rd Edition); WAIS-III = Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (3rd Edition). 