Direct control of paralyzed muscles by cortical neurons A potential treatment for paralysis resulting from spinal cord injury is to route control signals from the brain around the injury via artificial connections. Such signals could then control electrical stimulation of muscles, thereby restoring volitional movement to paralyzed limbs 1 – 3 . In previously separate experiments, activity of motor cortex neurons related to actual or imagined movements has been used to control computer cursors and robotic arms 4 – 10 , and paralyzed muscles have been activated by functional electrical stimulation (FES) 11 – 13 . Here we show that monkeys can directly control stimulation of muscles using the activity of neurons in motor cortex, thereby restoring goal-directed movements to a transiently paralyzed arm. Moreover, neurons could control functional stimulation equally well regardless of any prior association to movement, a finding that significantly expands the source of control signals for brain-machine interfaces. Monkeys learned to utilize these artificial connections from cortical cells to muscles to generate bidirectional wrist torques, and controlled multiple neuron-muscle pairs simultaneously. Such direct transforms from cortical activity to muscle stimulation could be implemented by autonomous electronic circuitry, creating a relatively natural neuroprosthesis. These results are the first demonstration that direct artificial connections between cortical cells and muscles can compensate for interrupted physiological pathways and restore volitional control of movement to paralyzed limbs.  Methods Cortical recording Sterile surgeries were performed with isoflurane anesthesia (1–1.5% in 50:50 02:N20). All surgeries were followed by a program of analgesics (buprenorphine 0.15 mg/kg IM and ketoprofen 5mg/kg PO) and antibiotics (cephalexin 25 mg/kg PO). Each animal was implanted with a cranial recording chamber over left hand and wrist area of motor cortex at stereotaxic coordinates A: 13mm, L: 18mm to permit cortical recordings 29 , 30 . To obtain longer duration cell recordings, monkey L was re-implanted with a chronic electrode array over left motor cortex. The array of 12 independently movable microwires is fully described elsewhere 31 . Briefly, 50 ?m tungsten wires were threaded through individual polyamide guide-tubes in a 2 × 6 array that was anchored to the skull. This array provided stable recordings from the same isolated cell for the duration of an experimental session, and across multiple days for ten cells 24 , 31 , 32 . Nerve block implant Reversible paralysis of the right wrist was achieved with one of two nerve block methods. First, catheters were implanted in the brachial plexus, near cords giving rise to the radial, ulnar and median nerves. Epidural catheters (19 Ga., Arrow International) were inserted into the epineurium surrounding each nerve and anchored in place with cyanoacrylate. Second, nerve cuffs with catheters 33 were implanted around the median and ulnar nerves in the upper arm. Catheters terminating in the lumen of each Silastic cuff (4 mm inner diameter, 30 mm long) permitted the nerves to be bathed in anesthetic. Nerves were identified by electrical stimulation, and catheters were tunneled subcutaneously to exit the skin on the upper back and sealed with an injection port. Thirty-one cells controlled FES during nerve blocks induced by the catheter method, and the remaining 13 cells during blocks induced by cuffs. Experimental paradigm The monkey sat with his right elbow and hand immobilized by padded splints while a transducer measured the flexion-extension (F-E) and radial-ulnar (R-U) torques produced about the wrist (see Figure 1A ). To receive an applesauce reward, the monkey maintained wrist torque within a center target (zero torque) followed by one of eight peripheral targets specifying different combinations of F-E and R-U torque (average magnitude 0.13 ± 0.01 nM). Isolated cell activity was discriminated online using template-matching software (Alpha Omega MSD). Subsequently, cell activity controlled cursor movement in one dimension. Inter-spike intervals were averaged over a 0.5 s sliding window to create a continuous signal for cursor position (and later FES control). If the cell was directionally tuned, targets were aligned with its preferred direction. For untuned cells or cells without tuning information (i.e., cells isolated after nerve block began), either the left or right screen position was arbitrarily chosen to represent high discharge rates for visual feedback. Monkeys practiced cell control for 10 minutes, maintaining discharge rate within each target for 0.5–1.0 s to receive a reward. Nerve block We blocked nerves leading to wrist muscles with local anesthetic to create temporary motor paralysis. Block onset typically occurred after 5–60 minutes, depending on anesthetic and block method. During this time the monkeys continued to perform the cell-controlled target tracking task. Additional doses were given regularly to maintain paralysis during FES control. Brain-controlled FES After onset of paralysis and an average of 36 ± 22 minutes of cell-controlled target tracking, the cell activity was converted to stimuli delivered to one or more paralyzed muscles. Wrist torque controlled the position of the cursor, and targets were randomly displayed on the monitor in one dimension. Monkeys were required to maintain torque within each target for 0.5–1.0 s (mean 0.56 s) to receive a reward. Targets remained on the screen until satisfied, followed by presentation of the next target either immediately or after a 1.5 s reward period. Forty-two cells controlled stimulation current in proportion to cell rate, permitting the monkey to grade contraction force. Two of these cells also controlled stimulation via the autonomous ‘Neurochip’ 23 , 24 to deliver a 1s train of stimuli (2.5 mA, 50/s) when smoothed cell rate exceeded a threshold ( Figure S4 ). Similarly, the first two cells in monkey I also triggered a 1s train of 50/s stimuli at 5 mA. To confirm continued nerve block during the practice session, the stimulator was turned off after every 10 minutes of FES to assure that the monkey could not acquire the peripheral target through volitional muscle contractions. Figures 2B & S4 illustrate the torques produced with the stimulator active compared to periods when the stimulator was turned off for 30 s. With the stimulator off, the monkey repeatedly attempted to satisfy the target but produced ?10% of the torque used to acquire the active target. For all such test periods with each cell the monkeys produced an average maximum of only 18.0 ± 21.3 % of the torque used to satisfy the targets. Data sampling Signals were digitized and stored to disk for offline analysis. Raw recording from motor cortex was band-passed from 1–10 kHz and sampled at 25 kHz, along with spike times from the online discrimination. Wrist torques (flexion-extension and radial-ulnar) were sampled at 5 kHz, and smoothed and down-sampled to 500 Hz during offline analysis. We also recorded behavioural parameters (target on screen, etc.), and muscle stimulation amplitude and timing (5 kHz). Data Analysis Task difficulty was increased incrementally by raising levels of torque targets and increasing hold times. This complicated the quantification of skill learning. Improvements were evident as higher performance levels prior to increments in task requirements (e.g., Figure S3 ), and these times were compared with performance at the beginning of a practice session. Specifically, the two-minute period with the peak performance was compared to the initial two minutes of practice (e.g., targets per minute). Control precision was measured by target errors and the number of failed attempts to reach a target. A target acquisition error was counted when the monkey activated the stimulator while the center target was on the screen, resulting in sufficient torque to satisfy the peripheral target had it been presented. Target errors are reported as the percentage of center targets presented. A failed attempt was counted whenever the monkey briefly acquired a peripheral torque target but did not satisfy the required hold time. A T-test was used to compare average torques during graded FES control. Otherwise, the non-parametric ranksum test was used for all comparisons as at least one data set for each remaining comparison failed Lilliefors test for normality. All reported values are means ± standard deviation (SD).  Cortical recording Sterile surgeries were performed with isoflurane anesthesia (1–1.5% in 50:50 02:N20). All surgeries were followed by a program of analgesics (buprenorphine 0.15 mg/kg IM and ketoprofen 5mg/kg PO) and antibiotics (cephalexin 25 mg/kg PO). Each animal was implanted with a cranial recording chamber over left hand and wrist area of motor cortex at stereotaxic coordinates A: 13mm, L: 18mm to permit cortical recordings 29 , 30 . To obtain longer duration cell recordings, monkey L was re-implanted with a chronic electrode array over left motor cortex. The array of 12 independently movable microwires is fully described elsewhere 31 . Briefly, 50 ?m tungsten wires were threaded through individual polyamide guide-tubes in a 2 × 6 array that was anchored to the skull. This array provided stable recordings from the same isolated cell for the duration of an experimental session, and across multiple days for ten cells 24 , 31 , 32 .  Nerve block implant Reversible paralysis of the right wrist was achieved with one of two nerve block methods. First, catheters were implanted in the brachial plexus, near cords giving rise to the radial, ulnar and median nerves. Epidural catheters (19 Ga., Arrow International) were inserted into the epineurium surrounding each nerve and anchored in place with cyanoacrylate. Second, nerve cuffs with catheters 33 were implanted around the median and ulnar nerves in the upper arm. Catheters terminating in the lumen of each Silastic cuff (4 mm inner diameter, 30 mm long) permitted the nerves to be bathed in anesthetic. Nerves were identified by electrical stimulation, and catheters were tunneled subcutaneously to exit the skin on the upper back and sealed with an injection port. Thirty-one cells controlled FES during nerve blocks induced by the catheter method, and the remaining 13 cells during blocks induced by cuffs.  Experimental paradigm The monkey sat with his right elbow and hand immobilized by padded splints while a transducer measured the flexion-extension (F-E) and radial-ulnar (R-U) torques produced about the wrist (see Figure 1A ). To receive an applesauce reward, the monkey maintained wrist torque within a center target (zero torque) followed by one of eight peripheral targets specifying different combinations of F-E and R-U torque (average magnitude 0.13 ± 0.01 nM). Isolated cell activity was discriminated online using template-matching software (Alpha Omega MSD). Subsequently, cell activity controlled cursor movement in one dimension. Inter-spike intervals were averaged over a 0.5 s sliding window to create a continuous signal for cursor position (and later FES control). If the cell was directionally tuned, targets were aligned with its preferred direction. For untuned cells or cells without tuning information (i.e., cells isolated after nerve block began), either the left or right screen position was arbitrarily chosen to represent high discharge rates for visual feedback. Monkeys practiced cell control for 10 minutes, maintaining discharge rate within each target for 0.5–1.0 s to receive a reward.  Nerve block We blocked nerves leading to wrist muscles with local anesthetic to create temporary motor paralysis. Block onset typically occurred after 5–60 minutes, depending on anesthetic and block method. During this time the monkeys continued to perform the cell-controlled target tracking task. Additional doses were given regularly to maintain paralysis during FES control.  Brain-controlled FES After onset of paralysis and an average of 36 ± 22 minutes of cell-controlled target tracking, the cell activity was converted to stimuli delivered to one or more paralyzed muscles. Wrist torque controlled the position of the cursor, and targets were randomly displayed on the monitor in one dimension. Monkeys were required to maintain torque within each target for 0.5–1.0 s (mean 0.56 s) to receive a reward. Targets remained on the screen until satisfied, followed by presentation of the next target either immediately or after a 1.5 s reward period. Forty-two cells controlled stimulation current in proportion to cell rate, permitting the monkey to grade contraction force. Two of these cells also controlled stimulation via the autonomous ‘Neurochip’ 23 , 24 to deliver a 1s train of stimuli (2.5 mA, 50/s) when smoothed cell rate exceeded a threshold ( Figure S4 ). Similarly, the first two cells in monkey I also triggered a 1s train of 50/s stimuli at 5 mA. To confirm continued nerve block during the practice session, the stimulator was turned off after every 10 minutes of FES to assure that the monkey could not acquire the peripheral target through volitional muscle contractions. Figures 2B & S4 illustrate the torques produced with the stimulator active compared to periods when the stimulator was turned off for 30 s. With the stimulator off, the monkey repeatedly attempted to satisfy the target but produced ?10% of the torque used to acquire the active target. For all such test periods with each cell the monkeys produced an average maximum of only 18.0 ± 21.3 % of the torque used to satisfy the targets.  Data sampling Signals were digitized and stored to disk for offline analysis. Raw recording from motor cortex was band-passed from 1–10 kHz and sampled at 25 kHz, along with spike times from the online discrimination. Wrist torques (flexion-extension and radial-ulnar) were sampled at 5 kHz, and smoothed and down-sampled to 500 Hz during offline analysis. We also recorded behavioural parameters (target on screen, etc.), and muscle stimulation amplitude and timing (5 kHz).  Data Analysis Task difficulty was increased incrementally by raising levels of torque targets and increasing hold times. This complicated the quantification of skill learning. Improvements were evident as higher performance levels prior to increments in task requirements (e.g., Figure S3 ), and these times were compared with performance at the beginning of a practice session. Specifically, the two-minute period with the peak performance was compared to the initial two minutes of practice (e.g., targets per minute). Control precision was measured by target errors and the number of failed attempts to reach a target. A target acquisition error was counted when the monkey activated the stimulator while the center target was on the screen, resulting in sufficient torque to satisfy the peripheral target had it been presented. Target errors are reported as the percentage of center targets presented. A failed attempt was counted whenever the monkey briefly acquired a peripheral torque target but did not satisfy the required hold time. A T-test was used to compare average torques during graded FES control. Otherwise, the non-parametric ranksum test was used for all comparisons as at least one data set for each remaining comparison failed Lilliefors test for normality. All reported values are means ± standard deviation (SD).  Supplementary Material 1 