Public health law for the collection and reporting of health care–associated infections Background State-based laws for reporting of health care-associated infections (HAI) have developed and changed dramatically in recent years, affecting the costs of reporting and impact on infection rates. It is necessary for practitioners of infection control to understand these changing legal frameworks and their application to practice. Methods Employing systematic state-based research, the researchers have documented legislation and administrative regulations for institution-specific HAI reporting, using this information to create a comprehensive resource on state-based laws for mandatory HAI reporting. Results As of August 27, 2007, 24 states have adopted laws requiring reporting of HAI rates, with an additional 7 states currently considering legislation that would require HAI reporting and 19 states employing detailed regulation in the absence of any current legislative authorization specific to HAI. This study documents (1) which states require reporting of HAI and, if so, whether this is done by legislation or administrative regulation; (2) whether the specific HAIs to be reported are identified in state law or codified generally as “diseases of public health importance,” with reporting specified by administrative regulation; and (3) what reporting policies and procedures are detailed in law. Conclusion Through analysis of the collected information, the researchers have examined the degree to which states have modernized their respective public health laws to approach mandatory reporting by way of general legislation regarding “matters of public health importance” and subsequent detailed administrative regulation to specify those matters.  METHODS To develop a descriptive database of state laws for the prevention, surveillance, and control of HAI, the researchers first identified state HAI legislation and administrative regulations across the states. (In this context, “legislation” refers to law developed by the legislative branch and promulgated by executive signature, and “regulation” consists of legal requirements developed by executive agency pursuant to its enabling statutory authority. 29 ) Building on (1) data collected through a Joint Task Force of the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America and APIC 30 and (2) procedures developed by the Healthcare-Associated Infection Working Group’s Tool Kit for reporting HAI, 31 the researchers systematically examined Web databases (eg, Lexis-Nexis, Westlaw, state legislative Web sites) and personal resources (in select cases in which Web-based information was not readily available) to develop a comprehensive summary of the substance and procedures of states’ mandatory HAI reporting. Following this documentation, the researchers categorized the data collected for each state reporting process on the basis of (1) general authority requiring reporting of “diseases of public health importance” or specific, detailed legislative authority regarding the reporting of HAIs; (2) organisms and infection sites specifically enumerated (ie, case/intervention definition); (3) required hospital reporter; (4) detail in the report (aggregate for hospital vs individual case report); and (5) extent to which reports are released to the public with individual hospital identifiers. Based on previous studies of health regulations 32 and experience in hospital-based infection control procedures, 33 these categories were deemed by the researchers as most likely to highlight the types of information of interest to those accessing the database, either to understand what is currently required in a given state or to consider possible regulatory reforms. This categorization was then analyzed from a comparative legal perspective to identify common themes among legislation and/or regulation governing the collection and reporting of HAI, to examine these similarities and differences to understand political context, and, as a result, to uncover general empirical relationships among state legal efforts.  RESULTS The state data have been organized in a Web-based table conducive to interstate regulatory comparison on the Web site of the Columbia Center for Health Policy ( http://www.nursing.columbia.edu/chphsr/projects/law/public_health.html ) and included as an Appendix to the present article. Based on an analysis of the categorizations of these laws and regulations, several patterns in hospital-based reporting become apparent. HAI legislation has been proposed in almost all states, with several bills having now passed out of committee to receive the support of the legislature and become codified in state law. As of August 27, 2007, 24 states have adopted laws requiring the reporting of HAI rates, with an additional 7 states currently considering legislation that would require HAI reporting and 19 states employing detailed regulation in the absence of any legislative authorization specific to HAI. (Additionally, New York City has become the first city to disclose HAI rates, albeit in the absence of legislation, for all public hospitals. 34 ) Table 1 lists the states with adopted legislation, proposed legislation, and adopted regulations. It is important to note that some states categorized as “proposed legislation” already have adopted legislation or regulations on mandatory reporting (eg, Pennsylvania); however, because superseding legislation has been proposed, they were listed in this intermediate category. States, based on experiences with voluntary reporting mechanisms since the 1970s, have moved in the last decade to institute systems of mandatory reporting through legislation. Every state that has passed legislation on HAI reporting has made such reporting mandatory by all regulated health care facilities. Beyond that commonality, states have instituted myriad legislative and regulatory frameworks to assure and specify mandatory reporting of HAI. Among the legislative schemes created through this process, the regulating agency responsible for HAI reporting is most often the state’s department of health (or equivalent agency). There are exceptions to this whereby the state has created an independent agency to monitor HAIs. In Pennsylvania, for example, the Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council had been established in 1986 but was reauthorized in 2003 to include nosocomial infections in its existing review of hospital-based reporting. 35 In cases in which the state has declined to assume authority as the regulating agency (eg, Arizona, Colorado, Tennessee, and Virginia), laws have simply regulated the mandatory reporting of HAI by requiring participation in the CDC’s voluntary National Healthcare Safety Network. Within these reports to the regulating agency, regulation often mandates a delineation of reporting by organism and by infection site. Where the legislation is specific, legislators have specified these organisms to include pneumonia, MRSA, Clostridium difficile , and Vancomycin-resistant enterococcus (VRE) and infection sites to include surgical sites, blood stream, and the urinary tract. In most cases, however, legislation delegates authority to the regulating agency to determine (and revise when necessary) both the reportable organisms and infection sites through subsequent regulation. States that have successfully mandated HAI reporting have, with certain exceptions (eg, Nebraska, Nevada), also required the release of that information on HAI rates to the public. Where they have done so, this publication of infection data has been done by way of both hospital-based data and aggregate state statistics. Although many states have accomplished this release of information through Internet posting, some state-regulating agencies are permitted to release the information only upon specific request (eg, Virginia).  RESULTS The state data have been organized in a Web-based table conducive to interstate regulatory comparison on the Web site of the Columbia Center for Health Policy ( http://www.nursing.columbia.edu/chphsr/projects/law/public_health.html ) and included as an Appendix to the present article. Based on an analysis of the categorizations of these laws and regulations, several patterns in hospital-based reporting become apparent. HAI legislation has been proposed in almost all states, with several bills having now passed out of committee to receive the support of the legislature and become codified in state law. As of August 27, 2007, 24 states have adopted laws requiring the reporting of HAI rates, with an additional 7 states currently considering legislation that would require HAI reporting and 19 states employing detailed regulation in the absence of any legislative authorization specific to HAI. (Additionally, New York City has become the first city to disclose HAI rates, albeit in the absence of legislation, for all public hospitals. 34 ) Table 1 lists the states with adopted legislation, proposed legislation, and adopted regulations. It is important to note that some states categorized as “proposed legislation” already have adopted legislation or regulations on mandatory reporting (eg, Pennsylvania); however, because superseding legislation has been proposed, they were listed in this intermediate category. States, based on experiences with voluntary reporting mechanisms since the 1970s, have moved in the last decade to institute systems of mandatory reporting through legislation. Every state that has passed legislation on HAI reporting has made such reporting mandatory by all regulated health care facilities. Beyond that commonality, states have instituted myriad legislative and regulatory frameworks to assure and specify mandatory reporting of HAI. Among the legislative schemes created through this process, the regulating agency responsible for HAI reporting is most often the state’s department of health (or equivalent agency). There are exceptions to this whereby the state has created an independent agency to monitor HAIs. In Pennsylvania, for example, the Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council had been established in 1986 but was reauthorized in 2003 to include nosocomial infections in its existing review of hospital-based reporting. 35 In cases in which the state has declined to assume authority as the regulating agency (eg, Arizona, Colorado, Tennessee, and Virginia), laws have simply regulated the mandatory reporting of HAI by requiring participation in the CDC’s voluntary National Healthcare Safety Network. Within these reports to the regulating agency, regulation often mandates a delineation of reporting by organism and by infection site. Where the legislation is specific, legislators have specified these organisms to include pneumonia, MRSA, Clostridium difficile , and Vancomycin-resistant enterococcus (VRE) and infection sites to include surgical sites, blood stream, and the urinary tract. In most cases, however, legislation delegates authority to the regulating agency to determine (and revise when necessary) both the reportable organisms and infection sites through subsequent regulation. States that have successfully mandated HAI reporting have, with certain exceptions (eg, Nebraska, Nevada), also required the release of that information on HAI rates to the public. Where they have done so, this publication of infection data has been done by way of both hospital-based data and aggregate state statistics. Although many states have accomplished this release of information through Internet posting, some state-regulating agencies are permitted to release the information only upon specific request (eg, Virginia).  DISCUSSION Reviewing the legislative history of the laws specific to HAI reporting, bills have been more likely to become legislation where they give broad authority to the health department to design specific reporting regulations based on a general statutory language. This was the case among the 5 states that adopted enabling language from the Turning Point Model State Public Health Act, 36 which provides legislative language that the state should develop regulation on any “disease or condition of public importance.” Among those states that have successfully legislated mandatory HAI reporting, legislation was often preceded by the legislative empanelling of task forces or committees to study the issue. For example, Texas created an Advisory Panel on Health Care Associated Infections, which recommended a mandatory reporting system. 37 As in Texas, state-specific reports created through this expert collaboration 38 , 39 would propose principles upon which mandatory reporting bills could then be drafted and legislation promulgated. Many states (eg, Alaska) that have not yet considered specific legislation have already convened an expert panel to study legislative proposals. The most detailed legal requirements for the reporting of HAI have derived from a prolonged period of consideration of reform with the cooperation of hospital associations. Pennsylvania highlights this trend, employing a phased reporting requirement on hospitals, beginning in 2004 with specific surgical site infections and expanding reporting categories each year until hospitals were required to report all HAIs. 4 Despite the promise of rapid change for this clear public health benefit, state hospital associations have often opposed these laws during their drafting and acted to slow or stop their implementation once regulations have been enacted. Three documented reasons appear to drive this resistance: fear of liability, reporting logistics, and questions of efficiency. First, public reporting is thought (often without justification) to lead to an increase in liability for hospitals in HAI cases. 40 Second, hospitals are concerned that data on hospital infection rates will not be reported or publicized in a way that presents an accurate picture of individual risk of infection, with hospitals conceivably varying in their reporting diligence and patients conceivably varying across hospitals in their propensity for infection. 4 Finally, many in the health care and public health community fear that resources spent on inefficient surveillance may divert resources from patient care and prevention. 41 Consequently, with the infrastructural changes necessary to meet new state reporting requirements, 26 it would be advantageous to incorporate health care organizations in the planning of reporting procedures to understand better the complexity and laboriousness of data collection and reporting and develop commitment from health care organizations through “ownership” of the resulting legislation. In light of the range of approaches developed by states in addressing HAI reporting, regulatory reform efforts could benefit from the recent development of model legislation. With states having each previously approached this issue de novo, federalism has not led to improvements in public health protection because hospital associations have divided states in an apparent effort to weaken legislation and regulation. Model legislative language, analogous to the Turning Point Model State Public Health Act, 36 would allow for the incorporation of best practices for public health in every state’s laws, providing baseline protections in infection control legislation and requiring pressing justification for deviating from this language. 42 APIC’s Model Legislation on Public Reporting of Healthcare-Associated Infections should facilitate the improvement and standardization of state HAI regulations, a process that has begun in several states that have drawn on the APIC’s work in drafting state legislation (eg, New Jersey). These model templates notwithstanding, current model legislation initiatives specify only the process of creating regulations, not the substance of those regulations, providing more of a general statement of principles than an enumeration of specific organisms and sites of infection to be collected and reported. For states to develop best practices in HAI control, substantive legislative and regulatory provisions for mandatory HAI reporting, based on the current state of HAI epidemiology, would make an even greater contribution. Finally, whereas early adopting states employed legislative specificity in HAI reporting, current lawmaking practices give flexibility to the regulating agency through broad legislative delegation. For many states, regulation has proved to be a less politically cumbersome approach to law reform than statutory change, providing necessary legal specificity without the risk of legislative retrenchment inherent in opening a state’s public health statutes to amendment. With this delegation to the regulating agency, this general legislative authority has expanded health department public health surveillance into the realm of quality control for the practice of medicine. 43 In confronting this uncharted terrain for health departments, it will be necessary to develop consensus on best practices for infection control in model regulations, providing an improved understanding of what state agencies must do to assure standardized reporting methods. Rather than simply giving token reference to the wide range of voluntary standards, model legislation should provide the normative judgments to select among standards and allow for uniform and consistent state approaches to key infection control activities.  DISCUSSION Reviewing the legislative history of the laws specific to HAI reporting, bills have been more likely to become legislation where they give broad authority to the health department to design specific reporting regulations based on a general statutory language. This was the case among the 5 states that adopted enabling language from the Turning Point Model State Public Health Act, 36 which provides legislative language that the state should develop regulation on any “disease or condition of public importance.” Among those states that have successfully legislated mandatory HAI reporting, legislation was often preceded by the legislative empanelling of task forces or committees to study the issue. For example, Texas created an Advisory Panel on Health Care Associated Infections, which recommended a mandatory reporting system. 37 As in Texas, state-specific reports created through this expert collaboration 38 , 39 would propose principles upon which mandatory reporting bills could then be drafted and legislation promulgated. Many states (eg, Alaska) that have not yet considered specific legislation have already convened an expert panel to study legislative proposals. The most detailed legal requirements for the reporting of HAI have derived from a prolonged period of consideration of reform with the cooperation of hospital associations. Pennsylvania highlights this trend, employing a phased reporting requirement on hospitals, beginning in 2004 with specific surgical site infections and expanding reporting categories each year until hospitals were required to report all HAIs. 4 Despite the promise of rapid change for this clear public health benefit, state hospital associations have often opposed these laws during their drafting and acted to slow or stop their implementation once regulations have been enacted. Three documented reasons appear to drive this resistance: fear of liability, reporting logistics, and questions of efficiency. First, public reporting is thought (often without justification) to lead to an increase in liability for hospitals in HAI cases. 40 Second, hospitals are concerned that data on hospital infection rates will not be reported or publicized in a way that presents an accurate picture of individual risk of infection, with hospitals conceivably varying in their reporting diligence and patients conceivably varying across hospitals in their propensity for infection. 4 Finally, many in the health care and public health community fear that resources spent on inefficient surveillance may divert resources from patient care and prevention. 41 Consequently, with the infrastructural changes necessary to meet new state reporting requirements, 26 it would be advantageous to incorporate health care organizations in the planning of reporting procedures to understand better the complexity and laboriousness of data collection and reporting and develop commitment from health care organizations through “ownership” of the resulting legislation. In light of the range of approaches developed by states in addressing HAI reporting, regulatory reform efforts could benefit from the recent development of model legislation. With states having each previously approached this issue de novo, federalism has not led to improvements in public health protection because hospital associations have divided states in an apparent effort to weaken legislation and regulation. Model legislative language, analogous to the Turning Point Model State Public Health Act, 36 would allow for the incorporation of best practices for public health in every state’s laws, providing baseline protections in infection control legislation and requiring pressing justification for deviating from this language. 42 APIC’s Model Legislation on Public Reporting of Healthcare-Associated Infections should facilitate the improvement and standardization of state HAI regulations, a process that has begun in several states that have drawn on the APIC’s work in drafting state legislation (eg, New Jersey). These model templates notwithstanding, current model legislation initiatives specify only the process of creating regulations, not the substance of those regulations, providing more of a general statement of principles than an enumeration of specific organisms and sites of infection to be collected and reported. For states to develop best practices in HAI control, substantive legislative and regulatory provisions for mandatory HAI reporting, based on the current state of HAI epidemiology, would make an even greater contribution. Finally, whereas early adopting states employed legislative specificity in HAI reporting, current lawmaking practices give flexibility to the regulating agency through broad legislative delegation. For many states, regulation has proved to be a less politically cumbersome approach to law reform than statutory change, providing necessary legal specificity without the risk of legislative retrenchment inherent in opening a state’s public health statutes to amendment. With this delegation to the regulating agency, this general legislative authority has expanded health department public health surveillance into the realm of quality control for the practice of medicine. 43 In confronting this uncharted terrain for health departments, it will be necessary to develop consensus on best practices for infection control in model regulations, providing an improved understanding of what state agencies must do to assure standardized reporting methods. Rather than simply giving token reference to the wide range of voluntary standards, model legislation should provide the normative judgments to select among standards and allow for uniform and consistent state approaches to key infection control activities.  CONCLUSION This research allows examination of whether regulations specifying mandatory reporting are able to deal more effectively with the evolving issues of HAI or whether the interest in reporting institution-specific data requires specific legislation, either to support the reporting or to stymie countervailing lobbying in the disclosure of information. The present results provide researchers with additional information to facilitate future research on questions of regulatory efficacy for HAI prevention and control. This project has created a Web-based system amenable to regular updating as regulations are promulgated, communicating its results and analysis to the public health community to assist in improving future regulatory reform efforts for HAI prevention and control. Because these laws have only recently been developed, with many bills currently pending in state legislatures or with regulations not yet enacted, it will be necessary to keep this legal tracking updated frequently, with real-time updates through Internet dissemination. With periodic updating of these nascent regulations in the database and communication to the public health and infection control communities, this project will inform policy makers of the various regulatory mechanisms that can be utilized as templates for mandatory reporting of HAI. Given the dearth of research on the effect of mandatory hospital reporting systems on rates of infection, additional research is needed to assess the political and policy efforts undertaken in states to translate best practices for infection control into law and practice. With these mandatory reporting laws rapidly coming into force across the country, there exists a unique window of opportunity to assess the impact of mandatory reporting on infection control programs, practices, and infection rates over time. Through future analysis and ongoing legislative tracking in all 50 states, researchers can investigate how (1) HAI reporting is codified into state law (eg, obstacles to legal reform) and (2) modernized state HAI regulations can influence medical practice. In this latter consideration, despite enthusiastic support for the public release of performance measures and extensive adoption of quality measurement and reporting, there is little evidence of the effect of public reporting on the delivery of health care, and even less is known about how this reporting may improve HAI rates. Future research will be necessary to assess the longer term effects of mandatory HAI reporting on infection control departments’ practices and their consequent effect on HAI rates. It is a tragic irony of our health care system that patients have found harm in places of healing. In the past 30 years, however, thinking has evolved from fatalism about the inevitability of HAI to hospital-based efforts to control infection and now to legislative requirements to inform patients. Although institutional medical care can never be free of risk, there is growing awareness that the risks of HAI can be greatly diminished through improved processes of care and that the law may be the impetus for abating these infections that cut into the public’s health. 