Biologically conformal treatment: biomarkers and functional imaging in radiation oncology ‘Conformal radiation therapy’ is the standard of care in radiation oncology, referring to the process of shaping the radiation beam to precisely match a tumor’s physical dimensions. We describe ‘biologically conformal radiotherapy’, in which the radiation oncologist matches the prescribed treatment to a tumor’s biological characteristics and the host’s predicted tolerance of radiation. This paradigm emphasizes that not all tumors are equally sensitive to radiation; conversely, some patients are especially susceptible to radiation’s side effects. Patients bearing radioresistant tumors or those prone to toxicity may be best treated with the incorporation of targeted radiation modulators or, in extreme cases, by a different modality. The biological characteristics of tumors can be assessed by a wide range of techniques: functional imaging (positron emission tomography and advanced magnetic resonance imaging), single gene/protein molecular techniques and ‘omic’ technologies. This paper reviews the latest advances in the use of biomarkers and functional imaging in guiding patients to receive the most appropriate treatment.  Conclusion Over the past 15 years, ‘conformal treatment’, in which the dose distribution of radiation is made to conform to the spatial dimensions of the tumor, has become the standard of care, with a resulting increase in tumor control and decreased toxicity. With the development of effective bio-markers we are witnessing the ushering in of the era of ‘biologically conformal treatment’ in which radiation, in combination with systemic agents, is made to conform to both tumor and host biological characteristics. ‘Biological conformal therapy’ requires the active participation of the physician before, during and after treatment completion. The radio-oncologist of the future will require a working knowledge of cancer biology and need to work in close cooperation with medical oncologist colleagues as we move from the era of the ‘class solution’ to that of ‘individualized medicine’.  Future perspective The next 5 years will see the entry of a large number of biological agents into clinical practice, many of which have been already been shown in the laboratory to combine synergistically with radiation. Molecular analysis of pretreatment biopsies will increasingly be used to guide the selection of the most appropriate agent. In the world of radiation oncology we will see the increasing use of PET-FDG to define targets for treatment; dedicated PET simulators are already in clinical use. New radiotracers for use with PET scans, enabling the visualization of hypoxia, cell proliferation, cell surface receptors and gene expression, will enter the clinic [ 101 ]. Hypoxic areas, as a marker of radioresistance, will be targeted to receive a higher radiation dose using the technique of ‘dose painting’. A competing technology is MRI. Perfusion MRI is able to both accurate classify tumors in a noninvasive manner and predict early radiation failure [ 62 ]. MRI spectroscopy is able to image tumor metabolism and has already been shown to be useful in identifying local recurrences amongst patients with prostate cancer [ 102 ]. As with PET-FDG, the available technology is far ahead of current practice. Clinical development of new technology requires time, patience, large clinical trials and finance. It is not clear which new technologies will enter everyday practice. Personalized medicine will become more reliable and more widespread with the adoption of genomic tools such as single nucleotide polymorphism analysis of the host and gene-expression profiling of tumors. Nonetheless, very few biomarkers are entering clinical practice [ 2 ]. Ideally the accuracy of biomarker-based recommendations would be tested in Phase III trials; unfortunately, this need is likely to be left mostly unmet. The challenge for the radiation oncology community over the next decade will be to design and perform the key trials in a timely and rational manner. Thankfully, sophisticated biomarker and imaging modalities are increasingly being integrated into clinical trials [ 103 ], bringing the bench and bedside closer together. Many of the studies reviewed in this paper are disappointingly grossly underpowered, and their biomarkers unvalidated. The large studies needed to verify genomic signatures can only be performed in a multi-institutional setting. Furthermore, the progress described here comes at a price: biological agents, radioactive tracers and genomic techniques are likely to remain expensive. In addition, biological conformal treatment requires more physician input ( Figure 5 ), increasing the workload of an already over-burdened specialty.  Introduction: individualization of radiation oncology Radiation oncology is undergoing a transformation from treating tumors with a ‘class solution’ to treatment based upon the biological characteristics of the host and tumor. This individualized treatment depends upon the development of biomarkers that accurately reflect both tumor and host biology.  Biomarkers Biomarkers may be measured before, during or after therapy. Their usefulness is dependent on validation with clinical end points in multiple clinical contexts. Very few have entered clinical use.  Evolving biomarkers Evolving biomarkers for use in radiation oncology include: Single nucleotide polymorphism analysis of the host genome. Circulating blood proteins. Immunohistochemistry of tumor biopsy. Expression profiling of tumor samples. Hypoxia, as assessed by microelectrode, tissue staining or proton emission tomography (PET). Ex vivo approaches, in which tumor biopsy tissue is grown and analyzed in the laboratory.  Functional imaging Functional imaging is based upon PET or magnetic resonance imaging technology to accurately delineate tumor from normal tissue, and hence has a role in radiation treatment planning. Furthermore, it is a sensitive indicator of response. Functional imaging is increasingly able to demonstrate a tumor’s biological characteristics and the quality of the microenvironment in a noninvasive manner.  Predictors of tumor response prior to the initiation of radiation therapy Hypoxia is a marker of radioresistance, and can be measured via immunohistochemical staining of biopsy specimens for HIF1-? or by means of specific radiotracers for use with PET scanners. Multiple molecules have been associated with radioresistance, the most prominent of which are the EGFR and mutated p53. PET-computed tomography imaging is increasingly being used to define the anatomical contours of tumor. In the future, it may be used to locate radioresistant areas within tumors requiring additional treatment.  Predictors of tumor response during radiation therapy Changes in the standardized uptake value (SUV; as measured with a PET scan) early in the course of radiation treatment may predict eventual response to treatment.  Predictors of tumor response post-radiation therapy A low SUV reading after the completion of radiation therapy is an increasingly used metric of response; however, methods have yet to be standardized and validated.  Predictors of toxicity to radiation TGF-?1 is a key protein responsible for radiation-induced fibrosis in multiple organs. In patients receiving lung irradiation, elevated plasma TGF-?1 levels have been shown to correlate with subsequent lung injury.  Future perspective A large number of biologically targeted agents are in development, many of which have been successfully combined with radiation in animal models. Sophisticated biomarker and imaging modalities are increasingly being integrated into clinical trials, and may become a condition in a medication’s ‘indicated use’.  Conclusion Radiation oncology is becoming increasingly individualized. Disparate technologies are being used to characterize or predict a tumor/host response to radiation in a noninvasive manner. 