New developments in mast cell biology Mast cells can function as effector and immunoregulatory cells in IgE-associated allergic disorders, as well as in certain innate and adaptive immune responses. This review will focus on exciting new developments in the field of mast cell biology published within the last year. It will highlight advances in the understanding of Fc?RI-mediated signaling and mast cell activation events, as well as in the use of genetic models to study mast cell function in vivo . Finally, we will discuss newly identified roles of mast cells or individual mast cell products, such as proteases and IL-10, in host defense, cardiovascular disease and tumor biology, and in settings in which mast cells have anti-inflammatory or immunosuppressive functions.  Conclusions The new evidence indicating that mast cells can contribute to the pathology of cardiovascular diseases and certain cancers (at least in rodents) continues to tarnish the reputation of this enigmatic cell. However, this “bad guy” image is increasingly being challenged, and to some extent overshadowed, by the identification of an impressive number of protective roles that mast cells can play in both innate and adaptive immune responses, and even in host responses to some tumors ( Fig. 4 ). But many questions in mast cell biology remain to be resolved. For example, certain features of mouse mast cell phenotype and/or function can vary substantially among different strains of mice 102 , 103 . It will be of interest to define how, and to what extent, various genetic factors can influence aspects mast cell biology in humans. However, this is likely to be a challenging topic to investigate. Another current goal is to understand how the mast cell lineage can perform so many distinct functions, e.g., depending on the setting either promoting or limiting innate or adaptive immune responses 6 , 104 , 105 . Can mast cells, like T cells, generate developmentally, phenotypically and functionally distinct “subsets”, or do individual mast cells have sufficient plasticity to exhibit distinct features based on their responsiveness to particular local and/or systemic environmental signals? Do both mechanisms occur? Finally, it will be important to assess how our understanding of mast cell biology can be exploited clinically. Defining to what extent one can safely enhance the positive functions of mast cells, or inhibit their harmful activities, will continue to represent important goals, both to achieve a fuller understanding of this fascinating cell and to exploit such knowledge to reduce disease and promote health.  Figures Figure 1 Simplified scheme of early Fc?RI-mediated signaling events. Ag-induced crosslinking of Fc?RI induces activation of Lyn, which phosphorylates Fc?RI ITAMs (green) and activates Syk following ITAM binding, and Fyn, which phosphorylates the adaptor Gab2 to activate the PI3K pathway. Lyn and Syk phosphorylate many adaptor molecules, e.g., LAT and NTAL, and enzymes to regulate activation of the Ras, PLC?, PI3K and other pathways. Grb2 and SOS activate the Ras/Erk pathway, which regulates transcription factor activation and arachidonic acid metabolism (through PLA2 activation). PLC? can either be activated through the coordinated function of LAT/Gads/SLP-76/Vav and Btk or independently of LAT through a PI3K/Btk-dependent pathway. PLC? activation regulates classical PKC activation (through DAG generation) and calcium responses (through the generation of IP3). IP3 binding to the IP3R triggers Ca2+ release from the ER; STIM1 couples ER Ca2+ store depletion with the activation of CRAC channels, leading to the influx of extracellular Ca2+ and ICRAC. The PI3K product, PI(3,4,5)P3, is an important lipid mediator that regulates the activity of various enzymes, e.g., Btk, Akt, PDK1, PLD and SK, and the formation of other lipid mediators, e.g., DAG and S1P. S1P can act intracellulary, to regulate Ca2+ influx and degranulation (independently of PLC and IP3), and extracellularly (following secretion from the cell) by binding to surface S1P1 or S1P2 receptors and thereby inducing cytoskeletal rearrangement or enhancing degranulation, respectively. The IKK complex consists of two catalytic subunits, IKK?/IKK1 and IKK?/IKK2, and a regulatory subunit, NEMO/IKK?; this complex phosphorylates I?B to activate the transcription factor NF?B. IKK?/IKK2 also phosphorylates SNAP23 to facilitate SNARE complex formation. Arrows indicate the contributions of these signaling pathways toward mast cell degranulation, arachidonic acid metabolism, and cytokine/chemokine/growth factor production. Note: some arrows do not indicate direct interactions or targets. Bcl10, B cell lymphoma 10; Btk, Bruton’s tyrosine kinase; Ca2+, calcium; CaM, calmodulin; CRAC, Ca2+ release activated calcium channel; DAG, diacylglycerol; Gab2, Grb2 associated binding protein 2; GADS, Grb2 related adaptor downstream of Shc; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; Erk, extracellular signal-regulated kinase; I CRAC, Ca2+ release activated current; I?B, inhibitor of ?B; IKK, I?B kinase; IP3, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate; IP3R, IP3 receptor; ITAM, immunoreceptor tyrosine based activation motif; LAT, linker for activation of T cells; MALT1, mucosa associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma translocation protein 1; NEMO, NF?B essential modulator; NFAT, nuclear factor of activated T cells; NF?B, nuclear factor ?B; NTAL, non-T cell activation linker; PI3K, phosphoinositide 3-kinase; PI(3,4,5)P3, phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate; PKC, protein kinase C; PL, phospholipase; RasGRP, Ras guanyl nucleotide-releasing protein; S1P, sphingosine 1 phosphate; SK, sphingosine kinase; SLP-76, SH2-domain containing leukocyte protein of 76 kDa; SOS, son of sevenless homolog; Sph, sphingosine; STIM1, stromal interaction molecule 1. Figure 2 Negative regulation of Fc?RI-mediated signaling events. Fc?RI aggregation activates a number of proteins that negatively regulate the positive signaling pathways activated downstream of this receptor. For example, Lyn, which initiates both activating and inhibitory signals, negatively regulates Fyn activity and, thus, Gab2 phosphorylation. Other negative regulators include c-Cbl (which facilitates the ubiquitination of Fc?RI, Lyn and Syk), the tyrosinse phosphatase SHP-1 (which dephosphorylates Syk), the lipid phosphatases SHIP (which catalyzes the hydrolysis of PI(3,4,5)P3 to PI(3,4)P2) and PTEN (which catalyzes the hydrolysis of PI(3,4,5)P3 to PI(4,5)P2), RasGAP (which enhances the intrinsic GTPase activity of Ras), RabGEF1 (which enhances Fc?RI internalization and can bind to GTP-bound Ras), and RGS13 (which binds to the p85? subunit of PI3K and disrupts its association with Gab2 and Grb2). Ag-induced coaggregation of Fc?RI with Fc?RIIB inhibits Fc?RI-induced signaling events and mast cell activation via Lyn mediated phosphorylation of the Fc?RIIB ITIM (red) and the subsequent recruitment of SHIP and DOK1. Finally, ES-62, a glycoprotein secreted by filarial nematodes, forms a complex with TLR4 (which causes the sequesteration and subsequent proteosome-independent degradation of PKC?) to block Fc?RI-induced PLD-coupled, SK-mediated Ca2+ flux and NF?B activation. DOK1, docking protein 1; Gab2, Grb2 associated binding protein 2; ITAM, immunoreceptor tyrosine based activation motif; ITIM, immunoreceptor tyrosine based inhibititory motif; NF?B, nuclear factor ?B; PI3K, phosphoinositide 3-kinase; PKC, protein kinase C; PLD, phospholipase D; PTEN, phosphatase and tensin homolog; RabGEF, Rab5 guanine nucleotide exchange factor; RasGAP, GTPase activating protein; RGS, regulator of G protein signaling; SHIP, Src homology 2 (SH2) domain-containing inositol 5?-phosphatase; SHP-1, SH2 domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase-1; SK, sphingosine kinase; TLR4, toll like receptor 4. Figure 3 Mast cell limit the pathology associated with CHS to urushiol. Cross-sections of ears (stained with Masson’s Trichrome) from WBB6F1- Kit +/+ (wild-type) mice ( a,b ), WBB6F1- Kit W/W-v mice ( c,d ) or WBB6F1- Kit W/W-v mice engrafted 8 weeks before the experiment with WT BMCMCs (WT BMCMC ? Kit W/W-v mice) ( e,f ) or Il10 ?/? BMCMCs ( Il10 ?/? BMCMC ? Kit W/W-v mice) ( g,h ) were obtained 5 d after challenge with vehicle (100% acetone) only ( a,c,e,g ) or 5 mg/ml of urushiol ( b,d,f,h ). Focal full thickness necrosis of the epidermis and/or ulceration occurred in association with CHS responses to urushiol at 5 d after challenge in 8/10 of the mast cell-deficient WBB6F1- Kit W/W-v mice and in 8/8 Il10 ?/? BMCMC ? Kit W/W-v mice but in none of the 10 wild-type or 7 WT BMCMC ? Kit W/W-v mice; * P < 0.05 by Chi-square test for all comparisons between rates of epidermal necrosis and ulceration in wild-type (WBB6F1- Kit +/+ ) mice or WT BMCMC ? KitW/W-v mice and the corresponding mast cell-deficient WBB6F1- Kit W/W-v mice or Il10 ?/? BMCMC ? Kit W/W-v mice. Similar findings were observed in association with CHS responses to urushiol in 5 of 7 C57BL/6- Kit W-sh/W-sh mice in response to DNFB. By contrast, epidermal necrosis and ulceration occurred in none of the corresponding congenic wild-type mice or WT BMCMC-engrafted C57BL/6- Kit W-sh/W-sh mice (10 or 8 for urushiol and 19 or 16 for DNFB, respectively); * P < 0.05 by Chi-squre test for all comparisons between rates of epidermal ulceration in wild-type or WT BMCMC-engrafted C57BL/6- Kit W-sh/W-sh mice and the corresponding mast cell-deficient C57BL/6- Kit W-sh/W-sh mice. C*: cartilage; double-headed arrows show thickness of dermis (D) or epidermis (Ep); arrows in insets: ulcers with adherent exudates (red). Scale bar in a = 100 ?m & in inset in a = 1000 ?m. Photomicrographs are representative of the findings observed in each of the 3 experiments performed ( n = 3–7 mice/group per experiment). Taken from 74 . Figure 4 Newly identified protective (green) or detrimental (red) roles of mast cells and mast cell products in biological responses in mice. AAA, abdominal aortic aneurysm; CPA3, carboxypeptidase A3; ET-1, endothelin-1; IgE, immunoglobulin E; IL, interleukin; MC, mast cell; MCP, mast cell protease; NLN, neurolysin; NT, neurotensin; SMC, smooth muscle cell; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; Tpsb2, tryptase ?2. 