Autophagy and the ubiquitin-proteasome system: collaborators in neuroprotection Protein degradation is an essential cellular function that, when dysregulated or impaired, can lead to a wide variety of disease states. The two major intracellular protein degradation systems are the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) and autophagy, a catabolic process that involves delivery of cellular components to the lysosome for degradation. While the UPS has garnered much attention as it relates to neurodegenerative disease, important links between autophagy and neurodegeneration have also become evident. Furthermore, recent studies have revealed interaction between the UPS and autophagy, suggesting a coordinated and complementary relationship between these degradation systems that becomes critical in times of cellular stress. Here we describe autophagy and review evidence implicating this system as an important player in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disease. We discuss the role of autophagy in neurodegeneration and review its neuroprotective functions as revealed by experimental manipulation in disease models. Finally, we explore potential parallels and connections between autophagy and the UPS, highlighting their collaborative roles in protecting against neurodegenerative disease.  Summary and unresolved questions The last few years have led to substantial insight into the relationship between autophagy and the UPS. It has become apparent that there is significant similarity, and in some cases overlap, in the regulation of these catabolic pathways by UBL modification, leading to the suggestion that they evolved from a common biological origin[ 95 ]. Further, it has become evident that the function of autophagy and the UPS are coordinated. For example, impairment of the UPS results in upregulation of autophagy ([ 50 , 64 ] and Figure 3 ), and in some contexts this upregulation of autophagy can compensate for impaired UPS function [ 50 , 74 ]. However, it is not known whether this compensatory relationship is reciprocal, as few reagents exist to upregulate the UPS. One study found that upregulation of UPS may afford neuroprotection from toxicity caused by disease proteins, though the authors did not examine the effects of UPS upregulation in autophagy-deficient cells [ 58 ]. The mechanism and the molecular players that regulate the relationship between autophagy and the UPS are beginning to be elucidated and, perhaps not surprisingly, recognition of UBL modification is emerging as a consistent theme. CMA is also clearly involved in the coordinated functioning of proteolytic pathways. CMA can selectively degrade some subunits of the proteasome, highlighting a relationship between CMA and the UPS [ 96 ]. In addition, acute blockage of CMA results in short-term impairment of both the UPS and macroautophagy, followed by a recovery of these catabolic systems as CMA blockade persists [ 97 ]. Chronic blockage of CMA results in constitutive activation of macroautophagy, which appears to be compensatory [ 59 ]. These interrelationships suggest a model in which the preferred route of degradation for a particular substrate may be linked to which system is most capable of efficiently degrading it. While much has been revealed in recent years, substantial questions remain. Most notable, it is largely unknown how the decision is made between degradative routes for any particular protein substrate when more than one pathway is available. HDAC6, p62, and Alfy have been implicated in directing ubiquitinated proteins for autophagic degradation, but the mechanisms whereby these proteins identify their targets and influence their degradation are still unknown. Tantalizing recent evidence suggests that different classes of substrates may be identified by polyubiquitin chains of differing topology, providing the signal for degradation by one proteolytic system or the other [ 93 , 98 ]. More specifically, it has been suggested that polyubiquitin chains with K48-linked chains are primarily degraded by the UPS, whereas those with K63-linked chains are directed to autophagy. Indeed, one might envision a “ubiquitin code” that translates into interaction with specific ubiquitin binding proteins, including HDAC6, Alfy, p62 or other members of the UBA family [ 99 ], which may in turn determine the fate of the substrate. However, experimental limitations in distinguishing between K48-, K63- and mixed-linkage ubiquitin chains must be overcome in order to answer this question effectively, and many of these relationships remain largely unexplored. This concept of different classes of substrates that are destined for degradation by differing pathways is consistent with one recent report in which disease-associated proteins were found to partition into two distinct intracellular compartments, with soluble ubiquitinated proteins accumulating in a proteasome-rich juxtanuclear region, and insoluble aggregated proteins accumulating in perivacuolar inclusions that colocalize with Atg8 [ 100 ]. It would be interesting to determine whether these proteins could be distinguished by differing UBL modifications. The mechanism by which upregulation of autophagy mitigates neurotoxicity associated with UPS impairment is also unresolved. It is unlikely that autophagy is able to compensate for the role of the UPS in fine-tuning the steady-state levels of short-lived regulatory proteins. More likely, augmentation of autophagy is neuroprotective by 1) maintaining the overall rate of catabolism, “freeing” amino acids that would otherwise lie useless in aggregated, nonfunctioning proteins, 2) eliminating specific protein substrates that would otherwise accumulate, aggregate and acquire toxic properties, or 3) a combination of these. Further illumination of the relationship between the UPS, autophagy and the relationship to human disease is vitally important and could lead to harnessing intrinsic catabolic pathways for therapeutic benefit.  Figures Figure 1 The UPS and the autophagy-lysosomal systems are the two main protein degradation systems in the cell. Protein that are tagged with polyubiquitin chains are generally considered to be substrates for the UPS, which feeds unfolded proteins through the barrel of the 26S proteasome and generates small digested peptides. Recent evidence suggests that some ubiquitinated substrates can also be degraded via the autophagy-lysosomal system. This system is comprised of (1) chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA), in which soluble substrates associated with a specific chaperone complex are translocated into the lysosome through the LAMP-2A lysosomal receptor, (2) microautophagy, in which small volumes of cytosol are directly engulfed by lysosomes, and (3) macroautophagy, in which cytosolic components are engulfed and delivered to the lysosome in bulk. Macroautophagy involves a series of maturation steps: first, a portion of cytoplasm is surrounded by an expanding elongation membrane or phagophore. The phagophore seals to form an autophagosome, which in mammals fuses with late endosomes and multivesicular bodies to form an amphisome. The amphisome then fuses with a lysosome to form an autolysosome, in which cytosolic cargo is degraded by lysosomal hydrolases. LC3-II is a protein that associates with the inner and outer surfaces of autophagic membranes and provides a histological marker of autophagic vacuoles. Figure 2 Assembly and elongation of autophagic membranes are accomplished via sequential action of UPS-like E1-E2-E3 cascades. In each case, an E1 enzyme activates a ubiquitin-like protein (UBL) such as ubiquitin, Atg12, or Atg8. The UBL is then transferred to an E2 conjugating enzyme, followed by an association with an E3 ligase that promotes association of the UBL and its target. (a) In the UPS, ubiquitination of substrates is accomplished by an E1-activating enzyme, E2-conjugating enzyme, and an E3-ligase. (b) In the first arm of the Atg conjugation pathway, Atg12 associates with the E1-like Atg7, is transferred to the E2-like Atg10, and is subsequently conjugated to Atg5. No E3-like protein has been identified in this pathway. (c) In the second arm of the Atg conjugation pathway, Atg8 associates with the E1-like Atg7, is transferred to the E2-like Atg3, and is conjugated to PE via the E3-like action of the Atg12-Atg5 complex. Adapted from [ 101 ] with permission. Figure 3 Proteasome impairment leads to upregulation of autophagic activity. (a) HeLa cells that stably express the UPS reporter UbG76V-GFP were treated with the irreversible proteasome inhibitor epoximicin for 72 hours and monitored for cell death. Increasing levels of the GFP substrate indicate impaired UPS function. Note the 24 hours time point used in (b)–(g) is within the window during which proteasome function is impaired, but the cells remain viable. (b–c) Images of LC3 staining (red) and DAPI (blue) show accumulation of LC3 puncta in epoximicin-treated cells. (d–e) Transmission electron microscopy images of cells reveal autophagic structures and prominent vacuolization in epoximicin-treated cells. (f–g) Increased magnification of structures in (e) reveal multi-membraned structures consistent with autophagic activity. Figure 4 A Drosophila model of proteasome impairment is modified by manipulation of autophagic activity. (a–b) The temperature-sensitive DTS7 mutant shows a normal eye phenotype at the permissive temperature of 22°C and a significant degenerative phenotype at the restrictive temperature of 28°C. (c) RNAi knockdown of the autophagy gene atg12 results in an enhancement of the DTS7 degenerative phenotype, suggesting that the autophagic activity that is induced in response to proteasome impairment is compensatory. (d) Treatment of DTS7 flies with rapamycin suppresses the degenerative phenotype, demonstrating that induction of autophagy can compensate for impaired proteasome function. Adapted from [ 50 ]. 