CHORIONIC GONADOTROPIN, ALPHA-FETOPROTEIN IN PREGNANCY AND MATERNAL RISK OF BREAST CANCER: A NESTED CASE-CONTROL STUDY Background: Pregnancy hormones are believed to be involved in the protection against breast cancer conferred by pregnancy. We explored the association of maternal breast cancer with chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) and alpha fetoprotein (AFP). Methods: In 2001, a case-control study was nested within the Northern Sweden Maternity Cohort, an ongoing study collecting blood samples from first-trimester pregnant women since 1975. Cases (210) and controls (357) were matched for age, parity and date of blood donation. hCG and AFP were measured by immunoassays. Findings: No overall significant association of breast cancer with either hCG or AFP was observed. However, women with hCG in the top tertile tended to be at lower risk of breast cancer than women with hCG in the lowest tertile in the whole study population and in subgroups of age at sampling, parity and age at cancer diagnosis. A borderline significant decrease in risk with high hCG was observed in women who developed breast cancer after the median lag-time to cancer diagnosis, [0.53 (0.27, 1.03), p = 0.06]. Conclusions: Although very preliminary, our findings are consistent with a possible long-term protective association of breast cancer risk with elevated circulating hCG in the early stages of pregnancy.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Study subjects were part of the Northern Sweden Maternity Cohort based at the University Hospital in Umeå (Umeå, Sweden), as described previously ( 14 ). The cohort was established in November 1975 with the purpose of preserving for research use serum samples from pregnant women tested for systemic infections. Virtually all pregnant women from the four northernmost counties of Sweden (total population ?800,000) attend one of the maternity health care clinics in the region and donate a blood sample mostly during the final weeks of the first trimester of pregnancy, or the early weeks of the second (weeks 6-18). These samples are periodically shipped frozen to a central repository at Umeå University Hospital, where they are analyzed and the leftovers stored at ?20°C. As of 2001, the biorepository included ?110,000 serum specimens from >83,000 women. A case-control study was nested within the Maternity cohort. Cohort members whose pregnancy resulted in the delivery of one live or stillborn infant were eligible. Miscarriages, induced abortions, and twin pregnancies were reasons for exclusion. Women whose blood had been drawn after the 20th week of gestation, had used hormonal medications to become pregnant or during pregnancy, or had a preceding cancer diagnosis (except non-melanoma skin cancers) were also excluded. If a cohort member had donated blood samples during several pregnancies, she was included in the study with the first donated sample. Potential cases were women diagnosed for the first time with invasive breast cancer after their entry into the cohort. Cases were identified through record linkages with the nationwide Swedish Cancer Registry using the unique 10-digit personal identity number assigned to every person born in, or legally resident of, Sweden. The registration of newly detected cancers in Sweden is based on mandatory reports from all physicians serving out-and in-patients departments in all public and private hospitals. Reporting is also mandatory for all pathologists involved with surgical biopsies, cytological specimens and autopsies, including private laboratories. The completeness of cancer registration in Sweden is considered to be close to 100 percent. Linkages done in 2000 and 2001 led to the identification of 426 potential case subjects. Potential controls were selected among cohort members alive and free of any cancer at the time of diagnosis of the index case and matching the case (1:2 ratio) on parity at the time of blood sampling (primiparous, nonprimiparous), age at sampling (±2.5 years), and date of blood sampling (±3 months). Because information on subjects in the cohort is limited to the personal identity number, name, consecutive serial number of sampling, and place of sampling, the identification of appropriately matched controls required a multi-step approach. First, lists of up to eight potential controls were drawn for each case based on approximate dates of blood draw and birth (part of the personal identity number). Potential cases and controls were subsequently contacted individually by letter (up to two) and, if necessary, by phone, to describe the project and elicit permission to participate in the study and consent to the release of their pregnancy medical records. Women willing to participate were asked to return the signed informed consent along with a brief reproductive history questionnaire to facilitate matching for parity before requesting medical records. For those consenting and for dead cohort members a full copy of the maternity and delivery records was requested from the 10 hospitals in the region. Records were first abstracted on matching information (parity and date of blood drawing) and eligibility (gestational age at blood draw). Among those eligible who met the matching criteria for a given case, the remainder of the index pregnancy information was abstracted for two controls, chosen randomly. Of the potential study subjects initially identified (426 cases and 3,408 controls), 1,279 controls were never contacted because of lack of funding. Among the subjects contacted, 2,378 (93 percent, 415 cases) returned the baseline information and 177 (7 percent, 11 cases) were non-respondents. Among the respondents, 547 (58 cases) did not meet the eligibility criteria for various reasons (blood draw after 20 week of gestation, twin pregnancy, abortion/miscarriage, not pregnant, missing/deteriorated blood sample (n=57, 18 cases)). Inadequate matching (596 controls) and matched sets lacking either the case or both controls further reduced the number of subjects available for study to 351 cases and 850 controls. Insufficient funding at the end of the study period forced us to cease retrieval of information and selection of study subjects and exclude from laboratory analyses an unselected subset of otherwise eligible study subjects (139 cases and 481 controls in total), very similar in all known characteristics to those included. Excluded from the present analyses were also 2 cases and 12 controls with no information about exact gestational day at blood donation, leaving a total of 210 cases and 357 controls for the study. Technicians, unaware of the case-control status of the specimens, performed the hormonal assays in the laboratory of Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital of Umeå. Individually matched case and control serum samples were always included in the same batch. All samples were measured in duplicate. If measurements between duplicates deviated by >5 percent, then all samples in a batch were measured anew. Bio-Rad control samples (Lyphochek, Bio-Rad, Irvine, CA) at two levels of the analyte were included in duplicate in each batch as quality controls. hCG was quantified with the Coat-a-Count hCG IRMA assay (Diagnostic Products Corporation, Los Angeles, CA). The antibody used is highly specific for intact hCG, with low cross-reactivity to other glycoprotein hormones present in patient samples and low cross-reactivity to alpha and beta hCG subunits. The intra- and inter-batch coefficients of variation based on the undiluted 170 mIU/mL Bio-Rad hCG control were 2.8 and 3.8 percent, respectively. AFP was quantified by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (Genentech, Inc., San Francisco, CA). The intra- and inter-assay coefficients of variation based on the 17 ?g/L Bio-Rad AFP control were 3.2 and 6.7 percent respectively. Probable outliers with hormone concentrations exceeding quartile 1 minus 3 times the interquartile range or quartile 3 plus 3 times the interquartile range were set to missing. In samples drawn in 1988 and thereafter there was an evident reduction in measured hCG to levels incompatible with pregnancy. No such effect on AFP concentrations was observed. Therefore, all subjects whose baseline blood sample had been drawn after 01/01/1988 were excluded from analyses on hCG (34 cases, 56 controls). Further exclusions involved a few other subjects with implausibly low hCG (<5,000 mIU/mL), or matched to one such case (3 cases, 7 controls). Seven AFP measurements, exceeding quartile 1 or 3 ± 3 times the interquartile range were set to missing. A total of 173 cases and 294 controls with valid hCG measurement and 204 cases and 349 controls with valid AFP measurement from sets with a case and at least one control were included in the statistical analyses. Both hCG and AFP concentrations vary throughout pregnancy, thus it was essential to take into consideration gestational day at blood donation. Exact matching for gestational day would have imposed unwarranted constrains for control selection and would have not been feasible even in a much larger cohort with gestational age data available in electronic format. Instead, to account for the hormonal variation with gestational age we applied the statistical approach described by Richardson et al. (1998) ( 8 ). In brief, mean curves for hCG and AFP variation during pregnancy were estimated on the bases of all available hormonal data using local linear regression ( 15 ), a non-parametric smoothing technique that employs weighted regression and uses varying subsets of the data to estimate the curve at each point. Prior to analysis, original hormone levels were natural log-transformed to limit heteroscedasticity. Concentrations for each woman were characterized as the difference (residual) between her assay value and the estimated mean hormone value determined for the day of gestation the blood sample was donated. In the remaining the text, hormone concentrations will refer to residuals. Paired t-test was used to compare mean hormone concentrations (residuals) of cases and controls (case value versus mean of the matched controls). The conditional logistic regression model, which is appropriate for matched data, was used to estimate odds ratios (OR) and corresponding 95 percent confidence intervals (95% CI) associated with increasing hormone concentrations. Subjects were classified in tertiles using the frequency distribution of the controls. Tests for trend were computed by treating the hormone variables as ordered categorical variables. Likelihood ratio tests were used to assess statistical significance. Hormone-disease associations were explored within strata of age at blood donation, parity (primiparous versus non-primiparous), age at cancer diagnosis (below and above median) and by time between blood donation and cancer diagnosis (below and above the median and according to periods of interest suggested by studies on transient increase in breast cancer risk following a pregnancy ( 3 ) ? 10 years, > 10 years). Formal tests of heterogeneity between the ORs in different subgroups were based on chi-square statistics, calculated as the deviations of logistic beta-coefficients observed in each of the subgroups, relative to the overall beta-coefficient ( 16 ). None of the tested covariates (baby's height, weight or gender, age at first birth, parity by index date (cancer diagnosis), maternal smoking at blood donation and placental weight) influenced the point estimates substantially (> 10 percent). Smoking was retained as adjusting variable in all hCG models as smoking was related to both breast cancer and hCG concentrations. The study, including its consent form and access to human subjects, was approved annually by the Ethics Committees of the University of Umeå and New York University School of Medicine.  RESULTS Selected baseline, pregnancy and reproductive characteristics of the study population are summarized in table 1 . In brief, mean age at blood donation was 30.9 years for the cases (range, 19 to 44) and 31.0 (range, 18 to 44) for the controls. The mean age at breast cancer diagnosis was 43.3 years, ranging from 25 to 59. Mean lag-time between blood drawing and date of diagnosis was 12.3 years, ranging from 1 to 23 years. Forty nine percent of study subjects were primiparous, with mean age of 29 years. The mean age of multiparous women was 34 years. Age at first birth, parity by date of diagnosis (index date for the controls), maternal weight and height at enrolment, babys' weight, length, placental weight and proportion of boys were similar between cases and controls. Case women reported smoking at blood draw more often (32 percent) than control women (25 percent), OR for breast cancer in smokers vs non-smokers was 1.47 (1.02 – 2.13), p < 0.04. For the majority of study subjects (72 percent) blood samples were drawn between the 8th and the 14th gestational week; 13 percent were drawn before the 8th and 15 percent were drawn after 14th gestational week. Mean day of gestation was 76.1 for cases and 77.8 for controls. hCG concentrations increased markedly during the first part of the first trimester, peaked about gestation week 10 and then started to decline ( figure 1 ). Among the cases and the controls combined, median hCG concentrations (in mIU/mL) were 72,274 before the 70th gestational day, 65,645 between the 70th and 84th day and 34,396 after day 84. This pattern is in agreement with clinical data ( 17 , 18 ). As expected ( 19 , 20 ), AFP concentrations increased progressively with increasing gestational age ( figure 2 ). Among the cases and the controls combined, median AFP concentrations (in ?g/L) were 2.6 before the 70th gestational day, 5.5 between the 70th and 84th day, and 16.0 after day 84. As observed in other studies, both cases and controls who donated blood during their first full-term pregnancy had higher hCG concentrations than those who already had at least one child (0.06 vs. ?0.04, p < 0.05), while levels of AFP were similar ( 21 - 23 ). hCG residuals were lower in smokers than in non-smokers (?0.19 vs. 0.08, p < 0.0001), but smoking during pregnancy did not affect AFP concentrations. hCG and AFP were not correlated between them, nor with maternal age, weight, height, placental weight or baby's height and weight (all correlations for hCG and AFP weaker than ± 0.13 and ± 0.08, respectively). Compared to control subjects, cases had lower mean hCG (p < 0.04), but similar AFP concentrations ( table 1 ). Table 2 summarizes the results of conditional logistic regression analyses. For hCG, the overall and most subgroup analyses (by age at blood donation, parity, age at cancer diagnosis) showed a non-significant decrease in breast cancer risk for subjects with hCG in the top tertile when compared to women with hCG in the first tertile. Risk estimates varied by lag-time between blood donation and cancer diagnosis. High hCG conferred borderline statistically significant protection against breast cancer in women diagnosed after the median lag-time to cancer diagnosis of 14 years. The test for homogeneity of ORs for continuous scale of hCG by median lag-time was not significant (p = 0.10). Analyses limited to cancers diagnosed more than 10 years after blood donation yielded similar results (data not shown). Adjustment for any potential confounders had only minimal effect on point estimates, however, as smoking was related to both breast cancer and hCG levels, it was retained in all hCG models. Limiting analyses to subject who donated a blood from gestational day 49 to 98 (7-14 gestational week) or to non-smokers yielded very similar risk estimates for the top tertiles: OR 0.58 (0.33-1.01), p < 0.06 and 0.73 (0.37-1.44), p < 0.33, respectively. AFP was not related to risk of maternal breast cancer overall ( table 2 ) or in any of the sub-group analyses (data not shown). Excluding subjects who donated blood after 01/01/1988 also yielded similar risk estimates ( table 2 ).  RESULTS Selected baseline, pregnancy and reproductive characteristics of the study population are summarized in table 1 . In brief, mean age at blood donation was 30.9 years for the cases (range, 19 to 44) and 31.0 (range, 18 to 44) for the controls. The mean age at breast cancer diagnosis was 43.3 years, ranging from 25 to 59. Mean lag-time between blood drawing and date of diagnosis was 12.3 years, ranging from 1 to 23 years. Forty nine percent of study subjects were primiparous, with mean age of 29 years. The mean age of multiparous women was 34 years. Age at first birth, parity by date of diagnosis (index date for the controls), maternal weight and height at enrolment, babys' weight, length, placental weight and proportion of boys were similar between cases and controls. Case women reported smoking at blood draw more often (32 percent) than control women (25 percent), OR for breast cancer in smokers vs non-smokers was 1.47 (1.02 – 2.13), p < 0.04. For the majority of study subjects (72 percent) blood samples were drawn between the 8th and the 14th gestational week; 13 percent were drawn before the 8th and 15 percent were drawn after 14th gestational week. Mean day of gestation was 76.1 for cases and 77.8 for controls. hCG concentrations increased markedly during the first part of the first trimester, peaked about gestation week 10 and then started to decline ( figure 1 ). Among the cases and the controls combined, median hCG concentrations (in mIU/mL) were 72,274 before the 70th gestational day, 65,645 between the 70th and 84th day and 34,396 after day 84. This pattern is in agreement with clinical data ( 17 , 18 ). As expected ( 19 , 20 ), AFP concentrations increased progressively with increasing gestational age ( figure 2 ). Among the cases and the controls combined, median AFP concentrations (in ?g/L) were 2.6 before the 70th gestational day, 5.5 between the 70th and 84th day, and 16.0 after day 84. As observed in other studies, both cases and controls who donated blood during their first full-term pregnancy had higher hCG concentrations than those who already had at least one child (0.06 vs. ?0.04, p < 0.05), while levels of AFP were similar ( 21 - 23 ). hCG residuals were lower in smokers than in non-smokers (?0.19 vs. 0.08, p < 0.0001), but smoking during pregnancy did not affect AFP concentrations. hCG and AFP were not correlated between them, nor with maternal age, weight, height, placental weight or baby's height and weight (all correlations for hCG and AFP weaker than ± 0.13 and ± 0.08, respectively). Compared to control subjects, cases had lower mean hCG (p < 0.04), but similar AFP concentrations ( table 1 ). Table 2 summarizes the results of conditional logistic regression analyses. For hCG, the overall and most subgroup analyses (by age at blood donation, parity, age at cancer diagnosis) showed a non-significant decrease in breast cancer risk for subjects with hCG in the top tertile when compared to women with hCG in the first tertile. Risk estimates varied by lag-time between blood donation and cancer diagnosis. High hCG conferred borderline statistically significant protection against breast cancer in women diagnosed after the median lag-time to cancer diagnosis of 14 years. The test for homogeneity of ORs for continuous scale of hCG by median lag-time was not significant (p = 0.10). Analyses limited to cancers diagnosed more than 10 years after blood donation yielded similar results (data not shown). Adjustment for any potential confounders had only minimal effect on point estimates, however, as smoking was related to both breast cancer and hCG levels, it was retained in all hCG models. Limiting analyses to subject who donated a blood from gestational day 49 to 98 (7-14 gestational week) or to non-smokers yielded very similar risk estimates for the top tertiles: OR 0.58 (0.33-1.01), p < 0.06 and 0.73 (0.37-1.44), p < 0.33, respectively. AFP was not related to risk of maternal breast cancer overall ( table 2 ) or in any of the sub-group analyses (data not shown). Excluding subjects who donated blood after 01/01/1988 also yielded similar risk estimates ( table 2 ).  DISCUSSION In this study no significant association between breast cancer and hCG or AFP concentrations measured during the first half of pregnancy was observed. However, in the total study population and in subgroups based on age at blood donation, parity, and median age at cancer diagnosis, women with hCG in the top tertiles consistently had lower risk of breast cancer in comparison with women with hCG in the lowest tertile. Borderline significant protection was observed only among women with lag-time between blood donation and cancer diagnosis exceeding the median. The latter observation fits epidemiological data showing a dual effect of pregnancy on risk of breast cancer – a transient increase in risk lasting 5 to 10 years followed by life-long protection ( 3 ). The study was inspired by the hypothesis of Russo and Russo, who proposed that hormonally-induced differentiation of the breast during pregnancy, characterized by profound, albeit transient morphological changes, limits the population of cancer-susceptible cells present in immature gland and underlies the protective effect of child-bearing ( 24 ). The same authors recently showed that a full-term pregnancy induces in breast epithelial cells a permanent genomic signature, characterized by altered expression of genes related to basic processes such as immune surveillance, DNA-repair, cell proliferation, differentiation and metabolism (reviewed in detail in( 25 )). Experimental work suggests that hCG may play an important role in this differentiation process, as in rodents, pregnancy and short treatment with recombinant hCG induce a very similar genomic signature ( 25 ). Furthermore treatment with hCG either before or after the administration of the chemical carcinogen resulted in a significant decrease in the incidence of mammary carcinomas in comparison with controls, similar to that conferred by pregnancy ( 26 , 27 ). Alternatively, it has been proposed that the protection related to hCG administration in experimental models could indirectly reflect the stimulus of hCG on estrogen and progesterone synthesis ( 28 ). AFP has been shown to bind to estradiol and to suppress estrogen-dependent growth of breast cancer cells ( 11 , 12 ). In contrast to our null findings, so far, two studies have indicted that high AFP during pregnancy is associated with reduced risk of breast cancer ( 8 , 9 ). However, in these studies, AFP was measured later in the course of pregnancy, during the 2nd or 3rd trimester, when its concentrations in maternal circulation increase substantially and may be more relevant as determinants of breast cancer risk than the relatively low levels during early pregnancy. The major limitations of our study is the inability to complete the recruitment of study subjects as initially intended and the unexpected drop in hCG concentrations in samples collected after 1988. Exclusion of potentially eligible subjects because of insufficient funding was random and not related to any particular characteristics of these women, thus it is unlikely that the selection bias was introduced. However, we have no explanation for the observed drop in hCG in samples collected after 1988 as there were no differences in sample handling, storage and analyses of which we are aware. Furthermore, no similar effect of storage time on hCG concentrations has been observed in another Scandinavian cohort with an identical design ( 29 ). The combined effect of these problems was to greatly reduce study size and ability to detect hormone-breast cancer associations. The study had 80% power to detect only an OR of 0.52 ( 30 ). It is likely that several other factors have decreased our ability to detect hormone-disease association. Apart from the unexpected drop in hCG levels in samples donated after 1988, the long-term storage of the NSMC serum samples at ?20°C could have caused further analyte deterioration. However, no consistent effect of storage time was evident on concentrations of either pre-1988 hCG or AFP, or on IGF-I and IGF-II measured in the same samples ( 14 ). Hormonal variations with gestational age followed closely what is reported in the literature ( 17 - 20 ), and the expected effect of parity and smoking on hCG and AFP concentrations were observed ( 21 - 23 , 31 ). Other studies (including one of the studies on AFP in pregnancy and maternal breast cancer) have shown that samples stored for many years at ?20°C can be used in epidemiological research on hormones and cancer and the expected hormone – cancer risk associations were observed ( 8 , 13 , 29 , 32 ). It is unknown how well a single hormone measurement during early pregnancy is likely to represent the exposure throughout gestation as such data are difficult to collect. In successive pregnancies, correlation between total estradiol and free estradiol measured between 8th and 17th week of both pregnancies were found to be as high as 0.78 and 0.73, respectively ( 33 ). Correlation hCG and AFP in successive pregnancies (measured during first/second trimester) has been lower – about 0.40 for both hormones ( 34 ). Although it is plausible to assume that the correlation between hormone measurements taken within a given pregnancy would be higher than that between hormone levels in successive pregnancies, a single measurement may be still not sufficient to characterize the overall hormonal exposure during pregnancy. On the positive side, the samples of the NSMC were donated about the peak of hCG concentrations during pregnancy - between 7 and 10th gestational weeks, which is likely to be the most relevant period of exposure to this hormone. In conclusion, although the results of the current study must be regarded as suggestive and should be interpreted with caution, they are consistent with a protective effect of elevated hCG during pregnancy on long-term risk of breast cancer.  DISCUSSION In this study no significant association between breast cancer and hCG or AFP concentrations measured during the first half of pregnancy was observed. However, in the total study population and in subgroups based on age at blood donation, parity, and median age at cancer diagnosis, women with hCG in the top tertiles consistently had lower risk of breast cancer in comparison with women with hCG in the lowest tertile. Borderline significant protection was observed only among women with lag-time between blood donation and cancer diagnosis exceeding the median. The latter observation fits epidemiological data showing a dual effect of pregnancy on risk of breast cancer – a transient increase in risk lasting 5 to 10 years followed by life-long protection ( 3 ). The study was inspired by the hypothesis of Russo and Russo, who proposed that hormonally-induced differentiation of the breast during pregnancy, characterized by profound, albeit transient morphological changes, limits the population of cancer-susceptible cells present in immature gland and underlies the protective effect of child-bearing ( 24 ). The same authors recently showed that a full-term pregnancy induces in breast epithelial cells a permanent genomic signature, characterized by altered expression of genes related to basic processes such as immune surveillance, DNA-repair, cell proliferation, differentiation and metabolism (reviewed in detail in( 25 )). Experimental work suggests that hCG may play an important role in this differentiation process, as in rodents, pregnancy and short treatment with recombinant hCG induce a very similar genomic signature ( 25 ). Furthermore treatment with hCG either before or after the administration of the chemical carcinogen resulted in a significant decrease in the incidence of mammary carcinomas in comparison with controls, similar to that conferred by pregnancy ( 26 , 27 ). Alternatively, it has been proposed that the protection related to hCG administration in experimental models could indirectly reflect the stimulus of hCG on estrogen and progesterone synthesis ( 28 ). AFP has been shown to bind to estradiol and to suppress estrogen-dependent growth of breast cancer cells ( 11 , 12 ). In contrast to our null findings, so far, two studies have indicted that high AFP during pregnancy is associated with reduced risk of breast cancer ( 8 , 9 ). However, in these studies, AFP was measured later in the course of pregnancy, during the 2nd or 3rd trimester, when its concentrations in maternal circulation increase substantially and may be more relevant as determinants of breast cancer risk than the relatively low levels during early pregnancy. The major limitations of our study is the inability to complete the recruitment of study subjects as initially intended and the unexpected drop in hCG concentrations in samples collected after 1988. Exclusion of potentially eligible subjects because of insufficient funding was random and not related to any particular characteristics of these women, thus it is unlikely that the selection bias was introduced. However, we have no explanation for the observed drop in hCG in samples collected after 1988 as there were no differences in sample handling, storage and analyses of which we are aware. Furthermore, no similar effect of storage time on hCG concentrations has been observed in another Scandinavian cohort with an identical design ( 29 ). The combined effect of these problems was to greatly reduce study size and ability to detect hormone-breast cancer associations. The study had 80% power to detect only an OR of 0.52 ( 30 ). It is likely that several other factors have decreased our ability to detect hormone-disease association. Apart from the unexpected drop in hCG levels in samples donated after 1988, the long-term storage of the NSMC serum samples at ?20°C could have caused further analyte deterioration. However, no consistent effect of storage time was evident on concentrations of either pre-1988 hCG or AFP, or on IGF-I and IGF-II measured in the same samples ( 14 ). Hormonal variations with gestational age followed closely what is reported in the literature ( 17 - 20 ), and the expected effect of parity and smoking on hCG and AFP concentrations were observed ( 21 - 23 , 31 ). Other studies (including one of the studies on AFP in pregnancy and maternal breast cancer) have shown that samples stored for many years at ?20°C can be used in epidemiological research on hormones and cancer and the expected hormone – cancer risk associations were observed ( 8 , 13 , 29 , 32 ). It is unknown how well a single hormone measurement during early pregnancy is likely to represent the exposure throughout gestation as such data are difficult to collect. In successive pregnancies, correlation between total estradiol and free estradiol measured between 8th and 17th week of both pregnancies were found to be as high as 0.78 and 0.73, respectively ( 33 ). Correlation hCG and AFP in successive pregnancies (measured during first/second trimester) has been lower – about 0.40 for both hormones ( 34 ). Although it is plausible to assume that the correlation between hormone measurements taken within a given pregnancy would be higher than that between hormone levels in successive pregnancies, a single measurement may be still not sufficient to characterize the overall hormonal exposure during pregnancy. On the positive side, the samples of the NSMC were donated about the peak of hCG concentrations during pregnancy - between 7 and 10th gestational weeks, which is likely to be the most relevant period of exposure to this hormone. In conclusion, although the results of the current study must be regarded as suggestive and should be interpreted with caution, they are consistent with a protective effect of elevated hCG during pregnancy on long-term risk of breast cancer. 