PI3K/Akt-Dependent Transcriptional Regulation and Activation of BMP-2-Smad Signaling by NF-?B in Metastatic Prostate Cancer Cells BACKGROUND Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) exert osteoinductive effects in prostate cancer (PC) via uncharacterized mechanisms. In this study, we investigated whether the nuclear transcription factor NF-?B, implicated in PC metastasis, is involved in transcriptional regulation and activation of BMP-2 or BMP-4/Smad signaling in PC cells. METHODS NF-?B inhibition was achieved by I?B? super-repressor adenoviral vector and activation was monitored by EMSA and reporter assays. BMP expression and activation was measured by PCR and reporter assays. Promoter binding assay was performed by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. Smad1/5/8 phosphorylation was measured by Western blot analysis. RESULTS PCR and chimeric BMP-2 and BMP-4 luciferase assays demonstrate that NF-?B confers robust and selective activation of BMP-2 in p65 overexpressing or rhTNF-?-stimulated PC cells. Inhibition of NF-?B significantly reduced transcript levels and autocrine production of BMP-2 by rhTNF-? stimulated C4-2B cells and to a lesser extent by the parental LNCaP cells. Selective inhibition of PI3K/Akt suppressed the NF-?B-induced BMP-2 promoter activity. Furthermore, suppression of NF-?B activation decreased the transcript levels and BMP-2-induced phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8, critical downstream targets of BMP-2 signaling in PC cells. Notably, the activation of BMPRII by BMP-2 is required for modulation of Smad activation by NF-?B in PC cells. Based on ChIP analysis, the transcriptional regulation of BMP-2 gene by NF-?B may be partially attributed to binding to b site on the BMP-2 promoter. CONCLUSIONS The data suggest that PI3K/Akt-NF-?B axis may promote PC bone metastasis in part by regulating transcription and activation of the BMP-2-Smad signaling cascade in osteotropic PC cells.  INTRODUCTION Prostate cancer (PC) is the most common form of cancer and is the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths in American males [ 1 ]. Bone is the most common site of PC metastasis, resulting in painful bone disease and significant complications. The predilection of PC to establish metastasis in bone as opposed to other organs suggests that the bone microenvironment offers a favorable site for PC growth. The characteristic feature of bone metastasis of PC is the development of an osteoblastic lesion, that is, bone formation, primarily because the major interacting host cells are osteoblasts [ 2 ]. However, the mechanisms of PC metastasis to bone are poorly understood. Therefore, understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying development of osseous lesions by metastatic PC cells is of paramount significance for devising preventive and/or therapeutic strategies. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) were originally identified by their unique ability to induce bone formation in vivo [ 3 – 5 ]. BMPs are members of the TGF-? superfamily that form active hetero- or homo-dimers with a molecular mass in the 20–38 kDa range [ 6 ]. BMPs initiate the signaling cascade through ligand binding and the activation of a complex of heteromeric serine/threonine transmembrane receptor kinases, type I and type II [ 6 ]. The activated BMP type I receptor phosphorylates Smad-1 and Smad-5, resulting in their dissociation from the receptor complex. The phosphorylated Smad1 and Smad5 then form hetero-oligomeric complexes with Smad4 and translocate into the nucleus to activate the transcription of target genes [ 7 – 9 ]. The BMP/Smad signaling pathway is also negatively regulated by a structurally and functionally divergent Smad protein of the subfamily of inhibitory Smads: Smad-6 and Smad-7 [ 7 – 9 ]. The role of BMPs in development and endochondral bone formation has been well characterized, but their regulation and role in PC progression remains poorly characterized. These soluble factors are implicated in homing of PC cells to the bone that ultimately leads to promotion and formation of osteoblastic lesions [ 10 ]. BMP-2 has been implicated in the stimulation of prostate cancer cell migration and invasion, as well as in the formation of osteoblastic lesions in vivo [ 11 ]. Although it has been reported that PC cells produce BMPs [ 12 ], the mechanisms involved in their activation and/or regulation which contribute specifically to bone metastasis are not fully elucidated. Other factors involved in PC metastasis are family members of the inducible nuclear transcription factors ?B (NF-?B), including Rel A (p65), Rel-B, C-Rel, p50/p105, and p52/p100 proteins. NF-?B has been shown to be activated by TNF-? and interleuin-6 (IL-6) in many cell systems, including cancer. Interestingly, the serum levels of TNF-? and IL-6 were found to be significantly elevated in, and correlated with metastatic PC compared with localized disease [ 13 ]. Members of NF-?B bind to their cognate response elements, as homo- or heterodimers, to modulate the expression of an array of genes implicated in diverse cellular processes. In quiescent cells, NF-?B proteins are sequestered in the cytoplasm by I?B?, which is phosphorylated, ubiquitinated, and subsequently degraded by the 26S proteasome. This results in the nuclear translocation of NF-?B and the binding of these proteins to NF-?B-responsive elements, followed byNF-?B-dependent transcriptional activation [ 14 – 18 ]. NF-?B is constitutively activated in a series of human PC cell lines and prostate carcinoma xenografts [ 19 ]. To this ecnd, two androgen-insensitive PC cell lines (PC-3 and DU-145) have higher constitutive NF-?B activation than the androgen-responsive cell line (LNCaP), suggesting that this heterodimeric family of transcription factors is a potentially important molecular target to prevent and/or cure PC metastasis [ 19 , 20 ]. Because it is essential for osteoclast activity, NF-?B has been shown to be an important transcription factor in bone turnover [ 21 ]. Targets of NF-?B have been shown to be important contributors to the aggressiveness of PC. We have recently reported a role for NF-?B in the SDF1? (CXCL12)-CXCR4 axis in enhancing prostate tumor cells’ endothelial cell adhesion and transendothelial migration [ 22 ]. Moreover, it has been reported that NF-?B promotes cell migration, proliferation, anti-apoptosis, angiogenesis, and metastasis by regulating the expression of genes, such as SDF-1?, VEGF, IL-8, MMP, and c-myc [ 23 ]. Several lines of evidence demonstrated NF-?B as an important target to prevent PC bone metastasis, which provides a rationale for further study of this transcription factor in metastatic disease [ 24 , 25 ]. These observations have prompted us to examine whether this pleiotropic transcription factor can mediate its metastasis-promoting effect via activation of transcription and autocrine production of the BMP-2/BMP-4-Smad signaling pathway in bone metastatic PC cells.  METHODS NF-?B inhibition was achieved by I?B? super-repressor adenoviral vector and activation was monitored by EMSA and reporter assays. BMP expression and activation was measured by PCR and reporter assays. Promoter binding assay was performed by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. Smad1/5/8 phosphorylation was measured by Western blot analysis.  RESULTS PCR and chimeric BMP-2 and BMP-4 luciferase assays demonstrate that NF-?B confers robust and selective activation of BMP-2 in p65 overexpressing or rhTNF-?-stimulated PC cells. Inhibition of NF-?B significantly reduced transcript levels and autocrine production of BMP-2 by rhTNF-? stimulated C4-2B cells and to a lesser extent by the parental LNCaP cells. Selective inhibition of PI3K/Akt suppressed the NF-?B-induced BMP-2 promoter activity. Furthermore, suppression of NF-?B activation decreased the transcript levels and BMP-2-induced phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8, critical downstream targets of BMP-2 signaling in PC cells. Notably, the activation of BMPRII by BMP-2 is required for modulation of Smad activation by NF-?B in PC cells. Based on ChIP analysis, the transcriptional regulation of BMP-2 gene by NF-?B may be partially attributed to binding to b site on the BMP-2 promoter.  CONCLUSIONS The data suggest that PI3K/Akt-NF-?B axis may promote PC bone metastasis in part by regulating transcription and activation of the BMP-2-Smad signaling cascade in osteotropic PC cells.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Plasmids and Reagents The NF-?B expression plasmids, pcDNA-p65, pcDNA-p50, pcDNA-p105 and NF-?B-luciferase reporter plasmid, were purchased from Stratagene (La Jolla, CA). The NF-?B-luc contains an enhancer with 5?B sites upstream of the luciferase gene. The BMP-2-luciferase construct, containing 2.7 kb BMP-2 promoter (?2712/+165), was generously provided by Dr. Ming Zhao, University of Texas Health Sciences Center at San Antonio [ 26 ]; the BMP-4-luciferase construct was donated by Dr. Ronald Koenig, University of Michigan. The BMP-4 promoter used in these studies includes nucleotides 2686–4539 (GenBank Accession # L47480), corresponding to bp ?1833 to +21 [ 27 ]. The pI?B?M expression vector was donated by Dr. Paul Chiao, MD Anderson Cancer Center and the dominant negative BMPRII receptor (pEGFP-dnBMPRII) expression plasmid was generously donated by Dr. Claude Labrie, University of Quebec. The null control (Adv-Null) and the recombinant dominant negative I?B?-S32A (Adv-dnI?B?) adenoviral vectors were purchased from Cell Biolabs, Inc. (San Diego, CA). The phosphorylation-defective I?B-S32A construct acts by sequestering the cytoplasmic NF-?B pool in a manner that is insensitive to extracellular stimuli. The DN-Akt expression plasmid was kindly provided by Dr. Bing-Hua Jiang (West Virginia University). The transfection reagent Lipofectamine 2000 was obtained from Invitrogen. The recombinant human BMP-2 and BMP-4 proteins and antibodies were purchased from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN); anti-phospho(Ser473)-Akt antibody was purchased from Cell Signaling, (Danvers, MA). The PI3K/Akt inhibitor, LY294002 was purchased from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA). The recom0binant human TNF? was obtained from BD biosciences. A rabbit antihuman RelA/p65 antibody was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). The phospho-Smad1/5/8 antibody and Smad-1 antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling (Danvers, MA). A luciferase Assay kit was purchased from Promega (Madison, WI) and a Galacto-Light™ beta-galactosidase reporter gene assay system was obtained from Applied Biosystems (Foster City, CA). Cell Lines and Adenovirus Transduction The androgen-dependent soft-tissue LNCaP cells, and their androgen independent subline C4-2B were cultured in T-medium (GIBCO, Carlsbad, CA), supplemented with 5% heat inactivated FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin, and maintained in an incubator at 37°C. These two cell lines mimic the natural progression of PC in humans. C4-2B, an androgen independent cell subline that metastasizes to the axial skeleton and is derived from LNCaP, is an androgen dependent cell line. To suppress NF-?B activation, PC cells were transduced with an adenovirus harboring a dominant-negative I?B? mutant (Adv-dnI?B?) or a control empty vector (Adv-Null). The vectors are replication-defective, E1-deleted adenoviruses expressing transgenes under the control of the cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter. The dnI?B? has mutations at serines 32 and 36, which prevent I?B? phosphorylation and ubiquitin degradation, leading to inhibition of NF-?B nuclear translocation. PC cells were plated for 24 hr, washed with PBS, and subsequently infected with 20 multiplicities of infection (MOI) of the dn-I?B? or the control Ad-CMV in serum-free media. Routinely, unless otherwise indicated, a 2 hr absorption period was allowed after which the medium was aspirated and replaced with fresh medium as described previously [ 28 ]. Luciferase Reporter Assay For detection of constitutive NF-?B activation in PC cells, semi-confluent (70%) LNCaP and C4-2B cells 3.0 × 105 were cultured in 6-well plates and transiently transfected 1.5 µg with a control (pCMV-luciferase) or p65-luciferase expression plasmid and 100 ng of pCMV-?-galactosidase plasmid using Lipofectamine 2000 in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen). To examine the effect of NF-?B on BMP promoter activity, cells were co-transfected with of BMP-4-, or BMP-2-luciferase reporter construct and either a pcDNA-p65, pcDNA-p50, or pcDNA-p105 expression plasmid. The modulation by PI3K/Akt of NF-?B’s transcriptional regulation of BMP-2 or BMP-4 in PC cells was monitored by addition of 25 µM of LY294002 inhibitor to the culture medium at time of transfection and by co-transfection of DN-Akt expression plasmid. After the incubation period of 48 hr, the luciferase substrate was added to the cell lysates and read in a luminometer (Monolight 3010, Pharmingen, Mississauga, ON, Canada). ?-galactosidase activity was used to normalize luciferase activity and is expressed in arbitrary units as we described [ 29 ]. Indirect Immunofluorescence Assay PC cells were transduced in 16-well chamber slides with 20 MOI of the control or the dnI?B? adenoviral constructs as shown above. A vehicle or rhTNF-? 10 ng/ml was then added to the culture medium for 2 hr. The cells were fixed with methanol/acetone 1:1 (v/v) for 5 min at room temperature and rinsed with PBS three times. After incubating in a protein block solution (DAKO, UT) the cells were incubated with rabbit anti-human RelA/p65 antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) at 1:100 dilution in 0.1% BSA/PBS for 1 hr at room temperature. The slides were washed with PBS three times and exposed to Oregon-green conjugated donkey anti-rabbit IgG antibody at 1:500 dilution (Molecular Probes, West Grove, PA) in a solution containing 0.1% BSA/PBS for 1 hr at room temperature. The slides were washed in TBST and mounted. Fluorescence images were captured and analyzed using a Nikon E800 laser scanning fluorescent microscope (Nikon, Melville, NY). Electrophoretic Mobility Gel Shift (EMSA) Assay A non-radioactive EMSA assay kit was used to assess NF-?B activation in LNCaP and C4-2B cells as recommended by the manufacturer (Roche), as described [ 30 ]. Briefly, cells were cultured to 70% confluency in complete RPMI-1640 medium. A double-stranded oligonucleotide probe, encompassing ?B binding site (Promega), was labeled at the 3? end with terminal transferase and DIG-ddUTP. The nuclear extracts 5 µg were prepared, quantified (Pierce, Rockford, IL), and subsequently mixed with DIG-labeled oligonucleotide 1 ng in a binding buffer containing poly d(I-C) in presence or absence of 100-fold excess unlabeled oligonucleotide for 30 min at room temperature. The mixture was then resolved onto a native polyacrylamide gel 12% at 70 V in 0.5× TBE buffer. The fractionated components were transferred to a positively charged nylon membrane by semi-dry electro-blotting at 25 V in 0.5× TBE buffer for 1 hr. The DIG-labeled DNA-protein complexes were then detected with alkaline phosphatase-conjugated anti-DIG antibody using a chemiluminescent alkaline phosphatase substrate and an X-ray film. Western blot Analysis To examine the effect of NF-?B on BMP-2 secretion, LNCaP and C4-2B cells were cultured to 70% confluency. PC cells were preincubated with the control or dnI?B? adenovirus 24 hr alone or treated with the TNF? 10 ng/ml for 2 hr. The cell culture media were collected after 48 hr and were concentrated in the presence of protease inhibitors at 4°C using Centricon protein concentrator (Millipore, Billerica, MA). In another set of experiments, phosphorylation of Smad and Akt proteins was examined in C4-2B cells transduced with 20 MOIs of control vector prior to the addition of rhBMP-2 200 ng/ml for 1 hr. To determine if NF-?B can activate Smad proteins independent of the BMP receptors, C4-2B cells were transfected with pEGFP-dnBMPRII, pI?B?M, pcDNA-p65, or a control pcDNA in presence of BMP-2 200 ng/ml as shown above. Total protein concentrations of cell lysates were quantified using the BCA protein assay kit (Pierce), fractionated (20 µg/lane) onto 12% SDS–polyacrylamide gels, and subsequently electroblotted by semi-dry transfer technique onto 0.2 µm nitrocellulose membranes. The blots were probed with anti-BMP-2, anti-PMB-4, phospho-Smad1/5/8, total Smad-1 or phosphor(Ser473)-Akt antibody (Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA), followed by detection using the ECL plus kit (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ) as we described [ 29 ]. RT-PCR Analysis To examine if NF-?B modulates BMPs and Smad gene expression, LNCaP and C4-2B cells (at 60–70% confluency) were subjected to a vehicle (PBS), a CMV adenovirus or a dominant negative I?B? adenovirus treatment as shown above. Total RNA was extracted using Qiagen RNeasy kit, and 1 µg of total RNA was reverse transcribed by incubating initially with random hexamers and dNTPs for 5 min at 65°C, then in a buffer mixture containing 0.1 M DTT, 25 mM MgCl2, 1× RT buffer, RNAsin, and Superscript II reverse transcriptase for 1 hr at 42°C. PCR amplification was performed using the following set of primer sets; BMP-2 (forward 5?-GACACTGAGACGCTGTTCC-3?, reverse 5?-CCATGGTCG ACCTT TAGG3?), BMP-4 (forward 5?-GCCGGAGGGCCAAGCGTAGCCCTAAG-3?, reverse 5?-CTGCCTGATCTCAGCGGCACCCACATC-3?); Smad-1 (forward 5?-TGTTGGAGGGGAG GTGTATG-3?, reverse 5?-CTGGCGGTGGTATTCTGCTC-3?),Smad-55?-ATATCCCAACTCCCCAGCAA-3?, reverse 5?-CTGGCGGTGGTATTCTGCTC-3?, and GAPDH (forward 5?-ACCACAGTCCATGCCATCA3?, reverse 5?-TCCACCACCCTGTTGCTGT-3?. The PCR conditions were 94°C for 1 min, 62°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 1.5 min for 33 cycles for human BMP-2 and BMP-4; 94°C for 30 sec, 94°C for 30 sec, and 72°C for 1 min for 30 cycles for Smad-1 and Smad-5, and 94°C for 30 sec, 60°C for 30 sec and 72°C for 1 min for GAPDH. PCR products were then resolved onto 1.2% agarose gels, stained with ethidium bromide, and visualized and analyzed under UV light by densitometric scanning as we described [ 30 ]. Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) Assay To examine if the induction of BMP-2 transactivation was attributed to NF-?B binding to its promoter, we mapped, using Genomatix Software, Genomatix Software GmbH, Munich, Germany, the NF-?B responsive region of the human BMP-2 promoter (Accession # NM_001200). The results revealed two putative ?B binding sites (?848 to ?833 and ?1112 to ?900) on the human BMP-2 promoter. Serum starved C4-2B cells (2 × 105) were transfected (2 µg) with a control plasmid or pCMV-p65 expression plasmid as shown above and subsequently exposed to Adv-dnI?B? or the Adv-Null constructs for 24 hr. Cells were then analyzed for p65 binding to the BMP-2 promoter using chromatin immunoprecipition (ChIP) assay (Upstate Biotechnology Inc., Lake Placid, NY) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, DNA/protein cross-linking was induced by the addition of formaldehyde (1% final concentration) directly to the culture medium for 10 min at 37°C. Cells were lysed and DNA in the supernatant was sheared by sonication. An aliquot of the sonicated chromatin samples (input) was removed for PCR analysis and the remainder was used for IPs. The nonspecific background was pre-cleared with salmon sperm DNA/Protein A agarose-50% slurry for 30 min at 4°C with agitation. The sonicated in vivo cross-linked chromatins were then immunoprecipitated overnight with rabbit anti-p65 or nonimmune rabbit IgG (5 µg) (Santa Cruz Biotech) with constant mixing at 4°C. Rabbit normal serum was used as a negative control. The antibody/histone complex was collected after incubation with salmon sperm DNA/Protein A agarose-50% slurry for 1 hr at 4°C with rotation. Protein A beads were collected by centrifugation and protein/DNA complexes were eluted from the beads followed by a cross-link reversal step by addition of 5 M NaCl to the eluted sample for 4 hr at 65°C. DNA from each IP reaction was PCR amplified by 35 cycles of 94°C for 30 sec, 60°C for 30 sec, and 72°C for 1 min using the following primer pair sets flanking the putative ?B binding sites: NF-?B (p65) 5?-CACGGAGGAGTTTATCACCTC AGCA-3? (sense), 5?-AACTTTCCCACCTGCTT GCATTCT G-3? (antisense); and NF-?B (p50) 5?-GCAGGTCTTTGCACCAAGATGAAC-3? (sense), 5?-AGGCACAATCCAGTCATTCCA CC-3? (antisense). Statistical Analysis All statistical analyses were performed using Graph Pad software. Significant differences were analyzed using Student’s t -test and two-tailed distribution at 5% level.  Plasmids and Reagents The NF-?B expression plasmids, pcDNA-p65, pcDNA-p50, pcDNA-p105 and NF-?B-luciferase reporter plasmid, were purchased from Stratagene (La Jolla, CA). The NF-?B-luc contains an enhancer with 5?B sites upstream of the luciferase gene. The BMP-2-luciferase construct, containing 2.7 kb BMP-2 promoter (?2712/+165), was generously provided by Dr. Ming Zhao, University of Texas Health Sciences Center at San Antonio [ 26 ]; the BMP-4-luciferase construct was donated by Dr. Ronald Koenig, University of Michigan. The BMP-4 promoter used in these studies includes nucleotides 2686–4539 (GenBank Accession # L47480), corresponding to bp ?1833 to +21 [ 27 ]. The pI?B?M expression vector was donated by Dr. Paul Chiao, MD Anderson Cancer Center and the dominant negative BMPRII receptor (pEGFP-dnBMPRII) expression plasmid was generously donated by Dr. Claude Labrie, University of Quebec. The null control (Adv-Null) and the recombinant dominant negative I?B?-S32A (Adv-dnI?B?) adenoviral vectors were purchased from Cell Biolabs, Inc. (San Diego, CA). The phosphorylation-defective I?B-S32A construct acts by sequestering the cytoplasmic NF-?B pool in a manner that is insensitive to extracellular stimuli. The DN-Akt expression plasmid was kindly provided by Dr. Bing-Hua Jiang (West Virginia University). The transfection reagent Lipofectamine 2000 was obtained from Invitrogen. The recombinant human BMP-2 and BMP-4 proteins and antibodies were purchased from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN); anti-phospho(Ser473)-Akt antibody was purchased from Cell Signaling, (Danvers, MA). The PI3K/Akt inhibitor, LY294002 was purchased from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA). The recom0binant human TNF? was obtained from BD biosciences. A rabbit antihuman RelA/p65 antibody was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). The phospho-Smad1/5/8 antibody and Smad-1 antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling (Danvers, MA). A luciferase Assay kit was purchased from Promega (Madison, WI) and a Galacto-Light™ beta-galactosidase reporter gene assay system was obtained from Applied Biosystems (Foster City, CA).  Cell Lines and Adenovirus Transduction The androgen-dependent soft-tissue LNCaP cells, and their androgen independent subline C4-2B were cultured in T-medium (GIBCO, Carlsbad, CA), supplemented with 5% heat inactivated FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin, and maintained in an incubator at 37°C. These two cell lines mimic the natural progression of PC in humans. C4-2B, an androgen independent cell subline that metastasizes to the axial skeleton and is derived from LNCaP, is an androgen dependent cell line. To suppress NF-?B activation, PC cells were transduced with an adenovirus harboring a dominant-negative I?B? mutant (Adv-dnI?B?) or a control empty vector (Adv-Null). The vectors are replication-defective, E1-deleted adenoviruses expressing transgenes under the control of the cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter. The dnI?B? has mutations at serines 32 and 36, which prevent I?B? phosphorylation and ubiquitin degradation, leading to inhibition of NF-?B nuclear translocation. PC cells were plated for 24 hr, washed with PBS, and subsequently infected with 20 multiplicities of infection (MOI) of the dn-I?B? or the control Ad-CMV in serum-free media. Routinely, unless otherwise indicated, a 2 hr absorption period was allowed after which the medium was aspirated and replaced with fresh medium as described previously [ 28 ].  Luciferase Reporter Assay For detection of constitutive NF-?B activation in PC cells, semi-confluent (70%) LNCaP and C4-2B cells 3.0 × 105 were cultured in 6-well plates and transiently transfected 1.5 µg with a control (pCMV-luciferase) or p65-luciferase expression plasmid and 100 ng of pCMV-?-galactosidase plasmid using Lipofectamine 2000 in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen). To examine the effect of NF-?B on BMP promoter activity, cells were co-transfected with of BMP-4-, or BMP-2-luciferase reporter construct and either a pcDNA-p65, pcDNA-p50, or pcDNA-p105 expression plasmid. The modulation by PI3K/Akt of NF-?B’s transcriptional regulation of BMP-2 or BMP-4 in PC cells was monitored by addition of 25 µM of LY294002 inhibitor to the culture medium at time of transfection and by co-transfection of DN-Akt expression plasmid. After the incubation period of 48 hr, the luciferase substrate was added to the cell lysates and read in a luminometer (Monolight 3010, Pharmingen, Mississauga, ON, Canada). ?-galactosidase activity was used to normalize luciferase activity and is expressed in arbitrary units as we described [ 29 ].  Indirect Immunofluorescence Assay PC cells were transduced in 16-well chamber slides with 20 MOI of the control or the dnI?B? adenoviral constructs as shown above. A vehicle or rhTNF-? 10 ng/ml was then added to the culture medium for 2 hr. The cells were fixed with methanol/acetone 1:1 (v/v) for 5 min at room temperature and rinsed with PBS three times. After incubating in a protein block solution (DAKO, UT) the cells were incubated with rabbit anti-human RelA/p65 antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) at 1:100 dilution in 0.1% BSA/PBS for 1 hr at room temperature. The slides were washed with PBS three times and exposed to Oregon-green conjugated donkey anti-rabbit IgG antibody at 1:500 dilution (Molecular Probes, West Grove, PA) in a solution containing 0.1% BSA/PBS for 1 hr at room temperature. The slides were washed in TBST and mounted. Fluorescence images were captured and analyzed using a Nikon E800 laser scanning fluorescent microscope (Nikon, Melville, NY).  Electrophoretic Mobility Gel Shift (EMSA) Assay A non-radioactive EMSA assay kit was used to assess NF-?B activation in LNCaP and C4-2B cells as recommended by the manufacturer (Roche), as described [ 30 ]. Briefly, cells were cultured to 70% confluency in complete RPMI-1640 medium. A double-stranded oligonucleotide probe, encompassing ?B binding site (Promega), was labeled at the 3? end with terminal transferase and DIG-ddUTP. The nuclear extracts 5 µg were prepared, quantified (Pierce, Rockford, IL), and subsequently mixed with DIG-labeled oligonucleotide 1 ng in a binding buffer containing poly d(I-C) in presence or absence of 100-fold excess unlabeled oligonucleotide for 30 min at room temperature. The mixture was then resolved onto a native polyacrylamide gel 12% at 70 V in 0.5× TBE buffer. The fractionated components were transferred to a positively charged nylon membrane by semi-dry electro-blotting at 25 V in 0.5× TBE buffer for 1 hr. The DIG-labeled DNA-protein complexes were then detected with alkaline phosphatase-conjugated anti-DIG antibody using a chemiluminescent alkaline phosphatase substrate and an X-ray film.  Western blot Analysis To examine the effect of NF-?B on BMP-2 secretion, LNCaP and C4-2B cells were cultured to 70% confluency. PC cells were preincubated with the control or dnI?B? adenovirus 24 hr alone or treated with the TNF? 10 ng/ml for 2 hr. The cell culture media were collected after 48 hr and were concentrated in the presence of protease inhibitors at 4°C using Centricon protein concentrator (Millipore, Billerica, MA). In another set of experiments, phosphorylation of Smad and Akt proteins was examined in C4-2B cells transduced with 20 MOIs of control vector prior to the addition of rhBMP-2 200 ng/ml for 1 hr. To determine if NF-?B can activate Smad proteins independent of the BMP receptors, C4-2B cells were transfected with pEGFP-dnBMPRII, pI?B?M, pcDNA-p65, or a control pcDNA in presence of BMP-2 200 ng/ml as shown above. Total protein concentrations of cell lysates were quantified using the BCA protein assay kit (Pierce), fractionated (20 µg/lane) onto 12% SDS–polyacrylamide gels, and subsequently electroblotted by semi-dry transfer technique onto 0.2 µm nitrocellulose membranes. The blots were probed with anti-BMP-2, anti-PMB-4, phospho-Smad1/5/8, total Smad-1 or phosphor(Ser473)-Akt antibody (Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA), followed by detection using the ECL plus kit (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ) as we described [ 29 ].  RT-PCR Analysis To examine if NF-?B modulates BMPs and Smad gene expression, LNCaP and C4-2B cells (at 60–70% confluency) were subjected to a vehicle (PBS), a CMV adenovirus or a dominant negative I?B? adenovirus treatment as shown above. Total RNA was extracted using Qiagen RNeasy kit, and 1 µg of total RNA was reverse transcribed by incubating initially with random hexamers and dNTPs for 5 min at 65°C, then in a buffer mixture containing 0.1 M DTT, 25 mM MgCl2, 1× RT buffer, RNAsin, and Superscript II reverse transcriptase for 1 hr at 42°C. PCR amplification was performed using the following set of primer sets; BMP-2 (forward 5?-GACACTGAGACGCTGTTCC-3?, reverse 5?-CCATGGTCG ACCTT TAGG3?), BMP-4 (forward 5?-GCCGGAGGGCCAAGCGTAGCCCTAAG-3?, reverse 5?-CTGCCTGATCTCAGCGGCACCCACATC-3?); Smad-1 (forward 5?-TGTTGGAGGGGAG GTGTATG-3?, reverse 5?-CTGGCGGTGGTATTCTGCTC-3?),Smad-55?-ATATCCCAACTCCCCAGCAA-3?, reverse 5?-CTGGCGGTGGTATTCTGCTC-3?, and GAPDH (forward 5?-ACCACAGTCCATGCCATCA3?, reverse 5?-TCCACCACCCTGTTGCTGT-3?. The PCR conditions were 94°C for 1 min, 62°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 1.5 min for 33 cycles for human BMP-2 and BMP-4; 94°C for 30 sec, 94°C for 30 sec, and 72°C for 1 min for 30 cycles for Smad-1 and Smad-5, and 94°C for 30 sec, 60°C for 30 sec and 72°C for 1 min for GAPDH. PCR products were then resolved onto 1.2% agarose gels, stained with ethidium bromide, and visualized and analyzed under UV light by densitometric scanning as we described [ 30 ].  Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) Assay To examine if the induction of BMP-2 transactivation was attributed to NF-?B binding to its promoter, we mapped, using Genomatix Software, Genomatix Software GmbH, Munich, Germany, the NF-?B responsive region of the human BMP-2 promoter (Accession # NM_001200). The results revealed two putative ?B binding sites (?848 to ?833 and ?1112 to ?900) on the human BMP-2 promoter. Serum starved C4-2B cells (2 × 105) were transfected (2 µg) with a control plasmid or pCMV-p65 expression plasmid as shown above and subsequently exposed to Adv-dnI?B? or the Adv-Null constructs for 24 hr. Cells were then analyzed for p65 binding to the BMP-2 promoter using chromatin immunoprecipition (ChIP) assay (Upstate Biotechnology Inc., Lake Placid, NY) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, DNA/protein cross-linking was induced by the addition of formaldehyde (1% final concentration) directly to the culture medium for 10 min at 37°C. Cells were lysed and DNA in the supernatant was sheared by sonication. An aliquot of the sonicated chromatin samples (input) was removed for PCR analysis and the remainder was used for IPs. The nonspecific background was pre-cleared with salmon sperm DNA/Protein A agarose-50% slurry for 30 min at 4°C with agitation. The sonicated in vivo cross-linked chromatins were then immunoprecipitated overnight with rabbit anti-p65 or nonimmune rabbit IgG (5 µg) (Santa Cruz Biotech) with constant mixing at 4°C. Rabbit normal serum was used as a negative control. The antibody/histone complex was collected after incubation with salmon sperm DNA/Protein A agarose-50% slurry for 1 hr at 4°C with rotation. Protein A beads were collected by centrifugation and protein/DNA complexes were eluted from the beads followed by a cross-link reversal step by addition of 5 M NaCl to the eluted sample for 4 hr at 65°C. DNA from each IP reaction was PCR amplified by 35 cycles of 94°C for 30 sec, 60°C for 30 sec, and 72°C for 1 min using the following primer pair sets flanking the putative ?B binding sites: NF-?B (p65) 5?-CACGGAGGAGTTTATCACCTC AGCA-3? (sense), 5?-AACTTTCCCACCTGCTT GCATTCT G-3? (antisense); and NF-?B (p50) 5?-GCAGGTCTTTGCACCAAGATGAAC-3? (sense), 5?-AGGCACAATCCAGTCATTCCA CC-3? (antisense).  Statistical Analysis All statistical analyses were performed using Graph Pad software. Significant differences were analyzed using Student’s t -test and two-tailed distribution at 5% level.  RESULTS Selective Up-Regulation of Gene Expression and Autocrine Production of BMP-2 by NF-?B in PC Cells We have been prompted by the fact that NF-?B activates BMP-2 in other cell systems to explore whether this phenomena occurs in PC cells. To this end, we investigated if NF-?B, implicated in PC metastasis, can modulate transcriptional activation and release of BMPs in the parental soft tissue LNCaP cells and their osteotropic subline C4-2B cells. The highly metastatic C4-2B PC cell line has been shown to be “programmed” to exhibit bone-like properties that would at least in part explain its affinity to develop osseous metastases. Our luciferase reporter assays demonstrate that C4-2B cells have a modest increase (~2-fold) in endogenous (constitutive) activation of this nuclear factor as opposed to LNCaP cells ( Fig. 1a ). This was further confirmed by EMSA in which nuclear translocation of NF-?B was found to be higher in C4-2B in comparison to LNCaP cells ( Fig. 1b ). To examine if inhibition of constitutive activation of this factor modulates the transcriptional levels of BMPs, PC cells were transduced (20 MOI) with a dominant negative I?B? super-repressor (Adv-dnI?B?) adenoviral vector or a control empty construct (Adv-Null) for 24 hr. The inhibitory effect of the dnI?B? adenovirus on NF-?B nuclear translocation was monitored by indirect immunofluorescence in C4-2B cells, treatment of C4-2B cells with the Adv-dnI?B? inhibited rhTNF-?-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation, and sequestered the heterodimeric protein in the cytoplasm ( Fig. 1c ). To examine if constitutive NF-?B activation is critical to transcriptional regulation of BMPs, transcript levels of BMP-2, BMP-4, and BMP-6 were measured using RT-PCR in Adv-dnI?B? transduced isogenic LNCaP and C4-2B cell lines in presence or absence of rhTNF-?. BMP-2 and BMP-4, but not BMP-6, mRNA transcripts were upregulated at 16 and 24 hr in rhTNF-? stimulated C4-2B ( Fig. 2a ) and to a lesser extent in the parental soft tissue LNCaP cells (data not shown). In contrast, suppression of NF-?B by Adv-dnI?B? reduced rhTNF-?-induced BMP-2 and, to a lesser magnitude, BMP-4 transcript levels in C4-2B cells ( Fig. 2b ), indicating NF-?B dependent upregulation of BMP-2 and BMP-4 by rhTNF-? in C4-2B cells. Intriguingly, the mRNA levels of BMP-2 and, to a lesser degree, BMP-4 were decreased upon dnI?B? mediated inhibition of constitutive NF-?B activation in C4-2B cells–thus suggesting a role for constitutive activation of this nuclear factor in transcriptional regulation of BMP-2 and BMP-4 in these cells ( Fig. 2c ). To gain further insight into whether induced or constitutively activated NF-?B promotes the release of BMPs by PC cells, we examined by immunoblotting the accumulation of BMP-2 proteins in culture media of TNF?-stimulated or unstimulated LNCaP and C4-2B cells in presence of Adv-dnI?B? or Adv-Null constructs. The relative levels of secreted BMP-2 proteins were reduced by selectively inhibiting constitutive NF-?B activation by Adv-dnI?B? in C4-2B cells in comparison to Adv-Null transduced cells ( Fig. 2d ). In addition, BMP-2 protein levels were elevated in the condition medium of TNF?-stimulated C4-2B cells. Interestingly, inhibiting constitutive activation of NF-?B by Adv-dnI?B? reduced secretion of BMP-2 by C4-2B cells. The TNF?-induced activation of NF-?B was further suppressed by the Adv-dnI?B?—suggesting a selective role for TNF-?-NF-?B axis in autocrine production of BMP-2 by the osteotropic C4-2B cells ( Fig. 2d ). In contrast, the conditioned media of parental LNCaP cells had undetectable levels of released BMP-2 and BMP-4 (data not shown). Involvement of PI3K/Akt in NF-?B-Induced Transactivation of BMP-2 in PC Cells The NF-?B regulation of BMP-2 and BMP-4 was further confirmed by the transient co-transfection of LNCaP and C4-2B cells with NF-?B expression plasmids p65, p50, or p105 (the precursor of p50) and a chimeric reporter plasmid encompassing a BMP-2 or BMP-4 promoter-driven luciferase gene. As depicted in Figure 3a , the p65-expressing C4-2B cells had a robust (35-fold) increase in the BMP-2 luciferase activity compared to cells co-transfected with control or other NF-?B subunits. A similar trend, but at a significantly lower level (21-fold), was observed in LNCaP cells ( Fig. 3a ). In contrast to BMP-2, transfection of p65 confers an 8-fold increase in BMP-4 luciferase activity in C4-2B cells as opposed to cells transfected with control or other NF-?B subunits ( Fig. 3b ). As expected, LNCaP cells exhibited only a 4-fold increase of BMP-4 promoter activity in response to the p65 subunit, which may be attributed to lower constitutive activation of NF-?B in this cell line ( Fig. 3b ). To explore a possible role of PI3K/Akt as upstream factors involved in NF-?B’s regulation of BMPs, PC cells were co-transfected with BMP reporter and p65 expression plasmids in presence of the PI3K/Akt chemical inhibitor LY294002 or the DN-Akt expression plasmid. Chemical inhibition of PI3K/Akt activity significantly lowers NF-?B-induced BMP-2 and BMP-4 promoter activities by 50% in C4-2B cells, indicating that this factor is partially involved in NF-?B-mediated transactivation of BMPs in C4-2B cells ( Fig. 3a,b ). Likewise, LY294002 suppressed, but at a significantly lower level, the transactivation of BMPs by p65 in LNCaP cells ( Fig. 3a,b ). The results were confirmed by expressing DN-Akt plasmids in PC cells. A comparable pattern to the LY294002 inhibition of NF-?B-mediated transactivation of BMPs was observed in DN-Akt transfected C4-2b and LNCaP cells when compared to p65 expressing cells, further attesting to the involvement of PI3K/Akt in the transcriptional regulation of BMP-2 by NF-?B in PC cells ( Fig. 3c,d ). To examine if a positive feedback loop occurs between NF-?B mediated secretion of BMPs and activation of NF-?B in PC cells, p65 luciferase activity was measured in C4-2B cells treated with human recombinant BMP-2 or BMP-4. As shown in Figure 4a , neither treatment caused activation of NF-?B in these cells, suggesting that other mechanisms, such as activation of upstream factors like PI3K/Akt by BMPs may be responsible for constitutive activation of NF-?B in this cell line. NF-?B Binding to BMP-2 Promoter We examined whether the induction of BMP-2 promoter activity by NF-?B in PC cells is attributed to binding of the nuclear factor to its responsive ?B element on BMP-2 promoter. By analyzing the genomic DNA sequence with Genomatix software (Genomatix, Germany), we identified two putative ?B binding sites (?848 to ?833 and ?1112 to ?900) on the 5?-flanking untranslated region of the human BMP-2 promoter sequence (Accession # NM_001200). Serum starved C4-2B cells were transfected for 24 hr with a control plasmid or p65 in presence of Adv-dnI?B? super-repressor or the control Adv-Null construct and subsequently analyzed by PCR for in vivo binding to the BMP-2 promoter using a chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. As shown in Figure 4b , PCR analysis of anti-65 precipitated DNA revealed increased binding to the ?B binding site (?848 to ?833) on the BMP-2 promoter in p65-expressing C4-2B cells transduced with the control Adv-Null construct. The increased binding is reduced to basal level of pcDNA transfected cells in response to Adv-dnI?B? in these cells, suggesting that NF-?B transcriptional regulation or activation of BMP-2 promoter may be induced in part by NF-?B binding to its ?B element on the BMP-2 promoter. NF-?B Selectively Regulates Smad Gene Expression and Activation BMP-2-Smad Signaling in PC Cells To gain insight into whether the constitutively active NF-?B interferes with the BMP-Smad signaling in PC cells, we examine if this nuclear factor modulates expression and/or activation of BMP-2 downstream targets Smad-1 and Smad-5 in PC cells. We, therefore, examined by PCR, the expression of Smad-1 and Smad-5 in LNCaP and C4-2B cells pre-transduced with Adv-dnI?B? or the Adv-Null adenoviral constructs. As depicted in Figure 4c,d , Smad-1 transcript levels were significantly reduced in both cell lines in response to inhibition of NF-?B activation when compared to untreated control cells or cells transduced with control adenoviral construct. In contrast, Smad-5 mRNA levels were significantly reduced upon inhibition of NF-?B in C4-2B cells, but to a lesser extent in LNCaP cells. These results suggest that in BMP unstimulated PC cells, constitutive NF-?B is partially involved in transcriptional regulation and/or steady-state mRNA levels of Smad-5, and to a lesser extent of Smad-1, in PC cells. In another set of experiments, we tested whether constitutive NF-?B activation is critical for BMP-2-induced Smad activation in PC cells. To this end, phosphorylated Smads were detected in LNCaP and C4-2B cells pretreated with the Adv-dnI?B? or the Adv-Null control constructs and subsequently stimulated with recombinant human BMP-2 (200 ng/ml) for 1 hr. Total protein lysates were then analyzed for phospho Smad1/5/8 by Western blot analysis. Whereas no detectable changes were observed in the ?-actin protein levels, blockade of NF-?B activation by the Adv-dnI?B?, in addition to reducing Smad-1 protein levels, decreased BMP-2 induced Smad-1/5/8 phosphorylation as opposed to Adv-Null in BMP-2 treated C4-2B cells ( Fig. 5a ). The results suggest that NF-?B may be involved in activation of BMP-2-Smad signaling in osteotropic PC cells. This observation was further confirmed in C4-2B cells stimulated with TNF-? and recombinant BMP-2 proteins in presence or absence of the Adv-dnI?B?. The results, shown in Figure 5b , demonstrate that inhibition of TNF-?-induced NF-?B activation reduces both Smad-1 protein levels and Smad-1/5/8 phosphorylation by approximately 50% in BMP-2 stimulated C4-2B cells. In contrast to BMP-2, we demonstrated that NF-?B is not involved in BMP-4-induced Smad-1 protein levels or phosphorylation of Smad?1/5/8 in C4-2B cells ( Fig. 5c ). Taken together, our results suggest that NF-?B selectively up-regulates Smad transcript and protein levels and activates BMP-2-Smad signaling by enhancing phosphorylation of Smad-1/5/8 in C4-2B cells. BMBRII Is Required for NF-?B Mediated Activation of Smad1/5/8 by BMP-2 in C4-2B Cells To further examine if NF-?B enhances BMP-2 mediated Smad protein phosphorylation independent of the BMP receptor, C4-2B cells were transfected with a dominant negative BMPRII receptor expression plasmid (pEGFP-dnBMPRII), pcDNA-p65, an I?B? super-repressor, pI?B?M, or control pcDNA expression plasmids in the presence of recombinant BMP-2 (200 ng/ml). Total protein lysates were then analyzed for phospho-Smad1/5/8 by Western blot analysis. As depicted in Figure 5d , overexpression of dnBMPRII alone or in combination with I?B? super-repressor significantly reduced Smad-1/5/8 phosphorylation in BMP-2 stimulated C4-2B cells in comparison to control BMP-2 treated cells. However, overexpression of the p65 subunit was not able to rescue dnBMPRII suppressed BMP-2-induced Smad1/5/8 phosphorylation, an effect that was further augmented in presence of the I?B? super-repressor. The data suggest that BMP-2 activation of BMPRII is required for NF-?B mediated phosphorylation of Smad-1/5/8 in C4-2B cells.  RESULTS Selective Up-Regulation of Gene Expression and Autocrine Production of BMP-2 by NF-?B in PC Cells We have been prompted by the fact that NF-?B activates BMP-2 in other cell systems to explore whether this phenomena occurs in PC cells. To this end, we investigated if NF-?B, implicated in PC metastasis, can modulate transcriptional activation and release of BMPs in the parental soft tissue LNCaP cells and their osteotropic subline C4-2B cells. The highly metastatic C4-2B PC cell line has been shown to be “programmed” to exhibit bone-like properties that would at least in part explain its affinity to develop osseous metastases. Our luciferase reporter assays demonstrate that C4-2B cells have a modest increase (~2-fold) in endogenous (constitutive) activation of this nuclear factor as opposed to LNCaP cells ( Fig. 1a ). This was further confirmed by EMSA in which nuclear translocation of NF-?B was found to be higher in C4-2B in comparison to LNCaP cells ( Fig. 1b ). To examine if inhibition of constitutive activation of this factor modulates the transcriptional levels of BMPs, PC cells were transduced (20 MOI) with a dominant negative I?B? super-repressor (Adv-dnI?B?) adenoviral vector or a control empty construct (Adv-Null) for 24 hr. The inhibitory effect of the dnI?B? adenovirus on NF-?B nuclear translocation was monitored by indirect immunofluorescence in C4-2B cells, treatment of C4-2B cells with the Adv-dnI?B? inhibited rhTNF-?-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation, and sequestered the heterodimeric protein in the cytoplasm ( Fig. 1c ). To examine if constitutive NF-?B activation is critical to transcriptional regulation of BMPs, transcript levels of BMP-2, BMP-4, and BMP-6 were measured using RT-PCR in Adv-dnI?B? transduced isogenic LNCaP and C4-2B cell lines in presence or absence of rhTNF-?. BMP-2 and BMP-4, but not BMP-6, mRNA transcripts were upregulated at 16 and 24 hr in rhTNF-? stimulated C4-2B ( Fig. 2a ) and to a lesser extent in the parental soft tissue LNCaP cells (data not shown). In contrast, suppression of NF-?B by Adv-dnI?B? reduced rhTNF-?-induced BMP-2 and, to a lesser magnitude, BMP-4 transcript levels in C4-2B cells ( Fig. 2b ), indicating NF-?B dependent upregulation of BMP-2 and BMP-4 by rhTNF-? in C4-2B cells. Intriguingly, the mRNA levels of BMP-2 and, to a lesser degree, BMP-4 were decreased upon dnI?B? mediated inhibition of constitutive NF-?B activation in C4-2B cells–thus suggesting a role for constitutive activation of this nuclear factor in transcriptional regulation of BMP-2 and BMP-4 in these cells ( Fig. 2c ). To gain further insight into whether induced or constitutively activated NF-?B promotes the release of BMPs by PC cells, we examined by immunoblotting the accumulation of BMP-2 proteins in culture media of TNF?-stimulated or unstimulated LNCaP and C4-2B cells in presence of Adv-dnI?B? or Adv-Null constructs. The relative levels of secreted BMP-2 proteins were reduced by selectively inhibiting constitutive NF-?B activation by Adv-dnI?B? in C4-2B cells in comparison to Adv-Null transduced cells ( Fig. 2d ). In addition, BMP-2 protein levels were elevated in the condition medium of TNF?-stimulated C4-2B cells. Interestingly, inhibiting constitutive activation of NF-?B by Adv-dnI?B? reduced secretion of BMP-2 by C4-2B cells. The TNF?-induced activation of NF-?B was further suppressed by the Adv-dnI?B?—suggesting a selective role for TNF-?-NF-?B axis in autocrine production of BMP-2 by the osteotropic C4-2B cells ( Fig. 2d ). In contrast, the conditioned media of parental LNCaP cells had undetectable levels of released BMP-2 and BMP-4 (data not shown). Involvement of PI3K/Akt in NF-?B-Induced Transactivation of BMP-2 in PC Cells The NF-?B regulation of BMP-2 and BMP-4 was further confirmed by the transient co-transfection of LNCaP and C4-2B cells with NF-?B expression plasmids p65, p50, or p105 (the precursor of p50) and a chimeric reporter plasmid encompassing a BMP-2 or BMP-4 promoter-driven luciferase gene. As depicted in Figure 3a , the p65-expressing C4-2B cells had a robust (35-fold) increase in the BMP-2 luciferase activity compared to cells co-transfected with control or other NF-?B subunits. A similar trend, but at a significantly lower level (21-fold), was observed in LNCaP cells ( Fig. 3a ). In contrast to BMP-2, transfection of p65 confers an 8-fold increase in BMP-4 luciferase activity in C4-2B cells as opposed to cells transfected with control or other NF-?B subunits ( Fig. 3b ). As expected, LNCaP cells exhibited only a 4-fold increase of BMP-4 promoter activity in response to the p65 subunit, which may be attributed to lower constitutive activation of NF-?B in this cell line ( Fig. 3b ). To explore a possible role of PI3K/Akt as upstream factors involved in NF-?B’s regulation of BMPs, PC cells were co-transfected with BMP reporter and p65 expression plasmids in presence of the PI3K/Akt chemical inhibitor LY294002 or the DN-Akt expression plasmid. Chemical inhibition of PI3K/Akt activity significantly lowers NF-?B-induced BMP-2 and BMP-4 promoter activities by 50% in C4-2B cells, indicating that this factor is partially involved in NF-?B-mediated transactivation of BMPs in C4-2B cells ( Fig. 3a,b ). Likewise, LY294002 suppressed, but at a significantly lower level, the transactivation of BMPs by p65 in LNCaP cells ( Fig. 3a,b ). The results were confirmed by expressing DN-Akt plasmids in PC cells. A comparable pattern to the LY294002 inhibition of NF-?B-mediated transactivation of BMPs was observed in DN-Akt transfected C4-2b and LNCaP cells when compared to p65 expressing cells, further attesting to the involvement of PI3K/Akt in the transcriptional regulation of BMP-2 by NF-?B in PC cells ( Fig. 3c,d ). To examine if a positive feedback loop occurs between NF-?B mediated secretion of BMPs and activation of NF-?B in PC cells, p65 luciferase activity was measured in C4-2B cells treated with human recombinant BMP-2 or BMP-4. As shown in Figure 4a , neither treatment caused activation of NF-?B in these cells, suggesting that other mechanisms, such as activation of upstream factors like PI3K/Akt by BMPs may be responsible for constitutive activation of NF-?B in this cell line. NF-?B Binding to BMP-2 Promoter We examined whether the induction of BMP-2 promoter activity by NF-?B in PC cells is attributed to binding of the nuclear factor to its responsive ?B element on BMP-2 promoter. By analyzing the genomic DNA sequence with Genomatix software (Genomatix, Germany), we identified two putative ?B binding sites (?848 to ?833 and ?1112 to ?900) on the 5?-flanking untranslated region of the human BMP-2 promoter sequence (Accession # NM_001200). Serum starved C4-2B cells were transfected for 24 hr with a control plasmid or p65 in presence of Adv-dnI?B? super-repressor or the control Adv-Null construct and subsequently analyzed by PCR for in vivo binding to the BMP-2 promoter using a chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. As shown in Figure 4b , PCR analysis of anti-65 precipitated DNA revealed increased binding to the ?B binding site (?848 to ?833) on the BMP-2 promoter in p65-expressing C4-2B cells transduced with the control Adv-Null construct. The increased binding is reduced to basal level of pcDNA transfected cells in response to Adv-dnI?B? in these cells, suggesting that NF-?B transcriptional regulation or activation of BMP-2 promoter may be induced in part by NF-?B binding to its ?B element on the BMP-2 promoter. NF-?B Selectively Regulates Smad Gene Expression and Activation BMP-2-Smad Signaling in PC Cells To gain insight into whether the constitutively active NF-?B interferes with the BMP-Smad signaling in PC cells, we examine if this nuclear factor modulates expression and/or activation of BMP-2 downstream targets Smad-1 and Smad-5 in PC cells. We, therefore, examined by PCR, the expression of Smad-1 and Smad-5 in LNCaP and C4-2B cells pre-transduced with Adv-dnI?B? or the Adv-Null adenoviral constructs. As depicted in Figure 4c,d , Smad-1 transcript levels were significantly reduced in both cell lines in response to inhibition of NF-?B activation when compared to untreated control cells or cells transduced with control adenoviral construct. In contrast, Smad-5 mRNA levels were significantly reduced upon inhibition of NF-?B in C4-2B cells, but to a lesser extent in LNCaP cells. These results suggest that in BMP unstimulated PC cells, constitutive NF-?B is partially involved in transcriptional regulation and/or steady-state mRNA levels of Smad-5, and to a lesser extent of Smad-1, in PC cells. In another set of experiments, we tested whether constitutive NF-?B activation is critical for BMP-2-induced Smad activation in PC cells. To this end, phosphorylated Smads were detected in LNCaP and C4-2B cells pretreated with the Adv-dnI?B? or the Adv-Null control constructs and subsequently stimulated with recombinant human BMP-2 (200 ng/ml) for 1 hr. Total protein lysates were then analyzed for phospho Smad1/5/8 by Western blot analysis. Whereas no detectable changes were observed in the ?-actin protein levels, blockade of NF-?B activation by the Adv-dnI?B?, in addition to reducing Smad-1 protein levels, decreased BMP-2 induced Smad-1/5/8 phosphorylation as opposed to Adv-Null in BMP-2 treated C4-2B cells ( Fig. 5a ). The results suggest that NF-?B may be involved in activation of BMP-2-Smad signaling in osteotropic PC cells. This observation was further confirmed in C4-2B cells stimulated with TNF-? and recombinant BMP-2 proteins in presence or absence of the Adv-dnI?B?. The results, shown in Figure 5b , demonstrate that inhibition of TNF-?-induced NF-?B activation reduces both Smad-1 protein levels and Smad-1/5/8 phosphorylation by approximately 50% in BMP-2 stimulated C4-2B cells. In contrast to BMP-2, we demonstrated that NF-?B is not involved in BMP-4-induced Smad-1 protein levels or phosphorylation of Smad?1/5/8 in C4-2B cells ( Fig. 5c ). Taken together, our results suggest that NF-?B selectively up-regulates Smad transcript and protein levels and activates BMP-2-Smad signaling by enhancing phosphorylation of Smad-1/5/8 in C4-2B cells. BMBRII Is Required for NF-?B Mediated Activation of Smad1/5/8 by BMP-2 in C4-2B Cells To further examine if NF-?B enhances BMP-2 mediated Smad protein phosphorylation independent of the BMP receptor, C4-2B cells were transfected with a dominant negative BMPRII receptor expression plasmid (pEGFP-dnBMPRII), pcDNA-p65, an I?B? super-repressor, pI?B?M, or control pcDNA expression plasmids in the presence of recombinant BMP-2 (200 ng/ml). Total protein lysates were then analyzed for phospho-Smad1/5/8 by Western blot analysis. As depicted in Figure 5d , overexpression of dnBMPRII alone or in combination with I?B? super-repressor significantly reduced Smad-1/5/8 phosphorylation in BMP-2 stimulated C4-2B cells in comparison to control BMP-2 treated cells. However, overexpression of the p65 subunit was not able to rescue dnBMPRII suppressed BMP-2-induced Smad1/5/8 phosphorylation, an effect that was further augmented in presence of the I?B? super-repressor. The data suggest that BMP-2 activation of BMPRII is required for NF-?B mediated phosphorylation of Smad-1/5/8 in C4-2B cells.  Selective Up-Regulation of Gene Expression and Autocrine Production of BMP-2 by NF-?B in PC Cells We have been prompted by the fact that NF-?B activates BMP-2 in other cell systems to explore whether this phenomena occurs in PC cells. To this end, we investigated if NF-?B, implicated in PC metastasis, can modulate transcriptional activation and release of BMPs in the parental soft tissue LNCaP cells and their osteotropic subline C4-2B cells. The highly metastatic C4-2B PC cell line has been shown to be “programmed” to exhibit bone-like properties that would at least in part explain its affinity to develop osseous metastases. Our luciferase reporter assays demonstrate that C4-2B cells have a modest increase (~2-fold) in endogenous (constitutive) activation of this nuclear factor as opposed to LNCaP cells ( Fig. 1a ). This was further confirmed by EMSA in which nuclear translocation of NF-?B was found to be higher in C4-2B in comparison to LNCaP cells ( Fig. 1b ). To examine if inhibition of constitutive activation of this factor modulates the transcriptional levels of BMPs, PC cells were transduced (20 MOI) with a dominant negative I?B? super-repressor (Adv-dnI?B?) adenoviral vector or a control empty construct (Adv-Null) for 24 hr. The inhibitory effect of the dnI?B? adenovirus on NF-?B nuclear translocation was monitored by indirect immunofluorescence in C4-2B cells, treatment of C4-2B cells with the Adv-dnI?B? inhibited rhTNF-?-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation, and sequestered the heterodimeric protein in the cytoplasm ( Fig. 1c ). To examine if constitutive NF-?B activation is critical to transcriptional regulation of BMPs, transcript levels of BMP-2, BMP-4, and BMP-6 were measured using RT-PCR in Adv-dnI?B? transduced isogenic LNCaP and C4-2B cell lines in presence or absence of rhTNF-?. BMP-2 and BMP-4, but not BMP-6, mRNA transcripts were upregulated at 16 and 24 hr in rhTNF-? stimulated C4-2B ( Fig. 2a ) and to a lesser extent in the parental soft tissue LNCaP cells (data not shown). In contrast, suppression of NF-?B by Adv-dnI?B? reduced rhTNF-?-induced BMP-2 and, to a lesser magnitude, BMP-4 transcript levels in C4-2B cells ( Fig. 2b ), indicating NF-?B dependent upregulation of BMP-2 and BMP-4 by rhTNF-? in C4-2B cells. Intriguingly, the mRNA levels of BMP-2 and, to a lesser degree, BMP-4 were decreased upon dnI?B? mediated inhibition of constitutive NF-?B activation in C4-2B cells–thus suggesting a role for constitutive activation of this nuclear factor in transcriptional regulation of BMP-2 and BMP-4 in these cells ( Fig. 2c ). To gain further insight into whether induced or constitutively activated NF-?B promotes the release of BMPs by PC cells, we examined by immunoblotting the accumulation of BMP-2 proteins in culture media of TNF?-stimulated or unstimulated LNCaP and C4-2B cells in presence of Adv-dnI?B? or Adv-Null constructs. The relative levels of secreted BMP-2 proteins were reduced by selectively inhibiting constitutive NF-?B activation by Adv-dnI?B? in C4-2B cells in comparison to Adv-Null transduced cells ( Fig. 2d ). In addition, BMP-2 protein levels were elevated in the condition medium of TNF?-stimulated C4-2B cells. Interestingly, inhibiting constitutive activation of NF-?B by Adv-dnI?B? reduced secretion of BMP-2 by C4-2B cells. The TNF?-induced activation of NF-?B was further suppressed by the Adv-dnI?B?—suggesting a selective role for TNF-?-NF-?B axis in autocrine production of BMP-2 by the osteotropic C4-2B cells ( Fig. 2d ). In contrast, the conditioned media of parental LNCaP cells had undetectable levels of released BMP-2 and BMP-4 (data not shown).  Selective Up-Regulation of Gene Expression and Autocrine Production of BMP-2 by NF-?B in PC Cells We have been prompted by the fact that NF-?B activates BMP-2 in other cell systems to explore whether this phenomena occurs in PC cells. To this end, we investigated if NF-?B, implicated in PC metastasis, can modulate transcriptional activation and release of BMPs in the parental soft tissue LNCaP cells and their osteotropic subline C4-2B cells. The highly metastatic C4-2B PC cell line has been shown to be “programmed” to exhibit bone-like properties that would at least in part explain its affinity to develop osseous metastases. Our luciferase reporter assays demonstrate that C4-2B cells have a modest increase (~2-fold) in endogenous (constitutive) activation of this nuclear factor as opposed to LNCaP cells ( Fig. 1a ). This was further confirmed by EMSA in which nuclear translocation of NF-?B was found to be higher in C4-2B in comparison to LNCaP cells ( Fig. 1b ). To examine if inhibition of constitutive activation of this factor modulates the transcriptional levels of BMPs, PC cells were transduced (20 MOI) with a dominant negative I?B? super-repressor (Adv-dnI?B?) adenoviral vector or a control empty construct (Adv-Null) for 24 hr. The inhibitory effect of the dnI?B? adenovirus on NF-?B nuclear translocation was monitored by indirect immunofluorescence in C4-2B cells, treatment of C4-2B cells with the Adv-dnI?B? inhibited rhTNF-?-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation, and sequestered the heterodimeric protein in the cytoplasm ( Fig. 1c ). To examine if constitutive NF-?B activation is critical to transcriptional regulation of BMPs, transcript levels of BMP-2, BMP-4, and BMP-6 were measured using RT-PCR in Adv-dnI?B? transduced isogenic LNCaP and C4-2B cell lines in presence or absence of rhTNF-?. BMP-2 and BMP-4, but not BMP-6, mRNA transcripts were upregulated at 16 and 24 hr in rhTNF-? stimulated C4-2B ( Fig. 2a ) and to a lesser extent in the parental soft tissue LNCaP cells (data not shown). In contrast, suppression of NF-?B by Adv-dnI?B? reduced rhTNF-?-induced BMP-2 and, to a lesser magnitude, BMP-4 transcript levels in C4-2B cells ( Fig. 2b ), indicating NF-?B dependent upregulation of BMP-2 and BMP-4 by rhTNF-? in C4-2B cells. Intriguingly, the mRNA levels of BMP-2 and, to a lesser degree, BMP-4 were decreased upon dnI?B? mediated inhibition of constitutive NF-?B activation in C4-2B cells–thus suggesting a role for constitutive activation of this nuclear factor in transcriptional regulation of BMP-2 and BMP-4 in these cells ( Fig. 2c ). To gain further insight into whether induced or constitutively activated NF-?B promotes the release of BMPs by PC cells, we examined by immunoblotting the accumulation of BMP-2 proteins in culture media of TNF?-stimulated or unstimulated LNCaP and C4-2B cells in presence of Adv-dnI?B? or Adv-Null constructs. The relative levels of secreted BMP-2 proteins were reduced by selectively inhibiting constitutive NF-?B activation by Adv-dnI?B? in C4-2B cells in comparison to Adv-Null transduced cells ( Fig. 2d ). In addition, BMP-2 protein levels were elevated in the condition medium of TNF?-stimulated C4-2B cells. Interestingly, inhibiting constitutive activation of NF-?B by Adv-dnI?B? reduced secretion of BMP-2 by C4-2B cells. The TNF?-induced activation of NF-?B was further suppressed by the Adv-dnI?B?—suggesting a selective role for TNF-?-NF-?B axis in autocrine production of BMP-2 by the osteotropic C4-2B cells ( Fig. 2d ). In contrast, the conditioned media of parental LNCaP cells had undetectable levels of released BMP-2 and BMP-4 (data not shown).  Involvement of PI3K/Akt in NF-?B-Induced Transactivation of BMP-2 in PC Cells The NF-?B regulation of BMP-2 and BMP-4 was further confirmed by the transient co-transfection of LNCaP and C4-2B cells with NF-?B expression plasmids p65, p50, or p105 (the precursor of p50) and a chimeric reporter plasmid encompassing a BMP-2 or BMP-4 promoter-driven luciferase gene. As depicted in Figure 3a , the p65-expressing C4-2B cells had a robust (35-fold) increase in the BMP-2 luciferase activity compared to cells co-transfected with control or other NF-?B subunits. A similar trend, but at a significantly lower level (21-fold), was observed in LNCaP cells ( Fig. 3a ). In contrast to BMP-2, transfection of p65 confers an 8-fold increase in BMP-4 luciferase activity in C4-2B cells as opposed to cells transfected with control or other NF-?B subunits ( Fig. 3b ). As expected, LNCaP cells exhibited only a 4-fold increase of BMP-4 promoter activity in response to the p65 subunit, which may be attributed to lower constitutive activation of NF-?B in this cell line ( Fig. 3b ). To explore a possible role of PI3K/Akt as upstream factors involved in NF-?B’s regulation of BMPs, PC cells were co-transfected with BMP reporter and p65 expression plasmids in presence of the PI3K/Akt chemical inhibitor LY294002 or the DN-Akt expression plasmid. Chemical inhibition of PI3K/Akt activity significantly lowers NF-?B-induced BMP-2 and BMP-4 promoter activities by 50% in C4-2B cells, indicating that this factor is partially involved in NF-?B-mediated transactivation of BMPs in C4-2B cells ( Fig. 3a,b ). Likewise, LY294002 suppressed, but at a significantly lower level, the transactivation of BMPs by p65 in LNCaP cells ( Fig. 3a,b ). The results were confirmed by expressing DN-Akt plasmids in PC cells. A comparable pattern to the LY294002 inhibition of NF-?B-mediated transactivation of BMPs was observed in DN-Akt transfected C4-2b and LNCaP cells when compared to p65 expressing cells, further attesting to the involvement of PI3K/Akt in the transcriptional regulation of BMP-2 by NF-?B in PC cells ( Fig. 3c,d ). To examine if a positive feedback loop occurs between NF-?B mediated secretion of BMPs and activation of NF-?B in PC cells, p65 luciferase activity was measured in C4-2B cells treated with human recombinant BMP-2 or BMP-4. As shown in Figure 4a , neither treatment caused activation of NF-?B in these cells, suggesting that other mechanisms, such as activation of upstream factors like PI3K/Akt by BMPs may be responsible for constitutive activation of NF-?B in this cell line.  Involvement of PI3K/Akt in NF-?B-Induced Transactivation of BMP-2 in PC Cells The NF-?B regulation of BMP-2 and BMP-4 was further confirmed by the transient co-transfection of LNCaP and C4-2B cells with NF-?B expression plasmids p65, p50, or p105 (the precursor of p50) and a chimeric reporter plasmid encompassing a BMP-2 or BMP-4 promoter-driven luciferase gene. As depicted in Figure 3a , the p65-expressing C4-2B cells had a robust (35-fold) increase in the BMP-2 luciferase activity compared to cells co-transfected with control or other NF-?B subunits. A similar trend, but at a significantly lower level (21-fold), was observed in LNCaP cells ( Fig. 3a ). In contrast to BMP-2, transfection of p65 confers an 8-fold increase in BMP-4 luciferase activity in C4-2B cells as opposed to cells transfected with control or other NF-?B subunits ( Fig. 3b ). As expected, LNCaP cells exhibited only a 4-fold increase of BMP-4 promoter activity in response to the p65 subunit, which may be attributed to lower constitutive activation of NF-?B in this cell line ( Fig. 3b ). To explore a possible role of PI3K/Akt as upstream factors involved in NF-?B’s regulation of BMPs, PC cells were co-transfected with BMP reporter and p65 expression plasmids in presence of the PI3K/Akt chemical inhibitor LY294002 or the DN-Akt expression plasmid. Chemical inhibition of PI3K/Akt activity significantly lowers NF-?B-induced BMP-2 and BMP-4 promoter activities by 50% in C4-2B cells, indicating that this factor is partially involved in NF-?B-mediated transactivation of BMPs in C4-2B cells ( Fig. 3a,b ). Likewise, LY294002 suppressed, but at a significantly lower level, the transactivation of BMPs by p65 in LNCaP cells ( Fig. 3a,b ). The results were confirmed by expressing DN-Akt plasmids in PC cells. A comparable pattern to the LY294002 inhibition of NF-?B-mediated transactivation of BMPs was observed in DN-Akt transfected C4-2b and LNCaP cells when compared to p65 expressing cells, further attesting to the involvement of PI3K/Akt in the transcriptional regulation of BMP-2 by NF-?B in PC cells ( Fig. 3c,d ). To examine if a positive feedback loop occurs between NF-?B mediated secretion of BMPs and activation of NF-?B in PC cells, p65 luciferase activity was measured in C4-2B cells treated with human recombinant BMP-2 or BMP-4. As shown in Figure 4a , neither treatment caused activation of NF-?B in these cells, suggesting that other mechanisms, such as activation of upstream factors like PI3K/Akt by BMPs may be responsible for constitutive activation of NF-?B in this cell line.  NF-?B Binding to BMP-2 Promoter We examined whether the induction of BMP-2 promoter activity by NF-?B in PC cells is attributed to binding of the nuclear factor to its responsive ?B element on BMP-2 promoter. By analyzing the genomic DNA sequence with Genomatix software (Genomatix, Germany), we identified two putative ?B binding sites (?848 to ?833 and ?1112 to ?900) on the 5?-flanking untranslated region of the human BMP-2 promoter sequence (Accession # NM_001200). Serum starved C4-2B cells were transfected for 24 hr with a control plasmid or p65 in presence of Adv-dnI?B? super-repressor or the control Adv-Null construct and subsequently analyzed by PCR for in vivo binding to the BMP-2 promoter using a chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. As shown in Figure 4b , PCR analysis of anti-65 precipitated DNA revealed increased binding to the ?B binding site (?848 to ?833) on the BMP-2 promoter in p65-expressing C4-2B cells transduced with the control Adv-Null construct. The increased binding is reduced to basal level of pcDNA transfected cells in response to Adv-dnI?B? in these cells, suggesting that NF-?B transcriptional regulation or activation of BMP-2 promoter may be induced in part by NF-?B binding to its ?B element on the BMP-2 promoter.  NF-?B Binding to BMP-2 Promoter We examined whether the induction of BMP-2 promoter activity by NF-?B in PC cells is attributed to binding of the nuclear factor to its responsive ?B element on BMP-2 promoter. By analyzing the genomic DNA sequence with Genomatix software (Genomatix, Germany), we identified two putative ?B binding sites (?848 to ?833 and ?1112 to ?900) on the 5?-flanking untranslated region of the human BMP-2 promoter sequence (Accession # NM_001200). Serum starved C4-2B cells were transfected for 24 hr with a control plasmid or p65 in presence of Adv-dnI?B? super-repressor or the control Adv-Null construct and subsequently analyzed by PCR for in vivo binding to the BMP-2 promoter using a chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. As shown in Figure 4b , PCR analysis of anti-65 precipitated DNA revealed increased binding to the ?B binding site (?848 to ?833) on the BMP-2 promoter in p65-expressing C4-2B cells transduced with the control Adv-Null construct. The increased binding is reduced to basal level of pcDNA transfected cells in response to Adv-dnI?B? in these cells, suggesting that NF-?B transcriptional regulation or activation of BMP-2 promoter may be induced in part by NF-?B binding to its ?B element on the BMP-2 promoter.  NF-?B Selectively Regulates Smad Gene Expression and Activation BMP-2-Smad Signaling in PC Cells To gain insight into whether the constitutively active NF-?B interferes with the BMP-Smad signaling in PC cells, we examine if this nuclear factor modulates expression and/or activation of BMP-2 downstream targets Smad-1 and Smad-5 in PC cells. We, therefore, examined by PCR, the expression of Smad-1 and Smad-5 in LNCaP and C4-2B cells pre-transduced with Adv-dnI?B? or the Adv-Null adenoviral constructs. As depicted in Figure 4c,d , Smad-1 transcript levels were significantly reduced in both cell lines in response to inhibition of NF-?B activation when compared to untreated control cells or cells transduced with control adenoviral construct. In contrast, Smad-5 mRNA levels were significantly reduced upon inhibition of NF-?B in C4-2B cells, but to a lesser extent in LNCaP cells. These results suggest that in BMP unstimulated PC cells, constitutive NF-?B is partially involved in transcriptional regulation and/or steady-state mRNA levels of Smad-5, and to a lesser extent of Smad-1, in PC cells. In another set of experiments, we tested whether constitutive NF-?B activation is critical for BMP-2-induced Smad activation in PC cells. To this end, phosphorylated Smads were detected in LNCaP and C4-2B cells pretreated with the Adv-dnI?B? or the Adv-Null control constructs and subsequently stimulated with recombinant human BMP-2 (200 ng/ml) for 1 hr. Total protein lysates were then analyzed for phospho Smad1/5/8 by Western blot analysis. Whereas no detectable changes were observed in the ?-actin protein levels, blockade of NF-?B activation by the Adv-dnI?B?, in addition to reducing Smad-1 protein levels, decreased BMP-2 induced Smad-1/5/8 phosphorylation as opposed to Adv-Null in BMP-2 treated C4-2B cells ( Fig. 5a ). The results suggest that NF-?B may be involved in activation of BMP-2-Smad signaling in osteotropic PC cells. This observation was further confirmed in C4-2B cells stimulated with TNF-? and recombinant BMP-2 proteins in presence or absence of the Adv-dnI?B?. The results, shown in Figure 5b , demonstrate that inhibition of TNF-?-induced NF-?B activation reduces both Smad-1 protein levels and Smad-1/5/8 phosphorylation by approximately 50% in BMP-2 stimulated C4-2B cells. In contrast to BMP-2, we demonstrated that NF-?B is not involved in BMP-4-induced Smad-1 protein levels or phosphorylation of Smad?1/5/8 in C4-2B cells ( Fig. 5c ). Taken together, our results suggest that NF-?B selectively up-regulates Smad transcript and protein levels and activates BMP-2-Smad signaling by enhancing phosphorylation of Smad-1/5/8 in C4-2B cells.  NF-?B Selectively Regulates Smad Gene Expression and Activation BMP-2-Smad Signaling in PC Cells To gain insight into whether the constitutively active NF-?B interferes with the BMP-Smad signaling in PC cells, we examine if this nuclear factor modulates expression and/or activation of BMP-2 downstream targets Smad-1 and Smad-5 in PC cells. We, therefore, examined by PCR, the expression of Smad-1 and Smad-5 in LNCaP and C4-2B cells pre-transduced with Adv-dnI?B? or the Adv-Null adenoviral constructs. As depicted in Figure 4c,d , Smad-1 transcript levels were significantly reduced in both cell lines in response to inhibition of NF-?B activation when compared to untreated control cells or cells transduced with control adenoviral construct. In contrast, Smad-5 mRNA levels were significantly reduced upon inhibition of NF-?B in C4-2B cells, but to a lesser extent in LNCaP cells. These results suggest that in BMP unstimulated PC cells, constitutive NF-?B is partially involved in transcriptional regulation and/or steady-state mRNA levels of Smad-5, and to a lesser extent of Smad-1, in PC cells. In another set of experiments, we tested whether constitutive NF-?B activation is critical for BMP-2-induced Smad activation in PC cells. To this end, phosphorylated Smads were detected in LNCaP and C4-2B cells pretreated with the Adv-dnI?B? or the Adv-Null control constructs and subsequently stimulated with recombinant human BMP-2 (200 ng/ml) for 1 hr. Total protein lysates were then analyzed for phospho Smad1/5/8 by Western blot analysis. Whereas no detectable changes were observed in the ?-actin protein levels, blockade of NF-?B activation by the Adv-dnI?B?, in addition to reducing Smad-1 protein levels, decreased BMP-2 induced Smad-1/5/8 phosphorylation as opposed to Adv-Null in BMP-2 treated C4-2B cells ( Fig. 5a ). The results suggest that NF-?B may be involved in activation of BMP-2-Smad signaling in osteotropic PC cells. This observation was further confirmed in C4-2B cells stimulated with TNF-? and recombinant BMP-2 proteins in presence or absence of the Adv-dnI?B?. The results, shown in Figure 5b , demonstrate that inhibition of TNF-?-induced NF-?B activation reduces both Smad-1 protein levels and Smad-1/5/8 phosphorylation by approximately 50% in BMP-2 stimulated C4-2B cells. In contrast to BMP-2, we demonstrated that NF-?B is not involved in BMP-4-induced Smad-1 protein levels or phosphorylation of Smad?1/5/8 in C4-2B cells ( Fig. 5c ). Taken together, our results suggest that NF-?B selectively up-regulates Smad transcript and protein levels and activates BMP-2-Smad signaling by enhancing phosphorylation of Smad-1/5/8 in C4-2B cells.  BMBRII Is Required for NF-?B Mediated Activation of Smad1/5/8 by BMP-2 in C4-2B Cells To further examine if NF-?B enhances BMP-2 mediated Smad protein phosphorylation independent of the BMP receptor, C4-2B cells were transfected with a dominant negative BMPRII receptor expression plasmid (pEGFP-dnBMPRII), pcDNA-p65, an I?B? super-repressor, pI?B?M, or control pcDNA expression plasmids in the presence of recombinant BMP-2 (200 ng/ml). Total protein lysates were then analyzed for phospho-Smad1/5/8 by Western blot analysis. As depicted in Figure 5d , overexpression of dnBMPRII alone or in combination with I?B? super-repressor significantly reduced Smad-1/5/8 phosphorylation in BMP-2 stimulated C4-2B cells in comparison to control BMP-2 treated cells. However, overexpression of the p65 subunit was not able to rescue dnBMPRII suppressed BMP-2-induced Smad1/5/8 phosphorylation, an effect that was further augmented in presence of the I?B? super-repressor. The data suggest that BMP-2 activation of BMPRII is required for NF-?B mediated phosphorylation of Smad-1/5/8 in C4-2B cells.  BMBRII Is Required for NF-?B Mediated Activation of Smad1/5/8 by BMP-2 in C4-2B Cells To further examine if NF-?B enhances BMP-2 mediated Smad protein phosphorylation independent of the BMP receptor, C4-2B cells were transfected with a dominant negative BMPRII receptor expression plasmid (pEGFP-dnBMPRII), pcDNA-p65, an I?B? super-repressor, pI?B?M, or control pcDNA expression plasmids in the presence of recombinant BMP-2 (200 ng/ml). Total protein lysates were then analyzed for phospho-Smad1/5/8 by Western blot analysis. As depicted in Figure 5d , overexpression of dnBMPRII alone or in combination with I?B? super-repressor significantly reduced Smad-1/5/8 phosphorylation in BMP-2 stimulated C4-2B cells in comparison to control BMP-2 treated cells. However, overexpression of the p65 subunit was not able to rescue dnBMPRII suppressed BMP-2-induced Smad1/5/8 phosphorylation, an effect that was further augmented in presence of the I?B? super-repressor. The data suggest that BMP-2 activation of BMPRII is required for NF-?B mediated phosphorylation of Smad-1/5/8 in C4-2B cells.  DISCUSSION BMPs are an important group of osteoinductive factors, which have the capacity to induce new bone formation in vivo. To this end, BMP expression has been shown to increase with PC progression. Harris et al. demonstrate that androgen-dependent LNCaP cells produce low levels of BMPs, whereas the aggressive androgen-independent PC-3 cells express high levels of BMP-2, -3, -4, and -6 [ 31 ]. In addition, the basal protein levels of BMPs were found to be elevated in prostate skeletal metastases [ 32 ], suggesting that BMPs produced by prostate tumor cells may be pivotal in the formation of osteoblastic lesions. The BMP receptors were also detected in prostate tissues and cell lines [ 32 ], indicating that autocrine and/or paracrine release of BMPs in the bone microenvironment may enhance osteo-mimicry and the metastatic potential of PC cells. However, the underlying mechanisms that modulate BMP gene expression and cell secretion, as they relate to enhancing PC metastatic potential, are yet to be delineated. That NF-?B has been implicated in transcriptional regulation of numerous genes involved in bone metastatic and hormone-refractory prostate cancer [ 33 ] prompted us to investigate its role in regulation of BMP/Smad signaling in PC cells. Our PCR analysis demonstrates that the osteotropic C4-2B subline have higher constitutive activation of NF-?B in comparison to parental soft-tissue LNCaP cells. The NF-?B selective regulation of BMP-2 in C4-2B cells was further confirmed by the transient co-transfection of NF-?B expression plasmids and a chimeric reporter plasmid encompassing a BMP-2 or BMP-4 promoter-driven luciferase gene. The selective role of constitutive or TNF-?-induced NF-?B activation in enhancing transcriptional regulation of BMP-2 mRNA, and to a lesser extent BMP-4, as well as secreted BMP-2 proteins, was verified by Adv-dnI?B? in C4-2B cells. We provide evidence at the molecular level that constitutive or induced activation of this nuclear factor in C4-2B increases transcriptional activation and autocrine production of BMP-2 and BMP-4 in C4-2B cells. Our data is consistent with previous reports linking NF-?B to BMPs in development as well as other cell systems, but not in PC cells. In the chick embryo, overexpression of a mutated form of IB? protein, which blocks NF-?B activation, leads to abnormality in limb bud development and changes in downstream signals including BMP-4 [ 34 ]. Willette et al. [ 35 ] reported that NF-?B activation led to an increase in BMP-2 expression in cardiovascular cells. In addition, it has been shown that NF-?B regulates the transcriptional activity of BMP-2 in growth plate chondrocytes during endochondral bone development [ 36 ], and that TNF-?-induces transcriptional upregulation of BMP-2 via a NF-?B-dependent mechanism in chondrocytes [ 37 ]. However, contrary to our results, one study demonstrates that NF-?B suppresses the expression of markers of osteoblast differentiation in Saos2 osteosarcoma cells by decreasing BMP-2 signaling [ 38 ]. These seemingly contradictory findings may be due to cell type-specific effects. Taken together, we demonstrate here for the first time that the constitutive activation of this nuclear transcription factor may be involved in regulating transcription and autocrine release of BMP-2 by osteotropic PC cells. These active, secreted BMPs are presumably available to act on PC cells as well as other cell targets in the bone microenvironment in autocrine and/or paracrine manner. Using specific chemical inhibitors and dominant negative expression plasmid strategies, we also demonstrate involvement of PI3K/Akt signaling in NF-?B-mediated regulation of BMP-2 and BMP-4 promoter activities in PC cells, with predominant inhibitory effects observed in C4-2B compared to LNCaP cells. Our data is concordant with the fact that constitutive activation of Akt has been reported in PC cells, which in turn stimulates the transactivation potential of the RelA/p65 subunit of NF-kappa B through utilization of the I kappa B kinase and activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase p38 [ 39 ]. However, chemical inhibition of p38 alone did not alter the NF-?B transcriptional regulation of BMP-2 and BMP-4 in C4-2B cells (Abdel-Mageed, unpublished observation), suggesting that a p38-independent mechanism is involved in crosstalk between in PI3K/Akt and transcriptional regulation of BMPs by NF-?B in PC cells. Despite the significant homology between the coding sequences for BMP-2 and BMP-4, the 5? flanking regulatory regions of the BMP-2 and BMP-4 genes are markedly distinct [ 40 ]. Based on genomic DNA sequence analysis and ChIP assay, we demonstrate in vivo the binding of NF-?B to BMP-2 promoter, suggesting that the transactivation of BMP-2 in C4-2B cells may be mediated in part by NF-?B binding to the ?B site on the 5?-flanking untranslated region of the human BMP-2 gene. Nonetheless, other evidence demonstrate that BMP-2 is a NF-?B target through involvement of IKK? and IKK? in TNF-? stimulated mouse embryonic fibroblasts [ 41 ]. It is of interest to note that the highly conserved NF-?B-binding site in the BMP-2 promoter region is absent in the 5?flanking region of the BMP-4 gene [ 40 ]. In contrast to BMP-2, our DNA analysis demonstrates that the BMP-4 promoter is GC-rich with obvious TATA or CAAT consensus sequences, does not contain putative NF-?B binding sites, but has positive and negative transcriptional regulatory elements that regulate its basal expression. Moreover, it has been shown that BMP-2 enhances BMP-4 transcripts in other cells [ 42 ], and that the initial BMP-2 stimulatory effect is followed by an inhibitory effect on BMP-4 gene expression [ 43 ]. Thus, the stimulatory effect of NF-?B on BMP-4 transcription we observed in PC cells may be induced by NF-?B autocrine production of BMP-2 in C4-2B cells. The autocrine production of BMP-4 may then inhibit its own expression in these cells. This is consistent with fact that BMP-4 inhibits its own expression in other cells, suggesting an autocrine control of BMP-4 expression [ 43 ]. This notion is further strengthened by the fact that BMP-2 protein, not BMP-4, was detected in the condition media of TNF-?-stimulated or p65 expressing C4-2B cells ( Fig. 2d ). Alternatively, accumulating evidence suggests that receptor specific Smads and Smad-4 directly participate in transcriptional complexes and function through their intrinsic C-terminus transcriptional activation domain to bind a heterologous DNA binding motif on several gene targets [ 44 , 45 ]. BMP-4 promoter revealed potential Smad binding sites [ 46 ] suggests that NF-?B may also induce transcriptional regulation of BMP-4 via activation of BMP-2-Smad signaling axis in C4-2B cells. It has been established that the receptor activation and cell signaling through BMP-2 is initiated by the binding of BMP-2 to preformed BMPR-I and BMPR-II receptor complexes followed by the phosphorylation of signal transducers Smad-1/5/8 (R-Smads) [ 47 ], and the regulation of target genes [ 48 , 49 ]. Previous reports have shown that the activation of the BMP receptor serine/threonine kinase stimulates the PI3K/Akt pathway [ 50 ]. However, the BMP-specific Smad-5 and Smad-1 do not contain any consensus Akt phosphorylation site [ 50 ], which indicates that Smads are not directly activated by PI3K/Akt and may function through intermediary molecules. This would be in contrast to other studies using the murine BMP-responsive osteogenic cell line 2T3, which suggests a positive role for PI3K/Akt in Smad signaling, with dominant negative Akt abrogating the Smad-dependent transcription of BMP-2 [ 51 ]. Importantly, inhibition of p38 kinase activity suppresses BMP-2 induced Smad-1 phosphorylation, as well as its translocation to the nucleus, suggesting that PI3K/Akt, p38, and their downstream target NF-?B are integrated with Smad-1 signaling [ 52 ]. To this end, we demonstrate that NF-?B is involved in the regulation of Smad gene expression and activation in the presence or absence of recombinant BMP-2 in C4-2B cells. Inhibition of endogenous NF-?B activation in absence of BMP-2 repressed the basal levels of Smad-1 mRNA and further suppressed BMP-2-induced Smad-1/5/8 phosphorylation in PC cells. Our data suggest that this nuclear factor regulates transcription of Smad proteins independent of BMP-2 signaling. In addition, the results also suggest a crosstalk between NF-?B and BMP-2-induced activation of Smad proteins in C4-2B cells. Our findings provide a compelling indication of how cell type-specific mechanisms mediate Smad activation. Collectively, the individual or cooperative roles of PI3K/Akt, p38, and NF-?B in BMP-2 specific Smad activation and regulation of osteogenic master switch molecules remain to be elucidated. Interestingly, the overexpression of BMPRII alone or in combination with I?B? super-repressor significantly reduced Smad-1/5/8 phosphorylation, which was not rescued by p65 expression. This suggests that constitutive or induced NF-?B activation alone is not sufficient to confer Smad-1/5/8 phosphorylation and that an intact BMP-2/BMPRII system is required for the NF-?B induced phosphorylation of Smad proteins. These findings further attest to the role of the BMP-2/BMP receptor which can activate Smad pathways via sequential activation of other signaling molecules, such as PI3K/Akt, p38 MAPK, and NF-?B in PC cells. This is consistent with previous reports that the BMP-2 signaling pathways are largely determined by the mode of BMP receptor oligomerization; signals induced by the binding of BMP-2 to preformed receptor complexes activate the Smad pathway, whereas BMP-2-induced recruitment of receptors activates a different, Smad-independent pathway including the activation of p38 MAPK [ 53 ]. Collectively, our data indicate that constitutive or stimulated NF-?B transcriptional activity regulates transcription and activation of the BMP-2-Smad signaling cascade in PI3K/Akt-dependent fashion in osteotropic PC cells. Based on our data, we propose that an increase of TNF? and IL-6 in the serum levels of advanced PC patients [ 54 , 55 ], known inducers of NF-?B signaling, may possibly enhance the transcription and release of BMP-2, and possibly BMP-4, by osteotropic PC tumor cells in a NF-?B-dependent manner, thereby enhancing their clonal expansion and metastatic potential in the bone microenvironment. The data further demonstrate that the NF-?B-BMP-2 axis may represent a new pathway by which this nuclear factor enhances osteomimicry and propensity for homing of PC cells to bone in vivo.  DISCUSSION BMPs are an important group of osteoinductive factors, which have the capacity to induce new bone formation in vivo. To this end, BMP expression has been shown to increase with PC progression. Harris et al. demonstrate that androgen-dependent LNCaP cells produce low levels of BMPs, whereas the aggressive androgen-independent PC-3 cells express high levels of BMP-2, -3, -4, and -6 [ 31 ]. In addition, the basal protein levels of BMPs were found to be elevated in prostate skeletal metastases [ 32 ], suggesting that BMPs produced by prostate tumor cells may be pivotal in the formation of osteoblastic lesions. The BMP receptors were also detected in prostate tissues and cell lines [ 32 ], indicating that autocrine and/or paracrine release of BMPs in the bone microenvironment may enhance osteo-mimicry and the metastatic potential of PC cells. However, the underlying mechanisms that modulate BMP gene expression and cell secretion, as they relate to enhancing PC metastatic potential, are yet to be delineated. That NF-?B has been implicated in transcriptional regulation of numerous genes involved in bone metastatic and hormone-refractory prostate cancer [ 33 ] prompted us to investigate its role in regulation of BMP/Smad signaling in PC cells. Our PCR analysis demonstrates that the osteotropic C4-2B subline have higher constitutive activation of NF-?B in comparison to parental soft-tissue LNCaP cells. The NF-?B selective regulation of BMP-2 in C4-2B cells was further confirmed by the transient co-transfection of NF-?B expression plasmids and a chimeric reporter plasmid encompassing a BMP-2 or BMP-4 promoter-driven luciferase gene. The selective role of constitutive or TNF-?-induced NF-?B activation in enhancing transcriptional regulation of BMP-2 mRNA, and to a lesser extent BMP-4, as well as secreted BMP-2 proteins, was verified by Adv-dnI?B? in C4-2B cells. We provide evidence at the molecular level that constitutive or induced activation of this nuclear factor in C4-2B increases transcriptional activation and autocrine production of BMP-2 and BMP-4 in C4-2B cells. Our data is consistent with previous reports linking NF-?B to BMPs in development as well as other cell systems, but not in PC cells. In the chick embryo, overexpression of a mutated form of IB? protein, which blocks NF-?B activation, leads to abnormality in limb bud development and changes in downstream signals including BMP-4 [ 34 ]. Willette et al. [ 35 ] reported that NF-?B activation led to an increase in BMP-2 expression in cardiovascular cells. In addition, it has been shown that NF-?B regulates the transcriptional activity of BMP-2 in growth plate chondrocytes during endochondral bone development [ 36 ], and that TNF-?-induces transcriptional upregulation of BMP-2 via a NF-?B-dependent mechanism in chondrocytes [ 37 ]. However, contrary to our results, one study demonstrates that NF-?B suppresses the expression of markers of osteoblast differentiation in Saos2 osteosarcoma cells by decreasing BMP-2 signaling [ 38 ]. These seemingly contradictory findings may be due to cell type-specific effects. Taken together, we demonstrate here for the first time that the constitutive activation of this nuclear transcription factor may be involved in regulating transcription and autocrine release of BMP-2 by osteotropic PC cells. These active, secreted BMPs are presumably available to act on PC cells as well as other cell targets in the bone microenvironment in autocrine and/or paracrine manner. Using specific chemical inhibitors and dominant negative expression plasmid strategies, we also demonstrate involvement of PI3K/Akt signaling in NF-?B-mediated regulation of BMP-2 and BMP-4 promoter activities in PC cells, with predominant inhibitory effects observed in C4-2B compared to LNCaP cells. Our data is concordant with the fact that constitutive activation of Akt has been reported in PC cells, which in turn stimulates the transactivation potential of the RelA/p65 subunit of NF-kappa B through utilization of the I kappa B kinase and activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase p38 [ 39 ]. However, chemical inhibition of p38 alone did not alter the NF-?B transcriptional regulation of BMP-2 and BMP-4 in C4-2B cells (Abdel-Mageed, unpublished observation), suggesting that a p38-independent mechanism is involved in crosstalk between in PI3K/Akt and transcriptional regulation of BMPs by NF-?B in PC cells. Despite the significant homology between the coding sequences for BMP-2 and BMP-4, the 5? flanking regulatory regions of the BMP-2 and BMP-4 genes are markedly distinct [ 40 ]. Based on genomic DNA sequence analysis and ChIP assay, we demonstrate in vivo the binding of NF-?B to BMP-2 promoter, suggesting that the transactivation of BMP-2 in C4-2B cells may be mediated in part by NF-?B binding to the ?B site on the 5?-flanking untranslated region of the human BMP-2 gene. Nonetheless, other evidence demonstrate that BMP-2 is a NF-?B target through involvement of IKK? and IKK? in TNF-? stimulated mouse embryonic fibroblasts [ 41 ]. It is of interest to note that the highly conserved NF-?B-binding site in the BMP-2 promoter region is absent in the 5?flanking region of the BMP-4 gene [ 40 ]. In contrast to BMP-2, our DNA analysis demonstrates that the BMP-4 promoter is GC-rich with obvious TATA or CAAT consensus sequences, does not contain putative NF-?B binding sites, but has positive and negative transcriptional regulatory elements that regulate its basal expression. Moreover, it has been shown that BMP-2 enhances BMP-4 transcripts in other cells [ 42 ], and that the initial BMP-2 stimulatory effect is followed by an inhibitory effect on BMP-4 gene expression [ 43 ]. Thus, the stimulatory effect of NF-?B on BMP-4 transcription we observed in PC cells may be induced by NF-?B autocrine production of BMP-2 in C4-2B cells. The autocrine production of BMP-4 may then inhibit its own expression in these cells. This is consistent with fact that BMP-4 inhibits its own expression in other cells, suggesting an autocrine control of BMP-4 expression [ 43 ]. This notion is further strengthened by the fact that BMP-2 protein, not BMP-4, was detected in the condition media of TNF-?-stimulated or p65 expressing C4-2B cells ( Fig. 2d ). Alternatively, accumulating evidence suggests that receptor specific Smads and Smad-4 directly participate in transcriptional complexes and function through their intrinsic C-terminus transcriptional activation domain to bind a heterologous DNA binding motif on several gene targets [ 44 , 45 ]. BMP-4 promoter revealed potential Smad binding sites [ 46 ] suggests that NF-?B may also induce transcriptional regulation of BMP-4 via activation of BMP-2-Smad signaling axis in C4-2B cells. It has been established that the receptor activation and cell signaling through BMP-2 is initiated by the binding of BMP-2 to preformed BMPR-I and BMPR-II receptor complexes followed by the phosphorylation of signal transducers Smad-1/5/8 (R-Smads) [ 47 ], and the regulation of target genes [ 48 , 49 ]. Previous reports have shown that the activation of the BMP receptor serine/threonine kinase stimulates the PI3K/Akt pathway [ 50 ]. However, the BMP-specific Smad-5 and Smad-1 do not contain any consensus Akt phosphorylation site [ 50 ], which indicates that Smads are not directly activated by PI3K/Akt and may function through intermediary molecules. This would be in contrast to other studies using the murine BMP-responsive osteogenic cell line 2T3, which suggests a positive role for PI3K/Akt in Smad signaling, with dominant negative Akt abrogating the Smad-dependent transcription of BMP-2 [ 51 ]. Importantly, inhibition of p38 kinase activity suppresses BMP-2 induced Smad-1 phosphorylation, as well as its translocation to the nucleus, suggesting that PI3K/Akt, p38, and their downstream target NF-?B are integrated with Smad-1 signaling [ 52 ]. To this end, we demonstrate that NF-?B is involved in the regulation of Smad gene expression and activation in the presence or absence of recombinant BMP-2 in C4-2B cells. Inhibition of endogenous NF-?B activation in absence of BMP-2 repressed the basal levels of Smad-1 mRNA and further suppressed BMP-2-induced Smad-1/5/8 phosphorylation in PC cells. Our data suggest that this nuclear factor regulates transcription of Smad proteins independent of BMP-2 signaling. In addition, the results also suggest a crosstalk between NF-?B and BMP-2-induced activation of Smad proteins in C4-2B cells. Our findings provide a compelling indication of how cell type-specific mechanisms mediate Smad activation. Collectively, the individual or cooperative roles of PI3K/Akt, p38, and NF-?B in BMP-2 specific Smad activation and regulation of osteogenic master switch molecules remain to be elucidated. Interestingly, the overexpression of BMPRII alone or in combination with I?B? super-repressor significantly reduced Smad-1/5/8 phosphorylation, which was not rescued by p65 expression. This suggests that constitutive or induced NF-?B activation alone is not sufficient to confer Smad-1/5/8 phosphorylation and that an intact BMP-2/BMPRII system is required for the NF-?B induced phosphorylation of Smad proteins. These findings further attest to the role of the BMP-2/BMP receptor which can activate Smad pathways via sequential activation of other signaling molecules, such as PI3K/Akt, p38 MAPK, and NF-?B in PC cells. This is consistent with previous reports that the BMP-2 signaling pathways are largely determined by the mode of BMP receptor oligomerization; signals induced by the binding of BMP-2 to preformed receptor complexes activate the Smad pathway, whereas BMP-2-induced recruitment of receptors activates a different, Smad-independent pathway including the activation of p38 MAPK [ 53 ]. Collectively, our data indicate that constitutive or stimulated NF-?B transcriptional activity regulates transcription and activation of the BMP-2-Smad signaling cascade in PI3K/Akt-dependent fashion in osteotropic PC cells. Based on our data, we propose that an increase of TNF? and IL-6 in the serum levels of advanced PC patients [ 54 , 55 ], known inducers of NF-?B signaling, may possibly enhance the transcription and release of BMP-2, and possibly BMP-4, by osteotropic PC tumor cells in a NF-?B-dependent manner, thereby enhancing their clonal expansion and metastatic potential in the bone microenvironment. The data further demonstrate that the NF-?B-BMP-2 axis may represent a new pathway by which this nuclear factor enhances osteomimicry and propensity for homing of PC cells to bone in vivo. 