Fetal Inflammatory Response in Women with Proteomic Biomarkers Characteristic of Intra-Amniotic Inflammation and Preterm Birth Objective To determine the relationship between presence of amniotic fluid (AF) biomarkers characteristic of inflammation (defensins 2 and 1, calgranulins C and A) and fetal inflammatory status at birth. Design Prospective observational cohort. Setting Tertiary referral University hospital Population 132 consecutive mothers (gestational age, median [interquartile range]: 29.6 [24.1-33.6] weeks), who had a clinically indicated amniocentesis to rule-out infection and their newborns. Methods Intra-amniotic inflammation was diagnosed by mass spectrometry SELDI-TOF. The AF proteomic fingerprint [Mass Restricted (MR) score] ranges from 0-4 (none to all biomarkers present). The intensity of intra-amniotic inflammation was graded based on the number of proteomic biomarkers: MR score 0: “no” inflammation; MR score 1-2: “minimal” inflammation; MR score 3-4: “severe” inflammation. At birth, cord blood was obtained for all cases. Severity of histological chorioamnionitis (HCA) and early onset neonatal sepsis (EONS) was based on established histological and hematological criteria. Interleukin-6 (IL-6) levels were measured by sensitive immunoassays. The cord blood-to-AF IL-6 ratio was used as an indicator of the differential inflammatory response in the fetal versus the AF compartment. Main Outcome Measures to relate proteomic biomarkers of intra-amniotic infection to cord blood IL-6 and to use the latter as the primary marker of fetal inflammatory response. Results Women with intra-amniotic inflammation delivered at an earlier gestational age (ANOVA, P<0.001) and had higher AF IL-6 levels (P<0.001). At birth, neonates of women with “severe” intra-amniotic inflammation had higher cord blood IL-6 levels (P=0.002) and a higher frequency of EONS (P=0.002). EONS was characterized by significantly elevated cord blood IL-6 levels (P<0.001). Out of the 39 neonates delivered by mothers with “minimal” intra-amniotic inflammation, 15 (39%) had umbilical cord blood IL-6 levels above the mean for the group, and 2 neonates had confirmed sepsis. The severity of the neutrophilic infiltrate in the chorionic plate (P<0.001), choriodecidua (P=0.002), umbilical cord (P<0.001), but not amnion (P>0.05) was an independent predictor of the cord blood-to-AF IL-6 ratio. Relationships were maintained following correction for gestational age, birthweight, amniocentesis-to delivery interval, cesarean delivery, status of the membranes, race, MR score, antibiotics and steroid exposure. Conclusion We provide evidence that presence in the AF of proteomic biomarkers characteristic of inflammation is associated with an increased inflammatory status of the fetus at birth. Neonates mount an increased inflammatory status and have positive blood cultures even in the context of “minimal” intra-amniotic inflammation.  Methods Study population and research design We studied prospectively 132 consecutive preterm singleton neonates born to mothers who had an amniocentesis to rule out infection. Women were recruited following admission to Labor and Birth or to the High Risk antepartum units at Yale New Haven Hospital (YNHH). Amniocentesis was indicated independent of our study protocol. The Human Investigation Committee of Yale University approved our study. Amniotic fluid was collected by ultrasound-guided amniocentesis for all the participants and each woman was followed prospectively to the point of delivery. Inclusion criteria included: a singleton fetus, gestational age ?23.1 weeks, symptoms of preterm labor, preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM), advanced cervical dilatation (>3 cm), or uterine contractions intractable to tocolysis. Women with anhydramnios, human immunodeficiency or hepatitis viral infections were not enrolled. Gestational age was determined based on last menstrual period and ultrasound information obtained prior to 20 weeks of gestation. 24 Preterm labor was defined as the presence of regular uterine contractions and documented cervical effacement and/or dilatation in patients <37 weeks gestational age. The diagnosis of PPROM was confirmed by vaginal AF “pooling”, “nitrazine”, “ferning” or by an amniocentesis-dye positive test. In the absence of infection PPROM was managed expectantly, and no digital exams were permitted. Patients received corticosteroids for lung maturity if <32 weeks gestational age and antibiotic therapy as clinically indicated. 25 The neonatology resuscitation team was present at the time of delivery for all cases. Laboratory tests performed for the purpose of diagnosing infection/inflammation were: glucose, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), Gram stain and white blood cell (WBC) count. For clinical management, an AF glucose cut-off of ?15 mg/dL and LDH levels ?419 U/L were considered suggestive of intra-amniotic infection. 26 , 27 Amniotic fluid not used for clinical purposes was spun at 3000 × g at 4°C for 20 min., aliquoted and immediately stored at ?80°C until IL-6 levels were measured by a specific and sensitive immunoassay. Microbiological analysis of AFs by culture Amniotic fluid was retrieved using sterile techniques and examined immediately for the presence of microorganisms using the traditional culturing method. Briefly, AF was centrifuged and the sediment re-suspended in 0.25 ml of supernatant. The concentrated AF was cultured for anaerobic bacteria, Ureaplasma and Mycoplasma spp using laboratory media such as Chocolate, Martin Lewis, MacConkey, Azido benzoic acid, Thioglycollate, Bacteroides Bile Esculin/Laked Blood Kanamycin Vancomycin (BBE/LKV) and Columbia CNA agar, Ureaplasma broth and agar. In addition the AF was cultured in an anaerobic chamber (Forma Anaerobic System, Thermo Electron Co, Waltham, MA) at 37 °C. The results of the microbiological tests were available for case management and were reported as final after 5 days of culturing. Presumptive bacterial identification was based on standard microbiological criteria of colonial morphology, medium reaction, Gram stain and the use of a VITEK 2 automated card system (bioMérieux, Hazelwood, MO, http://www.biomerieux-usa.com ) for bacterial identification based on biochemical tests and antibiotic susceptibility. MR score Fresh AF was used to generate the MR score. The method for generation of the MR score has been previously described. 18 The MR score ranges from 0 to 4, depending upon the presence or absence of each of the 4 protein biomarkers. 18 A value of 1 was assigned if a biomarker peak was present and 0 if absent. Based on our previous results, we stratified the study population based on the “severity” of inflammation (MR 0: “no” inflammation; MR 1-2: “minimal” inflammation; MR 3-4: “severe” inflammation). 19 All SELDI assays and scorings of the AF samples were performed by one investigator (IAB) without knowledge of the maternal clinical outcome, the results of the placental histological examination, AF and umbilical cord IL-6 levels and EONS. Umbilical cord blood Umbilical cord blood was obtained by aseptic puncture of the clamped umbilical vein at the time of delivery. Immediately following collection, the cord blood was centrifuged at 1000g for 15 minutes. Serum was aliquoted in sterile polypropylene tubes and stored at ?80°C until IL-6 levels were examined. Immunoassays for the IL-6 Enzyme-Linked ImmunoSorbent Assay for human IL-6 (Pierce-Endogen, Rockford, IL) was performed in duplicate according to manufacturers' instructions by investigators unaware of the AF and umbilical cord blood sample origin. The minimal detectable concentration was 1-pg/mL and the inter- and intra-assay coefficients of variation <10%. Histological evaluation of the placenta and diagnosis of inflammation In all 132 cases, hematoxylin and eosin- stained sections of extraplacental membranes (amnion and chorio-decidua), chorionic plate, chorio-decidua and umbilical cord were examined systematically for inflammation. Three histological stages of chorioamnionitis 28 (stage I: intervillositis, stage II: chorionic inflammation, and stage III: full-thickness inflammation of both chorion and amnion) were complemented by a previously described histological grading system that includes 4 grades of inflammation of the amnion, chorio-decidua and umbilical cord. 29 Evaluation of EONS Neonatal hematological indices and sepsis categorization were assessed from blood specimens and cultures obtained within 2 hours from the time of birth by an investigator (VB) unaware of the results of the umbilical cord IL-6 levels, proteomic profiling of the AF or histological evaluation of the placenta. 19 , 22 All 132 neonates were admitted to the Yale Newborn Special Care Unit. Neonatal sepsis was defined as the presence of confirmed or suspected sepsis at ? 72 hours after birth. Confirmed sepsis represented the presence of a positive blood culture. A diagnosis of EONS was based on clinical symptoms corroborated with hematological laboratory results. 30 , 31 The following hematological criteria were used as indicators of EONS: 1). absolute neutrophil count of < 7500 or > 14,500 cells/mm3; 2). Absolute band count > 1500 cells/mm3; 3). Immature/total neutrophil (I:T) ratio > 0.16; 4). Platelet count < 150,000 cells/mm3.32 Sepsis was suspected in the presence of ?2 hematological criteria in the absence of a positive blood culture. Early-onset neonatal sepsis was dichotomized into present (when sepsis was either confirmed or suspected) or absent. All neonates with confirmed or suspected sepsis received antibiotic therapy, per institutional protocol. The results of the AF IL-6 levels, histological examination of the placenta and presence or absence of EONS for 79 women were previously used in studies aimed to explore the maternal and fetal response to intrauterine infection/inflammation. 19 , 22 , 23 , 54 The relationship between the MR score and levels of cord blood IL-6, the results of the AF and cord blood IL-6 levels, histological examination of the placenta and specific hematological indices suggestive of EONS for 53 subjects included in the current submission have not been reported before. The relationship between cord blood IL-6 levels, EONS and absolute neutrophil cont as well as the results of the relationship between cord blood IL-6 to AF IL-6 ratio and histological examination of the placenta for all 132 cases included in the present analysis are novel. Statistical analysis Statistical analyses were performed with Sigma Stat, version 2.03 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL) and MedCalc (Broekstraat, Belgium) statistical softwares. Normality testing was performed using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Data were compared with one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnet's tests (parametric) or Kruskal-Wallis on ranks followed by Dunn's tests (non-parametric), to adjust for multiple comparisons as appropriate. The IL-6 concentrations were presented as arithmetic means with inter-quartile range. Statistical analysis was completed before (Kruskall-Wallis ANOVA) or after (One-Way ANOVA) logarithmic transformation of data. Pearson correlations were used to measure co-linearity between the selected independent variables as well as other relevant relationships between dependent and independent variables. Comparisons between proportions were done with Chi-square tests. Stepwise multivariable regression analysis was used to determine concurrent relationships between variables and to correct for possible influences of gestational age and birthweight. A p value of <0.05 was considered significant throughout the analysis.  Study population and research design We studied prospectively 132 consecutive preterm singleton neonates born to mothers who had an amniocentesis to rule out infection. Women were recruited following admission to Labor and Birth or to the High Risk antepartum units at Yale New Haven Hospital (YNHH). Amniocentesis was indicated independent of our study protocol. The Human Investigation Committee of Yale University approved our study. Amniotic fluid was collected by ultrasound-guided amniocentesis for all the participants and each woman was followed prospectively to the point of delivery. Inclusion criteria included: a singleton fetus, gestational age ?23.1 weeks, symptoms of preterm labor, preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM), advanced cervical dilatation (>3 cm), or uterine contractions intractable to tocolysis. Women with anhydramnios, human immunodeficiency or hepatitis viral infections were not enrolled. Gestational age was determined based on last menstrual period and ultrasound information obtained prior to 20 weeks of gestation. 24 Preterm labor was defined as the presence of regular uterine contractions and documented cervical effacement and/or dilatation in patients <37 weeks gestational age. The diagnosis of PPROM was confirmed by vaginal AF “pooling”, “nitrazine”, “ferning” or by an amniocentesis-dye positive test. In the absence of infection PPROM was managed expectantly, and no digital exams were permitted. Patients received corticosteroids for lung maturity if <32 weeks gestational age and antibiotic therapy as clinically indicated. 25 The neonatology resuscitation team was present at the time of delivery for all cases. Laboratory tests performed for the purpose of diagnosing infection/inflammation were: glucose, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), Gram stain and white blood cell (WBC) count. For clinical management, an AF glucose cut-off of ?15 mg/dL and LDH levels ?419 U/L were considered suggestive of intra-amniotic infection. 26 , 27 Amniotic fluid not used for clinical purposes was spun at 3000 × g at 4°C for 20 min., aliquoted and immediately stored at ?80°C until IL-6 levels were measured by a specific and sensitive immunoassay.  Microbiological analysis of AFs by culture Amniotic fluid was retrieved using sterile techniques and examined immediately for the presence of microorganisms using the traditional culturing method. Briefly, AF was centrifuged and the sediment re-suspended in 0.25 ml of supernatant. The concentrated AF was cultured for anaerobic bacteria, Ureaplasma and Mycoplasma spp using laboratory media such as Chocolate, Martin Lewis, MacConkey, Azido benzoic acid, Thioglycollate, Bacteroides Bile Esculin/Laked Blood Kanamycin Vancomycin (BBE/LKV) and Columbia CNA agar, Ureaplasma broth and agar. In addition the AF was cultured in an anaerobic chamber (Forma Anaerobic System, Thermo Electron Co, Waltham, MA) at 37 °C. The results of the microbiological tests were available for case management and were reported as final after 5 days of culturing. Presumptive bacterial identification was based on standard microbiological criteria of colonial morphology, medium reaction, Gram stain and the use of a VITEK 2 automated card system (bioMérieux, Hazelwood, MO, http://www.biomerieux-usa.com ) for bacterial identification based on biochemical tests and antibiotic susceptibility.  MR score Fresh AF was used to generate the MR score. The method for generation of the MR score has been previously described. 18 The MR score ranges from 0 to 4, depending upon the presence or absence of each of the 4 protein biomarkers. 18 A value of 1 was assigned if a biomarker peak was present and 0 if absent. Based on our previous results, we stratified the study population based on the “severity” of inflammation (MR 0: “no” inflammation; MR 1-2: “minimal” inflammation; MR 3-4: “severe” inflammation). 19 All SELDI assays and scorings of the AF samples were performed by one investigator (IAB) without knowledge of the maternal clinical outcome, the results of the placental histological examination, AF and umbilical cord IL-6 levels and EONS.  Umbilical cord blood Umbilical cord blood was obtained by aseptic puncture of the clamped umbilical vein at the time of delivery. Immediately following collection, the cord blood was centrifuged at 1000g for 15 minutes. Serum was aliquoted in sterile polypropylene tubes and stored at ?80°C until IL-6 levels were examined.  Immunoassays for the IL-6 Enzyme-Linked ImmunoSorbent Assay for human IL-6 (Pierce-Endogen, Rockford, IL) was performed in duplicate according to manufacturers' instructions by investigators unaware of the AF and umbilical cord blood sample origin. The minimal detectable concentration was 1-pg/mL and the inter- and intra-assay coefficients of variation <10%.  Histological evaluation of the placenta and diagnosis of inflammation In all 132 cases, hematoxylin and eosin- stained sections of extraplacental membranes (amnion and chorio-decidua), chorionic plate, chorio-decidua and umbilical cord were examined systematically for inflammation. Three histological stages of chorioamnionitis 28 (stage I: intervillositis, stage II: chorionic inflammation, and stage III: full-thickness inflammation of both chorion and amnion) were complemented by a previously described histological grading system that includes 4 grades of inflammation of the amnion, chorio-decidua and umbilical cord. 29  Evaluation of EONS Neonatal hematological indices and sepsis categorization were assessed from blood specimens and cultures obtained within 2 hours from the time of birth by an investigator (VB) unaware of the results of the umbilical cord IL-6 levels, proteomic profiling of the AF or histological evaluation of the placenta. 19 , 22 All 132 neonates were admitted to the Yale Newborn Special Care Unit. Neonatal sepsis was defined as the presence of confirmed or suspected sepsis at ? 72 hours after birth. Confirmed sepsis represented the presence of a positive blood culture. A diagnosis of EONS was based on clinical symptoms corroborated with hematological laboratory results. 30 , 31 The following hematological criteria were used as indicators of EONS: 1). absolute neutrophil count of < 7500 or > 14,500 cells/mm3; 2). Absolute band count > 1500 cells/mm3; 3). Immature/total neutrophil (I:T) ratio > 0.16; 4). Platelet count < 150,000 cells/mm3.32 Sepsis was suspected in the presence of ?2 hematological criteria in the absence of a positive blood culture. Early-onset neonatal sepsis was dichotomized into present (when sepsis was either confirmed or suspected) or absent. All neonates with confirmed or suspected sepsis received antibiotic therapy, per institutional protocol. The results of the AF IL-6 levels, histological examination of the placenta and presence or absence of EONS for 79 women were previously used in studies aimed to explore the maternal and fetal response to intrauterine infection/inflammation. 19 , 22 , 23 , 54 The relationship between the MR score and levels of cord blood IL-6, the results of the AF and cord blood IL-6 levels, histological examination of the placenta and specific hematological indices suggestive of EONS for 53 subjects included in the current submission have not been reported before. The relationship between cord blood IL-6 levels, EONS and absolute neutrophil cont as well as the results of the relationship between cord blood IL-6 to AF IL-6 ratio and histological examination of the placenta for all 132 cases included in the present analysis are novel.  Statistical analysis Statistical analyses were performed with Sigma Stat, version 2.03 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL) and MedCalc (Broekstraat, Belgium) statistical softwares. Normality testing was performed using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Data were compared with one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnet's tests (parametric) or Kruskal-Wallis on ranks followed by Dunn's tests (non-parametric), to adjust for multiple comparisons as appropriate. The IL-6 concentrations were presented as arithmetic means with inter-quartile range. Statistical analysis was completed before (Kruskall-Wallis ANOVA) or after (One-Way ANOVA) logarithmic transformation of data. Pearson correlations were used to measure co-linearity between the selected independent variables as well as other relevant relationships between dependent and independent variables. Comparisons between proportions were done with Chi-square tests. Stepwise multivariable regression analysis was used to determine concurrent relationships between variables and to correct for possible influences of gestational age and birthweight. A p value of <0.05 was considered significant throughout the analysis.  Results In Table 1 we present the clinical characteristics of the study subjects at the time of enrollment and their pregnancy outcomes. In this cohort, women of African American descent were more frequently diagnosed with “severe” (MR score 3-4) intra-amniotic inflammation. Women with MR scores 3-4 were of lower gestational age and more often had symptoms of clinical chorioamnionitis compared with the group of women with “no” (MR score 0) or “minimal” inflammation (MR score 1-2). Similarly, women with “severe” inflammation had a shorter amniocentesis to delivery interval, and consequently, gave birth at an earlier gestational age compared to the other 2 groups. At birth, neonates of mothers with “severe” inflammation had lower birthweight and Apgar scores. Women with “severe” inflammation of the AF more often underwent Cesarean section delivery. We present the results of the AF analysis in Table 2 . Women with “severe” intra-amniotic inflammation had lower AF glucose, higher LDH and WBC counts compared to the women with “no” or “minimal” inflammation. This finding was consistent with a higher prevalence of a positive Gram stain and a positive microbial culture of the AF in the group of women with “severe” inflammation. There was a significant inverse correlation between gestational age at enrollment and intra-amniotic infection as determined by a positive microbial culture (R= - 407, P<0.001). Pathological examination of the placenta demonstrated that “severe” inflammation of the AF was associated with a higher incidence and grades/stages of amniochorion, chorionic plate, and umbilical cord histological inflammation ( Table 3 ). We found that neonates delivered by mothers with MR scores 3-4 were more often anemic and had leukocytosis ( Table 4 ). These neonates were lymphopenic, had bandemia and a higher I:T neutrophil ratio. Overall, 6 neonates had confirmed sepsis documented by a positive blood culture. Two of the neonates were delivered by mothers with negative AF cultures but had MR scores of 2. All mothers with MR scores 3-4 who delivered neonates with proven sepsis (n=4) had positive AF cultures [ Escherichia coli (n=3); mixed flora: Staphylococcus aureus and Corynebacterium (n=1)]. Neonates delivered by mothers with AF MR score 3-4, more often had a hematological work-up suggestive of EONS compared to neonates delivered by mothers with MR score 0 or MR score 1-2. This relationship persisted after adjusting for gestational age at birth. The overall prevalence of EONS in our cohort was 26% (34/132) of which 56% of instances occurred in the context of PPROM. Interestingly, 5 of the 6 cases with proven sepsis documented by positive blood cultures occurred in the context of intact membranes. The AF IL-6 levels of women with MR scores 3-4 were significantly higher compared to the level of women with “no” or “minimal” inflammation (median [interquartile range], MR score 0: 0.3 [0.1 - 0.7] vs. MR score 1-2: 1.3 [0.5 - 3.9] vs. MR score 3-4: 22.1 [8.5 – 58.2] ng/ml, Kruskal Wallis ANOVA, P< 0.001) ( Figure 1A ). Neonates delivered by mothers with MR scores 3-4 had higher umbilical cord IL-6, compared to neonates delivered by mothers with “no” or “minimal” inflammation ( MR score 0: 5.9 [5.5 - 8.6] vs. MR score 1-2: 6.9 [5.4 - 97.6] vs. MR score 3-4: 28.9 [8.5 -161.3] pg/ml, P<0.001) ( Figure 1B ). Out of the 39 neonates delivered by mothers with MR score 1-2, 15 (39%) had umbilical cord blood IL-6 levels above the mean for the group. Two neonates had confirmed sepsis. The two neonates with positive blood cultures delivered by mothers with MR score 1-2 had umbilical cord blood IL-6 levels considerably above the mean for their group (IL-6 absolute values: 49,834 and 1,533 pg/ml, respectively). This occurred in the context of low AF IL-6 levels (IL-6 absolute values: 0.134 and 3.9 ng/mL). Both neonates had an amniocentesis to delivery interval less than 4 hours. Evaluation of white matter disorders showed that both neonates developed periventricular leucomalacia. In addition, the neuro-developmental outcome assessment at 18 months of age showed that both children had cerebral palsy. Two of the 4 neonates delivered by mothers with MR score 3-4 who had documented positive blood cultures expired soon after delivery (umbilical cord IL-6 absolute levels: 19,817 and 77.2 pg/ml, respectively). The other 2 neonates did not develop periventricular leucomalacia (umbilical cord IL-6 absolute levels: 90.2 and 460.6 pg/ml, respectively). The results of the neuro-developmental outcome at 18 months of age for the first infant showed mild gross motor delay for which the infant is currently getting therapy. The results of the neuro-developmental outcome for the second infant were not available at the time of this report. The amniocentesis to delivery interval was less than 10 hours for all 4 neonates. Of all the hematological indices that comprise EONS criteria, cord blood IL-6 correlated best with the I:T neutrophil ratio (R=0.501, P<0.001) and the absolute band count (R=0.330, P<0.001). Cord blood IL-6 correlated inversely with the degree of anemia as measured by neonatal hemoglobin concentration (R= -337, P<0.001) and hematocrit (R= -0.300, P<0.001). Neonates diagnosed with EONS had significantly higher cord blood IL-6 levels ( No EONS: 7.9 [5.8-37.2] vs. Yes EONS: 83.7 [17.3 – 361.6] pg/ml, P<0.001) ( Figure 2A ). At birth, there was a significant inverse correlation between the absolute neutrophil count and cord blood IL-6 levels, which was maintained following correction for gestational age and birthweight (R= -0.439, P<0.001) ( Figure 2B ). Overall, there was a significant correlation between the AF and cord blood IL-6 levels (R= 0.415, P<0.001) as shown in Figure 3 . However, in 94% of the cases, (124/132) the absolute value AF IL-6 concentration was higher than that measured in the umbilical cord blood. When separated by severity of intra-amniotic inflammation as depicted by the MR score, a disproportionate increase in AF IL-6 level compared to the fetal compartment was seen in cases complicated by severe AF inflammation. This lead to an apparent decrease in the proportion of cord blood IL-6 relative to that in AF (cord blood-to-AF IL-6 ratio: MR score 0: 2.8% [1.0-5.2] vs. MR score 1-2: 1.4% [0.4-6.4] vs. MR score 3-4: 0.2% [0.1-1.2], P<0.001). Because of the variability in the fetal response to the severity of intra-amniotic inflammation, we searched for factors that may impact on the degree to which AF inflammation leads to an increase in cord blood IL-6 levels. Multivariate stepwise analysis was conducted, with the cord blood-to-AF IL-6 ratio as the dependent variable and parameters such as HCA and funisitis, gestational age at delivery, birthweight, amniocentesis-to delivery interval, cesarean delivery, status of the membranes, race, MR score, antibiotics and steroid exposure as independent variables. We found out that the intensity of intra-amniotic inflammation as determined by the MR score in conjunction with the degree of both HCA and funisitis predicted the cord blood-to-AF IL-6 ratio (F ratio: 16.6, R= 0.540, P<0.001). This suggests that the degree of placental inflammation is an important factor in modulating cytokine levels in the fetuses of women whose pregnancies are complicated by intra-amniotic inflammation. To further explore this possibility, the relationship between the extent of the inflammatory infiltrate in the amnion, chorio-decidua, chorionic plate blood vessels (stages of histological chorioamnionitis) and umbilical cord (grades of funisitis) was examined, yielding a significant increase in cord blood-to-AF IL-6 ratio in the context of stages II and III neutrophil infiltration of the chorionic plate ( Figure 4A , ANOVA, P<0.001), grades 3-4 choriodeciduitis ( Figure 4B , P=0.002) and grades 2-4 funisitis ( Figure 4C , P<0.001). Conversely, the cord blood-to-AF IL-6 ratio was not influenced by the degree of amnionitis (P>0.05).  Results In Table 1 we present the clinical characteristics of the study subjects at the time of enrollment and their pregnancy outcomes. In this cohort, women of African American descent were more frequently diagnosed with “severe” (MR score 3-4) intra-amniotic inflammation. Women with MR scores 3-4 were of lower gestational age and more often had symptoms of clinical chorioamnionitis compared with the group of women with “no” (MR score 0) or “minimal” inflammation (MR score 1-2). Similarly, women with “severe” inflammation had a shorter amniocentesis to delivery interval, and consequently, gave birth at an earlier gestational age compared to the other 2 groups. At birth, neonates of mothers with “severe” inflammation had lower birthweight and Apgar scores. Women with “severe” inflammation of the AF more often underwent Cesarean section delivery. We present the results of the AF analysis in Table 2 . Women with “severe” intra-amniotic inflammation had lower AF glucose, higher LDH and WBC counts compared to the women with “no” or “minimal” inflammation. This finding was consistent with a higher prevalence of a positive Gram stain and a positive microbial culture of the AF in the group of women with “severe” inflammation. There was a significant inverse correlation between gestational age at enrollment and intra-amniotic infection as determined by a positive microbial culture (R= - 407, P<0.001). Pathological examination of the placenta demonstrated that “severe” inflammation of the AF was associated with a higher incidence and grades/stages of amniochorion, chorionic plate, and umbilical cord histological inflammation ( Table 3 ). We found that neonates delivered by mothers with MR scores 3-4 were more often anemic and had leukocytosis ( Table 4 ). These neonates were lymphopenic, had bandemia and a higher I:T neutrophil ratio. Overall, 6 neonates had confirmed sepsis documented by a positive blood culture. Two of the neonates were delivered by mothers with negative AF cultures but had MR scores of 2. All mothers with MR scores 3-4 who delivered neonates with proven sepsis (n=4) had positive AF cultures [ Escherichia coli (n=3); mixed flora: Staphylococcus aureus and Corynebacterium (n=1)]. Neonates delivered by mothers with AF MR score 3-4, more often had a hematological work-up suggestive of EONS compared to neonates delivered by mothers with MR score 0 or MR score 1-2. This relationship persisted after adjusting for gestational age at birth. The overall prevalence of EONS in our cohort was 26% (34/132) of which 56% of instances occurred in the context of PPROM. Interestingly, 5 of the 6 cases with proven sepsis documented by positive blood cultures occurred in the context of intact membranes. The AF IL-6 levels of women with MR scores 3-4 were significantly higher compared to the level of women with “no” or “minimal” inflammation (median [interquartile range], MR score 0: 0.3 [0.1 - 0.7] vs. MR score 1-2: 1.3 [0.5 - 3.9] vs. MR score 3-4: 22.1 [8.5 – 58.2] ng/ml, Kruskal Wallis ANOVA, P< 0.001) ( Figure 1A ). Neonates delivered by mothers with MR scores 3-4 had higher umbilical cord IL-6, compared to neonates delivered by mothers with “no” or “minimal” inflammation ( MR score 0: 5.9 [5.5 - 8.6] vs. MR score 1-2: 6.9 [5.4 - 97.6] vs. MR score 3-4: 28.9 [8.5 -161.3] pg/ml, P<0.001) ( Figure 1B ). Out of the 39 neonates delivered by mothers with MR score 1-2, 15 (39%) had umbilical cord blood IL-6 levels above the mean for the group. Two neonates had confirmed sepsis. The two neonates with positive blood cultures delivered by mothers with MR score 1-2 had umbilical cord blood IL-6 levels considerably above the mean for their group (IL-6 absolute values: 49,834 and 1,533 pg/ml, respectively). This occurred in the context of low AF IL-6 levels (IL-6 absolute values: 0.134 and 3.9 ng/mL). Both neonates had an amniocentesis to delivery interval less than 4 hours. Evaluation of white matter disorders showed that both neonates developed periventricular leucomalacia. In addition, the neuro-developmental outcome assessment at 18 months of age showed that both children had cerebral palsy. Two of the 4 neonates delivered by mothers with MR score 3-4 who had documented positive blood cultures expired soon after delivery (umbilical cord IL-6 absolute levels: 19,817 and 77.2 pg/ml, respectively). The other 2 neonates did not develop periventricular leucomalacia (umbilical cord IL-6 absolute levels: 90.2 and 460.6 pg/ml, respectively). The results of the neuro-developmental outcome at 18 months of age for the first infant showed mild gross motor delay for which the infant is currently getting therapy. The results of the neuro-developmental outcome for the second infant were not available at the time of this report. The amniocentesis to delivery interval was less than 10 hours for all 4 neonates. Of all the hematological indices that comprise EONS criteria, cord blood IL-6 correlated best with the I:T neutrophil ratio (R=0.501, P<0.001) and the absolute band count (R=0.330, P<0.001). Cord blood IL-6 correlated inversely with the degree of anemia as measured by neonatal hemoglobin concentration (R= -337, P<0.001) and hematocrit (R= -0.300, P<0.001). Neonates diagnosed with EONS had significantly higher cord blood IL-6 levels ( No EONS: 7.9 [5.8-37.2] vs. Yes EONS: 83.7 [17.3 – 361.6] pg/ml, P<0.001) ( Figure 2A ). At birth, there was a significant inverse correlation between the absolute neutrophil count and cord blood IL-6 levels, which was maintained following correction for gestational age and birthweight (R= -0.439, P<0.001) ( Figure 2B ). Overall, there was a significant correlation between the AF and cord blood IL-6 levels (R= 0.415, P<0.001) as shown in Figure 3 . However, in 94% of the cases, (124/132) the absolute value AF IL-6 concentration was higher than that measured in the umbilical cord blood. When separated by severity of intra-amniotic inflammation as depicted by the MR score, a disproportionate increase in AF IL-6 level compared to the fetal compartment was seen in cases complicated by severe AF inflammation. This lead to an apparent decrease in the proportion of cord blood IL-6 relative to that in AF (cord blood-to-AF IL-6 ratio: MR score 0: 2.8% [1.0-5.2] vs. MR score 1-2: 1.4% [0.4-6.4] vs. MR score 3-4: 0.2% [0.1-1.2], P<0.001). Because of the variability in the fetal response to the severity of intra-amniotic inflammation, we searched for factors that may impact on the degree to which AF inflammation leads to an increase in cord blood IL-6 levels. Multivariate stepwise analysis was conducted, with the cord blood-to-AF IL-6 ratio as the dependent variable and parameters such as HCA and funisitis, gestational age at delivery, birthweight, amniocentesis-to delivery interval, cesarean delivery, status of the membranes, race, MR score, antibiotics and steroid exposure as independent variables. We found out that the intensity of intra-amniotic inflammation as determined by the MR score in conjunction with the degree of both HCA and funisitis predicted the cord blood-to-AF IL-6 ratio (F ratio: 16.6, R= 0.540, P<0.001). This suggests that the degree of placental inflammation is an important factor in modulating cytokine levels in the fetuses of women whose pregnancies are complicated by intra-amniotic inflammation. To further explore this possibility, the relationship between the extent of the inflammatory infiltrate in the amnion, chorio-decidua, chorionic plate blood vessels (stages of histological chorioamnionitis) and umbilical cord (grades of funisitis) was examined, yielding a significant increase in cord blood-to-AF IL-6 ratio in the context of stages II and III neutrophil infiltration of the chorionic plate ( Figure 4A , ANOVA, P<0.001), grades 3-4 choriodeciduitis ( Figure 4B , P=0.002) and grades 2-4 funisitis ( Figure 4C , P<0.001). Conversely, the cord blood-to-AF IL-6 ratio was not influenced by the degree of amnionitis (P>0.05).  Discussion In this study we sought to determine the relationship between the presence of 4 AF proteomic biomarkers (human neutrophil defensins 2 and 1, calgranulins C and A) characteristic of intra-amniotic inflammation and the likelihood and severity of the fetal inflammatory response. We determined that although there is a direct correlation between the AF and cord blood IL-6 levels, the intensity of the fetal inflammatory response is not always directly correlated with the severity of intra-amniotic inflammation. This conclusion is based on our analysis showing that only neonates delivered in the context of “severe” intra-amniotic inflammation have significantly elevated cord blood IL-6 levels, but not those delivered by women with “no” or “minimal” inflammation. Similar to other studies, we have shown that neonates with hematological indices suggestive of EONS have higher umbilical cord IL-6 concentrations, which correlates best with the I:T ratio. 14 , 30 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 37 We further provide evidence that a significant inverse correlation between the absolute neutrophil count and umbilical cord IL-6 levels exists. Lastly, we demonstrated that the cord blood-to-AF IL-6 ratio (an indicator of the differential inflammatory response in the fetal versus the AF compartment) is highly correlated with the MR score and highly dependent on the severity of histological inflammation of the chorionic plate, chorio-decidua and funistis, but not that of the amnion. In prior studies we described that the components of a given MR score have an order in appearance (first defensins followed by calgranulins). 19 Our approach allowed us to objectively stratify the intensity of intra-amniotic inflammation and simultaneously assess the degree of fetal inflammation. In the present study, we reveal that the fetal inflammatory status in women with MR score 1-2 (defensin stage) is frequently minimal. Because the strength of the fetal inflammatory response is highly associated with the degree of placental HCA we can conclude that at the stage of “minimal” AF inflammation the fetus is most commonly protected. However, detection of a positive blood culture and umbilical cord IL-6 levels well above the mean in several neonates delivered by women with MR scores 1-2, show that this protection is not always complete. Several explanations may be possible. Experimental data indicate that the inflammatory process of the placenta and its membranes is generally regarded as a continuum. 38 It is believed that organisms first colonize and spread along the chorio-amniotic structure. Thus, the initial inflammatory response is thought to be maternal in its origin. 39 , 40 The next step involves infiltration of the membranous chorio-amnion followed by widespread inflammation within the AF cavity and development of necrotizing chorioamnionitis. This view holds true in light of studies which genotyped the amniochorion neutrophils and demonstrated that these cells matched the maternal genotype in all cases. 41 Lastly, placental lesions related to alterations in the uteroplacental vascular pathology of the chorionic plate (chorionitis, vasculitis, and moderate to severe villous edema) are regarded as an advanced stage of placental inflammation with mixed maternal and fetal origin. 41 , 42 , 43 , 44 That the above is consistent with experimental data in animals, it stands to reason that the hematogenic infection of the human fetus and mounting of a fetal inflammatory response, in the absence of concurrent AF colonization and inflammation, is possible. 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 Another possible explanation for the differential maternal and fetal inflammatory response may rest with our genetic makeup. 49 Deciphering the human genome has provided partial explanation for the extent to which the genetic make-up differs from person to person. The working model for inflammation induced PTB suggests that mothers and fetuses have a genetic predisposition toward either a hyper- or a hypo-reactive immune system. 50 The implications of this dissimilarity make a strong case for the variant maternal and fetal inflammatory response observed in this study and may provide clarification for our finding that at birth, several fetuses had positive blood cultures and an overwhelming inflammatory response in the context of “minimal” AF inflammation. The results of the microbiological studies pointed out that in approximately 30% of the cases the bacterial cultures were negative, although proteomic analysis of the AF implied “severe” intra-amniotic inflammation. This should not come as a surprise since factors other than infection (i.e bleeding) may be responsible for triggering intra-amniotic inflammation. 51 Lastly, although microbial cultures of the AF are highly regarded as the “gold standard” for detection of intra-amniotic infection, “difficult-to-cultivate” or “uncultivated” bacteria may not be found if the clinicians are relying on culture conditions alone. 52 The recent development in DNA-based culture-independent technology (16S rRNA) enables detection of previously unidentified uncultivated or difficult-to-cultivate bacterial species and may replace in the future the microbiological cultures to allow for a highly accurate diagnosis of intra-amniotic infection. 52 The presence of molecular pattern recognition receptors, notably Toll-like receptors (TLR) 2 and 4 on human trophoblast, and the existence of the S100A12/ENRAGE in the placental vascular tissue proves that the placenta is prepared to respond to a bacterial attack through an outpouring of inflammatory cytokines. 53 , 54 Our results imply that in the initial phase of the inflammatory response, the placenta plays an important protective role for the fetus. Yet, in a more advanced stage of inflammation, the placenta becomes an important regulator of the differential immune response observed in the AF versus the fetal compartment. Though the activity of Tolllike receptors seems to exhibit genetic control, the literature continues to be conflicted in regard to the existence of placental-fetal or placental-AF cytokine trafficking. 55 , 56 , 57 Although it has been demonstrated that radiolabeled IL-6 crosses the rat fetus in mid gestation, studies showed that in vitro there is either minimal or no transfer of proinflammatory cytokines across the human placenta. 57 , 58 If this hypothesis is true our data seem to suggest that this transfer is overwhelmingly directed toward the AF and not the fetal compartment. Compelling evidence suggests that intra-amniotic inflammation and HCA are risk factors for perinatal injury that includes white matter injury and development of periventricular leukomalacia. 2 , 59 , 60 Because a significant number of fetuses exposed to intra-amniotic inflammation and elevated AF cytokine levels do not develop cerebral palsy it appears reasonable to assume that along with genetic predisposition, several other factors may be involved in fetal defense. Still, the decision to actively intervene and deliver a fetus subjected to a hostile intra-uterine inflammatory process should take into account the risks and benefits for both the mother and for its very preterm neonate. A major clinical concern remains early and accurate recognition of the fetuses with positive blood cultures who have already mounted a robust inflammatory response in the context of “minimal” intra-amniotic inflammation. Unfortunately, neither the biophysical profile nor evaluation of the fetal heart rate reliably provide early identification and therefore, need for immediate delivery of a sick fetus. 61 , 62 , 63 Yet, ultrasound evaluation of the fetal adrenal gland volume has been recently proposed as a useful clinical marker for early recognition of an increased fetal inflammatory status in utero . 64 A rapid intervention based on this marker (i.e delivery versus anti-inflammatory treatment) may prove beneficial in the future for prevention of cerebral palsy. Until its clinical usefulness is proven in large randomized studies, or other clinically relevant genetic markers identified, for women with “severe” intra-amniotic inflammation, a reasonable approach may involve removing the fetus from a septic environment if birth in the very short term appears most likely. 25  Discussion In this study we sought to determine the relationship between the presence of 4 AF proteomic biomarkers (human neutrophil defensins 2 and 1, calgranulins C and A) characteristic of intra-amniotic inflammation and the likelihood and severity of the fetal inflammatory response. We determined that although there is a direct correlation between the AF and cord blood IL-6 levels, the intensity of the fetal inflammatory response is not always directly correlated with the severity of intra-amniotic inflammation. This conclusion is based on our analysis showing that only neonates delivered in the context of “severe” intra-amniotic inflammation have significantly elevated cord blood IL-6 levels, but not those delivered by women with “no” or “minimal” inflammation. Similar to other studies, we have shown that neonates with hematological indices suggestive of EONS have higher umbilical cord IL-6 concentrations, which correlates best with the I:T ratio. 14 , 30 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 37 We further provide evidence that a significant inverse correlation between the absolute neutrophil count and umbilical cord IL-6 levels exists. Lastly, we demonstrated that the cord blood-to-AF IL-6 ratio (an indicator of the differential inflammatory response in the fetal versus the AF compartment) is highly correlated with the MR score and highly dependent on the severity of histological inflammation of the chorionic plate, chorio-decidua and funistis, but not that of the amnion. In prior studies we described that the components of a given MR score have an order in appearance (first defensins followed by calgranulins). 19 Our approach allowed us to objectively stratify the intensity of intra-amniotic inflammation and simultaneously assess the degree of fetal inflammation. In the present study, we reveal that the fetal inflammatory status in women with MR score 1-2 (defensin stage) is frequently minimal. Because the strength of the fetal inflammatory response is highly associated with the degree of placental HCA we can conclude that at the stage of “minimal” AF inflammation the fetus is most commonly protected. However, detection of a positive blood culture and umbilical cord IL-6 levels well above the mean in several neonates delivered by women with MR scores 1-2, show that this protection is not always complete. Several explanations may be possible. Experimental data indicate that the inflammatory process of the placenta and its membranes is generally regarded as a continuum. 38 It is believed that organisms first colonize and spread along the chorio-amniotic structure. Thus, the initial inflammatory response is thought to be maternal in its origin. 39 , 40 The next step involves infiltration of the membranous chorio-amnion followed by widespread inflammation within the AF cavity and development of necrotizing chorioamnionitis. This view holds true in light of studies which genotyped the amniochorion neutrophils and demonstrated that these cells matched the maternal genotype in all cases. 41 Lastly, placental lesions related to alterations in the uteroplacental vascular pathology of the chorionic plate (chorionitis, vasculitis, and moderate to severe villous edema) are regarded as an advanced stage of placental inflammation with mixed maternal and fetal origin. 41 , 42 , 43 , 44 That the above is consistent with experimental data in animals, it stands to reason that the hematogenic infection of the human fetus and mounting of a fetal inflammatory response, in the absence of concurrent AF colonization and inflammation, is possible. 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 Another possible explanation for the differential maternal and fetal inflammatory response may rest with our genetic makeup. 49 Deciphering the human genome has provided partial explanation for the extent to which the genetic make-up differs from person to person. The working model for inflammation induced PTB suggests that mothers and fetuses have a genetic predisposition toward either a hyper- or a hypo-reactive immune system. 50 The implications of this dissimilarity make a strong case for the variant maternal and fetal inflammatory response observed in this study and may provide clarification for our finding that at birth, several fetuses had positive blood cultures and an overwhelming inflammatory response in the context of “minimal” AF inflammation. The results of the microbiological studies pointed out that in approximately 30% of the cases the bacterial cultures were negative, although proteomic analysis of the AF implied “severe” intra-amniotic inflammation. This should not come as a surprise since factors other than infection (i.e bleeding) may be responsible for triggering intra-amniotic inflammation. 51 Lastly, although microbial cultures of the AF are highly regarded as the “gold standard” for detection of intra-amniotic infection, “difficult-to-cultivate” or “uncultivated” bacteria may not be found if the clinicians are relying on culture conditions alone. 52 The recent development in DNA-based culture-independent technology (16S rRNA) enables detection of previously unidentified uncultivated or difficult-to-cultivate bacterial species and may replace in the future the microbiological cultures to allow for a highly accurate diagnosis of intra-amniotic infection. 52 The presence of molecular pattern recognition receptors, notably Toll-like receptors (TLR) 2 and 4 on human trophoblast, and the existence of the S100A12/ENRAGE in the placental vascular tissue proves that the placenta is prepared to respond to a bacterial attack through an outpouring of inflammatory cytokines. 53 , 54 Our results imply that in the initial phase of the inflammatory response, the placenta plays an important protective role for the fetus. Yet, in a more advanced stage of inflammation, the placenta becomes an important regulator of the differential immune response observed in the AF versus the fetal compartment. Though the activity of Tolllike receptors seems to exhibit genetic control, the literature continues to be conflicted in regard to the existence of placental-fetal or placental-AF cytokine trafficking. 55 , 56 , 57 Although it has been demonstrated that radiolabeled IL-6 crosses the rat fetus in mid gestation, studies showed that in vitro there is either minimal or no transfer of proinflammatory cytokines across the human placenta. 57 , 58 If this hypothesis is true our data seem to suggest that this transfer is overwhelmingly directed toward the AF and not the fetal compartment. Compelling evidence suggests that intra-amniotic inflammation and HCA are risk factors for perinatal injury that includes white matter injury and development of periventricular leukomalacia. 2 , 59 , 60 Because a significant number of fetuses exposed to intra-amniotic inflammation and elevated AF cytokine levels do not develop cerebral palsy it appears reasonable to assume that along with genetic predisposition, several other factors may be involved in fetal defense. Still, the decision to actively intervene and deliver a fetus subjected to a hostile intra-uterine inflammatory process should take into account the risks and benefits for both the mother and for its very preterm neonate. A major clinical concern remains early and accurate recognition of the fetuses with positive blood cultures who have already mounted a robust inflammatory response in the context of “minimal” intra-amniotic inflammation. Unfortunately, neither the biophysical profile nor evaluation of the fetal heart rate reliably provide early identification and therefore, need for immediate delivery of a sick fetus. 61 , 62 , 63 Yet, ultrasound evaluation of the fetal adrenal gland volume has been recently proposed as a useful clinical marker for early recognition of an increased fetal inflammatory status in utero . 64 A rapid intervention based on this marker (i.e delivery versus anti-inflammatory treatment) may prove beneficial in the future for prevention of cerebral palsy. Until its clinical usefulness is proven in large randomized studies, or other clinically relevant genetic markers identified, for women with “severe” intra-amniotic inflammation, a reasonable approach may involve removing the fetus from a septic environment if birth in the very short term appears most likely. 25 