Epigenetic Therapy of Leukemia: an update Carcinogenesis is classically thought to result from genetic alterations in DNA sequence such as deletions, mutations, or chromosomal translocations. These in turn may lead to the activation of oncogenes, inactivation of tumor suppressor genes or formation of chimeric oncoproteins. Epigenetics, in contrast, refers to a number of biochemical modifications of chromatin, either to DNA directly or to its associated protein complexes, that affect gene expression without altering the primary sequence of DNA 1 , 2 . A fundamental difference between genetic and epigenetic alterations is the irreversible nature of genetic lesions whereas epigenetic ones are potentially reversible, allowing for therapeutic intervention. In the last decade, it has become apparent that epigenetic changes play an important role in cancer, particularly in leukemia. Significant advances have been made in the elucidation of these processes as well as in translating this knowledge to the clinic, as in the development of new prognostic biomarkers or targeted therapies. In this review, we will focus on recent advances in epigenetic therapy in leukemia.  CONCLUSIONS AND NEEDS The field of epigenetic therapy is expanding rapidly. A large number of drugs with the capacity to alter the epigenetic structure of cancer cells are being used in clinical trials either as single agents or in combinations. Hypomethylating agents such as 5-azacitidine and decitabine are now established, approved therapies for MDS. Several issues related to hypomethylating treatments such as the optimal dose, schedule or route of administration are still being elucidated in clinical trials. The use of HDAC inhibitors as single agents has proved to be of limited clinical efficacy. Ongoing randomized trials exploring the use of HDAC inhibitors in combination with hypomethylation as well as other therapeutic agents will help elucidate the role of these agents in the treatment of MDS and leukemia. 