Anxiety: Its Role in the History of Psychiatric Epidemiology Background The role played by anxiety in the history of psychiatric epidemiology has not been well recognized. Such lack of understanding retarded the growth of psychiatric research in general populations. It seems useful to look back on this history while deliberations are being carried out about how anxiety will be presented in DSM-V. Methods Drawing on the literature and our own research, we examine work that was carried out during and after the Second World War by a Research Branch of the United States War Department, by the Stirling County Study, and by the Midtown Manhattan Study. The differential influences of Meyerian psychobiology and Freudian psychoanalysis are noted. Results The instruments developed in the early epidemiologic endeavors used questions about nervousness, palpitations, sweating, trembling, shortness of breath, upset stomach, etc. These symptoms are important features of what the clinical literature called “manifest”, “free-floating”, or “chronic anxiety”. A useful descriptive name is “autonomic anxiety”. Conclusions Although not focusing on specific circumstances as in Panic and Phobic Disorders, a non-specific form of autonomic anxiety is a common, disabling, and usually chronic disorder that received empirical verification in studies of several community populations. It is suggested that two types of general anxiety may need to be recognized-- one dominated by excessive worry and feelings of stress, as in the current DSM-IV definition of Generalized Anxiety Disorder, and another emphasizing frequent unexplainable autonomic fearfulness, as in the early epidemiologic studies.  DISCUSSION The years since Second World War have witnessed many changes. The interplay between clinical, psychological and epidemiologic approaches that created the field of ideas at that time has been expanded to include psychopharmacology, genetics, and neurobiology. The DSM has moved from its first to the approach of its fifth edition. Over these years anxiety lost the interest it had inspired as thinking shifted away from the unconscious. Depression gained attention as thinking about it shifted away from its psychotic manifestations to milder features that responded to psychotropic medicines. These shifts were not matched by changes in prevalence. Anxiety was present in the population despite diminution of psychoanalysis, and non-psychotic depression was present even when it was generally thought to be a psychotic disorder. With return of interest in anxiety, it has acquired a new definition that relegates to panic the autonomic indicators with which this history started and the general form has become centered on cognitive worry in place of the over-alertness of the body’s alarm system. Current issues about categorical versus dimensional measurement are, however, somewhat similar to those that swayed psychiatric epidemiology in its earlier phase although now the arguments are more based on empirical evidence while earlier it was more often rooted in theory. The Midtown Study took a dimensional approach which had its underpinning in the psychoanalytic thinking of those times. It was much broader than the “Common Mental Disorders” that are being discussed in dimensional terms now, and it seems unlikely that there will be a return to viewing all mental disorders as a continuum. Influenced by Meyerian psychobiology, we of the Stirling Study emphasized the syndromal quality of anxiety in which the cardinal feature is unwarranted fear and differentiated it from depression which is pervaded by sadness. The distinction between the two syndromes seemed important to us and allowed observation of what we consider to be the most important time-trend our data has yet suggested. The background is steadiness of the overall prevalence rates of the two disorders and their brand of comorbidity, but at the beginning in 1952, depression was about as prevalent among men as women and anxiety was distinctly a disorder of women. Over the new samples drawn in 1970 and then another in 1992, depression came to resemble anxiety as a disorder significantly more common among women. Our categories of anxiety and depression are broader than the ones in the recent DSMs. As long as the autonomic indicators were part of GAD, we thought our definition gave a reasonable fit with it. Now if our “anxiety” subjects were interviewed with the most recent diagnostic schedule, it is probable that some would be found to have Social Phobia, Simple Phobia, Agoraphobia, Panic Disorder, or a combination of these. We suspect, however, that a residue would still meet our criteria for autonomic anxiety and, in that regard, would appear to be frequently fearful of many things in many places. Further we suggest that our depression, which tends to be chronic, is a combination of what today would include Major Depressive Episode and Dysthymia. In other words, our definitions are not as specific as Panic, Social Phobia, Dysthymia, etc., but also not as broad as Neurotic Disorders or Internalization. A question raised by this review is whether there will be a place for a chronic and generalized form of disorders that involve fear and autonomic arousal. In clinical studies, it has been reported that such a pattern is often a prodrome or underlying condition for discrete episodes of Panic. However, the prodrome is excluded from the nosology in order to focus on the more specific diagnosis. Such an exclusion seems understandable for clinical practice but might not be equally reasonable for epidemiologic research. Data-gathering in epidemiology is conducted through interviews with subjects who, for the most part, have never been psychiatric patients. Usually the data derive from a single interview. Pinning down a history of episodic illnesses requires greater detail and dependence on recall than pertains for chronic disorders. The nosological needs of epidemiology may be different from those of clinical, genetic, psychopharmacological, or neurobiological psychiatry ( Marshall & Klein, 1999 ). Some consideration has been given to the concept of a “genetic nosology” that might incorporate both the categorical and dimensional traditions ( Smoller and Tsuang, 1998 ). While we do not propose an “epidemiologic nosology”, it might be fruitful to create standardized adjustments of a common classification for different types of research. For epidemiology, this might mean greater attention to chronic disorders. As improvements in nosology continue to move forward, it may also be worthwhile to bear in mind that non-specific autonomic anxiety has had a more demonstrably robust history in studies of community populations than has sometimes been appreciated. The disturbances that accompany the syndrome’s defining characteristic of fearfulness seem to be the types of symptoms that people are able to report accurately and reliably; that correspond well to validity assessments; and have led to a steady prevalence over time. Perhaps there are two different types of general anxiety that belong in a new classification -- one dominated by persistent worries and another by frequent autonomic fearfulness.  DISCUSSION The years since Second World War have witnessed many changes. The interplay between clinical, psychological and epidemiologic approaches that created the field of ideas at that time has been expanded to include psychopharmacology, genetics, and neurobiology. The DSM has moved from its first to the approach of its fifth edition. Over these years anxiety lost the interest it had inspired as thinking shifted away from the unconscious. Depression gained attention as thinking about it shifted away from its psychotic manifestations to milder features that responded to psychotropic medicines. These shifts were not matched by changes in prevalence. Anxiety was present in the population despite diminution of psychoanalysis, and non-psychotic depression was present even when it was generally thought to be a psychotic disorder. With return of interest in anxiety, it has acquired a new definition that relegates to panic the autonomic indicators with which this history started and the general form has become centered on cognitive worry in place of the over-alertness of the body’s alarm system. Current issues about categorical versus dimensional measurement are, however, somewhat similar to those that swayed psychiatric epidemiology in its earlier phase although now the arguments are more based on empirical evidence while earlier it was more often rooted in theory. The Midtown Study took a dimensional approach which had its underpinning in the psychoanalytic thinking of those times. It was much broader than the “Common Mental Disorders” that are being discussed in dimensional terms now, and it seems unlikely that there will be a return to viewing all mental disorders as a continuum. Influenced by Meyerian psychobiology, we of the Stirling Study emphasized the syndromal quality of anxiety in which the cardinal feature is unwarranted fear and differentiated it from depression which is pervaded by sadness. The distinction between the two syndromes seemed important to us and allowed observation of what we consider to be the most important time-trend our data has yet suggested. The background is steadiness of the overall prevalence rates of the two disorders and their brand of comorbidity, but at the beginning in 1952, depression was about as prevalent among men as women and anxiety was distinctly a disorder of women. Over the new samples drawn in 1970 and then another in 1992, depression came to resemble anxiety as a disorder significantly more common among women. Our categories of anxiety and depression are broader than the ones in the recent DSMs. As long as the autonomic indicators were part of GAD, we thought our definition gave a reasonable fit with it. Now if our “anxiety” subjects were interviewed with the most recent diagnostic schedule, it is probable that some would be found to have Social Phobia, Simple Phobia, Agoraphobia, Panic Disorder, or a combination of these. We suspect, however, that a residue would still meet our criteria for autonomic anxiety and, in that regard, would appear to be frequently fearful of many things in many places. Further we suggest that our depression, which tends to be chronic, is a combination of what today would include Major Depressive Episode and Dysthymia. In other words, our definitions are not as specific as Panic, Social Phobia, Dysthymia, etc., but also not as broad as Neurotic Disorders or Internalization. A question raised by this review is whether there will be a place for a chronic and generalized form of disorders that involve fear and autonomic arousal. In clinical studies, it has been reported that such a pattern is often a prodrome or underlying condition for discrete episodes of Panic. However, the prodrome is excluded from the nosology in order to focus on the more specific diagnosis. Such an exclusion seems understandable for clinical practice but might not be equally reasonable for epidemiologic research. Data-gathering in epidemiology is conducted through interviews with subjects who, for the most part, have never been psychiatric patients. Usually the data derive from a single interview. Pinning down a history of episodic illnesses requires greater detail and dependence on recall than pertains for chronic disorders. The nosological needs of epidemiology may be different from those of clinical, genetic, psychopharmacological, or neurobiological psychiatry ( Marshall & Klein, 1999 ). Some consideration has been given to the concept of a “genetic nosology” that might incorporate both the categorical and dimensional traditions ( Smoller and Tsuang, 1998 ). While we do not propose an “epidemiologic nosology”, it might be fruitful to create standardized adjustments of a common classification for different types of research. For epidemiology, this might mean greater attention to chronic disorders. As improvements in nosology continue to move forward, it may also be worthwhile to bear in mind that non-specific autonomic anxiety has had a more demonstrably robust history in studies of community populations than has sometimes been appreciated. The disturbances that accompany the syndrome’s defining characteristic of fearfulness seem to be the types of symptoms that people are able to report accurately and reliably; that correspond well to validity assessments; and have led to a steady prevalence over time. Perhaps there are two different types of general anxiety that belong in a new classification -- one dominated by persistent worries and another by frequent autonomic fearfulness. 