Chemical Mediators and the Resolution of Airway Inflammation Asthma pathobiology is remarkable for chronic airway inflammation that fails to spontaneously resolve. No curative therapy is currently available. A growing body of evidence indicates that, in health, inflammation resolution is an active process orchestrated by specific chemical mediators that are elaborated to restore tissue homeostasis. Activated cell membranes release polyunsaturated fatty acids from phospholipids for enzymatic conversion to biologically active mediators with profound regulatory effects on innate and adaptive immunity. Some of these mediators carry anti-inflammatory and pro-resolving actions that are transduced in a cell-type specific manner via specific recognition sites that initiate regulatory intracellular signals, such as presqualene diphosphate remodeling, to limit pro-phlogistic cell activation. Some of these counter-regulatory lipid mediators have been identified in the airway during asthma and defects in their production are associated with disease severity. In this review, we describe the biosynthesis and bioactions of pro-resolving chemical mediators and provide examples of select mediators and their structural analogs with particular relevance to asthma.  Introduction “Asthma is a chronic relapsing inflammatory disorder characterized by hyperreactive airways, leading to episodic, reversible bronchoconstriction, owing to increased responsiveness of the tracheobronchial tree to various stimuli.” 1 In many parts of the world, asthma morbidity and mortality is high and increasing 2 . An estimated 300 million people are currently suffering from the disease. In the United States, approximately 10% of individuals will have asthma. Japan has one of the highest prevalences in Asia with 6.7% of the population being asthmatic. The number of asthma patients treated at Japanese medical facilities has increased 330 fold in the last 30 years. Most patients with persistent asthma have mild to moderate disease. Their symptoms are controlled to a great extent by anti-inflammatory therapies, in particular inhaled corticosteroids. Long-term use of corticosteroids is associated with side effects that highlight the need for additional therapeutics. A minority of patients is classified as having severe asthma. While this group comprises only 5 to 10% of all asthmatics, they account for the majority of hospitalizations, emergency room visits, and mortality associated with asthma 3 . Patients with severe asthma have symptoms that are refractory to current therapy and that constitute an important unmet need in asthma management. Asthma is characterized by chronic airway inflammation punctuated by exacerbations with acute inflammatory responses. In most instances the airway inflammation does not resolve completely. To restore airway homeostasis, avoidance of allergen or provocative stimulus can lead to a passive decrease in pro-inflammatory effectors. However, a growing body of evidence supports a signaling network that actively promotes the resolution of inflammation in tissue catabasis. Several classes of natural anti-inflammatory chemical mediators have been identified that are produced at sites of inflammation. Here, we review recent progress in the biosynthesis and bioactions of pro-resolving chemical mediators and provide examples of select mediators with particular relevance to asthma.  Lipoxins Lipoxins (LXs) are lipoxygenase (LO) interaction products of arachidonic acid metabolism that were first discovered in 1984 4 . LXs were the first compounds identified to carry properties of pro-resolving mediators 5 . These eicosanoids are structurally and functionally distinct from pro-inflammatory prostaglandins and leukotrienes 5 . LXs are produced at sites of inflammation via cell-cell interactions. Activated epithelial cell 15-LO can convert arachidonic acid to 15(S)-hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid [15(S)-HpETE] that can be further transformed by neutrophil (PMN) and eosinophil (EOS) 5-LO to produce LX 5 . Of interest, 15(R)-HETE can be generated from arachidonic acid by either aspirin acetylated cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 or cytochrome p450 activity. 15(R)-HETE can also be further modified by 5-LO, leading to the generation of 15-epimer-LXs (15-epi-LXs) 6 . LXs and 15-epi-LXs signal via interactions with specific receptors. The LXA4 receptor is termed ALX and binds LXA4 with high affinity (Kd 0.7nM) 7 . ALX is a seven transmembrane spanning G protein coupled protein that is expressed on human airway epithelial cells, PMNs, monocytes, enterocytes and synovial fibroblasts 7 - 11 . Airway inflammation or injury increases ALX expression on both proximal airway and distal alveolar cells 8 , 12 . In addition to binding to LXA4 and 15-epi-LXA4, ALX can also recognize annexin 1, although with lower affinity than LXA4 13 , 14 . Annexin 1 is an anti-inflammatory peptide that is induced by glucocortocoids 15 , a frequent asthma therapy. LXs can also act as a receptor level antagonist to a subclass of LTD4 receptors (CysLT1 receptors) 16 . LXs also bind to the aryl hydrocarbon receptor, a ligand activated transcription factor 17 . Intracellular sites for LX recognition and transport have also been identified 18 . Thus, LXs can serve as agonists at cognate receptors to initiate counter-regulatory signals and, in some cases, share recognition sties with pro-inflammatory mediators to serve as antagonists for pro-phlogistic signals. LXs are produced in many human inflammatory lung diseases, including asthma. Of interest, severe asthma is characterized by diminished LX production with confirmatory data now available from three different continents in ethnically diverse populations 19 - 21 . In addition, the capacity to generate LXA4 in whole blood correlates with lung function (FEV1% predicted) 19 - 21 . LXs are produced at sites of airway inflammation and have many relevant cell-type specific effects on functional responses in asthma (see Table 1 ). For example, LXs are potent stop signals for PMN chemotaxis, trans-endothelial and trans-epithelial migration, production of reactive oxygen species, and azurophilic granule release 22 - 25 . In contrast, they promote monocyte locomotion 26 and macrophage mediated clearance of apoptotic PMN and microbial products by phagocytosis 27 . Distinct from immunosuppressive agents, LXs are host protective in experimental model systems. LXs and their stable analogs prevent PMN mediated tissue injury (reactive oxygen species), enhance bronchial epithelial cell proliferation in response to injury, and block the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines from epithelial cells 8 . In addition, LXs increase epithelial cell anti-infective activity 28 . Taken together, these data define LXs as homeostatic mediators that are anti-inflammatory and pro-resolving to promote tissue catabasis.  Presqualene Diphosphate In many individuals with severe asthma, PMN accumulation and activation in the airway characterizes their pathobiology. During a screen for counter-regulatory lipid mediators, presqualene diphosphate (PSDP) was identified as an intracellular signal in human peripheral blood PMNs 29 . PSDP is present in resting cell membranes and transiently remodels to presqualene monophosphate (PSMP) within seconds of receptor mediated cell activation 29 , 30 . Addition of biologically relevant quantities (nM) of PSDP, but not its monophosphate form (PSMP), inhibits O2? production from PMNs. Both phospholipase D (PLD) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) activity are important signal transduction pathways for rapid assembly of the NADPH oxidase (reviewed in 31 , 32 ). Of interest, PSDP directly interacts with PMN PI3K? as it deactivates and PSDP can potently block PI3K? activity in vitro 33 . In addition, PSDP can inhibit PLD activity from plant, microbial and mammalian origin ( Figure 1 ) 24 , 34 . Taken together, these data depict an intracellular signaling role for PSDP in the regulation of cell activation. Consistent with an anti-inflammatory role, the intracellular levels of PSDP in human PMN rapidly, within seconds, decrease upon PMN exposure to pro-inflammatory agonists and these decrements are accompanied by a reciprocal increase in PSMP. 15-epi LXA4 blocks leukotriene B4 mediated PSDP remodeling, PLD activation and O2? generation ( Figure 1 ) 23 . PSMP, which differs from PSDP by only a phosphate, does not inhibit PI3K, PLD or O2? production by PMN. Thus, the timing and reciprocal changes in amounts of PSDP and PSMP appear to regulate cell activation and indicated the presence of a pivotal phosphatase that converts PSDP to PSMP upon cellular stimulation. A candidate PSDP phosphatase was recently identified and named polyisoprenyl diphosphate phosphatase 1 (PDP1) (see Figure 1 ) 35 . By sequence analysis, PDP1, formerly referred to as CSS2? and PPAPDC2 (GeneID 403313), was determined to be a member of the lipid phosphate phosphatase/phosphotransferase (LPT) family of integral membrane proteins (see Fig. 2 ). LPT proteins are characterized by a core consisting of six transmembrane domains with a catalytic center split between two interacting loops external to the membrane (reviewed in 36 ). Other members of the LPT family participate in lipid metabolism, cell migration, and apoptosis. While several LPT proteins use multiple phospholipids as substrates, PDP1 has a distinct substrate preference for polyisoprenyl diphosphates (i.e. PSDP and farnesyl diphosphate) over phosphatidic acid 35 . Suggestive of a role in signal transduction, PDP1 is actively phosphorylated in response to cellular agonists 37 . Anti-inflammatory properties of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (i.e., statins) in airway inflammation 38 suggests immunoregulatory roles for isoprenoids, like PSDP, in the pathology of asthma.  Resolvins Resolvins were first identified in resolving inflammatory exudates and are now recognized as a class of anti-inflammatory, pro-resolving lipid mediators derived from omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids 39 . Currently, there are two reported series of resolvins. The D series resolvins are enzymatically derived from docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and the E series arise from eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) 39 , 40 . To generate E series resolvins (RvEs), aspirin acetylated COX-2 from endothelial cells or cytochrome p450 converts EPA to 18R-hydroxyeicosapentaenoic acid (18(R)-HEPE) 39 , which is subsequently modified by PMN LOs to form the bioactive RvEs 39 , 41 . A receptor for RvE1 has been identified as ChemR23 42 . ChemR23 is expressed on monocytes, macrophages and dendritic cells. Similar to ALX, the ChemR23 receptor binds to both lipid and peptide ligands. The protein chemerin is a peptide ligand for ChemR23 and appears to have a role in inflammation resolution. Chemerin is a macrophage and dendritic cell chemoattractant found in inflammatory exudates 43 , and mice deficient for the ChemR23 gene display enhanced levels of inflammation 44 . RvE1 can also interact with BLT1, and serves as a receptor level antagonist/partial agonist 45 . BLT1 is a receptor for the pro-inflammatory cytokine LTB4 and is expressed on PMN, EOS, monocytes and T-cells 46 . Together, antagonist activity for pro-inflammatory BLT1 receptors and agonist activity for anti-inflammatory ChemR23 receptors provide a molecular basis for the pro-resolution effects of RvE1. Similar to LXs and 15-epi-LXs, the D series resolvins can be produced in both an R and an S conformation. The 17 S D series resolvins are generated in whole blood, while the 17R conformers are created via interactions between aspirin acetylated COX-2 from endothelial cells and LO activity from PMN 46 - 48 . RvD1 is a potent regulator of renal ischemia-reperfusion in mice 49 , but no information is presently available in asthma. In the setting of experimental acute inflammation, resolvins display properties that are likely to be beneficial in resolving allergic airway responses. Resolvin E1 inhibits PMN transmigration and promotes the phagocytosis of apoptotic PMN by macrophages 39 , 50 ( Table 1 ). Of note, clinical studies demonstrate an increase in quality of life assessment for asthmatics placed on diets enriched with EPA and ?-linolenic acid (GLA) 51 . In addition, enteral feeding with diets enriched in EPA, GLA, and antioxidants improves clinical outcomes of critically ill patients with the acute respiratory distress syndrome 52 , 53 . Resolvins have yet to be discovered in lung disease, yet their anti-inflammatory effects in models of peritonitis and ischemia-reperfusion injury suggest that resolvins would also be lung protective 47 , 54 , 55 . In this area of active research, preliminary findings have recently linked RvE1 to control of allergic airway responses in a murine model of asthma 56 , 57 .  Protectins Protectin D1 (PD1) is the first member of a distinct class of DHA-derived counter-regulatory lipid mediators. PD1 is a 10R, 17S-docosatriene, and similar to LXs, PD1 production is reliant of 15-LO activity 39 , 47 . PD1 is found in human exhaled breath condensates and, of interest, PD1 levels are significantly decreased in exhaled breath condensates from patients with asthma exacerbations relative to healthy control subjects 58 . In a murine model of asthma, administration of PD1 prior to aeroallergen challenge reduced EOS and lymphocyte recruitment, as well as the levels of TH2 inflammatory cytokines. In addition, PD1 pretreatment led to decrements in airway mucus and hyperresponsiveness to inhaled methacholine 58 . The generation of both PD1 and LXs is linked to 15-LO 5 , 39 , 47 , and severe asthma is characterized by decreased 15-LO expression and activity 59 . Thus, severe or uncontrolled asthma appears to represent LX and PD1 deficient states.  Therapeutic Potential While LXs, 15-epi LXs, resolvins and protectins can promote the resolution of inflammation; they are autacoids that are rapidly inactivated. In the only human intervention trial reported to date with LXs, administration of nebulized LXA4 (10?4M) to human subjects with mild asthma dampened leukotriene C4 mediated bronchoconstriction without indications of deleterious side effects 60 . The use of high doses of LXA4 was necessitated by the compound's rapid inactivation. Subsequently, three generations of LX mimetics have been prepared and are effective when administered orally, via intraperitoneal injection, or intravenously 61 , 62 . In the lung, LX mimetics inhibit both airway hyper-responsiveness and inflammation in two distinct murine models of asthma 12 , 63 and PSDP mimetics dampen acid initiated acute murine lung injury 33 ( Table 2 ). Resolvin and PD1 analogs are currently undergoing design and testing. Mimetics of these chemical mediators hold promise for providing multi-pronged relief from pathologic airway responses by serving as pro-resolving agonists and/or inflammatory antagonists in stimulating a programmed return to homeostasis. The use of chemical mediators and their analogs to mimic natural agonists of resolution has the exciting potential to seed a new genus of therapeutics for asthma and related inflammatory diseases.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Illustration of cellular PSDP remodeling. Activation of PMNs results in the rapid and transient conversion of PSDP to PSMP concurrent with functional responses, such as superoxide anion generation, PLD and PI3K activity. PSDP remodeling is mediated by polyisoprenyl diphosphate phosphatase 1 (PDP1) and PSDP dephosphorylation is blocked by LX signaling. PSDP and PSMP are drawn with Chem3D Pro. The color scheme is as follows: red-oxygen, pink-phosphorus, blue-hydrogen, and grey-carbon. Figure 2 Evolutionary dendrogram based on sequence similarity among the lipid phosphate/phosphotransferase family members. Adapted from reference 36 . Table 1 Cell type-specific counter-regulatory mechanisms for chemical mediators of resolution. Cell Type Mediator Action/Response Ref(s) EOS LXA4 Blocks migration and chemotaxis 64 , 65 Dendritic cell LXA4 Blocks IL-12 Production 66 RvE1 Blocks IL-12 Production 67 Inhibits migration 42 PMN LXA4 Inhibits chemotaxis 22 Stops trans-endothelial and trans-epithelial migration 49 , 50 Blocks superoxide anion generation 23 Blocks azurophilic granule release 25 Blocks LTB4 mediated PSDP remodeling 23 PSDP Blocks superoxide anion generation 29 Inhibits PI3K? activity 33 Inhibits PLD activity 23 RvE1 Inhibits trans-endothelial and trans-epithelial migration 39 Inhibits superoxide anion generation 68 Aspirin-triggered RvD1 Stops transmigration 18 , 55 Monocyte Macrophage LXA4 Stimulates phagocytosis of apoptotic PMN 27 Enhances chemotaxis and adhesion to lamin 26 , 55 Blocks peroxynitrite generation 69 Reduces IL-8 release from cells isolated from asthmatics 70 RvE1 Stimulates phagocytosis of apoptotic PMN 50 RvD1 Blocks LPS-induced TNF release 54 PD1 Blocks LPS-induced TNF release 54 Bronchial Epithelial Cells LXA4 Basal cell proliferation after acid injury 8 Blocks IL-6 and IL-8 release 8 Table 2 Effects of chemical mediators, their mimetics and ALX signaling on the resolution of airway inflammation. * Experimental Model Mediator Regulation of Airway Responses Ref(s) WBC TH2 Cytokines AHR Mucus Ovalbumin-mediated allergic airway inflammation LX and LX analogs EOS/LY YES YES n.d. 12 , 63 CD11b-hALX transgenic mouse EOS/LY YES NO n.d. 12 PD1 EOS/LY YES YES YES 58 ? RvE1 EOS/LY YES YES YES 56 , 57 Cockroach allergen-mediated allergic airway inflammation LX and LX analogs EOS/LY YES YES n.d. 63 Acid-initiated acute lung injury CD11b-hALX transgenic mouse PMN n.d. n.d. n.d. 8 PSDP mimetic PMN n.d. n.d. n.d. 33 * Regulation of airway inflammatory phenotype for select chemical mediators and their signaling receptors are indicated for leukocyte trafficking (EOS-eosinophil, Ly-lymphocyte, PMN-neutrophil), bronchoalveolar lavage fluid TH2 inflammatory (TH2) cytokines, airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR), and airway mucus (periodic acid Schiff staining). 