Pooled analysis of patients with thunderclap headache evaluated by CT and LP is angiography necessary in patients with negative evaluations? Background Severe, abrupt onset headache raises concern for aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). The current standard work-up is brain CT scan followed by LP if the CT is non-diagnostic in patients with a normal neurological exam. Some have suggested that angiography is also indicated in this common clinical situation. Is evaluation with brain CT and LP for thunderclap headache to rule out SAH sufficient and is angiography needed? Methods We systematically searched for studies that followed neurologically-intact patients with thunderclap headache and normal CT and LP for at least 1 year. The primary outcome was SAH. We estimated the proportion of patients who developed SAH and the one-sided upper 95% confidence bound. Results Seven studies including 813 patients were identified. None of the patients developed SAH during follow-up (pooled proportion = 0, upper 95% confidence bound = 0.004). Conclusion Although our methods have important limitations, we believe this analysis will give clinicians better tools to decide whether or not to pursue further work-up with angiography in patients with thunderclap headache and normal neurological exam, CT, and LP.  Methods We systematically searched for studies that followed neurologically-intact patients with thunderclap headache and normal CT and LP for at least 1 year. The primary outcome was SAH. We estimated the proportion of patients who developed SAH and the one-sided upper 95% confidence bound.  Results Seven studies including 813 patients were identified. None of the patients developed SAH during follow-up (pooled proportion = 0, upper 95% confidence bound = 0.004).  Conclusion Although our methods have important limitations, we believe this analysis will give clinicians better tools to decide whether or not to pursue further work-up with angiography in patients with thunderclap headache and normal neurological exam, CT, and LP.  Methods We followed the MOOSE guidelines regarding meta-analysis of observational studies 15 . A systematic search of the literature for relevant studies was conducted and included a Medline search for articles with the words “subarachnoid hemorrhage,” “thunderclap headache” “normal head CT,” “normal CSF,” and “aneurysm.” as well as the bibliographies of retrieved papers and review papers on subarachnoid hemorrhage or thunderclap headache. Studies were excluded if they did not specify if the patients had a normal neurological examination, head CT and CSF. We found 7 articles in which patients with thunderclap headache, normal head CT and normal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were followed for a defined period of time. We included all 7 studies from which we abstracted salient aspects of design (e.g., patient demographics, duration, method of follow-up, intensity of follow-up investigations, results of diagnostic testing, percentage of patients with follow-up information and clinical outcomes). The main outcome from each study was expressed as a cumulative incidence of adverse outcome (SAH or sudden unexplained death) at 6 months. We calculated one-sided 95% confidence intervals for each study. 16 . The pooled cumulative incidence of SAH or sudden unexplained death was calculated weighting each study estimate by its sample size. 17 . Statistical analysis was performed in SigmaPlot version 10 (San Jose, CA).  Results We first assessed the aspects of clinical heterogeneity between the 7 studies ( Table 1 ). All studies shared the same clinical presentation of sudden and severe headache. All patients in these studies presented to an ED or were referred into the hospital. The evaluation in each study included only a head CT and an LP. The type of head CT was not specified in most of the studies. Only two studies specified the method of xanthrochromia measurement (spectrophotometry in one; visual inspection in the other). Two studies did not indicate the method of follow-up; the other 5 used a subsequent clinic visit or telephone interview. The incidence of hemorrhage or sudden death was zero, even in those studies with follow-up greater than 1 year. The upper 95% confidence bounds ranged from 0.006 in the study of 531 patients to 0.38 in the study of 8 participants ( Figure ). The pooled cumulative incidence was 0 with an upper 95% confidence bound of 0.004.  Results We first assessed the aspects of clinical heterogeneity between the 7 studies ( Table 1 ). All studies shared the same clinical presentation of sudden and severe headache. All patients in these studies presented to an ED or were referred into the hospital. The evaluation in each study included only a head CT and an LP. The type of head CT was not specified in most of the studies. Only two studies specified the method of xanthrochromia measurement (spectrophotometry in one; visual inspection in the other). Two studies did not indicate the method of follow-up; the other 5 used a subsequent clinic visit or telephone interview. The incidence of hemorrhage or sudden death was zero, even in those studies with follow-up greater than 1 year. The upper 95% confidence bounds ranged from 0.006 in the study of 531 patients to 0.38 in the study of 8 participants ( Figure ). The pooled cumulative incidence was 0 with an upper 95% confidence bound of 0.004.  Discussion Our analysis indicates that the probability of missing a subsequent SAH in neurologically intact patients presenting with thunderclap headache with normal CT and LP is less than roughly 0.4%. In terms of number needed to harm, 18 , we are reasonably confident that the number would not exceed one missed case for every 250 such patients. Our methods have important limitations. There is no well-accepted method to perform meta-analysis on low frequency events when there are few studies with small numbers of patients. For the pooled estimate of cumulative incidence, we used sample size weighting 17 which assumed that a fixed effects model was appropriate. We did not directly calculate estimates of within- or between-study variance or extent of between-study heterogeneity because no participant in any study developed the outcome of interest. It is unlikely that the true risk of SAH following a thunderclap headache with negative CT and LP is 0. Even if these headaches are unrelated to SAH, patients would likely have the same risk of SAH as the general population. However, the calculated upper 95% CI of 0.004 gives some reassurance that the risk is not high. In addition, meta-analysis can not overcome weaknesses of the underlying studies. Of particular concern, 65% of the patients in the pooled analysis came from a study with less than 100% follow-up. 11 . The incidence of missing a hemorrhage from this analysis should be balanced against the morbidity of performing cerebral angiograms, which carry a similar quantifiable risk of complications such as stroke. In addition, the risk of missing a hemorrhage should be balanced against the detection of false positives on CTA 12 . The 5.6% incidence of aneurysms reported in 1 study 12 is about what one would expect in an unselected population given that the incidence of aneurysms is 2-6% 19 . Our results, despite their intrinsic limitations, should help clinicians to decide whether angiography is indicated, and to better communicate the risk of missing SAH to patients as part of informed decision-making. Of course, in some highly selected patients whose history suggests diagnoses that CT and LP would be expected to miss (e.g., arterial dissection, cerebral venous sinus thrombosis and pituitary apoplexy), other imaging may be indicated 14 . Overall, our analysis supports the contention that a head CT and an LP constitute a sufficient work-up for SAH in most patients with thunderclap headache but it must be acknowledged that clinicians may need to consider other causes of acute severe headache for which CT and LP may be negative such as cerebral venous thrombosis and arterial dissection.  Discussion Our analysis indicates that the probability of missing a subsequent SAH in neurologically intact patients presenting with thunderclap headache with normal CT and LP is less than roughly 0.4%. In terms of number needed to harm, 18 , we are reasonably confident that the number would not exceed one missed case for every 250 such patients. Our methods have important limitations. There is no well-accepted method to perform meta-analysis on low frequency events when there are few studies with small numbers of patients. For the pooled estimate of cumulative incidence, we used sample size weighting 17 which assumed that a fixed effects model was appropriate. We did not directly calculate estimates of within- or between-study variance or extent of between-study heterogeneity because no participant in any study developed the outcome of interest. It is unlikely that the true risk of SAH following a thunderclap headache with negative CT and LP is 0. Even if these headaches are unrelated to SAH, patients would likely have the same risk of SAH as the general population. However, the calculated upper 95% CI of 0.004 gives some reassurance that the risk is not high. In addition, meta-analysis can not overcome weaknesses of the underlying studies. Of particular concern, 65% of the patients in the pooled analysis came from a study with less than 100% follow-up. 11 . The incidence of missing a hemorrhage from this analysis should be balanced against the morbidity of performing cerebral angiograms, which carry a similar quantifiable risk of complications such as stroke. In addition, the risk of missing a hemorrhage should be balanced against the detection of false positives on CTA 12 . The 5.6% incidence of aneurysms reported in 1 study 12 is about what one would expect in an unselected population given that the incidence of aneurysms is 2-6% 19 . Our results, despite their intrinsic limitations, should help clinicians to decide whether angiography is indicated, and to better communicate the risk of missing SAH to patients as part of informed decision-making. Of course, in some highly selected patients whose history suggests diagnoses that CT and LP would be expected to miss (e.g., arterial dissection, cerebral venous sinus thrombosis and pituitary apoplexy), other imaging may be indicated 14 . Overall, our analysis supports the contention that a head CT and an LP constitute a sufficient work-up for SAH in most patients with thunderclap headache but it must be acknowledged that clinicians may need to consider other causes of acute severe headache for which CT and LP may be negative such as cerebral venous thrombosis and arterial dissection.  Figure and Table Figure Forest plot showing one-sided confidence intervals on the probability of hemorrhage in 12 months follow-up. For individual studies, the upper, one-sided, exact 95% confidence intervals are shown. Table 1 1a. Patient characteristics Study Number of patients How were patients referred in to the study Age range Onset of HA defined Other characteristic of HA specified Wijdicks 71 Admitted to neurology service at univ hosp. 15-67 Yes Sudden, severe, unusual Harling 14 Admitted to general hosp. NS Yes Sudden, severe, generalized, “worst ever” Marcus 16 Presented to ED 29-63 Yes Sudden, severe, unusual maximal by 1min, “worst ever” Linn 59 Referred by GP to hosp NS Yes Sudden, severe, >1hr Landtblom 114 Referred to ED or seeking ED 18-86 Yes Maximal in 10s, sudden Duffy 8 Admitted to neurosurg service NS Yes Sudden, severe Perry 531 Presented to ED ?15 Yes Sudden, severe 1b. Evaluation of patients Study Physical examination-neurological findings Head CT: what model CSF analysis description W No deficits NS Normal H No deficits NS Normal M No deficits NS Normal Linn No deficits NS No xanthrochromia Landt No deficits GE 9800 No xanthrochromia Duffy No deficits NS Normal Perry No new deficits NS No Xanthrochromia 1c. Follow-up characteristics Study Percentage of patients followed Method of f/u (chart/phone/etc) Duration of f/u Recurrent h/a W 100% Clinic visit or telephone 1-7yr (mean 3 yr) 17% H 100% NS 18-36mo NS M 100% Telephone 14-21mo 25% Linn 100% NS 12 mo 20% Landt 100% Telephone interview 12 mo 24% Duffy 100% Clinic visit 12 mo NS Perry 89.6% Clinic visit or telephone > 6 mo NS NS = not specified  Figure and Table Figure Forest plot showing one-sided confidence intervals on the probability of hemorrhage in 12 months follow-up. For individual studies, the upper, one-sided, exact 95% confidence intervals are shown. Table 1 1a. Patient characteristics Study Number of patients How were patients referred in to the study Age range Onset of HA defined Other characteristic of HA specified Wijdicks 71 Admitted to neurology service at univ hosp. 15-67 Yes Sudden, severe, unusual Harling 14 Admitted to general hosp. NS Yes Sudden, severe, generalized, “worst ever” Marcus 16 Presented to ED 29-63 Yes Sudden, severe, unusual maximal by 1min, “worst ever” Linn 59 Referred by GP to hosp NS Yes Sudden, severe, >1hr Landtblom 114 Referred to ED or seeking ED 18-86 Yes Maximal in 10s, sudden Duffy 8 Admitted to neurosurg service NS Yes Sudden, severe Perry 531 Presented to ED ?15 Yes Sudden, severe 1b. Evaluation of patients Study Physical examination-neurological findings Head CT: what model CSF analysis description W No deficits NS Normal H No deficits NS Normal M No deficits NS Normal Linn No deficits NS No xanthrochromia Landt No deficits GE 9800 No xanthrochromia Duffy No deficits NS Normal Perry No new deficits NS No Xanthrochromia 1c. Follow-up characteristics Study Percentage of patients followed Method of f/u (chart/phone/etc) Duration of f/u Recurrent h/a W 100% Clinic visit or telephone 1-7yr (mean 3 yr) 17% H 100% NS 18-36mo NS M 100% Telephone 14-21mo 25% Linn 100% NS 12 mo 20% Landt 100% Telephone interview 12 mo 24% Duffy 100% Clinic visit 12 mo NS Perry 89.6% Clinic visit or telephone > 6 mo NS NS = not specified 