From cells to organs: building polarized tissue How do animal cells assemble into tissues and organs? A diverse array of tissue structures and shapes can be formed by organizing groups of cells into different polarized arrangements and by coordinating their polarity in space and time. Conserved design principles underlying this diversity are emerging from studies of model organisms and tissues. We discuss how conserved polarity complexes, signalling networks, transcription factors, membrane-trafficking pathways, mechanisms for forming lumens in tubes and other hollow structures, and transitions between different types of polarity, such as between epithelial and mesenchymal cells, are used in similar and iterative manners to build all tissues.  Conclusions and future prospects Although much has been learned about how the polarity of individual cells is established and maintained, we are still in the early days of understanding how polarized cells are put together to make tissues. Communication between cells, both through cell–cell contact and via the ECM and diffusible factors, and using both chemical and mechanical signals, is at the heart of polarized tissue and organ formation. Over 85% of fatal malignancies in adults in the USA arise from epithelial tissues 99 , and loss of polarity is a hallmark of increased malignancy. The mechanistic bases for this connection are rapidly being elucidated, as is described in several recent reviews 20 , 67 , 100 . Acute injury of major epithelial organ systems is collectively one of the most important causes of death worldwide 101 – 103 . Understanding polarization of epithelia, therefore, is important in analysing the response of a tissue to acute injury and in generating prospects for regenerative medicine. Many organs, such as the kidney, lung and liver, can recover from even severe or acute injury, provided that the patient survives the initial insult. In the case of the kidney, at least, this involves the local proliferation of epithelial cells, which replace their dead neighbours in denuded regions of the tubules through a process that appears to involve a pEMT 104 , 105 . Repeated injury, however, leads to a permanent EMT, whereby epithelial cells become fibroblastic and contribute to a fibrotic response, which ultimately destroys organ function 106 . Learning how to improve the response to acute injury, as well as how to avoid fibrosis and EMT after chronic injury, such as by controlling the polarity state of cells, offers enormous possibilities to enhance human health. As we begin to understand how polarization occurs and is controlled at the tissue level, we move closer to being able to translate such research potential into medical reality.  Figures and Table Figure 1 Cell polarization in diverse tissue types a | Epithelial tubes are comprised of tightly adhering cells that display strong apico–basal polarity. Lateral membranes possess desmosomes, adherens junctions and tight junctions (TJs), providing cell–cell adhesion and diffusion barriers. Basal membranes interact with underlying basement membrane and extracellular matrix (ECM). Apical membranes are specialized for absorption and secretion, such as for electrolytes, milk or O2. b | Neurons polarize to form a soma (cell body), an axon shaft, an axon terminal and dendrites. Neural synapses contain adhesion molecules for stabilization of the interaction between cells. The synapse provides a specialized region for neurotransmission to occur, through polarized targeting and uptake of neurotransmitters. c | The Drosophila melanogaster retina contains ommatidia made up of tubular neuroepithelia surrounding a central lumen (or interrhabdomeral space (IRS)). Cells are not radially symmetric in the tube but nevertheless follow a defined, polarized pattern. They have typical epithelial junctions (zonula adherens at the most apico–lateral region in D. melanogaster ) and a subapical actin-dense network (the rhabdomere terminal web), but their apical surfaces are specialized into two domains; the stalk membrane and the light-sensing rhabdomeres, which are specialized microvilli. Figure 2 EMT and MET in tissue morphogenesis a | Epithelial cells from tubes undergoing epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) lose apico–basal polarity, downregulate cell–cell adhesion, change their cytoskeleton composition and invade into the extracellular matrix (ECM) at areas where the basement membrane has broken down 21 . As cells adopt a mesenchymal state, they may also be polarized, displaying front–back polarization and Golgi orientation towards the leading edge (front) during migration 112 , 116 . Conversely, during mesenchymal–epithelial transition (MET), cells develop apico–basal polarity, express epithelial-specific proteins, form stable adhesions and generate luminal structures. b | Transforming growth factor-? (TGF?) (and other morphogens) can induce EMT by inducing Snail and the ZEB family of transcription factors (which can also crosstalk) 29 . Snail and ZEB directly repress the expression of numerous proteins that are involved in epithelial polarization, including polarity complexes 30 , 31 , cell–cell junctions 29 , the ECM 33 and the cytoskeleton 32 . Snail-1 can also alter membrane trafficking, such as by direct repression of RAB25 (REF. 32 ), a small GTPase that is involved in apical membrane trafficking 130 (although, paradoxically, RAB25 is overexpressed in some tumour types 131 ). The miR-200 family of microRNAs promotes epithelial polarity and can induce MET by inhibiting translation of ZEB1, thereby blocking induction of EMT 35 , 36 . Figure 3 Cavitation, hollowing and membrane repulsion as lumen-forming mechanisms a | During cavitation, groups of cells proliferate to form a cell mass. Apoptosis of non-extracellular matrix (ECM)-contacting inner cells results in lumen and polarized tube or cyst formation. Correct lumen formation requires the PAR and Scribble complexes, which modulate cell proliferation 68 . Apoptosis requires BCL2-family members (BCL2 and BIM) and is inhibited by proliferation-inducing oncoproteins (ERBB2, cyclin D1 and HPV16 E7), causing luminal filling 24 , 65 , 66 . b | During hollowing, polarity establishment and orientation requires laminin–?1-integrin to signal RAC1 (REFS 12 , 37 ), and is inhibited by RhoA–ROCK1 signalling 38 . Intracellular vesicles (varying in size in different systems 71 ) containing apical membrane components and endocytosis- and/or trans -Golgi-derived material are delivered to regions between cells 46 , 69 , 70 . This delivery depends on PTEN-mediated segregation of phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P2) to nascent apical regions, recruiting annexin-2 and, in turn, the CDC42–aPKC–PAR6 complex 46 , 73 . Once rudimentary lumens are formed (there may be multiple such lumens), tight junctions 87 , 132 , 133 , pump proteins 87 , 134 , the Crumbs complex 133 , 135 , the exocyst (Sec10 (REF. 136 )) and possibly ezrin 137 , 138 promote formation of a single, expanded lumen. c | During Drosophila melanogaster cardiac tube formation, two rows of myoendothelial cells line up along the midline. Membrane processes extend and join between cells on either side of the midline, first at the ventral-most and then at the dorsal-most regions between cells. Resultant junctions containing PAR3 (Bazooka (Baz)), DE-cadherin (Shotgun (Shg)), ?-catenin (Armadillo (Arm)) and Ena allow an enclosed lumen. Slit signalling to Robo at lumen surfaces, apparently regulated by dystroglycan (Dg), prevents extended adhesive contacts between cells (membrane repulsion), allowing lumens to form 74 , 75 . Figure 4 Membrane traffic and apical extracellular matrix secretion during lumen formation and expansion a | In the embryonic Drosophila melanogaster trachea an initially narrow lumen is expanded during a rapid burst of Molecular Cell Biology secretion at the apical membrane, dependent on the COPI and COPII vesicle transport complexes 92 , 93 . Chitin fibrils in the lumen (made by chitin synthetases) signal to underlying cells to organize luminal diameter before being subsequently remodelled into tracheal cuticle (reviewed in REF. 94 ). Clathrin-dependent endocytic activity at the apical surface directs luminal material to early endosomes (EE) and then to late endosomes (LE) for degradation, thereby clearing the lumen for gas entry 93 . Correct luminal secretion and expansion requires functional septate junctions 94 . b | Part of the D. melanogaster airway is divided into the dorsal trunk and dorsal branches, which sprout from the trunk. Wingless (Wg) signalling in the trunk induces the Spalt (SAL) transcription factor, which promotes DE-cadherin recycling through induction of the RIP11–RAB11 membrane-trafficking complex; lumens are formed by intercellular junctions between multiple cells. Decapentaplegic (Dpp) signalling in branches inhibits SAL expression, through the repressor Knirps (KNI), downregulating the RIP11–RAB11 complex and leading to formation of autocellular junctions and lumens in individual cells 80 . c | During ommatidium formation in the D. melanogaster retina, a tripartite complex of RAB11, RIP11 and the motor protein myosin V (MyoV) regulates transport of cargo to the rhabdomere, and is required for correct ommatidia organization 98 . RAB11 interacts with the exocyst complex, which also regulates apical transport to the rhabdomere 139 . Luminal secretion of the proteoglycan eyes shut (EYS) is required for expansion of the interrhabdomeral space (IRS), apparently occurring in an exocyst-independent manner 95 . ZA, zonula adherens. Table 1 Selected components involved in apical polarity and lumen formation Component Function Model system Loss-of-function phenotype Refs Polarity components PAR complex (PAR6–aPKC) AP polarity Zebrafish gut; MDCK cyst Multiple lumens; accumulation of luminal apoptotic cells 46 , 73 , 87 Crumbs complex (Crumbs-3–PATJ) AP polarity MDCK cyst; Dm salivary gland Multiple lumens, disrupted apico–basal polarity; distended luminal size 97 , 133 , 135 Scribble BL polarity MCF-10A cyst Lumen filling phenotype 68 Rho GTPases CDC42 (also ECT2) Rho GTPase CDC42 GEF; Embryoid body; MDCK cyst Disrupted polarity; multiple lumens 46 , 48 , 140 RAC1 Rho GTPase MDCK cyst Inverted apico–basal polarity 12 , 37 Apical transport Annexin-2 or -13 Apical transport MDCK cyst Multiple lumens 46 , 133 ARL3 Arl GTPase Dm trachea Inability to fuse lumens between branches 141 Eyes-closed (EYC) SNARE-complex modulator Dm photoreceptor No lumen expansion 141 Exocyst (SEC5–SEC6) Vesicle transport Dm photoreceptor Abnormal apical transport 139 FAPP2 Apical transport MDCK cyst Abnormal lumen expansion 142 RAB8 Apical transport Mouse intestine, Ce intestine Gross defect in apical organization 143 RAB11 complex (RAB11–RIP11–MyoV) Vesicle recycling Dm photoreceptor; MDCK cyst Abnormal apical transport, ectopic rhabdomere formation; multiple lumens 98 , 144 Syntaxin-2 or -3 t-SNARE(s) MDCK cyst Disrupted apico–basal polarity, small cysts 133 , 145 VIP17, galectin-3 Apical transport MDCK cyst Multiple lumens 133 Apical ECM/cytoskeleton Chitin synthetases and deacetylases Luminal ECM Dm trachea Distended luminal size 94 EPS-8 Actin regulation Ce intestine Distended luminal size 146 Ezrin Membrane–actin crosslinker Ce intestine; mouse intestine Distended luminal size; multiple lumens 137 , 138 Eyes shut (EYS) Proteoglycan Dm photoreceptor No lumen expansion 95 Piopio Luminal protein Dm trachea Inability to fuse lumens between branches 83 Slit–Robo– dystroglycan Repulsive complex Dm heart tube No lumen formed 74 , 75 Junction proteins E-cadherin Cell adhesion MDCK cyst Lumen filling, abnormal lumens 144 , 147 Na+/K+-ATPase Ion pump Dm trachea; zebrafish gut Distended luminal size; multiple lumens 87 , 90 TJs (APG2, claudins, JAM-A, ZO-1) TJ components Zebrafish gut; Dm trachea; MDCK cyst Multiple lumens; disruption to lumen dimensions; disrupted apico–basal polarity 87 , 132 , 148 , 149 Other ?1-integrin ECM signalling MDCK cyst Inverted apico–basal polarity 12 BIM, BCL2 Apoptosis Mouse mammary gland, MCF-10A cyst, MDCK cyst Accumulation of cells in lumen 47 , 65 , 66 CFTR Chloride channel Mouse model of PKD, MDCK cyst Reduced lumen size 89 PTEN Lipid phosphatase Dm photoreceptor; MDCK cyst Abnormal rhabdomere morphogenesis; multiple lumens 46 , 115 Podocalyxin Sialomucin MDCK cyst No lumen expansion 76 AP, apical; BL, basolateral; Ce , Caenorhabditis elegans ; CFTR, cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator; Dm , Drosophila melanogaster ; ECM, extracellular matrix; GEF, guanine nucleotide-exchange factor; MDCK, Madin–Darby canine kidney; PKD, polycystic kidney disease; TJ, tight junction. 