Assessment of Functional Effects of Unclassified Genetic Variants Inherited predisposition to disease is often linked to reduced activity of a disease associated gene product. Thus, quantitation of the influence of inherited variants on gene function can potentially be used to predict the disease relevance of these variants. While many disease genes have been extensively characterized at the functional level, few assays based on functional properties of the encoded proteins have been established for the purpose of predicting the contribution of rare inherited variants to disease. Much of the difficulty in establishing predictive functional assays stems from the technical complexity of the assays. However, perhaps the most challenging aspect of functional assay development for clinical testing purposes is the absolute requirement for validation of the sensitivity and specificity of the assays and the determination of positive predictive and negative predictive values of the assays relative to a “gold standard” measure of disease predisposition. In this commentary we provide examples of some of the functional assays under development for several cancer predisposition genes [ BRCA1, BRCA2 , CDKN2A, and mismatch repair (MMR) genes MLH1 , MSH2 , MSH6 , and PMS2 ] and present a detailed review of the issues associated with functional assay development. We conclude that validation is paramount for all assays that will be used for clinical interpretation of inherited variants of any gene, but note that in certain circumstances information derived from incompletely validated assays may be valuable for classification of variants for clinical purposes when used to supplement data derived from other sources.  Discussion The examples described above provide some insight into the complexity associated with functional assay development and interpretation. It is clear that assays for different genes have their own particular issues but there are also issues that are common for all of the assays discussed here. We briefly discuss some of the central issues associated with the use of functional assays for classification of VUS ( Figure 3 ). Do specific functional assays account for all functional effects? The answer to this question depends on the nature of the assay and also on the function of the gene product. The protein binding and activity assays for MMR proteins are well-defined. In contrast, in the setting of the multifunctional BRCA1 and BRCA2 proteins, no single assay will account for the functional effects of all variants. There is also uncertainty in the best assays to use for CDKN2A variants, even though the main phenotypic abnormality contributing to cancer is well understood. In addition, variants that induce aberrant splicing, exon skipping or mRNA/protein stability will be overlooked in the setting of most functional assays. As a result it seems unlikely that the influence of every variant can be accounted for using functional assays. Can variants be definitively shown to have no effect? There are a variety of considerations for variants that show wild type activity in functional assays. The NPV for each assay should be determined on a panel of known mutations and known neutral variants in order to quantify the interpretation of a wild type result [ Goldgar et al., 2008 ]. Aberrant splicing, exon skipping or mRNA/protein stability also must be considered using in silico and in vitro approaches when interpreting negative functional results [ Spurdle et al., 2008 ]. Negative results may also occur if a variant is in a different domain, one that does not influence the function being assayed. A variant may disrupt a specific binding site for a protein interaction that while important for tumor suppression is not assessed in the assay. In this setting the variant would be inappropriately viewed as “neutral”. Results from assays that do not apply to the domains in which variants are located must be excluded for the classification process. Defining variants as neutral may involve a laborious and hierarchical approach to functional studies, and knowing the NPV of each assay will be important in reaching conclusions regarding protein function. Final classification of neutral will likely require integration of multiple lines of evidence [ Goldgar et al., 2008 ]. How should differences in results among assays be interpreted? Discordant results may be very informative. One interpretation is that any in vitro result of functional loss should lead to a classification of pathogenic, as has been applied to MMR genes and CDKN2A variants. Alternatively, it is possible that some assays assess a bona fide function of a protein that is not necessarily required for tumor suppression. Validation of the PPV of all assays is therefore critical. Each biochemical pathway has specific features that demand sophistication in interpreting the results of assays. Therefore, the process of validation may require ongoing evaluation by panels with expertise in all aspects of the pathway and disease. Periodic consensus statements may be required, similar to what has been done for classification of carcinogens. Such statements should attempt to be comprehensive in evaluating data and transparent in discussing what conclusions were reached and why, as has been done for classifying BRCA mutations [Greenblatt et al., this issue]. The Working Group encourages this unified view of functional assays, which can be applied to all attempts to use in vitro data to classify genetic variants. Are there specific thresholds for function? Results from functional assays tend to cover the entire spectrum of responses within the dynamic range of each assay. Given the variation in results this raises the question of whether to use a specific cutoff point or a continuous measure of activity for distinguishing between inactivating and neutral effects. While validation of the sensitivity, specificity, and PV of an assay may result in the definition of a specific cutoff point, a continuous measure may be most useful in the absence of comprehensive validation. In the case of a continuous measure, one could assign variants whose values are comparable to known damaging mutants to a class called “damaging” and variants whose values are comparable to wild type or known neutral variants as “neutral”. The class that falls in between could be considered unknown. Alternatively, somewhat arbitrary “favor damaging” or “favor neutral” categories could be used. The most appropriate system may be different for different genes. Panels of experts for each gene should agree on classification schemes and their rationales before the results are used clinically. How can functional effect translate to risk? Establishing a predictive value for a test requires that a set of known deleterious and known neutral variants be studied to establish sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV. This method establishes the error rate of a given assay. This can subsequently be converted into a likelihood ratio that can be used in a Bayesian integrative analysis, in which data from family studies and sequence conservation analysis can be combined with functional assay data to generate an overall likelihood or odds that a variant is pathogenic or neutral. This step has not yet been accomplished for any of the assays described above, although advances in the area are expected in the near future. In the absence of these data, the functional assays are currently only used to qualitatively cross-validate and improve confidence in results from other models. How should the sensitivity, specificity, and PV of the assays be determined? Where possible, assays should be validated against a “gold standard” measure of the disease phenotype, such as genetic and clinicopathologic data from families (co-segregation of variants with disease) using known pathogenic and known neutral variants. Initially, few such known variants may be available for a given gene. An extension of this approach is the integrated Bayesean likelihood model that has been applied to BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants. This model accounts for co-segregation data, family history of cancer, co-occurrence of variants with known pathogenic mutations and tumor pathology data and appears to be the best developed method for this purpose. However, at this time this model is limited to genes with established estimates of penetrance [ Goldgar et al., 2008 ] and by the availability of family data for a large number of mutations. Indeed, it has even been difficult to establish the sensitivity and specificity of BRCA1 and BRCA2 assays because of limited availability of family data. An attractive feature of the Bayesean likelihood model is that new classification techniques such as in vitro assays, when validated and quantified against a panel of known variants, can be added to the baseline statistical genetic assessment for a variant. The greatest hindrance of assay validation today is the absence of “gold standard” data for established pathogenic and neutral variants. As a result, validation studies tend to be underpowered and yield wide confidence intervals. The certainty with which a variant can be classified by functional assays is limited, and results remain qualitative and not quantitative. Should qualitative functional assay data be used clinically? The ultimate goal of the use of functional tests is to provide information for the individual to make informed clinical decisions. In principle, only the most rigorously evaluated information should be used so that when a classification is made it carries a high level of certainty. It can be argued however, that such an approach, while scientifically sound, denies the patients and their families information that may not have achieved the “gold standard”. The patient and clinicians may prefer to make decisions based on reasonable estimates of moderately high or low risk from incomplete and less-than-optimal data rather than using no data at all [ Plon et al., 2008 ]. If this argument is accepted then several of the functional assays described above are already useful or will shortly be useful for clinical classification of variants, in a qualitative manner. For these reasons it might be useful to use a hierarchical validation scheme that mixes quantitative and qualitative elements. Statistical genetic data are currently the most powerful because they are quantitative. Some in silico sequence conservation methods have also been quantified, to a much less rigorous degree at this time [ Tavtigian et al., 2008a , b ]. Although predictive values have not been determined for in vitro functional assays, some do appear to be robust enough to contribute qualitatively to classification. This is particularly the case for in vitro MMR activity assays because the MMR pathway is well defined, both biochemically and genetically and it is established that defective MMR is causative for Lynch syndrome. If we find a complete defect of a variant in the in vitro MMR assay, and knowing that an MMR activity defect causes Lynch syndrome, at this stage we may diagnose the patient as such and dismiss the non-variant carrying relatives from screening ( Figure 2 , step 2). Thus, an in vitro functional defect identified by a technically validated assay for MMR activity should be considered strong qualitative evidence. In addition, newly developed assays that are quickly validated against a smaller panel of variants might also contribute to such a scheme. Since many variants will be rare, accumulating enough genetic data may take many years and in some cases never be achieved, so qualitative functional conclusions may provide an important contribution. One caveat for this approach is that since less-than-optimal data can be misinterpreted and misconstrued, it is crucial to ensure that the data from functional assays that is released is either of highest certainty or, if not, then clearly specified as tentative or uncertain. Will functional assays ever be used for clinical classification? Assay results as they stand now can be one of several tools to help with clinical decisions. At this time, results from most assays must be considered qualitative evidence. Once assays are validated against standards and Type I and Type II errors are evaluated, assays can likely be used for classification of variants. Whether they should be used for clinical decisions is a question that needs to be addressed together by laboratory scientists, clinicians, clinical geneticists, and patient advocates. Decisions will probably depend on whether individuals are comfortable using the results for clinical decisions knowing that they may include flaws. If that is the case, one needs to make sure that the target audience understands what data were used, all the limitations in the assays, all possible pitfalls, and also understands the significance of each class of variant used in the classification. Results can be disseminated to the biomedical community through publications and through locus sprecific databases [Greenblatt et al., this issue] so that recommendations are uniform. In addition, genetic counselors and clinicians may need specific training in interpretation of results and/or teaching aids to help with delivery of the information to patients.  Discussion The examples described above provide some insight into the complexity associated with functional assay development and interpretation. It is clear that assays for different genes have their own particular issues but there are also issues that are common for all of the assays discussed here. We briefly discuss some of the central issues associated with the use of functional assays for classification of VUS ( Figure 3 ). Do specific functional assays account for all functional effects? The answer to this question depends on the nature of the assay and also on the function of the gene product. The protein binding and activity assays for MMR proteins are well-defined. In contrast, in the setting of the multifunctional BRCA1 and BRCA2 proteins, no single assay will account for the functional effects of all variants. There is also uncertainty in the best assays to use for CDKN2A variants, even though the main phenotypic abnormality contributing to cancer is well understood. In addition, variants that induce aberrant splicing, exon skipping or mRNA/protein stability will be overlooked in the setting of most functional assays. As a result it seems unlikely that the influence of every variant can be accounted for using functional assays. Can variants be definitively shown to have no effect? There are a variety of considerations for variants that show wild type activity in functional assays. The NPV for each assay should be determined on a panel of known mutations and known neutral variants in order to quantify the interpretation of a wild type result [ Goldgar et al., 2008 ]. Aberrant splicing, exon skipping or mRNA/protein stability also must be considered using in silico and in vitro approaches when interpreting negative functional results [ Spurdle et al., 2008 ]. Negative results may also occur if a variant is in a different domain, one that does not influence the function being assayed. A variant may disrupt a specific binding site for a protein interaction that while important for tumor suppression is not assessed in the assay. In this setting the variant would be inappropriately viewed as “neutral”. Results from assays that do not apply to the domains in which variants are located must be excluded for the classification process. Defining variants as neutral may involve a laborious and hierarchical approach to functional studies, and knowing the NPV of each assay will be important in reaching conclusions regarding protein function. Final classification of neutral will likely require integration of multiple lines of evidence [ Goldgar et al., 2008 ]. How should differences in results among assays be interpreted? Discordant results may be very informative. One interpretation is that any in vitro result of functional loss should lead to a classification of pathogenic, as has been applied to MMR genes and CDKN2A variants. Alternatively, it is possible that some assays assess a bona fide function of a protein that is not necessarily required for tumor suppression. Validation of the PPV of all assays is therefore critical. Each biochemical pathway has specific features that demand sophistication in interpreting the results of assays. Therefore, the process of validation may require ongoing evaluation by panels with expertise in all aspects of the pathway and disease. Periodic consensus statements may be required, similar to what has been done for classification of carcinogens. Such statements should attempt to be comprehensive in evaluating data and transparent in discussing what conclusions were reached and why, as has been done for classifying BRCA mutations [Greenblatt et al., this issue]. The Working Group encourages this unified view of functional assays, which can be applied to all attempts to use in vitro data to classify genetic variants. Are there specific thresholds for function? Results from functional assays tend to cover the entire spectrum of responses within the dynamic range of each assay. Given the variation in results this raises the question of whether to use a specific cutoff point or a continuous measure of activity for distinguishing between inactivating and neutral effects. While validation of the sensitivity, specificity, and PV of an assay may result in the definition of a specific cutoff point, a continuous measure may be most useful in the absence of comprehensive validation. In the case of a continuous measure, one could assign variants whose values are comparable to known damaging mutants to a class called “damaging” and variants whose values are comparable to wild type or known neutral variants as “neutral”. The class that falls in between could be considered unknown. Alternatively, somewhat arbitrary “favor damaging” or “favor neutral” categories could be used. The most appropriate system may be different for different genes. Panels of experts for each gene should agree on classification schemes and their rationales before the results are used clinically. How can functional effect translate to risk? Establishing a predictive value for a test requires that a set of known deleterious and known neutral variants be studied to establish sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV. This method establishes the error rate of a given assay. This can subsequently be converted into a likelihood ratio that can be used in a Bayesian integrative analysis, in which data from family studies and sequence conservation analysis can be combined with functional assay data to generate an overall likelihood or odds that a variant is pathogenic or neutral. This step has not yet been accomplished for any of the assays described above, although advances in the area are expected in the near future. In the absence of these data, the functional assays are currently only used to qualitatively cross-validate and improve confidence in results from other models. How should the sensitivity, specificity, and PV of the assays be determined? Where possible, assays should be validated against a “gold standard” measure of the disease phenotype, such as genetic and clinicopathologic data from families (co-segregation of variants with disease) using known pathogenic and known neutral variants. Initially, few such known variants may be available for a given gene. An extension of this approach is the integrated Bayesean likelihood model that has been applied to BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants. This model accounts for co-segregation data, family history of cancer, co-occurrence of variants with known pathogenic mutations and tumor pathology data and appears to be the best developed method for this purpose. However, at this time this model is limited to genes with established estimates of penetrance [ Goldgar et al., 2008 ] and by the availability of family data for a large number of mutations. Indeed, it has even been difficult to establish the sensitivity and specificity of BRCA1 and BRCA2 assays because of limited availability of family data. An attractive feature of the Bayesean likelihood model is that new classification techniques such as in vitro assays, when validated and quantified against a panel of known variants, can be added to the baseline statistical genetic assessment for a variant. The greatest hindrance of assay validation today is the absence of “gold standard” data for established pathogenic and neutral variants. As a result, validation studies tend to be underpowered and yield wide confidence intervals. The certainty with which a variant can be classified by functional assays is limited, and results remain qualitative and not quantitative. Should qualitative functional assay data be used clinically? The ultimate goal of the use of functional tests is to provide information for the individual to make informed clinical decisions. In principle, only the most rigorously evaluated information should be used so that when a classification is made it carries a high level of certainty. It can be argued however, that such an approach, while scientifically sound, denies the patients and their families information that may not have achieved the “gold standard”. The patient and clinicians may prefer to make decisions based on reasonable estimates of moderately high or low risk from incomplete and less-than-optimal data rather than using no data at all [ Plon et al., 2008 ]. If this argument is accepted then several of the functional assays described above are already useful or will shortly be useful for clinical classification of variants, in a qualitative manner. For these reasons it might be useful to use a hierarchical validation scheme that mixes quantitative and qualitative elements. Statistical genetic data are currently the most powerful because they are quantitative. Some in silico sequence conservation methods have also been quantified, to a much less rigorous degree at this time [ Tavtigian et al., 2008a , b ]. Although predictive values have not been determined for in vitro functional assays, some do appear to be robust enough to contribute qualitatively to classification. This is particularly the case for in vitro MMR activity assays because the MMR pathway is well defined, both biochemically and genetically and it is established that defective MMR is causative for Lynch syndrome. If we find a complete defect of a variant in the in vitro MMR assay, and knowing that an MMR activity defect causes Lynch syndrome, at this stage we may diagnose the patient as such and dismiss the non-variant carrying relatives from screening ( Figure 2 , step 2). Thus, an in vitro functional defect identified by a technically validated assay for MMR activity should be considered strong qualitative evidence. In addition, newly developed assays that are quickly validated against a smaller panel of variants might also contribute to such a scheme. Since many variants will be rare, accumulating enough genetic data may take many years and in some cases never be achieved, so qualitative functional conclusions may provide an important contribution. One caveat for this approach is that since less-than-optimal data can be misinterpreted and misconstrued, it is crucial to ensure that the data from functional assays that is released is either of highest certainty or, if not, then clearly specified as tentative or uncertain. Will functional assays ever be used for clinical classification? Assay results as they stand now can be one of several tools to help with clinical decisions. At this time, results from most assays must be considered qualitative evidence. Once assays are validated against standards and Type I and Type II errors are evaluated, assays can likely be used for classification of variants. Whether they should be used for clinical decisions is a question that needs to be addressed together by laboratory scientists, clinicians, clinical geneticists, and patient advocates. Decisions will probably depend on whether individuals are comfortable using the results for clinical decisions knowing that they may include flaws. If that is the case, one needs to make sure that the target audience understands what data were used, all the limitations in the assays, all possible pitfalls, and also understands the significance of each class of variant used in the classification. Results can be disseminated to the biomedical community through publications and through locus sprecific databases [Greenblatt et al., this issue] so that recommendations are uniform. In addition, genetic counselors and clinicians may need specific training in interpretation of results and/or teaching aids to help with delivery of the information to patients.  Do specific functional assays account for all functional effects? The answer to this question depends on the nature of the assay and also on the function of the gene product. The protein binding and activity assays for MMR proteins are well-defined. In contrast, in the setting of the multifunctional BRCA1 and BRCA2 proteins, no single assay will account for the functional effects of all variants. There is also uncertainty in the best assays to use for CDKN2A variants, even though the main phenotypic abnormality contributing to cancer is well understood. In addition, variants that induce aberrant splicing, exon skipping or mRNA/protein stability will be overlooked in the setting of most functional assays. As a result it seems unlikely that the influence of every variant can be accounted for using functional assays.  Do specific functional assays account for all functional effects? The answer to this question depends on the nature of the assay and also on the function of the gene product. The protein binding and activity assays for MMR proteins are well-defined. In contrast, in the setting of the multifunctional BRCA1 and BRCA2 proteins, no single assay will account for the functional effects of all variants. There is also uncertainty in the best assays to use for CDKN2A variants, even though the main phenotypic abnormality contributing to cancer is well understood. In addition, variants that induce aberrant splicing, exon skipping or mRNA/protein stability will be overlooked in the setting of most functional assays. As a result it seems unlikely that the influence of every variant can be accounted for using functional assays.  Can variants be definitively shown to have no effect? There are a variety of considerations for variants that show wild type activity in functional assays. The NPV for each assay should be determined on a panel of known mutations and known neutral variants in order to quantify the interpretation of a wild type result [ Goldgar et al., 2008 ]. Aberrant splicing, exon skipping or mRNA/protein stability also must be considered using in silico and in vitro approaches when interpreting negative functional results [ Spurdle et al., 2008 ]. Negative results may also occur if a variant is in a different domain, one that does not influence the function being assayed. A variant may disrupt a specific binding site for a protein interaction that while important for tumor suppression is not assessed in the assay. In this setting the variant would be inappropriately viewed as “neutral”. Results from assays that do not apply to the domains in which variants are located must be excluded for the classification process. Defining variants as neutral may involve a laborious and hierarchical approach to functional studies, and knowing the NPV of each assay will be important in reaching conclusions regarding protein function. Final classification of neutral will likely require integration of multiple lines of evidence [ Goldgar et al., 2008 ].  Can variants be definitively shown to have no effect? There are a variety of considerations for variants that show wild type activity in functional assays. The NPV for each assay should be determined on a panel of known mutations and known neutral variants in order to quantify the interpretation of a wild type result [ Goldgar et al., 2008 ]. Aberrant splicing, exon skipping or mRNA/protein stability also must be considered using in silico and in vitro approaches when interpreting negative functional results [ Spurdle et al., 2008 ]. Negative results may also occur if a variant is in a different domain, one that does not influence the function being assayed. A variant may disrupt a specific binding site for a protein interaction that while important for tumor suppression is not assessed in the assay. In this setting the variant would be inappropriately viewed as “neutral”. Results from assays that do not apply to the domains in which variants are located must be excluded for the classification process. Defining variants as neutral may involve a laborious and hierarchical approach to functional studies, and knowing the NPV of each assay will be important in reaching conclusions regarding protein function. Final classification of neutral will likely require integration of multiple lines of evidence [ Goldgar et al., 2008 ].  How should differences in results among assays be interpreted? Discordant results may be very informative. One interpretation is that any in vitro result of functional loss should lead to a classification of pathogenic, as has been applied to MMR genes and CDKN2A variants. Alternatively, it is possible that some assays assess a bona fide function of a protein that is not necessarily required for tumor suppression. Validation of the PPV of all assays is therefore critical. Each biochemical pathway has specific features that demand sophistication in interpreting the results of assays. Therefore, the process of validation may require ongoing evaluation by panels with expertise in all aspects of the pathway and disease. Periodic consensus statements may be required, similar to what has been done for classification of carcinogens. Such statements should attempt to be comprehensive in evaluating data and transparent in discussing what conclusions were reached and why, as has been done for classifying BRCA mutations [Greenblatt et al., this issue]. The Working Group encourages this unified view of functional assays, which can be applied to all attempts to use in vitro data to classify genetic variants.  How should differences in results among assays be interpreted? Discordant results may be very informative. One interpretation is that any in vitro result of functional loss should lead to a classification of pathogenic, as has been applied to MMR genes and CDKN2A variants. Alternatively, it is possible that some assays assess a bona fide function of a protein that is not necessarily required for tumor suppression. Validation of the PPV of all assays is therefore critical. Each biochemical pathway has specific features that demand sophistication in interpreting the results of assays. Therefore, the process of validation may require ongoing evaluation by panels with expertise in all aspects of the pathway and disease. Periodic consensus statements may be required, similar to what has been done for classification of carcinogens. Such statements should attempt to be comprehensive in evaluating data and transparent in discussing what conclusions were reached and why, as has been done for classifying BRCA mutations [Greenblatt et al., this issue]. The Working Group encourages this unified view of functional assays, which can be applied to all attempts to use in vitro data to classify genetic variants.  Are there specific thresholds for function? Results from functional assays tend to cover the entire spectrum of responses within the dynamic range of each assay. Given the variation in results this raises the question of whether to use a specific cutoff point or a continuous measure of activity for distinguishing between inactivating and neutral effects. While validation of the sensitivity, specificity, and PV of an assay may result in the definition of a specific cutoff point, a continuous measure may be most useful in the absence of comprehensive validation. In the case of a continuous measure, one could assign variants whose values are comparable to known damaging mutants to a class called “damaging” and variants whose values are comparable to wild type or known neutral variants as “neutral”. The class that falls in between could be considered unknown. Alternatively, somewhat arbitrary “favor damaging” or “favor neutral” categories could be used. The most appropriate system may be different for different genes. Panels of experts for each gene should agree on classification schemes and their rationales before the results are used clinically.  Are there specific thresholds for function? Results from functional assays tend to cover the entire spectrum of responses within the dynamic range of each assay. Given the variation in results this raises the question of whether to use a specific cutoff point or a continuous measure of activity for distinguishing between inactivating and neutral effects. While validation of the sensitivity, specificity, and PV of an assay may result in the definition of a specific cutoff point, a continuous measure may be most useful in the absence of comprehensive validation. In the case of a continuous measure, one could assign variants whose values are comparable to known damaging mutants to a class called “damaging” and variants whose values are comparable to wild type or known neutral variants as “neutral”. The class that falls in between could be considered unknown. Alternatively, somewhat arbitrary “favor damaging” or “favor neutral” categories could be used. The most appropriate system may be different for different genes. Panels of experts for each gene should agree on classification schemes and their rationales before the results are used clinically.  How can functional effect translate to risk? Establishing a predictive value for a test requires that a set of known deleterious and known neutral variants be studied to establish sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV. This method establishes the error rate of a given assay. This can subsequently be converted into a likelihood ratio that can be used in a Bayesian integrative analysis, in which data from family studies and sequence conservation analysis can be combined with functional assay data to generate an overall likelihood or odds that a variant is pathogenic or neutral. This step has not yet been accomplished for any of the assays described above, although advances in the area are expected in the near future. In the absence of these data, the functional assays are currently only used to qualitatively cross-validate and improve confidence in results from other models.  How can functional effect translate to risk? Establishing a predictive value for a test requires that a set of known deleterious and known neutral variants be studied to establish sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV. This method establishes the error rate of a given assay. This can subsequently be converted into a likelihood ratio that can be used in a Bayesian integrative analysis, in which data from family studies and sequence conservation analysis can be combined with functional assay data to generate an overall likelihood or odds that a variant is pathogenic or neutral. This step has not yet been accomplished for any of the assays described above, although advances in the area are expected in the near future. In the absence of these data, the functional assays are currently only used to qualitatively cross-validate and improve confidence in results from other models.  How should the sensitivity, specificity, and PV of the assays be determined? Where possible, assays should be validated against a “gold standard” measure of the disease phenotype, such as genetic and clinicopathologic data from families (co-segregation of variants with disease) using known pathogenic and known neutral variants. Initially, few such known variants may be available for a given gene. An extension of this approach is the integrated Bayesean likelihood model that has been applied to BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants. This model accounts for co-segregation data, family history of cancer, co-occurrence of variants with known pathogenic mutations and tumor pathology data and appears to be the best developed method for this purpose. However, at this time this model is limited to genes with established estimates of penetrance [ Goldgar et al., 2008 ] and by the availability of family data for a large number of mutations. Indeed, it has even been difficult to establish the sensitivity and specificity of BRCA1 and BRCA2 assays because of limited availability of family data. An attractive feature of the Bayesean likelihood model is that new classification techniques such as in vitro assays, when validated and quantified against a panel of known variants, can be added to the baseline statistical genetic assessment for a variant. The greatest hindrance of assay validation today is the absence of “gold standard” data for established pathogenic and neutral variants. As a result, validation studies tend to be underpowered and yield wide confidence intervals. The certainty with which a variant can be classified by functional assays is limited, and results remain qualitative and not quantitative.  How should the sensitivity, specificity, and PV of the assays be determined? Where possible, assays should be validated against a “gold standard” measure of the disease phenotype, such as genetic and clinicopathologic data from families (co-segregation of variants with disease) using known pathogenic and known neutral variants. Initially, few such known variants may be available for a given gene. An extension of this approach is the integrated Bayesean likelihood model that has been applied to BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants. This model accounts for co-segregation data, family history of cancer, co-occurrence of variants with known pathogenic mutations and tumor pathology data and appears to be the best developed method for this purpose. However, at this time this model is limited to genes with established estimates of penetrance [ Goldgar et al., 2008 ] and by the availability of family data for a large number of mutations. Indeed, it has even been difficult to establish the sensitivity and specificity of BRCA1 and BRCA2 assays because of limited availability of family data. An attractive feature of the Bayesean likelihood model is that new classification techniques such as in vitro assays, when validated and quantified against a panel of known variants, can be added to the baseline statistical genetic assessment for a variant. The greatest hindrance of assay validation today is the absence of “gold standard” data for established pathogenic and neutral variants. As a result, validation studies tend to be underpowered and yield wide confidence intervals. The certainty with which a variant can be classified by functional assays is limited, and results remain qualitative and not quantitative.  Should qualitative functional assay data be used clinically? The ultimate goal of the use of functional tests is to provide information for the individual to make informed clinical decisions. In principle, only the most rigorously evaluated information should be used so that when a classification is made it carries a high level of certainty. It can be argued however, that such an approach, while scientifically sound, denies the patients and their families information that may not have achieved the “gold standard”. The patient and clinicians may prefer to make decisions based on reasonable estimates of moderately high or low risk from incomplete and less-than-optimal data rather than using no data at all [ Plon et al., 2008 ]. If this argument is accepted then several of the functional assays described above are already useful or will shortly be useful for clinical classification of variants, in a qualitative manner. For these reasons it might be useful to use a hierarchical validation scheme that mixes quantitative and qualitative elements. Statistical genetic data are currently the most powerful because they are quantitative. Some in silico sequence conservation methods have also been quantified, to a much less rigorous degree at this time [ Tavtigian et al., 2008a , b ]. Although predictive values have not been determined for in vitro functional assays, some do appear to be robust enough to contribute qualitatively to classification. This is particularly the case for in vitro MMR activity assays because the MMR pathway is well defined, both biochemically and genetically and it is established that defective MMR is causative for Lynch syndrome. If we find a complete defect of a variant in the in vitro MMR assay, and knowing that an MMR activity defect causes Lynch syndrome, at this stage we may diagnose the patient as such and dismiss the non-variant carrying relatives from screening ( Figure 2 , step 2). Thus, an in vitro functional defect identified by a technically validated assay for MMR activity should be considered strong qualitative evidence. In addition, newly developed assays that are quickly validated against a smaller panel of variants might also contribute to such a scheme. Since many variants will be rare, accumulating enough genetic data may take many years and in some cases never be achieved, so qualitative functional conclusions may provide an important contribution. One caveat for this approach is that since less-than-optimal data can be misinterpreted and misconstrued, it is crucial to ensure that the data from functional assays that is released is either of highest certainty or, if not, then clearly specified as tentative or uncertain.  Should qualitative functional assay data be used clinically? The ultimate goal of the use of functional tests is to provide information for the individual to make informed clinical decisions. In principle, only the most rigorously evaluated information should be used so that when a classification is made it carries a high level of certainty. It can be argued however, that such an approach, while scientifically sound, denies the patients and their families information that may not have achieved the “gold standard”. The patient and clinicians may prefer to make decisions based on reasonable estimates of moderately high or low risk from incomplete and less-than-optimal data rather than using no data at all [ Plon et al., 2008 ]. If this argument is accepted then several of the functional assays described above are already useful or will shortly be useful for clinical classification of variants, in a qualitative manner. For these reasons it might be useful to use a hierarchical validation scheme that mixes quantitative and qualitative elements. Statistical genetic data are currently the most powerful because they are quantitative. Some in silico sequence conservation methods have also been quantified, to a much less rigorous degree at this time [ Tavtigian et al., 2008a , b ]. Although predictive values have not been determined for in vitro functional assays, some do appear to be robust enough to contribute qualitatively to classification. This is particularly the case for in vitro MMR activity assays because the MMR pathway is well defined, both biochemically and genetically and it is established that defective MMR is causative for Lynch syndrome. If we find a complete defect of a variant in the in vitro MMR assay, and knowing that an MMR activity defect causes Lynch syndrome, at this stage we may diagnose the patient as such and dismiss the non-variant carrying relatives from screening ( Figure 2 , step 2). Thus, an in vitro functional defect identified by a technically validated assay for MMR activity should be considered strong qualitative evidence. In addition, newly developed assays that are quickly validated against a smaller panel of variants might also contribute to such a scheme. Since many variants will be rare, accumulating enough genetic data may take many years and in some cases never be achieved, so qualitative functional conclusions may provide an important contribution. One caveat for this approach is that since less-than-optimal data can be misinterpreted and misconstrued, it is crucial to ensure that the data from functional assays that is released is either of highest certainty or, if not, then clearly specified as tentative or uncertain.  Will functional assays ever be used for clinical classification? Assay results as they stand now can be one of several tools to help with clinical decisions. At this time, results from most assays must be considered qualitative evidence. Once assays are validated against standards and Type I and Type II errors are evaluated, assays can likely be used for classification of variants. Whether they should be used for clinical decisions is a question that needs to be addressed together by laboratory scientists, clinicians, clinical geneticists, and patient advocates. Decisions will probably depend on whether individuals are comfortable using the results for clinical decisions knowing that they may include flaws. If that is the case, one needs to make sure that the target audience understands what data were used, all the limitations in the assays, all possible pitfalls, and also understands the significance of each class of variant used in the classification. Results can be disseminated to the biomedical community through publications and through locus sprecific databases [Greenblatt et al., this issue] so that recommendations are uniform. In addition, genetic counselors and clinicians may need specific training in interpretation of results and/or teaching aids to help with delivery of the information to patients.  Will functional assays ever be used for clinical classification? Assay results as they stand now can be one of several tools to help with clinical decisions. At this time, results from most assays must be considered qualitative evidence. Once assays are validated against standards and Type I and Type II errors are evaluated, assays can likely be used for classification of variants. Whether they should be used for clinical decisions is a question that needs to be addressed together by laboratory scientists, clinicians, clinical geneticists, and patient advocates. Decisions will probably depend on whether individuals are comfortable using the results for clinical decisions knowing that they may include flaws. If that is the case, one needs to make sure that the target audience understands what data were used, all the limitations in the assays, all possible pitfalls, and also understands the significance of each class of variant used in the classification. Results can be disseminated to the biomedical community through publications and through locus sprecific databases [Greenblatt et al., this issue] so that recommendations are uniform. In addition, genetic counselors and clinicians may need specific training in interpretation of results and/or teaching aids to help with delivery of the information to patients.  Summary This working group believes that some in vitro functional data (e.g., mismatch repair, cell cycle inhibition, DNA repair and transcription activation and splicing assays) can be used to help classify variants at this time. However, standards for performing each assay must be agreed upon by the research and clinical community.  Summary This working group believes that some in vitro functional data (e.g., mismatch repair, cell cycle inhibition, DNA repair and transcription activation and splicing assays) can be used to help classify variants at this time. However, standards for performing each assay must be agreed upon by the research and clinical community.  Figures Figure 1 A. Diagram of human BRCA1 depicting defined domains and motifs (Green box, RING domain; Blue circles, BRCT domains; Black bars, nuclear localization signals). Regions showing conservation above 0.75 in a multiple sequence alignment (from human to puffer fish) are shown as dark blue boxes. Regions analyzed by domain-specific functional assays (ubiquitin ligase for the RING region; transcription assay for the C-terminal region) are depicted as red empty boxes. Graph aligned to the top diagram shows the number of entries in the BIC database for each missense variant recorded to date. Variants are shown as black (unclassified), red (pathogenic), and blue (neutral) bars. All pathogenic and neutral variants as classified in the BIC database are shown. B. Diagram for BRCA2 depicting the BRC repeats (arrows) and DNA binding domain. Regions showing conservation above 0.75 in a multiple sequence alignment (from human to puffer fish) are shown as dark blue boxes. Aligned graph shows position and frequency of all missense mutations in the BIC database. Variants are shown as black (unclassified), red (pathogenic), and blue (neutral) bars. All pathogenic and neutral variants as classified in the BIC database are shown. Figure 2 Proposed decision tree for the in vitro analysis of variants in MMR genes in suspected Lynch syndrome cases. Figure 3 Confounding factors in the interpretation of functional assays.  Figures Figure 1 A. Diagram of human BRCA1 depicting defined domains and motifs (Green box, RING domain; Blue circles, BRCT domains; Black bars, nuclear localization signals). Regions showing conservation above 0.75 in a multiple sequence alignment (from human to puffer fish) are shown as dark blue boxes. Regions analyzed by domain-specific functional assays (ubiquitin ligase for the RING region; transcription assay for the C-terminal region) are depicted as red empty boxes. Graph aligned to the top diagram shows the number of entries in the BIC database for each missense variant recorded to date. Variants are shown as black (unclassified), red (pathogenic), and blue (neutral) bars. All pathogenic and neutral variants as classified in the BIC database are shown. B. Diagram for BRCA2 depicting the BRC repeats (arrows) and DNA binding domain. Regions showing conservation above 0.75 in a multiple sequence alignment (from human to puffer fish) are shown as dark blue boxes. Aligned graph shows position and frequency of all missense mutations in the BIC database. Variants are shown as black (unclassified), red (pathogenic), and blue (neutral) bars. All pathogenic and neutral variants as classified in the BIC database are shown. Figure 2 Proposed decision tree for the in vitro analysis of variants in MMR genes in suspected Lynch syndrome cases. Figure 3 Confounding factors in the interpretation of functional assays. 