Mutations of LRTOMT, a fusion gene with alternative reading frames, cause nonsyndromic deafness in humans Many proteins necessary for sound transduction have been discovered through positional cloning of genes that cause deafness 1 – 3 . In this study, we report that mutations of LRTOMT are associated with profound non-syndromic hearing loss at the DFNB63 locus on human chromosome 11q13.3-q13.4. LRTOMT has two alternative reading frames and encodes two different proteins, LRTOMT1 and LRTOMT2, that are detected by Western blot analyses. LRTOMT2 is a putative methyltransferase. During evolution, novel transcripts can arise through partial or complete coalescence of genes 4 . We provide evidence that in the primate lineage LRTOMT evolved from the fusion of two neighboring ancestral genes, which exist as separate genes ( Lrrc51 and Tomt ) in rodents.  METHODS Subjects and clinical evaluations Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) at the National Center of Excellence in Molecular Biology, Lahore, Pakistan (FWA00001758) and the NIDCD/NINDS at the National Institutes of Health, USA (OH-93-N-016) approved this study. Approval was also obtained from the ethics committees of the medical faculty of the Karadeniz Technical University in Trabzon, Turkey, the Radboud University Nijmegen in The Netherlands and the University Hospital of Sfax in Tunisia. Written informed consent was obtained from all adult participants and from parents of subjects younger than 18 years of age. The Pakistani, Turkish and Tunisian families and some of the clinical data were previously reported 5 – 7 . Unpublished Tunisian families segregating nonsyndromic deafness linked to markers on chromosome 11q13.2-q13.3 are shown in Supplementary Fig. 1 (online). Several participating family members underwent otoscopic examination, pure-tone audiometry and vestibular function testing as previously described 5 – 7 . MRI or CT-scan analyses were performed to examine inner ear structure of two affected individuals and one normal hearing individual of Pakistani families segregating recessive mutations of FGF3 or LRTOMT . Genetic Linkage and Mutation Analysis Studies Protocols for linkage analyses were described previously 5 – 7 . All exons and intron-exon boundaries of 26 candidate genes in the refined DFNB63 interval were amplified under standard PCR conditions. Sequences of primers used for the amplification of LRTOMT are given in Supplementary Table 1 (online) and sequence analysis was performed using an ABI 3730 instrument as described earlier 27 – 28 . Control DNAs from 88 to 182 normal-hearing Pakistani, Tunisian or Turkish individuals were used to determine mutant allele frequencies ( Table 1 ). cDNA cloning and sequence analysis PCR-ready adult human liver cDNA (Ambion) was used for cloning full-length isoforms of LRTOMT. Poly(A)+ RNA was isolated (Poly(A)Pure, Ambion) from postnatal day 1 (P1) to P5 inner ear tissue dissected from 50 C57BL/6J mice and cDNA was synthesized using an oligo-dT primer and PowerScript reverse transcriptase (Clontech). We used premade adult mouse brain, heart, liver and rat brain cDNAs and Marathon-Ready cDNAs (Clontech). For chimpanzee, rhesus, baboon and lemur, the isoforms of LRTOMT were evaluated using cDNAs prepared from total RNA isolated from brain tissue obtained from the Southwest National Primate Research Center and the Duke Lemur Center. Rhesus brain PCR-ready cDNA was also obtained from CytoMol. All PCR products were subcloned and both strands were fully sequenced. The sequences of primers used to PCR amplify cDNA for LRTOMT , Lrrc51 , and Tomt from human, chimpanzee, rhesus, baboon, lemur, and rat tissues are provided in Supplementary Table 2 (online). RT-PCR analysis Lymphoblast cell lines were established by EBV transformation of peripheral-blood cells from deaf Turkish subjects and control individuals. Total RNA from these cells was isolated using the RNeasy Midi Kit (Qiagen). Subsequently, cDNA synthesis was performed according to standard procedures using random hexamers. PCR reactions were performed with gene-specific primers designed from sequences in exons 7 and 10 ( Supplementary Table 2 online). To evaluate splicing of exon 8 of LRTOMT , PCR fragments were isolated from agarose gel and the sequence was verified. For multiple tissue PCR analyses, we used cDNA panels (Clontech) synthesized using the tissues from humans 19 to 69 years old and from mice 8 to 12 weeks old. RNA from human fetal heart, skeletal muscle, liver and lung was obtained from Clontech. cDNA from human fetal cochlear RNA (16 to 22 weeks gestation) was synthesized as described 28 . Molecular modeling The crystal structure of rat COMT was used as a template (pdb-code 1h1d) to build a model of the catechol- O -methyltransferase domain of the human LRTOMT2 ( Fig. 2 ). The WHAT IF-server ( http://swift.cmbi.ru.nl ) was used for modeling. Energy minimization and analysis were done with Yasara ( http://www.yasara.org ). For the modeled region (residues 79-290) of LRTOMT2, there is 39% sequence identity with rat COMT. The alignment and a rotating figure of the model is available on http://www.cmbi.ru.nl/~hvensela/catechol . Digoxigenin cRNA <italic>in situ</italic> hybridization Sense and antisense probes for RNA in situ hybridization correspond to the 3’ ends of murine Tomt and Lrrc51 . PCR reactions to amplify cDNA were carried out on mouse total brain cDNA using primers given in Supplementary Table 2 (online). Amplimerswere cloned in both orientations into pCR2.1 using the TOPO TA Cloning Kit (Invitrogen) and sequenced with T7 and M13 primers. Subsequently, PCR reactions were performed with T7 and M13 vector primers using the pCR2.1 constructs as a template.Digoxigenin (DIG)-cRNA probes were generated by using these PCR products, and in situ hybridizations were performed as described previously 28 . The use of animals was performed under the approval of the animal experiment committee of Utrecht University. Antibodies, Immunocytochemistry, and Western blot analysis LRRC51 (PB837-K and PB837-T) and TOMT (PB840-L & PB840-R) antisera were raised in rabbit against the following synthetic peptides (Princeton BioMolecules): KRMGIKPKKVRAKQD (PB837-K), TGLRPVRHSKSGKSLT (PB837-T), IPRLRAQHQLNRADL (PB840-L) and RPRYYLRDLQLLEAHAL (PB840-R) (Genbank accession number pending). Antisera were affinity purified using AminoLink columns (Pierce Biotechnology) with beaded agarose to which we coupled the corresponding synthetic peptide used as the immunogen. A fluorescein-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibody was obtained from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech. Specificities of antibodies were determined by Western blot analyses and peptide blocking experiments ( Supplementary Fig. 8 online). No signal was detected when the primary antibody was preincubatedfor 2 hr at room temperature with an excess of the immunizingpeptide. Immunocytochemistry was performed as described previously 29 . For Western blot analyses, cochlea, retina and heart from C57BL/6J mice (7 and 40 days old) were sonicated in ice-cold protease inhibitor cocktail (Calbiochem Biosciences). Protein was extracted by boiling for 5 min in SDS-PAGE sample buffer (0.125M Tris-HCl, 20% glycerol, 4% SDS, 0.005% bromophenol blue). A 50 ?g protein sample was separated on a 10% Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen) and transferred to PVDF membrane (Millipore) for Western blot analyses as described 30 . Novex Sharp protein standard cat # LC5800 (Invitrogen) and Precision Plus Protein Prestained Standards Cat# 161-0375 (Bio Rad) were used for mouse and human tissue blots, respectively. For animal experiments approval was obtained by the NINDS/NIDCD Animal Care and Use Committee (protocol 1263-06).  Subjects and clinical evaluations Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) at the National Center of Excellence in Molecular Biology, Lahore, Pakistan (FWA00001758) and the NIDCD/NINDS at the National Institutes of Health, USA (OH-93-N-016) approved this study. Approval was also obtained from the ethics committees of the medical faculty of the Karadeniz Technical University in Trabzon, Turkey, the Radboud University Nijmegen in The Netherlands and the University Hospital of Sfax in Tunisia. Written informed consent was obtained from all adult participants and from parents of subjects younger than 18 years of age. The Pakistani, Turkish and Tunisian families and some of the clinical data were previously reported 5 – 7 . Unpublished Tunisian families segregating nonsyndromic deafness linked to markers on chromosome 11q13.2-q13.3 are shown in Supplementary Fig. 1 (online). Several participating family members underwent otoscopic examination, pure-tone audiometry and vestibular function testing as previously described 5 – 7 . MRI or CT-scan analyses were performed to examine inner ear structure of two affected individuals and one normal hearing individual of Pakistani families segregating recessive mutations of FGF3 or LRTOMT .  Genetic Linkage and Mutation Analysis Studies Protocols for linkage analyses were described previously 5 – 7 . All exons and intron-exon boundaries of 26 candidate genes in the refined DFNB63 interval were amplified under standard PCR conditions. Sequences of primers used for the amplification of LRTOMT are given in Supplementary Table 1 (online) and sequence analysis was performed using an ABI 3730 instrument as described earlier 27 – 28 . Control DNAs from 88 to 182 normal-hearing Pakistani, Tunisian or Turkish individuals were used to determine mutant allele frequencies ( Table 1 ).  cDNA cloning and sequence analysis PCR-ready adult human liver cDNA (Ambion) was used for cloning full-length isoforms of LRTOMT. Poly(A)+ RNA was isolated (Poly(A)Pure, Ambion) from postnatal day 1 (P1) to P5 inner ear tissue dissected from 50 C57BL/6J mice and cDNA was synthesized using an oligo-dT primer and PowerScript reverse transcriptase (Clontech). We used premade adult mouse brain, heart, liver and rat brain cDNAs and Marathon-Ready cDNAs (Clontech). For chimpanzee, rhesus, baboon and lemur, the isoforms of LRTOMT were evaluated using cDNAs prepared from total RNA isolated from brain tissue obtained from the Southwest National Primate Research Center and the Duke Lemur Center. Rhesus brain PCR-ready cDNA was also obtained from CytoMol. All PCR products were subcloned and both strands were fully sequenced. The sequences of primers used to PCR amplify cDNA for LRTOMT , Lrrc51 , and Tomt from human, chimpanzee, rhesus, baboon, lemur, and rat tissues are provided in Supplementary Table 2 (online).  RT-PCR analysis Lymphoblast cell lines were established by EBV transformation of peripheral-blood cells from deaf Turkish subjects and control individuals. Total RNA from these cells was isolated using the RNeasy Midi Kit (Qiagen). Subsequently, cDNA synthesis was performed according to standard procedures using random hexamers. PCR reactions were performed with gene-specific primers designed from sequences in exons 7 and 10 ( Supplementary Table 2 online). To evaluate splicing of exon 8 of LRTOMT , PCR fragments were isolated from agarose gel and the sequence was verified. For multiple tissue PCR analyses, we used cDNA panels (Clontech) synthesized using the tissues from humans 19 to 69 years old and from mice 8 to 12 weeks old. RNA from human fetal heart, skeletal muscle, liver and lung was obtained from Clontech. cDNA from human fetal cochlear RNA (16 to 22 weeks gestation) was synthesized as described 28 .  Molecular modeling The crystal structure of rat COMT was used as a template (pdb-code 1h1d) to build a model of the catechol- O -methyltransferase domain of the human LRTOMT2 ( Fig. 2 ). The WHAT IF-server ( http://swift.cmbi.ru.nl ) was used for modeling. Energy minimization and analysis were done with Yasara ( http://www.yasara.org ). For the modeled region (residues 79-290) of LRTOMT2, there is 39% sequence identity with rat COMT. The alignment and a rotating figure of the model is available on http://www.cmbi.ru.nl/~hvensela/catechol .  Digoxigenin cRNA <italic>in situ</italic> hybridization Sense and antisense probes for RNA in situ hybridization correspond to the 3’ ends of murine Tomt and Lrrc51 . PCR reactions to amplify cDNA were carried out on mouse total brain cDNA using primers given in Supplementary Table 2 (online). Amplimerswere cloned in both orientations into pCR2.1 using the TOPO TA Cloning Kit (Invitrogen) and sequenced with T7 and M13 primers. Subsequently, PCR reactions were performed with T7 and M13 vector primers using the pCR2.1 constructs as a template.Digoxigenin (DIG)-cRNA probes were generated by using these PCR products, and in situ hybridizations were performed as described previously 28 . The use of animals was performed under the approval of the animal experiment committee of Utrecht University.  Antibodies, Immunocytochemistry, and Western blot analysis LRRC51 (PB837-K and PB837-T) and TOMT (PB840-L & PB840-R) antisera were raised in rabbit against the following synthetic peptides (Princeton BioMolecules): KRMGIKPKKVRAKQD (PB837-K), TGLRPVRHSKSGKSLT (PB837-T), IPRLRAQHQLNRADL (PB840-L) and RPRYYLRDLQLLEAHAL (PB840-R) (Genbank accession number pending). Antisera were affinity purified using AminoLink columns (Pierce Biotechnology) with beaded agarose to which we coupled the corresponding synthetic peptide used as the immunogen. A fluorescein-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibody was obtained from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech. Specificities of antibodies were determined by Western blot analyses and peptide blocking experiments ( Supplementary Fig. 8 online). No signal was detected when the primary antibody was preincubatedfor 2 hr at room temperature with an excess of the immunizingpeptide. Immunocytochemistry was performed as described previously 29 . For Western blot analyses, cochlea, retina and heart from C57BL/6J mice (7 and 40 days old) were sonicated in ice-cold protease inhibitor cocktail (Calbiochem Biosciences). Protein was extracted by boiling for 5 min in SDS-PAGE sample buffer (0.125M Tris-HCl, 20% glycerol, 4% SDS, 0.005% bromophenol blue). A 50 ?g protein sample was separated on a 10% Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen) and transferred to PVDF membrane (Millipore) for Western blot analyses as described 30 . Novex Sharp protein standard cat # LC5800 (Invitrogen) and Precision Plus Protein Prestained Standards Cat# 161-0375 (Bio Rad) were used for mouse and human tissue blots, respectively. For animal experiments approval was obtained by the NINDS/NIDCD Animal Care and Use Committee (protocol 1263-06).  Supplementary Material 1 2 