SUBSTANCE P ENHANCES WOUND CLOSURE IN NITRIC OXIDE SYNTHASE KNOCKOUT MICE Introduction The neuropeptide, substance P (SP), upregulates nitric oxide production (NO). The purpose of this study was to determine whether SP enhances response to cutaneous injury in nitric oxide synthase knockout (NOS null) mice. Methods We studied mice with targeted deletions of the three NOS genes, neuronal (nNOS,), inducible (iNOS) or endothelial (eNOS). Full thickness dorsal wounds were treated daily (d0-6) with topical SP or normal saline (NaCl). Wounds were analyzed by flow cytometry for macrophage, leukocyte, endothelial, and dendritic cells. Healing time and wound epithelialization were compared using ANOVA. Results Wound closure in the three NOS null mice was slower than the control mice (p<0.05). SP treatment enhanced wound closure in NOS null mice (p<0.02). NOS null wounds exhibited reduced inflammation. SP increased macrophage, leukocyte, and dendritic cell densities at day three and day seven (p<0.05) in all NOS null mice. SP increased endothelial cell number in nNOS and iNOS null mice, but not in eNOS null mice (p>0.05). Conclusions SP ameliorated the impaired wound healing response observed in NOS null mice by enhancing wound closure kinetics and epithelialization. SP increased inflammatory cell density in the wounds supporting the essential role of inflammatory cells, especially macrophages, in wound repair.  INTRODUCTION Substance P (SP), a pro-inflammatory neuropeptide released from sensory nerves, modulates inflammatory responses to cutaneous injury ( 1 ) including vascular relaxation and permeability ( 2 – 6 ), mediator production ( 7 , 8 ), adhesion molecule expression ( 9 – 11 ), and migration and proliferation of inflammatory and endothelial cells ( 12 – 15 ). SP has long been recognized to induce secretion of a short acting mediator known as endothelium relaxing factor ( 16 ), which has been identified to be nitric oxide (NO)( 17 – 19 ) a free radical that mediates physiological and pathophysiological processes with beneficial and deleterious effects. Three distinct enzymes catalyze NO production from arginine: neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS/NOS1), inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS/NOS2), and endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS/NOS3) ( 6 , 20 – 22 ). SP has been shown to upregulate enzyme activity of iNOS and eNOS ( 23 , 24 ). NO is essential for adequate wound healing ( 25 – 28 ), sensory neuron differentiation ( 29 ) and repair ( 30 , 31 ), vascular homeostasis ( 16 ), angiogenesis ( 32 ), leukocyte activation and cytokine upregulation ( 33 ). All three NOS isoforms are expressed in skin ( 34 – 37 ). NO levels are elevated in normal burn wounds ( 38 , 39 ) and mice with targeted deletion of each of NOS genes display delayed cutaneous wound healing ( 40 – 42 ). We have previously documented that SP improves wound healing responses in a diabetic murine excisional model of impaired cutaneous healing ( 43 ). Whether this beneficial effect involves SP modulation of NOS activity has not been determined. The purpose of this study was to determine how NO might be involved in mediating SP induced pro-inflammatory events. To address this mechanism, we examined the effect of SP on wound healing kinetics in mice with targeted deletion of each of the three NOS isoforms and in their respective background controls. We hypothesized that SP would not improve the wound healing response in the NOS null mice.  Methods We studied mice with targeted deletions of the three NOS genes, neuronal (nNOS,), inducible (iNOS) or endothelial (eNOS). Full thickness dorsal wounds were treated daily (d0-6) with topical SP or normal saline (NaCl). Wounds were analyzed by flow cytometry for macrophage, leukocyte, endothelial, and dendritic cells. Healing time and wound epithelialization were compared using ANOVA.  Results Wound closure in the three NOS null mice was slower than the control mice (p<0.05). SP treatment enhanced wound closure in NOS null mice (p<0.02). NOS null wounds exhibited reduced inflammation. SP increased macrophage, leukocyte, and dendritic cell densities at day three and day seven (p<0.05) in all NOS null mice. SP increased endothelial cell number in nNOS and iNOS null mice, but not in eNOS null mice (p>0.05).  Conclusions SP ameliorated the impaired wound healing response observed in NOS null mice by enhancing wound closure kinetics and epithelialization. SP increased inflammatory cell density in the wounds supporting the essential role of inflammatory cells, especially macrophages, in wound repair.  METHODS Animal Model Animal experiments were conducted with five groups of mice (8–10 week old) purchased from the Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME): 1) iNOS null, 2) eNOS null, 3) nNOS null, 4) iNOS/eNOS controls (C57BL/6J), 5) nNOS controls (B6129SF/2J) according to IACAC guidelines with approval from the University of Washington Animal Care Committee. Time to Closure Experiment Time to closure experiments were performed with as described previously ( 44 , 45 ). Briefly, a full thickness dorsal 6-mm excisional wound was created on the dorsal surface with a dermal biopsy punch (Miltex Instrument Company, Inc., Bethpage, NY) and covered with a semi-occlusive dressing (Tegaderm, 3M, St Paul MN) affixed with an adhesive (Mastisol; Ferndale Laboratories, MI) to minimize removal of the dressing. Wounds (six mice/treatment group) were treated daily for seven days (d0-6) with topical application of 50 ?l of either SP (10?7M) or normal saline (NaCl) by infusion with a 26-gauge needle through the dressing onto the wound bed. The wounds were examined daily during the first week and subsequently five times per week until clinical wound closure. Wounds were photographed on day zero and on the day of closure and harvested at the day of closure for histology. The wounds were fixed in either zinc Tris buffer (0.1 M Tris, pH 7.4, 0.5g/L Calcium Acetate, 5.0g/L Zinc Acetate and 5.0g/L Zinc Chloride) for immunohistochemistry ( 46 ) or 10% neutral buffered formalin (NBF) for histology ( 47 ) and paraffin embedded. Wound Analysis Using digital images of the wounds, the wound area at day zero and at closure was measured using Adobe Photoshop 7.0® containing the Image Processing Tool Kit plug-in (Reindeer Games, Inc.) by two independent observers. As previously described ( 45 ), wound epithelialization was calculated according to the following equation: Wound epithelialization = 1 ? Wound size at closure Wound size at day 0 Nitric Oxide Analysis in Skin and Wounds NO production in the murine skin and wounds was determined by measuring the stable NO breakdown products nitrite and nitrate using a modified Griess reagent assay kit (Assay Designs, Inc, Ann Arbor, MI). Briefly, dorsal skin and wounds were harvested and homogenized at 4° C in 50mM TRIS HCl buffer (pH 7.4; 1ml/100mg tissue) containing 1mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and 1 ?M pepstatin A (Peninsula Laboratories, San Carlos, CA). Homogenate (50 ?l) was incubated with nitrate reductase to convert nitrate to nitrite followed by the colorimetric detection of nitrite as a colored azo dye product of the Griess reaction. Absorbance was measured at 540 nm and the concentration of nitrite (?Mol/L) was calculated from a nitrite standard curve. . The protein concentration (g/L) in each skin and wound sample was quantified by BCA assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The concentration of nitrite in each sample was standardized with the protein concentration and results were expressed as ?Mol nitrite/g protein. Flow Cytometry on Wound Samples In order to examine the inflammatory response in the wounds, we used tissue dispersion and flow cytometry, which has been validated as a technique for quantifying wound cellular composition ( 48 ). Briefly, 1.5 × 1.5 cm full-thickness, excisional wounds were created on the dorsal surface of the five groups of mice ( 48 ). Wound corners were tattooed to mark the original wound margins and the wounds were covered with a semi-occlusive dressing as above. Mice were randomly assigned to treatment with 300 microliters of daily topical infusion of either 10?7M SP ( 43 ) or NaCl onto the wound beds. Wounds were harvested at the tattooed margins on post wounding days three and seven (three mice per treatment group at each time point). Tissue dispersion and cell harvesting for flow cytometry was performed using enzymatic digestion in dispase and hyaluronidase ( 48 ). Cell counts were performed to determine total cell density. Flow cytometry (FACScan with CellQuest Pro software, Becton, Dickinson and Co, Franklin Lakes, NJ) was performed after immunostaining cells with FITC-labeled antibodies (F4/80 for macrophages; CD45 for leukocytes; CD31 for endothelial cells; CD11c for dendritic cells and rabbit IgG for controls). For each experiment, cell gating was set between 1–2% of the unstained controls and that gate was applied to all conditions in the same experiment. Overall, cell density was calculated using total cell counts and weights of each sample. Density of each cell type was calculated by applying percent values to overall total cell density in each sample. Immunohistochemistry and Image Analysis Cutaneous nerves were localized on the 6-?m sections of paraffin embedded skin samples using indirect immunoperoxidase with a polyclonal antibody against the general nerve marker, protein gene product 9.5 (PGP 9.5; Accurate Antibodies, Inc., Westbury, NY) and diaminobenzidine (DAB) as the chromagen. Non-overlapping digital images (25x) of each tissue section were taken with bright field illumination on a Nikon SA Microphot upright light microscope ( www.Nikonusa.com ; Meridian Instruments Company Inc, Kent WA). Digital images were imported into Adobe Photoshop 7.0® containing the Image Processing Tool Kit plug in (Reindeer Games, Inc.). Computer-assisted image analysis (CAIA) was used to quantify PGP 9.5 positive profiles which reflected nerves in the immunostained skin as previously described ( 49 ). The number and area of PGP 9.5+ profiles per dermal area (?m2) in each skin sample was measured. In each image, the peroxidase/DAB brown reaction product was isolated through a scripted process of background color removal as previously reported ( 49 ). Two observers, blinded to treatment, analyzed all specimens. Inter-user reliability and differential PGP 9.5+ profile counts in each group were confirmed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). Substance P Levels in Murine Skin Denuded dorsal skin was excised, frozen, and stored in liquid nitrogen. While frozen, the tissue was weighed, cut into 2-mm pieces, and pulverized in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle. Substance P was extracted from skin using acid extraction ( 50 ). Briefly, pulverized tissue was resuspended in 2 M acetic acid (5 ml/g tissue) containing 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM pepstatin A, and 1 mM PMSF, heated at 100°C for 30 minutes and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 10,000× g at room temperature. Extracts were assayed for substance P using the Correlate-EIA Substance P Enzyme Immunoassay Kit (Assay Designs, Ann Arbor, MI) according to manufacturer instructions. Substance P levels were normalized to sample protein concentration. Statistical Methods Potential differences in NO levels (?Mol nitrite/g protein) or SP in uninjured skin and wound samples from the null mice and their respective controls were determined using the student’s t-test (p<0.05 was considered as statistically significant.) Healing time, degree of epithelialization at time of closure and density of specific cell types from flow cytometry in each group were compared using ANOVA test (p<0.05 was considered as statistically significant). Results are expressed as mean ± standard deviation.  Animal Model Animal experiments were conducted with five groups of mice (8–10 week old) purchased from the Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME): 1) iNOS null, 2) eNOS null, 3) nNOS null, 4) iNOS/eNOS controls (C57BL/6J), 5) nNOS controls (B6129SF/2J) according to IACAC guidelines with approval from the University of Washington Animal Care Committee.  Time to Closure Experiment Time to closure experiments were performed with as described previously ( 44 , 45 ). Briefly, a full thickness dorsal 6-mm excisional wound was created on the dorsal surface with a dermal biopsy punch (Miltex Instrument Company, Inc., Bethpage, NY) and covered with a semi-occlusive dressing (Tegaderm, 3M, St Paul MN) affixed with an adhesive (Mastisol; Ferndale Laboratories, MI) to minimize removal of the dressing. Wounds (six mice/treatment group) were treated daily for seven days (d0-6) with topical application of 50 ?l of either SP (10?7M) or normal saline (NaCl) by infusion with a 26-gauge needle through the dressing onto the wound bed. The wounds were examined daily during the first week and subsequently five times per week until clinical wound closure. Wounds were photographed on day zero and on the day of closure and harvested at the day of closure for histology. The wounds were fixed in either zinc Tris buffer (0.1 M Tris, pH 7.4, 0.5g/L Calcium Acetate, 5.0g/L Zinc Acetate and 5.0g/L Zinc Chloride) for immunohistochemistry ( 46 ) or 10% neutral buffered formalin (NBF) for histology ( 47 ) and paraffin embedded.  Wound Analysis Using digital images of the wounds, the wound area at day zero and at closure was measured using Adobe Photoshop 7.0® containing the Image Processing Tool Kit plug-in (Reindeer Games, Inc.) by two independent observers. As previously described ( 45 ), wound epithelialization was calculated according to the following equation: Wound epithelialization = 1 ? Wound size at closure Wound size at day 0  Nitric Oxide Analysis in Skin and Wounds NO production in the murine skin and wounds was determined by measuring the stable NO breakdown products nitrite and nitrate using a modified Griess reagent assay kit (Assay Designs, Inc, Ann Arbor, MI). Briefly, dorsal skin and wounds were harvested and homogenized at 4° C in 50mM TRIS HCl buffer (pH 7.4; 1ml/100mg tissue) containing 1mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and 1 ?M pepstatin A (Peninsula Laboratories, San Carlos, CA). Homogenate (50 ?l) was incubated with nitrate reductase to convert nitrate to nitrite followed by the colorimetric detection of nitrite as a colored azo dye product of the Griess reaction. Absorbance was measured at 540 nm and the concentration of nitrite (?Mol/L) was calculated from a nitrite standard curve. . The protein concentration (g/L) in each skin and wound sample was quantified by BCA assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The concentration of nitrite in each sample was standardized with the protein concentration and results were expressed as ?Mol nitrite/g protein.  Flow Cytometry on Wound Samples In order to examine the inflammatory response in the wounds, we used tissue dispersion and flow cytometry, which has been validated as a technique for quantifying wound cellular composition ( 48 ). Briefly, 1.5 × 1.5 cm full-thickness, excisional wounds were created on the dorsal surface of the five groups of mice ( 48 ). Wound corners were tattooed to mark the original wound margins and the wounds were covered with a semi-occlusive dressing as above. Mice were randomly assigned to treatment with 300 microliters of daily topical infusion of either 10?7M SP ( 43 ) or NaCl onto the wound beds. Wounds were harvested at the tattooed margins on post wounding days three and seven (three mice per treatment group at each time point). Tissue dispersion and cell harvesting for flow cytometry was performed using enzymatic digestion in dispase and hyaluronidase ( 48 ). Cell counts were performed to determine total cell density. Flow cytometry (FACScan with CellQuest Pro software, Becton, Dickinson and Co, Franklin Lakes, NJ) was performed after immunostaining cells with FITC-labeled antibodies (F4/80 for macrophages; CD45 for leukocytes; CD31 for endothelial cells; CD11c for dendritic cells and rabbit IgG for controls). For each experiment, cell gating was set between 1–2% of the unstained controls and that gate was applied to all conditions in the same experiment. Overall, cell density was calculated using total cell counts and weights of each sample. Density of each cell type was calculated by applying percent values to overall total cell density in each sample.  Immunohistochemistry and Image Analysis Cutaneous nerves were localized on the 6-?m sections of paraffin embedded skin samples using indirect immunoperoxidase with a polyclonal antibody against the general nerve marker, protein gene product 9.5 (PGP 9.5; Accurate Antibodies, Inc., Westbury, NY) and diaminobenzidine (DAB) as the chromagen. Non-overlapping digital images (25x) of each tissue section were taken with bright field illumination on a Nikon SA Microphot upright light microscope ( www.Nikonusa.com ; Meridian Instruments Company Inc, Kent WA). Digital images were imported into Adobe Photoshop 7.0® containing the Image Processing Tool Kit plug in (Reindeer Games, Inc.). Computer-assisted image analysis (CAIA) was used to quantify PGP 9.5 positive profiles which reflected nerves in the immunostained skin as previously described ( 49 ). The number and area of PGP 9.5+ profiles per dermal area (?m2) in each skin sample was measured. In each image, the peroxidase/DAB brown reaction product was isolated through a scripted process of background color removal as previously reported ( 49 ). Two observers, blinded to treatment, analyzed all specimens. Inter-user reliability and differential PGP 9.5+ profile counts in each group were confirmed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA).  Substance P Levels in Murine Skin Denuded dorsal skin was excised, frozen, and stored in liquid nitrogen. While frozen, the tissue was weighed, cut into 2-mm pieces, and pulverized in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle. Substance P was extracted from skin using acid extraction ( 50 ). Briefly, pulverized tissue was resuspended in 2 M acetic acid (5 ml/g tissue) containing 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM pepstatin A, and 1 mM PMSF, heated at 100°C for 30 minutes and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 10,000× g at room temperature. Extracts were assayed for substance P using the Correlate-EIA Substance P Enzyme Immunoassay Kit (Assay Designs, Ann Arbor, MI) according to manufacturer instructions. Substance P levels were normalized to sample protein concentration.  Statistical Methods Potential differences in NO levels (?Mol nitrite/g protein) or SP in uninjured skin and wound samples from the null mice and their respective controls were determined using the student’s t-test (p<0.05 was considered as statistically significant.) Healing time, degree of epithelialization at time of closure and density of specific cell types from flow cytometry in each group were compared using ANOVA test (p<0.05 was considered as statistically significant). Results are expressed as mean ± standard deviation.  RESULTS Wound repair kinetics The average time for wound closure was significantly slower in NaCl treated wounds in all three NOS null mice (20.6d in eNOS null, 19.8 in iNOS null and 21.6 d in nNOS null) compared to their respective control mice (16.1d in i/eNOS control; 14.2d in nNOS controls), (p?0.05, Figure 1 ). Topical SP treatment accelerated wound closure compared to NaCl treatment in all NOS null mice groups (p<0.02), but had no effect in control mice ( Figure 1 ). SP also improved wound epithelialization at the day of closure in all NOS null mice compared to NaCl treatment (p<0.02, Figure 2 ). SP effect on inflammation Inflammatory cell response on days three and seven after wounding was determined by evaluating specific cell populations using flow cytometry. Flow cytometry plots such as the one in Figure 3 were generated to determine percentages of dendritic cells, macrophages, leukocytes, and endothelial cells. The overall cell density in the SP-treated wounds was greater than in NaCl-treated wounds on day three in nNOS null and iNOS null mice and on day seven post-wounding in all NOS null mice (p?0.05, Figure 4 ). There were no significant differences in cell density in control mice treated with SP compared to NaCl at day three or seven (p>0.05, Figure 4 ). Dendritic cells, macrophages, leukocytes densities were greater in the SP-treated wounds than in NaCl-treated wounds at both day three and day seven post-wounding (p?0.05) in all NOS null mice ( Figure 5a, b, c ). Whereas SP increased endothelial cell number in nNOS and iNOS murine wounds on days three & seven (p?0.05, Figure 5a, c ), the neuropeptide had no effect on endothelial cell number in the eNOS null mice (p>0.05; Figure 5b ). Dendritic cells, macrophages, leukocytes, and endothelial cell densities were not altered by SP treatment in control murine wounds at either day three or seven (p>0.05; Figure 5d, e ). These results suggest that the topical application of SP enhances the local inflammatory cell response in NOS null mice but does not affect responses to injury under normal wounding conditions. NO measurements in skin and wounds In order to determine whether SP altered nitric oxide levels in wounds in the NOS null mice, we measured nitrite and nitrate levels. Baseline NO levels were not significantly different (?Mol/gm protein) in unwounded skin of either iNOS (p=0.39) or eNOS null mice (p=0.31) compared to their controls; unwounded skin of nNOS null mice demonstrated higher NO levels (p=0.04; Table 1 ). Nitrate and nitrite levels in NaCl treated wounds were lower in all NOS null mice compared with their respective controls. In the substance P treated wounds in null mice, nitrate and nitrite levels approached normal levels on day seven (p=0.04 in iNOS null; p=0.01 in eNOS null mice; p=0.89 in nNOS null mice; Table 1 ). Nerve Distribution in NOS null Mice SP effects on wound healing responses in the NOS null mice raises the possibility that NOS null mice are deficient in SP production due to reduced nerve numbers. Using computerized image analysis ( 49 ) we confirmed that the iNOS null mice have significantly reduced number and total area of PGP 9.5+ structures per ?m2 dermal area ( Table 2 ). Nerve counts in nNOS skin were lower than control tissues from nNOS control mice but this did not reach significance; reduction in the area of PGP 9.5+ profiles per dermal area in nNOS null mice approaches significance. Interestingly the eNOS null mice had more nerves and increased nerve area but neither was statistically significant. These data suggest that iNOS null mice have fewer nerve fibers than control mice but that nNOS and eNOS mice have no significant reduction in cutaneous innervation. Substance P levels in NOS null Mice Since nerve numbers are reduced in the dermis of the iNOS skin and slightly reduced in nNOS null mice, a corresponding decrease in cutaneous SP concentration might also be expected. However, SP levels as determined by ELISA were not significantly different between the NOS null mice and normal controls ( Table 2 .) SP levels in skin from the iNOS null mice (31.8pg/mg protein) and eNOS null mice (32.5 pg/mg protein) were lower than the control mice (44.7pg/mg protein) but did not reach significance (p=0.06). SP levels in the nNOS null murine skin (44.2pg/mg protein) were likewise no different than in their control mice (42.8pg/mg protein; p>0.05.) It is possible that further dermal – epidermal separation would identify statistically significant differences in either the epidermis or the dermis. However, very low total cutaneous SP levels in whole skin samples suggest that assaying the epidermis and dermis separately is not logistically practical.  RESULTS Wound repair kinetics The average time for wound closure was significantly slower in NaCl treated wounds in all three NOS null mice (20.6d in eNOS null, 19.8 in iNOS null and 21.6 d in nNOS null) compared to their respective control mice (16.1d in i/eNOS control; 14.2d in nNOS controls), (p?0.05, Figure 1 ). Topical SP treatment accelerated wound closure compared to NaCl treatment in all NOS null mice groups (p<0.02), but had no effect in control mice ( Figure 1 ). SP also improved wound epithelialization at the day of closure in all NOS null mice compared to NaCl treatment (p<0.02, Figure 2 ). SP effect on inflammation Inflammatory cell response on days three and seven after wounding was determined by evaluating specific cell populations using flow cytometry. Flow cytometry plots such as the one in Figure 3 were generated to determine percentages of dendritic cells, macrophages, leukocytes, and endothelial cells. The overall cell density in the SP-treated wounds was greater than in NaCl-treated wounds on day three in nNOS null and iNOS null mice and on day seven post-wounding in all NOS null mice (p?0.05, Figure 4 ). There were no significant differences in cell density in control mice treated with SP compared to NaCl at day three or seven (p>0.05, Figure 4 ). Dendritic cells, macrophages, leukocytes densities were greater in the SP-treated wounds than in NaCl-treated wounds at both day three and day seven post-wounding (p?0.05) in all NOS null mice ( Figure 5a, b, c ). Whereas SP increased endothelial cell number in nNOS and iNOS murine wounds on days three & seven (p?0.05, Figure 5a, c ), the neuropeptide had no effect on endothelial cell number in the eNOS null mice (p>0.05; Figure 5b ). Dendritic cells, macrophages, leukocytes, and endothelial cell densities were not altered by SP treatment in control murine wounds at either day three or seven (p>0.05; Figure 5d, e ). These results suggest that the topical application of SP enhances the local inflammatory cell response in NOS null mice but does not affect responses to injury under normal wounding conditions. NO measurements in skin and wounds In order to determine whether SP altered nitric oxide levels in wounds in the NOS null mice, we measured nitrite and nitrate levels. Baseline NO levels were not significantly different (?Mol/gm protein) in unwounded skin of either iNOS (p=0.39) or eNOS null mice (p=0.31) compared to their controls; unwounded skin of nNOS null mice demonstrated higher NO levels (p=0.04; Table 1 ). Nitrate and nitrite levels in NaCl treated wounds were lower in all NOS null mice compared with their respective controls. In the substance P treated wounds in null mice, nitrate and nitrite levels approached normal levels on day seven (p=0.04 in iNOS null; p=0.01 in eNOS null mice; p=0.89 in nNOS null mice; Table 1 ). Nerve Distribution in NOS null Mice SP effects on wound healing responses in the NOS null mice raises the possibility that NOS null mice are deficient in SP production due to reduced nerve numbers. Using computerized image analysis ( 49 ) we confirmed that the iNOS null mice have significantly reduced number and total area of PGP 9.5+ structures per ?m2 dermal area ( Table 2 ). Nerve counts in nNOS skin were lower than control tissues from nNOS control mice but this did not reach significance; reduction in the area of PGP 9.5+ profiles per dermal area in nNOS null mice approaches significance. Interestingly the eNOS null mice had more nerves and increased nerve area but neither was statistically significant. These data suggest that iNOS null mice have fewer nerve fibers than control mice but that nNOS and eNOS mice have no significant reduction in cutaneous innervation. Substance P levels in NOS null Mice Since nerve numbers are reduced in the dermis of the iNOS skin and slightly reduced in nNOS null mice, a corresponding decrease in cutaneous SP concentration might also be expected. However, SP levels as determined by ELISA were not significantly different between the NOS null mice and normal controls ( Table 2 .) SP levels in skin from the iNOS null mice (31.8pg/mg protein) and eNOS null mice (32.5 pg/mg protein) were lower than the control mice (44.7pg/mg protein) but did not reach significance (p=0.06). SP levels in the nNOS null murine skin (44.2pg/mg protein) were likewise no different than in their control mice (42.8pg/mg protein; p>0.05.) It is possible that further dermal – epidermal separation would identify statistically significant differences in either the epidermis or the dermis. However, very low total cutaneous SP levels in whole skin samples suggest that assaying the epidermis and dermis separately is not logistically practical.  Wound repair kinetics The average time for wound closure was significantly slower in NaCl treated wounds in all three NOS null mice (20.6d in eNOS null, 19.8 in iNOS null and 21.6 d in nNOS null) compared to their respective control mice (16.1d in i/eNOS control; 14.2d in nNOS controls), (p?0.05, Figure 1 ). Topical SP treatment accelerated wound closure compared to NaCl treatment in all NOS null mice groups (p<0.02), but had no effect in control mice ( Figure 1 ). SP also improved wound epithelialization at the day of closure in all NOS null mice compared to NaCl treatment (p<0.02, Figure 2 ).  Wound repair kinetics The average time for wound closure was significantly slower in NaCl treated wounds in all three NOS null mice (20.6d in eNOS null, 19.8 in iNOS null and 21.6 d in nNOS null) compared to their respective control mice (16.1d in i/eNOS control; 14.2d in nNOS controls), (p?0.05, Figure 1 ). Topical SP treatment accelerated wound closure compared to NaCl treatment in all NOS null mice groups (p<0.02), but had no effect in control mice ( Figure 1 ). SP also improved wound epithelialization at the day of closure in all NOS null mice compared to NaCl treatment (p<0.02, Figure 2 ).  SP effect on inflammation Inflammatory cell response on days three and seven after wounding was determined by evaluating specific cell populations using flow cytometry. Flow cytometry plots such as the one in Figure 3 were generated to determine percentages of dendritic cells, macrophages, leukocytes, and endothelial cells. The overall cell density in the SP-treated wounds was greater than in NaCl-treated wounds on day three in nNOS null and iNOS null mice and on day seven post-wounding in all NOS null mice (p?0.05, Figure 4 ). There were no significant differences in cell density in control mice treated with SP compared to NaCl at day three or seven (p>0.05, Figure 4 ). Dendritic cells, macrophages, leukocytes densities were greater in the SP-treated wounds than in NaCl-treated wounds at both day three and day seven post-wounding (p?0.05) in all NOS null mice ( Figure 5a, b, c ). Whereas SP increased endothelial cell number in nNOS and iNOS murine wounds on days three & seven (p?0.05, Figure 5a, c ), the neuropeptide had no effect on endothelial cell number in the eNOS null mice (p>0.05; Figure 5b ). Dendritic cells, macrophages, leukocytes, and endothelial cell densities were not altered by SP treatment in control murine wounds at either day three or seven (p>0.05; Figure 5d, e ). These results suggest that the topical application of SP enhances the local inflammatory cell response in NOS null mice but does not affect responses to injury under normal wounding conditions.  SP effect on inflammation Inflammatory cell response on days three and seven after wounding was determined by evaluating specific cell populations using flow cytometry. Flow cytometry plots such as the one in Figure 3 were generated to determine percentages of dendritic cells, macrophages, leukocytes, and endothelial cells. The overall cell density in the SP-treated wounds was greater than in NaCl-treated wounds on day three in nNOS null and iNOS null mice and on day seven post-wounding in all NOS null mice (p?0.05, Figure 4 ). There were no significant differences in cell density in control mice treated with SP compared to NaCl at day three or seven (p>0.05, Figure 4 ). Dendritic cells, macrophages, leukocytes densities were greater in the SP-treated wounds than in NaCl-treated wounds at both day three and day seven post-wounding (p?0.05) in all NOS null mice ( Figure 5a, b, c ). Whereas SP increased endothelial cell number in nNOS and iNOS murine wounds on days three & seven (p?0.05, Figure 5a, c ), the neuropeptide had no effect on endothelial cell number in the eNOS null mice (p>0.05; Figure 5b ). Dendritic cells, macrophages, leukocytes, and endothelial cell densities were not altered by SP treatment in control murine wounds at either day three or seven (p>0.05; Figure 5d, e ). These results suggest that the topical application of SP enhances the local inflammatory cell response in NOS null mice but does not affect responses to injury under normal wounding conditions.  NO measurements in skin and wounds In order to determine whether SP altered nitric oxide levels in wounds in the NOS null mice, we measured nitrite and nitrate levels. Baseline NO levels were not significantly different (?Mol/gm protein) in unwounded skin of either iNOS (p=0.39) or eNOS null mice (p=0.31) compared to their controls; unwounded skin of nNOS null mice demonstrated higher NO levels (p=0.04; Table 1 ). Nitrate and nitrite levels in NaCl treated wounds were lower in all NOS null mice compared with their respective controls. In the substance P treated wounds in null mice, nitrate and nitrite levels approached normal levels on day seven (p=0.04 in iNOS null; p=0.01 in eNOS null mice; p=0.89 in nNOS null mice; Table 1 ).  NO measurements in skin and wounds In order to determine whether SP altered nitric oxide levels in wounds in the NOS null mice, we measured nitrite and nitrate levels. Baseline NO levels were not significantly different (?Mol/gm protein) in unwounded skin of either iNOS (p=0.39) or eNOS null mice (p=0.31) compared to their controls; unwounded skin of nNOS null mice demonstrated higher NO levels (p=0.04; Table 1 ). Nitrate and nitrite levels in NaCl treated wounds were lower in all NOS null mice compared with their respective controls. In the substance P treated wounds in null mice, nitrate and nitrite levels approached normal levels on day seven (p=0.04 in iNOS null; p=0.01 in eNOS null mice; p=0.89 in nNOS null mice; Table 1 ).  Nerve Distribution in NOS null Mice SP effects on wound healing responses in the NOS null mice raises the possibility that NOS null mice are deficient in SP production due to reduced nerve numbers. Using computerized image analysis ( 49 ) we confirmed that the iNOS null mice have significantly reduced number and total area of PGP 9.5+ structures per ?m2 dermal area ( Table 2 ). Nerve counts in nNOS skin were lower than control tissues from nNOS control mice but this did not reach significance; reduction in the area of PGP 9.5+ profiles per dermal area in nNOS null mice approaches significance. Interestingly the eNOS null mice had more nerves and increased nerve area but neither was statistically significant. These data suggest that iNOS null mice have fewer nerve fibers than control mice but that nNOS and eNOS mice have no significant reduction in cutaneous innervation.  Nerve Distribution in NOS null Mice SP effects on wound healing responses in the NOS null mice raises the possibility that NOS null mice are deficient in SP production due to reduced nerve numbers. Using computerized image analysis ( 49 ) we confirmed that the iNOS null mice have significantly reduced number and total area of PGP 9.5+ structures per ?m2 dermal area ( Table 2 ). Nerve counts in nNOS skin were lower than control tissues from nNOS control mice but this did not reach significance; reduction in the area of PGP 9.5+ profiles per dermal area in nNOS null mice approaches significance. Interestingly the eNOS null mice had more nerves and increased nerve area but neither was statistically significant. These data suggest that iNOS null mice have fewer nerve fibers than control mice but that nNOS and eNOS mice have no significant reduction in cutaneous innervation.  Substance P levels in NOS null Mice Since nerve numbers are reduced in the dermis of the iNOS skin and slightly reduced in nNOS null mice, a corresponding decrease in cutaneous SP concentration might also be expected. However, SP levels as determined by ELISA were not significantly different between the NOS null mice and normal controls ( Table 2 .) SP levels in skin from the iNOS null mice (31.8pg/mg protein) and eNOS null mice (32.5 pg/mg protein) were lower than the control mice (44.7pg/mg protein) but did not reach significance (p=0.06). SP levels in the nNOS null murine skin (44.2pg/mg protein) were likewise no different than in their control mice (42.8pg/mg protein; p>0.05.) It is possible that further dermal – epidermal separation would identify statistically significant differences in either the epidermis or the dermis. However, very low total cutaneous SP levels in whole skin samples suggest that assaying the epidermis and dermis separately is not logistically practical.  Substance P levels in NOS null Mice Since nerve numbers are reduced in the dermis of the iNOS skin and slightly reduced in nNOS null mice, a corresponding decrease in cutaneous SP concentration might also be expected. However, SP levels as determined by ELISA were not significantly different between the NOS null mice and normal controls ( Table 2 .) SP levels in skin from the iNOS null mice (31.8pg/mg protein) and eNOS null mice (32.5 pg/mg protein) were lower than the control mice (44.7pg/mg protein) but did not reach significance (p=0.06). SP levels in the nNOS null murine skin (44.2pg/mg protein) were likewise no different than in their control mice (42.8pg/mg protein; p>0.05.) It is possible that further dermal – epidermal separation would identify statistically significant differences in either the epidermis or the dermis. However, very low total cutaneous SP levels in whole skin samples suggest that assaying the epidermis and dermis separately is not logistically practical.  DISCUSSION The skin, including the epidermis and dermis, contains non-myelinated sensory nerve fibers ( 3 , 51 ). Sensory nerve release of tachykinins such as substance P mediates pro-inflammatory responses ( 51 , 52 ). Nitric oxide induces many of the same downstream pro-inflammatory effects seen with SP. Insufficient levels of both appear to be implicated in impaired wound repair ( 28 , 43 ). In this study, we have demonstrated that topical application of substance P improves wound healing kinetics in a model of impaired murine wound healing in NOS null mice and support our hypothesis that SP contributes to the dermal wound repair process. Substance P activates both iNOS (calcium independent) ( 24 ), and the constitutively expressed eNOS (calcium dependent) enzymes ( 23 ). Therefore, NO may be a key intermediary metabolite for substance P mediated responses during wound repair. As part of our attempt to understand the mechanism by which substance P mediates responses to injury, we have shown that substance P improves wound closure kinetics, epithelialization, and inflammatory cellular responses in the NOS null mice. In all three knock out models, substanceP enhanced numbers of inflammatory cells on days three and seven after wounding. Past studies have determined that bone marrow derived cells, specifically macrophages ( 53 ) may be crucial to normal healing responses. Topical substance P increased endothelial cell number in nNOS null and iNOS null mice on days three and seven compared to NaCl treated mice. Interestingly, substance P did not increase endothelial cell number in the eNOS null mice (p>0.05) suggesting that substance P activation of eNOS in endothelial cells may contribute to wound repair angiogenesis. Reports of eNOS mediated endothelial cell proliferation and migration in response to VEGF support our observation ( 54 ). In spite of this lack of effect on endothelial cells in eNOS null mice, substance P treated wounds healed more rapidly than NaCl treated wounds. Whereas, wound angiogenesis has been considered mandatory for wound healing, normal healing has been reported with angioinhibition ( 55 ). This suggests that impaired angiogenesis is not a limiting factor in healing in eNOS null mice wounds and that SP is impacting other responses to injury in these mice. Interestingly, topical substance P enhanced NO production in wounds of mice with targeted deletions of each of the three isoforms of the NOS genes. This suggests that substance P increased activity of one of the other NOS isoforms in the null mice. Subsequent studies in our laboratory demonstrate that substance P has no effect on wound healing kinetics in C56Bl6 murine wounds treated with topical N?-nitro-L-arginine-methyl-ester (L-NAME) a non-specific NOS inhibitor (data not shown.) This confirms the essential role that NO may have in mediating substance P pro-inflammatory effects. With our observation that the neuropeptide, substance P, improves healing in NOS null mice and the recognized neurotrophic effects by NO on nerve growth in uninjured skin ( 56 , 57 ), we evaluated nerve distribution in samples of uninjured skin from each of the NOS null mice genotypes. Whereas nerve numbers in the NOS null mice were reduced compared to control mice, this finding was only significant in the iNOS null mice. Likewise, substance P levels were reduced in uninjured skin in the NOS null mice, but did not reach statistical significance. Given that in all three models substance P improved wound healing kinetics and increased inflammatory response, a small but relative reduction in this pro-inflammatory neuropeptide may be sufficient to alter responses to injury.  DISCUSSION The skin, including the epidermis and dermis, contains non-myelinated sensory nerve fibers ( 3 , 51 ). Sensory nerve release of tachykinins such as substance P mediates pro-inflammatory responses ( 51 , 52 ). Nitric oxide induces many of the same downstream pro-inflammatory effects seen with SP. Insufficient levels of both appear to be implicated in impaired wound repair ( 28 , 43 ). In this study, we have demonstrated that topical application of substance P improves wound healing kinetics in a model of impaired murine wound healing in NOS null mice and support our hypothesis that SP contributes to the dermal wound repair process. Substance P activates both iNOS (calcium independent) ( 24 ), and the constitutively expressed eNOS (calcium dependent) enzymes ( 23 ). Therefore, NO may be a key intermediary metabolite for substance P mediated responses during wound repair. As part of our attempt to understand the mechanism by which substance P mediates responses to injury, we have shown that substance P improves wound closure kinetics, epithelialization, and inflammatory cellular responses in the NOS null mice. In all three knock out models, substanceP enhanced numbers of inflammatory cells on days three and seven after wounding. Past studies have determined that bone marrow derived cells, specifically macrophages ( 53 ) may be crucial to normal healing responses. Topical substance P increased endothelial cell number in nNOS null and iNOS null mice on days three and seven compared to NaCl treated mice. Interestingly, substance P did not increase endothelial cell number in the eNOS null mice (p>0.05) suggesting that substance P activation of eNOS in endothelial cells may contribute to wound repair angiogenesis. Reports of eNOS mediated endothelial cell proliferation and migration in response to VEGF support our observation ( 54 ). In spite of this lack of effect on endothelial cells in eNOS null mice, substance P treated wounds healed more rapidly than NaCl treated wounds. Whereas, wound angiogenesis has been considered mandatory for wound healing, normal healing has been reported with angioinhibition ( 55 ). This suggests that impaired angiogenesis is not a limiting factor in healing in eNOS null mice wounds and that SP is impacting other responses to injury in these mice. Interestingly, topical substance P enhanced NO production in wounds of mice with targeted deletions of each of the three isoforms of the NOS genes. This suggests that substance P increased activity of one of the other NOS isoforms in the null mice. Subsequent studies in our laboratory demonstrate that substance P has no effect on wound healing kinetics in C56Bl6 murine wounds treated with topical N?-nitro-L-arginine-methyl-ester (L-NAME) a non-specific NOS inhibitor (data not shown.) This confirms the essential role that NO may have in mediating substance P pro-inflammatory effects. With our observation that the neuropeptide, substance P, improves healing in NOS null mice and the recognized neurotrophic effects by NO on nerve growth in uninjured skin ( 56 , 57 ), we evaluated nerve distribution in samples of uninjured skin from each of the NOS null mice genotypes. Whereas nerve numbers in the NOS null mice were reduced compared to control mice, this finding was only significant in the iNOS null mice. Likewise, substance P levels were reduced in uninjured skin in the NOS null mice, but did not reach statistical significance. Given that in all three models substance P improved wound healing kinetics and increased inflammatory response, a small but relative reduction in this pro-inflammatory neuropeptide may be sufficient to alter responses to injury.  CONCLUSIONS Substance P ameliorated the impaired wound healing response observed in NOS null mice by enhancing wound closure kinetics and wound epithelialization in all NOS (eNOS, iNOS and nNOS) null mice. Specifically, substance P increased inflammatory cell density in the wounds, supporting the essential role of inflammatory cells, especially macrophages, in wound repair. Absence of substance P effects on endothelial cell number in eNOS null wounds suggests that NO may mediate substance P-induced wound angiogenesis.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Substance P (SP) improves wound healing kinetics in mice with targeted deletion of each of the NOS isoforms. NOS knockout mice treated with topical substance P healed faster than those treated with NaCl († ¥ ? p<0.01). There was no significant difference in time to closure between treatment groups in the control mice (p>0.05). Error bars represent standard deviation. Figure 2 Substance P treatment resulted in a statistically significant increased wound epithelialization compared to NaCl treatment in each of the NOS null groups (†, ¥, ? p<0.01). Substance P treatment had no effect on wound epithelialization in the control mice (* p>0.1). Error bars represent standard deviation. Figure 3 Flow cytometry was performed on cells stained with FITC – labeled antibodies (CD11c for dendritic cells; F4/80 for macrophages; CD45 for leukocytes; CD31 for endothelial cells.) For each experiment, cell gating was set between 1–2% of the unstained controls and that gate was applied to all conditions in the same experiment. In the data shown here, the cell gating for unstained cells was set at 1.33% of total cell population and this gate was used for each of the other conditions. Figure 4 Using flow cytometry, total cell density was greater in Substance P-treated wounds than in NaCl-treated wounds on day three in iNOS null (*p<0.01) and nNOS null (†p<0.01) mice and on day seven post-wounding in all NOS null mice (¶ p<0.01). There were no significant differences in cell density in control groups treated with SP compared to NaCl at any time points (p>0.1). Error bars represent standard deviation. Figure 5 In each of the NOS null mice, flow cytometry demonstrated that topical substance P increased dendritic cells (CD11c), macrophages (F480), and leukocytes (CD45) in excisional wounds. This effect was not seen in the control mice. In each figure, error bars represent standard deviation a) In iNOS null mice, topical substance P increased density of all four cell types on day three and day seven compared to NaCl (*p<0.05; †p<0.01). The IgG controls had levels below detection. b) In eNOS null mice, topical substance P increased density of dendritic cells, macrophages, and leukocytes at day three and day seven compared to NaCl (*p<0.05; † p<0.01). SP had no significant effect on endothelial cell number in the eNOS null mice at either time point. c) In nNOS null mice, topical substance P increased density of dendritic cells, macrophages, leukocytes and endothelial cells compared to NaCl on day three and day seven post-wounding (* p<0.01; † p<0.05). d) In the iNOS/eNOS control mice, topical substance P had no significant effect on density of dendritic cells, macrophages, leukocytes, or endothelial cells compared to NaCl on day three or seven after wounding. e) In the nNOS control mice, topical substance P had no significant effect on density of dendritic cells, macrophages, leukocytes, or endothelial cells compared to NaCl on day three or seven post-wounding. Table 1 A key question in this study is whether NO is a mediator of substance P activity. Our data suggest that in spite of the targeted deletion of the NOS genes in each model, baseline NO levels in the murine skin do not differ from control mice. Also topical substance P increases nitrate and nitrite (stable nitric oxide metabolite) in iNOS and eNOS null wounds but not nNOS null wounds. Baseline nitrate and nitrite levels (?Mol nitrate & nitrite/g protein) did not differ in uninjured skin samples from iNOS null mice ( * p=0.39) or eNOS null mice ( ? p=0.31) and their controls. Nitrate and nitrite levels were slightly higher in uninjured nNOS null mice skin samples ( † p=0.04) compared to controls. Topical substance P increased nitrate and nitrite levels in iNOS null (p=0.04) and eNOS null (p=0.01) wounds compared to NaCl treatment. Substance P did not affect nitrate and nitrite levels in nNOS null wounds and had no effect in any control mice wounds. Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation. Uninjured skin NaCl treated wounds Substance P treated wounds p-values: NaCl versus Substance P e,iNOS Control 15.78±3.67 * ? 11.89±6.10 12.52±2.81 0.75 iNOS null 13.72±2.35 * 3.59±1.26 9.08±2.71 0.04 eNOS null 13.71±4.37 ? 6.59±0.02 15.14±0.33 0.01 nNOS Control 13.52±3.56 † 16.05±4.98 12.18±3.29 0.25 nNOS null 17.61±2.09 † 7.75±4.11 12.72±4.79 0.89 * p=0.39; ? p=0.31; † p=0.04 Table 2 Since the wound healing appeared to be improved with topical substance P, we evaluated baseline nerve counts and size as well as baseline substance P levels. The density of PGP+ nerves (# of PGP+ structures/dermal area) was reduced in iNOS null murine dermis (p<0.001); it was increased but not significant in eNOS mice (p=0.28) and low but not significant in nNOS mice (p=0.12) The area fraction of nerves (area of PGP+ structures/dermal area) was significantly reduced in iNOS null murine dermis (p=0.03) and approached significance in nNOS null dermis (p=0.07). No difference in nerve area fraction was observed in eNOS null dermis (p=0.43). Substance P levels in skin from the NOS null mice were not statistically different from levels in the respective controls. Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation. i/e NOS control murine dermis iNOS null murine dermis eNOS null murine dermis nNOS control murine dermis nNOS null murine dermis # PGP + structures/?m 2 dermis 0.0012±.0003*† 0.0007±.0003* p=0.0007 0.0014±.0006† p= 0.28 0.0011±.0002¥ 0.0007±.0005¥ p=0.12 Area of PGP + structures/?m 2 dermis 78.3±39.9*† 52.5±39.9* p=0.03 94.4±45.8† p=0.43 2.6±21.4¥ 53.6±47.0¥ p=0.07 Substance P levels (pg/mg protein) 44.7±10.3*† 31.8±3.4* p=0.06 32.5±6.1† p=0.06 42.8±17.0¥ 44.2±11.6¥ p=0.9 