Aggregates Assembled from Overexpression of Wild Type ?-Synuclein Are Not Toxic to Human Neuronal Cells Filamentous ?-synuclein (?-syn) aggregates form Lewy bodies (LBs), the neuropathologic hallmarks of Parkinson disease and related ?-synucleinopathies. To model Lewy body-associated neurodegeneration, we generated transfectant human neuronal type cells (clone 3D5) in which expression of human wild-type ?-syn is regulated by the tetracycline off (TetOff)-inducible mechanism. Retinoic acid-elicited differentiation promoted assembly of ?-syn aggregates after TetOff induction in 3D5 cells. The aggregates accumulated 14 days after TetOff induction were primarily soluble and showed augmented thioflavin affinity with concomitant phosphorylation and nitration of ?-syn. Extension of the induction led to the formation of sarkosyl-insoluble aggregates that appeared concurrently with thioflavin-positive inclusions. Immunoelectron microscopy revealed that the inclusions consist of dense bundles of 8- to 12-nm ?-syn fibrils that congregate in the perikarya and resemble LBs. Most importantly, accumulation of soluble and insoluble aggregates after TetOff induction for 14 and 28 days was reversible and did not compromise the viability of the cells or their subsequent survival. Thus, this chemically defined culture paradigm provides a useful means to elucidate how oxidative injuries and other insults that are associated with aging promote ?-syn to self-assemble or interact with other molecules leading to neuronal degeneration in ?-synucleinopathies.  INTRODUCTION Accumulation of ?-synuclein (?-syn) aggregates to form filamentous inclusions, Lewy bodies (LBs) and Lewy neurites within vulnerable neurons is a pathologic hallmark of neurodegenerative disorders, including Parkinson disease (PD) and dementia with LBs ( 1 , 2 ); collectively, these are known as ?-synucleinopathies. Although it is unclear how ?-syn mediates neurodegeneration, an understanding of its natural history holds promise for effective therapeutic intervention. Cellular and animal models through which the sequence of events that lead to ?-syn-mediated neurodegeneration can be elucidated are of crucial importance to deciphering the relevant pathogenetic mechanisms in these diseases. ?-Syn is a highly soluble presynaptic protein of 140 amino acid residues encoded by the SNCA gene on chromosome 4q21 ( 3 , 4 ). Its peptide sequence contains an N-terminal amphipathic region (residues 1-65), a central hydrophobic domain (residues 66-95) and an acidic C-terminal tail (residues 96-140) ( 3 , 5 ). Identification of SNCA mutations ( 6 - 8 ) or multiplications in familial and sporadic PD ( 9 , 10 ) indicates that ?-syn plays a crucial role in PD pathogenesis ( 1 , 11 ). Aside from the etiopathogenic role of extra copies of SNCA in PD or dementia with LBs ( 9 , 12 - 14 ), polymorphisms within its promoter appear to confer risk for sporadic PD by upregulating ?-syn expression ( 15 - 20 ), suggesting that elevated expression of the wild-type ?-syn is sufficient to cause neurodegeneration and clinical manifestations that are characterized by ?-syn aggregation. Aggregates of ?-syn in fibrillar form constitute a principal component of LBs in both familial and sporadic PD ( 21 , 22 ). This provides compelling evidence that ?-syn aggregation is of key importance to the pathophysiology of PD. The assembly of ?-syn filaments involves transformation of soluble ?-syn into amyloidogenic aggregates leading to formation of protofibrils and final fibrillation. Aside from SNCA mutations, elevated concentration of ?-syn has been reported to increase its propensity to self-interact and form aggregates ( 23 ). Posttranslational modifications, such as truncation, phosphorylation and nitration, of ?-syn have also been identified in LBs and have been found to be important in mediating ?-syn aggregation/fibrillogenesis in vitro ( 24 - 26 ), as well as in eliciting ?-syn pathology in transgenic animals ( 27 , 28 ). Elucidation of the mechanism of ?-syn aggregation is, therefore, crucial to our understanding of how LB pathology evolves. In this study, we developed a cell-based aggregation paradigm in which overexpression of wild-type ?-syn results in assembly of its aggregates and the formation of LB-like inclusions in human neuronal cells, thereby permitting us to determine what the consequences of this aggregation are to a neuron and how they may affect its survival.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Generation of Conditional Transfectant 3D5 pTRE vector for the conditional expression of ?-syn was constructed and used to transfect our tetracycline off (TetOff) founder line derived from human neuroblastoma M17D cells ( 29 ) for the production of inducible transfectants exactly as previously described ( 30 , 31 ). To screen potential clones emerging from puromycin selection, we seeded paired cultures for each clone and rinsed them on the next day before incubating for 5 days. One clone destined for transgene expression was incubated using Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (Invitrogen Corp., Carlsbad, CA) that was supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen), 400 ?g/ml G418 (EMD Biosciences, La Jolla, CA) and 1 ?g/ml puromycin (Sigma Chemicals, St. Louis, MO); the other clone was incubated for the same duration using the same medium but supplemented with 2 ?g/ml Tet (Sigma). The cultures were then harvested to derive lysate specimens of the induced and its non-induced counterpart for Western blot analysis according to Ko et al ( 32 ). Prior to selecting candidate clones, we also evaluated their ability to express neuronal phenotypes, (i.e. the formation of elaborate neurites plus augmented neurofilament expression) in response to 10 ?M all- trans -retinoic acid (RA; Sigma) ( 33 ) using the ?-syn/neurofilament dual immunofluorescence procedure described below. Of our chosen clones, transfectant 3D5 was used throughout this study. 3D5 cells were seeded in the Tet-containing medium described above at 2 × 105 cells/plate (100 × 20 mm, BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) or 2 × 104 cells/well in 24-well plates with and without glass coverslips (12 mm in diameter; Bellco Glass, Inc., Vineland, NJ) for immunofluorescence and in situ ultrastructural examination, respectively. On the next day, the cultures were exposed to 10 ?M RA for 10 days in the Neurobasal medium (Invitrogen) with B-27 supplement (Invitrogen), L-glutamine (2 mM; Sigma), G418 (400 ?g/ml; EMD), puromycin (1 ?g/ml; Sigma) and Tet (2 ?g/ml). The cells were rinsed before incubating them for up to 28 days in the presence (i.e. non-induced) or absence (i.e. induced) of Tet (2 ?g/ml). Growth Kinetic Studies 3D5 cells were seeded in replicate on 100 × 20 mm plates at 2 × 105 cells/plate and monitored their growth was monitored thereafter following indicated treatments. At predetermined intervals, the cells were harvested independently from each of the 5 sister cultures in a treatment group by trypsinization to derive cell suspensions from which the numbers were determined using NucleoCounter, according to Ko et al ( 34 ). Population doubling times were calculated from the slopes of growth curves. To determine the impact on cell survival following 14- or 28-day TetOff induction, incubations were extended to 52 days using the same culture conditions or by adding 2 ?g/ml Tet to terminate TetOff induction on day 14 or 28 and then following through with the aforementioned analyses. Antibodies To evaluate transgene expression of ?-syn by immunoblotting, we used antibodies Synuclein-1 (BD Biosciences) and Ab98 ( 32 ) with the aid of monoclonal antibodies directed against ?-tubulin (EP1332Y; Epitomics, Burlingame, CA), ?-tubulin (TUB2.1, Sigma), ?-actin (AC-74, Sigma) and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) (1D4, Covance Research Products, Berkeley, CA) to verify specimen loading. Additional immunoprobes specific for distinct domains of ?-syn were: SYN128 (SYSY#128-002; Synaptic System GmbH, Gottingen, Germany), HuA (from V. M. –Y. Lee, Univ. of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA), AB5464 (Chemicon International, Inc., Temecula, CA), NAC (V. M. –Y. Lee), Ab111 (AB5038P; Chemicon), mAb211 (sc-12767; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Santa Cruz, CA) and Syn202 (sc-32281; Santa Cruz Biotechnology); antibodies to ?-syn phosphorylation (pSer129; Wako Chemicals USA, Richmond, VA) and nitration (Ab504; V. M. –Y Lee) were also employed to characterize ?-syn production, accumulation, aggregation and posttranslational modifications ( Table 1 ). Antibodies to neurofilament (NF210) ( 35 ) and bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU; Covance) were used to evaluate differentiation and proliferation, respectively. Immunocytochemical Analyses For ?-syn/neurofilament dual immunofluorescence, cells were seeded on glass coverslips in 24-well plates and processed according to Ko et al ( 34 ) except for the use of Alexa 488-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) (1:200; Invitrogen) and Alexa 594-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) (1:200; Invitrogen) to visualize immunoreactivities of Synuclein-1 (1:100) and NF210 (1:100), respectively, before 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole diacetate (DAPI: Invitrogen) counterstaining. Antibodies Ab98 and DO-1 (Santa Cruz) were used similarly to assess ?-syn/p53 double immunofluorescence. Digitized photomicrograph images of randomly selected fields were captured using an Olympus DP70 camera attached to Olympus BX50 fluorescent microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) as previously described ( 34 ). To determine the proportions of ?-syn-overproducing populations from separate treatment groups or at different time points following TetOff induction, the cells were permeabilized with 0.0001% saponin in Hanks’ balanced salt solution (HBSS) after fixation with 2% paraformaldehyde/HBSS and methanol. The fixed cells were rinsed thoroughly and stored in 0.1 M Tris saline (pH 7.6)/0.02% sodium azide at 4°C until all groups (i.e. separate treatments or time points) were collected. The fixed specimens from distinct groups were probed simultaneously with Synuclein-1 (1:100), counterstained with DAPI and used an identical exposure conditions to capture photomicrographic images as described above. The relative intensity of ?-syn immunoreactivity of 2,000 cells or more from randomly selected fields was graded according to Ko et al ( 34 ) and calculated to derive data for comparative analyses by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). The same procedure was also followed to demonstrate thioflavin S-positive, ?-syn inclusions except that saponin permeabilization was performed before fixation and the immunoprobed cultures were stained with 0.05% thioflavin S/formalin before DAPI counterstaining. To assess cell proliferation, the cells were grown similarly on glass coverslips and exposed to 10 ?M BrdU for 1 hour at various intervals. The BrdU uptake was detected following glycine/ethanol fixation with a mouse anti-BrdU antibody (1:200); the immunoreactivity was visualized using Alexa 488-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) (1:200). The nuclear uptake of BrdU was verified in situ by DAPI counterstaining. Viability for the replica 3D5 cultures on coverslips was also evaluated using a fluorescence-based LIVE/DEAD Viability/Cytotoxicity Kit (Invitrogen). Conversion of cell-permeant calcein AM (nonfluorescent) by intracellular esterase gives rise to intensely fluorescent calcein (excitation 495 nm/emission 515 nm) that is well retained within live cells whereas binding of ethidium homodimer-1 with nucleic acids after it enters cells with damaged membranes produces a bright red fluorescence (excitation 495 nm/emission 635 nm) in dead cells, thus permitting simultaneous visualization of live and dead cells in situ ( 36 ). Digitized photomicrograph images of at least 10 randomly selected fields, each containing more than 400 cells, were captured as described above to count live and dead cells and derive their proportions for distinct intervals following TetOff induction. Fractionation Studies of Culture Specimens 3D5 cells that had been incubated with or without Tet for 14 or 28 days following RA-elicited neuronal differentiation were harvested and lysates prepared to derive buffer-soluble (SN1), buffer-insoluble, sarkosyl-soluble (SN2) and sarkosyl-insoluble (Srk/P) fractions, according to Ko et al ( 30 ). The sarkosyl-insoluble preparations derived from induced or non-induced cultures were resuspended with 50 mM Tris (pH 8) before they were assayed in triplicates for thioflavin S binding or evaluated by electron microscopy, exactly as previously described ( 30 ). Western Blot Analysis Protein constituents of the culture lysates or their fractionated derivatives were resolved by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) according to Ko et al ( 32 ) except that 10% to 20% Tricine gels (Invitrogen) were used. This was followed by transblotting onto nitrocellulose membranes (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). Recombinant ?-syn was included as a reference. Low-molecular-weight range (2,500–45,000 kDa) Rainbow colored protein molecular weight markers (GE Healthcare Bioscience, Piscataway, NJ) were used in conjunction with MagicMark XP Western protein standard (Invitrogen) or Precision Plus Protein Standards (Bio-Rad) to calibrate molecular size. Unless indicated otherwise, the electroblots were probed using Synuclein-1 (1:500) the immunoreactivity of which was detected with peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) antibody (1:2,000; Chemicon) and visualized with enhanced chemiluminescence plus reagent (GE Healthcare Bioscience). Immunoprobes specific for other domains of the ?-syn molecule ( Table 1 ) were also included to characterize ?-syn and its derivatives by grading their immunoreactivities according to Ko et al ( 30 ). Comparable loading was consistently verified by reprobing the ?-syn blots or their replicas using antibodies to GAPDH, ?-actin, ?-tubulin and ?-tubulin. To determine activation of caspase and p53, antibodies to ?-catenin (BD Biosciences) and p53 (including its derivatives phosphorylated at Ser-15 and Ser-6; Cell Signaling Technology, Inc., Danvers, MA), respectively were used. Ultrastructural Evaluation of Thioflavin-Positive, ?-Synuclein Inclusions To evaluate inclusions assembled in the differentiated 3D5 cells from ?-syn overproduction at the ultrastructural level, the cells were grown on Thermanox plastic coverslips (diameter: 13 mm; NUNC, Naperville, IL) in 24-well plates according to the aforementioned paradigm and prepared according to the procedure described above for the thioflavin S-positive, ?-syn inclusions except that: (1) Ab98 (1:200) was used as primary antibody; (2) 6-nm colloidal gold-AffiniPure goat anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) (1:20; Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, West Grove, PA) as secondary antibody; and (3) the immunoprobed cultures were fixed and processed for in situ Epon-embedding according to Ko et al ( 30 ). Epon sections containing filamentous inclusions were etched with 0.5 % sodium ethoxide, incubated with saturated sodium periodate to remove osmication, and blocked with goat serum before immunogold labeling for Ab98 using 10-nm gold-labeled, goat anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) (Auroprobe EM GAR; GE Healthcare Bioscience) as described above.  Generation of Conditional Transfectant 3D5 pTRE vector for the conditional expression of ?-syn was constructed and used to transfect our tetracycline off (TetOff) founder line derived from human neuroblastoma M17D cells ( 29 ) for the production of inducible transfectants exactly as previously described ( 30 , 31 ). To screen potential clones emerging from puromycin selection, we seeded paired cultures for each clone and rinsed them on the next day before incubating for 5 days. One clone destined for transgene expression was incubated using Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (Invitrogen Corp., Carlsbad, CA) that was supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen), 400 ?g/ml G418 (EMD Biosciences, La Jolla, CA) and 1 ?g/ml puromycin (Sigma Chemicals, St. Louis, MO); the other clone was incubated for the same duration using the same medium but supplemented with 2 ?g/ml Tet (Sigma). The cultures were then harvested to derive lysate specimens of the induced and its non-induced counterpart for Western blot analysis according to Ko et al ( 32 ). Prior to selecting candidate clones, we also evaluated their ability to express neuronal phenotypes, (i.e. the formation of elaborate neurites plus augmented neurofilament expression) in response to 10 ?M all- trans -retinoic acid (RA; Sigma) ( 33 ) using the ?-syn/neurofilament dual immunofluorescence procedure described below. Of our chosen clones, transfectant 3D5 was used throughout this study. 3D5 cells were seeded in the Tet-containing medium described above at 2 × 105 cells/plate (100 × 20 mm, BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) or 2 × 104 cells/well in 24-well plates with and without glass coverslips (12 mm in diameter; Bellco Glass, Inc., Vineland, NJ) for immunofluorescence and in situ ultrastructural examination, respectively. On the next day, the cultures were exposed to 10 ?M RA for 10 days in the Neurobasal medium (Invitrogen) with B-27 supplement (Invitrogen), L-glutamine (2 mM; Sigma), G418 (400 ?g/ml; EMD), puromycin (1 ?g/ml; Sigma) and Tet (2 ?g/ml). The cells were rinsed before incubating them for up to 28 days in the presence (i.e. non-induced) or absence (i.e. induced) of Tet (2 ?g/ml).  Growth Kinetic Studies 3D5 cells were seeded in replicate on 100 × 20 mm plates at 2 × 105 cells/plate and monitored their growth was monitored thereafter following indicated treatments. At predetermined intervals, the cells were harvested independently from each of the 5 sister cultures in a treatment group by trypsinization to derive cell suspensions from which the numbers were determined using NucleoCounter, according to Ko et al ( 34 ). Population doubling times were calculated from the slopes of growth curves. To determine the impact on cell survival following 14- or 28-day TetOff induction, incubations were extended to 52 days using the same culture conditions or by adding 2 ?g/ml Tet to terminate TetOff induction on day 14 or 28 and then following through with the aforementioned analyses.  Antibodies To evaluate transgene expression of ?-syn by immunoblotting, we used antibodies Synuclein-1 (BD Biosciences) and Ab98 ( 32 ) with the aid of monoclonal antibodies directed against ?-tubulin (EP1332Y; Epitomics, Burlingame, CA), ?-tubulin (TUB2.1, Sigma), ?-actin (AC-74, Sigma) and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) (1D4, Covance Research Products, Berkeley, CA) to verify specimen loading. Additional immunoprobes specific for distinct domains of ?-syn were: SYN128 (SYSY#128-002; Synaptic System GmbH, Gottingen, Germany), HuA (from V. M. –Y. Lee, Univ. of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA), AB5464 (Chemicon International, Inc., Temecula, CA), NAC (V. M. –Y. Lee), Ab111 (AB5038P; Chemicon), mAb211 (sc-12767; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Santa Cruz, CA) and Syn202 (sc-32281; Santa Cruz Biotechnology); antibodies to ?-syn phosphorylation (pSer129; Wako Chemicals USA, Richmond, VA) and nitration (Ab504; V. M. –Y Lee) were also employed to characterize ?-syn production, accumulation, aggregation and posttranslational modifications ( Table 1 ). Antibodies to neurofilament (NF210) ( 35 ) and bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU; Covance) were used to evaluate differentiation and proliferation, respectively.  Immunocytochemical Analyses For ?-syn/neurofilament dual immunofluorescence, cells were seeded on glass coverslips in 24-well plates and processed according to Ko et al ( 34 ) except for the use of Alexa 488-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) (1:200; Invitrogen) and Alexa 594-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) (1:200; Invitrogen) to visualize immunoreactivities of Synuclein-1 (1:100) and NF210 (1:100), respectively, before 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole diacetate (DAPI: Invitrogen) counterstaining. Antibodies Ab98 and DO-1 (Santa Cruz) were used similarly to assess ?-syn/p53 double immunofluorescence. Digitized photomicrograph images of randomly selected fields were captured using an Olympus DP70 camera attached to Olympus BX50 fluorescent microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) as previously described ( 34 ). To determine the proportions of ?-syn-overproducing populations from separate treatment groups or at different time points following TetOff induction, the cells were permeabilized with 0.0001% saponin in Hanks’ balanced salt solution (HBSS) after fixation with 2% paraformaldehyde/HBSS and methanol. The fixed cells were rinsed thoroughly and stored in 0.1 M Tris saline (pH 7.6)/0.02% sodium azide at 4°C until all groups (i.e. separate treatments or time points) were collected. The fixed specimens from distinct groups were probed simultaneously with Synuclein-1 (1:100), counterstained with DAPI and used an identical exposure conditions to capture photomicrographic images as described above. The relative intensity of ?-syn immunoreactivity of 2,000 cells or more from randomly selected fields was graded according to Ko et al ( 34 ) and calculated to derive data for comparative analyses by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). The same procedure was also followed to demonstrate thioflavin S-positive, ?-syn inclusions except that saponin permeabilization was performed before fixation and the immunoprobed cultures were stained with 0.05% thioflavin S/formalin before DAPI counterstaining. To assess cell proliferation, the cells were grown similarly on glass coverslips and exposed to 10 ?M BrdU for 1 hour at various intervals. The BrdU uptake was detected following glycine/ethanol fixation with a mouse anti-BrdU antibody (1:200); the immunoreactivity was visualized using Alexa 488-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) (1:200). The nuclear uptake of BrdU was verified in situ by DAPI counterstaining. Viability for the replica 3D5 cultures on coverslips was also evaluated using a fluorescence-based LIVE/DEAD Viability/Cytotoxicity Kit (Invitrogen). Conversion of cell-permeant calcein AM (nonfluorescent) by intracellular esterase gives rise to intensely fluorescent calcein (excitation 495 nm/emission 515 nm) that is well retained within live cells whereas binding of ethidium homodimer-1 with nucleic acids after it enters cells with damaged membranes produces a bright red fluorescence (excitation 495 nm/emission 635 nm) in dead cells, thus permitting simultaneous visualization of live and dead cells in situ ( 36 ). Digitized photomicrograph images of at least 10 randomly selected fields, each containing more than 400 cells, were captured as described above to count live and dead cells and derive their proportions for distinct intervals following TetOff induction.  Fractionation Studies of Culture Specimens 3D5 cells that had been incubated with or without Tet for 14 or 28 days following RA-elicited neuronal differentiation were harvested and lysates prepared to derive buffer-soluble (SN1), buffer-insoluble, sarkosyl-soluble (SN2) and sarkosyl-insoluble (Srk/P) fractions, according to Ko et al ( 30 ). The sarkosyl-insoluble preparations derived from induced or non-induced cultures were resuspended with 50 mM Tris (pH 8) before they were assayed in triplicates for thioflavin S binding or evaluated by electron microscopy, exactly as previously described ( 30 ).  Western Blot Analysis Protein constituents of the culture lysates or their fractionated derivatives were resolved by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) according to Ko et al ( 32 ) except that 10% to 20% Tricine gels (Invitrogen) were used. This was followed by transblotting onto nitrocellulose membranes (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). Recombinant ?-syn was included as a reference. Low-molecular-weight range (2,500–45,000 kDa) Rainbow colored protein molecular weight markers (GE Healthcare Bioscience, Piscataway, NJ) were used in conjunction with MagicMark XP Western protein standard (Invitrogen) or Precision Plus Protein Standards (Bio-Rad) to calibrate molecular size. Unless indicated otherwise, the electroblots were probed using Synuclein-1 (1:500) the immunoreactivity of which was detected with peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) antibody (1:2,000; Chemicon) and visualized with enhanced chemiluminescence plus reagent (GE Healthcare Bioscience). Immunoprobes specific for other domains of the ?-syn molecule ( Table 1 ) were also included to characterize ?-syn and its derivatives by grading their immunoreactivities according to Ko et al ( 30 ). Comparable loading was consistently verified by reprobing the ?-syn blots or their replicas using antibodies to GAPDH, ?-actin, ?-tubulin and ?-tubulin. To determine activation of caspase and p53, antibodies to ?-catenin (BD Biosciences) and p53 (including its derivatives phosphorylated at Ser-15 and Ser-6; Cell Signaling Technology, Inc., Danvers, MA), respectively were used.  Ultrastructural Evaluation of Thioflavin-Positive, ?-Synuclein Inclusions To evaluate inclusions assembled in the differentiated 3D5 cells from ?-syn overproduction at the ultrastructural level, the cells were grown on Thermanox plastic coverslips (diameter: 13 mm; NUNC, Naperville, IL) in 24-well plates according to the aforementioned paradigm and prepared according to the procedure described above for the thioflavin S-positive, ?-syn inclusions except that: (1) Ab98 (1:200) was used as primary antibody; (2) 6-nm colloidal gold-AffiniPure goat anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) (1:20; Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, West Grove, PA) as secondary antibody; and (3) the immunoprobed cultures were fixed and processed for in situ Epon-embedding according to Ko et al ( 30 ). Epon sections containing filamentous inclusions were etched with 0.5 % sodium ethoxide, incubated with saturated sodium periodate to remove osmication, and blocked with goat serum before immunogold labeling for Ab98 using 10-nm gold-labeled, goat anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) (Auroprobe EM GAR; GE Healthcare Bioscience) as described above.  RESULTS Conditional Overproduction of ?-Syn Leads to Intracellular Assembly of Its Aggregates in Differentiated 3D5 Cells To develop a cell-based paradigm for ?-syn accumulation, we performed serial transfection to generate conditional transfectant cells (3D5 clone) from human neuroblastoma dopaminergic BE(2)-M17D cells ( 29 , 37 ). The transfectant was cloned for its responsiveness to TetOff induction and RA-elicited differentiation. Transgenic expression of human wild-type ?-syn in 3D5 cells is regulated by the TetOff inducible expression system in a time-dependent manner ( Fig. 1a ). TetOff induction of conditional overexpression for 14 days resulted in progressive accumulation of full-length 15-kDa ?-syn; its 8- and 12-kD fragments give rise to minimal aggregation ( Fig. 1a ). Quantitative analyses of the immunoblots revealed that ?-syn expression increased to 1.58 ± 0.13, 4.31 ± 0.42, 5.11 ± 0.57 and 8.23 ± 1.05 (Mean ± SEM; n = 3) times that of the endogenous, (i.e. in non-induced cells) following TetOff induction for 3, 7, 10 and 14 days, respectively. To model intraneuronal assembly of ?-syn aggregates, we designed a culture paradigm ( Fig. 1b ) in which neuronal differentiation is elicited by incubating the 3D5 cells with RA for 10 days before TetOff induction of ?-syn overexpression ( Fig. 2a ). This led to increased production of ?-syn (15-kD), and its 8- and 12-kD fragments that precipitate assembly of ?-syn aggregates, including the 33-kD oligomer (asterisk), smearing (>33 kD) and high molecular weight (HMW) species in the cells ( Fig. 1c ). Quantitatively, the blots showed 2.2-, 16.1-, 20.6- and 40.9-fold increases in total production, including of full-length ?-syn and its truncated and oligomeric derivatives, after 3, 7, 10 and 14 days of TetOff induction, respectively. Growth kinetic analyses reveal that in addition to eliciting neuronal differentiation RA exposure slows proliferation of the 3D5 cells, thereby leaving their population sizes virtually unaltered for weeks (black circles; Fig. 2b ). TetOff induction of ?-syn overexpression caused a modest reduction in growth initially but did not change the population size sustained by extended RA treatment (white circles; Fig. 2b ). This cytostatic effect was verified by the marked extension of population doubling time from 48 hours to 249 hours after a 14-day RA exposure; this was further lengthened to 1,273 hours when the RA treatment continued for another 14 days. Moreover, TetOff induction alone slowed the growth of undifferentiated 3D5 cells by extending their doubling time to 55 hours. The impact of TetOff induction on proliferation became more pronounced following neuronal differentiation as indicated from the prolonged doubling time, i.e. 273 hours and 1,899 hours, after 14 and 28 days of TetOff induction, respectively. BrdU incorporation assay permits direct visualization of cells that are engaged in DNA synthesis (i.e. BrdU-positive) to estimate the proportion of S phase cells. In a 3D5 cell culture with exponential growth, the proportion of S phase cells was 10.6% and this declined sharply to 5.1% after RA exposure for 10 days. The BrdU-labeled population dropped to 3.0% and 0.9% after subsequent TetOff induction for 14 and 28 days, respectively, thereby confirming a marked slowdown in traversing the cell cycle. Aggregates of ?-Synuclein Are Assembled Primarily from Its Fragments with C-Terminal Truncation To define the biochemical nature of ?-syn derivatives in differentiated 3D5 cells by immunoblot, we used 9 antibodies directed against different domains of the ?-syn molecule ( Fig. 3a ). Strong reactivity of these antibodies with intact 15 kD ?-syn validated their utility as specific immunoprobes for ?-syn detection ( Fig. 3b ; Table 1 ). In addition to a buildup of full-length ?-syn, most of the antibodies detected accumulation of 8- and 12-kD fragments and other aggregated assemblies in the differentiated 3D5 cells after TetOff induction for 14 days. The 12-kD fragment did not react with antibodies mAb211 and Syn202, suggesting that it arises from ?-syn degradation with amino acid residues 121-140 that are missing from its C-terminus. In addition to lacking reactivity with mAb211 and Syn202, the 8-kD species did not react with Ab111 and showed only weak reactivity with Ab98, suggesting that it is most likely truncated where the Ab98 recognizes it. Taken together, both 8- and 12-kD species accumulate from 14-day TetOff induction as predominant ?-syn fragments that lack at least 20 amino acid residues at their C-terminus. Antibodies Syn202 and mAb211 reacted minimally with any aggregated assemblies larger than 33 kD (i.e. smearing and HMW species), suggesting that the aggregates are oligomeric or polymerized assemblies of ?-syn fragments truncated at the C-terminus. This also raises the possibility that such aggregates are assembled from the aforementioned 8- or 12-kD fragments. Reactivity with mAb211 but not Syn202 suggests that the 33-kD oligomer (asterisk in Fig. 3b ) arises from crosslinking of ?-syn fragments that may differ in the extent of C-terminal truncation. The 33-kD oligomer stands out as the only aggregated species that shows prominent reactivity with mAb211; this suggests that all aggregates, except the 33-kD, are assembled from ?-syn fragments that lack the epitope recognized by mAb211 or that this epitope becomes less accessible for antibody recognition as ?-syn aggregates associate further from the 33-kD oligomer with a progressive increase in structural compactness. Intraneuronal Deposition of ?-Syn Aggregates with Concomitant Phosphorylation and Nitration Characteristic of ?-Synucleinopathy To determine whether aggregates of ?-syn are assembled with concomitant phosphorylation and nitration, we included antibodies pS129 and Ab504 in the immunoblotting analyses ( Table 1 ; Fig. 4 ). The post-translational modifications were absent in the undifferentiated 3D5 cells or those exposed to RA alone. By contrast, both immunoprobes reacted with the differentiated 3D5 cells after TetOff induction for 14 or 28 days when accumulations of ?-syn and its aggregated derivatives were evident. Most importantly, phosphorylation or nitration was detectable only with the full-length, monomeric ?-syn, despite an overt buildup of its derivatives, particularly aggregated species. Therefore, the results indicate that ?-syn aggregates assembled in this paradigm appear concomitantly with the phosphorylation and nitration that are characteristic of ?-syn pathology in synucleinopathies. HMW ?-Syn Aggregates Exhibit Sarkosyl-Insolubility and Augmented Affinity for Thioflavin S To define the physicochemical properties of ?-syn and its derivatives that accumulate in the cells, we performed fractionation analysis for the culture lysates derived from 14- and 28-day TetOff induction. As shown in Figure 5a , Western blotting of SN1, SN2 and Srk/P fractions reveals the following: (i) soluble aggregates of up to 250 kD account for most of the ?-syn immunoreactivity in the differentiated 3D5 cells following 14 day TetOff induction; (ii) 8-kD and 12-kD ?-syn fragments and oligomeric/polymerized assemblies (i.e. 33-kD and smearing [>33-kD]) are primarily buffer-soluble although they are also detectable in trace amounts as buffer-insoluble/sarkosyl-soluble (SN2); (iii) the sarkosyl-insoluble fraction (Srk/P) consists mainly of oligomeric or polymerized assemblies (i.e. smearing [>33-kD] and HMW), although modest amounts of mAb111-positive HMW aggregates (arrows) remain sarkosyl-soluble (SN2); and (iv) sarkosyl-insoluble aggregates derived from 14 and 28 day preparations show less and no, respectively, Ab111 reactivity, suggesting that these aggregated species are assembled with a progressive increase in structural compactness over time leading to a decline in their antibody accessibility. Sarkosyl-insoluble aggregates collected after TetOff induction for 14 days showed enhanced thioflavin binding ( Fig. 5b ), indicating that ?-syn aggregates are assembled in a ?-sheet structure. When ?-syn overproduction was extended to 28 days, there was a remarkable increase in thioflavin binding, suggesting that ?-syn aggregates continue to assemble after the 14th day in a striking ?-sheet transformation. Taken together, these data suggest that the differentiated 3D5 cells respond to a progressive buildup of ?-syn with posttranslational modifications, such as phosphorylation, nitration and truncation. Products of such modifications may provide an effective seeding mechanism that favors assembly of HMW and thioflavin-binding oligomers that lead to fibrillogenesis in this paradigm. Formation of Thioflavin-Positive, ?-Syn Inclusions in the Differentiated 3D5 Cells Extension of TetOff induction to 28 days led to the appearance of 0.5- to 8-?m-diameter inclusions in the cytoplasm of the differentiated 3D5 cells ( Fig. 6 ). To determine the biophysical nature of the inclusions, we extracted the culture with saponin prior to immunofluorescence staining with the Synuclein-1 antibody ( Fig. 6a ) and found that the detergent-insoluble inclusions in the perikarya are ?-syn-positive (red) and that they are stained by thioflavin S (green) and resemble LBs. These LB-like inclusions emerged concurrently with the assembly of sarkosyl-insoluble aggregates, as shown by Western blot analysis ( Fig. 5a ). Most importantly, the appeared concomitant with a marked increase in the thioflavin binding signal by fluorospectrometric analyses ( Fig. 5b ). Conditional ?-Syn Overproduction Leads to Formation of Filamentous ?-Synuclein Inclusions Ultrastructural examination of the thioflavin-positive, ?-syn inclusions demonstrated that they contain dense bundles of filaments and lack a limiting membrane; they are, therefore, reminiscent of LBs ( Fig. 7 ). In sibling cultures that were embedded in Epon in situ, there were filamentous 0.5- to 7-?m-diameter inclusions that contain dense bundles of 8- to 12-nm fibrils that segregate from organelles in perikarya and neurites ( Fig. 7a–c ); these resemble the LBs of PD and other ?-synucleinopathies. Immunogold analyses using antibody Ab98 after etching the Epon sections demonstrated that the fibrils were decorated with immunogold particles, thereby indicating that that the filaments within the LB-like inclusions are composed of ?-syn ( Fig. 7d ). Reversible Assembly of ?-Synuclein Aggregates To determine whether assembly of ?-syn aggregates is reversible, we extended incubation of the aggregate-bearing cultures, derived from 14- or 28-day TetOff induction, with 2 ?g/ml Tet for up to 28 days under the same serum-free conditions. Immunoblotting data obtained thereafter revealed that this prolonged incubation led to the disappearance of soluble and insoluble aggregates that had assembled at 14 and 28 days, respectively, after TetOff induction ( Fig. 8a, b ). Moreover, the buildup of full-length ?-syn and its fragments from the aforementioned overproduction also vanished concurrently with reversal of aggregate formation. Therefore, the intracellular accumulation of ?-syn and its truncated and aggregated derivatives that lead to the formation of LB-like inclusions is reversible in these cells. Assembled ?-Synuclein Aggregates Are Not Neurotoxic To ascertain whether the aforementioned assembly of soluble or insoluble aggregates leading to formation of LB-like inclusions is neurotoxic, we assessed the survival of aggregate/inclusion-bearing cells by growth kinetic analysis ( Fig. 8c ). The results indicate that extended incubation of the differentiated 3D5 cells after terminating 14- or 28-day TetOff induction does not lead to any apparent change in the cell numbers. This suggests that the ?-syn aggregates assembled following 14-day TetOff induction are not toxic to the human neuronal cells. Most importantly, the LB-like inclusions emerging from a buildup of insoluble ?-syn aggregates after TetOff induction for 28 days are also not toxic to the cells and do not affect their subsequent survival. To confirm that the intracellular assembly of soluble or insoluble ?-syn aggregates does not induce toxicity to the differentiated 3D5 cells, we used the calcein/ethidium homodimer-1 cytotoxicity assay ( Table 2 ). This analysis demonstrated that overexpression of ?-syn or accumulation of its aggregates causes a minimal impact on cell viability despite that percent cell survivals of the induced cultures are statistically different when compared to their non-induced counterparts after 7- or 28-day TetOff induction. We also performed Western blot analyses to determine whether a caspase or p53-mediated cell death mechanism becomes activated upon intracellular assembly of ?-syn aggregates. RA-elicited differentiation caused a modest increase in the level of p53 and ?-catenin (a sensitive indicator for caspase activation), but TetOff induction did not affect their levels, suggesting that formation of ?-syn aggregates does not cause activation of caspase or a p53-mediated apoptotic mechanism (data not shown). The lack of p53 activation agrees with the data of immunofluorescence studies that show that nuclear translocation of p53 is absent. Taken together, our data suggest that formation of soluble ?-syn aggregates or filamentous LB-like inclusions does not cause p53 or caspase activation for an apoptotic mechanism in the differentiated 3D5 cells.  RESULTS Conditional Overproduction of ?-Syn Leads to Intracellular Assembly of Its Aggregates in Differentiated 3D5 Cells To develop a cell-based paradigm for ?-syn accumulation, we performed serial transfection to generate conditional transfectant cells (3D5 clone) from human neuroblastoma dopaminergic BE(2)-M17D cells ( 29 , 37 ). The transfectant was cloned for its responsiveness to TetOff induction and RA-elicited differentiation. Transgenic expression of human wild-type ?-syn in 3D5 cells is regulated by the TetOff inducible expression system in a time-dependent manner ( Fig. 1a ). TetOff induction of conditional overexpression for 14 days resulted in progressive accumulation of full-length 15-kDa ?-syn; its 8- and 12-kD fragments give rise to minimal aggregation ( Fig. 1a ). Quantitative analyses of the immunoblots revealed that ?-syn expression increased to 1.58 ± 0.13, 4.31 ± 0.42, 5.11 ± 0.57 and 8.23 ± 1.05 (Mean ± SEM; n = 3) times that of the endogenous, (i.e. in non-induced cells) following TetOff induction for 3, 7, 10 and 14 days, respectively. To model intraneuronal assembly of ?-syn aggregates, we designed a culture paradigm ( Fig. 1b ) in which neuronal differentiation is elicited by incubating the 3D5 cells with RA for 10 days before TetOff induction of ?-syn overexpression ( Fig. 2a ). This led to increased production of ?-syn (15-kD), and its 8- and 12-kD fragments that precipitate assembly of ?-syn aggregates, including the 33-kD oligomer (asterisk), smearing (>33 kD) and high molecular weight (HMW) species in the cells ( Fig. 1c ). Quantitatively, the blots showed 2.2-, 16.1-, 20.6- and 40.9-fold increases in total production, including of full-length ?-syn and its truncated and oligomeric derivatives, after 3, 7, 10 and 14 days of TetOff induction, respectively. Growth kinetic analyses reveal that in addition to eliciting neuronal differentiation RA exposure slows proliferation of the 3D5 cells, thereby leaving their population sizes virtually unaltered for weeks (black circles; Fig. 2b ). TetOff induction of ?-syn overexpression caused a modest reduction in growth initially but did not change the population size sustained by extended RA treatment (white circles; Fig. 2b ). This cytostatic effect was verified by the marked extension of population doubling time from 48 hours to 249 hours after a 14-day RA exposure; this was further lengthened to 1,273 hours when the RA treatment continued for another 14 days. Moreover, TetOff induction alone slowed the growth of undifferentiated 3D5 cells by extending their doubling time to 55 hours. The impact of TetOff induction on proliferation became more pronounced following neuronal differentiation as indicated from the prolonged doubling time, i.e. 273 hours and 1,899 hours, after 14 and 28 days of TetOff induction, respectively. BrdU incorporation assay permits direct visualization of cells that are engaged in DNA synthesis (i.e. BrdU-positive) to estimate the proportion of S phase cells. In a 3D5 cell culture with exponential growth, the proportion of S phase cells was 10.6% and this declined sharply to 5.1% after RA exposure for 10 days. The BrdU-labeled population dropped to 3.0% and 0.9% after subsequent TetOff induction for 14 and 28 days, respectively, thereby confirming a marked slowdown in traversing the cell cycle. Aggregates of ?-Synuclein Are Assembled Primarily from Its Fragments with C-Terminal Truncation To define the biochemical nature of ?-syn derivatives in differentiated 3D5 cells by immunoblot, we used 9 antibodies directed against different domains of the ?-syn molecule ( Fig. 3a ). Strong reactivity of these antibodies with intact 15 kD ?-syn validated their utility as specific immunoprobes for ?-syn detection ( Fig. 3b ; Table 1 ). In addition to a buildup of full-length ?-syn, most of the antibodies detected accumulation of 8- and 12-kD fragments and other aggregated assemblies in the differentiated 3D5 cells after TetOff induction for 14 days. The 12-kD fragment did not react with antibodies mAb211 and Syn202, suggesting that it arises from ?-syn degradation with amino acid residues 121-140 that are missing from its C-terminus. In addition to lacking reactivity with mAb211 and Syn202, the 8-kD species did not react with Ab111 and showed only weak reactivity with Ab98, suggesting that it is most likely truncated where the Ab98 recognizes it. Taken together, both 8- and 12-kD species accumulate from 14-day TetOff induction as predominant ?-syn fragments that lack at least 20 amino acid residues at their C-terminus. Antibodies Syn202 and mAb211 reacted minimally with any aggregated assemblies larger than 33 kD (i.e. smearing and HMW species), suggesting that the aggregates are oligomeric or polymerized assemblies of ?-syn fragments truncated at the C-terminus. This also raises the possibility that such aggregates are assembled from the aforementioned 8- or 12-kD fragments. Reactivity with mAb211 but not Syn202 suggests that the 33-kD oligomer (asterisk in Fig. 3b ) arises from crosslinking of ?-syn fragments that may differ in the extent of C-terminal truncation. The 33-kD oligomer stands out as the only aggregated species that shows prominent reactivity with mAb211; this suggests that all aggregates, except the 33-kD, are assembled from ?-syn fragments that lack the epitope recognized by mAb211 or that this epitope becomes less accessible for antibody recognition as ?-syn aggregates associate further from the 33-kD oligomer with a progressive increase in structural compactness. Intraneuronal Deposition of ?-Syn Aggregates with Concomitant Phosphorylation and Nitration Characteristic of ?-Synucleinopathy To determine whether aggregates of ?-syn are assembled with concomitant phosphorylation and nitration, we included antibodies pS129 and Ab504 in the immunoblotting analyses ( Table 1 ; Fig. 4 ). The post-translational modifications were absent in the undifferentiated 3D5 cells or those exposed to RA alone. By contrast, both immunoprobes reacted with the differentiated 3D5 cells after TetOff induction for 14 or 28 days when accumulations of ?-syn and its aggregated derivatives were evident. Most importantly, phosphorylation or nitration was detectable only with the full-length, monomeric ?-syn, despite an overt buildup of its derivatives, particularly aggregated species. Therefore, the results indicate that ?-syn aggregates assembled in this paradigm appear concomitantly with the phosphorylation and nitration that are characteristic of ?-syn pathology in synucleinopathies. HMW ?-Syn Aggregates Exhibit Sarkosyl-Insolubility and Augmented Affinity for Thioflavin S To define the physicochemical properties of ?-syn and its derivatives that accumulate in the cells, we performed fractionation analysis for the culture lysates derived from 14- and 28-day TetOff induction. As shown in Figure 5a , Western blotting of SN1, SN2 and Srk/P fractions reveals the following: (i) soluble aggregates of up to 250 kD account for most of the ?-syn immunoreactivity in the differentiated 3D5 cells following 14 day TetOff induction; (ii) 8-kD and 12-kD ?-syn fragments and oligomeric/polymerized assemblies (i.e. 33-kD and smearing [>33-kD]) are primarily buffer-soluble although they are also detectable in trace amounts as buffer-insoluble/sarkosyl-soluble (SN2); (iii) the sarkosyl-insoluble fraction (Srk/P) consists mainly of oligomeric or polymerized assemblies (i.e. smearing [>33-kD] and HMW), although modest amounts of mAb111-positive HMW aggregates (arrows) remain sarkosyl-soluble (SN2); and (iv) sarkosyl-insoluble aggregates derived from 14 and 28 day preparations show less and no, respectively, Ab111 reactivity, suggesting that these aggregated species are assembled with a progressive increase in structural compactness over time leading to a decline in their antibody accessibility. Sarkosyl-insoluble aggregates collected after TetOff induction for 14 days showed enhanced thioflavin binding ( Fig. 5b ), indicating that ?-syn aggregates are assembled in a ?-sheet structure. When ?-syn overproduction was extended to 28 days, there was a remarkable increase in thioflavin binding, suggesting that ?-syn aggregates continue to assemble after the 14th day in a striking ?-sheet transformation. Taken together, these data suggest that the differentiated 3D5 cells respond to a progressive buildup of ?-syn with posttranslational modifications, such as phosphorylation, nitration and truncation. Products of such modifications may provide an effective seeding mechanism that favors assembly of HMW and thioflavin-binding oligomers that lead to fibrillogenesis in this paradigm. Formation of Thioflavin-Positive, ?-Syn Inclusions in the Differentiated 3D5 Cells Extension of TetOff induction to 28 days led to the appearance of 0.5- to 8-?m-diameter inclusions in the cytoplasm of the differentiated 3D5 cells ( Fig. 6 ). To determine the biophysical nature of the inclusions, we extracted the culture with saponin prior to immunofluorescence staining with the Synuclein-1 antibody ( Fig. 6a ) and found that the detergent-insoluble inclusions in the perikarya are ?-syn-positive (red) and that they are stained by thioflavin S (green) and resemble LBs. These LB-like inclusions emerged concurrently with the assembly of sarkosyl-insoluble aggregates, as shown by Western blot analysis ( Fig. 5a ). Most importantly, the appeared concomitant with a marked increase in the thioflavin binding signal by fluorospectrometric analyses ( Fig. 5b ). Conditional ?-Syn Overproduction Leads to Formation of Filamentous ?-Synuclein Inclusions Ultrastructural examination of the thioflavin-positive, ?-syn inclusions demonstrated that they contain dense bundles of filaments and lack a limiting membrane; they are, therefore, reminiscent of LBs ( Fig. 7 ). In sibling cultures that were embedded in Epon in situ, there were filamentous 0.5- to 7-?m-diameter inclusions that contain dense bundles of 8- to 12-nm fibrils that segregate from organelles in perikarya and neurites ( Fig. 7a–c ); these resemble the LBs of PD and other ?-synucleinopathies. Immunogold analyses using antibody Ab98 after etching the Epon sections demonstrated that the fibrils were decorated with immunogold particles, thereby indicating that that the filaments within the LB-like inclusions are composed of ?-syn ( Fig. 7d ). Reversible Assembly of ?-Synuclein Aggregates To determine whether assembly of ?-syn aggregates is reversible, we extended incubation of the aggregate-bearing cultures, derived from 14- or 28-day TetOff induction, with 2 ?g/ml Tet for up to 28 days under the same serum-free conditions. Immunoblotting data obtained thereafter revealed that this prolonged incubation led to the disappearance of soluble and insoluble aggregates that had assembled at 14 and 28 days, respectively, after TetOff induction ( Fig. 8a, b ). Moreover, the buildup of full-length ?-syn and its fragments from the aforementioned overproduction also vanished concurrently with reversal of aggregate formation. Therefore, the intracellular accumulation of ?-syn and its truncated and aggregated derivatives that lead to the formation of LB-like inclusions is reversible in these cells. Assembled ?-Synuclein Aggregates Are Not Neurotoxic To ascertain whether the aforementioned assembly of soluble or insoluble aggregates leading to formation of LB-like inclusions is neurotoxic, we assessed the survival of aggregate/inclusion-bearing cells by growth kinetic analysis ( Fig. 8c ). The results indicate that extended incubation of the differentiated 3D5 cells after terminating 14- or 28-day TetOff induction does not lead to any apparent change in the cell numbers. This suggests that the ?-syn aggregates assembled following 14-day TetOff induction are not toxic to the human neuronal cells. Most importantly, the LB-like inclusions emerging from a buildup of insoluble ?-syn aggregates after TetOff induction for 28 days are also not toxic to the cells and do not affect their subsequent survival. To confirm that the intracellular assembly of soluble or insoluble ?-syn aggregates does not induce toxicity to the differentiated 3D5 cells, we used the calcein/ethidium homodimer-1 cytotoxicity assay ( Table 2 ). This analysis demonstrated that overexpression of ?-syn or accumulation of its aggregates causes a minimal impact on cell viability despite that percent cell survivals of the induced cultures are statistically different when compared to their non-induced counterparts after 7- or 28-day TetOff induction. We also performed Western blot analyses to determine whether a caspase or p53-mediated cell death mechanism becomes activated upon intracellular assembly of ?-syn aggregates. RA-elicited differentiation caused a modest increase in the level of p53 and ?-catenin (a sensitive indicator for caspase activation), but TetOff induction did not affect their levels, suggesting that formation of ?-syn aggregates does not cause activation of caspase or a p53-mediated apoptotic mechanism (data not shown). The lack of p53 activation agrees with the data of immunofluorescence studies that show that nuclear translocation of p53 is absent. Taken together, our data suggest that formation of soluble ?-syn aggregates or filamentous LB-like inclusions does not cause p53 or caspase activation for an apoptotic mechanism in the differentiated 3D5 cells.  Conditional Overproduction of ?-Syn Leads to Intracellular Assembly of Its Aggregates in Differentiated 3D5 Cells To develop a cell-based paradigm for ?-syn accumulation, we performed serial transfection to generate conditional transfectant cells (3D5 clone) from human neuroblastoma dopaminergic BE(2)-M17D cells ( 29 , 37 ). The transfectant was cloned for its responsiveness to TetOff induction and RA-elicited differentiation. Transgenic expression of human wild-type ?-syn in 3D5 cells is regulated by the TetOff inducible expression system in a time-dependent manner ( Fig. 1a ). TetOff induction of conditional overexpression for 14 days resulted in progressive accumulation of full-length 15-kDa ?-syn; its 8- and 12-kD fragments give rise to minimal aggregation ( Fig. 1a ). Quantitative analyses of the immunoblots revealed that ?-syn expression increased to 1.58 ± 0.13, 4.31 ± 0.42, 5.11 ± 0.57 and 8.23 ± 1.05 (Mean ± SEM; n = 3) times that of the endogenous, (i.e. in non-induced cells) following TetOff induction for 3, 7, 10 and 14 days, respectively. To model intraneuronal assembly of ?-syn aggregates, we designed a culture paradigm ( Fig. 1b ) in which neuronal differentiation is elicited by incubating the 3D5 cells with RA for 10 days before TetOff induction of ?-syn overexpression ( Fig. 2a ). This led to increased production of ?-syn (15-kD), and its 8- and 12-kD fragments that precipitate assembly of ?-syn aggregates, including the 33-kD oligomer (asterisk), smearing (>33 kD) and high molecular weight (HMW) species in the cells ( Fig. 1c ). Quantitatively, the blots showed 2.2-, 16.1-, 20.6- and 40.9-fold increases in total production, including of full-length ?-syn and its truncated and oligomeric derivatives, after 3, 7, 10 and 14 days of TetOff induction, respectively. Growth kinetic analyses reveal that in addition to eliciting neuronal differentiation RA exposure slows proliferation of the 3D5 cells, thereby leaving their population sizes virtually unaltered for weeks (black circles; Fig. 2b ). TetOff induction of ?-syn overexpression caused a modest reduction in growth initially but did not change the population size sustained by extended RA treatment (white circles; Fig. 2b ). This cytostatic effect was verified by the marked extension of population doubling time from 48 hours to 249 hours after a 14-day RA exposure; this was further lengthened to 1,273 hours when the RA treatment continued for another 14 days. Moreover, TetOff induction alone slowed the growth of undifferentiated 3D5 cells by extending their doubling time to 55 hours. The impact of TetOff induction on proliferation became more pronounced following neuronal differentiation as indicated from the prolonged doubling time, i.e. 273 hours and 1,899 hours, after 14 and 28 days of TetOff induction, respectively. BrdU incorporation assay permits direct visualization of cells that are engaged in DNA synthesis (i.e. BrdU-positive) to estimate the proportion of S phase cells. In a 3D5 cell culture with exponential growth, the proportion of S phase cells was 10.6% and this declined sharply to 5.1% after RA exposure for 10 days. The BrdU-labeled population dropped to 3.0% and 0.9% after subsequent TetOff induction for 14 and 28 days, respectively, thereby confirming a marked slowdown in traversing the cell cycle.  Conditional Overproduction of ?-Syn Leads to Intracellular Assembly of Its Aggregates in Differentiated 3D5 Cells To develop a cell-based paradigm for ?-syn accumulation, we performed serial transfection to generate conditional transfectant cells (3D5 clone) from human neuroblastoma dopaminergic BE(2)-M17D cells ( 29 , 37 ). The transfectant was cloned for its responsiveness to TetOff induction and RA-elicited differentiation. Transgenic expression of human wild-type ?-syn in 3D5 cells is regulated by the TetOff inducible expression system in a time-dependent manner ( Fig. 1a ). TetOff induction of conditional overexpression for 14 days resulted in progressive accumulation of full-length 15-kDa ?-syn; its 8- and 12-kD fragments give rise to minimal aggregation ( Fig. 1a ). Quantitative analyses of the immunoblots revealed that ?-syn expression increased to 1.58 ± 0.13, 4.31 ± 0.42, 5.11 ± 0.57 and 8.23 ± 1.05 (Mean ± SEM; n = 3) times that of the endogenous, (i.e. in non-induced cells) following TetOff induction for 3, 7, 10 and 14 days, respectively. To model intraneuronal assembly of ?-syn aggregates, we designed a culture paradigm ( Fig. 1b ) in which neuronal differentiation is elicited by incubating the 3D5 cells with RA for 10 days before TetOff induction of ?-syn overexpression ( Fig. 2a ). This led to increased production of ?-syn (15-kD), and its 8- and 12-kD fragments that precipitate assembly of ?-syn aggregates, including the 33-kD oligomer (asterisk), smearing (>33 kD) and high molecular weight (HMW) species in the cells ( Fig. 1c ). Quantitatively, the blots showed 2.2-, 16.1-, 20.6- and 40.9-fold increases in total production, including of full-length ?-syn and its truncated and oligomeric derivatives, after 3, 7, 10 and 14 days of TetOff induction, respectively. Growth kinetic analyses reveal that in addition to eliciting neuronal differentiation RA exposure slows proliferation of the 3D5 cells, thereby leaving their population sizes virtually unaltered for weeks (black circles; Fig. 2b ). TetOff induction of ?-syn overexpression caused a modest reduction in growth initially but did not change the population size sustained by extended RA treatment (white circles; Fig. 2b ). This cytostatic effect was verified by the marked extension of population doubling time from 48 hours to 249 hours after a 14-day RA exposure; this was further lengthened to 1,273 hours when the RA treatment continued for another 14 days. Moreover, TetOff induction alone slowed the growth of undifferentiated 3D5 cells by extending their doubling time to 55 hours. The impact of TetOff induction on proliferation became more pronounced following neuronal differentiation as indicated from the prolonged doubling time, i.e. 273 hours and 1,899 hours, after 14 and 28 days of TetOff induction, respectively. BrdU incorporation assay permits direct visualization of cells that are engaged in DNA synthesis (i.e. BrdU-positive) to estimate the proportion of S phase cells. In a 3D5 cell culture with exponential growth, the proportion of S phase cells was 10.6% and this declined sharply to 5.1% after RA exposure for 10 days. The BrdU-labeled population dropped to 3.0% and 0.9% after subsequent TetOff induction for 14 and 28 days, respectively, thereby confirming a marked slowdown in traversing the cell cycle.  Aggregates of ?-Synuclein Are Assembled Primarily from Its Fragments with C-Terminal Truncation To define the biochemical nature of ?-syn derivatives in differentiated 3D5 cells by immunoblot, we used 9 antibodies directed against different domains of the ?-syn molecule ( Fig. 3a ). Strong reactivity of these antibodies with intact 15 kD ?-syn validated their utility as specific immunoprobes for ?-syn detection ( Fig. 3b ; Table 1 ). In addition to a buildup of full-length ?-syn, most of the antibodies detected accumulation of 8- and 12-kD fragments and other aggregated assemblies in the differentiated 3D5 cells after TetOff induction for 14 days. The 12-kD fragment did not react with antibodies mAb211 and Syn202, suggesting that it arises from ?-syn degradation with amino acid residues 121-140 that are missing from its C-terminus. In addition to lacking reactivity with mAb211 and Syn202, the 8-kD species did not react with Ab111 and showed only weak reactivity with Ab98, suggesting that it is most likely truncated where the Ab98 recognizes it. Taken together, both 8- and 12-kD species accumulate from 14-day TetOff induction as predominant ?-syn fragments that lack at least 20 amino acid residues at their C-terminus. Antibodies Syn202 and mAb211 reacted minimally with any aggregated assemblies larger than 33 kD (i.e. smearing and HMW species), suggesting that the aggregates are oligomeric or polymerized assemblies of ?-syn fragments truncated at the C-terminus. This also raises the possibility that such aggregates are assembled from the aforementioned 8- or 12-kD fragments. Reactivity with mAb211 but not Syn202 suggests that the 33-kD oligomer (asterisk in Fig. 3b ) arises from crosslinking of ?-syn fragments that may differ in the extent of C-terminal truncation. The 33-kD oligomer stands out as the only aggregated species that shows prominent reactivity with mAb211; this suggests that all aggregates, except the 33-kD, are assembled from ?-syn fragments that lack the epitope recognized by mAb211 or that this epitope becomes less accessible for antibody recognition as ?-syn aggregates associate further from the 33-kD oligomer with a progressive increase in structural compactness.  Aggregates of ?-Synuclein Are Assembled Primarily from Its Fragments with C-Terminal Truncation To define the biochemical nature of ?-syn derivatives in differentiated 3D5 cells by immunoblot, we used 9 antibodies directed against different domains of the ?-syn molecule ( Fig. 3a ). Strong reactivity of these antibodies with intact 15 kD ?-syn validated their utility as specific immunoprobes for ?-syn detection ( Fig. 3b ; Table 1 ). In addition to a buildup of full-length ?-syn, most of the antibodies detected accumulation of 8- and 12-kD fragments and other aggregated assemblies in the differentiated 3D5 cells after TetOff induction for 14 days. The 12-kD fragment did not react with antibodies mAb211 and Syn202, suggesting that it arises from ?-syn degradation with amino acid residues 121-140 that are missing from its C-terminus. In addition to lacking reactivity with mAb211 and Syn202, the 8-kD species did not react with Ab111 and showed only weak reactivity with Ab98, suggesting that it is most likely truncated where the Ab98 recognizes it. Taken together, both 8- and 12-kD species accumulate from 14-day TetOff induction as predominant ?-syn fragments that lack at least 20 amino acid residues at their C-terminus. Antibodies Syn202 and mAb211 reacted minimally with any aggregated assemblies larger than 33 kD (i.e. smearing and HMW species), suggesting that the aggregates are oligomeric or polymerized assemblies of ?-syn fragments truncated at the C-terminus. This also raises the possibility that such aggregates are assembled from the aforementioned 8- or 12-kD fragments. Reactivity with mAb211 but not Syn202 suggests that the 33-kD oligomer (asterisk in Fig. 3b ) arises from crosslinking of ?-syn fragments that may differ in the extent of C-terminal truncation. The 33-kD oligomer stands out as the only aggregated species that shows prominent reactivity with mAb211; this suggests that all aggregates, except the 33-kD, are assembled from ?-syn fragments that lack the epitope recognized by mAb211 or that this epitope becomes less accessible for antibody recognition as ?-syn aggregates associate further from the 33-kD oligomer with a progressive increase in structural compactness.  Intraneuronal Deposition of ?-Syn Aggregates with Concomitant Phosphorylation and Nitration Characteristic of ?-Synucleinopathy To determine whether aggregates of ?-syn are assembled with concomitant phosphorylation and nitration, we included antibodies pS129 and Ab504 in the immunoblotting analyses ( Table 1 ; Fig. 4 ). The post-translational modifications were absent in the undifferentiated 3D5 cells or those exposed to RA alone. By contrast, both immunoprobes reacted with the differentiated 3D5 cells after TetOff induction for 14 or 28 days when accumulations of ?-syn and its aggregated derivatives were evident. Most importantly, phosphorylation or nitration was detectable only with the full-length, monomeric ?-syn, despite an overt buildup of its derivatives, particularly aggregated species. Therefore, the results indicate that ?-syn aggregates assembled in this paradigm appear concomitantly with the phosphorylation and nitration that are characteristic of ?-syn pathology in synucleinopathies.  Intraneuronal Deposition of ?-Syn Aggregates with Concomitant Phosphorylation and Nitration Characteristic of ?-Synucleinopathy To determine whether aggregates of ?-syn are assembled with concomitant phosphorylation and nitration, we included antibodies pS129 and Ab504 in the immunoblotting analyses ( Table 1 ; Fig. 4 ). The post-translational modifications were absent in the undifferentiated 3D5 cells or those exposed to RA alone. By contrast, both immunoprobes reacted with the differentiated 3D5 cells after TetOff induction for 14 or 28 days when accumulations of ?-syn and its aggregated derivatives were evident. Most importantly, phosphorylation or nitration was detectable only with the full-length, monomeric ?-syn, despite an overt buildup of its derivatives, particularly aggregated species. Therefore, the results indicate that ?-syn aggregates assembled in this paradigm appear concomitantly with the phosphorylation and nitration that are characteristic of ?-syn pathology in synucleinopathies.  HMW ?-Syn Aggregates Exhibit Sarkosyl-Insolubility and Augmented Affinity for Thioflavin S To define the physicochemical properties of ?-syn and its derivatives that accumulate in the cells, we performed fractionation analysis for the culture lysates derived from 14- and 28-day TetOff induction. As shown in Figure 5a , Western blotting of SN1, SN2 and Srk/P fractions reveals the following: (i) soluble aggregates of up to 250 kD account for most of the ?-syn immunoreactivity in the differentiated 3D5 cells following 14 day TetOff induction; (ii) 8-kD and 12-kD ?-syn fragments and oligomeric/polymerized assemblies (i.e. 33-kD and smearing [>33-kD]) are primarily buffer-soluble although they are also detectable in trace amounts as buffer-insoluble/sarkosyl-soluble (SN2); (iii) the sarkosyl-insoluble fraction (Srk/P) consists mainly of oligomeric or polymerized assemblies (i.e. smearing [>33-kD] and HMW), although modest amounts of mAb111-positive HMW aggregates (arrows) remain sarkosyl-soluble (SN2); and (iv) sarkosyl-insoluble aggregates derived from 14 and 28 day preparations show less and no, respectively, Ab111 reactivity, suggesting that these aggregated species are assembled with a progressive increase in structural compactness over time leading to a decline in their antibody accessibility. Sarkosyl-insoluble aggregates collected after TetOff induction for 14 days showed enhanced thioflavin binding ( Fig. 5b ), indicating that ?-syn aggregates are assembled in a ?-sheet structure. When ?-syn overproduction was extended to 28 days, there was a remarkable increase in thioflavin binding, suggesting that ?-syn aggregates continue to assemble after the 14th day in a striking ?-sheet transformation. Taken together, these data suggest that the differentiated 3D5 cells respond to a progressive buildup of ?-syn with posttranslational modifications, such as phosphorylation, nitration and truncation. Products of such modifications may provide an effective seeding mechanism that favors assembly of HMW and thioflavin-binding oligomers that lead to fibrillogenesis in this paradigm.  HMW ?-Syn Aggregates Exhibit Sarkosyl-Insolubility and Augmented Affinity for Thioflavin S To define the physicochemical properties of ?-syn and its derivatives that accumulate in the cells, we performed fractionation analysis for the culture lysates derived from 14- and 28-day TetOff induction. As shown in Figure 5a , Western blotting of SN1, SN2 and Srk/P fractions reveals the following: (i) soluble aggregates of up to 250 kD account for most of the ?-syn immunoreactivity in the differentiated 3D5 cells following 14 day TetOff induction; (ii) 8-kD and 12-kD ?-syn fragments and oligomeric/polymerized assemblies (i.e. 33-kD and smearing [>33-kD]) are primarily buffer-soluble although they are also detectable in trace amounts as buffer-insoluble/sarkosyl-soluble (SN2); (iii) the sarkosyl-insoluble fraction (Srk/P) consists mainly of oligomeric or polymerized assemblies (i.e. smearing [>33-kD] and HMW), although modest amounts of mAb111-positive HMW aggregates (arrows) remain sarkosyl-soluble (SN2); and (iv) sarkosyl-insoluble aggregates derived from 14 and 28 day preparations show less and no, respectively, Ab111 reactivity, suggesting that these aggregated species are assembled with a progressive increase in structural compactness over time leading to a decline in their antibody accessibility. Sarkosyl-insoluble aggregates collected after TetOff induction for 14 days showed enhanced thioflavin binding ( Fig. 5b ), indicating that ?-syn aggregates are assembled in a ?-sheet structure. When ?-syn overproduction was extended to 28 days, there was a remarkable increase in thioflavin binding, suggesting that ?-syn aggregates continue to assemble after the 14th day in a striking ?-sheet transformation. Taken together, these data suggest that the differentiated 3D5 cells respond to a progressive buildup of ?-syn with posttranslational modifications, such as phosphorylation, nitration and truncation. Products of such modifications may provide an effective seeding mechanism that favors assembly of HMW and thioflavin-binding oligomers that lead to fibrillogenesis in this paradigm.  Formation of Thioflavin-Positive, ?-Syn Inclusions in the Differentiated 3D5 Cells Extension of TetOff induction to 28 days led to the appearance of 0.5- to 8-?m-diameter inclusions in the cytoplasm of the differentiated 3D5 cells ( Fig. 6 ). To determine the biophysical nature of the inclusions, we extracted the culture with saponin prior to immunofluorescence staining with the Synuclein-1 antibody ( Fig. 6a ) and found that the detergent-insoluble inclusions in the perikarya are ?-syn-positive (red) and that they are stained by thioflavin S (green) and resemble LBs. These LB-like inclusions emerged concurrently with the assembly of sarkosyl-insoluble aggregates, as shown by Western blot analysis ( Fig. 5a ). Most importantly, the appeared concomitant with a marked increase in the thioflavin binding signal by fluorospectrometric analyses ( Fig. 5b ).  Formation of Thioflavin-Positive, ?-Syn Inclusions in the Differentiated 3D5 Cells Extension of TetOff induction to 28 days led to the appearance of 0.5- to 8-?m-diameter inclusions in the cytoplasm of the differentiated 3D5 cells ( Fig. 6 ). To determine the biophysical nature of the inclusions, we extracted the culture with saponin prior to immunofluorescence staining with the Synuclein-1 antibody ( Fig. 6a ) and found that the detergent-insoluble inclusions in the perikarya are ?-syn-positive (red) and that they are stained by thioflavin S (green) and resemble LBs. These LB-like inclusions emerged concurrently with the assembly of sarkosyl-insoluble aggregates, as shown by Western blot analysis ( Fig. 5a ). Most importantly, the appeared concomitant with a marked increase in the thioflavin binding signal by fluorospectrometric analyses ( Fig. 5b ).  Conditional ?-Syn Overproduction Leads to Formation of Filamentous ?-Synuclein Inclusions Ultrastructural examination of the thioflavin-positive, ?-syn inclusions demonstrated that they contain dense bundles of filaments and lack a limiting membrane; they are, therefore, reminiscent of LBs ( Fig. 7 ). In sibling cultures that were embedded in Epon in situ, there were filamentous 0.5- to 7-?m-diameter inclusions that contain dense bundles of 8- to 12-nm fibrils that segregate from organelles in perikarya and neurites ( Fig. 7a–c ); these resemble the LBs of PD and other ?-synucleinopathies. Immunogold analyses using antibody Ab98 after etching the Epon sections demonstrated that the fibrils were decorated with immunogold particles, thereby indicating that that the filaments within the LB-like inclusions are composed of ?-syn ( Fig. 7d ).  Conditional ?-Syn Overproduction Leads to Formation of Filamentous ?-Synuclein Inclusions Ultrastructural examination of the thioflavin-positive, ?-syn inclusions demonstrated that they contain dense bundles of filaments and lack a limiting membrane; they are, therefore, reminiscent of LBs ( Fig. 7 ). In sibling cultures that were embedded in Epon in situ, there were filamentous 0.5- to 7-?m-diameter inclusions that contain dense bundles of 8- to 12-nm fibrils that segregate from organelles in perikarya and neurites ( Fig. 7a–c ); these resemble the LBs of PD and other ?-synucleinopathies. Immunogold analyses using antibody Ab98 after etching the Epon sections demonstrated that the fibrils were decorated with immunogold particles, thereby indicating that that the filaments within the LB-like inclusions are composed of ?-syn ( Fig. 7d ).  Reversible Assembly of ?-Synuclein Aggregates To determine whether assembly of ?-syn aggregates is reversible, we extended incubation of the aggregate-bearing cultures, derived from 14- or 28-day TetOff induction, with 2 ?g/ml Tet for up to 28 days under the same serum-free conditions. Immunoblotting data obtained thereafter revealed that this prolonged incubation led to the disappearance of soluble and insoluble aggregates that had assembled at 14 and 28 days, respectively, after TetOff induction ( Fig. 8a, b ). Moreover, the buildup of full-length ?-syn and its fragments from the aforementioned overproduction also vanished concurrently with reversal of aggregate formation. Therefore, the intracellular accumulation of ?-syn and its truncated and aggregated derivatives that lead to the formation of LB-like inclusions is reversible in these cells.  Reversible Assembly of ?-Synuclein Aggregates To determine whether assembly of ?-syn aggregates is reversible, we extended incubation of the aggregate-bearing cultures, derived from 14- or 28-day TetOff induction, with 2 ?g/ml Tet for up to 28 days under the same serum-free conditions. Immunoblotting data obtained thereafter revealed that this prolonged incubation led to the disappearance of soluble and insoluble aggregates that had assembled at 14 and 28 days, respectively, after TetOff induction ( Fig. 8a, b ). Moreover, the buildup of full-length ?-syn and its fragments from the aforementioned overproduction also vanished concurrently with reversal of aggregate formation. Therefore, the intracellular accumulation of ?-syn and its truncated and aggregated derivatives that lead to the formation of LB-like inclusions is reversible in these cells.  Assembled ?-Synuclein Aggregates Are Not Neurotoxic To ascertain whether the aforementioned assembly of soluble or insoluble aggregates leading to formation of LB-like inclusions is neurotoxic, we assessed the survival of aggregate/inclusion-bearing cells by growth kinetic analysis ( Fig. 8c ). The results indicate that extended incubation of the differentiated 3D5 cells after terminating 14- or 28-day TetOff induction does not lead to any apparent change in the cell numbers. This suggests that the ?-syn aggregates assembled following 14-day TetOff induction are not toxic to the human neuronal cells. Most importantly, the LB-like inclusions emerging from a buildup of insoluble ?-syn aggregates after TetOff induction for 28 days are also not toxic to the cells and do not affect their subsequent survival. To confirm that the intracellular assembly of soluble or insoluble ?-syn aggregates does not induce toxicity to the differentiated 3D5 cells, we used the calcein/ethidium homodimer-1 cytotoxicity assay ( Table 2 ). This analysis demonstrated that overexpression of ?-syn or accumulation of its aggregates causes a minimal impact on cell viability despite that percent cell survivals of the induced cultures are statistically different when compared to their non-induced counterparts after 7- or 28-day TetOff induction. We also performed Western blot analyses to determine whether a caspase or p53-mediated cell death mechanism becomes activated upon intracellular assembly of ?-syn aggregates. RA-elicited differentiation caused a modest increase in the level of p53 and ?-catenin (a sensitive indicator for caspase activation), but TetOff induction did not affect their levels, suggesting that formation of ?-syn aggregates does not cause activation of caspase or a p53-mediated apoptotic mechanism (data not shown). The lack of p53 activation agrees with the data of immunofluorescence studies that show that nuclear translocation of p53 is absent. Taken together, our data suggest that formation of soluble ?-syn aggregates or filamentous LB-like inclusions does not cause p53 or caspase activation for an apoptotic mechanism in the differentiated 3D5 cells.  Assembled ?-Synuclein Aggregates Are Not Neurotoxic To ascertain whether the aforementioned assembly of soluble or insoluble aggregates leading to formation of LB-like inclusions is neurotoxic, we assessed the survival of aggregate/inclusion-bearing cells by growth kinetic analysis ( Fig. 8c ). The results indicate that extended incubation of the differentiated 3D5 cells after terminating 14- or 28-day TetOff induction does not lead to any apparent change in the cell numbers. This suggests that the ?-syn aggregates assembled following 14-day TetOff induction are not toxic to the human neuronal cells. Most importantly, the LB-like inclusions emerging from a buildup of insoluble ?-syn aggregates after TetOff induction for 28 days are also not toxic to the cells and do not affect their subsequent survival. To confirm that the intracellular assembly of soluble or insoluble ?-syn aggregates does not induce toxicity to the differentiated 3D5 cells, we used the calcein/ethidium homodimer-1 cytotoxicity assay ( Table 2 ). This analysis demonstrated that overexpression of ?-syn or accumulation of its aggregates causes a minimal impact on cell viability despite that percent cell survivals of the induced cultures are statistically different when compared to their non-induced counterparts after 7- or 28-day TetOff induction. We also performed Western blot analyses to determine whether a caspase or p53-mediated cell death mechanism becomes activated upon intracellular assembly of ?-syn aggregates. RA-elicited differentiation caused a modest increase in the level of p53 and ?-catenin (a sensitive indicator for caspase activation), but TetOff induction did not affect their levels, suggesting that formation of ?-syn aggregates does not cause activation of caspase or a p53-mediated apoptotic mechanism (data not shown). The lack of p53 activation agrees with the data of immunofluorescence studies that show that nuclear translocation of p53 is absent. Taken together, our data suggest that formation of soluble ?-syn aggregates or filamentous LB-like inclusions does not cause p53 or caspase activation for an apoptotic mechanism in the differentiated 3D5 cells.  DISCUSSION The most pressing issue concerning intracellular assembly of protein aggregates in neurodegenerative disorders is whether or not the aggregates are pathogenic. A laser microdissection analysis of neurons from the midbrain of PD patients has suggested that LBs are associated with cells that are less healthy ( 38 ). One interpretation of such an association is that LBs contribute to neuron dysfunction by sequestering proteins vital to the cell. An alternative view is that LBs are formed as a protective mechanism. To recapitulate both the composition and the ultrastructure of LB in a human neuron, we created a cell-based ?-syn aggregation model using transfectant human neuronal lineage 3D5 cells in which expression of wild type ?-syn is regulated by the TetOff inducible mechanism in a time-dependent manner. To address the pathophysiological relevance of ?-syn aggregation, we incubated the cells with RA to elicit neuronal differentiation thereby making them resemble human neurons in vivo. Overexpression of ?-syn via TetOff induction for 14 days or more led to a marked buildup of truncated and aggregated derivatives of ?-syn in the differentiated cells, whereas the same transgene overproduction resulted in less accumulation of ?-syn and its modest aggregation in their undifferentiated counterparts. Growth kinetic and doubling time analysis demonstrated that the RA-elicited differentiation and concomitant proliferation arrest resulted in augmented overproduction of ?-syn following RA exposure. Moreover, the impact on proliferation became more pronounced after TetOff induction. The marked increase in ?-syn concentration from TetOff induction is crucial to the formation of ?-syn aggregates in the differentiated 3D5 cells. This is supported by the immunoblotting analyses indicating that 2 or 4 weeks after terminating 14- or 28-day TetOff induction, the production of ?-syn and its derivatives returns to the level of the non-induced cells and leads to a disappearance of aggregate assemblies. In addition to augmenting accumulation and aggregation of ?-syn, RA may also affect the synthesis or modification of its interacting partners or other molecules that are capable of promoting ?-syn aggregation. We have begun exploring this possibility with ongoing proteomic analyses. ?-Syn assemblies accumulated in the RA-differentiated cells exhibit different solubilities. Although most assemblies are soluble in buffer or sarkosyl, a small fraction is detergent-insoluble. Moreover, the insoluble assemblies from 14-day TetOff induction showed enhanced thioflavin binding that became markedly augmented after 28 days when assemblies greater than 40 kD in size appeared. These results suggest that TetOff-induced overproduction of ?-syn led to its accumulation and conformational conversion from random coils to ?-pleated structures that further promote assembly of ?-syn aggregates. Immunoblotting analyses using antibodies to distinct ?-syn subdomains revealed that the aggregated assemblies that accumulated after 14-day TetOff induction contain ?-syn without its C-terminus. These assemblies were heterogeneous in size, ranging from 33 to 250 kDa or larger and accumulated following build-up of monomeric and truncated ?-syn. These findings suggest that in the differentiated 3D5 cells, fragments of ?-syn generated from its C-terminal truncation accumulate during TetOff induction to favor further aggregate assembly. This is consistent with the notion that ?-syn with C-terminal truncation is a predominant species that is enriched in the pathological ?-syn aggregates; this truncation appears to correlate with heightened propensity to oligomerize in brains and cultured cells ( 39 ). Moreover, the results are also consistent with the central hydrophobic region of ?-syn forming the core of its aggregates and that negative charges in the C-terminus counteract ?-syn aggregation ( 40 ). It is noteworthy that overexpression of ?-syn with C-terminal truncation promotes LB formation in transgenic mice ( 27 ). At the light microscopic level, the RA-differentiated cells accumulated ?-syn-positive inclusions after 28, but not 14, days of TetOff induction. Ultrastructurally, these inclusions contain compact bundles of 8- to 12-nm-filaments that are recognized by ?-syn antibodies. Thus, the results from our culture paradigm provide direct evidence at the cellular level that production and accumulation of ?-syn with posttranslational modifications facilitate the formation of ?-syn inclusions that resemble LBs. In familial and sporadic Lewy body disease, ?-syn is selectively phosphorylated at Ser129 as a predominant pathologic change; such modification promotes fibril formation in vitro ( 26 ). Our Western blot analyses revealed that Ser129 phosphorylation appeared as early as day 14 after TetOff induction and that this modification persisted through subsequent assembly of sarkosyl-insoluble aggregates. It is important to note that this change is associated with monomeric ?-syn only. This suggests that the ?-syn oligomers/assemblies formed in the present paradigm contain ?-syn truncated at site(s) preceding Ser 129. The role of phosphorylation in aggregate formation is not clear although it is possible that Ser129 phosphorylation indirectly affects the assembly by altering the susceptibility of ?-syn to C-terminal truncation. Ubiquitination is a posttranslational modification that targets cellular proteins for degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome system ( 41 , 42 ). LBs and other ?-syn-containing inclusions have been shown to be ubiquitinated ( 43 ) although the ?-syn species with such modifications are not poly-ubiquitinated for proteasomal degradation (44- 47 ). Recent identification of mutations in genes coding for parkin, an E3 ubiquitin ligase ( 48 ), and ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolases (UCHL-1) ( 49 ) have strengthened the link between ubiquitin-proteasome system dysfunction and PD pathogenesis ( 50 ). The accumulation/aggregation of ?-syn and the formation of LB-like inclusions in our paradigm did not lead to detection of ubiquitin immunoreactivity in monomeric ?-syn or its derivatives by Western blot analysis. This result is consistent with data that indicate that ?-syn metabolism and aggregation involve a ubiquitin-independent pathway ( 51 ). In addition, ubiquitination of ?-syn appears to follow its fibrillization ( 45 ) and is, therefore, not required for protein aggregation. Nitration of tyrosine residues is a posttranslational modification resulting from oxidative stress and is known to be associated with ?-syn aggregation in vivo ( 52 , 53 ). In particular, nitration at Tyr125 leads to ?-syn dimerization whereas this modification at Tyr39 results in a reduced affinity for lipid vesicles, thus enhancing the polymerization propensity of the ?-syn molecule ( 54 ). Our immunoblotting analyses demonstrated the presence of nitrated ?-syn after TetOff induction for 14 days or longer. The reason for this is not clear because in the current paradigm we included a wide variety of antioxidants, including retinoids, reduced glutathione, DL-?-tocopherol, superoxide dismutase and catalase, and did not employ any agents or toxins known to cause oxidative injury. Additional studies are clearly warranted to identify nitrosylated tyrosine residue(s) whereby the role of this modification can be better defined. Growth kinetics analyses revealed that the assembly of soluble ?-syn aggregates and the formation of LB-like inclusions from TetOff induction hardly affected cell numbers in the RA-differentiated cells. To follow the fate of aggregates- or inclusion-bearing cells, we extended the 28-day TetOff induction for additional 14 days and found no apparent change in cell number or pattern of ?-syn aggregation from that observed before this manipulation. This, along with the persistence of cells harboring thioflavin-positive ?-syn inclusions beyond 28 days of TetOff induction led us to conclude that the aggregates or the LB-like inclusions assembled from wild-type ?-syn overproduction are not toxic to these neuron-like cells. Whether aggregate/inclusion-bearing cells become more susceptible to toxins or oxidative insults thereafter remains an issue for future investigation. It also remains to be determined whether the clearance of such soluble and insoluble ?-syn assemblies can be influenced by perturbing certain proteolytic mechanism(s). In contrast to recent demonstrations that neurodegeneration occurs independently of the formation of filamentous inclusions in a conditional mouse model that overexpresses wild type ?-syn ( 55 ) and that neurite degeneration in RA-differentiated cells that express the LRRK2 mutation ( 56 ), it is not entirely clear why the aggregates assembled from ?-syn overproduction are not cytotoxic in our paradigm. ?-Syn is involved in synaptic function ( 57 ) and its intracellular distribution and metabolism involve axonal transport ( 58 ). It is possible that ?-syn aggregates/inclusions did not exert any cytotoxic effect because the present culture system lacks axonal and synaptic organization for neuronal connectivity. This is consistent with the finding that presynpatic accumulation of ?-syn aggregates results in synaptic dysfunction leading to neurodegeneration ( 59 ), whereas LBs are formed as a protective measure in which small ?-syn aggregates are sequestered through active retrograde transport ( 60 , 61 ). This notion is consistent with the absence of unhealthy or degenerating structures in neurites that bear ?-syn aggregates. In our forthcoming studies we will investigate how exposure to oxidative injuries or aging-associated insults may affect the self-assembly of ?-syn or its interactions with partners to promote the generation of noxious aggregates that may cause neuronal cell death. Circular dichroism analyses of ?-syn fibrillogenesis in vitro revealed a multistep process giving rise to a number of conformationally distinct intermediates ( 62 ). Transformation of ?-syn into neurotoxic molecules probably involves a sequential conversion into oligomers and protofibrils ( 63 ). Because of the inherent affinity of ?-syn for vesicles, its oligomer can elicit ion channel activity through a pore-forming mechanism leading to subsequent toxicity ( 64 , 65 ). This has led to a current consensus in the field that the creation and stabilization of these oligomers by mutations or in a particular cellular milieu may be of key pathogenic importance. Moreover, recent studies have suggested that dopamine metabolites play a role in promoting ?-syn aggregation by forming dopamine ?-syn adducts that stabilize soluble oligomers or protofibrils which are potentially neurotoxic ( 66 , 67 ). Future studies using a 3D5-derived transfectant that produces human dopamine transporter or a transfectant expressing mutant A53T ?-syn may help improve our understanding of how ?-syn mediates neurodegeneration. In summary, we have developed a serum-free culture paradigm in which overexpression of the wild-type ?-syn promotes its assembly to form LB-like inclusions, thus recapitulating intraneuronal assembly of LBs in sporadic PD and related ?-synucleinopathies. The chemically defined nature of our paradigm permits its utility as a cell-based aggregation model to elucidate the mechanistic role of oxidative injury, ?-syn mutations, toxins and other agents in ?-syn-mediated neurodegeneration at the molecular level.  DISCUSSION The most pressing issue concerning intracellular assembly of protein aggregates in neurodegenerative disorders is whether or not the aggregates are pathogenic. A laser microdissection analysis of neurons from the midbrain of PD patients has suggested that LBs are associated with cells that are less healthy ( 38 ). One interpretation of such an association is that LBs contribute to neuron dysfunction by sequestering proteins vital to the cell. An alternative view is that LBs are formed as a protective mechanism. To recapitulate both the composition and the ultrastructure of LB in a human neuron, we created a cell-based ?-syn aggregation model using transfectant human neuronal lineage 3D5 cells in which expression of wild type ?-syn is regulated by the TetOff inducible mechanism in a time-dependent manner. To address the pathophysiological relevance of ?-syn aggregation, we incubated the cells with RA to elicit neuronal differentiation thereby making them resemble human neurons in vivo. Overexpression of ?-syn via TetOff induction for 14 days or more led to a marked buildup of truncated and aggregated derivatives of ?-syn in the differentiated cells, whereas the same transgene overproduction resulted in less accumulation of ?-syn and its modest aggregation in their undifferentiated counterparts. Growth kinetic and doubling time analysis demonstrated that the RA-elicited differentiation and concomitant proliferation arrest resulted in augmented overproduction of ?-syn following RA exposure. Moreover, the impact on proliferation became more pronounced after TetOff induction. The marked increase in ?-syn concentration from TetOff induction is crucial to the formation of ?-syn aggregates in the differentiated 3D5 cells. This is supported by the immunoblotting analyses indicating that 2 or 4 weeks after terminating 14- or 28-day TetOff induction, the production of ?-syn and its derivatives returns to the level of the non-induced cells and leads to a disappearance of aggregate assemblies. In addition to augmenting accumulation and aggregation of ?-syn, RA may also affect the synthesis or modification of its interacting partners or other molecules that are capable of promoting ?-syn aggregation. We have begun exploring this possibility with ongoing proteomic analyses. ?-Syn assemblies accumulated in the RA-differentiated cells exhibit different solubilities. Although most assemblies are soluble in buffer or sarkosyl, a small fraction is detergent-insoluble. Moreover, the insoluble assemblies from 14-day TetOff induction showed enhanced thioflavin binding that became markedly augmented after 28 days when assemblies greater than 40 kD in size appeared. These results suggest that TetOff-induced overproduction of ?-syn led to its accumulation and conformational conversion from random coils to ?-pleated structures that further promote assembly of ?-syn aggregates. Immunoblotting analyses using antibodies to distinct ?-syn subdomains revealed that the aggregated assemblies that accumulated after 14-day TetOff induction contain ?-syn without its C-terminus. These assemblies were heterogeneous in size, ranging from 33 to 250 kDa or larger and accumulated following build-up of monomeric and truncated ?-syn. These findings suggest that in the differentiated 3D5 cells, fragments of ?-syn generated from its C-terminal truncation accumulate during TetOff induction to favor further aggregate assembly. This is consistent with the notion that ?-syn with C-terminal truncation is a predominant species that is enriched in the pathological ?-syn aggregates; this truncation appears to correlate with heightened propensity to oligomerize in brains and cultured cells ( 39 ). Moreover, the results are also consistent with the central hydrophobic region of ?-syn forming the core of its aggregates and that negative charges in the C-terminus counteract ?-syn aggregation ( 40 ). It is noteworthy that overexpression of ?-syn with C-terminal truncation promotes LB formation in transgenic mice ( 27 ). At the light microscopic level, the RA-differentiated cells accumulated ?-syn-positive inclusions after 28, but not 14, days of TetOff induction. Ultrastructurally, these inclusions contain compact bundles of 8- to 12-nm-filaments that are recognized by ?-syn antibodies. Thus, the results from our culture paradigm provide direct evidence at the cellular level that production and accumulation of ?-syn with posttranslational modifications facilitate the formation of ?-syn inclusions that resemble LBs. In familial and sporadic Lewy body disease, ?-syn is selectively phosphorylated at Ser129 as a predominant pathologic change; such modification promotes fibril formation in vitro ( 26 ). Our Western blot analyses revealed that Ser129 phosphorylation appeared as early as day 14 after TetOff induction and that this modification persisted through subsequent assembly of sarkosyl-insoluble aggregates. It is important to note that this change is associated with monomeric ?-syn only. This suggests that the ?-syn oligomers/assemblies formed in the present paradigm contain ?-syn truncated at site(s) preceding Ser 129. The role of phosphorylation in aggregate formation is not clear although it is possible that Ser129 phosphorylation indirectly affects the assembly by altering the susceptibility of ?-syn to C-terminal truncation. Ubiquitination is a posttranslational modification that targets cellular proteins for degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome system ( 41 , 42 ). LBs and other ?-syn-containing inclusions have been shown to be ubiquitinated ( 43 ) although the ?-syn species with such modifications are not poly-ubiquitinated for proteasomal degradation (44- 47 ). Recent identification of mutations in genes coding for parkin, an E3 ubiquitin ligase ( 48 ), and ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolases (UCHL-1) ( 49 ) have strengthened the link between ubiquitin-proteasome system dysfunction and PD pathogenesis ( 50 ). The accumulation/aggregation of ?-syn and the formation of LB-like inclusions in our paradigm did not lead to detection of ubiquitin immunoreactivity in monomeric ?-syn or its derivatives by Western blot analysis. This result is consistent with data that indicate that ?-syn metabolism and aggregation involve a ubiquitin-independent pathway ( 51 ). In addition, ubiquitination of ?-syn appears to follow its fibrillization ( 45 ) and is, therefore, not required for protein aggregation. Nitration of tyrosine residues is a posttranslational modification resulting from oxidative stress and is known to be associated with ?-syn aggregation in vivo ( 52 , 53 ). In particular, nitration at Tyr125 leads to ?-syn dimerization whereas this modification at Tyr39 results in a reduced affinity for lipid vesicles, thus enhancing the polymerization propensity of the ?-syn molecule ( 54 ). Our immunoblotting analyses demonstrated the presence of nitrated ?-syn after TetOff induction for 14 days or longer. The reason for this is not clear because in the current paradigm we included a wide variety of antioxidants, including retinoids, reduced glutathione, DL-?-tocopherol, superoxide dismutase and catalase, and did not employ any agents or toxins known to cause oxidative injury. Additional studies are clearly warranted to identify nitrosylated tyrosine residue(s) whereby the role of this modification can be better defined. Growth kinetics analyses revealed that the assembly of soluble ?-syn aggregates and the formation of LB-like inclusions from TetOff induction hardly affected cell numbers in the RA-differentiated cells. To follow the fate of aggregates- or inclusion-bearing cells, we extended the 28-day TetOff induction for additional 14 days and found no apparent change in cell number or pattern of ?-syn aggregation from that observed before this manipulation. This, along with the persistence of cells harboring thioflavin-positive ?-syn inclusions beyond 28 days of TetOff induction led us to conclude that the aggregates or the LB-like inclusions assembled from wild-type ?-syn overproduction are not toxic to these neuron-like cells. Whether aggregate/inclusion-bearing cells become more susceptible to toxins or oxidative insults thereafter remains an issue for future investigation. It also remains to be determined whether the clearance of such soluble and insoluble ?-syn assemblies can be influenced by perturbing certain proteolytic mechanism(s). In contrast to recent demonstrations that neurodegeneration occurs independently of the formation of filamentous inclusions in a conditional mouse model that overexpresses wild type ?-syn ( 55 ) and that neurite degeneration in RA-differentiated cells that express the LRRK2 mutation ( 56 ), it is not entirely clear why the aggregates assembled from ?-syn overproduction are not cytotoxic in our paradigm. ?-Syn is involved in synaptic function ( 57 ) and its intracellular distribution and metabolism involve axonal transport ( 58 ). It is possible that ?-syn aggregates/inclusions did not exert any cytotoxic effect because the present culture system lacks axonal and synaptic organization for neuronal connectivity. This is consistent with the finding that presynpatic accumulation of ?-syn aggregates results in synaptic dysfunction leading to neurodegeneration ( 59 ), whereas LBs are formed as a protective measure in which small ?-syn aggregates are sequestered through active retrograde transport ( 60 , 61 ). This notion is consistent with the absence of unhealthy or degenerating structures in neurites that bear ?-syn aggregates. In our forthcoming studies we will investigate how exposure to oxidative injuries or aging-associated insults may affect the self-assembly of ?-syn or its interactions with partners to promote the generation of noxious aggregates that may cause neuronal cell death. Circular dichroism analyses of ?-syn fibrillogenesis in vitro revealed a multistep process giving rise to a number of conformationally distinct intermediates ( 62 ). Transformation of ?-syn into neurotoxic molecules probably involves a sequential conversion into oligomers and protofibrils ( 63 ). Because of the inherent affinity of ?-syn for vesicles, its oligomer can elicit ion channel activity through a pore-forming mechanism leading to subsequent toxicity ( 64 , 65 ). This has led to a current consensus in the field that the creation and stabilization of these oligomers by mutations or in a particular cellular milieu may be of key pathogenic importance. Moreover, recent studies have suggested that dopamine metabolites play a role in promoting ?-syn aggregation by forming dopamine ?-syn adducts that stabilize soluble oligomers or protofibrils which are potentially neurotoxic ( 66 , 67 ). Future studies using a 3D5-derived transfectant that produces human dopamine transporter or a transfectant expressing mutant A53T ?-syn may help improve our understanding of how ?-syn mediates neurodegeneration. In summary, we have developed a serum-free culture paradigm in which overexpression of the wild-type ?-syn promotes its assembly to form LB-like inclusions, thus recapitulating intraneuronal assembly of LBs in sporadic PD and related ?-synucleinopathies. The chemically defined nature of our paradigm permits its utility as a cell-based aggregation model to elucidate the mechanistic role of oxidative injury, ?-syn mutations, toxins and other agents in ?-syn-mediated neurodegeneration at the molecular level.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 ?-syn expression and aggregation in RA-differentiated 3D5 cells. ( a ) Time-dependent overexpression of ?-syn via the TetOff inducible expression system. Replicate 3D5 cultures were incubated without Tet for up to 14 days to elicit ?-syn overexpression. Sibling cultures were harvested at indicated intervals following TetOff induction. Equivalent protein constituents from lysates were resolved by SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. Molecular weight markers calibrate molecular mobility. The blots were probed with antibodies Synuclein-1 and Ab111 for ?-syn production and the then reprobed using antibodies against ?-tubulin and ?-actin to verify comparable loading. The 15-kDa ?-syn monomer and its 8- and 12-kD fragments accumulate progressively over time. ( b ) Cellular ?-syn aggregation paradigm. Overexpression of ?-syn is elicited by TetOff induction for up to 28 days in 3D5 cells following their 10-day exposure to 10 ?M RA beginning on the day after seeding. ( c ) Progressive assembly of ?-syn aggregates from time-dependent ?-syn overproduction. 3D5 cells were induced to overproduce ?-syn via TetOff induction for up to 14 days following RA-elicited differentiation as in ( b ). Replicate cultures were collected at indicated intervals to derive lysate preparations from which protein constituents were resolved and blots were probed as in ( a ). Production of ?-syn monomer and its 8- and 12-kD fragments increases in a time-dependent manner leading to progressive accumulation of 33 kDa (asterisk) or larger ?-syn aggregates in the differentiated 3D5 cells. Figure 2 Conditional ?-syn overexpression following RA-elicited neuronal differentiation. ( a ) ?-syn/neurofilament dual immunofluorescence. Replicate 3D5 cultures grown with (0 ?g/ml Tet) or without TetOff induction (2 ?g/ml Tet) following RA-elicited differentiation were fixed separately at the indicated intervals and probed simultaneously using antibodies to ?-syn (upper panels) and neurofilament (NFH, lower panels). Scale bars = 50 ?m. There is prominent ?-syn accumulation from 14-day TetOff induction in the RA-exposed 3D5 cells where neuronal differentiation is evident from their elaborate network of neurites as is evident from their neurofilament immunoreactivity. The non-induced cells show similar neurofilament staining but exhibit only barely detectable ?-syn immunoreactivity (upper panel). Endogenous ?-syn in the undifferentiated cells is almost undetectable (rightmost/upper panel). RA for 10 days augmented ?-syn and neurofilament production in a time-dependent manner although such increase in ?-syn expression was modest. ( b ) Growth kinetics. Replicate 3D5 cultures were seeded and exposed to RA on the next day for 10 days before half of them went through the TetOff induction paradigm of Figure 1b (white circles) while the other half incubated with 2 ?g/ml Tet for the same duration as non-induced controls (black circles). At indicated intervals, cell counts in 5 plates of each group were performed as described in Materials and Methods. Values depicted represent averages of 5 determinants and vertical bars denote standard errors of means. Note that RA arrests proliferation of 3D5 cells making their population size stay almost constant following an extended exposure and that TetOff induction causes additional reduction in growth initially but does not alter the growth pattern from RA exposure. Figure 3 Immunoprofiling of ?-syn and derivatives accumulated in differentiated 3D5 cells. ( a ) Epitope map of ?-syn antibodies used in this study. ( b ) Immunoblotting analysis of the lysate specimen prepared from RA-differentiated 3D5 cells harvested after 14 day TetOff induction using the antibodies depicted in ( a ). The arrow indicates the gel top. All of the antibodies react with intact (i.e. 15-kDa) ?-syn. Antibodies Syn202 and mAb211 do not recognize 8- and 12-kD ?-syn, indicating that these fragments are truncated at the C-terminus. Reactivity of Ab111 with 12-kD fragment but not the 8-kD reflects differences in the extent of C-terminal truncation. The 33 kDa (asterisk) is the only aggregated species showing prominent reactivity with mAb211. Figure 4 Formation of ?-syn aggregates with concomitant phosphorylation and nitration. Replicate 3D5 cultures grown with or without 10-day RA exposure were incubated in the presence or absence of Tet (2 ?g/ml) for up to 28 days as eluted in Figure 1b . Lysates were prepared to derive replica blots followed by probing using antibodies pS129 and Ab504 for ?-syn phosphorylation and nitration, respectively. Antibody Ab111 was employed to confirm aggregate assembly and a GAPDH antibody to verify specimen loading. Note that both posttranslational modifications were detectable in samples derived from TetOff induction for 14 and 28 days and that the immunoreactivity was present only in the intact ?-syn monomer despite pronounced accumulation of its truncated and aggregated derivatives. Figure 5 Fractionation analysis. ( a ) Assembly of soluble and insoluble ?-syn aggregates. Replica 3D5 cultures were grown and eluted under conditions as in Figure 4 . Lysates were subjected to salt/sarkosyl extraction and ultracentrifugation to obtain buffer-soluble (SN1), buffer-insoluble/sarkosyl-soluble (SN2) and sarkosyl-insoluble (Srk/P) fractions of which electroblots were evaluated by immunoblotting using lysate:SN1:SN2:Srk/P at 1:1:10:60 loading, (1 corresponds to 2.5 × 105 cells per lane). Conditional overproduction of ?-syn led to the formation of aggregates, including 33-kD (asterisk), smearing above 33 kD and HMW species, of which some displayed reduced solubility from salt/sarkosyl extraction; the non-induced lysates did not show aggregate assembly despite their modest increase in ?-syn expression from RA-induced differentiation. ?-Syn, its fragments and aggregates of up to 250 kD were primarily buffer-soluble (SN1) although they were also present in trace amount as buffer-insoluble/sarkosyl-soluble (SN2). The Srk/P fraction consisted mainly of polymerized assemblies although a modest amount of HMW aggregates detected with Ab111 remained sarkosyl-soluble (SN2). ( b ) Thioflavin binding. The Srk/P preparation derived from differentiated 3D5 cells after incubation in the presence (non-induced) or absence (-Tet) of Tet (2 ?g/ml) for 14 or 28 days, as in ( a ), were evaluated for thioflavin binding using an excitation wavelength at 440 nm, as in ( 30 ). Note that the sarkosyl-insoluble aggregates derived from 14-day TetOff induction (-Tet/14d) exhibited heightened thioflavin binding, indicating that ?-syn aggregates assembled in a ?-sheet structure. A more striking increase in thioflavin binding was observed in samples from 28 day induction (-Tet/28d) indicating that aggregates of ?-syn assembled from its prolonged overproduction with remarkable ?-sheet transformation. Figure 6 Formation of LB-like inclusions. Cells of transfectant 3D5 grown on glass coverslips in 24-well plates were RA-differentiated for 10 days before 28-day TetOff induction. They were then saponin-permeabilized prior to thioflavin S and ?-syn staining, as described in Materials and Methods. In contrast to the lack of thioflavin ( b ) and ?-syn ( b’ ) staining in non-induced cells (RA/+Tet [28d]), overproduction of ?-syn from 28-day TetOff induction led to formation of thioflavin-positive ( a ), ?-syn ( a’ ) inclusions (0.5–4.0 ?m in diameter; arrows) in the perinuclear cytoplasm of RA-differentiated cells (RA/-Tet [28d]). Scale bars = 50 ?m. Figure 7 Electron micrographs of filamentous inclusions assembled from extended overproduction of ?-syn. 3D5 cultures were grown as in the aggregation paradigm in Figure 1b and Epon-embedded in situ for ultrastructural evaluation after 28-day TetOff induction. They contain filamentous inclusions consisting of densely packed bundles of 8~12-nm fibrils that segregate from organelles in the perinuclear cytoplasm ( a, b ) and neurite ( c ) of the neuron-like cell. Arrows denote the contours of fibrillar inclusions in ( a ) and ( b ) that are enlarged in ( a’ ) and ( b’ ). Asterisks in ( b ) and ( b’ ) indicate mitochondria clusters at the center of a fibrillar inclusion in the perinuclear cytoplasm. N = nucleus; G = Golgi complex; m = mitochondrion. Scale bars = 1 ?m in a and b and 300 nm in a’, b’ and c . In etched Epon sections probed with Ab98 for immunogold labeling, constituent fibrils of the filamentous inclusion (arrowheads in d) are decorated with 10 nm gold particles (white arrows), thus verifying that ?-syn fibrils congregate to form the LB-like inclusions. Scale bars, 1 ?m ( d ); 200 nm ( d’ ). Figure 8 Assembly of aggregated ?-syn is reversible and not toxic to RA-differentiated 3D5 cells. Conditional overproduction of ?-syn via TetOff induction for 2 ( a ) or 4 weeks ( b ) after RA-elicited differentiation was terminated by adding Tet (2 ?g/ml) to the medium for up to 4 weeks. Lysate specimens were prepared thereafter and were evaluated by immunoblotting as in Figure 4 . Arrows indicate the gel top where insoluble aggregates appear. ( a ) Note that truncated and aggregated ?-syn accumulated from 2-week TetOff induction (lanes 1) reduced to barely detectable following 2-week supplementation of Tet (lanes 2). Four weeks of Tet supplementation after 14-day TetOff induction (lanes 3) diminished the ?-syn level to levels of non-induced cells (lanes 4), indicating that accumulation of aggregated and truncated ?-syn from TetOff induction is reversible in the differentiated 3D5 cells. ( b ) RA-differentiated cells assembled soluble and insoluble ?-syn aggregates after TetOff induction for 4 to 6 weeks (lanes 1 and 2). Two-week Tet supplementation led to complete disappearance of aggregate formation (lanes 3), indicating a reversible assembly of soluble and insoluble ?-syn aggregates from extended TetOff induction. ( c ) Growth kinetic analysis. Replica cultures of RA-differentiated 3D5 cells were supplemented with Tet (2 ?g/ml) to terminate TetOff induction for up to 28 days and their growth was monitored as described in Materials and methods. Each value represents an average of 5 determinants derived independently from separate plates harvested at indicated intervals from each of the three groups in a representative of three experiments. Error bars denote standard errors of means. Tet supplementation after 14- (square) or 28-day (triangle) TetOff induction minimally changed the population size or caused any apparent decline in cell survival, suggesting that soluble and insoluble aggregates assembled predominantly after 14 and 28, respectively, days of TetOff induction are not toxic to these neuron-like cells. Table 1 Immunoprofiling of ?-Syn and Derivatives * Antibody Epitope HMW smearing (>33 kD) 33-kD 15-kD 12-kD 8-kD HuA N-terminus 1 1 2 3 0 0 SY128 2~25 0 <1 <1 1 ?1 <1 AB5464 11~26 1 1 1 1 ?1 1 NAC 61~95 <1 <1 2 3 1 3 Synuclein-1 91~99 ?1 1 <1 3 1 2 Ab98 98~115 0 <1 <1 2 1 <1 Ab111 111~131 2 2 2 3 <1 0 mAb211 121~125 ?1 ?1 1 3 0 0 Syn202 130~140 0 0 0 >2 0 0 pSer129 pSer129 0 0 0 1 0 0 Ab504 nitration 0 0 0 1 0 0 * Immunoreactivities with the antibodies indicated in Figure 3a of ?-syn and derivatives in Figure 3b were scored using the grading system following grading system: 3 = strong; 2 = medium; 1 = weak; 0 = none, as previously described ( 30 ). Table 2 Minimal Effects of Intracellular ?-Syn Aggregate Assembly on Differentiated 3D5 Cell Survival a Retinoic Acid (10 ?M × days) [Tet] One-way ANOVA b days 2 ?g/ml 0 ?g/ml 10 0 d ----------- 97.62 ± 0.21 --------- 17 7 d 95.51 ± 0.43 97.37 ± 0.21 p = 0.001 24 14 d 95.46 ± 0.48 94.55 ± 0.62 p = 0.258 38 28 d 96.08 ± 0.28 94.63 ± 0.47 p = 0.015 a At the indicated intervals after TetOff induction, replicate cultures on glass coverslips were assayed for cell survival using a mixture of calcein AM/ethidium homodimer-1 of the LIVE/DEAD viability/cytotoxicity kit (Invitrogen). Digitized photomicroscopic images of 10 randomly selected fields, each containing more than 400 cells, were captured subsequently from 3 representative experiments to derive percent cell survival estimates (Mean ± SEM; n = 10), as described in Materials and methods. b One-way ANOVA was performed for each time point between the TetOff-induced and their non-induced counterparts.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 ?-syn expression and aggregation in RA-differentiated 3D5 cells. ( a ) Time-dependent overexpression of ?-syn via the TetOff inducible expression system. Replicate 3D5 cultures were incubated without Tet for up to 14 days to elicit ?-syn overexpression. Sibling cultures were harvested at indicated intervals following TetOff induction. Equivalent protein constituents from lysates were resolved by SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. Molecular weight markers calibrate molecular mobility. The blots were probed with antibodies Synuclein-1 and Ab111 for ?-syn production and the then reprobed using antibodies against ?-tubulin and ?-actin to verify comparable loading. The 15-kDa ?-syn monomer and its 8- and 12-kD fragments accumulate progressively over time. ( b ) Cellular ?-syn aggregation paradigm. Overexpression of ?-syn is elicited by TetOff induction for up to 28 days in 3D5 cells following their 10-day exposure to 10 ?M RA beginning on the day after seeding. ( c ) Progressive assembly of ?-syn aggregates from time-dependent ?-syn overproduction. 3D5 cells were induced to overproduce ?-syn via TetOff induction for up to 14 days following RA-elicited differentiation as in ( b ). Replicate cultures were collected at indicated intervals to derive lysate preparations from which protein constituents were resolved and blots were probed as in ( a ). Production of ?-syn monomer and its 8- and 12-kD fragments increases in a time-dependent manner leading to progressive accumulation of 33 kDa (asterisk) or larger ?-syn aggregates in the differentiated 3D5 cells. Figure 2 Conditional ?-syn overexpression following RA-elicited neuronal differentiation. ( a ) ?-syn/neurofilament dual immunofluorescence. Replicate 3D5 cultures grown with (0 ?g/ml Tet) or without TetOff induction (2 ?g/ml Tet) following RA-elicited differentiation were fixed separately at the indicated intervals and probed simultaneously using antibodies to ?-syn (upper panels) and neurofilament (NFH, lower panels). Scale bars = 50 ?m. There is prominent ?-syn accumulation from 14-day TetOff induction in the RA-exposed 3D5 cells where neuronal differentiation is evident from their elaborate network of neurites as is evident from their neurofilament immunoreactivity. The non-induced cells show similar neurofilament staining but exhibit only barely detectable ?-syn immunoreactivity (upper panel). Endogenous ?-syn in the undifferentiated cells is almost undetectable (rightmost/upper panel). RA for 10 days augmented ?-syn and neurofilament production in a time-dependent manner although such increase in ?-syn expression was modest. ( b ) Growth kinetics. Replicate 3D5 cultures were seeded and exposed to RA on the next day for 10 days before half of them went through the TetOff induction paradigm of Figure 1b (white circles) while the other half incubated with 2 ?g/ml Tet for the same duration as non-induced controls (black circles). At indicated intervals, cell counts in 5 plates of each group were performed as described in Materials and Methods. Values depicted represent averages of 5 determinants and vertical bars denote standard errors of means. Note that RA arrests proliferation of 3D5 cells making their population size stay almost constant following an extended exposure and that TetOff induction causes additional reduction in growth initially but does not alter the growth pattern from RA exposure. Figure 3 Immunoprofiling of ?-syn and derivatives accumulated in differentiated 3D5 cells. ( a ) Epitope map of ?-syn antibodies used in this study. ( b ) Immunoblotting analysis of the lysate specimen prepared from RA-differentiated 3D5 cells harvested after 14 day TetOff induction using the antibodies depicted in ( a ). The arrow indicates the gel top. All of the antibodies react with intact (i.e. 15-kDa) ?-syn. Antibodies Syn202 and mAb211 do not recognize 8- and 12-kD ?-syn, indicating that these fragments are truncated at the C-terminus. Reactivity of Ab111 with 12-kD fragment but not the 8-kD reflects differences in the extent of C-terminal truncation. The 33 kDa (asterisk) is the only aggregated species showing prominent reactivity with mAb211. Figure 4 Formation of ?-syn aggregates with concomitant phosphorylation and nitration. Replicate 3D5 cultures grown with or without 10-day RA exposure were incubated in the presence or absence of Tet (2 ?g/ml) for up to 28 days as eluted in Figure 1b . Lysates were prepared to derive replica blots followed by probing using antibodies pS129 and Ab504 for ?-syn phosphorylation and nitration, respectively. Antibody Ab111 was employed to confirm aggregate assembly and a GAPDH antibody to verify specimen loading. Note that both posttranslational modifications were detectable in samples derived from TetOff induction for 14 and 28 days and that the immunoreactivity was present only in the intact ?-syn monomer despite pronounced accumulation of its truncated and aggregated derivatives. Figure 5 Fractionation analysis. ( a ) Assembly of soluble and insoluble ?-syn aggregates. Replica 3D5 cultures were grown and eluted under conditions as in Figure 4 . Lysates were subjected to salt/sarkosyl extraction and ultracentrifugation to obtain buffer-soluble (SN1), buffer-insoluble/sarkosyl-soluble (SN2) and sarkosyl-insoluble (Srk/P) fractions of which electroblots were evaluated by immunoblotting using lysate:SN1:SN2:Srk/P at 1:1:10:60 loading, (1 corresponds to 2.5 × 105 cells per lane). Conditional overproduction of ?-syn led to the formation of aggregates, including 33-kD (asterisk), smearing above 33 kD and HMW species, of which some displayed reduced solubility from salt/sarkosyl extraction; the non-induced lysates did not show aggregate assembly despite their modest increase in ?-syn expression from RA-induced differentiation. ?-Syn, its fragments and aggregates of up to 250 kD were primarily buffer-soluble (SN1) although they were also present in trace amount as buffer-insoluble/sarkosyl-soluble (SN2). The Srk/P fraction consisted mainly of polymerized assemblies although a modest amount of HMW aggregates detected with Ab111 remained sarkosyl-soluble (SN2). ( b ) Thioflavin binding. The Srk/P preparation derived from differentiated 3D5 cells after incubation in the presence (non-induced) or absence (-Tet) of Tet (2 ?g/ml) for 14 or 28 days, as in ( a ), were evaluated for thioflavin binding using an excitation wavelength at 440 nm, as in ( 30 ). Note that the sarkosyl-insoluble aggregates derived from 14-day TetOff induction (-Tet/14d) exhibited heightened thioflavin binding, indicating that ?-syn aggregates assembled in a ?-sheet structure. A more striking increase in thioflavin binding was observed in samples from 28 day induction (-Tet/28d) indicating that aggregates of ?-syn assembled from its prolonged overproduction with remarkable ?-sheet transformation. Figure 6 Formation of LB-like inclusions. Cells of transfectant 3D5 grown on glass coverslips in 24-well plates were RA-differentiated for 10 days before 28-day TetOff induction. They were then saponin-permeabilized prior to thioflavin S and ?-syn staining, as described in Materials and Methods. In contrast to the lack of thioflavin ( b ) and ?-syn ( b’ ) staining in non-induced cells (RA/+Tet [28d]), overproduction of ?-syn from 28-day TetOff induction led to formation of thioflavin-positive ( a ), ?-syn ( a’ ) inclusions (0.5–4.0 ?m in diameter; arrows) in the perinuclear cytoplasm of RA-differentiated cells (RA/-Tet [28d]). Scale bars = 50 ?m. Figure 7 Electron micrographs of filamentous inclusions assembled from extended overproduction of ?-syn. 3D5 cultures were grown as in the aggregation paradigm in Figure 1b and Epon-embedded in situ for ultrastructural evaluation after 28-day TetOff induction. They contain filamentous inclusions consisting of densely packed bundles of 8~12-nm fibrils that segregate from organelles in the perinuclear cytoplasm ( a, b ) and neurite ( c ) of the neuron-like cell. Arrows denote the contours of fibrillar inclusions in ( a ) and ( b ) that are enlarged in ( a’ ) and ( b’ ). Asterisks in ( b ) and ( b’ ) indicate mitochondria clusters at the center of a fibrillar inclusion in the perinuclear cytoplasm. N = nucleus; G = Golgi complex; m = mitochondrion. Scale bars = 1 ?m in a and b and 300 nm in a’, b’ and c . In etched Epon sections probed with Ab98 for immunogold labeling, constituent fibrils of the filamentous inclusion (arrowheads in d) are decorated with 10 nm gold particles (white arrows), thus verifying that ?-syn fibrils congregate to form the LB-like inclusions. Scale bars, 1 ?m ( d ); 200 nm ( d’ ). Figure 8 Assembly of aggregated ?-syn is reversible and not toxic to RA-differentiated 3D5 cells. Conditional overproduction of ?-syn via TetOff induction for 2 ( a ) or 4 weeks ( b ) after RA-elicited differentiation was terminated by adding Tet (2 ?g/ml) to the medium for up to 4 weeks. Lysate specimens were prepared thereafter and were evaluated by immunoblotting as in Figure 4 . Arrows indicate the gel top where insoluble aggregates appear. ( a ) Note that truncated and aggregated ?-syn accumulated from 2-week TetOff induction (lanes 1) reduced to barely detectable following 2-week supplementation of Tet (lanes 2). Four weeks of Tet supplementation after 14-day TetOff induction (lanes 3) diminished the ?-syn level to levels of non-induced cells (lanes 4), indicating that accumulation of aggregated and truncated ?-syn from TetOff induction is reversible in the differentiated 3D5 cells. ( b ) RA-differentiated cells assembled soluble and insoluble ?-syn aggregates after TetOff induction for 4 to 6 weeks (lanes 1 and 2). Two-week Tet supplementation led to complete disappearance of aggregate formation (lanes 3), indicating a reversible assembly of soluble and insoluble ?-syn aggregates from extended TetOff induction. ( c ) Growth kinetic analysis. Replica cultures of RA-differentiated 3D5 cells were supplemented with Tet (2 ?g/ml) to terminate TetOff induction for up to 28 days and their growth was monitored as described in Materials and methods. Each value represents an average of 5 determinants derived independently from separate plates harvested at indicated intervals from each of the three groups in a representative of three experiments. Error bars denote standard errors of means. Tet supplementation after 14- (square) or 28-day (triangle) TetOff induction minimally changed the population size or caused any apparent decline in cell survival, suggesting that soluble and insoluble aggregates assembled predominantly after 14 and 28, respectively, days of TetOff induction are not toxic to these neuron-like cells. Table 1 Immunoprofiling of ?-Syn and Derivatives * Antibody Epitope HMW smearing (>33 kD) 33-kD 15-kD 12-kD 8-kD HuA N-terminus 1 1 2 3 0 0 SY128 2~25 0 <1 <1 1 ?1 <1 AB5464 11~26 1 1 1 1 ?1 1 NAC 61~95 <1 <1 2 3 1 3 Synuclein-1 91~99 ?1 1 <1 3 1 2 Ab98 98~115 0 <1 <1 2 1 <1 Ab111 111~131 2 2 2 3 <1 0 mAb211 121~125 ?1 ?1 1 3 0 0 Syn202 130~140 0 0 0 >2 0 0 pSer129 pSer129 0 0 0 1 0 0 Ab504 nitration 0 0 0 1 0 0 * Immunoreactivities with the antibodies indicated in Figure 3a of ?-syn and derivatives in Figure 3b were scored using the grading system following grading system: 3 = strong; 2 = medium; 1 = weak; 0 = none, as previously described ( 30 ). Table 2 Minimal Effects of Intracellular ?-Syn Aggregate Assembly on Differentiated 3D5 Cell Survival a Retinoic Acid (10 ?M × days) [Tet] One-way ANOVA b days 2 ?g/ml 0 ?g/ml 10 0 d ----------- 97.62 ± 0.21 --------- 17 7 d 95.51 ± 0.43 97.37 ± 0.21 p = 0.001 24 14 d 95.46 ± 0.48 94.55 ± 0.62 p = 0.258 38 28 d 96.08 ± 0.28 94.63 ± 0.47 p = 0.015 a At the indicated intervals after TetOff induction, replicate cultures on glass coverslips were assayed for cell survival using a mixture of calcein AM/ethidium homodimer-1 of the LIVE/DEAD viability/cytotoxicity kit (Invitrogen). Digitized photomicroscopic images of 10 randomly selected fields, each containing more than 400 cells, were captured subsequently from 3 representative experiments to derive percent cell survival estimates (Mean ± SEM; n = 10), as described in Materials and methods. b One-way ANOVA was performed for each time point between the TetOff-induced and their non-induced counterparts. 