Bimodal Oscillation Frequencies of Blood Flow in the Inflammatory Colon Microcirculation Rhythmic changes in blood flow direction have been described in the mucosal plexus of mice with acute colitis. In this report, we studied mice with acute colitis induced by either dextran sodium sulphate or trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid. Both forms of colitis were asscociated with blood flow oscillations as documented by fluorescence intravital videomicroscopy. The complex oscillation patterns suggested more than one mechanism for these changes in blood flow. By tracking fluorescent nanoparticles in the inflamed mucosal plexus, we identified two forms of blood flow oscillations within the inflammatory mouse colon. Stable oscillations were associated with a base frequency of approximately 2 cycles/sec. Velocity measurements in the upstream and downstream vessel segments indicated that stable oscillations were the result of regional flow occlusion within the mucosal plexus. In contrast, metastable oscillations demonstrated a lower frequency (0.2 to 0.4 cycles/sec) and appeared to be the result of flow dynamics in vessels linked by the bridging mucosal vessels. These blood flow oscillations were not directly associated with cardiopulmonary movement. We conclude that both the stable and metasable oscillating patterns reflect flow adaptations to inflammatory changes in the mucosal plexus.  Introduction A common phenomenon in biology, rhythmic oscillations occur in a variety of metabolic and regulatory systems ( Rapp, 1981 ). In the circulatory system, pressure waves resulting from cardiac contraction or ventilatory mechanics are a well-recognized source of rhythmicity ( Hosomi and Hayashida, 1984 ) ( Berridge et al., 1981 ). Under normal circumstances, blood pressure waves can result in rhythmic variation in antegrade blood flow velocity, but are not associated with changes in blood flow direction ( Miyakawa, 1984 ). Recently, we have described rhythmic changes in blood flow direction during inflammation ( Turhan et al., 2007 ). The relationship of these blood flow oscillations to systemic blood pressure rhythmicity or inflammatory blood flow adaptations is unknown. Attempts to investigate blood flow adaptations in inflammation have focused on the colon microcirculation because of its disease relevance and complex microarchitecture ( Kruschewski et al., 2001 ; Appleyard et al., 2002 ; Mori et al., 2005 ). The mouse colon is composed of a quasi-polygonal mucosal plexus linked to the serosal plexus by bridging vessels ( Ravnic et al., 2007a ). In our previous work, the rhythmic blood flow oscillations were observed in the bridging vessels several days after the onset of acute inflammation. The oscillations demonstrated frequencies that ranged from 0.2 to 5.1 cycles/sec ( Turhan et al., 2007 ). Although the mechanism of oscillation was unclear, the reproducibility of the observations suggested that rhythmic oscillations were an adaptive response of the mucosal network to acute inflammation. In this report, we identified two forms of blood flow oscillations within the inflammatory mouse colon. Stable oscillations were associated with a base frequency of 2 cycles/sec and appeared to be the result of regional flow occlusion within the mucosal plexus. In contrast, metastable oscillations demonstrated a lower frequency (0.2 to 0.4 cycles/sec) and appeared to be the result of flow dynamics within vessels linked by the bridging mucosal vessels.  Methods Mice Male Balb/c mice (Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME), 25–33g were used in all experiments. The care of the animals was consistent with guidelines of the American Association for Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (Bethesda, MD). TNBS administration The acute colitis model has been described previously ( Ravnic et al., 2007a ). After the mouse abdomen was sheared and cleaned, 36ul of 2.5% 2,4,6- trinitrochlorobenzene (TNCB)(ChemArt, Egling, Germany) in a 4:1 acetone:olive oil solution was applied to a 1.5cm diameter circular PhastTransfer Filter Paper (Pharmacia, Upsala, Sweden). The TNCB soaked filter paper was applied to the sheared abdomen and secured with Tegaderm (3M, St. Paul, MN) and Durapore Surgical Tape (3M, St. Paul, MN). The TNCB patch was removed 24 hours after application. Six days later 125ul of 1.75% 2,4, 6- trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid (TNBS) (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) in a 50% ethanol vehicle was instilled into the rectum. Control mice were treated with PBS alone. Dextran sulphate administration The dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) (TdB Consultancy AB, Uppsala, Sweden) model of colitis was similar to that described previously ( Okayasu et al., 1990 ). Briefly, DSS was freshly prepared and added daily to the BALB/c mice drinking water at a final concentration of 5%. The mice were assessed daily for clinical signs and total body weight. The DSS treatment was continued for 5 days. The mice were studied on days 4, 5 and 6. Surgical anesthesia The mice undergoing intravital microscopy were anesthetized using intraperitoneal injections of Ketamine (80–100 mg/kg) and Xylazine (5–16 mg/kg). Dosing was titrated to optimize the anesthetic/analgesic effects and minimize cardiorespiratory effects. Morphometry and image analysis Images were processesed with the MetaMorph Imaging System 7.0 software (Molecular Devices, Brandywine, PA). The 14-bit grayscale images were thresholded and standard distance calibration was performed. The MetaMorph’s region measurements and caliper applications were used to measure vessel dimensions. The data was logged into Microsoft Excel 2003 (Redmond WA) by dynamic data exchange. Intravital microscopy The colon was exteriorized through a midline laparotomy incision and imaged using a Nikon Eclipse TE2000 inverted epifluorescence microscope using Nikon 10x, 20x, and 40x objectives. The intravital microscopy was performed by using a custom-machined emersion stage. The tissue contact area consisted of vacuum galleries that provided tissue apposition to the lens surface without tissue compression. An X-Cite (Exfo; Vanier, Canada) 120 watt metal halide light source and a liquid light guide was used to illuminate the tissue samples. Excitation and emission filters (Chroma, Rockingham, VT) in separate LEP motorized filter wheels were controlled by a MAC5000 controller (Ludl) and MetaMorph software 7.0 (Molecular Devices). The intravital videomicroscopy 14-bit fluorescent images were digitally recorded with an electron multiplier CCD (EMCCD) camera (C9100-02, Hamamatsu, Japan). Images with 1000 x 1000 pixel resolution were routinely obtained at frame rates exceeding 60 fps with 2x2 binning or subarray acquisition. The images were recorded in image stacks comprising 30 second to 10 minute video sequences on a Dell Precision workstation (3.06Ghz Xeon processors, 15,000rpm ultra- SCSI hard drive, 4gb RAM and an Nvidia Quadro 3450 graphics card with 512mb memory). The image stacks were processed with standard MetaMorph filters. Routine distance calibration and thresholding was applied to the “stacked” image sequences ( Ravnic et al., 2006b ). Intravenous fluorescence labeling A 5-(and-6)- carboxyfluorescein diacetate, succinimidyl ester (CFSE) (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) labeling solution was prepared in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) as described ( Becker et al., 2004 ; Ravnic et al., 2006a ). The freshly prepared CFSE (400ul) was injected into the tail vein of an anesthetized mouse. In some mice, a 10% 250,000kD fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-dextran (Sigma) solution in normal saline was prepared. Mice were injected via the tail vein with 150ul of the prepared solution. The CFSE and FITC-dextran tracer s(ex 480nm, em 520nm) were imaged with 25nm band pass filters (Omega). Preparation of the nanoparticles The previously described polystyrene spheres were produced with superior fluorescence properties and neutral surface charge ( Ravnic et al., 2007b ). The particles were labeled with derivatives of the BODIPDY and coumarin fluorochromes using organic solvents by Molecular Probes (Invitrogen; Eugene OR). The nanoparticles used in this study were green (ex 488; em 510), and infra-red (ex 655nm; em 710nm). Image stack analysis Digital intravital microscopy images were obtained without motion artifact to facilitate subsequent processing. The stream acquired images were stacked in time-series sequences of 500 or 1000 consecutive frames. The stacks were systematically analyzed to ensure that each pixel position were constant throughout the image stack. In the absence of motion, the image “stacks” were processed using standard MetaMorph (Molecular Devices) operations that calculate average and best focus resultant images. The stack “average” was a process that selected a time-series average pixel intensity at each pixel position in the image. The stack “best focus” estimated the regions of best focus to within one-tenth pixel accuracy along the time series. Space-time plots Space-time plots were created by measuring the intensity values of a region of interest through a time-based series of images. In most cases, the space-time plots were constructed using the MetaMorph Kymograph application (Molecular Devices). The application was used to create a cross-sectional view of grayscale intensity values along a region or “transept” drawn on the image stack. In most cases, this region of interest was drawn along the axis of the vessel and incorporating as much of the vessel width as possible. The average pixel intensity across the vessel width was used to track movement in the time series. The image stack was preprocessed with background subtraction to improve both the signal-to-noise ratio and the sensitivity of motion detection. The resulting kymograph image was analyzed by using a line tool to define the vessel segment distance, as well as the time and velocity data for the region. Fourier analysis Oscillations in vascular segments were characterized by both tracking individual fluorescent nanoparticles and plotting the displacement of the average cross-sectional signal. Particle tracking was performed using the MetaMorph object tracking application (Molecular Devices). The intensity centroids of the particles were identified and their displacements tracked through planes in the source image stack. Particle tracking permitted highly resolved measurement of particle displacement; however, the reference frame was limited to the residence time of the individual particle. To provide an expanded reference frame, the time series of the average cross-sectional signal was represented as a space-time plot ( Turhan et al., 2007 ). The space-time plots of the oscillatory vessels were analyzed as an 8-bit grayscale image file. A representative tracing, typically produced by one or more nanoparticles, was thresholded to restrict the analysis to nanoparticle fluorescence. The thresholded image was binarized and converted to a numerical matrix (line graph) amenable to Fourier analysis. The discrete Fourier transform was performed with custom software. After analysis, the power density spectrum was then recombined to ensure that the analysis could reproduce the original image characteristics. Statistical analysis Significance estimates were based on multiple comparisons of paired data by Student-Newman-Keuls or Mann-Whitney test for non-parametric analysis of variance. The significance level for the sample distribution was defined as P<.05.  Mice Male Balb/c mice (Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME), 25–33g were used in all experiments. The care of the animals was consistent with guidelines of the American Association for Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (Bethesda, MD).  TNBS administration The acute colitis model has been described previously ( Ravnic et al., 2007a ). After the mouse abdomen was sheared and cleaned, 36ul of 2.5% 2,4,6- trinitrochlorobenzene (TNCB)(ChemArt, Egling, Germany) in a 4:1 acetone:olive oil solution was applied to a 1.5cm diameter circular PhastTransfer Filter Paper (Pharmacia, Upsala, Sweden). The TNCB soaked filter paper was applied to the sheared abdomen and secured with Tegaderm (3M, St. Paul, MN) and Durapore Surgical Tape (3M, St. Paul, MN). The TNCB patch was removed 24 hours after application. Six days later 125ul of 1.75% 2,4, 6- trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid (TNBS) (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) in a 50% ethanol vehicle was instilled into the rectum. Control mice were treated with PBS alone.  Dextran sulphate administration The dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) (TdB Consultancy AB, Uppsala, Sweden) model of colitis was similar to that described previously ( Okayasu et al., 1990 ). Briefly, DSS was freshly prepared and added daily to the BALB/c mice drinking water at a final concentration of 5%. The mice were assessed daily for clinical signs and total body weight. The DSS treatment was continued for 5 days. The mice were studied on days 4, 5 and 6.  Surgical anesthesia The mice undergoing intravital microscopy were anesthetized using intraperitoneal injections of Ketamine (80–100 mg/kg) and Xylazine (5–16 mg/kg). Dosing was titrated to optimize the anesthetic/analgesic effects and minimize cardiorespiratory effects.  Morphometry and image analysis Images were processesed with the MetaMorph Imaging System 7.0 software (Molecular Devices, Brandywine, PA). The 14-bit grayscale images were thresholded and standard distance calibration was performed. The MetaMorph’s region measurements and caliper applications were used to measure vessel dimensions. The data was logged into Microsoft Excel 2003 (Redmond WA) by dynamic data exchange.  Intravital microscopy The colon was exteriorized through a midline laparotomy incision and imaged using a Nikon Eclipse TE2000 inverted epifluorescence microscope using Nikon 10x, 20x, and 40x objectives. The intravital microscopy was performed by using a custom-machined emersion stage. The tissue contact area consisted of vacuum galleries that provided tissue apposition to the lens surface without tissue compression. An X-Cite (Exfo; Vanier, Canada) 120 watt metal halide light source and a liquid light guide was used to illuminate the tissue samples. Excitation and emission filters (Chroma, Rockingham, VT) in separate LEP motorized filter wheels were controlled by a MAC5000 controller (Ludl) and MetaMorph software 7.0 (Molecular Devices). The intravital videomicroscopy 14-bit fluorescent images were digitally recorded with an electron multiplier CCD (EMCCD) camera (C9100-02, Hamamatsu, Japan). Images with 1000 x 1000 pixel resolution were routinely obtained at frame rates exceeding 60 fps with 2x2 binning or subarray acquisition. The images were recorded in image stacks comprising 30 second to 10 minute video sequences on a Dell Precision workstation (3.06Ghz Xeon processors, 15,000rpm ultra- SCSI hard drive, 4gb RAM and an Nvidia Quadro 3450 graphics card with 512mb memory). The image stacks were processed with standard MetaMorph filters. Routine distance calibration and thresholding was applied to the “stacked” image sequences ( Ravnic et al., 2006b ).  Intravenous fluorescence labeling A 5-(and-6)- carboxyfluorescein diacetate, succinimidyl ester (CFSE) (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) labeling solution was prepared in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) as described ( Becker et al., 2004 ; Ravnic et al., 2006a ). The freshly prepared CFSE (400ul) was injected into the tail vein of an anesthetized mouse. In some mice, a 10% 250,000kD fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-dextran (Sigma) solution in normal saline was prepared. Mice were injected via the tail vein with 150ul of the prepared solution. The CFSE and FITC-dextran tracer s(ex 480nm, em 520nm) were imaged with 25nm band pass filters (Omega).  Preparation of the nanoparticles The previously described polystyrene spheres were produced with superior fluorescence properties and neutral surface charge ( Ravnic et al., 2007b ). The particles were labeled with derivatives of the BODIPDY and coumarin fluorochromes using organic solvents by Molecular Probes (Invitrogen; Eugene OR). The nanoparticles used in this study were green (ex 488; em 510), and infra-red (ex 655nm; em 710nm).  Image stack analysis Digital intravital microscopy images were obtained without motion artifact to facilitate subsequent processing. The stream acquired images were stacked in time-series sequences of 500 or 1000 consecutive frames. The stacks were systematically analyzed to ensure that each pixel position were constant throughout the image stack. In the absence of motion, the image “stacks” were processed using standard MetaMorph (Molecular Devices) operations that calculate average and best focus resultant images. The stack “average” was a process that selected a time-series average pixel intensity at each pixel position in the image. The stack “best focus” estimated the regions of best focus to within one-tenth pixel accuracy along the time series.  Space-time plots Space-time plots were created by measuring the intensity values of a region of interest through a time-based series of images. In most cases, the space-time plots were constructed using the MetaMorph Kymograph application (Molecular Devices). The application was used to create a cross-sectional view of grayscale intensity values along a region or “transept” drawn on the image stack. In most cases, this region of interest was drawn along the axis of the vessel and incorporating as much of the vessel width as possible. The average pixel intensity across the vessel width was used to track movement in the time series. The image stack was preprocessed with background subtraction to improve both the signal-to-noise ratio and the sensitivity of motion detection. The resulting kymograph image was analyzed by using a line tool to define the vessel segment distance, as well as the time and velocity data for the region.  Fourier analysis Oscillations in vascular segments were characterized by both tracking individual fluorescent nanoparticles and plotting the displacement of the average cross-sectional signal. Particle tracking was performed using the MetaMorph object tracking application (Molecular Devices). The intensity centroids of the particles were identified and their displacements tracked through planes in the source image stack. Particle tracking permitted highly resolved measurement of particle displacement; however, the reference frame was limited to the residence time of the individual particle. To provide an expanded reference frame, the time series of the average cross-sectional signal was represented as a space-time plot ( Turhan et al., 2007 ). The space-time plots of the oscillatory vessels were analyzed as an 8-bit grayscale image file. A representative tracing, typically produced by one or more nanoparticles, was thresholded to restrict the analysis to nanoparticle fluorescence. The thresholded image was binarized and converted to a numerical matrix (line graph) amenable to Fourier analysis. The discrete Fourier transform was performed with custom software. After analysis, the power density spectrum was then recombined to ensure that the analysis could reproduce the original image characteristics.  Statistical analysis Significance estimates were based on multiple comparisons of paired data by Student-Newman-Keuls or Mann-Whitney test for non-parametric analysis of variance. The significance level for the sample distribution was defined as P<.05.  Results Spatial-temporal blood flow patterns The blood flow patterns in the submucosal and mucosal blood vessels were investigated using fluorescent nanoparticle tracers and intravital videomicroscopy. The nanoparticles were tracked as they passed between the submucosal vessels ( Figure 1A , single arrow) and the mucosal plexus ( Figure 1A , double arrow). In control mice, the tracers generally demonstrated unidirectional and continuous blood flow patterns. In contrast, chemically-induced colitis was associated with rhythmically oscillating blood flow within the bridging vessels ( Figure 1A , triple arrow; 1C, segment 'b'). The time-space plots of fluorescent nanoparticles within the microcirculation showed continuous flow in the feeding submucosal artery ( Figure 1C , segment ‘a’), but oscillating flow in the bridging mucosal vessel ( Figure 1C , segment ‘b’). Both visible segments of the submucosal artery ( Figure 1D , segments ‘a’ and ‘c’) demonstrated continuous (non-oscillating) blood flow. The oscillations observed in both TNBS (N=10) and DSS (N=20) models of colitis were statistically indistinguishable; the results were pooled for subsequent analysis. Stable oscillations Intravital videomicroscopic examination of more than 30 mice with chemically-induced colitis (TNBS, N=10; DSS, N=20) demonstrated both stable and metastable rhythmic oscillations. Stable oscillations were empirically defined as those oscillations that maintained a similar frequency and amplitude throughout the recording ( Figure 2 ). The mean frequency of stable oscillations was 2.7±1.2 /sec. A possible explanation for the stability of the oscillation was suggested by velocity measurements in the neighboring interbranch segments. Although the neighboring segments were not always well-visualized, a consistent finding was diminished flow in the mucosal plexus fed by the oscillating arterial segment This finding suggested that the bridging vessel was flow-limited by the mucosal plexus; that is, the velocity of nanoparticles in the bridging vessels and the downstream segments were similar ( Figure 3A ). In contrast, the venous oscillations appeared to be limited by the upstream mucosal plexus segment. The downstream segments demonstrate the expected step-up in venous flow velocity ( Figure 3B ). Further, venous flow was continuous and uniform. Metastable oscillations Distinct from stable oscillations, intravital microscopy of the colon microcirculation also demonstrated metastable oscillations within the bridging vessels. Metastable oscillations were defined as quasi-periodic oscillations that failed to maintain a steady state and demonstrated unpredictable variations in oscillation frequency and amplitude ( Figure 4 ). The mean frequency of stable oscillations was 0.3±0.8 /sec. No consistent structural characteristics were identified; namely, metastable oscillations were observed in vessel segments with variable diameters (10um to 78um) and lengths (66um to 498um). A consistent functional observation, however, was the presence of counter flows in the linked vessel segments; that is, axial flow in the boundary vessels was frequently in opposite directions ( Figure 5A,B ). Another consistent observation was the apparent increase in fluorescence intensity within the oscillating segments ( Figure 5B ). Observed in both stable ( Figure 1A ) and metastable ( Figure 5B ) oscillating segments, the increased fluorescence intensity appeared to represent a demonstrable increase in the density of CFSE-labeled cells and fluorescent nanoparticles. Frequency domain The pattern of oscillations suggested distinct adaptative responses of the microcirculatory network to acute inflammation. To analyze the network adaptation, we evaluated the energy density spectrum of both the stable and metastable oscillations in the frequency demain using discrete Fourier analysis ( Figure 6 ). Stable oscillations demonstrated the higher frequency (2/sec) oscillations that were apparent with visual inspection ( Figure 6A ). In addition, the stable oscillations also demonstrated a dominant lower frequency (0.2/sec) component that was less apparent on inspection. In contrast, metastable oscillations demonstrated only the lower frequency (0.2/sec component ( Figure 6B ). These findings suggested that stable, higher frequency, oscillations reflected both occlusion of the mucosal plexus vessels and flow instability within the mucosal circuit; whereas, metastable oscillations reflected only the network flow instability.  Results Spatial-temporal blood flow patterns The blood flow patterns in the submucosal and mucosal blood vessels were investigated using fluorescent nanoparticle tracers and intravital videomicroscopy. The nanoparticles were tracked as they passed between the submucosal vessels ( Figure 1A , single arrow) and the mucosal plexus ( Figure 1A , double arrow). In control mice, the tracers generally demonstrated unidirectional and continuous blood flow patterns. In contrast, chemically-induced colitis was associated with rhythmically oscillating blood flow within the bridging vessels ( Figure 1A , triple arrow; 1C, segment 'b'). The time-space plots of fluorescent nanoparticles within the microcirculation showed continuous flow in the feeding submucosal artery ( Figure 1C , segment ‘a’), but oscillating flow in the bridging mucosal vessel ( Figure 1C , segment ‘b’). Both visible segments of the submucosal artery ( Figure 1D , segments ‘a’ and ‘c’) demonstrated continuous (non-oscillating) blood flow. The oscillations observed in both TNBS (N=10) and DSS (N=20) models of colitis were statistically indistinguishable; the results were pooled for subsequent analysis. Stable oscillations Intravital videomicroscopic examination of more than 30 mice with chemically-induced colitis (TNBS, N=10; DSS, N=20) demonstrated both stable and metastable rhythmic oscillations. Stable oscillations were empirically defined as those oscillations that maintained a similar frequency and amplitude throughout the recording ( Figure 2 ). The mean frequency of stable oscillations was 2.7±1.2 /sec. A possible explanation for the stability of the oscillation was suggested by velocity measurements in the neighboring interbranch segments. Although the neighboring segments were not always well-visualized, a consistent finding was diminished flow in the mucosal plexus fed by the oscillating arterial segment This finding suggested that the bridging vessel was flow-limited by the mucosal plexus; that is, the velocity of nanoparticles in the bridging vessels and the downstream segments were similar ( Figure 3A ). In contrast, the venous oscillations appeared to be limited by the upstream mucosal plexus segment. The downstream segments demonstrate the expected step-up in venous flow velocity ( Figure 3B ). Further, venous flow was continuous and uniform. Metastable oscillations Distinct from stable oscillations, intravital microscopy of the colon microcirculation also demonstrated metastable oscillations within the bridging vessels. Metastable oscillations were defined as quasi-periodic oscillations that failed to maintain a steady state and demonstrated unpredictable variations in oscillation frequency and amplitude ( Figure 4 ). The mean frequency of stable oscillations was 0.3±0.8 /sec. No consistent structural characteristics were identified; namely, metastable oscillations were observed in vessel segments with variable diameters (10um to 78um) and lengths (66um to 498um). A consistent functional observation, however, was the presence of counter flows in the linked vessel segments; that is, axial flow in the boundary vessels was frequently in opposite directions ( Figure 5A,B ). Another consistent observation was the apparent increase in fluorescence intensity within the oscillating segments ( Figure 5B ). Observed in both stable ( Figure 1A ) and metastable ( Figure 5B ) oscillating segments, the increased fluorescence intensity appeared to represent a demonstrable increase in the density of CFSE-labeled cells and fluorescent nanoparticles. Frequency domain The pattern of oscillations suggested distinct adaptative responses of the microcirculatory network to acute inflammation. To analyze the network adaptation, we evaluated the energy density spectrum of both the stable and metastable oscillations in the frequency demain using discrete Fourier analysis ( Figure 6 ). Stable oscillations demonstrated the higher frequency (2/sec) oscillations that were apparent with visual inspection ( Figure 6A ). In addition, the stable oscillations also demonstrated a dominant lower frequency (0.2/sec) component that was less apparent on inspection. In contrast, metastable oscillations demonstrated only the lower frequency (0.2/sec component ( Figure 6B ). These findings suggested that stable, higher frequency, oscillations reflected both occlusion of the mucosal plexus vessels and flow instability within the mucosal circuit; whereas, metastable oscillations reflected only the network flow instability.  Spatial-temporal blood flow patterns The blood flow patterns in the submucosal and mucosal blood vessels were investigated using fluorescent nanoparticle tracers and intravital videomicroscopy. The nanoparticles were tracked as they passed between the submucosal vessels ( Figure 1A , single arrow) and the mucosal plexus ( Figure 1A , double arrow). In control mice, the tracers generally demonstrated unidirectional and continuous blood flow patterns. In contrast, chemically-induced colitis was associated with rhythmically oscillating blood flow within the bridging vessels ( Figure 1A , triple arrow; 1C, segment 'b'). The time-space plots of fluorescent nanoparticles within the microcirculation showed continuous flow in the feeding submucosal artery ( Figure 1C , segment ‘a’), but oscillating flow in the bridging mucosal vessel ( Figure 1C , segment ‘b’). Both visible segments of the submucosal artery ( Figure 1D , segments ‘a’ and ‘c’) demonstrated continuous (non-oscillating) blood flow. The oscillations observed in both TNBS (N=10) and DSS (N=20) models of colitis were statistically indistinguishable; the results were pooled for subsequent analysis.  Spatial-temporal blood flow patterns The blood flow patterns in the submucosal and mucosal blood vessels were investigated using fluorescent nanoparticle tracers and intravital videomicroscopy. The nanoparticles were tracked as they passed between the submucosal vessels ( Figure 1A , single arrow) and the mucosal plexus ( Figure 1A , double arrow). In control mice, the tracers generally demonstrated unidirectional and continuous blood flow patterns. In contrast, chemically-induced colitis was associated with rhythmically oscillating blood flow within the bridging vessels ( Figure 1A , triple arrow; 1C, segment 'b'). The time-space plots of fluorescent nanoparticles within the microcirculation showed continuous flow in the feeding submucosal artery ( Figure 1C , segment ‘a’), but oscillating flow in the bridging mucosal vessel ( Figure 1C , segment ‘b’). Both visible segments of the submucosal artery ( Figure 1D , segments ‘a’ and ‘c’) demonstrated continuous (non-oscillating) blood flow. The oscillations observed in both TNBS (N=10) and DSS (N=20) models of colitis were statistically indistinguishable; the results were pooled for subsequent analysis.  Stable oscillations Intravital videomicroscopic examination of more than 30 mice with chemically-induced colitis (TNBS, N=10; DSS, N=20) demonstrated both stable and metastable rhythmic oscillations. Stable oscillations were empirically defined as those oscillations that maintained a similar frequency and amplitude throughout the recording ( Figure 2 ). The mean frequency of stable oscillations was 2.7±1.2 /sec. A possible explanation for the stability of the oscillation was suggested by velocity measurements in the neighboring interbranch segments. Although the neighboring segments were not always well-visualized, a consistent finding was diminished flow in the mucosal plexus fed by the oscillating arterial segment This finding suggested that the bridging vessel was flow-limited by the mucosal plexus; that is, the velocity of nanoparticles in the bridging vessels and the downstream segments were similar ( Figure 3A ). In contrast, the venous oscillations appeared to be limited by the upstream mucosal plexus segment. The downstream segments demonstrate the expected step-up in venous flow velocity ( Figure 3B ). Further, venous flow was continuous and uniform.  Stable oscillations Intravital videomicroscopic examination of more than 30 mice with chemically-induced colitis (TNBS, N=10; DSS, N=20) demonstrated both stable and metastable rhythmic oscillations. Stable oscillations were empirically defined as those oscillations that maintained a similar frequency and amplitude throughout the recording ( Figure 2 ). The mean frequency of stable oscillations was 2.7±1.2 /sec. A possible explanation for the stability of the oscillation was suggested by velocity measurements in the neighboring interbranch segments. Although the neighboring segments were not always well-visualized, a consistent finding was diminished flow in the mucosal plexus fed by the oscillating arterial segment This finding suggested that the bridging vessel was flow-limited by the mucosal plexus; that is, the velocity of nanoparticles in the bridging vessels and the downstream segments were similar ( Figure 3A ). In contrast, the venous oscillations appeared to be limited by the upstream mucosal plexus segment. The downstream segments demonstrate the expected step-up in venous flow velocity ( Figure 3B ). Further, venous flow was continuous and uniform.  Metastable oscillations Distinct from stable oscillations, intravital microscopy of the colon microcirculation also demonstrated metastable oscillations within the bridging vessels. Metastable oscillations were defined as quasi-periodic oscillations that failed to maintain a steady state and demonstrated unpredictable variations in oscillation frequency and amplitude ( Figure 4 ). The mean frequency of stable oscillations was 0.3±0.8 /sec. No consistent structural characteristics were identified; namely, metastable oscillations were observed in vessel segments with variable diameters (10um to 78um) and lengths (66um to 498um). A consistent functional observation, however, was the presence of counter flows in the linked vessel segments; that is, axial flow in the boundary vessels was frequently in opposite directions ( Figure 5A,B ). Another consistent observation was the apparent increase in fluorescence intensity within the oscillating segments ( Figure 5B ). Observed in both stable ( Figure 1A ) and metastable ( Figure 5B ) oscillating segments, the increased fluorescence intensity appeared to represent a demonstrable increase in the density of CFSE-labeled cells and fluorescent nanoparticles.  Metastable oscillations Distinct from stable oscillations, intravital microscopy of the colon microcirculation also demonstrated metastable oscillations within the bridging vessels. Metastable oscillations were defined as quasi-periodic oscillations that failed to maintain a steady state and demonstrated unpredictable variations in oscillation frequency and amplitude ( Figure 4 ). The mean frequency of stable oscillations was 0.3±0.8 /sec. No consistent structural characteristics were identified; namely, metastable oscillations were observed in vessel segments with variable diameters (10um to 78um) and lengths (66um to 498um). A consistent functional observation, however, was the presence of counter flows in the linked vessel segments; that is, axial flow in the boundary vessels was frequently in opposite directions ( Figure 5A,B ). Another consistent observation was the apparent increase in fluorescence intensity within the oscillating segments ( Figure 5B ). Observed in both stable ( Figure 1A ) and metastable ( Figure 5B ) oscillating segments, the increased fluorescence intensity appeared to represent a demonstrable increase in the density of CFSE-labeled cells and fluorescent nanoparticles.  Frequency domain The pattern of oscillations suggested distinct adaptative responses of the microcirculatory network to acute inflammation. To analyze the network adaptation, we evaluated the energy density spectrum of both the stable and metastable oscillations in the frequency demain using discrete Fourier analysis ( Figure 6 ). Stable oscillations demonstrated the higher frequency (2/sec) oscillations that were apparent with visual inspection ( Figure 6A ). In addition, the stable oscillations also demonstrated a dominant lower frequency (0.2/sec) component that was less apparent on inspection. In contrast, metastable oscillations demonstrated only the lower frequency (0.2/sec component ( Figure 6B ). These findings suggested that stable, higher frequency, oscillations reflected both occlusion of the mucosal plexus vessels and flow instability within the mucosal circuit; whereas, metastable oscillations reflected only the network flow instability.  Frequency domain The pattern of oscillations suggested distinct adaptative responses of the microcirculatory network to acute inflammation. To analyze the network adaptation, we evaluated the energy density spectrum of both the stable and metastable oscillations in the frequency demain using discrete Fourier analysis ( Figure 6 ). Stable oscillations demonstrated the higher frequency (2/sec) oscillations that were apparent with visual inspection ( Figure 6A ). In addition, the stable oscillations also demonstrated a dominant lower frequency (0.2/sec) component that was less apparent on inspection. In contrast, metastable oscillations demonstrated only the lower frequency (0.2/sec component ( Figure 6B ). These findings suggested that stable, higher frequency, oscillations reflected both occlusion of the mucosal plexus vessels and flow instability within the mucosal circuit; whereas, metastable oscillations reflected only the network flow instability.  Discussion Rhythmic fluctuations of the blood has long been considered an intriguing property of the circulatory system ( Mori, 1974 ; French, 1978 ; Reubi, 1985 ). In the past, circulatory rhythms superimposed on, or slower than, cardiopulmonary rhythms have been considered little more than functionless epiphenomena; however, concepts of adaptation, local regulation, and feedback control have suggested the potential utility of re-examining rhythmicity in the microcirculation ( Hosomi and Hayashida, 1984 ) ( Berridge et al., 1981 ) ( Carr et al., 2005 ). In this report, we identified two distinct types of blood flow oscillations in the inflammatory colon microcirculation. One type of oscillation demonstrated relative stability and a frequency near 2/sec; the other type was metastable and demonstrated a dominant frequency near 0.2/sec. Videomicroscopic observations of the feeding microcirculation suggested that these oscillations were not directly linked to cardiopulmonary movement and the frequencies of the oscillations were not typical of local vasomotion ( Secomb et al., 1989 ). Further, the mucosal plexus and its feeding vessels are an exchange bed without regulatory smooth muscle or detectable sphincter-like activity ( Turhan et al., 2007 ). Both the stable and metastable oscillating patterns appeared to reflect flow adaptations to inflammatory changes in the mucosal plexus. In stable oscillations, an analysis of network flow velocities suggested that flow limitation occurred within the mucosal plexus. One possibility is that the rhythmic oscillations reflected intravascular occlusion. Potentially mediated by leukocytes, platelets, or coagulation factors, intravascular occlusion could be responsible for the restorative delays in blood flow believed to be necessary for rhythmic oscillations ( Hosomi and Hayashida, 1984 ; Carr et al., 2005 ) ( Berridge et al., 1981 ). In metastable oscillations, counter flows were frequently observed in vessels linked by an intervening oscillating segment. The counter flows likely reflected a network flow adaption: blood flow was reversed in some of the bridging vessels as an adaptive response to intravascular occlusion of spatially related segments of the mucosal plexus. The relationship between cardiac rhythms and flow oscillations in the inflammatory microcirculation remains unclear. In our initial report of oscillations in the inflammatory microcirculation, we noted that oscillations were not present in the upstream segment and microcirculatory oscillations were not in-phase or phase-locked with arterial rhythms ( Turhan et al., 2007 ). Further, the flow patterns in the arterial circulation-- phasic changes in antegrade flow velocity --are distinct from the rhythmic retrograde displacement of nanoparticles observed in the oscillating microcirculation. Nonetheless, the cardiac rhythms are the net source of energy in the system. The heart produces the systemic blood pressure that must be ultimately converted into the observed microcirculatory flow patterns. The functional relationship of fluctuations in systemic arterial blood pressure to oscillatory displacement of blood particles in the microcirculation is an important question that deserves further study. A limitation of our analysis is the extent to which methodogy--in particular the temporal and spatial reference frame--determined the identification of oscillations and the interpretation of stability and metastability. Our optical system limited our typical image field to 250um2 during video recordings. Similarly, we were limited to an observation and recording period of less than 30 minutes and frequently less than 10 minutes. Finally, recording frame rates were limited to a maximum of 60 to 100 frames per second. These limitations have been addressed with systematic sampling approaches; nonetheless, it is theoretically possible that an expanded reference frame would provide additional insights into the colonic flow patterns and oscillation frequencies. An interesting observation of the oscillatory blood flow was the striking increase in fluorescence intensity within the oscillating segments. The blood fluorescence, largely reflecting labeled blood cells and nanoparticles, was significantly greater in both stable and metastable oscillating segments. The increase in fluorescence intensity suggested a dynamic change in blood viscosity. We speculate that the dynamic changes of the physical properties of the blood within the oscillating segment contributes to the adaptive response. It is likely that blood composition plays an important role in modulating the rhythmic oscillations observed in these studies. In our analysis, discrete Fourier analysis was used to decompose the oscillation signal into its component frequencies. This analysis was empirically designed to explore the adaptive responses of the microcirculation. The discrete Fourier analysis has the advantage of resolving complex oscillations into discrete energy spectra. The disadvantages of Fourier analysis include the technical realities of the reference frame and the potential for spectral leakage. Despite these unavoidable sources of variability, discrete Fourier analysis was able to resolve oscillation frequencies that were strikingly consistent in two models (TNBS and DSS) of inflammatory colitis.  Discussion Rhythmic fluctuations of the blood has long been considered an intriguing property of the circulatory system ( Mori, 1974 ; French, 1978 ; Reubi, 1985 ). In the past, circulatory rhythms superimposed on, or slower than, cardiopulmonary rhythms have been considered little more than functionless epiphenomena; however, concepts of adaptation, local regulation, and feedback control have suggested the potential utility of re-examining rhythmicity in the microcirculation ( Hosomi and Hayashida, 1984 ) ( Berridge et al., 1981 ) ( Carr et al., 2005 ). In this report, we identified two distinct types of blood flow oscillations in the inflammatory colon microcirculation. One type of oscillation demonstrated relative stability and a frequency near 2/sec; the other type was metastable and demonstrated a dominant frequency near 0.2/sec. Videomicroscopic observations of the feeding microcirculation suggested that these oscillations were not directly linked to cardiopulmonary movement and the frequencies of the oscillations were not typical of local vasomotion ( Secomb et al., 1989 ). Further, the mucosal plexus and its feeding vessels are an exchange bed without regulatory smooth muscle or detectable sphincter-like activity ( Turhan et al., 2007 ). Both the stable and metastable oscillating patterns appeared to reflect flow adaptations to inflammatory changes in the mucosal plexus. In stable oscillations, an analysis of network flow velocities suggested that flow limitation occurred within the mucosal plexus. One possibility is that the rhythmic oscillations reflected intravascular occlusion. Potentially mediated by leukocytes, platelets, or coagulation factors, intravascular occlusion could be responsible for the restorative delays in blood flow believed to be necessary for rhythmic oscillations ( Hosomi and Hayashida, 1984 ; Carr et al., 2005 ) ( Berridge et al., 1981 ). In metastable oscillations, counter flows were frequently observed in vessels linked by an intervening oscillating segment. The counter flows likely reflected a network flow adaption: blood flow was reversed in some of the bridging vessels as an adaptive response to intravascular occlusion of spatially related segments of the mucosal plexus. The relationship between cardiac rhythms and flow oscillations in the inflammatory microcirculation remains unclear. In our initial report of oscillations in the inflammatory microcirculation, we noted that oscillations were not present in the upstream segment and microcirculatory oscillations were not in-phase or phase-locked with arterial rhythms ( Turhan et al., 2007 ). Further, the flow patterns in the arterial circulation-- phasic changes in antegrade flow velocity --are distinct from the rhythmic retrograde displacement of nanoparticles observed in the oscillating microcirculation. Nonetheless, the cardiac rhythms are the net source of energy in the system. The heart produces the systemic blood pressure that must be ultimately converted into the observed microcirculatory flow patterns. The functional relationship of fluctuations in systemic arterial blood pressure to oscillatory displacement of blood particles in the microcirculation is an important question that deserves further study. A limitation of our analysis is the extent to which methodogy--in particular the temporal and spatial reference frame--determined the identification of oscillations and the interpretation of stability and metastability. Our optical system limited our typical image field to 250um2 during video recordings. Similarly, we were limited to an observation and recording period of less than 30 minutes and frequently less than 10 minutes. Finally, recording frame rates were limited to a maximum of 60 to 100 frames per second. These limitations have been addressed with systematic sampling approaches; nonetheless, it is theoretically possible that an expanded reference frame would provide additional insights into the colonic flow patterns and oscillation frequencies. An interesting observation of the oscillatory blood flow was the striking increase in fluorescence intensity within the oscillating segments. The blood fluorescence, largely reflecting labeled blood cells and nanoparticles, was significantly greater in both stable and metastable oscillating segments. The increase in fluorescence intensity suggested a dynamic change in blood viscosity. We speculate that the dynamic changes of the physical properties of the blood within the oscillating segment contributes to the adaptive response. It is likely that blood composition plays an important role in modulating the rhythmic oscillations observed in these studies. In our analysis, discrete Fourier analysis was used to decompose the oscillation signal into its component frequencies. This analysis was empirically designed to explore the adaptive responses of the microcirculation. The discrete Fourier analysis has the advantage of resolving complex oscillations into discrete energy spectra. The disadvantages of Fourier analysis include the technical realities of the reference frame and the potential for spectral leakage. Despite these unavoidable sources of variability, discrete Fourier analysis was able to resolve oscillation frequencies that were strikingly consistent in two models (TNBS and DSS) of inflammatory colitis.  Figures Figure 1 Intravital microscopy of the inflammatory colon microcirculation. A) Flow paths of two nanoparticles in a submucosal artery bridging to the mucosal plexus; locations of the nanoparticles are denoted at 20msec intervals. One nanoparticle (red) remained within the submucosal artery, whereas the second nanoparticle (yellow) entered the mucosal plexus after passing through an oscillating segment (b). The submucosal arter (single arrow) connects to mucosal plexus (double arrow) through the briding vessel (triple arrow). B) Vessel segments, reflecting these flow paths, are shown. C–D) Space-time plots obtained from the average signal intensity of 2.5um wide line scans oriented along the centerline of the vessel. The descending vertical axis represents time with each tick representing 1 second in the 10 second time series. The displacement of both nanoparticles (thick lines, arrow) and CFSE-labeled blood cells (thin lines) are plotted; the slope of these lines represents velocity. C) Space-time plot of the vessel segments (a–b) traversed by the yellow flow path. D) Space-time plot of the vessel segments (a–b) traversed by the red flow path. The mean velocity of particles in the a and c segments was 1270+175um/sec. In the b segment, nanoparticle velocity varied with time: the mean velocity varied from 55+12um/sec (0–5 seconds) to 124+19um/sec (5–10 seconds). Figure 2 Time domain of stable oscillations in the bridging vessels of the mouse colon. Relative axial displacement is shown in the time domain (N=4 mice). The space-time plots of oscillating segments of 4 different mice were thresholded, binarized and converted to a numerical matrix. A plot of a representative particle was selected from each time series. Stability was empirically defined by steady state oscillations that continued throughout the recording period. Figure 3 Flow velocities of fluorescent nanoparticles tracked by intravital fluorescence videomicroscopy in upstream vessel segment, the oscillating segment, and the downstream segment. Vessel segments were functionally defined. The data was plotted with the box defining the 25th and 75th velocity precentiles with the whiskers defining the 5th and 95th percentile. The median value was plotted as a square. Figure 4 Metastable oscillations in the bridging vessels of the mouse colon. The space-time plots of oscillating segments of 4 different mice were thresholded, binarized and converted to a numerical matrix. A plot of a representative particle was selected from each time series. Metastability was empirically defined by the loss of steady state oscillations that continued to devolve throughout the recording period. Figure 5 Intravital microscopy images depicting the anatomic and flow relationships leading to metastable oscillations. A) A 1000 frame video image stack was processed with the “best focus” function (MetaMorph). This function provides anatomic detail of the vascular conduits by eliminating moving nanoparticles and out-of-plane illumination. The direction of blood flow in the vessels bordering the oscillating segment is shown (arrows). B) A 1000 frame video image stack processed with the “average” pixel intensity function (MetaMorph). This function reveals the increased fluorescence intensity within the oscillating segment. The direction of blood flow, revealed by nanoparticle movement tracked in the video sequence, is shown (arrows). Bar=100um. Figure 6 Power spectral density of the oscillatory blood observed in the mouse colon. The space- time plots from mice with chemically-induced (DSS) colitis were thresholded, binarized and converted to a numerical matrix. The time domain was analyzed using a discrete Fourier transform and plotted as a power spectrum in the frequency domain. The power spectral density of oscillations empirically defined as stable (A, N=4 mice) and metastable (B, N=4 mice) are shown as a combined dataset.  Figures Figure 1 Intravital microscopy of the inflammatory colon microcirculation. A) Flow paths of two nanoparticles in a submucosal artery bridging to the mucosal plexus; locations of the nanoparticles are denoted at 20msec intervals. One nanoparticle (red) remained within the submucosal artery, whereas the second nanoparticle (yellow) entered the mucosal plexus after passing through an oscillating segment (b). The submucosal arter (single arrow) connects to mucosal plexus (double arrow) through the briding vessel (triple arrow). B) Vessel segments, reflecting these flow paths, are shown. C–D) Space-time plots obtained from the average signal intensity of 2.5um wide line scans oriented along the centerline of the vessel. The descending vertical axis represents time with each tick representing 1 second in the 10 second time series. The displacement of both nanoparticles (thick lines, arrow) and CFSE-labeled blood cells (thin lines) are plotted; the slope of these lines represents velocity. C) Space-time plot of the vessel segments (a–b) traversed by the yellow flow path. D) Space-time plot of the vessel segments (a–b) traversed by the red flow path. The mean velocity of particles in the a and c segments was 1270+175um/sec. In the b segment, nanoparticle velocity varied with time: the mean velocity varied from 55+12um/sec (0–5 seconds) to 124+19um/sec (5–10 seconds). Figure 2 Time domain of stable oscillations in the bridging vessels of the mouse colon. Relative axial displacement is shown in the time domain (N=4 mice). The space-time plots of oscillating segments of 4 different mice were thresholded, binarized and converted to a numerical matrix. A plot of a representative particle was selected from each time series. Stability was empirically defined by steady state oscillations that continued throughout the recording period. Figure 3 Flow velocities of fluorescent nanoparticles tracked by intravital fluorescence videomicroscopy in upstream vessel segment, the oscillating segment, and the downstream segment. Vessel segments were functionally defined. The data was plotted with the box defining the 25th and 75th velocity precentiles with the whiskers defining the 5th and 95th percentile. The median value was plotted as a square. Figure 4 Metastable oscillations in the bridging vessels of the mouse colon. The space-time plots of oscillating segments of 4 different mice were thresholded, binarized and converted to a numerical matrix. A plot of a representative particle was selected from each time series. Metastability was empirically defined by the loss of steady state oscillations that continued to devolve throughout the recording period. Figure 5 Intravital microscopy images depicting the anatomic and flow relationships leading to metastable oscillations. A) A 1000 frame video image stack was processed with the “best focus” function (MetaMorph). This function provides anatomic detail of the vascular conduits by eliminating moving nanoparticles and out-of-plane illumination. The direction of blood flow in the vessels bordering the oscillating segment is shown (arrows). B) A 1000 frame video image stack processed with the “average” pixel intensity function (MetaMorph). This function reveals the increased fluorescence intensity within the oscillating segment. The direction of blood flow, revealed by nanoparticle movement tracked in the video sequence, is shown (arrows). Bar=100um. Figure 6 Power spectral density of the oscillatory blood observed in the mouse colon. The space- time plots from mice with chemically-induced (DSS) colitis were thresholded, binarized and converted to a numerical matrix. The time domain was analyzed using a discrete Fourier transform and plotted as a power spectrum in the frequency domain. The power spectral density of oscillations empirically defined as stable (A, N=4 mice) and metastable (B, N=4 mice) are shown as a combined dataset. 