Preventing Neurocognitive Late Effects in Childhood Cancer Survivors Neurocognitive late effects are common sequelae of cancer in children, especially in those who have undergone treatment for brain tumors or in those receiving prophylactic cranial radiation therapy to treat leukemia. Neurocognitive morbidity in attention, executive functioning, processing speed, working memory, and memory frequently occurs and contributes to declines in intellectual and academic abilities. Oncologists are faced with the challenge of using the most effective, often the most intense, therapy to achieve the primary goal of medical success, balanced with the desire to prevent adverse late effects. Not all children with similar diagnoses and treatment have identical neurocognitive outcomes; some do very poorly and some do well. Attention now turns to the reliable prediction of risk for poor outcomes and then, using risk-adapted therapy, to preserve neurocognitive function. Prevention of late effects through rehabilitative strategies, continuation of school, and pharmacotherapy will be explored.  Discussion Children treated for cancer are at risk for neurocognitive late effects that produce declines in IQ, academic skills, and career attainment. The use of intensive chemotherapy (eg, methotrexate) and radiation therapy are thought to cause damage to cortical and subcortical white matter, resulting in these late effects. Symptoms consistent with attention-deficit disorder and deficits in mental processing speed, working memory, executive functioning, and memory combine to leave survivors intellectually and academically disadvantaged. In some children, IQ drops by as much as 3 to 4 points per year (approximately 1 standard deviation every 5 years). Brain calcifications, leukoencephalopathy, and declines in the volume of white matter correlate with these declines in neurocognitive functioning. Preventing these late effects is a challenge for both the medical team and for psychologists and rehabilitation specialists. Advances in neurosurgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy techniques are helping to a great extent, but may not be totally successful at preventing these late effects. Prevention depends in part on being able to predict those at greatest risk. Factors that are known to predict poor neurocognitive outcome include a young age at treatment; the use of steroids, methotrexate, and craniospinal irradiation; and medical and neurological complications. Advances in neuroimaging, including diffusion tensor imaging of white matter tracts, magnetic resonance spectrography, PET, and functional MRI, hold promise for helping to predict during the acute phase of treatment those patients who may suffer the greatest white matter changes and hence neurocognitive declines. Consequently, these patients may have risk-adapted therapy that seeks to lessen their morbidity. However, using genetic markers such as polymorphisms for DNA repair and methotrexate metabolism may actually help predict those at risk before therapy even begins. For survivors who show neurocognitive decline following cancer treatment, rehabilitation similar to that used for survivors of traumatic brain injury have shown some effectiveness. However, for those newly diagnosed patients who are identified as being at risk by one of the above methods, prophylactic interventions such cognitive training and maintenance of academic growth may offer the best hope of preventing late effects. Cancer is the No. 2 cause of death (after accidents) in children under the age of 15. Nevertheless, the survival rate approaches 90% for those diagnosed with acute lymphoblastic leukemia today, although less for children with brain tumors. A child cured of cancer may have many more decades of life ahead of them than adults cured of their cancer. In addition, the child is in the formative years of school, career and social development and is therefore at risk for falling short of their potential due to neurocognitive late effects of their cancer and its treatment. As cure rates for cancer and brain tumors climb, prevention of these late effects becomes more of a priority.  Discussion Children treated for cancer are at risk for neurocognitive late effects that produce declines in IQ, academic skills, and career attainment. The use of intensive chemotherapy (eg, methotrexate) and radiation therapy are thought to cause damage to cortical and subcortical white matter, resulting in these late effects. Symptoms consistent with attention-deficit disorder and deficits in mental processing speed, working memory, executive functioning, and memory combine to leave survivors intellectually and academically disadvantaged. In some children, IQ drops by as much as 3 to 4 points per year (approximately 1 standard deviation every 5 years). Brain calcifications, leukoencephalopathy, and declines in the volume of white matter correlate with these declines in neurocognitive functioning. Preventing these late effects is a challenge for both the medical team and for psychologists and rehabilitation specialists. Advances in neurosurgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy techniques are helping to a great extent, but may not be totally successful at preventing these late effects. Prevention depends in part on being able to predict those at greatest risk. Factors that are known to predict poor neurocognitive outcome include a young age at treatment; the use of steroids, methotrexate, and craniospinal irradiation; and medical and neurological complications. Advances in neuroimaging, including diffusion tensor imaging of white matter tracts, magnetic resonance spectrography, PET, and functional MRI, hold promise for helping to predict during the acute phase of treatment those patients who may suffer the greatest white matter changes and hence neurocognitive declines. Consequently, these patients may have risk-adapted therapy that seeks to lessen their morbidity. However, using genetic markers such as polymorphisms for DNA repair and methotrexate metabolism may actually help predict those at risk before therapy even begins. For survivors who show neurocognitive decline following cancer treatment, rehabilitation similar to that used for survivors of traumatic brain injury have shown some effectiveness. However, for those newly diagnosed patients who are identified as being at risk by one of the above methods, prophylactic interventions such cognitive training and maintenance of academic growth may offer the best hope of preventing late effects. Cancer is the No. 2 cause of death (after accidents) in children under the age of 15. Nevertheless, the survival rate approaches 90% for those diagnosed with acute lymphoblastic leukemia today, although less for children with brain tumors. A child cured of cancer may have many more decades of life ahead of them than adults cured of their cancer. In addition, the child is in the formative years of school, career and social development and is therefore at risk for falling short of their potential due to neurocognitive late effects of their cancer and its treatment. As cure rates for cancer and brain tumors climb, prevention of these late effects becomes more of a priority. 