Inhibition of Carbohydrate Oxidation During the First Minute of Reperfusion After Brief Ischemia: NMR Detection of Hyperpolarized 13CO 2 and H 13 CO 3 ? Isolated rat hearts were studied by 31P NMR and 13C NMR. Hyperpolarized [1-13C]pyruvate was supplied to control normoxic hearts and production of [1-13C]lactate, [1-13C]alanine, 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? was monitored with 1-s temporal resolution. Hearts were also subjected to 10 min of global ischemia followed by reperfusion. Developed pressure, heart rate, oxygen consumption, [ATP], [phosphocreatine], and pH recovered within 3 min after the ischemic period. During the first 90 s of reperfusion, [1-13C]alanine and [1-13C]lactate appeared rapidly, demonstrating metabolism of pyruvate through two enzymes largely confined to the cytosol, alanine aminotransferase, and lactate dehydrogenase. 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? were not detected. Late after ischemia and reperfusion, the products of pyruvate dehydrogenase, 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? were easily detected. Using this multinuclear NMR approach, we established that during the first 90 s of reperfusion PDH flux is essentially zero and recovers within 20 min in reversibly-injured myocardium.  METHODS [1-13C]pyruvate, 99% enriched, was obtained from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Inc. (Andover, MA). The trityl radical, tris{8-carboxyl-2,2,6,6-tetra[2-(1-hydroxyethyl)]-benzo(1,2-d:4,5-d)bis( 1 , 3 )dithiole-4-yl}methyl sodium salt, was obtained from Oxford Molecular Biotools Ltd. (Abingdon, Oxfordshire, UK). All other chemicals were obtained from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). Sprague-Dawley rats were obtained from Charles River Laboratories (Wilmington, MA) and given free access to standard rat chow and water. Heart Perfusions Protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Hearts from adult male Sprague Dawley (12 weeks in age, ~350 g) rats were rapidly excised under general anesthesia and perfused at 37°C and 100 cm H2O using standard Langendorff methods. Heart rate and developed pressure were monitored through a catheter in the left ventricle. After the aorta was cannulated, the heart was supplied initially with nonrecirculating medium and placed in an 18-mm NMR tube. The perfusing medium was a modified Krebs-Henseleit buffer containing the following (in mM): NaCl (118), KCl (4.7), NaHCO3 ( 25 ), MgSO4 (1.2), CaCl2 (1.25), and unenriched pyruvate (2.0) bubbled continuously with a 95/5 mixture of O2/CO2. The water-jacketed glass perfusion apparatus was placed into the bore of a 14.1 Tesla (T) magnet. During a preparation and stabilization time of approximately 20 min, the NMR probe was tuned and the field homogeneity was optimized using the strong 23Na free induction decay signal arising from the perfusate. A line width of 15 Hz was typically obtained. The total volume of the perfusing medium was 400 to 500 mL. Effluent from the heart was recirculated after passing through a cellulose acetate filter (pore size, 5 microns). Ischemia was induced by inflating a balloon in the aortic cannula. Ischemia was confirmed by the lack of return of perfusate from the NMR tube to the bench. After 10 min of ischemia, the balloon was deflated to reestablish flow. Completion of the set-up process, ischemia and reperfusion was timed to coincide with dissolution of the hyperpolarized substrate. During the ischemic period, the temperature of the hearts was maintained at 37°C with heated air. Typical coronary flow rates were 8 mL/min for hearts before ischemia. During the first minute of reperfusion coronary flow increased to ~ 18 –20 mL/min. A total of four hearts were used for each perfusion condition coupled with 13C spectroscopy. Four additional hearts prepared with the immediate and late reperfusion conditions were used to obtain 31P spectroscopy at the relevant time points. Hyperpolarization and Delivery of <sup>13</sup>C-Enriched Substrates to Hearts The polarization process, similar to the procedure described by Golman et al. ( 22 ), was started approximately 90 min before each experiment. An aliquot, ~20 ?L, of a 3-M solution of [1-13C]pyruvate prepared in deionized H2O was mixed with an equal volume of 16.6 mM trityl radical in 50/50 glycerol/water. The solutions were polarized using a commercial device (HyperSense™, Oxford Instruments Molecular Biotools, Abingdon, UK) to a level of ~ 15% after 90 min of microwave irradiation at 1.4°K. The polarized sample was rapidly thawed by dissolution in 4 mL of heated water containing 0.85 mM Na2EDTA. Three milliliters of the resulting solution was further diluted into 20 mL of substrate-free perfusate to achieve a final concentration of 2 mM hyperpolarized [1-13C]pyruvate. Total time required for dissolution, ejection and further dilution was approximately 10 s. The solution was injected gently and continuously by catheter into the perfusion column directly above the heart over a period of 90 s. The temperature of all solutions entering the heart was 37° and the pH was 7.3–7.4. The NMR console was triggered to start acquisition at the end of the dissolution process. NMR Spectroscopy of the Isolated Heart 13C and 31P NMR spectra were acquired at 14.1T (Varian INOVA) in an 18-mm broadband probe (Doty Scientific, Inc., Columbia, SC). 31P NMR spectra were acquired using 90° pulses, a 20,000 Hz bandwidth and 80586 points. The acquisition time was ~ 2 s and the inter-acquisition delay was ~ 1 s, yielding a total delay between pulses of ~ 3 s. Typically 64 scans were collected over 3 min. The FIDs were zero-filled before apodization and Fourier transformation. 31P spectra were acquired at baseline, during ischemia and during reperfusion. The first 3-min spectrum after reperfusion was triggered simultaneously with initiation of reperfusion. 31P NMR spectra were acquired in all hearts studied with hyperpolarized 13C except during the ~ 3-min period required for 13C NMR scans. Four additional hearts were examined exclusively by 31P NMR. Longitudinal relaxation times for ATP and phosphocreatine were measured by inversion recovery. [ATP] and [phosphocreatine] were calculated after correction for differential saturation. A small glass bulb containing dioxane was secured near the left ventricle to serve as an internal 13C standard. After retuning the probe, 13C NMR spectra were acquired using 66° pulses. The first free induction decays (FIDs) were acquired a few seconds before injection of the hyperpolarized solution. Serial, single FIDs were acquired over a ± 21,000 Hz bandwidth into 83,990 points with proton decoupling using GARP ( 23 ). No NOE effects were noted with this scheme. Acquisition time was ~ 1 s, giving a time to repeat of 1 s for each scan. Typically 150 – 180 separate FIDs were collected. These data were zero-filled before Fourier transformation. The relative peak areas were measured by integration using the VNMR software. Chemical shifts were assigned relative to the dioxane external standard at 67.4 ppm. The chemical shift of dissolved 13CO2 was taken from published data ( 24 ). Magnetization transfer was performed by selective saturation of either 13CO2 or H 13 CO 3 ? using frequency selective Gaussian pulses ( 25 ). Data Analysis Myocardial pH was determined by 31P NMR from the chemical shift of the inorganic phosphate resonance ( 26 ). Total ATP was referenced to 13.7 ?mol/g, a previously-measured [ATP] under these conditions ( 27 ). Free [ADP] was calculated from the equilibrium constant of the creatine kinase reaction, the measured pH and total creatine reported previously for pyruvate-perfused hearts ( 27 ).  Heart Perfusions Protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Hearts from adult male Sprague Dawley (12 weeks in age, ~350 g) rats were rapidly excised under general anesthesia and perfused at 37°C and 100 cm H2O using standard Langendorff methods. Heart rate and developed pressure were monitored through a catheter in the left ventricle. After the aorta was cannulated, the heart was supplied initially with nonrecirculating medium and placed in an 18-mm NMR tube. The perfusing medium was a modified Krebs-Henseleit buffer containing the following (in mM): NaCl (118), KCl (4.7), NaHCO3 ( 25 ), MgSO4 (1.2), CaCl2 (1.25), and unenriched pyruvate (2.0) bubbled continuously with a 95/5 mixture of O2/CO2. The water-jacketed glass perfusion apparatus was placed into the bore of a 14.1 Tesla (T) magnet. During a preparation and stabilization time of approximately 20 min, the NMR probe was tuned and the field homogeneity was optimized using the strong 23Na free induction decay signal arising from the perfusate. A line width of 15 Hz was typically obtained. The total volume of the perfusing medium was 400 to 500 mL. Effluent from the heart was recirculated after passing through a cellulose acetate filter (pore size, 5 microns). Ischemia was induced by inflating a balloon in the aortic cannula. Ischemia was confirmed by the lack of return of perfusate from the NMR tube to the bench. After 10 min of ischemia, the balloon was deflated to reestablish flow. Completion of the set-up process, ischemia and reperfusion was timed to coincide with dissolution of the hyperpolarized substrate. During the ischemic period, the temperature of the hearts was maintained at 37°C with heated air. Typical coronary flow rates were 8 mL/min for hearts before ischemia. During the first minute of reperfusion coronary flow increased to ~ 18 –20 mL/min. A total of four hearts were used for each perfusion condition coupled with 13C spectroscopy. Four additional hearts prepared with the immediate and late reperfusion conditions were used to obtain 31P spectroscopy at the relevant time points.  Hyperpolarization and Delivery of <sup>13</sup>C-Enriched Substrates to Hearts The polarization process, similar to the procedure described by Golman et al. ( 22 ), was started approximately 90 min before each experiment. An aliquot, ~20 ?L, of a 3-M solution of [1-13C]pyruvate prepared in deionized H2O was mixed with an equal volume of 16.6 mM trityl radical in 50/50 glycerol/water. The solutions were polarized using a commercial device (HyperSense™, Oxford Instruments Molecular Biotools, Abingdon, UK) to a level of ~ 15% after 90 min of microwave irradiation at 1.4°K. The polarized sample was rapidly thawed by dissolution in 4 mL of heated water containing 0.85 mM Na2EDTA. Three milliliters of the resulting solution was further diluted into 20 mL of substrate-free perfusate to achieve a final concentration of 2 mM hyperpolarized [1-13C]pyruvate. Total time required for dissolution, ejection and further dilution was approximately 10 s. The solution was injected gently and continuously by catheter into the perfusion column directly above the heart over a period of 90 s. The temperature of all solutions entering the heart was 37° and the pH was 7.3–7.4. The NMR console was triggered to start acquisition at the end of the dissolution process.  NMR Spectroscopy of the Isolated Heart 13C and 31P NMR spectra were acquired at 14.1T (Varian INOVA) in an 18-mm broadband probe (Doty Scientific, Inc., Columbia, SC). 31P NMR spectra were acquired using 90° pulses, a 20,000 Hz bandwidth and 80586 points. The acquisition time was ~ 2 s and the inter-acquisition delay was ~ 1 s, yielding a total delay between pulses of ~ 3 s. Typically 64 scans were collected over 3 min. The FIDs were zero-filled before apodization and Fourier transformation. 31P spectra were acquired at baseline, during ischemia and during reperfusion. The first 3-min spectrum after reperfusion was triggered simultaneously with initiation of reperfusion. 31P NMR spectra were acquired in all hearts studied with hyperpolarized 13C except during the ~ 3-min period required for 13C NMR scans. Four additional hearts were examined exclusively by 31P NMR. Longitudinal relaxation times for ATP and phosphocreatine were measured by inversion recovery. [ATP] and [phosphocreatine] were calculated after correction for differential saturation. A small glass bulb containing dioxane was secured near the left ventricle to serve as an internal 13C standard. After retuning the probe, 13C NMR spectra were acquired using 66° pulses. The first free induction decays (FIDs) were acquired a few seconds before injection of the hyperpolarized solution. Serial, single FIDs were acquired over a ± 21,000 Hz bandwidth into 83,990 points with proton decoupling using GARP ( 23 ). No NOE effects were noted with this scheme. Acquisition time was ~ 1 s, giving a time to repeat of 1 s for each scan. Typically 150 – 180 separate FIDs were collected. These data were zero-filled before Fourier transformation. The relative peak areas were measured by integration using the VNMR software. Chemical shifts were assigned relative to the dioxane external standard at 67.4 ppm. The chemical shift of dissolved 13CO2 was taken from published data ( 24 ). Magnetization transfer was performed by selective saturation of either 13CO2 or H 13 CO 3 ? using frequency selective Gaussian pulses ( 25 ).  Data Analysis Myocardial pH was determined by 31P NMR from the chemical shift of the inorganic phosphate resonance ( 26 ). Total ATP was referenced to 13.7 ?mol/g, a previously-measured [ATP] under these conditions ( 27 ). Free [ADP] was calculated from the equilibrium constant of the creatine kinase reaction, the measured pH and total creatine reported previously for pyruvate-perfused hearts ( 27 ).  RESULTS Oxygen consumption and developed pressure were typical of isolated rat hearts subjected to brief global ischemia and reperfusion ( Fig. 1 ). Oxygen consumption before ischemia was 30.29 ?mol/g d.w./min. During the first 30 s after reperfusion, oxygen consumption recovered to baseline levels. Similarly, rate-pressure product recovered virtually immediately upon reperfusion. The 31P NMR spectra were also typical of isolated rat hearts ( 27 ) during the control, transient global ischemia, and reperfusion periods. Longitudinal relaxation times for each metabolite were measured by saturation-recovery in separate experiments. The measured T1s were 5.8 s for inorganic phosphate, 1.5 s for phosphocreatine, and 0.57 and 0.7 s, respectively for the beta and gamma positions of ATP. After coronary flow was interrupted, there was a rapid decrease in [phosphocreatine], a slower decrease in [ATP] and pH in the cytosol, and a rapid increase in [Pi] (inorganic phosphate) ( 20 ). These changes, summarized in Table 1 , confirm the characteristic metabolic consequences of severe ischemia. Upon reperfusion, tissue pH, [ATP] and [PCr] returned quickly to preischemic levels and the 31P NMR spectrum acquired during the first 3 min of reperfusion was characteristic of a nearly normal energetic state. This rapid recovery of the 31P NMR spectrum, in combination with the rapid recovery of oxygen consumption and rate–pressure product, suggests that flux through the citric acid cycle was nearly normal during the first minute of reperfusion. The calculated free [ADP] within 10 min after reperfusion was not significantly different compared with baseline conditions (0.18 ± 0.05 vs. 0.30 ± 0.1 ?mol/g d.w.). Because [ATP] and [Pi] were also at baseline by 10 min of reperfusion, two widely-used indices of cell energy state, [ATP]/[ADP] and phosphorylation potential, [ATP]/([ADP][Pi]), were also at baseline. Any changes in pyruvate metabolism late after ischemia cannot be attributed to overall cellular energy state. A typical control 13C NMR spectrum from a normoxic heart summed from 100 scans is shown in Figure 2 . In this example, the dominant resonances were pyruvate C1 (170.6 ppm), lactate C1 (183.2 ppm), alanine C1 (176.5 ppm), pyruvate hydrate C1 (179.0 ppm), bicarbonate ( H 13 CO 3 ? , 160.9 ppm), and 13CO2 (124.5 ppm). Individual spectra demonstrating the kinetics of appearance of pyruvate, lactate, CO2 and bicarbonate are shown in the insets after switching from unlabeled pyruvate to hyperpolarized [1-13C]pyruvate. In control hearts, [1-13C]pyruvate, [1-13C]lactate, and [1-13C]alanine appeared within a few seconds, followed by 13CO2 and [13C]bicarbonate. Because the metabolite pool sizes were already established before switchover, the appearance of [1-13C]lactate does not represent net synthesis but rather indicates exchange of labeled pyruvate into the established lactate pool. The sum of 13C NMR spectra acquired in the first 100 s after reperfusion with immediate injection of [1-13C]pyruvate is illustrated in Figure 3 . The signal due to [1-13C]lactate was increased compared with baseline, and neither 13CO2 nor [13C]bicarbonate could be detected even with relatively prolonged (90 s) signal averaging. The inset ( Fig. 3A ) shows the 31P NMR spectrum acquired during the first 3 min of reperfusion in a separate heart. The [phosphocreatine]/[ATP] ratio and [Pi] were essentially normal even though the spectrum was acquired during essentially the same period as the 13C spectrum. Late after reperfusion ( Fig. 3 ), the 13C NMR spectra were notable for reduced lactate and increased H 13 CO 3 ? and 13CO2 compared with preischemic conditions. A representative 31P NMR spectrum (inset, Fig. 3B ) demonstrated near-complete recovery of [ATP], [phosphocreatine] and pH as would be expected for brief normothermic ischemia. The immediate product of [1-13C]pyruvate cleavage is 13CO2. Because bicarbonate and CO2 are normally inter-converted rapidly by carbonic anhydrase, the absence of either signal during the first 90 s demonstrates negligible flux through PDH early during the reperfusion period after ischemia. Flux through PDH was re-established by 20 min of reperfusion. The relative signal intensity of both metabolites, 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? , is sensitive to pH as described by the Henderson-Hasselbalch relationship ( 28 ). In control hearts, the H 13 CO 3 ? and 13CO2 signals were both observed several seconds after injection of hyperpolarized [1-13C]pyruvate. However, early after ischemia neither H 13 CO 3 ? nor 13CO2 signals could be detected. Late after ischemia, the ratio of resonance areas was 7 to 1 for the 25-s period after both peaks became visible. After a correction for the T1 of CO2 and bicarbonate, the pH was measured to be 7.1. Values for the T1 of CO2 and bicarbonate were obtained by fitting of the magnetization decay as a function of time, and were 21 and 19 s, respectively. Assuming that the rate of exchange through carbonic anhydrase is rapid compared with the rate of 13CO2 generation and that other factors do not distort the H 13 CO 3 ? / C 13 O 2 ratio, we believe this to be an accurate estimate of the pH, because the pH calculated from the chemical shift of inorganic phosphate was 7.0. The relation between the observed 13C signal and the concentration of the metabolite is difficult to determine because the rate constant for decay of 13C polarization, T1, may be reduced in an enzyme-substrate complex or in the relatively viscous mitochondrial matrix. A simple index with high dynamic range, the relative intensities of the [1-13C]lactate resonance compared with either H 13 CO 3 ? or 13CO2, may prove useful in assessing postischemic myocardium. In the first minute after reperfusion, [1-13C]lactate was much higher than in control hearts, consistent with pyruvate exchange into a large lactate pool ( Fig. 4 ). Conversely, the products of PDH flux, 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? , were virtually undetectable due to inhibition of PDH flux immediately after reperfusion. These observations can be conveniently summarized, illustrated in Figure 5 , as the ratio [13C]bicarbonate/[1-13C]lactate (or 13CO2/[1-13C]lactate). There was a dramatic difference in the time course observed in hearts early vs. late after reperfusion. This ratio may provide a very rapid and useful index of metabolic state without an absolute measure of polarization or metabolite concentrations. The total areas under the curve defined by the bicarbonate/lactate ratio are shown as a bar graph with standard deviations (n = 4) in the inset to Figure 5 . The means are different at a 99% confidence level.  RESULTS Oxygen consumption and developed pressure were typical of isolated rat hearts subjected to brief global ischemia and reperfusion ( Fig. 1 ). Oxygen consumption before ischemia was 30.29 ?mol/g d.w./min. During the first 30 s after reperfusion, oxygen consumption recovered to baseline levels. Similarly, rate-pressure product recovered virtually immediately upon reperfusion. The 31P NMR spectra were also typical of isolated rat hearts ( 27 ) during the control, transient global ischemia, and reperfusion periods. Longitudinal relaxation times for each metabolite were measured by saturation-recovery in separate experiments. The measured T1s were 5.8 s for inorganic phosphate, 1.5 s for phosphocreatine, and 0.57 and 0.7 s, respectively for the beta and gamma positions of ATP. After coronary flow was interrupted, there was a rapid decrease in [phosphocreatine], a slower decrease in [ATP] and pH in the cytosol, and a rapid increase in [Pi] (inorganic phosphate) ( 20 ). These changes, summarized in Table 1 , confirm the characteristic metabolic consequences of severe ischemia. Upon reperfusion, tissue pH, [ATP] and [PCr] returned quickly to preischemic levels and the 31P NMR spectrum acquired during the first 3 min of reperfusion was characteristic of a nearly normal energetic state. This rapid recovery of the 31P NMR spectrum, in combination with the rapid recovery of oxygen consumption and rate–pressure product, suggests that flux through the citric acid cycle was nearly normal during the first minute of reperfusion. The calculated free [ADP] within 10 min after reperfusion was not significantly different compared with baseline conditions (0.18 ± 0.05 vs. 0.30 ± 0.1 ?mol/g d.w.). Because [ATP] and [Pi] were also at baseline by 10 min of reperfusion, two widely-used indices of cell energy state, [ATP]/[ADP] and phosphorylation potential, [ATP]/([ADP][Pi]), were also at baseline. Any changes in pyruvate metabolism late after ischemia cannot be attributed to overall cellular energy state. A typical control 13C NMR spectrum from a normoxic heart summed from 100 scans is shown in Figure 2 . In this example, the dominant resonances were pyruvate C1 (170.6 ppm), lactate C1 (183.2 ppm), alanine C1 (176.5 ppm), pyruvate hydrate C1 (179.0 ppm), bicarbonate ( H 13 CO 3 ? , 160.9 ppm), and 13CO2 (124.5 ppm). Individual spectra demonstrating the kinetics of appearance of pyruvate, lactate, CO2 and bicarbonate are shown in the insets after switching from unlabeled pyruvate to hyperpolarized [1-13C]pyruvate. In control hearts, [1-13C]pyruvate, [1-13C]lactate, and [1-13C]alanine appeared within a few seconds, followed by 13CO2 and [13C]bicarbonate. Because the metabolite pool sizes were already established before switchover, the appearance of [1-13C]lactate does not represent net synthesis but rather indicates exchange of labeled pyruvate into the established lactate pool. The sum of 13C NMR spectra acquired in the first 100 s after reperfusion with immediate injection of [1-13C]pyruvate is illustrated in Figure 3 . The signal due to [1-13C]lactate was increased compared with baseline, and neither 13CO2 nor [13C]bicarbonate could be detected even with relatively prolonged (90 s) signal averaging. The inset ( Fig. 3A ) shows the 31P NMR spectrum acquired during the first 3 min of reperfusion in a separate heart. The [phosphocreatine]/[ATP] ratio and [Pi] were essentially normal even though the spectrum was acquired during essentially the same period as the 13C spectrum. Late after reperfusion ( Fig. 3 ), the 13C NMR spectra were notable for reduced lactate and increased H 13 CO 3 ? and 13CO2 compared with preischemic conditions. A representative 31P NMR spectrum (inset, Fig. 3B ) demonstrated near-complete recovery of [ATP], [phosphocreatine] and pH as would be expected for brief normothermic ischemia. The immediate product of [1-13C]pyruvate cleavage is 13CO2. Because bicarbonate and CO2 are normally inter-converted rapidly by carbonic anhydrase, the absence of either signal during the first 90 s demonstrates negligible flux through PDH early during the reperfusion period after ischemia. Flux through PDH was re-established by 20 min of reperfusion. The relative signal intensity of both metabolites, 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? , is sensitive to pH as described by the Henderson-Hasselbalch relationship ( 28 ). In control hearts, the H 13 CO 3 ? and 13CO2 signals were both observed several seconds after injection of hyperpolarized [1-13C]pyruvate. However, early after ischemia neither H 13 CO 3 ? nor 13CO2 signals could be detected. Late after ischemia, the ratio of resonance areas was 7 to 1 for the 25-s period after both peaks became visible. After a correction for the T1 of CO2 and bicarbonate, the pH was measured to be 7.1. Values for the T1 of CO2 and bicarbonate were obtained by fitting of the magnetization decay as a function of time, and were 21 and 19 s, respectively. Assuming that the rate of exchange through carbonic anhydrase is rapid compared with the rate of 13CO2 generation and that other factors do not distort the H 13 CO 3 ? / C 13 O 2 ratio, we believe this to be an accurate estimate of the pH, because the pH calculated from the chemical shift of inorganic phosphate was 7.0. The relation between the observed 13C signal and the concentration of the metabolite is difficult to determine because the rate constant for decay of 13C polarization, T1, may be reduced in an enzyme-substrate complex or in the relatively viscous mitochondrial matrix. A simple index with high dynamic range, the relative intensities of the [1-13C]lactate resonance compared with either H 13 CO 3 ? or 13CO2, may prove useful in assessing postischemic myocardium. In the first minute after reperfusion, [1-13C]lactate was much higher than in control hearts, consistent with pyruvate exchange into a large lactate pool ( Fig. 4 ). Conversely, the products of PDH flux, 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? , were virtually undetectable due to inhibition of PDH flux immediately after reperfusion. These observations can be conveniently summarized, illustrated in Figure 5 , as the ratio [13C]bicarbonate/[1-13C]lactate (or 13CO2/[1-13C]lactate). There was a dramatic difference in the time course observed in hearts early vs. late after reperfusion. This ratio may provide a very rapid and useful index of metabolic state without an absolute measure of polarization or metabolite concentrations. The total areas under the curve defined by the bicarbonate/lactate ratio are shown as a bar graph with standard deviations (n = 4) in the inset to Figure 5 . The means are different at a 99% confidence level.  DISCUSSION Even at very high rates of oxygen consumption, the heart possesses the enzymatic machinery to derive virtually all energy from a single precursor such as glucose, pyruvate, or fatty acids of various chain lengths ( 27 ). Because glucose and pyruvate require PDH for metabolism to acetyl-CoA while fatty acids do not, the metabolic network of the heart must adjust PDH flux rapidly over a wide dynamic range as substrate conditions and hemodynamic demands change ( 27 , 29 – 30 ). In the present study, flux through PDH was examined in the postischemic heart using hyperpolarized [1-13C]pyruvate. Conceptually, this approach is similar to monitoring 14CO2 release from [1-14C]pyruvate ( 10 – 12 , 31 , 32 ), but it offers the overwhelming advantage of simultaneous detection of other metabolites such as lactate and alanine, the convenience and inherent safety of working with a stable isotope, and the potential for clinical application. Production of <sup>13</sup>CO<sub>2</sub> and [<sup>13</sup>C]Bicarbonate After Ischemia The immediate decarboxylation product of [1-13C]pyruvate is 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? is subsequently produced as a consequence of the high activity of carbonic anhydrase. As expected, in these studies 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? evolved quickly in normoxic hearts, consistent with our earlier observations ( 16 ). High flux through the reaction would be expected in the presence of saturating concentrations of pyruvate. However, immediately after ischemia, 13CO2 was undetectable and H 13 CO 3 ? could only be detected at a few timepoints. This observation could not be attributed to impaired perfusion or transport of pyruvate into the cytosol because [1-13C]lactate was abundant. Given the acidification measured by 31P NMR, the [ H 13 CO 3 ? ] should decrease because of protonation and conversion to dissolved 13CO2. The absence of detectable 13CO2 is most consistent with markedly reduced production of 13CO2 early after reperfusion due to reduced PDH flux. Appearance of 13CO2 and [13C]bicarbonate was substantially different 20 min after reperfusion compared with immediately after reperfusion, demonstrating marked differences in PDH flux. Regulation of PDH flux is due to both covalent modification and feedback inhibition ( 11 , 12 , 31 , 32 ). Inactivation by phosphorylation occurs when acetyl-CoA is abundant or when the mitochondrial environment is reducing. Two key reaction products, NADH and acetyl-CoA, also act as competitive feedback inhibitors. Earlier studies demonstrated preserved total PDH content and maintenance of a large fraction of PDH in its active form early after ischemia ( 5 , 33 ), suggesting an overall neutral effect of ischemia on enzyme content and on covalent modification. Although other studies ( 34 ) found a decrease in PDH activation after ischemia, the effect was transient and PDH activation returned to normal within 5 min. Therefore, the factors that may be expected to regulate PDH flux early after ischemia are NADH/NAD+ and acetyl-CoA/CoA. The current observation of marked suppression of bicarbonate and CO2 appearance in the first 90 s of reperfusion followed later by rapid appearance of [13C]bicarbonate and 13CO2 strongly suggests that the reducing state of postischemic heart tissue inhibits PDH flux, and this allosteric effect is reversed within a few minutes. Flux through PDH monitored by 14CO2 release from [1-14C]pyruvate or [1-14C]lactate was examined 5 min ( 23 ) or later after reperfusion in isolated hearts. Terrand et al. ( 13 ) found that 14CO2 release from [1-14C]lactate was unchanged compared with preischemic control at 5 min or 20 min after reperfusion. These observations are generally consistent with reports of unaltered glucose oxidation ( 35 , 36 ) during reperfusion. Other studies, however, showed increased ( 37 ) as well as decreased ( 38 ) flux through PDH early after ischemia. Direct comparison to earlier studies is difficult because the assessment of 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? appearance in the current study was performed over the first 90 – 120 s of reperfusion. To our knowledge, no previous studies have examined PDH flux in this early time frame. After 20 min of ischemia in vivo followed by 2 hr of reperfusion, the appearance of 13C bicarbonate was decreased ( 15 ). The discrepancy between these earlier results and our current observations is likely due to differences in availability of alternative substrates to the myocardium. Free fatty acids and ketones are available for oxidation in vivo and were likely increased late in vivo after transient ischemia. In the current study, the only exogenous substrate was [1-13C]pyruvate. Together, these results suggest that the capacity to oxidize carbohydrates is preserved after brief ischemia, but alternative substrates such as fatty acids may compete effectively with carbohydrates. Bicarbonate-Lactate Ratio The NADH/NAD+ ratio increases rapidly during ischemia and recovers quickly after reperfusion. The high NADH/NAD+ would be expected to have two important effects in this experiment. First, the rapid appearance of [1-13C]lactate during the first 90 s of reperfusion demonstrates delivery of the tracer into the cytosol and flux through lactate dehydrogenase. Because the [lactate] at end-ischemia is increased, the large lactate signal likely is due to exchange of [1-13C]pyruvate with a large lactate pool driven by the strongly reducing environment of ischemia. Second, a high NADH/NAD+ should inhibit PDH and reduce appearance of 13CO2 from [1-13C] pyruvate ( Fig. 4 ). A low H 13 CO 3 ? / [ 1 ? C 13 ] lactate ratio is exactly the expected consequence of a strong reducing environment. Later, as the redox environment returns to normal in viable myocardium, PDH flux should recover and lactate should clear. Consequently, the ratio H 13 CO 3 ? / [ 1 ? C 13 ] lactate would be expected to rise in recovering myocardium, indicating the combination of restored PDH flux and lactate washout. A simple kinetic model was constructed to illustrate the principle. A 75% decrease in the rate constant for flux through PDH dramatically decreased the ratio [13C]bicarbonate/[1-13C]lactate ( Fig. 6 ), qualitatively consistent with the experimental observations. The bicarbonate/lactate ratio may be a useful indicator of recovery of metabolic function in the myocardium. The highly significant differences between the areas under the curve as shown in the inset of Figure 5 lend credence to this assertion. Sources of Acetyl-CoA Early During Reperfusion In the absence of exogenous fatty acids, heart tissue avidly metabolizes pyruvate in the citric acid cycle. The absence of signals from 13CO2 or H 13 CO 3 ? early after reperfusion in a heart supplied with [1-13C]pyruvate might suggest that citric acid cycle flux is reduced. However, this conclusion is inconsistent with two simultaneously acquired experimental observations. First, the reappearance of ATP could not be due to net flux through the creatine kinase reaction—the concentration of phosphocreatine was negligible at end-ischemia— but rather must have been produced by oxidative phosphorylation. Second, the high rate of oxygen consumption indicates continuous and rapid production of reducing equivalents. Aside from exogenous pyruvate, there are three possible sources of reducing equivalents early during reperfusion under these conditions. Glycogen or several intermediates that accumulate after ischemia—such as succinate, malate, alanine, and lactate— could be metabolized to pyruvate and subsequently through PDH to Ac-CoA for generation of reducing equivalents in the TCA cycle. However, PDH flux was negligible so the combined flux through these pathways cannot be a significant source of reducing equivalents during the first 90 s after reperfusion. Because succinate builds up during ischemia, conversion of excess succinate to oxaloacetate could provide a second source of reducing equivalents. Conversion of all the accumulated succinate during the first minute of reperfusion, approximately 0.5 ?mol/g d.w.( 39 ), to oxaloacetate will consume oxygen at a rate of approximately 0.5 ?mol/g d.w./min, or only a small fraction of the observed oxygen consumption of approximately 40 ?mol/g d.w./min. We suggest that the third possibility, oxidation of substrates that bypass PDH, is a reasonable alternative. Because exogenous long chain fatty acids and ketones were not provided and PDH flux was negligible, the only significant source for reducing equivalents is oxidation of endogenous triglycerides. However, it should be emphasized that triglyceride oxidation was not directly measured. Clinical Relevance The capacity of the myocardium to oxidize carbohydrates is severely inhibited during the first minute after reperfusion even in the presence of saturating concentrations of pyruvate. There is abundant evidence that oxidation of carbohydrates and particularly pyruvate is beneficial for the postischemic heart, although the mechanism is not fully understood. If flux through PDH is required for this beneficial effect, as reported earlier ( 40 ), then the current observations suggest that interventions should target the earliest period of reperfusion, although later intervention may also be valuable. A natural question is the practical clinical relevance of hyperpolarized 13C MRI. Because specific metabolic products can be monitored separately from one another and from the parent tracer, 13C magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging (MRSI) offers a fundamental advantage compared with radiotracer imaging. Specifically, the appearance of [1-13C]pyruvate serves as a perfusion marker and confirms delivery of tracer to the myocardium. Equilibration of 13C label into the alanine and lactate pools provides information about redox reactions and transamination reactions that are largely confined to the cytosol. Decarboxylation of pyruvate occurs at the first step of PDH once pyruvate enters the mitochondrial matrix resulting in stoichiometric release of 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? . These individual reactions, all probed in one exam, are inaccessible with radiotracer technology. A second advantage is that 13C is a stable isotope and therefore convenient to handle in any setting. Although a stable electron free radical is required for the polarization process, this can be removed easily by an adsorption membrane before injection. Finally, the 13C image, in principle, is largely insensitive to the magnetic field because the 13C polarization is established outside the observe field. Therefore, integration with conventional anatomical MRI studies at current clinical fields is feasible. It is encouraging that Golman and colleagues have already demonstrated cardiac imaging using [1-13C]pyruvate in a large-animal model at 1.5 T ( 15 ). In fact, this observation is somewhat unexpected because injected [1-13C]pyruvate must contribute significantly to acetyl-CoA despite alternative substrates such as fatty acids, ketones, and lactate. Clinical applications should be feasible, and the current study suggests that 13C images may be highly sensitive to recent ischemia.  DISCUSSION Even at very high rates of oxygen consumption, the heart possesses the enzymatic machinery to derive virtually all energy from a single precursor such as glucose, pyruvate, or fatty acids of various chain lengths ( 27 ). Because glucose and pyruvate require PDH for metabolism to acetyl-CoA while fatty acids do not, the metabolic network of the heart must adjust PDH flux rapidly over a wide dynamic range as substrate conditions and hemodynamic demands change ( 27 , 29 – 30 ). In the present study, flux through PDH was examined in the postischemic heart using hyperpolarized [1-13C]pyruvate. Conceptually, this approach is similar to monitoring 14CO2 release from [1-14C]pyruvate ( 10 – 12 , 31 , 32 ), but it offers the overwhelming advantage of simultaneous detection of other metabolites such as lactate and alanine, the convenience and inherent safety of working with a stable isotope, and the potential for clinical application. Production of <sup>13</sup>CO<sub>2</sub> and [<sup>13</sup>C]Bicarbonate After Ischemia The immediate decarboxylation product of [1-13C]pyruvate is 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? is subsequently produced as a consequence of the high activity of carbonic anhydrase. As expected, in these studies 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? evolved quickly in normoxic hearts, consistent with our earlier observations ( 16 ). High flux through the reaction would be expected in the presence of saturating concentrations of pyruvate. However, immediately after ischemia, 13CO2 was undetectable and H 13 CO 3 ? could only be detected at a few timepoints. This observation could not be attributed to impaired perfusion or transport of pyruvate into the cytosol because [1-13C]lactate was abundant. Given the acidification measured by 31P NMR, the [ H 13 CO 3 ? ] should decrease because of protonation and conversion to dissolved 13CO2. The absence of detectable 13CO2 is most consistent with markedly reduced production of 13CO2 early after reperfusion due to reduced PDH flux. Appearance of 13CO2 and [13C]bicarbonate was substantially different 20 min after reperfusion compared with immediately after reperfusion, demonstrating marked differences in PDH flux. Regulation of PDH flux is due to both covalent modification and feedback inhibition ( 11 , 12 , 31 , 32 ). Inactivation by phosphorylation occurs when acetyl-CoA is abundant or when the mitochondrial environment is reducing. Two key reaction products, NADH and acetyl-CoA, also act as competitive feedback inhibitors. Earlier studies demonstrated preserved total PDH content and maintenance of a large fraction of PDH in its active form early after ischemia ( 5 , 33 ), suggesting an overall neutral effect of ischemia on enzyme content and on covalent modification. Although other studies ( 34 ) found a decrease in PDH activation after ischemia, the effect was transient and PDH activation returned to normal within 5 min. Therefore, the factors that may be expected to regulate PDH flux early after ischemia are NADH/NAD+ and acetyl-CoA/CoA. The current observation of marked suppression of bicarbonate and CO2 appearance in the first 90 s of reperfusion followed later by rapid appearance of [13C]bicarbonate and 13CO2 strongly suggests that the reducing state of postischemic heart tissue inhibits PDH flux, and this allosteric effect is reversed within a few minutes. Flux through PDH monitored by 14CO2 release from [1-14C]pyruvate or [1-14C]lactate was examined 5 min ( 23 ) or later after reperfusion in isolated hearts. Terrand et al. ( 13 ) found that 14CO2 release from [1-14C]lactate was unchanged compared with preischemic control at 5 min or 20 min after reperfusion. These observations are generally consistent with reports of unaltered glucose oxidation ( 35 , 36 ) during reperfusion. Other studies, however, showed increased ( 37 ) as well as decreased ( 38 ) flux through PDH early after ischemia. Direct comparison to earlier studies is difficult because the assessment of 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? appearance in the current study was performed over the first 90 – 120 s of reperfusion. To our knowledge, no previous studies have examined PDH flux in this early time frame. After 20 min of ischemia in vivo followed by 2 hr of reperfusion, the appearance of 13C bicarbonate was decreased ( 15 ). The discrepancy between these earlier results and our current observations is likely due to differences in availability of alternative substrates to the myocardium. Free fatty acids and ketones are available for oxidation in vivo and were likely increased late in vivo after transient ischemia. In the current study, the only exogenous substrate was [1-13C]pyruvate. Together, these results suggest that the capacity to oxidize carbohydrates is preserved after brief ischemia, but alternative substrates such as fatty acids may compete effectively with carbohydrates. Bicarbonate-Lactate Ratio The NADH/NAD+ ratio increases rapidly during ischemia and recovers quickly after reperfusion. The high NADH/NAD+ would be expected to have two important effects in this experiment. First, the rapid appearance of [1-13C]lactate during the first 90 s of reperfusion demonstrates delivery of the tracer into the cytosol and flux through lactate dehydrogenase. Because the [lactate] at end-ischemia is increased, the large lactate signal likely is due to exchange of [1-13C]pyruvate with a large lactate pool driven by the strongly reducing environment of ischemia. Second, a high NADH/NAD+ should inhibit PDH and reduce appearance of 13CO2 from [1-13C] pyruvate ( Fig. 4 ). A low H 13 CO 3 ? / [ 1 ? C 13 ] lactate ratio is exactly the expected consequence of a strong reducing environment. Later, as the redox environment returns to normal in viable myocardium, PDH flux should recover and lactate should clear. Consequently, the ratio H 13 CO 3 ? / [ 1 ? C 13 ] lactate would be expected to rise in recovering myocardium, indicating the combination of restored PDH flux and lactate washout. A simple kinetic model was constructed to illustrate the principle. A 75% decrease in the rate constant for flux through PDH dramatically decreased the ratio [13C]bicarbonate/[1-13C]lactate ( Fig. 6 ), qualitatively consistent with the experimental observations. The bicarbonate/lactate ratio may be a useful indicator of recovery of metabolic function in the myocardium. The highly significant differences between the areas under the curve as shown in the inset of Figure 5 lend credence to this assertion. Sources of Acetyl-CoA Early During Reperfusion In the absence of exogenous fatty acids, heart tissue avidly metabolizes pyruvate in the citric acid cycle. The absence of signals from 13CO2 or H 13 CO 3 ? early after reperfusion in a heart supplied with [1-13C]pyruvate might suggest that citric acid cycle flux is reduced. However, this conclusion is inconsistent with two simultaneously acquired experimental observations. First, the reappearance of ATP could not be due to net flux through the creatine kinase reaction—the concentration of phosphocreatine was negligible at end-ischemia— but rather must have been produced by oxidative phosphorylation. Second, the high rate of oxygen consumption indicates continuous and rapid production of reducing equivalents. Aside from exogenous pyruvate, there are three possible sources of reducing equivalents early during reperfusion under these conditions. Glycogen or several intermediates that accumulate after ischemia—such as succinate, malate, alanine, and lactate— could be metabolized to pyruvate and subsequently through PDH to Ac-CoA for generation of reducing equivalents in the TCA cycle. However, PDH flux was negligible so the combined flux through these pathways cannot be a significant source of reducing equivalents during the first 90 s after reperfusion. Because succinate builds up during ischemia, conversion of excess succinate to oxaloacetate could provide a second source of reducing equivalents. Conversion of all the accumulated succinate during the first minute of reperfusion, approximately 0.5 ?mol/g d.w.( 39 ), to oxaloacetate will consume oxygen at a rate of approximately 0.5 ?mol/g d.w./min, or only a small fraction of the observed oxygen consumption of approximately 40 ?mol/g d.w./min. We suggest that the third possibility, oxidation of substrates that bypass PDH, is a reasonable alternative. Because exogenous long chain fatty acids and ketones were not provided and PDH flux was negligible, the only significant source for reducing equivalents is oxidation of endogenous triglycerides. However, it should be emphasized that triglyceride oxidation was not directly measured. Clinical Relevance The capacity of the myocardium to oxidize carbohydrates is severely inhibited during the first minute after reperfusion even in the presence of saturating concentrations of pyruvate. There is abundant evidence that oxidation of carbohydrates and particularly pyruvate is beneficial for the postischemic heart, although the mechanism is not fully understood. If flux through PDH is required for this beneficial effect, as reported earlier ( 40 ), then the current observations suggest that interventions should target the earliest period of reperfusion, although later intervention may also be valuable. A natural question is the practical clinical relevance of hyperpolarized 13C MRI. Because specific metabolic products can be monitored separately from one another and from the parent tracer, 13C magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging (MRSI) offers a fundamental advantage compared with radiotracer imaging. Specifically, the appearance of [1-13C]pyruvate serves as a perfusion marker and confirms delivery of tracer to the myocardium. Equilibration of 13C label into the alanine and lactate pools provides information about redox reactions and transamination reactions that are largely confined to the cytosol. Decarboxylation of pyruvate occurs at the first step of PDH once pyruvate enters the mitochondrial matrix resulting in stoichiometric release of 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? . These individual reactions, all probed in one exam, are inaccessible with radiotracer technology. A second advantage is that 13C is a stable isotope and therefore convenient to handle in any setting. Although a stable electron free radical is required for the polarization process, this can be removed easily by an adsorption membrane before injection. Finally, the 13C image, in principle, is largely insensitive to the magnetic field because the 13C polarization is established outside the observe field. Therefore, integration with conventional anatomical MRI studies at current clinical fields is feasible. It is encouraging that Golman and colleagues have already demonstrated cardiac imaging using [1-13C]pyruvate in a large-animal model at 1.5 T ( 15 ). In fact, this observation is somewhat unexpected because injected [1-13C]pyruvate must contribute significantly to acetyl-CoA despite alternative substrates such as fatty acids, ketones, and lactate. Clinical applications should be feasible, and the current study suggests that 13C images may be highly sensitive to recent ischemia.  Production of <sup>13</sup>CO<sub>2</sub> and [<sup>13</sup>C]Bicarbonate After Ischemia The immediate decarboxylation product of [1-13C]pyruvate is 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? is subsequently produced as a consequence of the high activity of carbonic anhydrase. As expected, in these studies 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? evolved quickly in normoxic hearts, consistent with our earlier observations ( 16 ). High flux through the reaction would be expected in the presence of saturating concentrations of pyruvate. However, immediately after ischemia, 13CO2 was undetectable and H 13 CO 3 ? could only be detected at a few timepoints. This observation could not be attributed to impaired perfusion or transport of pyruvate into the cytosol because [1-13C]lactate was abundant. Given the acidification measured by 31P NMR, the [ H 13 CO 3 ? ] should decrease because of protonation and conversion to dissolved 13CO2. The absence of detectable 13CO2 is most consistent with markedly reduced production of 13CO2 early after reperfusion due to reduced PDH flux. Appearance of 13CO2 and [13C]bicarbonate was substantially different 20 min after reperfusion compared with immediately after reperfusion, demonstrating marked differences in PDH flux. Regulation of PDH flux is due to both covalent modification and feedback inhibition ( 11 , 12 , 31 , 32 ). Inactivation by phosphorylation occurs when acetyl-CoA is abundant or when the mitochondrial environment is reducing. Two key reaction products, NADH and acetyl-CoA, also act as competitive feedback inhibitors. Earlier studies demonstrated preserved total PDH content and maintenance of a large fraction of PDH in its active form early after ischemia ( 5 , 33 ), suggesting an overall neutral effect of ischemia on enzyme content and on covalent modification. Although other studies ( 34 ) found a decrease in PDH activation after ischemia, the effect was transient and PDH activation returned to normal within 5 min. Therefore, the factors that may be expected to regulate PDH flux early after ischemia are NADH/NAD+ and acetyl-CoA/CoA. The current observation of marked suppression of bicarbonate and CO2 appearance in the first 90 s of reperfusion followed later by rapid appearance of [13C]bicarbonate and 13CO2 strongly suggests that the reducing state of postischemic heart tissue inhibits PDH flux, and this allosteric effect is reversed within a few minutes. Flux through PDH monitored by 14CO2 release from [1-14C]pyruvate or [1-14C]lactate was examined 5 min ( 23 ) or later after reperfusion in isolated hearts. Terrand et al. ( 13 ) found that 14CO2 release from [1-14C]lactate was unchanged compared with preischemic control at 5 min or 20 min after reperfusion. These observations are generally consistent with reports of unaltered glucose oxidation ( 35 , 36 ) during reperfusion. Other studies, however, showed increased ( 37 ) as well as decreased ( 38 ) flux through PDH early after ischemia. Direct comparison to earlier studies is difficult because the assessment of 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? appearance in the current study was performed over the first 90 – 120 s of reperfusion. To our knowledge, no previous studies have examined PDH flux in this early time frame. After 20 min of ischemia in vivo followed by 2 hr of reperfusion, the appearance of 13C bicarbonate was decreased ( 15 ). The discrepancy between these earlier results and our current observations is likely due to differences in availability of alternative substrates to the myocardium. Free fatty acids and ketones are available for oxidation in vivo and were likely increased late in vivo after transient ischemia. In the current study, the only exogenous substrate was [1-13C]pyruvate. Together, these results suggest that the capacity to oxidize carbohydrates is preserved after brief ischemia, but alternative substrates such as fatty acids may compete effectively with carbohydrates.  Production of <sup>13</sup>CO<sub>2</sub> and [<sup>13</sup>C]Bicarbonate After Ischemia The immediate decarboxylation product of [1-13C]pyruvate is 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? is subsequently produced as a consequence of the high activity of carbonic anhydrase. As expected, in these studies 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? evolved quickly in normoxic hearts, consistent with our earlier observations ( 16 ). High flux through the reaction would be expected in the presence of saturating concentrations of pyruvate. However, immediately after ischemia, 13CO2 was undetectable and H 13 CO 3 ? could only be detected at a few timepoints. This observation could not be attributed to impaired perfusion or transport of pyruvate into the cytosol because [1-13C]lactate was abundant. Given the acidification measured by 31P NMR, the [ H 13 CO 3 ? ] should decrease because of protonation and conversion to dissolved 13CO2. The absence of detectable 13CO2 is most consistent with markedly reduced production of 13CO2 early after reperfusion due to reduced PDH flux. Appearance of 13CO2 and [13C]bicarbonate was substantially different 20 min after reperfusion compared with immediately after reperfusion, demonstrating marked differences in PDH flux. Regulation of PDH flux is due to both covalent modification and feedback inhibition ( 11 , 12 , 31 , 32 ). Inactivation by phosphorylation occurs when acetyl-CoA is abundant or when the mitochondrial environment is reducing. Two key reaction products, NADH and acetyl-CoA, also act as competitive feedback inhibitors. Earlier studies demonstrated preserved total PDH content and maintenance of a large fraction of PDH in its active form early after ischemia ( 5 , 33 ), suggesting an overall neutral effect of ischemia on enzyme content and on covalent modification. Although other studies ( 34 ) found a decrease in PDH activation after ischemia, the effect was transient and PDH activation returned to normal within 5 min. Therefore, the factors that may be expected to regulate PDH flux early after ischemia are NADH/NAD+ and acetyl-CoA/CoA. The current observation of marked suppression of bicarbonate and CO2 appearance in the first 90 s of reperfusion followed later by rapid appearance of [13C]bicarbonate and 13CO2 strongly suggests that the reducing state of postischemic heart tissue inhibits PDH flux, and this allosteric effect is reversed within a few minutes. Flux through PDH monitored by 14CO2 release from [1-14C]pyruvate or [1-14C]lactate was examined 5 min ( 23 ) or later after reperfusion in isolated hearts. Terrand et al. ( 13 ) found that 14CO2 release from [1-14C]lactate was unchanged compared with preischemic control at 5 min or 20 min after reperfusion. These observations are generally consistent with reports of unaltered glucose oxidation ( 35 , 36 ) during reperfusion. Other studies, however, showed increased ( 37 ) as well as decreased ( 38 ) flux through PDH early after ischemia. Direct comparison to earlier studies is difficult because the assessment of 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? appearance in the current study was performed over the first 90 – 120 s of reperfusion. To our knowledge, no previous studies have examined PDH flux in this early time frame. After 20 min of ischemia in vivo followed by 2 hr of reperfusion, the appearance of 13C bicarbonate was decreased ( 15 ). The discrepancy between these earlier results and our current observations is likely due to differences in availability of alternative substrates to the myocardium. Free fatty acids and ketones are available for oxidation in vivo and were likely increased late in vivo after transient ischemia. In the current study, the only exogenous substrate was [1-13C]pyruvate. Together, these results suggest that the capacity to oxidize carbohydrates is preserved after brief ischemia, but alternative substrates such as fatty acids may compete effectively with carbohydrates.  Bicarbonate-Lactate Ratio The NADH/NAD+ ratio increases rapidly during ischemia and recovers quickly after reperfusion. The high NADH/NAD+ would be expected to have two important effects in this experiment. First, the rapid appearance of [1-13C]lactate during the first 90 s of reperfusion demonstrates delivery of the tracer into the cytosol and flux through lactate dehydrogenase. Because the [lactate] at end-ischemia is increased, the large lactate signal likely is due to exchange of [1-13C]pyruvate with a large lactate pool driven by the strongly reducing environment of ischemia. Second, a high NADH/NAD+ should inhibit PDH and reduce appearance of 13CO2 from [1-13C] pyruvate ( Fig. 4 ). A low H 13 CO 3 ? / [ 1 ? C 13 ] lactate ratio is exactly the expected consequence of a strong reducing environment. Later, as the redox environment returns to normal in viable myocardium, PDH flux should recover and lactate should clear. Consequently, the ratio H 13 CO 3 ? / [ 1 ? C 13 ] lactate would be expected to rise in recovering myocardium, indicating the combination of restored PDH flux and lactate washout. A simple kinetic model was constructed to illustrate the principle. A 75% decrease in the rate constant for flux through PDH dramatically decreased the ratio [13C]bicarbonate/[1-13C]lactate ( Fig. 6 ), qualitatively consistent with the experimental observations. The bicarbonate/lactate ratio may be a useful indicator of recovery of metabolic function in the myocardium. The highly significant differences between the areas under the curve as shown in the inset of Figure 5 lend credence to this assertion.  Bicarbonate-Lactate Ratio The NADH/NAD+ ratio increases rapidly during ischemia and recovers quickly after reperfusion. The high NADH/NAD+ would be expected to have two important effects in this experiment. First, the rapid appearance of [1-13C]lactate during the first 90 s of reperfusion demonstrates delivery of the tracer into the cytosol and flux through lactate dehydrogenase. Because the [lactate] at end-ischemia is increased, the large lactate signal likely is due to exchange of [1-13C]pyruvate with a large lactate pool driven by the strongly reducing environment of ischemia. Second, a high NADH/NAD+ should inhibit PDH and reduce appearance of 13CO2 from [1-13C] pyruvate ( Fig. 4 ). A low H 13 CO 3 ? / [ 1 ? C 13 ] lactate ratio is exactly the expected consequence of a strong reducing environment. Later, as the redox environment returns to normal in viable myocardium, PDH flux should recover and lactate should clear. Consequently, the ratio H 13 CO 3 ? / [ 1 ? C 13 ] lactate would be expected to rise in recovering myocardium, indicating the combination of restored PDH flux and lactate washout. A simple kinetic model was constructed to illustrate the principle. A 75% decrease in the rate constant for flux through PDH dramatically decreased the ratio [13C]bicarbonate/[1-13C]lactate ( Fig. 6 ), qualitatively consistent with the experimental observations. The bicarbonate/lactate ratio may be a useful indicator of recovery of metabolic function in the myocardium. The highly significant differences between the areas under the curve as shown in the inset of Figure 5 lend credence to this assertion.  Sources of Acetyl-CoA Early During Reperfusion In the absence of exogenous fatty acids, heart tissue avidly metabolizes pyruvate in the citric acid cycle. The absence of signals from 13CO2 or H 13 CO 3 ? early after reperfusion in a heart supplied with [1-13C]pyruvate might suggest that citric acid cycle flux is reduced. However, this conclusion is inconsistent with two simultaneously acquired experimental observations. First, the reappearance of ATP could not be due to net flux through the creatine kinase reaction—the concentration of phosphocreatine was negligible at end-ischemia— but rather must have been produced by oxidative phosphorylation. Second, the high rate of oxygen consumption indicates continuous and rapid production of reducing equivalents. Aside from exogenous pyruvate, there are three possible sources of reducing equivalents early during reperfusion under these conditions. Glycogen or several intermediates that accumulate after ischemia—such as succinate, malate, alanine, and lactate— could be metabolized to pyruvate and subsequently through PDH to Ac-CoA for generation of reducing equivalents in the TCA cycle. However, PDH flux was negligible so the combined flux through these pathways cannot be a significant source of reducing equivalents during the first 90 s after reperfusion. Because succinate builds up during ischemia, conversion of excess succinate to oxaloacetate could provide a second source of reducing equivalents. Conversion of all the accumulated succinate during the first minute of reperfusion, approximately 0.5 ?mol/g d.w.( 39 ), to oxaloacetate will consume oxygen at a rate of approximately 0.5 ?mol/g d.w./min, or only a small fraction of the observed oxygen consumption of approximately 40 ?mol/g d.w./min. We suggest that the third possibility, oxidation of substrates that bypass PDH, is a reasonable alternative. Because exogenous long chain fatty acids and ketones were not provided and PDH flux was negligible, the only significant source for reducing equivalents is oxidation of endogenous triglycerides. However, it should be emphasized that triglyceride oxidation was not directly measured.  Sources of Acetyl-CoA Early During Reperfusion In the absence of exogenous fatty acids, heart tissue avidly metabolizes pyruvate in the citric acid cycle. The absence of signals from 13CO2 or H 13 CO 3 ? early after reperfusion in a heart supplied with [1-13C]pyruvate might suggest that citric acid cycle flux is reduced. However, this conclusion is inconsistent with two simultaneously acquired experimental observations. First, the reappearance of ATP could not be due to net flux through the creatine kinase reaction—the concentration of phosphocreatine was negligible at end-ischemia— but rather must have been produced by oxidative phosphorylation. Second, the high rate of oxygen consumption indicates continuous and rapid production of reducing equivalents. Aside from exogenous pyruvate, there are three possible sources of reducing equivalents early during reperfusion under these conditions. Glycogen or several intermediates that accumulate after ischemia—such as succinate, malate, alanine, and lactate— could be metabolized to pyruvate and subsequently through PDH to Ac-CoA for generation of reducing equivalents in the TCA cycle. However, PDH flux was negligible so the combined flux through these pathways cannot be a significant source of reducing equivalents during the first 90 s after reperfusion. Because succinate builds up during ischemia, conversion of excess succinate to oxaloacetate could provide a second source of reducing equivalents. Conversion of all the accumulated succinate during the first minute of reperfusion, approximately 0.5 ?mol/g d.w.( 39 ), to oxaloacetate will consume oxygen at a rate of approximately 0.5 ?mol/g d.w./min, or only a small fraction of the observed oxygen consumption of approximately 40 ?mol/g d.w./min. We suggest that the third possibility, oxidation of substrates that bypass PDH, is a reasonable alternative. Because exogenous long chain fatty acids and ketones were not provided and PDH flux was negligible, the only significant source for reducing equivalents is oxidation of endogenous triglycerides. However, it should be emphasized that triglyceride oxidation was not directly measured.  Clinical Relevance The capacity of the myocardium to oxidize carbohydrates is severely inhibited during the first minute after reperfusion even in the presence of saturating concentrations of pyruvate. There is abundant evidence that oxidation of carbohydrates and particularly pyruvate is beneficial for the postischemic heart, although the mechanism is not fully understood. If flux through PDH is required for this beneficial effect, as reported earlier ( 40 ), then the current observations suggest that interventions should target the earliest period of reperfusion, although later intervention may also be valuable. A natural question is the practical clinical relevance of hyperpolarized 13C MRI. Because specific metabolic products can be monitored separately from one another and from the parent tracer, 13C magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging (MRSI) offers a fundamental advantage compared with radiotracer imaging. Specifically, the appearance of [1-13C]pyruvate serves as a perfusion marker and confirms delivery of tracer to the myocardium. Equilibration of 13C label into the alanine and lactate pools provides information about redox reactions and transamination reactions that are largely confined to the cytosol. Decarboxylation of pyruvate occurs at the first step of PDH once pyruvate enters the mitochondrial matrix resulting in stoichiometric release of 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? . These individual reactions, all probed in one exam, are inaccessible with radiotracer technology. A second advantage is that 13C is a stable isotope and therefore convenient to handle in any setting. Although a stable electron free radical is required for the polarization process, this can be removed easily by an adsorption membrane before injection. Finally, the 13C image, in principle, is largely insensitive to the magnetic field because the 13C polarization is established outside the observe field. Therefore, integration with conventional anatomical MRI studies at current clinical fields is feasible. It is encouraging that Golman and colleagues have already demonstrated cardiac imaging using [1-13C]pyruvate in a large-animal model at 1.5 T ( 15 ). In fact, this observation is somewhat unexpected because injected [1-13C]pyruvate must contribute significantly to acetyl-CoA despite alternative substrates such as fatty acids, ketones, and lactate. Clinical applications should be feasible, and the current study suggests that 13C images may be highly sensitive to recent ischemia.  Clinical Relevance The capacity of the myocardium to oxidize carbohydrates is severely inhibited during the first minute after reperfusion even in the presence of saturating concentrations of pyruvate. There is abundant evidence that oxidation of carbohydrates and particularly pyruvate is beneficial for the postischemic heart, although the mechanism is not fully understood. If flux through PDH is required for this beneficial effect, as reported earlier ( 40 ), then the current observations suggest that interventions should target the earliest period of reperfusion, although later intervention may also be valuable. A natural question is the practical clinical relevance of hyperpolarized 13C MRI. Because specific metabolic products can be monitored separately from one another and from the parent tracer, 13C magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging (MRSI) offers a fundamental advantage compared with radiotracer imaging. Specifically, the appearance of [1-13C]pyruvate serves as a perfusion marker and confirms delivery of tracer to the myocardium. Equilibration of 13C label into the alanine and lactate pools provides information about redox reactions and transamination reactions that are largely confined to the cytosol. Decarboxylation of pyruvate occurs at the first step of PDH once pyruvate enters the mitochondrial matrix resulting in stoichiometric release of 13CO2 and H 13 CO 3 ? . These individual reactions, all probed in one exam, are inaccessible with radiotracer technology. A second advantage is that 13C is a stable isotope and therefore convenient to handle in any setting. Although a stable electron free radical is required for the polarization process, this can be removed easily by an adsorption membrane before injection. Finally, the 13C image, in principle, is largely insensitive to the magnetic field because the 13C polarization is established outside the observe field. Therefore, integration with conventional anatomical MRI studies at current clinical fields is feasible. It is encouraging that Golman and colleagues have already demonstrated cardiac imaging using [1-13C]pyruvate in a large-animal model at 1.5 T ( 15 ). In fact, this observation is somewhat unexpected because injected [1-13C]pyruvate must contribute significantly to acetyl-CoA despite alternative substrates such as fatty acids, ketones, and lactate. Clinical applications should be feasible, and the current study suggests that 13C images may be highly sensitive to recent ischemia.  Figures and Table FIG. 1 Influence of brief ischemia on oxygen consumption, rate-pressure product, and energetics. Oxygen consumption, heart rate, developed pressure, and 31P NMR spectra were acquired before, during, and after 10 min of ischemia. Oxygen consumption (upper panel) and rate-pressure product (heart rate × developed pressure) both recovered to baseline conditions within a few seconds. FIG. 2 13C NMR spectrum of a normoxic isolated rat heart. This spectrum is the sum of 100 scans. Resonances assigned to 13CO2,H13CO3?, pyruvate C1, lactate C1, alanine C1, and pyruvate hydrate C1 are shown. Stacked plots of individual 13C resonances are shown in the insets. Each resonance is a single scan from the chemical shift ± ~ 10 Hz from the region assigned to pyruvate C1, H13CO3?, 13CO2, or lactate C1. FIG. 3 13C and 31P NMR spectra early and late after ischemia and reperfusion. A,B: After 10 min of ischemia, hearts were reperfused and hyperpolarized [1-13C]pyruvate was injected immediately (A) or 15 min (B) after reflow. Immediately after reperfusion, signal from H13CO3? and 13CO2 was nearly undetectable and signal from [1-13C]lactate was easily observed. Conversely, late after reperfusion H13CO3? and 13CO2 were easily detected and signal from [1-13C]lactate was similar to control. The insets show the 31P NMR spectra acquired during the first 3 min (A) and approximately 15–18 min (B) after reperfusion. Pi, inorganic phosphate; PCr, phosphocreatine; ATP, adenosine triphosphate. FIG. 4 Effect of ischemia on kinetics of appearance of [1-13C]pyruvate, [1-13C]lactate, H13CO3?, and 13CO2. The signals are shown early (left column) and late (right column) after ischemia. H13CO3? and 13CO2 were undetectable early after ischemia but were increased when [1-13C]pyruvate was injected 15 min after ischemia. FIG. 5 13C bicarbonate/lactate ratio. The ratio of the resonance areas from the [1-13C]lactate and H13CO3? is shown for three groups: control (A, open squares), early after reperfusion (B, triangles), and 15 min after reperfusion (C, open circles). The inset displays the integrated area under the appearance curve for each case. The error bars are ± the standard deviation. FIG. 6 Interpretation of the 13C bicarbonate/lactate ratio. A: Early during reperfusion, flux through PDH is reduced (dotted lines) and exchange of [1-13C]pyruvate into a large lactate pool is active. The bicarbonate/lactate ratio is low and substrates that do not require metabolism through PDH provide most of the acetyl-CoA. B: Late after reperfusion, flux through PDH recovers (solid lines) and exchange of [1-13C]pyruvate into the lactate pool is reduced. At this point, the ratio of 13C NMR signals from H13CO3? relative to [1-13C]lactate is increased because oxidation of [1-13C]pyruvate is increased relative to other substrates. Table 1 31P Data for Perfused Hearts Control Late during Ischemia Early after Ischemia Late after Ischemia pH 6.95 ± 0.06 6.38 ± 0.06 6.81 ± 0.12 6.99 ± 0.08 [PCr] ?mol/gdw 9.15 ± 1.39 0.66 ± 0.4 9.37 ± 1.71 10.91 ± 2.08 [ATP] ?mol/gdw 13.70 ± 0.00 9.04 ± 2.0 11.03 ± 2.03 9.79 ± 2.42  Figures and Table FIG. 1 Influence of brief ischemia on oxygen consumption, rate-pressure product, and energetics. Oxygen consumption, heart rate, developed pressure, and 31P NMR spectra were acquired before, during, and after 10 min of ischemia. Oxygen consumption (upper panel) and rate-pressure product (heart rate × developed pressure) both recovered to baseline conditions within a few seconds. FIG. 2 13C NMR spectrum of a normoxic isolated rat heart. This spectrum is the sum of 100 scans. Resonances assigned to 13CO2,H13CO3?, pyruvate C1, lactate C1, alanine C1, and pyruvate hydrate C1 are shown. Stacked plots of individual 13C resonances are shown in the insets. Each resonance is a single scan from the chemical shift ± ~ 10 Hz from the region assigned to pyruvate C1, H13CO3?, 13CO2, or lactate C1. FIG. 3 13C and 31P NMR spectra early and late after ischemia and reperfusion. A,B: After 10 min of ischemia, hearts were reperfused and hyperpolarized [1-13C]pyruvate was injected immediately (A) or 15 min (B) after reflow. Immediately after reperfusion, signal from H13CO3? and 13CO2 was nearly undetectable and signal from [1-13C]lactate was easily observed. Conversely, late after reperfusion H13CO3? and 13CO2 were easily detected and signal from [1-13C]lactate was similar to control. The insets show the 31P NMR spectra acquired during the first 3 min (A) and approximately 15–18 min (B) after reperfusion. Pi, inorganic phosphate; PCr, phosphocreatine; ATP, adenosine triphosphate. FIG. 4 Effect of ischemia on kinetics of appearance of [1-13C]pyruvate, [1-13C]lactate, H13CO3?, and 13CO2. The signals are shown early (left column) and late (right column) after ischemia. H13CO3? and 13CO2 were undetectable early after ischemia but were increased when [1-13C]pyruvate was injected 15 min after ischemia. FIG. 5 13C bicarbonate/lactate ratio. The ratio of the resonance areas from the [1-13C]lactate and H13CO3? is shown for three groups: control (A, open squares), early after reperfusion (B, triangles), and 15 min after reperfusion (C, open circles). The inset displays the integrated area under the appearance curve for each case. The error bars are ± the standard deviation. FIG. 6 Interpretation of the 13C bicarbonate/lactate ratio. A: Early during reperfusion, flux through PDH is reduced (dotted lines) and exchange of [1-13C]pyruvate into a large lactate pool is active. The bicarbonate/lactate ratio is low and substrates that do not require metabolism through PDH provide most of the acetyl-CoA. B: Late after reperfusion, flux through PDH recovers (solid lines) and exchange of [1-13C]pyruvate into the lactate pool is reduced. At this point, the ratio of 13C NMR signals from H13CO3? relative to [1-13C]lactate is increased because oxidation of [1-13C]pyruvate is increased relative to other substrates. Table 1 31P Data for Perfused Hearts Control Late during Ischemia Early after Ischemia Late after Ischemia pH 6.95 ± 0.06 6.38 ± 0.06 6.81 ± 0.12 6.99 ± 0.08 [PCr] ?mol/gdw 9.15 ± 1.39 0.66 ± 0.4 9.37 ± 1.71 10.91 ± 2.08 [ATP] ?mol/gdw 13.70 ± 0.00 9.04 ± 2.0 11.03 ± 2.03 9.79 ± 2.42 