Initial Management of Childhood Brain Tumors: Neurosurgical Considerations Intracranial tumors are the most common solid tumors in children. The infratentorial compartment will be the primary site for 60% to 70% of these tumors, including astrocytomas, medulloblastomas, and ependymomas. Several technological advancements have increased our knowledge of the cell biology of pediatric brain tumors, facilitated earlier diagnosis, and improved neurosurgical resections while minimizing neurological deficits. These in turn have not only improved the survival of children with brain tumors but also their quality of life. Current management strategies in most cases rely on surgery coupled with adjuvant therapies, including radiation therapy and chemotherapy. The vulnerability of the immature brain to adjuvant therapies creates many challenges for the treating physician. We review current diagnostic and therapeutic approaches and outcome for children harboring the most common pediatric brain tumors: astrocytomas (low- and high-grade glioma), ependymoma, medulloblastoma, and craniopharyngioma. The emphasis will be on the neurosurgical management of children with these tumors.  Conclusion The neurosurgeon has traditionally played an integral role in the management of children with brain tumors. This trend will likely continue far into the future for many tumor types. Here, we have presented the data showing that neurosurgical extirpation of brain tumors can improve survival for children with low-grade glioma, high-grade glioma, medulloblastoma, ependymoma, and craniopharyngioma. In some instances, neurosurgery must be combined with expertly administered adjuvant therapies such as radiation therapy and chemotherapy, as in the case of medulloblastoma. In all instances, neurosurgery must be performed with the utmost skill and planning, and be bolstered by the latest technologies, such as intraoperative neuronavigation or MRI, functional mapping, and microneurosurgical techniques, to ensure that patients who survive the biology of their tumors are not held prisoner to devastating long-term neurological impairments. In the field of neurosurgery, we can expect to see minimally invasive techniques, such as neuro-endoscopy and stereotactic delivery of chemotherapeutics via convection-enhanced delivery, play an increasingly important role. 