Sequence variant classification and reporting: recommendations for improving the interpretation of cancer susceptibility genetic test results Genetic testing of cancer susceptibility genes is now widely applied in clinical practice to predict risk of developing cancer. In general, sequence-based testing of germline DNA is used to determine whether an individual carries a change that is clearly likely to disrupt normal gene function. Genetic testing may detect changes that are clearly pathogenic, clearly neutral or variants of unclear clinical significance. Such variants present a considerable challenge to the diagnostic laboratory and the receiving clinician in terms of interpretation and clear presentation of the implications of the result to the patient. There does not appear to be a consistent approach to interpreting and reporting the clinical significance of variants either among genes or among laboratories. The potential for confusion among clinicians and patients is considerable and misinterpretation may lead to inappropriate clinical consequences. In this article we review the current state of sequence-based genetic testing, describe other standardized reporting systems used in oncology and propose a standardized classification system for application to sequence based results for cancer predisposition genes. We suggest a system of five classes of variants based on the degree of likelihood of pathogenicity. Each class is associated with specific recommendations for clinical management of at-risk relatives that will depend on the syndrome. We propose that panels of experts on each cancer predisposition syndrome facilitate the classification scheme and designate appropriate surveillance and cancer management guidelines. The international adoption of a standardized reporting system should improve the clinical utility of sequence-based genetic tests to predict cancer risk.  Conclusion We have presented in this paper a scheme for clinical reporting of genetic variants particularly orientated towards inherited mutations in tumour suppressor genes conferring a high risk of cancer. Both under- and over-interpretation of such a result are common in clinical practice. The purpose of this classification and reporting framework is to improve the clinical utilization of genetic testing results, to maximize the opportunity to learn more about variants for the benefit of other families and to minimize the risk of incorrect interpretation of variants in the clinical setting. If applied successfully, the principles of this classification could be expanded to other genes where inactivating mutations can occur throughout the gene and where analysis of the gene detects sequence variants for which a clear functional consequence cannot be immediately assigned.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 The algorithm used for data combination during evaluation of possible carcinogens Figure 2 The index case (arrowed) was referred to the genetics service following the diagnosis of a grade 3 breast cancer. Her mother died of a serous papillary ovarian carcinoma aged 48 years. Genetic testing revealed variant D3095E in the BRCA2 gene. Table 1 BIRADS system for reporting mammography results Category Diagnosis Description; Recommended Action Probability of Malignancy 6 Known Biopsy Proven Malignancy Lesions known to be malignant that are being imaged prior to definitive treatment; assure that treatment is completed N/A 5 Highly Suspicious of Malignancy Lesion that has a high probability of being malignant; take appropriate action ? 95% 4 Suspicious Abnormality Not characteristic of breast cancer, but reasonable probability of being malignant; biopsy should be considered 3 to 94% 3 Probably Benign Findings that have a high probability of being benign six-month short interval follow-up <2% 2 Benign A definite benign finding; routine screening recommended 1 Negative There is nothing to comment on; routine screening recommended 0 Incomplete Your mammogram or ultrasound didn’t give the radiologist enough information to make a clear diagnosis; follow-up imaging is necessary Table 2 IARC (International Agency for Cancer Research) Classification of Carcinogens Group Description 1 The agent is carcinogenic to humans 2A The agent is probably carcinogenic to humans 2B The agent is possibly carcinogenic to humans 3 The agent is not classifiable as to its carcinogenicity to humans 4 The agent is probably not carcinogenic to humans Table 3 Proposed Classification System for Sequence Variants Identified by Genetic Testing Class Description Probability of being Pathogenic 5 Definitely Pathogenic >0.99 4 Likely Pathogenic 0.95–0.99 3 Uncertain 0.05–0.949 2 Likely Not Pathogenic or of Little Clinical Significance 0.001–0.049 1 Not Pathogenic or of No Clinical Significance <0.001 Table 4 Testing Recommendations Associated with Each Class of Variant Class Clinical Testing Surveillance Recommendations if At-Risk Relative is Positive Research Testing of Family Members 5 Test at-risk relatives for variant Full high-risk surveillance guidelines Not indicated 4 Test at-risk relatives for variant * Full high-risk surveillance guidelines May be helpful to further classify variant 3 Do not use for predictive testing in at-risk relatives * Based on family history (and other risk factors) May be helpful to further classify variant 2 Do not use for predictive testing in at-risk relatives * Treat as “no mutation detected” for this disorder May be helpful to further classify variant 1 Do not use for predictive testing in at-risk relatives * Treat as “no mutation detected” for this disorder Not indicated * Recommend continuing to test proband for any additional testing modalities available for the disorder in question, e.g. rearrangement testing. 