Increased soluble urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (suPAR) is associated with thrombosis and inhibition of plasmin generation in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) patients Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) is an acquired genetic disorder of the bone marrow that produces intravascular hemolysis, proclivity to venous thrombosis, and hematopoietic failure. Mutation in the PIG-A gene of a hematopoietic stem cell abrogates synthesis of glycosylphosphoinositol (GPI) anchors and expression of all GPI-anchored proteins on the surface of progeny erythrocytes, leukocytes, and platelets. Urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR), a GPI-linked protein expressed on neutrophils, mediates endogenous thrombolysis through a urokinase-dependent mechanism. Here we show that membrane GPI-anchored uPAR is decreased or absent on granulocytes and platelets of patients with PNH, while soluble uPAR (suPAR) levels are increased in patients’ plasma. Serum suPAR concentrations correlated with the number of GPI-negative neutrophils and were highest in patients who later develop thrombosis. In vitro , suPAR is released from PNH hematopoietic cells and from platelets upon activation, suggesting that these cells are the probable source of plasma suPAR in the absence of GPI anchor synthesis and trafficking of uPAR to the cell membrane. In vitro, the addition of recombinant suPAR results in a dose-dependent decrease in the activity of single-chain urokinase. We hypothesized that suPAR, prevents the interaction of urokinase with membrane-anchored uPAR on residual normal cells.  Methods and Materials Patient selection and analysis After informed consent, using protocols approved by the Institutional Review Board of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, serum and bone marrow samples were obtained from 87 patients with PNH sera were prepared at time of entry of the patient into study and frozen for later analysis. The diagnosis of PNH was based on flow cytometry of cell surface GPI-anchored proteins, for erythrocytes, CD59 and CD55 and, for granulocytes, CD16 and CD66 with CD15 for gating 26 . Patients receiving G-CSF for neutropenia were eliminated because of the drug’s influence on suPAR 27 . Charts were reviewed for history of thrombosis retrospectively with reviewers blinded to the suPAR value. Thrombosis of the lower extremities was documented by ultrasound, and pulmonary embolus by spiral computed tomography (CT) or high probability ventilation-perfusion scan. Head computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was used to demonstrate thrombosis of the venous sinuses and ultrasound for Budd Chiari syndrome. Twenty healthy donors and ten patients with aplastic anemia without PNH were also studied. suPAR ELISA Soluble uPAR were measured with the kinetic ELISA (American Diagnostic, Stanford, Ct); all serum samples were analyzed in duplicate and many in triplicate. Protease activity assays Plasminogen activation by urokinase was quantified by adaptation of published methods 28 , Recombinant human single chain urokinase (scuPA) and the plasmin substrate Spectrozyme PL were purchased from American Diagnostica (Stamford, CT). Chromogenic assays were performed in 96 well microtiter plates using a total reaction volume of 200 ?l in the presence of 0.5%BSA-PBS. Spectrozyme PL (0.5mM, final concentration) was mixed with variable concentrations of scuPA, and the suPAR and incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes. Following incubation, plasminogen (1?M, final concentration) was added, and the absorbance readings at 405 nm were measured and plotted against time for varying concentrations of suPAR. Bone marrow cell separation and culture Bone marrow was obtained by aspiration from the posterior iliac crest into syringes containing media supplemented 1:10 with heparin (O’Neill and Feldman, St Louis, MO). Mononuclear cells were isolated by density gradient centrifugation with the use of lymphocyte separation medium (Organon, Durham, NC). BMMNCs were cultured in growth factor media for four days as previously described. 29 Cells were centrifuged and ELISA for suPAR was performed. Flow cytometry Intracellular staining for suPAR expression was performed by means of the Pharmingen Intracellular Staining Kit. 16 Double-color surface staining was first performed with phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated anti-CD13 and anti-CD42a to distinguish platelets and granulocytes. CD62-FITC was used when appropriate to identify activated platelets. Cells were permeabilized by means of a saponin-based method (Pharmingen) and stained with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-anti-suPAR (Pharmingen and BioSource, Camarillo, CA). Specificity of the antibody was confirmed by showing elimination of staining with a suPAR. Samples were analyzed by means of the Coulter (Hialeah, FL) EPICS V flow cytometer. ELISA We assessed the reproducibility of ELISA in clinical samples. Serum from twenty normal donors and ten PNH patients were performed in triplicate and with a high degree of reproducibility i.e. (Pearson r = 0.97). Duplicate tests performed on blood samples from 10 patients assayed during periods of comparable disease activity (GPI-anchored protein neutrophils ±10%) also showed good reproducibility; linear regression analysis demonstrated a p value of <0.0001 Immunoblotting Fresh serum was used for immunoprecipitation which was performed as previously described 30 with a polyclonal antibody directed to suPAR (American Diagnostica). Proteins (10?g/lane) were resolved in 12% Tris-glycine SDS gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) electrophoresis at 125V and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The membrane was blocked for 2 h with 5% BSA in PBS and 0.05% Tween-20 followed by incubation in primary suPAR mAb. Subsequently, membranes were incubated in horse radish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary anti-mouse IgG antibody and detection of the bands of interest was performed using the chemiluminescence kit with luminol (ECL plus system, Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Buckinghamshire, UK). Membranes were stripped after the first blotting in ImmunoPure IgG elution buffer (Pierce, Rockford, IL) re-blocked and re-blotted with another antibody (Ab). To evaluate equal loading of the lanes membranes were re-blotted with anti-actin polyclonal Ab; each was probed with suPAR mAb (American Diagnostica). Statistical methods Basic characteristics of PNH patients and controls were described using summary statistics, such as medians, means, standard deviations, ranges and proportions. In the absence of justifiable patterns by the missing mechanism, absent data were assumed to be missing completely at random, and were deleted in the analysis. Among the PNH patients, sample means of baseline suPAR (ng/mL) along with their corresponding standard errors and 95% confidence intervals were calculated for patients grouped by sex, LDH (?400, >400), GpI-negative neutrophils (?500, >500), GpI percent (?60%, >60%), ANC (?500, >500), Mono absolute (?300, >300), and the sum of ANC and Mono absolute (?800, >800). P-values based on two-sample T-tests were calculated for testing equal means of baseline suPAR between patient groups. For statistical analysis using continuous covariates, natural log-transformations were used for LDH, GpI-negative neutrophils, GpI percent, ANC and Mono absolute. These transformations reduced the skewness of the covariate distributions. Linear regression models were used to evaluate the correlations between baseline suPAR and age, sex, and the log-transformations of LDH, GpI-negative neutrophils, GpI percent, ANC and Mono absolute. Univariate and multivariate Cox Proportional Hazard models were used to evaluate the effects of age, sex, baseline suPAR and the log-transformations of LDH, GpI-negative neutrophils, GpI percent, ANC and Mono absolute on the time-to-first-clot distributions. P-values based on log-rank and t statistics were used for testing the null hypothesis that the corresponding covariate had no effect on the time-to-first-clot distribution. All numerical results were computed using the Splus 7 Statistical Software Package (Insightful Inc., Seattle, WA).  Patient selection and analysis After informed consent, using protocols approved by the Institutional Review Board of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, serum and bone marrow samples were obtained from 87 patients with PNH sera were prepared at time of entry of the patient into study and frozen for later analysis. The diagnosis of PNH was based on flow cytometry of cell surface GPI-anchored proteins, for erythrocytes, CD59 and CD55 and, for granulocytes, CD16 and CD66 with CD15 for gating 26 . Patients receiving G-CSF for neutropenia were eliminated because of the drug’s influence on suPAR 27 . Charts were reviewed for history of thrombosis retrospectively with reviewers blinded to the suPAR value. Thrombosis of the lower extremities was documented by ultrasound, and pulmonary embolus by spiral computed tomography (CT) or high probability ventilation-perfusion scan. Head computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was used to demonstrate thrombosis of the venous sinuses and ultrasound for Budd Chiari syndrome. Twenty healthy donors and ten patients with aplastic anemia without PNH were also studied.  suPAR ELISA Soluble uPAR were measured with the kinetic ELISA (American Diagnostic, Stanford, Ct); all serum samples were analyzed in duplicate and many in triplicate.  Protease activity assays Plasminogen activation by urokinase was quantified by adaptation of published methods 28 , Recombinant human single chain urokinase (scuPA) and the plasmin substrate Spectrozyme PL were purchased from American Diagnostica (Stamford, CT). Chromogenic assays were performed in 96 well microtiter plates using a total reaction volume of 200 ?l in the presence of 0.5%BSA-PBS. Spectrozyme PL (0.5mM, final concentration) was mixed with variable concentrations of scuPA, and the suPAR and incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes. Following incubation, plasminogen (1?M, final concentration) was added, and the absorbance readings at 405 nm were measured and plotted against time for varying concentrations of suPAR.  Bone marrow cell separation and culture Bone marrow was obtained by aspiration from the posterior iliac crest into syringes containing media supplemented 1:10 with heparin (O’Neill and Feldman, St Louis, MO). Mononuclear cells were isolated by density gradient centrifugation with the use of lymphocyte separation medium (Organon, Durham, NC). BMMNCs were cultured in growth factor media for four days as previously described. 29 Cells were centrifuged and ELISA for suPAR was performed.  Flow cytometry Intracellular staining for suPAR expression was performed by means of the Pharmingen Intracellular Staining Kit. 16 Double-color surface staining was first performed with phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated anti-CD13 and anti-CD42a to distinguish platelets and granulocytes. CD62-FITC was used when appropriate to identify activated platelets. Cells were permeabilized by means of a saponin-based method (Pharmingen) and stained with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-anti-suPAR (Pharmingen and BioSource, Camarillo, CA). Specificity of the antibody was confirmed by showing elimination of staining with a suPAR. Samples were analyzed by means of the Coulter (Hialeah, FL) EPICS V flow cytometer.  ELISA We assessed the reproducibility of ELISA in clinical samples. Serum from twenty normal donors and ten PNH patients were performed in triplicate and with a high degree of reproducibility i.e. (Pearson r = 0.97). Duplicate tests performed on blood samples from 10 patients assayed during periods of comparable disease activity (GPI-anchored protein neutrophils ±10%) also showed good reproducibility; linear regression analysis demonstrated a p value of <0.0001  Immunoblotting Fresh serum was used for immunoprecipitation which was performed as previously described 30 with a polyclonal antibody directed to suPAR (American Diagnostica). Proteins (10?g/lane) were resolved in 12% Tris-glycine SDS gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) electrophoresis at 125V and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The membrane was blocked for 2 h with 5% BSA in PBS and 0.05% Tween-20 followed by incubation in primary suPAR mAb. Subsequently, membranes were incubated in horse radish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary anti-mouse IgG antibody and detection of the bands of interest was performed using the chemiluminescence kit with luminol (ECL plus system, Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Buckinghamshire, UK). Membranes were stripped after the first blotting in ImmunoPure IgG elution buffer (Pierce, Rockford, IL) re-blocked and re-blotted with another antibody (Ab). To evaluate equal loading of the lanes membranes were re-blotted with anti-actin polyclonal Ab; each was probed with suPAR mAb (American Diagnostica).  Statistical methods Basic characteristics of PNH patients and controls were described using summary statistics, such as medians, means, standard deviations, ranges and proportions. In the absence of justifiable patterns by the missing mechanism, absent data were assumed to be missing completely at random, and were deleted in the analysis. Among the PNH patients, sample means of baseline suPAR (ng/mL) along with their corresponding standard errors and 95% confidence intervals were calculated for patients grouped by sex, LDH (?400, >400), GpI-negative neutrophils (?500, >500), GpI percent (?60%, >60%), ANC (?500, >500), Mono absolute (?300, >300), and the sum of ANC and Mono absolute (?800, >800). P-values based on two-sample T-tests were calculated for testing equal means of baseline suPAR between patient groups. For statistical analysis using continuous covariates, natural log-transformations were used for LDH, GpI-negative neutrophils, GpI percent, ANC and Mono absolute. These transformations reduced the skewness of the covariate distributions. Linear regression models were used to evaluate the correlations between baseline suPAR and age, sex, and the log-transformations of LDH, GpI-negative neutrophils, GpI percent, ANC and Mono absolute. Univariate and multivariate Cox Proportional Hazard models were used to evaluate the effects of age, sex, baseline suPAR and the log-transformations of LDH, GpI-negative neutrophils, GpI percent, ANC and Mono absolute on the time-to-first-clot distributions. P-values based on log-rank and t statistics were used for testing the null hypothesis that the corresponding covariate had no effect on the time-to-first-clot distribution. All numerical results were computed using the Splus 7 Statistical Software Package (Insightful Inc., Seattle, WA).  Results Soluble uPAR is increased in PNH Soluble uPAR was measured by ELISA in the sera of 80 patients with PNH at their initial visit, and in twenty normal controls and ten patients with AA but without PNH. Soluble uPAR was increased in patients with PNH compared to AA patients without PNH and healthy controls ( Table 1 , Fig. 1a ). Increased serum suPAR was confirmed by immunoblotting in 15 patients (example seen in Fig. 1b ). Linear regression analysis demonstrated a statistically significant relationship between the absolute number of GPI-negative neutrophils and suPAR levels measured by ELISA (p<0.001). Soluble uPAR is present in GPI-negative neutrophils lacking membrane uPAR Previously, others have demonstrated that suPAR is secreted from PNH leukocytes of patients with PNH 31 and could be a potential source of suPAR in the plasma. Here we reproduced these findings but also demonstrated release of suPAR by BMMNC in culture and by activated platelets. When peripheral blood granulocytes were surface-stained with CD15-APC, CD59-PE, and anti-uPAR-FITC, a proportion of normal CD59-positive granulocytes (presumably those which are activated) but not PNH, CD59- granulocytes stained with anti-suPAR (example seen in Fig. 2a ). At the same time, when these samples were intracellularly stained with anti-uPAR-FITC, most of the population of both CD59-postive and -negative granulocytes stained with anti-uPAR-FITC suggesting that uPAR is synthesized but is not surface-expressed without the GPI-anchor. Stained granulocyte populations are seen in Fig. 2b . When BMMNCs from individuals with >90% GPI-negative neutrophils and AA patients without PNH were placed in culture media for four days, centrifuged to remove the cells, and supernatants tested by ELISA, there were significant increases in supernantant levels measured by ELISA for the PNH samples only and this could not be accounted for by differences cell death ( Fig. 2c ). In the three patients tested immediately following thrombosis the suPAR levels declined slightly, presumably related to increased levels of uPA. GPI-anchored protein negative activated platelets release suPAR Platelets obtained from patients PNH were activated by addition of adenosine diphosphate (ADP) (1?M) to platelet-rich plasma obtained from four PNH patients with >90% GPI-anchor protein negative platelets and four healthy donors. Platelets were identified by anti-CD42-PECy5 (anit-GPIIb,IIIa); these were gated and activated platelets were distinguished by CD62-PE staining and the percent of these cells staining with anti-uPAR-FITC were measured. Only normal, activated platelets and not platelets from PNH patients demonstrated membrane uPAR ( Fig. 3a ). When these platelets were centrifuged, PNH platelet poor plasma (PPP) but not normal PPP demonstrated significant increases in suPAR compared to non-activated platelets by ELISA, suggesting that PNH platelets secrete suPAR upon activation, while normal platelets express the protein on their surface. ( Fig. 3b ). suPAR decreases plasmin generation Plasmin generation rate was measured at without and with varying concentrations of suPAR by a time-dependent change in the optical density at 405nm. There was a dose-dependent decrease in the activity of single-chain urokinase following the addition of recombinant suPAR ( Fig. 4 ). Thrombosis in PNH patients Eighty-seven patients were stratified according to a history of thrombosis; suPAR and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels were analyzed (suPAR was not available for seven patients). Univariate analysis showed that ANC, absolute number of GPI-negative neutrophils, percent GPI-negative neutrophils, and LDH correlated with suPAR levels ( Table 1 ). For a mean follow-up of 4.1 years, there were 29 venous thrombotic events, one myocardial infarction (patient age 56 with no risk factors), and two cerebral vascular events (both under age 50, no risk factors). Thrombosis-free survival was significantly shorter in patients with LDH? 1000 units/mL or suPAR ? 2 ng/mL ( Fig. 5 ). Multivariate analysis showed that male sex, suPAR, and LDH were independently associated with risk of thrombosis.  Results Soluble uPAR is increased in PNH Soluble uPAR was measured by ELISA in the sera of 80 patients with PNH at their initial visit, and in twenty normal controls and ten patients with AA but without PNH. Soluble uPAR was increased in patients with PNH compared to AA patients without PNH and healthy controls ( Table 1 , Fig. 1a ). Increased serum suPAR was confirmed by immunoblotting in 15 patients (example seen in Fig. 1b ). Linear regression analysis demonstrated a statistically significant relationship between the absolute number of GPI-negative neutrophils and suPAR levels measured by ELISA (p<0.001). Soluble uPAR is present in GPI-negative neutrophils lacking membrane uPAR Previously, others have demonstrated that suPAR is secreted from PNH leukocytes of patients with PNH 31 and could be a potential source of suPAR in the plasma. Here we reproduced these findings but also demonstrated release of suPAR by BMMNC in culture and by activated platelets. When peripheral blood granulocytes were surface-stained with CD15-APC, CD59-PE, and anti-uPAR-FITC, a proportion of normal CD59-positive granulocytes (presumably those which are activated) but not PNH, CD59- granulocytes stained with anti-suPAR (example seen in Fig. 2a ). At the same time, when these samples were intracellularly stained with anti-uPAR-FITC, most of the population of both CD59-postive and -negative granulocytes stained with anti-uPAR-FITC suggesting that uPAR is synthesized but is not surface-expressed without the GPI-anchor. Stained granulocyte populations are seen in Fig. 2b . When BMMNCs from individuals with >90% GPI-negative neutrophils and AA patients without PNH were placed in culture media for four days, centrifuged to remove the cells, and supernatants tested by ELISA, there were significant increases in supernantant levels measured by ELISA for the PNH samples only and this could not be accounted for by differences cell death ( Fig. 2c ). In the three patients tested immediately following thrombosis the suPAR levels declined slightly, presumably related to increased levels of uPA. GPI-anchored protein negative activated platelets release suPAR Platelets obtained from patients PNH were activated by addition of adenosine diphosphate (ADP) (1?M) to platelet-rich plasma obtained from four PNH patients with >90% GPI-anchor protein negative platelets and four healthy donors. Platelets were identified by anti-CD42-PECy5 (anit-GPIIb,IIIa); these were gated and activated platelets were distinguished by CD62-PE staining and the percent of these cells staining with anti-uPAR-FITC were measured. Only normal, activated platelets and not platelets from PNH patients demonstrated membrane uPAR ( Fig. 3a ). When these platelets were centrifuged, PNH platelet poor plasma (PPP) but not normal PPP demonstrated significant increases in suPAR compared to non-activated platelets by ELISA, suggesting that PNH platelets secrete suPAR upon activation, while normal platelets express the protein on their surface. ( Fig. 3b ). suPAR decreases plasmin generation Plasmin generation rate was measured at without and with varying concentrations of suPAR by a time-dependent change in the optical density at 405nm. There was a dose-dependent decrease in the activity of single-chain urokinase following the addition of recombinant suPAR ( Fig. 4 ). Thrombosis in PNH patients Eighty-seven patients were stratified according to a history of thrombosis; suPAR and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels were analyzed (suPAR was not available for seven patients). Univariate analysis showed that ANC, absolute number of GPI-negative neutrophils, percent GPI-negative neutrophils, and LDH correlated with suPAR levels ( Table 1 ). For a mean follow-up of 4.1 years, there were 29 venous thrombotic events, one myocardial infarction (patient age 56 with no risk factors), and two cerebral vascular events (both under age 50, no risk factors). Thrombosis-free survival was significantly shorter in patients with LDH? 1000 units/mL or suPAR ? 2 ng/mL ( Fig. 5 ). Multivariate analysis showed that male sex, suPAR, and LDH were independently associated with risk of thrombosis.  Soluble uPAR is increased in PNH Soluble uPAR was measured by ELISA in the sera of 80 patients with PNH at their initial visit, and in twenty normal controls and ten patients with AA but without PNH. Soluble uPAR was increased in patients with PNH compared to AA patients without PNH and healthy controls ( Table 1 , Fig. 1a ). Increased serum suPAR was confirmed by immunoblotting in 15 patients (example seen in Fig. 1b ). Linear regression analysis demonstrated a statistically significant relationship between the absolute number of GPI-negative neutrophils and suPAR levels measured by ELISA (p<0.001).  Soluble uPAR is increased in PNH Soluble uPAR was measured by ELISA in the sera of 80 patients with PNH at their initial visit, and in twenty normal controls and ten patients with AA but without PNH. Soluble uPAR was increased in patients with PNH compared to AA patients without PNH and healthy controls ( Table 1 , Fig. 1a ). Increased serum suPAR was confirmed by immunoblotting in 15 patients (example seen in Fig. 1b ). Linear regression analysis demonstrated a statistically significant relationship between the absolute number of GPI-negative neutrophils and suPAR levels measured by ELISA (p<0.001).  Soluble uPAR is present in GPI-negative neutrophils lacking membrane uPAR Previously, others have demonstrated that suPAR is secreted from PNH leukocytes of patients with PNH 31 and could be a potential source of suPAR in the plasma. Here we reproduced these findings but also demonstrated release of suPAR by BMMNC in culture and by activated platelets. When peripheral blood granulocytes were surface-stained with CD15-APC, CD59-PE, and anti-uPAR-FITC, a proportion of normal CD59-positive granulocytes (presumably those which are activated) but not PNH, CD59- granulocytes stained with anti-suPAR (example seen in Fig. 2a ). At the same time, when these samples were intracellularly stained with anti-uPAR-FITC, most of the population of both CD59-postive and -negative granulocytes stained with anti-uPAR-FITC suggesting that uPAR is synthesized but is not surface-expressed without the GPI-anchor. Stained granulocyte populations are seen in Fig. 2b . When BMMNCs from individuals with >90% GPI-negative neutrophils and AA patients without PNH were placed in culture media for four days, centrifuged to remove the cells, and supernatants tested by ELISA, there were significant increases in supernantant levels measured by ELISA for the PNH samples only and this could not be accounted for by differences cell death ( Fig. 2c ). In the three patients tested immediately following thrombosis the suPAR levels declined slightly, presumably related to increased levels of uPA.  Soluble uPAR is present in GPI-negative neutrophils lacking membrane uPAR Previously, others have demonstrated that suPAR is secreted from PNH leukocytes of patients with PNH 31 and could be a potential source of suPAR in the plasma. Here we reproduced these findings but also demonstrated release of suPAR by BMMNC in culture and by activated platelets. When peripheral blood granulocytes were surface-stained with CD15-APC, CD59-PE, and anti-uPAR-FITC, a proportion of normal CD59-positive granulocytes (presumably those which are activated) but not PNH, CD59- granulocytes stained with anti-suPAR (example seen in Fig. 2a ). At the same time, when these samples were intracellularly stained with anti-uPAR-FITC, most of the population of both CD59-postive and -negative granulocytes stained with anti-uPAR-FITC suggesting that uPAR is synthesized but is not surface-expressed without the GPI-anchor. Stained granulocyte populations are seen in Fig. 2b . When BMMNCs from individuals with >90% GPI-negative neutrophils and AA patients without PNH were placed in culture media for four days, centrifuged to remove the cells, and supernatants tested by ELISA, there were significant increases in supernantant levels measured by ELISA for the PNH samples only and this could not be accounted for by differences cell death ( Fig. 2c ). In the three patients tested immediately following thrombosis the suPAR levels declined slightly, presumably related to increased levels of uPA.  GPI-anchored protein negative activated platelets release suPAR Platelets obtained from patients PNH were activated by addition of adenosine diphosphate (ADP) (1?M) to platelet-rich plasma obtained from four PNH patients with >90% GPI-anchor protein negative platelets and four healthy donors. Platelets were identified by anti-CD42-PECy5 (anit-GPIIb,IIIa); these were gated and activated platelets were distinguished by CD62-PE staining and the percent of these cells staining with anti-uPAR-FITC were measured. Only normal, activated platelets and not platelets from PNH patients demonstrated membrane uPAR ( Fig. 3a ). When these platelets were centrifuged, PNH platelet poor plasma (PPP) but not normal PPP demonstrated significant increases in suPAR compared to non-activated platelets by ELISA, suggesting that PNH platelets secrete suPAR upon activation, while normal platelets express the protein on their surface. ( Fig. 3b ).  GPI-anchored protein negative activated platelets release suPAR Platelets obtained from patients PNH were activated by addition of adenosine diphosphate (ADP) (1?M) to platelet-rich plasma obtained from four PNH patients with >90% GPI-anchor protein negative platelets and four healthy donors. Platelets were identified by anti-CD42-PECy5 (anit-GPIIb,IIIa); these were gated and activated platelets were distinguished by CD62-PE staining and the percent of these cells staining with anti-uPAR-FITC were measured. Only normal, activated platelets and not platelets from PNH patients demonstrated membrane uPAR ( Fig. 3a ). When these platelets were centrifuged, PNH platelet poor plasma (PPP) but not normal PPP demonstrated significant increases in suPAR compared to non-activated platelets by ELISA, suggesting that PNH platelets secrete suPAR upon activation, while normal platelets express the protein on their surface. ( Fig. 3b ).  suPAR decreases plasmin generation Plasmin generation rate was measured at without and with varying concentrations of suPAR by a time-dependent change in the optical density at 405nm. There was a dose-dependent decrease in the activity of single-chain urokinase following the addition of recombinant suPAR ( Fig. 4 ).  suPAR decreases plasmin generation Plasmin generation rate was measured at without and with varying concentrations of suPAR by a time-dependent change in the optical density at 405nm. There was a dose-dependent decrease in the activity of single-chain urokinase following the addition of recombinant suPAR ( Fig. 4 ).  Thrombosis in PNH patients Eighty-seven patients were stratified according to a history of thrombosis; suPAR and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels were analyzed (suPAR was not available for seven patients). Univariate analysis showed that ANC, absolute number of GPI-negative neutrophils, percent GPI-negative neutrophils, and LDH correlated with suPAR levels ( Table 1 ). For a mean follow-up of 4.1 years, there were 29 venous thrombotic events, one myocardial infarction (patient age 56 with no risk factors), and two cerebral vascular events (both under age 50, no risk factors). Thrombosis-free survival was significantly shorter in patients with LDH? 1000 units/mL or suPAR ? 2 ng/mL ( Fig. 5 ). Multivariate analysis showed that male sex, suPAR, and LDH were independently associated with risk of thrombosis.  Thrombosis in PNH patients Eighty-seven patients were stratified according to a history of thrombosis; suPAR and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels were analyzed (suPAR was not available for seven patients). Univariate analysis showed that ANC, absolute number of GPI-negative neutrophils, percent GPI-negative neutrophils, and LDH correlated with suPAR levels ( Table 1 ). For a mean follow-up of 4.1 years, there were 29 venous thrombotic events, one myocardial infarction (patient age 56 with no risk factors), and two cerebral vascular events (both under age 50, no risk factors). Thrombosis-free survival was significantly shorter in patients with LDH? 1000 units/mL or suPAR ? 2 ng/mL ( Fig. 5 ). Multivariate analysis showed that male sex, suPAR, and LDH were independently associated with risk of thrombosis.  Discussion Thromboembolism is frequent in PNH 32 ; 33 where it is the most common cause of death. In this study we demonstrate increased suPAR in the sera of PNH patients who eventually developed thrombosis. Multivariate analysis of the factors associated with thrombosis in our cohort of 87 PNH patients show that LDH, male sex, and suPAR levels were independently associated with time to first thrombosis. Factors correlating with elevated suPAR levels included the absolute number and percent of GPI negative neutrolphils, and ANC. These clinical findings are consistent with our in vitro observations that PNH BMMNCs and mature activated platelets and neutrophils 34 release suPAR and could be a source of this protein in PNH serum. We confirmed the results of others’ 35 that suPAR impedes plasmin generation from plasminogen in vitro. Defects in urokinase activation related to suPAR as well as a relative deficiency of platelets and leukocytes with GPI-linked-uPAR may contribute to the alterations in fibrinolysis 12 . It is likely that suPAR inhibits the generation of plasmin by competitively inhibitiing uPA-binding to GPI-anchored uPAR. A factor potentially accounting for differences in the biological behavior of soluble and GPI-linked uPAR may be related to changes in the molecular conformation of uPAR when this protein is not attached to the membrane. These changes confer an ability to bind to entirely different epitopes compared to its GPI-anchored form 36 ; 37 . Some evidence suggests that uPAR possesses little intrinsic zymogenic activity, but serves the mechanical function of bringing uPA and plasminogen into juxtaposition on the cell membrane 38 -a role that can only be played by the GPI-anchored form. Fibrinolytic defects such as plasminogen deficiency are not generally associated with thrombosis in the absence of additional risk factors 39 . In PNH, hemolysis is a likely contributor to the pro-thrombotic state. During hemolysis, plasma-free hemoglobin is released binding nitric oxide resulting in lower levels near the vessel endothelium 13 . Plasma red cell and platelet microvesicles with procoagulant activity 40 are formed. It is likely that among other factors, free hemoglobin released during hemolysis increases tissue factor production from the endothelium 22 and complement activation of platelets results in up-regulation of platelet ?-granular protein, P-selectin, and release of high molecular weight von Willebrand factor from the vascular endothelium 41 . Recent observations that patients on elizumab 42 and anecdotal evidence suggesting that thrombi form during hemolytic episodes further support a role for hemolysis in PNH thrombophilia. The combination of hemolysis and suPAR-related impairment in fibrinolysis in PNH (mechanism detailed in Fig. 6 ) may explain the greater frequency of thrombosis in patients whose disease is primarily marked by hemolysis rather than bone marrow failure 8 . In this circumstance more autologous PNH red cell production results in more potential for hemolysis and improved neutrophil and platelet production result in higher suPAR levels. The fact that both the ANC as well as the absolute number of GPI-negative neutrophils correlates with the suPAR levels supports this hypothesis. The relative contribution of both hemolysis and the fibrinolytic defect introduced by excess suPAR needs to be addressed, particularly in patients taking eclizumab who may be reluctant to continue their anticoagulation after their hemolysis is controlled.  Discussion Thromboembolism is frequent in PNH 32 ; 33 where it is the most common cause of death. In this study we demonstrate increased suPAR in the sera of PNH patients who eventually developed thrombosis. Multivariate analysis of the factors associated with thrombosis in our cohort of 87 PNH patients show that LDH, male sex, and suPAR levels were independently associated with time to first thrombosis. Factors correlating with elevated suPAR levels included the absolute number and percent of GPI negative neutrolphils, and ANC. These clinical findings are consistent with our in vitro observations that PNH BMMNCs and mature activated platelets and neutrophils 34 release suPAR and could be a source of this protein in PNH serum. We confirmed the results of others’ 35 that suPAR impedes plasmin generation from plasminogen in vitro. Defects in urokinase activation related to suPAR as well as a relative deficiency of platelets and leukocytes with GPI-linked-uPAR may contribute to the alterations in fibrinolysis 12 . It is likely that suPAR inhibits the generation of plasmin by competitively inhibitiing uPA-binding to GPI-anchored uPAR. A factor potentially accounting for differences in the biological behavior of soluble and GPI-linked uPAR may be related to changes in the molecular conformation of uPAR when this protein is not attached to the membrane. These changes confer an ability to bind to entirely different epitopes compared to its GPI-anchored form 36 ; 37 . Some evidence suggests that uPAR possesses little intrinsic zymogenic activity, but serves the mechanical function of bringing uPA and plasminogen into juxtaposition on the cell membrane 38 -a role that can only be played by the GPI-anchored form. Fibrinolytic defects such as plasminogen deficiency are not generally associated with thrombosis in the absence of additional risk factors 39 . In PNH, hemolysis is a likely contributor to the pro-thrombotic state. During hemolysis, plasma-free hemoglobin is released binding nitric oxide resulting in lower levels near the vessel endothelium 13 . Plasma red cell and platelet microvesicles with procoagulant activity 40 are formed. It is likely that among other factors, free hemoglobin released during hemolysis increases tissue factor production from the endothelium 22 and complement activation of platelets results in up-regulation of platelet ?-granular protein, P-selectin, and release of high molecular weight von Willebrand factor from the vascular endothelium 41 . Recent observations that patients on elizumab 42 and anecdotal evidence suggesting that thrombi form during hemolytic episodes further support a role for hemolysis in PNH thrombophilia. The combination of hemolysis and suPAR-related impairment in fibrinolysis in PNH (mechanism detailed in Fig. 6 ) may explain the greater frequency of thrombosis in patients whose disease is primarily marked by hemolysis rather than bone marrow failure 8 . In this circumstance more autologous PNH red cell production results in more potential for hemolysis and improved neutrophil and platelet production result in higher suPAR levels. The fact that both the ANC as well as the absolute number of GPI-negative neutrophils correlates with the suPAR levels supports this hypothesis. The relative contribution of both hemolysis and the fibrinolytic defect introduced by excess suPAR needs to be addressed, particularly in patients taking eclizumab who may be reluctant to continue their anticoagulation after their hemolysis is controlled. 