A RANDOMIZED TRIAL OF ADJUVANT THALIDOMIDE VERSUS OBSERVATION IN PATIENTS WITH COMPLETELY RESECTED HIGH RISK RENAL CELL CARCINOMA OBJECTIVES Thalidomide has demonstrated modest activity in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC). We evaluated the role of adjuvant thalidomide after complete resection of high-risk RCC. METHODS Eligibility criteria for enrollment on this randomized trial included any histological subtype, T2 (high grade, any N), T3/T4 (any grade, any N), or node positive (any grade, any T) RCC. Eligible patients were randomized to observation or to receive thalidomide 300 mg daily for 24 months. Patients were followed up until disease recurrence or death. The primary objective of this trial was to evaluate the effect of adjuvant thalidomide on recurrence-free survival (RFS) after nephrectomy for high-risk RCC. RESULTS After 46 patients were enrolled, the trial was stopped at a median follow up of 43.9 months (range 9.7–74.2). Patients on the thalidomide arm had inferior 2- and 3- year probabilities of recurrence-free survival, compared to controls (47.8% vs. 69.3% and 28.7% vs. 69.3%, respectively; p =0.022). The 2- and 3- year cancer-specific survival was similar for both groups. All observed deaths were attributable to RCC ( p =0.392). By multivariate analysis, tumor size and grade predicted recurrence (p= 0.001 and 0.013) and kidney cancer-specific death (p=0.002 and 0.014). Thalidomide treatment, however, was not an independent predictor of recurrence or cancer-specific mortality. CONCLUSIONS In this small randomized controlled trial, adjuvant thalidomide therapy after complete resection of high-risk RCC did not improve the 2- and 3-year RFS rates or cancer specific death rates.  RESULTS Between December 2001 and December 2005, 46 patients (23 in each study arm) were accrued to this trial. The treatment and observation arms were matched for patient and tumor characteristics ( Table 1 ). Per-protocol interim analysis, performed in January, 2006, when 18 of expected 55 events occurred, revealed a less than 1% chance of observing the minimum 50% reduction in relapse rate if the trend of events continued with full accrual. Consequently it was concluded, that given the minimal likelihood that adjuvant thalidomide would demonstrate the clinically significant benefit projected, continued accrual to the trial was not justified. At a median follow up of 43.9 months (range 9.7–74.2), 18 (78.3%) patients randomized to adjuvant thalidomide and 8 (34.8%) patients randomized to observation had a documented RCC recurrence. Table 2 provides a summary of oncologic outcomes. Briefly, median RFS was 18.5 months in the thalidomide arm, but was not reached in the observation cohort ( p =0.022). Likewise, patients treated with thalidomide had inferior 2- and 3- year probabilities of RFS, compared to controls (47.8% vs. 69.3% and 28.7% vs. 69.3%, respectively; p =0.022). Interestingly, in patients who had recurrent disease, median time to disease recurrence was longer in the thalidomide group, compared to the observation group (12.4 months vs. 5.5 months). The sites of first failure were distant metastases in 72% of the thalidomide-treated patients and 78% of the patients randomized to observation (p=0.613), while regional nodal or isolated local recurrences only were observed in 28% and 22% of study patients, respectively (p=0.787). The pattern of metastatic disease was also similar between the two groups ( Table 2 ). At the time of this analysis, 9 (39.1%) patients treated with adjuvant thalidomide died of RCC (median CSS 71.1 months), compared to 5 (21.7%) patients randomized to observation (median CSS not reached, p =0.392). The 2- and 3- year CSS was similar in both study arms, and all observed deaths were attributable to RCC ( Table 2 ). In patients who died from RCC, median time to death was longer for the thalidomide-treated patients, compared to that for the patients in the observation group (34.1 months vs. 11.2 months). The effect of various covariates — study arm, pathologic primary tumor and nodal stage, size and grade — on RFS and CSS was tested with the Cox proportional-hazards model. The small number of patients and events precluded inclusion of all available variables in the multivariate analysis ( Table 3 ). Tumor size and grade each significantly predicted recurrence (p= 0.001 and 0.013) and kidney cancer-specific death (p=0.002 and 0.014), independent of study randomization. The median duration of therapy administered to 21 patients was 5.9 months (range, 1.0 to 24.4 months). The summary of adverse events (AEs) associated with thalidomide is shown in Table 4 . There was no treatment-related mortality. Five grade 3 AEs were experienced by 4 (19.0%) patients treated with thalidomide. The most common AEs were pain, constipation, fatigue, and neuropathy, necessitating at least one dose reduction in 62% of patients. Excluding the patients who experienced RCC relapse before receiving 24 months of adjuvant treatment, only 35.7% (5 of 14) received the planned course of therapy. The majority of the remaining patients discontinued therapy at various time points due to troublesome toxicity.  RESULTS Between December 2001 and December 2005, 46 patients (23 in each study arm) were accrued to this trial. The treatment and observation arms were matched for patient and tumor characteristics ( Table 1 ). Per-protocol interim analysis, performed in January, 2006, when 18 of expected 55 events occurred, revealed a less than 1% chance of observing the minimum 50% reduction in relapse rate if the trend of events continued with full accrual. Consequently it was concluded, that given the minimal likelihood that adjuvant thalidomide would demonstrate the clinically significant benefit projected, continued accrual to the trial was not justified. At a median follow up of 43.9 months (range 9.7–74.2), 18 (78.3%) patients randomized to adjuvant thalidomide and 8 (34.8%) patients randomized to observation had a documented RCC recurrence. Table 2 provides a summary of oncologic outcomes. Briefly, median RFS was 18.5 months in the thalidomide arm, but was not reached in the observation cohort ( p =0.022). Likewise, patients treated with thalidomide had inferior 2- and 3- year probabilities of RFS, compared to controls (47.8% vs. 69.3% and 28.7% vs. 69.3%, respectively; p =0.022). Interestingly, in patients who had recurrent disease, median time to disease recurrence was longer in the thalidomide group, compared to the observation group (12.4 months vs. 5.5 months). The sites of first failure were distant metastases in 72% of the thalidomide-treated patients and 78% of the patients randomized to observation (p=0.613), while regional nodal or isolated local recurrences only were observed in 28% and 22% of study patients, respectively (p=0.787). The pattern of metastatic disease was also similar between the two groups ( Table 2 ). At the time of this analysis, 9 (39.1%) patients treated with adjuvant thalidomide died of RCC (median CSS 71.1 months), compared to 5 (21.7%) patients randomized to observation (median CSS not reached, p =0.392). The 2- and 3- year CSS was similar in both study arms, and all observed deaths were attributable to RCC ( Table 2 ). In patients who died from RCC, median time to death was longer for the thalidomide-treated patients, compared to that for the patients in the observation group (34.1 months vs. 11.2 months). The effect of various covariates — study arm, pathologic primary tumor and nodal stage, size and grade — on RFS and CSS was tested with the Cox proportional-hazards model. The small number of patients and events precluded inclusion of all available variables in the multivariate analysis ( Table 3 ). Tumor size and grade each significantly predicted recurrence (p= 0.001 and 0.013) and kidney cancer-specific death (p=0.002 and 0.014), independent of study randomization. The median duration of therapy administered to 21 patients was 5.9 months (range, 1.0 to 24.4 months). The summary of adverse events (AEs) associated with thalidomide is shown in Table 4 . There was no treatment-related mortality. Five grade 3 AEs were experienced by 4 (19.0%) patients treated with thalidomide. The most common AEs were pain, constipation, fatigue, and neuropathy, necessitating at least one dose reduction in 62% of patients. Excluding the patients who experienced RCC relapse before receiving 24 months of adjuvant treatment, only 35.7% (5 of 14) received the planned course of therapy. The majority of the remaining patients discontinued therapy at various time points due to troublesome toxicity.  DISCUSSION In this trial, we evaluated the potential role of thalidomide as systemic adjuvant therapy for patients with resected locally advanced RCC. Although patients selected for this trial were at high-risk for RCC recurrence, as documented by 59% relapse rate within reported follow-up, we did not observe the projected improvement in any oncologic outcomes associated with adjuvant thalidomide use, thus resulting in early termination of this clinical trial. Furthermore, we detected inferior RFS, the primary end-point of this trial, in patients treated with adjuvant thalidomide, compared to patients managed with observation. By multivariate analysis, however, adjusting for the effects of pathologic tumor characteristics, adjuvant thalidomide was not an independent predictor of RFS or CSS, suggesting that adverse pathologic features in patients randomized to treatment may have contributed to inferior RFS in the treatment arm of the trial. Consistent with previous reports, thalidomide therapy had a moderate toxicity profile, with only a minority of patients able to tolerate the planned maximum dose of 300 mg/day and a few patients completing 24 months of adjuvant treatment. The most common side effects observed were constipation, fatigue, pain, and neurological toxicity; however the incidence of grade 3 or 4 AEs was relatively low. Peripheral neuropathy was observed in 78% of patients, although it was mild. Many other treatment strategies have been evaluated in the adjuvant setting for RCC, but none has translated into improvement of oncologic outcomes. 21 – 25 The choice of thalidomide as adjuvant treatment was based on the following rationale. At the time of trial design, thalidomide had been shown to eradicate various solid tumors in animal models by inducing apoptosis in tumor neo-vasculature, and demonstrated considerable activity in angiogenic tumors, such as multiple myeloma and Kaposi’s sarcoma. 7 , 10 – 13 In addition, emerging phase II data, at that time, had suggested modest anti-tumor effects using thalidomide as single-agent therapy for metastatic, immunotherapy-refractory RCC. A trial conducted at the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center demonstrated a 7% partial response rate, and an additional 31% of patients had stabilization of their disease. 18 In a similar study from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, no partial responses were obtained, but 64% of heavily pre-treated metastatic RCC patients had stabilization of disease. 15 Finally, the convenience of oral administration of thalidomide and its toxicity profile, compared favorably to immunotherapeutic agents used for management of advanced RCC. Several limitations of this study warrant discussion. The potential impact of unbalanced randomization coupled with the small number of patients may have been contributing factors to the negative findings of this study. A larger proportion of patients randomized to therapy had extrarenal tumor extension, non-clear cell histology and sarcomatoid features. Because of the small number of patients accrued on this trial, it is possible that these differences may have been important, albeit not statistically significant. We had chosen a moderate dose of thalidomide (300 mg/day) to maximize clinical activity while limiting systemic toxicity. It should be noted that the doses of thalidomide used in the majority of phase II metastatic RCC trials were significantly higher (600 to 1,200 mg/day). 15 – 18 Nevertheless, due to toxicity, dose reduction was necessary in 61% of our patients, and excluding patients who suffered RCC relapse while on thalidomide, only 36% completed the planned 24 months of therapy; all of these factors could explain lack of improvement in RFS and CSS seen in this study. Alternatively, through it’s immunomodulatory properties, thalidomide may have exerted a deleterious effect on oncologic outcomes of patients with micrometastatic RCC, highlighting the need for rigorous testing of all adjuvant therapeutics in a context of a clinical trial.  DISCUSSION In this trial, we evaluated the potential role of thalidomide as systemic adjuvant therapy for patients with resected locally advanced RCC. Although patients selected for this trial were at high-risk for RCC recurrence, as documented by 59% relapse rate within reported follow-up, we did not observe the projected improvement in any oncologic outcomes associated with adjuvant thalidomide use, thus resulting in early termination of this clinical trial. Furthermore, we detected inferior RFS, the primary end-point of this trial, in patients treated with adjuvant thalidomide, compared to patients managed with observation. By multivariate analysis, however, adjusting for the effects of pathologic tumor characteristics, adjuvant thalidomide was not an independent predictor of RFS or CSS, suggesting that adverse pathologic features in patients randomized to treatment may have contributed to inferior RFS in the treatment arm of the trial. Consistent with previous reports, thalidomide therapy had a moderate toxicity profile, with only a minority of patients able to tolerate the planned maximum dose of 300 mg/day and a few patients completing 24 months of adjuvant treatment. The most common side effects observed were constipation, fatigue, pain, and neurological toxicity; however the incidence of grade 3 or 4 AEs was relatively low. Peripheral neuropathy was observed in 78% of patients, although it was mild. Many other treatment strategies have been evaluated in the adjuvant setting for RCC, but none has translated into improvement of oncologic outcomes. 21 – 25 The choice of thalidomide as adjuvant treatment was based on the following rationale. At the time of trial design, thalidomide had been shown to eradicate various solid tumors in animal models by inducing apoptosis in tumor neo-vasculature, and demonstrated considerable activity in angiogenic tumors, such as multiple myeloma and Kaposi’s sarcoma. 7 , 10 – 13 In addition, emerging phase II data, at that time, had suggested modest anti-tumor effects using thalidomide as single-agent therapy for metastatic, immunotherapy-refractory RCC. A trial conducted at the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center demonstrated a 7% partial response rate, and an additional 31% of patients had stabilization of their disease. 18 In a similar study from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, no partial responses were obtained, but 64% of heavily pre-treated metastatic RCC patients had stabilization of disease. 15 Finally, the convenience of oral administration of thalidomide and its toxicity profile, compared favorably to immunotherapeutic agents used for management of advanced RCC. Several limitations of this study warrant discussion. The potential impact of unbalanced randomization coupled with the small number of patients may have been contributing factors to the negative findings of this study. A larger proportion of patients randomized to therapy had extrarenal tumor extension, non-clear cell histology and sarcomatoid features. Because of the small number of patients accrued on this trial, it is possible that these differences may have been important, albeit not statistically significant. We had chosen a moderate dose of thalidomide (300 mg/day) to maximize clinical activity while limiting systemic toxicity. It should be noted that the doses of thalidomide used in the majority of phase II metastatic RCC trials were significantly higher (600 to 1,200 mg/day). 15 – 18 Nevertheless, due to toxicity, dose reduction was necessary in 61% of our patients, and excluding patients who suffered RCC relapse while on thalidomide, only 36% completed the planned 24 months of therapy; all of these factors could explain lack of improvement in RFS and CSS seen in this study. Alternatively, through it’s immunomodulatory properties, thalidomide may have exerted a deleterious effect on oncologic outcomes of patients with micrometastatic RCC, highlighting the need for rigorous testing of all adjuvant therapeutics in a context of a clinical trial.  CONCLUSIONS Our data suggest that single-agent thalidomide used in the adjuvant setting after complete resection of high-risk RCC does not improve oncologic outcomes, and therefore, the risk/benefit ratio clearly does not favor the use of thalidomide in this setting. 