Imaging of CNS Tumors in Children: Advances and Limitations MR technology is constantly improving. Functional imaging techniques such as MR spectroscopy, perfusion imaging, diffusion imaging and diffusion tensor imaging are increasingly utilized in the pediatric patient with a brain tumor. However estimate of tumor size remains the primary imaging endpoint in the evaluation of response to treatment; validation across institutions and vendor platforms of MRI functional parameters is necessary given the relative uncommon occurrence of brain tumors in children. Pediatric neuroimaging can be challenging, and the optimal way to image children with CNS tumors is not uniformly applied across all centers. Application of proper scanning techniques and validation of functional imaging techniques should lead to improved care of children with CNS tumors  Conclusion MR technology is improving, with faster gradients, more sensitive coils and improved software. Evaluation of tumor size remains the primary imaging endpoint in the evaluation of response for most pediatric patients with CNS neoplasms. As evident from the literature, multiple MRI functional parameters have been validated, primarily in adult CNS tumor studies; these techniques need validation across institutions and vendor platforms in the pediatric population. Greater use of these functional parameters will increase the impact of imaging on patient care. More powerful magnets (3 Tesla instead of 1.5 Tesla) will further advance the field of imaging; advantages of the 3 Tesla systems include greater speed and resolution, increased sensitivity to gadolinium enhancement and improved spectral resolution (with MRS). The optimal way to image children with CNS tumor is not uniformly applied across all centers. Pediatric neuroimaging can be challenging, primarily because of issues of sedation, patient size and physiologic motion. Dissemination throughout the subarachnoid spaces is not always recognized. Criteria for study eligibility and response determination are not always understood. Increased awareness of these factors, validation of functional imaging techniques and the increased availability of electronic distribution of imaging studies should lead to improved care of children with CNS tumors.  Figures Figure 1 A patient treated for a malignant frontal glioma with suspected radiation necrosis. Axial contrast enhanced T1 image (A) shows an enhancing lesion next to the ventricle. Single voxel long echo MRS (B) shows marked elevation of choline (peak on the left) and lactate (double peak on the right) indicative of tumor rather than radiation necrosis. The box in A indicates the position on the MRS. Figure 2 Axial T2 weighted image (A) of a patient with an infiltrative brain stem glioma. rCBV map of a DSC perfusion study (B) reveals significant increase in signal, reflective of high capillary density. Figure 3 Assessment of tumor cellularity with DI. Axial T2 image (A) of a patient with a brain stem infiltrative glioma. The ADC image of this patient (B) shows elevated signal consistent with unrestricted diffusion and low cellularity. ADC image (C) of a different patient (same patient as figure 2 ) shows low signal consistent with restricted diffusion and higher cellularity. 