Gene-specific control of the TLR-induced inflammatory response Toll-like receptors (TLRs) induce a complex inflammatory response that functions to alert the body to infection, neutralize pathogens, and repair damaged tissues. An excessive or persistent inflammatory response can be fatal, so multiple regulatory mechanisms have evolved to control the extent and duration of inflammation. Our current understanding of the control of inflammation is based on negative regulation of TLR signaling. However, TLR-induced genes have diverse functions, and control of signaling pathways does not allow for groups of genes with distinct functions to be differentially regulated. Recent evidence suggests many inflammatory genes are instead regulated by epigenetic modifications to individual promoters. This level of control allows a single gene to be expressed or silenced according to its function, irrespective of other genes induced by the same receptor, and therefore is “gene-specific.” Gene-specific control of the TLR-induced inflammatory response is an emerging paradigm in the study of inflammation, and may provide the basis for selective modulation of the inflammatory response.  Conclusions Safe and effective treatments for many inflammatory diseases currently do not exist; most therapies either target a single proinflammatory mediator or broadly affect multiple body systems. While the first type of drug only works in very specific contexts, the second type of drug may have unwanted side effects. For example, blocking TNF? doesn’t work for people with sepsis, although it is highly effective for people with rheumatoid arthritis[ 7 ; 55 ]. Glucocorticoids, on the other hand, work well to inhibit inflammation in many contexts[ 50 ]. However, since they affect multiple systems, GC also have severe side-effects including diabetes, decreased wound healing, skin atrophy, muscle-wasting, adrenal axis insufficiency, cataracts, ulcers, hypertension, metabolic disorders, water imbalance, and osteoporosis[ 50 ]. In addition, both TNF? blockers and GC increase susceptibility to infections[ 55 ]. Ideally, we would like to inhibit inappropriate proinflammatory responses and leave antimicrobial and other physiological responses intact. In this review, we have discussed the possibility that such selective control of inflammation could be achieved through epigenetic modifications. Gene-specific control of sub-groups or modules of inflammatory genes with distinct functions is an emerging paradigm in the study of the innate immune response to infection. This new conceptual scheme may provide important insight into the nature of the inflammatory response and lead to development of novel treatments for inflammatory disease. 