Absence of MGMT promoter methylation in endometrial cancer Objective O6 –methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) acts to repair DNA damaged by alkylation of guanine residues. MGMT promoter methylation and gene silencing is seen in a variety of cancers and pre-cancerous changes [ 1 - 3 ]. The loss of MGMT activity and promoter methylation is associated with increased sensitivity to alkylating agents and is a favorable prognostic indicator in gliomas [ 4 - 6 ]. We sought to determine if MGMT promoter methylation plays a role in endometrial cancer. Methods One hundred and twenty primary endometrial cancers were analyzed for MGMT promoter methylation by combined bisulfite restriction analysis (COBRA). The cohort included 77 endometrioid endometrial cancers, 43 endometrial tumors of adverse histologic type, and 6 endometrial cancer cell lines. Twenty-one endometrioid and mixed endometrioid ovarian cancers were also analyzed. A subset of the primary tumors was analyzed for MGMT expression by immunohistochemistry. Results No MGMT promoter methylation was seen in the 120 endometrial cancers evaluated or the 6 endometrial cancer cell lines. One of the 21 endometrioid ovarian cancers showed methylation. Immunohistochemistry revealed moderate to high level expression of MGMT in the primary endometrial tumors. Conclusion MGMT promoter methylation is an infrequent event in endometrial cancer. MGMT expression and the ability to repair damaged alkylguanine residues could in part explain the limited response of endometrial tumors to alkylating chemotherapy.  Introduction O6 –methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) repairs DNA damaged via alkylation by removing a methyl group from the O6 position of guanine, thus preventing DNA mutation [ 7 ]. MGMT promoter methylation and gene silencing has been associated with a variety cancers and pre-cancerous states. Specifically, MGMT promoter methylation is seen in 30-40% of colon cancers [ 1 ], oral leukoplakia and early SSC (increased in smokers) [ 2 - 3 ], and up to 90% of gliomas [ 4 ]. In gliomas, MGMT promoter methylation is associated with significantly improved survival for patients treated with the alkylating agent temozolomide [ 5 - 6 ]. Improved survival among patients with MGMT promoter methylation may reflect increased temozolomide cytotoxicity because the tumor cells' inability to repair alkylguanine residues. Endometrial cancer is the most common gynecologic malignancy in women in the US, with over 40,000 new cases in 2008 [ 8 ]. Most of these cases will be early stage disease, and most women will be cured, however, recurrent and advanced stage endometrial cancer will still account for an estimated 7,470 deaths in 2008 [ 8 ]. Endometrial cancer is likely to become an even greater public health concern with the aging population and rising incidence of obesity in the US. Alkylating agents have been utilized alone or in combination with other chemotherapeutic agents in patients with advanced stage endometrial cancer. Response rates are variable, but overall alkylating agents are not highly effective in endometrial cancer [ 9 - 10 ]. We hypothesized that MGMT promoter methylation might play a role in endometrial tumorigenesis and as such could in part determine response to therapies. Previous studies examining MGMT promoter methylation in a small series of primary endometrioid endometrial cancers suggested a lack of methylation [ 11 ]. Studies of synchronous ovarian and endometrial primary tumors on the other hand demonstrated a high rate of MGMT promoter methylation [ 12 ]. We evaluated MGMT promoter methylation in a large collection of primary uterine cancers representative of all grades, stages and histologic types.  Methods One hundred and twenty primary endometrial cancers were analyzed for MGMT promoter methylation by combined bisulfite restriction analysis (COBRA). The cohort included 77 endometrioid endometrial cancers, 43 endometrial tumors of adverse histologic type, and 6 endometrial cancer cell lines. Twenty-one endometrioid and mixed endometrioid ovarian cancers were also analyzed. A subset of the primary tumors was analyzed for MGMT expression by immunohistochemistry.  Results No MGMT promoter methylation was seen in the 120 endometrial cancers evaluated or the 6 endometrial cancer cell lines. One of the 21 endometrioid ovarian cancers showed methylation. Immunohistochemistry revealed moderate to high level expression of MGMT in the primary endometrial tumors.  Conclusion MGMT promoter methylation is an infrequent event in endometrial cancer. MGMT expression and the ability to repair damaged alkylguanine residues could in part explain the limited response of endometrial tumors to alkylating chemotherapy.  Materials and Methods DNA preparation All primary endometrial and ovarian tumors, normal endometrium and matched normal tissue specimens used in this study were collected as part of prospective studies to investigate the causes, diagnosis and prevention of endometrial cancer and gynecologic malignancies. All patients consented to molecular analyses and follow-up as part of Washington University Medical Center Human Research Protection Office (HRPO)-approved protocols (HRPO91-507, 93-0828 and 92-242). Tissue specimens and blood were obtained at the time of surgery and stored at -70° C until DNA extraction. Normal DNA was isolated from peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) using the QiaAmp DNA blood Midi kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). Genomic DNA from tumor tissues, and normal endometrium and cell lines was extracted using the DNeasy Tissue kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). All colorectal specimens were obtained from banked DNA previously studied by Herfarth [ 13 ]. Bisulfite Conversion DNA bisulfite conversion was performed using a commercially available kit (EZ DNA Methylation Gold Kit, Zymo Research, Orange, CA). Mgmt Cobra Assay A single round of Touchdown PCR was used for amplification as previously described [ 14 ]. Forward Primer: 5? TTGGTAAAATTAAGGTATAGAGTTTT 3? Reverse Primer was made degenerate at an internal CG site to prevent preferential amplification of methylated DNA. Sequences were 5? CTAAAACAATCTACGGCATCCTC 3? and 5? CTAAAACAATCTACAGCATCCTC 3?. PCR products were then digested with Taq I and diagnostic fragments resolved on a 10% polyacrylamide gels, stained with ethidium bromide, and photoimaged with a UV camera (ImageSTore 500 Version 7.12, White/UV Transilluminator; UVP, Inc., Upland, CA). Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry was performed on a subset of primary tumors. Five micrometer sections of paraffin embedded tissues were obtained of 18 endometrioid tumors. Sections were deparaffinized and stained with anti-MGMT (Mouse anti-human, clone MT3.1 DakoCytomation, Inc, Carpinteria, California) using heat-induced epitope retrieval (ER2, Leica Biosystems, Inc, Bannockburn, IL) and an automatic stainer (Bond System, Leica Biosystems).  DNA preparation All primary endometrial and ovarian tumors, normal endometrium and matched normal tissue specimens used in this study were collected as part of prospective studies to investigate the causes, diagnosis and prevention of endometrial cancer and gynecologic malignancies. All patients consented to molecular analyses and follow-up as part of Washington University Medical Center Human Research Protection Office (HRPO)-approved protocols (HRPO91-507, 93-0828 and 92-242). Tissue specimens and blood were obtained at the time of surgery and stored at -70° C until DNA extraction. Normal DNA was isolated from peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) using the QiaAmp DNA blood Midi kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). Genomic DNA from tumor tissues, and normal endometrium and cell lines was extracted using the DNeasy Tissue kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). All colorectal specimens were obtained from banked DNA previously studied by Herfarth [ 13 ].  Bisulfite Conversion DNA bisulfite conversion was performed using a commercially available kit (EZ DNA Methylation Gold Kit, Zymo Research, Orange, CA).  Mgmt Cobra Assay A single round of Touchdown PCR was used for amplification as previously described [ 14 ]. Forward Primer: 5? TTGGTAAAATTAAGGTATAGAGTTTT 3? Reverse Primer was made degenerate at an internal CG site to prevent preferential amplification of methylated DNA. Sequences were 5? CTAAAACAATCTACGGCATCCTC 3? and 5? CTAAAACAATCTACAGCATCCTC 3?. PCR products were then digested with Taq I and diagnostic fragments resolved on a 10% polyacrylamide gels, stained with ethidium bromide, and photoimaged with a UV camera (ImageSTore 500 Version 7.12, White/UV Transilluminator; UVP, Inc., Upland, CA).  Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry was performed on a subset of primary tumors. Five micrometer sections of paraffin embedded tissues were obtained of 18 endometrioid tumors. Sections were deparaffinized and stained with anti-MGMT (Mouse anti-human, clone MT3.1 DakoCytomation, Inc, Carpinteria, California) using heat-induced epitope retrieval (ER2, Leica Biosystems, Inc, Bannockburn, IL) and an automatic stainer (Bond System, Leica Biosystems).  Results No MGMT promoter methylation was seen in the 120 uterine cancers evaluated ( Table 1 ). Forty-three tumors represented aggressive histologies (serous, clear cell and malignant mixed müllerian tumor) and of the endometrioid endometrial cancers 53% were advanced stage disease. The non-endometrioid and high stage endometrial cancer specimens were from women who would typically receive adjuvant therapy, most frequently chemotherapy. A universally methylated DNA positive control for the COBRA assay demonstrated the expected 97 and 64 bp Taq I restriction fragments whereas none of the uterine cancer amplification products digested with Taq I ( Figure 1A ). One of 21 primary ovarian tumors showed methylation ( Figure 1B ). Normal ovarian tissues and omentum were also negative for methylation by COBRA (data not shown). Primary colorectal cancer DNAs ( Figure 1C ) previously shown to have MGMT methylation [ 13 ] demonstrated the expected bands. Normal endometrium and peripheral blood DNA from endometrial cancer patients showed no methylation at the MGMT promoter. No methylation was seen by COBRA in the Ishikawa, HEC-1A, KLE, SKUT- IB, ANCA-3, and RL952 endometrial cancer cell lines (data not shown). Immunohistochemistry showed abundant nuclear MGMT expression in the uterine epithelium and absent or reduced expression in stroma in both normal and cancer specimens ( Fig 2A and B ). The ovarian cancer with promoter methylation had high level MGMT staining ( Figure 2C and D ).  Results No MGMT promoter methylation was seen in the 120 uterine cancers evaluated ( Table 1 ). Forty-three tumors represented aggressive histologies (serous, clear cell and malignant mixed müllerian tumor) and of the endometrioid endometrial cancers 53% were advanced stage disease. The non-endometrioid and high stage endometrial cancer specimens were from women who would typically receive adjuvant therapy, most frequently chemotherapy. A universally methylated DNA positive control for the COBRA assay demonstrated the expected 97 and 64 bp Taq I restriction fragments whereas none of the uterine cancer amplification products digested with Taq I ( Figure 1A ). One of 21 primary ovarian tumors showed methylation ( Figure 1B ). Normal ovarian tissues and omentum were also negative for methylation by COBRA (data not shown). Primary colorectal cancer DNAs ( Figure 1C ) previously shown to have MGMT methylation [ 13 ] demonstrated the expected bands. Normal endometrium and peripheral blood DNA from endometrial cancer patients showed no methylation at the MGMT promoter. No methylation was seen by COBRA in the Ishikawa, HEC-1A, KLE, SKUT- IB, ANCA-3, and RL952 endometrial cancer cell lines (data not shown). Immunohistochemistry showed abundant nuclear MGMT expression in the uterine epithelium and absent or reduced expression in stroma in both normal and cancer specimens ( Fig 2A and B ). The ovarian cancer with promoter methylation had high level MGMT staining ( Figure 2C and D ).  Discussion This study is the first to assess MGMT promoter methylation in a large number of endometrial cancers. No methylation was seen in our survey of 120 cases representative of all grades, stages and histologic types. The six endometrial cancer cell lines evaluated also showed no evidence of methylation of the MGMT promoter. These results confirm previous findings in a small number (n=17) of endometrial cancers by [ 15 ] Jacinto et al. [ 11 ] and Esteller et al. The absence of MGMT promoter methylation in the endometrial cancer cell lines in noteworthy given that these cell lines are known to have multiple mutations and that several have been shown to have the so-called CpG island methylator phenotype [ 16 - 18 ]. A recent study by Zighelboim et al. [ 19 ] reported frequent tumor-specific methylation in a series of >350 primary endometrioid endometrial cancers. COBRA evaluation of the TITF1, MLH1 and SESN3 promoters demonstrated nearly a third of cases had two or more methylation events. Our results from a large series of tumors (120) indicate MGMT promoter methylation is rare event in endometrial cancer. MGMT expression as shown by immunohistochemistry in the endometrioid ovarian cancer with MGMT promoter methylation was unexpected given methylation is correlated with absence of MGMT protein product in gliomas and other cancers [ 11 ]. Recent studies from Rodriguez et al., however showed poor correlation between MGMT promoter methylation and MGMT expression by immunohistochemistry in glioblastoma specimens [ 20 ]. The authors suggest that since many normal cells are trapped in the infiltrating glioblastoma it may be those normal cells that stain for MGMT complicating interpretation of tumor cells. This however, seems unlikely in the ovarian tumor specimen we investigated. Previous studies evaluating alkylating agents such as ifosfamide and cyclophosphamide in the treatment of advanced stage or progressive endometrial cancer showed lackluster responses to this class of cytotoxics [ 21 - 22 ]. MGMT activity in endometrial cancers could explain in part the limited response to alkylating agents. MGMT normally repairs methylguanine residues. If MGMT fails to repair this damage, then a mismatch lesion is generated. Normally the DNA mismatch repair complex then engages in futile repair processes which result in strand breakage and ultimately targets the cell for apoptosis [ 23 ]. Loss of DNA mismatch repair occurs in 20-25% of endometrial cancers [ 24 - 25 ]. In cancers lacking DNA mismatch repair, DNA damage by alkylating agents may not lead to cell death. Our data suggest MGMT is normally active in the majority of endometrial cancers. Resistance to alkylating agents in these cancers is likely attributable to lesion repair (mediated by MGMT) and loss of DNA mismatch repair. In neuroblastoma and gliomas, response to alkylating agents has been correlated with methylation of the MGMT promoter [ 4 - 6 , 26 ]. Wagner et al demonstrated pretreatment of neuroblastoma cells with O6-benzylguanine, an MGMT inactivating agent, reduced the IC50 of temozolomide (an alkylating agent) 10 fold regardless of the level of MGMT expression [ 26 ]. Similar experiments have been performed in colon cancer and oral cancer cell lines [ 27 ]. Future study of MGMT inhibitors in endometrial cancer may ultimately improve sensitivity to alkylating agents.  Discussion This study is the first to assess MGMT promoter methylation in a large number of endometrial cancers. No methylation was seen in our survey of 120 cases representative of all grades, stages and histologic types. The six endometrial cancer cell lines evaluated also showed no evidence of methylation of the MGMT promoter. These results confirm previous findings in a small number (n=17) of endometrial cancers by [ 15 ] Jacinto et al. [ 11 ] and Esteller et al. The absence of MGMT promoter methylation in the endometrial cancer cell lines in noteworthy given that these cell lines are known to have multiple mutations and that several have been shown to have the so-called CpG island methylator phenotype [ 16 - 18 ]. A recent study by Zighelboim et al. [ 19 ] reported frequent tumor-specific methylation in a series of >350 primary endometrioid endometrial cancers. COBRA evaluation of the TITF1, MLH1 and SESN3 promoters demonstrated nearly a third of cases had two or more methylation events. Our results from a large series of tumors (120) indicate MGMT promoter methylation is rare event in endometrial cancer. MGMT expression as shown by immunohistochemistry in the endometrioid ovarian cancer with MGMT promoter methylation was unexpected given methylation is correlated with absence of MGMT protein product in gliomas and other cancers [ 11 ]. Recent studies from Rodriguez et al., however showed poor correlation between MGMT promoter methylation and MGMT expression by immunohistochemistry in glioblastoma specimens [ 20 ]. The authors suggest that since many normal cells are trapped in the infiltrating glioblastoma it may be those normal cells that stain for MGMT complicating interpretation of tumor cells. This however, seems unlikely in the ovarian tumor specimen we investigated. Previous studies evaluating alkylating agents such as ifosfamide and cyclophosphamide in the treatment of advanced stage or progressive endometrial cancer showed lackluster responses to this class of cytotoxics [ 21 - 22 ]. MGMT activity in endometrial cancers could explain in part the limited response to alkylating agents. MGMT normally repairs methylguanine residues. If MGMT fails to repair this damage, then a mismatch lesion is generated. Normally the DNA mismatch repair complex then engages in futile repair processes which result in strand breakage and ultimately targets the cell for apoptosis [ 23 ]. Loss of DNA mismatch repair occurs in 20-25% of endometrial cancers [ 24 - 25 ]. In cancers lacking DNA mismatch repair, DNA damage by alkylating agents may not lead to cell death. Our data suggest MGMT is normally active in the majority of endometrial cancers. Resistance to alkylating agents in these cancers is likely attributable to lesion repair (mediated by MGMT) and loss of DNA mismatch repair. In neuroblastoma and gliomas, response to alkylating agents has been correlated with methylation of the MGMT promoter [ 4 - 6 , 26 ]. Wagner et al demonstrated pretreatment of neuroblastoma cells with O6-benzylguanine, an MGMT inactivating agent, reduced the IC50 of temozolomide (an alkylating agent) 10 fold regardless of the level of MGMT expression [ 26 ]. Similar experiments have been performed in colon cancer and oral cancer cell lines [ 27 ]. Future study of MGMT inhibitors in endometrial cancer may ultimately improve sensitivity to alkylating agents.  Figures and Table Figure 1 Representative COBRA for three cancer types. A. Endometrial cancers. B. Ovarian cancers. C. Colon cancers. Restriction products were resolved on 10% polyacrylamide gels. UM: universally methylated positive control. +: methylated specimen; - unmethylated specimen. Arrows indicate methylation-specific restriction digestion products. Figure 2 Representative examples of MGMT immunohistochemistry A. COBRA negative normal endometrium. B. COBRA negative endometrial cancer. C. H&E staining of COBRA positive endometrioid ovarian cancer. D. MGMT staining of COBRA positive endometrioid ovarian cancer Table 1 Breakdown of tumors analyzed for MGMT promoter methylation Primary cancers (N) N (% methylated) Uterine 120 (0%) Total Stage ?I (66) ?II (14) ?III (26) ?IV (14) Histology Endometrioid ?Grade 1 (39) ?Grade 2 (21) ?Grade 3 (17) Papillary serous (16) Clear cell (8) Malignant mixed müllerian tumor (19) Ovarian 21 (4.8%) Total Histology Endometrioid 11 (0%) Mixed (endometrioid and serous or clear cell) 10 (10%) Colorectal 7 (43%)  Figures and Table Figure 1 Representative COBRA for three cancer types. A. Endometrial cancers. B. Ovarian cancers. C. Colon cancers. Restriction products were resolved on 10% polyacrylamide gels. UM: universally methylated positive control. +: methylated specimen; - unmethylated specimen. Arrows indicate methylation-specific restriction digestion products. Figure 2 Representative examples of MGMT immunohistochemistry A. COBRA negative normal endometrium. B. COBRA negative endometrial cancer. C. H&E staining of COBRA positive endometrioid ovarian cancer. D. MGMT staining of COBRA positive endometrioid ovarian cancer Table 1 Breakdown of tumors analyzed for MGMT promoter methylation Primary cancers (N) N (% methylated) Uterine 120 (0%) Total Stage ?I (66) ?II (14) ?III (26) ?IV (14) Histology Endometrioid ?Grade 1 (39) ?Grade 2 (21) ?Grade 3 (17) Papillary serous (16) Clear cell (8) Malignant mixed müllerian tumor (19) Ovarian 21 (4.8%) Total Histology Endometrioid 11 (0%) Mixed (endometrioid and serous or clear cell) 10 (10%) Colorectal 7 (43%) 