Proteomics of the Lysosome Defects in lysosomal function have been associated with numerous monogenic human diseases typically classified as lysosomal storage diseases. However, there is increasing evidence that lysosomal proteins are also involved in more widespread human diseases including cancer and Alzheimer disease. Thus, there is a continuing interest in understanding the cellular functions of the lysosome and an emerging approach to this is the identification of its constituent proteins by proteomic analyses. To date, the mammalian lysosome has been shown to contain ~ 60 soluble luminal proteins and ~25 transmembrane proteins. However, recent proteomic studies based upon affinity purification of soluble components or subcellular fractionation to obtain both soluble and membrane components suggest that there may be many more of both classes of protein resident within this organelle than previously appreciated. Discovery of such proteins has important implications for understanding the function and the dynamics of the lysosome but can also lead the way towards the discovery of the genetic basis for human diseases of hitherto unknown etiology. Here, we describe current approaches to lysosomal proteomics and data interpretation and review the new lysosomal proteins that have recently emerged from such studies.  1. Introduction to the lysosome Discovered by Christian de Duve over 50 years ago [ 1 ], the lysosome is a cytoplasmic cellular organelle that has risen to prominence because of its critical role in cellular function and tissue homeostasis as well as its involvement in numerous human diseases (reviewed in [ 2 , 3 ]). Present in all nucleated eukaryotic cells, the lysosome is delimited by a single-layer lipid membrane and has an acidic internal pH (~ 5) that is maintained by an ATP-dependent proton pump. The primary cellular function of the lysosome is the degradation and recycling of macromolecules obtained by endocytosis, autophagy and other cellular trafficking pathways. Several classes of macromolecules are hydrolyzed including proteins, polysaccharides, lipids and nucleic acids and this is achieved by the concerted action of numerous soluble catabolic enzymes within the lumen of the lysosome, collectively termed acid hydrolases. Acid hydrolases have evolved to function in the low pH of this organelle and possess a wide variety of enzymatic properties. Over 60 of these enzymes and soluble accessory proteins have been described to date. A number of studies have investigated the proteome of soluble lysosomal proteins from a variety of mammalian tissues and cell types ([ 4 ]; reviewed in [ 5 ]) revealing that, for the most part, these proteins tend to be fairly ubiquitous. However, some lysosomal proteins have very limited tissue distribution and perform specialized cellular functions e.g. the granzymes of immune cells [ 6 ]. In addition to the soluble luminal proteins, many integral and peripheral membrane proteins are associated with the lysosome and have a variety of functions including catalysis, transmembrane transport of substrates and digestion products, establishment of pH gradients, vesicular transport and maintenance of lysosomal structural integrity [ 3 ]. Classical biochemical and genetic analyses have resulted in the characterization of numerous components of the lysosome. More recently, the application of highly-sensitive proteomic approaches has lead to the identification of many new proteins that may function in this compartment and for some, lysosomal localization has now been verified. It is these new lysosomal proteins that form the focus of this review. Approaches to the discovery and validation of lysosomal candidates have recently been reviewed in depth [ 5 ] and for the most part, will be outlined in brief here.  2. Lysosomes and human disease The lysosomal system is of considerable biomedical importance as alterations in lysosomes and lysosomal proteins are associated with numerous human diseases ( Table 1 ) [ 3 , 7 ]. To date, over 50 monogenic human genetic diseases have been identified that are primarily associated with lysosomal dysfunction and the majority of these are classified as lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs). Here, deficiencies in lysosomal proteins, most commonly soluble luminal ones, result in an accumulation of storage material within the lysosome. Storage material primarily represents undigested substrates and may result in alterations in the ultrastructure of the lysosome that are often specific to a given LSD and which may be diagnostically valuable. Defects in various classes of lysosomal proteins result in disease (reviewed in [ 7 ]) but most LSDs result from mutations in genes encoding lysosomal enzymes. Other LSDs result from defects in soluble accessory proteins that are involved in functions such as presenting substrates to hydrolytic enzymes, membrane proteins that transport degradation products out of the lysosome or components of the cellular machinery involved in the processing or trafficking of lysosomal proteins. Individually, LSDs are rare but as a group, their frequency is significant, with an incidence of ~ 1:5000 live births [ 8 ]. In addition to these diseases, there is increasing evidence that lysosomes and lysosomal activities may be involved in more widespread, polygenic diseases such as cancer [ 9 ], arthritis [ 10 ], atherosclerosis [ 11 ] and Alzheimer’s disease [ 12 ]. Of particular recent interest is the function of the lysosome in cellular autophagic pathways that may play a protective role against infection, aging, neurodegeneration and cancer (reviewed in [ 13 ]).  3. Significance of lysosomal proteomic studies As interest in the role of the lysosomal system under normal conditions and in human disease continues to increase, more studies are being directed towards the elucidation of the mammalian lysosomal proteome and that of related organelles (reviewed in [ 3 , 5 ]). Understanding the full range of biological functions of this organelle provides essential information regarding the normal function of the cell but may also shed insights into how lysosomes may influence general cellular activities in pathogenic states. In some cases, changes in lysosomal activities may be directly involved in disease and thus identifying such changes could potentially lead to novel therapeutic targets. Other alterations in lysosomal activities may not be directly involved in pathogenesis per se but may reflect disease and could potentially be useful as prognostic or diagnostic markers. It is worth noting that while select lysosomal activities can be individually measured in disease samples, the application of quantitative proteomic approaches can provide a global picture of the lysosomal system in particular by revealing coordinate alterations in expression. Another rationale for the comprehensive characterization of the mammalian lysosome is that there remain human diseases of unknown genetic etiology that appear to be lysosomal in origin based upon morphological or other clinical criteria. For example, the presence of membrane-delimited storage bodies, especially when associated with progressive neurodegeneration, would be highly suggestive of a lysosomal storage disease. There are a number of clinically defined diseases that fall into this category, notable examples of which are the adult form of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis and geleophysic dysplasia (reviewed in [ 5 ]). To date, proteomic approaches have led to the identification of three human lysosomal disease genes. In a comparative proteomic study [ 14 ], lysosomal proteins in late infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, a fatal neurodegenerative disease of children, were compared to those in normal controls. A previously uncharacterized lysosomal protein was found to be absent in the patient samples and mutations were subsequently found in its respective gene, confirming it to be the basis for disease. This protein was eventually demonstrated to be tripeptidyl peptidase I, a lysosomal protease [ 15 , 16 ]. Two other proteomic studies led to the discovery of disease genes not by a comparative approach but by instead providing candidates for further genetic analysis. In a study of purified soluble lysosomal proteins, a previously characterized cholesterol binding protein was found and confirmed to reside within the lysosome [ 17 ] and this information provided a rationale for a genetic screen of this protein in unsolved lysosomal storage diseases exhibiting cholesterol storage. Mutations were found in the gene encoding this protein in Niemann-Pick C Type 2, a neurovisceral disease of children that was of unknown basis at the time. Mucopolysaccharidosis IIIC (MPSIIIC) is a lysosomal disease that was known to be caused by a loss of heparan acetyl-CoA:alpha-glucosaminide N-acetyltransferase (HGSNAT) activity and while the gene encoding this protein had been mapped by linkage analysis, it had not been identified [ 18 ]. In a proteomic study of purified lysosomal membrane proteins [ 19 ], a novel membrane protein was identified whose gene mapped to the same locus as that determined for the defect in MPSIIIC. Subsequent analysis of this novel lysosomal protein revealed mutations in MPSIIIC and confirmed that it encoded HGSNAT [ 20 ]. In addition to clinically-defined diseases of unknown basis, there are numerous patients diagnosed with apparent lysosomal storage disease in which the gene defect cannot be found. Many of these cases may represent atypical clinical presentation of established LSDs, often with a mild or delayed onset resulting from partial loss of function mutations [ 21 ]. However, some cases are likely to result from defects in lysosomal proteins that are not currently associated with human disease while others might be caused by mutations in genes encoding lysosomal proteins that have not yet been identified or assigned to this organelle. In all of these cases, lysosomal proteomic analyses could play a pivotal role in the identification of gene defects.  4. Organellar proteomics, subcellular fractionation and application to the lysosome Proteomic characterization of individual organelles [ 22 ] can provide valuable information regarding their function in normal and disease states. In addition, this type of approach circumvents analytical issues associated with the complexity of the entire proteome and represents a tractable method for determining the proteome of a given tissue or cell type. The most widely applied approach towards organellar proteomics involves subcellular fractionation, typically by differential and gradient centrifugation, and protein identification using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and these methods can be applied towards the lysosomal proteome. However, because of the overlapping physical properties of organelles, the resolution of subcellular fractionation by density centrifugation is limited, typically allowing for the enrichment of organelles but not purification to homogeneity. As a result, these experiments are highly susceptible to false positive errors in assignment of location and data must be interpreted carefully with appropriate validation. This problem is compounded by the fact that some proteins may be present in multiple cellular locations. For example, proteins derived from mitochondria may be found in both mitochondria and lysosomes involved in autophagic degradation of mitochondria. Lysosomal proteins may be found in lysosomes as well as their sites of synthesis (ER and Golgi) and in transport vesicles. There are emerging methodological improvements that increase the accuracy of analytical or preparative subcellular fractionation approaches to organellar proteomics. In a density gradient, organelles migrate with overlapping but distinct profiles thus, rather than simply characterizing the proteome of organelle-enriched preparations, one approach is to use quantitative mass spectrometric methods to measure the distribution of proteins across the gradient and assign location by reference to the distribution of marker proteins. Protein distribution can be measured using quantitative isotopic labeling [ 23 ] or label-free methods [ 24 ]. Another approach for definitive localization is to use methods that specifically alter the biophysical properties of organelles, resulting in a characteristic shift of their density as measured by gradient centrifugation. The distribution of marker enzymes for a given organelle is thus altered and other proteins with a similar shift in distribution can thereby be assigned to this compartment. For the lysosome, a selective shift in buoyant density can be achieved in a number of ways. Treatment of animals with Triton WR-1339 (tyloxapol) prior to tissue harvest and subcellular fractionation causes a lysosomal accumulation of lipids in the so-called “tritosomes” [ 25 , 26 ]. Loss of NPC2, a lysosomal cholesterol binding protein, results in an accumulation of cholesterol and other lipids within the lysosome with a concomitant decrease in density [ 27 ]. In addition, treatment of cultured cells with progesterone also results in a shift in the buoyant density of lysosomes [ 28 ], presumably by blocking cholesterol egress [ 29 ]. For each of these methods, the density of other organelles remains largely unchanged, thus the shift in distribution represents a specific test for lysosomal localization. In the past, such approaches have been limited to the analysis of proteins for which biochemical tests or immunological reagents are available. However, the use of mass spectrometry for protein identification and quantitation in subcellular fractionation will greatly expand the application of these methods. A number of studies have used subcellular fractionation to investigate the lysosomal proteome. In an early study, lysosomes were prepared from human placenta by Percoll gradient centrifugation and constituent proteins identified by N-terminal sequencing by Edman degradation after fractionation by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, resulting in the assignment of eight lysosomal proteins [ 30 ]. In another study, rat liver tritosomes prepared by sucrose density gradient centrifugation were analyzed using mass spectrometric methods for protein identification and 215 proteins were confidently identified [ 19 ]. Some of these proteins were previously designated to be lysosomal but the majority were assigned to other organelles. While some cellular proteins certainly have multiple cellular locations, this does illustrate the problems of false positive localization (discussed earlier) that emerge in the analysis of organelle-enriched fractions. Methods to address this problem are discussed below (Section 6). Protocols have also been established to isolate lysosomes by selectively loading with dextran [ 31 ], iron [ 32 ] or gold [ 33 ] or by immunoisolation using antibodies specific for lysosomal membrane glycoproteins (REF). These different approaches undoubtedly have individual merits but, to date, none have been applied to lysosomal proteomics studies.  5. Affinity purification of lysosomal proteins A subgroup of lysosomal proteins representing the majority of soluble luminal components can be purified by affinity chromatography for proteomic characterization. Newly synthesized lysosomal proteins contain a specific carbohydrate modification, mannose 6-phosphate (Man6-P) that is recognized and bound by two Man6-P receptors (MPRs). MPRs direct the targeting of lysosomal proteins from the trans -Golgi to an acidified prelysosomal compartment where the Man6-P modification is variably removed depending on tissue and cell type. Purified MPRs can be used for the visualization of Man6-P glycoproteins in biological samples [ 34 ]. In addition, when immobilized on a solid support, purified MPRs can be used for the affinity purification of Man6-P containing proteins which are specifically eluted from the immobilized MPR by free Man6-P, an approach first described in an analysis of Man6-P glycoproteins purified from rat brain [ 35 ]. Early proteomic analyses [ 35 , 36 ] of purified Man6-P glycoproteins relied upon N-terminal sequencing for protein identification but subsequent studies have employed more sensitive mass spectrometric methods and have focussed on a wide variety of sources of these proteins. Proteins containing Man6-P have now been affinity-purified from 17 different rat tissues [ 4 , 35 ], mouse brain [ 37 ] and plasma [ 38 ], human brain [ 37 , 39 ], plasma [ 40 ] and urine [ 36 , 41 ]. The same approach has also been used to purify Man6-P glycoproteins from media conditioned by mouse osteoclasts that naturally secrete lysosomal proteins [ 42 ], human monocytes and breast cancer cell lines that were chemically induced to secrete lysosomal proteins [ 43 , 44 ] or mouse embryonic fibroblasts that secrete lysosomal proteins in the absence of both MPRs [ 45 ]. Taken together, proteomic analysis of purified Man6-P glycoproteins has resulted in the identification of 60 known lysosomal proteins as well as numerous candidates that may also have lysosomal function (reviewed in [ 5 ]). Other classes of proteins are also identified in these studies including contaminants that are not specifically eluted from the immobilized MPR (i.e., “sticky” or abundant proteins). In addition, some non-lysosomal proteins, e.g., lectins and protease inhibitors, may bind and copurify with true Man6-P glycoproteins. One approach that has proven useful to differentiate between true Man6-P glycoproteins and other proteins has been to directly identify the site of the N-linked oligosaccharide that contains Man6-P using mass spectrometric methods after deglycosylation of purified Man6-P containing glycopeptides with Endoglycosidase H [ 37 ]. This method has verified the presence of Man6-P in numerous proteins not previously thought to contain this modification. However, based on the identification of proteins known to contain Man6-P, a significant drawback of this approach is that not all deglycosylated peptides that are known to be present are assigned and therefore proteome coverage appears to be limited. Most likely, this simply reflects the specific properties (e.g. sequence and size) of a given peptide that may cause it to be selectively lost during sample preparation or to be missed by the mass spectrometer because it is poorly ionized or it is outside the mass range constraints of the instrument. Alternatively, failure to detect a given Man-6-phosphorylation site may simply reflect low peptide abundance. It is worth noting that while the majority of soluble lysosomal proteins are targeted to the lysosome via the Man6P-dependent pathway, other pathways do exist thus there may be multiple ways in which a given lysosomal protein can reach its final destination. Some soluble lysosomal proteins are targeted solely by Man6P-independent routes and will not be affinity purified on immobilized MPR. An example is ?-glucocerebrosidase which is targeted to the lysosome via interaction with the lysosomal transmembrane protein LIMP2 [ 46 ].  6. Approaches to distinguish candidate novel lysosomal proteins from contaminants In the characterization of lysosomal proteomes prepared by both subcellular fractionation and affinity purification, distinguishing candidates for novel lysosomal proteins from contaminants and other classes of protein remains problematic. To some extent, knowledge-based interpretation of data can be helpful; for example, homologs of known lysosomal proteins are particularly likely to reside within this organelle. An example is acid-sphingomyelinase like 3A, which has been found in numerous subcellular fractionation and affinity purification studies and which is almost certainly a true lysosomal protein. However, this sort of analysis fails with proteins where a known or predicted function remains to be determined. An example of such a protein is mammalian ependymin-related protein 1, which is lysosomal [ 27 , 45 ] but of completely unknown function. Given that many of the most interesting new lysosomal proteins will be those of novel function, better methods to differentiate between candidates and other proteins are needed. Methods based upon quantitative LC-MS/MS are now beginning to emerge that can help with this challenging problem. Schröder et al [ 47 ] have recently reported an analysis of lysosomal membrane proteins isolated from human placenta and while the preparative approaches were conventional, this study differs from previous analysis of similar samples in that a statistical analysis was incorporated to exclude contaminants [ 47 ]. In this approach, a lysosomal “dense pool” fraction which contained lysosomes, mitochondria and other material, was first prepared from placenta by Percoll gradient centrifugation. Lysosomes were disrupted by incubation with methionine methyl ester, which is hydrolyzed within the lysosome resulting in their selective disruption via osmotic stress. Mitochondria were then removed by sucrose density gradient centrifugation and lipofuscin removed by a further Percoll gradient, resulting in an apparently homogeneous lysosomal membrane preparation. The lysosomal membrane and the dense pool samples were then analyzed by LC-MS/MS and enrichment in the former determined by a spectral counting, a semiquantitative method for measuring relative protein abundance [ 48 ]. Based upon known lysosomal proteins, a threshold for enrichment was established and this was used to filter the data set together with a threshold for the probability of enrichment. This resulted in exclusion of the majority of known mitochondrial, ER, plasma membrane and peroxisomal proteins identified and allowed for the most accurate description of the lysosomal membrane proteome to date. However, while this study certainly represents a significant step forward in subcellular fractionation-based lysosomal proteomics, one limitation is that lysosomal constituents cannot be distinguished from proteins undergoing degradation within the lysosomal compartment. In order to achieve this, it will be necessary to follow the total distribution of candidate proteins in all subcellular and extracellular fractions, not just the lysosome. For preparations of affinity purified Man6-P glycoproteins, a recent approach to exclude contaminants is based upon a comparison between mock and specific eluates of the immobilized MPR affinity columns [ 4 ]. After loading and washing, columns are first eluted with buffer containing mannose and glucose 6-phosphate (the “mock” eluate) then eluted with buffer containing Man6-P (the specific eluate). Spectral counting was then used to estimate the relative abundance of each identified protein in both eluates with the prediction that true Man6-P glycoproteins (but possibly also proteins that do not contain Man6-P but which associate with Man6-P glycoproteins, depending upon the strength of interaction) should be enriched in the Man6-P eluate relative to the mannose/glucose 6-phosphate eluate. In contrast, non-specific contaminants (i.e., abundant or “sticky” proteins that leach from the column in a Man6-P independent manner) should be present at equal or greater levels in the mock compared to specific eluate. Based upon known lysosomal proteins, this prediction proved to be the case, with 59/60 of these proteins with the lower 95% confidence interval of the enrichment ratio being greater than 2.75 [ 4 ]. Spectral count analysis revealed 52 proteins that are not currently assigned to the lysosome that were similarly enriched and thus represent primary candidates for lysosomal localization. In concept, the approach of comparing protein levels in mock versus specific affinity column eluates is similar to the I-DIRT procedure for identifying specific members of a protein complex that are isolated by the affinity tagging of one of its constituents [ 49 ]. However, one important difference is that estimation of protein levels in the MPR affinity column eluates was achieved by spectral counting rather than isotopic labelling. This decreases the number of experimental manipulations and simplifies data analysis but there are limitations to this approach. Inherent to the use of spectral counting as a tool in assigning lysosomal localization in experiments based upon subcellular fractionation or affinity chromatography is that the confidence of the conclusions are highly dependent on the number of spectra observed. Statistical theory allows calculation of confidence intervals for the relative abundance ratio of a protein in two samples of interest [ 4 , 38 ]. The 95% confidence intervals are quite wide for proteins with low spectral counts and, as a result, significant conclusions are frequently difficult to make with respect to less abundant proteins in a mixture. Targeted mass spectrometric analyses that limit sampling of abundant species and promote sampling of minor species may help. However, measurement of protein abundance using isotope labeling methods is much less dependent on the number of spectra assigned to an individual protein and may be especially useful in investigating low abundance proteins. These approaches or others quantitative methods, e.g. peptide peak integration combined with high-resolution MS, are likely to have increasingly significant application in the investigation of lysosomal proteomes.  7. Approaches to the validation of lysosomal candidates Novel lysosomal candidates can be identified by MPR affinity purification or by subcellular fractionation but for either approach, there remains a need for the validation of cellular location. Most proteins containing Man6-P reside within the lysosome but there are some that contain this modification that do not reside within this organelle or which may do so only transiently (e.g., glycoproteins that are aberrantly phosphorylated and thus targeted to the lysosome where they are rapidly degraded). Proteins assigned to the lysosomal compartment by subcellular fractionation could represent new lysosomal proteins or alternatively, they could be contaminants from other organelles, proteins undergoing degradation in the lysosome or proteins that associate with the lysosomal membrane after cell lysis. There are two primary ways of achieving this, each with their own particular merits and limitations (reviewed in [ 5 ]). First, morphological approaches to compare the cellular distribution with lysosomal markers can provide valuable information. Endogenous or recombinant expressed proteins can be detected immunohistochemically or by tagging with a recombinant epitope or fluorescent protein but there are drawbacks: generation and validation of antibodies can be difficult and time-consuming for previously uncharacterized proteins; immuno- or fluorescent tags are prone to degradation in the protease rich environment of the lysosome [ 45 , 50 ]; and expression of lysosomal proteins at supraphysiological levels can result in incorrect intracellular targeting or secretion from the cell [ 51 , 52 ], complicating assignment of cellular location. Second, analytical subcellular fractionation can provide a powerful tool in determining the subcellular localization of a protein of interest, especially when combined with methods that elicit a specific shift in lysosome density as discussed earlier. Again, however, antibody reagents may be required for those proteins that lack a functional assay.  8. Novel lysosomal M6P-containing proteins Increasingly sensitive mass spectrometry techniques for protein identification have resulted in the identification of a large number of proteins from numerous sources when purified by affinity chromatography on immobilized MPRs. These proteins can be classified into a broad range of categories based upon their known or predicted properties: 1) known lysosomal Man6-P glycoproteins; 2) potentially new lysosomal proteins; 3) proteins assigned to cellular compartments other than the lysosome and 4); probable contaminants. Here, we will summarize the current state of knowledge regarding some potentially new lysosomal proteins and also discuss a number of proteins that have been demonstrated to contain Man6-P but which have been assigned to other cellular or extracellular locations. For consistency, human gene nomenclature is used even though for some proteins, orthologs in mouse and rat were originally identified. Potential and confirmed lysosomal proteins arising from MPR-affinity purification studies The following proteins have been identified in proteomic analyses of purified Man6-P glycoprotein preparation and may represent new lysosomal proteins. Table 2 summarizes the reports in which each protein was identified and summarizes evidence for lysosomal localization including whether the presence of Man6-P has been directly verified using mass spectrometric methods [ 37 ]. Acid sphingomyelinase-like phosphodiesterase 3a (SMPLD3a) SMPDL3a was first identified as an interacting partner of the tumor suppressor gene DBC1 (formerly DBCCR1) in a yeast 2-hybrid screen [ 53 ]. The biological significance of this potential interaction is not known and remains to be corroborated by other approaches. The cellular function of SMPDL3a is not known. The eponym sphingomyelinase-like is inferred from its homology (30% identical, 47% similar) to lysosomal acid sphingomyelinase but such an activity has not yet been demonstrated by biochemical means. Cellular repressor of E1A-stimulated genes (CREG) CREG1 was first described as a cellular protein with some sequence similarity to the adenoviral E1A oncogene that was proposed to play a role in transcriptional regulation of cell growth and differentiation [ 54 ]. CREG1 is a 220 amino acid glycoprotein that is secreted when overexpressed and which has been also suggested to function intracellularly as a transcriptional repressor by counteracting E1A in human teratocarcinoma cells [ 55 ]. CREG1 has also been suggested to promote differentiation and cell growth arrest by the inhibition of ERK1/2 in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells [ 56 ]. Secreted CREG1 binds to the MPR300 (CI-MPR; M6P/IGF2R) in a glycosylation-dependent manner and has been directly demonstrated to contain Man6-P residues [ 37 , 45 , 55 ]. Endogenous CREG1 did not co-localize with LAMP-1 [ 55 ] whereas other studies [ 45 ] could show that after internalization in human fibroblasts, a C-terminal tagged version of CREG1 localizes to LAMP1-positive lysosomes. In addition, in subcellular fraction analyses of rat liver, CREG1 was found to codistribute with lysosomal markers in untreated rats and rats treated with Triton WR-1339 (M. Qian and Lobel, unpublished data) (see Section 4). Recently, a lysosomal localization for CREG1 was unequivocally demonstrated by subcellular fractionation and immunolocalization [ 57 ] although its function within this organelle here remains to be elucidated. Arylsulfatase G (ARSG) Initially identified by a bioinformatic search of EST databases [ 58 ], ARSG is a novel sulfatase gene with significant similarity to lysosomal arylsulfatase A (37% identical, 50% similar). Initial studies of recombinant ARSG expressed in COS-7 cells suggested that it was localized to the ER [ 58 ] but the isolation of this protein by MPR-affinity purification and verification of Man6-phosphorylation strongly suggested lysosomal localization. A subsequent study also showed that this protein binds MPR and importantly, confirmed a lysosomal localization by immunohistochemistry [ 59 ]. In the same study, ARSG was also demonstrated to have sulfatase activity at acidic pH towards arylsulfatase pseudo-substrates. Arylsulfatase K, telethon sulfatase (ARSK) Another member of the arylsulfatase family, ARSK, was also identified by bioinformatic analyses [ 60 ] and later identified by MPR-affinity purification and shown to contain Man6-P. ARSK is a 536 amino acid protein with relatively little homology with other sulfatases (a maximum of 22% identity to other known sulfatases) and such an activity has yet to be demonstrated experimentally. The precise spatial orientation of key amino acids are essential for sulfatase function and these are conserved in ARSK, consistent with a sulfatase activity [ 61 ]. N-acylsphingosine amidohydrolase (acid ceramidase)-like (NAAA) Isolated by MPR-affinity purification from mouse brain, NAAA is a 359 amino acid N-acylethanolamine-hydrolyzing acid amidase that is related (33% identical, 52% similar) to the established lysosomal acid ceramidase. NAAA was first purified from human megakaryoblastic cells [ 62 ] and subsequently found in various rat tissues [ 63 ]. GFP-tagged NAAA derivatives were originally suggested to localize within the lysosome [ 64 , 65 ] and recently, this has been demonstrated for the endogenous protein [ 66 ]. NAAA was originally found to hydrolyze anadamide at acidic pH [ 62 ] and later shown to hydrolyze bioactive N-acylethanolamines into free fatty acids and ethanolamine [ 65 ]. Mannose-6-phosphate protein P76 (P76, LOC196463) P76 (formerly hypothetical protein LOC196463) was first identified as a relatively abundant constituent of preparations of Man6-P glycoproteins from humans and rodents and has now been convincingly demonstrated to be located within the lysosome [ 45 , 67 , 68 ]. Recombinant P76 was internalized and delivered to the lysosome of cultured cells in a MPR-dependent manner [ 45 ] and, consistent with this observation, carbohydrate residues containing Man6-P were identified at 5 of 6 potential N-linked glycosylation sites of P76 isolated from human brain [ 37 ]. It is synthesized as single chain precursor that is processed to multiple smaller chains [ 37 , 45 , 67 , 69 ] The function of P76 is not known. This protein has significant homology (36% identical, 52% similar) with phospholipase B (lysophospholipase) from Dictyostelium discoideum , therefore a function in lipid metabolism has been suggested but this remains to be demonstrated. Interestingly, an apparent lysosomal acid phospholipase B activity was demonstrated using an electron microscopic approach in liver and kidney from mice [ 70 ]. The highly glycosylated P67 from Trypanosoma brucei displays 28% identity to human P76 but differs in an additional C-terminal transmembrane domain and thus resembles the lysosomal integral membrane proteins LAMP-1/-2 from a structural point of view [ 71 ]. The depletion of P67 in trypanosomes by RNAi knockdown dramatically alters lysosomal morphology and function and eventually leads to retarded growth and death of the parasite in the mammalian bloodstream [ 72 ]. In RNAi-treated trypanosomes of bloodstream origin, lysosomes were extremely enlarged (4–6 times) and exhibited autophagosome-like membranes [ 72 ]. The observation that ablation of the trypanosome ortholog of P76 results in a severe lysosomal defect suggests that this protein may well be worth further investigation in human lysosomal storage diseases of unknown etiology. FLJ22662 A second member of the phospholipase B-related family, FLJ22662 is located on chromosome 12p13 and encodes a protein that is predicted to be 552 amino acids long and which is 32% identical to P76. Like P76, a potential catalytic function for this protein remains to be determined. Mammalian ependymin-related protein 1 (EPDR1) First purified from rat brain [ 35 ], human and rodent EPDR1 have since been found in most proteomic analyses of M6P-glycoproteins. EPDR1 contains at least one carbohydrate with Man6-P and has been clearly demonstrated to reside within the lysosome [ 27 , 45 ]. EPDR1 is named after ependymin which is a predominant glycoprotein in the cerebrospinal fluid of teleost fishes [ 73 ]. Piscine ependymins have been suggested to be associated with neoplasticity and regeneration of the brain by modulating calcium homeostasis (reviewed in [ 74 ]). Mammalian EPDR1 was first described as a gene that was shown to be upregulated in human colorectal tumor specimens (hence designated “ u pregulated in c olorectal c ancer gene- 1 ”) [ 75 ] and down-regulated in hematopoetic cells [ 76 ]. While EPDR1 is clearly lysosomal, homology searching fails to any significant similarity to other proteins of known function that might provide clues to its cellular role. From this perspective, EPDR1 represents a particularly interesting new lysosomal protein that will require further investigation to ascertain its function. Serine carboxypeptidase 1, Retinoid-inducible serine carboxypeptidase (SCPEP1) SCPEP1 was originally identified in a screen for genes responding to retinoid in rat vascular smooth muscle cells [ 77 ]. SCPEP1 is classified as a member of the serine carboxypeptidase family S10 which is characterized by a catalytic triad of Ser, Asp and His and which exhibit peptidase activity at acidic pH, which is consistent with lysosomal function [ 78 ]. SCPEP1 is 23% identical to the lysosomal serine carboxypeptidases protective protein/cathepsin A (23% identity) and 20% identical to vacuolar carboxypeptidase Y from S. cerevisiae . The 35 kDa mature SCPEP1 arises from a 51 kDa precursor and both a C-terminally fluorescent-tagged derivative and the endogenous protein have been shown to localize to the lysosome [ 45 , 79 ]. However, to date, no enzymatic activity has been demonstrated for SCPEP1 [ 79 ]. Epididymis-specific alpha-D-mannosidase (MAN2B2) In addition to the well known lysosomal acid alpha-D-mannosidase (MAN2B1), MAN2B2 was purified as a second alpha -D-mannosidase in porcine epididymal fluid [ 80 ]. The 135 kDa MAN2B2 precursor is processed into subunits with apparent molecular weights of 63 kDa and 51 kDa, respectively [ 80 ]. The mouse ortholog Man2B2 is ubiquitously expressed [ 81 ]. Identified in most studies of purified Man6-P glycoproteins, human MAN2B2 has recently been shown to preferentially cleave the core alpha 1,6-mannose residue from the Man3-GlcNAc but not from Man3-GlcNAc2 or larger high mannose oligosaccharides [ 82 ]. A lysosomal alpha -mannosidase specific for alpha 1,6-linked core mannose residues, probably representing MAN2B2, was partially purified from human alpha-mannosidosis fibroblasts, human spleen and rat liver [ 83 – 85 ]. Ribonucleases 1, 6 and T2 (RNASE6, RNASET2) Three ribonucleases have been purified by MPR affinity chromatography including pancreatic ribonuclease (RNASE1), ribonuclease 6 (RNASE6) and ribonuclease T2 (RNASET2) and these are promising lysosomal candidates due to their respective hydrolytic activities. For RNASET2, Man6-phosphorylation has been experimentally verified [ 37 ] and a lysosomal localization was recently demonstrated by subcellular fractionation [ 86 ]. Cat eye syndrome critical region 1 (CECR1) CECR1 is a human homolog of insect-derived growth factor and encodes an adenosine deaminase isoenzyme (ADA2) that was found at low levels in human serum and may be active at sites of inflammation during hypoxia and of tumor growth [ 87 ]. Interestingly, the pH optimum for adenosine deaminase activity is slightly acidic (~ pH 6.6) which could reflect a lysosomal function. Acycloxyacyl hydrolase (AOAH) AOAH specifically deacylates bacterial lipopolysaccharide endotoxins and in doing so, is thought to play an important role in host defence. This protein has some sequence similarity with lysosomal saposins, has been experimentally determined to contain Man6-P, can be endocytosed in an MPR-dependent manner [ 88 ], has a pH optima for catalytic activity between 5 and 6 depending on substrate [ 89 ] and, when expressed in BHK cells, it is present in vesicular cytoplasmic bodies [ 90 ]. All of these observations are consistent with a lysosomal localization. Man6-P glycoproteins proteins that are assigned to other locations A number of proteins that are routinely identified in MPR-affinity purified preparations are not currently assigned to the lysosome but are assigned to cellular compartments or thought to be secreted. Some of these proteins may be incorrectly assigned or they may have multiple cellular locations. A number of ER/Golgi proteins are frequently seen, including procollagen-lysine 1,2-oxoglutarate 5-dioxygenase 1 and microsomal stress 70 protein ATPase [ 5 ]. In addition, numerous abundant plasma proteins have also been found and surprisingly shown to contain Man6-P [ 40 ]. The significance of Man6-P on these proteins is unclear but it is possible that they may simply represent low affinity substrates for the lysosomal phosphotransferase that receive the Man6-P modification to some degree. For ER/Golgi proteins, this may simply reflect spatial proximity to the phosphotransferase. For abundant plasma proteins, this may reflect their high abundance within the biosynthetic secretory pathway combined with the fact that they are low affinity ligands for the lysosomal enzyme phosphotransferase, resulting in a proportion of each receiving the Man6-P modification. Thus, while a lysosomal function for some of these Man6-P glycoproteins cannot be ruled out, further studies are needed to understand the significance of Man6-phosphorylation in these cases.  Potential and confirmed lysosomal proteins arising from MPR-affinity purification studies The following proteins have been identified in proteomic analyses of purified Man6-P glycoprotein preparation and may represent new lysosomal proteins. Table 2 summarizes the reports in which each protein was identified and summarizes evidence for lysosomal localization including whether the presence of Man6-P has been directly verified using mass spectrometric methods [ 37 ].  Acid sphingomyelinase-like phosphodiesterase 3a (SMPLD3a) SMPDL3a was first identified as an interacting partner of the tumor suppressor gene DBC1 (formerly DBCCR1) in a yeast 2-hybrid screen [ 53 ]. The biological significance of this potential interaction is not known and remains to be corroborated by other approaches. The cellular function of SMPDL3a is not known. The eponym sphingomyelinase-like is inferred from its homology (30% identical, 47% similar) to lysosomal acid sphingomyelinase but such an activity has not yet been demonstrated by biochemical means.  Cellular repressor of E1A-stimulated genes (CREG) CREG1 was first described as a cellular protein with some sequence similarity to the adenoviral E1A oncogene that was proposed to play a role in transcriptional regulation of cell growth and differentiation [ 54 ]. CREG1 is a 220 amino acid glycoprotein that is secreted when overexpressed and which has been also suggested to function intracellularly as a transcriptional repressor by counteracting E1A in human teratocarcinoma cells [ 55 ]. CREG1 has also been suggested to promote differentiation and cell growth arrest by the inhibition of ERK1/2 in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells [ 56 ]. Secreted CREG1 binds to the MPR300 (CI-MPR; M6P/IGF2R) in a glycosylation-dependent manner and has been directly demonstrated to contain Man6-P residues [ 37 , 45 , 55 ]. Endogenous CREG1 did not co-localize with LAMP-1 [ 55 ] whereas other studies [ 45 ] could show that after internalization in human fibroblasts, a C-terminal tagged version of CREG1 localizes to LAMP1-positive lysosomes. In addition, in subcellular fraction analyses of rat liver, CREG1 was found to codistribute with lysosomal markers in untreated rats and rats treated with Triton WR-1339 (M. Qian and Lobel, unpublished data) (see Section 4). Recently, a lysosomal localization for CREG1 was unequivocally demonstrated by subcellular fractionation and immunolocalization [ 57 ] although its function within this organelle here remains to be elucidated.  Arylsulfatase G (ARSG) Initially identified by a bioinformatic search of EST databases [ 58 ], ARSG is a novel sulfatase gene with significant similarity to lysosomal arylsulfatase A (37% identical, 50% similar). Initial studies of recombinant ARSG expressed in COS-7 cells suggested that it was localized to the ER [ 58 ] but the isolation of this protein by MPR-affinity purification and verification of Man6-phosphorylation strongly suggested lysosomal localization. A subsequent study also showed that this protein binds MPR and importantly, confirmed a lysosomal localization by immunohistochemistry [ 59 ]. In the same study, ARSG was also demonstrated to have sulfatase activity at acidic pH towards arylsulfatase pseudo-substrates.  Arylsulfatase K, telethon sulfatase (ARSK) Another member of the arylsulfatase family, ARSK, was also identified by bioinformatic analyses [ 60 ] and later identified by MPR-affinity purification and shown to contain Man6-P. ARSK is a 536 amino acid protein with relatively little homology with other sulfatases (a maximum of 22% identity to other known sulfatases) and such an activity has yet to be demonstrated experimentally. The precise spatial orientation of key amino acids are essential for sulfatase function and these are conserved in ARSK, consistent with a sulfatase activity [ 61 ].  N-acylsphingosine amidohydrolase (acid ceramidase)-like (NAAA) Isolated by MPR-affinity purification from mouse brain, NAAA is a 359 amino acid N-acylethanolamine-hydrolyzing acid amidase that is related (33% identical, 52% similar) to the established lysosomal acid ceramidase. NAAA was first purified from human megakaryoblastic cells [ 62 ] and subsequently found in various rat tissues [ 63 ]. GFP-tagged NAAA derivatives were originally suggested to localize within the lysosome [ 64 , 65 ] and recently, this has been demonstrated for the endogenous protein [ 66 ]. NAAA was originally found to hydrolyze anadamide at acidic pH [ 62 ] and later shown to hydrolyze bioactive N-acylethanolamines into free fatty acids and ethanolamine [ 65 ].  Mannose-6-phosphate protein P76 (P76, LOC196463) P76 (formerly hypothetical protein LOC196463) was first identified as a relatively abundant constituent of preparations of Man6-P glycoproteins from humans and rodents and has now been convincingly demonstrated to be located within the lysosome [ 45 , 67 , 68 ]. Recombinant P76 was internalized and delivered to the lysosome of cultured cells in a MPR-dependent manner [ 45 ] and, consistent with this observation, carbohydrate residues containing Man6-P were identified at 5 of 6 potential N-linked glycosylation sites of P76 isolated from human brain [ 37 ]. It is synthesized as single chain precursor that is processed to multiple smaller chains [ 37 , 45 , 67 , 69 ] The function of P76 is not known. This protein has significant homology (36% identical, 52% similar) with phospholipase B (lysophospholipase) from Dictyostelium discoideum , therefore a function in lipid metabolism has been suggested but this remains to be demonstrated. Interestingly, an apparent lysosomal acid phospholipase B activity was demonstrated using an electron microscopic approach in liver and kidney from mice [ 70 ]. The highly glycosylated P67 from Trypanosoma brucei displays 28% identity to human P76 but differs in an additional C-terminal transmembrane domain and thus resembles the lysosomal integral membrane proteins LAMP-1/-2 from a structural point of view [ 71 ]. The depletion of P67 in trypanosomes by RNAi knockdown dramatically alters lysosomal morphology and function and eventually leads to retarded growth and death of the parasite in the mammalian bloodstream [ 72 ]. In RNAi-treated trypanosomes of bloodstream origin, lysosomes were extremely enlarged (4–6 times) and exhibited autophagosome-like membranes [ 72 ]. The observation that ablation of the trypanosome ortholog of P76 results in a severe lysosomal defect suggests that this protein may well be worth further investigation in human lysosomal storage diseases of unknown etiology.  FLJ22662 A second member of the phospholipase B-related family, FLJ22662 is located on chromosome 12p13 and encodes a protein that is predicted to be 552 amino acids long and which is 32% identical to P76. Like P76, a potential catalytic function for this protein remains to be determined.  Mammalian ependymin-related protein 1 (EPDR1) First purified from rat brain [ 35 ], human and rodent EPDR1 have since been found in most proteomic analyses of M6P-glycoproteins. EPDR1 contains at least one carbohydrate with Man6-P and has been clearly demonstrated to reside within the lysosome [ 27 , 45 ]. EPDR1 is named after ependymin which is a predominant glycoprotein in the cerebrospinal fluid of teleost fishes [ 73 ]. Piscine ependymins have been suggested to be associated with neoplasticity and regeneration of the brain by modulating calcium homeostasis (reviewed in [ 74 ]). Mammalian EPDR1 was first described as a gene that was shown to be upregulated in human colorectal tumor specimens (hence designated “ u pregulated in c olorectal c ancer gene- 1 ”) [ 75 ] and down-regulated in hematopoetic cells [ 76 ]. While EPDR1 is clearly lysosomal, homology searching fails to any significant similarity to other proteins of known function that might provide clues to its cellular role. From this perspective, EPDR1 represents a particularly interesting new lysosomal protein that will require further investigation to ascertain its function.  Serine carboxypeptidase 1, Retinoid-inducible serine carboxypeptidase (SCPEP1) SCPEP1 was originally identified in a screen for genes responding to retinoid in rat vascular smooth muscle cells [ 77 ]. SCPEP1 is classified as a member of the serine carboxypeptidase family S10 which is characterized by a catalytic triad of Ser, Asp and His and which exhibit peptidase activity at acidic pH, which is consistent with lysosomal function [ 78 ]. SCPEP1 is 23% identical to the lysosomal serine carboxypeptidases protective protein/cathepsin A (23% identity) and 20% identical to vacuolar carboxypeptidase Y from S. cerevisiae . The 35 kDa mature SCPEP1 arises from a 51 kDa precursor and both a C-terminally fluorescent-tagged derivative and the endogenous protein have been shown to localize to the lysosome [ 45 , 79 ]. However, to date, no enzymatic activity has been demonstrated for SCPEP1 [ 79 ].  Epididymis-specific alpha-D-mannosidase (MAN2B2) In addition to the well known lysosomal acid alpha-D-mannosidase (MAN2B1), MAN2B2 was purified as a second alpha -D-mannosidase in porcine epididymal fluid [ 80 ]. The 135 kDa MAN2B2 precursor is processed into subunits with apparent molecular weights of 63 kDa and 51 kDa, respectively [ 80 ]. The mouse ortholog Man2B2 is ubiquitously expressed [ 81 ]. Identified in most studies of purified Man6-P glycoproteins, human MAN2B2 has recently been shown to preferentially cleave the core alpha 1,6-mannose residue from the Man3-GlcNAc but not from Man3-GlcNAc2 or larger high mannose oligosaccharides [ 82 ]. A lysosomal alpha -mannosidase specific for alpha 1,6-linked core mannose residues, probably representing MAN2B2, was partially purified from human alpha-mannosidosis fibroblasts, human spleen and rat liver [ 83 – 85 ].  Ribonucleases 1, 6 and T2 (RNASE6, RNASET2) Three ribonucleases have been purified by MPR affinity chromatography including pancreatic ribonuclease (RNASE1), ribonuclease 6 (RNASE6) and ribonuclease T2 (RNASET2) and these are promising lysosomal candidates due to their respective hydrolytic activities. For RNASET2, Man6-phosphorylation has been experimentally verified [ 37 ] and a lysosomal localization was recently demonstrated by subcellular fractionation [ 86 ].  Cat eye syndrome critical region 1 (CECR1) CECR1 is a human homolog of insect-derived growth factor and encodes an adenosine deaminase isoenzyme (ADA2) that was found at low levels in human serum and may be active at sites of inflammation during hypoxia and of tumor growth [ 87 ]. Interestingly, the pH optimum for adenosine deaminase activity is slightly acidic (~ pH 6.6) which could reflect a lysosomal function.  Acycloxyacyl hydrolase (AOAH) AOAH specifically deacylates bacterial lipopolysaccharide endotoxins and in doing so, is thought to play an important role in host defence. This protein has some sequence similarity with lysosomal saposins, has been experimentally determined to contain Man6-P, can be endocytosed in an MPR-dependent manner [ 88 ], has a pH optima for catalytic activity between 5 and 6 depending on substrate [ 89 ] and, when expressed in BHK cells, it is present in vesicular cytoplasmic bodies [ 90 ]. All of these observations are consistent with a lysosomal localization.  Man6-P glycoproteins proteins that are assigned to other locations A number of proteins that are routinely identified in MPR-affinity purified preparations are not currently assigned to the lysosome but are assigned to cellular compartments or thought to be secreted. Some of these proteins may be incorrectly assigned or they may have multiple cellular locations. A number of ER/Golgi proteins are frequently seen, including procollagen-lysine 1,2-oxoglutarate 5-dioxygenase 1 and microsomal stress 70 protein ATPase [ 5 ]. In addition, numerous abundant plasma proteins have also been found and surprisingly shown to contain Man6-P [ 40 ]. The significance of Man6-P on these proteins is unclear but it is possible that they may simply represent low affinity substrates for the lysosomal phosphotransferase that receive the Man6-P modification to some degree. For ER/Golgi proteins, this may simply reflect spatial proximity to the phosphotransferase. For abundant plasma proteins, this may reflect their high abundance within the biosynthetic secretory pathway combined with the fact that they are low affinity ligands for the lysosomal enzyme phosphotransferase, resulting in a proportion of each receiving the Man6-P modification. Thus, while a lysosomal function for some of these Man6-P glycoproteins cannot be ruled out, further studies are needed to understand the significance of Man6-phosphorylation in these cases.  9. Novel lysosomal membrane proteins Subcellular fractionation, genetic and other approaches have recently led to the discovery of several new lysosomal membrane proteins and provided many candidates for localization to this compartment (summarized in Table 3 ). Lysosomal p40 (C2orf18) Lysosomal p40 (gene name 4930471M23Rik) was originally identified in a preparation of lysosomal membranes derived from rat liver lysosomes [ 91 ]. Lysosomal localization was subsequently demonstrated by cosedimentation with lysosomal marker proteins after subcellular fraction and colocalization GFP-tagged versions of p40 with LAMP-1 [ 91 ]. Mouse p40 is a highly hydrophobic integral membrane protein that has between seven to ten transmembrane domains that are linked to each other by relatively short loops. Unlike most lysosomal membrane proteins, p40 does not contain any N-linked carbohydrate residues. The lysosomal half-life of p40 was estimated ~10 h [ 91 ] which is comparable with highly-glycosylated proteins such as LAMP-1 or LIMP-1, -2 or -3 for which deglycosylation results in an increased proteolysis [ 92 , 93 ]. Sequence homologies suggest that p40 may function as a lysosomal nucleotide-sugar transporter. Transmembrane protein 74 (TMEM74) Initially, TMEM74 was identified in a genetic screen for human ORFs that could promote autophagy in cultured cells [ 94 ]. TMEM74 is a 305 amino acid protein with a predicted molecular weight of 33.3 kDa and is conserved in mammals. It is of unknown function and lacks homology to other proteins that may provide clues to its molecular role. However, TMEM74-GFP fusion protein was shown to localize to lysosomes and autophagosomes and it appears important in the regulation of autophagy [ 94 ] as its ablation by RNAi approaches strongly inhibited starvation-induced autophagy. Heparan-alpha-glucosaminide N-acetyltransferase (HGSNAT, TMEM76) Heparan alpha-glucosaminide N-acetyltransferase activity has long been associated with lysosomal compartment and with the lysosomal storage disorder mucopolysaccharidosis IIIC (MPS IIIC, or Sanfilippo C) [ 95 ]. Prior to its discovery, a transmembrane acetylation model was hypothesized in which HGSNAT was proposed to be a membrane protein that transfers acetyl-residues from cytosolic acetyl-CoA onto luminal heparan sulfate [ 96 ]. Despite these insights into the mechanism of HGSNAT action, its gene was not identified until 2006, when two groups reported its discovery using different approaches. One study used a traditional genetic linkage analysis of 27 patients and 17 unaffected relatives [ 97 ] while the other used a proteomic candidate approach (see above) [ 20 ]. HGSNAT consists of 635 amino acids and with 11 predicted transmembrane domains and several tyrosine-based and di-leucine motifs in its cytosolic C-terminus for lysosomal targeting. The lysosomal localisation of HGSNAT was confirmed by immunofluorescence studies and wild type HGSNAT cDNA was shown to functionally reconstitute N-acetyltransferase activity in fibroblasts of MPS IIIC patients. Subsequent mutational studies of MPS IIIC patients have revealed a range of mutations in HGSNAT [ 20 , 97 , 98 ]. Major facilitator superfamily domain containing 8 protein (MFSD8, CLN7) Mutations in the MFSD8 gene are the molecular cause of variant late-infantile-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (LINCL) in a subset of Turkish LINCL patients [ 99 ]. MFSD8 encodes a highly conserved 518 amino acids protein with a calculated molecular weight of ~ 58 kDa and 12 predicted transmembrane domains. Expression of a tagged version of MFSD8 in COS-1 and HeLa cells predominantly resulted in lysosomal localization [ 99 ]. The molecular function of MFSD8 is unknown but its affiliation with the major facilitator superfamily in combination with homology to different transporter domains argues for a lysosomal transporter function. Proteomic analysis has also identified this protein as a component of the lysosome [ 47 ]. Other new lysosomal membrane proteins The innovative recent study of human placental lysosome membranes by Schröder et al. [ 47 ] used a statistical analysis of mass spectrometry data to differentiate lysosomal proteins from contaminants (see Section 6) and has yielded numerous candidate lysosomal proteins for further evaluation. Enriched in the lysosomal fraction were 28 proteins not previously assigned to this location, of which 12 were of unknown function. As a test of this approach, the subcellular localization of two of these proteins, TMEM92 and C7orf28A, was examined with YFP-tagged derivatives. Both localized to the lysosome indicating that the approach appears to provide reliable data. This study represents most rigorous analysis of the lysosomal membrane proteome to date and provides convincing evidence that there are numerous lysosomal membrane proteins that remain to be characterized.  Lysosomal p40 (C2orf18) Lysosomal p40 (gene name 4930471M23Rik) was originally identified in a preparation of lysosomal membranes derived from rat liver lysosomes [ 91 ]. Lysosomal localization was subsequently demonstrated by cosedimentation with lysosomal marker proteins after subcellular fraction and colocalization GFP-tagged versions of p40 with LAMP-1 [ 91 ]. Mouse p40 is a highly hydrophobic integral membrane protein that has between seven to ten transmembrane domains that are linked to each other by relatively short loops. Unlike most lysosomal membrane proteins, p40 does not contain any N-linked carbohydrate residues. The lysosomal half-life of p40 was estimated ~10 h [ 91 ] which is comparable with highly-glycosylated proteins such as LAMP-1 or LIMP-1, -2 or -3 for which deglycosylation results in an increased proteolysis [ 92 , 93 ]. Sequence homologies suggest that p40 may function as a lysosomal nucleotide-sugar transporter.  Transmembrane protein 74 (TMEM74) Initially, TMEM74 was identified in a genetic screen for human ORFs that could promote autophagy in cultured cells [ 94 ]. TMEM74 is a 305 amino acid protein with a predicted molecular weight of 33.3 kDa and is conserved in mammals. It is of unknown function and lacks homology to other proteins that may provide clues to its molecular role. However, TMEM74-GFP fusion protein was shown to localize to lysosomes and autophagosomes and it appears important in the regulation of autophagy [ 94 ] as its ablation by RNAi approaches strongly inhibited starvation-induced autophagy.  Heparan-alpha-glucosaminide N-acetyltransferase (HGSNAT, TMEM76) Heparan alpha-glucosaminide N-acetyltransferase activity has long been associated with lysosomal compartment and with the lysosomal storage disorder mucopolysaccharidosis IIIC (MPS IIIC, or Sanfilippo C) [ 95 ]. Prior to its discovery, a transmembrane acetylation model was hypothesized in which HGSNAT was proposed to be a membrane protein that transfers acetyl-residues from cytosolic acetyl-CoA onto luminal heparan sulfate [ 96 ]. Despite these insights into the mechanism of HGSNAT action, its gene was not identified until 2006, when two groups reported its discovery using different approaches. One study used a traditional genetic linkage analysis of 27 patients and 17 unaffected relatives [ 97 ] while the other used a proteomic candidate approach (see above) [ 20 ]. HGSNAT consists of 635 amino acids and with 11 predicted transmembrane domains and several tyrosine-based and di-leucine motifs in its cytosolic C-terminus for lysosomal targeting. The lysosomal localisation of HGSNAT was confirmed by immunofluorescence studies and wild type HGSNAT cDNA was shown to functionally reconstitute N-acetyltransferase activity in fibroblasts of MPS IIIC patients. Subsequent mutational studies of MPS IIIC patients have revealed a range of mutations in HGSNAT [ 20 , 97 , 98 ].  Major facilitator superfamily domain containing 8 protein (MFSD8, CLN7) Mutations in the MFSD8 gene are the molecular cause of variant late-infantile-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (LINCL) in a subset of Turkish LINCL patients [ 99 ]. MFSD8 encodes a highly conserved 518 amino acids protein with a calculated molecular weight of ~ 58 kDa and 12 predicted transmembrane domains. Expression of a tagged version of MFSD8 in COS-1 and HeLa cells predominantly resulted in lysosomal localization [ 99 ]. The molecular function of MFSD8 is unknown but its affiliation with the major facilitator superfamily in combination with homology to different transporter domains argues for a lysosomal transporter function. Proteomic analysis has also identified this protein as a component of the lysosome [ 47 ].  Other new lysosomal membrane proteins The innovative recent study of human placental lysosome membranes by Schröder et al. [ 47 ] used a statistical analysis of mass spectrometry data to differentiate lysosomal proteins from contaminants (see Section 6) and has yielded numerous candidate lysosomal proteins for further evaluation. Enriched in the lysosomal fraction were 28 proteins not previously assigned to this location, of which 12 were of unknown function. As a test of this approach, the subcellular localization of two of these proteins, TMEM92 and C7orf28A, was examined with YFP-tagged derivatives. Both localized to the lysosome indicating that the approach appears to provide reliable data. This study represents most rigorous analysis of the lysosomal membrane proteome to date and provides convincing evidence that there are numerous lysosomal membrane proteins that remain to be characterized.  10. Concluding Remarks The multiple approaches towards the isolation and identification of lysosomal proteins described here have already generated a lengthy list of potential novel candidates for residence in this organelle. The list of potentially new lysosomal proteins is likely to continue to grow with the discovery of other proteins that are restricted to particular cells or tissues that have yet to be analyzed using proteomic approaches. This is illustrated with a recent analysis of multiple rat tissues [ 4 ] that has yielded even more potential lysosomal candidates. In addition, improvements in the sensitivity and accuracy of mass spectrometric methods for protein identification will increasingly facilitate the identification of low abundance constituents of mixtures of lysosomal proteins. Despite considerable progress, there remain significant obstacles to a complete characterization of the composition and function of the lysosome using proteomic approaches. First, as methods for protein identification become more sensitive, contaminants, as well as bona fide lysosomal proteins, will increasingly be identified, potentially resulting in more false positive assignments to the lysosome. To a degree, the problems associated with differentiating between proteins of interest and contaminants is countered by an increasing general awareness of the need for parallel control samples in proteomic studies together with robust biostatistical methods for data analysis [ 49 ]. Second, in validating candidates identified by both subcellular fractionation and MPR-affinity chromatography, it is likely that in future it may be insufficient to simply show that a given protein can localize to the lysosome as this will not differentiate functional lysosomal components from proteins undergoing lysosomal degradation or the small proportion of some proteins that may aberrantly receive the Man6-P modification and be targeted to and stable in the lysosome. It is thus becoming clear that, in the validation of lysosomal candidates, it is necessary to not only demonstrate a lysosomal localization but also determine the proportion of the endogenous protein that resides within this compartment. Thirdly, many of the new lysosomal proteins that are beginning to emerge are of completely unknown function, and while knowing that they are lysosomal is valuable in its own right, a lack of functional information limits our understanding of the global role of the lysosomal system. In many cases, as described earlier, homology with proteins of known function can provide useful clues to function but in some cases, this is not the case (e.g. EPDR1). Understanding the role of such proteins is of particular interest as they could potentially facilitate completely new lysosomal functions. Future studies using genetic approaches in model organisms may be helpful in such cases and may also highlight possible human diseases that might arise from their deficiency.  Tables Table 1 Established lysosomal proteins and associated human disorders Many membrane proteins involved in cellular trafficking have multiple cellular locations and some may be transiently associated with the lysosome (e.g., recycling receptors and adaptors involved in vesicular targeting). We have therefore limited this list to membrane proteins that appear to be primarily located to the lysosome and which function within this organelle. Protein Disease Protein Type Protein Function Man6-P ABCA2 membrane lipid metabolism? ABCB9/TAP-like transporter membrane antigen processing ATPase, V-H+ including ~ 13 subunits KUFOR-RAKEB SYNDROME/PARKINSON DISEASE 9 membrane membrane transporter CD68 membrane CLC-7 OSTEOPETROSIS membrane Transporter CLN3 protein CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL 3, JUVENILE membrane Unknown Cystinosin CYSTINOSIS membrane Transporter LALP70 membrane LAPTM4 membrane LIMP-1/CD63/LAMP-3 membrane LIMP-2/LGP85 membrane lysosomal transport Lipopolysaccharide-induced TNF factor LITAF membrane LYAAT-1 membrane Transporter Lysosome-associated membrane protein 1 (LAMP1) membrane Lysosome-associated membrane protein 2 (LAMP2) DANON DISEASE membrane structural, protein import Major facilitator superfamily domain containing 8 CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL 7, LATE INFANTILE, VARIANT membrane transporter (?) Mucolipin MUCOLIPIDOSIS IV (SIALOLIPIDOSIS) membrane membrane transporter Nicastrin membrane NPC1 protein NIEMANN-PICK DISEASE, TYPE C1 membrane membrane transporter (?) Sialic acid transporter/Sialin SALLA DISEASE membrane Transporter Solute carrier family 17 SIALURIA membrane membrane transporter 1-O-acylceramide synthase soluble catabolic enzyme + Acid ceramidase FARBER DISEASE soluble catabolic enzyme + Acid lipase WOLMAN DISEASE soluble catabolic enzyme + Alpha-galactosidase A FABRY DISEASE soluble catabolic enzyme + Alpha-L-iduronidase MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE I (HURLER AND SCHEIE SYNDROMES) soluble catabolic enzyme + Alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase SCHINDLER DISEASE, TYPE I soluble catabolic enzyme + Alpha-N-acetylglucosaminidase MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE IIIB (SANFILIPPO SYNDROME B) soluble catabolic enzyme + Arylsulfatase A METACHROMATIC LEUKODYSTROPHY soluble catabolic enzyme + Arylsulfatase B MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE VI (MAROTEAUX-LAMY SYNDROME) soluble catabolic enzyme + Beta-galactosidase MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE IVB (MORQUIO SYNDROME B) soluble catabolic enzyme + Beta-glucuronidase MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE VII (SLY SYNDROME) soluble catabolic enzyme + Beta-hexosaminidase alpha chain TAY-SACHS DISEASE soluble catabolic enzyme + Beta-hexosaminidase beta chain SANDHOFF DISEASE soluble catabolic enzyme + Beta-mannosidase MANNOSIDOSIS, BETA A, LYSOSOMAL soluble catabolic enzyme + Carboxypeptidase, vitellogenic-like soluble catabolic enzyme ? + Cathepsin B soluble catabolic enzyme + Cathepsin D CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL 10, CONGENITAL soluble catabolic enzyme + Cathepsin F soluble catabolic enzyme + Cathepsin H soluble catabolic enzyme + Cathepsin K PYCNODYSOSTOSIS soluble catabolic enzyme + Cathepsin L soluble catabolic enzyme + Cathepsin O soluble catabolic enzyme + Cathepsin S soluble catabolic enzyme + Cathepsin Z soluble catabolic enzyme + CLN5 protein CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL 5, LATE INFANTILE, VARIANT soluble Unknown + Deoxyribonuclease II soluble catabolic enzyme + Dipeptidyl-peptidase I PAPILLON-LEFEVRE SYNDROME soluble catabolic enzyme + Galactocerebrosidase KRABBE DISEASE soluble catabolic enzyme + Gamma-glutamyl hydrolase soluble catabolic enzyme + Glycosylasparaginase ASPARTYLGLUCOSAMINURIA soluble catabolic enzyme + GM2 activator TAY-SACHS DISEASE, AB VARIANT, soluble accessory protein + Hyaluronidase MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE IX (HYALURONIDASE DEFICIENCY) soluble catabolic enzyme + Iduronate 2-sulfatase MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE II (HUNTER SYNDROME) soluble catabolic enzyme + Interferon gamma inducible protein 30 soluble catabolic enzyme Legumain soluble catabolic enzyme + Lysosomal alpha-glucosidase GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE II (POMPE DISEASE) soluble catabolic enzyme + Lysosomal alpha-mannosidase MANNOSIDOSIS, ALPHA B, LYSOSOMAL soluble catabolic enzyme + Lysosomal protective protein/Cathepsin A NEURAMINIDASE DEFICIENCY WITH BETA-GALACTOSIDASE DEFICIENCY soluble catabolic enzyme/accessory protein + Myeloperoxidase MYELOPEROXIDASE DEFICIENCY soluble host defence + N-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfatase MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE IVA (MORQUIO SYNDROME A) soluble catabolic enzyme + N-acetylglucosamine-6-sulfatase MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE IIID (SANFILIPPO SYNDROME D) soluble catabolic enzyme + NPC2 protein NIEMANN-PICK DISEASE, TYPE C2 soluble soluble transporter + N-sulphoglucosamine sulphohydrolase/heparan N-sulfatase MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE IIIA (SANFILIPPO SYNDROME A) soluble catabolic enzyme + Palmitoyl-protein thioesterase 1 CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL 1, INFANTILE/BATTEN soluble catabolic enzyme + Palmitoyl-protein thioesterase 2 soluble catabolic enzyme + Saposin COMBINED SAPOSIN DEFICIENCY; KRABBE DISEASE, ATYPICAL, DUE TO SAPOSIN A DEFICIENCY; METACHROMATIC LEUKODYSTROPHY DUE TO SAPOSIN B DEFICIENCY; GAUCHER DISEASE, ATYPICAL, DUE TO SAPOSIN C DEFICIENCY soluble accessory protein + Sialic acid 9-O-acetylesterase soluble + Sialidase 1 MUCOLIPIDOSIS I (SIALIDOSIS) soluble catabolic enzyme + Sialidase 4 soluble catabolic enzyme + Sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase NIEMANN-PICK DISEASE, TYPE A AND B soluble catabolic enzyme + Tartrate-resistant acid phospahatase soluble catabolic enzyme + Tissue alpha-L-fucosidase FUCOSIDOSIS soluble catabolic enzyme + Tripeptidyl-peptidase I CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL 2, LATE INFANTILE/BATTEN soluble catabolic enzyme + Lysosomal acid phosphatase (LAP) soluble, membrane associated catabolic enzyme Glucocerebrosidase GAUCHER DISEASE soluble. membrane associated catabolic enzyme + Table 2 Potentially novel soluble lysosomal proteins that were identified in Man6-P glycoproteomic analyses. Protein Gene Ref. M6P sites verified Lysosomal validation Acycloxyacyl hydrolase AOAH b,c yes Arylsulfatase G ARSG h yes Arylsulfatase K ARSK c,h,i yes N-acylsphingosine amidohydrolase 2 ASAH2 h N-acylethanolamine-hydrolyzing acid amidase NAAA h,i Biotinidase precursor BTD c,f,h,i yes Cat eye syndrome critical region 1 CECR1 c,f,g yes Clusterin CLU c,f,h,i Cellular repressor of E1A-stimulated genes CREG a,b,c,d,f,i yes morphological, subcellular fractionation* Deoxyribonuclease 1 DNASE1 g,i Mammalian ependymin related protein 1 EPDR1 c,d,f,h,i yes morphological, subcellular fractionation Epididymis-specific alpha-D-mannosidase MAN2B2 a,c,d,e,f,g,h,i yes ER aminopeptidase 1 ERAP1 f,i Hypothetical protein FLJ22662 FLJ22662 c,f,g,i yes Plasma alpha-L-2-fucosidase FUCA2 c,f,i yes Interleukin-4-induced gene 1 IL4I1 e,i morphological Mannose-6-phosphate protein P76* LOC196463 c,d,f,g,h,i yes morphological, subcellular fractionation Phospholipase D3 PLD3 c,h,i Procollagen-lysine 1,2-oxoglutarate 5-dioxygenase 1 PLOD1 b,e,f,g,i Protein O-fucosyltransferase 1 POFUT1 h,i Protein O-fucosyltransferase 2 POFUT2 c,f,h,i yes Prostaglandin-H2 D-isomerase PTGDS c,f,h yes Pancreatic ribonuclease RNASE1 g, f Ribonuclease 6 RNASE6 d,f,g,i Ribonuclease T2 RNASET2 subcellular fractionation Serine carboxypeptidase 1 SCPEP1 c,d,e,h,i yes morphological, subcellular fractionation* Neuroserpin SERPINI1 c,i yes Acid sphingomyelinase-like phosphodiesterase 3A SMPDL3A c,e,f,g,h,i yes Microsomal stress 70 protein ATPase STCH c,f,g,i yes Sulfatase modifying factor 2 SUMF2 c,f,i yes References are a, Journet et al (2000), Electrophoresis 21, 3411–3419; b, Journet et al (2002), Proteomics 2, 1026–1040; c, Sleat et al (2005), Proteomics 5, 1520–1532; d, Kollmann et al (2005), Proteomics 5 3966–3978; e, Czupalla et al (2006), Mol Cell Proteomics 5, 134–143; f, Sleat et al (2006), Mol Cell Proteomics 5, 1942–1956.; g, Sleat et al (2007), Biochim Biophys Acta 1774, 368–372 ; h, Qian et al (2008), Mol Cell Proteomics 7, 58–70; and i, Sleat et al (2008), J Prot Research 7, 3010–3021. Table 3 Novel lysosomal membrane proteins. Membrane proteins Gene Ref. putative sorting signals (EXXXLL-like, YXX ? -like) Lysosomal validation Lysosomal p40 C2orf18 a, e Yes morphological, subcellular fractionation Transmembrane protein 74 TMEM74 f (yes) depending on orientation morphological Heparan-?-glucosaminide N-acetyl-transferase (TMEM76) HGSNAT b, c, e Yes morphological Major facilitator superfamily domain containing 8 protein (MFSD8 alias CLN7) MFSD8 d, e Yes morphological LOC201931 alias FLJ38482 TMEM192 e Yes morphological C7orf28A alias LOC51622 C7orf28A e (yes) depending on orientation morphological References are: a, Boonen et al (2006), Biochem J 395, 39–47; b, Fan et al (2006), Am J Hum Genet 79, 738–744; c, Hrebicek et al (2006), Am J Hum Genet 79, 807–819; d, Siintola et al (2007), Am J Hum Genet 81, 136–146; e, Schröder et al (2007), Traffic 8, 1676–1686; and f, Yu et al (2008), Biochem Biophys Res Commun 369, 622–629. ? large hydrophobic amino acid 