Adipose Inflammation, Insulin Resistance, and Cardiovascular Disease Adiposity-associated inflammation and insulin resistance are strongly implicated in the development of type 2 diabetes and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. This article reviews the mechanisms of adipose inflammation, because these may represent therapeutic targets for insulin resistance and for prevention of metabolic and cardiovascular consequences of obesity. The initial insult in adipose inflammation and insulin resistance, mediated by macrophage recruitment and endogenous ligand activation of Toll-like receptors, is perpetuated through chemokine secretion, adipose retention of macrophages, and elaboration of pro-inflammatory adipocytokines. Activation of various kinases modulates adipocyte transcription factors, including peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-? and NF?B, attenuating insulin signaling and increasing adipocytokine and free fatty acid secretion. Inflammation retards adipocyte differentiation and further exacerbates adipose dysfunction and inflammation. Paracrine and endocrine adipose inflammatory events induce a local and systemic inflammatory, insulin-resistant state promoting meta-bolic dyslipidemia, type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. Developing therapeutic strategies that target both adipose inflammation and insulin resistance may help to prevent type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease in the emerging epidemic of obesity.  Conclusion This article reviews recent data regarding mechanisms of adiposity-associated inflammation and IR, which play a pivotal role in the metabolic and cardiovascular consequences of obesity. The initial insult may occur through recruitment of macrophages and innate immune antigen activation of TLRs, which can be perpetuated through secretion of chemokines, retention of macrophages in adipose, and secretion of adipocytokines. This inflammatory milieu induces adipocyte inflammatory cascades, such as the NF?B pathway, via activation of various kinases, and this modulates adipocyte transcription factors, attenuates insulin signaling, and increases pro-inflammatory adipocytokines and FFAs. Inflammatory attenuation of adipocyte differentiation further exacerbates adipose dysfunction. These paracrine and endocrine adipose inflammatory events induce a systemic inflammatory, insulin-resistant, atherogenic state and metabolic dyslipidemia, resulting in type 2 diabetes and CVD. Application of therapeutic strategies that target both adipose inflammation and IR may be required to prevent and treat type 2 diabetes and atherosclerotic CVD in the emerging epidemic of obesity. 