Estrogen-related receptor alpha is critical for the growth of estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer Expression of estrogen-related receptor alpha (ERR?) has recently been shown to carry negative prognostic significance in breast and ovarian cancers. The specific role of this orphan nuclear receptor in tumor growth and progression, however, is yet to be fully understood. The significant homology between estrogen receptor alpha (ER?) and ERR? initially suggested that these receptors may have similar transcriptional targets. Using the well-characterized ER?-positive MCF-7 breast cancer cell line, we sought to gain a genome-wide picture of ER?-ERR? cross-talk using an unbiased microarray approach. In addition to generating a host of novel ERR? target genes, this study yielded the surprising result that most ERR?-regulated genes are unrelated to estrogen-signaling. The relatively small number of genes regulated by both ER? and ERR? led us to expand our study to the more aggressive and less clinically treatable ER?-negative class of breast cancers. In this setting we found that ERR? expression is required for the basal level of expression of many known and novel ERR? target genes. Introduction of an siRNA directed to ERR? into the highly aggressive breast carcinoma MDA-MB-231 cell line dramatically reduced the migratory potential of these cells. Although stable knockdown of ERR? expression in MDA-MB-231 cells had no impact on in vitro cell proliferation, a significant reduction of tumor growth rate was observed when these cells were implanted as xenografts. Our results confirm a role for ERR? in breast cancer growth and highlight it as a potential therapeutic target for estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer.  Introduction Estrogen-related receptor alpha (ERR?, NR3B) is an orphan member of the nuclear receptor (NR) superfamily that shares considerable structural homology to the classical estrogen receptors ER? and ER?. Although its primary function appears to be the activation of fatty acid oxidation and mitochondrial biogenesis in tissues that have high energy demands (e.g., cardiac and skeletal muscle), its expression has also been associated with a negative outcome in breast and ovarian cancers ( 1 – 3 ). This latter finding is somewhat paradoxical given that cancers are generally thought to rely predominantly on glycolytic metabolism ( 4 ). It is unclear therefore, considering the known biology of ERR?, how this receptor is involved in tumor pathophysiology. One proposed mechanism regarding the role of ERR? in breast cancer biology stems from the observation that ERR? and ER? share a high degree of structural similarity. It has been hypothesized in breast cancer that ERR? may function as a modulator of estrogen signaling. Indeed, crosstalk between the ER? and ERR? signaling pathways has been observed at several levels ( 5 – 8 ). It was initially suggested that ERR? might function as an alternate receptor for estrogens. However, it now appears that neither physiological nor synthetic ER? ligands are likely to interact in a significant manner with ERR?. Indeed, crystallographic analysis of apo-ERR? indicates that even without ligand this orphan receptor adopts an active conformation, recruiting cofactors and initiating transcription ( 9 ). Despite the inability of ERR? to respond directly to estrogens and antiestrogens, this receptor may affect ER? signaling at the level of target gene transcription. Notably, ER? and ERR? are more highly homologous within their DNA binding domains. Not surprisingly, therefore, direct DNA-binding studies and reporter gene assays have indicated that many classical palindromic Estrogen Response Elements (EREs) can function as Estrogen-Related Receptor Response Elements (ERREs) ( 10 ). The majority of the ERREs mapped in genes involved in metabolism, however, do not interact in a significant manner with ER?. That EREs may represent a subset of ERREs supports a model in which ERR? exhibits activities both related and unrelated to ER? signaling in breast cancer. Definition of the ERR? transcriptome in breast cancer will likely help to determine the extent to which its role in this context involves cross-talk with the ER?-signaling pathway and to identify the mechanisms by which this receptor impacts tumor pathology. Whereas a physiological role for ERR? as a regulator of estrogen signaling remains to be described, its role as a modulator of metabolic processes in muscle, heart and liver are well-characterized. In these settings, ERR? enhances ?-oxidation of fatty acids and regulates flux through the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) by transcriptional induction of rate limiting enzymes in each process ( 11 – 14 ). Although certain tumors rely heavily on glycolysis, the capacity to generate ATP through OXPHOS is not always completely lost. For example, cancer cells may retain the ability to use a variety of oxidative substrates, including fatty acids, glutamine, and ketone bodies ( 15 , 16 ). Recent studies have shown that the TCA cycle and OXPHOS pathway are utilized in tumors not only to generate ATP, but also to supply the biosynthetic precursors required for sustained proliferation ( 17 ). Considering the complexity of tumor metabolism, the extent to which ERR? function in breast cancer is related to either its metabolic functions or its interaction with the ER?-signaling pathway remains to be determined. In view of this potential duality in ERR? function, we sought to define the ER?-related and ER?-unrelated transcriptional effects of ERR? activity in breast cancer cells. The significant number of genes affected by ERR? activity but not by estrogen treatment led to the hypothesis that an ER?-independent activity of ERR? may partially account for the negative correlation between ERR? expression and patient outcomes. We used a xenograft model of ER?-negative breast cancer to test the impact of ER?-independent ERR? activity on breast cancer pathology and found that ERR? knockdown significantly inhibited tumor growth. These studies provide compelling evidence that ERR? is involved in breast cancer growth and justify further investigation into the use of ERR? as a therapeutic target.  Materials and Methods Cell culture MDA-MB-231 cells were cultured in DMEM, AU565 and BT474 cells in RPMI, and MCF-7 cells in DMEM/F12 (Invitrogen). Stable MDA-MB-231 luciferase cells and derived cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with antibiotics. Generation and transduction of adenoviruses The generation of PGC-1? adenoviruses has been described ( 18 ). Cells were infected at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 20–100 (2 h at 20°C). For microarray experiments, MCF-7 cells were cultured in estrogen-free media (48 h) before adenoviral infection (MOI 50), treated 12 h later and harvested after an additional 12 h. In experiments with siRNA and PGC-1? infections, cells were infected with siRNA adenovirus 48 h prior to a infection with PGC-1? ( 11 ). Immunoblot analysis verified that ERR? knock-down did not alter ER? expression ( Supplementary Figure 1 ). RNA preparations and analysis Total RNA was isolated using Qiagen or BioRad RNA purification columns and DNase treated (BioRad). An iScript cDNA synthesis kit (BioRad) was used (1µg RNA). Real-time PCR was performed (0.25µL cDNA, 0.4µM specific primers ( Table S1 ), and BioRad iQ SYBRGreen supermix) and results quantified using the 2???Ct method ( 19 ). Microarray data analysis Probe synthesis, hybridization on Affymetrix HG133A GeneChips (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) and scanning were performed at the Expression Analysis Institute (Durham, NC). Probe-level analysis was performed in dChip ( 20 ). Normalization and statistical cutoffs are described in detail in the Supplementary Materials and Methods . Immunobloting Protein extracts were separated by 8% SDS-PAGE and transferred onto nitrocellulose membrane. ERR? protein was detected using a mouse anti-ERR? monoclonal antibody ( 18 ), and Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase detected using goat anti-GAPDH (V-18) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc). Retroviral constructs and gene silencing ERR? siRNA oligonucleotides ( 11 ) and control siRNA oligonucleotides ( 18 ) were ligated into PSR-GFP/Neo (OligoEngine). Stable cell lines were constructed and sorted using standard techniques as described in Supplementary Materials and Materials . To achieve ERR? re-expression, an siRNA-resistant ERR? (ERRsiR) was constructed by introducing silent mutations into the siRNA targeted region. Proliferation and migration assays For proliferation assays, 5000 cells per well were plated in a 96-well plate. Cell number was assayed using FluoReporter Blue Fluorometric dsDNA Quantitation kit (Molecular Probes). For migration assays, serum starved cells migrated for 4 h, were crystal violet stained and then counted. See Supplementary Materials and Methods for details. <italic>In vivo</italic> tumor formation All animal handling and procedures were approved (Duke University Medical Center). 2 × 106 cells (in 50% matrigel (BD Matrigel Matrix, BD Biosciences) in PBS) were injected into the axillary mammary fat pad of 6–8 week-old female athymic nu/nu mice (10 mice per group) ( 21 ). Primary tumor volume was quantified using calipers (volume = (width2)(length)/2) and tumors removed either at a maximum of 1500 mm3 or upon ulcerated. Tumors were excised and frozen in liquid N2. Statistical analyses Proliferation, migration and RT-qPCR data are represented as mean ± SEM for biological replicates unless otherwise noted. Significance was evaluated by Mann-Whitney U-test for all biological data (GraphPad) and Student’s t-test as indicated.  Cell culture MDA-MB-231 cells were cultured in DMEM, AU565 and BT474 cells in RPMI, and MCF-7 cells in DMEM/F12 (Invitrogen). Stable MDA-MB-231 luciferase cells and derived cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with antibiotics.  Generation and transduction of adenoviruses The generation of PGC-1? adenoviruses has been described ( 18 ). Cells were infected at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 20–100 (2 h at 20°C). For microarray experiments, MCF-7 cells were cultured in estrogen-free media (48 h) before adenoviral infection (MOI 50), treated 12 h later and harvested after an additional 12 h. In experiments with siRNA and PGC-1? infections, cells were infected with siRNA adenovirus 48 h prior to a infection with PGC-1? ( 11 ). Immunoblot analysis verified that ERR? knock-down did not alter ER? expression ( Supplementary Figure 1 ).  RNA preparations and analysis Total RNA was isolated using Qiagen or BioRad RNA purification columns and DNase treated (BioRad). An iScript cDNA synthesis kit (BioRad) was used (1µg RNA). Real-time PCR was performed (0.25µL cDNA, 0.4µM specific primers ( Table S1 ), and BioRad iQ SYBRGreen supermix) and results quantified using the 2???Ct method ( 19 ).  Microarray data analysis Probe synthesis, hybridization on Affymetrix HG133A GeneChips (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) and scanning were performed at the Expression Analysis Institute (Durham, NC). Probe-level analysis was performed in dChip ( 20 ). Normalization and statistical cutoffs are described in detail in the Supplementary Materials and Methods .  Immunobloting Protein extracts were separated by 8% SDS-PAGE and transferred onto nitrocellulose membrane. ERR? protein was detected using a mouse anti-ERR? monoclonal antibody ( 18 ), and Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase detected using goat anti-GAPDH (V-18) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc).  Retroviral constructs and gene silencing ERR? siRNA oligonucleotides ( 11 ) and control siRNA oligonucleotides ( 18 ) were ligated into PSR-GFP/Neo (OligoEngine). Stable cell lines were constructed and sorted using standard techniques as described in Supplementary Materials and Materials . To achieve ERR? re-expression, an siRNA-resistant ERR? (ERRsiR) was constructed by introducing silent mutations into the siRNA targeted region.  Proliferation and migration assays For proliferation assays, 5000 cells per well were plated in a 96-well plate. Cell number was assayed using FluoReporter Blue Fluorometric dsDNA Quantitation kit (Molecular Probes). For migration assays, serum starved cells migrated for 4 h, were crystal violet stained and then counted. See Supplementary Materials and Methods for details.  <italic>In vivo</italic> tumor formation All animal handling and procedures were approved (Duke University Medical Center). 2 × 106 cells (in 50% matrigel (BD Matrigel Matrix, BD Biosciences) in PBS) were injected into the axillary mammary fat pad of 6–8 week-old female athymic nu/nu mice (10 mice per group) ( 21 ). Primary tumor volume was quantified using calipers (volume = (width2)(length)/2) and tumors removed either at a maximum of 1500 mm3 or upon ulcerated. Tumors were excised and frozen in liquid N2.  Statistical analyses Proliferation, migration and RT-qPCR data are represented as mean ± SEM for biological replicates unless otherwise noted. Significance was evaluated by Mann-Whitney U-test for all biological data (GraphPad) and Student’s t-test as indicated.  Results The majority of ERR? target genes in breast cancer are unrelated to ER? signaling The relationship between the ER? and ERR? transcriptomes was evaluated in MCF-7 breast cancer cells using a classical microarray approach. Since a small molecule ligand has not been identified for ERR?, its transcriptional activity in these studies was induced using its known coactivator PGC-1? (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-? coactivator-1?) as a protein ligand ( 22 ). Although complementary approaches such as knocking down ERR? were subsequently employed, PGC-1? was used as a coactivator to highlight ERR? target genes by providing a large dynamic range of regulation amenable to microarray technology. PGC-1? enhances the transcriptional activity of several nuclear receptors (NRs) and non-NR transcription factors resulting in the regulation of a variety of metabolic processes including lipid metabolism, mitochondrial biogenesis and oxidative metabolism ( 14 , 23 ). To isolate the ERR?-PGC-1? complex in these studies, we utilized a customized PGC-1? that selectively binds to and activates the ERRs (ERRspPGC1). Non-NR-dependent activities of PGC-1? were controlled for using a variant PGC-1? in which the leucines within the NR-interacting domain had been mutated to alanines (L2L3M). We previously reported the construction, validation and use of ERRspPGC1 (therein termed PGC-1? 2X9) and L2L3M in the context of hepatic gene regulation and function of ERR? ( 18 ). For the microarray study, MCF-7 cells were grown in estrogen-free conditions for 48 hours prior to adenoviral infection with wild-type (WT) PGC-1?, ERRspPGC1, L3L3M or ?-galactosidase (?gal). When maximal expression of the PGC-1? construct was achieved (12 h), cells were treated with either vehicle or estradiol (10nM) for an additional 12 hours. This enabled the identification of genes regulated by ERR? or ER? in breast cancer cells and analysis of pathway overlap. We confirmed equivalent expression of each PGC-1? variant and that ERRspPGC1 activates known ERR? target genes (e.g., medium chain acyl dehydrogenase, ACADM) similarly to wild-type PGC-1?, but does not activate ER? targets (e.g., progesterone receptor, PR) ( Figure 1C and Supplementary Figure S2 ). We also verified that canonical ER? target genes (e.g., PR) were activated by estradiol treatment under our experimental conditions ( Supplementary Figure S2 ). Analysis of microarray expression data revealed that the vast majority of genes were similarly regulated by ERRspPGC1 and WT PGC-1? compared to either control condition (?gal or PGC-1? L2L3M; Supplementary Figure S3 ). This result agrees with our previous findings ( 24 ), and suggests that ERR? may be a major conduit of PGC-1? signaling in breast cancer cells. We did find, however, that WT PGC-1? regulated a subset of genes differently than ERRspPGC1 (particularly in estradiol treated samples), which is likely due to PGC-1? coactivation of other NRs (e.g., ER?) ( 25 ). Therefore, to determine the degree of cross-talk between ERR? and ER?, we identified genes regulated by either ERRspPGC1 (vehicle treated, PGC-1? L2L3M versus ERRspPGC1 infected) or estradiol (PGC-1? L2L3M infected, vehicle versus estradiol). Applying identical statistical thresholds for each comparison (Student’s t test p<0.01, fold change >50%), 620 ERR?-regulated and 99 ER?-regulated genes were identified ( Supplementary Table S2 ). Initial inspection revealed that only 15 probesets were present in both groups, and we next sought to address the difference in the gene expression patterns between the samples with activated ERR? versus with activated ER? (ERRspPGC1 infected, vehicle treated samples versus L2L3M infected, estradiol treated samples). This analysis indicated that the effects of ERR? and ER? may not be as distinct as was thought based on the small number of genes regulated by both receptors in our initial analysis. Specifically, 34% of the 704 initially identified genes were not differentially regulated by ERR? versus by ER? ( Figure 1A light gray region, Supplementary Table S2 ). Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of the genes regulated by either ERR? or ER? revealed five major expression patterns ( Figure 1B ). We validated genes subject to each pattern of regulation by RT-qPCR ( Figure 1C and Supplementary Figure S4 ). The majority of genes are induced predominately by ERR?, with little ER? contribution (Classes I). Class II represents genes that are positively regulated by ER? and ERR?, while Class III is comprised of genes upregulated by ER? and repressed by ERR?. Although direct competition for DNA binding may explain the activity of ERR? on Class III genes, it may also be due to cofactor competition, a mechanism that is likely to be relevant in cells where both receptors are activated. The reduction of basal levels of gene expression by ERRspPGC1 on some genes in this group raises the possibility that the ERR? actively represses genes through a mechanism independent of ER?. Genes in Class IV are upregulated by estradiol with little or no contribution of ERR?. Finally, the dominant feature of Class V genes is repression by ERR?. Within this class, however, resides a subset of genes repressed by both ERR? and ER? (e.g., Cyclin G2). Although these results taken together suggest some overlap between the ER? and ERR? pathways in breast cancer cells, they also demonstrate that a large portion of ERR? activity may be unrelated to ER?-signaling. This finding motivated our continued investigations into the role of ER?-independent ERR? activity in breast cancer. Functional classes of genes regulated by ERR? in breast cancer cell lines As a first step in defining the functional role of ERR? in breast cancer, we performed gene ontology (GO) analysis on the ERR? regulated genes identified above. This analysis yielded 12 overrepresented GO terms, the majority of which are composed of genes involved in aerobic metabolism ( Supplementary Table S3 ). Notably, we found that the majority of enzymes of the TCA and electron transport chain are induced by ERR?. Several of these genes have been shown previously to be physiologically relevant ERR? targets in other tissues, and their potential roles in tumor pathophysiology is a matter of active research ( 24 ). While GO analysis revealed a major impact of ERR? signaling on genes involved in aspects of energy metabolism, inspection of the list of ERR?-regulated genes also provided insight into its role in tumor biology. Considering both the intrinsic and treatment-induced metabolic stress in the tumor microenvironment, it is notable that several genes involved in the response to oxidative stress, including superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2) and detoxification enzyme glutathione s-transferase M1 (GSTM1) were induced by ERRspPGC1 ( Figure 2A ). Using a knock-down approach to compliment activation of ERR? by PGC-1?, we verified that these genes were regulated by ERRspPGC1 in an ERR?-dependent manner in both ER?-positive and ER?-negative cell lines ( Figure 2A ). Furthermore, and of particular relevance to cancer biology, ERRspPGC1 induced expression of the highly angiogenic growth factor VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor), which has recently been identified as a direct ERR? transcriptional target in murine skeletal muscle ( 26 ). We found that the basal level of many ERRspPGC1-induced genes, including VEGF, SOD2 and the key TCA cycle enzyme IDH3A (isocitrate dehydrogenase 3A) is dependent on ERR? expression in the ER?-positive MCF-7 and BT474 and ER?-negative AU565 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines ( Figure 2B and data not shown). Taken together, our data suggest that ERR? is critical for expression of the detoxification genes SOD2 and GSTM1, the angiogenic gene VEGF, and that it can regulate the expression of a numerous genes involved in energy metabolism. Furthermore, ERR? plays a role in the basal expression of these genes in both ER?-positive and ER?-negative breast cancer cell lines. Encouraged that endogenous ERR? contributes to the basal expression of these potentially cancer-associated genes, we sought to determine the phenotypic effects of manipulating ERR? activity. Because of the limited cross-talk found in the MCF-7 microarray as well as the potential significance of the many ERR?-regulated genes unrelated to ER? signaling, we focused on delineating the role of ERR? in ER?-negative breast cancer. Evaluation of the role of ERR? on proliferation and migration in a cellular model of ER?-negative breast cancer We generated a series of derivatives of the MDA-MB-231-luciferase cell line which is a well-validated model of ER?-negative breast cancer that can be studied in vitro or as a xenograft ( 27 ). Derivative stable cell lines were constructed by retroviral-mediated expression of an siRNA directed against ERR? or a scrambled control siRNA and transformants selected using a co-expressed GFP protein ( 11 ). The resultant polyclonal populations (a) MDA-MB-231-luc siERR? and (b) MDA-MB-231-luc siCON (referred to as MDA231 siERR? and MDA231 siCON) were then subjected to further characterization. We demonstrated quantitative inhibition of ERR? expression in the MDA231 siERR? cells compared to the control cell line ( Figure 3A ). The efficacy of the siRNA was confirmed as expression of ERR? target genes was decreased in the cells with ERR? knocked-down compared to control cells ( Figure 3A ). We next evaluated the effects of ERR? knockdown on in vitro proliferation using the MDA231 siERR? and MDA231 siCON cell lines. Under optimal growth conditions, we determined that altering ERR? activity does not affect the basal rate of cell growth in these cells ( Figure 3B ). Comparable results were observed in other breast cancer cell lines similarly manipulated (data not shown). We next addressed whether ERR? is required for the invasive phenotype of MDA-MB-231 cells. Using an in vitro transwell migration assay we observed that ERR? knock-down resulted in a 65% reduction in cell migration ( Figure 3C ). Importantly, re-expression of ERR? using an siRNA-resistant ERR? (ERRsiR) resulted in reversion to the control level of migration. Although the molecular basis for this change in migratory ability remains unknown, these results indicate that ERR? can affect in vitro migration and would suggest that ERR? may alter the in vivo correlate, tumor metastasis. Decreased ERR? expression compromises the growth of ER?-negative tumors in athymic nude mice Given that the majority of genes regulated by ERR? in breast cancer cells are involved in metabolism, we hypothesized that if ERR? had a role in cell growth, it might be evident only under the metabolic pressures of in vivo tumor growth. Therefore, we proceeded to evaluate the role of ERR? in cells propagated as murine xenografts, a model that would allow us to evaluate the impact of tumor microenvironment on ERR? function. Specifically, MDA231 siERR? or MDA231 siCON cells were injected orthotopically into the mammary fat pads of athymic nude mice (10 mice per group). Although the initial take rate of each cell line was equivalent, the growth rate of the resultant tumors was significantly lower in the ERR? knockdown cells versus control ( Figure 4A ). Intriguingly, the MDA231 siERR?-derived tumors exhibited a lag phase prior to resumption of tumor growth such that seven out of ten tumors reached over 500 mm3 by day 46. Analysis of the growth curves for each tumor demonstrated that the doubling time of the siERR? tumors was 12.8 days versus 7.8 days for the tumors arising from control siCON cells ( Figure 4B ). We hypothesize that under the selective pressure of the tumor environment, the siERR? tumors eventually develop alternative mechanisms to adapt to the metabolic conditions in vivo . The development of resistance to ER?-inhibition is similarly manifest in a growth curve lag phase and increased doubling time when MCF-7 cells are grown as xenografts in the presence of fulvestrant ( 28 ). Real time PCR analysis of the primary tumors harvested from mice revealed that ERR? remained silenced in the siERR? xenografts ( Figure 4C ). Given the regulation of VEGF by ERR? in vitro and the prominent role of VEGF in tumor angiogenesis, we examined VEGF expression in the xenograft tumors. Although VEGF mRNA was significantly decreased in the MDA231 siERR?-derived tumors ( Figure 4C ), there was no detectible difference in blood vessel density at the time of tumor excision (as indicated by CD31 staining, Supplementary Figure S5 ). This may be due to the excision timing as all surgeries were performed when a significant tumor burden was reached (500–1500 mm3) rather than at the same number of days post injection. We speculate that while ERR? regulation of VEGF may play a role in the delayed growth kinetics of the MDA231 siERR? xenografts, activation of compensatory pathways may obscure any effect on vessel development by the time the tumors reach maximal size. Finally, whole-animal imaging for luciferase expression after primary tumor excision did not yield evidence of metastatic spread. Although the MDA-MB-231 cell line is characterized as highly aggressive, we hypothesize that the lack of metastases in our experiment may be due to heterogeneity of MDA-MB-231 cell lines and the particular subline used. Additional models such as cardiac and tail vein injection as well as alternative breast cancer cell lines will be required to test the effects of ERR?, manifest as a decrease in migration in vitro , on tumor metastasis in vivo .  Results The majority of ERR? target genes in breast cancer are unrelated to ER? signaling The relationship between the ER? and ERR? transcriptomes was evaluated in MCF-7 breast cancer cells using a classical microarray approach. Since a small molecule ligand has not been identified for ERR?, its transcriptional activity in these studies was induced using its known coactivator PGC-1? (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-? coactivator-1?) as a protein ligand ( 22 ). Although complementary approaches such as knocking down ERR? were subsequently employed, PGC-1? was used as a coactivator to highlight ERR? target genes by providing a large dynamic range of regulation amenable to microarray technology. PGC-1? enhances the transcriptional activity of several nuclear receptors (NRs) and non-NR transcription factors resulting in the regulation of a variety of metabolic processes including lipid metabolism, mitochondrial biogenesis and oxidative metabolism ( 14 , 23 ). To isolate the ERR?-PGC-1? complex in these studies, we utilized a customized PGC-1? that selectively binds to and activates the ERRs (ERRspPGC1). Non-NR-dependent activities of PGC-1? were controlled for using a variant PGC-1? in which the leucines within the NR-interacting domain had been mutated to alanines (L2L3M). We previously reported the construction, validation and use of ERRspPGC1 (therein termed PGC-1? 2X9) and L2L3M in the context of hepatic gene regulation and function of ERR? ( 18 ). For the microarray study, MCF-7 cells were grown in estrogen-free conditions for 48 hours prior to adenoviral infection with wild-type (WT) PGC-1?, ERRspPGC1, L3L3M or ?-galactosidase (?gal). When maximal expression of the PGC-1? construct was achieved (12 h), cells were treated with either vehicle or estradiol (10nM) for an additional 12 hours. This enabled the identification of genes regulated by ERR? or ER? in breast cancer cells and analysis of pathway overlap. We confirmed equivalent expression of each PGC-1? variant and that ERRspPGC1 activates known ERR? target genes (e.g., medium chain acyl dehydrogenase, ACADM) similarly to wild-type PGC-1?, but does not activate ER? targets (e.g., progesterone receptor, PR) ( Figure 1C and Supplementary Figure S2 ). We also verified that canonical ER? target genes (e.g., PR) were activated by estradiol treatment under our experimental conditions ( Supplementary Figure S2 ). Analysis of microarray expression data revealed that the vast majority of genes were similarly regulated by ERRspPGC1 and WT PGC-1? compared to either control condition (?gal or PGC-1? L2L3M; Supplementary Figure S3 ). This result agrees with our previous findings ( 24 ), and suggests that ERR? may be a major conduit of PGC-1? signaling in breast cancer cells. We did find, however, that WT PGC-1? regulated a subset of genes differently than ERRspPGC1 (particularly in estradiol treated samples), which is likely due to PGC-1? coactivation of other NRs (e.g., ER?) ( 25 ). Therefore, to determine the degree of cross-talk between ERR? and ER?, we identified genes regulated by either ERRspPGC1 (vehicle treated, PGC-1? L2L3M versus ERRspPGC1 infected) or estradiol (PGC-1? L2L3M infected, vehicle versus estradiol). Applying identical statistical thresholds for each comparison (Student’s t test p<0.01, fold change >50%), 620 ERR?-regulated and 99 ER?-regulated genes were identified ( Supplementary Table S2 ). Initial inspection revealed that only 15 probesets were present in both groups, and we next sought to address the difference in the gene expression patterns between the samples with activated ERR? versus with activated ER? (ERRspPGC1 infected, vehicle treated samples versus L2L3M infected, estradiol treated samples). This analysis indicated that the effects of ERR? and ER? may not be as distinct as was thought based on the small number of genes regulated by both receptors in our initial analysis. Specifically, 34% of the 704 initially identified genes were not differentially regulated by ERR? versus by ER? ( Figure 1A light gray region, Supplementary Table S2 ). Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of the genes regulated by either ERR? or ER? revealed five major expression patterns ( Figure 1B ). We validated genes subject to each pattern of regulation by RT-qPCR ( Figure 1C and Supplementary Figure S4 ). The majority of genes are induced predominately by ERR?, with little ER? contribution (Classes I). Class II represents genes that are positively regulated by ER? and ERR?, while Class III is comprised of genes upregulated by ER? and repressed by ERR?. Although direct competition for DNA binding may explain the activity of ERR? on Class III genes, it may also be due to cofactor competition, a mechanism that is likely to be relevant in cells where both receptors are activated. The reduction of basal levels of gene expression by ERRspPGC1 on some genes in this group raises the possibility that the ERR? actively represses genes through a mechanism independent of ER?. Genes in Class IV are upregulated by estradiol with little or no contribution of ERR?. Finally, the dominant feature of Class V genes is repression by ERR?. Within this class, however, resides a subset of genes repressed by both ERR? and ER? (e.g., Cyclin G2). Although these results taken together suggest some overlap between the ER? and ERR? pathways in breast cancer cells, they also demonstrate that a large portion of ERR? activity may be unrelated to ER?-signaling. This finding motivated our continued investigations into the role of ER?-independent ERR? activity in breast cancer. Functional classes of genes regulated by ERR? in breast cancer cell lines As a first step in defining the functional role of ERR? in breast cancer, we performed gene ontology (GO) analysis on the ERR? regulated genes identified above. This analysis yielded 12 overrepresented GO terms, the majority of which are composed of genes involved in aerobic metabolism ( Supplementary Table S3 ). Notably, we found that the majority of enzymes of the TCA and electron transport chain are induced by ERR?. Several of these genes have been shown previously to be physiologically relevant ERR? targets in other tissues, and their potential roles in tumor pathophysiology is a matter of active research ( 24 ). While GO analysis revealed a major impact of ERR? signaling on genes involved in aspects of energy metabolism, inspection of the list of ERR?-regulated genes also provided insight into its role in tumor biology. Considering both the intrinsic and treatment-induced metabolic stress in the tumor microenvironment, it is notable that several genes involved in the response to oxidative stress, including superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2) and detoxification enzyme glutathione s-transferase M1 (GSTM1) were induced by ERRspPGC1 ( Figure 2A ). Using a knock-down approach to compliment activation of ERR? by PGC-1?, we verified that these genes were regulated by ERRspPGC1 in an ERR?-dependent manner in both ER?-positive and ER?-negative cell lines ( Figure 2A ). Furthermore, and of particular relevance to cancer biology, ERRspPGC1 induced expression of the highly angiogenic growth factor VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor), which has recently been identified as a direct ERR? transcriptional target in murine skeletal muscle ( 26 ). We found that the basal level of many ERRspPGC1-induced genes, including VEGF, SOD2 and the key TCA cycle enzyme IDH3A (isocitrate dehydrogenase 3A) is dependent on ERR? expression in the ER?-positive MCF-7 and BT474 and ER?-negative AU565 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines ( Figure 2B and data not shown). Taken together, our data suggest that ERR? is critical for expression of the detoxification genes SOD2 and GSTM1, the angiogenic gene VEGF, and that it can regulate the expression of a numerous genes involved in energy metabolism. Furthermore, ERR? plays a role in the basal expression of these genes in both ER?-positive and ER?-negative breast cancer cell lines. Encouraged that endogenous ERR? contributes to the basal expression of these potentially cancer-associated genes, we sought to determine the phenotypic effects of manipulating ERR? activity. Because of the limited cross-talk found in the MCF-7 microarray as well as the potential significance of the many ERR?-regulated genes unrelated to ER? signaling, we focused on delineating the role of ERR? in ER?-negative breast cancer. Evaluation of the role of ERR? on proliferation and migration in a cellular model of ER?-negative breast cancer We generated a series of derivatives of the MDA-MB-231-luciferase cell line which is a well-validated model of ER?-negative breast cancer that can be studied in vitro or as a xenograft ( 27 ). Derivative stable cell lines were constructed by retroviral-mediated expression of an siRNA directed against ERR? or a scrambled control siRNA and transformants selected using a co-expressed GFP protein ( 11 ). The resultant polyclonal populations (a) MDA-MB-231-luc siERR? and (b) MDA-MB-231-luc siCON (referred to as MDA231 siERR? and MDA231 siCON) were then subjected to further characterization. We demonstrated quantitative inhibition of ERR? expression in the MDA231 siERR? cells compared to the control cell line ( Figure 3A ). The efficacy of the siRNA was confirmed as expression of ERR? target genes was decreased in the cells with ERR? knocked-down compared to control cells ( Figure 3A ). We next evaluated the effects of ERR? knockdown on in vitro proliferation using the MDA231 siERR? and MDA231 siCON cell lines. Under optimal growth conditions, we determined that altering ERR? activity does not affect the basal rate of cell growth in these cells ( Figure 3B ). Comparable results were observed in other breast cancer cell lines similarly manipulated (data not shown). We next addressed whether ERR? is required for the invasive phenotype of MDA-MB-231 cells. Using an in vitro transwell migration assay we observed that ERR? knock-down resulted in a 65% reduction in cell migration ( Figure 3C ). Importantly, re-expression of ERR? using an siRNA-resistant ERR? (ERRsiR) resulted in reversion to the control level of migration. Although the molecular basis for this change in migratory ability remains unknown, these results indicate that ERR? can affect in vitro migration and would suggest that ERR? may alter the in vivo correlate, tumor metastasis. Decreased ERR? expression compromises the growth of ER?-negative tumors in athymic nude mice Given that the majority of genes regulated by ERR? in breast cancer cells are involved in metabolism, we hypothesized that if ERR? had a role in cell growth, it might be evident only under the metabolic pressures of in vivo tumor growth. Therefore, we proceeded to evaluate the role of ERR? in cells propagated as murine xenografts, a model that would allow us to evaluate the impact of tumor microenvironment on ERR? function. Specifically, MDA231 siERR? or MDA231 siCON cells were injected orthotopically into the mammary fat pads of athymic nude mice (10 mice per group). Although the initial take rate of each cell line was equivalent, the growth rate of the resultant tumors was significantly lower in the ERR? knockdown cells versus control ( Figure 4A ). Intriguingly, the MDA231 siERR?-derived tumors exhibited a lag phase prior to resumption of tumor growth such that seven out of ten tumors reached over 500 mm3 by day 46. Analysis of the growth curves for each tumor demonstrated that the doubling time of the siERR? tumors was 12.8 days versus 7.8 days for the tumors arising from control siCON cells ( Figure 4B ). We hypothesize that under the selective pressure of the tumor environment, the siERR? tumors eventually develop alternative mechanisms to adapt to the metabolic conditions in vivo . The development of resistance to ER?-inhibition is similarly manifest in a growth curve lag phase and increased doubling time when MCF-7 cells are grown as xenografts in the presence of fulvestrant ( 28 ). Real time PCR analysis of the primary tumors harvested from mice revealed that ERR? remained silenced in the siERR? xenografts ( Figure 4C ). Given the regulation of VEGF by ERR? in vitro and the prominent role of VEGF in tumor angiogenesis, we examined VEGF expression in the xenograft tumors. Although VEGF mRNA was significantly decreased in the MDA231 siERR?-derived tumors ( Figure 4C ), there was no detectible difference in blood vessel density at the time of tumor excision (as indicated by CD31 staining, Supplementary Figure S5 ). This may be due to the excision timing as all surgeries were performed when a significant tumor burden was reached (500–1500 mm3) rather than at the same number of days post injection. We speculate that while ERR? regulation of VEGF may play a role in the delayed growth kinetics of the MDA231 siERR? xenografts, activation of compensatory pathways may obscure any effect on vessel development by the time the tumors reach maximal size. Finally, whole-animal imaging for luciferase expression after primary tumor excision did not yield evidence of metastatic spread. Although the MDA-MB-231 cell line is characterized as highly aggressive, we hypothesize that the lack of metastases in our experiment may be due to heterogeneity of MDA-MB-231 cell lines and the particular subline used. Additional models such as cardiac and tail vein injection as well as alternative breast cancer cell lines will be required to test the effects of ERR?, manifest as a decrease in migration in vitro , on tumor metastasis in vivo .  The majority of ERR? target genes in breast cancer are unrelated to ER? signaling The relationship between the ER? and ERR? transcriptomes was evaluated in MCF-7 breast cancer cells using a classical microarray approach. Since a small molecule ligand has not been identified for ERR?, its transcriptional activity in these studies was induced using its known coactivator PGC-1? (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-? coactivator-1?) as a protein ligand ( 22 ). Although complementary approaches such as knocking down ERR? were subsequently employed, PGC-1? was used as a coactivator to highlight ERR? target genes by providing a large dynamic range of regulation amenable to microarray technology. PGC-1? enhances the transcriptional activity of several nuclear receptors (NRs) and non-NR transcription factors resulting in the regulation of a variety of metabolic processes including lipid metabolism, mitochondrial biogenesis and oxidative metabolism ( 14 , 23 ). To isolate the ERR?-PGC-1? complex in these studies, we utilized a customized PGC-1? that selectively binds to and activates the ERRs (ERRspPGC1). Non-NR-dependent activities of PGC-1? were controlled for using a variant PGC-1? in which the leucines within the NR-interacting domain had been mutated to alanines (L2L3M). We previously reported the construction, validation and use of ERRspPGC1 (therein termed PGC-1? 2X9) and L2L3M in the context of hepatic gene regulation and function of ERR? ( 18 ). For the microarray study, MCF-7 cells were grown in estrogen-free conditions for 48 hours prior to adenoviral infection with wild-type (WT) PGC-1?, ERRspPGC1, L3L3M or ?-galactosidase (?gal). When maximal expression of the PGC-1? construct was achieved (12 h), cells were treated with either vehicle or estradiol (10nM) for an additional 12 hours. This enabled the identification of genes regulated by ERR? or ER? in breast cancer cells and analysis of pathway overlap. We confirmed equivalent expression of each PGC-1? variant and that ERRspPGC1 activates known ERR? target genes (e.g., medium chain acyl dehydrogenase, ACADM) similarly to wild-type PGC-1?, but does not activate ER? targets (e.g., progesterone receptor, PR) ( Figure 1C and Supplementary Figure S2 ). We also verified that canonical ER? target genes (e.g., PR) were activated by estradiol treatment under our experimental conditions ( Supplementary Figure S2 ). Analysis of microarray expression data revealed that the vast majority of genes were similarly regulated by ERRspPGC1 and WT PGC-1? compared to either control condition (?gal or PGC-1? L2L3M; Supplementary Figure S3 ). This result agrees with our previous findings ( 24 ), and suggests that ERR? may be a major conduit of PGC-1? signaling in breast cancer cells. We did find, however, that WT PGC-1? regulated a subset of genes differently than ERRspPGC1 (particularly in estradiol treated samples), which is likely due to PGC-1? coactivation of other NRs (e.g., ER?) ( 25 ). Therefore, to determine the degree of cross-talk between ERR? and ER?, we identified genes regulated by either ERRspPGC1 (vehicle treated, PGC-1? L2L3M versus ERRspPGC1 infected) or estradiol (PGC-1? L2L3M infected, vehicle versus estradiol). Applying identical statistical thresholds for each comparison (Student’s t test p<0.01, fold change >50%), 620 ERR?-regulated and 99 ER?-regulated genes were identified ( Supplementary Table S2 ). Initial inspection revealed that only 15 probesets were present in both groups, and we next sought to address the difference in the gene expression patterns between the samples with activated ERR? versus with activated ER? (ERRspPGC1 infected, vehicle treated samples versus L2L3M infected, estradiol treated samples). This analysis indicated that the effects of ERR? and ER? may not be as distinct as was thought based on the small number of genes regulated by both receptors in our initial analysis. Specifically, 34% of the 704 initially identified genes were not differentially regulated by ERR? versus by ER? ( Figure 1A light gray region, Supplementary Table S2 ). Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of the genes regulated by either ERR? or ER? revealed five major expression patterns ( Figure 1B ). We validated genes subject to each pattern of regulation by RT-qPCR ( Figure 1C and Supplementary Figure S4 ). The majority of genes are induced predominately by ERR?, with little ER? contribution (Classes I). Class II represents genes that are positively regulated by ER? and ERR?, while Class III is comprised of genes upregulated by ER? and repressed by ERR?. Although direct competition for DNA binding may explain the activity of ERR? on Class III genes, it may also be due to cofactor competition, a mechanism that is likely to be relevant in cells where both receptors are activated. The reduction of basal levels of gene expression by ERRspPGC1 on some genes in this group raises the possibility that the ERR? actively represses genes through a mechanism independent of ER?. Genes in Class IV are upregulated by estradiol with little or no contribution of ERR?. Finally, the dominant feature of Class V genes is repression by ERR?. Within this class, however, resides a subset of genes repressed by both ERR? and ER? (e.g., Cyclin G2). Although these results taken together suggest some overlap between the ER? and ERR? pathways in breast cancer cells, they also demonstrate that a large portion of ERR? activity may be unrelated to ER?-signaling. This finding motivated our continued investigations into the role of ER?-independent ERR? activity in breast cancer.  The majority of ERR? target genes in breast cancer are unrelated to ER? signaling The relationship between the ER? and ERR? transcriptomes was evaluated in MCF-7 breast cancer cells using a classical microarray approach. Since a small molecule ligand has not been identified for ERR?, its transcriptional activity in these studies was induced using its known coactivator PGC-1? (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-? coactivator-1?) as a protein ligand ( 22 ). Although complementary approaches such as knocking down ERR? were subsequently employed, PGC-1? was used as a coactivator to highlight ERR? target genes by providing a large dynamic range of regulation amenable to microarray technology. PGC-1? enhances the transcriptional activity of several nuclear receptors (NRs) and non-NR transcription factors resulting in the regulation of a variety of metabolic processes including lipid metabolism, mitochondrial biogenesis and oxidative metabolism ( 14 , 23 ). To isolate the ERR?-PGC-1? complex in these studies, we utilized a customized PGC-1? that selectively binds to and activates the ERRs (ERRspPGC1). Non-NR-dependent activities of PGC-1? were controlled for using a variant PGC-1? in which the leucines within the NR-interacting domain had been mutated to alanines (L2L3M). We previously reported the construction, validation and use of ERRspPGC1 (therein termed PGC-1? 2X9) and L2L3M in the context of hepatic gene regulation and function of ERR? ( 18 ). For the microarray study, MCF-7 cells were grown in estrogen-free conditions for 48 hours prior to adenoviral infection with wild-type (WT) PGC-1?, ERRspPGC1, L3L3M or ?-galactosidase (?gal). When maximal expression of the PGC-1? construct was achieved (12 h), cells were treated with either vehicle or estradiol (10nM) for an additional 12 hours. This enabled the identification of genes regulated by ERR? or ER? in breast cancer cells and analysis of pathway overlap. We confirmed equivalent expression of each PGC-1? variant and that ERRspPGC1 activates known ERR? target genes (e.g., medium chain acyl dehydrogenase, ACADM) similarly to wild-type PGC-1?, but does not activate ER? targets (e.g., progesterone receptor, PR) ( Figure 1C and Supplementary Figure S2 ). We also verified that canonical ER? target genes (e.g., PR) were activated by estradiol treatment under our experimental conditions ( Supplementary Figure S2 ). Analysis of microarray expression data revealed that the vast majority of genes were similarly regulated by ERRspPGC1 and WT PGC-1? compared to either control condition (?gal or PGC-1? L2L3M; Supplementary Figure S3 ). This result agrees with our previous findings ( 24 ), and suggests that ERR? may be a major conduit of PGC-1? signaling in breast cancer cells. We did find, however, that WT PGC-1? regulated a subset of genes differently than ERRspPGC1 (particularly in estradiol treated samples), which is likely due to PGC-1? coactivation of other NRs (e.g., ER?) ( 25 ). Therefore, to determine the degree of cross-talk between ERR? and ER?, we identified genes regulated by either ERRspPGC1 (vehicle treated, PGC-1? L2L3M versus ERRspPGC1 infected) or estradiol (PGC-1? L2L3M infected, vehicle versus estradiol). Applying identical statistical thresholds for each comparison (Student’s t test p<0.01, fold change >50%), 620 ERR?-regulated and 99 ER?-regulated genes were identified ( Supplementary Table S2 ). Initial inspection revealed that only 15 probesets were present in both groups, and we next sought to address the difference in the gene expression patterns between the samples with activated ERR? versus with activated ER? (ERRspPGC1 infected, vehicle treated samples versus L2L3M infected, estradiol treated samples). This analysis indicated that the effects of ERR? and ER? may not be as distinct as was thought based on the small number of genes regulated by both receptors in our initial analysis. Specifically, 34% of the 704 initially identified genes were not differentially regulated by ERR? versus by ER? ( Figure 1A light gray region, Supplementary Table S2 ). Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of the genes regulated by either ERR? or ER? revealed five major expression patterns ( Figure 1B ). We validated genes subject to each pattern of regulation by RT-qPCR ( Figure 1C and Supplementary Figure S4 ). The majority of genes are induced predominately by ERR?, with little ER? contribution (Classes I). Class II represents genes that are positively regulated by ER? and ERR?, while Class III is comprised of genes upregulated by ER? and repressed by ERR?. Although direct competition for DNA binding may explain the activity of ERR? on Class III genes, it may also be due to cofactor competition, a mechanism that is likely to be relevant in cells where both receptors are activated. The reduction of basal levels of gene expression by ERRspPGC1 on some genes in this group raises the possibility that the ERR? actively represses genes through a mechanism independent of ER?. Genes in Class IV are upregulated by estradiol with little or no contribution of ERR?. Finally, the dominant feature of Class V genes is repression by ERR?. Within this class, however, resides a subset of genes repressed by both ERR? and ER? (e.g., Cyclin G2). Although these results taken together suggest some overlap between the ER? and ERR? pathways in breast cancer cells, they also demonstrate that a large portion of ERR? activity may be unrelated to ER?-signaling. This finding motivated our continued investigations into the role of ER?-independent ERR? activity in breast cancer.  Functional classes of genes regulated by ERR? in breast cancer cell lines As a first step in defining the functional role of ERR? in breast cancer, we performed gene ontology (GO) analysis on the ERR? regulated genes identified above. This analysis yielded 12 overrepresented GO terms, the majority of which are composed of genes involved in aerobic metabolism ( Supplementary Table S3 ). Notably, we found that the majority of enzymes of the TCA and electron transport chain are induced by ERR?. Several of these genes have been shown previously to be physiologically relevant ERR? targets in other tissues, and their potential roles in tumor pathophysiology is a matter of active research ( 24 ). While GO analysis revealed a major impact of ERR? signaling on genes involved in aspects of energy metabolism, inspection of the list of ERR?-regulated genes also provided insight into its role in tumor biology. Considering both the intrinsic and treatment-induced metabolic stress in the tumor microenvironment, it is notable that several genes involved in the response to oxidative stress, including superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2) and detoxification enzyme glutathione s-transferase M1 (GSTM1) were induced by ERRspPGC1 ( Figure 2A ). Using a knock-down approach to compliment activation of ERR? by PGC-1?, we verified that these genes were regulated by ERRspPGC1 in an ERR?-dependent manner in both ER?-positive and ER?-negative cell lines ( Figure 2A ). Furthermore, and of particular relevance to cancer biology, ERRspPGC1 induced expression of the highly angiogenic growth factor VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor), which has recently been identified as a direct ERR? transcriptional target in murine skeletal muscle ( 26 ). We found that the basal level of many ERRspPGC1-induced genes, including VEGF, SOD2 and the key TCA cycle enzyme IDH3A (isocitrate dehydrogenase 3A) is dependent on ERR? expression in the ER?-positive MCF-7 and BT474 and ER?-negative AU565 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines ( Figure 2B and data not shown). Taken together, our data suggest that ERR? is critical for expression of the detoxification genes SOD2 and GSTM1, the angiogenic gene VEGF, and that it can regulate the expression of a numerous genes involved in energy metabolism. Furthermore, ERR? plays a role in the basal expression of these genes in both ER?-positive and ER?-negative breast cancer cell lines. Encouraged that endogenous ERR? contributes to the basal expression of these potentially cancer-associated genes, we sought to determine the phenotypic effects of manipulating ERR? activity. Because of the limited cross-talk found in the MCF-7 microarray as well as the potential significance of the many ERR?-regulated genes unrelated to ER? signaling, we focused on delineating the role of ERR? in ER?-negative breast cancer.  Functional classes of genes regulated by ERR? in breast cancer cell lines As a first step in defining the functional role of ERR? in breast cancer, we performed gene ontology (GO) analysis on the ERR? regulated genes identified above. This analysis yielded 12 overrepresented GO terms, the majority of which are composed of genes involved in aerobic metabolism ( Supplementary Table S3 ). Notably, we found that the majority of enzymes of the TCA and electron transport chain are induced by ERR?. Several of these genes have been shown previously to be physiologically relevant ERR? targets in other tissues, and their potential roles in tumor pathophysiology is a matter of active research ( 24 ). While GO analysis revealed a major impact of ERR? signaling on genes involved in aspects of energy metabolism, inspection of the list of ERR?-regulated genes also provided insight into its role in tumor biology. Considering both the intrinsic and treatment-induced metabolic stress in the tumor microenvironment, it is notable that several genes involved in the response to oxidative stress, including superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2) and detoxification enzyme glutathione s-transferase M1 (GSTM1) were induced by ERRspPGC1 ( Figure 2A ). Using a knock-down approach to compliment activation of ERR? by PGC-1?, we verified that these genes were regulated by ERRspPGC1 in an ERR?-dependent manner in both ER?-positive and ER?-negative cell lines ( Figure 2A ). Furthermore, and of particular relevance to cancer biology, ERRspPGC1 induced expression of the highly angiogenic growth factor VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor), which has recently been identified as a direct ERR? transcriptional target in murine skeletal muscle ( 26 ). We found that the basal level of many ERRspPGC1-induced genes, including VEGF, SOD2 and the key TCA cycle enzyme IDH3A (isocitrate dehydrogenase 3A) is dependent on ERR? expression in the ER?-positive MCF-7 and BT474 and ER?-negative AU565 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines ( Figure 2B and data not shown). Taken together, our data suggest that ERR? is critical for expression of the detoxification genes SOD2 and GSTM1, the angiogenic gene VEGF, and that it can regulate the expression of a numerous genes involved in energy metabolism. Furthermore, ERR? plays a role in the basal expression of these genes in both ER?-positive and ER?-negative breast cancer cell lines. Encouraged that endogenous ERR? contributes to the basal expression of these potentially cancer-associated genes, we sought to determine the phenotypic effects of manipulating ERR? activity. Because of the limited cross-talk found in the MCF-7 microarray as well as the potential significance of the many ERR?-regulated genes unrelated to ER? signaling, we focused on delineating the role of ERR? in ER?-negative breast cancer.  Evaluation of the role of ERR? on proliferation and migration in a cellular model of ER?-negative breast cancer We generated a series of derivatives of the MDA-MB-231-luciferase cell line which is a well-validated model of ER?-negative breast cancer that can be studied in vitro or as a xenograft ( 27 ). Derivative stable cell lines were constructed by retroviral-mediated expression of an siRNA directed against ERR? or a scrambled control siRNA and transformants selected using a co-expressed GFP protein ( 11 ). The resultant polyclonal populations (a) MDA-MB-231-luc siERR? and (b) MDA-MB-231-luc siCON (referred to as MDA231 siERR? and MDA231 siCON) were then subjected to further characterization. We demonstrated quantitative inhibition of ERR? expression in the MDA231 siERR? cells compared to the control cell line ( Figure 3A ). The efficacy of the siRNA was confirmed as expression of ERR? target genes was decreased in the cells with ERR? knocked-down compared to control cells ( Figure 3A ). We next evaluated the effects of ERR? knockdown on in vitro proliferation using the MDA231 siERR? and MDA231 siCON cell lines. Under optimal growth conditions, we determined that altering ERR? activity does not affect the basal rate of cell growth in these cells ( Figure 3B ). Comparable results were observed in other breast cancer cell lines similarly manipulated (data not shown). We next addressed whether ERR? is required for the invasive phenotype of MDA-MB-231 cells. Using an in vitro transwell migration assay we observed that ERR? knock-down resulted in a 65% reduction in cell migration ( Figure 3C ). Importantly, re-expression of ERR? using an siRNA-resistant ERR? (ERRsiR) resulted in reversion to the control level of migration. Although the molecular basis for this change in migratory ability remains unknown, these results indicate that ERR? can affect in vitro migration and would suggest that ERR? may alter the in vivo correlate, tumor metastasis.  Evaluation of the role of ERR? on proliferation and migration in a cellular model of ER?-negative breast cancer We generated a series of derivatives of the MDA-MB-231-luciferase cell line which is a well-validated model of ER?-negative breast cancer that can be studied in vitro or as a xenograft ( 27 ). Derivative stable cell lines were constructed by retroviral-mediated expression of an siRNA directed against ERR? or a scrambled control siRNA and transformants selected using a co-expressed GFP protein ( 11 ). The resultant polyclonal populations (a) MDA-MB-231-luc siERR? and (b) MDA-MB-231-luc siCON (referred to as MDA231 siERR? and MDA231 siCON) were then subjected to further characterization. We demonstrated quantitative inhibition of ERR? expression in the MDA231 siERR? cells compared to the control cell line ( Figure 3A ). The efficacy of the siRNA was confirmed as expression of ERR? target genes was decreased in the cells with ERR? knocked-down compared to control cells ( Figure 3A ). We next evaluated the effects of ERR? knockdown on in vitro proliferation using the MDA231 siERR? and MDA231 siCON cell lines. Under optimal growth conditions, we determined that altering ERR? activity does not affect the basal rate of cell growth in these cells ( Figure 3B ). Comparable results were observed in other breast cancer cell lines similarly manipulated (data not shown). We next addressed whether ERR? is required for the invasive phenotype of MDA-MB-231 cells. Using an in vitro transwell migration assay we observed that ERR? knock-down resulted in a 65% reduction in cell migration ( Figure 3C ). Importantly, re-expression of ERR? using an siRNA-resistant ERR? (ERRsiR) resulted in reversion to the control level of migration. Although the molecular basis for this change in migratory ability remains unknown, these results indicate that ERR? can affect in vitro migration and would suggest that ERR? may alter the in vivo correlate, tumor metastasis.  Decreased ERR? expression compromises the growth of ER?-negative tumors in athymic nude mice Given that the majority of genes regulated by ERR? in breast cancer cells are involved in metabolism, we hypothesized that if ERR? had a role in cell growth, it might be evident only under the metabolic pressures of in vivo tumor growth. Therefore, we proceeded to evaluate the role of ERR? in cells propagated as murine xenografts, a model that would allow us to evaluate the impact of tumor microenvironment on ERR? function. Specifically, MDA231 siERR? or MDA231 siCON cells were injected orthotopically into the mammary fat pads of athymic nude mice (10 mice per group). Although the initial take rate of each cell line was equivalent, the growth rate of the resultant tumors was significantly lower in the ERR? knockdown cells versus control ( Figure 4A ). Intriguingly, the MDA231 siERR?-derived tumors exhibited a lag phase prior to resumption of tumor growth such that seven out of ten tumors reached over 500 mm3 by day 46. Analysis of the growth curves for each tumor demonstrated that the doubling time of the siERR? tumors was 12.8 days versus 7.8 days for the tumors arising from control siCON cells ( Figure 4B ). We hypothesize that under the selective pressure of the tumor environment, the siERR? tumors eventually develop alternative mechanisms to adapt to the metabolic conditions in vivo . The development of resistance to ER?-inhibition is similarly manifest in a growth curve lag phase and increased doubling time when MCF-7 cells are grown as xenografts in the presence of fulvestrant ( 28 ). Real time PCR analysis of the primary tumors harvested from mice revealed that ERR? remained silenced in the siERR? xenografts ( Figure 4C ). Given the regulation of VEGF by ERR? in vitro and the prominent role of VEGF in tumor angiogenesis, we examined VEGF expression in the xenograft tumors. Although VEGF mRNA was significantly decreased in the MDA231 siERR?-derived tumors ( Figure 4C ), there was no detectible difference in blood vessel density at the time of tumor excision (as indicated by CD31 staining, Supplementary Figure S5 ). This may be due to the excision timing as all surgeries were performed when a significant tumor burden was reached (500–1500 mm3) rather than at the same number of days post injection. We speculate that while ERR? regulation of VEGF may play a role in the delayed growth kinetics of the MDA231 siERR? xenografts, activation of compensatory pathways may obscure any effect on vessel development by the time the tumors reach maximal size. Finally, whole-animal imaging for luciferase expression after primary tumor excision did not yield evidence of metastatic spread. Although the MDA-MB-231 cell line is characterized as highly aggressive, we hypothesize that the lack of metastases in our experiment may be due to heterogeneity of MDA-MB-231 cell lines and the particular subline used. Additional models such as cardiac and tail vein injection as well as alternative breast cancer cell lines will be required to test the effects of ERR?, manifest as a decrease in migration in vitro , on tumor metastasis in vivo .  Decreased ERR? expression compromises the growth of ER?-negative tumors in athymic nude mice Given that the majority of genes regulated by ERR? in breast cancer cells are involved in metabolism, we hypothesized that if ERR? had a role in cell growth, it might be evident only under the metabolic pressures of in vivo tumor growth. Therefore, we proceeded to evaluate the role of ERR? in cells propagated as murine xenografts, a model that would allow us to evaluate the impact of tumor microenvironment on ERR? function. Specifically, MDA231 siERR? or MDA231 siCON cells were injected orthotopically into the mammary fat pads of athymic nude mice (10 mice per group). Although the initial take rate of each cell line was equivalent, the growth rate of the resultant tumors was significantly lower in the ERR? knockdown cells versus control ( Figure 4A ). Intriguingly, the MDA231 siERR?-derived tumors exhibited a lag phase prior to resumption of tumor growth such that seven out of ten tumors reached over 500 mm3 by day 46. Analysis of the growth curves for each tumor demonstrated that the doubling time of the siERR? tumors was 12.8 days versus 7.8 days for the tumors arising from control siCON cells ( Figure 4B ). We hypothesize that under the selective pressure of the tumor environment, the siERR? tumors eventually develop alternative mechanisms to adapt to the metabolic conditions in vivo . The development of resistance to ER?-inhibition is similarly manifest in a growth curve lag phase and increased doubling time when MCF-7 cells are grown as xenografts in the presence of fulvestrant ( 28 ). Real time PCR analysis of the primary tumors harvested from mice revealed that ERR? remained silenced in the siERR? xenografts ( Figure 4C ). Given the regulation of VEGF by ERR? in vitro and the prominent role of VEGF in tumor angiogenesis, we examined VEGF expression in the xenograft tumors. Although VEGF mRNA was significantly decreased in the MDA231 siERR?-derived tumors ( Figure 4C ), there was no detectible difference in blood vessel density at the time of tumor excision (as indicated by CD31 staining, Supplementary Figure S5 ). This may be due to the excision timing as all surgeries were performed when a significant tumor burden was reached (500–1500 mm3) rather than at the same number of days post injection. We speculate that while ERR? regulation of VEGF may play a role in the delayed growth kinetics of the MDA231 siERR? xenografts, activation of compensatory pathways may obscure any effect on vessel development by the time the tumors reach maximal size. Finally, whole-animal imaging for luciferase expression after primary tumor excision did not yield evidence of metastatic spread. Although the MDA-MB-231 cell line is characterized as highly aggressive, we hypothesize that the lack of metastases in our experiment may be due to heterogeneity of MDA-MB-231 cell lines and the particular subline used. Additional models such as cardiac and tail vein injection as well as alternative breast cancer cell lines will be required to test the effects of ERR?, manifest as a decrease in migration in vitro , on tumor metastasis in vivo .  Discussion Since the first correlative study was performed demonstrating a relationship between ERR? expression and breast cancer prognosis ( 1 ), additional associations between the expression of this receptor and patient prognosis have been observed in several type of tumors ( 29 – 31 ). However, a causal relationship between ERR? activity and disease outcomes has not been established. In the present study, we have investigated the role of ERR? signaling in breast cancer by identifying ERR?-regulated genes and examining the effect of altering ERR? activity in vitro and in vivo . Our initial characterization of ERR? target genes in relation to estrogen-regulated genes revealed that the majority of ERR? activity is unrelated to ER? signaling and led us to focus further phenotypic characterization on the role of ERR? in ER?-negative tumors. In vivo studies revealed that ERR? knockdown had a dramatic inhibitory effect on tumor growth in mice, a finding of pivotal importance in the validation of this NR as a therapeutic target in breast cancer. One of the primary hypotheses we sought to address in this study was that the role of ERR? in breast cancer is that of a modulator of estrogen signaling. This hypothesis was based on the observation that ER? and ERR? exhibit similar DNA-binding site preferences and the finding that both receptors are capable of activating ERE-mediated gene transcription in transient transfection assays. It was not surprising, therefore, that our studies in MCF-7 cells revealed that a large number of ER?-regulated genes were modified by ERR? activity. One particularly interesting example of ERR?-ER? cross-talk is CXCL12, a gene previously identified as an ER? target, that is thought to be involved in mediating the mitogenic actions of estrogen and that has also been implicated in the metastasis of breast cancer to bone ( 32 , 33 ). Unlike CXCL12, the majority of the genes co-regulated by ERR? and ER? are positively regulated by estradiol and negatively regulated by ERR? following its activation by PGC-1?. This is consistent with reporter gene assays in which ERR? expression led to decreased estrogen-responsiveness of several promoters in MCF-7 cells ( 34 ). Previous studies have attributed this finding to competition for DNA binding by the two receptors or to transcriptional squelching subsequent to the sequestration of limiting coactivators ( 7 , 10 ). Whole genome studies, such as ChIP, will enable an evaluation of the extent to which ER? and ERR? binding sequences overlap in endogenous genes and the relative importance of this mechanism of receptor cross-talk in breast tumor pathology. Although potential points of ERR?-ER? cross-talk were identified, our microarray analysis demonstrated that a large portion of ERR? activity in breast cancer may be completely unrelated to estrogen signaling. It should be noted, however, that in contrast with previously reported MCF-7 microarray data, the majority of genes significantly regulated by ER? in this study were induced rather than repressed by estrogen treatment ( 35 , 36 ). We hypothesize that is due to a combination of the specific experimental conditions and the parameters used for microarray analysis (applied uniformly to select ERR? and ER? regulated genes). In total, we may have under-estimated the ER?-ERR? cross-talk, particularly with respect to genes down-regulated by estradiol. Despite this potential limitation, we identified genes co-regulated by these receptors in different patterns, which likely represent distinct mechanisms of receptor crosstalk. Furthermore, under the conditions of our analysis, the predominant regulation on the largest class of genes was due to ERR? activation. As assessed by gene ontology, PGC-1? coactivation of ERR? had the largest impact on genes classified as regulators of metabolism, few of which were affected by ER?. This result led us to investigate the ER?-independent activity of ERR? with the hypothesis that this activity may contribute towards breast cancer pathology. We observed that ERR? knock-down in the ER?-negative MDA-MB-231 cell line significantly attenuated the growth rate of these cells as murine xenografts, suggesting that ERR? may be a viable therapeutic target for patients with ER?-negative tumors. Although the present studies are restricted to the ER?/PR/ERBB2 negative MDA-MB-231 cell line, a model for a particularly aggressive class of breast cancer, our preliminary and ongoing experiments using other cells suggest that the role of ERR? is not restricted to this type of breast cancer. Specifically, the observation that ERR? expression supports target gene expression in multiple cell lines lends credence to the hypothesis that ERR? has a general role in breast cancer biology ( Figure 2B ). Additional in vivo experiments will be necessary to determine whether the similarities in ERR? function at the level of target gene regulation translate to the level of cell phenotype and tumor growth. One of our most interesting findings was that ERR? knockdown did not impact the proliferation rate of MDA-MB-231 cells in vitro whereas the same cells exhibited compromised growth propagated as xenografts. This is not completely unexpected given that the physiological roles of ERR? have been primarily described in tissues with high metabolic demand. We hypothesize that the microenvironment of a rapidly growing tumor recapitulates these conditions and thus highlights the functional significance of ERR?. Indeed, an examination of the MCF-7 array data revealed that all of the TCA enzymes and at least one subunit of each complex of the mitochondrial respiratory chain were positively regulated by ERR?. Building on experiments performed in skeletal muscle, our preliminary data (not shown) indicates that oxygen consumption is increased in MCF-7 breast cancer cells with activated ERR? ( 13 ). However, whether or not increased OXPHOS provides tumor cells with a growth advantage is a matter of considerable debate. Although an increased rate of OXPHOS has been associated with production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and subsequent caspase-mediated apoptosis ( 37 ), recent evidence suggests that ERR? may enhance ROS detoxification. Specifically, breast cancer brain metastases exhibit increased levels of ERR? and PGC-1? and exhibit enhanced protection against the deleterious effects of oxidative stress ( 38 ). Interestingly, we observed in several breast cancer cell lines that ERR? increases the expression of SOD2, which inactivates superoxide anions, and GSTM1, an enzyme that buffers cells from ROS ( Figure 2A ). These anti-oxidant defenses may allow cancer cells to capitalize on the ability of ERR? to increase OXPHOS activity. This hypothesis is also supported by compelling studies that have defined a role for PGC-1? coactivation of ERR? in the response to oxidative stress in pathologic processes such as neurodegeneration ( 39 ). In addition to providing substrates for further aerobic metabolism, the TCA cycle may contribute to tumor growth in an OXPHOS-independent manner. Indeed, it has been shown recently that a primary function of the TCA cycle is to provide the intermediates needed for the production of non-essential amino acids, a rate-limiting process in rapidly growing cells ( 17 ). Clearly, the strong link between ERR?, metabolism and the growth and progression of breast tumors warrants further investigation. Taken together our findings provide significant validation for ERR? as a therapeutic target in ER?-negative breast tumors. Pharmaceutical interest in ERR? as a drug target was initially stimulated by studies that highlighted the potential utility of agonists as treatments for metabolic disorders such as diabetes and obesity. However, despite tremendous effort, ERR? has proven to be an intractable target with respect to the development of agonists ( 40 ). In contrast, several small molecules have been developed that function as antagonists or inverse agonists by altering ERR? in such a manner as to block coactivator interactions ( 41 ). Although there are no published studies that examine the in vivo activities of these compounds, the mild phenotype observed in the ERR? knockout mouse suggests that systemic administration of this class of ERR? antagonists may exhibit minimal significant side effects ( 42 ). A priority for future studies, therefore, will be the analysis in vivo of appropriate ERR? inverse agonists and antagonists for their ability to recapitulate the effects on tumor growth observed subsequent to siRNA-mediated knockdown of ERR?. In conjunction with the growing body of literature defining the role of ERR? in tumor pathology, our work highlights the activity of ERR? in cellular models of ER?/PR/ERBB2 triple negative breast cancer, and suggests that ERR? may be an attractive therapeutic target in this aggressive and treatment-resistant type of breast cancer.  Discussion Since the first correlative study was performed demonstrating a relationship between ERR? expression and breast cancer prognosis ( 1 ), additional associations between the expression of this receptor and patient prognosis have been observed in several type of tumors ( 29 – 31 ). However, a causal relationship between ERR? activity and disease outcomes has not been established. In the present study, we have investigated the role of ERR? signaling in breast cancer by identifying ERR?-regulated genes and examining the effect of altering ERR? activity in vitro and in vivo . Our initial characterization of ERR? target genes in relation to estrogen-regulated genes revealed that the majority of ERR? activity is unrelated to ER? signaling and led us to focus further phenotypic characterization on the role of ERR? in ER?-negative tumors. In vivo studies revealed that ERR? knockdown had a dramatic inhibitory effect on tumor growth in mice, a finding of pivotal importance in the validation of this NR as a therapeutic target in breast cancer. One of the primary hypotheses we sought to address in this study was that the role of ERR? in breast cancer is that of a modulator of estrogen signaling. This hypothesis was based on the observation that ER? and ERR? exhibit similar DNA-binding site preferences and the finding that both receptors are capable of activating ERE-mediated gene transcription in transient transfection assays. It was not surprising, therefore, that our studies in MCF-7 cells revealed that a large number of ER?-regulated genes were modified by ERR? activity. One particularly interesting example of ERR?-ER? cross-talk is CXCL12, a gene previously identified as an ER? target, that is thought to be involved in mediating the mitogenic actions of estrogen and that has also been implicated in the metastasis of breast cancer to bone ( 32 , 33 ). Unlike CXCL12, the majority of the genes co-regulated by ERR? and ER? are positively regulated by estradiol and negatively regulated by ERR? following its activation by PGC-1?. This is consistent with reporter gene assays in which ERR? expression led to decreased estrogen-responsiveness of several promoters in MCF-7 cells ( 34 ). Previous studies have attributed this finding to competition for DNA binding by the two receptors or to transcriptional squelching subsequent to the sequestration of limiting coactivators ( 7 , 10 ). Whole genome studies, such as ChIP, will enable an evaluation of the extent to which ER? and ERR? binding sequences overlap in endogenous genes and the relative importance of this mechanism of receptor cross-talk in breast tumor pathology. Although potential points of ERR?-ER? cross-talk were identified, our microarray analysis demonstrated that a large portion of ERR? activity in breast cancer may be completely unrelated to estrogen signaling. It should be noted, however, that in contrast with previously reported MCF-7 microarray data, the majority of genes significantly regulated by ER? in this study were induced rather than repressed by estrogen treatment ( 35 , 36 ). We hypothesize that is due to a combination of the specific experimental conditions and the parameters used for microarray analysis (applied uniformly to select ERR? and ER? regulated genes). In total, we may have under-estimated the ER?-ERR? cross-talk, particularly with respect to genes down-regulated by estradiol. Despite this potential limitation, we identified genes co-regulated by these receptors in different patterns, which likely represent distinct mechanisms of receptor crosstalk. Furthermore, under the conditions of our analysis, the predominant regulation on the largest class of genes was due to ERR? activation. As assessed by gene ontology, PGC-1? coactivation of ERR? had the largest impact on genes classified as regulators of metabolism, few of which were affected by ER?. This result led us to investigate the ER?-independent activity of ERR? with the hypothesis that this activity may contribute towards breast cancer pathology. We observed that ERR? knock-down in the ER?-negative MDA-MB-231 cell line significantly attenuated the growth rate of these cells as murine xenografts, suggesting that ERR? may be a viable therapeutic target for patients with ER?-negative tumors. Although the present studies are restricted to the ER?/PR/ERBB2 negative MDA-MB-231 cell line, a model for a particularly aggressive class of breast cancer, our preliminary and ongoing experiments using other cells suggest that the role of ERR? is not restricted to this type of breast cancer. Specifically, the observation that ERR? expression supports target gene expression in multiple cell lines lends credence to the hypothesis that ERR? has a general role in breast cancer biology ( Figure 2B ). Additional in vivo experiments will be necessary to determine whether the similarities in ERR? function at the level of target gene regulation translate to the level of cell phenotype and tumor growth. One of our most interesting findings was that ERR? knockdown did not impact the proliferation rate of MDA-MB-231 cells in vitro whereas the same cells exhibited compromised growth propagated as xenografts. This is not completely unexpected given that the physiological roles of ERR? have been primarily described in tissues with high metabolic demand. We hypothesize that the microenvironment of a rapidly growing tumor recapitulates these conditions and thus highlights the functional significance of ERR?. Indeed, an examination of the MCF-7 array data revealed that all of the TCA enzymes and at least one subunit of each complex of the mitochondrial respiratory chain were positively regulated by ERR?. Building on experiments performed in skeletal muscle, our preliminary data (not shown) indicates that oxygen consumption is increased in MCF-7 breast cancer cells with activated ERR? ( 13 ). However, whether or not increased OXPHOS provides tumor cells with a growth advantage is a matter of considerable debate. Although an increased rate of OXPHOS has been associated with production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and subsequent caspase-mediated apoptosis ( 37 ), recent evidence suggests that ERR? may enhance ROS detoxification. Specifically, breast cancer brain metastases exhibit increased levels of ERR? and PGC-1? and exhibit enhanced protection against the deleterious effects of oxidative stress ( 38 ). Interestingly, we observed in several breast cancer cell lines that ERR? increases the expression of SOD2, which inactivates superoxide anions, and GSTM1, an enzyme that buffers cells from ROS ( Figure 2A ). These anti-oxidant defenses may allow cancer cells to capitalize on the ability of ERR? to increase OXPHOS activity. This hypothesis is also supported by compelling studies that have defined a role for PGC-1? coactivation of ERR? in the response to oxidative stress in pathologic processes such as neurodegeneration ( 39 ). In addition to providing substrates for further aerobic metabolism, the TCA cycle may contribute to tumor growth in an OXPHOS-independent manner. Indeed, it has been shown recently that a primary function of the TCA cycle is to provide the intermediates needed for the production of non-essential amino acids, a rate-limiting process in rapidly growing cells ( 17 ). Clearly, the strong link between ERR?, metabolism and the growth and progression of breast tumors warrants further investigation. Taken together our findings provide significant validation for ERR? as a therapeutic target in ER?-negative breast tumors. Pharmaceutical interest in ERR? as a drug target was initially stimulated by studies that highlighted the potential utility of agonists as treatments for metabolic disorders such as diabetes and obesity. However, despite tremendous effort, ERR? has proven to be an intractable target with respect to the development of agonists ( 40 ). In contrast, several small molecules have been developed that function as antagonists or inverse agonists by altering ERR? in such a manner as to block coactivator interactions ( 41 ). Although there are no published studies that examine the in vivo activities of these compounds, the mild phenotype observed in the ERR? knockout mouse suggests that systemic administration of this class of ERR? antagonists may exhibit minimal significant side effects ( 42 ). A priority for future studies, therefore, will be the analysis in vivo of appropriate ERR? inverse agonists and antagonists for their ability to recapitulate the effects on tumor growth observed subsequent to siRNA-mediated knockdown of ERR?. In conjunction with the growing body of literature defining the role of ERR? in tumor pathology, our work highlights the activity of ERR? in cellular models of ER?/PR/ERBB2 triple negative breast cancer, and suggests that ERR? may be an attractive therapeutic target in this aggressive and treatment-resistant type of breast cancer.  Supplementary Material 1 9 10 2 3 4 5 6 7 8  Supplementary Material 1 9 10 2 3 4 5 6 7 8  Figures Figure 1 Definition of the overlap between ERR? and ER? signaling in MCF-7 cells A, Number of genes regulated by ERR? (induced or repressed by infection of ERRspPGC1 compared to L2L3M) versus genes regulated by ER? (induced or repressed by estrogen treatment) and those that belong to both groups (15 genes). 620 ERR?-regulated and 99 ER?-regulated genes were identified using a Student’s t-test with a p-value cutoff of p<0.01 and fold change of >50% up or down. A comparison was then made to determine the subset of genes regulated by either pathway in which expression levels were significantly different (p<0.01) between MCF-7 cells expressing ERRspPGC1 (vehicle treated) and MCF-7 cells treated with estradiol (expressing control L2L3M). Genes in which this secondary analysis demonstrated no significant difference between ERR? and estrogen-induced expression are shown in light gray. B, Hierarchical clustering of genes regulated by ER? and ERR?, illustrated on a subset of MCF-7 microarray conditions. Cells were infected with adenovirus and treated twelve hours later with vehicle or estradiol (10nM). ERR? regulated genes were defined as the set of genes affected by ERRspPGC1 (I, II, III, V) and ER? targets as genes induced or repressed by addition of estradiol (predominately in Classes II, III, IV). C, Real-time PCR of representative genes from each class found in the microarray. Four different infections (negative control ?-galactosidase and wild-type PGC-1? in addition to the two PGC-1? mutants) were analyzed with vehicle or estradiol treatment. 36B4 was used as internal normalization control, and a representative experiment shown for each gene. ACADM (medium chain acyl dehydrogenase) represents genes regulated only by ERR? activation (Class I) and RET (ret proto-oncogene) represents genes regulated only by ER? (Class IV). Note that in addition to the jointly regulated genes in Class II and III (e.g, CXCL12 (stromal derived factor-1) and cyclin E2), Class V was found to contain some dually regulated genes (e.g., cyclin G2). Figure 2 The regulation of genes involved in the response to oxidative stress by ERR? and the dependence of basal levels of ERR? target genes on ERR? expression A, PGC-1? induction of SOD2 and GSTM1, ERR? target genes identified in the MCF-7 array, is dependent on ERR? expression. MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells were serially infected with the siRNA to ERR? (siERR?) or scrambled control (siCON) adenovirus indicated followed by ERRspPGC1 or the control ?-galactosidase virus. mRNA levels are assessed by RT-qPCR, normalized to the expression of 36B4 and represented ± SEM.B, Basal levels of ERR? target genes in breast cancer cell lines MCF-7 and BT474 (ER?-positive) and AU565 (ER?-negative) cell lines analyzed by RT-qPCR following adenoviral infection with siRNA to ERR? (siERR?) or scrambled control (siCON). Figure 3 Generation and characterization of MDA-MB-231-luciferase cells expressing ERR? shRNA A, RT-qPCR of ERR? and target genes in MDA231 siERR? cells versus MDA231 siCON cells. Data normalized to 36B4 and shown as fraction of siCON mRNA ± SEM. B, Results of in vitro proliferation assays showing no statistically significant differences between cell lines. Data from three biological replicates plotted as fold over cells plated ± SEM. C, Down-regulation of ERR? results in significantly reduced ability to migrate while re-expression of ERRsiR restores migration. The indicated stable MDA-MB-231 cell lines were serum starved for 18 h and allowed to migrate toward serum in a Boyden Chamber. Migrated cells were stained, imaged and counted. Cells were plated in triplicate and data of biological replicates plotted as normalized ratio to cells migrated in the MDA231 siCON YFP cell line. Western blot analysis of the protein levels of ERR? in whole cell extract from each MDA-MB-231-derived cell lines with GAPDH shown as a loading control. Figure 4 Silencing of ERR? decreases the growth rate of MDA-MB-231-luciferase cells grown as xenografts Stable cell lines were injected into the mammary fat pad of nude mice. A, Tumor growth rate of the cell lines after orthotopic injection. Points, mean volume for 10 mice per cell line; bars, SEM (*P<0.05). B, Doubling time of each tumor was calculated by best fit exponential curve and plotted as the average ± SEM (*P<0.05). C, The expression of ERR? and VEGF are decreased in ERR? knock-down tumors compared to control tumors while the control GAPDH is not. mRNA was collected and target gene expression measured by RT-qPCR. Data are normalized to cyclophilin expression and represented ± SEM (*P<0.05).  Figures Figure 1 Definition of the overlap between ERR? and ER? signaling in MCF-7 cells A, Number of genes regulated by ERR? (induced or repressed by infection of ERRspPGC1 compared to L2L3M) versus genes regulated by ER? (induced or repressed by estrogen treatment) and those that belong to both groups (15 genes). 620 ERR?-regulated and 99 ER?-regulated genes were identified using a Student’s t-test with a p-value cutoff of p<0.01 and fold change of >50% up or down. A comparison was then made to determine the subset of genes regulated by either pathway in which expression levels were significantly different (p<0.01) between MCF-7 cells expressing ERRspPGC1 (vehicle treated) and MCF-7 cells treated with estradiol (expressing control L2L3M). Genes in which this secondary analysis demonstrated no significant difference between ERR? and estrogen-induced expression are shown in light gray. B, Hierarchical clustering of genes regulated by ER? and ERR?, illustrated on a subset of MCF-7 microarray conditions. Cells were infected with adenovirus and treated twelve hours later with vehicle or estradiol (10nM). ERR? regulated genes were defined as the set of genes affected by ERRspPGC1 (I, II, III, V) and ER? targets as genes induced or repressed by addition of estradiol (predominately in Classes II, III, IV). C, Real-time PCR of representative genes from each class found in the microarray. Four different infections (negative control ?-galactosidase and wild-type PGC-1? in addition to the two PGC-1? mutants) were analyzed with vehicle or estradiol treatment. 36B4 was used as internal normalization control, and a representative experiment shown for each gene. ACADM (medium chain acyl dehydrogenase) represents genes regulated only by ERR? activation (Class I) and RET (ret proto-oncogene) represents genes regulated only by ER? (Class IV). Note that in addition to the jointly regulated genes in Class II and III (e.g, CXCL12 (stromal derived factor-1) and cyclin E2), Class V was found to contain some dually regulated genes (e.g., cyclin G2). Figure 2 The regulation of genes involved in the response to oxidative stress by ERR? and the dependence of basal levels of ERR? target genes on ERR? expression A, PGC-1? induction of SOD2 and GSTM1, ERR? target genes identified in the MCF-7 array, is dependent on ERR? expression. MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells were serially infected with the siRNA to ERR? (siERR?) or scrambled control (siCON) adenovirus indicated followed by ERRspPGC1 or the control ?-galactosidase virus. mRNA levels are assessed by RT-qPCR, normalized to the expression of 36B4 and represented ± SEM.B, Basal levels of ERR? target genes in breast cancer cell lines MCF-7 and BT474 (ER?-positive) and AU565 (ER?-negative) cell lines analyzed by RT-qPCR following adenoviral infection with siRNA to ERR? (siERR?) or scrambled control (siCON). Figure 3 Generation and characterization of MDA-MB-231-luciferase cells expressing ERR? shRNA A, RT-qPCR of ERR? and target genes in MDA231 siERR? cells versus MDA231 siCON cells. Data normalized to 36B4 and shown as fraction of siCON mRNA ± SEM. B, Results of in vitro proliferation assays showing no statistically significant differences between cell lines. Data from three biological replicates plotted as fold over cells plated ± SEM. C, Down-regulation of ERR? results in significantly reduced ability to migrate while re-expression of ERRsiR restores migration. The indicated stable MDA-MB-231 cell lines were serum starved for 18 h and allowed to migrate toward serum in a Boyden Chamber. Migrated cells were stained, imaged and counted. Cells were plated in triplicate and data of biological replicates plotted as normalized ratio to cells migrated in the MDA231 siCON YFP cell line. Western blot analysis of the protein levels of ERR? in whole cell extract from each MDA-MB-231-derived cell lines with GAPDH shown as a loading control. Figure 4 Silencing of ERR? decreases the growth rate of MDA-MB-231-luciferase cells grown as xenografts Stable cell lines were injected into the mammary fat pad of nude mice. A, Tumor growth rate of the cell lines after orthotopic injection. Points, mean volume for 10 mice per cell line; bars, SEM (*P<0.05). B, Doubling time of each tumor was calculated by best fit exponential curve and plotted as the average ± SEM (*P<0.05). C, The expression of ERR? and VEGF are decreased in ERR? knock-down tumors compared to control tumors while the control GAPDH is not. mRNA was collected and target gene expression measured by RT-qPCR. Data are normalized to cyclophilin expression and represented ± SEM (*P<0.05). 