A Prospective Feasibility Trial to Determine the Significance of the Sentinel Node Gradient in Breast Cancer: A Predictor of Nodal Metastasis Location Background Sentinel node (SN) biopsy is standard for breast cancer staging but SN dye gradients and their significance have never been characterized. If predictive of SN metastasis location, their use for focused pathology examination might improve intraoperative imprint cytology sensitivity. Methods This prospective trial enrolled clinically node-negative patients with invasive breast cancer not undergoing neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Surgeons marked SN gradients at their bluest end. Nodal halves were examined separately by imprint cytology and the marked SN half was correlated to metastasis location. Demographic, pathologic, and prognostic features were recorded. Results Mean patient age and tumor size for the 102 patients was 59.6 years and 2.2 cm, respectively. Of 169 SNs, 159 (94.1%) had dye gradients, which varied by tumor quadrant, but not by histology, diagnosis method, grade, or stage. Among 41 marked SNs with metastases, 92.7% were present in the halves marked by the surgeon. Fourteen were confined to 1 nodal half with 11 on the marked side and 3 on the unmarked side ( p =0.029). Metastases were smaller when confined to 1 versus both SN halves (0.14 vs. 0.75 cm, p= 0.005), and smaller (0.87 vs. 0.13 cm, p <0.0001) when missed intraoperatively. Conclusion Dye gradients occur in most SNs and predict metastasis location. The smallest metastases are hardest to detect intraoperatively and are usually confined to the marked SN half. This suggests that marking a SN's bluest half warrants further study to explore whether its correlation to metastasis location may be exploited to focus pathologic examination and decrease the reoperative axillary dissection rate.  Introduction Lymphatic mapping/sentinel lymphadenectomy (LM/SL) has become the standard of care in surgical staging of breast cancer to assess nodal status for metastatic disease. 1 Currently, both hematoxylin and eosin (H & E) as well as immunohistochemical staining (IHC) can be used to detect metastases, 2 although the current trend is for fewer institutions to utilize IHC because the significance of isolated tumor cells and even small micrometastases detected solely by IHC is questionable. 3 Refinements to the evaluation of LM/SL should therefore focus on H & E detection. LM/SL has been extensively characterized, with thousands of articles published on the topic. Sentinel lymph node (SN) microanatomy has been documented to be predictable, 4 but no published trial has been performed to investigate the significance of SN dye gradients. If these gradients are reliable and predictive of metastasis location, they may potentially be useful in order to orient the intraoperative H&E examination of breast cancer SNs to reduce the likelihood of a false negative intraoperative examination. It is common practice for many surgeons to perform LM/SL using intraoperative imprint cytology to determine SN status and then perform axillary lymphadenectomy at the same procedure if metastatic disease is present. Unfortunately, a meta-analysis of studies of intraoperative imprint cytology (“touch prep”) reported a sensitivity of only 63%, 5 which decreases as metastasic deposit size becomes smaller. These false negative results often necessitate performance of a second operative procedure. The purpose of this feasibility study was to determine the significance and characteristics of the SN gradient, as well as to determine whether SN gradients predict SN metastasis location. Such a correlation, if it exists, may have the potential to be exploited in order to improve intraoperative sensitivity for their detection.  Methods This prospective trial enrolled clinically node-negative patients with invasive breast cancer not undergoing neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Surgeons marked SN gradients at their bluest end. Nodal halves were examined separately by imprint cytology and the marked SN half was correlated to metastasis location. Demographic, pathologic, and prognostic features were recorded.  Results Mean patient age and tumor size for the 102 patients was 59.6 years and 2.2 cm, respectively. Of 169 SNs, 159 (94.1%) had dye gradients, which varied by tumor quadrant, but not by histology, diagnosis method, grade, or stage. Among 41 marked SNs with metastases, 92.7% were present in the halves marked by the surgeon. Fourteen were confined to 1 nodal half with 11 on the marked side and 3 on the unmarked side ( p =0.029). Metastases were smaller when confined to 1 versus both SN halves (0.14 vs. 0.75 cm, p= 0.005), and smaller (0.87 vs. 0.13 cm, p <0.0001) when missed intraoperatively.  Conclusion Dye gradients occur in most SNs and predict metastasis location. The smallest metastases are hardest to detect intraoperatively and are usually confined to the marked SN half. This suggests that marking a SN's bluest half warrants further study to explore whether its correlation to metastasis location may be exploited to focus pathologic examination and decrease the reoperative axillary dissection rate.  Methods Patients gave consent and were prospectively enrolled between December 2006 and August 2007 for this IRB-approved protocol. All patients with invasive breast cancer including those with microinvasion, deemed appropriate for LM/SL by the treating surgeon, were eligible for enrollment. Patients undergoing both breast conservation and total mastectomy were eligible, although patients undergoing neoadjuvant chemotherapy were excluded. Lymphatic mapping was permissible by dye injection, radiocolloid injection, or both, as per the preference of the surgeon. The most common technique used involved blue dye only. The method of dye injection was specified by the protocol and consisted of 5 ccs of dye injected in a subareolar location after skin preparation and draping. Isosulfan blue, (Lymphazurin™, US Surgical, Norwalk, Conn), 1%, was used until a national shortage precluded its use, at which time 1% methlyene blue was substituted. When utilized, 0.75-1 mCi of 99[Tc]-sulfur colloid was injected intradermally the morning of operation by physicians in the Nuclear Medicine department. Breast massage was performed after dye injection intraoperatively for approximately 5 minutes. SNs were defined as those nodes that were radioactive at 10 times the background counts, stained blue, or had a clearly visible blue lymphatic entering the lymph node. These nodes were removed and the presence of a dye and/or radioactivity gradient within each SN was noted. A blue dye gradient was defined as a variation in the intensity of lymph node staining that was visible to the naked eye. In SNs that were not blue but were identified by the presence of a blue lymphatic, the entry point of that lymphatic into the node was defined as the blue end. A radioactivity gradient was defined as a variation in the radioactivity detectable by gamma counter by 10% or greater. An end of a SN was defined as half of the lymph node bisected through its shortest axis as seen in Figure 1 . On removal of each SN, the surgeon determined whether a blue dye gradient and/or radioactivity gradient was present. If the node was blue but not radioactive or vise versa, the more intensely staining or radioactive end of the SN was marked for pathology with a suture. If the lymph node was blue and radioactive and demonstrated gradients for both substrates, the blue dye end was always the end marked, whether or not the gradients were concordant. This concordance data was prospectively captured, along with demographics, procedural, and breast cancer prognostic data. Breast cancer primary location was classified by quadrant. Tumors at axial locations (12:00, 3:00, etc.) were classified as being within the clockwise adjacent quadrant. Intraoperative imprint cytology (“touch prep”) was performed on all SNs and in accordance with our institutional standard, 6 H & E staining was performed without IHC. Sectioning, imprint cytology, and H & E staining were performed as per pathology standard operating procedure, although each marked SN was first divided by the pathologist along its shortest axis prior to imprint cytology ( Figure 1 ) and each half was examined separately. After bisection into the marked and unmarked halves, each nodal half was sectioned again along the long axis of the node, and each portion was touched separately to a glass slide and stained with H & E stains. If negative, 3 levels of 4 ?m-thick sections were cut from formalin fixed paraffin-embedded tissue and stained using H & E. At the time of processing, the pathologist noted the size of each lymph node, the characteristics of any nodal metastases including size and whether gross disease was present, the need to perform a frozen section, and the correlation of any metastases on both imprint cytology and permanent section to the half of the lymph node marked by the surgeon. When more than 1 metastatic focus in a SN was present, the largest focus was measured. Where a SN specimen was found to contain more than 1 lymph node, only the node or nodes marked by the surgeon were evaluated for the protocol; other nodes were evaluated as per routine SN procedure. A single-tailed exact McNemar test with a type I error of 5% was used to test the null hypothesis that the probability of detecting metastases in the blue stained end of the SNs was the same as detecting them in the unstained end. Our sample size was calculated to require 100 patients, estimating a 30% incidence of sentinel node metastases, with 70% of patients having metastatic foci that did not span both nodal halves. McNemar test was structured to have 80% power. Fisher exact test was used for univariate analysis of the variables of breast quadrant, presence or absence of nodal metastatic disease, histology, grade, stage, and biopsy method, while Wilcoxon test was used to analyze the continuous variables of age, body mass index (BMI), tumor size and SN size.  Results There were 102 patients enrolled. Two patients were male, and the average and median patient age was 59.6 and 59.5 years, respectively (range, 26-88 years). Primary tumor characteristics are listed in Table 1 . Breast cancer diagnosis was made by core biopsy in 82 cases, excision in 18, and fine needle aspiration (FNA) in 2. Primary treatment consisted of breast conservation in 69 patients and mastectomy in 33, with both male patients having a mastectomy. All 102 patients underwent LM/SL to assess nodal status, with failure to identify a SN in 5 cases (4.9%). No patient had a history of prior ipsilateral SN biopsy or axillary dissection. Isosulfan blue dye, 1%, was utilized for mapping in 96 patients with 2 also undergoing radionuclide injection, and methylene blue was used alone in 7 patients. The average invasive tumor size was 2.2 cm, ranging from a 0.3 mm focus of microinvasion to 10.0 cm. One patient had ductal carcinoma in situ with a focus of microinvasion found only on core biopsy. Final pathologic examination demonstrated 35 patients (34.3%) to have metastatic disease in 43 SNs (25.4%). In those with a positive SN, an average of 4.9 total nodes were found to contain metastatic disease after completion axillary dissection. Three of the 5 patients in whom no SN was identified had nodal metastatic disease, and these patients had 13, 4, and 2 positive nodes each. Although positive nodes were identified intraoperatively, they were neither blue nor hot and were not classified as sentinel nodes for the purposes of this study. Axillary dissection was performed in all but 3 patients found to have at least 1 SN containing metastatic disease; 2 due to patient refusal, and 1 based upon the recommendation of the surgeon. An average of 1.7 and a median of 2 SNs were removed per patient, and a total of 169 SNs were removed overall. Visible dye gradients were present in 159 (94.1%) nodes and in 95 of the 97 (98%) patients in whom SNs were identified ( Figure 2 ) with the remainder of SNs uniformly blue. Patient and tumor characteristics related to the presence or absence of a dye gradient are listed in Table 2 . SN and dye gradient characteristics per node and per patient are listed in Tables 2 and 3 . The 2 patients who were mapped with both radionuclide and dye had a total of 3 SNs removed. The first patient had 1 SN with 1 end more intensely stained from the dye and the opposite end more radioactive. In this node, metastatic disease corresponded to the darkest area of dye, opposite the end of higher radioactivity. In the second patient, whose SNs were both negative, 1 node had a dye gradient but no radioactivity gradient while the second lymph node had a concordant end, with the most intense dye and radioactivity gradients at the same end. Metastatic disease was found in 41 SNs (25.8%) marked with gradients and in 2 of the 10 nodes without gradients. Among those with gradients and metastatic disease, the marked half of the SN contained metastatic disease in 38 (92.7%), and 3 (7.3%) contained metastatic disease solely in the unmarked half. In 14 SNs, the metastatic disease was confined to 1 half of the lymph node. The location of the gradient as marked by the surgeon significantly predicted the location of the metastases, with 11 nodes having metastases solely in the marked half and 3 nodes with metastases in the unmarked half ( p =0.029). Metastatic foci in all SNs averaged 0.58 cm in size. The size of the nodal metastatic disease, when present in both SN halves averaged 0.75 cm, while metastases only present in 1 SN half averaged 0.14 cm in diameter ( p =0.005, Table 4 ). The average metastasis size was not different between those metastases present only in the marked half versus those present solely in the unmarked half (0.14 vs. 0.12 cm, p= 0.76) of the SN. The overall false negative intraoperative examination rate was 39.5%. There were 26 true positive and no false positive intraoperative examinations. Only 2 of the false negatives were patients with invasive lobular carcinoma. Sensitivity and specificity of intraoperative examination were 60.5% and 100% overall, respectively. Sensitivity for isolated tumor cells (?0.2 mm), micrometastases (>0.2 – 2.0 mm), and macrometastases (?2.0 mm) were 0%, 25.0%, and 91.6%, respectively. Of the 17 metastases missed intraoperatively, 10 (58.8%) were confined to 1 SN half, with 8 in the marked half. The mean diameter of those metastases that were falsely negative on intraoperative examination was significantly smaller at 0.13 cm in comparison with those metastases found intraoperatively, averaging 0.87 cm ( p <0.0001). The 2 metastases in SNs without a gradient averaged 1.3 cm in size, whereas the metastases in those with a gradient averaged 0.54 ( p =0.10). SN size varied from 0.20 to 4.0 cm. Univariate analysis was performed for predictors of the presence or absence of a SN gradient. The factors analyzed were age, BMI, method of diagnosis (FNA, core needle, or excisional biopsy), primary tumor size and grade, SN size, the presence or absence of nodal metastatic disease, primary tumor location, histology, and pathologic stage. A difference in the likelihood of a gradient was noted by quadrant of the primary tumor, with gradients more frequently seen with tumors in the upper quadrants ( p =0.024). Figure 3 shows the numbers and percentages of nodes with and without a dye gradient delineated by region of the breast. As depicted in Figure 3 , 33 (82.5%) of 40 patients with lower quadrant primary tumors had SNs with gradients, whereas patients with upper quadrant primaries demonstrated gradients in 110 (97.3%) of 113 SNs.  Results There were 102 patients enrolled. Two patients were male, and the average and median patient age was 59.6 and 59.5 years, respectively (range, 26-88 years). Primary tumor characteristics are listed in Table 1 . Breast cancer diagnosis was made by core biopsy in 82 cases, excision in 18, and fine needle aspiration (FNA) in 2. Primary treatment consisted of breast conservation in 69 patients and mastectomy in 33, with both male patients having a mastectomy. All 102 patients underwent LM/SL to assess nodal status, with failure to identify a SN in 5 cases (4.9%). No patient had a history of prior ipsilateral SN biopsy or axillary dissection. Isosulfan blue dye, 1%, was utilized for mapping in 96 patients with 2 also undergoing radionuclide injection, and methylene blue was used alone in 7 patients. The average invasive tumor size was 2.2 cm, ranging from a 0.3 mm focus of microinvasion to 10.0 cm. One patient had ductal carcinoma in situ with a focus of microinvasion found only on core biopsy. Final pathologic examination demonstrated 35 patients (34.3%) to have metastatic disease in 43 SNs (25.4%). In those with a positive SN, an average of 4.9 total nodes were found to contain metastatic disease after completion axillary dissection. Three of the 5 patients in whom no SN was identified had nodal metastatic disease, and these patients had 13, 4, and 2 positive nodes each. Although positive nodes were identified intraoperatively, they were neither blue nor hot and were not classified as sentinel nodes for the purposes of this study. Axillary dissection was performed in all but 3 patients found to have at least 1 SN containing metastatic disease; 2 due to patient refusal, and 1 based upon the recommendation of the surgeon. An average of 1.7 and a median of 2 SNs were removed per patient, and a total of 169 SNs were removed overall. Visible dye gradients were present in 159 (94.1%) nodes and in 95 of the 97 (98%) patients in whom SNs were identified ( Figure 2 ) with the remainder of SNs uniformly blue. Patient and tumor characteristics related to the presence or absence of a dye gradient are listed in Table 2 . SN and dye gradient characteristics per node and per patient are listed in Tables 2 and 3 . The 2 patients who were mapped with both radionuclide and dye had a total of 3 SNs removed. The first patient had 1 SN with 1 end more intensely stained from the dye and the opposite end more radioactive. In this node, metastatic disease corresponded to the darkest area of dye, opposite the end of higher radioactivity. In the second patient, whose SNs were both negative, 1 node had a dye gradient but no radioactivity gradient while the second lymph node had a concordant end, with the most intense dye and radioactivity gradients at the same end. Metastatic disease was found in 41 SNs (25.8%) marked with gradients and in 2 of the 10 nodes without gradients. Among those with gradients and metastatic disease, the marked half of the SN contained metastatic disease in 38 (92.7%), and 3 (7.3%) contained metastatic disease solely in the unmarked half. In 14 SNs, the metastatic disease was confined to 1 half of the lymph node. The location of the gradient as marked by the surgeon significantly predicted the location of the metastases, with 11 nodes having metastases solely in the marked half and 3 nodes with metastases in the unmarked half ( p =0.029). Metastatic foci in all SNs averaged 0.58 cm in size. The size of the nodal metastatic disease, when present in both SN halves averaged 0.75 cm, while metastases only present in 1 SN half averaged 0.14 cm in diameter ( p =0.005, Table 4 ). The average metastasis size was not different between those metastases present only in the marked half versus those present solely in the unmarked half (0.14 vs. 0.12 cm, p= 0.76) of the SN. The overall false negative intraoperative examination rate was 39.5%. There were 26 true positive and no false positive intraoperative examinations. Only 2 of the false negatives were patients with invasive lobular carcinoma. Sensitivity and specificity of intraoperative examination were 60.5% and 100% overall, respectively. Sensitivity for isolated tumor cells (?0.2 mm), micrometastases (>0.2 – 2.0 mm), and macrometastases (?2.0 mm) were 0%, 25.0%, and 91.6%, respectively. Of the 17 metastases missed intraoperatively, 10 (58.8%) were confined to 1 SN half, with 8 in the marked half. The mean diameter of those metastases that were falsely negative on intraoperative examination was significantly smaller at 0.13 cm in comparison with those metastases found intraoperatively, averaging 0.87 cm ( p <0.0001). The 2 metastases in SNs without a gradient averaged 1.3 cm in size, whereas the metastases in those with a gradient averaged 0.54 ( p =0.10). SN size varied from 0.20 to 4.0 cm. Univariate analysis was performed for predictors of the presence or absence of a SN gradient. The factors analyzed were age, BMI, method of diagnosis (FNA, core needle, or excisional biopsy), primary tumor size and grade, SN size, the presence or absence of nodal metastatic disease, primary tumor location, histology, and pathologic stage. A difference in the likelihood of a gradient was noted by quadrant of the primary tumor, with gradients more frequently seen with tumors in the upper quadrants ( p =0.024). Figure 3 shows the numbers and percentages of nodes with and without a dye gradient delineated by region of the breast. As depicted in Figure 3 , 33 (82.5%) of 40 patients with lower quadrant primary tumors had SNs with gradients, whereas patients with upper quadrant primaries demonstrated gradients in 110 (97.3%) of 113 SNs.  Discussion The evaluation of breast cancer SNs has evolved since the introduction of the procedure for staging in the early 1990's. 7 , 8 The more recent modifications to the technique have not involved the intraoperative method of LM/SL, but have primarily been focused instead on how the pathologic examination is performed, such as the routine use of step sectioning 2 and the frequent use of IHC, although the value of the latter procedure has been questioned. 3 Despite extensive literature on various aspects of the SN technique and its application, characterization of SN dye gradients and their potential contribution to that technique remain unexplored. Injection of blue dye, with or without radionuclide is overwhelmingly used as part of standard LM/SL technique, 9 , 10 and Morton marks blue dye gradients for guiding melanoma permanent sections (personal communication, 2001). To our knowledge, the value of this approach has not been formally studied or published prior to this trial. The use of dye gradients may be applicable in all SN procedures, but have the greatest potential to be useful in breast cancer, where the value of the ultrasensitive IHC for detection of metastases has been questioned. Unlike current melanoma staging, an increase in the sensitivity for breast cancer metastases of all sizes is not desirable because the smallest metastases seen solely by IHC have questionable significance and their detection can pose a management dilemma. In contrast, modifications to LM/SL technique that improve on the false-negative rate of intraoperative H&E examination for breast cancer metastases of significance would be useful, and our characterization of SN dye gradients suggests that they should be explored for that potential. In this trial we found that 98% of patients with identifiable SNs demonstrated dye gradients. Isosulfan blue was used in 95 patients and methylene blue was used in 7, but gradients were seen with both dye substrates. Our results also demonstrate that the dye gradient does not appear contingent upon primary tumor characteristics, biopsy method, or patient-related factors. Larger primary tumor size, higher grade, and increasing numbers of positive nodes might suggest a greater likelihood of lymphatic emboli or heavy nodal tumor burden which would interfere with the presence of a gradient, but this was not observed. The size of the SN also did not predict the presence of a gradient. The small number of patients without a gradient precludes a definitive assessment of the impact of metastasis size on the presence of a gradient, but the largest metastasis seen in the study (3.0 cm) was present in a SN containing a gradient. The only characteristic that correlated with the presence or absence of a gradient was the location of the primary tumor. As the trial protocol specified the use of a subareolar injection and a 5-minute massage time, it remains unclear why patients with lower quadrant tumors had a slightly higher incidence of nodes uniformly permeated by dye with no gradient. There is no consensus regarding the role or direction of subareolar lymphatic flow in the breast. 11 It is conceivable that obstruction of breast lymphatics by tumors inferiorly may allow more direct and rapid permeation of dye to the axillary nodes, decreasing diffusion time through those SNs, consequently decreasing the number of gradients seen, but this remains uncertain. The finding suggests that there may be factors related to the location of the primary tumor and lymphatic flow that remain uncharacterized. Nonetheless, the impact of this finding was minimal because of the very high frequency of SN gradients. The practical clinical applicability of the dye gradient was demonstrated by the appearance of dye in nodes varying in size from 0.2 cm to 4 cm, and by the ability of the surgeon to distinguish the most intensely stained nodal half in SNs as small as 0.5 cm. Because the SN gradient is a nearly ubiquitous, reliable, intraoperative finding that can be identified in nodes of all sizes, it becomes easy to mark the nodes intraoperatively with little time or expense, and this may have clinical implications. Although the biggest impact of marking SNs is on those metastases that are located in only 1 half of the SN, the benefit extends to all SNs with metastases by allowing the surgeon to indicate to the pathologist which half of the node is the half most likely to contain metastases. This may allow a more focused and accurate intraoperative examination by looking in greater detail at only half of the SN, regardless of whether metastases are present in 1 or both halves. This potential ability to improve upon the detection of H&E metastases intraoperatively also remains important because this may not only improve upon the time and resources required for detection by focusing on half of the node, but also because detection of small nodal metastases remains problematic. Both frozen section and imprint cytology are used for intraoperative examination and have been reported to have similar sensitivity for the detection of metastases. 12 The reported sensitivity of imprint cytology for the detection of metastases >2.0 mm in size is high, ranging from 74-92%. 12 - 17 These reports are consistent with the 92% sensitivity observed in this study for metastases of this size. In contrast, the ability to detect micrometastases or isolated tumor cells intraoperatively is limited, with sensitivities of less than 25% in the majority of studies. We also observed a sensitivity of 25% for the detection of micrometastases. At present, axillary dissection is standard practice after the finding of metastases to the SN, although the need for the procedure in all patients has been questioned. 18 Although this trial was designed to characterize and establish the reliability of SN dye gradients, efforts to explore the implications of our findings are underway. Use of SN gradient marking to decrease the false negative rate of intraoperative examination of the SN is worthy of study because it may have the potential to spare patients a second operative procedure with its associated morbidity and cost. Other methods of improving the intraoperative detection of metastases have also been examined. Morton et al found that injection of a special carbon dye assisted the pathologist in the identification of micrometastases in the SNs of patients with melanoma. 4 , 19 , 20 The uptake of carbon dye correlated with metastasis location, which is a finding consistent with our study, which suggests that the microanatomic location of an SN metastasis is not random. Carbon dye is not approved by the Food and Drug Administration for routine clinical use, however, and involves an extra injection that causes permanent black tattooing of the skin. Viale et al 21 intraoperaively evaluated 15 pairs of frozen SN sections cut at 50-micron intervals, for a total of 60 sections per lymph node. The sensitivity of this technique was 93.3% and the negative predictive value 94.1%, but rapid immunohistochemistry had limited sensitivity for the detection of small metastases, and was costly and time consuming for both the pathologist and the surgeon. Intraoperative IHC has consequently not been widely adopted. Another method of intraoperative SN evaluation currently being investigated is the use of polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In a prospective study involving 416 patients, the sensitivity for the detection of metastases >2 mm was 98% but fell to 57% for the detection of metastases between 0.2 and 2 mm. 22 The sensitivities in our study were 92% and 25%, respectively, for metastases in these size groups, but because this was a correlative study to examine the potential association between dye gradient and metastasis location, a more intensive gradient-directed pathology examination to evaluate the utility of this technique for the intraoperative detection of micrometastases was not performed. Although the results of the PCR assay are of interest, it is performed on homogenized tissue which destroys the architecture of the node and metastases, and the ability to evaluate the metastasis size for decision making purposes. In addition, the assay was positive in 4% of cases where no tumor was present in adjacent tissue sections, suggesting false positive results. The 30 to 55 minutes required to perform this PCR assay is considerably longer than the time required to place a suture in a lymph node, and the $80 cost per lymph node is significantly higher than the $1.12 for the silk suture used to mark the dye gradient in our study, suggesting the value of exploring the use of the SN gradient further. Although our study demonstrated a significant correlation between metastasis location and the marked end of the SN, suggesting that the marking procedure could facilitate the identification of nodal metastases, this was a feasibility study. It is possible that there may have been a bias introducted into evaluation of the SN by the location of the marking suture, although the nodal halves were separated and processed in an identical fashion. Although the surgeons participating in this trial mapped with blue dye alone in the majority of cases, many surgeons routinely use a radionuclide, alone or in combination with blue dye, for mapping. The SN identification rate seen here is consistent with prior studies, 10 , 23 and when positive nodes were identified that were not blue or hot, these were not defined as SNs for this study. The applicability of our findings to a radioactivity gradient remains uncertain, although data from the American College of Surgeons Z0010 trial 10 demonstrated that 94.2% of surgeons mapped with blue dye, alone or in combination with radiocolloid, while only 5.7% mapped with radiocolloid alone, indicating the potential for widespread utility of the dye gradient in clinical practice. In summary, we have characterized the SN gradient, and demonstrated it to be a reliable finding that correlates with metastasis location. This SN characteristic is easily identifiable by the surgeon, and allows orientation of breast cancer SNs for pathologic examination. Because it is representative of metastasis location, this finding is now being explored for its ability to allow focused evaluation intraoperatively in order to decrease the time and cost associated with this procedure. This issue can only be addressed through a randomized clinical trial which has at its endpoint the sensitivity for the intraoperative detection of metastases.  Discussion The evaluation of breast cancer SNs has evolved since the introduction of the procedure for staging in the early 1990's. 7 , 8 The more recent modifications to the technique have not involved the intraoperative method of LM/SL, but have primarily been focused instead on how the pathologic examination is performed, such as the routine use of step sectioning 2 and the frequent use of IHC, although the value of the latter procedure has been questioned. 3 Despite extensive literature on various aspects of the SN technique and its application, characterization of SN dye gradients and their potential contribution to that technique remain unexplored. Injection of blue dye, with or without radionuclide is overwhelmingly used as part of standard LM/SL technique, 9 , 10 and Morton marks blue dye gradients for guiding melanoma permanent sections (personal communication, 2001). To our knowledge, the value of this approach has not been formally studied or published prior to this trial. The use of dye gradients may be applicable in all SN procedures, but have the greatest potential to be useful in breast cancer, where the value of the ultrasensitive IHC for detection of metastases has been questioned. Unlike current melanoma staging, an increase in the sensitivity for breast cancer metastases of all sizes is not desirable because the smallest metastases seen solely by IHC have questionable significance and their detection can pose a management dilemma. In contrast, modifications to LM/SL technique that improve on the false-negative rate of intraoperative H&E examination for breast cancer metastases of significance would be useful, and our characterization of SN dye gradients suggests that they should be explored for that potential. In this trial we found that 98% of patients with identifiable SNs demonstrated dye gradients. Isosulfan blue was used in 95 patients and methylene blue was used in 7, but gradients were seen with both dye substrates. Our results also demonstrate that the dye gradient does not appear contingent upon primary tumor characteristics, biopsy method, or patient-related factors. Larger primary tumor size, higher grade, and increasing numbers of positive nodes might suggest a greater likelihood of lymphatic emboli or heavy nodal tumor burden which would interfere with the presence of a gradient, but this was not observed. The size of the SN also did not predict the presence of a gradient. The small number of patients without a gradient precludes a definitive assessment of the impact of metastasis size on the presence of a gradient, but the largest metastasis seen in the study (3.0 cm) was present in a SN containing a gradient. The only characteristic that correlated with the presence or absence of a gradient was the location of the primary tumor. As the trial protocol specified the use of a subareolar injection and a 5-minute massage time, it remains unclear why patients with lower quadrant tumors had a slightly higher incidence of nodes uniformly permeated by dye with no gradient. There is no consensus regarding the role or direction of subareolar lymphatic flow in the breast. 11 It is conceivable that obstruction of breast lymphatics by tumors inferiorly may allow more direct and rapid permeation of dye to the axillary nodes, decreasing diffusion time through those SNs, consequently decreasing the number of gradients seen, but this remains uncertain. The finding suggests that there may be factors related to the location of the primary tumor and lymphatic flow that remain uncharacterized. Nonetheless, the impact of this finding was minimal because of the very high frequency of SN gradients. The practical clinical applicability of the dye gradient was demonstrated by the appearance of dye in nodes varying in size from 0.2 cm to 4 cm, and by the ability of the surgeon to distinguish the most intensely stained nodal half in SNs as small as 0.5 cm. Because the SN gradient is a nearly ubiquitous, reliable, intraoperative finding that can be identified in nodes of all sizes, it becomes easy to mark the nodes intraoperatively with little time or expense, and this may have clinical implications. Although the biggest impact of marking SNs is on those metastases that are located in only 1 half of the SN, the benefit extends to all SNs with metastases by allowing the surgeon to indicate to the pathologist which half of the node is the half most likely to contain metastases. This may allow a more focused and accurate intraoperative examination by looking in greater detail at only half of the SN, regardless of whether metastases are present in 1 or both halves. This potential ability to improve upon the detection of H&E metastases intraoperatively also remains important because this may not only improve upon the time and resources required for detection by focusing on half of the node, but also because detection of small nodal metastases remains problematic. Both frozen section and imprint cytology are used for intraoperative examination and have been reported to have similar sensitivity for the detection of metastases. 12 The reported sensitivity of imprint cytology for the detection of metastases >2.0 mm in size is high, ranging from 74-92%. 12 - 17 These reports are consistent with the 92% sensitivity observed in this study for metastases of this size. In contrast, the ability to detect micrometastases or isolated tumor cells intraoperatively is limited, with sensitivities of less than 25% in the majority of studies. We also observed a sensitivity of 25% for the detection of micrometastases. At present, axillary dissection is standard practice after the finding of metastases to the SN, although the need for the procedure in all patients has been questioned. 18 Although this trial was designed to characterize and establish the reliability of SN dye gradients, efforts to explore the implications of our findings are underway. Use of SN gradient marking to decrease the false negative rate of intraoperative examination of the SN is worthy of study because it may have the potential to spare patients a second operative procedure with its associated morbidity and cost. Other methods of improving the intraoperative detection of metastases have also been examined. Morton et al found that injection of a special carbon dye assisted the pathologist in the identification of micrometastases in the SNs of patients with melanoma. 4 , 19 , 20 The uptake of carbon dye correlated with metastasis location, which is a finding consistent with our study, which suggests that the microanatomic location of an SN metastasis is not random. Carbon dye is not approved by the Food and Drug Administration for routine clinical use, however, and involves an extra injection that causes permanent black tattooing of the skin. Viale et al 21 intraoperaively evaluated 15 pairs of frozen SN sections cut at 50-micron intervals, for a total of 60 sections per lymph node. The sensitivity of this technique was 93.3% and the negative predictive value 94.1%, but rapid immunohistochemistry had limited sensitivity for the detection of small metastases, and was costly and time consuming for both the pathologist and the surgeon. Intraoperative IHC has consequently not been widely adopted. Another method of intraoperative SN evaluation currently being investigated is the use of polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In a prospective study involving 416 patients, the sensitivity for the detection of metastases >2 mm was 98% but fell to 57% for the detection of metastases between 0.2 and 2 mm. 22 The sensitivities in our study were 92% and 25%, respectively, for metastases in these size groups, but because this was a correlative study to examine the potential association between dye gradient and metastasis location, a more intensive gradient-directed pathology examination to evaluate the utility of this technique for the intraoperative detection of micrometastases was not performed. Although the results of the PCR assay are of interest, it is performed on homogenized tissue which destroys the architecture of the node and metastases, and the ability to evaluate the metastasis size for decision making purposes. In addition, the assay was positive in 4% of cases where no tumor was present in adjacent tissue sections, suggesting false positive results. The 30 to 55 minutes required to perform this PCR assay is considerably longer than the time required to place a suture in a lymph node, and the $80 cost per lymph node is significantly higher than the $1.12 for the silk suture used to mark the dye gradient in our study, suggesting the value of exploring the use of the SN gradient further. Although our study demonstrated a significant correlation between metastasis location and the marked end of the SN, suggesting that the marking procedure could facilitate the identification of nodal metastases, this was a feasibility study. It is possible that there may have been a bias introducted into evaluation of the SN by the location of the marking suture, although the nodal halves were separated and processed in an identical fashion. Although the surgeons participating in this trial mapped with blue dye alone in the majority of cases, many surgeons routinely use a radionuclide, alone or in combination with blue dye, for mapping. The SN identification rate seen here is consistent with prior studies, 10 , 23 and when positive nodes were identified that were not blue or hot, these were not defined as SNs for this study. The applicability of our findings to a radioactivity gradient remains uncertain, although data from the American College of Surgeons Z0010 trial 10 demonstrated that 94.2% of surgeons mapped with blue dye, alone or in combination with radiocolloid, while only 5.7% mapped with radiocolloid alone, indicating the potential for widespread utility of the dye gradient in clinical practice. In summary, we have characterized the SN gradient, and demonstrated it to be a reliable finding that correlates with metastasis location. This SN characteristic is easily identifiable by the surgeon, and allows orientation of breast cancer SNs for pathologic examination. Because it is representative of metastasis location, this finding is now being explored for its ability to allow focused evaluation intraoperatively in order to decrease the time and cost associated with this procedure. This issue can only be addressed through a randomized clinical trial which has at its endpoint the sensitivity for the intraoperative detection of metastases.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Schematic of SN bisection is shown. a) The SN is divided along its short axis into two halves. b) Each half is then bisected perpendicularly to that initial cut along its widest face in order to perform imprint cytology on each plane marked with an asterisk (*). Figure 2 A sentinel node in vivo demonstrates the bluest portion visible adjacent to the arrow. Figure 3 Presence or absence of a SN gradient by location of the primary tumor. Percentages represent proportions of nodes with and without gradients for primary tumors occurring in the quadrant. The trend ( p =0.024) suggests a greater percentage of gradients in the upper quadrants and central breast. Two multicentric tumors, not shown here, each had 1 SN, both of which had gradients. UOQ = Upper outer quadrants ( n =84), UIQ = Upper inner quadrants ( n =29), LOQ = Lower outer quadrants ( n =23), LIQ = Lower inner quadrants ( n =17), Central = Central primaries ( n =14). Table 1 Primary tumor characteristics of the 102 enrolled patients. n Histologic tumor type Infiltrating ductal carcinoma * 91 Infiltrating lobular carcinoma 9 Mixed infiltrating ductal/lobular 2 Grade I 12 II 47 III 43 Primary tumor size (cm) Range 0.03 - 10.0 Mean 2.2 Median 2.0 Receptor status ER-positive 86 PR-positive 68 ER-negative/PR-negative 15 HER-2/neu status § Positive 38 * includes DCIS with microinvasion § 3+ IHC or amplified by FISH Table 2 Patient and tumor characteristics based upon the presence or absence of a SN dye gradient. Numbers are per node unless otherwise specified. Per-patient percentages are based upon 97 of 102 pts in whom SNs were identified. Dye Gradient: Present: n (%) Absent: n (%) p Patients 95 (97.9) 2 (2.1) Patient Age (Mean) 59.6 57.5 0.81 Mean primary tumor size (cm) 2.2 2.5 0.69 Mean/Median SNs per patient 1.6/1 0.1/0 Total n SNs 159 (94.1) 10 (5.9) Mean SN size (cm) 1.2 1.3 0.61 SNs containing metastatic disease 41 (25.8) 2 (20.0) 1.0 Histology * IDC ILC IDLC 145 (91.2) 10 (6.3) 4 (2.5) 10 (100.0) 0 0 1.0 Diagnosis Method FNA Core Excision 2 (1.3) 131 (82.4) 26 (16.4) 0 9 (90.0) 1 (10.0) 1.0 Primary quadrant § UOQ UIQ LIQ LOQ Central Multicentric 81 (50.9) 29 (18.2) 14 (8.8) 19 (12.0) 14 (8.8) 2 (1.3) 3 (30.0) 0 3 (30.0) 4 (40.0) 0 0 0.024 Tumor grade I II III 17 (10.7) 69 (43.4) 73 (45.9) 2 (20.0) 4 (40.0) 4 (40.0) 0.59 Stage I II III IV 73 (45.9) 64 (40.3) 22 (13.8) 0 6 (60.0) 3 (30.0) 1 (10.0) 0 0.82 * IDC = Infiltrating ductal carcinoma (including DCIS with microinvasion), IDLC = Infiltrating ductal carcinoma with ductal and lobular features. § UOQ = upper outer quadrant, UIQ = upper inner quadrant, LIQ = lower inner quadrant, LOQ = lower outer quadrant, Central is defined as retroareolar. Table 3 SN gradient characteristics per patient. n (%) Patients with at least 1 SN containing a gradient 95 (97.9) * Patients with no SNs containing a gradient ?2 (2.1) * Patients with no SN identified ?5 (4.9) Mean number of SN with a gradient ?1.6 Mean number of SN without a gradient ?0.1 Number of SN with a gradient (range) ?0-6 Number of SN without a gradient (range) ?0-2 * Percentage among those with SNs identified Table 4 Variation in sentinel node metastasis size as a function of detection result and dye gradient. n Average Metastasis Size (cm) All SNs 43 0.58 False negative SNs 17 0.13 True positive SNs 26 0.87 SNs with Gradient Present 41 0.54 ???Unmarked SN half only 3 0.12 ???Marked SN half only 11 0.14 ???Both SN halves 27 0.75 No SN gradient present 2 1.30  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Schematic of SN bisection is shown. a) The SN is divided along its short axis into two halves. b) Each half is then bisected perpendicularly to that initial cut along its widest face in order to perform imprint cytology on each plane marked with an asterisk (*). Figure 2 A sentinel node in vivo demonstrates the bluest portion visible adjacent to the arrow. Figure 3 Presence or absence of a SN gradient by location of the primary tumor. Percentages represent proportions of nodes with and without gradients for primary tumors occurring in the quadrant. The trend ( p =0.024) suggests a greater percentage of gradients in the upper quadrants and central breast. Two multicentric tumors, not shown here, each had 1 SN, both of which had gradients. UOQ = Upper outer quadrants ( n =84), UIQ = Upper inner quadrants ( n =29), LOQ = Lower outer quadrants ( n =23), LIQ = Lower inner quadrants ( n =17), Central = Central primaries ( n =14). Table 1 Primary tumor characteristics of the 102 enrolled patients. n Histologic tumor type Infiltrating ductal carcinoma * 91 Infiltrating lobular carcinoma 9 Mixed infiltrating ductal/lobular 2 Grade I 12 II 47 III 43 Primary tumor size (cm) Range 0.03 - 10.0 Mean 2.2 Median 2.0 Receptor status ER-positive 86 PR-positive 68 ER-negative/PR-negative 15 HER-2/neu status § Positive 38 * includes DCIS with microinvasion § 3+ IHC or amplified by FISH Table 2 Patient and tumor characteristics based upon the presence or absence of a SN dye gradient. Numbers are per node unless otherwise specified. Per-patient percentages are based upon 97 of 102 pts in whom SNs were identified. Dye Gradient: Present: n (%) Absent: n (%) p Patients 95 (97.9) 2 (2.1) Patient Age (Mean) 59.6 57.5 0.81 Mean primary tumor size (cm) 2.2 2.5 0.69 Mean/Median SNs per patient 1.6/1 0.1/0 Total n SNs 159 (94.1) 10 (5.9) Mean SN size (cm) 1.2 1.3 0.61 SNs containing metastatic disease 41 (25.8) 2 (20.0) 1.0 Histology * IDC ILC IDLC 145 (91.2) 10 (6.3) 4 (2.5) 10 (100.0) 0 0 1.0 Diagnosis Method FNA Core Excision 2 (1.3) 131 (82.4) 26 (16.4) 0 9 (90.0) 1 (10.0) 1.0 Primary quadrant § UOQ UIQ LIQ LOQ Central Multicentric 81 (50.9) 29 (18.2) 14 (8.8) 19 (12.0) 14 (8.8) 2 (1.3) 3 (30.0) 0 3 (30.0) 4 (40.0) 0 0 0.024 Tumor grade I II III 17 (10.7) 69 (43.4) 73 (45.9) 2 (20.0) 4 (40.0) 4 (40.0) 0.59 Stage I II III IV 73 (45.9) 64 (40.3) 22 (13.8) 0 6 (60.0) 3 (30.0) 1 (10.0) 0 0.82 * IDC = Infiltrating ductal carcinoma (including DCIS with microinvasion), IDLC = Infiltrating ductal carcinoma with ductal and lobular features. § UOQ = upper outer quadrant, UIQ = upper inner quadrant, LIQ = lower inner quadrant, LOQ = lower outer quadrant, Central is defined as retroareolar. Table 3 SN gradient characteristics per patient. n (%) Patients with at least 1 SN containing a gradient 95 (97.9) * Patients with no SNs containing a gradient ?2 (2.1) * Patients with no SN identified ?5 (4.9) Mean number of SN with a gradient ?1.6 Mean number of SN without a gradient ?0.1 Number of SN with a gradient (range) ?0-6 Number of SN without a gradient (range) ?0-2 * Percentage among those with SNs identified Table 4 Variation in sentinel node metastasis size as a function of detection result and dye gradient. n Average Metastasis Size (cm) All SNs 43 0.58 False negative SNs 17 0.13 True positive SNs 26 0.87 SNs with Gradient Present 41 0.54 ???Unmarked SN half only 3 0.12 ???Marked SN half only 11 0.14 ???Both SN halves 27 0.75 No SN gradient present 2 1.30 