Cancer Registries and Monitoring the Impact of Prophylactic Human Papillomavirus Vaccines: The Potential Role The recent US Food and Drug Administration licensure of a prophylactic vaccine against oncogenic human papillomavirus (HPV) types 16 and 18, the first of its kind, poses unique challenges in postmarketing vaccine surveillance, especially in measuring vaccine effectiveness against biologic endpoints of HPV infection. Historically, the national system of population-based cancer registries in the US has provided high-quality data on cancer incidence and mortality for the most important biologic endpoints, namely, anogenital cancers and some oral cavity/oropharyngeal cancers. There also has been some data collection on cancer precursors; however, this activity has been inconsistent and of lower priority. Because effectiveness against HPV-associated cancers will not be measurable for several decades, strengthening and possibly expanding the capacity of registries to collect precancer data, which are earlier manifestations of infection, must be considered. Collecting type-specific data on HPV-associated precancers and cancers. While keeping in mind the current limitations of registry operations, they discuss resources that may be needed to implement and sustain these types of activities.  Conclusions The development and introduction of prophylactic HPV vaccines creates a public health mandate to monitor their ultimate impact in reducing the HPV-associated disease burden in our nation. The PAHO 10 report has acknowledged that implementing the full range of HPV surveillance strategies can be complex and costly. The report suggests that every country should examine its infrastructure and capability to determine the best course of action. In the United States, the existing public health infrastructure bodes well for the potentially large role that cancer registries may play in evaluating the effectiveness of prophylactic HPV vaccine activities. The HPV vaccine provides a new focus for cancer prevention activities. Clinical trials have demonstrated the tremendous potential of the vaccine for reducing cervical cancer in the United States and worldwide. NPCR and SEER will have major roles in monitoring the vaccine’s impact in the United States; the well developed nationwide cancer registry infrastructure already in place is positioned uniquely to adopt selected recommendations proposed by PAHO. 10 NPCR and SEER already collect, for example, information regarding the histology of invasive cervical cancers and other invasive HPV-associated cancers. Expanded roles for monitoring the impact of the HPV vaccine could include the collection of data regarding cervical cancer precursors and precursors of other HPV-associated cancers, the collection of data regarding HPV type, and linkages to vaccine registries. Major resource challenges exist, however, for expanding the current work of registries (eg, the reporting burden of precursors), and feasibility studies are needed to evaluate the resources and costs for registries to implement these new activities. The adoption of E-ABHACUS nationwide offers the opportunity to develop a new paradigm of an integrated partnership approach to cancer surveillance. Accordingly, this initiative should be given careful consideration as a logical avenue for augmenting our existing cancer registry resources for postmarketing HPV vaccine surveillance.  Figures and Tables FIGURE 1 Comparison of 4 classification systems for squamous cells; Bethesda 2001 (cytology), cervical intraepitheliali neoplasia (CIN) nomenclature (histology), dysplasia nomenclature (cytology and histology), and Papanicolaou classification (cytology; the categories are not shown to scale). ASC-US indicates atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance; NILM, negative for intraepithelial lesion and malignancy; SIL, squamous intraepithelial lesion; LSIL, low-grade SIL; HSIL, high-grade SIL; CA, invasive carcinoma; ASC-H, atypical squamous cells, cannot exclude HSIL; NOS, not otherwise specified; KA, koilocytotic atypia; Mild, mild dysplasia; Mod, moderate dysplasia; Sev, severe dysplasia; CIS, carcinoma in situ. Reproduced with permission from Oxford University Press and the Journal of the National Cancer Institute (Sherman ME, Lorincz AT, Scott DR, et al. Baseline cytology, human papillomavirus testing, and risk for cervical neoplasia: a 10-year cohort analysis. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003;95:46–52 19 ). TABLE 1 Results From an Ad Hoc Meeting Conducted by the Pan American Health Organization on Important Biologic Endpoints for Human Papillomavirus Vaccine Surveillance Endpoints for HPV Surveillance and Measurement Indicators Endpoint Measurement Indicator Genital HPV infections Changes in prevalence Genital warts (depends on vaccine product being used) Changes in prevalence Cervical cancer precursors, specifically CIN-3 based on histologic determination Changes in the overall prevalence Invasive cervical cancer based on histologic determination Changes in the incidence profiles Invasive cervical cancer mortality Changes in mortality profiles HPV type-specific changes in histologically defined CIN-3 lesions Changes in type-specific incidence in CIN-3 precursor lesions HPV indicates human papillomavirus; CIN-3, cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grade 3. * See Pan American Health Organization, 2006. 10 TABLE 2 Historical Rationale for Discontinuing Collection of Cervical Intraepithelial Neoplasia 3 and Cervical Carcinoma In Situ: Conclusions and Recommendations by the American Association for Cancer Research Uniform Data Standards Committee: Subcommittee on Noninvasive Cervix Lesions, 1993 * Conclusions 1. Data on preinvasive cervical neoplasia as currently collected by US registries are no longer comparable historically for monitoring trends over time and cannot be made to be comparable. The problem will get worse as the Bethesda System (TBS) is adopted more widely for histopathology. Collection of only the term carcinoma in situ (CIS) yields undercounts in recent data compared with the past. Collection of both of the terms CIS and cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 3 (CIN-3) yields over counts compared with the past. 2. In the future, it will not be possible in every case to distinguish moderate dysplasia, severe dysplasia, and CIS on pathology reports. 3. There is evidence that the relative use of the 3-tier, 4-tier, and TBS systems varies from place to place within the US. Thee comparability of current data across registries is limited by different rates of differences in terminology used on pathology reports. 4. Data as collected presently can be used to monitor differences in subpopulations within a geographic area as long as biases in diagnostic criteria and case ascertainment are not present. Preinvasive rates help to interpret differences in invasive rates, and in situ/invasive ratios in particular appear to have implications for prevention activities. 5. Adjacent grades of preinvasive lesions are more difficult to distinguish from one another and are less reproducible than the distinction between invasive and noninvasive lesions. 6. Treatment is becoming more conservative and more uniform for high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) and the other equivalent terms. Because colposcopic biopsy and loop electrosurgical excision procedures can be therapeutic as well as diagnostic, histologic diagnoses of preinvasive lesions represent cancer control interventions. Fewer ablative procedures will be done without tissue diagnosis, so this is not expected to be a significant source of missed cases. 7. Diagnosis and treatment, as also is true to some extent for other cancer sites, are moving out of the hospital setting. It will become more and more difficult and expensive to find cases and collect required demographic data, such as the patient’s race and place of residence. Out of area laboratories likely be a problem and will be an increasingly important source of missed cases. 8. The Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program, which sets the de facto reporting standard in this area, likely will drop collection of CIS and CIN-3 in all areas and instead, with special funds, will expand collection to include HSIL and its equivalent terms in selected areas. Recommendations 1. The only way to collect histologic data that would be comparable over time in the future is to collect all HSIL and all of its equivalents in the 3- and 4-tier systems. This would increase the number of preinvasive cervix uteri cases in a registry that currently collects CIS and CIN-3 by approximately 2- to 3-fold; however, the new data would not be comparable to data collected earlier. 2. For research on the natural history of this disease, special studies that include the entire spectrum of low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) and HSIL will be necessary. 3. Population-based registries need to assess locally the anticipated uses of the data (are time trends desirable? Are comparisons to data from other areas needed? Will cancer control programs use the data), present and future pathology practices in their areas (Will TBS be used for histopathology?), and available resources (can the registry afford to collect substantially more cases?) and decide whether to: a. Collect CIS, CIN-3, and severe dysplasia, which will not be possible if TBS is used for histopathology; or b. Collect all HSIL and its equivalent terms in the 3- and 4-tier systems, which will substantially added to the caseload; or c. Drop the collection of all data for all but invasive cervical cancers. 4. The subcommittee strongly recommends that population-based registries discontinue routine collection of data on preinvasive cervical neoplasia unless there is strong local need and interest and sufficient resources are available to collect all HSIL and its equivalent terms. * 2008 Updates: 1) TBS categories have changed from 2-tiered (low grade and high grade) to multiple tiers (atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance [ASC-US]; ASC-US, cannot rule out HSIL; atypical granular cells; LSIL; and HSIL); 2) CIN-3 plays a larger role among the in situ cancers for the 1 registry that has continued collection of this variable (Michigan); 3) TBS is recommended for cytology and the 3-tiered system (CIN-1, CIN-2, and CIN-3) usually is reserved for histology; 4) there still may be pathologists who use the 2-tiered system (low grade and high grade) for histology; and 5) there still may be pathologists who use the dysplasia categories (mild, moderate, severe) for histology. TABLE 3 Comparison of Reportable Human Papillomavirus-associated Cancers and Precancers: Commission on Cancer; National Program of Cancer Registries; and Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results * Reportable Diagnoses on or After Jan. 1, 2005 COC (Behavior Code of 2 or 3 in ICD-O 3) SEER (Behavior Code of 2 or 3 in ICD-O 3) NPCR (Behavior Code of 2 or 3 in ICD-O 3) Exceptions (not reportable) • Skin cancers (c44._) with histology 8000–8110 (after Jan. 1, 2003); prior to that date, AJCC stage groups 2–4 in this group were reportable • Skin cancers (c44._) with histologies 8000–8005, 8010–8046, 8050–8084, and 8090–8110 • Skin cancers (c44._) with histologies 8000–8005, 8010–8046, 8050–8084, and 8090–8110 • CIS of the cervix and CIN-3 (after Jan. 1, 1996) • CIS of the cervix and CIN-3 (after Jan. 1, 1996) • CIS of the cervix and CIN-3 (after Jan. 1, 1996) • PIN-3 (after Jan. 1 • PIN-3 (after Jan. 1, 2001) • PIN-3 (after Jan. 1, 2001) • VIN-3 (after Jan. 1, 96) • VAIN-3 (after Jan. 1, 1996) • AIN (after Jan. 1, 1996) COC indicates Commission on Cancer; SEER, Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results; NPCR, National Program of Cancer Registries; ICD-O 3, International Classification of Diseases for Oncology, 3rd edition; AJCC, American Joint Committee on Cancer; CIS, cervical carcinoma in situ; CIN-3, cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 3; PIN-3, penile intraepithelial neoplasia 3; VIN-3, vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia 3; VAIN-3, vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia 3; AIN, anal intraepithelial neoplasia. * See North American Association of Central Cancer Registries, 2006. 18 