Harvest Health: Translation of the Chronic Disease Self-Management Program for Older African Americans in a Senior Setting Purpose We describe the translation of K. R. Lorig and colleagues’ Chronic Disease Self-Management Program (CDSMP) for delivery in a senior center and evaluate pre–post benefits for African American participants. Design and Methods Modifications to the CDSMP included a name change; an additional introductory session; and course augmentations involving culturally relevant foods, stress reduction techniques, and communicating with racially/ethnically diverse physicians. We recruited participants from senior center members, area churches, and word of mouth. We conducted baseline and 4-month post-interviews. Results A total of 569 African American elders attended an introductory session, with 519 (91%) enrolling in the 6-session program. Of the 519, 444 (86%) completed ?4 sessions and 414 (79%) completed pre–post interviews. We found small but statistically significant improvements for exercise ( p = .001), use of cognitive management strategies ( p = .001), energy/fatigue ( p = .001), self-efficacy ( p = .001), health distress ( p = .001), and illness intrusiveness in different life domains (probabilities from .001–.021). We found no changes for health utilization. Outcomes did not differ by gender, number of sessions attended, number and type of chronic conditions, facilitator, leader, or recruitment site. Implications The CDSMP can be translated for delivery by trained senior center personnel to African American elders. Participant benefits compare favorably to original trial outcomes. The translated program is replicable and may help to address health disparities.  Discussion HH demonstrates the utility of the CDSMP with an underserved population, necessary modifications, and feasibility of having trained, certified senior center staff delivering the program. The high rate of initial interest ( n = 569), enrollment ( n = 519), and retention ( n = 444) within a brief period (24 months) reflects its salience for this group and the ability of a senior center to rapidly enroll the community it serves. HH had small but statistically significant benefits for participants in four clinically relevant areas ( Schulz et al., 2002 ): quality of life, through improved self-efficacy and decreased health distress; reduced symptomatology, represented by declines in illness intrusion; social significance, such as maintenance of health utilization patterns over 4 months; and social validity or acceptability and perceived benefit, demonstrated by attendance and retention rates. Personal testimonials such as the following attest to the profound effect of the program on health and overall well-being: My blood sugars and my blood pressure are now normal. I am now eating more fruits, vegetables and walking for exercise. I feel so much better. I am no longer tired, depressed and sluggish. The positive health habits are now a part of my life and I cannot imagine going back to my old habits. and I’ve been confined to this motorized wheelchair for two years. My action plan is to walk in the corridor at Center in the Park. Thanks to the motivation and support from my peers and the instructors after 4 weeks, I’m walking in the corridor, which is 140 steps. Pre–post changes of HH compared favorably to those in the Lorig and colleagues (1999) trials. Although we did not find health utilization changes, 4-month patterns were similar to baseline. We did not find leader, facilitator, or site effects, or large or statistically significant differences by gender, level of exposure to course content, or chronicity, suggesting that HH provided similar benefits to all participants with a range of chronic health conditions and symptoms. Noncompleters had poorer health than completers, suggesting that the program should be available to individuals when initially diagnosed with a chronic disease and that a different intervention may be necessary for a more distressed group. Important questions regarding clinical relevance remain, including how long benefits are sustained, whether improvements reflect objective health changes, and what the long-term impact is on health utilization. Also, word of mouth was an important recruitment source, making it unclear whether individuals were predisposed to view the program positively. Nevertheless, previous research has shown that lifestyle changes such as those reported here, if sustained, can positively impact health and reduce utilization ( Clark et al., 2000 ; Wagner et al., 2001 ). Future research is warranted to further evaluate health-related outcomes, whether booster sessions are needed for continued self-management, and whether the program reduces health disparities. Challenges and Lessons Learned Three factors are critical to successfully replicating HH in other community-based settings. The first involves staffing. It is important to involve facilitators who are knowledgeable about the target population, can build trust, and demonstrate an authentic commitment to helping people improve their health. This is pivotal to program success, as participant testimonies demonstrate: “I want to thank [the instructors] for their positive attitude and helpfulness. They gave us lots of useful information for now and into the future. This is a wonderful program and I hope it will continue.” Another participant said: Having an action plan and receiving support from my instructors helped me overcome my fears and anxiety. I am no longer afraid to be alone. I am exercising, eating healthy, and I’ve lost about 8 pounds. I’m now doing volunteer work at CIP and also at my church. My doctor is very pleased with my progress. A related point is that staff must value the importance of evidence-based programs and implementing them as intended. Observation and rating of staff to ensure program fidelity must be embedded in programmatic considerations; if not, drift can occur. A second consideration is marketing. Designing and disseminating culturally appropriate and relevant marketing materials is essential for successful recruitment and enrollment. When collecting evaluation data, it is critical to explain to staff and participants why specific questions are asked and how responses will be used for program improvements. A third consideration is an agency’s capacity to deliver HH, including bearing unfunded associated costs (e.g., providing limited space, administrative support, supplies, utilities, travel costs for training and licensing fees) and using resources for a free program instead of offering other potentially paid-for programming. The most critical challenge facing CIP and senior centers who adopt HH is sustaining the program. Noteworthy is that high expectations for program continuation among CIP members and former HH participants have required CIP to reallocate committed resources to exploring ways to offer the program. CIP has identified steps an agency can take to enhance opportunities for sustainability. One is to establish the acceptability of providing evidence-based programming in an agency by educating the organization’s board, administrators, and staff and incorporating such programs into the strategic planning process for health promotion offerings. Another approach is to identify ways to translate the benefits of HH participation to ongoing paid center activities. For example, HH participants are encouraged to join the senior center and participate in fee-paid offerings such as fitness programs, health promotion activities, and life-long learning classes that support chronic disease self-management. Another challenge is implementing a practical evaluation approach. In this project, resources were available for research partners to collect and analyze data. At a minimum, evaluation of HH by senior centers should include attendance, documentation of individual action plans, program satisfaction, self-rated health, and efficacy to provide indicators of acceptability, adherence to goal attainment, and programmatic gains. In conclusion, HH represents a successful translation of the CDSMP for an African American community and for delivery by senior center staff. Important lessons and challenges for replication at the community level were gleaned. HH embraces the essential elements for managing chronic illness, including utilizing community resources and partnerships to develop and support programming and encouraging and providing skills to persons to participate in self-management. The most critical challenge is developing a funding mechanism for sustaining this program within the network of aging services.  Discussion HH demonstrates the utility of the CDSMP with an underserved population, necessary modifications, and feasibility of having trained, certified senior center staff delivering the program. The high rate of initial interest ( n = 569), enrollment ( n = 519), and retention ( n = 444) within a brief period (24 months) reflects its salience for this group and the ability of a senior center to rapidly enroll the community it serves. HH had small but statistically significant benefits for participants in four clinically relevant areas ( Schulz et al., 2002 ): quality of life, through improved self-efficacy and decreased health distress; reduced symptomatology, represented by declines in illness intrusion; social significance, such as maintenance of health utilization patterns over 4 months; and social validity or acceptability and perceived benefit, demonstrated by attendance and retention rates. Personal testimonials such as the following attest to the profound effect of the program on health and overall well-being: My blood sugars and my blood pressure are now normal. I am now eating more fruits, vegetables and walking for exercise. I feel so much better. I am no longer tired, depressed and sluggish. The positive health habits are now a part of my life and I cannot imagine going back to my old habits. and I’ve been confined to this motorized wheelchair for two years. My action plan is to walk in the corridor at Center in the Park. Thanks to the motivation and support from my peers and the instructors after 4 weeks, I’m walking in the corridor, which is 140 steps. Pre–post changes of HH compared favorably to those in the Lorig and colleagues (1999) trials. Although we did not find health utilization changes, 4-month patterns were similar to baseline. We did not find leader, facilitator, or site effects, or large or statistically significant differences by gender, level of exposure to course content, or chronicity, suggesting that HH provided similar benefits to all participants with a range of chronic health conditions and symptoms. Noncompleters had poorer health than completers, suggesting that the program should be available to individuals when initially diagnosed with a chronic disease and that a different intervention may be necessary for a more distressed group. Important questions regarding clinical relevance remain, including how long benefits are sustained, whether improvements reflect objective health changes, and what the long-term impact is on health utilization. Also, word of mouth was an important recruitment source, making it unclear whether individuals were predisposed to view the program positively. Nevertheless, previous research has shown that lifestyle changes such as those reported here, if sustained, can positively impact health and reduce utilization ( Clark et al., 2000 ; Wagner et al., 2001 ). Future research is warranted to further evaluate health-related outcomes, whether booster sessions are needed for continued self-management, and whether the program reduces health disparities. Challenges and Lessons Learned Three factors are critical to successfully replicating HH in other community-based settings. The first involves staffing. It is important to involve facilitators who are knowledgeable about the target population, can build trust, and demonstrate an authentic commitment to helping people improve their health. This is pivotal to program success, as participant testimonies demonstrate: “I want to thank [the instructors] for their positive attitude and helpfulness. They gave us lots of useful information for now and into the future. This is a wonderful program and I hope it will continue.” Another participant said: Having an action plan and receiving support from my instructors helped me overcome my fears and anxiety. I am no longer afraid to be alone. I am exercising, eating healthy, and I’ve lost about 8 pounds. I’m now doing volunteer work at CIP and also at my church. My doctor is very pleased with my progress. A related point is that staff must value the importance of evidence-based programs and implementing them as intended. Observation and rating of staff to ensure program fidelity must be embedded in programmatic considerations; if not, drift can occur. A second consideration is marketing. Designing and disseminating culturally appropriate and relevant marketing materials is essential for successful recruitment and enrollment. When collecting evaluation data, it is critical to explain to staff and participants why specific questions are asked and how responses will be used for program improvements. A third consideration is an agency’s capacity to deliver HH, including bearing unfunded associated costs (e.g., providing limited space, administrative support, supplies, utilities, travel costs for training and licensing fees) and using resources for a free program instead of offering other potentially paid-for programming. The most critical challenge facing CIP and senior centers who adopt HH is sustaining the program. Noteworthy is that high expectations for program continuation among CIP members and former HH participants have required CIP to reallocate committed resources to exploring ways to offer the program. CIP has identified steps an agency can take to enhance opportunities for sustainability. One is to establish the acceptability of providing evidence-based programming in an agency by educating the organization’s board, administrators, and staff and incorporating such programs into the strategic planning process for health promotion offerings. Another approach is to identify ways to translate the benefits of HH participation to ongoing paid center activities. For example, HH participants are encouraged to join the senior center and participate in fee-paid offerings such as fitness programs, health promotion activities, and life-long learning classes that support chronic disease self-management. Another challenge is implementing a practical evaluation approach. In this project, resources were available for research partners to collect and analyze data. At a minimum, evaluation of HH by senior centers should include attendance, documentation of individual action plans, program satisfaction, self-rated health, and efficacy to provide indicators of acceptability, adherence to goal attainment, and programmatic gains. In conclusion, HH represents a successful translation of the CDSMP for an African American community and for delivery by senior center staff. Important lessons and challenges for replication at the community level were gleaned. HH embraces the essential elements for managing chronic illness, including utilizing community resources and partnerships to develop and support programming and encouraging and providing skills to persons to participate in self-management. The most critical challenge is developing a funding mechanism for sustaining this program within the network of aging services.  Challenges and Lessons Learned Three factors are critical to successfully replicating HH in other community-based settings. The first involves staffing. It is important to involve facilitators who are knowledgeable about the target population, can build trust, and demonstrate an authentic commitment to helping people improve their health. This is pivotal to program success, as participant testimonies demonstrate: “I want to thank [the instructors] for their positive attitude and helpfulness. They gave us lots of useful information for now and into the future. This is a wonderful program and I hope it will continue.” Another participant said: Having an action plan and receiving support from my instructors helped me overcome my fears and anxiety. I am no longer afraid to be alone. I am exercising, eating healthy, and I’ve lost about 8 pounds. I’m now doing volunteer work at CIP and also at my church. My doctor is very pleased with my progress. A related point is that staff must value the importance of evidence-based programs and implementing them as intended. Observation and rating of staff to ensure program fidelity must be embedded in programmatic considerations; if not, drift can occur. A second consideration is marketing. Designing and disseminating culturally appropriate and relevant marketing materials is essential for successful recruitment and enrollment. When collecting evaluation data, it is critical to explain to staff and participants why specific questions are asked and how responses will be used for program improvements. A third consideration is an agency’s capacity to deliver HH, including bearing unfunded associated costs (e.g., providing limited space, administrative support, supplies, utilities, travel costs for training and licensing fees) and using resources for a free program instead of offering other potentially paid-for programming. The most critical challenge facing CIP and senior centers who adopt HH is sustaining the program. Noteworthy is that high expectations for program continuation among CIP members and former HH participants have required CIP to reallocate committed resources to exploring ways to offer the program. CIP has identified steps an agency can take to enhance opportunities for sustainability. One is to establish the acceptability of providing evidence-based programming in an agency by educating the organization’s board, administrators, and staff and incorporating such programs into the strategic planning process for health promotion offerings. Another approach is to identify ways to translate the benefits of HH participation to ongoing paid center activities. For example, HH participants are encouraged to join the senior center and participate in fee-paid offerings such as fitness programs, health promotion activities, and life-long learning classes that support chronic disease self-management. Another challenge is implementing a practical evaluation approach. In this project, resources were available for research partners to collect and analyze data. At a minimum, evaluation of HH by senior centers should include attendance, documentation of individual action plans, program satisfaction, self-rated health, and efficacy to provide indicators of acceptability, adherence to goal attainment, and programmatic gains. In conclusion, HH represents a successful translation of the CDSMP for an African American community and for delivery by senior center staff. Important lessons and challenges for replication at the community level were gleaned. HH embraces the essential elements for managing chronic illness, including utilizing community resources and partnerships to develop and support programming and encouraging and providing skills to persons to participate in self-management. The most critical challenge is developing a funding mechanism for sustaining this program within the network of aging services.  Challenges and Lessons Learned Three factors are critical to successfully replicating HH in other community-based settings. The first involves staffing. It is important to involve facilitators who are knowledgeable about the target population, can build trust, and demonstrate an authentic commitment to helping people improve their health. This is pivotal to program success, as participant testimonies demonstrate: “I want to thank [the instructors] for their positive attitude and helpfulness. They gave us lots of useful information for now and into the future. This is a wonderful program and I hope it will continue.” Another participant said: Having an action plan and receiving support from my instructors helped me overcome my fears and anxiety. I am no longer afraid to be alone. I am exercising, eating healthy, and I’ve lost about 8 pounds. I’m now doing volunteer work at CIP and also at my church. My doctor is very pleased with my progress. A related point is that staff must value the importance of evidence-based programs and implementing them as intended. Observation and rating of staff to ensure program fidelity must be embedded in programmatic considerations; if not, drift can occur. A second consideration is marketing. Designing and disseminating culturally appropriate and relevant marketing materials is essential for successful recruitment and enrollment. When collecting evaluation data, it is critical to explain to staff and participants why specific questions are asked and how responses will be used for program improvements. A third consideration is an agency’s capacity to deliver HH, including bearing unfunded associated costs (e.g., providing limited space, administrative support, supplies, utilities, travel costs for training and licensing fees) and using resources for a free program instead of offering other potentially paid-for programming. The most critical challenge facing CIP and senior centers who adopt HH is sustaining the program. Noteworthy is that high expectations for program continuation among CIP members and former HH participants have required CIP to reallocate committed resources to exploring ways to offer the program. CIP has identified steps an agency can take to enhance opportunities for sustainability. One is to establish the acceptability of providing evidence-based programming in an agency by educating the organization’s board, administrators, and staff and incorporating such programs into the strategic planning process for health promotion offerings. Another approach is to identify ways to translate the benefits of HH participation to ongoing paid center activities. For example, HH participants are encouraged to join the senior center and participate in fee-paid offerings such as fitness programs, health promotion activities, and life-long learning classes that support chronic disease self-management. Another challenge is implementing a practical evaluation approach. In this project, resources were available for research partners to collect and analyze data. At a minimum, evaluation of HH by senior centers should include attendance, documentation of individual action plans, program satisfaction, self-rated health, and efficacy to provide indicators of acceptability, adherence to goal attainment, and programmatic gains. In conclusion, HH represents a successful translation of the CDSMP for an African American community and for delivery by senior center staff. Important lessons and challenges for replication at the community level were gleaned. HH embraces the essential elements for managing chronic illness, including utilizing community resources and partnerships to develop and support programming and encouraging and providing skills to persons to participate in self-management. The most critical challenge is developing a funding mechanism for sustaining this program within the network of aging services. 