Histone Deacetylase Inhibitor Romidepsin Has Differential Activity in Core Binding Factor Acute Myeloid Leukemia Purpose Recruitment of histone deacetylases (HDAC) is a mechanism of transcriptional repression implicated in the differentiation block in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). We hypothesized that the HDAC inhibitor romidepsin could cause transcriptional derepression, up-regulation of specific target genes in AML, and differentiation of the leukemic clone. The primary objectives of the study were to evaluate the safety and efficacy of romidepsin in advanced AML. Experimental Design Twenty patients were stratified into cohort A or B based on the absence or presence of chromosomal abnormalities known to recruit HDACs, including those involving core binding factor (CBF). Romidepsin was administered i.v. at 13 mg/m2/d on days 1,8, and 15 of a 28-day cycle. Pharmacodynamic endpoints were evaluated at serial time points. Results Common adverse effects noted were grade 1 to 2 nausea, anorexia, and fatigue. No objective evidence of antileukemic activity was seen in cohort A. In cohort B, although there were no clinical responses by standard criteria, antileukemic activity was observed in 5 of 7 patients. Two patients had clearance of bone marrow blasts and 3 patients had a >50% decrease in bone marrow blasts. Furthermore, in cohort B, at 24 h, there was a significant increase in MDR1 ( P = 0.005), p15 ( P = 0.01), and p14 ( P < 0.0001) expression. In cohort A, although there was a trend toward up-regulation of MDR1 , p15 , and p14 expression, these changes were not statistically significant. Conclusion Romidepsin has differential antileukemic and molecular activity in CBF AML. Development of this agent in CBF AML should focus on combinations that target related mechanisms of gene silencing such as DNA methylation.  Results Patient characteristics Twenty patients were enrolled between June 2002 and October 2006, including 13 patients on cohort A and 7 patients on cohort B. Pretreatment patient characteristics for the study as a whole are summarized in Table 1 . Baseline characteristics for patients enrolled on cohort B are summarized in Table 2 . Despite the fact that these cytogenetic subgroups of AML have been shown traditionally to have a good prognosis, all patients enrolled in cohort B had multiply relapsed and/or refractory disease. In addition, almost all patients within this cohort had additional chromosomal abnormalities or other features predictive of poor risk disease, in addition to translocations involving AML1 or CBF b. One patient (patient 7) with a novel t(4;21)(q31.3;q22) was stratified into cohort B, because interphase cytogenetics (fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis) with a TEL/AML1 probe showed involvement of AML1 on chromosome band 21q22. Treatment outcome Antileukemic activity Of the 13 patients enrolled in cohort A 6 received 1 cycle of therapy, 1 patient received 1.66 cycles (two of the three planned doses during cycle 2), and 2 patients received 2 cycles. Four patients received <1 cycle of therapy (two of the three planned doses of therapy). All 13 patients were evaluable for toxicity, and 12 patients were evaluable for response. One patient with therapy-related leukemia and a background history of breast cancer failed to complete 1 cycle of therapy due to recurrence of a malignant pleural effusion from her breast cancer and was considered inevaluable for response. Treatment was discontinued in three other patients before completion of cycle 1 because of disease progression. There was no objective evidence of antileukemic activity in cohort A. Of the 7 patients enrolled in group B, 1 patient received 3 cycles of therapy, 3 patients received 2 cycles of therapy, and 4 patients received 1 cycle of therapy. There were no objective responses by classic response criteria in part due to the failure of normal hematopoiesis. Antileukemic activity was observed with disappearance of bone marrow blasts after 1 and 2 cycles of therapy, respectively, in 2 patients, in the setting of a relatively cellular marrow (marrow cellularity of ?20%). An additional 3 patients had a >50% decrease in bone marrow blasts ( Table 2 ). None of these 5 patients had received hydroxyurea while being treated on this study. In addition, none of these 5 patients had any evidence of an intervening period of marrow aplasia, and in 3 of these patients, an increasing percentage of promyelocytes, myelocytes, and monocytes was observed in the marrow aspirates concurrent with the reduction in blast count. These findings suggest that the antileukemic effects of romidepsin in these patients were mediated through a differentiating, rather than a nonspecific cytotoxic, effect. The antileukemic response was short-lived, however, with all 5 patients developing disease progression within 30 days of achieving their best response to treatment with romidepsin. Toxicity The treatment was well tolerated. The most common treatment-related toxicities were mild (grade 1-2) nausea, anorexia, and fatigue occurring in 35%, 25%, and 20% of patients, respectively. Twenty-five percent of patients had grade 1 cardiac changes consisting mainly of asymptomatic nonspecific ST and T wave abnormalities ( Table 3 ). Grade 1 and 2 liver function abnormalities occurred in 10% of patients. Pharmacodynamic studies Target gene expression Kasumi-1 cells (an AML1-ETO -expressing cell line) were used for assay validation. This cell line was treated with romidepsin for 4 h at concentrations ranging from 1 to 100 nmol/L. A dose-dependent up-regulation in the expression of the MDR1 gene, a known target of AML1 -ETO mediated transcriptional repression, was observed. Similarly, up-regulation of pl4ARF , which is also a target of AMLl-ETO -mediated repression, was shown. To determine whether the use of romidepsin in AML in vivo results in up-regulation of specific target genes at the doses evaluated in this study, quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR analysis for MDR1 , pl4ARF , and pl5 in patient-derived samples was done in 11 patients in cohort A and 6 patients in cohort B. These revealed a trend toward up-regulation of MDR1 , pl5 , and p14ARF expression by hour 24 in cohort A (42%, 12%, and 36% mean increase in expression, respectively); however, these changes were not statistically significant ( Fig. 1A-C ). In contrast, in cohort B, at 24 h, there was a 75% mean increase in MDR1 expression ( P = 0.005), a 162% mean increase in pl5 ( P = 0.01), and a 106% mean increase in pl4ARF ( P < 0.0001; Fig. 1A-C ). The kinetics of the changes in gene expression were similar on both days 1 and 8 of therapy in both cohorts of patients. Global histone protein acetylation This assay was optimized using Kasumi-1 cells treated with romidepsin at a dose of 10 nmol/L for 48 h. An increase in histone H3 acetylation was observed following romidepsin treatment ( Fig. 2A ). Similarly, an increase in histone H3 acetylation was seen in 6 of 7 (86%) patients in cohort B, including all 5 patients with evidence of antileukemic activity ( Fig. 2B and C ). Four of 13 (31%) patients in cohort A also showed an increase in H3 acetylation. These results confirm that romidepsin induces genome-wide histone acetylation in AML, as reported previously, and suggest that this effect may be more pronounced in patients with translocations involving AML1 . Promoter-specific histone acetylation In 4 patients with sufficient material preserved, chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis was carried out for promoter-specific changes in histone H3 and H4 acetylation. An induction in H3 acetylation was observed at both pl5 and MDR1 promoters ( Fig. 3A and B ), in keeping with the gene expression data that showed an up-regulation of pl5 and MDR1 expression in the same 4 patients.  Results Patient characteristics Twenty patients were enrolled between June 2002 and October 2006, including 13 patients on cohort A and 7 patients on cohort B. Pretreatment patient characteristics for the study as a whole are summarized in Table 1 . Baseline characteristics for patients enrolled on cohort B are summarized in Table 2 . Despite the fact that these cytogenetic subgroups of AML have been shown traditionally to have a good prognosis, all patients enrolled in cohort B had multiply relapsed and/or refractory disease. In addition, almost all patients within this cohort had additional chromosomal abnormalities or other features predictive of poor risk disease, in addition to translocations involving AML1 or CBF b. One patient (patient 7) with a novel t(4;21)(q31.3;q22) was stratified into cohort B, because interphase cytogenetics (fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis) with a TEL/AML1 probe showed involvement of AML1 on chromosome band 21q22. Treatment outcome Antileukemic activity Of the 13 patients enrolled in cohort A 6 received 1 cycle of therapy, 1 patient received 1.66 cycles (two of the three planned doses during cycle 2), and 2 patients received 2 cycles. Four patients received <1 cycle of therapy (two of the three planned doses of therapy). All 13 patients were evaluable for toxicity, and 12 patients were evaluable for response. One patient with therapy-related leukemia and a background history of breast cancer failed to complete 1 cycle of therapy due to recurrence of a malignant pleural effusion from her breast cancer and was considered inevaluable for response. Treatment was discontinued in three other patients before completion of cycle 1 because of disease progression. There was no objective evidence of antileukemic activity in cohort A. Of the 7 patients enrolled in group B, 1 patient received 3 cycles of therapy, 3 patients received 2 cycles of therapy, and 4 patients received 1 cycle of therapy. There were no objective responses by classic response criteria in part due to the failure of normal hematopoiesis. Antileukemic activity was observed with disappearance of bone marrow blasts after 1 and 2 cycles of therapy, respectively, in 2 patients, in the setting of a relatively cellular marrow (marrow cellularity of ?20%). An additional 3 patients had a >50% decrease in bone marrow blasts ( Table 2 ). None of these 5 patients had received hydroxyurea while being treated on this study. In addition, none of these 5 patients had any evidence of an intervening period of marrow aplasia, and in 3 of these patients, an increasing percentage of promyelocytes, myelocytes, and monocytes was observed in the marrow aspirates concurrent with the reduction in blast count. These findings suggest that the antileukemic effects of romidepsin in these patients were mediated through a differentiating, rather than a nonspecific cytotoxic, effect. The antileukemic response was short-lived, however, with all 5 patients developing disease progression within 30 days of achieving their best response to treatment with romidepsin. Toxicity The treatment was well tolerated. The most common treatment-related toxicities were mild (grade 1-2) nausea, anorexia, and fatigue occurring in 35%, 25%, and 20% of patients, respectively. Twenty-five percent of patients had grade 1 cardiac changes consisting mainly of asymptomatic nonspecific ST and T wave abnormalities ( Table 3 ). Grade 1 and 2 liver function abnormalities occurred in 10% of patients. Pharmacodynamic studies Target gene expression Kasumi-1 cells (an AML1-ETO -expressing cell line) were used for assay validation. This cell line was treated with romidepsin for 4 h at concentrations ranging from 1 to 100 nmol/L. A dose-dependent up-regulation in the expression of the MDR1 gene, a known target of AML1 -ETO mediated transcriptional repression, was observed. Similarly, up-regulation of pl4ARF , which is also a target of AMLl-ETO -mediated repression, was shown. To determine whether the use of romidepsin in AML in vivo results in up-regulation of specific target genes at the doses evaluated in this study, quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR analysis for MDR1 , pl4ARF , and pl5 in patient-derived samples was done in 11 patients in cohort A and 6 patients in cohort B. These revealed a trend toward up-regulation of MDR1 , pl5 , and p14ARF expression by hour 24 in cohort A (42%, 12%, and 36% mean increase in expression, respectively); however, these changes were not statistically significant ( Fig. 1A-C ). In contrast, in cohort B, at 24 h, there was a 75% mean increase in MDR1 expression ( P = 0.005), a 162% mean increase in pl5 ( P = 0.01), and a 106% mean increase in pl4ARF ( P < 0.0001; Fig. 1A-C ). The kinetics of the changes in gene expression were similar on both days 1 and 8 of therapy in both cohorts of patients. Global histone protein acetylation This assay was optimized using Kasumi-1 cells treated with romidepsin at a dose of 10 nmol/L for 48 h. An increase in histone H3 acetylation was observed following romidepsin treatment ( Fig. 2A ). Similarly, an increase in histone H3 acetylation was seen in 6 of 7 (86%) patients in cohort B, including all 5 patients with evidence of antileukemic activity ( Fig. 2B and C ). Four of 13 (31%) patients in cohort A also showed an increase in H3 acetylation. These results confirm that romidepsin induces genome-wide histone acetylation in AML, as reported previously, and suggest that this effect may be more pronounced in patients with translocations involving AML1 . Promoter-specific histone acetylation In 4 patients with sufficient material preserved, chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis was carried out for promoter-specific changes in histone H3 and H4 acetylation. An induction in H3 acetylation was observed at both pl5 and MDR1 promoters ( Fig. 3A and B ), in keeping with the gene expression data that showed an up-regulation of pl5 and MDR1 expression in the same 4 patients.  Patient characteristics Twenty patients were enrolled between June 2002 and October 2006, including 13 patients on cohort A and 7 patients on cohort B. Pretreatment patient characteristics for the study as a whole are summarized in Table 1 . Baseline characteristics for patients enrolled on cohort B are summarized in Table 2 . Despite the fact that these cytogenetic subgroups of AML have been shown traditionally to have a good prognosis, all patients enrolled in cohort B had multiply relapsed and/or refractory disease. In addition, almost all patients within this cohort had additional chromosomal abnormalities or other features predictive of poor risk disease, in addition to translocations involving AML1 or CBF b. One patient (patient 7) with a novel t(4;21)(q31.3;q22) was stratified into cohort B, because interphase cytogenetics (fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis) with a TEL/AML1 probe showed involvement of AML1 on chromosome band 21q22.  Patient characteristics Twenty patients were enrolled between June 2002 and October 2006, including 13 patients on cohort A and 7 patients on cohort B. Pretreatment patient characteristics for the study as a whole are summarized in Table 1 . Baseline characteristics for patients enrolled on cohort B are summarized in Table 2 . Despite the fact that these cytogenetic subgroups of AML have been shown traditionally to have a good prognosis, all patients enrolled in cohort B had multiply relapsed and/or refractory disease. In addition, almost all patients within this cohort had additional chromosomal abnormalities or other features predictive of poor risk disease, in addition to translocations involving AML1 or CBF b. One patient (patient 7) with a novel t(4;21)(q31.3;q22) was stratified into cohort B, because interphase cytogenetics (fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis) with a TEL/AML1 probe showed involvement of AML1 on chromosome band 21q22.  Treatment outcome Antileukemic activity Of the 13 patients enrolled in cohort A 6 received 1 cycle of therapy, 1 patient received 1.66 cycles (two of the three planned doses during cycle 2), and 2 patients received 2 cycles. Four patients received <1 cycle of therapy (two of the three planned doses of therapy). All 13 patients were evaluable for toxicity, and 12 patients were evaluable for response. One patient with therapy-related leukemia and a background history of breast cancer failed to complete 1 cycle of therapy due to recurrence of a malignant pleural effusion from her breast cancer and was considered inevaluable for response. Treatment was discontinued in three other patients before completion of cycle 1 because of disease progression. There was no objective evidence of antileukemic activity in cohort A. Of the 7 patients enrolled in group B, 1 patient received 3 cycles of therapy, 3 patients received 2 cycles of therapy, and 4 patients received 1 cycle of therapy. There were no objective responses by classic response criteria in part due to the failure of normal hematopoiesis. Antileukemic activity was observed with disappearance of bone marrow blasts after 1 and 2 cycles of therapy, respectively, in 2 patients, in the setting of a relatively cellular marrow (marrow cellularity of ?20%). An additional 3 patients had a >50% decrease in bone marrow blasts ( Table 2 ). None of these 5 patients had received hydroxyurea while being treated on this study. In addition, none of these 5 patients had any evidence of an intervening period of marrow aplasia, and in 3 of these patients, an increasing percentage of promyelocytes, myelocytes, and monocytes was observed in the marrow aspirates concurrent with the reduction in blast count. These findings suggest that the antileukemic effects of romidepsin in these patients were mediated through a differentiating, rather than a nonspecific cytotoxic, effect. The antileukemic response was short-lived, however, with all 5 patients developing disease progression within 30 days of achieving their best response to treatment with romidepsin. Toxicity The treatment was well tolerated. The most common treatment-related toxicities were mild (grade 1-2) nausea, anorexia, and fatigue occurring in 35%, 25%, and 20% of patients, respectively. Twenty-five percent of patients had grade 1 cardiac changes consisting mainly of asymptomatic nonspecific ST and T wave abnormalities ( Table 3 ). Grade 1 and 2 liver function abnormalities occurred in 10% of patients.  Treatment outcome Antileukemic activity Of the 13 patients enrolled in cohort A 6 received 1 cycle of therapy, 1 patient received 1.66 cycles (two of the three planned doses during cycle 2), and 2 patients received 2 cycles. Four patients received <1 cycle of therapy (two of the three planned doses of therapy). All 13 patients were evaluable for toxicity, and 12 patients were evaluable for response. One patient with therapy-related leukemia and a background history of breast cancer failed to complete 1 cycle of therapy due to recurrence of a malignant pleural effusion from her breast cancer and was considered inevaluable for response. Treatment was discontinued in three other patients before completion of cycle 1 because of disease progression. There was no objective evidence of antileukemic activity in cohort A. Of the 7 patients enrolled in group B, 1 patient received 3 cycles of therapy, 3 patients received 2 cycles of therapy, and 4 patients received 1 cycle of therapy. There were no objective responses by classic response criteria in part due to the failure of normal hematopoiesis. Antileukemic activity was observed with disappearance of bone marrow blasts after 1 and 2 cycles of therapy, respectively, in 2 patients, in the setting of a relatively cellular marrow (marrow cellularity of ?20%). An additional 3 patients had a >50% decrease in bone marrow blasts ( Table 2 ). None of these 5 patients had received hydroxyurea while being treated on this study. In addition, none of these 5 patients had any evidence of an intervening period of marrow aplasia, and in 3 of these patients, an increasing percentage of promyelocytes, myelocytes, and monocytes was observed in the marrow aspirates concurrent with the reduction in blast count. These findings suggest that the antileukemic effects of romidepsin in these patients were mediated through a differentiating, rather than a nonspecific cytotoxic, effect. The antileukemic response was short-lived, however, with all 5 patients developing disease progression within 30 days of achieving their best response to treatment with romidepsin. Toxicity The treatment was well tolerated. The most common treatment-related toxicities were mild (grade 1-2) nausea, anorexia, and fatigue occurring in 35%, 25%, and 20% of patients, respectively. Twenty-five percent of patients had grade 1 cardiac changes consisting mainly of asymptomatic nonspecific ST and T wave abnormalities ( Table 3 ). Grade 1 and 2 liver function abnormalities occurred in 10% of patients.  Antileukemic activity Of the 13 patients enrolled in cohort A 6 received 1 cycle of therapy, 1 patient received 1.66 cycles (two of the three planned doses during cycle 2), and 2 patients received 2 cycles. Four patients received <1 cycle of therapy (two of the three planned doses of therapy). All 13 patients were evaluable for toxicity, and 12 patients were evaluable for response. One patient with therapy-related leukemia and a background history of breast cancer failed to complete 1 cycle of therapy due to recurrence of a malignant pleural effusion from her breast cancer and was considered inevaluable for response. Treatment was discontinued in three other patients before completion of cycle 1 because of disease progression. There was no objective evidence of antileukemic activity in cohort A. Of the 7 patients enrolled in group B, 1 patient received 3 cycles of therapy, 3 patients received 2 cycles of therapy, and 4 patients received 1 cycle of therapy. There were no objective responses by classic response criteria in part due to the failure of normal hematopoiesis. Antileukemic activity was observed with disappearance of bone marrow blasts after 1 and 2 cycles of therapy, respectively, in 2 patients, in the setting of a relatively cellular marrow (marrow cellularity of ?20%). An additional 3 patients had a >50% decrease in bone marrow blasts ( Table 2 ). None of these 5 patients had received hydroxyurea while being treated on this study. In addition, none of these 5 patients had any evidence of an intervening period of marrow aplasia, and in 3 of these patients, an increasing percentage of promyelocytes, myelocytes, and monocytes was observed in the marrow aspirates concurrent with the reduction in blast count. These findings suggest that the antileukemic effects of romidepsin in these patients were mediated through a differentiating, rather than a nonspecific cytotoxic, effect. The antileukemic response was short-lived, however, with all 5 patients developing disease progression within 30 days of achieving their best response to treatment with romidepsin.  Antileukemic activity Of the 13 patients enrolled in cohort A 6 received 1 cycle of therapy, 1 patient received 1.66 cycles (two of the three planned doses during cycle 2), and 2 patients received 2 cycles. Four patients received <1 cycle of therapy (two of the three planned doses of therapy). All 13 patients were evaluable for toxicity, and 12 patients were evaluable for response. One patient with therapy-related leukemia and a background history of breast cancer failed to complete 1 cycle of therapy due to recurrence of a malignant pleural effusion from her breast cancer and was considered inevaluable for response. Treatment was discontinued in three other patients before completion of cycle 1 because of disease progression. There was no objective evidence of antileukemic activity in cohort A. Of the 7 patients enrolled in group B, 1 patient received 3 cycles of therapy, 3 patients received 2 cycles of therapy, and 4 patients received 1 cycle of therapy. There were no objective responses by classic response criteria in part due to the failure of normal hematopoiesis. Antileukemic activity was observed with disappearance of bone marrow blasts after 1 and 2 cycles of therapy, respectively, in 2 patients, in the setting of a relatively cellular marrow (marrow cellularity of ?20%). An additional 3 patients had a >50% decrease in bone marrow blasts ( Table 2 ). None of these 5 patients had received hydroxyurea while being treated on this study. In addition, none of these 5 patients had any evidence of an intervening period of marrow aplasia, and in 3 of these patients, an increasing percentage of promyelocytes, myelocytes, and monocytes was observed in the marrow aspirates concurrent with the reduction in blast count. These findings suggest that the antileukemic effects of romidepsin in these patients were mediated through a differentiating, rather than a nonspecific cytotoxic, effect. The antileukemic response was short-lived, however, with all 5 patients developing disease progression within 30 days of achieving their best response to treatment with romidepsin.  Toxicity The treatment was well tolerated. The most common treatment-related toxicities were mild (grade 1-2) nausea, anorexia, and fatigue occurring in 35%, 25%, and 20% of patients, respectively. Twenty-five percent of patients had grade 1 cardiac changes consisting mainly of asymptomatic nonspecific ST and T wave abnormalities ( Table 3 ). Grade 1 and 2 liver function abnormalities occurred in 10% of patients.  Toxicity The treatment was well tolerated. The most common treatment-related toxicities were mild (grade 1-2) nausea, anorexia, and fatigue occurring in 35%, 25%, and 20% of patients, respectively. Twenty-five percent of patients had grade 1 cardiac changes consisting mainly of asymptomatic nonspecific ST and T wave abnormalities ( Table 3 ). Grade 1 and 2 liver function abnormalities occurred in 10% of patients.  Pharmacodynamic studies Target gene expression Kasumi-1 cells (an AML1-ETO -expressing cell line) were used for assay validation. This cell line was treated with romidepsin for 4 h at concentrations ranging from 1 to 100 nmol/L. A dose-dependent up-regulation in the expression of the MDR1 gene, a known target of AML1 -ETO mediated transcriptional repression, was observed. Similarly, up-regulation of pl4ARF , which is also a target of AMLl-ETO -mediated repression, was shown. To determine whether the use of romidepsin in AML in vivo results in up-regulation of specific target genes at the doses evaluated in this study, quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR analysis for MDR1 , pl4ARF , and pl5 in patient-derived samples was done in 11 patients in cohort A and 6 patients in cohort B. These revealed a trend toward up-regulation of MDR1 , pl5 , and p14ARF expression by hour 24 in cohort A (42%, 12%, and 36% mean increase in expression, respectively); however, these changes were not statistically significant ( Fig. 1A-C ). In contrast, in cohort B, at 24 h, there was a 75% mean increase in MDR1 expression ( P = 0.005), a 162% mean increase in pl5 ( P = 0.01), and a 106% mean increase in pl4ARF ( P < 0.0001; Fig. 1A-C ). The kinetics of the changes in gene expression were similar on both days 1 and 8 of therapy in both cohorts of patients. Global histone protein acetylation This assay was optimized using Kasumi-1 cells treated with romidepsin at a dose of 10 nmol/L for 48 h. An increase in histone H3 acetylation was observed following romidepsin treatment ( Fig. 2A ). Similarly, an increase in histone H3 acetylation was seen in 6 of 7 (86%) patients in cohort B, including all 5 patients with evidence of antileukemic activity ( Fig. 2B and C ). Four of 13 (31%) patients in cohort A also showed an increase in H3 acetylation. These results confirm that romidepsin induces genome-wide histone acetylation in AML, as reported previously, and suggest that this effect may be more pronounced in patients with translocations involving AML1 . Promoter-specific histone acetylation In 4 patients with sufficient material preserved, chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis was carried out for promoter-specific changes in histone H3 and H4 acetylation. An induction in H3 acetylation was observed at both pl5 and MDR1 promoters ( Fig. 3A and B ), in keeping with the gene expression data that showed an up-regulation of pl5 and MDR1 expression in the same 4 patients.  Pharmacodynamic studies Target gene expression Kasumi-1 cells (an AML1-ETO -expressing cell line) were used for assay validation. This cell line was treated with romidepsin for 4 h at concentrations ranging from 1 to 100 nmol/L. A dose-dependent up-regulation in the expression of the MDR1 gene, a known target of AML1 -ETO mediated transcriptional repression, was observed. Similarly, up-regulation of pl4ARF , which is also a target of AMLl-ETO -mediated repression, was shown. To determine whether the use of romidepsin in AML in vivo results in up-regulation of specific target genes at the doses evaluated in this study, quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR analysis for MDR1 , pl4ARF , and pl5 in patient-derived samples was done in 11 patients in cohort A and 6 patients in cohort B. These revealed a trend toward up-regulation of MDR1 , pl5 , and p14ARF expression by hour 24 in cohort A (42%, 12%, and 36% mean increase in expression, respectively); however, these changes were not statistically significant ( Fig. 1A-C ). In contrast, in cohort B, at 24 h, there was a 75% mean increase in MDR1 expression ( P = 0.005), a 162% mean increase in pl5 ( P = 0.01), and a 106% mean increase in pl4ARF ( P < 0.0001; Fig. 1A-C ). The kinetics of the changes in gene expression were similar on both days 1 and 8 of therapy in both cohorts of patients. Global histone protein acetylation This assay was optimized using Kasumi-1 cells treated with romidepsin at a dose of 10 nmol/L for 48 h. An increase in histone H3 acetylation was observed following romidepsin treatment ( Fig. 2A ). Similarly, an increase in histone H3 acetylation was seen in 6 of 7 (86%) patients in cohort B, including all 5 patients with evidence of antileukemic activity ( Fig. 2B and C ). Four of 13 (31%) patients in cohort A also showed an increase in H3 acetylation. These results confirm that romidepsin induces genome-wide histone acetylation in AML, as reported previously, and suggest that this effect may be more pronounced in patients with translocations involving AML1 . Promoter-specific histone acetylation In 4 patients with sufficient material preserved, chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis was carried out for promoter-specific changes in histone H3 and H4 acetylation. An induction in H3 acetylation was observed at both pl5 and MDR1 promoters ( Fig. 3A and B ), in keeping with the gene expression data that showed an up-regulation of pl5 and MDR1 expression in the same 4 patients.  Target gene expression Kasumi-1 cells (an AML1-ETO -expressing cell line) were used for assay validation. This cell line was treated with romidepsin for 4 h at concentrations ranging from 1 to 100 nmol/L. A dose-dependent up-regulation in the expression of the MDR1 gene, a known target of AML1 -ETO mediated transcriptional repression, was observed. Similarly, up-regulation of pl4ARF , which is also a target of AMLl-ETO -mediated repression, was shown. To determine whether the use of romidepsin in AML in vivo results in up-regulation of specific target genes at the doses evaluated in this study, quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR analysis for MDR1 , pl4ARF , and pl5 in patient-derived samples was done in 11 patients in cohort A and 6 patients in cohort B. These revealed a trend toward up-regulation of MDR1 , pl5 , and p14ARF expression by hour 24 in cohort A (42%, 12%, and 36% mean increase in expression, respectively); however, these changes were not statistically significant ( Fig. 1A-C ). In contrast, in cohort B, at 24 h, there was a 75% mean increase in MDR1 expression ( P = 0.005), a 162% mean increase in pl5 ( P = 0.01), and a 106% mean increase in pl4ARF ( P < 0.0001; Fig. 1A-C ). The kinetics of the changes in gene expression were similar on both days 1 and 8 of therapy in both cohorts of patients.  Target gene expression Kasumi-1 cells (an AML1-ETO -expressing cell line) were used for assay validation. This cell line was treated with romidepsin for 4 h at concentrations ranging from 1 to 100 nmol/L. A dose-dependent up-regulation in the expression of the MDR1 gene, a known target of AML1 -ETO mediated transcriptional repression, was observed. Similarly, up-regulation of pl4ARF , which is also a target of AMLl-ETO -mediated repression, was shown. To determine whether the use of romidepsin in AML in vivo results in up-regulation of specific target genes at the doses evaluated in this study, quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR analysis for MDR1 , pl4ARF , and pl5 in patient-derived samples was done in 11 patients in cohort A and 6 patients in cohort B. These revealed a trend toward up-regulation of MDR1 , pl5 , and p14ARF expression by hour 24 in cohort A (42%, 12%, and 36% mean increase in expression, respectively); however, these changes were not statistically significant ( Fig. 1A-C ). In contrast, in cohort B, at 24 h, there was a 75% mean increase in MDR1 expression ( P = 0.005), a 162% mean increase in pl5 ( P = 0.01), and a 106% mean increase in pl4ARF ( P < 0.0001; Fig. 1A-C ). The kinetics of the changes in gene expression were similar on both days 1 and 8 of therapy in both cohorts of patients.  Global histone protein acetylation This assay was optimized using Kasumi-1 cells treated with romidepsin at a dose of 10 nmol/L for 48 h. An increase in histone H3 acetylation was observed following romidepsin treatment ( Fig. 2A ). Similarly, an increase in histone H3 acetylation was seen in 6 of 7 (86%) patients in cohort B, including all 5 patients with evidence of antileukemic activity ( Fig. 2B and C ). Four of 13 (31%) patients in cohort A also showed an increase in H3 acetylation. These results confirm that romidepsin induces genome-wide histone acetylation in AML, as reported previously, and suggest that this effect may be more pronounced in patients with translocations involving AML1 .  Global histone protein acetylation This assay was optimized using Kasumi-1 cells treated with romidepsin at a dose of 10 nmol/L for 48 h. An increase in histone H3 acetylation was observed following romidepsin treatment ( Fig. 2A ). Similarly, an increase in histone H3 acetylation was seen in 6 of 7 (86%) patients in cohort B, including all 5 patients with evidence of antileukemic activity ( Fig. 2B and C ). Four of 13 (31%) patients in cohort A also showed an increase in H3 acetylation. These results confirm that romidepsin induces genome-wide histone acetylation in AML, as reported previously, and suggest that this effect may be more pronounced in patients with translocations involving AML1 .  Promoter-specific histone acetylation In 4 patients with sufficient material preserved, chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis was carried out for promoter-specific changes in histone H3 and H4 acetylation. An induction in H3 acetylation was observed at both pl5 and MDR1 promoters ( Fig. 3A and B ), in keeping with the gene expression data that showed an up-regulation of pl5 and MDR1 expression in the same 4 patients.  Promoter-specific histone acetylation In 4 patients with sufficient material preserved, chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis was carried out for promoter-specific changes in histone H3 and H4 acetylation. An induction in H3 acetylation was observed at both pl5 and MDR1 promoters ( Fig. 3A and B ), in keeping with the gene expression data that showed an up-regulation of pl5 and MDR1 expression in the same 4 patients.  Discussion This phase II study of romidepsin in relapsed and refractory AML shows that this HDACI has a differential antileukemic activity in patients with CBF AML [predominantly t(8;21)] and that this was associated with an up-regulation of AML1 target genes. These findings are in keeping with observations in vitro that have established that t(8;21) AML is sensitive to therapy with various HDACIs including romidepsin ( 7 , 16 – 19 , 27 ). Despite the in vitro evidence suggesting an inherent sensitivity of this cytogenetic subset of AML to this class of agents, this is the first study to actually show antileukemic activity in vivo in a cohort of patients with t(8;21) AML and other translocations involving the AML1 gene. Romidepsin has been investigated in a phase I trial ( 28 ) conducted at this dose and schedule in two groups of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia and AML, respectively. In that trial that involved 10 AML patients, there were no patients with CBF AML. There were no objective responses reported, nor was there evidence of significant antileukemic activity (such as clearance of bone marrow blasts). The phase I experience mirrors our experience in the 13 patients enrolled in cohort A of this study. The authors of the phase I trial also observed an increase in global H3 and H4 acetylation as well as acetylation at the p21 promoter in the patients studied. Another recendy published pilot trial of romidepsin in myeloid neoplasms included 9 patients with AML and 3 with MDS, none of whom had CBF AML. Of these, 1 patient with previously untreated AML and a del (7q) achieved a complete remission after one infusion of romidepsin administered at a higher dose (18 mg/m2) than used in our study. The response duration was brief, however, with recurrent cytopenias being documented 29 days after the achievement of CR ( 29 ). Other clinical trials investigating HDACIs in AML have recruited very few patients with CBF AML and have seldom enrolled patients with t(8;21) ( 30 – 36 ). In our own trial, an antileukemic effect was seen in the majority of CBF AML patients studied, and global histone H3 acetylation was observed following romidepsin therapy in several patients, particularly those with CBF AML. In addition, up-regulation of MDRl and pl4ARF (both targets of AML1-ETO mediated transcriptional repression; refs. 9 , 10 ) were observed, and these effects were most pronounced in the CBF AML subgroup as we had originally hypothesized. Interestingly, although p15 , a well-described target of epigenetic silencing in AML, was also up-regulated in several patients in both subgroups, the increase in expression after romidepsin treatment was most striking, as a whole, in patients with CBF AML. Although we observed an antileukemic effect of romidepsin in several patients with CBF AML, including a patient with a novel t(4;21) shown by fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis to involve AML1 , these effects were short in duration. The reason for this finding remains to be determined. One likely explanation is that the patients enrolled on this study had advanced disease and the majority had evidence of clonal evolution with additional chromosomal aberrations present besides those involving AML1 or CBF b, implicating other pathways. Because romidepsin up-regulates MDR1 in vitro and in vivo ( 37 , 38 ), a finding that has been described with several other HDACIs and observed in our study in both subgroups of patients, and romidepsin is a known substrate for MDR1, ( 39 ) another possibility is that the drug may mediate its own resistance in vivo . In vitro , acquired resistance to romidepsin has been shown from reversible MDR1 induction caused by histone hyperacetylation at the MDR1 promoter ( 37 ), and MDR1-mediated drug efflux has also been shown in cell lines following romidepsin exposure ( 40 ). Although we were able to show for the first time that romidepsin induced histone acetylation at the MDR1 promoter in vivo , insufficient material was available to assess the level and function of MDR1 and other MDR-related proteins. Future clinical trials investigating this agent should, therefore, evaluate the possibility of up-regulation of MDR1 and MDRl-mediated drug efflux as a potential mechanism of chemoresistance to romidepsin. If true, this may provide a potential rationale for therapeutic combinations with MDR inhibitors. In summary, our experience in this trial provides in vivo evidence to support a proof of principle for further clinical investigation of HDACIs in CBF AML and particularly t(8;21) AML. Although CBF AML has a better prognosis than other subtypes of AML, f 50% of patients relapse, with the prognosis of patients with the t(8;21) apparently worse than those with the inv( 16 ) ( 41 ). Recently, the AML1-ETO fusion protein has been shown to associate with DNA methyltransferase 1 ( 27 ) in addition to recruiting HDACs. Therefore, future studies in this area should consider combining HDACIs with agents such as DNA methyltransferase inhibitors that have been shown to be synergistic with HDACIs in vitro in a variety of malignancies including t(8;21) AML ( 17 , 27 , 42 , 43 ). Our pharmacodynamic studies raise the possibility of MDR1 up-regulation as a potential mechanism of chemoresistance to romidepsin in AML and underscore the need for additional investigation of this issue in preclinical studies and clinical trials investigating romidepsin and similar agents for the treatment of AML.  Discussion This phase II study of romidepsin in relapsed and refractory AML shows that this HDACI has a differential antileukemic activity in patients with CBF AML [predominantly t(8;21)] and that this was associated with an up-regulation of AML1 target genes. These findings are in keeping with observations in vitro that have established that t(8;21) AML is sensitive to therapy with various HDACIs including romidepsin ( 7 , 16 – 19 , 27 ). Despite the in vitro evidence suggesting an inherent sensitivity of this cytogenetic subset of AML to this class of agents, this is the first study to actually show antileukemic activity in vivo in a cohort of patients with t(8;21) AML and other translocations involving the AML1 gene. Romidepsin has been investigated in a phase I trial ( 28 ) conducted at this dose and schedule in two groups of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia and AML, respectively. In that trial that involved 10 AML patients, there were no patients with CBF AML. There were no objective responses reported, nor was there evidence of significant antileukemic activity (such as clearance of bone marrow blasts). The phase I experience mirrors our experience in the 13 patients enrolled in cohort A of this study. The authors of the phase I trial also observed an increase in global H3 and H4 acetylation as well as acetylation at the p21 promoter in the patients studied. Another recendy published pilot trial of romidepsin in myeloid neoplasms included 9 patients with AML and 3 with MDS, none of whom had CBF AML. Of these, 1 patient with previously untreated AML and a del (7q) achieved a complete remission after one infusion of romidepsin administered at a higher dose (18 mg/m2) than used in our study. The response duration was brief, however, with recurrent cytopenias being documented 29 days after the achievement of CR ( 29 ). Other clinical trials investigating HDACIs in AML have recruited very few patients with CBF AML and have seldom enrolled patients with t(8;21) ( 30 – 36 ). In our own trial, an antileukemic effect was seen in the majority of CBF AML patients studied, and global histone H3 acetylation was observed following romidepsin therapy in several patients, particularly those with CBF AML. In addition, up-regulation of MDRl and pl4ARF (both targets of AML1-ETO mediated transcriptional repression; refs. 9 , 10 ) were observed, and these effects were most pronounced in the CBF AML subgroup as we had originally hypothesized. Interestingly, although p15 , a well-described target of epigenetic silencing in AML, was also up-regulated in several patients in both subgroups, the increase in expression after romidepsin treatment was most striking, as a whole, in patients with CBF AML. Although we observed an antileukemic effect of romidepsin in several patients with CBF AML, including a patient with a novel t(4;21) shown by fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis to involve AML1 , these effects were short in duration. The reason for this finding remains to be determined. One likely explanation is that the patients enrolled on this study had advanced disease and the majority had evidence of clonal evolution with additional chromosomal aberrations present besides those involving AML1 or CBF b, implicating other pathways. Because romidepsin up-regulates MDR1 in vitro and in vivo ( 37 , 38 ), a finding that has been described with several other HDACIs and observed in our study in both subgroups of patients, and romidepsin is a known substrate for MDR1, ( 39 ) another possibility is that the drug may mediate its own resistance in vivo . In vitro , acquired resistance to romidepsin has been shown from reversible MDR1 induction caused by histone hyperacetylation at the MDR1 promoter ( 37 ), and MDR1-mediated drug efflux has also been shown in cell lines following romidepsin exposure ( 40 ). Although we were able to show for the first time that romidepsin induced histone acetylation at the MDR1 promoter in vivo , insufficient material was available to assess the level and function of MDR1 and other MDR-related proteins. Future clinical trials investigating this agent should, therefore, evaluate the possibility of up-regulation of MDR1 and MDRl-mediated drug efflux as a potential mechanism of chemoresistance to romidepsin. If true, this may provide a potential rationale for therapeutic combinations with MDR inhibitors. In summary, our experience in this trial provides in vivo evidence to support a proof of principle for further clinical investigation of HDACIs in CBF AML and particularly t(8;21) AML. Although CBF AML has a better prognosis than other subtypes of AML, f 50% of patients relapse, with the prognosis of patients with the t(8;21) apparently worse than those with the inv( 16 ) ( 41 ). Recently, the AML1-ETO fusion protein has been shown to associate with DNA methyltransferase 1 ( 27 ) in addition to recruiting HDACs. Therefore, future studies in this area should consider combining HDACIs with agents such as DNA methyltransferase inhibitors that have been shown to be synergistic with HDACIs in vitro in a variety of malignancies including t(8;21) AML ( 17 , 27 , 42 , 43 ). Our pharmacodynamic studies raise the possibility of MDR1 up-regulation as a potential mechanism of chemoresistance to romidepsin in AML and underscore the need for additional investigation of this issue in preclinical studies and clinical trials investigating romidepsin and similar agents for the treatment of AML. 