Farp2 and Stk25 are candidate genes for the HDL cholesterol locus on mouse chromosome 1 Objective To identify the gene responsible for the quantitative trait locus (QTL) Hdlq14 , a high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL) QTL previously identified in a C57BL/6J x 129S1/SvImJ cross. Methods and Results Hdlq14 was first confirmed as an independent QTL by detecting it in an intercross between NZB/B1NJ and NZW/LacJ, two strains that had identical genotypes at nearby QTL genes on chromosome 1. Using the bioinformatics tools of combined cross data and haplotype analysis, we narrowed this QTL from a 45 Mb, 225 -gene region to 2 genes, Farp2 and Stk25 . Sequencing and expression studies showed that Farp2 had an amino acid polymorphism in an important plekstrin domain and that Stk25 had a significant expression difference between the parental strains. These two genes are immediately adjacent to each other and share the same haplotype over 45 inbred strains. The haplotype was associated with a significant difference in HDL levels among these strains. Conclusion We confirmed Hdlq14 as a separate independent QTL for HDL and narrowed the region to two genes, Farp2 and Stk25 with considerable evidence for both. Additional studies are needed to choose between these two genes or to show that both are important in determining HDL levels.  Methods and Results Hdlq14 was first confirmed as an independent QTL by detecting it in an intercross between NZB/B1NJ and NZW/LacJ, two strains that had identical genotypes at nearby QTL genes on chromosome 1. Using the bioinformatics tools of combined cross data and haplotype analysis, we narrowed this QTL from a 45 Mb, 225 -gene region to 2 genes, Farp2 and Stk25 . Sequencing and expression studies showed that Farp2 had an amino acid polymorphism in an important plekstrin domain and that Stk25 had a significant expression difference between the parental strains. These two genes are immediately adjacent to each other and share the same haplotype over 45 inbred strains. The haplotype was associated with a significant difference in HDL levels among these strains.  Conclusion We confirmed Hdlq14 as a separate independent QTL for HDL and narrowed the region to two genes, Farp2 and Stk25 with considerable evidence for both. Additional studies are needed to choose between these two genes or to show that both are important in determining HDL levels.  Materials and Methods Animals and diet The (NZB x NZW)F1 were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME) and mated to produce 272 male and female F2 progeny. Mice were maintained in a temperature- and humidity-controlled environment with a 14h light/10h dark cycle and given unrestricted access to food and acidified water. Weanling mice were fed standard chow containing 6% fat (LabDiets, 5K52, St. Louis, MO) until 8 weeks old and then fed an atherogenic diet containing (w/w) 15% dairy fat, 1% cholesterol, and 0.5% cholic acid as described previously. 5 Experiments were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of The Jackson Laboratory. Data from three other crosses are used in this manuscript: the published 294 female mouse B6 x 129 intercross 3 and two unpublished crosses, the 277 female mouse B6 x C3H/HeJ intercross and the 146 male mouse (NZO/H1LtJ x NON/LtJ) x NON/LtJ backcross. These latter two crosses are described in detail in a manuscript in preparation (Su, DiPetrillo, Ishimori, Leiter, Churchill, Paigen, Stylianou), but the raw data from these crosses are archived in a public database and currently available if the reader is interested at http://phenome.jax.org/pub-cgi/phenome/mpdcgi?rtn=projects/qtlprojlist . The relevant LOD score plots for chromosome 1 from these crosses are included in this manuscript. Phenotyping and genotyping After consuming the atherogenic diet for 8 weeks, mice were fasted for 4 h in the morning, blood collected from the retro-orbital sinus into tubes with EDTA, centrifuged at 9000 rpm for 5 min, and plasma frozen at ?20°C until analyzed. Plasma samples were analyzed within a week of being collected for HDL concentrations, measured directly with a Synchron CX Delta System (Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA) using the assay called HDLD, which is an enzymatic reagent kit (no. 650207, Beckman Coulter). In this measurement, only the HDL lipoprotein particles were solubilized and the HDL cholesterol was released to react with cholesterol esterase and cholesterol oxidase. All crosses had HDL measured in exactly the same way. Each HDL assay included standards from the manufacturer, our own laboratory standards prepared from a large plasma pool, which was aliquoted and frozen. Once a month we also included biological standards by measuring 6 C57BL/6 mice. Our original HDL assay was carefully validated by ultracentrifugation 6 in both chow and atherogenic-diet fed mice and this assay was validated against our first assay. DNA was prepared from tail samples. Tail tips were digested with proteinase K, and DNA was extracted with phenol-chloroform and re-suspended in 10 mM Tris.HCl (PH:8.0). Polymorphic MIT microsatellite markers D1Mit1 , D1Mit373 , D1Mit212 , D1Mit177 , D1Mit132 , D1Mit336 , D1Mit218 , D1Mit103 , D1Mit14 , and D1Mit148 were genotyped using agarose gel electrophoresis (NuSieve 3:1, FMC BioProducts, Rockland, ME) and SNPs rs3717961, rs3708797, and rs3022854 were genotyped by the Allele-Typing Service at The Jackson Laboratory in conjunction with KBiosciences (Hoddesdon, UK). Statistical analysis HDL values were natural log-transformed to reduce the right skew in the HDL distribution, and more importantly, to produce a constant variance among the crosses. This prevents a cross with greater phenotypic variance from dominating the results when cross data are combined. QTL mapping was carried out as previously described 7 , 8 with a multiple imputation algorithm 9 used to account for missing marker genotypes. Sex was first included as an additive covariate to account for overall differences in HDL between the sexes. A second scan included sex as an interactive covariate to identify sex specific QTL. The difference in LOD score (?LOD) between these two scans constitutes a test for QTL-by-sex interaction, and a LOD of 2 or more represents a significance difference in QTL between sexes. 10 QTL were deemed significant if they either met or exceeded the 95% genome-wide adjusted threshold, which was assessed by permutation analysis 9 . Analyses were carried out using Pseudomarker 1.1 software ( http://www.jax.org/staff/churchill/labsite ). QTL confidence intervals were calculated according to the posterior probability density of QTL locations, as described previously. 9 We combined the raw Chr 1 data from the B6 x 129 3 and NZB x NZW crosses by recoding the B6 and NZB genotypes as L for low HDL alleles and the 129 and NZW genotypes as H for high HDL alleles. 11 An LOD score was computed at 2-cM intervals across the QTL interval for each cross separately and then for both crosses combined. The combined data were analyzed with “HDL phenotype” as standardized and “cross” as an additive covariate. Data other than the QTL were analyzed using Graphpad Prism (Windowsv4.00, GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA). Student’s t -test was used to compare the plasma HDL concentrations among the different groups. Haplotype analysis SNPs used in the haplotype analysis were obtained from the publicly available mouse SNP databases ( http://jax.org/phenome/snps ). The missing SNP data for some strains were imputed as previously described 12 . We identified the regions where the mouse genome displays a haplotype block structure, assigned individual strains to local dominant haplotypes, and inferred the genotypes of missing SNP alleles using a hidden Markov model. These imputed genotypes are publicly available at http://cgd.jax.org/imputedSNPdata/v1.1/ 12 . Gene sequencing To sequence candidate genes in the parental strains NZW, 129, NZB, and B6, we used the genomic sequence of B6, obtained from the UCSC mouse genome assembly ( http://genome.ucsc.edu/ ) to design primers that amplified each exon and at least 50 nucleotides of the adjacent introns ( Supplemental Table I ). Purified PCR products were subjected to thermocycle sequencing, and resulting fragments analyzed on capillary-based machines by the Jackson Laboratory DNA Sequence Laboratory. Sequences were analyzed by aligning to the genomic B6 sequence using Sequencher software (version 4.1.4, GeneCodes Technology, Ann Arbor, MI). These sequences have been submitted to dbSNP (rs13475988 and rs13467752). Gene expression examined by real-time PCR Liver RNA was extracted from 5 female atherogenic diet-fed mice of each strain of B6, 129, NZB, and NZW by using TRIzolR (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Gene expression was examined by quantitative real-time PCR as described previously 8 . Briefly, 2 ?g RNA was primed with random hexamers to synthesize cDNA, cDNA samples were mixed with SYBR green master mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) and gene-specific primers ( Supplemental Table II ) in a total volume of 25 ?l. Quantitative real-time PCR was performed on an ABI PRISM 7500 Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems). PCR reactions were carried out in triplicate. Gene expression was normalized to the expression of ? -actin, and fold differences between strains were calculated by the ??Ct method. 13  Animals and diet The (NZB x NZW)F1 were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME) and mated to produce 272 male and female F2 progeny. Mice were maintained in a temperature- and humidity-controlled environment with a 14h light/10h dark cycle and given unrestricted access to food and acidified water. Weanling mice were fed standard chow containing 6% fat (LabDiets, 5K52, St. Louis, MO) until 8 weeks old and then fed an atherogenic diet containing (w/w) 15% dairy fat, 1% cholesterol, and 0.5% cholic acid as described previously. 5 Experiments were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of The Jackson Laboratory. Data from three other crosses are used in this manuscript: the published 294 female mouse B6 x 129 intercross 3 and two unpublished crosses, the 277 female mouse B6 x C3H/HeJ intercross and the 146 male mouse (NZO/H1LtJ x NON/LtJ) x NON/LtJ backcross. These latter two crosses are described in detail in a manuscript in preparation (Su, DiPetrillo, Ishimori, Leiter, Churchill, Paigen, Stylianou), but the raw data from these crosses are archived in a public database and currently available if the reader is interested at http://phenome.jax.org/pub-cgi/phenome/mpdcgi?rtn=projects/qtlprojlist . The relevant LOD score plots for chromosome 1 from these crosses are included in this manuscript.  Phenotyping and genotyping After consuming the atherogenic diet for 8 weeks, mice were fasted for 4 h in the morning, blood collected from the retro-orbital sinus into tubes with EDTA, centrifuged at 9000 rpm for 5 min, and plasma frozen at ?20°C until analyzed. Plasma samples were analyzed within a week of being collected for HDL concentrations, measured directly with a Synchron CX Delta System (Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA) using the assay called HDLD, which is an enzymatic reagent kit (no. 650207, Beckman Coulter). In this measurement, only the HDL lipoprotein particles were solubilized and the HDL cholesterol was released to react with cholesterol esterase and cholesterol oxidase. All crosses had HDL measured in exactly the same way. Each HDL assay included standards from the manufacturer, our own laboratory standards prepared from a large plasma pool, which was aliquoted and frozen. Once a month we also included biological standards by measuring 6 C57BL/6 mice. Our original HDL assay was carefully validated by ultracentrifugation 6 in both chow and atherogenic-diet fed mice and this assay was validated against our first assay. DNA was prepared from tail samples. Tail tips were digested with proteinase K, and DNA was extracted with phenol-chloroform and re-suspended in 10 mM Tris.HCl (PH:8.0). Polymorphic MIT microsatellite markers D1Mit1 , D1Mit373 , D1Mit212 , D1Mit177 , D1Mit132 , D1Mit336 , D1Mit218 , D1Mit103 , D1Mit14 , and D1Mit148 were genotyped using agarose gel electrophoresis (NuSieve 3:1, FMC BioProducts, Rockland, ME) and SNPs rs3717961, rs3708797, and rs3022854 were genotyped by the Allele-Typing Service at The Jackson Laboratory in conjunction with KBiosciences (Hoddesdon, UK).  Statistical analysis HDL values were natural log-transformed to reduce the right skew in the HDL distribution, and more importantly, to produce a constant variance among the crosses. This prevents a cross with greater phenotypic variance from dominating the results when cross data are combined. QTL mapping was carried out as previously described 7 , 8 with a multiple imputation algorithm 9 used to account for missing marker genotypes. Sex was first included as an additive covariate to account for overall differences in HDL between the sexes. A second scan included sex as an interactive covariate to identify sex specific QTL. The difference in LOD score (?LOD) between these two scans constitutes a test for QTL-by-sex interaction, and a LOD of 2 or more represents a significance difference in QTL between sexes. 10 QTL were deemed significant if they either met or exceeded the 95% genome-wide adjusted threshold, which was assessed by permutation analysis 9 . Analyses were carried out using Pseudomarker 1.1 software ( http://www.jax.org/staff/churchill/labsite ). QTL confidence intervals were calculated according to the posterior probability density of QTL locations, as described previously. 9 We combined the raw Chr 1 data from the B6 x 129 3 and NZB x NZW crosses by recoding the B6 and NZB genotypes as L for low HDL alleles and the 129 and NZW genotypes as H for high HDL alleles. 11 An LOD score was computed at 2-cM intervals across the QTL interval for each cross separately and then for both crosses combined. The combined data were analyzed with “HDL phenotype” as standardized and “cross” as an additive covariate. Data other than the QTL were analyzed using Graphpad Prism (Windowsv4.00, GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA). Student’s t -test was used to compare the plasma HDL concentrations among the different groups.  Haplotype analysis SNPs used in the haplotype analysis were obtained from the publicly available mouse SNP databases ( http://jax.org/phenome/snps ). The missing SNP data for some strains were imputed as previously described 12 . We identified the regions where the mouse genome displays a haplotype block structure, assigned individual strains to local dominant haplotypes, and inferred the genotypes of missing SNP alleles using a hidden Markov model. These imputed genotypes are publicly available at http://cgd.jax.org/imputedSNPdata/v1.1/ 12 .  Gene sequencing To sequence candidate genes in the parental strains NZW, 129, NZB, and B6, we used the genomic sequence of B6, obtained from the UCSC mouse genome assembly ( http://genome.ucsc.edu/ ) to design primers that amplified each exon and at least 50 nucleotides of the adjacent introns ( Supplemental Table I ). Purified PCR products were subjected to thermocycle sequencing, and resulting fragments analyzed on capillary-based machines by the Jackson Laboratory DNA Sequence Laboratory. Sequences were analyzed by aligning to the genomic B6 sequence using Sequencher software (version 4.1.4, GeneCodes Technology, Ann Arbor, MI). These sequences have been submitted to dbSNP (rs13475988 and rs13467752).  Gene expression examined by real-time PCR Liver RNA was extracted from 5 female atherogenic diet-fed mice of each strain of B6, 129, NZB, and NZW by using TRIzolR (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Gene expression was examined by quantitative real-time PCR as described previously 8 . Briefly, 2 ?g RNA was primed with random hexamers to synthesize cDNA, cDNA samples were mixed with SYBR green master mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) and gene-specific primers ( Supplemental Table II ) in a total volume of 25 ?l. Quantitative real-time PCR was performed on an ABI PRISM 7500 Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems). PCR reactions were carried out in triplicate. Gene expression was normalized to the expression of ? -actin, and fold differences between strains were calculated by the ??Ct method. 13  Bioinformatic tools narrowed <italic>Hdlq14</italic> to 2 genes The confidence intervals for Hdlq14 were quite large: 80 Mb containing 487 genes for the B6 x 129 cross ( Fig. 2B , step a) and 45 Mb containing 225 genes for the NZB x NZW cross ( Fig. 2B , step b). To narrow Hdlq14 , we used a series of bioinformatic and statistical tools, 14 including analyzing combined cross data and haplotype analysis. Analyzing combined cross data narrowed Hdlq14 to a 27.3 Mb, 125-gene region The large confidence interval of a typical QTL results from the limited number of recombinations in a cross. By combining and analyzing data from multiple crosses, the number of recombinations is increased, and the QTL interval is reduced. 11 This depends on the assumption that the QTL in the two crosses are caused by the same gene. If they are not, then the confidence interval will not be decreased in the combined cross analysis and the QTL may actually divide into two peaks. To combine the raw data, we used log transformed values so that the crosses would contribute equally. The genotype information is recoded from a strain-specific code to a phenotype-specific code; B6 and NZB genotypes were recoded as L for the low HDL allele and 129 and NZW genotypes were recoded as H for the high HDL allele. Our analysis increased the Hdlq14 LOD score to 5.1 ( Fig. 2A , dashed line), narrowed the 95% confidence interval to 27.3 Mb (from Mb 89.8–117.1 Mb) ( Fig. 2B , step c), and reduced the number of genes in the region to 125. Haplotype analysis narrowed Hdlq14 to a region containing only 2 genes Haplotype analysis reduces the QTL regions by eliminating those regions that are identical by descent between the two strains as inferred by a shared SNP pattern. This is particularly effective for the related strains NZW and NZB because they shared 63.2% of their genomes 8 . However, haplotype analysis depends on the assumptions that the mutation causing the QTL is ancestral and that the SNPs are sufficiently dense so that the DNA regions identical by descent can be correctly inferred. These are fairly safe assumptions in this case. Not only are 97% of mutations ancestral, but this QTL was found in two different crosses, thus making it very likely that the mutation is indeed ancestral. Furthermore, 3 of the strains, B6, NZW and 129, are among the strains resequenced by Perlegen so that the density of SNPs is very high. We carried out the haplotype analysis in two steps using 4 crosses ( Fig. 2B , step d and e). Two of these crosses detected the QTL, B6 x 129 and NZW x NZB, and two crosses failed to detect the QTL, B6 x C3H and NZO x NON ( Fig. 3A ). In the first step we used the 2 crosses that detected the QTL to identify genomic regions shared between strains NZW and 129 but different from strains NZB and B6. We compared the haplotypes throughout the reduced Hdlq14 interval, defining a common haplotype block to be 3 or more consecutive shared alleles. We found those regions where the B6 SNPs were identical to the NZB SNPs (both strains have alleles for low HDL), where the NZW SNPs were identical to 129 SNPs (both stains have alleles for high HDL), and where the SNPs for the strains with high and low HDL alleles differed. This haplotype analysis further narrowed Hdlq14 to a 2.3 Mb, 19-gene region ( Fig. 2B , step d, Fig. 3B ). In the second step, we utilized the haplotypes of the parental strains in the two crosses that failed to detect a QTL, the NZO x NON and the B6 x C3H crosses ( Fig 3A ). Since the manuscript for these two crosses is still in preparation (Su, DiPetrillo, Ishimori, Leiter, Paigen, and Stylianou), the raw genotype and phenotype data has been archived in http://phenome.jax.org/pub-cgi/phenome/mpdcgi?rtn=projects/qtlprojlist . For these 2 crosses, we searched for a haplotype that is the same for all 4 strains because no QTL was detected. These crosses had identical haplotypes for the SNPs in the Farp2 and Stk25 genes but different haplotypes for the other 17 genes ( Fig. 3B ). Thus, these 2 crosses reduced the QTL region to just 2 genes and eliminated the other 17 genes ( Fig. 2B , step e).  Analyzing combined cross data narrowed Hdlq14 to a 27.3 Mb, 125-gene region The large confidence interval of a typical QTL results from the limited number of recombinations in a cross. By combining and analyzing data from multiple crosses, the number of recombinations is increased, and the QTL interval is reduced. 11 This depends on the assumption that the QTL in the two crosses are caused by the same gene. If they are not, then the confidence interval will not be decreased in the combined cross analysis and the QTL may actually divide into two peaks. To combine the raw data, we used log transformed values so that the crosses would contribute equally. The genotype information is recoded from a strain-specific code to a phenotype-specific code; B6 and NZB genotypes were recoded as L for the low HDL allele and 129 and NZW genotypes were recoded as H for the high HDL allele. Our analysis increased the Hdlq14 LOD score to 5.1 ( Fig. 2A , dashed line), narrowed the 95% confidence interval to 27.3 Mb (from Mb 89.8–117.1 Mb) ( Fig. 2B , step c), and reduced the number of genes in the region to 125.  Haplotype analysis narrowed Hdlq14 to a region containing only 2 genes Haplotype analysis reduces the QTL regions by eliminating those regions that are identical by descent between the two strains as inferred by a shared SNP pattern. This is particularly effective for the related strains NZW and NZB because they shared 63.2% of their genomes 8 . However, haplotype analysis depends on the assumptions that the mutation causing the QTL is ancestral and that the SNPs are sufficiently dense so that the DNA regions identical by descent can be correctly inferred. These are fairly safe assumptions in this case. Not only are 97% of mutations ancestral, but this QTL was found in two different crosses, thus making it very likely that the mutation is indeed ancestral. Furthermore, 3 of the strains, B6, NZW and 129, are among the strains resequenced by Perlegen so that the density of SNPs is very high. We carried out the haplotype analysis in two steps using 4 crosses ( Fig. 2B , step d and e). Two of these crosses detected the QTL, B6 x 129 and NZW x NZB, and two crosses failed to detect the QTL, B6 x C3H and NZO x NON ( Fig. 3A ). In the first step we used the 2 crosses that detected the QTL to identify genomic regions shared between strains NZW and 129 but different from strains NZB and B6. We compared the haplotypes throughout the reduced Hdlq14 interval, defining a common haplotype block to be 3 or more consecutive shared alleles. We found those regions where the B6 SNPs were identical to the NZB SNPs (both strains have alleles for low HDL), where the NZW SNPs were identical to 129 SNPs (both stains have alleles for high HDL), and where the SNPs for the strains with high and low HDL alleles differed. This haplotype analysis further narrowed Hdlq14 to a 2.3 Mb, 19-gene region ( Fig. 2B , step d, Fig. 3B ). In the second step, we utilized the haplotypes of the parental strains in the two crosses that failed to detect a QTL, the NZO x NON and the B6 x C3H crosses ( Fig 3A ). Since the manuscript for these two crosses is still in preparation (Su, DiPetrillo, Ishimori, Leiter, Paigen, and Stylianou), the raw genotype and phenotype data has been archived in http://phenome.jax.org/pub-cgi/phenome/mpdcgi?rtn=projects/qtlprojlist . For these 2 crosses, we searched for a haplotype that is the same for all 4 strains because no QTL was detected. These crosses had identical haplotypes for the SNPs in the Farp2 and Stk25 genes but different haplotypes for the other 17 genes ( Fig. 3B ). Thus, these 2 crosses reduced the QTL region to just 2 genes and eliminated the other 17 genes ( Fig. 2B , step e).  Expression studies and sequencing of <italic>Farp2</italic> and <italic>Stk25</italic> provide additional evidence for both genes Since the QTL gene must have either an expression difference between the parental strains or a coding region polymorphism that changes function, we sequenced both candidate genes in B6, 129, NZW and NZB. The SNPs were classified by whether or not they changed an amino acid (Cn for coding-nonsynonymous, Cs for coding region-synonymous). Sequencing Stk25 revealed only one synonymous change ( Table 1A ), but recent evidence 15 , 16 has shown that a synonymous change can affect a protein’s expression level and function if it changes a codon’s frequency. Using codon frequency tables ( http://www.kazusa.or.jp/codon ), we found the Cs in Stk25 had a major change in codon frequency (23% for ACA to 5% for ACG). Sequencing Farp2 revealed 1 Cn and 1 Cs ( Table 1A ). The Cn in Farp2 changed the amino acid from leucine to proline at amino acid 821, which could affect the folding and thus the function of its encoded protein, and this variant was in a highly conserved region of the protein known as a pleckstrin domain 17 ( Fig. 4A ). We sequenced Farp2 in 12 strains (129, A/J, B6, C3H, CAST/EiJ, DBA/2J, FVB/NJ, NOD/LtJ, NZB, NZW, RIIIS/J, SM/J, and SJL/J) and determined the amino acid changing SNP (rs13475988) in an additional 4 strains (PERA/EiJ, I/LnJ, NZO/H1J, and NON/LtJ). Combining our data with SNP data in the Mouse Phenome Database, we show the distribution of the key amino acid changing SNP across the 45 inbred strains ( Table 1B ). We also compared expression in the livers of atherogenic-diet fed mice for the parental strains and their F1 progeny for both genes using quantitative real-time PCR. Farp2 showed no difference in expression, but Stk25 expression was significantly higher in the low HDL allele strains, 4.6-fold higher in B6 compared to 129 and 4.8-fold higher in NZB compared to NZW ( Fig. 4B ). Stk25 expression in (B6x129) F1 or (NZBxNZW) F1 mice was comparable to the B6 or NZB mice, respectively ( Fig. 4B ). This is consistent with the recessive high HDL allele observed in each cross ( Fig. 1D ). These studies showed that Farp2 had an amino acid change that might affect function and that Stk25 had an expression difference. Thus, both genes remain viable candidates for the QTL.  The <italic>Farp2/Stk25</italic> haplotype was associated with altered HDL concentrations Farp2 and Stk25 are immediately adjacent to each other and partly overlapping, although transcribed in opposite directions ( http://www.ensembl.org/ ). There has been no recombination between these genes among the 45 inbred strains that we examined ( Supplementary figure II ). To determine whether the key amino acid changing polymorphism in Farp2 was associated with variation in HDL, we analyzed plasma HDL concentrations of the 45 inbred mouse strains ( www.jax.org/phenome ), avoiding the effect of Hdlq15 by dividing the strains into groups based on their polymorphisms at Apoa2 (the key amino acid change Ala61-to-Val61) 4 ( Supplementary figure II ). In Apoa2 Ala61 group (32 strains) ( Fig. 5 ), HDL levels of strains having the haplotype associated with the Farp2 821Leu allele (11 strains) were significantly higher than those of strains having the haplotype associated with the 821Pro allele (21 strains) in both female and male mice (65 ± 7 vs.52 ± 5 mg/dL and 83 ±8 vs. 62 ± 6 mg/dL, P < 0.01, respectively). Similar trends were found in strains having Apoa2 Val61 (13 strains) (104 ± 12 vs. 81 ± 9 mg/dL in females, P < 0.01, and 135 ± 13 vs.101 ± 8 mg/dL in males, P < 0.01) ( Fig. 5 ). Thus, the haplotype at Farp2/Stk25 affects HDL concentration in multiple strains.  Results An intercross between strains NZB and NZW confirms <italic>Hdlq14</italic> To confirm the existence of Hdlq14 , we performed a cross that eliminated the effects of Apoa2 . Using a dense SNP map from the Broad Institute http://www.broad.mit.edu/mouse/hapmap/ , we choose strains to intercross that had identical Apoa2 genes, but different haplotypes over the Hdlq14 region. One pair of readily available strains fit these criteria, NZB and NZW. NZW’s Hdlq14 haplotype was identical to strain 129 and NZB’s haplotype was identical to strain B6. Thus, a cross between NZB x NZW should confirm the Hdlq14 QTL found between B6 x 129. Plasma HDL concentrations were measured in both sexes for the parental, (NZB x NZW) F1 mice, and 264 F2 progeny after animals had been fed an atherogenic diet for 8 weeks. Compared with sex-matched NZW, NZB mice displayed significantly increased HDL concentrations ( P < 0.01) ( Fig. 1A ). F1 female mice displayed HDL concentrations intermediate between and significantly different ( P < 0.01) from those of the female parental strains, F1 male mice displayed HDL concentrations comparable to those of NZB males and significantly higher than those of NZW males ( P < 0.01) ( Fig. 1A ). The distribution of log-transformed HDL concentrations in F2 progeny was approximately normal ( Fig. 1B ). Using sex as additive or interactive covariate, we identified a locus influencing plasma HDL with a peak near D1Mit336 (58.7 cM, 98.44 Mb in NCBI Build 36) and a significant LOD score of 3.3 or 4.4 depending on sex as additive or interactive covariate ( Fig. 1C ). The difference in LOD score (?LOD) between the scans with sex as an additive or interactive covariate is 1.1, which is lower than the threshold (?LOD is 2 or more) for significant difference in QTL between the sexes, so the QTL did not differ between sexes. This QTL explained 5.5% of the total variance of HDL concentration. The 95% confidence interval was from 80–125 Mb, which overlapped with the 82–162 Mb Hdlq14 region identified in the 129 x B6 intercross. The NZW allele for high HDL levels was recessive ( Fig. 1D ). These data confirm the existence of Hdlq14 separate from the nearby QTL peaks caused by Hdlq15 . Bioinformatic tools narrowed <italic>Hdlq14</italic> to 2 genes The confidence intervals for Hdlq14 were quite large: 80 Mb containing 487 genes for the B6 x 129 cross ( Fig. 2B , step a) and 45 Mb containing 225 genes for the NZB x NZW cross ( Fig. 2B , step b). To narrow Hdlq14 , we used a series of bioinformatic and statistical tools, 14 including analyzing combined cross data and haplotype analysis. Analyzing combined cross data narrowed Hdlq14 to a 27.3 Mb, 125-gene region The large confidence interval of a typical QTL results from the limited number of recombinations in a cross. By combining and analyzing data from multiple crosses, the number of recombinations is increased, and the QTL interval is reduced. 11 This depends on the assumption that the QTL in the two crosses are caused by the same gene. If they are not, then the confidence interval will not be decreased in the combined cross analysis and the QTL may actually divide into two peaks. To combine the raw data, we used log transformed values so that the crosses would contribute equally. The genotype information is recoded from a strain-specific code to a phenotype-specific code; B6 and NZB genotypes were recoded as L for the low HDL allele and 129 and NZW genotypes were recoded as H for the high HDL allele. Our analysis increased the Hdlq14 LOD score to 5.1 ( Fig. 2A , dashed line), narrowed the 95% confidence interval to 27.3 Mb (from Mb 89.8–117.1 Mb) ( Fig. 2B , step c), and reduced the number of genes in the region to 125. Haplotype analysis narrowed Hdlq14 to a region containing only 2 genes Haplotype analysis reduces the QTL regions by eliminating those regions that are identical by descent between the two strains as inferred by a shared SNP pattern. This is particularly effective for the related strains NZW and NZB because they shared 63.2% of their genomes 8 . However, haplotype analysis depends on the assumptions that the mutation causing the QTL is ancestral and that the SNPs are sufficiently dense so that the DNA regions identical by descent can be correctly inferred. These are fairly safe assumptions in this case. Not only are 97% of mutations ancestral, but this QTL was found in two different crosses, thus making it very likely that the mutation is indeed ancestral. Furthermore, 3 of the strains, B6, NZW and 129, are among the strains resequenced by Perlegen so that the density of SNPs is very high. We carried out the haplotype analysis in two steps using 4 crosses ( Fig. 2B , step d and e). Two of these crosses detected the QTL, B6 x 129 and NZW x NZB, and two crosses failed to detect the QTL, B6 x C3H and NZO x NON ( Fig. 3A ). In the first step we used the 2 crosses that detected the QTL to identify genomic regions shared between strains NZW and 129 but different from strains NZB and B6. We compared the haplotypes throughout the reduced Hdlq14 interval, defining a common haplotype block to be 3 or more consecutive shared alleles. We found those regions where the B6 SNPs were identical to the NZB SNPs (both strains have alleles for low HDL), where the NZW SNPs were identical to 129 SNPs (both stains have alleles for high HDL), and where the SNPs for the strains with high and low HDL alleles differed. This haplotype analysis further narrowed Hdlq14 to a 2.3 Mb, 19-gene region ( Fig. 2B , step d, Fig. 3B ). In the second step, we utilized the haplotypes of the parental strains in the two crosses that failed to detect a QTL, the NZO x NON and the B6 x C3H crosses ( Fig 3A ). Since the manuscript for these two crosses is still in preparation (Su, DiPetrillo, Ishimori, Leiter, Paigen, and Stylianou), the raw genotype and phenotype data has been archived in http://phenome.jax.org/pub-cgi/phenome/mpdcgi?rtn=projects/qtlprojlist . For these 2 crosses, we searched for a haplotype that is the same for all 4 strains because no QTL was detected. These crosses had identical haplotypes for the SNPs in the Farp2 and Stk25 genes but different haplotypes for the other 17 genes ( Fig. 3B ). Thus, these 2 crosses reduced the QTL region to just 2 genes and eliminated the other 17 genes ( Fig. 2B , step e). Expression studies and sequencing of <italic>Farp2</italic> and <italic>Stk25</italic> provide additional evidence for both genes Since the QTL gene must have either an expression difference between the parental strains or a coding region polymorphism that changes function, we sequenced both candidate genes in B6, 129, NZW and NZB. The SNPs were classified by whether or not they changed an amino acid (Cn for coding-nonsynonymous, Cs for coding region-synonymous). Sequencing Stk25 revealed only one synonymous change ( Table 1A ), but recent evidence 15 , 16 has shown that a synonymous change can affect a protein’s expression level and function if it changes a codon’s frequency. Using codon frequency tables ( http://www.kazusa.or.jp/codon ), we found the Cs in Stk25 had a major change in codon frequency (23% for ACA to 5% for ACG). Sequencing Farp2 revealed 1 Cn and 1 Cs ( Table 1A ). The Cn in Farp2 changed the amino acid from leucine to proline at amino acid 821, which could affect the folding and thus the function of its encoded protein, and this variant was in a highly conserved region of the protein known as a pleckstrin domain 17 ( Fig. 4A ). We sequenced Farp2 in 12 strains (129, A/J, B6, C3H, CAST/EiJ, DBA/2J, FVB/NJ, NOD/LtJ, NZB, NZW, RIIIS/J, SM/J, and SJL/J) and determined the amino acid changing SNP (rs13475988) in an additional 4 strains (PERA/EiJ, I/LnJ, NZO/H1J, and NON/LtJ). Combining our data with SNP data in the Mouse Phenome Database, we show the distribution of the key amino acid changing SNP across the 45 inbred strains ( Table 1B ). We also compared expression in the livers of atherogenic-diet fed mice for the parental strains and their F1 progeny for both genes using quantitative real-time PCR. Farp2 showed no difference in expression, but Stk25 expression was significantly higher in the low HDL allele strains, 4.6-fold higher in B6 compared to 129 and 4.8-fold higher in NZB compared to NZW ( Fig. 4B ). Stk25 expression in (B6x129) F1 or (NZBxNZW) F1 mice was comparable to the B6 or NZB mice, respectively ( Fig. 4B ). This is consistent with the recessive high HDL allele observed in each cross ( Fig. 1D ). These studies showed that Farp2 had an amino acid change that might affect function and that Stk25 had an expression difference. Thus, both genes remain viable candidates for the QTL. The <italic>Farp2/Stk25</italic> haplotype was associated with altered HDL concentrations Farp2 and Stk25 are immediately adjacent to each other and partly overlapping, although transcribed in opposite directions ( http://www.ensembl.org/ ). There has been no recombination between these genes among the 45 inbred strains that we examined ( Supplementary figure II ). To determine whether the key amino acid changing polymorphism in Farp2 was associated with variation in HDL, we analyzed plasma HDL concentrations of the 45 inbred mouse strains ( www.jax.org/phenome ), avoiding the effect of Hdlq15 by dividing the strains into groups based on their polymorphisms at Apoa2 (the key amino acid change Ala61-to-Val61) 4 ( Supplementary figure II ). In Apoa2 Ala61 group (32 strains) ( Fig. 5 ), HDL levels of strains having the haplotype associated with the Farp2 821Leu allele (11 strains) were significantly higher than those of strains having the haplotype associated with the 821Pro allele (21 strains) in both female and male mice (65 ± 7 vs.52 ± 5 mg/dL and 83 ±8 vs. 62 ± 6 mg/dL, P < 0.01, respectively). Similar trends were found in strains having Apoa2 Val61 (13 strains) (104 ± 12 vs. 81 ± 9 mg/dL in females, P < 0.01, and 135 ± 13 vs.101 ± 8 mg/dL in males, P < 0.01) ( Fig. 5 ). Thus, the haplotype at Farp2/Stk25 affects HDL concentration in multiple strains.  Results An intercross between strains NZB and NZW confirms <italic>Hdlq14</italic> To confirm the existence of Hdlq14 , we performed a cross that eliminated the effects of Apoa2 . Using a dense SNP map from the Broad Institute http://www.broad.mit.edu/mouse/hapmap/ , we choose strains to intercross that had identical Apoa2 genes, but different haplotypes over the Hdlq14 region. One pair of readily available strains fit these criteria, NZB and NZW. NZW’s Hdlq14 haplotype was identical to strain 129 and NZB’s haplotype was identical to strain B6. Thus, a cross between NZB x NZW should confirm the Hdlq14 QTL found between B6 x 129. Plasma HDL concentrations were measured in both sexes for the parental, (NZB x NZW) F1 mice, and 264 F2 progeny after animals had been fed an atherogenic diet for 8 weeks. Compared with sex-matched NZW, NZB mice displayed significantly increased HDL concentrations ( P < 0.01) ( Fig. 1A ). F1 female mice displayed HDL concentrations intermediate between and significantly different ( P < 0.01) from those of the female parental strains, F1 male mice displayed HDL concentrations comparable to those of NZB males and significantly higher than those of NZW males ( P < 0.01) ( Fig. 1A ). The distribution of log-transformed HDL concentrations in F2 progeny was approximately normal ( Fig. 1B ). Using sex as additive or interactive covariate, we identified a locus influencing plasma HDL with a peak near D1Mit336 (58.7 cM, 98.44 Mb in NCBI Build 36) and a significant LOD score of 3.3 or 4.4 depending on sex as additive or interactive covariate ( Fig. 1C ). The difference in LOD score (?LOD) between the scans with sex as an additive or interactive covariate is 1.1, which is lower than the threshold (?LOD is 2 or more) for significant difference in QTL between the sexes, so the QTL did not differ between sexes. This QTL explained 5.5% of the total variance of HDL concentration. The 95% confidence interval was from 80–125 Mb, which overlapped with the 82–162 Mb Hdlq14 region identified in the 129 x B6 intercross. The NZW allele for high HDL levels was recessive ( Fig. 1D ). These data confirm the existence of Hdlq14 separate from the nearby QTL peaks caused by Hdlq15 . Bioinformatic tools narrowed <italic>Hdlq14</italic> to 2 genes The confidence intervals for Hdlq14 were quite large: 80 Mb containing 487 genes for the B6 x 129 cross ( Fig. 2B , step a) and 45 Mb containing 225 genes for the NZB x NZW cross ( Fig. 2B , step b). To narrow Hdlq14 , we used a series of bioinformatic and statistical tools, 14 including analyzing combined cross data and haplotype analysis. Analyzing combined cross data narrowed Hdlq14 to a 27.3 Mb, 125-gene region The large confidence interval of a typical QTL results from the limited number of recombinations in a cross. By combining and analyzing data from multiple crosses, the number of recombinations is increased, and the QTL interval is reduced. 11 This depends on the assumption that the QTL in the two crosses are caused by the same gene. If they are not, then the confidence interval will not be decreased in the combined cross analysis and the QTL may actually divide into two peaks. To combine the raw data, we used log transformed values so that the crosses would contribute equally. The genotype information is recoded from a strain-specific code to a phenotype-specific code; B6 and NZB genotypes were recoded as L for the low HDL allele and 129 and NZW genotypes were recoded as H for the high HDL allele. Our analysis increased the Hdlq14 LOD score to 5.1 ( Fig. 2A , dashed line), narrowed the 95% confidence interval to 27.3 Mb (from Mb 89.8–117.1 Mb) ( Fig. 2B , step c), and reduced the number of genes in the region to 125. Haplotype analysis narrowed Hdlq14 to a region containing only 2 genes Haplotype analysis reduces the QTL regions by eliminating those regions that are identical by descent between the two strains as inferred by a shared SNP pattern. This is particularly effective for the related strains NZW and NZB because they shared 63.2% of their genomes 8 . However, haplotype analysis depends on the assumptions that the mutation causing the QTL is ancestral and that the SNPs are sufficiently dense so that the DNA regions identical by descent can be correctly inferred. These are fairly safe assumptions in this case. Not only are 97% of mutations ancestral, but this QTL was found in two different crosses, thus making it very likely that the mutation is indeed ancestral. Furthermore, 3 of the strains, B6, NZW and 129, are among the strains resequenced by Perlegen so that the density of SNPs is very high. We carried out the haplotype analysis in two steps using 4 crosses ( Fig. 2B , step d and e). Two of these crosses detected the QTL, B6 x 129 and NZW x NZB, and two crosses failed to detect the QTL, B6 x C3H and NZO x NON ( Fig. 3A ). In the first step we used the 2 crosses that detected the QTL to identify genomic regions shared between strains NZW and 129 but different from strains NZB and B6. We compared the haplotypes throughout the reduced Hdlq14 interval, defining a common haplotype block to be 3 or more consecutive shared alleles. We found those regions where the B6 SNPs were identical to the NZB SNPs (both strains have alleles for low HDL), where the NZW SNPs were identical to 129 SNPs (both stains have alleles for high HDL), and where the SNPs for the strains with high and low HDL alleles differed. This haplotype analysis further narrowed Hdlq14 to a 2.3 Mb, 19-gene region ( Fig. 2B , step d, Fig. 3B ). In the second step, we utilized the haplotypes of the parental strains in the two crosses that failed to detect a QTL, the NZO x NON and the B6 x C3H crosses ( Fig 3A ). Since the manuscript for these two crosses is still in preparation (Su, DiPetrillo, Ishimori, Leiter, Paigen, and Stylianou), the raw genotype and phenotype data has been archived in http://phenome.jax.org/pub-cgi/phenome/mpdcgi?rtn=projects/qtlprojlist . For these 2 crosses, we searched for a haplotype that is the same for all 4 strains because no QTL was detected. These crosses had identical haplotypes for the SNPs in the Farp2 and Stk25 genes but different haplotypes for the other 17 genes ( Fig. 3B ). Thus, these 2 crosses reduced the QTL region to just 2 genes and eliminated the other 17 genes ( Fig. 2B , step e). Expression studies and sequencing of <italic>Farp2</italic> and <italic>Stk25</italic> provide additional evidence for both genes Since the QTL gene must have either an expression difference between the parental strains or a coding region polymorphism that changes function, we sequenced both candidate genes in B6, 129, NZW and NZB. The SNPs were classified by whether or not they changed an amino acid (Cn for coding-nonsynonymous, Cs for coding region-synonymous). Sequencing Stk25 revealed only one synonymous change ( Table 1A ), but recent evidence 15 , 16 has shown that a synonymous change can affect a protein’s expression level and function if it changes a codon’s frequency. Using codon frequency tables ( http://www.kazusa.or.jp/codon ), we found the Cs in Stk25 had a major change in codon frequency (23% for ACA to 5% for ACG). Sequencing Farp2 revealed 1 Cn and 1 Cs ( Table 1A ). The Cn in Farp2 changed the amino acid from leucine to proline at amino acid 821, which could affect the folding and thus the function of its encoded protein, and this variant was in a highly conserved region of the protein known as a pleckstrin domain 17 ( Fig. 4A ). We sequenced Farp2 in 12 strains (129, A/J, B6, C3H, CAST/EiJ, DBA/2J, FVB/NJ, NOD/LtJ, NZB, NZW, RIIIS/J, SM/J, and SJL/J) and determined the amino acid changing SNP (rs13475988) in an additional 4 strains (PERA/EiJ, I/LnJ, NZO/H1J, and NON/LtJ). Combining our data with SNP data in the Mouse Phenome Database, we show the distribution of the key amino acid changing SNP across the 45 inbred strains ( Table 1B ). We also compared expression in the livers of atherogenic-diet fed mice for the parental strains and their F1 progeny for both genes using quantitative real-time PCR. Farp2 showed no difference in expression, but Stk25 expression was significantly higher in the low HDL allele strains, 4.6-fold higher in B6 compared to 129 and 4.8-fold higher in NZB compared to NZW ( Fig. 4B ). Stk25 expression in (B6x129) F1 or (NZBxNZW) F1 mice was comparable to the B6 or NZB mice, respectively ( Fig. 4B ). This is consistent with the recessive high HDL allele observed in each cross ( Fig. 1D ). These studies showed that Farp2 had an amino acid change that might affect function and that Stk25 had an expression difference. Thus, both genes remain viable candidates for the QTL. The <italic>Farp2/Stk25</italic> haplotype was associated with altered HDL concentrations Farp2 and Stk25 are immediately adjacent to each other and partly overlapping, although transcribed in opposite directions ( http://www.ensembl.org/ ). There has been no recombination between these genes among the 45 inbred strains that we examined ( Supplementary figure II ). To determine whether the key amino acid changing polymorphism in Farp2 was associated with variation in HDL, we analyzed plasma HDL concentrations of the 45 inbred mouse strains ( www.jax.org/phenome ), avoiding the effect of Hdlq15 by dividing the strains into groups based on their polymorphisms at Apoa2 (the key amino acid change Ala61-to-Val61) 4 ( Supplementary figure II ). In Apoa2 Ala61 group (32 strains) ( Fig. 5 ), HDL levels of strains having the haplotype associated with the Farp2 821Leu allele (11 strains) were significantly higher than those of strains having the haplotype associated with the 821Pro allele (21 strains) in both female and male mice (65 ± 7 vs.52 ± 5 mg/dL and 83 ±8 vs. 62 ± 6 mg/dL, P < 0.01, respectively). Similar trends were found in strains having Apoa2 Val61 (13 strains) (104 ± 12 vs. 81 ± 9 mg/dL in females, P < 0.01, and 135 ± 13 vs.101 ± 8 mg/dL in males, P < 0.01) ( Fig. 5 ). Thus, the haplotype at Farp2/Stk25 affects HDL concentration in multiple strains.  An intercross between strains NZB and NZW confirms <italic>Hdlq14</italic> To confirm the existence of Hdlq14 , we performed a cross that eliminated the effects of Apoa2 . Using a dense SNP map from the Broad Institute http://www.broad.mit.edu/mouse/hapmap/ , we choose strains to intercross that had identical Apoa2 genes, but different haplotypes over the Hdlq14 region. One pair of readily available strains fit these criteria, NZB and NZW. NZW’s Hdlq14 haplotype was identical to strain 129 and NZB’s haplotype was identical to strain B6. Thus, a cross between NZB x NZW should confirm the Hdlq14 QTL found between B6 x 129. Plasma HDL concentrations were measured in both sexes for the parental, (NZB x NZW) F1 mice, and 264 F2 progeny after animals had been fed an atherogenic diet for 8 weeks. Compared with sex-matched NZW, NZB mice displayed significantly increased HDL concentrations ( P < 0.01) ( Fig. 1A ). F1 female mice displayed HDL concentrations intermediate between and significantly different ( P < 0.01) from those of the female parental strains, F1 male mice displayed HDL concentrations comparable to those of NZB males and significantly higher than those of NZW males ( P < 0.01) ( Fig. 1A ). The distribution of log-transformed HDL concentrations in F2 progeny was approximately normal ( Fig. 1B ). Using sex as additive or interactive covariate, we identified a locus influencing plasma HDL with a peak near D1Mit336 (58.7 cM, 98.44 Mb in NCBI Build 36) and a significant LOD score of 3.3 or 4.4 depending on sex as additive or interactive covariate ( Fig. 1C ). The difference in LOD score (?LOD) between the scans with sex as an additive or interactive covariate is 1.1, which is lower than the threshold (?LOD is 2 or more) for significant difference in QTL between the sexes, so the QTL did not differ between sexes. This QTL explained 5.5% of the total variance of HDL concentration. The 95% confidence interval was from 80–125 Mb, which overlapped with the 82–162 Mb Hdlq14 region identified in the 129 x B6 intercross. The NZW allele for high HDL levels was recessive ( Fig. 1D ). These data confirm the existence of Hdlq14 separate from the nearby QTL peaks caused by Hdlq15 .  An intercross between strains NZB and NZW confirms <italic>Hdlq14</italic> To confirm the existence of Hdlq14 , we performed a cross that eliminated the effects of Apoa2 . Using a dense SNP map from the Broad Institute http://www.broad.mit.edu/mouse/hapmap/ , we choose strains to intercross that had identical Apoa2 genes, but different haplotypes over the Hdlq14 region. One pair of readily available strains fit these criteria, NZB and NZW. NZW’s Hdlq14 haplotype was identical to strain 129 and NZB’s haplotype was identical to strain B6. Thus, a cross between NZB x NZW should confirm the Hdlq14 QTL found between B6 x 129. Plasma HDL concentrations were measured in both sexes for the parental, (NZB x NZW) F1 mice, and 264 F2 progeny after animals had been fed an atherogenic diet for 8 weeks. Compared with sex-matched NZW, NZB mice displayed significantly increased HDL concentrations ( P < 0.01) ( Fig. 1A ). F1 female mice displayed HDL concentrations intermediate between and significantly different ( P < 0.01) from those of the female parental strains, F1 male mice displayed HDL concentrations comparable to those of NZB males and significantly higher than those of NZW males ( P < 0.01) ( Fig. 1A ). The distribution of log-transformed HDL concentrations in F2 progeny was approximately normal ( Fig. 1B ). Using sex as additive or interactive covariate, we identified a locus influencing plasma HDL with a peak near D1Mit336 (58.7 cM, 98.44 Mb in NCBI Build 36) and a significant LOD score of 3.3 or 4.4 depending on sex as additive or interactive covariate ( Fig. 1C ). The difference in LOD score (?LOD) between the scans with sex as an additive or interactive covariate is 1.1, which is lower than the threshold (?LOD is 2 or more) for significant difference in QTL between the sexes, so the QTL did not differ between sexes. This QTL explained 5.5% of the total variance of HDL concentration. The 95% confidence interval was from 80–125 Mb, which overlapped with the 82–162 Mb Hdlq14 region identified in the 129 x B6 intercross. The NZW allele for high HDL levels was recessive ( Fig. 1D ). These data confirm the existence of Hdlq14 separate from the nearby QTL peaks caused by Hdlq15 .  Discussion In the present study, we confirmed another chromosome 1 HDL QTL, previously identified in a B6 x 129 intercross 3 , by crossing two strains that did not differ in the genotype for two nearby QTL genes. The peak of this locus was at D1Mit336 (58.7 cM, 98.4Mb), and the 95% confidence interval was from 80 Mb through 125 Mb. This study illustrates a useful method of separating closely linked QTLs. Usually such separation is achieved by constructing a set of overlapping congenic strains in the region, a process that requires a minimum of 5–6 generations of breeding. This report presents an alternative method of selecting strains that are closely related and that are identical for the gene (or haplotype) of one QTL region but differ in haplotype for the second region thought to possess the second QTL gene. Although this method is faster than constructing congenics, it does require the use of data from multiple F2 crosses, but in this particular case, those crosses were already done. In a 2-generation intercross, we were able to show that this region did indeed carry another QTL gene. Then we narrowed the QTL region by a set of bioinfomatic methods including combining the two crosses and haplotyping with 2 crosses that detected the QTL. We also haplotyped using two crosses, B6 x C3H and NON x NZO, that failed to detect the QTL. It is always problematic to reason from negative data, but in the case of these two crosses we had the raw data from our own work, and we could ensure from the flat LOD score plots ( Fig 3A ) that these QTLs were truly absent and not just merely present but not significant enough to be reported. Adding these two crosses narrowed Hdlq14 from a 45 Mb, 271-gene to 2 genes. We evaluated these candidate genes by sequence and expression analysis. Stk25 had a large expression difference and Farp2 had an amino acid change. The variant Pro821Leu of Farp2 was in a highly conserved region of the protein ( Fig. 4A ) in the pleckstrin homology (PH) domain 17 , 18 , a region characteristic of proteins with diverse enzymatic or regulatory functions (such as phospholipases, GTPase-regulating proteins, and protein kinases) and lipid-binding proteins. 19 The pleckstrin domain itself is thought to bind lipids. 18 Stk25 encodes serine/threonine kinase 25, a crucial regulator of AMPK kinase in muscle and liver cells 20 : its activity is potentially important in lipid metabolism. Because rodent and human QTLs for the same trait often map to the homologous genomic regions, these homologous QTLs in mice and humans may be caused by the same underlying gene, which is correct in many instances. 21 – 23 We often use the concordance of mouse and human QTL in narrowing a QTL region 7 , 8 , 24 . In fact, Farp2 and Stk25 are located on human 2q37.2-37.3, where a human QTL for HDL has been identified. 25 We did not use this human QTL to narrow the mouse QTL region because it had a low LOD score in the original report, which was apparent only when applied to diabetics and disappeared when applied to the whole population. However, now that we have narrowed the mouse QTL, the existence of the human QTL provides some additional support. It has been also reported that the polymorphisms in Farp2 gene are associated with the variations of human HDL levels in a more recent genome-wide association study. 26 These two lines of evidence suggest that Farp2 and Stk25 identified from mice may be likely HDL genes for humans as well. We were unable to further decide between these two candidates; they are immediately adjacent to each other and no historical recombination occurred between them in the 45 inbred strains that we examined. Additional studies are needed to choose between these two genes.  Discussion In the present study, we confirmed another chromosome 1 HDL QTL, previously identified in a B6 x 129 intercross 3 , by crossing two strains that did not differ in the genotype for two nearby QTL genes. The peak of this locus was at D1Mit336 (58.7 cM, 98.4Mb), and the 95% confidence interval was from 80 Mb through 125 Mb. This study illustrates a useful method of separating closely linked QTLs. Usually such separation is achieved by constructing a set of overlapping congenic strains in the region, a process that requires a minimum of 5–6 generations of breeding. This report presents an alternative method of selecting strains that are closely related and that are identical for the gene (or haplotype) of one QTL region but differ in haplotype for the second region thought to possess the second QTL gene. Although this method is faster than constructing congenics, it does require the use of data from multiple F2 crosses, but in this particular case, those crosses were already done. In a 2-generation intercross, we were able to show that this region did indeed carry another QTL gene. Then we narrowed the QTL region by a set of bioinfomatic methods including combining the two crosses and haplotyping with 2 crosses that detected the QTL. We also haplotyped using two crosses, B6 x C3H and NON x NZO, that failed to detect the QTL. It is always problematic to reason from negative data, but in the case of these two crosses we had the raw data from our own work, and we could ensure from the flat LOD score plots ( Fig 3A ) that these QTLs were truly absent and not just merely present but not significant enough to be reported. Adding these two crosses narrowed Hdlq14 from a 45 Mb, 271-gene to 2 genes. We evaluated these candidate genes by sequence and expression analysis. Stk25 had a large expression difference and Farp2 had an amino acid change. The variant Pro821Leu of Farp2 was in a highly conserved region of the protein ( Fig. 4A ) in the pleckstrin homology (PH) domain 17 , 18 , a region characteristic of proteins with diverse enzymatic or regulatory functions (such as phospholipases, GTPase-regulating proteins, and protein kinases) and lipid-binding proteins. 19 The pleckstrin domain itself is thought to bind lipids. 18 Stk25 encodes serine/threonine kinase 25, a crucial regulator of AMPK kinase in muscle and liver cells 20 : its activity is potentially important in lipid metabolism. Because rodent and human QTLs for the same trait often map to the homologous genomic regions, these homologous QTLs in mice and humans may be caused by the same underlying gene, which is correct in many instances. 21 – 23 We often use the concordance of mouse and human QTL in narrowing a QTL region 7 , 8 , 24 . In fact, Farp2 and Stk25 are located on human 2q37.2-37.3, where a human QTL for HDL has been identified. 25 We did not use this human QTL to narrow the mouse QTL region because it had a low LOD score in the original report, which was apparent only when applied to diabetics and disappeared when applied to the whole population. However, now that we have narrowed the mouse QTL, the existence of the human QTL provides some additional support. It has been also reported that the polymorphisms in Farp2 gene are associated with the variations of human HDL levels in a more recent genome-wide association study. 26 These two lines of evidence suggest that Farp2 and Stk25 identified from mice may be likely HDL genes for humans as well. We were unable to further decide between these two candidates; they are immediately adjacent to each other and no historical recombination occurred between them in the 45 inbred strains that we examined. Additional studies are needed to choose between these two genes.  Supplementary Material 1 2 3  Supplementary Material 1 2 3  Figures and Table Figure 1 Hdlq14 is confirmed in the NZB x NZW intercross. (A) Plasma HDL concentration in NZB, NZW, and F1 (NZB x NZW) progeny. * P < 0.01 vs. NZW, ** P < 0.01 vs. NZB and NZW. (B) Distribution of log-transformed plasma HDL concentrations in (NZB x NZW)F2 progeny. (C) LOD score plot for plasma HDL on Chr 1. (D) The allele effect at peak marker D1Mit336 on plasma HDL. WW, BB, and BW designate F2 mice homozygous for the NZW allele, NZB allele and heterozygous, respectively. * P < 0.01 vs. homozygous NZB and heterozygous mice. Values are expressed as mean HDL ± SD. Figure 2 Hdlq14 was narrowed by bioinformatic tools. (A) Hdlq14 is reduced by combining the crosses NZB x NZW and B6 x 129. The combined cross is shown as a dotted line. The distal peak represents the QTL caused by Apoa2 difference between B6 and 129. (B) The processes of narrowing Hdlq14 . (a) The 95% CI is between Mb 82 -162 in the B6 x 129 cross. (b) The 95% CI is between Mb 80 - 125 in the NZB x NZW cross. (c) Hdlq14 was reduced to a 125-gene, 27.3-Mb region (Mb 89.8 -117.1) by combining crosses. (d) Using crosses NZB x NZW and B6x129 that detected Hdlq14, haplotyping reduced the region to 2.3 Mb containing 19 genes. (e) Using crosses B6xC3H and NON x NZO, which failed to detect Hdlq14, haplotyping further reduced the QTL to 2 genes. Figure 3 Haplotyping with two crosses that failed to detect the QTL. (A) LOD score plots on Chr 1 in crosses B6 x C3H (solid line), NZO x NON (dotted line), and the combined crosses between B6 x 129 and NZB x NZW (dashed line). (B) Haplotype structure of the 19 genes among strains NON, NZO, B6, and C3H. The black boxes on the vertical line representing Chr 1 are the 2.3 Mb regions containing 19 genes. To the right are the haplotypes from these two additional crosses: NON alleles (or alleles identical to NON) are gray, the alleles that differ from NON in strains NZO, C3H, and B6 are white. Because the crosses did not detect the QTL, the haplotype pattern should be identical among all 4 strains; this is found only for Farp2 and Stk25 . Figure 4 Location of Farp2 polymorphism in conserved region and expression differences for Stk25 . (A) Proline 821(marked with *) in Farp2 is in a conserved region in mammals. (B) Stk25 expression in livers from atherogenic-diet fed B6, 129, (B6x129) F1, NZB, NZW and (NZBxNZW) F1 female mice, which is expressed as mRNA copies per 1000 copies of ? -actin. Figure 5 HDL concentrations in inbred mouse strains separated by Farp2 variants Leu821Pro. Based on Apoa2 Ala/Val61 and Farp2 Leu/Pro821, the mice were separated into 4 major groups ( Supplemental Figure II ), the number of strains in each group was given in parenthesis. The upper panel is from females and lower one is from males. Plasma HDL concentrations (mean ± SD, mg/dL) were measured when mice were at the age of 7–10 weeks. The number of mice/strain varied from 10–40 (24 ± 7 males and 22 ± 6 females). * P < 0.01 vs. mice with Pro821. Table 1 Table 1A. Polymorphisms in the coding regions of Farp2 and Stk25 Gene SNP ID Cn or Cs Amino acid change Stk25 rs13467752 Cs Thr320Thr Farp2 rs30357838 Cs Leu785Leu Farp2 rs13475988 Cn Leu821Pro Table 1B. Distribution of the Farp2 polymorphism among 45 mouse strains Amino acid Strains Leucine821 129S1/SvImJ, 129X1/SvJ, A/J, AKR/J, BALB/cJ, BTBR T+ tf/tf, CE/J, DBA/1J, DBA/2J, FVB/NJ, I/LnJ, KK/HLJ, LP/J, NOD/LtJ, NZW/LacJ, SJL/J, SWR/J, WSB/EiJ Proline821 BUB/BnJ, C3H/HeJ, C57BL/6J, C57BL/10J, C57BLKS/J, C57BR/cdJ, C57L/J, C58/J, CZECHII/EiJ, CAST/EiJ, CBA/J, JF1/Ms, MA/MyJ, MOLF/EiJ, MSM/Ms, MRL/MpJ, NON/LtJ, NZB/BlNJ, NZO/HlLtJ, PERA/EiJ, PL/J, PWK/PhJ, RF/J, RIIIS/J, SEA/GnJ, SM/J, SPRET/EiJ  Figures and Table Figure 1 Hdlq14 is confirmed in the NZB x NZW intercross. (A) Plasma HDL concentration in NZB, NZW, and F1 (NZB x NZW) progeny. * P < 0.01 vs. NZW, ** P < 0.01 vs. NZB and NZW. (B) Distribution of log-transformed plasma HDL concentrations in (NZB x NZW)F2 progeny. (C) LOD score plot for plasma HDL on Chr 1. (D) The allele effect at peak marker D1Mit336 on plasma HDL. WW, BB, and BW designate F2 mice homozygous for the NZW allele, NZB allele and heterozygous, respectively. * P < 0.01 vs. homozygous NZB and heterozygous mice. Values are expressed as mean HDL ± SD. Figure 2 Hdlq14 was narrowed by bioinformatic tools. (A) Hdlq14 is reduced by combining the crosses NZB x NZW and B6 x 129. The combined cross is shown as a dotted line. The distal peak represents the QTL caused by Apoa2 difference between B6 and 129. (B) The processes of narrowing Hdlq14 . (a) The 95% CI is between Mb 82 -162 in the B6 x 129 cross. (b) The 95% CI is between Mb 80 - 125 in the NZB x NZW cross. (c) Hdlq14 was reduced to a 125-gene, 27.3-Mb region (Mb 89.8 -117.1) by combining crosses. (d) Using crosses NZB x NZW and B6x129 that detected Hdlq14, haplotyping reduced the region to 2.3 Mb containing 19 genes. (e) Using crosses B6xC3H and NON x NZO, which failed to detect Hdlq14, haplotyping further reduced the QTL to 2 genes. Figure 3 Haplotyping with two crosses that failed to detect the QTL. (A) LOD score plots on Chr 1 in crosses B6 x C3H (solid line), NZO x NON (dotted line), and the combined crosses between B6 x 129 and NZB x NZW (dashed line). (B) Haplotype structure of the 19 genes among strains NON, NZO, B6, and C3H. The black boxes on the vertical line representing Chr 1 are the 2.3 Mb regions containing 19 genes. To the right are the haplotypes from these two additional crosses: NON alleles (or alleles identical to NON) are gray, the alleles that differ from NON in strains NZO, C3H, and B6 are white. Because the crosses did not detect the QTL, the haplotype pattern should be identical among all 4 strains; this is found only for Farp2 and Stk25 . Figure 4 Location of Farp2 polymorphism in conserved region and expression differences for Stk25 . (A) Proline 821(marked with *) in Farp2 is in a conserved region in mammals. (B) Stk25 expression in livers from atherogenic-diet fed B6, 129, (B6x129) F1, NZB, NZW and (NZBxNZW) F1 female mice, which is expressed as mRNA copies per 1000 copies of ? -actin. Figure 5 HDL concentrations in inbred mouse strains separated by Farp2 variants Leu821Pro. Based on Apoa2 Ala/Val61 and Farp2 Leu/Pro821, the mice were separated into 4 major groups ( Supplemental Figure II ), the number of strains in each group was given in parenthesis. The upper panel is from females and lower one is from males. Plasma HDL concentrations (mean ± SD, mg/dL) were measured when mice were at the age of 7–10 weeks. The number of mice/strain varied from 10–40 (24 ± 7 males and 22 ± 6 females). * P < 0.01 vs. mice with Pro821. Table 1 Table 1A. Polymorphisms in the coding regions of Farp2 and Stk25 Gene SNP ID Cn or Cs Amino acid change Stk25 rs13467752 Cs Thr320Thr Farp2 rs30357838 Cs Leu785Leu Farp2 rs13475988 Cn Leu821Pro Table 1B. Distribution of the Farp2 polymorphism among 45 mouse strains Amino acid Strains Leucine821 129S1/SvImJ, 129X1/SvJ, A/J, AKR/J, BALB/cJ, BTBR T+ tf/tf, CE/J, DBA/1J, DBA/2J, FVB/NJ, I/LnJ, KK/HLJ, LP/J, NOD/LtJ, NZW/LacJ, SJL/J, SWR/J, WSB/EiJ Proline821 BUB/BnJ, C3H/HeJ, C57BL/6J, C57BL/10J, C57BLKS/J, C57BR/cdJ, C57L/J, C58/J, CZECHII/EiJ, CAST/EiJ, CBA/J, JF1/Ms, MA/MyJ, MOLF/EiJ, MSM/Ms, MRL/MpJ, NON/LtJ, NZB/BlNJ, NZO/HlLtJ, PERA/EiJ, PL/J, PWK/PhJ, RF/J, RIIIS/J, SEA/GnJ, SM/J, SPRET/EiJ 