The Emerging Role of MicroRNAs in Cardiac Remodeling and Heart Failure Recent studies have suggested a potentially important role for a family of tiny regulatory RNAs, known as microRNAs (miRNAs or miRs), in the control of diverse aspects of cardiac function in health and disease. Although the field of miRNA biology is relatively new, there is emerging evidence that miRNAs may play an important role in the pathogenesis of heart failure through their ability to regulate the expression levels of genes that govern the process of adaptive and maladaptive cardiac remodeling. Here we review the biology of miRNAs in relation to their role in modulating various aspects of the process of cardiac remodeling, as well as discuss the potential application of miRNA biology to the field of heart failure.  CONCLUSION In the foregoing discussion, we have reviewed the emerging importance of miRNAs in the failing heart. Although our understanding of miRNA biology in heart failure is embryonic at present, the experimental literature reviewed herein suggests that miRNAs contribute to adverse/pathological remodeling, and hence are sufficient to contribute to disease progression in heart failure. As shown in Figure 7 , miRNAs regulate key components of the remodeling process, including cardiac myocyte biology, cell fate, extracellular matrix remodeling, and neurohormonal activation. Given that miRNAs are coordinately regulated in response to stress signals, and given that miRNAs regulate the expression levels of gene networks that determine the so-called “heart failure phenotype,” it is tempting to speculate that miRNAs, acting singly or in combination, may be responsible for modulating the transition from adaptive to pathological cardiac remodeling. Although predicting the success of future therapeutic strategies in the field of heart failure is fraught with difficulty, one can envision that miRNA biology may contribute to our understanding of heart failure in at least three important areas. First, as modern computational methodologies continue to improve, it is likely that studying the expression patterns of miRNAs will lead to the identification of interesting new disease targets that are not obvious with classic “pathway driven (e.g., neurohormonal)” approaches. Moreover, this type of strategy would, for the first time, engender therapeutic strategies that directly address the fundamental biology of heart failure, insofar as they would be directed at the targets that are responsible for cardiac remodeling. Second, expression profiling of miRNAs in circulating leukocytes and/or myocardial tissue may one day be used to help to identify personalized strategies for heart failure patients, as is currently being done in the field of oncology. 42 , 43 For example expression profiling of miRNAs might also be used to help in the earlier implantation and/or removal of circulatory assist devices if investigators are able to reliably determine miRNA signatures for worsening heart failure and/or myocardial recovery. Third, it is possible that certain miRNAs may themselves become may become therapeutic targets in heart failure. As discussed in depth elsewhere, 44 – 46 the use of chemically modified oligonucleotides to target specific miRNAs and/or to disrupt the binding between a specific miRNA and a specific mRNA target is now possible. Although this type of a therapeutic approach will be subject to many of the same challenges that have plagued gene therapy in terms of modes of delivery and toxicity, it is nonetheless completely feasible. Targeted miRNA approaches may also prove challenging because of the potential for a myriad of “off-target” effects with this approach. As with all things in heart failure, progress in this field will require the collaborative efforts between basic scientists and clinical scientists in order to perform the requisite target validation and the careful clinical phenotyping that are required in order to move from the bench to the bedside. Given how little we know about miRNAs in heart failure at present, and given that there are seemingly an infinite number of interactions between miRNAs and their cognate target genes, some of which have yet to be characterized, it is almost certain that our learning curve will be extremely steep now and for the foreseeable future.  Supplementary Material 1 