The Development of Nicotinic Receptors in the Human Medulla Oblongata: Inter-relationship with the Serotonergic System Maternal cigarette smoking during pregnancy adversely affects fetal development and increases the risk for the sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). In SIDS we have reported abnormalities in the medullary serotonergic (5-HT) system, which is vital for homeostatic control. In this study we analyzed the inter-relationship between nicotinic receptors (nAChRs), to which nicotine in cigarette smoke bind, and the medullary 5-HT system in the human fetus and infant as a step towards determining the mechanisms whereby smoking increases SIDS risk in infants with 5-HT defects. Immunohistochemistry for the ?4 nAChR subunit and 5-HT neurons was applied in fetal and infant medullae (15–92 postconceptional weeks, n=9). The distribution of different nAChRs was determined from 39–82 postconceptional weeks (n=5) using tissue autoradiography for 3H-nicotine, 3H-epibatidine, 3H-cytisine, and 125I-bungarotoxin; the findings were compared to laboratory 5-HT1A and 5-HT transporter binding data, and 5-HT neuronal density. Alpha4 immunoreactivity was ubiquitously expressed in medullary nuclei related to homeostatic functions from 15 weeks on, including rhombic lip germinal cells. At all ages, ?4 co-localized with 5-HT neurons, indicating a potential site of interaction whereby exogenous nicotine may adversely affect 5-HT neuronal development and function. Binding for heteromeric nAChRs was highest in the inferior olive, and for homomeric nAChRs, in the vagal complex. In the paragigantocellularis lateralis, 5-HT1A receptor binding simultaneously increased as ?7 binding decreased across infancy. This study indicates parallel dynamic and complex changes in the medullary nicotinic and 5-HT systems throughout early life, i.e., the period of risk for SIDS.  Introduction Maternal cigarette smoking during pregnancy is a major public health problem world-wide despite extensive warnings about its harmful effects upon the fetus ( Chiolero et al., 2005 ; Aliyu et al., 2007 ; Raatikainen et al., 2007 ). Indeed, 20–25% of women in the general population in the United States smoke during pregnancy ( Chiolero et al., 2005 ; Raatikainen et al., 2007 ), with up to 75% of women in high risk populations for infant mortality and morbidity e.g., American Indians in the Northern Plains ( Iyasu et al., 2002 ) and Australian aborigines ( Gilchrist et al., 2004 ). Cigarette smoking during pregnancy is associated in the offspring with prematurity ( Chiolero et al., 2005 ; Raatikainen et al., 2007 ), low birth weight ( Chiolero et al., 2005 ; Raatikainen et al., 2007 ), and cognitive/attention deficits ( Julvez et al., 2007 ). In addition, the risk for the sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), the leading cause of postneonatal infant mortality in the United States, is increased five-fold or more in infants born to mothers who smoke during pregnancy compared to those whose mothers do not smoke ( Blair et al., 1996 ). SIDS is the sudden death of an infant what remains unexplained after a complete autopsy and death scene investigation ( Willinger et al., 1991 ); typically a seemingly healthy infant is found dead after a sleep period. Reports of impairment of cardiorespiratory function and/or arousal in infants exposed to cigarette smoke during gestation suggest that such exposure harms the fetal development of cardiorespiratory and arousal pathways, the majority of which are located in the brainstem ( Kahn et al., 1994 ; Lewis and Bosque, 1995 ; Parslow et al., 2004 ). Brainstem neurotransmitter abnormalities are found in SIDS infants, particularly in the serotonergic (5-HT) system in the medulla oblongata which is involved in the modulation of cardiorespiration and arousal under homeostatic stress ( Panigrahy et al., 2000 ; Kinney et al., 2001 ; Kinney et al., 2003 ; Kinney, 2005 ; Paterson et al., 2006b ) and thus these abnormalities in the 5-HT system are likely to play an important role in the failure to respond to a life-threatening event after birth. SIDS infants exposed to cigarette smoke during fetal development also demonstrate abnormal binding to nicotinic receptors (nAChRs) in mesopontine regions related to arousal in combination with the medullary 5-HT abnormalities ( Duncan et al., 2008 ). Given that nicotine is a major neurotoxic component of cigarette smoke and is a potent agonist to the brain’s endogenous nAChRs, the SIDS data suggest that the increased risk for SIDS due to maternal smoking during pregnancy may be related to rostral nAChRs abnormalities induced by exogenous nicotine in association with the caudal 5-HT abnormalities. Critical to determining the inter-relationships of nAChR and the medullary 5-HT system and the pathogenesis of SIDS is a basic understanding of the development of nAChRs relative to medullary 5-HT neurons, receptors, and transporter (5-HTT) in the fetal period and infancy. Yet, virtually nothing is known about the relevant chemical anatomy in the developing human medulla, and this we undertook the following baseline study to help bridge this gap in knowledge. Nicotinic receptors are pentameric, ligand-gated ion channels comprised of heteromeric or homomeric subunits encoded by 9? (?2–10) and 3? (?2–4) genes ( Gotti et al., 2006 ), with ?7 being the only subunit known to form homomeric receptors in the human brain. These subunits are located at pre-, post- and/or peri-synaptic sites ( Lucas-Meunier et al., 2003 ) and each nAChR subtype displays unique physiological and pharmacological properties ( Cimino et al., 1995 ; Hellstrom-Lindahl and Court, 2000 ; Gotti et al., 2006 ), as well as distinct neuroanatomical distributions at different developmental time-points ( Cimino et al., 1995 ; Adams et al., 2002 ; Tribollet et al., 2004 ). Presynaptic nAChRs regulate neurotransmitter release, while postsynaptic nAChRs activate intracellular signaling and gene transcription ( McKay et al., 2007 ). Nicotine exposure is known to have multiple effects on the 5-HT system ( Mihailescu et al., 1998 ; Kenny et al., 2001 ; Slotkin et al., 2007b ), and thus the expression of nAChRs by 5-HT neurons may play an important role in the 5-HT abnormalities reported in SIDS. In the human infant, the medullary 5-HT system is comprised of 5-HT neuronal cell bodies in the raphé (raphé obscurus and raphé pallidus), extra-raphé (paragigantocellularis lateralis [PGCL], gigantocellularis, intermediate reticular zone, and subtrigeminal nucleus), and ventral surface (embedded within the arcuate nucleus) ( Kinney et al., 2007 ). In a series of normative studies of the human fetal and infant medulla, we have reported the temporal and topographic profiles of 5-HT neuronal cell bodies ( Kinney et al., 2007 ), 5-HT receptors ( Zec et al., 1996 ; Paterson et al., 2004a ), and 5-HT transporter (5-HTT) ( Paterson et al., 2004a ). In the following study, we expanded upon this valuable 5-HT-related database by delineating the spatial and temporal sequence of nAChR receptor development relative to maturational changes in the medullary 5-HT system. We tested the following hypotheses: 1) nAChRs are concentrated in regions related to medullary sites that contain 5-HT cell bodies and/or receive 5-HT terminals and are involved in cardiorespiratory control and/or arousal; 2) nAChRs are expressed by 5-HT cell bodies, indicating a potential site whereby exogenous nicotine in cigarette smoke interacts directly with 5-HT neurons to alter 5-HT development and/or function; 3) nAChR subtypes are expressed in the fetal medulla in sites related to cardiorespiration and/or arousal, indicating a site of interaction with exogenous nicotine during prenatal development that may alter the developmental program of these sites and thereby alter cardiorespiratory patterning and arousal responses postnatally; and 4) rapid changes are occurring in the development of 5-HT-related markers and nAChRs in parallel, suggesting that the fetal and infant time-frame, i.e. the risk period for SIDS, is a critical period in the development of medullary 5-HT system relevant to nAChRs. To test these hypotheses, we used single- and double-labeling immunocytochemistry and tissue section autoradiography, and we integrated the new nAChR-related findings with the previous 5-HT related findings ( Kinney et al., 2001 ; Kinney et al., 2003 ; Paterson et al., 2006b ) in our ever-expanding database of human brainstem chemical anatomy in early life. Given the extraordinary difficulty in collecting normative brainstems from human fetuses and infants, we believe this combined analysis is justified and necessary.  Materials and Methods Clinical Database Brainstems were obtained from autopsies in the Departments of Pathology, Children’s Hospital Boston and Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, and the office of the Chief Medical Examiner, San Diego, CA with approval of the Committee on Clinical Investigation. Fetal age was determined by the standard method of foot-length measurements. All ages (in weeks) were expressed as postconceptional age which is the sum of gestational plus postnatal age. Single-label Immunocytochemistry for the Developmental Profile of nAChRs Immunocytochemistry was performed with antibodies to ?4 and 5-HT cells ( Table 1 ). Medullae were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, cut into 3 mm blocks, embedded in paraffin, serially or stepped sectioned at 4 ?m-thick in the coronal plane, and mounted upon glass microscopic slides. The paraffin sections were de-waxed and re-hydrated through to water. Antigen retrieval was preformed using 10% citrate buffer at 195 °F for 10 minutes, and following phosphate buffered saline (PBS) washes, sections were treated with peroxidase blocking reagent (Dako Cytomation, Carpinteria, CA) for 20 minutes. Tissue sections were blocked for 1 hour in 4% normal goat serum and 0.1% triton X following incubation with the primary antibody ( Table 1 ). Following PBS washes, tissues were incubated with secondary antibodies followed by ABC elite kit (1hr, Vector, Burlingame, CA) and reacted with di-amino denzadine substrate (Dako Cytomation, Carpinteria, CA). All sections for the same antibody were stained in the same run and in all cases staining failed to occur with omission of the primary antibody. In this study the Chemicon and Covance ?4 nAChR antibodies produced identical immunostaining patterns in the paraffin-embedded human medulla which was comparative to that of positive control tissues (rat brain) and to those reported previously in rodents ( Cucchiaro and Commons, 2003 ) and rabbits (( Cucchiaro and Commons, 2003 ; Centeno et al., 2004 ). Specificity for human brain tissues using western blot characteristics for the Covance antibody has been previously reported ( Whiting and Lindstrom, 1988 ) with immunolabelling being eliminated in brain sections from ?4 knock out mice ( Whiteaker et al., 2006 ). For analysis optimum results for ?4 were obtained using the Covance antibody for DAB staining and the Chemicon antibody for immunofluorescence. Each case had a minimum of three stained sections for analysis. The medullary nuclei were identified anatomically in reference to the human brainstem atlas of Olszewski and Baxter (1982) , with the exception of the raphé nuclei, which were classified according to the atlas of Paxinos and Huang (1995) . The levels and nuclei at which analysis was performed are presented with their atlas number ( Olszewski and Baxter, 1982 ) in parentheses: 1) mid-medulla, level of nucleus of Roller (Plate X), for analysis of the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS), dorsal motor nucleus of vagus (DMX), hypoglossal nucleus, principal inferior olive (ION), medial accessory olive, and arcuate nucleus; 2) rostral medulla (Plate XII), for analysis of the raphé obscurus, paragigantocellularis lateralis (PGCL), gigantocellularis, intermediate reticular zone, dorsal accessory olive, ION, and arcuate nucleus. As defined by us, the medullary 5-HT system consists of neurons with their cell bodies located in the raphé (raphé obscurus and raphé magnus), extra-raphé (PGCL, gigantocellularis, intermediate reticular zone, and subtrigeminal nucleus) and ventral positions, including the arcuate nucleus, and projection sites that mediate cardiovascular and respiratory functions, e.g., NTS, DMX, and hypoglossal nucleus ( Kinney et al., 2007 ). Immunostained sections were visualized using a Olympus BX51 microscope (Olympus America Inc., Melville, NY) and representative images captured using an Olympus DP71 camera (Olympus America Inc., Melville, NY) and Microsuite Biological Suite 5 computer software. Images were saved as .tiff files and image size and contrast adjusted in Adobe Photoshop Software (Adobe systems, San Jose, CA). Figures were constructed in CorelDraw Graphics Suite 12 (Corel Corporation, Ottowa, CA) including the addition of text and scale bars. Nicotinic Receptor Binding in the Infant Medulla with Tissue Autoradiography We investigated nAChR binding in newly acquired specimens with 4 different radioligands, each with different affinities to different subunits of the nAChRs ( Table 2 ). Blocks of fresh infant medullae, stored at ?70oC until use, were serially sectioned at 20 ?m on a motorized Leitz cryostat and mounted on glass microscopic slides. For each radioligand, the general methods of tissue autoradiography were identical ( Kinney et al., 1993 ); specific details for each radioligand are provided in Table 2 . The unfixed sections were preincubated in buffer for 30–60 minutes, followed by incubation with the selected radioligand diluted in the same buffer. Non-specific binding was determined in a subset of adjacent sections that were incubated with the radioligand and excess “cold” displacer ( Table 2 ). To remove unbound ligand, the sections were washed in a series of changes of buffer followed by distilled water. The sections were then dried under a stream of anhydrous air and exposed to film or phosphoimage plates ( Table 2 ). A set of 3H- or 125I-standards (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ) was included in each X-ray cassette to permit the conversion of the optical densities of silver grains in autoradiograms to specific activity of tissue-bound ligand to fentomole per milligram (fmol/mg) of tissue. Receptor binding density (expressed as the specific activity of tissue-bound ligand) was analyzed in 11 nuclei of each medulla (see above). The one exception was 3H-nicotine binding in which we used for reference and comparison the values previously obtained by us in 5 nuclei ( Kinney et al., 1993 ; Nachmanoff et al., 1998 ). The selected nuclei were analyzed at 2 standardized brainstem levels (2 specific and 1 nonspecific autoradiograms for each nucleus, 4 measurements for each paired nucleus), according to standard sampling procedures established in our laboratory ( Kinney et al., 2001 ). As there was no significant difference in binding measurements between the right and left (paired) nuclei, binding densities were combined and expressed as a mean ± standard error of the mean. Generation of Brainstem Autoradiograms The MCID Elite 6 imaging system (Imaging Research Inc., Ontario, CA) was used to perform quantitative densitometry of autoradiographs. Optical densities were converted to specific activities of tissue bound ligand in fmol/mg tissue with 3H or 125I-standards. Receptor binding density was determined in each brainstem nucleus by digitizing the boundaries of nuclei upon the color image of the autoradiogram displayed on the computer monitor. Calculations to equate for nonspecific binding were made if needed. Specific activity data are presented as computer-generated mosaics with an increasing linear color step scale for each ligand. The quantitative data for comparison of binding levels across different radioligands are presented with a “normalized scale” of the percentage of binding relative to a nucleus with high binding, thus the ION (100%) for nAChR markers or raphé obscurus (100%) for 5-HT markers. Binding levels are then compared by the following scale: 0: no binding; 1+: low binding (1–25%); 2+: moderate binding (26–50%); 3+: high binding (51–75%); 4+: very high binding (76–100%); 5+: intense binding (>101%). Serotonergic Markers in the Infant Medulla For neurochemical analysis of 5-HT1A receptors and 5-HTT binding, and immunocytochemistry analysis for quantification of 5-HT cell number as markers of the 5-HT system, we combined nAChR observations in recently acquired tissue specimens with 5-HT related observations based upon the established database in our laboratory ( Zec et al., 1996 ; Paterson et al., 2006b ; Kinney et al., 2007 ). Our methods and distribution patterns for 5-HT1A receptors, 5-HTT binding, and 5-HT neuronal density have been published previously ( Paterson et al., 2006b ; Kinney et al., 2007 ). Double-Label Immunofluorescence for the Co-localization of Nicotinic Receptors and 5-HT Neurons Double-label immunofluorescence was performed to determine co-localization and distribution of ?4 nAChR (Chemicon) and 5-HT neurons ( Table 1 ) using alternating sections on the paraffin-embedded cases above (n=5). The same methods described above were employed with the exception of 20 minutes of citrate buffer retrieval and no peroxidase blocking reagent treatment before the cocktail mixture of antibodies was applied to the tissue ON at 4°C after which the appropriate Alexa-Fluor secondary antibodies (Invetrogen Molecular Probes, Eugene, Oregon, USA) were applied ( Table 1 , 1 hr). Omission of the primary antibody resulted in no staining. Slides were viewed using either FITC or TRITC filters using a Olympus BX51 microscope (Olympus America Inc., Melville, NY). Images were captured using a Photometrics Cool Snap Fx camera (Photometrics, Tucson, CA) and MICD Elite 6.0 program (Imaging Research Inc., Ontario, Canada). Images were pseudo-colored and merged using Adobe Photoshop 6.0. Statistical Analysis All data are presented as the mean ± standard error of the mean. Linear regression analysis was used to determine the effects of postconceptional age and postmortem interval on receptor binding. P-values <0.05 were considered significant.  Clinical Database Brainstems were obtained from autopsies in the Departments of Pathology, Children’s Hospital Boston and Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, and the office of the Chief Medical Examiner, San Diego, CA with approval of the Committee on Clinical Investigation. Fetal age was determined by the standard method of foot-length measurements. All ages (in weeks) were expressed as postconceptional age which is the sum of gestational plus postnatal age.  Single-label Immunocytochemistry for the Developmental Profile of nAChRs Immunocytochemistry was performed with antibodies to ?4 and 5-HT cells ( Table 1 ). Medullae were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, cut into 3 mm blocks, embedded in paraffin, serially or stepped sectioned at 4 ?m-thick in the coronal plane, and mounted upon glass microscopic slides. The paraffin sections were de-waxed and re-hydrated through to water. Antigen retrieval was preformed using 10% citrate buffer at 195 °F for 10 minutes, and following phosphate buffered saline (PBS) washes, sections were treated with peroxidase blocking reagent (Dako Cytomation, Carpinteria, CA) for 20 minutes. Tissue sections were blocked for 1 hour in 4% normal goat serum and 0.1% triton X following incubation with the primary antibody ( Table 1 ). Following PBS washes, tissues were incubated with secondary antibodies followed by ABC elite kit (1hr, Vector, Burlingame, CA) and reacted with di-amino denzadine substrate (Dako Cytomation, Carpinteria, CA). All sections for the same antibody were stained in the same run and in all cases staining failed to occur with omission of the primary antibody. In this study the Chemicon and Covance ?4 nAChR antibodies produced identical immunostaining patterns in the paraffin-embedded human medulla which was comparative to that of positive control tissues (rat brain) and to those reported previously in rodents ( Cucchiaro and Commons, 2003 ) and rabbits (( Cucchiaro and Commons, 2003 ; Centeno et al., 2004 ). Specificity for human brain tissues using western blot characteristics for the Covance antibody has been previously reported ( Whiting and Lindstrom, 1988 ) with immunolabelling being eliminated in brain sections from ?4 knock out mice ( Whiteaker et al., 2006 ). For analysis optimum results for ?4 were obtained using the Covance antibody for DAB staining and the Chemicon antibody for immunofluorescence. Each case had a minimum of three stained sections for analysis. The medullary nuclei were identified anatomically in reference to the human brainstem atlas of Olszewski and Baxter (1982) , with the exception of the raphé nuclei, which were classified according to the atlas of Paxinos and Huang (1995) . The levels and nuclei at which analysis was performed are presented with their atlas number ( Olszewski and Baxter, 1982 ) in parentheses: 1) mid-medulla, level of nucleus of Roller (Plate X), for analysis of the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS), dorsal motor nucleus of vagus (DMX), hypoglossal nucleus, principal inferior olive (ION), medial accessory olive, and arcuate nucleus; 2) rostral medulla (Plate XII), for analysis of the raphé obscurus, paragigantocellularis lateralis (PGCL), gigantocellularis, intermediate reticular zone, dorsal accessory olive, ION, and arcuate nucleus. As defined by us, the medullary 5-HT system consists of neurons with their cell bodies located in the raphé (raphé obscurus and raphé magnus), extra-raphé (PGCL, gigantocellularis, intermediate reticular zone, and subtrigeminal nucleus) and ventral positions, including the arcuate nucleus, and projection sites that mediate cardiovascular and respiratory functions, e.g., NTS, DMX, and hypoglossal nucleus ( Kinney et al., 2007 ). Immunostained sections were visualized using a Olympus BX51 microscope (Olympus America Inc., Melville, NY) and representative images captured using an Olympus DP71 camera (Olympus America Inc., Melville, NY) and Microsuite Biological Suite 5 computer software. Images were saved as .tiff files and image size and contrast adjusted in Adobe Photoshop Software (Adobe systems, San Jose, CA). Figures were constructed in CorelDraw Graphics Suite 12 (Corel Corporation, Ottowa, CA) including the addition of text and scale bars.  Nicotinic Receptor Binding in the Infant Medulla with Tissue Autoradiography We investigated nAChR binding in newly acquired specimens with 4 different radioligands, each with different affinities to different subunits of the nAChRs ( Table 2 ). Blocks of fresh infant medullae, stored at ?70oC until use, were serially sectioned at 20 ?m on a motorized Leitz cryostat and mounted on glass microscopic slides. For each radioligand, the general methods of tissue autoradiography were identical ( Kinney et al., 1993 ); specific details for each radioligand are provided in Table 2 . The unfixed sections were preincubated in buffer for 30–60 minutes, followed by incubation with the selected radioligand diluted in the same buffer. Non-specific binding was determined in a subset of adjacent sections that were incubated with the radioligand and excess “cold” displacer ( Table 2 ). To remove unbound ligand, the sections were washed in a series of changes of buffer followed by distilled water. The sections were then dried under a stream of anhydrous air and exposed to film or phosphoimage plates ( Table 2 ). A set of 3H- or 125I-standards (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ) was included in each X-ray cassette to permit the conversion of the optical densities of silver grains in autoradiograms to specific activity of tissue-bound ligand to fentomole per milligram (fmol/mg) of tissue. Receptor binding density (expressed as the specific activity of tissue-bound ligand) was analyzed in 11 nuclei of each medulla (see above). The one exception was 3H-nicotine binding in which we used for reference and comparison the values previously obtained by us in 5 nuclei ( Kinney et al., 1993 ; Nachmanoff et al., 1998 ). The selected nuclei were analyzed at 2 standardized brainstem levels (2 specific and 1 nonspecific autoradiograms for each nucleus, 4 measurements for each paired nucleus), according to standard sampling procedures established in our laboratory ( Kinney et al., 2001 ). As there was no significant difference in binding measurements between the right and left (paired) nuclei, binding densities were combined and expressed as a mean ± standard error of the mean.  Generation of Brainstem Autoradiograms The MCID Elite 6 imaging system (Imaging Research Inc., Ontario, CA) was used to perform quantitative densitometry of autoradiographs. Optical densities were converted to specific activities of tissue bound ligand in fmol/mg tissue with 3H or 125I-standards. Receptor binding density was determined in each brainstem nucleus by digitizing the boundaries of nuclei upon the color image of the autoradiogram displayed on the computer monitor. Calculations to equate for nonspecific binding were made if needed. Specific activity data are presented as computer-generated mosaics with an increasing linear color step scale for each ligand. The quantitative data for comparison of binding levels across different radioligands are presented with a “normalized scale” of the percentage of binding relative to a nucleus with high binding, thus the ION (100%) for nAChR markers or raphé obscurus (100%) for 5-HT markers. Binding levels are then compared by the following scale: 0: no binding; 1+: low binding (1–25%); 2+: moderate binding (26–50%); 3+: high binding (51–75%); 4+: very high binding (76–100%); 5+: intense binding (>101%).  Serotonergic Markers in the Infant Medulla For neurochemical analysis of 5-HT1A receptors and 5-HTT binding, and immunocytochemistry analysis for quantification of 5-HT cell number as markers of the 5-HT system, we combined nAChR observations in recently acquired tissue specimens with 5-HT related observations based upon the established database in our laboratory ( Zec et al., 1996 ; Paterson et al., 2006b ; Kinney et al., 2007 ). Our methods and distribution patterns for 5-HT1A receptors, 5-HTT binding, and 5-HT neuronal density have been published previously ( Paterson et al., 2006b ; Kinney et al., 2007 ).  Double-Label Immunofluorescence for the Co-localization of Nicotinic Receptors and 5-HT Neurons Double-label immunofluorescence was performed to determine co-localization and distribution of ?4 nAChR (Chemicon) and 5-HT neurons ( Table 1 ) using alternating sections on the paraffin-embedded cases above (n=5). The same methods described above were employed with the exception of 20 minutes of citrate buffer retrieval and no peroxidase blocking reagent treatment before the cocktail mixture of antibodies was applied to the tissue ON at 4°C after which the appropriate Alexa-Fluor secondary antibodies (Invetrogen Molecular Probes, Eugene, Oregon, USA) were applied ( Table 1 , 1 hr). Omission of the primary antibody resulted in no staining. Slides were viewed using either FITC or TRITC filters using a Olympus BX51 microscope (Olympus America Inc., Melville, NY). Images were captured using a Photometrics Cool Snap Fx camera (Photometrics, Tucson, CA) and MICD Elite 6.0 program (Imaging Research Inc., Ontario, Canada). Images were pseudo-colored and merged using Adobe Photoshop 6.0.  Statistical Analysis All data are presented as the mean ± standard error of the mean. Linear regression analysis was used to determine the effects of postconceptional age and postmortem interval on receptor binding. P-values <0.05 were considered significant.  Immunocytochemistry Clinical Database For immunocytochemistry, 9 medullae fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin were examined. The ages of the cases in postconceptional weeks were: 15, 23, 30, 37, 38, 42, 52 (3 postnatal months), 80 (10 postnatal months), and 92 (approximately 1 year) weeks. The mean age was 45.4±8.5 postconceptional weeks. The causes of death were: spontaneous abortion (n=2); cardiopulmonary disease (n=3); Fryns Syndrome (n=1); neuroblastoma (n=1), and mild hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (n=2). There were no histopathologic brainstem changes in any case upon standard neuropathologic examination. Postmortem intervals ranged from 11–48 hours (median 12 hours), with no visually obvious effect of postmortem interval upon immunostaining. The Developmental Distribution of the ?4 nAChR Subunit The earliest time-point examined by us of ?4 immunostaining was 15 gestational weeks, i.e., early in the second trimester, and the latest time-point, 13 postnatal months, i.e., the end of infancy. At 15 weeks, we previously reported that early differentiating 5-HT neurons are present in raphé obscurus, raphé pallidus, gigantocellularis, and PGCL, as well as scattered within the arcuate nucleus along the ventral medullary surface ( Kinney et al., 2007 ). At this same age, we now report that ?4 was expressed by differentiating (5-HT and non-5-HT) neurons in virtually all nuclei throughout the medulla, but with variable intensity of immunostaining ( Figure 1 ). Notably, moderate immunostaining was present upon neuronal cell bodies in the in the raphé obscurus ( Figure 1A ) and extra-raphé ( Figure 1E ), i.e., sites of 5-HT cell bodies. Intense immunoreactivity was also present in sites involved in cardiorespiratory control and which are known to receive heavy 5-HT projections, i.e., hypoglossal nucleus (upper airway patency) ( Figure 1A ) and DMX (preganglionic outflow of the parasympathetic system), with a mild degree of immunostaining in the nucleus ambiguous (innervation of larynx and pharynx). The undifferentiated neurons of the primorida of the ION expressed mild immunostaining ( Figure 1A ). Of note, ?4 immunostaining was detected in the early differentiating cytoplasm of scattered germinal cells of the rhombic lip ( Figure 1B ): these immunopositive cells were immature with a small amount of cytoplasm rimming the large nucleus. Furthermore, ?4 immunopositive neurons with trailing processes were seen adjacent to the rhombic lip at the ventrolateral medullary surface ( Figure 1C ). Intense punctate immunoreactivity was also present throughout the neuropil ( Figure 1E, F ). In the 8 cases ranging in age from 23 gestational weeks (midgestation) to 13 postnatal months, the pattern of ?4 immunostaining was essentially the same as that at 15 gestational weeks with no obvious developmental differences in the intensity or topography ( Figure 2 ). The two exceptions were found in known derivatives of the rhombic lip, i.e., arcuate nucleus and ION ( Figure 3 ). In both of these regions, there was an obvious visual increase in the intensity of immunostaining from 23 to 44 gestational weeks ( Figure 3 ); thereafter staining intensity did not visually change. Relationship of ?4 to 5-HT Neuronal Cell Bodies With the application of double-label immunocytochemistry, we found that at as early as 15 gestational weeks, 5-HT (and non 5-HT) neurons in the raphé obscurus ( Figure 4A-C ) and extra-raphé (data not shown) co-localized with ?4. This same pattern of co-localization was observed at term ( Figure 4D-F ), 3 postnatal months, and 10 postnatal months ( Figure 5 ). In addition, 5-HT neurons in the PGCL ( Figure 6C ), and arcuate nucleus ( Figure 6F ) co-localized with ?4 at these ages. The ?4 immunostaining was discrete and punctuate upon the 5-HT cell bodies ( Figures 4 and 6 ), consistent with postsynaptic receptor localization ( Figure 6C ). The Quantitative Distribution of nAChR Binding in the Human Infant Medulla Autoradiography Clinical Database We compared the binding patterns of three specific nAChR radioligands in newly accrued tissues to each other and to binding to the broad radioligand 3H-nicotine (the later determined in our archival dataset) ( Kinney et al., 1993 ; Nachmanoff et al., 1998 ). In the current (non-published cases), nAChR receptor binding to 3H-epibatidine, 3H-cytisine, and 125I-bgt was analyzed in 5 infant cases at 39 and 41 weeks, and 4, 6 and 9 postnatal months (mean: 55.5±6.9 postconceptional weeks). The causes of death were: congenital heart disease, n=3; acute pneumonia, n=1; and accidental asphyxia, n=1; there was no primary brainstem histopathology in any case. The mean postmortem interval was 14.6±2.0 hours. There was no effect of postmortem interval upon nAChR binding, as previously reported by us for 3H-nicotine ( Nachmanoff et al., 1998 ; Duncan et al., 2008 ). We also compared the quantitative distribution of nAChR binding with each of the three radioligands under study (exception 3H-cytisine due to insufficient data) to 5-HT receptor and transporter binding, and 5-HT neuronal density in our archival database ( Paterson et al., 2006b ; Kinney et al., 2007 ). General observations The relative distribution of nAChR binding with 3H-nicotine, 3H-epibatidine, 3H-cytisine and, 125I-bgt varied across medullary nuclei depending on the radioligand used ( Table 3 , 4 ) ( Figure 7 ), as expected given that differences in binding patterns are based on the affinity of each ligand to specific nAChR subunits ( Table 2 ). For all radioligands except 125I-bgt, the highest binding was striking in the ION ( Table 3 ) ( Figure 7 ). Accordingly, we arbitrarily defined the binding level in the ION as the “internal standard” at 100% for each nAChR radioligand and calculated the binding in each nucleus for each radioligand as a percent of this standard ( Table 4 ). In this way, we were able to compare the relative binding levels among the radioligands to each other. While several developmental changes in nAChR binding levels were observed with different radioligands we found that the major postnatal changes in binding occurred in the DMX because they involved changes in more than one radioligand, i.e., 3H-epibatidine and 125I-bgt ( Table 5 ) ( Figure 8 ). <sup>3</sup>H-Nicotine Binding From analysis in this study and the archival dataset, we observed that 3H-nicotine binding which demonstrates affinity to all nAChRs was the highest in the ION ( Table 3 ), with 50–80% higher levels than that in any other nucleus (p<0.001) ( Figure 7A ) ( Kinney et al., 1993 ). The lowest detectable binding was in the raphé obscurus, no binding was detectable in the arcuate nucleus at the ventral surface ( Table 3 ). There were no significant changes in 3H-nicotine binding in any nucleus analyzed over the age-range studied (38–66 postconceptional weeks) ( Table 5 ). <sup>3</sup>H-Epibatidine Binding Tritiated-epibatidine binding (affinity to the ?2–4, ?2, and ?4) was visually prominent in all medullary nuclei, in contrast to the overall low binding in these nuclei to 3H-nicotine (with the obvious exception of the ION). As with 3H-nicotine binding, 3H-epibatidine binding was highest in the ION, with binding levels approximately 80% higher than those of the raphé obscurus and arcuate nucleus and 43% higher than the NTS and DMX ( Table 3 ) ( Figure 7B ). Notably, binding in the arcuate nucleus was visually distinct in contrast to its absence with 3H-nicotine binding ( Figure 7 ). Of all the radioligands analyzed, the pattern and intensity of 3H-epibatidine binding most closely resembled that of the ?4 immunostaining. There was a significant decrease in 3H-epibatine binding with increasing postconceptional age in two nuclei, the DMX (p=0.01) ( Table 5 ) ( Figure 8A ) and dorsal accessory olive (p=0.02) ( Table 5 ). <sup>3</sup>H-Cytisine Binding In the 2 available cases (39 and 41 postconceptional weeks), 3H-cytisine binding to ?4?2 was highest in the ION, as well as in the dorsal accessory olive ( Table 3 ). The binding in all tegmental nuclei, however, was very low, even more so than that for 3H-nicotine ( Table 4 ) ( Figure 7C ). Interestingly, binding in the medial accessory olive was approximately 80% lower than that in the other components of the olivary complex, i.e., ION and dorsal accessory nucleus. Evaluation of the developmental profile in infancy was precluded by the small sample size. <sup>125</sup>I-Bungarotoxin Binding The pattern of binding to homomeric nAChRs with 125I-bgt was distinctly different from that of 3H-nicotine, 3H-epipatidine, and 3H-cysteine, i.e., all heteromeric nAChRs. In contrast to the highest binding with all of the heteromeric radioligands in the ION, binding with 125I-bgt to ?7 was highest in the DMX and NTS ( Table 3 , 4 ), being three-fold higher than that in the ION in the DMX, and one-fold higher in the NTS ( Table 3 ) ( Figure 7D ). The lowest binding was present in the arcuate nucleus, although it was still visually distinct. There were significant decreases in 125I-bgt binding with increasing postconceptional age in four nuclei: NTS (p=0.02), DMX (p=0.03) ( Figure 8B ), PGCL (p=0.01), and arcuate nucleus (p=0.002) ( Table 5 ). These changes are in contrast to the findings above of changes occurring in two nuclei with 3H-epibatine and in none with 3H-nicotine. Interactions between nAChR binding and Markers of the 5-HT System during Infancy Using the unique archival normative data concerning 5-HT markers in our laboratory, we compared the developmental profiles of nAChR expression and 5-HT neuronal density, 5-HT receptor binding, and 5-HTT binding of the medullary 5-HT system. This analysis revealed that in only one nucleus, the PGCL, were there simultaneous changes in both nicotinic and 5-HT-related markers, i.e., there was an increase in 5-HT1A receptor binding and decrease in ?7 receptor binding with increasing age in early infancy ( Table 5 ) ( Figure 9 ), with the “cross-over” time-point at 2–3 months. While we found decreasing nAChR binding with increasing postnatal age in the vagal complex (DMX [3H-epibatine and 125I-bgt] and NTS [125I-bgt]), dorsal accessory olive (3H-epibitine), and arcuate nucleus (125I-bgt), there were no concomitant changes in these nuclei in any 5-HT maker ( Table 5 ). In the hypoglossal nucleus, 5-HT1A receptor binding increased with increasing postconceptional age, yet there were no changes in nAChR binding over the same time-period. We found no developmental changes for either nicotinic or 5-HT markers in the raphé obscurus, intermediate reticular zone, or gigantocellularis nucleus i.e., in all sites of 5-HT neurons ( Kinney et al., 2007 ), ION, or medial accessory olive ( Table 5 ). In addition, 5-HTT binding and 5-HT neuronal densities were unchanged in any nuclei over infancy ( Table 5 ). In essence, we found that dynamic changes in either the nAChR and/or 5-HT markers occurred in 6 of the 11 (55%) nuclei sampled throughout infancy indicating complex developmental profiles simultaneously in the nicotinic and 5-HT systems in the medulla ( Figure 10 ).  Clinical Database For immunocytochemistry, 9 medullae fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin were examined. The ages of the cases in postconceptional weeks were: 15, 23, 30, 37, 38, 42, 52 (3 postnatal months), 80 (10 postnatal months), and 92 (approximately 1 year) weeks. The mean age was 45.4±8.5 postconceptional weeks. The causes of death were: spontaneous abortion (n=2); cardiopulmonary disease (n=3); Fryns Syndrome (n=1); neuroblastoma (n=1), and mild hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (n=2). There were no histopathologic brainstem changes in any case upon standard neuropathologic examination. Postmortem intervals ranged from 11–48 hours (median 12 hours), with no visually obvious effect of postmortem interval upon immunostaining.  The Developmental Distribution of the ?4 nAChR Subunit The earliest time-point examined by us of ?4 immunostaining was 15 gestational weeks, i.e., early in the second trimester, and the latest time-point, 13 postnatal months, i.e., the end of infancy. At 15 weeks, we previously reported that early differentiating 5-HT neurons are present in raphé obscurus, raphé pallidus, gigantocellularis, and PGCL, as well as scattered within the arcuate nucleus along the ventral medullary surface ( Kinney et al., 2007 ). At this same age, we now report that ?4 was expressed by differentiating (5-HT and non-5-HT) neurons in virtually all nuclei throughout the medulla, but with variable intensity of immunostaining ( Figure 1 ). Notably, moderate immunostaining was present upon neuronal cell bodies in the in the raphé obscurus ( Figure 1A ) and extra-raphé ( Figure 1E ), i.e., sites of 5-HT cell bodies. Intense immunoreactivity was also present in sites involved in cardiorespiratory control and which are known to receive heavy 5-HT projections, i.e., hypoglossal nucleus (upper airway patency) ( Figure 1A ) and DMX (preganglionic outflow of the parasympathetic system), with a mild degree of immunostaining in the nucleus ambiguous (innervation of larynx and pharynx). The undifferentiated neurons of the primorida of the ION expressed mild immunostaining ( Figure 1A ). Of note, ?4 immunostaining was detected in the early differentiating cytoplasm of scattered germinal cells of the rhombic lip ( Figure 1B ): these immunopositive cells were immature with a small amount of cytoplasm rimming the large nucleus. Furthermore, ?4 immunopositive neurons with trailing processes were seen adjacent to the rhombic lip at the ventrolateral medullary surface ( Figure 1C ). Intense punctate immunoreactivity was also present throughout the neuropil ( Figure 1E, F ). In the 8 cases ranging in age from 23 gestational weeks (midgestation) to 13 postnatal months, the pattern of ?4 immunostaining was essentially the same as that at 15 gestational weeks with no obvious developmental differences in the intensity or topography ( Figure 2 ). The two exceptions were found in known derivatives of the rhombic lip, i.e., arcuate nucleus and ION ( Figure 3 ). In both of these regions, there was an obvious visual increase in the intensity of immunostaining from 23 to 44 gestational weeks ( Figure 3 ); thereafter staining intensity did not visually change.  Relationship of ?4 to 5-HT Neuronal Cell Bodies With the application of double-label immunocytochemistry, we found that at as early as 15 gestational weeks, 5-HT (and non 5-HT) neurons in the raphé obscurus ( Figure 4A-C ) and extra-raphé (data not shown) co-localized with ?4. This same pattern of co-localization was observed at term ( Figure 4D-F ), 3 postnatal months, and 10 postnatal months ( Figure 5 ). In addition, 5-HT neurons in the PGCL ( Figure 6C ), and arcuate nucleus ( Figure 6F ) co-localized with ?4 at these ages. The ?4 immunostaining was discrete and punctuate upon the 5-HT cell bodies ( Figures 4 and 6 ), consistent with postsynaptic receptor localization ( Figure 6C ).  The Quantitative Distribution of nAChR Binding in the Human Infant Medulla Autoradiography Clinical Database We compared the binding patterns of three specific nAChR radioligands in newly accrued tissues to each other and to binding to the broad radioligand 3H-nicotine (the later determined in our archival dataset) ( Kinney et al., 1993 ; Nachmanoff et al., 1998 ). In the current (non-published cases), nAChR receptor binding to 3H-epibatidine, 3H-cytisine, and 125I-bgt was analyzed in 5 infant cases at 39 and 41 weeks, and 4, 6 and 9 postnatal months (mean: 55.5±6.9 postconceptional weeks). The causes of death were: congenital heart disease, n=3; acute pneumonia, n=1; and accidental asphyxia, n=1; there was no primary brainstem histopathology in any case. The mean postmortem interval was 14.6±2.0 hours. There was no effect of postmortem interval upon nAChR binding, as previously reported by us for 3H-nicotine ( Nachmanoff et al., 1998 ; Duncan et al., 2008 ). We also compared the quantitative distribution of nAChR binding with each of the three radioligands under study (exception 3H-cytisine due to insufficient data) to 5-HT receptor and transporter binding, and 5-HT neuronal density in our archival database ( Paterson et al., 2006b ; Kinney et al., 2007 ).  General observations The relative distribution of nAChR binding with 3H-nicotine, 3H-epibatidine, 3H-cytisine and, 125I-bgt varied across medullary nuclei depending on the radioligand used ( Table 3 , 4 ) ( Figure 7 ), as expected given that differences in binding patterns are based on the affinity of each ligand to specific nAChR subunits ( Table 2 ). For all radioligands except 125I-bgt, the highest binding was striking in the ION ( Table 3 ) ( Figure 7 ). Accordingly, we arbitrarily defined the binding level in the ION as the “internal standard” at 100% for each nAChR radioligand and calculated the binding in each nucleus for each radioligand as a percent of this standard ( Table 4 ). In this way, we were able to compare the relative binding levels among the radioligands to each other. While several developmental changes in nAChR binding levels were observed with different radioligands we found that the major postnatal changes in binding occurred in the DMX because they involved changes in more than one radioligand, i.e., 3H-epibatidine and 125I-bgt ( Table 5 ) ( Figure 8 ).  <sup>3</sup>H-Nicotine Binding From analysis in this study and the archival dataset, we observed that 3H-nicotine binding which demonstrates affinity to all nAChRs was the highest in the ION ( Table 3 ), with 50–80% higher levels than that in any other nucleus (p<0.001) ( Figure 7A ) ( Kinney et al., 1993 ). The lowest detectable binding was in the raphé obscurus, no binding was detectable in the arcuate nucleus at the ventral surface ( Table 3 ). There were no significant changes in 3H-nicotine binding in any nucleus analyzed over the age-range studied (38–66 postconceptional weeks) ( Table 5 ).  <sup>3</sup>H-Epibatidine Binding Tritiated-epibatidine binding (affinity to the ?2–4, ?2, and ?4) was visually prominent in all medullary nuclei, in contrast to the overall low binding in these nuclei to 3H-nicotine (with the obvious exception of the ION). As with 3H-nicotine binding, 3H-epibatidine binding was highest in the ION, with binding levels approximately 80% higher than those of the raphé obscurus and arcuate nucleus and 43% higher than the NTS and DMX ( Table 3 ) ( Figure 7B ). Notably, binding in the arcuate nucleus was visually distinct in contrast to its absence with 3H-nicotine binding ( Figure 7 ). Of all the radioligands analyzed, the pattern and intensity of 3H-epibatidine binding most closely resembled that of the ?4 immunostaining. There was a significant decrease in 3H-epibatine binding with increasing postconceptional age in two nuclei, the DMX (p=0.01) ( Table 5 ) ( Figure 8A ) and dorsal accessory olive (p=0.02) ( Table 5 ).  <sup>3</sup>H-Cytisine Binding In the 2 available cases (39 and 41 postconceptional weeks), 3H-cytisine binding to ?4?2 was highest in the ION, as well as in the dorsal accessory olive ( Table 3 ). The binding in all tegmental nuclei, however, was very low, even more so than that for 3H-nicotine ( Table 4 ) ( Figure 7C ). Interestingly, binding in the medial accessory olive was approximately 80% lower than that in the other components of the olivary complex, i.e., ION and dorsal accessory nucleus. Evaluation of the developmental profile in infancy was precluded by the small sample size.  <sup>125</sup>I-Bungarotoxin Binding The pattern of binding to homomeric nAChRs with 125I-bgt was distinctly different from that of 3H-nicotine, 3H-epipatidine, and 3H-cysteine, i.e., all heteromeric nAChRs. In contrast to the highest binding with all of the heteromeric radioligands in the ION, binding with 125I-bgt to ?7 was highest in the DMX and NTS ( Table 3 , 4 ), being three-fold higher than that in the ION in the DMX, and one-fold higher in the NTS ( Table 3 ) ( Figure 7D ). The lowest binding was present in the arcuate nucleus, although it was still visually distinct. There were significant decreases in 125I-bgt binding with increasing postconceptional age in four nuclei: NTS (p=0.02), DMX (p=0.03) ( Figure 8B ), PGCL (p=0.01), and arcuate nucleus (p=0.002) ( Table 5 ). These changes are in contrast to the findings above of changes occurring in two nuclei with 3H-epibatine and in none with 3H-nicotine.  Interactions between nAChR binding and Markers of the 5-HT System during Infancy Using the unique archival normative data concerning 5-HT markers in our laboratory, we compared the developmental profiles of nAChR expression and 5-HT neuronal density, 5-HT receptor binding, and 5-HTT binding of the medullary 5-HT system. This analysis revealed that in only one nucleus, the PGCL, were there simultaneous changes in both nicotinic and 5-HT-related markers, i.e., there was an increase in 5-HT1A receptor binding and decrease in ?7 receptor binding with increasing age in early infancy ( Table 5 ) ( Figure 9 ), with the “cross-over” time-point at 2–3 months. While we found decreasing nAChR binding with increasing postnatal age in the vagal complex (DMX [3H-epibatine and 125I-bgt] and NTS [125I-bgt]), dorsal accessory olive (3H-epibitine), and arcuate nucleus (125I-bgt), there were no concomitant changes in these nuclei in any 5-HT maker ( Table 5 ). In the hypoglossal nucleus, 5-HT1A receptor binding increased with increasing postconceptional age, yet there were no changes in nAChR binding over the same time-period. We found no developmental changes for either nicotinic or 5-HT markers in the raphé obscurus, intermediate reticular zone, or gigantocellularis nucleus i.e., in all sites of 5-HT neurons ( Kinney et al., 2007 ), ION, or medial accessory olive ( Table 5 ). In addition, 5-HTT binding and 5-HT neuronal densities were unchanged in any nuclei over infancy ( Table 5 ). In essence, we found that dynamic changes in either the nAChR and/or 5-HT markers occurred in 6 of the 11 (55%) nuclei sampled throughout infancy indicating complex developmental profiles simultaneously in the nicotinic and 5-HT systems in the medulla ( Figure 10 ).  Potential Limitations of the Study A potential limitation of this study is the small sample size of fetal and infant medullae; yet normative tissues from human cases in early life are extraordinarily difficult to accrue, given that autopsies are extremely rare in this age-group. Despite the small sample size, we found robust developmental changes that underscore their potential validity. Obviously, ongoing accrual of cases is needed for confirmation and is in progress. While results from knockout mice studies on the specificity of currently available antibodies to nAChRs are unclear ( Whiteaker et al., 2006 ; Moser et al., 2007 ), extrapolation of these findings to other species, including humans, should be made with caution ( Jones and Wonnacott, 2005 ). However, the authors acknowledge that until specificity can be validated, interpretation of the results obtained with the use of the ?4 nAChR antibody in the human medulla should be made in combination with the distribution patterns of ligand binding. Furthermore the absence of a reliable ?7 antibody for use in human postmortem tissues and thus the inability to assess its protein distribution with Immunocytochemistry is another limitation of this study. In rats, however, ?7 protein expression is present in the NTS, DMX, hypoglossal nucleus and extra-raphé (a region containing 5-HT neurons) ( Dominguez del Toro et al., 1994 ). Thus, ?7 binding expression seen in the human infant medulla in this study appears similar to ?7 protein expression determined by immunohistochemistry in the rat.  Results Immunocytochemistry Clinical Database For immunocytochemistry, 9 medullae fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin were examined. The ages of the cases in postconceptional weeks were: 15, 23, 30, 37, 38, 42, 52 (3 postnatal months), 80 (10 postnatal months), and 92 (approximately 1 year) weeks. The mean age was 45.4±8.5 postconceptional weeks. The causes of death were: spontaneous abortion (n=2); cardiopulmonary disease (n=3); Fryns Syndrome (n=1); neuroblastoma (n=1), and mild hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (n=2). There were no histopathologic brainstem changes in any case upon standard neuropathologic examination. Postmortem intervals ranged from 11–48 hours (median 12 hours), with no visually obvious effect of postmortem interval upon immunostaining. The Developmental Distribution of the ?4 nAChR Subunit The earliest time-point examined by us of ?4 immunostaining was 15 gestational weeks, i.e., early in the second trimester, and the latest time-point, 13 postnatal months, i.e., the end of infancy. At 15 weeks, we previously reported that early differentiating 5-HT neurons are present in raphé obscurus, raphé pallidus, gigantocellularis, and PGCL, as well as scattered within the arcuate nucleus along the ventral medullary surface ( Kinney et al., 2007 ). At this same age, we now report that ?4 was expressed by differentiating (5-HT and non-5-HT) neurons in virtually all nuclei throughout the medulla, but with variable intensity of immunostaining ( Figure 1 ). Notably, moderate immunostaining was present upon neuronal cell bodies in the in the raphé obscurus ( Figure 1A ) and extra-raphé ( Figure 1E ), i.e., sites of 5-HT cell bodies. Intense immunoreactivity was also present in sites involved in cardiorespiratory control and which are known to receive heavy 5-HT projections, i.e., hypoglossal nucleus (upper airway patency) ( Figure 1A ) and DMX (preganglionic outflow of the parasympathetic system), with a mild degree of immunostaining in the nucleus ambiguous (innervation of larynx and pharynx). The undifferentiated neurons of the primorida of the ION expressed mild immunostaining ( Figure 1A ). Of note, ?4 immunostaining was detected in the early differentiating cytoplasm of scattered germinal cells of the rhombic lip ( Figure 1B ): these immunopositive cells were immature with a small amount of cytoplasm rimming the large nucleus. Furthermore, ?4 immunopositive neurons with trailing processes were seen adjacent to the rhombic lip at the ventrolateral medullary surface ( Figure 1C ). Intense punctate immunoreactivity was also present throughout the neuropil ( Figure 1E, F ). In the 8 cases ranging in age from 23 gestational weeks (midgestation) to 13 postnatal months, the pattern of ?4 immunostaining was essentially the same as that at 15 gestational weeks with no obvious developmental differences in the intensity or topography ( Figure 2 ). The two exceptions were found in known derivatives of the rhombic lip, i.e., arcuate nucleus and ION ( Figure 3 ). In both of these regions, there was an obvious visual increase in the intensity of immunostaining from 23 to 44 gestational weeks ( Figure 3 ); thereafter staining intensity did not visually change. Relationship of ?4 to 5-HT Neuronal Cell Bodies With the application of double-label immunocytochemistry, we found that at as early as 15 gestational weeks, 5-HT (and non 5-HT) neurons in the raphé obscurus ( Figure 4A-C ) and extra-raphé (data not shown) co-localized with ?4. This same pattern of co-localization was observed at term ( Figure 4D-F ), 3 postnatal months, and 10 postnatal months ( Figure 5 ). In addition, 5-HT neurons in the PGCL ( Figure 6C ), and arcuate nucleus ( Figure 6F ) co-localized with ?4 at these ages. The ?4 immunostaining was discrete and punctuate upon the 5-HT cell bodies ( Figures 4 and 6 ), consistent with postsynaptic receptor localization ( Figure 6C ). The Quantitative Distribution of nAChR Binding in the Human Infant Medulla Autoradiography Clinical Database We compared the binding patterns of three specific nAChR radioligands in newly accrued tissues to each other and to binding to the broad radioligand 3H-nicotine (the later determined in our archival dataset) ( Kinney et al., 1993 ; Nachmanoff et al., 1998 ). In the current (non-published cases), nAChR receptor binding to 3H-epibatidine, 3H-cytisine, and 125I-bgt was analyzed in 5 infant cases at 39 and 41 weeks, and 4, 6 and 9 postnatal months (mean: 55.5±6.9 postconceptional weeks). The causes of death were: congenital heart disease, n=3; acute pneumonia, n=1; and accidental asphyxia, n=1; there was no primary brainstem histopathology in any case. The mean postmortem interval was 14.6±2.0 hours. There was no effect of postmortem interval upon nAChR binding, as previously reported by us for 3H-nicotine ( Nachmanoff et al., 1998 ; Duncan et al., 2008 ). We also compared the quantitative distribution of nAChR binding with each of the three radioligands under study (exception 3H-cytisine due to insufficient data) to 5-HT receptor and transporter binding, and 5-HT neuronal density in our archival database ( Paterson et al., 2006b ; Kinney et al., 2007 ). General observations The relative distribution of nAChR binding with 3H-nicotine, 3H-epibatidine, 3H-cytisine and, 125I-bgt varied across medullary nuclei depending on the radioligand used ( Table 3 , 4 ) ( Figure 7 ), as expected given that differences in binding patterns are based on the affinity of each ligand to specific nAChR subunits ( Table 2 ). For all radioligands except 125I-bgt, the highest binding was striking in the ION ( Table 3 ) ( Figure 7 ). Accordingly, we arbitrarily defined the binding level in the ION as the “internal standard” at 100% for each nAChR radioligand and calculated the binding in each nucleus for each radioligand as a percent of this standard ( Table 4 ). In this way, we were able to compare the relative binding levels among the radioligands to each other. While several developmental changes in nAChR binding levels were observed with different radioligands we found that the major postnatal changes in binding occurred in the DMX because they involved changes in more than one radioligand, i.e., 3H-epibatidine and 125I-bgt ( Table 5 ) ( Figure 8 ). <sup>3</sup>H-Nicotine Binding From analysis in this study and the archival dataset, we observed that 3H-nicotine binding which demonstrates affinity to all nAChRs was the highest in the ION ( Table 3 ), with 50–80% higher levels than that in any other nucleus (p<0.001) ( Figure 7A ) ( Kinney et al., 1993 ). The lowest detectable binding was in the raphé obscurus, no binding was detectable in the arcuate nucleus at the ventral surface ( Table 3 ). There were no significant changes in 3H-nicotine binding in any nucleus analyzed over the age-range studied (38–66 postconceptional weeks) ( Table 5 ). <sup>3</sup>H-Epibatidine Binding Tritiated-epibatidine binding (affinity to the ?2–4, ?2, and ?4) was visually prominent in all medullary nuclei, in contrast to the overall low binding in these nuclei to 3H-nicotine (with the obvious exception of the ION). As with 3H-nicotine binding, 3H-epibatidine binding was highest in the ION, with binding levels approximately 80% higher than those of the raphé obscurus and arcuate nucleus and 43% higher than the NTS and DMX ( Table 3 ) ( Figure 7B ). Notably, binding in the arcuate nucleus was visually distinct in contrast to its absence with 3H-nicotine binding ( Figure 7 ). Of all the radioligands analyzed, the pattern and intensity of 3H-epibatidine binding most closely resembled that of the ?4 immunostaining. There was a significant decrease in 3H-epibatine binding with increasing postconceptional age in two nuclei, the DMX (p=0.01) ( Table 5 ) ( Figure 8A ) and dorsal accessory olive (p=0.02) ( Table 5 ). <sup>3</sup>H-Cytisine Binding In the 2 available cases (39 and 41 postconceptional weeks), 3H-cytisine binding to ?4?2 was highest in the ION, as well as in the dorsal accessory olive ( Table 3 ). The binding in all tegmental nuclei, however, was very low, even more so than that for 3H-nicotine ( Table 4 ) ( Figure 7C ). Interestingly, binding in the medial accessory olive was approximately 80% lower than that in the other components of the olivary complex, i.e., ION and dorsal accessory nucleus. Evaluation of the developmental profile in infancy was precluded by the small sample size. <sup>125</sup>I-Bungarotoxin Binding The pattern of binding to homomeric nAChRs with 125I-bgt was distinctly different from that of 3H-nicotine, 3H-epipatidine, and 3H-cysteine, i.e., all heteromeric nAChRs. In contrast to the highest binding with all of the heteromeric radioligands in the ION, binding with 125I-bgt to ?7 was highest in the DMX and NTS ( Table 3 , 4 ), being three-fold higher than that in the ION in the DMX, and one-fold higher in the NTS ( Table 3 ) ( Figure 7D ). The lowest binding was present in the arcuate nucleus, although it was still visually distinct. There were significant decreases in 125I-bgt binding with increasing postconceptional age in four nuclei: NTS (p=0.02), DMX (p=0.03) ( Figure 8B ), PGCL (p=0.01), and arcuate nucleus (p=0.002) ( Table 5 ). These changes are in contrast to the findings above of changes occurring in two nuclei with 3H-epibatine and in none with 3H-nicotine. Interactions between nAChR binding and Markers of the 5-HT System during Infancy Using the unique archival normative data concerning 5-HT markers in our laboratory, we compared the developmental profiles of nAChR expression and 5-HT neuronal density, 5-HT receptor binding, and 5-HTT binding of the medullary 5-HT system. This analysis revealed that in only one nucleus, the PGCL, were there simultaneous changes in both nicotinic and 5-HT-related markers, i.e., there was an increase in 5-HT1A receptor binding and decrease in ?7 receptor binding with increasing age in early infancy ( Table 5 ) ( Figure 9 ), with the “cross-over” time-point at 2–3 months. While we found decreasing nAChR binding with increasing postnatal age in the vagal complex (DMX [3H-epibatine and 125I-bgt] and NTS [125I-bgt]), dorsal accessory olive (3H-epibitine), and arcuate nucleus (125I-bgt), there were no concomitant changes in these nuclei in any 5-HT maker ( Table 5 ). In the hypoglossal nucleus, 5-HT1A receptor binding increased with increasing postconceptional age, yet there were no changes in nAChR binding over the same time-period. We found no developmental changes for either nicotinic or 5-HT markers in the raphé obscurus, intermediate reticular zone, or gigantocellularis nucleus i.e., in all sites of 5-HT neurons ( Kinney et al., 2007 ), ION, or medial accessory olive ( Table 5 ). In addition, 5-HTT binding and 5-HT neuronal densities were unchanged in any nuclei over infancy ( Table 5 ). In essence, we found that dynamic changes in either the nAChR and/or 5-HT markers occurred in 6 of the 11 (55%) nuclei sampled throughout infancy indicating complex developmental profiles simultaneously in the nicotinic and 5-HT systems in the medulla ( Figure 10 ).  Results Immunocytochemistry Clinical Database For immunocytochemistry, 9 medullae fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin were examined. The ages of the cases in postconceptional weeks were: 15, 23, 30, 37, 38, 42, 52 (3 postnatal months), 80 (10 postnatal months), and 92 (approximately 1 year) weeks. The mean age was 45.4±8.5 postconceptional weeks. The causes of death were: spontaneous abortion (n=2); cardiopulmonary disease (n=3); Fryns Syndrome (n=1); neuroblastoma (n=1), and mild hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (n=2). There were no histopathologic brainstem changes in any case upon standard neuropathologic examination. Postmortem intervals ranged from 11–48 hours (median 12 hours), with no visually obvious effect of postmortem interval upon immunostaining. The Developmental Distribution of the ?4 nAChR Subunit The earliest time-point examined by us of ?4 immunostaining was 15 gestational weeks, i.e., early in the second trimester, and the latest time-point, 13 postnatal months, i.e., the end of infancy. At 15 weeks, we previously reported that early differentiating 5-HT neurons are present in raphé obscurus, raphé pallidus, gigantocellularis, and PGCL, as well as scattered within the arcuate nucleus along the ventral medullary surface ( Kinney et al., 2007 ). At this same age, we now report that ?4 was expressed by differentiating (5-HT and non-5-HT) neurons in virtually all nuclei throughout the medulla, but with variable intensity of immunostaining ( Figure 1 ). Notably, moderate immunostaining was present upon neuronal cell bodies in the in the raphé obscurus ( Figure 1A ) and extra-raphé ( Figure 1E ), i.e., sites of 5-HT cell bodies. Intense immunoreactivity was also present in sites involved in cardiorespiratory control and which are known to receive heavy 5-HT projections, i.e., hypoglossal nucleus (upper airway patency) ( Figure 1A ) and DMX (preganglionic outflow of the parasympathetic system), with a mild degree of immunostaining in the nucleus ambiguous (innervation of larynx and pharynx). The undifferentiated neurons of the primorida of the ION expressed mild immunostaining ( Figure 1A ). Of note, ?4 immunostaining was detected in the early differentiating cytoplasm of scattered germinal cells of the rhombic lip ( Figure 1B ): these immunopositive cells were immature with a small amount of cytoplasm rimming the large nucleus. Furthermore, ?4 immunopositive neurons with trailing processes were seen adjacent to the rhombic lip at the ventrolateral medullary surface ( Figure 1C ). Intense punctate immunoreactivity was also present throughout the neuropil ( Figure 1E, F ). In the 8 cases ranging in age from 23 gestational weeks (midgestation) to 13 postnatal months, the pattern of ?4 immunostaining was essentially the same as that at 15 gestational weeks with no obvious developmental differences in the intensity or topography ( Figure 2 ). The two exceptions were found in known derivatives of the rhombic lip, i.e., arcuate nucleus and ION ( Figure 3 ). In both of these regions, there was an obvious visual increase in the intensity of immunostaining from 23 to 44 gestational weeks ( Figure 3 ); thereafter staining intensity did not visually change. Relationship of ?4 to 5-HT Neuronal Cell Bodies With the application of double-label immunocytochemistry, we found that at as early as 15 gestational weeks, 5-HT (and non 5-HT) neurons in the raphé obscurus ( Figure 4A-C ) and extra-raphé (data not shown) co-localized with ?4. This same pattern of co-localization was observed at term ( Figure 4D-F ), 3 postnatal months, and 10 postnatal months ( Figure 5 ). In addition, 5-HT neurons in the PGCL ( Figure 6C ), and arcuate nucleus ( Figure 6F ) co-localized with ?4 at these ages. The ?4 immunostaining was discrete and punctuate upon the 5-HT cell bodies ( Figures 4 and 6 ), consistent with postsynaptic receptor localization ( Figure 6C ). The Quantitative Distribution of nAChR Binding in the Human Infant Medulla Autoradiography Clinical Database We compared the binding patterns of three specific nAChR radioligands in newly accrued tissues to each other and to binding to the broad radioligand 3H-nicotine (the later determined in our archival dataset) ( Kinney et al., 1993 ; Nachmanoff et al., 1998 ). In the current (non-published cases), nAChR receptor binding to 3H-epibatidine, 3H-cytisine, and 125I-bgt was analyzed in 5 infant cases at 39 and 41 weeks, and 4, 6 and 9 postnatal months (mean: 55.5±6.9 postconceptional weeks). The causes of death were: congenital heart disease, n=3; acute pneumonia, n=1; and accidental asphyxia, n=1; there was no primary brainstem histopathology in any case. The mean postmortem interval was 14.6±2.0 hours. There was no effect of postmortem interval upon nAChR binding, as previously reported by us for 3H-nicotine ( Nachmanoff et al., 1998 ; Duncan et al., 2008 ). We also compared the quantitative distribution of nAChR binding with each of the three radioligands under study (exception 3H-cytisine due to insufficient data) to 5-HT receptor and transporter binding, and 5-HT neuronal density in our archival database ( Paterson et al., 2006b ; Kinney et al., 2007 ). General observations The relative distribution of nAChR binding with 3H-nicotine, 3H-epibatidine, 3H-cytisine and, 125I-bgt varied across medullary nuclei depending on the radioligand used ( Table 3 , 4 ) ( Figure 7 ), as expected given that differences in binding patterns are based on the affinity of each ligand to specific nAChR subunits ( Table 2 ). For all radioligands except 125I-bgt, the highest binding was striking in the ION ( Table 3 ) ( Figure 7 ). Accordingly, we arbitrarily defined the binding level in the ION as the “internal standard” at 100% for each nAChR radioligand and calculated the binding in each nucleus for each radioligand as a percent of this standard ( Table 4 ). In this way, we were able to compare the relative binding levels among the radioligands to each other. While several developmental changes in nAChR binding levels were observed with different radioligands we found that the major postnatal changes in binding occurred in the DMX because they involved changes in more than one radioligand, i.e., 3H-epibatidine and 125I-bgt ( Table 5 ) ( Figure 8 ). <sup>3</sup>H-Nicotine Binding From analysis in this study and the archival dataset, we observed that 3H-nicotine binding which demonstrates affinity to all nAChRs was the highest in the ION ( Table 3 ), with 50–80% higher levels than that in any other nucleus (p<0.001) ( Figure 7A ) ( Kinney et al., 1993 ). The lowest detectable binding was in the raphé obscurus, no binding was detectable in the arcuate nucleus at the ventral surface ( Table 3 ). There were no significant changes in 3H-nicotine binding in any nucleus analyzed over the age-range studied (38–66 postconceptional weeks) ( Table 5 ). <sup>3</sup>H-Epibatidine Binding Tritiated-epibatidine binding (affinity to the ?2–4, ?2, and ?4) was visually prominent in all medullary nuclei, in contrast to the overall low binding in these nuclei to 3H-nicotine (with the obvious exception of the ION). As with 3H-nicotine binding, 3H-epibatidine binding was highest in the ION, with binding levels approximately 80% higher than those of the raphé obscurus and arcuate nucleus and 43% higher than the NTS and DMX ( Table 3 ) ( Figure 7B ). Notably, binding in the arcuate nucleus was visually distinct in contrast to its absence with 3H-nicotine binding ( Figure 7 ). Of all the radioligands analyzed, the pattern and intensity of 3H-epibatidine binding most closely resembled that of the ?4 immunostaining. There was a significant decrease in 3H-epibatine binding with increasing postconceptional age in two nuclei, the DMX (p=0.01) ( Table 5 ) ( Figure 8A ) and dorsal accessory olive (p=0.02) ( Table 5 ). <sup>3</sup>H-Cytisine Binding In the 2 available cases (39 and 41 postconceptional weeks), 3H-cytisine binding to ?4?2 was highest in the ION, as well as in the dorsal accessory olive ( Table 3 ). The binding in all tegmental nuclei, however, was very low, even more so than that for 3H-nicotine ( Table 4 ) ( Figure 7C ). Interestingly, binding in the medial accessory olive was approximately 80% lower than that in the other components of the olivary complex, i.e., ION and dorsal accessory nucleus. Evaluation of the developmental profile in infancy was precluded by the small sample size. <sup>125</sup>I-Bungarotoxin Binding The pattern of binding to homomeric nAChRs with 125I-bgt was distinctly different from that of 3H-nicotine, 3H-epipatidine, and 3H-cysteine, i.e., all heteromeric nAChRs. In contrast to the highest binding with all of the heteromeric radioligands in the ION, binding with 125I-bgt to ?7 was highest in the DMX and NTS ( Table 3 , 4 ), being three-fold higher than that in the ION in the DMX, and one-fold higher in the NTS ( Table 3 ) ( Figure 7D ). The lowest binding was present in the arcuate nucleus, although it was still visually distinct. There were significant decreases in 125I-bgt binding with increasing postconceptional age in four nuclei: NTS (p=0.02), DMX (p=0.03) ( Figure 8B ), PGCL (p=0.01), and arcuate nucleus (p=0.002) ( Table 5 ). These changes are in contrast to the findings above of changes occurring in two nuclei with 3H-epibatine and in none with 3H-nicotine. Interactions between nAChR binding and Markers of the 5-HT System during Infancy Using the unique archival normative data concerning 5-HT markers in our laboratory, we compared the developmental profiles of nAChR expression and 5-HT neuronal density, 5-HT receptor binding, and 5-HTT binding of the medullary 5-HT system. This analysis revealed that in only one nucleus, the PGCL, were there simultaneous changes in both nicotinic and 5-HT-related markers, i.e., there was an increase in 5-HT1A receptor binding and decrease in ?7 receptor binding with increasing age in early infancy ( Table 5 ) ( Figure 9 ), with the “cross-over” time-point at 2–3 months. While we found decreasing nAChR binding with increasing postnatal age in the vagal complex (DMX [3H-epibatine and 125I-bgt] and NTS [125I-bgt]), dorsal accessory olive (3H-epibitine), and arcuate nucleus (125I-bgt), there were no concomitant changes in these nuclei in any 5-HT maker ( Table 5 ). In the hypoglossal nucleus, 5-HT1A receptor binding increased with increasing postconceptional age, yet there were no changes in nAChR binding over the same time-period. We found no developmental changes for either nicotinic or 5-HT markers in the raphé obscurus, intermediate reticular zone, or gigantocellularis nucleus i.e., in all sites of 5-HT neurons ( Kinney et al., 2007 ), ION, or medial accessory olive ( Table 5 ). In addition, 5-HTT binding and 5-HT neuronal densities were unchanged in any nuclei over infancy ( Table 5 ). In essence, we found that dynamic changes in either the nAChR and/or 5-HT markers occurred in 6 of the 11 (55%) nuclei sampled throughout infancy indicating complex developmental profiles simultaneously in the nicotinic and 5-HT systems in the medulla ( Figure 10 ).  Discussion The agonist nicotine in maternal cigarette smoke crosses the placenta into the fetal circulation and then crosses the fetal blood-brain-barrier to bind to brain nAChRs, with the potential to alter the development and function of the cholinergic, as well as other neurotransmitter, systems ( Luck et al., 1985 ; Slotkin et al., 2005 ; Slotkin et al., 2007a ; Dwyer et al., 2008 ). In this study, we defined the developmental topography of cholinergic nAChRs relative to the medullary 5-HT system in the human fetus and infant as a first step towards deciphering the underlying basis of the effect of exogenous nicotine in maternal cigarette smoke upon the developing human 5-HT system, i.e., a system of special interest in the link between SIDS and maternal cigarette smoking during pregnancy. Our major finding is that the maturational profiles of nAChRs and markers of 5-HT neuronal cell bodies, receptors, and transporter are complex and dynamic relative to one another in early life, suggesting a vulnerable period in their simultaneous development. Moreover, nAChR expression is present in virtually all medullary nuclei, including those that are comprised by 5-HT cell bodies or that receive 5-HT projections. The expression of nAChRs in cardiovascular, respiratory, and motor nuclei in the human fetal and infant medulla is supported by extensive animal data ( Swanson et al., 1987 ; Hellstrom-Lindahl et al., 1998 ; Ferreira et al., 2000 ; Cucchiaro and Commons, 2003 ; Kubin and Fenik, 2004 ; Padley et al., 2007 ). Rodent studies suggest that the cholinergic projections to medullary nuclei are primarily from the pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus and laterodorsal tegmental nucleus in the mesopons that are critical for arousal and the generation of REM sleep, suggesting that nAChRs also play an important role in these components of state regulation ( Frank et al., 2001 ; Lena at al., 2004 ; Padley et al., 2007 ; Rukhadze and Kubin, 2007 ). Of note, prenatal nicotine exposure interrupts normal sleep/wake cycling by reducing periods of REM sleep in the neonatal rat ( Frank et al., 2001 ), and ?2 knockout mice experience increased periods of REM ( Lena et al., 2004 ) and impaired respiration which is enhanced upon nicotine exposure ( Cohen et al., 2002 ). In the following discussion, we highlight insights from our data into the potential neuroanatomic substrate of the adverse effects of maternal cigarette smoke (nicotine) on the development and function of cardiovascular and respiratory 5-HT related networks in the human medulla. Fetal Expression of nAChRs in the Human Medulla In the immunocytochemical analysis of nAChR expression, we focused upon the ?4 subunit due to its high affinity to nicotine ( Benwell et al., 1988 ; Flores et al., 1992 ) and its known role in the medullary control of homeostasis ( Fonck et al., 2005 ; Hatori et al., 2006 ; Shao et al., 2008 ). We found ?4 expression at 15 gestational weeks by a subpopulation of germinal cells in the rhombic lip, the origin of cerebellar-relay nuclei in particular in the medulla and pons ( Rakic and Sidman, 1982 ; Landsberg et al., 2005 ). This observation suggests that ?4 plays a trophic role upon at least a subset of rhombic lip precursors. In embryonic and fetal development, acetylcholine and nicotine via nAChRs experimentally influence neuronal cell proliferation, migration, survival, and differentiation ( Opanashuk et al., 2001 ; Torrao and Britto, 2002 ). Functional nAChRs are present on stem and progenitor cells in the cerebral cortex of the mouse as early as embryonic day 10 ( Schneider et al., 2002 ). The trophic role of acetylcholine during early life is underscored by experiments in which ablation of basal forebrain cholinergic neurons results in reduced laminar thickness, neuronal size, and dendritic tree field in the cortical projection targets ( Hohmann et al., 1988 ; Robertson et al., 1998 ). In fetal monkey brains from offspring of mothers exposed to nicotine, regional neuronal cell loss, decrease in cell size, and abnormal neurite outgrowth are found ( Slotkin et al., 2005 ), suggesting that nAChR-mediated trophic effects are adversely altered by exogenous nicotine exposure; importantly, the prenatal effects persist postnatally ( Good et al., 2006 ; Slotkin et al., 2007b ). Of direct relevance to the rhombic lip, multiple nAChR subtypes are expressed by cultured rat granule neurons, derivatives of the rhombic lip in the cerebellar cortex ( Didier et al., 1995 ), as well as by the human external granular layer ( Court et al., 1995 ). Interestingly, the mouse external granule cells express ?3, not ?4, nAChR subunits, a potential species-, age-. and/or region-specific difference of ?4 expression in the human rhombic lip ( Opanashuk et al., 2001 ). In addition to the rhombic lip, we observed nAChR expression in multiple post-mitotic neuronal subtypes in medullary nuclei as early as the second trimester, the earliest time-point studied by us. Parenthetically, nAChRs have been reported in human fetal brainstem homogenates as early as 4–6 gestational weeks ( Hellstrom-Lindahl and Court, 2000 ). Nicotinic Receptors and Their Relationship to the Medullary 5-HT System There is considerable functional evidence for important nicotinic-5-HT interactions in animal models. Nicotine injected into rat brains, for example, inhibits 5-HT neuronal firing, an affect blocked by the nAChR antagonist mecamylamine ( Touiki et al., 2007 ). Nicotine exposure also increases 5-HT release and alters 5-HT neuronal firing in rat hippocampal and mesencephalic slices in a dose-dependent manner ( Mihailescu et al., 1998 ; Kenny et al., 2001 ). In rats, prenatal nicotine via maternal osmotic pumps from gestational day 4 to term suppresses 5-HT1A receptor binding and upregulates 5-HT2 receptor binding at 6 postnatal months ( Slotkin et al., 2007b ). In our study, the ?4 subunit is expressed by the soma and processes of 5-HT (and non-5-HT) neurons at 15 gestational weeks (and thereafter) in the raphé (raphé obscurus), extra-raphé (gigantocellularis and PGCL) and ventral surface (arcuate nucleus). Thus, exogenous nicotine in maternal cigarette smoke potentially binds to these receptors to adversely influence 5-HT neuronal development and/or function via receptor-mediated interactions. In the infant, nicotine from second hand smoke could act at these sites as well. Of the 11 nuclei in the medulla that we analyzed both with nicotinic and 5-HT markers, only the PGCL demonstrates changes in the two systems simultaneously, whereas one nucleus (hypoglossal nucleus) demonstrates changes only in 5-HT markers (5-HT1A receptor binding), and four nuclei (NTS, DMX, dorsal accessory nucleus, and arcuate nucleus), changes in nAChR binding only. Over this same time-period, 5-HTT binding and 5-HT neuronal cell density do not change. This analysis was based upon the premise that receptor and transporter binding levels are reasonable “markers” of transmitter function and that developmental changes within them are indicators of how the transmitter system as a whole changes with maturation. While we do not propose that a change in one system is driving a change in the other, the simultaneous occurrence of changes in the two systems suggests an exceptionally “active” (susceptible) time for these two systems in the PGCL relative to each other, notably during the peak age for SIDS. Thus, it seems appropriate to focus in the future upon the PGCL as a “model” medullary site to probe nicotinic-5-HT interactions both at the physiological and neuropathologic levels. The basis of the rise in 5-HT1A receptor binding and concomitant decrease in ?7 receptor binding during early infancy is unknown, begging the question of the type of underlying changes in neuronal number, terminal projections, dendritic arborization, and/or spine maturation that “account” for changes in receptor number and/or affinity. Nevertheless, receptor changes for each system may be independent of other structural changes, given receptor binding increases for one ligand and decreases for the other, but this speculation remains to be proven. The preponderance of nuclei sampled with changes in nAChR receptor binding changes (five of the eleven nuclei), as opposed to those with 5-HT1A binding (two of the ten nuclei), suggests enhanced developmental plasticity in nicotinic as opposed to 5-HT receptors in early infancy, but again, considerably more information is needed for certainty. The Localization of nAChRs in the Sites Relevant to Cardiopulmonary Function and Arousal in the Human Fetal and Infant Medulla Paragigantocellularis lateralis The PGCL, at least in part, is the human homologue of the preBötzinger complex in rodents, i.e., the putative site of respiratory rhythm generation ( Paterson et al., 2004b ). Within the preBötzinger complex in mouse models, nicotine alters the respiratory pattern by exciting inspiratory neurons via ?4?2 and not ?7 receptors ( Shao and Feldman, 2002 ). Of major interest in regards to the effect of maternal cigarette smoke and nicotine upon arousal in the off-spring is also evidence that the PGCL plays a role in sleep/wake patterning ( Darnall et al., 2005 ). Physiological studies in human infants exposed to cigarette smoke during gestation demonstrate abnormal arousals ( Lewis and Bosque, 1995 ; Franco et al., 1999 ; Horne et al., 2002 ; Blair et al., 2006 ); moreover, prospective monitoring studies indicate deficits in cortical and subcortical arousals in SIDS infants prior to death ( Kahn, 1992 ; Schechtman et al., 1992 ; Kato et al., 2003 ). Thus, the question arises as to the site of action of prenatal nicotine upon brainstem arousal systems, given that arousal is mediated by descending, as well as ascending, pathways that influence subcortical, as opposed to cortical, arousal ( Siegel, 2002 ; Sinton and McCarley, 2004 ; Saper et al., 2005 ). Descending (subcortical) pathways include 5-HT neurons in the raphé obscurus ( Brown et al., 2008 ) and PGCL ( Bradley et al., 2002 ; Darnall et al., 2005 ), and their disruption results in sleep fragmentation and the virtual loss of REM sleep. We speculate that acetylcholine via the mesopontine source nuclei constitutively affects descending arousal through influencing 5-HT neuronal firing in these medullary sites, an idea for testing in animal models with transmitter-specific neuroanatomic and neurophysiologic methods. The vagal complex We found that the DMX (preganglionic parasympathetic outflow) and NTS (visceral sensory input) are the nuclei with the highest homomeric (?7) receptor binding (125I-bgt) in the infant medulla. Dissociated preganglionic neurons of the rat DMX express functional nAChRs ( Nabekura et al., 1995 ), and application of nicotine to medullary slices causes depolarization of DMX neurons ( Ito et al., 1989 ). Acetylcholine excites cardiac vagal neurons that control heart rate and cardiac function and that are located in the DMX and nucleus ambiguous in part via the activation of direct ligand-gated postsynaptic nAChRs ( Wang et al., 2001 ). In human infants, ?7 nAChR binding is three-fold higher in the DMX and one-fold higher in the NTS than the ION, the site with the highest binding density for heteromeric nAChRs. This observation potentially suggests a greater role for ?7 compared to other nAChR subunits in the function(s) of the vagal complex. Noteworthy is the observation that the most dramatic changes in nAChR binding occur in the DMX and NTS across human infancy. Arcuate nucleus This nucleus, comprised of neurons of heterogeneous transmitter phenotypes clustered over the ventral surface of the human medulla, is postulated to be homologous to the respiratory chemosensitive fields in cats ( Filiano et al., 1990 ; Paterson et al., 2006a ; Benarroch et al., 2007 ). Chemosensitivity in the arcuate nucleus has largely been attributed to 5-HT neurons embedded in this region ( Paterson et al., 2006a ; Kinney et al., 2007 ), as 5-HT neurons on the ventral surface of the rat have been shown to be chemosensitive ( Richerson et al., 2001 ). Structural and neurotransmitter abnormalities have been reported in the arcuate nucleus in SIDS cases by us and others ( Panigrahy et al., 1997 ; Mallard et al., 1999 ; Panigrahy et al., 2000 ; Kinney et al., 2003 ; Paterson et al., 2006b ), including reduced muscarinic receptor binding ( Kinney et al., 1995 ) but not altered nAChR binding ( Nachmanoff et al., 1998 ; Duncan et al., 2008 ). In the present study, we found that 5-HT neurons (as well as non-5-HT neurons) in the human arcuate nucleus express ?4, suggesting a site of interaction whereby acetylcholine or nicotine influences the central response to carbon dioxide. Indeed, low doses of nicotine applied to the ventral medullary surface of cats elevate blood pressure and respiration, and high doses decrease heart rate and increase respiration ( Dev and Loeschcke, 1979 ). Using the radioligand 3H-nicotine, we previously reported that there are no binding abnormalities to nAChRs in the arcuate nucleus in SIDS cases compared to controls ( Nachmanoff et al., 1998 ; Duncan et al., 2008 ). Yet, the present study suggests that the use of the 3H-nicotine may have masked a specific nAChR subunit binding abnormality because it was too broad and did not visually highlight this region in autoradiographs. The presence of visually detectable binding with 3H-epibatidine and 125I-bgt that we observed in this study underscores the need in future studies to apply these specific radioligands in order to detect potential nAChR binding differences between SIDS and controls in the arcuate nucleus. Principle inferior olive In this study, the ION was the single medullary region with the highest binding for all radioligands analyzed for heteromeric (but not homomeric) nAChRs in the infant period; indeed, binding density in this site was 5–8-fold higher than that of any other nucleus, including the dorsal and medial accessory olives, subdivisions of the human inferior olivary complex. The ION, the sole source of climbing fibers to the Purkinje cells, is known to receive cholinergic input from mesopontine ACh neurons ( Woolf and Butcher, 1989 ), and is critical for somatic motor, respiratory, and autonomic coordination ( Urbano et al., 2006 ; Zhuang et al., 2008 ). The specific role of nAChRs in the human infant ION is unknown, but their heavy concentration at this site likely increases the susceptibility of this nucleus to nicotine neurotoxicity at least through infancy. Potential Limitations of the Study A potential limitation of this study is the small sample size of fetal and infant medullae; yet normative tissues from human cases in early life are extraordinarily difficult to accrue, given that autopsies are extremely rare in this age-group. Despite the small sample size, we found robust developmental changes that underscore their potential validity. Obviously, ongoing accrual of cases is needed for confirmation and is in progress. While results from knockout mice studies on the specificity of currently available antibodies to nAChRs are unclear ( Whiteaker et al., 2006 ; Moser et al., 2007 ), extrapolation of these findings to other species, including humans, should be made with caution ( Jones and Wonnacott, 2005 ). However, the authors acknowledge that until specificity can be validated, interpretation of the results obtained with the use of the ?4 nAChR antibody in the human medulla should be made in combination with the distribution patterns of ligand binding. Furthermore the absence of a reliable ?7 antibody for use in human postmortem tissues and thus the inability to assess its protein distribution with Immunocytochemistry is another limitation of this study. In rats, however, ?7 protein expression is present in the NTS, DMX, hypoglossal nucleus and extra-raphé (a region containing 5-HT neurons) ( Dominguez del Toro et al., 1994 ). Thus, ?7 binding expression seen in the human infant medulla in this study appears similar to ?7 protein expression determined by immunohistochemistry in the rat. Conclusions Cholinergic nAChRs are ubiquitous in the human fetal and infant medulla, including in the medullary 5-HT system. Importantly, 5-HT neurons express nAChRs as early as the second trimester, providing the substrate whereby nicotine neurotoxicity is triggered by exposure to maternal cigarette smoke during pregnancy and environmental smoke thereafter. This study provides plausibility for the biological hazards of maternal cigarette smoking upon the developing brainstem and SIDS risk, and underscores the public health message against smoking during pregnancy to reduce this risk.  Fetal Expression of nAChRs in the Human Medulla In the immunocytochemical analysis of nAChR expression, we focused upon the ?4 subunit due to its high affinity to nicotine ( Benwell et al., 1988 ; Flores et al., 1992 ) and its known role in the medullary control of homeostasis ( Fonck et al., 2005 ; Hatori et al., 2006 ; Shao et al., 2008 ). We found ?4 expression at 15 gestational weeks by a subpopulation of germinal cells in the rhombic lip, the origin of cerebellar-relay nuclei in particular in the medulla and pons ( Rakic and Sidman, 1982 ; Landsberg et al., 2005 ). This observation suggests that ?4 plays a trophic role upon at least a subset of rhombic lip precursors. In embryonic and fetal development, acetylcholine and nicotine via nAChRs experimentally influence neuronal cell proliferation, migration, survival, and differentiation ( Opanashuk et al., 2001 ; Torrao and Britto, 2002 ). Functional nAChRs are present on stem and progenitor cells in the cerebral cortex of the mouse as early as embryonic day 10 ( Schneider et al., 2002 ). The trophic role of acetylcholine during early life is underscored by experiments in which ablation of basal forebrain cholinergic neurons results in reduced laminar thickness, neuronal size, and dendritic tree field in the cortical projection targets ( Hohmann et al., 1988 ; Robertson et al., 1998 ). In fetal monkey brains from offspring of mothers exposed to nicotine, regional neuronal cell loss, decrease in cell size, and abnormal neurite outgrowth are found ( Slotkin et al., 2005 ), suggesting that nAChR-mediated trophic effects are adversely altered by exogenous nicotine exposure; importantly, the prenatal effects persist postnatally ( Good et al., 2006 ; Slotkin et al., 2007b ). Of direct relevance to the rhombic lip, multiple nAChR subtypes are expressed by cultured rat granule neurons, derivatives of the rhombic lip in the cerebellar cortex ( Didier et al., 1995 ), as well as by the human external granular layer ( Court et al., 1995 ). Interestingly, the mouse external granule cells express ?3, not ?4, nAChR subunits, a potential species-, age-. and/or region-specific difference of ?4 expression in the human rhombic lip ( Opanashuk et al., 2001 ). In addition to the rhombic lip, we observed nAChR expression in multiple post-mitotic neuronal subtypes in medullary nuclei as early as the second trimester, the earliest time-point studied by us. Parenthetically, nAChRs have been reported in human fetal brainstem homogenates as early as 4–6 gestational weeks ( Hellstrom-Lindahl and Court, 2000 ).  Nicotinic Receptors and Their Relationship to the Medullary 5-HT System There is considerable functional evidence for important nicotinic-5-HT interactions in animal models. Nicotine injected into rat brains, for example, inhibits 5-HT neuronal firing, an affect blocked by the nAChR antagonist mecamylamine ( Touiki et al., 2007 ). Nicotine exposure also increases 5-HT release and alters 5-HT neuronal firing in rat hippocampal and mesencephalic slices in a dose-dependent manner ( Mihailescu et al., 1998 ; Kenny et al., 2001 ). In rats, prenatal nicotine via maternal osmotic pumps from gestational day 4 to term suppresses 5-HT1A receptor binding and upregulates 5-HT2 receptor binding at 6 postnatal months ( Slotkin et al., 2007b ). In our study, the ?4 subunit is expressed by the soma and processes of 5-HT (and non-5-HT) neurons at 15 gestational weeks (and thereafter) in the raphé (raphé obscurus), extra-raphé (gigantocellularis and PGCL) and ventral surface (arcuate nucleus). Thus, exogenous nicotine in maternal cigarette smoke potentially binds to these receptors to adversely influence 5-HT neuronal development and/or function via receptor-mediated interactions. In the infant, nicotine from second hand smoke could act at these sites as well. Of the 11 nuclei in the medulla that we analyzed both with nicotinic and 5-HT markers, only the PGCL demonstrates changes in the two systems simultaneously, whereas one nucleus (hypoglossal nucleus) demonstrates changes only in 5-HT markers (5-HT1A receptor binding), and four nuclei (NTS, DMX, dorsal accessory nucleus, and arcuate nucleus), changes in nAChR binding only. Over this same time-period, 5-HTT binding and 5-HT neuronal cell density do not change. This analysis was based upon the premise that receptor and transporter binding levels are reasonable “markers” of transmitter function and that developmental changes within them are indicators of how the transmitter system as a whole changes with maturation. While we do not propose that a change in one system is driving a change in the other, the simultaneous occurrence of changes in the two systems suggests an exceptionally “active” (susceptible) time for these two systems in the PGCL relative to each other, notably during the peak age for SIDS. Thus, it seems appropriate to focus in the future upon the PGCL as a “model” medullary site to probe nicotinic-5-HT interactions both at the physiological and neuropathologic levels. The basis of the rise in 5-HT1A receptor binding and concomitant decrease in ?7 receptor binding during early infancy is unknown, begging the question of the type of underlying changes in neuronal number, terminal projections, dendritic arborization, and/or spine maturation that “account” for changes in receptor number and/or affinity. Nevertheless, receptor changes for each system may be independent of other structural changes, given receptor binding increases for one ligand and decreases for the other, but this speculation remains to be proven. The preponderance of nuclei sampled with changes in nAChR receptor binding changes (five of the eleven nuclei), as opposed to those with 5-HT1A binding (two of the ten nuclei), suggests enhanced developmental plasticity in nicotinic as opposed to 5-HT receptors in early infancy, but again, considerably more information is needed for certainty.  The Localization of nAChRs in the Sites Relevant to Cardiopulmonary Function and Arousal in the Human Fetal and Infant Medulla Paragigantocellularis lateralis The PGCL, at least in part, is the human homologue of the preBötzinger complex in rodents, i.e., the putative site of respiratory rhythm generation ( Paterson et al., 2004b ). Within the preBötzinger complex in mouse models, nicotine alters the respiratory pattern by exciting inspiratory neurons via ?4?2 and not ?7 receptors ( Shao and Feldman, 2002 ). Of major interest in regards to the effect of maternal cigarette smoke and nicotine upon arousal in the off-spring is also evidence that the PGCL plays a role in sleep/wake patterning ( Darnall et al., 2005 ). Physiological studies in human infants exposed to cigarette smoke during gestation demonstrate abnormal arousals ( Lewis and Bosque, 1995 ; Franco et al., 1999 ; Horne et al., 2002 ; Blair et al., 2006 ); moreover, prospective monitoring studies indicate deficits in cortical and subcortical arousals in SIDS infants prior to death ( Kahn, 1992 ; Schechtman et al., 1992 ; Kato et al., 2003 ). Thus, the question arises as to the site of action of prenatal nicotine upon brainstem arousal systems, given that arousal is mediated by descending, as well as ascending, pathways that influence subcortical, as opposed to cortical, arousal ( Siegel, 2002 ; Sinton and McCarley, 2004 ; Saper et al., 2005 ). Descending (subcortical) pathways include 5-HT neurons in the raphé obscurus ( Brown et al., 2008 ) and PGCL ( Bradley et al., 2002 ; Darnall et al., 2005 ), and their disruption results in sleep fragmentation and the virtual loss of REM sleep. We speculate that acetylcholine via the mesopontine source nuclei constitutively affects descending arousal through influencing 5-HT neuronal firing in these medullary sites, an idea for testing in animal models with transmitter-specific neuroanatomic and neurophysiologic methods. The vagal complex We found that the DMX (preganglionic parasympathetic outflow) and NTS (visceral sensory input) are the nuclei with the highest homomeric (?7) receptor binding (125I-bgt) in the infant medulla. Dissociated preganglionic neurons of the rat DMX express functional nAChRs ( Nabekura et al., 1995 ), and application of nicotine to medullary slices causes depolarization of DMX neurons ( Ito et al., 1989 ). Acetylcholine excites cardiac vagal neurons that control heart rate and cardiac function and that are located in the DMX and nucleus ambiguous in part via the activation of direct ligand-gated postsynaptic nAChRs ( Wang et al., 2001 ). In human infants, ?7 nAChR binding is three-fold higher in the DMX and one-fold higher in the NTS than the ION, the site with the highest binding density for heteromeric nAChRs. This observation potentially suggests a greater role for ?7 compared to other nAChR subunits in the function(s) of the vagal complex. Noteworthy is the observation that the most dramatic changes in nAChR binding occur in the DMX and NTS across human infancy. Arcuate nucleus This nucleus, comprised of neurons of heterogeneous transmitter phenotypes clustered over the ventral surface of the human medulla, is postulated to be homologous to the respiratory chemosensitive fields in cats ( Filiano et al., 1990 ; Paterson et al., 2006a ; Benarroch et al., 2007 ). Chemosensitivity in the arcuate nucleus has largely been attributed to 5-HT neurons embedded in this region ( Paterson et al., 2006a ; Kinney et al., 2007 ), as 5-HT neurons on the ventral surface of the rat have been shown to be chemosensitive ( Richerson et al., 2001 ). Structural and neurotransmitter abnormalities have been reported in the arcuate nucleus in SIDS cases by us and others ( Panigrahy et al., 1997 ; Mallard et al., 1999 ; Panigrahy et al., 2000 ; Kinney et al., 2003 ; Paterson et al., 2006b ), including reduced muscarinic receptor binding ( Kinney et al., 1995 ) but not altered nAChR binding ( Nachmanoff et al., 1998 ; Duncan et al., 2008 ). In the present study, we found that 5-HT neurons (as well as non-5-HT neurons) in the human arcuate nucleus express ?4, suggesting a site of interaction whereby acetylcholine or nicotine influences the central response to carbon dioxide. Indeed, low doses of nicotine applied to the ventral medullary surface of cats elevate blood pressure and respiration, and high doses decrease heart rate and increase respiration ( Dev and Loeschcke, 1979 ). Using the radioligand 3H-nicotine, we previously reported that there are no binding abnormalities to nAChRs in the arcuate nucleus in SIDS cases compared to controls ( Nachmanoff et al., 1998 ; Duncan et al., 2008 ). Yet, the present study suggests that the use of the 3H-nicotine may have masked a specific nAChR subunit binding abnormality because it was too broad and did not visually highlight this region in autoradiographs. The presence of visually detectable binding with 3H-epibatidine and 125I-bgt that we observed in this study underscores the need in future studies to apply these specific radioligands in order to detect potential nAChR binding differences between SIDS and controls in the arcuate nucleus. Principle inferior olive In this study, the ION was the single medullary region with the highest binding for all radioligands analyzed for heteromeric (but not homomeric) nAChRs in the infant period; indeed, binding density in this site was 5–8-fold higher than that of any other nucleus, including the dorsal and medial accessory olives, subdivisions of the human inferior olivary complex. The ION, the sole source of climbing fibers to the Purkinje cells, is known to receive cholinergic input from mesopontine ACh neurons ( Woolf and Butcher, 1989 ), and is critical for somatic motor, respiratory, and autonomic coordination ( Urbano et al., 2006 ; Zhuang et al., 2008 ). The specific role of nAChRs in the human infant ION is unknown, but their heavy concentration at this site likely increases the susceptibility of this nucleus to nicotine neurotoxicity at least through infancy.  Paragigantocellularis lateralis The PGCL, at least in part, is the human homologue of the preBötzinger complex in rodents, i.e., the putative site of respiratory rhythm generation ( Paterson et al., 2004b ). Within the preBötzinger complex in mouse models, nicotine alters the respiratory pattern by exciting inspiratory neurons via ?4?2 and not ?7 receptors ( Shao and Feldman, 2002 ). Of major interest in regards to the effect of maternal cigarette smoke and nicotine upon arousal in the off-spring is also evidence that the PGCL plays a role in sleep/wake patterning ( Darnall et al., 2005 ). Physiological studies in human infants exposed to cigarette smoke during gestation demonstrate abnormal arousals ( Lewis and Bosque, 1995 ; Franco et al., 1999 ; Horne et al., 2002 ; Blair et al., 2006 ); moreover, prospective monitoring studies indicate deficits in cortical and subcortical arousals in SIDS infants prior to death ( Kahn, 1992 ; Schechtman et al., 1992 ; Kato et al., 2003 ). Thus, the question arises as to the site of action of prenatal nicotine upon brainstem arousal systems, given that arousal is mediated by descending, as well as ascending, pathways that influence subcortical, as opposed to cortical, arousal ( Siegel, 2002 ; Sinton and McCarley, 2004 ; Saper et al., 2005 ). Descending (subcortical) pathways include 5-HT neurons in the raphé obscurus ( Brown et al., 2008 ) and PGCL ( Bradley et al., 2002 ; Darnall et al., 2005 ), and their disruption results in sleep fragmentation and the virtual loss of REM sleep. We speculate that acetylcholine via the mesopontine source nuclei constitutively affects descending arousal through influencing 5-HT neuronal firing in these medullary sites, an idea for testing in animal models with transmitter-specific neuroanatomic and neurophysiologic methods.  The vagal complex We found that the DMX (preganglionic parasympathetic outflow) and NTS (visceral sensory input) are the nuclei with the highest homomeric (?7) receptor binding (125I-bgt) in the infant medulla. Dissociated preganglionic neurons of the rat DMX express functional nAChRs ( Nabekura et al., 1995 ), and application of nicotine to medullary slices causes depolarization of DMX neurons ( Ito et al., 1989 ). Acetylcholine excites cardiac vagal neurons that control heart rate and cardiac function and that are located in the DMX and nucleus ambiguous in part via the activation of direct ligand-gated postsynaptic nAChRs ( Wang et al., 2001 ). In human infants, ?7 nAChR binding is three-fold higher in the DMX and one-fold higher in the NTS than the ION, the site with the highest binding density for heteromeric nAChRs. This observation potentially suggests a greater role for ?7 compared to other nAChR subunits in the function(s) of the vagal complex. Noteworthy is the observation that the most dramatic changes in nAChR binding occur in the DMX and NTS across human infancy.  Arcuate nucleus This nucleus, comprised of neurons of heterogeneous transmitter phenotypes clustered over the ventral surface of the human medulla, is postulated to be homologous to the respiratory chemosensitive fields in cats ( Filiano et al., 1990 ; Paterson et al., 2006a ; Benarroch et al., 2007 ). Chemosensitivity in the arcuate nucleus has largely been attributed to 5-HT neurons embedded in this region ( Paterson et al., 2006a ; Kinney et al., 2007 ), as 5-HT neurons on the ventral surface of the rat have been shown to be chemosensitive ( Richerson et al., 2001 ). Structural and neurotransmitter abnormalities have been reported in the arcuate nucleus in SIDS cases by us and others ( Panigrahy et al., 1997 ; Mallard et al., 1999 ; Panigrahy et al., 2000 ; Kinney et al., 2003 ; Paterson et al., 2006b ), including reduced muscarinic receptor binding ( Kinney et al., 1995 ) but not altered nAChR binding ( Nachmanoff et al., 1998 ; Duncan et al., 2008 ). In the present study, we found that 5-HT neurons (as well as non-5-HT neurons) in the human arcuate nucleus express ?4, suggesting a site of interaction whereby acetylcholine or nicotine influences the central response to carbon dioxide. Indeed, low doses of nicotine applied to the ventral medullary surface of cats elevate blood pressure and respiration, and high doses decrease heart rate and increase respiration ( Dev and Loeschcke, 1979 ). Using the radioligand 3H-nicotine, we previously reported that there are no binding abnormalities to nAChRs in the arcuate nucleus in SIDS cases compared to controls ( Nachmanoff et al., 1998 ; Duncan et al., 2008 ). Yet, the present study suggests that the use of the 3H-nicotine may have masked a specific nAChR subunit binding abnormality because it was too broad and did not visually highlight this region in autoradiographs. The presence of visually detectable binding with 3H-epibatidine and 125I-bgt that we observed in this study underscores the need in future studies to apply these specific radioligands in order to detect potential nAChR binding differences between SIDS and controls in the arcuate nucleus.  Principle inferior olive In this study, the ION was the single medullary region with the highest binding for all radioligands analyzed for heteromeric (but not homomeric) nAChRs in the infant period; indeed, binding density in this site was 5–8-fold higher than that of any other nucleus, including the dorsal and medial accessory olives, subdivisions of the human inferior olivary complex. The ION, the sole source of climbing fibers to the Purkinje cells, is known to receive cholinergic input from mesopontine ACh neurons ( Woolf and Butcher, 1989 ), and is critical for somatic motor, respiratory, and autonomic coordination ( Urbano et al., 2006 ; Zhuang et al., 2008 ). The specific role of nAChRs in the human infant ION is unknown, but their heavy concentration at this site likely increases the susceptibility of this nucleus to nicotine neurotoxicity at least through infancy.  Conclusions Cholinergic nAChRs are ubiquitous in the human fetal and infant medulla, including in the medullary 5-HT system. Importantly, 5-HT neurons express nAChRs as early as the second trimester, providing the substrate whereby nicotine neurotoxicity is triggered by exposure to maternal cigarette smoke during pregnancy and environmental smoke thereafter. This study provides plausibility for the biological hazards of maternal cigarette smoking upon the developing brainstem and SIDS risk, and underscores the public health message against smoking during pregnancy to reduce this risk.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 ?4 immunoreactivity in the medulla at 15 gestational weeks (A) Immunostaining for the ?4 nAChR showed ubiquitous distribution. (B) A subpopulation of rhombic lip cells with differentiating cytoplasm were intensely immunoreactive for ?4, as well as (C), cells with trailing processes migrating away from this region. (D) Diagrammatic representation of the human medulla at 15 weeks gestation. (E, F) ?4 immunopositive punctuate fibers/axons in the neuropil. HG, hypoglossal nucleus; ION, inferior olive; PCA, postconceptional age; RO, raphé obscurus. Scales A: 255 ?m; B: 41 ?m; C 6.2 ?m, E: 26 ?m; F: 12 ?m. Figure 2 ?4 immunoreactivity in the medulla at term and infancy Nicotinic receptor immunoreactivity for ?4 was ubiquitously expressed in all nuclei, including the (A) raphé obscurus; (C) dorsal motor nucleus of vagus (DMX), hypoglossal nucleus (HG); (D) arcuate nucleus and (E) inferior olive (ION). (B) A diagram of the human medulla at term is provided for orientation. PCA, postconceptional age. Scales A: 30 ?m; C: 65 ?m; D: 93 ?m; E: 103 ?m. Figure 3 Comparisons of ?4 nAChR immunoreactivity in the medulla at 23 and 44 weeks post conception ?4 immunoreactive cells at 23 weeks (A, C) and 44 weeks (B, D) in the arcuate nucleus (A, B) and inferior olive (ION) (C, D). In both nuclei there is a visually obvious increase in immunoreactivity in the cell soma over the last half of gestation. PCA, postconceptional age. Scales A, B: 93 ?m; C: 104 ?m; D: 87 ?m. Figure 4 Colocalization of ?4 and 5-HT neurons in the medulla (A, D) ?4 immunopositive cells (red) and (B, E) PH8 immunopositive (5-HT) neurons (green) in the raphé obscurus at 15 weeks (A-C) and at term (D-F). (C, F) Colocalization of expression is demonstrated by merging of images (yellow). A subpopulation of neurons expressing ?4 which were not serotonergic, yet are observed in association to 5-HT cells (F, arrow). PCA, postconceptional age. Scales: A-C: 12 ?m; D-F: 20 ?m. Figure 5 Colocalization of ?4 and 5-HT neurons in the raphé obscurus (A) ?4 immunopositive cells (red) and (B) PH8 immunopositive (5-HT) neurons (green) in the raphé obscurus at 10 postnatal months. (C) Colocalization of all visible 5-HT neurons is demonstrated by merging of the image (yellow). A subset of non-5-HT neurons also express ?4 in this region. PCA, postconceptional age. Scales: A-C: 100 ?m. Figure 6 Colocalization of ?4 and 5-HT neurons in the medulla (A, D) ?4 immunopositive neurons (red) and (B, E) PH8 immunopositive (5-HT) neurons (green) in the paragigantocellularis lateralis (PGCL) at 10 months postnatal (A-C) and arcuate nucleus at term (D-F), with colocalization demonstrated by merging of the images (yellow) (C, F). A subpopulation of neurons expressing ?4 were not serotonergic, yet were in close proximity to 5-HT cells (C). At high magnification the ?4 immunostaining is punctate, consistent with receptors (C). Scales: D-F: 8.4 ?m; A-C: 42 ?m. Figure 7 nAChR binding in the infant medulla Psuedocolored autoradiographic images of 3H-nicotine (A), 3H-epibatidine (B), 3H-cytisine (C) and 125I-bgt (D) binding in the infant medulla (mid-level) with specific activity scales and graphs of binding in select nuclei for each radioligand where binding levels are presented for each ligand as a percent of binding in the inferior olivary nucleus (ION) arbitrarily defined as 100%. Differences in binding patterns are based on the affinity of each ligand to specific nAChR subunits. The highest density of binding with 3H-epibatidine was seen in the inferior olive ION (B). The highest binding density for 125I-bgt was in the dorsal motor nucleus of vagus (DMX) (D). ARC, arcuate nucleus; HG, hypoglossal nucleus; NTS; nucleus of the solitary tract; PGCL, paragigantocellularis lateralis; RO, raphé obscurus. Figure 8 Development profiles of nAChR binding in the dorsal motor nucleus in the infant medulla Receptor binding for both 3H-epibatidine (A) and 125I-bgt (B) significantly decreased (p<0.05) over infancy in the dorsal motor nucleus (DMX). PCA, postconceptional age. Figure 9 Developmental profile of nAChR and 5-HT receptor binding in the paragigantocellularis lateralis There was a significant reduction (p<0.05) in ?7 (125I-bgt) and a significant increase in 5-HT1A (3H-8-OH-DPAT) receptor binding over infancy in the paragigantocellularis lateralis (PGCL). PCA, postconceptional age. Figure 10 Comparative development sequences of nAChRs and 5-HT markers in the human medulla Profiles for the nAChR and 5-HT systems in the (A) paragigantocellularis lateralis; (B) arcuate nucleus; and (C) nucleus of the solitary tract show that dynamic changes occur in different nuclei and across development. – no change; ? decrease; ? increase. * fetal 5-HT neuronal densities from Kinney et al., 2007 . NA; data not available for receptor and transporter binding in the fetal period. This diagram highlights the complexity of the developmental changes in the nicotinic and 5-HT systems in the human medulla relative to one another. Table 1 Antibodies used to assess the developmental profile of nAChRs in the medulla oblongata of the human fetus and infant Antibody Host Source/cat number/lot Immunogen Dilution Peptide sequence Labels ?4 nAChR Guinea pig polyclonal IgG Chemicon/AB5590/0608038451 Synthetic peptide corresponding to AA 568–588 of the rat nAChR 1:200 AA 568–588 of rat nAChR Nerve fibers and cell bodies corresponding to in situ pattern using rat nAChR probes ( Wada et al., 1989 ) ?4 nAChR (MAb-299) Rat monoclonal IgG1 Covance/MRT-613R/147939002 Purified rat brain nAChR 1:500 * Characterized by Whiting and Lindstrom, 1988 Binds to the extracellular surface of ?4 nAChR subunits ( Whiting and Lindstrom, 1988 ) PH8 for tryptophan hydroxylase, key biosynthetic enzyme Murine monoclonal IgG Chemicon/MAB5278/16401065 Immunoglobulin fraction from murine ascites fluid 1:1000 Common epitope of tryptophan hydroxylase (TPOH), tyrosine hydroxylase and phenylalanine hydroxylase. In fixed human tissue PH8 binds specifically to TPOH due to antigenic changes induced by fixation ( Haan et al., 1987 ; Baker et al., 1991 ; Kinney et al., 2007 ) Table 2 Autoradiographic procedures for nAChRs Ligand Preferential Binding Supplier/ Catalogue/Lot Concentration Incubation time/temp Displacer Detection Method 3H-Nicotine All nAChR PerkinElmer/NE 3.5 nM 25 min/RT 10 ?M L-nicotine 3H sensitive film (LKB (Reference for comparison radioligand Kinney et al., 1993 ; Nachmanoff et al., 1998 ; Duncan et al., 2008 ) subunits ( Jensen et al., 2005 ) T827/3329280 (79.5 Ci/mmol) hydrogen Ultrofilm): 12 weeks 3H-Epibatidine ?2–4, ?2, ?4 ( Jensen et al., 2005 ) PerkinElmer/NE T1102/3557074 0.5 nM (56 Ci/mmol) 60 min/RT 300 ?M L-nicotine hydrogen phosphoimage plates, BAS TR2025 system: 3 weeks 3H-Cytisine ?4?2 subtype ( Jensen et al., 2005 ) PerkinElmer/NE T1504/3559630 2nM (27 Ci/mmol 60 min/RT 100 ?M L-nicotine hydrogen phosphoimage plates, BAS TR2025 system: 6 weeks 125I-Bungarotoxin ?7 ( Jensen et al., 2005 ) PerkinElmer/NE X126/BE31670 1.5 nM (120 Ci/mmol) 120 min/4°C 1 mM L-nicotine hydrogen 125I-sensitive film (Kodak BoiMax MR): 5 days Table 3 Nicotinic receptor binding in the human infant medulla (fmol/mg tissue) Nuclei 3H-nicotine (all nAChRs) (n=5) 3H-epibatidine (?2–4, ?2,?4) (n=5) 3H-cytisine ( ?4?2) (n=2) 125I-bgt (?7) (n=5) HG 9.90 ± 1.00 * 25.65 ± 4.35 5.20 2.25 ± 0.52 NTS 7.50 ± 1.00 * 43.22 ± 4.67 2.61 5.44 ± 0.46 DMX 9.27 ± 1.23 41.63 ± 4.91 2.58 10.79 ± 0.87 MAO 17.00 ± 1.50 * 35.14 ± 3.77 7.05 3.12 ± 0.69 DAO 15.2 ± 1.70 * 40.02 ± 6.70 10.65 4.51 ± 1.08 ION 23.98 ± 1.56 75.08 ± 5.89 33.02 3.39 ± 1.00 IRZ 10.88 ± 1.31 26.63 ± 4.01 5.34 4.14 ± 1.30 GC 9.70 ± 1.11 25.57 ± 5.44 6.94 4.10 ± 1.21 PGCL 8.77 ± 1.08 24.56 ± 5.04 6.23 3.34 ± 1.25 RO 4.60 ± 0.69 14.25 ± 2.34 3.20 2.60 ± 0.84 ARC No detectable binding * 16.21 ± 2.20 3.43 2.11 ± 0.26 Values are expressed as means ± SEM and are relative to their own radioligand. * Data for certain nuclei for 3H-nicotine binding have been previously published ( Nachmanoff et al., 1998 ). Due to tissue constraints, only 2 cases were available for 3H-cytisine analysis and are used for reference. Abbreviations: HG, hypoglossal nucleus; NTS, nucleus of the solitary tract; DMX, dorsal motor nucleus; MAO, medial accessory olive; DAO, dorsal accessory olive; ION, inferior olive; IRZ, intermediate reticular zone; GC, gigantocellularis; PGCL, paragigantocellularis lateralis; RO, raphé obscurus; ARC, arcuate nucleus. Table 4 Summary of observations of nAChR and 5-HT markers in the human infant medulla Source Immunohistochemistry Receptor Binding ?4 protein expression: single label ?4 nAChR & 5- HT co- localization: double label 3H-nicotine (all nAChRs) 3H-epibatidine (?2–4, ?2, ?4) 3H-cytisine (?4?2) 125I-bgt (?7) 3H-8-OH-DPAT (5-HT1A ) 125I-RTI-55 (5-HTT) RO Present Present + + + +++ ++++ ++++ GC Present Present ++ ++ + +++++ ++ +++ PGCL Present Present ++ ++ + ++++ ++ ++ ARC Present Present 0 + + ++++ + + HG Present No 5-HT cells ++ ++ + ++++ + +++ NTS Present No 5-HT cells ++ +++ + +++++ ++ ++ DMX Present No 5-HT cells ++ +++ + +++++ Not measured Not measured ION Present No 5-HT cells ++++ ++++ ++++ ++++ + Not measured Key: Scale as a percent of the ION (nAChRs) or RO (5-HT markers [ Paterson et al., 2004a ; Paterson et al., 2006b ]): 0: no binding; 1– 25% low binding +; 26–50% moderate binding ++; 51–75% high binding +++; 76–100% very high binding ++++; above 101% intense binding +++++. Abbreviations: RO, raphé obscurus; GC, gigantocellularis; PGCL, paragigantocellularis lateralis; ARC, arcuate nucleus; HG, hypoglossal nucleus; NTS, nucleus of the solitary tract; DMX, dorsal motor nucleus; ION, inferior olive. Table 5 Comparison of developmental changes in binding to 5-HT1A, 5-HTT, 5-HT neuronal density and nAChRs with increasing age in the human infant medulla Nuclei 5-HT1A * 5-HTT * 5-HT neuronal density * Epibatidine Bungarotoxin Nicotine PGCL Increase (0.04) No change No change No change Decrease (0.01) No change HG Increase (0.003) No change No neurons No change No change * Not reported NTS No change No change No neurons No change Decrease (0.02) * Not reported ARC No change No change No change No change Decrease (0.002) No change DAO No change No change No neurons Decrease (0.02) No change * Not reported DMX Not measured Not measured No neurons Decrease (0.01) Decrease (0.03) No change IRZ No change No change No change No change No change No change GC No change No change No change No change No change No change RO No change No change No change No change No change No change ION No change Not measured No neurons No change No change No change MAO No change No change No neurons No change No change * Not reported * The 5-HT-related data have been previously published and are shown here for comparison ( Paterson et al., 2004a ; Paterson et al., 2006b ), 3H-nicotine data have been previously published in select nuclei ( Nachmanoff et al., 1998 ). Abbreviations: PGCL, paragigantocellularis lateralis; HG, hypoglossal nucleus; NTS, nucleus of the solitary tract; ARC, arcuate nucleus; DAO, dorsal accessory olive; DMX, dorsal motor nucleus; IRZ, intermediate reticular zone; GC, gigantocellularis; RO, raphé obscurus; ION, inferior olive; MAO, medial accessory olive. 