Understanding and Treating Triple-Negative Breast Cancer Triple-negative breast cancer is a subtype of breast cancer that is clinically negative for expression of estrogen and progesterone receptors (ER/PR) and HER2 protein. It is characterized by its unique molecular profile, aggressive behavior, distinct patterns of metastasis, and lack of targeted therapies. Although not synonymous, the majority of triple-negative breast cancers carry the “basal-like” molecular profile on gene expression arrays. The majority of BRCA1-associated breast cancers are triple-negative and basal-like; the extent to which the BRCA1 pathway contributes to the behavior of sporadic basal-like breast cancers is an area of active research. Epidemiologic studies illustrate a high prevalence of triple-negative breast cancers among younger women and those of African descent. Increasing evidence suggests that the risk factor profile differs between this subtype and the more common luminal subtypes. Although sensitive to chemotherapy, early relapse is common and a predilection for visceral metastasis, including brain metastasis, is seen. Targeted agents, including epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors, are currently in clinical trials and hold promise in the treatment of this aggressive disease.  Conclusions In summary, triple-negative breast cancer largely represents a subtype of breast tumors with unique molecular and clinical characteristics, distinctive risk factors and patterns of recurrence, association with BRCA1 mutation status, inferior prognosis, and expanding therapeutic options. Multiple excellent approaches to improved care of triple-negative breast cancer, including DNA-damaging agents such as platinums, targeted agents against EGFR and VEGF, and PARP inhibitors are under investigation. Current research strategies are aimed at better understanding both the risk factors and the biology underlying triple-negative breast cancer, with the goal of developing preventive measures and improving treatment strategies for this challenging subtype of breast cancer.  Tables Table 1 Classic Molecular Features of Luminal vs Basal Epithelial Cells Luminal Epithelial Cell Markers Basal Epithelial Cell Markers Higher Expression Higher Expression CK7, CK8, CK18, CK19 CK5, CK14, CK17 MUC1 Smooth muscle markers Alpha-6 integrin Calponin, caldesmon BCL2 p63, beta-4 integrin ER Laminin, maspin PR CD10, P-cadherin, caveolin-1 GATA3 NGFR Epithelial cell adhesion molecules HER1/EGFR Lower Expression Lower Expression Basal CK (CK5, CK14, CK17) ER, PR, HER2 HER2 Desmin CK = cytokeratins; EGFR = epidermal growth factor receptor; ER = estrogen receptor; NGFR = nerve growth factor receptor; PR = progesterone receptor. Table 2 Therapeutic Strategies in Triple-Negative Breast Cancer Treatment Approach Status Anthracyclines Proven efficacy[ 46 , 47 ] Taxanes Proven efficacy[ 45 ] Platinum agents Active, comparison to other cytotoxics unclear[ 51 ] Bevacizumab Suggested in subset analyses of unselected phase III trial, E2100[ 60 ] Sunitinib Suggested by subset analyses of unselected phase II trial[ 62 ] EGFR inhibition Preclinical data, modest activity with chemotherapy in phase II studies[ 52 , 55 ] PARP inhibition Preclinical data, in investigation EGFR = epidermal growth factor receptor; PARP = poly ADP-ribose polymerase. 