Late Effects on the Urinary Bladder in Patients Treated for Cancer in Childhood: A Report from the Children’s Oncology Group Childhood cancer survivors who have had pelvic or central nervous system surgery or have received alkylator-containing chemotherapy or pelvic radiotherapy as part of their cancer therapy may experience urinary bladder late effects. This article reviews the medical literature on long-term bladder complications in survivors of childhood cancer and outlines the Children’s Oncology Group Long Term Followup (COG LTFU) Guidelines related to bladder function. An overview of the treatment of bladder late effects and recommended counseling for survivors with these complications are presented.  Conclusions The COG LTFU guidelines offer a comprehensive summary of the risk factors associated with long-term bladder complications after treatment for childhood cancer, based on evidence in the medical literature and expert panel review. Further studies will be required to confirm the validity of the screening recommendations and to better define more precisely the risk factors associated with certain late effects. Survivors who have been exposed to therapies that are potentially toxic to the bladder deserve careful ongoing follow-up in order to detect bladder complications so that intervention can be accomplished in a timely fashion. Urologists, internists, pediatricians, nurses, and psychologists, as well as other medical specialists, may be necessary to provide appropriate interventions for the patient at risk for bladder complications following treatment of cancer in childhood.  Supplementary Material Supp Appendix Supp Table  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Ileal neobladder. This figure shows a bladder constructed of ileum to replace the native bladder removed at time of cystectomy. The small intestine is opened and reconfigured into a spherical shape. The bowel segment is sewn to the native urethra above the pelvic floor. The ureters are reimplanted into the new reservoir. The patient may be able to void spontaneosly but some patients require intermittent catheterization to empty the neobladder. Figure 2 Continent urinary reservoir. This figure shows a continent diversion made to replace the bladder following cystectomy. These reservoirs can be constructed from the either colon alone or a combination of colon and ileum. A catheterizable channel is constructed from either the native appendix or a small piece of ileum tapered into a narrow channel. This is implanted into the reservoir and then brought to the skin. The reservoir is emptied intermittently by catheterization. The ureters are reimplanted into the new reservoir. Table I COG LTFU Screening Guidelines for Bladder Late Effects Therapeutic Exposure Potential Late Effect Risk Factors Highest Risk Factors Recommendations Guideline Score Health Counseling/ Further Considerations Section 11: Cyclophosphamide Ifosfamide Hemorrhagic cystitis Bladder fibrosis Dysfunctional voiding Vesicoureteral reflux Hydronephrosis Higher cumulative doses (decreased incidence with use of Mesna) Combined with pelvic radiation Alcohol use Smoking Cyclophosphamide dose ? 3 gm/m2 Pelvic radiation dose ? 30 Gy Annual history, including hematuria, urinary urgency/frequency, urinary incontinence/retention, dysuria, nocturia, abnormal urinary stream Annual urinalysis 1 Counseling: Counsel to promptly report dysuria or gross hematuria. Further Considerations: Urine culture, spot urine calcium/creatinine ratio, and ultrasound of kidney and bladder for patients with microscopic hematuria (defined as ?5 RBC/HFP on at least 2 occasions). Nephrology or urology referral for patients with culture- negative microscopic hematuria AND abnormal ultrasound and/or abnormal calcium/creatinine ratio. Urology referral for patients with culture negative macroscopic hematuria Section 12: Cyclophosphamide Bladder malignancy Combined with pelvic radiation Alcohol use Smoking Annual history, including hematuria, urinary urgency/frequency, urinary incontinence/retention, dysuria, nocturia, abnormal urinary stream Annual urinalysis 2A Same as Section 11 Section 80: Radiotherapy ? 30 Gy to whole abdomen, pelvis, sacral spine Hemorrhagic cystitis Higher radiation dose (? 30 Gy to entire bladder; ? 60 Gy to portion of bladder) Combined with cyclophosphamide and/or ifosfamide Annual history, including hematuria, urinary urgency/frequency, urinary incontinence/retention, dysuria, nocturia, abnormal urinary stream 2A Same as Section 11 Section 81: Radiotherapy ? 30 Gy to whole abdomen, pelvis, sacral spine Bladder fibrosis Dysfunctional voiding Vesicoureteral reflux Hydronephrosis Higher radiation dose (? 45 Gy) Radiation to entire bladder Combined with: - Cyclophosphamide - Ifosfamide - Vincristine Annual history, including hematuria, urinary urgency/frequency, urinary incontinence/retention, dysuria, nocturia, abnormal urinary stream Annual urinalysis 1 Urologic consultation for patients with incontinence or dysfunctional voiding Section 82: Radiotherapy to whole abdomen, pelvis, sacral spine Bladder malignancy Combined with cyclophosphamide or ifosfamide Alcohol use Smoking Annual history, including hematuria, urinary urgency/frequency, urinary incontinence/retention, dysuria, nocturia, abnormal urinary stream Annual urinalysis 2A Same as Section 11 Section 109: Cystectomy Cystectomy- related complication: Chronic urinary tract infection Renal dysfunction Vesicoureteral reflux Hydronephrosis Reservoir calculi Spontaneous neobladder perforation Vitamin B12/ folate/ carotene deficiency Annual urology evaluation 1 except reservoir calculi = 2A and Vitamin B12/ folate/ carotene deficiency = 2B None Section 119: Neurosurgery – spinal cord Neurogenic bladder Urinary incontinence Tumor adjacent to or compressing spinal cord or cauda equina Radiation dose ? 45 Gy to lumbar and/or sacral spine and/or cauda equina Injury above the level of the sacrum Radiation ?50 Gy to lumbar and/or sacral spine and/or cauda equina Annual history, including hematuria, urinary urgency/frequency, urinary incontinence/retention, dysuria, nocturia, abnormal urinary stream 1 Counseling: Counsel regarding adequate fluid intake, regular voiding, seeking medical attention for symptoms of voiding dysfunction or urinary tract infection, compliance with recommended bladder catheterization regimen. Further Considerations: Urologic consultation for patients with dysfunctional voiding or recurrent urinary tract infections Section 126: Pelvic surgery Urinary incontinence Urinary tract obstruction Tumor adjacent to or compressing spinal cord or cauda equina Retroperitoneal node dissection Extensive pelvic dissection Radiation to the bladder, pelvis, and/or lumbar-sacral spine and/or lumbar/sacral spine Annual history, including hematuria, urinary urgency/frequency, urinary incontinence/retention, dysuria, nocturia, abnormal urinary stream 1 Same as section 119 Guideline scores for the COG Long Term Follow-up Guidelines 1. There is uniform consensus of the panel that: (1) there is high-level evidence linking the late efect with the therapeutic exposure and (2) the screening recommendation is appropriate based on the collective clinical experience of panel members 2A. There is uniform consensus of the panel that: (1) there is lower-level evidence linking the late effect with the therapeutic exposure and (2) the screening recommendation is appropriate based on the collective clinical experience of panel members 2B. There is non-uniform consensus of the panel that: (1) there is lower-level evidence linking the late effect with the therapeutic exposure and (2) the screening recommendation is appropriate based on the collective clinical expeirence of panel members 3. There is major disagreement that the recommendation is appropriate Table II Dysfunctional Voiding Scoring System Over the last month Almost never Less than half the time About half the time Almost every time Not available 1. I have had wet clothes or wet underwear during the day 0 1 2 3 NA 2. When I wet myself, my underwear is soaked. 0 1 2 3 NA 3. I miss having a bowel movement every day. 0 1 2 3 NA 4. I have to push for my bowel movements to come out. 0 1 2 3 NA 5. I only go to the bathroom one or two times each day. 0 1 2 3 NA 6. I can hold onto my pee by crossing my legs, squatting or doing the “pee dance”. 0 1 2 3 NA 7. When I have to pee, I cannot wait. 0 1 2 3 NA 8. I have to push to pee. 0 1 2 3 NA 9. When I pee it hurts. 0 1 2 3 NA 10. Parents to answer . Has your child experienced something stressful e.g. new baby, new school, School problems, Abuse (sexual/physical), Home problems (divorce/death) No (0) Yes (3) TOTAL Abnormal values: >9 (males), >6 (females) Reprinted from 38 with permission. 