Deletion of Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor in myeloid cells accelerates tumorigenesis Angiogenesis and the development of a vascular network is required for tumor progression, and involves release of angiogenic factors, including vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), from both malignant and stromal cell types 1 . Infiltration by cells of the myeloid lineage is a hallmark of many tumors, and in many cases the macrophages in these infiltrates express VEGF 2 . Here we show that deletion of inflammatory cell-derived VEGF attenuates the formation of a typical high-density vessel network, thus blocking the angiogenic switch in solid tumors. Vasculature in tumors lacking myeloid cell-derived VEGF was less tortuous, with increased pericyte coverage and decreased vessel length, indicating vascular normalization. In addition, loss of myeloid-derived VEGF decreases VEGFR2 phosphorylation in tumors, even though overall VEGF levels in the tumors are unaffected. However, myeloid deletion of VEGF resulted in an accelerated tumor progression in multiple subcutaneous isograft models and an autochthonous transgenic model of mammary tumorigenesis, with less overall tumor cell death and decreased tumor hypoxia. Furthermore, loss of myeloid cell VEGF increased tumor susceptibility to chemotherapeutic cytotoxicity. This demonstrates that myeloid-derived VEGF is essential for tumorigenic alteration of vasculature and signaling to VEGFR2, and that these changes act to retard, not promote, tumor progression.  Methods Chemotherapy The treatment with chemotherapy was started six days post-injection of 1×10 7 Lewis lung carcinoma cells. Cisplatin (5mg/kg) and Cyclophosphamide (170mg/kg) were purchased from Sigma and given i.p. every second day until day 10. Histology, immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence For whole-mount preparation of mammary glands, the inguinal gland was removed and fixed in 10% phosphate-buffered formalin (Fisher Scientific, Fair Lawn, NJ) and dehydrated through a series of graded acetone and ethanol washes. Glands were stained for 3 h with Harris hematoxylin (VWR Int., West Chester, PA), and excess stain was removed by washing in water. Glands were destained in acidic 50% ethanol and dehydrated and stored in methyl salicylate (Fisher Scientific). After removal tumors were fixed in 10% Formalin, Zinc fixative (BD Pharmingen) or 4% paraformaldehyde, respectively and then embedded in paraffin. For hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) and immunostaining, 5?m sections were deparaffinized with xylene and rehydrated with graded ethanol. The sections were stained according to routine immunohistochemistry procedures and visualized by Vectastain ABC or ABC-AP kit (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). Primary antibodies used for immmunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence: biotinylated rat anti-CD 31 at 1:100 dilution (BD Pharmingen), rat anti-CD 34 (Novus), biotinylated mouse anti-PCNA at 1:800 dilution (BD Pharmingen), biotinylated rat anti-F4/80 at 1:200 dilution (Serotec), rabbit anti-VEGF at 1:50 dilution (sc-152, Santa Cruz), mouse anti-SMA-alpha at 1:500 (Chemicon). The fluorochrome-conjugated Alexa 488 and Alexa 555 were used as secondary antibodies (1:200). Pimonidazole Hydrochloride (Hypoxyprobe™-1) was injected intraperitoneally (60 mg/kg bodyweight) 1 hour prior to tumor removal and was detected with a Mouse IgG1 monoclonal antibody (Mab1, Natural Pharmacia International). TUNEL-Assay (Promega) was performed according to the manufacturers instructions. Quantitative analysis of histologic markers For quantitative analysis of the distribution of immunohistochemical markers within the tumor, the midline sections of tumors were photographed into TIFF images using a Leica DMR microscope and SPOT™ RT color camera system (Diagnostic Instruments Inc.) and the area (number of pixels) with positive staining equal to or greater than a set threshhold was measured using the Image J program and such marked areas were normalized by the number of images for each tumor. For comparison at different stages of progression PyMT tumors were classified as previously described7. To determine vessel density, the vasculature marked by CD 31 and CD 34 was skeletonized using the Image J program and the area covered by blood vessels was measured and the number of vessels per field was determined, respectively. To estimate change in vessel length, the skeletonized blood vessels that showed up in a longitudinal cut within an image were traced along their midline and the number of pixels was converted into distance in millimeters using Image J. The tortuosity (T) of blood vessel was defined by the following equation: T=L/S ? 1 where L is the length of the vessel of interest and S the straight line distance between its endpoints. Confocal microscopy Co-localization of pericytes (SMA-?) endothelial cells (CD 31) was imaged on 20-?m sections of excised LLC tumors. Images were acquired using laser scanning confocal microscopy under 60/1.4 NA oil objective (Nikon C1si, Nikon Instruments Inc). Flow cytometry Tumors were excised and cut into small pieces before incubation in a shaker at 37 degrees at 250 RPM for 2 hours in 0.1% Collagenase A (Roche) in RPMI 1640 (Invitrogen). The resulting single cell suspension was pelleted and rinsed in PBS before treatment with hypotonic lysis buffer and passing through a 40uM cell strainer (BD Biosciences). One million cells per condition were then incubated with Fc Block (BD Biosciences) to block nonspecific FcR binding before labeling with fluorescently conjugated antibodies (eBiosciences) using standard protocols. Data was acquired on a FACSCalibur flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) with propidium iodide to exclude non-viable cells and analyzed with FlowJo Software (Tree Star). Determination of vascular permeability 200 ?l of Fluorescein isothiocyanate-dextran (2,000,000 MW, Sigma) were injected intravenously at a concentration of 50mg/ml. After 10 minutes tumors were removed and immediately frozen in OCT compound. 10 ?m cryosections were cut and vascular permeability was determined based on 10 randomly taken pictures from each tumor. By using Image J the edges of blood vessel were indentified and the extravascular as well as the intravascular area (number of pixels) covered by FITC-dextran were measured. In order to determine vascular permeability in a quantitative manner the amount of extravascular staining over the amount of intravascular FITC-dextran was calculated. Immunoprecipitation and Immunoblotting Tumors were lysed in RIPA buffer and 500 ?g of lysate were used for immunoprecipitation of VEGFR2. The following antibodies were used in this study: rabbit anti-VEGFR2 (55B11, Cell signaling), HRP-conjugated anti-phosphotyrosine (4G10®, Millipore), rabbit anti-VEGF (sc-152, Santa Cruz) and mouse anti-?-actin (Sigma). For a quantitative analysis the membranes were scanned with a fluorescense scanner and the signal stength was determined by using ImageQuant® software. Determination of deletion frequency and gene expression by quantitative PCR Thioglycollate-elicited macrophages as well as FACS sorted F4/80-positive tumor-associated macrophages isolated from PyMT-Mut tumors were used for isolation of genomic DNA as previuously described5. Whole tumors were ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen and subsequently homogenized in TRIzol® reagent (Invitrogen). Total RNA was isolated following the manufacturer's instructions. For real-time PCR analysis, the isolated RNA was reverse transcribed. For PCR reactions, TaqMan-Universal Mastermix (Applied Biosytems) was used. 50 ng cDNA was used as template to determine the relative amount of mRNA by real-time PCR (ABI Prism 7700 sequence detection system), using specific primers and probes with the following sequences: VEGF reverse 5?-ATCCGCATGATCTGCATGG-3?, VEGF forward 5?-AGTCCCATGAAGTGATCAAGTTCA-3?, VEGF probe (6FAM)TGCCCACGTCAGAGAGCAACATCAC(BHQ-1) PGK reverse 5?-TTCTTGCTGCTCTCAGTACCACA-3? PGK forward 5?-CAAATTTGATGAGAATGCCAAGACT-3? PGK probe (6FAM)TATACCTGCTGGCTGGATGGGCTTGGACT(BHQ-1) Cell Culture Cells were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM High Glucose), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mM glutamine, 50 U/ml penicillin and 100?g/ml streptomycin.  Chemotherapy The treatment with chemotherapy was started six days post-injection of 1×10 7 Lewis lung carcinoma cells. Cisplatin (5mg/kg) and Cyclophosphamide (170mg/kg) were purchased from Sigma and given i.p. every second day until day 10.  Histology, immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence For whole-mount preparation of mammary glands, the inguinal gland was removed and fixed in 10% phosphate-buffered formalin (Fisher Scientific, Fair Lawn, NJ) and dehydrated through a series of graded acetone and ethanol washes. Glands were stained for 3 h with Harris hematoxylin (VWR Int., West Chester, PA), and excess stain was removed by washing in water. Glands were destained in acidic 50% ethanol and dehydrated and stored in methyl salicylate (Fisher Scientific). After removal tumors were fixed in 10% Formalin, Zinc fixative (BD Pharmingen) or 4% paraformaldehyde, respectively and then embedded in paraffin. For hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) and immunostaining, 5?m sections were deparaffinized with xylene and rehydrated with graded ethanol. The sections were stained according to routine immunohistochemistry procedures and visualized by Vectastain ABC or ABC-AP kit (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). Primary antibodies used for immmunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence: biotinylated rat anti-CD 31 at 1:100 dilution (BD Pharmingen), rat anti-CD 34 (Novus), biotinylated mouse anti-PCNA at 1:800 dilution (BD Pharmingen), biotinylated rat anti-F4/80 at 1:200 dilution (Serotec), rabbit anti-VEGF at 1:50 dilution (sc-152, Santa Cruz), mouse anti-SMA-alpha at 1:500 (Chemicon). The fluorochrome-conjugated Alexa 488 and Alexa 555 were used as secondary antibodies (1:200). Pimonidazole Hydrochloride (Hypoxyprobe™-1) was injected intraperitoneally (60 mg/kg bodyweight) 1 hour prior to tumor removal and was detected with a Mouse IgG1 monoclonal antibody (Mab1, Natural Pharmacia International). TUNEL-Assay (Promega) was performed according to the manufacturers instructions.  Quantitative analysis of histologic markers For quantitative analysis of the distribution of immunohistochemical markers within the tumor, the midline sections of tumors were photographed into TIFF images using a Leica DMR microscope and SPOT™ RT color camera system (Diagnostic Instruments Inc.) and the area (number of pixels) with positive staining equal to or greater than a set threshhold was measured using the Image J program and such marked areas were normalized by the number of images for each tumor. For comparison at different stages of progression PyMT tumors were classified as previously described7. To determine vessel density, the vasculature marked by CD 31 and CD 34 was skeletonized using the Image J program and the area covered by blood vessels was measured and the number of vessels per field was determined, respectively. To estimate change in vessel length, the skeletonized blood vessels that showed up in a longitudinal cut within an image were traced along their midline and the number of pixels was converted into distance in millimeters using Image J. The tortuosity (T) of blood vessel was defined by the following equation: T=L/S ? 1 where L is the length of the vessel of interest and S the straight line distance between its endpoints.  Confocal microscopy Co-localization of pericytes (SMA-?) endothelial cells (CD 31) was imaged on 20-?m sections of excised LLC tumors. Images were acquired using laser scanning confocal microscopy under 60/1.4 NA oil objective (Nikon C1si, Nikon Instruments Inc).  Flow cytometry Tumors were excised and cut into small pieces before incubation in a shaker at 37 degrees at 250 RPM for 2 hours in 0.1% Collagenase A (Roche) in RPMI 1640 (Invitrogen). The resulting single cell suspension was pelleted and rinsed in PBS before treatment with hypotonic lysis buffer and passing through a 40uM cell strainer (BD Biosciences). One million cells per condition were then incubated with Fc Block (BD Biosciences) to block nonspecific FcR binding before labeling with fluorescently conjugated antibodies (eBiosciences) using standard protocols. Data was acquired on a FACSCalibur flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) with propidium iodide to exclude non-viable cells and analyzed with FlowJo Software (Tree Star).  Determination of vascular permeability 200 ?l of Fluorescein isothiocyanate-dextran (2,000,000 MW, Sigma) were injected intravenously at a concentration of 50mg/ml. After 10 minutes tumors were removed and immediately frozen in OCT compound. 10 ?m cryosections were cut and vascular permeability was determined based on 10 randomly taken pictures from each tumor. By using Image J the edges of blood vessel were indentified and the extravascular as well as the intravascular area (number of pixels) covered by FITC-dextran were measured. In order to determine vascular permeability in a quantitative manner the amount of extravascular staining over the amount of intravascular FITC-dextran was calculated.  Immunoprecipitation and Immunoblotting Tumors were lysed in RIPA buffer and 500 ?g of lysate were used for immunoprecipitation of VEGFR2. The following antibodies were used in this study: rabbit anti-VEGFR2 (55B11, Cell signaling), HRP-conjugated anti-phosphotyrosine (4G10®, Millipore), rabbit anti-VEGF (sc-152, Santa Cruz) and mouse anti-?-actin (Sigma). For a quantitative analysis the membranes were scanned with a fluorescense scanner and the signal stength was determined by using ImageQuant® software.  Determination of deletion frequency and gene expression by quantitative PCR Thioglycollate-elicited macrophages as well as FACS sorted F4/80-positive tumor-associated macrophages isolated from PyMT-Mut tumors were used for isolation of genomic DNA as previuously described5. Whole tumors were ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen and subsequently homogenized in TRIzol® reagent (Invitrogen). Total RNA was isolated following the manufacturer's instructions. For real-time PCR analysis, the isolated RNA was reverse transcribed. For PCR reactions, TaqMan-Universal Mastermix (Applied Biosytems) was used. 50 ng cDNA was used as template to determine the relative amount of mRNA by real-time PCR (ABI Prism 7700 sequence detection system), using specific primers and probes with the following sequences: VEGF reverse 5?-ATCCGCATGATCTGCATGG-3?, VEGF forward 5?-AGTCCCATGAAGTGATCAAGTTCA-3?, VEGF probe (6FAM)TGCCCACGTCAGAGAGCAACATCAC(BHQ-1) PGK reverse 5?-TTCTTGCTGCTCTCAGTACCACA-3? PGK forward 5?-CAAATTTGATGAGAATGCCAAGACT-3? PGK probe (6FAM)TATACCTGCTGGCTGGATGGGCTTGGACT(BHQ-1)  Cell Culture Cells were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM High Glucose), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mM glutamine, 50 U/ml penicillin and 100?g/ml streptomycin.  Supplementary Material 1 