Novel Tracers and Their Development for the Imaging of Metastatic Prostate Cancer There are presently no accurate methods of imaging prostate cancer metastases to bone. An unprecedented number of novel imaging agents, based on the biology of the disease, are now available for testing. We reviewed contemporary molecular imaging modalities that have been tested in humans with metastatic prostate cancer, with consideration of the studies' adherence to current prostate cancer clinical trial designs. Articles from the years 2002 to 2008 on PET using 18F-FDG, 11C-choline, 18F-choline, 18F-flouride, 11C-acetate, 11C-methionine, and 18F-fluoro-5?-dihydrotestosterone in patients with metastatic prostate cancer were reviewed. Although these studies are encouraging, most focus on the rising population with prostate-specific antigen, and many involve small numbers of patients and do not adhere to consensus criteria for clinical trial designs in prostate cancer. Hence, although many promising agents are available for testing, such studies would benefit from closer collaboration between those in the fields of medical oncology and nuclear medicine.  Conclusion An unprecedented number of tracers are now available for study in prostate cancer, based on an expanding awareness of the biologic complexity involved. These include metabolic, apoptotic, angiogenic, and other pathways. 18F-FDG has been studied the most and shows sensitivity in detecting metastatic disease in soft tissue and bone, although the study populations have been mixed. 11C-choline, 18F-FCH, and 11C-acetate have been studied mostly in the early detection of prostate cancer. 18F-flouride offers the potential for detection of bone metastasis, but more studies are needed to evaluate this tracer further. 18F-FDHTand 18F-FACBC are the newest imaging modalities under investigation; they show preliminary promise for the detection of metastatic disease. Although various imaging modalities based on nuclear medicine technology are being explored, several common themes emerge. First, most studies focus on the rising-PSA population. This focus is understandable, given the clinical challenge—to find the site of relapse in these patients with rising PSA. However, this is a difficult niche for new imaging modalities, because it is not known if such techniques have any ability to detect bone, nodal, or local disease. It may well be easier to ascertain whether an imaging modality detects a specific distribution of disease in patients with metastatic disease rather than in the rising-PSA population. The second observation is that many of these studies, although they focus on the rising-PSA population, do not follow the definition set out in the consensus criteria. Rising-PSA patients, by definition, are those who do not show findings on standard imaging modalities ( 9 – 11 ). Therefore, to have an endpoint of correlation with findings on standard scans is paradoxic; by definition, these standard scans must have negative results. Tofit patients into the standard clinical-states model, one must work backward from standard scans. That is, the clinical state is defined by findings on bone scintigraphy and CT. In addition, most of these studies involve small numbers of patients and have so many subgroups and so many different endpoints that the numbers of each patient type are disturbingly small and inconclusive. Finally, it is important that studies use uniform assessments performed at regular intervals, to allow comparisons between studies. The same assessments—such as the investigational scan, standard CT scan, and standard bone scan—should be followed longitudinally, so that lesions seen on standard scans but not on PET scans can be verified as either active cancer (false-negative) or benign changes (true-negative). Positive PET findings not seen on standard scans can be defined as either true lesions that emerge as cancer on subsequent standard studies (true-positive) or as false-positive findings. When studied rigorously, these investigational agents have the ability to transform drug development in prostate cancer. Patients with a predefined biologic profile could be identified. Scans could also be used to assess therapeutic pharmacodynamics, staging, and prognostication. To properly develop such powerful tools, the nuclear medicine community and the prostate cancer clinical trials community are collaborating so that prostate cancer clinical trials can make use of biologic imaging. 