Iatrogenic Cushing’s Syndrome Following Epidural Triamcinolone in an HIV-1 Infected Patient Undergoing Therapy with Ritonavir-Lopinavir  Discussion Although prolonged Cushing’s syndrome (6–12 months) resulting from epidural administration of methylprednisolone alone has been known to occur in a normal host without HIV infection, such reports are extremely rare ( 1 ). Drug-drug interactions are common with antiretroviral therapy, particularly so with antiretrovirals that interact with hepatic metabolizing enzymes, especially cytochrome p450 3A4 (CYP3A4) microsomal oxidation pathway, which is responsible for phase I metabolism of a substantial proportion of xenobiotics. Since its introduction for treatment of HIV-1 infection, the use of ritonavir has resulted in recognition of significant drug interactions arising from the decreased clearance of drugs metabolized by CYP3A4. Although numerous case reports warn against the potentially lethal combination of inhaled fluticasone propionate in patients on low dose ritonavir ( 2 ), a similar association with epidural triamcinolone has not been reported to date. In this patient, ritonavir administration contributed to the development of profound and persistent adrenal suppression due to the significant inhibition of metabolism of 140 mg (322 ?M) of triamcinolone acetonide given as epidural injections. Triamcinolone acetonide is typically rapidly metabolized, with an estimated half life of 2–3 hours ( 3 ); the acetonide version is less water soluble than other glucocorticoid derivatives, and absorption from intra-articular sites has been reported to continue for 2–3 weeks following injection ( 4 ). In this patient, the rate of decline in triamcinolone acetonide levels ( Figure 1 ) from days 22–62 following the last dose of epidural injection approximated linear decay kinetics (slope 0.0154 ?g/day, r2=0.992) with a calculated half life of 21.3 days. We infer from these data that the triamcinolone acetonide half-life was prolonged at least 170-fold. Analysis of steroid pharmacokinetics in the presence of ritonavir indicate that the half-life of prednisolone was 33% longer in normal hosts four days after the coadministration of ritonavir (200 mg daily) and prednisone (20 mg, one time dose), and that the magnitude of the interaction was diminished by day fourteen ( 5 ). This suggests that some effect on glucocorticoids may have been anticipated, but the inhibition seen in this patient was extreme. Factors in addition to ritonavir may have influenced triamcinolone levels in this case. Both lopinavir and atazanavir exhibit inhibitory effects on CYP3A, albeit to lesser potency than ritonavir, and the combinations of these drugs likely contributed to net CYP3A inhibition ( 6 , 7 ). The patient had a history of chronic hepatitis B and it is not known whether hepatic injury from hepatitis B infection contributed to relatively slow metabolism of triamcinolone acetonide; no elevations in serum ALT or AST were detected in this patient, although specific effects on drug metabolizing enzymes has not been investigated extensively. Horikke and coworkers ( 8 ) have reported a 2-fold decrease in CYP3A4 mRNA in individuals with chronic hepatitis B infection compared with uninfected controls, suggesting a potential effect of hepatitis B on drug metabolism. The use of nevirapine hastened glucocorticoid clearance, likely due to nevirapine induction of CYP 3A4 ( 9 ). Considerable caution to this approach, however, should be emphasized given that adrenal crisis could result from a rapid decline in glucocorticoid levels if it unmasked suppression of pituitary ACTH production by the previous glucocorticoid exposure. It is important to use the lowest effective glucocorticoid dose for all patients, particularly so for individuals with HIV infection, who are at elevated risk for complications of steroid therapy, including infectious and non-infectious complications (e.g., avascular necrosis). In this context, drug-drug interactions because of cytochrome p450 inhibition may be serious, life threatening or fatal. Progression of Kaposi’s sarcoma has been reported in HIV patients with iatrogenic Cushing’s syndrome, although our patient did not experience this adverse event ( 10 ). Marked decrease in circulating lymphocytes in response to glucocorticoids has been previously reported ( 11 ), and the relatively slow rebound in peripheral CD4 cells suggests the need for continued caution when corticosteroids are co-administered. Epidural corticosteroids are frequently prescribed to patients for various indications, including intractable pain. Monitoring drug-drug interactions is a critical aspect of routine evaluation in HIV-1 infected individuals; therapeutic drug monitoring has been proposed ( 12 ), although practical limitations preclude feasibility in routine clinical care. Rather, primary physicians and consults should have a heightened sense of awareness for potential interactions, to avoid important adverse effects in patients who receive epidural corticosteroids.  Discussion Although prolonged Cushing’s syndrome (6–12 months) resulting from epidural administration of methylprednisolone alone has been known to occur in a normal host without HIV infection, such reports are extremely rare ( 1 ). Drug-drug interactions are common with antiretroviral therapy, particularly so with antiretrovirals that interact with hepatic metabolizing enzymes, especially cytochrome p450 3A4 (CYP3A4) microsomal oxidation pathway, which is responsible for phase I metabolism of a substantial proportion of xenobiotics. Since its introduction for treatment of HIV-1 infection, the use of ritonavir has resulted in recognition of significant drug interactions arising from the decreased clearance of drugs metabolized by CYP3A4. Although numerous case reports warn against the potentially lethal combination of inhaled fluticasone propionate in patients on low dose ritonavir ( 2 ), a similar association with epidural triamcinolone has not been reported to date. In this patient, ritonavir administration contributed to the development of profound and persistent adrenal suppression due to the significant inhibition of metabolism of 140 mg (322 ?M) of triamcinolone acetonide given as epidural injections. Triamcinolone acetonide is typically rapidly metabolized, with an estimated half life of 2–3 hours ( 3 ); the acetonide version is less water soluble than other glucocorticoid derivatives, and absorption from intra-articular sites has been reported to continue for 2–3 weeks following injection ( 4 ). In this patient, the rate of decline in triamcinolone acetonide levels ( Figure 1 ) from days 22–62 following the last dose of epidural injection approximated linear decay kinetics (slope 0.0154 ?g/day, r2=0.992) with a calculated half life of 21.3 days. We infer from these data that the triamcinolone acetonide half-life was prolonged at least 170-fold. Analysis of steroid pharmacokinetics in the presence of ritonavir indicate that the half-life of prednisolone was 33% longer in normal hosts four days after the coadministration of ritonavir (200 mg daily) and prednisone (20 mg, one time dose), and that the magnitude of the interaction was diminished by day fourteen ( 5 ). This suggests that some effect on glucocorticoids may have been anticipated, but the inhibition seen in this patient was extreme. Factors in addition to ritonavir may have influenced triamcinolone levels in this case. Both lopinavir and atazanavir exhibit inhibitory effects on CYP3A, albeit to lesser potency than ritonavir, and the combinations of these drugs likely contributed to net CYP3A inhibition ( 6 , 7 ). The patient had a history of chronic hepatitis B and it is not known whether hepatic injury from hepatitis B infection contributed to relatively slow metabolism of triamcinolone acetonide; no elevations in serum ALT or AST were detected in this patient, although specific effects on drug metabolizing enzymes has not been investigated extensively. Horikke and coworkers ( 8 ) have reported a 2-fold decrease in CYP3A4 mRNA in individuals with chronic hepatitis B infection compared with uninfected controls, suggesting a potential effect of hepatitis B on drug metabolism. The use of nevirapine hastened glucocorticoid clearance, likely due to nevirapine induction of CYP 3A4 ( 9 ). Considerable caution to this approach, however, should be emphasized given that adrenal crisis could result from a rapid decline in glucocorticoid levels if it unmasked suppression of pituitary ACTH production by the previous glucocorticoid exposure. It is important to use the lowest effective glucocorticoid dose for all patients, particularly so for individuals with HIV infection, who are at elevated risk for complications of steroid therapy, including infectious and non-infectious complications (e.g., avascular necrosis). In this context, drug-drug interactions because of cytochrome p450 inhibition may be serious, life threatening or fatal. Progression of Kaposi’s sarcoma has been reported in HIV patients with iatrogenic Cushing’s syndrome, although our patient did not experience this adverse event ( 10 ). Marked decrease in circulating lymphocytes in response to glucocorticoids has been previously reported ( 11 ), and the relatively slow rebound in peripheral CD4 cells suggests the need for continued caution when corticosteroids are co-administered. Epidural corticosteroids are frequently prescribed to patients for various indications, including intractable pain. Monitoring drug-drug interactions is a critical aspect of routine evaluation in HIV-1 infected individuals; therapeutic drug monitoring has been proposed ( 12 ), although practical limitations preclude feasibility in routine clinical care. Rather, primary physicians and consults should have a heightened sense of awareness for potential interactions, to avoid important adverse effects in patients who receive epidural corticosteroids.  Figure Figure 1 Triamcinolone and cortisol levels detected after final epidural injection time point (day 0). Concomitant antiretroviral regimens are indicated. LPV = lopinavir; r=ritonavir; TDF = tenofovir; FTC = emtricitabine; ATZ = atazanavir, D4T = stavudine, 3TC = emtricitabine.  Figure Figure 1 Triamcinolone and cortisol levels detected after final epidural injection time point (day 0). Concomitant antiretroviral regimens are indicated. LPV = lopinavir; r=ritonavir; TDF = tenofovir; FTC = emtricitabine; ATZ = atazanavir, D4T = stavudine, 3TC = emtricitabine. 