Differential Drinking Patterns of Family History Positive and Family History Negative First Semester College Females Objective This study compares the natural drinking patterns of family history positive and family history negative women during their first semester of college, a transitional period known to coincide with considerable alcohol-related risks. Method Seventy-two incoming undergraduate females, approximately half of whom reported a family history of alcohol misuse, completed initial questionnaires as well as Timeline Followback assessments. In addition, participants completed five successive weeks of online behavioral diaries measuring three categories of prospective alcohol consumption: total drinks, maximum drinks, and heavy episodic drinking events. Repeated measures ANCOVA models, controlling for prior alcohol consumption, examined participants’ drinking behavior. Results Over the course of the five assessed weeks, first semester females with a genetic predisposition to alcohol problems were found to consume significantly more total drinks ( p < .05), maximum drinks ( p < .05), and were more likely to drink heavily ( p < .05) than family history negative peers. Conclusions Findings highlight increased alcohol-related risks faced by incoming first-year college females with a reported family history of problematic drinking and, thus, emphasize the need for early interventions targeted toward this at-risk group.  Study Limitations One limitation of the present investigation is the fairly small sample size. Due to lack of respondents, we were restricted to a broad operationalization of the family history of alcohol abuse variable, in which parents, grandparents, uncles, aunts, cousins and siblings were merged. Though the current findings highlight the significance of family history of problematic alcohol usage regardless of the relationship to the respondent, future studies examining the distinctive roles of first, second, and third degree hereditability appear warranted. Additionally, it is important to note that FH status was derived from participants’ conventional assessment of alcohol abuse, and was not specifically defined in any way. Results are thus anchored in participant perceptions rather than DSM-IV criteria and must be interpreted as such. Finally, the findings from this study should be qualified by the limitation that the current sample consists of students from one mid-sized private university on the West Coast. Since rates of collegiate alcohol consumption are shown to be highest in Northeast and North Central regions and lowest in the Western region of the U.S., results may under represent the drinking behavior of typical college women in the United States ( O’Malley and Johnston, 2002 ).  IV. Discussion Findings from this sample of first-year college females indicate that students with a reported family history of alcohol abuse consume significantly greater amounts of alcohol during the initial weeks of college than students without a reported family history of alcohol abuse. Despite showing no baseline differences in alcohol usage, FH+ females exhibited riskier drinking patterns throughout the assessed five weeks than FH? respondents in all categories of alcohol consumption, including total drinks, maximum drinks, and heavy episodic drinking events. Results confirm prior studies that show greater alcohol vulnerability for college females with a family history of problematic drinking than without ( Kushner and Sher, 1993 ; Perkins and Berkowitz, 1991 ; Pullen, 2001). In addition, our study extends earlier research by focusing on differential patterns of FH+ and FH? women’s alcohol consumption during the critical first semester of college. Such early assessment is advantageous when investigating the impact of family history on collegiate drinking as it captures patterns of alcohol usage before higher risk students may drop out. Overall, the current findings offer unique insight by suggesting that the alcohol-related perils posed by college transitions may be population-specific. Similar baseline consumption levels in conjunction with significantly different drinking patterns between FH+ and FH? respondents point to college entrance as a risk factor for excessive alcohol use among females with genetic predispositions to problematic drinking. It appears that college cultures and environments, which tend to condone and even encourage alcohol consumption, may trigger increased drinking among FH+ women. Further, FH+ women may be more likely to manage challenging college transitions through drinking than their FH? peers. Yet regardless of family history status, respondents maintained fairly stable levels of alcohol consumption and heavy episodic drinking across the five measured weeks. This finding further emphasizes the importance of drinking decisions made during the initial few weeks of college. Study Limitations One limitation of the present investigation is the fairly small sample size. Due to lack of respondents, we were restricted to a broad operationalization of the family history of alcohol abuse variable, in which parents, grandparents, uncles, aunts, cousins and siblings were merged. Though the current findings highlight the significance of family history of problematic alcohol usage regardless of the relationship to the respondent, future studies examining the distinctive roles of first, second, and third degree hereditability appear warranted. Additionally, it is important to note that FH status was derived from participants’ conventional assessment of alcohol abuse, and was not specifically defined in any way. Results are thus anchored in participant perceptions rather than DSM-IV criteria and must be interpreted as such. Finally, the findings from this study should be qualified by the limitation that the current sample consists of students from one mid-sized private university on the West Coast. Since rates of collegiate alcohol consumption are shown to be highest in Northeast and North Central regions and lowest in the Western region of the U.S., results may under represent the drinking behavior of typical college women in the United States ( O’Malley and Johnston, 2002 ). Conclusions The present study prospectively recorded the natural drinking patterns of first-year college women over five weeks early in their first semester of college. Overall, we found that first semester FH+ females consumed significantly more alcohol and were significantly more likely to drink heavily than first semester FH? females. The short-term hazards of excessive alcohol consumption among FH+ college women can lead to a host of physical and emotional injuries while potential long-term implications include persistence of heavy drinking and alcohol dependence after college ( Jennison, 2004 ). A pattern of greater consumption in the first semester of college by genetically predisposed female college entrants emphasizes the need for prevention efforts targeted toward this at-risk group. Non-judgmental and non-coercive interventions taking place during the first weeks of college should aim to help FH+ females better understand the dangers associated with drinking and why they might be inclined to use alcohol to cope with new college surroundings. It may be helpful to address the issues of family alcohol history and the specific risks associated with it in these interventions. Further, studies using large samples of FH+ and FH? females that differentiate genetic linkages to alcohol problems and follow weekly consumption patterns throughout the entire first year of college would be constructive.  Conclusions The present study prospectively recorded the natural drinking patterns of first-year college women over five weeks early in their first semester of college. Overall, we found that first semester FH+ females consumed significantly more alcohol and were significantly more likely to drink heavily than first semester FH? females. The short-term hazards of excessive alcohol consumption among FH+ college women can lead to a host of physical and emotional injuries while potential long-term implications include persistence of heavy drinking and alcohol dependence after college ( Jennison, 2004 ). A pattern of greater consumption in the first semester of college by genetically predisposed female college entrants emphasizes the need for prevention efforts targeted toward this at-risk group. Non-judgmental and non-coercive interventions taking place during the first weeks of college should aim to help FH+ females better understand the dangers associated with drinking and why they might be inclined to use alcohol to cope with new college surroundings. It may be helpful to address the issues of family alcohol history and the specific risks associated with it in these interventions. Further, studies using large samples of FH+ and FH? females that differentiate genetic linkages to alcohol problems and follow weekly consumption patterns throughout the entire first year of college would be constructive. 