Immune escape by Epstein Barr virus associated malignancies Persistent Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection remains asymptomatic in the majority of virus carriers, despite the potent growth transforming potential of this virus. The increased frequency of EBV associated B cell lymphomas in immune compromised individuals suggests that tumor-free chronic infection with this virus is in part due to immune control. Here we discuss the evidence that loss of selective components of EBV specific immunity might contribute to EBV associated malignancies, like Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma, Burkitt’s and Hodgkin’s lymphoma, in otherwise immune competent patients. Furthermore, we discuss how current vaccine approaches against EBV might be able to target these selective deficiencies.  5. Conclusions There is now mounting evidence that in addition to growth transforming contributions of both EBV and mutations, EBV associated malignancies in otherwise immune competent individuals escape immune control by either immune compromising coinfection or conditioning of their microenvironment. Since these tumors, like NPC, Hodgkin’s and Burkitt’s lymphoma express only a limited group of EBV antigens, only a select group of the protective EBV specific T cell responses needs to be compromised to allow their emergence. The challenge of developing immunotherapies against these EBV associated malignancies lies now in formulating vaccines comprised of relevant CD4+ and CD8+ T cell EBV antigens expressed in these tumors with a potent adjuvant that will elicit protective EBV specific Th1 immunity 90 , 91 with a strong central memory component 92 . The consensus at the moment seems to be that EBNA1 as a promising CD4+ T cell antigen, should be combined with LMP1 and LMP2 for CD8+ T cell stimulation in such a vaccine for both prevention of symptomatic EBV infection as well as immunotherapy against EBV associated malignancies.  Figure Figure 1 EBV associated lymphomas are thought to primarily develop from two latency states. All eight latent EBV antigens can be found expressed in naïve B cells of healthy virus carriers. Only substantial immune escape by immune suppression from dominant and subdominant CD4+ (EBNA1 and LMP specific, respectively) and CD8+ (EBNA3 and EBNA1, LMP1, respectively) T cell responses can lead to PTLD and HIV-associate diffuse large cell lymphoma. In contrast, the restricted latency pattern of Hodgkin’s lymphoma only needs to escape dominant and subdominant CD4+, and CD8+ T cell responses of intermediate and low dominance. Finally, Burkitt’s lymphoma, which probably also develops from germinal center B cells, shuts down latent EBV infection even further and prevents, due to its constitutively active c-myc activity, LMP expression. Burkitt’s lymphoma, therefore, has only to compromise dominant CD4+ and subdominant CD8+ T cell responses against EBNA1 to escape from immune control (red circles: CD4+ T cells, blue circles CD8+ T cells, grouped into dominant, intermediate and subdominant responses). 