Lack of classic histology should not prevent diagnosis of necrolytic acral erythema We describe a patient who was referred for management of psoriasis unresponsive to treatment. Given the predominantly acral distribution of the patient’s rash and his known diagnosis of hepatitis C, we considered the diagnosis of necrolytic acral erythema (NAE) and empirically began treatment with oral zinc sulfate. At follow up 3 weeks later, the patient had exceptional improvement in his cutaneous disease, supporting our diagnosis of NAE. NAE is a recently described entity, and limited information is known regarding the etiology and pathogenesis; however, previous reports have been fairly consistent regarding the clinical and histopathologic presentation. We describe a patient without the classic histologic or clinical findings of previously described cases of NAE. We feel that it is important to keep the diagnosis of NAE in one’s differential for a predominantly acrally distributed rash. Further, we recommend additional work up including hepatitis C status and zinc levels as well as possible treatment with oral zinc sulfate in patients with a potential diagnosis of NAE.  INTRODUCTION Necrolytic acral erythema (NAE) was first described by el Darouti, et al in 1996. 1 el Darouti’s group reported seven Egyptian patients with hepatitis C and a rash involving predominantly acral sites, specifically the dorsal feet. Since their initial description, there have been several other small studies and cases adding to our knowledge of this entity. We report a case of NAE with clinical and histopathologic features that differ from those of previously reported patients and which closely mimic psoriasis.  CASE REPORT A 46-year-old African American male with a past medical history significant for hemophilia and hepatitis C was seen in our clinic for treatment of psoriasis. His disease had not responded to various topical medications including calcipotriene, and clobetasol ointment and lotion. The rash, which had been present for 2 years, had been previously diagnosed as psoriasis on the basis of clinical and histopathologic investigations. Physical examination revealed a well-nourished male with skin lesions localized predominantly to acral surfaces. Impressive erythematous, hyperkeratotic and crusted plaques were seen on the hands, forearms, lower legs, knees and elbows ( Figure 1 ). Only a few small thin plaques were seen on the dorsal feet, but there was nearly complete involvement of the plantar surfaces. There were scattered erythematous, scaly papules and hyperkeratotic plaques on the patient’s chest and presacrum. The back, scalp, face and oral mucosa were clear. The fingernails did manifest pitting. Laboratory studies were significant for mildly elevated levels of aspartate aminotransferase (54 U/L, reference range, 15–40 U/L), total bilirubin (2.0 mg/dL, reference range, 0.4–1.4 mg/dL) and alkaline phosphatase (150 U/L, reference range, 39–117 U/L). CBC was essentially normal. Hepatitis C antibody was positive as expected (genotype 1a with a viral load of 375,000). Histopathological examination of a punch biopsy specimen revealed psoriasiform hyperplasia with prominent confluent parakeratosis, hypogranulosis and thinning of the suprapapillary plates ( Figure 2 ). Within the broad parakeratotic layer, numerous neutrophils were noted with focal aggregation into neutrophilic microabscessess ( Figure 3 ). Plugging of the infundibular portion of hair follicles by parakeratotic scale with numerous neutrophils was seen ( Figure 2 ). Dilatation of small vessels in the papillary dermis and a superficial perivascular lymphocytic and neutrophilic dermal infiltrate were noted. Neither epidermal spongiosis nor reticular degeneration of superficial keratinocytes with dyskeratosis and vacuolization were appreciated in the biopsy. At his initial visit, the patient was started on zinc supplementation at 220mg BID as well as triamcinolone ointment, which he reported to use only once daily. At follow-up approximately 3 weeks later, the patient had dramatic improvement of his skin lesions ( Figure 4 ) with only a few residual focal hyperkeratotic plaques on his plantar feet, erythematous, slightly scaly, thin plaques on his hands, and resolving violaceous to hyperpigmented, slightly scaly, thin plaques and scaly papules on his upper extremities and sacral area. The zinc level was within normal limits at 88 mcg/dL (reference range, 60–130 mcg/dL), and serum glucagon and amino acid levels were essentially normal. At a subsequent follow-up 2 months later, his skin disease had completely resolved. Clinical findings as well as his dramatic response to zinc supplementation led to a diagnosis of necrolytic acral erythema. The patient was referred to gastroenterology for possible treatment of his hepatitis C; however, his cutaneous disease had completely resolved without treatment with interferon-alpha.  DISCUSSION NAE has been reported exclusively in patients with hepatitis C and is thought to be pathognomonic for this infection. 2 Cutaneous findings can vary depending upon the stage of the lesions. Acute lesions often show pronounced erythema with vesicles and flaccid bullae, especially around the periphery of plaques. 1 , 3 More chronic lesions appear as erythematous to violaceous plaques with thick scale, erosions and crusting, and often have a dark red rim. 1 , 3 , 4 , 5 Acral sites are predominantly involved, typically with greater involvement of the lower extremities than the upper extremities. 2 , 4 , 6 The most classic location of NAE plaques is the dorsal feet, with the majority of cases noting involvement of this area. 1 , 2 , 4 , 6 , 7 However, as demonstrated by our patient, significant involvement of the dorsal feet is not critical for diagnosis. Previous reports indicate that the palms, soles, nail bed and nail plate remain uninvolved in NAE, 2 and this may be true for the majority of patients described. However, our patient clearly had involvement of all of these areas, and most notably, he had pitting of the nails lending support to his misdiagnosis of psoriasis. There has also been a previously reported case of NAE with palm/sole disease. 5 Therefore, plantar, palmar and nail involvement should not exclude this diagnosis. Patients with NAE may also develop plaques on non-acral sites including the trunk and upper extremities, but these areas are less involved than the distal extremities. The periorificial area and oral mucosa are usually spared. 5 Patients may complain of pruritus, burning, or aching pain associated with the lesions. 2 , 3 , 6 , 7 Histologic findings of this entity often resemble those of other necrolytic erythemas. In a histologic study of 30 cases, Abdallah et al. found that in the early stage, NAE is characterized by acanthosis, epidermal spongiosis and a superficial perivascular dermatitis resembling nummular dermatitis. In its fully developed form, the disease exhibits psoriasiform hyperplasia and prominent papillomatosis with parakeratosis, subcorneal pustules, epidermal pallor and necrotic keratinocytes. 8 Confluent necrosis of the keratinocytes in the upper parts of the epidermis may lead to cleft formation. 3 In addition, vascular ectasia, papillary dermal inflammation and pigment incontinence are also seen. 8 Due to the lack of specific histopathologic features, correct diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion and clinico-pathologic correlations. 9 Differentiation from psoriasis is often not possible on clinical grounds; however, the presence of foci of epidermal dyskeratosis and pallor helps clarify the diagnosis. Our case is remarkable in that it lacks foci of epidermal necrosis as well as reticular degeneration with epidermal clefting or epidermal pallor, and shows only minimal papillomatosis, thus closely mimicking psoriasis histopathologically. 3 Since histological findings in NAE are often similar to other necrolytic erythemas, clinical exam and laboratory data are helpful in distinguishing this entity. In comparison with acrodermatitis enteropathica, serum zinc levels are usually normal in NAE, 1 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 with only few isolated reports of deficient zinc levels. 3 , 10 Glucagon levels are also usually normal, in contrast with the elevated levels seen in necrolytic migratory erythema. 4 , 5 Amino acid levels have been measured to be low in some patients. 1 , 3 All patients are positive for hepatitis C. 1 Initial treatment of NAE consists of oral zinc sulfate supplementation, 4 , 6 , 7 , 10 and response is often noted within several weeks of beginning therapy. 4 , 5 , 6 , 10 The recommended dose is 440 mg/day divided in 2 doses. 4 , 7 In many patients, including ours, complete or near-complete resolution of skin lesions is attained with zinc treatment alone. 3 , 7 , 10 Nofal, et al. noted the best response to zinc in two patients that had low zinc levels at presentation. Three patients with normal zinc levels responded to zinc supplementation, but to a lesser degree. 3 However, other reported patients have shown only minimal improvement with zinc therapy. This could be the result of sub-therapeutic treatment with doses of only 60mg/day in at least some of these patients. 1 It is important to note that oral zinc sulfate has been evaluated as a possible treatment for psoriasis. Psoriatic patients given oral zinc therapy were noted to show no improvement in their clinical disease. 11 , 12 Thus, it is unlikely that our patient actually had psoriasis, given his dramatic response to zinc therapy. Oral amino acid supplementation has also been tried, but efficacy in skin disease has been minimal. 3 , 4 Topical corticosteroids and intralesional triamcinolone injections may be helpful in a subset of patients, but generally are not very effective. 1 , 2 , 7 Treatment of underlying hepatitis C (with interferon-alpha with or without ribavirin) is the definitive treatment and has led to improvement of skin disease in the majority of patients, 1 , 4 , 5 , 6 sometimes with durable remission of skin disease despite lack of effective treatment of hepatitis C. 4 , 5 However, some reports note recurrence of the NAE lesions after discontinuation of interferon treatment, and relapses of NAE may coincide with the reappearance of liver disease and HCV viral load recovery. 2 , 6 The pathogenesis of NAE has not been determined. Several mechanisms have been proposed, including hepatocellular dysfunction, hyperglucagonemia, hypoaminoacidemia, hypoalbuminemia, zinc deficiency and diabetes, but the etiology of NAE appears likely to be multifactorial. 3 Zinc deficiency in particular has been suggested as an etiologic factor in the skin lesions given the presence of zinc deficiency in a subset of patients with the disease, and the clinical response to zinc supplementation seen in many patients. Najarian theorizes that even patients with normal serum zinc levels may harbor occult cutaneous zinc deficiency. 10 What role zinc plays in disease pathogenesis, and whether zinc supplementation corrects an underlying deficiency in the skin or works via other mechanisms, still remain to be elucidated. The role of hepatitis C in NAE is also unclear. Treatment of hepatitis C undoubtedly results in improvement of NAE lesions, even in cases in which the underlying hepatitis C is not effectively treated and the viral load remains elevated. 5 Some reports have specifically noted worsening severity of NAE skin lesions with increased activity of underlying hepatitis 1 while others have observed no association between the severity of hepatic disease or viral load levels and the extent of skin findings. 2 , 6 El-Ghandour and colleagues demonstrated that electron microscopy did not show any evidence of viral particles in the keratinocytes, dermal infiltrate or vascular endothelium of lesional skin, nor was HCV-RNA detected in lesional skin by PCR analysis. However, clumped tonofilaments were noted on EM, which they concluded may possibly suggest a viral etiology for the skin lesions. 1 Thus, the exact role hepatitis C plays in this disease is still to be determined. The role of various hepatitis C strains in the development and clinical picture of NAE also remains to be seen. The largest reported series of NAE cases all report on Egyptian patients. 1 , 2 , 3 , 6 The clinical picture may differ in patients from the United States where different genotypes of HCV prevail. 13 At least one author questions whether NAE is indeed rare in the United States, possibly due to discrepant HCV strains or host factors, or whether the disease is more common but under-recognized. 2 Early recognition of NAE is extremely important. The awareness of the clinical features of this disease and consideration of this entity in a differential diagnosis is important for several reasons. First, recognition of NAE can allow diagnosis of hepatitis C in previously unaware patients. In one study, 26 of 30 patients (87%) with NAE had identification of their skin disease before initial diagnosis of hepatitis C. 2 In another study, 18 of 23 patients were initially diagnosed by a dermatologist as having NAE and then referred for HCV testing. 6 Recognition of NAE may allow early treatment of hepatitis C with possible prevention of the long-term hepatic sequellae of this virus, including cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Second, recognition of this entity allows for efficacious treatment. As in our case, many of these patients are given incorrect diagnoses such as psoriasis. Consequently, these patients are treated inappropriately, often with no success and much frustration on the part of patient and physician. Treatment with oral zinc supplementation is easy, economical and safe, and may result in dramatic improvement in the patient’s skin disease.  DISCUSSION NAE has been reported exclusively in patients with hepatitis C and is thought to be pathognomonic for this infection. 2 Cutaneous findings can vary depending upon the stage of the lesions. Acute lesions often show pronounced erythema with vesicles and flaccid bullae, especially around the periphery of plaques. 1 , 3 More chronic lesions appear as erythematous to violaceous plaques with thick scale, erosions and crusting, and often have a dark red rim. 1 , 3 , 4 , 5 Acral sites are predominantly involved, typically with greater involvement of the lower extremities than the upper extremities. 2 , 4 , 6 The most classic location of NAE plaques is the dorsal feet, with the majority of cases noting involvement of this area. 1 , 2 , 4 , 6 , 7 However, as demonstrated by our patient, significant involvement of the dorsal feet is not critical for diagnosis. Previous reports indicate that the palms, soles, nail bed and nail plate remain uninvolved in NAE, 2 and this may be true for the majority of patients described. However, our patient clearly had involvement of all of these areas, and most notably, he had pitting of the nails lending support to his misdiagnosis of psoriasis. There has also been a previously reported case of NAE with palm/sole disease. 5 Therefore, plantar, palmar and nail involvement should not exclude this diagnosis. Patients with NAE may also develop plaques on non-acral sites including the trunk and upper extremities, but these areas are less involved than the distal extremities. The periorificial area and oral mucosa are usually spared. 5 Patients may complain of pruritus, burning, or aching pain associated with the lesions. 2 , 3 , 6 , 7 Histologic findings of this entity often resemble those of other necrolytic erythemas. In a histologic study of 30 cases, Abdallah et al. found that in the early stage, NAE is characterized by acanthosis, epidermal spongiosis and a superficial perivascular dermatitis resembling nummular dermatitis. In its fully developed form, the disease exhibits psoriasiform hyperplasia and prominent papillomatosis with parakeratosis, subcorneal pustules, epidermal pallor and necrotic keratinocytes. 8 Confluent necrosis of the keratinocytes in the upper parts of the epidermis may lead to cleft formation. 3 In addition, vascular ectasia, papillary dermal inflammation and pigment incontinence are also seen. 8 Due to the lack of specific histopathologic features, correct diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion and clinico-pathologic correlations. 9 Differentiation from psoriasis is often not possible on clinical grounds; however, the presence of foci of epidermal dyskeratosis and pallor helps clarify the diagnosis. Our case is remarkable in that it lacks foci of epidermal necrosis as well as reticular degeneration with epidermal clefting or epidermal pallor, and shows only minimal papillomatosis, thus closely mimicking psoriasis histopathologically. 3 Since histological findings in NAE are often similar to other necrolytic erythemas, clinical exam and laboratory data are helpful in distinguishing this entity. In comparison with acrodermatitis enteropathica, serum zinc levels are usually normal in NAE, 1 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 with only few isolated reports of deficient zinc levels. 3 , 10 Glucagon levels are also usually normal, in contrast with the elevated levels seen in necrolytic migratory erythema. 4 , 5 Amino acid levels have been measured to be low in some patients. 1 , 3 All patients are positive for hepatitis C. 1 Initial treatment of NAE consists of oral zinc sulfate supplementation, 4 , 6 , 7 , 10 and response is often noted within several weeks of beginning therapy. 4 , 5 , 6 , 10 The recommended dose is 440 mg/day divided in 2 doses. 4 , 7 In many patients, including ours, complete or near-complete resolution of skin lesions is attained with zinc treatment alone. 3 , 7 , 10 Nofal, et al. noted the best response to zinc in two patients that had low zinc levels at presentation. Three patients with normal zinc levels responded to zinc supplementation, but to a lesser degree. 3 However, other reported patients have shown only minimal improvement with zinc therapy. This could be the result of sub-therapeutic treatment with doses of only 60mg/day in at least some of these patients. 1 It is important to note that oral zinc sulfate has been evaluated as a possible treatment for psoriasis. Psoriatic patients given oral zinc therapy were noted to show no improvement in their clinical disease. 11 , 12 Thus, it is unlikely that our patient actually had psoriasis, given his dramatic response to zinc therapy. Oral amino acid supplementation has also been tried, but efficacy in skin disease has been minimal. 3 , 4 Topical corticosteroids and intralesional triamcinolone injections may be helpful in a subset of patients, but generally are not very effective. 1 , 2 , 7 Treatment of underlying hepatitis C (with interferon-alpha with or without ribavirin) is the definitive treatment and has led to improvement of skin disease in the majority of patients, 1 , 4 , 5 , 6 sometimes with durable remission of skin disease despite lack of effective treatment of hepatitis C. 4 , 5 However, some reports note recurrence of the NAE lesions after discontinuation of interferon treatment, and relapses of NAE may coincide with the reappearance of liver disease and HCV viral load recovery. 2 , 6 The pathogenesis of NAE has not been determined. Several mechanisms have been proposed, including hepatocellular dysfunction, hyperglucagonemia, hypoaminoacidemia, hypoalbuminemia, zinc deficiency and diabetes, but the etiology of NAE appears likely to be multifactorial. 3 Zinc deficiency in particular has been suggested as an etiologic factor in the skin lesions given the presence of zinc deficiency in a subset of patients with the disease, and the clinical response to zinc supplementation seen in many patients. Najarian theorizes that even patients with normal serum zinc levels may harbor occult cutaneous zinc deficiency. 10 What role zinc plays in disease pathogenesis, and whether zinc supplementation corrects an underlying deficiency in the skin or works via other mechanisms, still remain to be elucidated. The role of hepatitis C in NAE is also unclear. Treatment of hepatitis C undoubtedly results in improvement of NAE lesions, even in cases in which the underlying hepatitis C is not effectively treated and the viral load remains elevated. 5 Some reports have specifically noted worsening severity of NAE skin lesions with increased activity of underlying hepatitis 1 while others have observed no association between the severity of hepatic disease or viral load levels and the extent of skin findings. 2 , 6 El-Ghandour and colleagues demonstrated that electron microscopy did not show any evidence of viral particles in the keratinocytes, dermal infiltrate or vascular endothelium of lesional skin, nor was HCV-RNA detected in lesional skin by PCR analysis. However, clumped tonofilaments were noted on EM, which they concluded may possibly suggest a viral etiology for the skin lesions. 1 Thus, the exact role hepatitis C plays in this disease is still to be determined. The role of various hepatitis C strains in the development and clinical picture of NAE also remains to be seen. The largest reported series of NAE cases all report on Egyptian patients. 1 , 2 , 3 , 6 The clinical picture may differ in patients from the United States where different genotypes of HCV prevail. 13 At least one author questions whether NAE is indeed rare in the United States, possibly due to discrepant HCV strains or host factors, or whether the disease is more common but under-recognized. 2 Early recognition of NAE is extremely important. The awareness of the clinical features of this disease and consideration of this entity in a differential diagnosis is important for several reasons. First, recognition of NAE can allow diagnosis of hepatitis C in previously unaware patients. In one study, 26 of 30 patients (87%) with NAE had identification of their skin disease before initial diagnosis of hepatitis C. 2 In another study, 18 of 23 patients were initially diagnosed by a dermatologist as having NAE and then referred for HCV testing. 6 Recognition of NAE may allow early treatment of hepatitis C with possible prevention of the long-term hepatic sequellae of this virus, including cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Second, recognition of this entity allows for efficacious treatment. As in our case, many of these patients are given incorrect diagnoses such as psoriasis. Consequently, these patients are treated inappropriately, often with no success and much frustration on the part of patient and physician. Treatment with oral zinc supplementation is easy, economical and safe, and may result in dramatic improvement in the patient’s skin disease.  Figures Figure 1 Crusted, erythematous plaques involving the palmar hands and extending to the dorsal aspect of the fingers and hands Figure 2 The biopsy shows psoriasiform hyperplasia and plugging of the infundibular portion of hair follicles by a parakeratotic scale containing numerous neutrophils. Confluent parakeratosis, hypogranulosis and thinning of the suprapapillary plates are also noted. (Hematoxylin and eosin stain, 40X) Figure 3 Higher magnification shows confluent parakeratosis with numerous associated neutrophils and neutrphilic microabscesses as well as dilatation of small vessels in the papillary dermis. (Hematoxylin and eosin stain, 200X) Figure 4 At a follow up visit less than 3 weeks later, the patient had remarkable improvement in his skin lesions with oral zinc sulfate therapy.  Figures Figure 1 Crusted, erythematous plaques involving the palmar hands and extending to the dorsal aspect of the fingers and hands Figure 2 The biopsy shows psoriasiform hyperplasia and plugging of the infundibular portion of hair follicles by a parakeratotic scale containing numerous neutrophils. Confluent parakeratosis, hypogranulosis and thinning of the suprapapillary plates are also noted. (Hematoxylin and eosin stain, 40X) Figure 3 Higher magnification shows confluent parakeratosis with numerous associated neutrophils and neutrphilic microabscesses as well as dilatation of small vessels in the papillary dermis. (Hematoxylin and eosin stain, 200X) Figure 4 At a follow up visit less than 3 weeks later, the patient had remarkable improvement in his skin lesions with oral zinc sulfate therapy. 