Up-Regulation of Cell Surface Toll-Like Receptors on Circulating ?? T-Cells Following Burn Injury Burn injury is associated with profound inflammation and activation of the innate immune system involving ?? T-cells. Similarly, toll-like receptors (TLR) are associated with activation of the innate immune response; however, it is unclear whether TLR expression is altered in ?? T-cells after major burn injury. To study this, male C57BL/6 mice were subjected to burn injury (25% TBSA) and 1 or 7 days thereafter, blood and spleen cells were isolated and subjected to FACs analysis for TLRs and other phenotypic markers (?? TCR, ?? TCR, CD69, CD120b). A marked increase in the number of circulating ?? T-cells was observed at 24 hr. post-burn (14% vs. 4%) and a higher percentage of these cells expressed TLR-2. TLR-4 expression was also increased post-burn, but to a lesser degree. These changes in TLR expression were not associated with altered CD69 or CD120b expression in ?? T-cells. The mobilization of, and increased TLR expression in, ?? T-cells was transient, as phenotypic changes were not evident at 7 days post-burn or in ?? T-cells from the circulation or spleen. The increases in TLR expression were not observed in ?? T-cells after burn injury. In conclusion, 24 hr. after burn injury mobilization of ?? T-cells with increased TLR expression was observed. This finding suggests that this unique T-cell population is critical in the innate immune response to injury, possibly through the recognition of danger signals by TLRs.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Animals C57BL/6 male mice (18–22 g; 8–10 weeks of age, Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA) were used for all experiments. The mice were allowed to acclimatize in the animal facility for at least one week prior to experimentation. Animals were randomly assigned into either a thermal injury group or a sham treatment group. The experiments in this study were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Alabama at Birmingham where the animal studies were performed. In addition, the animal experiments were performed in accordance with the National Institutes of Health guidelines for the care and handling of laboratory animals. Thermal injury procedure Mice received a scald burn as described previously [ 22 ]. Briefly, the mice were anesthetized by intra-peritoneal injection of ketamine/xylazine and the dorsal surface was shaved. The anesthetized mouse was placed in a custom insulated mold exposing 12.5% of their total body surface area along the right dorsum. The mold was immersed in 70°C water for 10 sec, producing a burn injury. The mouse was repositioned in the mold exposing the left dorsum, and the mold was re-immersed in 70°C water for 10 sec. The resulting injury covered 25% total body surface area, and previous studies have verified this injury to be a full-thickness burn, as defined by injury to the epidermal, dermal, and subdermal layers [ 23 ]. The mice were then resuscitated with 1 ml of Ringer’s lactate solution administered by intraperitoneal injection and returned to their cages. The cages were placed on a heating pad for 2 hr until the mice were fully awake, at which time they were returned to the animal facility. Sham treatment consisted of anesthesia and resuscitation with Ringer’s lactate solution only. The mice were not given analgesics post-procedure due to the profound immunomodulatory properties of NSAIDs and opiates [ 24 – 26 ]. Collection of cell populations Anti-coagulated whole blood was obtained at 1 or 7 days after thermal injury or sham procedure by cardiac puncture. Splenocyte and MLN cells were collected at 7 days post-injury and cell suspensions prepared in PBS as described elsewhere [ 27 ; 28 ]. Determination of cellular phenotype Blood, Spleen or Mesenteric Lymph Node (MLN) cells were stained with a combination of antibodies (?? TCR, ?? TCR, TLR-2, TLR-4, CD69, CD120b) conjugated to either FITC or PE to assess cellular phenotype. The manufacturer’s recommended methodology for each cell population was employed (BD Pharmingen). Appropriate isotype controls were included. FITC and PE were analyzed with a Becton-Dickinson LSR II flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, Mountain View, CA). Unless noted otherwise, the entire lymphocyte and monocyte populations (as determined for forward and side scatter) were gated in the analysis. A minimum of 20,000 events was collected and WinMIDI 2.8 software was used to analyze the results. Analysis of cytokine levels Plasma was collected and stored at ?80° C until being assayed for TNF-?, IL-6, IL-10, KC and MCP-1. The Cytometric Bead Array (CBA; BD Pharmingen) and CBA Mouse Flex Sets were used for all analyses according to the manufacturer’s instructions with some modification. In brief, 25 ?l of mixed capture beads were incubated with 25 ?l of plasma for 1 hr at room temperature in the dark. Twenty-five ?l of PE detection reagent was then added and incubated for 1 hr. The immunocomplexes were then washed twice with wash buffer and centrifuged at 200 × g for 5 min. Analysis was then carried out using the LSR II flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) and the data was processed with the accompanying FACSDiva and FCAPArray software. Statistical analysis Data are expressed as mean ± SEM. Comparisons were analyzed using ANOVA. A P value of < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant for all analyses.  Animals C57BL/6 male mice (18–22 g; 8–10 weeks of age, Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA) were used for all experiments. The mice were allowed to acclimatize in the animal facility for at least one week prior to experimentation. Animals were randomly assigned into either a thermal injury group or a sham treatment group. The experiments in this study were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Alabama at Birmingham where the animal studies were performed. In addition, the animal experiments were performed in accordance with the National Institutes of Health guidelines for the care and handling of laboratory animals.  Thermal injury procedure Mice received a scald burn as described previously [ 22 ]. Briefly, the mice were anesthetized by intra-peritoneal injection of ketamine/xylazine and the dorsal surface was shaved. The anesthetized mouse was placed in a custom insulated mold exposing 12.5% of their total body surface area along the right dorsum. The mold was immersed in 70°C water for 10 sec, producing a burn injury. The mouse was repositioned in the mold exposing the left dorsum, and the mold was re-immersed in 70°C water for 10 sec. The resulting injury covered 25% total body surface area, and previous studies have verified this injury to be a full-thickness burn, as defined by injury to the epidermal, dermal, and subdermal layers [ 23 ]. The mice were then resuscitated with 1 ml of Ringer’s lactate solution administered by intraperitoneal injection and returned to their cages. The cages were placed on a heating pad for 2 hr until the mice were fully awake, at which time they were returned to the animal facility. Sham treatment consisted of anesthesia and resuscitation with Ringer’s lactate solution only. The mice were not given analgesics post-procedure due to the profound immunomodulatory properties of NSAIDs and opiates [ 24 – 26 ].  Collection of cell populations Anti-coagulated whole blood was obtained at 1 or 7 days after thermal injury or sham procedure by cardiac puncture. Splenocyte and MLN cells were collected at 7 days post-injury and cell suspensions prepared in PBS as described elsewhere [ 27 ; 28 ].  Determination of cellular phenotype Blood, Spleen or Mesenteric Lymph Node (MLN) cells were stained with a combination of antibodies (?? TCR, ?? TCR, TLR-2, TLR-4, CD69, CD120b) conjugated to either FITC or PE to assess cellular phenotype. The manufacturer’s recommended methodology for each cell population was employed (BD Pharmingen). Appropriate isotype controls were included. FITC and PE were analyzed with a Becton-Dickinson LSR II flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, Mountain View, CA). Unless noted otherwise, the entire lymphocyte and monocyte populations (as determined for forward and side scatter) were gated in the analysis. A minimum of 20,000 events was collected and WinMIDI 2.8 software was used to analyze the results.  Analysis of cytokine levels Plasma was collected and stored at ?80° C until being assayed for TNF-?, IL-6, IL-10, KC and MCP-1. The Cytometric Bead Array (CBA; BD Pharmingen) and CBA Mouse Flex Sets were used for all analyses according to the manufacturer’s instructions with some modification. In brief, 25 ?l of mixed capture beads were incubated with 25 ?l of plasma for 1 hr at room temperature in the dark. Twenty-five ?l of PE detection reagent was then added and incubated for 1 hr. The immunocomplexes were then washed twice with wash buffer and centrifuged at 200 × g for 5 min. Analysis was then carried out using the LSR II flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) and the data was processed with the accompanying FACSDiva and FCAPArray software.  Statistical analysis Data are expressed as mean ± SEM. Comparisons were analyzed using ANOVA. A P value of < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant for all analyses.  RESULTS Effect of burn injury on circulating immune cells At 24 hrs after burn injury a profound change in the phenotype of the circulating immune cells was observed ( Fig. 1 ). Based on the analysis of forward and side scatter the granulocyte and lymphocyte/monocyte populations could be identified. Approximately a 2-fold increase in the percentage of granulocytes was observed in the blood on burn injured mice as compared with shams (p<0.05). In parallel, an approximate 50% drop in the percentage of circulating lymphocytes and monocytes was observed; however, due to high variability between animals statistical significance was not observed. Further analysis of the cells in the lymphocyte and monocyte population revealed that the percentage of the cells positive for ?? TCR was significantly greater (p<0.05) in the burn group (9.9±1.5% vs. 18.9±3.6% for sham and burn, respectively; mean ± SEM; n=6/group. Fig. 2 ). TLR expression by circulating T-cells early post-injury At 24 hrs after burn injury the percentage of the ?? T-cells expressing TLR-2 or TLR-4 significantly increased as compared to sham animals (p<0.05; Fig. 3 ). A significantly greater proportion of the ?? T-cells in the burn group where TLR-2+ as compared with ?? T-cells that were not expressing TLR-2 (p<0.05; Fig 3A ). Gamma-delta T-cells in the burn group had similar percentages for the TLR-4+ and TLR-4? populations ( Fig. 3B ). No such differences were observed in ?? T-cells from sham animals. In contrast to ?? T-cells, the expression of TLR-2 or TLR-4 on ?? T-cells at 24 hrs after burn injury was not different from that of sham animals ( Fig. 4 ). Moreover, the majority of the ?? T-cells were negative for TLR expression. The circulating ?? T-cells were further analyzed for the expression of the T-cell activation markers CD69 and CD120b (p75 TNFR2). In contrast to TLR-2 and -4 expressions, expression of CD69 and CD120b was not different between the sham and burn groups ( Table 1 ). Burn injury induction of a systemic inflammatory response Burn injury induced a systemic inflammatory response at 24 hrs post-injury as evidenced by the increased plasma levels of IL-6 and KC as compared to sham animals (p<0.05; Fig. 5 ). Plasma levels of these inflammatory mediators was increased approximately 10–12-fold. In contrast, TNF-?, IL-10, and MCP-1 plasma levels were not different between sham and burn animals at 24 hrs post-injury. TLR expression by circulating tissue-fixed T-cells late post-injury The increased expression of TLRs on circulating ?? T-cells appeared to be transient, as analysis of cells at 7 days post-injury revealed no differences between the sham and burn groups ( Fig. 6A, 6B ). Similarly, no differences in TLR expression were observed in circulating ?? T-cells at 7 days post-injury ( Fig. 6C, 6D ). T-cells isolated from the spleen and MLN were assessed for and TLR-2 or TLR-4 expression. The data presented in Table 2 indicates that the vast majority of the tissue-fixed T-cells were of the ?? TCR phenotype. The expression TLR-2 or TLR-4 on either T-cell population was negligible, irrespective of sham treatment or burn injury  RESULTS Effect of burn injury on circulating immune cells At 24 hrs after burn injury a profound change in the phenotype of the circulating immune cells was observed ( Fig. 1 ). Based on the analysis of forward and side scatter the granulocyte and lymphocyte/monocyte populations could be identified. Approximately a 2-fold increase in the percentage of granulocytes was observed in the blood on burn injured mice as compared with shams (p<0.05). In parallel, an approximate 50% drop in the percentage of circulating lymphocytes and monocytes was observed; however, due to high variability between animals statistical significance was not observed. Further analysis of the cells in the lymphocyte and monocyte population revealed that the percentage of the cells positive for ?? TCR was significantly greater (p<0.05) in the burn group (9.9±1.5% vs. 18.9±3.6% for sham and burn, respectively; mean ± SEM; n=6/group. Fig. 2 ). TLR expression by circulating T-cells early post-injury At 24 hrs after burn injury the percentage of the ?? T-cells expressing TLR-2 or TLR-4 significantly increased as compared to sham animals (p<0.05; Fig. 3 ). A significantly greater proportion of the ?? T-cells in the burn group where TLR-2+ as compared with ?? T-cells that were not expressing TLR-2 (p<0.05; Fig 3A ). Gamma-delta T-cells in the burn group had similar percentages for the TLR-4+ and TLR-4? populations ( Fig. 3B ). No such differences were observed in ?? T-cells from sham animals. In contrast to ?? T-cells, the expression of TLR-2 or TLR-4 on ?? T-cells at 24 hrs after burn injury was not different from that of sham animals ( Fig. 4 ). Moreover, the majority of the ?? T-cells were negative for TLR expression. The circulating ?? T-cells were further analyzed for the expression of the T-cell activation markers CD69 and CD120b (p75 TNFR2). In contrast to TLR-2 and -4 expressions, expression of CD69 and CD120b was not different between the sham and burn groups ( Table 1 ). Burn injury induction of a systemic inflammatory response Burn injury induced a systemic inflammatory response at 24 hrs post-injury as evidenced by the increased plasma levels of IL-6 and KC as compared to sham animals (p<0.05; Fig. 5 ). Plasma levels of these inflammatory mediators was increased approximately 10–12-fold. In contrast, TNF-?, IL-10, and MCP-1 plasma levels were not different between sham and burn animals at 24 hrs post-injury. TLR expression by circulating tissue-fixed T-cells late post-injury The increased expression of TLRs on circulating ?? T-cells appeared to be transient, as analysis of cells at 7 days post-injury revealed no differences between the sham and burn groups ( Fig. 6A, 6B ). Similarly, no differences in TLR expression were observed in circulating ?? T-cells at 7 days post-injury ( Fig. 6C, 6D ). T-cells isolated from the spleen and MLN were assessed for and TLR-2 or TLR-4 expression. The data presented in Table 2 indicates that the vast majority of the tissue-fixed T-cells were of the ?? TCR phenotype. The expression TLR-2 or TLR-4 on either T-cell population was negligible, irrespective of sham treatment or burn injury  Effect of burn injury on circulating immune cells At 24 hrs after burn injury a profound change in the phenotype of the circulating immune cells was observed ( Fig. 1 ). Based on the analysis of forward and side scatter the granulocyte and lymphocyte/monocyte populations could be identified. Approximately a 2-fold increase in the percentage of granulocytes was observed in the blood on burn injured mice as compared with shams (p<0.05). In parallel, an approximate 50% drop in the percentage of circulating lymphocytes and monocytes was observed; however, due to high variability between animals statistical significance was not observed. Further analysis of the cells in the lymphocyte and monocyte population revealed that the percentage of the cells positive for ?? TCR was significantly greater (p<0.05) in the burn group (9.9±1.5% vs. 18.9±3.6% for sham and burn, respectively; mean ± SEM; n=6/group. Fig. 2 ).  Effect of burn injury on circulating immune cells At 24 hrs after burn injury a profound change in the phenotype of the circulating immune cells was observed ( Fig. 1 ). Based on the analysis of forward and side scatter the granulocyte and lymphocyte/monocyte populations could be identified. Approximately a 2-fold increase in the percentage of granulocytes was observed in the blood on burn injured mice as compared with shams (p<0.05). In parallel, an approximate 50% drop in the percentage of circulating lymphocytes and monocytes was observed; however, due to high variability between animals statistical significance was not observed. Further analysis of the cells in the lymphocyte and monocyte population revealed that the percentage of the cells positive for ?? TCR was significantly greater (p<0.05) in the burn group (9.9±1.5% vs. 18.9±3.6% for sham and burn, respectively; mean ± SEM; n=6/group. Fig. 2 ).  TLR expression by circulating T-cells early post-injury At 24 hrs after burn injury the percentage of the ?? T-cells expressing TLR-2 or TLR-4 significantly increased as compared to sham animals (p<0.05; Fig. 3 ). A significantly greater proportion of the ?? T-cells in the burn group where TLR-2+ as compared with ?? T-cells that were not expressing TLR-2 (p<0.05; Fig 3A ). Gamma-delta T-cells in the burn group had similar percentages for the TLR-4+ and TLR-4? populations ( Fig. 3B ). No such differences were observed in ?? T-cells from sham animals. In contrast to ?? T-cells, the expression of TLR-2 or TLR-4 on ?? T-cells at 24 hrs after burn injury was not different from that of sham animals ( Fig. 4 ). Moreover, the majority of the ?? T-cells were negative for TLR expression. The circulating ?? T-cells were further analyzed for the expression of the T-cell activation markers CD69 and CD120b (p75 TNFR2). In contrast to TLR-2 and -4 expressions, expression of CD69 and CD120b was not different between the sham and burn groups ( Table 1 ).  TLR expression by circulating T-cells early post-injury At 24 hrs after burn injury the percentage of the ?? T-cells expressing TLR-2 or TLR-4 significantly increased as compared to sham animals (p<0.05; Fig. 3 ). A significantly greater proportion of the ?? T-cells in the burn group where TLR-2+ as compared with ?? T-cells that were not expressing TLR-2 (p<0.05; Fig 3A ). Gamma-delta T-cells in the burn group had similar percentages for the TLR-4+ and TLR-4? populations ( Fig. 3B ). No such differences were observed in ?? T-cells from sham animals. In contrast to ?? T-cells, the expression of TLR-2 or TLR-4 on ?? T-cells at 24 hrs after burn injury was not different from that of sham animals ( Fig. 4 ). Moreover, the majority of the ?? T-cells were negative for TLR expression. The circulating ?? T-cells were further analyzed for the expression of the T-cell activation markers CD69 and CD120b (p75 TNFR2). In contrast to TLR-2 and -4 expressions, expression of CD69 and CD120b was not different between the sham and burn groups ( Table 1 ).  Burn injury induction of a systemic inflammatory response Burn injury induced a systemic inflammatory response at 24 hrs post-injury as evidenced by the increased plasma levels of IL-6 and KC as compared to sham animals (p<0.05; Fig. 5 ). Plasma levels of these inflammatory mediators was increased approximately 10–12-fold. In contrast, TNF-?, IL-10, and MCP-1 plasma levels were not different between sham and burn animals at 24 hrs post-injury.  Burn injury induction of a systemic inflammatory response Burn injury induced a systemic inflammatory response at 24 hrs post-injury as evidenced by the increased plasma levels of IL-6 and KC as compared to sham animals (p<0.05; Fig. 5 ). Plasma levels of these inflammatory mediators was increased approximately 10–12-fold. In contrast, TNF-?, IL-10, and MCP-1 plasma levels were not different between sham and burn animals at 24 hrs post-injury.  TLR expression by circulating tissue-fixed T-cells late post-injury The increased expression of TLRs on circulating ?? T-cells appeared to be transient, as analysis of cells at 7 days post-injury revealed no differences between the sham and burn groups ( Fig. 6A, 6B ). Similarly, no differences in TLR expression were observed in circulating ?? T-cells at 7 days post-injury ( Fig. 6C, 6D ). T-cells isolated from the spleen and MLN were assessed for and TLR-2 or TLR-4 expression. The data presented in Table 2 indicates that the vast majority of the tissue-fixed T-cells were of the ?? TCR phenotype. The expression TLR-2 or TLR-4 on either T-cell population was negligible, irrespective of sham treatment or burn injury  TLR expression by circulating tissue-fixed T-cells late post-injury The increased expression of TLRs on circulating ?? T-cells appeared to be transient, as analysis of cells at 7 days post-injury revealed no differences between the sham and burn groups ( Fig. 6A, 6B ). Similarly, no differences in TLR expression were observed in circulating ?? T-cells at 7 days post-injury ( Fig. 6C, 6D ). T-cells isolated from the spleen and MLN were assessed for and TLR-2 or TLR-4 expression. The data presented in Table 2 indicates that the vast majority of the tissue-fixed T-cells were of the ?? TCR phenotype. The expression TLR-2 or TLR-4 on either T-cell population was negligible, irrespective of sham treatment or burn injury  DISCUSSION Major injuries, such as burn injury, induce a profound immunoinflammatory response that ultimately can predispose the host to various types of opportunistic infections. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) can recognize conserved microbial antigens and/or host stress or danger signals induced by injury. Thus, injury-induced alterations in TLR expression or responsiveness by the injured host may contribute to the development of infectious complications and the potential for the development of multiple system organ failure and death. The studies presented here were conducted to determine whether changes in TLR expression by ?? T-cells after burn injury were associated with the inflammatory response. We have made a number of important observations concerning the post-burn immunoinflammatory response. First, a profound change in the circulating immune cell populations was observed relatively early post-burn (i.e., 24 hr) that was associated with an increased circulating ?? T-cells, granulocytes and a systemic inflammatory response. Secondly, these ?? T-cells were primed for TLR reactivity, as evidenced by increased expression of TLR-2 and TLR-4. Third, these changes in TLR expression were specific for the ?? TCR T-cell subset in the circulation and transient, since it was not observed in the spleen, MLN or blood at 7 days post-injury. TLRs are cell surface molecules that participate in innate immunity by recognizing conserved motifs on pathogens These pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMP) are displayed in a variety of microorganisms [ 17 ; 29 ], as well as endogenous danger/damage associated molecular pattern molecules (DAMP’s) [ 30 ]. Increased TLR reactivity by macrophages has been implicated in a number of immunopathological aspects of burn injury [ 1 ; 15 ; 18 ]. These studies have primarily focused on responses to the TLR-4 ligand LPS. This enhanced TLR reactivity appears to be in part related to increased expression of intracellular TLR-4-MD2, rather than cell surface expression of the receptor complex [ 18 ]. Our laboratory and others [ 18 ; 31 ; 32 ] have also shown TLR-4 reactivity is associated with an increase in p38 MAPK activity. Nonetheless, TLR signaling pathways converge in the activation of the transcription factor NF-?B, which controls the expression of an array of inflammatory associated genes [ 30 ]. In contrast to macrophages, the analysis of TLR expression by T-cells post-injury has been very limited. A recent study by Cairns et al. [ 33 ] have shown that late post-burn injury (i.e., 14 days) increased expression of TLR-4 was evident on splenic T-cells. The current findings are consistent with the work Cairns et al. with regard to T-cell expression of TLRs; however, TLR expression was seen earlier, only in the circulation and specific for the ?? T-cell subset. This apparent discrepancy is most likely related to the time post-injury used for analysis (i.e., 1–7 days vs. 14 days). Moreover, while patient studies indicate mobilization and activation of ?? T-cells in SIRS patients at 24 hr (i.e., 0–1 day) [ 34 ], it remains to be determined whether changes in ?? T-cell TLR expression occur earlier than 24 hrs. post-injury, as mobilization of this cell population has been observed at 3–4 hr after burn injury or sepsis in mouse injury models [ 9 ; 35 ]. Gamma-delta T cells responses have observed in disease states of by an infectious and non-infectious nature, suggesting that this unique T-cell subset has a primary role in immunoregulation and the protection of host tissues against the damaging side-effects of immune responses [ 36 ]. There are a number of features which distinguish ?? T-cells from “traditional” ?? T-cells. Most ?? T-cells have a phenotype of spontaneous activation with a rapid turnover rate [ 37 ] and quickly expand upon activation by pathogens or inflammatory stimuli [ 13 ]. A critical role for ?? T-cells has been demonstrated with regard to inflammation, pro-inflammatory cytokine (i.e., TNF-?) production [ 38 ] and tissue repair [ 39 ]. They also can regulate Th1-type and Th2-type T-cell phenotypes and establishment of protective CD8+ responses [ 40 ]. A clinical study has demonstrated activated ?? T-cells are present in the circulation of SIRS patients [ 34 ]. We have also shown that early post-burn (3 hr) in our murine model there is a mobilization of ?? T-cells to the circulation [ 9 ]. In that study the circulating ?? T-cells were in an primed state as evidenced by increased CD120b expression [ 41 ]. In contrast, our findings at 24 hr post-burn indicate that, while increased number of ?? T-cells are present in the circulation, their phenotype has changed and the cells, in a classical sense, are not activated, since CD120b and CD69 expression was unaltered. While the increased expression of TLR-2 and TLR-4 suggests that these ?? T-cells may be more reactive towards PAMPs and DAMPs [ 29 ; 30 ], it remains to be determined whether this phenotypic change significantly alters the response to TLR ligands post-burn. Chemokine receptors are expressed on both circulating and tissue ?? T-cells that allow them to extravasate and migrate to sites of tissue damage or infectious foci. Gamma-delta T-cells can also produce chemokines and thereby contribute to the recruitment of additional ?? T-cells [ 9 ; 42 ; 43 ]. It can be suggested that injury induces an early activation and migration of ?? T-cells from epithelial rich tissue to the lymph/circulation and subsequently to burn injured tissue to help control inflammation and/or initiate the healing process. Previous studies have support such a concept for ?? T-cells under other pathological conditions [ 44 ; 45 ]. Moreover, this process appears to be, in part, TLR-dependent [ 46 ]. Nonetheless, it remains to be yet determined whether or not such trafficking of ?? T-cells occurs post-burn. While the regulation of TLR expression is not clearly understood [ 47 ], cell surface TLR expression is likely to be limited to avoid excessive activation. Thus, the transient nature of the post-burn increase in ?? T-cell TLR expression is likely to be protective. Studies have shown that TLR expression is transiently upregulated on monocytes in response to LPS or TNF-? [ 48 ; 49 ]. Moreover, the activation of TLRs can induce the expression of genes that regulate cell migration [ 50 ]. Thus, the post-burn changes in ?? T-cell TLR expression may be related to the early inflammatory response (i.e., TNF-?) and important in their mobilization and migration. The findings presented here further support a role for ?? T-cell in post-burn immunopathology. Previous studies demonstrated high mortality in mice lacking ?? T-cells during the initial 48 h post-burn period [ 8 ], a role for ?? T-cells in post-burn end organ injury [ 9 ], and an important role in post-burn wound healing [ 10 ; 11 ]. We have extended these observations by demonstrating a potential role for TLRs in the ?? T-cells response to burn injury. It is likely that the activation and migration of ?? T-cell during the initial post-injury period (i.e., 24 hr.) is overall protective to the host, most likely via regulation of inflammation and initiation of healing processes. Nonetheless, additional studies are needed to develop a more comprehensive understanding of this unique T-cell subset and their role in post-injury immunopathology.  DISCUSSION Major injuries, such as burn injury, induce a profound immunoinflammatory response that ultimately can predispose the host to various types of opportunistic infections. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) can recognize conserved microbial antigens and/or host stress or danger signals induced by injury. Thus, injury-induced alterations in TLR expression or responsiveness by the injured host may contribute to the development of infectious complications and the potential for the development of multiple system organ failure and death. The studies presented here were conducted to determine whether changes in TLR expression by ?? T-cells after burn injury were associated with the inflammatory response. We have made a number of important observations concerning the post-burn immunoinflammatory response. First, a profound change in the circulating immune cell populations was observed relatively early post-burn (i.e., 24 hr) that was associated with an increased circulating ?? T-cells, granulocytes and a systemic inflammatory response. Secondly, these ?? T-cells were primed for TLR reactivity, as evidenced by increased expression of TLR-2 and TLR-4. Third, these changes in TLR expression were specific for the ?? TCR T-cell subset in the circulation and transient, since it was not observed in the spleen, MLN or blood at 7 days post-injury. TLRs are cell surface molecules that participate in innate immunity by recognizing conserved motifs on pathogens These pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMP) are displayed in a variety of microorganisms [ 17 ; 29 ], as well as endogenous danger/damage associated molecular pattern molecules (DAMP’s) [ 30 ]. Increased TLR reactivity by macrophages has been implicated in a number of immunopathological aspects of burn injury [ 1 ; 15 ; 18 ]. These studies have primarily focused on responses to the TLR-4 ligand LPS. This enhanced TLR reactivity appears to be in part related to increased expression of intracellular TLR-4-MD2, rather than cell surface expression of the receptor complex [ 18 ]. Our laboratory and others [ 18 ; 31 ; 32 ] have also shown TLR-4 reactivity is associated with an increase in p38 MAPK activity. Nonetheless, TLR signaling pathways converge in the activation of the transcription factor NF-?B, which controls the expression of an array of inflammatory associated genes [ 30 ]. In contrast to macrophages, the analysis of TLR expression by T-cells post-injury has been very limited. A recent study by Cairns et al. [ 33 ] have shown that late post-burn injury (i.e., 14 days) increased expression of TLR-4 was evident on splenic T-cells. The current findings are consistent with the work Cairns et al. with regard to T-cell expression of TLRs; however, TLR expression was seen earlier, only in the circulation and specific for the ?? T-cell subset. This apparent discrepancy is most likely related to the time post-injury used for analysis (i.e., 1–7 days vs. 14 days). Moreover, while patient studies indicate mobilization and activation of ?? T-cells in SIRS patients at 24 hr (i.e., 0–1 day) [ 34 ], it remains to be determined whether changes in ?? T-cell TLR expression occur earlier than 24 hrs. post-injury, as mobilization of this cell population has been observed at 3–4 hr after burn injury or sepsis in mouse injury models [ 9 ; 35 ]. Gamma-delta T cells responses have observed in disease states of by an infectious and non-infectious nature, suggesting that this unique T-cell subset has a primary role in immunoregulation and the protection of host tissues against the damaging side-effects of immune responses [ 36 ]. There are a number of features which distinguish ?? T-cells from “traditional” ?? T-cells. Most ?? T-cells have a phenotype of spontaneous activation with a rapid turnover rate [ 37 ] and quickly expand upon activation by pathogens or inflammatory stimuli [ 13 ]. A critical role for ?? T-cells has been demonstrated with regard to inflammation, pro-inflammatory cytokine (i.e., TNF-?) production [ 38 ] and tissue repair [ 39 ]. They also can regulate Th1-type and Th2-type T-cell phenotypes and establishment of protective CD8+ responses [ 40 ]. A clinical study has demonstrated activated ?? T-cells are present in the circulation of SIRS patients [ 34 ]. We have also shown that early post-burn (3 hr) in our murine model there is a mobilization of ?? T-cells to the circulation [ 9 ]. In that study the circulating ?? T-cells were in an primed state as evidenced by increased CD120b expression [ 41 ]. In contrast, our findings at 24 hr post-burn indicate that, while increased number of ?? T-cells are present in the circulation, their phenotype has changed and the cells, in a classical sense, are not activated, since CD120b and CD69 expression was unaltered. While the increased expression of TLR-2 and TLR-4 suggests that these ?? T-cells may be more reactive towards PAMPs and DAMPs [ 29 ; 30 ], it remains to be determined whether this phenotypic change significantly alters the response to TLR ligands post-burn. Chemokine receptors are expressed on both circulating and tissue ?? T-cells that allow them to extravasate and migrate to sites of tissue damage or infectious foci. Gamma-delta T-cells can also produce chemokines and thereby contribute to the recruitment of additional ?? T-cells [ 9 ; 42 ; 43 ]. It can be suggested that injury induces an early activation and migration of ?? T-cells from epithelial rich tissue to the lymph/circulation and subsequently to burn injured tissue to help control inflammation and/or initiate the healing process. Previous studies have support such a concept for ?? T-cells under other pathological conditions [ 44 ; 45 ]. Moreover, this process appears to be, in part, TLR-dependent [ 46 ]. Nonetheless, it remains to be yet determined whether or not such trafficking of ?? T-cells occurs post-burn. While the regulation of TLR expression is not clearly understood [ 47 ], cell surface TLR expression is likely to be limited to avoid excessive activation. Thus, the transient nature of the post-burn increase in ?? T-cell TLR expression is likely to be protective. Studies have shown that TLR expression is transiently upregulated on monocytes in response to LPS or TNF-? [ 48 ; 49 ]. Moreover, the activation of TLRs can induce the expression of genes that regulate cell migration [ 50 ]. Thus, the post-burn changes in ?? T-cell TLR expression may be related to the early inflammatory response (i.e., TNF-?) and important in their mobilization and migration. The findings presented here further support a role for ?? T-cell in post-burn immunopathology. Previous studies demonstrated high mortality in mice lacking ?? T-cells during the initial 48 h post-burn period [ 8 ], a role for ?? T-cells in post-burn end organ injury [ 9 ], and an important role in post-burn wound healing [ 10 ; 11 ]. We have extended these observations by demonstrating a potential role for TLRs in the ?? T-cells response to burn injury. It is likely that the activation and migration of ?? T-cell during the initial post-injury period (i.e., 24 hr.) is overall protective to the host, most likely via regulation of inflammation and initiation of healing processes. Nonetheless, additional studies are needed to develop a more comprehensive understanding of this unique T-cell subset and their role in post-injury immunopathology. 