?H2AX and cancer Histone H2AX phosphorylation on a serine four residues from the carboxyl terminus (producing ?H2AX) is a sensitive marker for DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). DSBs may lead to cancer but, paradoxically, are also used to kill cancer cells. Using ?H2AX detection to determine the extent of DSB induction may help to detect precancerous cells, to stage cancers, to monitor the effectiveness of cancer therapies and to develop novel anticancer drugs.  Conclusions This Perspective has concentrated on ?H2AX as a potentially useful tool to further human health. The above discussions indicate that monitoring DSB responses through ?H2AX formation is already showing excellent potential for judging therapeutic progress and cancer progression 89 , 93 , 101 , 122 , 125 . Quick and inexpensive methods using ?H2AX formation for DSB detection in blood, skin or other tissues that are obtained by minimally invasive means could be a valuable tool, permitting clinicians to monitor whether an agent is causing the desired level of damage in a patient. Quicker assays, such as an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for ?H2AX, could be developed and automated to permit almost real-time monitoring of DNA damage levels in the clinic. In addition, it may be that the level of ongoing DNA damage and repair is an extremely sensitive indicator of organismal stress. A number of recent studies have used DNA damage as an output to determine overall cell health, including examining DNA-damage effects from air pollution 126 , handling chemotherapeutic agents 127 , mobile phone use 128 and eating organic versus regular apples 129 . Thus, ?H2AX may be useful in determining whether a particular environmental agent is stressful to an animal or person. As genome integrity is central to cellular health and ?H2AX focus formation is currently the most sensitive assay for genome integrity, being able to routinely monitor DSB levels in individuals could provide useful tools for improving human health. 