Treatment of newly diagnosed myeloma The introduction of thalidomide, bortezomib and lenalidomide has dramatically changed the treatment paradigm of multiple myeloma (MM). In patients eligible for autologous stem cell transplant (ASCT), combinations including thalidomide/dexamethasone (Thal/Dex) or bortezomib/dexamethasone (Bort/Dex) or lenalidomide/dexamethasone (Rev/Dex) have been introduced as induction regimens in patients eligible for ASCT. New induction regimens have significantly increased complete response rate before and after ASCT with a positive impact on progression-free survival. Maintenance therapy with thalidomide, under investigation with lenalidomide, may further prolong remission duration. In patients not eligible for ASCT, randomized studies have shown that melphalan, prednisone, thalidomide (MPT) and melphalan, prednisone and bortezomib (MPV) are both superior to melphalan and prednisone (MP), and are now considered standard of care. Ongoing trials will soon assess if MP plus lenalidomide may be considered an attractive option. More complex regimens combining thalidomide or bortezomib or lenalidomide with cyclophosphamide or doxorubicin have been also tested. In small cohorts of patients bortezomib or lenalidomide may overcome the poor prognosis induced by deletion 13 or translocation t(4;14) or deletion 17p13. If these data will be confirmed, a cytogenetically riskadapted strategy might become the most appropriate strategy.  Conclusions High-dose melphalan followed by ASCT in younger patients and oral MPT or MPV in elderly patients are the standard of care for the frontline therapy of myeloma. Survival after transplant appears to be related to the achievement of CR or VGPR. Improved response rate after induction treatment, before transplant, could translate to better results after high-dose therapy with prolonged survival. In younger patients, combinations incorporating thalidomide or lenalidomide or bortezomib significantly increase the pretransplant CR plus VGPR rate before high-dose melphalan and autologous transplantation. These combinations may further improve the CR plus VGPR rate achieved after transplant. A reasonable alternative approach is to collect stem cell at diagnosis and leave the ASCT option for relapse. Both approaches need the evidence of efficacy from the ongoing prospective randomized studies. These evidences should always include at least data on PFS advantage. If survival improvement represents the ultimate goal, response advantage is not adequate, by itself, to define treatment efficacy. Cytogenetic abnormalities, such as chromosome 13 deletion or t(4;14), are considered negative prognostic factors. Unfortunately, most of the studies reported to date have not prospectively stratified patients based on cytogenetic abnormalities, making a firm conclusion difficult. In a small cohort of patients receiving bortezomib or lenalidomide, the PFS of patients with deletion of chromosome 13 or chromosomal translocation (4;14) was not significantly different from those who did not show such abnormalities. It must however, be mentioned that irrespective of cytogenetic ‘risk profile,’ MM remains incurable. To determine the optimal regimen for each individual patient based on a cytogenetically adapted strategy, comprehensive study and long-term follow-up is required. 