Social and Ethical Implications of Genomics, Race, Ethnicity and Health Inequities Objectives To review ethical, ethnic/ancestral, and societal issues of genetic and genomic information and technologies in the context of racial and ethnic health disparities. Data sources Research and journal articles, government reports, web sites. Conclusion As knowledge of human genetic variation and its link to diseases continues to grow, some see race and ethnicity well poised to serve as genetic surrogates in predicting disease etiology and treatment response. However, stereotyping and bias, in clinical interactions can be barriers to effective treatment for racial and ethnic minority patients. Implications for nursing practice The nursing profession has a key role in assuring that genomic healthcare does not enhance racial and ethnic health inequities. This will require utilization of new genomic knowledge and caring for each patient as an individual in a culturally and clinically appropriate manner.  Conclusions In this era of genomic medicine what can nurses and other health professionals do to provide the best care to each and every patient? As a first step, increased knowledge of genomics and its growing relevance for clinical practice is required. Table 2 provides a list of web resources relevant to genomics and nursing practice. A second step is to recognize and understand the complexities and challenges of genomics, race, and healthcare and their relevance to health disparities ( 62 , 63 ). Having this knowledge, we believe, will afford nurses the necessary skills to provide individualized personal health care to each patient; not as a black or an African American or a white or a Caucasian patient, but as a patient with a condition for which health professionals are trained to provide care. The genome era will continue to provide the nursing, medical and research communities with new information to help personalize treatment. However, we must be diligent in recognizing that genetic information is not the sole component towards true individualized care. As social scientists that study how health professionals think about race and genetics, we believe the following considerations are important to the field of oncology nursing: Treat each patient as an individual This statement seems elementary and self evident; in reality it is a core principle for the provision of appropriate nursing care. Do not generalize clinical response and patient behaviors based upon patient characteristics, particularly race and ethnicity. Individualized care and decision making are what is required, not generalizations and stereotypes. Race is not a phenotype Phenotype is the observed characteristics of an individual, produced by the interaction of genes and environment ( 64 ). Ethnicity and race are not phenotypes, but rather social categories and groupings that can correlate with genetic variation in the human population. Viewing race as a phenotype can lead to barriers to effective patient care. Bias does not equal racism Humans bring their bias and stereotypes to everything they do. Those biases are not necessarily intentional or destructive. Seeking to understand implicit and explicit bias presented by the health professional and the patient is one step in addressing health disparities. The nursing profession has a key role in assuring that genomic healthcare does not enhance racial and ethnic health disparities, but rather reduces them. To achieve this goal will require further understanding of how new genomic knowledge relates to health and disease, and a willingness to care for each patient as an individual in a culturally and clinically appropriate manner. Although challenging for all health professionals, we believe nurses and the nursing profession can offer leadership in the implementation of genomics into healthcare.  Treat each patient as an individual This statement seems elementary and self evident; in reality it is a core principle for the provision of appropriate nursing care. Do not generalize clinical response and patient behaviors based upon patient characteristics, particularly race and ethnicity. Individualized care and decision making are what is required, not generalizations and stereotypes.  Race is not a phenotype Phenotype is the observed characteristics of an individual, produced by the interaction of genes and environment ( 64 ). Ethnicity and race are not phenotypes, but rather social categories and groupings that can correlate with genetic variation in the human population. Viewing race as a phenotype can lead to barriers to effective patient care.  Bias does not equal racism Humans bring their bias and stereotypes to everything they do. Those biases are not necessarily intentional or destructive. Seeking to understand implicit and explicit bias presented by the health professional and the patient is one step in addressing health disparities. The nursing profession has a key role in assuring that genomic healthcare does not enhance racial and ethnic health disparities, but rather reduces them. To achieve this goal will require further understanding of how new genomic knowledge relates to health and disease, and a willingness to care for each patient as an individual in a culturally and clinically appropriate manner. Although challenging for all health professionals, we believe nurses and the nursing profession can offer leadership in the implementation of genomics into healthcare.  Tables Table 1 U.S. Census race categories, 1800–2000 Year Categories 1800 Free White Males; Free White Females; All other free Persons, except Indians Not Taxed; Slaves 1810 Free White Males; Free White Females; All other free Persons, except Indians Not Taxed; Slaves 1820 Free White Males; Free White Females; Free colored persons, All other persons, except Indians Not Taxed; Slaves 1830 Free White Persons; Free Colored Persons; Slaves 1840 Free White Persons; Free Colored Persons; Slaves 1850 Black; Mulatto a 1860 Black; Mulatto; (Indian) b 1880 White; Black; Mulatto; Chinese; Indian 1890 White; Black Mulatto; Quadroon; Octoroon; Chinese; Japanese; Indian 1900 White; Black; Chinese; Japanese; Indian 1910 White; Black; Mulatto; Chinese; Japanese; Indian; Other (+ write in) 1920 White; Black; Mulatto; Indian; Chinese; Japanese; Filipino; Hindu; Korean; Other (+ write in) 1930 White; Negro; Mexican; Indian; Chinese; Japanese; Filipino; Hindu; Korean; (Other races, spell out in full) 1940 White; Negro; Indian; Chinese; Japanese; Filipino; Hindu; Korean; (Other races, spell out in full) 1950 White; Negro; Indian; Japanese; Chinese; Filipino; (Other race-spell out) 1960 White; Negro; American Indian; Japanese; Chinese; Filipino; Hawaiian; Part-Hawaiian; Aleut Eskimo, etc. 1970 White; Negro or Black; American Indian; Japanese; Chinese; Filipino; Hawaiian; Korean; Other (print race) 1980 White; Negro or Black; Japanese; Chinese; Filipino; Korean; Vietnamese; American Indian; Asian Indian; Hawaiian; Guamanian; Samoan; Eskimo; Aleut; Other (specify) 1990 White; Black or Negro; American Indian; Eskimo; Aleut; Chinese; Filipino; Hawaiian; Korean; Vietnamese; Japanese; Asian Indian; Samoan; Guamanian; Other API (Asian or Pacific Islander); Other race 2000 White; Black, African American, or Negro; American Indian or Alaska Native; Asian Indian; Chinese; Filipino; Japanese; Korean; Vietnamese; Native Hawaiian; Guamanian or Chamorro; Samoan; Other Asian (Print Race); Other Pacific Islander (Print Race); Some other race (Print Race) Note . Categories are presented in the order in which they appeared on schedules. Source . US Bureau of the Census. a In 1850, free persons were enumerated on the form for “free inhabitants”; slaves were enumerated on the form designated for “slave inhabitants.” For the free schedule, the instructions told the enumerators: “In all cases where the person is white leave the space blank in the column marked ‘Color’ ”. For the slave schedule, the listed categories were black (B) or mulatto (M). b Although “Indian” was not listed on the census schedule, the instructions read: “ ‘Indians’—Indians not taxed are not to be enumerated. The families of Indians who have renounced tribal rule, and who under State or Territorial laws exercise the rights of citizens, are to be enumerated. In all such cases write ‘Ind.’ opposite their names, in column 6, under heading ‘Color’.” Table 2 Web Resources for Cancer Genomic Information Professional Organizations American Academy of Family Physicians www.aafp.org American Academy of Nursing (AAN) www.aannet.org American Board of Medical Genetics (ABMG) www.abmg.org American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) www.acmg.net American Medical Association www.ama-assn.org/ama/pub/category/1799.html American Nurses Association (ANA) www.nursingworld.org American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) www.asco.org American Society of Human Genetics (ASHG) www.ashg.org International Society of Nurses in Genetics (ISONG) www.isong.org National Coalition for Health Professional Education in Genetics (NCHPEG) www.nchpeg.org National Society of Genetic Counselors, Inc. (NSGC) www.nsgc.org Oncology Nursing Society (ONS) www.ons.org Clinical Genetics Resources GeneTests www.genetests.org Human Genome Epidemiology Network (HuGENet™) www.cdc.gov/genomics/hugenet/default.htm INFOGENETICS www.infogenetics.org/ Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgI?db=OMIM Sources for Patient Information and Referrals Genetics and Rare Diseases Information Center (GARD) http://www.genome.gov/10000409 Genetic Alliance www.geneticalliance.org Talking Glossary http://www.genome.gov/10002096 Family History Resources U.S. Surgeon General’s Family History Initiative www.hhs.gov/familyhistory Centers for Disease Control and Prevention National Office for Public Health Genomics http://www.cdc.gov/genomics/fHix.htm Other Sites Cancer Genetics Network (CGN) http://epi.grants.cancer.gov/CGN National Cancer Institute (NCI) www.cancer.gov National Human Genome Research Institute www.genome.gov National Institute for Nursing Research (NINR) www.ninr.nih.gov Secretary’s Advisory Committee on Genetics, Health and Society (SACGHS) http://www4.od.nih.gov/oba/sacghs.htm Thomas—U.S. Congress on the Internet www.thomas.gov/ Source: Modified fromVasquez S, Jenkins J. Identifying Appropriate Referrals and Resources (in press) . 