Clinical Trials – The Art of Enrollment Objectives Enrollment barriers and multidisciplinary approaches to increase cancer trials participation are presented. Recruitment barriers, research in Maryland, and a Best Practice for cancer trials are discussed. Data Sources Journal and research articles, web sites. Conclusion Clinical trials have produced prevention and care advances for cancer and other diseases. Trial enrollment is lower for minorities and underserved communities. A comprehensive program for addressing enrollment barriers should incorporate research on barriers, multidisciplinary teams, and education and trial infrastructure in community settings. Implications for Nursing Practice Health disparities training, including culturally appropriate enrollment approaches for education and retention of underserved communities, should incorporate community stakeholders and nurse/physician researchers.  Discussion Community-Academic Partnerships: A Comprehensive Clinical Trials Model Our program has implemented comprehensive research to understand existing attitudes and potential barriers to participation and targeted community-based participatory programs to improve accrual of underserved populations to clinical trials. Through local and regional initiatives undertaken with long-standing community partners, an intensive, multi-level program to increase cancer trial accrual and availability in minority and rural underserved communities has been implemented. This comprehensive research and programmatic initiative has resulted in dramatic increases in clinical trials accrual on the Eastern Shore of Maryland, as well as National Best Practice award in 2004 from the US Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. 24 An essential component of our programs is health and research literacy and building public trust in research as a tool to eliminate health disparities. UMSOM and Eastern Shore Cancer Research Network implemented a comprehensive model to increase accrual and participation in clinical trials on the Eastern Shore of Maryland. The model has a multi-pronged approach that includes: Intensive community education on trial design, benefits and risks, Physician and nurse education, and Infrastructure for trial regulatory and data collection and management in community rather than academic settings. 24 The National Best Practice Award on Rural Cancer Clinical Trials US HHS The UMSOM Office of Policy and Planning and the Eastern Shore Cancer Research Network, a single community oncologist practice located on the Eastern Shore of Maryland, shared a National Best Practice award from the Secretary of the US Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) Committee on Science and Policy in September 2004 for increasing Eastern Shore resident access to and participation in cancer clinical trials. The Eastern Shore Cancer Research Network, a community oncologist practice, was an equal partner in this program and award. Between 2000-2006, enrollment in clinical trials on the Eastern Shore of Maryland increased twenty fold and the number of open protocols increased forty fold. 24 This is the only clinical trials community centered best practice in the nation and the only rural clinical trial best practice in the nation.  Discussion Community-Academic Partnerships: A Comprehensive Clinical Trials Model Our program has implemented comprehensive research to understand existing attitudes and potential barriers to participation and targeted community-based participatory programs to improve accrual of underserved populations to clinical trials. Through local and regional initiatives undertaken with long-standing community partners, an intensive, multi-level program to increase cancer trial accrual and availability in minority and rural underserved communities has been implemented. This comprehensive research and programmatic initiative has resulted in dramatic increases in clinical trials accrual on the Eastern Shore of Maryland, as well as National Best Practice award in 2004 from the US Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. 24 An essential component of our programs is health and research literacy and building public trust in research as a tool to eliminate health disparities. UMSOM and Eastern Shore Cancer Research Network implemented a comprehensive model to increase accrual and participation in clinical trials on the Eastern Shore of Maryland. The model has a multi-pronged approach that includes: Intensive community education on trial design, benefits and risks, Physician and nurse education, and Infrastructure for trial regulatory and data collection and management in community rather than academic settings. 24 The National Best Practice Award on Rural Cancer Clinical Trials US HHS The UMSOM Office of Policy and Planning and the Eastern Shore Cancer Research Network, a single community oncologist practice located on the Eastern Shore of Maryland, shared a National Best Practice award from the Secretary of the US Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) Committee on Science and Policy in September 2004 for increasing Eastern Shore resident access to and participation in cancer clinical trials. The Eastern Shore Cancer Research Network, a community oncologist practice, was an equal partner in this program and award. Between 2000-2006, enrollment in clinical trials on the Eastern Shore of Maryland increased twenty fold and the number of open protocols increased forty fold. 24 This is the only clinical trials community centered best practice in the nation and the only rural clinical trial best practice in the nation.  Community-Academic Partnerships: A Comprehensive Clinical Trials Model Our program has implemented comprehensive research to understand existing attitudes and potential barriers to participation and targeted community-based participatory programs to improve accrual of underserved populations to clinical trials. Through local and regional initiatives undertaken with long-standing community partners, an intensive, multi-level program to increase cancer trial accrual and availability in minority and rural underserved communities has been implemented. This comprehensive research and programmatic initiative has resulted in dramatic increases in clinical trials accrual on the Eastern Shore of Maryland, as well as National Best Practice award in 2004 from the US Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. 24 An essential component of our programs is health and research literacy and building public trust in research as a tool to eliminate health disparities. UMSOM and Eastern Shore Cancer Research Network implemented a comprehensive model to increase accrual and participation in clinical trials on the Eastern Shore of Maryland. The model has a multi-pronged approach that includes: Intensive community education on trial design, benefits and risks, Physician and nurse education, and Infrastructure for trial regulatory and data collection and management in community rather than academic settings. 24  Community-Academic Partnerships: A Comprehensive Clinical Trials Model Our program has implemented comprehensive research to understand existing attitudes and potential barriers to participation and targeted community-based participatory programs to improve accrual of underserved populations to clinical trials. Through local and regional initiatives undertaken with long-standing community partners, an intensive, multi-level program to increase cancer trial accrual and availability in minority and rural underserved communities has been implemented. This comprehensive research and programmatic initiative has resulted in dramatic increases in clinical trials accrual on the Eastern Shore of Maryland, as well as National Best Practice award in 2004 from the US Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. 24 An essential component of our programs is health and research literacy and building public trust in research as a tool to eliminate health disparities. UMSOM and Eastern Shore Cancer Research Network implemented a comprehensive model to increase accrual and participation in clinical trials on the Eastern Shore of Maryland. The model has a multi-pronged approach that includes: Intensive community education on trial design, benefits and risks, Physician and nurse education, and Infrastructure for trial regulatory and data collection and management in community rather than academic settings. 24  The National Best Practice Award on Rural Cancer Clinical Trials US HHS The UMSOM Office of Policy and Planning and the Eastern Shore Cancer Research Network, a single community oncologist practice located on the Eastern Shore of Maryland, shared a National Best Practice award from the Secretary of the US Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) Committee on Science and Policy in September 2004 for increasing Eastern Shore resident access to and participation in cancer clinical trials. The Eastern Shore Cancer Research Network, a community oncologist practice, was an equal partner in this program and award. Between 2000-2006, enrollment in clinical trials on the Eastern Shore of Maryland increased twenty fold and the number of open protocols increased forty fold. 24 This is the only clinical trials community centered best practice in the nation and the only rural clinical trial best practice in the nation.  The National Best Practice Award on Rural Cancer Clinical Trials US HHS The UMSOM Office of Policy and Planning and the Eastern Shore Cancer Research Network, a single community oncologist practice located on the Eastern Shore of Maryland, shared a National Best Practice award from the Secretary of the US Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) Committee on Science and Policy in September 2004 for increasing Eastern Shore resident access to and participation in cancer clinical trials. The Eastern Shore Cancer Research Network, a community oncologist practice, was an equal partner in this program and award. Between 2000-2006, enrollment in clinical trials on the Eastern Shore of Maryland increased twenty fold and the number of open protocols increased forty fold. 24 This is the only clinical trials community centered best practice in the nation and the only rural clinical trial best practice in the nation.  Conclusions Despite persistent underrepresentation in clinical research of African Americans and other racial/ethnic minorities and underserved communities, there is great interest by these communities in participating in the research process and making societal contributions through research on improvements in health, disease management, and prevention. The art of enrollment in clinical trials requires a comprehensive and multidisciplinary approach to address the persistent effects of historical examples of unethical research and barriers to research participation on multiple levels. Incorporation of community and health professional education, training on culturally competence and health disparities for researchers and policies which support availability of trials and design factors is essential. Engagement of communities in participatory programs on enrollment and retention of African Americans and other underrepresented groups is important to ensure diversity in trial enrollment. 