Rationale and Design Issues of the Randomized Intervention for Children With Vesicoureteral Reflux (RIVUR) Study OBJECTIVE Our goal is to determine if antimicrobial prophylaxis with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole prevents recurrent urinary tract infections and renal scarring in children who are found to have vesicoureteral reflux after a first or second urinary tract infection. DESIGN, PARTICIPANTS, AND METHODS The Randomized Intervention for Children With Vesicoureteral Reflux (RIVUR) study is a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Six hundred children aged 2 to 72 months will be recruited from both primary and subspecialty care settings at clinical trial centers throughout North America. Children who are found to have grades I to IV vesicoureteral reflux after the index febrile or symptomatic urinary tract infection will be randomly assigned to receive daily doses of either trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole or placebo for 2 years. Scheduled follow-up contacts include in-person study visits every 6 months and telephone interviews every 2 months. Biospecimens (urine and blood) and genetic specimens (blood) will be collected for future studies of the genetic and biochemical determinants of vesicoureteral reflux, recurrent urinary tract infection, renal insufficiency, and renal scarring. RESULTS The primary outcome is recurrence of urinary tract infection. Secondary outcomes include time to recurrent urinary tract infection, renal scarring (assessed by dimercaptosuccinic acid scan), treatment failure, renal function, resource utilization, and development of antimicrobial resistance in stool flora. CONCLUSIONS The RIVUR study will provide useful information to clinicians about the risks and benefits of prophylactic antibiotics for children who are diagnosed with vesicoureteral reflux after a first or second urinary tract infection. The data and specimens collected over the course of the study will allow researchers to better understand the pathophysiology of recurrent urinary tract infection and its sequelae.  STATISTICAL METHODS Power Analysis Power calculations were based on a simple comparison of the difference in proportion of events between treatment groups. Table 5 presents estimates of the study power for a range of plausible event rates and treatment effects. The calculations assume that the event rate in the placebo group will be either 20% or 25%. The event rate in adherent children in the active treatment group is assumed to be 10%. All calculations assume a type I error rate of ? = .05 (2-sided). In estimating the effect of nonadherence, including drop-out, we assumed that children in the treated group who drop out or are noncompliant have the same rate of F/SUTIs as those in the placebo group (ie, no treatment effect). Because many of those children will receive some active therapy for some period of time, this is a somewhat conservative assumption. To adjust for these effects, the observed event rate in the treated group was estimated as a blend of the unadjusted event rates for the 2 groups ( Table 6 ). Thus, for example, if the event rate in the placebo group is 20%, the nonadjusted event rate in the treated group is 10%, and nonadherence/attrition rate is 15%, the adjusted event rate in the treated group will be (0.10 × 0.85) + (0.20 × 0.15) = 0.115. These analyses suggest that we will have adequate power to detect a clinically significant treatment effect over a wide range of assumptions about the placebo event and nonadherence/attrition rates. Statistical Analysis Plan A detailed statistical analysis plan has been developed. The primary efficacy analysis will be a Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test stratified according to clinical site on an intention-to-treat data set; an unstratified analysis will also be performed. Secondary analyses for the primary end point will use logistic regression to adjust for severity of VUR at baseline and other prognostic variables. Subgroup analyses will be performed to estimate treatment effects according to age, gender, baseline severity of VUR, and other covariates by using logistic regression models. Also, additional safety and tolerability analyses are planned. Interim efficacy analyses will be performed on the basis of a schedule approved by the data and safety monitoring board. The overall type I error rate will be controlled by using a Lan-DeMets spending function. Conditional power will also be estimated at the time of interim efficacy analyses. 40 - 42 The primary analysis of the dichotomous secondary outcomes (treatment failure, renal scarring, and antimicrobial resistance) will also be a Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test stratified according to clinical site and using the intention-to-treat principle. Additional analyses adjusting for covariates will use logistic regression. The primary analysis of time to recurrent F/SUTI will use a stratified log-rank test. Repositories and Ancillary Studies Biospecimens (urine and blood) and genetic specimens (blood) from participants for whom appropriate consent has been obtained will be collected, processed, and submitted to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases specimen and genetics repositories at baseline and after the 24-month visit. These specimens will serve as material for ancillary studies to understand the genetic and biochemical basis for VUR, recurrent UTI, renal insufficiency, and renal scarring. An ancillary study committee has been formed and drafted a policy for ancillary studies using repository specimens and/or data collected during the RIVUR study.  Power Analysis Power calculations were based on a simple comparison of the difference in proportion of events between treatment groups. Table 5 presents estimates of the study power for a range of plausible event rates and treatment effects. The calculations assume that the event rate in the placebo group will be either 20% or 25%. The event rate in adherent children in the active treatment group is assumed to be 10%. All calculations assume a type I error rate of ? = .05 (2-sided). In estimating the effect of nonadherence, including drop-out, we assumed that children in the treated group who drop out or are noncompliant have the same rate of F/SUTIs as those in the placebo group (ie, no treatment effect). Because many of those children will receive some active therapy for some period of time, this is a somewhat conservative assumption. To adjust for these effects, the observed event rate in the treated group was estimated as a blend of the unadjusted event rates for the 2 groups ( Table 6 ). Thus, for example, if the event rate in the placebo group is 20%, the nonadjusted event rate in the treated group is 10%, and nonadherence/attrition rate is 15%, the adjusted event rate in the treated group will be (0.10 × 0.85) + (0.20 × 0.15) = 0.115. These analyses suggest that we will have adequate power to detect a clinically significant treatment effect over a wide range of assumptions about the placebo event and nonadherence/attrition rates.  Statistical Analysis Plan A detailed statistical analysis plan has been developed. The primary efficacy analysis will be a Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test stratified according to clinical site on an intention-to-treat data set; an unstratified analysis will also be performed. Secondary analyses for the primary end point will use logistic regression to adjust for severity of VUR at baseline and other prognostic variables. Subgroup analyses will be performed to estimate treatment effects according to age, gender, baseline severity of VUR, and other covariates by using logistic regression models. Also, additional safety and tolerability analyses are planned. Interim efficacy analyses will be performed on the basis of a schedule approved by the data and safety monitoring board. The overall type I error rate will be controlled by using a Lan-DeMets spending function. Conditional power will also be estimated at the time of interim efficacy analyses. 40 - 42 The primary analysis of the dichotomous secondary outcomes (treatment failure, renal scarring, and antimicrobial resistance) will also be a Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test stratified according to clinical site and using the intention-to-treat principle. Additional analyses adjusting for covariates will use logistic regression. The primary analysis of time to recurrent F/SUTI will use a stratified log-rank test.  Repositories and Ancillary Studies Biospecimens (urine and blood) and genetic specimens (blood) from participants for whom appropriate consent has been obtained will be collected, processed, and submitted to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases specimen and genetics repositories at baseline and after the 24-month visit. These specimens will serve as material for ancillary studies to understand the genetic and biochemical basis for VUR, recurrent UTI, renal insufficiency, and renal scarring. An ancillary study committee has been formed and drafted a policy for ancillary studies using repository specimens and/or data collected during the RIVUR study.  CONCLUSIONS The RIVUR study will provide useful information to clinicians about the risks and benefits of prophylactic antibiotics for children who have had a first or second UTI and are found to have VUR. The data and specimens collected over the course of the study will allow researchers to better understand the pathophysiology of recurrent UTI and its sequelae.  Figures and Tables FIGURE 1 Flow diagram for recruitment and follow-up. FIGURE 2 International Reflux Study VUR grading scheme. FIGURE 3 Grading system for characterizing the extent of renal scarring: 0, no kidney segments affected; 1, 1 to 2 kidney segments affected; 2, 3 to 4 kidney segments affected; 3, >4 kidney segments affected; 4, global atrophy characterized by a diffusely scarred and shrunken kidney. TABLE 1 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria for the RIVUR Trial Inclusion Criteria Exclusion Criteria Age at randomization: at least 2 mo but <6 y of age; note that children as young as 1 mo may be screened for the study UTI diagnosis >112 d before randomization Diagnosed first or second F/SUTI within 112 d before randomization For children <6 mo of age at randomization, gestational age <34 wk Presence of grade I to IV VUR on the basis of radiographic VCUG performed within 112 d of diagnosis of index UTI Comorbid urologic anomalies a Appropriately treated index F/SUTI Known sulfa allergy, G6PD deficiency, or other conditions that are contraindications for use of TMP/SMZ History of other renal injury/disease Unable to complete the study protocol Congenital or acquired immunodeficiency Underlying anomalies or chronic diseases that could potentially interfere with response to therapy such as chronic gastrointestinal conditions (ie, malabsorption, inflammatory bowel disease), liver or kidney failure, or malignancy Complex cardiac disease Syndromes associated with VUR or bladder dysfunction Index UTI not treated successfully a Hydronephrosis, Society for Fetal Urology (SFU) grade 4, ureterocele, urethral valve, solitary kidney, profoundly decreased renal size unilaterally on ultrasound, multicystic dysplastic kidney, neurogenic bladder, pelvic kidney or fused kidney. TABLE 2 RIVUR Clinical Trial Centers Hospital City, State, Country Recruitment Sites a Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Philadelphia, PA PCP, ED, UP, IS Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh, PA PCP, ED, UP, IS Johns Hopkins School of Medicine Baltimore, MD PCP, UP, NP, IS Children's Hospital of Michigan Detroit, MI IS Women and Children's Hospital of Buffalo Buffalo, NY PCP, ED, UP, IS Children's Hospital Boston Boston, MA PCP, ED, UP, NP Children's Hospital of Columbus Columbus, OH PCP, ED Children's Mercy Hospital Kansas City, MO UP, NP, IS Texas Children's Hospital Houston, TX UP, NP University of Alabama at Birmingham Birmingham, AL PCP, UP, NP Children's National Medical Center Washington, DC PCP, ED, UP, NP, IS University of Oklahoma Oklahoma City, OK UP Cincinnati Children's Hospital Cincinnati, OH PCP, UP, IS Alfred I. du Pont Hospital for Children Wilmington, DE PCP, UP, IS Penn State Hershey Medical Center Hershey, PA PCP, ED, UP, NP, IS Children's Memorial Hospital Chicago, IL PCP, ED, UP, NP, IS Wake Forest University Baptist Medical Center Winston-Salem, NC PCP, ED, UP, NP, IS University of Wisconsin Children's Hospital Madison, WI PCP, ED, UP, NP, IS Akron Children's Hospital Akron, OH PCP, ED, UP, NP, IS a PCP indicates primary care practice; ED, emergency department; UP, urology practice; NP, nephrology practice; IS, inpatient service. TABLE 3 Summary of Observations and Procedures Study Month ?2-to 0-mo Visit (Screening) 0-mo Visit (Random Assignment/ Baseline) 6-mo Visit (Follow-up) 12-mo Visit (Follow-up) 18-mo Visit (Follow-up) 24-mo Exit Visit (Follow-up) Every 2 mo (Telephone Follow-up) Ultrasound X a Contrast VCUG X a X Informed consent X DMSA scan X b X X c Detailed medical history X Interim history X X X X X Physical examination X X X X X X Questionnaires ?DVSS and PACCT Group criteria (age ? 3 y) X X X ?Parent diary d X X X X X ?Quality-of-life assessment X X X Randomization X Study-medication dispensation X X X X Study medication X X X X X Accountability Urine tests ?Urinalysis X X ?Culture X e X e ?Microalbumin/creatinine X X ?Urine for central repository X X Blood tests ?CBC with differential X X X X X ?Creatinine, electrolytes X X ?Cystatin C X X ?Blood for central X X ?Repository Rectal swabs f X X Telephone Follow-up X CBC indicates complete blood count. a Screening ultrasound and VCUG may occur any time within 16 weeks after the index UTI. b Screening DMSA may occur any time within 16 weeks after the index UTI. c Twenty-four-month DMSA scan may not occur if a study outcome scan has already been obtained. d Paper or Web-based data collection. e If urinalysis results are positive, culture is obtained. f Rectal swabs will also be collected when participants meet treatment-failure criteria. TABLE 4 Definition of UTI Febrile UTI (FUTI) Symptomatic Nonfebrile UTI (SUTI) I. Fever I. Symptoms ?Documented temperature of at least 100.4°F or 38°C, measured anywhere on the body either at home or at doctor's office ?Suprapubic, abdominal, or flank pain or tenderness, or urinary urgency, frequency, or hesitancy, or dysuria, or foul-smelling urine, or in infants ?4 mo old, failure to thrive, dehydration, or hypothermia and and II. Pyuria on urinalysis II. Pyuria on urinalysis ??10 WBCs permm3 (uncentrifuged specimen) ??10 WBCs permm3 (uncentrifuged specimen) ?or ?or ??5 WBCs per hpf (centrifuged specimen) ??5 WBCs per hpf (centrifuged specimen) ?or ?or ?Trace or more leukocyte esterase on dipstick ?Trace or more leukocyte esterase on dipstick and and III. Culture-proven infection with a single organism III. Culture-proven infection with a single organism ??5 × 104 CFU per mL (catheterized or suprapubic aspiration urine specimen) ??5 × 104 CFU per mL (catheterized or suprapubic aspiration urine specimen) ?or ?or ??105 CFU per mL (clean voided specimen) ??105 CFU per mL (clean voided specimen) WBC indicates white blood cell; hpf, high-powered field; CFU, colony-forming units. TABLE 5 Estimated Power Placebo Event Rate Nonadherence/Attrition Rate 5% 10% 15% 20% 0.87 0.83 0.78 25% 0.99 0.98 0.97 The estimated study power for the primary hypothesis, given the assumptions and adjustments shown in Table 5 , is shown. TABLE 6 Event Rate in Treated Group, Adjusted for Nonadherence/Attrition Placebo Event Rate Nonadherence/Attrition Rate 5% 10% 15% 20% 0.105 0.11 0.115 25% 0.108 0.115 0.122 