REPRESSION OF 15-HYDROXYPROSTAGLANDIN DEHYDROGENASE INVOLVES HDAC2 AND SNAIL IN COLORECTAL CANCER Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) promotes cancer progression by modulating proliferation, apoptosis, angiogenesis and the immune response. Enzymatic degradation of PGE2 involves the NAD+–dependent 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (15-PGDH). Recent reports have shown a marked diminution of 15-PGDH expression in colorectal carcinomas. We report here that treatment of colorectal cancer (CRC) cells with histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, including sodium butyrate (NaB) and valproic acid (VPA), induces 15-PGDH expression. Additionally, we demonstrate that pre-treatment of CRC cells with HDAC inhibitors can block EGF or Snail-mediated transcriptional repression of 15-PGDH. We demonstrate an interaction between Snail and HDAC2 and the binding of HDAC2 to the 15-PGDH promoter. In vivo we observe increased Hdac2 expression in Apc-deficient mouse adenomas, which inversely correlated with loss of 15-Pgdh expression. Finally, in human colon cancers, elevated HDAC expression correlated with down-regulation of 15-PGDH . These data suggest that class I histone deacetylases, specifically HDAC2, and the transcriptional repressor Snail, play an central role in the suppression 15-PGDH expression. These results also provide a COX2-independent mechanism to explain increased PGE2 levels that contribute to progression of colorectal cancer.  Introduction The development of colorectal cancer involves the accumulation of genetic alterations and epigenomic changes that affect cell growth, cell death and the tumor microenvironment. Aberrant Wnt, Ras, and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) signaling pathways have been shown to play major roles in the progression of colon cancer and other solid malignancies. Evidence of a positive relationship between COX-2 expression and human colorectal cancer (CRC) was first reported in 1994 ( 1 ). Several subsequent studies confirmed that COX-2 expression is elevated in approximately 50% of adenomas and 80% of adenocarcinomas ( 2 , 3 ). One promising group of compounds for prevention of CRC is nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) that primarily target cyclooxygenase enzymes (COX-1 and COX-2). Both of these enzymes convert arachidonic acid into an endoperoxide intermediate that is further metabolized to five structurally related prostaglandins (PGs), including PGE2, PGD2, PGF2?, PGI2, and thromboxane A2. However, recent clinical trial results indicate that prolonged use of high dosages of some COX-2 selective inhibitors (COXIBs) is associated with unacceptable cardiovascular side effects, even though these drugs were extremely effective in preventing polyp recurrence in humans. A preponderance of data implicates prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), the most abundant prostaglandin in colorectal cancers ( 4 ), as a significant mediator in cancer progression. COX-2-derived PGE2 is known to promote tumor-associated neovascularization, inhibition of cell death, stimulate cell proliferation and motility ( 5 ). Treatment of in vivo rodent colorectal cancer models with PGE2 increases cell proliferation and confers a survival advantage on epithelial cells of the gastrointestinal tract ( 6 , 7 ). For example, Wang et al. recently reported that PGE2 treatment of Apc Min/+ mice increased the size and number of intestinal adenomas, especially those in the large intestine ( 8 ). While steady-state tissue levels of PGE2 depend on relative rates of biosynthesis and breakdown, virtually all reports examining the role of PGE2 in physiology and disease have focused solely on cyclooxygenase-dependent formation of this bioactive lipid. A plausible complementary pathway yielding increased local levels of PGE2 in cancer involves reduced degradation of PGE2 by NAD+-dependent 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (15-PGDH). Human 15-PGDH (encoded by HPGD gene) is located on chromosome 4 and encodes a 29 kDa protein that catalyzes the rate-limiting step of prostaglandin catabolism via oxidization of the 15(S)-hydroxyl group of prostaglandins to yield inactive 15-keto metabolites ( 9 , 10 ). Genetic deletion of 15-Pgdh in mice leads to increased tissue levels of PGE2 ( 11 ). While prior studies on the distribution and activity of 15-PGDH have focused primarily on parturition and uterine biology, recent data suggest that 15-PGDH plays a role in carcinogenesis ( 12 , 13 ), with data suggesting that 15-PGDH behaves as a tumor suppressor in lung, breast, and colon cancers ( 14 – 18 ). Additional support for this hypothesis was recently reported using an animal model, in which examination of gastrointestinal tract of 15-Pgdh ?/? mice crossed Apc Min/+ mice showed that genetic ablation of 15-Pgdh resulted in a 7.6-fold increase in colon tumors arising in these mice ( 19 ). Taken together, these reports strongly support the hypothesis that 15-PGDH plays an important role as a tumor suppressor gene in the prevention of carcinogenesis. Previously, we observed repression of 15-PGDH expression in a subset of human colorectal carcinomas and CRC cells ( 15 ). Furthermore, we reported evidence suggesting that one mechanism of 15-PGDH repression occurs through epidermal growth factor (EGF) induction of the transcriptional repressor Snail to regulate 15-PGDH expression ( 15 , 17 ). Specifically, EGF can induce Snail, which binds E-box elements (CANNTG) found within the 15-PGDH promoter to repress transcription ( 17 ). In the present study, we further examined the epigenetic regulation of 15-PGDH by HDACs in colorectal cancer cells to obtain a better understanding of the underlying mechanism(s) involved. Specifically, our data suggest that HDACs interact with Snail at the 15-PGDH promoter to aid in transcriptional repression of this gene. We show that multiple HDAC inhibitors, including sodium butyrate (NaB) and valproic acid (VPA), induce 15-PGDH expression in CRC cells. Additionally, we demonstrate that pre-treatment of CRC cells with HDAC inhibitors can block EGF or Snail-mediated transcriptional repression of 15-PGDH. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays examining the 15-PGDH promoter in CRC cells shows loss of HDAC2 binding after treatment with an HDAC inhibitor. Furthermore, we observe increased expression of Hdac2 in Apc-deficient mouse adenomas, which inversely correlates with loss of 15-PGDH expression in these polyps. Finally, in human colon cancers, elevated HDAC expression correlates well with down-regulation of 15-PGDH .  Materials and Methods Reagents and cell lines Valproic acid, sodium butyrate, 5-Aza-2?-deoxycytidine, and EGF were purchased from Sigma. CRC cell lines, HT-29 and LS-174T, were maintained in McCoy’s 5A; whereas HEK 293T cell lines were grown in DMEM. Medium was supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum, 100 units/mL penicillin, and 100 mg/mL streptomycin. Cells were maintained in 5% CO2 atmosphere at 37°C. Quantitative Real-time PCR Total cellular RNA was isolated from cell lines with Trizol reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. cDNA for each RNA sample was synthesized using an Invitrogen Superscript III First-strand synthesis system (Invitrogen). PCR contained iQ SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad), 50 ng of each primer, and 5 ml of 1:500 diluted reverse transcriptase template in a 25 ml reaction volume. Oligonucleotides for ?-actin, 15-PGDH were used as previously described ( 17 ). The quantitative real-time PCR for each treatment was done in triplicate, and the average C t was determined. The relative gene expression was normalized to ?-actin and was calculated using the 2?? C t method. RNA interference A short hairpin RNA retroviral expression system, pRetroSuper ( 20 ) was employed to knock down Snail expression as previously described ( 17 ). Immunoblotting Analysis of whole cell lysates was completed as previously described ( 17 ). Antibodies: 15-PGDH (200-179; 1:2,000) from Novus Biologicals; ?-actin (A-5441; 1:2,500) from Sigma; Hemagglutinin (MMS-101P 1:1,000) from Covance Research Products, Inc.; HDAC2 (sc-9959; 1:1,000) from Santa Cruz Biotechnology; DNTM1 (ab13537; 1:500) from Abcam. Membranes were treated with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies and developed using chemiluminescent detection reagent (Amersham). Transcient transfection and reporter gene analysis Transfection and analysis of a 2.4-kb 15-PGDH promoter luciferase construct in CRC cells was completed as previously described ( 17 ). Immunohistochemistry Paraffin sections of adult Apc Min/+ intestine were dewaxed, rehydrated, and incubated overnight at 4°C using an antibody against acetyl-Histone H3 (06-599MN; 1:100) from Upstate. Negative controls received no antibody. The Vectastain ABC peroxidase system (Vector Laboratories) was used for immunodetection. Animals C57BL/6 and C57BL/6-Apc Min/+ mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratory. The mice were housed and fed with standard mouse diet in the Animal Care Facility according to National Institutes of Health and institutional guidelines for laboratory animals. Human Colorectal Tissue Samples Human colorectal tumor specimens were obtained from surgical resections, with Vanderbilt Internal Board approval as previously described ( 15 ). Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay CRC cells were cultured with either NaB, Aza-dC, or with a control vehicle, and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay was conducted with HDAC2 antibodies using a previously described ChIP assay protocol ( 21 ). Primers for the 15-PGDH promoter were 5?-GGTAGGCTACCAGCGGCTCT-3? and 5?-GTTCCCATCTCGTAATCAGTGG-3?. Statistical Analysis The data are expressed as the mean ± S.E. Statistical significance was determined by Student’s t test. All tests were two-sided and value of P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Spearman correlation coefficient was used to estimate the association between two continuous measurements.  Reagents and cell lines Valproic acid, sodium butyrate, 5-Aza-2?-deoxycytidine, and EGF were purchased from Sigma. CRC cell lines, HT-29 and LS-174T, were maintained in McCoy’s 5A; whereas HEK 293T cell lines were grown in DMEM. Medium was supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum, 100 units/mL penicillin, and 100 mg/mL streptomycin. Cells were maintained in 5% CO2 atmosphere at 37°C.  Quantitative Real-time PCR Total cellular RNA was isolated from cell lines with Trizol reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. cDNA for each RNA sample was synthesized using an Invitrogen Superscript III First-strand synthesis system (Invitrogen). PCR contained iQ SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad), 50 ng of each primer, and 5 ml of 1:500 diluted reverse transcriptase template in a 25 ml reaction volume. Oligonucleotides for ?-actin, 15-PGDH were used as previously described ( 17 ). The quantitative real-time PCR for each treatment was done in triplicate, and the average C t was determined. The relative gene expression was normalized to ?-actin and was calculated using the 2?? C t method.  RNA interference A short hairpin RNA retroviral expression system, pRetroSuper ( 20 ) was employed to knock down Snail expression as previously described ( 17 ).  Immunoblotting Analysis of whole cell lysates was completed as previously described ( 17 ). Antibodies: 15-PGDH (200-179; 1:2,000) from Novus Biologicals; ?-actin (A-5441; 1:2,500) from Sigma; Hemagglutinin (MMS-101P 1:1,000) from Covance Research Products, Inc.; HDAC2 (sc-9959; 1:1,000) from Santa Cruz Biotechnology; DNTM1 (ab13537; 1:500) from Abcam. Membranes were treated with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies and developed using chemiluminescent detection reagent (Amersham).  Transcient transfection and reporter gene analysis Transfection and analysis of a 2.4-kb 15-PGDH promoter luciferase construct in CRC cells was completed as previously described ( 17 ).  Immunohistochemistry Paraffin sections of adult Apc Min/+ intestine were dewaxed, rehydrated, and incubated overnight at 4°C using an antibody against acetyl-Histone H3 (06-599MN; 1:100) from Upstate. Negative controls received no antibody. The Vectastain ABC peroxidase system (Vector Laboratories) was used for immunodetection.  Animals C57BL/6 and C57BL/6-Apc Min/+ mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratory. The mice were housed and fed with standard mouse diet in the Animal Care Facility according to National Institutes of Health and institutional guidelines for laboratory animals.  Human Colorectal Tissue Samples Human colorectal tumor specimens were obtained from surgical resections, with Vanderbilt Internal Board approval as previously described ( 15 ).  Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay CRC cells were cultured with either NaB, Aza-dC, or with a control vehicle, and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay was conducted with HDAC2 antibodies using a previously described ChIP assay protocol ( 21 ). Primers for the 15-PGDH promoter were 5?-GGTAGGCTACCAGCGGCTCT-3? and 5?-GTTCCCATCTCGTAATCAGTGG-3?.  Statistical Analysis The data are expressed as the mean ± S.E. Statistical significance was determined by Student’s t test. All tests were two-sided and value of P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Spearman correlation coefficient was used to estimate the association between two continuous measurements.  Results HDAC inhibitors increase expression of 15-PGDH To further understand the mechanisms responsible for regulating 15-PGDH expression in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells, we determined whether histone deacetylases (HDACs) are involved in the transcriptional repression of 15-PGDH. To investigate this process, we examined multiple CRC cell lines, including HT-29 and LS-174T. We determined whether treatment of CRC cells with HDAC inhibitors, valproic acid (VPA) and sodium butyrate (NaB), could alter 15-PGDH expression as compared to mock-treated cells. As shown in figure 1 A , treatment of CRC cells for 24 hours with increasing doses of NaB, which is known to inhibit HDAC activity, induces increased levels of 15-PGDH transcripts approximately 3.7-fold as observed by quantitative real-time PCR (5mM NaB; P=0.049). A similar increase in 15-PGDH protein expression was also observed after NaB treatment of CRC cells ( Fig. 1 C ). In addition, we observed that stimulation of CRC cells with VPA for 24 hours increased both 15-PGDH transcript levels and 15-PGDH protein expression in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 1 B , and Fig 1 D , respectively). Cells treated with 5mM VPA displayed a 3.8-fold increase in 15-PGDH expression (P=0.048). Inhibition of HDACs block EGF- and Snail-mediated transcriptional repression of 15-PGDH Previously, we reported that the 5’UTR of 15-PGDH contains three Snail binding sites, referred to as E-box elements (CANNTG), in the proximal promoter, and established that EGF treatment and/or expression of a wild-type Snail expression construct can reduce 15-PGDH expression in CRC cells ( 17 ). Therefore, we sought to determine whether inhibition of HDAC activity could block the ability of EGF or Snail expression to down-regulate 15-PGDH expression in CRC cells. In accordance with our previous report ( 17 ), we observed that EGF treatment of colorectal cancer cell lines results in reduced 15-PGDH promoter activity ( Fig. 2 A and B ). Exposure of CRC cells to NaB in the absence of EGF resulted in approximately a 4.7-fold increase of 15-PGDH promoter activity ( Fig. 2 A , P=0.0024 ). Interestingly, pre-treatment of CRC cells with EGF, prior to addition of the HDAC inhibitor NaB, is insufficient to completely ablate the increase of 15-PGDH promoter activity observed following treatment with NaB alone ( Fig. 2 A ). Similarily, addition of VPA to CRC cells also resulted in a significant 7.1-fold increase in 15-PGDH promoter activity ( Fig. 2 B , P=0.048 ), and we observed that pre-treatment of CRC cells with EGF did not inhibit the ability of VPA to induce 15-PGDH promoter activity ( Fig. 2 B ). We next examined whether Snail expression can reduce 15-PGDH expression and to determine if Snail interactions with HDACs are required to regulate this process. Addition of a wild-type Snail expression construct to CRC cells repressed 15-PGDH luciferase promoter activity ( Fig. 2 C and D ); however, in cells also treated with 5mM NaB or 5mM VPA, we did not observe repression of 15-PGDH promoter activity, even in the presence of Snail overexpression ( Fig. 2 C and D ). Instead, we observed that treatment of cells with HDAC inhibitors and Snail resulted in a significant increase in 15-PGDH promoter activity ( Fig. 2 C and D ). Taken together, we find that Snail may require HDACs to repress 15-PGDH promoter activity and that HDAC inhibitors can inhibit repression of 15-PGDH expression mediated by EGF and Snail in CRC cells. Interaction of Snail and HDAC2 at the 15-PGDH promoter Examination of the 15-PGDH promoter reveals the presence of multiple transcription factor binding sites, including multiple Sp1 and Sp3 sites, which are known to involve binding of HDACs ( 22 ). Published reports suggest that the transcriptional repressor Snail and other related transcriptional repressors can interact with HDACs, including HDAC1 and HDAC2, to repress transcription of target genes ( 23 , 24 ). To confirm these reports we transfected a wild-type Snail expression construct containing a hemagglutinin (HA) tag in HEK 293T cells to detect possible interactions between Snail and HDACs using immunoprecipitation techniques. As shown in Fig. 3 A , we observe that HA-tagged Snail is able to co-precipitate with HDAC2, while a Snail-HDAC2 complex is not observed in untransfected control cells. In addition, we observed interactions of Snail with HDAC1 by co-immunoprecipitation in HA-Snail transfected HEK 293T cells (data not shown). Next, we determined whether HDAC2 binds to the 15-PGDH promoter in CRC cells. Using the ChIP assay, our data show that in mock treated CRC cells HDAC2 binds to the 15-PGDH promoter, while NaB treatment for 24 hours results in reduced HDAC2 binding ( Fig. 3 B ). Quantitative analysis of DNA from these ChIP assays also shows decreased HDAC2 binding in NaB treated samples as compared to mock-treated controls ( Fig. 3 C ). Taken together, our data suggest that HDAC2 can interact with Snail, and that HDAC2 can bind to the 15-PGDH promoter, and the resulting HDAC2-Snail complex is involved in changes in 15-PGDH expression in vitro . HDAC expression inversely correlates with 15-PGDH expression in vivo To corroborate our in vitro findings, we analyzed expression and localization of HDACs and 15-PGDH in vivo by utilizing mice that harbor a nonsense Apc mutation and spontaneously develop adenomas. Examination of 15-Pgdh expression by in situ hybridization demonstrates that 15-Pgdh expression is observed in the well-differentiated villi in wild-type mice, while 15-Pgdh expression is absent in adenomas taken from Apc Min/+ mice ( Fig. 4 A )( 17 ). Examination of Hdac2 expression in wild-type mice shows moderate levels of expression in the proliferative crypt compartment ( Fig. 4 A ), and increased Hdac2 expression appears to be present in adenomas taken from Apc Min/+ mice ( Fig. 4 A ). Comparison of the localization of gene expression shows that Hdac2 expression inversely correlates with 15-Pgdh expression in this animal model. We next quantified 15-Pgdh and Hdac2 expression in matched normal and polyp tissue taken from 15-week-old Apc Min/+ mice by quantitative real-time PCR ( Fig. 4 B ). This data supports our previous observation wherein we observe reduced 15-Pgdh expression in adenomas from Apc Min/+ mice ( 17 ), whereas Hdac2 expression appears to be reciprocally elevated in these adenomas ( Fig. 4 A and 4 B ). To examine the ability of HDAC inhibitors to disrupt HDAC expression in vivo , we treated Apc Min/+ mice ( n =9) with VPA (400 mg/kg) or vehicle for four weeks. Consistent with our model and one previous report ( 25 ), we observe that VPA treatment inhibits Hdac2 expression and nearly eliminates tumor burden in Apc Min/+ mice ( Supplemental Fig. 1 A and B ). Immunohistochemical analysis of acetyl-Histone H3 confirmed that VPA was absorbed appropriately ( Supplemental Fig. 1 C ). Thus, VPA inhibits HDAC2 expression in vivo and should be studied further for its ability to repress tumorigenesis in the intestine. Based on our findings that Hdac2 expression is inversely correlated with 15-Pgdh expression in adenomas in Apc Min/+ mice, we hypothesize that a similar relationship might exist in matched human normal and tumor samples. We have previously observed that 15-PGDH expression is significantly down-regulated in most colorectal cancers ( 15 , 17 ). Subsequent examination of HDAC2 expression from a subset of matched normal and tumor samples shows that HDAC2 expression increases 3-fold on average in colorectal carcinomas ( Fig. 4 C ). Notably, we observe that independent, pairwise comparison in 11 normal and tumor samples shows that 15-PGDH and HDAC2 are reciprocally expressed within both normal and tumor samples ( Fig. 4 D ). In addition, we observed that other class I HDACs displayed a similar reciprocal expression pattern with 15-PGDH expression in matched normal and tumor samples ( Supplemental Fig. 2 A and B ; Supplemental Table I ). Epigenetic regulation of 15-PGDH expression by HDAC inhibitors and demethylating agents Epigenetic repression of tumor suppressor genes by increased methylation often disrupts differentiation of epithelial and hematopoietic cells and can promote cancer progression. Recently, it has been suggested that the 15-PGDH promoter is methylated in about 30% of primary breast tumors and one breast cancer cell line ( 16 ). To begin to address whether methylation of the 15-PGDH promoter also occurs in colorectal cancers, we carried out preliminary experiments to determine whether treatment of CRC cells with 5-Aza-2?-deoxycytidine (Aza-dC), a known demethylating agent, could restore 15-PGDH expression in CRC cells. Our preliminary findings indicate that after 72 hours of Aza-dC treatment in CRC cells, we observed an increase in 15-PGDH protein expression as compared to vehicle treated cells ( Fig. 5A ), whereas Aza-dC treatment decreased expression of a DNA methyltransferase 1, DNMT1 ( Fig. 5A ). Interestingly, when CRC cells are treated with both Aza-dC for 72 hours and NaB for the last 24 hours, we found an additive increase in 15-PGDH protein expression as compared with only NaB treatment for 24 hours ( Fig. 5B ). Taken together, our observations support the hypothesis that the 15-PGDH promoter may be hypermethylated in colorectal cancers; however, further experiments are necessary to identify specific CpG islands which are methylated.  Results HDAC inhibitors increase expression of 15-PGDH To further understand the mechanisms responsible for regulating 15-PGDH expression in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells, we determined whether histone deacetylases (HDACs) are involved in the transcriptional repression of 15-PGDH. To investigate this process, we examined multiple CRC cell lines, including HT-29 and LS-174T. We determined whether treatment of CRC cells with HDAC inhibitors, valproic acid (VPA) and sodium butyrate (NaB), could alter 15-PGDH expression as compared to mock-treated cells. As shown in figure 1 A , treatment of CRC cells for 24 hours with increasing doses of NaB, which is known to inhibit HDAC activity, induces increased levels of 15-PGDH transcripts approximately 3.7-fold as observed by quantitative real-time PCR (5mM NaB; P=0.049). A similar increase in 15-PGDH protein expression was also observed after NaB treatment of CRC cells ( Fig. 1 C ). In addition, we observed that stimulation of CRC cells with VPA for 24 hours increased both 15-PGDH transcript levels and 15-PGDH protein expression in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 1 B , and Fig 1 D , respectively). Cells treated with 5mM VPA displayed a 3.8-fold increase in 15-PGDH expression (P=0.048). Inhibition of HDACs block EGF- and Snail-mediated transcriptional repression of 15-PGDH Previously, we reported that the 5’UTR of 15-PGDH contains three Snail binding sites, referred to as E-box elements (CANNTG), in the proximal promoter, and established that EGF treatment and/or expression of a wild-type Snail expression construct can reduce 15-PGDH expression in CRC cells ( 17 ). Therefore, we sought to determine whether inhibition of HDAC activity could block the ability of EGF or Snail expression to down-regulate 15-PGDH expression in CRC cells. In accordance with our previous report ( 17 ), we observed that EGF treatment of colorectal cancer cell lines results in reduced 15-PGDH promoter activity ( Fig. 2 A and B ). Exposure of CRC cells to NaB in the absence of EGF resulted in approximately a 4.7-fold increase of 15-PGDH promoter activity ( Fig. 2 A , P=0.0024 ). Interestingly, pre-treatment of CRC cells with EGF, prior to addition of the HDAC inhibitor NaB, is insufficient to completely ablate the increase of 15-PGDH promoter activity observed following treatment with NaB alone ( Fig. 2 A ). Similarily, addition of VPA to CRC cells also resulted in a significant 7.1-fold increase in 15-PGDH promoter activity ( Fig. 2 B , P=0.048 ), and we observed that pre-treatment of CRC cells with EGF did not inhibit the ability of VPA to induce 15-PGDH promoter activity ( Fig. 2 B ). We next examined whether Snail expression can reduce 15-PGDH expression and to determine if Snail interactions with HDACs are required to regulate this process. Addition of a wild-type Snail expression construct to CRC cells repressed 15-PGDH luciferase promoter activity ( Fig. 2 C and D ); however, in cells also treated with 5mM NaB or 5mM VPA, we did not observe repression of 15-PGDH promoter activity, even in the presence of Snail overexpression ( Fig. 2 C and D ). Instead, we observed that treatment of cells with HDAC inhibitors and Snail resulted in a significant increase in 15-PGDH promoter activity ( Fig. 2 C and D ). Taken together, we find that Snail may require HDACs to repress 15-PGDH promoter activity and that HDAC inhibitors can inhibit repression of 15-PGDH expression mediated by EGF and Snail in CRC cells. Interaction of Snail and HDAC2 at the 15-PGDH promoter Examination of the 15-PGDH promoter reveals the presence of multiple transcription factor binding sites, including multiple Sp1 and Sp3 sites, which are known to involve binding of HDACs ( 22 ). Published reports suggest that the transcriptional repressor Snail and other related transcriptional repressors can interact with HDACs, including HDAC1 and HDAC2, to repress transcription of target genes ( 23 , 24 ). To confirm these reports we transfected a wild-type Snail expression construct containing a hemagglutinin (HA) tag in HEK 293T cells to detect possible interactions between Snail and HDACs using immunoprecipitation techniques. As shown in Fig. 3 A , we observe that HA-tagged Snail is able to co-precipitate with HDAC2, while a Snail-HDAC2 complex is not observed in untransfected control cells. In addition, we observed interactions of Snail with HDAC1 by co-immunoprecipitation in HA-Snail transfected HEK 293T cells (data not shown). Next, we determined whether HDAC2 binds to the 15-PGDH promoter in CRC cells. Using the ChIP assay, our data show that in mock treated CRC cells HDAC2 binds to the 15-PGDH promoter, while NaB treatment for 24 hours results in reduced HDAC2 binding ( Fig. 3 B ). Quantitative analysis of DNA from these ChIP assays also shows decreased HDAC2 binding in NaB treated samples as compared to mock-treated controls ( Fig. 3 C ). Taken together, our data suggest that HDAC2 can interact with Snail, and that HDAC2 can bind to the 15-PGDH promoter, and the resulting HDAC2-Snail complex is involved in changes in 15-PGDH expression in vitro . HDAC expression inversely correlates with 15-PGDH expression in vivo To corroborate our in vitro findings, we analyzed expression and localization of HDACs and 15-PGDH in vivo by utilizing mice that harbor a nonsense Apc mutation and spontaneously develop adenomas. Examination of 15-Pgdh expression by in situ hybridization demonstrates that 15-Pgdh expression is observed in the well-differentiated villi in wild-type mice, while 15-Pgdh expression is absent in adenomas taken from Apc Min/+ mice ( Fig. 4 A )( 17 ). Examination of Hdac2 expression in wild-type mice shows moderate levels of expression in the proliferative crypt compartment ( Fig. 4 A ), and increased Hdac2 expression appears to be present in adenomas taken from Apc Min/+ mice ( Fig. 4 A ). Comparison of the localization of gene expression shows that Hdac2 expression inversely correlates with 15-Pgdh expression in this animal model. We next quantified 15-Pgdh and Hdac2 expression in matched normal and polyp tissue taken from 15-week-old Apc Min/+ mice by quantitative real-time PCR ( Fig. 4 B ). This data supports our previous observation wherein we observe reduced 15-Pgdh expression in adenomas from Apc Min/+ mice ( 17 ), whereas Hdac2 expression appears to be reciprocally elevated in these adenomas ( Fig. 4 A and 4 B ). To examine the ability of HDAC inhibitors to disrupt HDAC expression in vivo , we treated Apc Min/+ mice ( n =9) with VPA (400 mg/kg) or vehicle for four weeks. Consistent with our model and one previous report ( 25 ), we observe that VPA treatment inhibits Hdac2 expression and nearly eliminates tumor burden in Apc Min/+ mice ( Supplemental Fig. 1 A and B ). Immunohistochemical analysis of acetyl-Histone H3 confirmed that VPA was absorbed appropriately ( Supplemental Fig. 1 C ). Thus, VPA inhibits HDAC2 expression in vivo and should be studied further for its ability to repress tumorigenesis in the intestine. Based on our findings that Hdac2 expression is inversely correlated with 15-Pgdh expression in adenomas in Apc Min/+ mice, we hypothesize that a similar relationship might exist in matched human normal and tumor samples. We have previously observed that 15-PGDH expression is significantly down-regulated in most colorectal cancers ( 15 , 17 ). Subsequent examination of HDAC2 expression from a subset of matched normal and tumor samples shows that HDAC2 expression increases 3-fold on average in colorectal carcinomas ( Fig. 4 C ). Notably, we observe that independent, pairwise comparison in 11 normal and tumor samples shows that 15-PGDH and HDAC2 are reciprocally expressed within both normal and tumor samples ( Fig. 4 D ). In addition, we observed that other class I HDACs displayed a similar reciprocal expression pattern with 15-PGDH expression in matched normal and tumor samples ( Supplemental Fig. 2 A and B ; Supplemental Table I ). Epigenetic regulation of 15-PGDH expression by HDAC inhibitors and demethylating agents Epigenetic repression of tumor suppressor genes by increased methylation often disrupts differentiation of epithelial and hematopoietic cells and can promote cancer progression. Recently, it has been suggested that the 15-PGDH promoter is methylated in about 30% of primary breast tumors and one breast cancer cell line ( 16 ). To begin to address whether methylation of the 15-PGDH promoter also occurs in colorectal cancers, we carried out preliminary experiments to determine whether treatment of CRC cells with 5-Aza-2?-deoxycytidine (Aza-dC), a known demethylating agent, could restore 15-PGDH expression in CRC cells. Our preliminary findings indicate that after 72 hours of Aza-dC treatment in CRC cells, we observed an increase in 15-PGDH protein expression as compared to vehicle treated cells ( Fig. 5A ), whereas Aza-dC treatment decreased expression of a DNA methyltransferase 1, DNMT1 ( Fig. 5A ). Interestingly, when CRC cells are treated with both Aza-dC for 72 hours and NaB for the last 24 hours, we found an additive increase in 15-PGDH protein expression as compared with only NaB treatment for 24 hours ( Fig. 5B ). Taken together, our observations support the hypothesis that the 15-PGDH promoter may be hypermethylated in colorectal cancers; however, further experiments are necessary to identify specific CpG islands which are methylated.  HDAC inhibitors increase expression of 15-PGDH To further understand the mechanisms responsible for regulating 15-PGDH expression in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells, we determined whether histone deacetylases (HDACs) are involved in the transcriptional repression of 15-PGDH. To investigate this process, we examined multiple CRC cell lines, including HT-29 and LS-174T. We determined whether treatment of CRC cells with HDAC inhibitors, valproic acid (VPA) and sodium butyrate (NaB), could alter 15-PGDH expression as compared to mock-treated cells. As shown in figure 1 A , treatment of CRC cells for 24 hours with increasing doses of NaB, which is known to inhibit HDAC activity, induces increased levels of 15-PGDH transcripts approximately 3.7-fold as observed by quantitative real-time PCR (5mM NaB; P=0.049). A similar increase in 15-PGDH protein expression was also observed after NaB treatment of CRC cells ( Fig. 1 C ). In addition, we observed that stimulation of CRC cells with VPA for 24 hours increased both 15-PGDH transcript levels and 15-PGDH protein expression in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 1 B , and Fig 1 D , respectively). Cells treated with 5mM VPA displayed a 3.8-fold increase in 15-PGDH expression (P=0.048).  HDAC inhibitors increase expression of 15-PGDH To further understand the mechanisms responsible for regulating 15-PGDH expression in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells, we determined whether histone deacetylases (HDACs) are involved in the transcriptional repression of 15-PGDH. To investigate this process, we examined multiple CRC cell lines, including HT-29 and LS-174T. We determined whether treatment of CRC cells with HDAC inhibitors, valproic acid (VPA) and sodium butyrate (NaB), could alter 15-PGDH expression as compared to mock-treated cells. As shown in figure 1 A , treatment of CRC cells for 24 hours with increasing doses of NaB, which is known to inhibit HDAC activity, induces increased levels of 15-PGDH transcripts approximately 3.7-fold as observed by quantitative real-time PCR (5mM NaB; P=0.049). A similar increase in 15-PGDH protein expression was also observed after NaB treatment of CRC cells ( Fig. 1 C ). In addition, we observed that stimulation of CRC cells with VPA for 24 hours increased both 15-PGDH transcript levels and 15-PGDH protein expression in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 1 B , and Fig 1 D , respectively). Cells treated with 5mM VPA displayed a 3.8-fold increase in 15-PGDH expression (P=0.048).  Inhibition of HDACs block EGF- and Snail-mediated transcriptional repression of 15-PGDH Previously, we reported that the 5’UTR of 15-PGDH contains three Snail binding sites, referred to as E-box elements (CANNTG), in the proximal promoter, and established that EGF treatment and/or expression of a wild-type Snail expression construct can reduce 15-PGDH expression in CRC cells ( 17 ). Therefore, we sought to determine whether inhibition of HDAC activity could block the ability of EGF or Snail expression to down-regulate 15-PGDH expression in CRC cells. In accordance with our previous report ( 17 ), we observed that EGF treatment of colorectal cancer cell lines results in reduced 15-PGDH promoter activity ( Fig. 2 A and B ). Exposure of CRC cells to NaB in the absence of EGF resulted in approximately a 4.7-fold increase of 15-PGDH promoter activity ( Fig. 2 A , P=0.0024 ). Interestingly, pre-treatment of CRC cells with EGF, prior to addition of the HDAC inhibitor NaB, is insufficient to completely ablate the increase of 15-PGDH promoter activity observed following treatment with NaB alone ( Fig. 2 A ). Similarily, addition of VPA to CRC cells also resulted in a significant 7.1-fold increase in 15-PGDH promoter activity ( Fig. 2 B , P=0.048 ), and we observed that pre-treatment of CRC cells with EGF did not inhibit the ability of VPA to induce 15-PGDH promoter activity ( Fig. 2 B ). We next examined whether Snail expression can reduce 15-PGDH expression and to determine if Snail interactions with HDACs are required to regulate this process. Addition of a wild-type Snail expression construct to CRC cells repressed 15-PGDH luciferase promoter activity ( Fig. 2 C and D ); however, in cells also treated with 5mM NaB or 5mM VPA, we did not observe repression of 15-PGDH promoter activity, even in the presence of Snail overexpression ( Fig. 2 C and D ). Instead, we observed that treatment of cells with HDAC inhibitors and Snail resulted in a significant increase in 15-PGDH promoter activity ( Fig. 2 C and D ). Taken together, we find that Snail may require HDACs to repress 15-PGDH promoter activity and that HDAC inhibitors can inhibit repression of 15-PGDH expression mediated by EGF and Snail in CRC cells.  Inhibition of HDACs block EGF- and Snail-mediated transcriptional repression of 15-PGDH Previously, we reported that the 5’UTR of 15-PGDH contains three Snail binding sites, referred to as E-box elements (CANNTG), in the proximal promoter, and established that EGF treatment and/or expression of a wild-type Snail expression construct can reduce 15-PGDH expression in CRC cells ( 17 ). Therefore, we sought to determine whether inhibition of HDAC activity could block the ability of EGF or Snail expression to down-regulate 15-PGDH expression in CRC cells. In accordance with our previous report ( 17 ), we observed that EGF treatment of colorectal cancer cell lines results in reduced 15-PGDH promoter activity ( Fig. 2 A and B ). Exposure of CRC cells to NaB in the absence of EGF resulted in approximately a 4.7-fold increase of 15-PGDH promoter activity ( Fig. 2 A , P=0.0024 ). Interestingly, pre-treatment of CRC cells with EGF, prior to addition of the HDAC inhibitor NaB, is insufficient to completely ablate the increase of 15-PGDH promoter activity observed following treatment with NaB alone ( Fig. 2 A ). Similarily, addition of VPA to CRC cells also resulted in a significant 7.1-fold increase in 15-PGDH promoter activity ( Fig. 2 B , P=0.048 ), and we observed that pre-treatment of CRC cells with EGF did not inhibit the ability of VPA to induce 15-PGDH promoter activity ( Fig. 2 B ). We next examined whether Snail expression can reduce 15-PGDH expression and to determine if Snail interactions with HDACs are required to regulate this process. Addition of a wild-type Snail expression construct to CRC cells repressed 15-PGDH luciferase promoter activity ( Fig. 2 C and D ); however, in cells also treated with 5mM NaB or 5mM VPA, we did not observe repression of 15-PGDH promoter activity, even in the presence of Snail overexpression ( Fig. 2 C and D ). Instead, we observed that treatment of cells with HDAC inhibitors and Snail resulted in a significant increase in 15-PGDH promoter activity ( Fig. 2 C and D ). Taken together, we find that Snail may require HDACs to repress 15-PGDH promoter activity and that HDAC inhibitors can inhibit repression of 15-PGDH expression mediated by EGF and Snail in CRC cells.  Interaction of Snail and HDAC2 at the 15-PGDH promoter Examination of the 15-PGDH promoter reveals the presence of multiple transcription factor binding sites, including multiple Sp1 and Sp3 sites, which are known to involve binding of HDACs ( 22 ). Published reports suggest that the transcriptional repressor Snail and other related transcriptional repressors can interact with HDACs, including HDAC1 and HDAC2, to repress transcription of target genes ( 23 , 24 ). To confirm these reports we transfected a wild-type Snail expression construct containing a hemagglutinin (HA) tag in HEK 293T cells to detect possible interactions between Snail and HDACs using immunoprecipitation techniques. As shown in Fig. 3 A , we observe that HA-tagged Snail is able to co-precipitate with HDAC2, while a Snail-HDAC2 complex is not observed in untransfected control cells. In addition, we observed interactions of Snail with HDAC1 by co-immunoprecipitation in HA-Snail transfected HEK 293T cells (data not shown). Next, we determined whether HDAC2 binds to the 15-PGDH promoter in CRC cells. Using the ChIP assay, our data show that in mock treated CRC cells HDAC2 binds to the 15-PGDH promoter, while NaB treatment for 24 hours results in reduced HDAC2 binding ( Fig. 3 B ). Quantitative analysis of DNA from these ChIP assays also shows decreased HDAC2 binding in NaB treated samples as compared to mock-treated controls ( Fig. 3 C ). Taken together, our data suggest that HDAC2 can interact with Snail, and that HDAC2 can bind to the 15-PGDH promoter, and the resulting HDAC2-Snail complex is involved in changes in 15-PGDH expression in vitro .  Interaction of Snail and HDAC2 at the 15-PGDH promoter Examination of the 15-PGDH promoter reveals the presence of multiple transcription factor binding sites, including multiple Sp1 and Sp3 sites, which are known to involve binding of HDACs ( 22 ). Published reports suggest that the transcriptional repressor Snail and other related transcriptional repressors can interact with HDACs, including HDAC1 and HDAC2, to repress transcription of target genes ( 23 , 24 ). To confirm these reports we transfected a wild-type Snail expression construct containing a hemagglutinin (HA) tag in HEK 293T cells to detect possible interactions between Snail and HDACs using immunoprecipitation techniques. As shown in Fig. 3 A , we observe that HA-tagged Snail is able to co-precipitate with HDAC2, while a Snail-HDAC2 complex is not observed in untransfected control cells. In addition, we observed interactions of Snail with HDAC1 by co-immunoprecipitation in HA-Snail transfected HEK 293T cells (data not shown). Next, we determined whether HDAC2 binds to the 15-PGDH promoter in CRC cells. Using the ChIP assay, our data show that in mock treated CRC cells HDAC2 binds to the 15-PGDH promoter, while NaB treatment for 24 hours results in reduced HDAC2 binding ( Fig. 3 B ). Quantitative analysis of DNA from these ChIP assays also shows decreased HDAC2 binding in NaB treated samples as compared to mock-treated controls ( Fig. 3 C ). Taken together, our data suggest that HDAC2 can interact with Snail, and that HDAC2 can bind to the 15-PGDH promoter, and the resulting HDAC2-Snail complex is involved in changes in 15-PGDH expression in vitro .  HDAC expression inversely correlates with 15-PGDH expression in vivo To corroborate our in vitro findings, we analyzed expression and localization of HDACs and 15-PGDH in vivo by utilizing mice that harbor a nonsense Apc mutation and spontaneously develop adenomas. Examination of 15-Pgdh expression by in situ hybridization demonstrates that 15-Pgdh expression is observed in the well-differentiated villi in wild-type mice, while 15-Pgdh expression is absent in adenomas taken from Apc Min/+ mice ( Fig. 4 A )( 17 ). Examination of Hdac2 expression in wild-type mice shows moderate levels of expression in the proliferative crypt compartment ( Fig. 4 A ), and increased Hdac2 expression appears to be present in adenomas taken from Apc Min/+ mice ( Fig. 4 A ). Comparison of the localization of gene expression shows that Hdac2 expression inversely correlates with 15-Pgdh expression in this animal model. We next quantified 15-Pgdh and Hdac2 expression in matched normal and polyp tissue taken from 15-week-old Apc Min/+ mice by quantitative real-time PCR ( Fig. 4 B ). This data supports our previous observation wherein we observe reduced 15-Pgdh expression in adenomas from Apc Min/+ mice ( 17 ), whereas Hdac2 expression appears to be reciprocally elevated in these adenomas ( Fig. 4 A and 4 B ). To examine the ability of HDAC inhibitors to disrupt HDAC expression in vivo , we treated Apc Min/+ mice ( n =9) with VPA (400 mg/kg) or vehicle for four weeks. Consistent with our model and one previous report ( 25 ), we observe that VPA treatment inhibits Hdac2 expression and nearly eliminates tumor burden in Apc Min/+ mice ( Supplemental Fig. 1 A and B ). Immunohistochemical analysis of acetyl-Histone H3 confirmed that VPA was absorbed appropriately ( Supplemental Fig. 1 C ). Thus, VPA inhibits HDAC2 expression in vivo and should be studied further for its ability to repress tumorigenesis in the intestine. Based on our findings that Hdac2 expression is inversely correlated with 15-Pgdh expression in adenomas in Apc Min/+ mice, we hypothesize that a similar relationship might exist in matched human normal and tumor samples. We have previously observed that 15-PGDH expression is significantly down-regulated in most colorectal cancers ( 15 , 17 ). Subsequent examination of HDAC2 expression from a subset of matched normal and tumor samples shows that HDAC2 expression increases 3-fold on average in colorectal carcinomas ( Fig. 4 C ). Notably, we observe that independent, pairwise comparison in 11 normal and tumor samples shows that 15-PGDH and HDAC2 are reciprocally expressed within both normal and tumor samples ( Fig. 4 D ). In addition, we observed that other class I HDACs displayed a similar reciprocal expression pattern with 15-PGDH expression in matched normal and tumor samples ( Supplemental Fig. 2 A and B ; Supplemental Table I ).  HDAC expression inversely correlates with 15-PGDH expression in vivo To corroborate our in vitro findings, we analyzed expression and localization of HDACs and 15-PGDH in vivo by utilizing mice that harbor a nonsense Apc mutation and spontaneously develop adenomas. Examination of 15-Pgdh expression by in situ hybridization demonstrates that 15-Pgdh expression is observed in the well-differentiated villi in wild-type mice, while 15-Pgdh expression is absent in adenomas taken from Apc Min/+ mice ( Fig. 4 A )( 17 ). Examination of Hdac2 expression in wild-type mice shows moderate levels of expression in the proliferative crypt compartment ( Fig. 4 A ), and increased Hdac2 expression appears to be present in adenomas taken from Apc Min/+ mice ( Fig. 4 A ). Comparison of the localization of gene expression shows that Hdac2 expression inversely correlates with 15-Pgdh expression in this animal model. We next quantified 15-Pgdh and Hdac2 expression in matched normal and polyp tissue taken from 15-week-old Apc Min/+ mice by quantitative real-time PCR ( Fig. 4 B ). This data supports our previous observation wherein we observe reduced 15-Pgdh expression in adenomas from Apc Min/+ mice ( 17 ), whereas Hdac2 expression appears to be reciprocally elevated in these adenomas ( Fig. 4 A and 4 B ). To examine the ability of HDAC inhibitors to disrupt HDAC expression in vivo , we treated Apc Min/+ mice ( n =9) with VPA (400 mg/kg) or vehicle for four weeks. Consistent with our model and one previous report ( 25 ), we observe that VPA treatment inhibits Hdac2 expression and nearly eliminates tumor burden in Apc Min/+ mice ( Supplemental Fig. 1 A and B ). Immunohistochemical analysis of acetyl-Histone H3 confirmed that VPA was absorbed appropriately ( Supplemental Fig. 1 C ). Thus, VPA inhibits HDAC2 expression in vivo and should be studied further for its ability to repress tumorigenesis in the intestine. Based on our findings that Hdac2 expression is inversely correlated with 15-Pgdh expression in adenomas in Apc Min/+ mice, we hypothesize that a similar relationship might exist in matched human normal and tumor samples. We have previously observed that 15-PGDH expression is significantly down-regulated in most colorectal cancers ( 15 , 17 ). Subsequent examination of HDAC2 expression from a subset of matched normal and tumor samples shows that HDAC2 expression increases 3-fold on average in colorectal carcinomas ( Fig. 4 C ). Notably, we observe that independent, pairwise comparison in 11 normal and tumor samples shows that 15-PGDH and HDAC2 are reciprocally expressed within both normal and tumor samples ( Fig. 4 D ). In addition, we observed that other class I HDACs displayed a similar reciprocal expression pattern with 15-PGDH expression in matched normal and tumor samples ( Supplemental Fig. 2 A and B ; Supplemental Table I ).  Epigenetic regulation of 15-PGDH expression by HDAC inhibitors and demethylating agents Epigenetic repression of tumor suppressor genes by increased methylation often disrupts differentiation of epithelial and hematopoietic cells and can promote cancer progression. Recently, it has been suggested that the 15-PGDH promoter is methylated in about 30% of primary breast tumors and one breast cancer cell line ( 16 ). To begin to address whether methylation of the 15-PGDH promoter also occurs in colorectal cancers, we carried out preliminary experiments to determine whether treatment of CRC cells with 5-Aza-2?-deoxycytidine (Aza-dC), a known demethylating agent, could restore 15-PGDH expression in CRC cells. Our preliminary findings indicate that after 72 hours of Aza-dC treatment in CRC cells, we observed an increase in 15-PGDH protein expression as compared to vehicle treated cells ( Fig. 5A ), whereas Aza-dC treatment decreased expression of a DNA methyltransferase 1, DNMT1 ( Fig. 5A ). Interestingly, when CRC cells are treated with both Aza-dC for 72 hours and NaB for the last 24 hours, we found an additive increase in 15-PGDH protein expression as compared with only NaB treatment for 24 hours ( Fig. 5B ). Taken together, our observations support the hypothesis that the 15-PGDH promoter may be hypermethylated in colorectal cancers; however, further experiments are necessary to identify specific CpG islands which are methylated.  Epigenetic regulation of 15-PGDH expression by HDAC inhibitors and demethylating agents Epigenetic repression of tumor suppressor genes by increased methylation often disrupts differentiation of epithelial and hematopoietic cells and can promote cancer progression. Recently, it has been suggested that the 15-PGDH promoter is methylated in about 30% of primary breast tumors and one breast cancer cell line ( 16 ). To begin to address whether methylation of the 15-PGDH promoter also occurs in colorectal cancers, we carried out preliminary experiments to determine whether treatment of CRC cells with 5-Aza-2?-deoxycytidine (Aza-dC), a known demethylating agent, could restore 15-PGDH expression in CRC cells. Our preliminary findings indicate that after 72 hours of Aza-dC treatment in CRC cells, we observed an increase in 15-PGDH protein expression as compared to vehicle treated cells ( Fig. 5A ), whereas Aza-dC treatment decreased expression of a DNA methyltransferase 1, DNMT1 ( Fig. 5A ). Interestingly, when CRC cells are treated with both Aza-dC for 72 hours and NaB for the last 24 hours, we found an additive increase in 15-PGDH protein expression as compared with only NaB treatment for 24 hours ( Fig. 5B ). Taken together, our observations support the hypothesis that the 15-PGDH promoter may be hypermethylated in colorectal cancers; however, further experiments are necessary to identify specific CpG islands which are methylated.  Discussion Our observations suggest that down-regulation of 15-PGDH expression can occur by several epigenetic mechanisms in colorectal cancers. Here we identify a role for histone deacetylases in the repression of the PGE2 catabolic enzyme, 15-PGDH, in both CRC cells and primary colorectal cancer samples. A previous report by Tai et al. suggests that treatment of a lung cancer cell line, A549, with the HDAC inhibitors, scriptaid and sodium butyrate, can restore both 15-PGDH expression and activity ( 26 ). Here, we suggest that the mechanism of transcriptional silencing through histone deacetylation also occurs in colorectal cancer cells and may involve histone deacetylases, specifically HDAC2, along with additional factors, like the transcriptional repressor Snail to repress 15-PGDH expression. Several reports suggest that transcriptional factors, including Slug and Snail, can interact with histone deaceytlases to form repressor complexes for gene transcription ( 23 , 24 ). For example, it has been shown that Snail can form a repressor complex to inhibit E-cadherin (encoded by CDH1 ) expression through recruitment of the co-repressor SIN3A, HDAC1 and HDAC2 and that Snail requires a HDAC2 interaction to repress E-cadherin ( 23 ). Treatment of cells with an HDAC inhibitor is sufficient to block the repressor effect observed with Snail ( 23 ). In addition, Chaudhuri et al. have shown that the tumor suppressor gene BRCA2 contains several E-box elements, and that the Snail family member, Slug, is involved in silencing BRCA2 transcription ( 24 , 27 ). Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays suggest that Slug mediates its action by recruiting HDAC1 to the silencer E-box ( 24 , 27 ). Taken together, these findings are consistent with the idea that the Snail family of transcriptional repressors may act in concert with HDACs in regulating expression of tumor suppressor genes and promoting carcinogenesis. Previous studies examining class I HDAC expression in colorectal cancers have shown that HDAC1, 2, and 3 expression is elevated in tumor samples ( 25 , 28 , 29 ). For example, immunohistochemical analysis of 57 human colon cancers showed elevated HDAC2 expression in 82% of tumor samples ( 25 ). Furthermore, HDAC2 levels were also elevated in intestinal polyps from Apc Min/+ mice as compared to normal tissue ( 25 ). Our in vivo results examining HDAC2 expression in both human colorectal cancers and intestinal polyps are in agreement with these previous observations. We show here that 15-PGDH is reciprocally expressed as compared to HDAC2 in these samples. Interestingly, we have previously reported a similar reciprocal relationship between 15-PGDH and Snail expression ( 17 ). Taken together with our in vitro results showing that both Snail ( 17 ) and HDAC2 can be localized to the 15-PGDH promoter, our data suggests a potential mechanism for 15-PGDH repression during colon carcinogenesis in which Snail and HDAC2 bind to the 15-PGDH promoter to inhibit gene expression. HDACs are emerging as an exciting new class of anticancer agents for the treatment of solid malignancies. They represent a structurally diverse group of compounds that inhibit proliferation, induce differentiation and/or apoptosis in a variety of tumor models. HDAC inhibition results in the accumulation of acetylated nuclear histones in both tumor and normal tissues. The effects of HDAC inhibitors on gene expression appear to be highly selective, by affecting changes in expression of certain genes involved in regulation of cell cycle (p21Cip1/Waf1, cyclins) and apoptosis (CD95, Bcl-2 and Bax) ( 30 , 31 ). HDAC inhibition not only results in acetylation of histones, but also transcription factors ( 30 ). Several HDAC inhibitors have shown impressive anti-neoplastic activity in vivo with remarkably little toxicity in preclinical studies ( 30 ). Importantly, some of these inhibitors are currently in phase I clinical trials. The effect of HDACs on 15-PDGH expression may help to explain yet another mechanism for their anti-tumor properties. Several lines of evidence suggest that 15-PGDH expression is also down-regulated by epigenetic mechanisms other than histone deacetylation as published in recent studies examining prostate and breast cancers ( 16 , 32 ). Evaluation of primary tumor samples from prostate and breast cancers showed that the promoter of 15-PGDH displays a high level of hypermethylation in prostate cancer samples (73%; 30 of 41)( 32 ), whereas a more modest level of methylation was shown for breast cancer samples (30%; 3 of 10) ( 16 ). Moreover, examination of breast and prostate cancer cell lines revealed that a proportion of these cells lines display hypermethylation of the 15-PGDH promoter ( 16 , 32 ). In addition, treatment of those cancer cells with the demethylating agent Aza-dC results in restoration of 15-PGDH expression. Our preliminary analysis of CRC cell lines treated with Aza-dC show that drug treatment can partially restore 15-PGDH expression in these cells. Furthermore, our results suggest a combined role for both histone deacetylation and methylation of the 15-PGDH promoter in regulating its expression in colorectal cancer. Further experiments are necessary to specifically determine the region where 15-PGDH methylation occurs as well as analysis of a large cohort of matched normal and tumor tissues to determine how frequently methylation of 15-PGDH promoter occurs in colorectal cancers. In summary, our data suggests that histone deacetylases, including HDAC2, and the transcriptional repressor Snail, may play a significant role of suppressing 15-PGDH expression and provide an alternative COX2-independent mechanism responsible for increased PGE2 levels in the tumor microenvironment and thus promote progression of colorectal cancer.  Discussion Our observations suggest that down-regulation of 15-PGDH expression can occur by several epigenetic mechanisms in colorectal cancers. Here we identify a role for histone deacetylases in the repression of the PGE2 catabolic enzyme, 15-PGDH, in both CRC cells and primary colorectal cancer samples. A previous report by Tai et al. suggests that treatment of a lung cancer cell line, A549, with the HDAC inhibitors, scriptaid and sodium butyrate, can restore both 15-PGDH expression and activity ( 26 ). Here, we suggest that the mechanism of transcriptional silencing through histone deacetylation also occurs in colorectal cancer cells and may involve histone deacetylases, specifically HDAC2, along with additional factors, like the transcriptional repressor Snail to repress 15-PGDH expression. Several reports suggest that transcriptional factors, including Slug and Snail, can interact with histone deaceytlases to form repressor complexes for gene transcription ( 23 , 24 ). For example, it has been shown that Snail can form a repressor complex to inhibit E-cadherin (encoded by CDH1 ) expression through recruitment of the co-repressor SIN3A, HDAC1 and HDAC2 and that Snail requires a HDAC2 interaction to repress E-cadherin ( 23 ). Treatment of cells with an HDAC inhibitor is sufficient to block the repressor effect observed with Snail ( 23 ). In addition, Chaudhuri et al. have shown that the tumor suppressor gene BRCA2 contains several E-box elements, and that the Snail family member, Slug, is involved in silencing BRCA2 transcription ( 24 , 27 ). Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays suggest that Slug mediates its action by recruiting HDAC1 to the silencer E-box ( 24 , 27 ). Taken together, these findings are consistent with the idea that the Snail family of transcriptional repressors may act in concert with HDACs in regulating expression of tumor suppressor genes and promoting carcinogenesis. Previous studies examining class I HDAC expression in colorectal cancers have shown that HDAC1, 2, and 3 expression is elevated in tumor samples ( 25 , 28 , 29 ). For example, immunohistochemical analysis of 57 human colon cancers showed elevated HDAC2 expression in 82% of tumor samples ( 25 ). Furthermore, HDAC2 levels were also elevated in intestinal polyps from Apc Min/+ mice as compared to normal tissue ( 25 ). Our in vivo results examining HDAC2 expression in both human colorectal cancers and intestinal polyps are in agreement with these previous observations. We show here that 15-PGDH is reciprocally expressed as compared to HDAC2 in these samples. Interestingly, we have previously reported a similar reciprocal relationship between 15-PGDH and Snail expression ( 17 ). Taken together with our in vitro results showing that both Snail ( 17 ) and HDAC2 can be localized to the 15-PGDH promoter, our data suggests a potential mechanism for 15-PGDH repression during colon carcinogenesis in which Snail and HDAC2 bind to the 15-PGDH promoter to inhibit gene expression. HDACs are emerging as an exciting new class of anticancer agents for the treatment of solid malignancies. They represent a structurally diverse group of compounds that inhibit proliferation, induce differentiation and/or apoptosis in a variety of tumor models. HDAC inhibition results in the accumulation of acetylated nuclear histones in both tumor and normal tissues. The effects of HDAC inhibitors on gene expression appear to be highly selective, by affecting changes in expression of certain genes involved in regulation of cell cycle (p21Cip1/Waf1, cyclins) and apoptosis (CD95, Bcl-2 and Bax) ( 30 , 31 ). HDAC inhibition not only results in acetylation of histones, but also transcription factors ( 30 ). Several HDAC inhibitors have shown impressive anti-neoplastic activity in vivo with remarkably little toxicity in preclinical studies ( 30 ). Importantly, some of these inhibitors are currently in phase I clinical trials. The effect of HDACs on 15-PDGH expression may help to explain yet another mechanism for their anti-tumor properties. Several lines of evidence suggest that 15-PGDH expression is also down-regulated by epigenetic mechanisms other than histone deacetylation as published in recent studies examining prostate and breast cancers ( 16 , 32 ). Evaluation of primary tumor samples from prostate and breast cancers showed that the promoter of 15-PGDH displays a high level of hypermethylation in prostate cancer samples (73%; 30 of 41)( 32 ), whereas a more modest level of methylation was shown for breast cancer samples (30%; 3 of 10) ( 16 ). Moreover, examination of breast and prostate cancer cell lines revealed that a proportion of these cells lines display hypermethylation of the 15-PGDH promoter ( 16 , 32 ). In addition, treatment of those cancer cells with the demethylating agent Aza-dC results in restoration of 15-PGDH expression. Our preliminary analysis of CRC cell lines treated with Aza-dC show that drug treatment can partially restore 15-PGDH expression in these cells. Furthermore, our results suggest a combined role for both histone deacetylation and methylation of the 15-PGDH promoter in regulating its expression in colorectal cancer. Further experiments are necessary to specifically determine the region where 15-PGDH methylation occurs as well as analysis of a large cohort of matched normal and tumor tissues to determine how frequently methylation of 15-PGDH promoter occurs in colorectal cancers. In summary, our data suggests that histone deacetylases, including HDAC2, and the transcriptional repressor Snail, may play a significant role of suppressing 15-PGDH expression and provide an alternative COX2-independent mechanism responsible for increased PGE2 levels in the tumor microenvironment and thus promote progression of colorectal cancer.  Supplementary Material Text_figures  Supplementary Material Text_figures  Figures Figure 1 HDAC inhibitors increase 15-PGDH expression in CRC cells A and B , 15-PGDH transcripts were quantitated by real-time PCR in HT-29 cells (data for LS-174 cells not shown) treated with increasing concentrations of either sodium butyrate (NaB) or valproic acid (VPA) for 24 hours. The relative number of 15-PGDH transcripts for each treatment was normalized to GAPDH . The fold induction of the relative levels of 15-PGDH transcripts when compared with control or NaB or VPA treatments ( on top of each column ). C and D , HT-29 cell lysates (50 mg) treated as shown above each lane, were separated by 4–20% SDS-PAGE; immunoblot probed with antibodies to the proteins ( right ). ?-Actin was used as a loading control. Data shown are averages of three independent experiments with similar findings. Columns , mean; bars , SE. CRC , colorectal carcinoma; NaB , sodium butyrate; VPA , valproic acid. Figure 2 Inhibition of HDACs block EGF- and Snail-mediated transcriptional repression of 15-PGDH A and B , 15-PGDH promoter activity in HT-29 CRC cells following 24 hours of EGFR signaling with EGF (100 ng/mL) and either sodium butyrate (5 mM) or valproic acid (5 mM). C and D , 15-PGDH promoter activity in HT-29 CRC cells following stimulation with either sodium butyrate (5 mM) or valproic acid (5 mM) for 24 hours in the presence of increasing amounts of a Snail expression construct. The fold induction of the relative levels of 15-PGDH transcripts when compared with control or NaB or VPA treatments ( on top of each column ). Data shown are averages of three independent experiments with similar findings. Columns , mean; bars , SE. CRC , colorectal carcinoma; NaB , sodium butyrate; VPA , valproic acid. Figure 3 Snail and HDAC2 repress 15-PGDH expression A , Immunoblot showing HA-Snail levels in HEK 293T cell lines after immunoprecipitation with antibodies to either hemagglutinin or HDAC2 in the absence or presence of a transfected HA-Snail expression construct. B , Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay in HT-29 cells treated with 5 mM of sodium butyrate for 24 hours. Samples were immunoprecipitated using an antibody recognizing HDAC2 or a non-specific antibody, normal rabbit immunoglobulin. The products were analyzed with primers for a region within the 15-PGDH promoter and after PCR of 30 cycles, products were run on a 2% agarose gel with ethidium bromide. The non-specific antibody control showed no PCR product. C , Quantitation of ChIP samples was also examined using real-time PCR with primers to the 15-PGDH gene. The graph shows the ratio of mean PCR signal from chromatin IP with HDAC2 antibody to that with the normal rabbit immunoglobulin. Results are expressed as ratios of the real-time PCR signals obtained for IP with specific antibodies to HDAC2 to those obtained for mock IP with IgG. Data shown are representative results of three independent experiments with similar findings. IP , immunoprecipitation. HA , hemagglutinin. Figure 4 <italic>HDAC2</italic> expression inversely correlates with <italic>15-PGDH</italic> expression <italic>in vivo</italic> A , in situ hybridization for 15-Pgdh expression in wild-type and Apc Min/+ mouse intestine. Arrows and *, adenoma. Bar, 100 µM. B , summary of quantitative real-time PCR analysis for Hdac2 and 15-Pgdh expression in 6 pairs of polyps from Apc Min/+ mice and matched normal intestinal tissue. C , summary of quantitative real-time PCR analysis for HDAC2 and 15-PGDH expression in 11 pairs of human colorectal carcinomas and matched normal tissue. D , independent comparison of 15-PGDH and HDAC2 expression for 11 normal and 11 colorectal cancer samples. The Spearman coefficient was calculated to determine statistical correlation ( r s=0.6636, P = 0.0130). Figure 5 Epigenetic regulation of 15-PGDH HT-29 cells (data for LS-174T not shown) were treated A , with either DMSO (vehicle) or Aza-dC for 72 hours, B , with either DMSO (vehicle) or NaB (24 hours) or a combination of Aza-dC for 72 hours and NaB for the last 24 hours at the concentration shown. Forty micrograms of each lysate were run per lane. Antibodies used ( right ). Data shown are representative results of three independent experiments with similar finding.  Figures Figure 1 HDAC inhibitors increase 15-PGDH expression in CRC cells A and B , 15-PGDH transcripts were quantitated by real-time PCR in HT-29 cells (data for LS-174 cells not shown) treated with increasing concentrations of either sodium butyrate (NaB) or valproic acid (VPA) for 24 hours. The relative number of 15-PGDH transcripts for each treatment was normalized to GAPDH . The fold induction of the relative levels of 15-PGDH transcripts when compared with control or NaB or VPA treatments ( on top of each column ). C and D , HT-29 cell lysates (50 mg) treated as shown above each lane, were separated by 4–20% SDS-PAGE; immunoblot probed with antibodies to the proteins ( right ). ?-Actin was used as a loading control. Data shown are averages of three independent experiments with similar findings. Columns , mean; bars , SE. CRC , colorectal carcinoma; NaB , sodium butyrate; VPA , valproic acid. Figure 2 Inhibition of HDACs block EGF- and Snail-mediated transcriptional repression of 15-PGDH A and B , 15-PGDH promoter activity in HT-29 CRC cells following 24 hours of EGFR signaling with EGF (100 ng/mL) and either sodium butyrate (5 mM) or valproic acid (5 mM). C and D , 15-PGDH promoter activity in HT-29 CRC cells following stimulation with either sodium butyrate (5 mM) or valproic acid (5 mM) for 24 hours in the presence of increasing amounts of a Snail expression construct. The fold induction of the relative levels of 15-PGDH transcripts when compared with control or NaB or VPA treatments ( on top of each column ). Data shown are averages of three independent experiments with similar findings. Columns , mean; bars , SE. CRC , colorectal carcinoma; NaB , sodium butyrate; VPA , valproic acid. Figure 3 Snail and HDAC2 repress 15-PGDH expression A , Immunoblot showing HA-Snail levels in HEK 293T cell lines after immunoprecipitation with antibodies to either hemagglutinin or HDAC2 in the absence or presence of a transfected HA-Snail expression construct. B , Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay in HT-29 cells treated with 5 mM of sodium butyrate for 24 hours. Samples were immunoprecipitated using an antibody recognizing HDAC2 or a non-specific antibody, normal rabbit immunoglobulin. The products were analyzed with primers for a region within the 15-PGDH promoter and after PCR of 30 cycles, products were run on a 2% agarose gel with ethidium bromide. The non-specific antibody control showed no PCR product. C , Quantitation of ChIP samples was also examined using real-time PCR with primers to the 15-PGDH gene. The graph shows the ratio of mean PCR signal from chromatin IP with HDAC2 antibody to that with the normal rabbit immunoglobulin. Results are expressed as ratios of the real-time PCR signals obtained for IP with specific antibodies to HDAC2 to those obtained for mock IP with IgG. Data shown are representative results of three independent experiments with similar findings. IP , immunoprecipitation. HA , hemagglutinin. Figure 4 <italic>HDAC2</italic> expression inversely correlates with <italic>15-PGDH</italic> expression <italic>in vivo</italic> A , in situ hybridization for 15-Pgdh expression in wild-type and Apc Min/+ mouse intestine. Arrows and *, adenoma. Bar, 100 µM. B , summary of quantitative real-time PCR analysis for Hdac2 and 15-Pgdh expression in 6 pairs of polyps from Apc Min/+ mice and matched normal intestinal tissue. C , summary of quantitative real-time PCR analysis for HDAC2 and 15-PGDH expression in 11 pairs of human colorectal carcinomas and matched normal tissue. D , independent comparison of 15-PGDH and HDAC2 expression for 11 normal and 11 colorectal cancer samples. The Spearman coefficient was calculated to determine statistical correlation ( r s=0.6636, P = 0.0130). Figure 5 Epigenetic regulation of 15-PGDH HT-29 cells (data for LS-174T not shown) were treated A , with either DMSO (vehicle) or Aza-dC for 72 hours, B , with either DMSO (vehicle) or NaB (24 hours) or a combination of Aza-dC for 72 hours and NaB for the last 24 hours at the concentration shown. Forty micrograms of each lysate were run per lane. Antibodies used ( right ). Data shown are representative results of three independent experiments with similar finding. 