Glioblastoma microvesicles transport RNA and protein that promote tumor growth and provide diagnostic biomarkers  Materials and methods Collection of tumor samples and serum from glioblastoma patients For cell culture, brain tumor specimens from patients diagnosed by a neuropathologist as glioblastoma multiforme were taken directly from surgery and placed in cold sterile Neurobasal media (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The specimens were dissociated into single cells within 1 hr from the time of surgery using a Neural Tissue Dissociation Kit (Miltenyi Biotech, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) and plated in DMEM 5% microvesicle-depleted dFBS (prepared by ultracentrifugation at 110,000 × g for 16 hrs to remove bovine microvesicles) supplemented with penicillin-streptomycin (10 IU ml?1 and 10 ?g ml?1, respectively, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA). Matched de-identified frozen tumor and serum samples from confirmed glioblastoma patients were obtained from the Department of Neurosurgery (Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, USA and the Cancer Research Center; VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). These samples were kept at ?80°C until use. Scanning EM Human glioblastoma cells were placed on ornithine-coated coverslips, fixed in 0.5 × Karnovskys fixative and then washed 2×5 min with PBS. The cells were dehydrated in 35% EtOH 10 min, 50% EtOH 2×10 min, 70% EtOH 2×10 min, 95% EtOH 2×10 min, 100% EtOH 4×10 min and then transferred to a Tousimis SAMDRI-795 semi-automatic Critical Point Dryer followed by coating with chromium in a GATAN Model 681 High Resolution Ion Beam Coater. Microvesicle isolation Glioblastoma cells at passage 1–15 were cultured in microvesicle-free media (DMEM containing 5% dFBS). The conditioned medium from 40 million cells was harvested after 48 hrs. The microvesicles were purified by differential centrifugation 15 . In brief, glioblastomaconditioned medium was centrifuged for 10 min at 300 × g to eliminate cell contamination. Supernatants were further centrifuged for 20 min at 16,500 × g and filtered through a 0.22 ?m filter. Microvesicles were pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 110,000 × g for 70 min. The microvesicle pellets were washed in 13 ml PBS, pelleted again and resuspended in PBS. Exosomes were measured for their protein content using DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Serum exosomes from healthy controls and glioblastoma patients were diluted up to 13 ml in PBS and sterile filtered before centrifugation. RNA isolation To evaluate whether RNA was present inside the microvesicles, RNase A (Fermentas, Glen Burnie, MD, USA) was added to suspensions of microvesicles at a final concentration of 100 ?g/ml and incubated for 15 min at 37°C. Total RNA was then purified using the MirVana RNA isolation kit (Ambion, Austin TX, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The RNA was quantified using a nanodrop ND-1000 (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Wilmington, DE, USA). Snap frozen tumor biopsies were thawed on RNAlater ICE (Ambion, Austin TX, USA) according to manufacturer’s recommendation followed by RNA extraction using the MirVana RNA isolation kit. Microarray analysis The microarray experiments were performed by Miltenyi Biotech (Auburn, CA, USA) using the Agilent Whole Human Genome Microarray, 4×44K, two color array. The array was performed on two different RNA preparations from primary glioblastoma cells and their microvesicles. The data was analysed using the GeneSifter software (Vizxlabs, Seattle, WA, USA). The Intersector software (Vizxlabs) was used to extract the genes readily detected on both arrays. Quantitative miRNA RT-PCR Total RNA was isolated using the mirVana RNA isolation kit. Total RNA (30 ng) was converted into cDNA using specific miR-primers (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) and further amplified according to the manufacturer’s protocol. HBMVEC in vitro angiogenesis assay HBMVECs (30,000) (Cell Systems, Catalogue #ACBRI-376, Kirkland, WA, USA) were cultured on Matrigel-coated wells in a 24-well plate in basal medium (Lonza Biologics Inc., Portsmouth, NH, USA) only, or supplemented with glioblastoma microvesicles (7 ?g/well) or a cocktail of angiogenic factors (EGM; hydrocortisone, EGF, FGF, VEGF, IGF, ascorbic acid, FBS, and heparin; Singlequots from Lonza). Tubule formation was measured after 16 hrs and analyzed with the ImageJ software (NIH). Gluc mRNA translation assay Primary human glioblastoma cells were infected with a selfinactivating lentivirus vector expressing secreted Gluc under a cytomegalovirus promoter 37 to achieve an infection efficiency of >95%. The cells were stably transduced and microvesicles generated during the subsequent passages (2–10) were isolated and purified as above. Microvesicles (50 ?g) were added to 50,000 HBMVEC and incubated for 24 hrs. The Gluc activity in the supernatant was measured directly after microvesicle addition (0 hrs), and 15 hrs and 24 hrs later and normalised to the Gluc activity in the microvesicles. The results are presented as the mean ± SEM (n = 4). PKH67 labelled microvesicle Purified glioblastoma microvesicles were labelled with PKH67 Green Fluorescent labelling kit (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) as described 21 . The labelled microvesicles were incubated with HBMVEC in culture (5 ?g/50,000 cells). Microvesicles were allowed to bind for 20 min at 4°C and cells were then washed and incubated at 37°C for 1 hr. RT PCR and nested PCR RNA was extracted using the MirVana RNA isolation kit. RNA was converted to cDNA using the Omniscript RT kit (if starting material was >50 ng) or Sensiscript RT kit (if starting material was <50 ng) (Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA, USA) using a mix of oligo dT and random hexamer primer according to manufacturer’s recommendation. The following PCR primers were used: GAPDH primers; Forw 5?-GAA GGT GAA GGT CGG AGT C-3?, Reverse 5?-GAA GAT GGT GAT GGG ATT TC-3?. EGFR/EGFRvIII PCR1; Forw 5?-CCAGTATTGATCGGGAGAGC-3?, Reverse 5?-TCAGAATATCCAGTTCCTGTGG-3?, EGFR/EGFRvIII PCR2; Forw 5?-ATG CGA CCC TCC GGG ACG-3?, Reverse 5?-GAG TAT GTG TGA AGG AGT-3?. The Gluc primers have been described previously 24. PCR protocol: 94°C 3 min; 94°C 45 s, 60°C 45 s, 72°C 2 min × 35 cycles; 72°C 7 min. Angiogenesis antibody array One mg total protein from either primary glioblastoma cells or purified microvesicles isolated from the same cells were lysed in Promega lysis buffer (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and then added to the human angiogenesis antibody array (Panomics, Fremont, CA, USA) according to manufacturer’s recommendations. The arrays were scanned and analysed with the ImageJ software (NIH). Statistics The statistical analyses were performed using Students t-test.  Materials and methods Collection of tumor samples and serum from glioblastoma patients For cell culture, brain tumor specimens from patients diagnosed by a neuropathologist as glioblastoma multiforme were taken directly from surgery and placed in cold sterile Neurobasal media (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The specimens were dissociated into single cells within 1 hr from the time of surgery using a Neural Tissue Dissociation Kit (Miltenyi Biotech, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) and plated in DMEM 5% microvesicle-depleted dFBS (prepared by ultracentrifugation at 110,000 × g for 16 hrs to remove bovine microvesicles) supplemented with penicillin-streptomycin (10 IU ml?1 and 10 ?g ml?1, respectively, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA). Matched de-identified frozen tumor and serum samples from confirmed glioblastoma patients were obtained from the Department of Neurosurgery (Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, USA and the Cancer Research Center; VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). These samples were kept at ?80°C until use. Scanning EM Human glioblastoma cells were placed on ornithine-coated coverslips, fixed in 0.5 × Karnovskys fixative and then washed 2×5 min with PBS. The cells were dehydrated in 35% EtOH 10 min, 50% EtOH 2×10 min, 70% EtOH 2×10 min, 95% EtOH 2×10 min, 100% EtOH 4×10 min and then transferred to a Tousimis SAMDRI-795 semi-automatic Critical Point Dryer followed by coating with chromium in a GATAN Model 681 High Resolution Ion Beam Coater. Microvesicle isolation Glioblastoma cells at passage 1–15 were cultured in microvesicle-free media (DMEM containing 5% dFBS). The conditioned medium from 40 million cells was harvested after 48 hrs. The microvesicles were purified by differential centrifugation 15 . In brief, glioblastomaconditioned medium was centrifuged for 10 min at 300 × g to eliminate cell contamination. Supernatants were further centrifuged for 20 min at 16,500 × g and filtered through a 0.22 ?m filter. Microvesicles were pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 110,000 × g for 70 min. The microvesicle pellets were washed in 13 ml PBS, pelleted again and resuspended in PBS. Exosomes were measured for their protein content using DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Serum exosomes from healthy controls and glioblastoma patients were diluted up to 13 ml in PBS and sterile filtered before centrifugation. RNA isolation To evaluate whether RNA was present inside the microvesicles, RNase A (Fermentas, Glen Burnie, MD, USA) was added to suspensions of microvesicles at a final concentration of 100 ?g/ml and incubated for 15 min at 37°C. Total RNA was then purified using the MirVana RNA isolation kit (Ambion, Austin TX, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The RNA was quantified using a nanodrop ND-1000 (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Wilmington, DE, USA). Snap frozen tumor biopsies were thawed on RNAlater ICE (Ambion, Austin TX, USA) according to manufacturer’s recommendation followed by RNA extraction using the MirVana RNA isolation kit. Microarray analysis The microarray experiments were performed by Miltenyi Biotech (Auburn, CA, USA) using the Agilent Whole Human Genome Microarray, 4×44K, two color array. The array was performed on two different RNA preparations from primary glioblastoma cells and their microvesicles. The data was analysed using the GeneSifter software (Vizxlabs, Seattle, WA, USA). The Intersector software (Vizxlabs) was used to extract the genes readily detected on both arrays. Quantitative miRNA RT-PCR Total RNA was isolated using the mirVana RNA isolation kit. Total RNA (30 ng) was converted into cDNA using specific miR-primers (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) and further amplified according to the manufacturer’s protocol. HBMVEC in vitro angiogenesis assay HBMVECs (30,000) (Cell Systems, Catalogue #ACBRI-376, Kirkland, WA, USA) were cultured on Matrigel-coated wells in a 24-well plate in basal medium (Lonza Biologics Inc., Portsmouth, NH, USA) only, or supplemented with glioblastoma microvesicles (7 ?g/well) or a cocktail of angiogenic factors (EGM; hydrocortisone, EGF, FGF, VEGF, IGF, ascorbic acid, FBS, and heparin; Singlequots from Lonza). Tubule formation was measured after 16 hrs and analyzed with the ImageJ software (NIH). Gluc mRNA translation assay Primary human glioblastoma cells were infected with a selfinactivating lentivirus vector expressing secreted Gluc under a cytomegalovirus promoter 37 to achieve an infection efficiency of >95%. The cells were stably transduced and microvesicles generated during the subsequent passages (2–10) were isolated and purified as above. Microvesicles (50 ?g) were added to 50,000 HBMVEC and incubated for 24 hrs. The Gluc activity in the supernatant was measured directly after microvesicle addition (0 hrs), and 15 hrs and 24 hrs later and normalised to the Gluc activity in the microvesicles. The results are presented as the mean ± SEM (n = 4). PKH67 labelled microvesicle Purified glioblastoma microvesicles were labelled with PKH67 Green Fluorescent labelling kit (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) as described 21 . The labelled microvesicles were incubated with HBMVEC in culture (5 ?g/50,000 cells). Microvesicles were allowed to bind for 20 min at 4°C and cells were then washed and incubated at 37°C for 1 hr. RT PCR and nested PCR RNA was extracted using the MirVana RNA isolation kit. RNA was converted to cDNA using the Omniscript RT kit (if starting material was >50 ng) or Sensiscript RT kit (if starting material was <50 ng) (Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA, USA) using a mix of oligo dT and random hexamer primer according to manufacturer’s recommendation. The following PCR primers were used: GAPDH primers; Forw 5?-GAA GGT GAA GGT CGG AGT C-3?, Reverse 5?-GAA GAT GGT GAT GGG ATT TC-3?. EGFR/EGFRvIII PCR1; Forw 5?-CCAGTATTGATCGGGAGAGC-3?, Reverse 5?-TCAGAATATCCAGTTCCTGTGG-3?, EGFR/EGFRvIII PCR2; Forw 5?-ATG CGA CCC TCC GGG ACG-3?, Reverse 5?-GAG TAT GTG TGA AGG AGT-3?. The Gluc primers have been described previously 24. PCR protocol: 94°C 3 min; 94°C 45 s, 60°C 45 s, 72°C 2 min × 35 cycles; 72°C 7 min. Angiogenesis antibody array One mg total protein from either primary glioblastoma cells or purified microvesicles isolated from the same cells were lysed in Promega lysis buffer (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and then added to the human angiogenesis antibody array (Panomics, Fremont, CA, USA) according to manufacturer’s recommendations. The arrays were scanned and analysed with the ImageJ software (NIH). Statistics The statistical analyses were performed using Students t-test.  Collection of tumor samples and serum from glioblastoma patients For cell culture, brain tumor specimens from patients diagnosed by a neuropathologist as glioblastoma multiforme were taken directly from surgery and placed in cold sterile Neurobasal media (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The specimens were dissociated into single cells within 1 hr from the time of surgery using a Neural Tissue Dissociation Kit (Miltenyi Biotech, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) and plated in DMEM 5% microvesicle-depleted dFBS (prepared by ultracentrifugation at 110,000 × g for 16 hrs to remove bovine microvesicles) supplemented with penicillin-streptomycin (10 IU ml?1 and 10 ?g ml?1, respectively, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA). Matched de-identified frozen tumor and serum samples from confirmed glioblastoma patients were obtained from the Department of Neurosurgery (Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, USA and the Cancer Research Center; VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). These samples were kept at ?80°C until use.  Collection of tumor samples and serum from glioblastoma patients For cell culture, brain tumor specimens from patients diagnosed by a neuropathologist as glioblastoma multiforme were taken directly from surgery and placed in cold sterile Neurobasal media (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The specimens were dissociated into single cells within 1 hr from the time of surgery using a Neural Tissue Dissociation Kit (Miltenyi Biotech, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) and plated in DMEM 5% microvesicle-depleted dFBS (prepared by ultracentrifugation at 110,000 × g for 16 hrs to remove bovine microvesicles) supplemented with penicillin-streptomycin (10 IU ml?1 and 10 ?g ml?1, respectively, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA). Matched de-identified frozen tumor and serum samples from confirmed glioblastoma patients were obtained from the Department of Neurosurgery (Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, USA and the Cancer Research Center; VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). These samples were kept at ?80°C until use.  Scanning EM Human glioblastoma cells were placed on ornithine-coated coverslips, fixed in 0.5 × Karnovskys fixative and then washed 2×5 min with PBS. The cells were dehydrated in 35% EtOH 10 min, 50% EtOH 2×10 min, 70% EtOH 2×10 min, 95% EtOH 2×10 min, 100% EtOH 4×10 min and then transferred to a Tousimis SAMDRI-795 semi-automatic Critical Point Dryer followed by coating with chromium in a GATAN Model 681 High Resolution Ion Beam Coater.  Scanning EM Human glioblastoma cells were placed on ornithine-coated coverslips, fixed in 0.5 × Karnovskys fixative and then washed 2×5 min with PBS. The cells were dehydrated in 35% EtOH 10 min, 50% EtOH 2×10 min, 70% EtOH 2×10 min, 95% EtOH 2×10 min, 100% EtOH 4×10 min and then transferred to a Tousimis SAMDRI-795 semi-automatic Critical Point Dryer followed by coating with chromium in a GATAN Model 681 High Resolution Ion Beam Coater.  Microvesicle isolation Glioblastoma cells at passage 1–15 were cultured in microvesicle-free media (DMEM containing 5% dFBS). The conditioned medium from 40 million cells was harvested after 48 hrs. The microvesicles were purified by differential centrifugation 15 . In brief, glioblastomaconditioned medium was centrifuged for 10 min at 300 × g to eliminate cell contamination. Supernatants were further centrifuged for 20 min at 16,500 × g and filtered through a 0.22 ?m filter. Microvesicles were pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 110,000 × g for 70 min. The microvesicle pellets were washed in 13 ml PBS, pelleted again and resuspended in PBS. Exosomes were measured for their protein content using DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Serum exosomes from healthy controls and glioblastoma patients were diluted up to 13 ml in PBS and sterile filtered before centrifugation.  Microvesicle isolation Glioblastoma cells at passage 1–15 were cultured in microvesicle-free media (DMEM containing 5% dFBS). The conditioned medium from 40 million cells was harvested after 48 hrs. The microvesicles were purified by differential centrifugation 15 . In brief, glioblastomaconditioned medium was centrifuged for 10 min at 300 × g to eliminate cell contamination. Supernatants were further centrifuged for 20 min at 16,500 × g and filtered through a 0.22 ?m filter. Microvesicles were pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 110,000 × g for 70 min. The microvesicle pellets were washed in 13 ml PBS, pelleted again and resuspended in PBS. Exosomes were measured for their protein content using DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Serum exosomes from healthy controls and glioblastoma patients were diluted up to 13 ml in PBS and sterile filtered before centrifugation.  RNA isolation To evaluate whether RNA was present inside the microvesicles, RNase A (Fermentas, Glen Burnie, MD, USA) was added to suspensions of microvesicles at a final concentration of 100 ?g/ml and incubated for 15 min at 37°C. Total RNA was then purified using the MirVana RNA isolation kit (Ambion, Austin TX, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The RNA was quantified using a nanodrop ND-1000 (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Wilmington, DE, USA). Snap frozen tumor biopsies were thawed on RNAlater ICE (Ambion, Austin TX, USA) according to manufacturer’s recommendation followed by RNA extraction using the MirVana RNA isolation kit.  RNA isolation To evaluate whether RNA was present inside the microvesicles, RNase A (Fermentas, Glen Burnie, MD, USA) was added to suspensions of microvesicles at a final concentration of 100 ?g/ml and incubated for 15 min at 37°C. Total RNA was then purified using the MirVana RNA isolation kit (Ambion, Austin TX, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The RNA was quantified using a nanodrop ND-1000 (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Wilmington, DE, USA). Snap frozen tumor biopsies were thawed on RNAlater ICE (Ambion, Austin TX, USA) according to manufacturer’s recommendation followed by RNA extraction using the MirVana RNA isolation kit.  Microarray analysis The microarray experiments were performed by Miltenyi Biotech (Auburn, CA, USA) using the Agilent Whole Human Genome Microarray, 4×44K, two color array. The array was performed on two different RNA preparations from primary glioblastoma cells and their microvesicles. The data was analysed using the GeneSifter software (Vizxlabs, Seattle, WA, USA). The Intersector software (Vizxlabs) was used to extract the genes readily detected on both arrays.  Microarray analysis The microarray experiments were performed by Miltenyi Biotech (Auburn, CA, USA) using the Agilent Whole Human Genome Microarray, 4×44K, two color array. The array was performed on two different RNA preparations from primary glioblastoma cells and their microvesicles. The data was analysed using the GeneSifter software (Vizxlabs, Seattle, WA, USA). The Intersector software (Vizxlabs) was used to extract the genes readily detected on both arrays.  Quantitative miRNA RT-PCR Total RNA was isolated using the mirVana RNA isolation kit. Total RNA (30 ng) was converted into cDNA using specific miR-primers (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) and further amplified according to the manufacturer’s protocol.  Quantitative miRNA RT-PCR Total RNA was isolated using the mirVana RNA isolation kit. Total RNA (30 ng) was converted into cDNA using specific miR-primers (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) and further amplified according to the manufacturer’s protocol.  HBMVEC in vitro angiogenesis assay HBMVECs (30,000) (Cell Systems, Catalogue #ACBRI-376, Kirkland, WA, USA) were cultured on Matrigel-coated wells in a 24-well plate in basal medium (Lonza Biologics Inc., Portsmouth, NH, USA) only, or supplemented with glioblastoma microvesicles (7 ?g/well) or a cocktail of angiogenic factors (EGM; hydrocortisone, EGF, FGF, VEGF, IGF, ascorbic acid, FBS, and heparin; Singlequots from Lonza). Tubule formation was measured after 16 hrs and analyzed with the ImageJ software (NIH).  HBMVEC in vitro angiogenesis assay HBMVECs (30,000) (Cell Systems, Catalogue #ACBRI-376, Kirkland, WA, USA) were cultured on Matrigel-coated wells in a 24-well plate in basal medium (Lonza Biologics Inc., Portsmouth, NH, USA) only, or supplemented with glioblastoma microvesicles (7 ?g/well) or a cocktail of angiogenic factors (EGM; hydrocortisone, EGF, FGF, VEGF, IGF, ascorbic acid, FBS, and heparin; Singlequots from Lonza). Tubule formation was measured after 16 hrs and analyzed with the ImageJ software (NIH).  Gluc mRNA translation assay Primary human glioblastoma cells were infected with a selfinactivating lentivirus vector expressing secreted Gluc under a cytomegalovirus promoter 37 to achieve an infection efficiency of >95%. The cells were stably transduced and microvesicles generated during the subsequent passages (2–10) were isolated and purified as above. Microvesicles (50 ?g) were added to 50,000 HBMVEC and incubated for 24 hrs. The Gluc activity in the supernatant was measured directly after microvesicle addition (0 hrs), and 15 hrs and 24 hrs later and normalised to the Gluc activity in the microvesicles. The results are presented as the mean ± SEM (n = 4).  Gluc mRNA translation assay Primary human glioblastoma cells were infected with a selfinactivating lentivirus vector expressing secreted Gluc under a cytomegalovirus promoter 37 to achieve an infection efficiency of >95%. The cells were stably transduced and microvesicles generated during the subsequent passages (2–10) were isolated and purified as above. Microvesicles (50 ?g) were added to 50,000 HBMVEC and incubated for 24 hrs. The Gluc activity in the supernatant was measured directly after microvesicle addition (0 hrs), and 15 hrs and 24 hrs later and normalised to the Gluc activity in the microvesicles. The results are presented as the mean ± SEM (n = 4).  PKH67 labelled microvesicle Purified glioblastoma microvesicles were labelled with PKH67 Green Fluorescent labelling kit (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) as described 21 . The labelled microvesicles were incubated with HBMVEC in culture (5 ?g/50,000 cells). Microvesicles were allowed to bind for 20 min at 4°C and cells were then washed and incubated at 37°C for 1 hr.  PKH67 labelled microvesicle Purified glioblastoma microvesicles were labelled with PKH67 Green Fluorescent labelling kit (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) as described 21 . The labelled microvesicles were incubated with HBMVEC in culture (5 ?g/50,000 cells). Microvesicles were allowed to bind for 20 min at 4°C and cells were then washed and incubated at 37°C for 1 hr.  RT PCR and nested PCR RNA was extracted using the MirVana RNA isolation kit. RNA was converted to cDNA using the Omniscript RT kit (if starting material was >50 ng) or Sensiscript RT kit (if starting material was <50 ng) (Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA, USA) using a mix of oligo dT and random hexamer primer according to manufacturer’s recommendation. The following PCR primers were used: GAPDH primers; Forw 5?-GAA GGT GAA GGT CGG AGT C-3?, Reverse 5?-GAA GAT GGT GAT GGG ATT TC-3?. EGFR/EGFRvIII PCR1; Forw 5?-CCAGTATTGATCGGGAGAGC-3?, Reverse 5?-TCAGAATATCCAGTTCCTGTGG-3?, EGFR/EGFRvIII PCR2; Forw 5?-ATG CGA CCC TCC GGG ACG-3?, Reverse 5?-GAG TAT GTG TGA AGG AGT-3?. The Gluc primers have been described previously 24. PCR protocol: 94°C 3 min; 94°C 45 s, 60°C 45 s, 72°C 2 min × 35 cycles; 72°C 7 min.  RT PCR and nested PCR RNA was extracted using the MirVana RNA isolation kit. RNA was converted to cDNA using the Omniscript RT kit (if starting material was >50 ng) or Sensiscript RT kit (if starting material was <50 ng) (Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA, USA) using a mix of oligo dT and random hexamer primer according to manufacturer’s recommendation. The following PCR primers were used: GAPDH primers; Forw 5?-GAA GGT GAA GGT CGG AGT C-3?, Reverse 5?-GAA GAT GGT GAT GGG ATT TC-3?. EGFR/EGFRvIII PCR1; Forw 5?-CCAGTATTGATCGGGAGAGC-3?, Reverse 5?-TCAGAATATCCAGTTCCTGTGG-3?, EGFR/EGFRvIII PCR2; Forw 5?-ATG CGA CCC TCC GGG ACG-3?, Reverse 5?-GAG TAT GTG TGA AGG AGT-3?. The Gluc primers have been described previously 24. PCR protocol: 94°C 3 min; 94°C 45 s, 60°C 45 s, 72°C 2 min × 35 cycles; 72°C 7 min.  Angiogenesis antibody array One mg total protein from either primary glioblastoma cells or purified microvesicles isolated from the same cells were lysed in Promega lysis buffer (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and then added to the human angiogenesis antibody array (Panomics, Fremont, CA, USA) according to manufacturer’s recommendations. The arrays were scanned and analysed with the ImageJ software (NIH).  Angiogenesis antibody array One mg total protein from either primary glioblastoma cells or purified microvesicles isolated from the same cells were lysed in Promega lysis buffer (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and then added to the human angiogenesis antibody array (Panomics, Fremont, CA, USA) according to manufacturer’s recommendations. The arrays were scanned and analysed with the ImageJ software (NIH).  Statistics The statistical analyses were performed using Students t-test.  Statistics The statistical analyses were performed using Students t-test.  Supplementary Material 1  Supplementary Material 1 