TREM-2 Mediated Signaling Induces Antigen Uptake and Retention in Mature Myeloid Dendritic Cells 1 This is an author-produced version of a manuscript accepted for publication in The Journal of Immunology (The JI) . The American Association of Immunologists, Inc. (AAI), the publisher of The JI , holds the copyright to this manuscript. This version of the manuscript has not yet been copyedited or subjected to editorial proofreading by The JI ; hence, it may differ from the final version published in The JI (online and in print). AAI (The JI) is not liable for errors or omissions in this author-produced version of the manuscript or in any version derived from it by the U.S. National Institutes of Health or any other third party. The final, citable version of record can be found at www.jimmunol.org . Myeloid dendritic cells (mDC) activated with a B7-DC-specific cross-linking IgM antibody (B7-DC XAb) take up and retain antigen and interact with T cell compartments to affect a number of biologic changes that together cause strong anti-tumor responses and blockade of inflammatory airway disease in animal models. The molecular events mediating the initial responses in mDC remain unclear. Here we show that B7-DC XAb caused rapid phosphorylation of the adaptor protein DAP12 and intracellular kinases Syk and PLC?1. Pretreatment of mDC with the Syk inhibitor Piceatannol blocked B7-DC XAb-induced antigen uptake with a concomitant loss of tumor protection in mice. Vaccination with tumor lysate-pulsed wildtype mDCXAb, but not TREM-2 knockout mDCXAb, protected mice from lethal melanoma challenge. Multi-molecular caps appeared within minutes of B7-DC XAb binding to either human or mouse mDC, and FRET analysis showed that class II, CD80, CD86 and TREM-2 are recruited in tight association on the cell surface. When TREM-2 expression was reduced in WT mDC using shRNA or by using mDC from TREM-2 knockout mice, in vitro DC failed to take up antigen after B7-DC XAb stimulation. These results directly link TREM-2 signaling with one change in the mDC phenotype that occurs in response to this unique antibody. The parallel signaling events observed in both human and mouse mDC support the hypothesis that B7-DC cross-linking may be useful as a therapeutic immune modulator in human patients.  INTRODUCTION Dendritic cells (DC) are key targets in schemes to regulate immunity for the treatment of cancer, allergy, infectious diseases, transplant rejection, and autoimmunity ( 1 ). Activation of DC through the TLR family initiates DC maturation resulting in down regulation of antigen uptake and migration to regional lymph nodes, where they encounter and activate naïve T cells ( 2 , 3 ). As DC mature, the cell surface expression of a series of co-stimulatory molecules is up regulated ( 4 , 5 ). These co-stimulatory molecules are critical for the activation of naïve T cells ( 6 ). The activated DC also produce immunomodulating cytokines which influence the polarity of the ensuing immune response, determining the array of effector mechanisms brought to bear at the site of infection ( 7 , 8 ). We have recently described a new approach for modulating the activity of DC that is distinct from previously defined mechanisms, yet results in potent immunomodulatory signals. B7-DC (or, PD-L2) is a B7 family member normally expressed on the cell surface of dendritic cells ( 9 ). The receptor for this protein, PD-1, is expressed on activated T cells ( 10 ). Cross-linking B7-DC in vitro or in vivo with the human IgM antibody B7-DC XAb alters a wide variety of important functions of mDC, inducing 1) enhanced survival, 2) increased ability to process and present soluble antigen in the class I antigen-presenting pathway, 3) enhanced ability to activate naïve T cells, 4) increased efficiency of seeding draining lymph nodes, and 5) up-regulation of the key immunomodulating cytokine, IL-12 ( 11 , 12 ). However, mDC treated with B7-DC XAb do not display traditionally defined maturation phenotypes ( 12 ) such as an up-regulation of the co-stimulatory markers CD80 or CD86 or a concomitant increase in cell surface expression of class II antigen presenting molecules. Instead, treatment of immature mDC with B7-DC XAb results in increased antigen uptake and even restores the ability of TLR-ligand matured mDC to take up and retain antigen ( 13 ). The combination of TLR-9 ligand and B7-DC cross-linking results in a synergistic CTL response against peptide antigen ( 13 ). These differences in maturation lead to important biological distinctions between cells activated by traditional approaches compared to cells activated by cross-linking B7-DC. For example, mDC activated with B7-DC XAb are highly efficient modulators of the polarity of Th2 memory cells ( 14 ), effectively redirect T regulatory cells into effector cell phenotypes ( 15 ), and rapidly activate cytolytic T cell responses ( 16 ) whereas DC matured using TLR agonists are relatively inefficient inducers of these changes in T cell behavior. B7-DC interaction with PD-1 has been shown to result in either a positive response ( 9 ) or a negative response ( 10 ) by T cells. This discrepancy could be due either to the different model systems used or to the ability of B7-DC to interact with more than one of the receptors that differentially govern T cell responsiveness ( 17 ). The positive immune response observed when we treated animals with B7-DC XAb might also be attributable to a blockade of interactions between B7-DC and PD-1. However, adoptive transfer experiments using mDC activated in vitro under conditions where B7-DC XAb did not physically block expression of accessible B7-DC on the cell surface demonstrated full immunomodulatory capabilities ( 18 ). How cross-linking B7-DC stimulates the immunomodulatory properties of mDC is not known. The plethora of immunomodulatory effects due to fundamental changes in mDC signaling is reflected in how mDCs interact with T cell lineages. To understand the mechanisms involved, we previously showed that engagement of B7-DC by this IgM antibody protected mDC from cell death caused by cytokine withdrawal. This protection was mediated by intracellular signals involving PI3K, Akt and NF?B ( 11 , 19 ). Thus, cross linking of molecules on the surface of mDC by B7-DC XAb appears to elicit back-signals similar to events described following the ligation of B7 family members in studies using a CTLA-4-Ig fusion protein ( 20 , 21 ). However, B7-DC XAb invoked responses remain poorly defined. Here we demonstrate that cross-linking of B7-DC molecules on mouse mDC derived from bone marrow precursors results in phosphorylation of the upstream adaptor protein DAP12 and the protein kinases Syk and PLC?. Syk?PLC? activation leads to the restoration of antigen uptake and retention in matured dendritic cells. Tumor lysate pulsed B7-DC XAb mDC pre-treated with Syk inhibitor fail to take up and retain antigen or to protect mice against tumors upon adoptive transfer. Importantly, multi-molecular complexes involving several cell surface molecules, including TREM-2, form on B7-DC XAb-activated mDC. TREM (Triggering receptor expressed by myeloid cells)-2 is an activating receptor of the immunoglobulin superfamily and regulates the development and function of dendritic cells, microglia, and osteoclasts ( 22 ). Our studies with TREM-2 deficient mDC show that TREM-2 initiates signaling through DAP12 and Syk and mediates antigen uptake and retention that occurs in matured dendritic cells upon cross linking with B7-DC XAb. These signals and changes in mDC function are necessary for B7-DC XAb to have its unique immune modulating properties.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Mice C57BL/6J, and B6.129s4-CD80?/?CD86?/? mice mice of 6?8 weeks old were obtained from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor) and used for generation of bone marrow derived DC. OT-II mice for T cell activation assay were also from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor). Class II knock out mice ( 23 ) were a gift from Dr. Chella David, Mayo Clinic. TREM-2 knock out mice ( 24 ) were bred in the mouse colony at Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO. All animals were maintained at the Mayo Clinic animal facility for at least one week prior to use according to protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, Mayo Clinic. Antibodies and Other Reagents Appropriate fluorophore labeled antibodies against murine I-Ab (25?9?17), murine class II specific IgM (25?9?3), APC labeled anti-mouse CD11c (HL3) FITC labeled anti-human class II (TU39), FITC labeled anti-human CD28 (CD28.2), APC labeled anti-human CD28 (CD28.2), PE labeled anti-human CD4 (RPA-T4) and PE labeled anti-human HLA A, B,C (G46?2.6) were purchased from BD PharMingen (San Jose, CA). Appropriate fluorophore labeled antibodies against mouse class II (M5/114.15.2), CD80 (16.10A1), CD86 (GL-1), CD11c (N418), APC labeled antibody against human DR (LN3), PE labeled anti-human CD80 (2D10.4), CD86 (IT2.2), murine B7-DC specific IgG antibody (TY25), and human B7-DC IgG antibody (MIH18) were all purchased from eBioscience (San Diego, CA). All secondary appropriately fluorophore labeled F(ab)2 fragment antibodies used in this study were obtained from Jackson Immunoresearch (Westgrove, PA). An IgM antibody (28?13?3) specific for mouse class I H-2 Kb was obtained from a hybridoma cell line from ATCC (HB-41) (Manassas, VA). Antibody against the protein kinase Syk (4D10) was obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). Anti-phosphotyrosine (4G10) and Goat anti-mouse antibodies were obtained from Upstate Cell Signaling Solutions (Lake Placid, NY). Anti-mouse TREM-2 antibodies 237920 (for Flow cytometry) and 237916 (for Western Blot) were purchased from R&D systems (Minneapolis, MN). Rabbit antibodies against PLC?1 (MC490) and DAP12 (MC457) were developed by Dr. Paul Leibson, Mayo Clinic. Ovalbumin labeled with FITC or APC was purchased from Molecular Probes (Eugene, OR). Protein A Sepharose was purchased from Pierce Biotechnology (Rockford, IL). DAPI, DNAse and LPS were obtained from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). All inhibitors used in this study were obtained from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA) unless otherwise indicated. Piceatannol was obtained from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Rac-1 inhibitor, NSC23766 was a kind gift from Dr. Daniel Billadeau, Mayo Clinic. CpG oligonucleotides as described ( 25 ) were synthesized in Mayo core facility. The polynucleotide pI:C was purchased from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA). All human IgMs were purified as described ( 26 ) and used at 10 ?g/ml. Generation of mDC mDC from mouse bone marrow were generated as described ( 27 ). Bone marrow was isolated from the long bones of the hind legs. Erythrocytes were lysed by treatment with ammonium chloride/potassium bicarbonate/EDTA at 37°C. The remaining cells were plated 1 × 106 cells/ml in six-well plates (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) in RPMI containing 10 ng/ml of murine GM-CSF and 1 ng/ml of murine IL-4 (PeproTech, Rocky Hill, NJ). The cells were incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2. After 48 hours, the cells were washed and replated with RPMI containing the same concentration of GM-CSF and IL-4 for another 5 days. Human DC were derived from CD14+ mononuclear cells isolated from peripheral blood using magnetic bead sorting (Miltenyi Biotec, Auburn, CA). Buffy coat was obtained from a unit of blood donated by a normal human donor. The peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated by centrifugation over Ficoll-Paque PLUS (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ) and CD14+ cells were separated by positive magnetic cell sorting. The isolated cells were incubated in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 5% human AB serum (HP 10220, Valley Biomedical, Winchester, VA), 1% Sodium Pyruvate (Mediatech, Herndon, VA), 1% Non-essential amino acids (Mediatech, Herndon, VA), 1 ng/ml IL-4 (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) and 50 ng/ml GM-CSF (Berlex, Richmond, CA) at 1×106 cells/ml, 3 ml/well in six well plates for 6?8 days at 37°C with 5% CO2. Maturation of DC was achieved by addition of TLR agonist ODN 1826 ( 11 ) for a period of 24 hours before being used for antigen uptake assays. The conditions used to culture both bone marrow derived mouse DC and peripheral blood derived human DC are favorable toward myeloid-type DC, thus we refer to the DC in this report as mDC. Production of shTREM2 and shControl virus Oligos containing the shTREM2 sequence (5?-TGATGCTGGAGATCTCTGGGTTCAAGAGACCCAGA GATCTCCAGCATCTTTTTTC-3?) and shControl sequence (5?-TGACTGCTGAAGGTCGCTTGTTTCAAGAGACCAAGCGACCTCCAGCATCTTTTTTC-3?) ( 28 ) were synthesized and cloned into the pSUPER RNAi System (provided by Dr. Daniel Billadeau, Mayo Clinic) using the key restriction sites Bgl II and Hind III. All sequences were confirmed by automated sequencing of the vectors by the Mayo Clinic Molecular Biology Core Facility. The resulting vectors were co- transfected with VSV-G and gagpol plasmids (provided by Dr. Richard Vile, Mayo Clinic) into 293T cells. Supernatant was collected at 48 and 72 hours, pooled, filtered through a 0.45 micron filter and frozen until used for transduction. Viral titers, determined by counting the number of resistant HT1080 cell colonies after selection in puromycin 4 days, were 2.8 × 107 and 3.6 × 107 viral particles per ml for the shRNA and scrambled control encoding viruses, respectively. Transduction of mDC For transducing mDC with the virus, the mDC culture media was replaced with fresh media containing 1 ml of supernatant containing the scrambled virus or virus encoding shRNA against TREM-2 and 2 ml RPMI (MOI ? 30, see above). Cytokines were added to a final concentration of 10 ng/ml murine GM-CSF and 1 ng/ml murine IL-4 at day 2 of mDC culture. Cells were maintained for another 3 days before using the mDC for antigen uptake assay as mentioned above or for analysis of phosphorylation status of DAP12 and Syk proteins. Using this transient transduction procedure, intracellular staining showed that TREM-2 protein levels were reduced by approximately 60%. Immunoprecipitations and Western blots Whole cell lysates were prepared from mouse or human dendritic cells stimulated with control antibody or B7-DC XAb. In experiments involving inhibition of Syk kinase, cells were pre-incubated with 10?M of Piceatannol for 30 minutes. For suppression of TREM-2, mDC were transduced as above and were stimulated with control antibody or B7-DC XAb on day six. Cells were lysed on ice for 10 min in 1 ml buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl, 40 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 50 mM NaF, 30 mM Na4P2O7, 0.1% BSA, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM PMSF, 5 ?g/ml aprotinin, 10 ?g/ml leupeptin, and 1% Triton X-100. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,800 × g for 5 min at 4°C and the supernatant used for further analysis. For immunoprecipitation, antibody (10?g) against mouse Syk (4D10) or PLC?1 (MC490) or DAP12 (MC457) was bound to protein A-Sepharose beads at 4°C for 2 hours under constant rotation. Supernatant from cell lysate were added to the antibody-coupled beads and incubated for 2 hours at 4°C with constant rotation. Protein complexes were then eluted in 40 ?l of SDS sample buffer, resolved by SDS-PAGE, and transferred to Immobilon-P membranes (Millipore). Tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins were detected using the anti-phosphotyrosine specific antibody, 4G10, followed by goat anti-mouse IgG coupled to Horse Radish Peroxidase (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and the SuperSignal detection system (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL). Thereafter, total protein was visualized by staining the membrane with Ponceau staining solution (Pierce Biotechnology) for 30 seconds in case of analysis of whole cell lysate or in the case of immunoprecipitation assays, the membrane was stripped with 7M guanidine, blocked with BSA, probed with the antibody against the whole protein followed by protein A coupled to HRP (Amersham Biosciences) and the SuperSignal detection system. For analysis of co-precipitating signaling molecules, affinity purified antibody against mouse Class II (I-Ab) (KH74) was used for immunoprecipitation. TREM-2 was detected by blot using mouse antibody (237920) and Goat-anti mouse coupled to HRP. Live cell imaging for visualization of multi-molecular complex Mouse mDC were stained with anti-Class II-FITC (MF/114.15.2), and either anti-CD80-PE (16.10A1) /CD86-PE (GL-1), or anti-CD11c-PE (N418). Human mDC were stained with anti-Class II-FITC (LN3) and anti-CD80-PE (2D10.4)/CD86-PE (IT2.2). DAPI was used to stain the nuclei. All incubations were carried out for 15 minutes at 37°C. The cells were subsequently stimulated with 10 ?g/ml of control antibody (sHIgM39) or B7-DC XAb and were observed every 5 minutes using time lapse confocal imaging at 40× magnification with a LSM510 Laser scanning confocal microscope with a 37°C stage (Carl-Zeiss Inc, Oberkochen, Germany). Flow Cytometry and FRET Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET) occurs when certain fluorophores are in close enough proximity (<80 Å) such that when one has been excited (the donor), energy can be directly transferred to the other (the acceptor), causing it to fluoresce. A flow cytometry approach using fluorochrome-coupled antibodies specific for cell surface molecules was used to study changes in cell surface interactions in response to crosslinking antibody treatment as described previously ( 29 ). Briefly, mouse mDC were stained with anti-Class II APC (M5/114.15.2) and anti-CD80-PE (16.10A1)/CD86-PE (GL-1) or anti-TREM-2-PE (237920). Human mDC were stained with APC–anti class II (LN3) and anti-CD80-PE (2D10.4)/CD86-PE (IT2.2). All staining was for 15 minutes. In experiments involving blocking of B7-DC, both fluorophore labeled antibodies and purified anti-mouse B7-DC (TY-25) or purified anti-human B7-DC (MIH18) IgG monoclonal antibody was added at 10?g/ml for 15 minutes. Cells were stimulated with control antibody or B7-DC XAb or purified anti-mouse class II IgM (25?9?3) and aliquots from different groups were taken at different time points. After 15 minutes of incubation, the cells were washed and fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde prior to analysis by FACS performed by the Mayo Flow Cytometry Core Facility using a FACSCaliber (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ). Antibody-induced generation of a FRET signal (upon excitation of PE at 488nm and emission of APC at 660nm) was visualized in FL3 channel (650?670 nm LP). Data collected as log10 fluorescence were analyzed using CellQuest (BD Biosciences). MFI= Mean Fluorescence Intensity Antigen uptake and retention assay Experiments to assess the accumulation of antigen (reflecting both antigen uptake and retention) were carried out as described previously ( 13 ). Day 5 mDC were matured with TLR ligand CpG-ODN (10 ?g/ml) for mouse mDC ( 11 ) or pI:C (10 ?g/ml) for human mDC. The matured cells were incubated with ovalbumin (1 mg/ml) labeled with FITC or APC and control antibody or B7-DC XAb for 2 hours, washed and analyzed by FacsCaliBur (Becton Dickinson). In studies involving inhibitors, cells were pretreated 30 minutes as indicated in the figures or at 10 ?M concentration prior to the addition of control antibody or B7-DC XAb. T cell stimulation by mDC To ensure that inhibition of antigen uptake by various signaling inhibitors did not compromise all DC functions, mDC were tested for their ability to stimulate T cell proliferation. Naive mouse splenocytes were harvested from the OT-II mice, plated in triplicate (3 × 105), and stimulated in vitro for 3 days with titrated doses of mDC that were pretreated with different inhibitors (10 ?g/ml), pulsed with 10 ?M OT-II peptide (ISQAVHAAHAEINEAGR), and treated with control antibody or B7-DC XAb overnight. The cells were pulsed with [3H]-thymidine for 18 h prior to harvest. 3H incorporation was measured by liquid scintillation. Tumor vaccine experiments All in vivo tumor experiments were carried out as previously described ( 30 ). Briefly, all the groups of mice were injected with 0.5 x106 B16 melanoma cells in the right flank. In addition, some mice were vaccinated with B16 melanoma lysate-pulsed wildtype or TREM-2 knockout myeloid dendritic cells (2×106, intraperitoneally) treated with control antibody or with B7-DC XAb. In some experiments, mice received mDC that were pretreated for 15 minutes with 10 ?g/ml of the Syk inhibitor Piceatannol prior to the addition of lysate and B7-DC XAb. After 7 days, draining lymph node cells (from 2 mice in each group) were harvested, pooled and used as effectors against the 51Cr-labeled B16 melanoma target cells. The remaining mice were monitored for the tumor growth and mice bearing tumors of size 17×17 were euthanized as per the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee recommendations.  Mice C57BL/6J, and B6.129s4-CD80?/?CD86?/? mice mice of 6?8 weeks old were obtained from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor) and used for generation of bone marrow derived DC. OT-II mice for T cell activation assay were also from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor). Class II knock out mice ( 23 ) were a gift from Dr. Chella David, Mayo Clinic. TREM-2 knock out mice ( 24 ) were bred in the mouse colony at Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO. All animals were maintained at the Mayo Clinic animal facility for at least one week prior to use according to protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, Mayo Clinic.  Antibodies and Other Reagents Appropriate fluorophore labeled antibodies against murine I-Ab (25?9?17), murine class II specific IgM (25?9?3), APC labeled anti-mouse CD11c (HL3) FITC labeled anti-human class II (TU39), FITC labeled anti-human CD28 (CD28.2), APC labeled anti-human CD28 (CD28.2), PE labeled anti-human CD4 (RPA-T4) and PE labeled anti-human HLA A, B,C (G46?2.6) were purchased from BD PharMingen (San Jose, CA). Appropriate fluorophore labeled antibodies against mouse class II (M5/114.15.2), CD80 (16.10A1), CD86 (GL-1), CD11c (N418), APC labeled antibody against human DR (LN3), PE labeled anti-human CD80 (2D10.4), CD86 (IT2.2), murine B7-DC specific IgG antibody (TY25), and human B7-DC IgG antibody (MIH18) were all purchased from eBioscience (San Diego, CA). All secondary appropriately fluorophore labeled F(ab)2 fragment antibodies used in this study were obtained from Jackson Immunoresearch (Westgrove, PA). An IgM antibody (28?13?3) specific for mouse class I H-2 Kb was obtained from a hybridoma cell line from ATCC (HB-41) (Manassas, VA). Antibody against the protein kinase Syk (4D10) was obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). Anti-phosphotyrosine (4G10) and Goat anti-mouse antibodies were obtained from Upstate Cell Signaling Solutions (Lake Placid, NY). Anti-mouse TREM-2 antibodies 237920 (for Flow cytometry) and 237916 (for Western Blot) were purchased from R&D systems (Minneapolis, MN). Rabbit antibodies against PLC?1 (MC490) and DAP12 (MC457) were developed by Dr. Paul Leibson, Mayo Clinic. Ovalbumin labeled with FITC or APC was purchased from Molecular Probes (Eugene, OR). Protein A Sepharose was purchased from Pierce Biotechnology (Rockford, IL). DAPI, DNAse and LPS were obtained from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). All inhibitors used in this study were obtained from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA) unless otherwise indicated. Piceatannol was obtained from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Rac-1 inhibitor, NSC23766 was a kind gift from Dr. Daniel Billadeau, Mayo Clinic. CpG oligonucleotides as described ( 25 ) were synthesized in Mayo core facility. The polynucleotide pI:C was purchased from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA). All human IgMs were purified as described ( 26 ) and used at 10 ?g/ml.  Generation of mDC mDC from mouse bone marrow were generated as described ( 27 ). Bone marrow was isolated from the long bones of the hind legs. Erythrocytes were lysed by treatment with ammonium chloride/potassium bicarbonate/EDTA at 37°C. The remaining cells were plated 1 × 106 cells/ml in six-well plates (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) in RPMI containing 10 ng/ml of murine GM-CSF and 1 ng/ml of murine IL-4 (PeproTech, Rocky Hill, NJ). The cells were incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2. After 48 hours, the cells were washed and replated with RPMI containing the same concentration of GM-CSF and IL-4 for another 5 days. Human DC were derived from CD14+ mononuclear cells isolated from peripheral blood using magnetic bead sorting (Miltenyi Biotec, Auburn, CA). Buffy coat was obtained from a unit of blood donated by a normal human donor. The peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated by centrifugation over Ficoll-Paque PLUS (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ) and CD14+ cells were separated by positive magnetic cell sorting. The isolated cells were incubated in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 5% human AB serum (HP 10220, Valley Biomedical, Winchester, VA), 1% Sodium Pyruvate (Mediatech, Herndon, VA), 1% Non-essential amino acids (Mediatech, Herndon, VA), 1 ng/ml IL-4 (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) and 50 ng/ml GM-CSF (Berlex, Richmond, CA) at 1×106 cells/ml, 3 ml/well in six well plates for 6?8 days at 37°C with 5% CO2. Maturation of DC was achieved by addition of TLR agonist ODN 1826 ( 11 ) for a period of 24 hours before being used for antigen uptake assays. The conditions used to culture both bone marrow derived mouse DC and peripheral blood derived human DC are favorable toward myeloid-type DC, thus we refer to the DC in this report as mDC.  Production of shTREM2 and shControl virus Oligos containing the shTREM2 sequence (5?-TGATGCTGGAGATCTCTGGGTTCAAGAGACCCAGA GATCTCCAGCATCTTTTTTC-3?) and shControl sequence (5?-TGACTGCTGAAGGTCGCTTGTTTCAAGAGACCAAGCGACCTCCAGCATCTTTTTTC-3?) ( 28 ) were synthesized and cloned into the pSUPER RNAi System (provided by Dr. Daniel Billadeau, Mayo Clinic) using the key restriction sites Bgl II and Hind III. All sequences were confirmed by automated sequencing of the vectors by the Mayo Clinic Molecular Biology Core Facility. The resulting vectors were co- transfected with VSV-G and gagpol plasmids (provided by Dr. Richard Vile, Mayo Clinic) into 293T cells. Supernatant was collected at 48 and 72 hours, pooled, filtered through a 0.45 micron filter and frozen until used for transduction. Viral titers, determined by counting the number of resistant HT1080 cell colonies after selection in puromycin 4 days, were 2.8 × 107 and 3.6 × 107 viral particles per ml for the shRNA and scrambled control encoding viruses, respectively.  Transduction of mDC For transducing mDC with the virus, the mDC culture media was replaced with fresh media containing 1 ml of supernatant containing the scrambled virus or virus encoding shRNA against TREM-2 and 2 ml RPMI (MOI ? 30, see above). Cytokines were added to a final concentration of 10 ng/ml murine GM-CSF and 1 ng/ml murine IL-4 at day 2 of mDC culture. Cells were maintained for another 3 days before using the mDC for antigen uptake assay as mentioned above or for analysis of phosphorylation status of DAP12 and Syk proteins. Using this transient transduction procedure, intracellular staining showed that TREM-2 protein levels were reduced by approximately 60%.  Immunoprecipitations and Western blots Whole cell lysates were prepared from mouse or human dendritic cells stimulated with control antibody or B7-DC XAb. In experiments involving inhibition of Syk kinase, cells were pre-incubated with 10?M of Piceatannol for 30 minutes. For suppression of TREM-2, mDC were transduced as above and were stimulated with control antibody or B7-DC XAb on day six. Cells were lysed on ice for 10 min in 1 ml buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl, 40 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 50 mM NaF, 30 mM Na4P2O7, 0.1% BSA, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM PMSF, 5 ?g/ml aprotinin, 10 ?g/ml leupeptin, and 1% Triton X-100. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,800 × g for 5 min at 4°C and the supernatant used for further analysis. For immunoprecipitation, antibody (10?g) against mouse Syk (4D10) or PLC?1 (MC490) or DAP12 (MC457) was bound to protein A-Sepharose beads at 4°C for 2 hours under constant rotation. Supernatant from cell lysate were added to the antibody-coupled beads and incubated for 2 hours at 4°C with constant rotation. Protein complexes were then eluted in 40 ?l of SDS sample buffer, resolved by SDS-PAGE, and transferred to Immobilon-P membranes (Millipore). Tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins were detected using the anti-phosphotyrosine specific antibody, 4G10, followed by goat anti-mouse IgG coupled to Horse Radish Peroxidase (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and the SuperSignal detection system (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL). Thereafter, total protein was visualized by staining the membrane with Ponceau staining solution (Pierce Biotechnology) for 30 seconds in case of analysis of whole cell lysate or in the case of immunoprecipitation assays, the membrane was stripped with 7M guanidine, blocked with BSA, probed with the antibody against the whole protein followed by protein A coupled to HRP (Amersham Biosciences) and the SuperSignal detection system. For analysis of co-precipitating signaling molecules, affinity purified antibody against mouse Class II (I-Ab) (KH74) was used for immunoprecipitation. TREM-2 was detected by blot using mouse antibody (237920) and Goat-anti mouse coupled to HRP.  Live cell imaging for visualization of multi-molecular complex Mouse mDC were stained with anti-Class II-FITC (MF/114.15.2), and either anti-CD80-PE (16.10A1) /CD86-PE (GL-1), or anti-CD11c-PE (N418). Human mDC were stained with anti-Class II-FITC (LN3) and anti-CD80-PE (2D10.4)/CD86-PE (IT2.2). DAPI was used to stain the nuclei. All incubations were carried out for 15 minutes at 37°C. The cells were subsequently stimulated with 10 ?g/ml of control antibody (sHIgM39) or B7-DC XAb and were observed every 5 minutes using time lapse confocal imaging at 40× magnification with a LSM510 Laser scanning confocal microscope with a 37°C stage (Carl-Zeiss Inc, Oberkochen, Germany).  Flow Cytometry and FRET Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET) occurs when certain fluorophores are in close enough proximity (<80 Å) such that when one has been excited (the donor), energy can be directly transferred to the other (the acceptor), causing it to fluoresce. A flow cytometry approach using fluorochrome-coupled antibodies specific for cell surface molecules was used to study changes in cell surface interactions in response to crosslinking antibody treatment as described previously ( 29 ). Briefly, mouse mDC were stained with anti-Class II APC (M5/114.15.2) and anti-CD80-PE (16.10A1)/CD86-PE (GL-1) or anti-TREM-2-PE (237920). Human mDC were stained with APC–anti class II (LN3) and anti-CD80-PE (2D10.4)/CD86-PE (IT2.2). All staining was for 15 minutes. In experiments involving blocking of B7-DC, both fluorophore labeled antibodies and purified anti-mouse B7-DC (TY-25) or purified anti-human B7-DC (MIH18) IgG monoclonal antibody was added at 10?g/ml for 15 minutes. Cells were stimulated with control antibody or B7-DC XAb or purified anti-mouse class II IgM (25?9?3) and aliquots from different groups were taken at different time points. After 15 minutes of incubation, the cells were washed and fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde prior to analysis by FACS performed by the Mayo Flow Cytometry Core Facility using a FACSCaliber (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ). Antibody-induced generation of a FRET signal (upon excitation of PE at 488nm and emission of APC at 660nm) was visualized in FL3 channel (650?670 nm LP). Data collected as log10 fluorescence were analyzed using CellQuest (BD Biosciences). MFI= Mean Fluorescence Intensity  Antigen uptake and retention assay Experiments to assess the accumulation of antigen (reflecting both antigen uptake and retention) were carried out as described previously ( 13 ). Day 5 mDC were matured with TLR ligand CpG-ODN (10 ?g/ml) for mouse mDC ( 11 ) or pI:C (10 ?g/ml) for human mDC. The matured cells were incubated with ovalbumin (1 mg/ml) labeled with FITC or APC and control antibody or B7-DC XAb for 2 hours, washed and analyzed by FacsCaliBur (Becton Dickinson). In studies involving inhibitors, cells were pretreated 30 minutes as indicated in the figures or at 10 ?M concentration prior to the addition of control antibody or B7-DC XAb.  T cell stimulation by mDC To ensure that inhibition of antigen uptake by various signaling inhibitors did not compromise all DC functions, mDC were tested for their ability to stimulate T cell proliferation. Naive mouse splenocytes were harvested from the OT-II mice, plated in triplicate (3 × 105), and stimulated in vitro for 3 days with titrated doses of mDC that were pretreated with different inhibitors (10 ?g/ml), pulsed with 10 ?M OT-II peptide (ISQAVHAAHAEINEAGR), and treated with control antibody or B7-DC XAb overnight. The cells were pulsed with [3H]-thymidine for 18 h prior to harvest. 3H incorporation was measured by liquid scintillation.  Tumor vaccine experiments All in vivo tumor experiments were carried out as previously described ( 30 ). Briefly, all the groups of mice were injected with 0.5 x106 B16 melanoma cells in the right flank. In addition, some mice were vaccinated with B16 melanoma lysate-pulsed wildtype or TREM-2 knockout myeloid dendritic cells (2×106, intraperitoneally) treated with control antibody or with B7-DC XAb. In some experiments, mice received mDC that were pretreated for 15 minutes with 10 ?g/ml of the Syk inhibitor Piceatannol prior to the addition of lysate and B7-DC XAb. After 7 days, draining lymph node cells (from 2 mice in each group) were harvested, pooled and used as effectors against the 51Cr-labeled B16 melanoma target cells. The remaining mice were monitored for the tumor growth and mice bearing tumors of size 17×17 were euthanized as per the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee recommendations.  RESULTS DAP12-Syk-PLC? mediates B7-DC XAb-induced antigen uptake and retention in mature human mDC We have demonstrated earlier that cross linking B7-DC on mature mDC from mice leads to restoration of the ability of the mDC to take up and retain protein antigen ( 13 ). Matured human mDC also responded to B7-DC XAb treatment by regaining the ability to take up and retain antigen ( Fig. 1 A ). Initial studies into the mechanisms regulating this process showed that global protein phosphorylation was induced as early as one minute after treatment of mDC with B7-DC XAb (data not shown). To determine what kinases were activated and what signaling intermediates mediated the antigen uptake response, we tested whether Src, Syk, and PLC? inhibitors blocked steps in the activation pathway. Blockade of Src kinases with PP2 resulted in the inhibition of antigen accumulation by matured mDC upon B7-DC cross-linking ( Fig. 1 B ). Similarly, pharmacologic agents that block calcium dependent PKC activity, PI3 kinase, and the Rho family GTPase RAC1 were also inhibitory ( Fig. 1 C ). B7-DC XAb treatment of mDC resulted in the activation of ERK, but not p38 (data not shown). However, inhibitors of Rho-A, MEK, and p38 pathways did not influence B7-DC XAb-induced antigen accumulation ( Fig. 1 C ). Assessment of cell viability using Alamar Blue or Annexin V binding showed that 94?98% of the mDC treated with B7-DC XAb were viable and remained so in the presence of the various inhibitors (data not shown). As no signaling elements in B7-DC have been identified, it seemed likely that an association with adapter molecules containing signaling domains would be required to mediate an mDC response. DAP12 is an adaptor molecule that can couple receptor molecules like TREM-2 that lack innate signaling capability to downstream activation pathways ( 31 - 33 ). DAP12 was rapidly phosphorylated on tyrosine upon cross-linking B7-DC ( Fig. 2 A ). Further analysis showed that B7-DC XAb stimulation of human mDC also caused the tyrosine phosphorylation of p72 Syk ( Fig. 2 B ), shown in other systems to be downstream of a Src kinase ( 34 ) and associated with Fc receptor-mediated antigen uptake by B cells, macrophages, and DC ( 35 ). PLC?1, a downstream substrate for Syk ( 36 ) was also phosphorylated ( Fig. 2 C ). Vav1, a RhoGEF activated by Syk and required for cytoskeletal rearrangements during antigen uptake in B cells ( 37 ) also was phosphorylated in DC following activation with B7-DC XAb (data not shown). Pretreatment of mDC with Piceatannol inhibited phosphorylation of Syk and PLC?1 ( Figs. 2 D and 2 E ) and inhibited accumulation of tagged proteins by matured mDC in a dose responsive manner ( Fig. 2 F ). Inhibition of PLC? using U73122, but not with the inactive analogue U73343 ( Fig. 2 G ) also blocked the accumulation of antigen. Thus, the ability of mDC to regain the ability to take up and retain antigen in response to B7-DC XAb is mediated by the activation of multiple kinases, especially Syk and PLC? which are tied to B7-DC by DAP12. Intact Syk pathway in myeloid dendritic cells is necessary for the protection of mice against tumor We next tested whether the mDC signaling intermediates we identified in vitro were important for the immunomodulatory affects observed using B7-DC XAb. We showed previously that administration of B7-DC XAb into mice leads to the generation of a potent CTL response and tumor clearance ( 30 ). Mice immunized with B16 tumor lysate and receiving B7-DC XAb treatment are protected against B16 melanoma tumor ( 38 ). Because Syk was the upstream kinase involved in inducing antigen uptake in myeloid dendritic cells, we asked whether inhibition of Syk affected B7-DC XAb-induced tumor immunity in a B16 melanoma model. Myeloid dendritic cells were treated with Piceatannol before being pulsed with the tumor cell lysate and treated with B7-DC XAb or control antibody. Adoptive transfer of the mDC pulsed with the B16 melanoma tumor cell lysate and activated with the B7-DC XAb induced a potent CTL response ( Fig. 3 A ) and protected the mice against a lethal challenge of B16 tumor ( Fig. 3 C ). However, mice that received Piceatannol-treated mDC did not mount a cytotoxic response and failed to clear the tumor ( Figs. 3 B and 3 C ). Peptide-pulsed mDC treated with Piceatannol were still able to stimulate T cell proliferation in vitro ( Fig. 3 D ). Taken together, these findings indicate that the B7-DC XAb activation of the Syk pathway in myeloid dendritic cells is required for the processing of antigens from tumor lysates and the subsequent induction of tumor immunity. B7-DC XAb leads to multi-molecular cap on the surface of the mDC Since B7-DC has a short cytoplasmic tail and is thereby lacking inherent signaling capability, we hypothesize that B7-DC XAb may be able to cause topological changes and/or clustering of membrane molecules that could recruit and activate DAP12/Syk pathways in mDC. To test this, we looked for changes in membrane localization of key molecules involved in the mDC stimulation of naïve T cells. We found that Class II, CD80 and CD86 molecules were reorganized into a distinct cap-like cluster on the cell membranes of both mouse and human mDC within 15 minutes after antibody treatment ( Figs. 4 A and 4 B ). The relationship between co-capped molecules and the kinetics of cap formation were investigated further using fluorescent resonance energy transfer (FRET). Within 10 minutes of B7-DC XAb treatment, class II, CD80, and CD86 molecules moved into close juxtaposition (<80 Angstroms) as judged by the induction of a strong FRET signal ( Fig. 5 A and 5 B ). However, no FRET signal could be detected when mDC were incubated with a different IgM antibody that binds to mouse Class II molecules ( Fig. 5 C ). Moreover, if the acceptor fluorophore was quenched as a result of this photo-bleaching, emission of donor fluorophore increased, further confirming FRET and the implied proximity of the rearranged class II and CD80/CD86 molecules on the cell surface (data not shown). The ability of B7-DC XAb to form capped structures on the surface of human and mouse mDC was abolished by blockade of B7-DC XAb with the B7-DC-specific IgG antibody MIH18 on human mDC ( Fig. 5 D , top row) and by the IgG antibody TY-25 on mouse mDC ( Fig. 5 D , bottom row). These observations are consistent with our previous findings that the ability of B7-DC XAb to induce functional changes in mDC is dependent on direct binding to B7-DC ( 11 , 12 ). To test whether the complex was internalized, cells were stripped of the bound fluorophore-labeled antibodies using Hanks buffer (pH 2.5) and subsequently analyzed for FRET signal. Signal was lost when cells were stripped at 15 minutes, though a weak signal was detected if the cells were stripped at 30 minutes, suggesting internalization of some of the complex (data not shown). The independent recruitment of CD80, CD86, and class II molecules into the cap was investigated using mDC derived from CD80/CD86 double knock out or MHC class II knock out mice. Following treatment with B7-DC XAb, co-capping (FRET) of CD11c with class II still occurred in CD80?/?CD86?/? mDC and co-capping of CD80 with CD86 still occurred in Class II?/? mDC ( Fig. 5 E , top and bottom panels respectively) indicating that B7-DC XAb can induce clustering of these particular molecules independently of one another. TREM-2 mediates activation of a DAP12-Syk signaling pathway and is required for antigen accumulation by mature mDC treated with B7-DC XAb TREM-2, a recently described pattern recognition receptor expressed on monocytes and cultured DC, is known to signal through DAP12 ( 39 , 40 ). As visualized by FRET, an association of TREM-2 with class II molecules was observed within 5 minutes and was increased in 15 minutes after treatment of mDC with B7-DC XAb ( Fig. 6 A ). In contrast, TREM-2 was not associated with class II molecules on mDC following treatment with isotype control antibody. The association of TREM-2 with class II molecules was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation of TREM-2 with the class II molecule I-Ab in lysates isolated from mDC 5 minutes after B7-DC XAb treatment ( Fig. 6 B ). To evaluate the functional importance of TREM-2 in mDC activated with B7-DC XAb, we assessed the activation of antigen uptake and retention by matured TREM-2 deficient mDC using a knockdown strategy. Transduction of a retrovirus containing shDNA for TREM-2 into mouse mDC substantially reduced the expression of TREM-2 on the cell surface ( Fig. 6 C ). This reduction was associated with the absence of the phosphorylation of DAP12 and Syk ( Fig. 6 D and 6 E ). Furthermore, using matured mDC, the shDNA-transduced cells accumulated very little ovalbumin when treated with B7-DC XAb ( Fig. 6 F , right panel). When mDC were transduced with virus containing a scrambled shDNA sequence, expression of TREM-2 ( Fig. 6 C ), phosphorylation of DAP12, and Syk ( Figs. 6 D and 6 E ), and accumulation of ovalbumin ( Fig. 6 F , left panel) were similar to that observed for nontransduced mDC ( 13 ). The important contribution of TREM-2 in the transduction of B7-DC XAb induced signals was further confirmed using mDC derived from TREM-2 KO mice. While, phosphorylation of DAP12 and Syk was readily induced in wild type mDC activated with the MTAb B7-DC XAb, phosphorylation of these same signaling intermediates was not observed in TREM-2 KO mDC ( Figs. 7 A and 7 B ), and the matured KO mDC did not regain the ability to accumulate ovalbumin after antibody treatment ( Fig. 7 C ). Furthermore, whereas WT mDC pulsed with B16 tumor lysate and B7-DC XAb functioned efficiently as an anti-tumor vaccine (fully protecting 5/5 animals from B16 melanoma challenge), animals receiving a TREM-2 KO mDC vaccine succumbed to the melanoma (5/5 animals; p < 0.05).  RESULTS DAP12-Syk-PLC? mediates B7-DC XAb-induced antigen uptake and retention in mature human mDC We have demonstrated earlier that cross linking B7-DC on mature mDC from mice leads to restoration of the ability of the mDC to take up and retain protein antigen ( 13 ). Matured human mDC also responded to B7-DC XAb treatment by regaining the ability to take up and retain antigen ( Fig. 1 A ). Initial studies into the mechanisms regulating this process showed that global protein phosphorylation was induced as early as one minute after treatment of mDC with B7-DC XAb (data not shown). To determine what kinases were activated and what signaling intermediates mediated the antigen uptake response, we tested whether Src, Syk, and PLC? inhibitors blocked steps in the activation pathway. Blockade of Src kinases with PP2 resulted in the inhibition of antigen accumulation by matured mDC upon B7-DC cross-linking ( Fig. 1 B ). Similarly, pharmacologic agents that block calcium dependent PKC activity, PI3 kinase, and the Rho family GTPase RAC1 were also inhibitory ( Fig. 1 C ). B7-DC XAb treatment of mDC resulted in the activation of ERK, but not p38 (data not shown). However, inhibitors of Rho-A, MEK, and p38 pathways did not influence B7-DC XAb-induced antigen accumulation ( Fig. 1 C ). Assessment of cell viability using Alamar Blue or Annexin V binding showed that 94?98% of the mDC treated with B7-DC XAb were viable and remained so in the presence of the various inhibitors (data not shown). As no signaling elements in B7-DC have been identified, it seemed likely that an association with adapter molecules containing signaling domains would be required to mediate an mDC response. DAP12 is an adaptor molecule that can couple receptor molecules like TREM-2 that lack innate signaling capability to downstream activation pathways ( 31 - 33 ). DAP12 was rapidly phosphorylated on tyrosine upon cross-linking B7-DC ( Fig. 2 A ). Further analysis showed that B7-DC XAb stimulation of human mDC also caused the tyrosine phosphorylation of p72 Syk ( Fig. 2 B ), shown in other systems to be downstream of a Src kinase ( 34 ) and associated with Fc receptor-mediated antigen uptake by B cells, macrophages, and DC ( 35 ). PLC?1, a downstream substrate for Syk ( 36 ) was also phosphorylated ( Fig. 2 C ). Vav1, a RhoGEF activated by Syk and required for cytoskeletal rearrangements during antigen uptake in B cells ( 37 ) also was phosphorylated in DC following activation with B7-DC XAb (data not shown). Pretreatment of mDC with Piceatannol inhibited phosphorylation of Syk and PLC?1 ( Figs. 2 D and 2 E ) and inhibited accumulation of tagged proteins by matured mDC in a dose responsive manner ( Fig. 2 F ). Inhibition of PLC? using U73122, but not with the inactive analogue U73343 ( Fig. 2 G ) also blocked the accumulation of antigen. Thus, the ability of mDC to regain the ability to take up and retain antigen in response to B7-DC XAb is mediated by the activation of multiple kinases, especially Syk and PLC? which are tied to B7-DC by DAP12. Intact Syk pathway in myeloid dendritic cells is necessary for the protection of mice against tumor We next tested whether the mDC signaling intermediates we identified in vitro were important for the immunomodulatory affects observed using B7-DC XAb. We showed previously that administration of B7-DC XAb into mice leads to the generation of a potent CTL response and tumor clearance ( 30 ). Mice immunized with B16 tumor lysate and receiving B7-DC XAb treatment are protected against B16 melanoma tumor ( 38 ). Because Syk was the upstream kinase involved in inducing antigen uptake in myeloid dendritic cells, we asked whether inhibition of Syk affected B7-DC XAb-induced tumor immunity in a B16 melanoma model. Myeloid dendritic cells were treated with Piceatannol before being pulsed with the tumor cell lysate and treated with B7-DC XAb or control antibody. Adoptive transfer of the mDC pulsed with the B16 melanoma tumor cell lysate and activated with the B7-DC XAb induced a potent CTL response ( Fig. 3 A ) and protected the mice against a lethal challenge of B16 tumor ( Fig. 3 C ). However, mice that received Piceatannol-treated mDC did not mount a cytotoxic response and failed to clear the tumor ( Figs. 3 B and 3 C ). Peptide-pulsed mDC treated with Piceatannol were still able to stimulate T cell proliferation in vitro ( Fig. 3 D ). Taken together, these findings indicate that the B7-DC XAb activation of the Syk pathway in myeloid dendritic cells is required for the processing of antigens from tumor lysates and the subsequent induction of tumor immunity. B7-DC XAb leads to multi-molecular cap on the surface of the mDC Since B7-DC has a short cytoplasmic tail and is thereby lacking inherent signaling capability, we hypothesize that B7-DC XAb may be able to cause topological changes and/or clustering of membrane molecules that could recruit and activate DAP12/Syk pathways in mDC. To test this, we looked for changes in membrane localization of key molecules involved in the mDC stimulation of naïve T cells. We found that Class II, CD80 and CD86 molecules were reorganized into a distinct cap-like cluster on the cell membranes of both mouse and human mDC within 15 minutes after antibody treatment ( Figs. 4 A and 4 B ). The relationship between co-capped molecules and the kinetics of cap formation were investigated further using fluorescent resonance energy transfer (FRET). Within 10 minutes of B7-DC XAb treatment, class II, CD80, and CD86 molecules moved into close juxtaposition (<80 Angstroms) as judged by the induction of a strong FRET signal ( Fig. 5 A and 5 B ). However, no FRET signal could be detected when mDC were incubated with a different IgM antibody that binds to mouse Class II molecules ( Fig. 5 C ). Moreover, if the acceptor fluorophore was quenched as a result of this photo-bleaching, emission of donor fluorophore increased, further confirming FRET and the implied proximity of the rearranged class II and CD80/CD86 molecules on the cell surface (data not shown). The ability of B7-DC XAb to form capped structures on the surface of human and mouse mDC was abolished by blockade of B7-DC XAb with the B7-DC-specific IgG antibody MIH18 on human mDC ( Fig. 5 D , top row) and by the IgG antibody TY-25 on mouse mDC ( Fig. 5 D , bottom row). These observations are consistent with our previous findings that the ability of B7-DC XAb to induce functional changes in mDC is dependent on direct binding to B7-DC ( 11 , 12 ). To test whether the complex was internalized, cells were stripped of the bound fluorophore-labeled antibodies using Hanks buffer (pH 2.5) and subsequently analyzed for FRET signal. Signal was lost when cells were stripped at 15 minutes, though a weak signal was detected if the cells were stripped at 30 minutes, suggesting internalization of some of the complex (data not shown). The independent recruitment of CD80, CD86, and class II molecules into the cap was investigated using mDC derived from CD80/CD86 double knock out or MHC class II knock out mice. Following treatment with B7-DC XAb, co-capping (FRET) of CD11c with class II still occurred in CD80?/?CD86?/? mDC and co-capping of CD80 with CD86 still occurred in Class II?/? mDC ( Fig. 5 E , top and bottom panels respectively) indicating that B7-DC XAb can induce clustering of these particular molecules independently of one another. TREM-2 mediates activation of a DAP12-Syk signaling pathway and is required for antigen accumulation by mature mDC treated with B7-DC XAb TREM-2, a recently described pattern recognition receptor expressed on monocytes and cultured DC, is known to signal through DAP12 ( 39 , 40 ). As visualized by FRET, an association of TREM-2 with class II molecules was observed within 5 minutes and was increased in 15 minutes after treatment of mDC with B7-DC XAb ( Fig. 6 A ). In contrast, TREM-2 was not associated with class II molecules on mDC following treatment with isotype control antibody. The association of TREM-2 with class II molecules was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation of TREM-2 with the class II molecule I-Ab in lysates isolated from mDC 5 minutes after B7-DC XAb treatment ( Fig. 6 B ). To evaluate the functional importance of TREM-2 in mDC activated with B7-DC XAb, we assessed the activation of antigen uptake and retention by matured TREM-2 deficient mDC using a knockdown strategy. Transduction of a retrovirus containing shDNA for TREM-2 into mouse mDC substantially reduced the expression of TREM-2 on the cell surface ( Fig. 6 C ). This reduction was associated with the absence of the phosphorylation of DAP12 and Syk ( Fig. 6 D and 6 E ). Furthermore, using matured mDC, the shDNA-transduced cells accumulated very little ovalbumin when treated with B7-DC XAb ( Fig. 6 F , right panel). When mDC were transduced with virus containing a scrambled shDNA sequence, expression of TREM-2 ( Fig. 6 C ), phosphorylation of DAP12, and Syk ( Figs. 6 D and 6 E ), and accumulation of ovalbumin ( Fig. 6 F , left panel) were similar to that observed for nontransduced mDC ( 13 ). The important contribution of TREM-2 in the transduction of B7-DC XAb induced signals was further confirmed using mDC derived from TREM-2 KO mice. While, phosphorylation of DAP12 and Syk was readily induced in wild type mDC activated with the MTAb B7-DC XAb, phosphorylation of these same signaling intermediates was not observed in TREM-2 KO mDC ( Figs. 7 A and 7 B ), and the matured KO mDC did not regain the ability to accumulate ovalbumin after antibody treatment ( Fig. 7 C ). Furthermore, whereas WT mDC pulsed with B16 tumor lysate and B7-DC XAb functioned efficiently as an anti-tumor vaccine (fully protecting 5/5 animals from B16 melanoma challenge), animals receiving a TREM-2 KO mDC vaccine succumbed to the melanoma (5/5 animals; p < 0.05).  DAP12-Syk-PLC? mediates B7-DC XAb-induced antigen uptake and retention in mature human mDC We have demonstrated earlier that cross linking B7-DC on mature mDC from mice leads to restoration of the ability of the mDC to take up and retain protein antigen ( 13 ). Matured human mDC also responded to B7-DC XAb treatment by regaining the ability to take up and retain antigen ( Fig. 1 A ). Initial studies into the mechanisms regulating this process showed that global protein phosphorylation was induced as early as one minute after treatment of mDC with B7-DC XAb (data not shown). To determine what kinases were activated and what signaling intermediates mediated the antigen uptake response, we tested whether Src, Syk, and PLC? inhibitors blocked steps in the activation pathway. Blockade of Src kinases with PP2 resulted in the inhibition of antigen accumulation by matured mDC upon B7-DC cross-linking ( Fig. 1 B ). Similarly, pharmacologic agents that block calcium dependent PKC activity, PI3 kinase, and the Rho family GTPase RAC1 were also inhibitory ( Fig. 1 C ). B7-DC XAb treatment of mDC resulted in the activation of ERK, but not p38 (data not shown). However, inhibitors of Rho-A, MEK, and p38 pathways did not influence B7-DC XAb-induced antigen accumulation ( Fig. 1 C ). Assessment of cell viability using Alamar Blue or Annexin V binding showed that 94?98% of the mDC treated with B7-DC XAb were viable and remained so in the presence of the various inhibitors (data not shown). As no signaling elements in B7-DC have been identified, it seemed likely that an association with adapter molecules containing signaling domains would be required to mediate an mDC response. DAP12 is an adaptor molecule that can couple receptor molecules like TREM-2 that lack innate signaling capability to downstream activation pathways ( 31 - 33 ). DAP12 was rapidly phosphorylated on tyrosine upon cross-linking B7-DC ( Fig. 2 A ). Further analysis showed that B7-DC XAb stimulation of human mDC also caused the tyrosine phosphorylation of p72 Syk ( Fig. 2 B ), shown in other systems to be downstream of a Src kinase ( 34 ) and associated with Fc receptor-mediated antigen uptake by B cells, macrophages, and DC ( 35 ). PLC?1, a downstream substrate for Syk ( 36 ) was also phosphorylated ( Fig. 2 C ). Vav1, a RhoGEF activated by Syk and required for cytoskeletal rearrangements during antigen uptake in B cells ( 37 ) also was phosphorylated in DC following activation with B7-DC XAb (data not shown). Pretreatment of mDC with Piceatannol inhibited phosphorylation of Syk and PLC?1 ( Figs. 2 D and 2 E ) and inhibited accumulation of tagged proteins by matured mDC in a dose responsive manner ( Fig. 2 F ). Inhibition of PLC? using U73122, but not with the inactive analogue U73343 ( Fig. 2 G ) also blocked the accumulation of antigen. Thus, the ability of mDC to regain the ability to take up and retain antigen in response to B7-DC XAb is mediated by the activation of multiple kinases, especially Syk and PLC? which are tied to B7-DC by DAP12.  DAP12-Syk-PLC? mediates B7-DC XAb-induced antigen uptake and retention in mature human mDC We have demonstrated earlier that cross linking B7-DC on mature mDC from mice leads to restoration of the ability of the mDC to take up and retain protein antigen ( 13 ). Matured human mDC also responded to B7-DC XAb treatment by regaining the ability to take up and retain antigen ( Fig. 1 A ). Initial studies into the mechanisms regulating this process showed that global protein phosphorylation was induced as early as one minute after treatment of mDC with B7-DC XAb (data not shown). To determine what kinases were activated and what signaling intermediates mediated the antigen uptake response, we tested whether Src, Syk, and PLC? inhibitors blocked steps in the activation pathway. Blockade of Src kinases with PP2 resulted in the inhibition of antigen accumulation by matured mDC upon B7-DC cross-linking ( Fig. 1 B ). Similarly, pharmacologic agents that block calcium dependent PKC activity, PI3 kinase, and the Rho family GTPase RAC1 were also inhibitory ( Fig. 1 C ). B7-DC XAb treatment of mDC resulted in the activation of ERK, but not p38 (data not shown). However, inhibitors of Rho-A, MEK, and p38 pathways did not influence B7-DC XAb-induced antigen accumulation ( Fig. 1 C ). Assessment of cell viability using Alamar Blue or Annexin V binding showed that 94?98% of the mDC treated with B7-DC XAb were viable and remained so in the presence of the various inhibitors (data not shown). As no signaling elements in B7-DC have been identified, it seemed likely that an association with adapter molecules containing signaling domains would be required to mediate an mDC response. DAP12 is an adaptor molecule that can couple receptor molecules like TREM-2 that lack innate signaling capability to downstream activation pathways ( 31 - 33 ). DAP12 was rapidly phosphorylated on tyrosine upon cross-linking B7-DC ( Fig. 2 A ). Further analysis showed that B7-DC XAb stimulation of human mDC also caused the tyrosine phosphorylation of p72 Syk ( Fig. 2 B ), shown in other systems to be downstream of a Src kinase ( 34 ) and associated with Fc receptor-mediated antigen uptake by B cells, macrophages, and DC ( 35 ). PLC?1, a downstream substrate for Syk ( 36 ) was also phosphorylated ( Fig. 2 C ). Vav1, a RhoGEF activated by Syk and required for cytoskeletal rearrangements during antigen uptake in B cells ( 37 ) also was phosphorylated in DC following activation with B7-DC XAb (data not shown). Pretreatment of mDC with Piceatannol inhibited phosphorylation of Syk and PLC?1 ( Figs. 2 D and 2 E ) and inhibited accumulation of tagged proteins by matured mDC in a dose responsive manner ( Fig. 2 F ). Inhibition of PLC? using U73122, but not with the inactive analogue U73343 ( Fig. 2 G ) also blocked the accumulation of antigen. Thus, the ability of mDC to regain the ability to take up and retain antigen in response to B7-DC XAb is mediated by the activation of multiple kinases, especially Syk and PLC? which are tied to B7-DC by DAP12.  Intact Syk pathway in myeloid dendritic cells is necessary for the protection of mice against tumor We next tested whether the mDC signaling intermediates we identified in vitro were important for the immunomodulatory affects observed using B7-DC XAb. We showed previously that administration of B7-DC XAb into mice leads to the generation of a potent CTL response and tumor clearance ( 30 ). Mice immunized with B16 tumor lysate and receiving B7-DC XAb treatment are protected against B16 melanoma tumor ( 38 ). Because Syk was the upstream kinase involved in inducing antigen uptake in myeloid dendritic cells, we asked whether inhibition of Syk affected B7-DC XAb-induced tumor immunity in a B16 melanoma model. Myeloid dendritic cells were treated with Piceatannol before being pulsed with the tumor cell lysate and treated with B7-DC XAb or control antibody. Adoptive transfer of the mDC pulsed with the B16 melanoma tumor cell lysate and activated with the B7-DC XAb induced a potent CTL response ( Fig. 3 A ) and protected the mice against a lethal challenge of B16 tumor ( Fig. 3 C ). However, mice that received Piceatannol-treated mDC did not mount a cytotoxic response and failed to clear the tumor ( Figs. 3 B and 3 C ). Peptide-pulsed mDC treated with Piceatannol were still able to stimulate T cell proliferation in vitro ( Fig. 3 D ). Taken together, these findings indicate that the B7-DC XAb activation of the Syk pathway in myeloid dendritic cells is required for the processing of antigens from tumor lysates and the subsequent induction of tumor immunity.  Intact Syk pathway in myeloid dendritic cells is necessary for the protection of mice against tumor We next tested whether the mDC signaling intermediates we identified in vitro were important for the immunomodulatory affects observed using B7-DC XAb. We showed previously that administration of B7-DC XAb into mice leads to the generation of a potent CTL response and tumor clearance ( 30 ). Mice immunized with B16 tumor lysate and receiving B7-DC XAb treatment are protected against B16 melanoma tumor ( 38 ). Because Syk was the upstream kinase involved in inducing antigen uptake in myeloid dendritic cells, we asked whether inhibition of Syk affected B7-DC XAb-induced tumor immunity in a B16 melanoma model. Myeloid dendritic cells were treated with Piceatannol before being pulsed with the tumor cell lysate and treated with B7-DC XAb or control antibody. Adoptive transfer of the mDC pulsed with the B16 melanoma tumor cell lysate and activated with the B7-DC XAb induced a potent CTL response ( Fig. 3 A ) and protected the mice against a lethal challenge of B16 tumor ( Fig. 3 C ). However, mice that received Piceatannol-treated mDC did not mount a cytotoxic response and failed to clear the tumor ( Figs. 3 B and 3 C ). Peptide-pulsed mDC treated with Piceatannol were still able to stimulate T cell proliferation in vitro ( Fig. 3 D ). Taken together, these findings indicate that the B7-DC XAb activation of the Syk pathway in myeloid dendritic cells is required for the processing of antigens from tumor lysates and the subsequent induction of tumor immunity.  B7-DC XAb leads to multi-molecular cap on the surface of the mDC Since B7-DC has a short cytoplasmic tail and is thereby lacking inherent signaling capability, we hypothesize that B7-DC XAb may be able to cause topological changes and/or clustering of membrane molecules that could recruit and activate DAP12/Syk pathways in mDC. To test this, we looked for changes in membrane localization of key molecules involved in the mDC stimulation of naïve T cells. We found that Class II, CD80 and CD86 molecules were reorganized into a distinct cap-like cluster on the cell membranes of both mouse and human mDC within 15 minutes after antibody treatment ( Figs. 4 A and 4 B ). The relationship between co-capped molecules and the kinetics of cap formation were investigated further using fluorescent resonance energy transfer (FRET). Within 10 minutes of B7-DC XAb treatment, class II, CD80, and CD86 molecules moved into close juxtaposition (<80 Angstroms) as judged by the induction of a strong FRET signal ( Fig. 5 A and 5 B ). However, no FRET signal could be detected when mDC were incubated with a different IgM antibody that binds to mouse Class II molecules ( Fig. 5 C ). Moreover, if the acceptor fluorophore was quenched as a result of this photo-bleaching, emission of donor fluorophore increased, further confirming FRET and the implied proximity of the rearranged class II and CD80/CD86 molecules on the cell surface (data not shown). The ability of B7-DC XAb to form capped structures on the surface of human and mouse mDC was abolished by blockade of B7-DC XAb with the B7-DC-specific IgG antibody MIH18 on human mDC ( Fig. 5 D , top row) and by the IgG antibody TY-25 on mouse mDC ( Fig. 5 D , bottom row). These observations are consistent with our previous findings that the ability of B7-DC XAb to induce functional changes in mDC is dependent on direct binding to B7-DC ( 11 , 12 ). To test whether the complex was internalized, cells were stripped of the bound fluorophore-labeled antibodies using Hanks buffer (pH 2.5) and subsequently analyzed for FRET signal. Signal was lost when cells were stripped at 15 minutes, though a weak signal was detected if the cells were stripped at 30 minutes, suggesting internalization of some of the complex (data not shown). The independent recruitment of CD80, CD86, and class II molecules into the cap was investigated using mDC derived from CD80/CD86 double knock out or MHC class II knock out mice. Following treatment with B7-DC XAb, co-capping (FRET) of CD11c with class II still occurred in CD80?/?CD86?/? mDC and co-capping of CD80 with CD86 still occurred in Class II?/? mDC ( Fig. 5 E , top and bottom panels respectively) indicating that B7-DC XAb can induce clustering of these particular molecules independently of one another.  B7-DC XAb leads to multi-molecular cap on the surface of the mDC Since B7-DC has a short cytoplasmic tail and is thereby lacking inherent signaling capability, we hypothesize that B7-DC XAb may be able to cause topological changes and/or clustering of membrane molecules that could recruit and activate DAP12/Syk pathways in mDC. To test this, we looked for changes in membrane localization of key molecules involved in the mDC stimulation of naïve T cells. We found that Class II, CD80 and CD86 molecules were reorganized into a distinct cap-like cluster on the cell membranes of both mouse and human mDC within 15 minutes after antibody treatment ( Figs. 4 A and 4 B ). The relationship between co-capped molecules and the kinetics of cap formation were investigated further using fluorescent resonance energy transfer (FRET). Within 10 minutes of B7-DC XAb treatment, class II, CD80, and CD86 molecules moved into close juxtaposition (<80 Angstroms) as judged by the induction of a strong FRET signal ( Fig. 5 A and 5 B ). However, no FRET signal could be detected when mDC were incubated with a different IgM antibody that binds to mouse Class II molecules ( Fig. 5 C ). Moreover, if the acceptor fluorophore was quenched as a result of this photo-bleaching, emission of donor fluorophore increased, further confirming FRET and the implied proximity of the rearranged class II and CD80/CD86 molecules on the cell surface (data not shown). The ability of B7-DC XAb to form capped structures on the surface of human and mouse mDC was abolished by blockade of B7-DC XAb with the B7-DC-specific IgG antibody MIH18 on human mDC ( Fig. 5 D , top row) and by the IgG antibody TY-25 on mouse mDC ( Fig. 5 D , bottom row). These observations are consistent with our previous findings that the ability of B7-DC XAb to induce functional changes in mDC is dependent on direct binding to B7-DC ( 11 , 12 ). To test whether the complex was internalized, cells were stripped of the bound fluorophore-labeled antibodies using Hanks buffer (pH 2.5) and subsequently analyzed for FRET signal. Signal was lost when cells were stripped at 15 minutes, though a weak signal was detected if the cells were stripped at 30 minutes, suggesting internalization of some of the complex (data not shown). The independent recruitment of CD80, CD86, and class II molecules into the cap was investigated using mDC derived from CD80/CD86 double knock out or MHC class II knock out mice. Following treatment with B7-DC XAb, co-capping (FRET) of CD11c with class II still occurred in CD80?/?CD86?/? mDC and co-capping of CD80 with CD86 still occurred in Class II?/? mDC ( Fig. 5 E , top and bottom panels respectively) indicating that B7-DC XAb can induce clustering of these particular molecules independently of one another.  TREM-2 mediates activation of a DAP12-Syk signaling pathway and is required for antigen accumulation by mature mDC treated with B7-DC XAb TREM-2, a recently described pattern recognition receptor expressed on monocytes and cultured DC, is known to signal through DAP12 ( 39 , 40 ). As visualized by FRET, an association of TREM-2 with class II molecules was observed within 5 minutes and was increased in 15 minutes after treatment of mDC with B7-DC XAb ( Fig. 6 A ). In contrast, TREM-2 was not associated with class II molecules on mDC following treatment with isotype control antibody. The association of TREM-2 with class II molecules was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation of TREM-2 with the class II molecule I-Ab in lysates isolated from mDC 5 minutes after B7-DC XAb treatment ( Fig. 6 B ). To evaluate the functional importance of TREM-2 in mDC activated with B7-DC XAb, we assessed the activation of antigen uptake and retention by matured TREM-2 deficient mDC using a knockdown strategy. Transduction of a retrovirus containing shDNA for TREM-2 into mouse mDC substantially reduced the expression of TREM-2 on the cell surface ( Fig. 6 C ). This reduction was associated with the absence of the phosphorylation of DAP12 and Syk ( Fig. 6 D and 6 E ). Furthermore, using matured mDC, the shDNA-transduced cells accumulated very little ovalbumin when treated with B7-DC XAb ( Fig. 6 F , right panel). When mDC were transduced with virus containing a scrambled shDNA sequence, expression of TREM-2 ( Fig. 6 C ), phosphorylation of DAP12, and Syk ( Figs. 6 D and 6 E ), and accumulation of ovalbumin ( Fig. 6 F , left panel) were similar to that observed for nontransduced mDC ( 13 ). The important contribution of TREM-2 in the transduction of B7-DC XAb induced signals was further confirmed using mDC derived from TREM-2 KO mice. While, phosphorylation of DAP12 and Syk was readily induced in wild type mDC activated with the MTAb B7-DC XAb, phosphorylation of these same signaling intermediates was not observed in TREM-2 KO mDC ( Figs. 7 A and 7 B ), and the matured KO mDC did not regain the ability to accumulate ovalbumin after antibody treatment ( Fig. 7 C ). Furthermore, whereas WT mDC pulsed with B16 tumor lysate and B7-DC XAb functioned efficiently as an anti-tumor vaccine (fully protecting 5/5 animals from B16 melanoma challenge), animals receiving a TREM-2 KO mDC vaccine succumbed to the melanoma (5/5 animals; p < 0.05).  TREM-2 mediates activation of a DAP12-Syk signaling pathway and is required for antigen accumulation by mature mDC treated with B7-DC XAb TREM-2, a recently described pattern recognition receptor expressed on monocytes and cultured DC, is known to signal through DAP12 ( 39 , 40 ). As visualized by FRET, an association of TREM-2 with class II molecules was observed within 5 minutes and was increased in 15 minutes after treatment of mDC with B7-DC XAb ( Fig. 6 A ). In contrast, TREM-2 was not associated with class II molecules on mDC following treatment with isotype control antibody. The association of TREM-2 with class II molecules was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation of TREM-2 with the class II molecule I-Ab in lysates isolated from mDC 5 minutes after B7-DC XAb treatment ( Fig. 6 B ). To evaluate the functional importance of TREM-2 in mDC activated with B7-DC XAb, we assessed the activation of antigen uptake and retention by matured TREM-2 deficient mDC using a knockdown strategy. Transduction of a retrovirus containing shDNA for TREM-2 into mouse mDC substantially reduced the expression of TREM-2 on the cell surface ( Fig. 6 C ). This reduction was associated with the absence of the phosphorylation of DAP12 and Syk ( Fig. 6 D and 6 E ). Furthermore, using matured mDC, the shDNA-transduced cells accumulated very little ovalbumin when treated with B7-DC XAb ( Fig. 6 F , right panel). When mDC were transduced with virus containing a scrambled shDNA sequence, expression of TREM-2 ( Fig. 6 C ), phosphorylation of DAP12, and Syk ( Figs. 6 D and 6 E ), and accumulation of ovalbumin ( Fig. 6 F , left panel) were similar to that observed for nontransduced mDC ( 13 ). The important contribution of TREM-2 in the transduction of B7-DC XAb induced signals was further confirmed using mDC derived from TREM-2 KO mice. While, phosphorylation of DAP12 and Syk was readily induced in wild type mDC activated with the MTAb B7-DC XAb, phosphorylation of these same signaling intermediates was not observed in TREM-2 KO mDC ( Figs. 7 A and 7 B ), and the matured KO mDC did not regain the ability to accumulate ovalbumin after antibody treatment ( Fig. 7 C ). Furthermore, whereas WT mDC pulsed with B16 tumor lysate and B7-DC XAb functioned efficiently as an anti-tumor vaccine (fully protecting 5/5 animals from B16 melanoma challenge), animals receiving a TREM-2 KO mDC vaccine succumbed to the melanoma (5/5 animals; p < 0.05).  DISCUSSION The ability of B7-DC XAb to induce a spectrum of biologic changes in mDC is consistent with the hypothesis that B7-DC may function as a signaling receptor on DC. Others have provided evidence for reverse signaling through a number of B7 family members, including CD80 and CD86 in response to CTLA-4-Ig or CD28-Ig ligands and B7-H1 in response to autoantibodies ( 20 , 21 , 41 ). Ligation of CD80 and CD86 by CTLA-4-Ig induces activation of NF-?B, p38 MAP kinases, and STAT1, leading to the secretion of IFN? and the suppression of T cell proliferation ( 20 ). In contrast, CD28-Ig has been shown to activate NF-?B and MAP kinase pathways and the production of IL-6 and IFN? by DC, supporting potent T cell responses ( 21 ). Here, we have used both human and mouse mDC to show that cross-linking B7-DC with the IgM antibody B7-DC XAb results in a reorganization of cell surface molecules, the activation of intracellular kinases, and the induction of antigen uptake and retention by mature myeloid dendritic cells. These signaling events require TREM-2 and are mediated by the activation of Syk. Furthermore, both TREM-2 and Syk are required for B7-DC XAb-induced tumor immunity in mice. While our data show that CD80 and CD86 are present in the molecular caps formed by B7-DC cross-linking, their role in Syk activation is unknown. Our previous studies showed that CD80 and CD86 are not required for Th1-polarization of recall responses induced by B7-DC XAb ( 12 ). We have also documented the expression of an array of immune mediators resulting from cross-linking B7-DC on mDC ( 26 , 30 ) whose role in B7-DC XAb action are not yet clear. A key conclusion from all these studies is that engagement of B7 family members with different ligands can induce a spectrum of immunomodulatory signals that can either up-regulate or down-regulate the immune response. Engagement of B7-DC with B7-DC XAb results in the formation of multi-molecular clusters including cell surface molecules involved in the generation of a productive T cell response (CD80, CD86, class II, and TREM-2). The ability of B7-DC XAb to induce these structures on the surface of cells is in contrast to the inability of an anti-class II IgM to induce comparable molecular clusters. The fact that bivalent antibodies specific for B7-DC block membrane rearrangements induced by B7-DC XAb on both human and mouse mDC demonstrates that the induction of molecular complexes is mediated through B7-DC in both species. The structures of human and mouse B7-DC differ with respect to the size of their cytoplasmic tails ( 9 , 10 ). While human B7-DC has a tail of 30 amino acids that could be a potential site for interactions with intracellular signaling molecules, mouse B7-DC is missing most of this structure, having only a few amino acids on the cytoplasmic side of the cell membrane. The B7-DC transmembrane domain is unremarkable in both species and contains no charged residues. Similar to all members of the B7 family, the extracellular domains of B7-DC are predicted to fold into two immunoglobulin-like domains. Molecules with these folds have a tendency to form heterodimers: CD8, immunoglobulins, and T cell receptors and more recently B7 family members being notable examples ( 42 ). Whether the formation of multi-molecular structures featuring the close juxtaposition of molecules such as class II, CD80, CD86, CD11c with B7-DC is critical for the generation of intracellular signals or is the consequence of signals generated by other molecular interactions remains to be tested. Nonetheless, the formation of molecular clusters containing TREM-2 in response to B7-DC XAb treatment demonstrates the principle that molecules other than B7-DC with intrinsic signaling capability may be recruited in this process. One unanswered question is whether activation of mDC with B7-DC XAb represents a normal physiological process. It seems unlikely that cross-linking B7-DC in isolation is a means for intercellular communication. However, it is possible that reorganization of the DC membrane during interactions with the T cell surface induces intracellular signals in the DC also involving B7-DC. What is interesting is that antibody induced cross-linking of B7-DC is a stimulus that has distinct physiological consequences that might be exploited in the treatment or prevention of disease. The potential importance of this novel DC activation pathway is illustrated by our findings that B7-DC XAb has potent immunomodulatory effects in vitro and protects mice from allergic airway inflammation or lethal melanoma challenge ( 26 , 30 , 38 ). Thus, with this report, we have new understanding of the molecular mechanisms linking B7-DC XAb binding on mDC, the recruitment of TREM-2 into membrane clusters, the activation of Syk to an enhanced uptake and retention of antigen in mature mDC, and the induction of tumor immunity in mice. Our interpretation is that DC residing in tumors and/or draining lymph nodes are activated by cross-linking B7-DC and that the induced changes enhance their ability to capture tumor antigens and mobilize a protective cellular immune response against developing melanoma nodules (see also 11 , 14 , 30 , 38 ). Moreover, changes in gene expression induced by B7-DC cross-linking of resident DC alters the polarity of the immune response against allergenic antigen introduced into the airways in a mouse model of allergic asthma ( 26 ). The observations documented in this report demonstrate that this human IgM activates signaling pathways in human DC that closely mirror activated pathways in the mouse, providing a basis for our hypothesis that B7-DC XAb will be a potent modulator of human immune responses and the rationale for developing this reagent to modulate DC function to treat human disease.  DISCUSSION The ability of B7-DC XAb to induce a spectrum of biologic changes in mDC is consistent with the hypothesis that B7-DC may function as a signaling receptor on DC. Others have provided evidence for reverse signaling through a number of B7 family members, including CD80 and CD86 in response to CTLA-4-Ig or CD28-Ig ligands and B7-H1 in response to autoantibodies ( 20 , 21 , 41 ). Ligation of CD80 and CD86 by CTLA-4-Ig induces activation of NF-?B, p38 MAP kinases, and STAT1, leading to the secretion of IFN? and the suppression of T cell proliferation ( 20 ). In contrast, CD28-Ig has been shown to activate NF-?B and MAP kinase pathways and the production of IL-6 and IFN? by DC, supporting potent T cell responses ( 21 ). Here, we have used both human and mouse mDC to show that cross-linking B7-DC with the IgM antibody B7-DC XAb results in a reorganization of cell surface molecules, the activation of intracellular kinases, and the induction of antigen uptake and retention by mature myeloid dendritic cells. These signaling events require TREM-2 and are mediated by the activation of Syk. Furthermore, both TREM-2 and Syk are required for B7-DC XAb-induced tumor immunity in mice. While our data show that CD80 and CD86 are present in the molecular caps formed by B7-DC cross-linking, their role in Syk activation is unknown. Our previous studies showed that CD80 and CD86 are not required for Th1-polarization of recall responses induced by B7-DC XAb ( 12 ). We have also documented the expression of an array of immune mediators resulting from cross-linking B7-DC on mDC ( 26 , 30 ) whose role in B7-DC XAb action are not yet clear. A key conclusion from all these studies is that engagement of B7 family members with different ligands can induce a spectrum of immunomodulatory signals that can either up-regulate or down-regulate the immune response. Engagement of B7-DC with B7-DC XAb results in the formation of multi-molecular clusters including cell surface molecules involved in the generation of a productive T cell response (CD80, CD86, class II, and TREM-2). The ability of B7-DC XAb to induce these structures on the surface of cells is in contrast to the inability of an anti-class II IgM to induce comparable molecular clusters. The fact that bivalent antibodies specific for B7-DC block membrane rearrangements induced by B7-DC XAb on both human and mouse mDC demonstrates that the induction of molecular complexes is mediated through B7-DC in both species. The structures of human and mouse B7-DC differ with respect to the size of their cytoplasmic tails ( 9 , 10 ). While human B7-DC has a tail of 30 amino acids that could be a potential site for interactions with intracellular signaling molecules, mouse B7-DC is missing most of this structure, having only a few amino acids on the cytoplasmic side of the cell membrane. The B7-DC transmembrane domain is unremarkable in both species and contains no charged residues. Similar to all members of the B7 family, the extracellular domains of B7-DC are predicted to fold into two immunoglobulin-like domains. Molecules with these folds have a tendency to form heterodimers: CD8, immunoglobulins, and T cell receptors and more recently B7 family members being notable examples ( 42 ). Whether the formation of multi-molecular structures featuring the close juxtaposition of molecules such as class II, CD80, CD86, CD11c with B7-DC is critical for the generation of intracellular signals or is the consequence of signals generated by other molecular interactions remains to be tested. Nonetheless, the formation of molecular clusters containing TREM-2 in response to B7-DC XAb treatment demonstrates the principle that molecules other than B7-DC with intrinsic signaling capability may be recruited in this process. One unanswered question is whether activation of mDC with B7-DC XAb represents a normal physiological process. It seems unlikely that cross-linking B7-DC in isolation is a means for intercellular communication. However, it is possible that reorganization of the DC membrane during interactions with the T cell surface induces intracellular signals in the DC also involving B7-DC. What is interesting is that antibody induced cross-linking of B7-DC is a stimulus that has distinct physiological consequences that might be exploited in the treatment or prevention of disease. The potential importance of this novel DC activation pathway is illustrated by our findings that B7-DC XAb has potent immunomodulatory effects in vitro and protects mice from allergic airway inflammation or lethal melanoma challenge ( 26 , 30 , 38 ). Thus, with this report, we have new understanding of the molecular mechanisms linking B7-DC XAb binding on mDC, the recruitment of TREM-2 into membrane clusters, the activation of Syk to an enhanced uptake and retention of antigen in mature mDC, and the induction of tumor immunity in mice. Our interpretation is that DC residing in tumors and/or draining lymph nodes are activated by cross-linking B7-DC and that the induced changes enhance their ability to capture tumor antigens and mobilize a protective cellular immune response against developing melanoma nodules (see also 11 , 14 , 30 , 38 ). Moreover, changes in gene expression induced by B7-DC cross-linking of resident DC alters the polarity of the immune response against allergenic antigen introduced into the airways in a mouse model of allergic asthma ( 26 ). The observations documented in this report demonstrate that this human IgM activates signaling pathways in human DC that closely mirror activated pathways in the mouse, providing a basis for our hypothesis that B7-DC XAb will be a potent modulator of human immune responses and the rationale for developing this reagent to modulate DC function to treat human disease.  Supplementary Material Methods and Materials, References, and Figure Captions Review Fig 1 Review Fig 2 Review Fig 3 Review Fig 4 Review Fig 5 Review Fig 6  Supplementary Material Methods and Materials, References, and Figure Captions Review Fig 1 Review Fig 2 Review Fig 3 Review Fig 4 Review Fig 5 Review Fig 6  Figures Figure 1 Kinase and cytoskeleton reorganization inhibitors affect OVA-FITC uptake by matured human mDC A , Human mDC were left untreated (black filled histogram) or were matured overnight with poly I:C. On day six, the mDC cultures were activated the isotype control antibody (grey unfilled histograms) or with B7-DC XAb (white unfilled histogram) and pulsed with OVA-FITC. Uptake of OVA-FITC was assessed 24 hours later by flow cytometry. B and C , Day 6 matured mDC were pre-incubated without or with the Src kinase inhibitor PP2 (0.3, 1, 3, or 10 ?M), the PKC inhibitor Bim (50 nM), Rho A inhibitor Y-27632 (25 ?M), PI3 kinase inhibitor LY294002 (10 ?M), PLC? inhibitor U73122 (10 ?M), MEK inhibitor PD98059 (10 ?M), p38 MAP kinase inhibitor SB203580 (1 ?M), or Rac1 inhibitor NSC23766 (50 ?M) prior to activation with isotype control antibody or B7-DC XAb. All cells were pulsed with OVA-FITC at the time of treatment and analyzed for OVA-FITC uptake 24 hours later by flow cytometry. Data are representative of 3 or more experiments. Figure 2 The DAP12-Syk-PLC? is activated by B7-DC XAb and is required for regained antigen uptake in matured mDC Matured human mDC were treated with the B7-DC XAb for varying times. Immunoprecipitates were prepared using antibodies specific for DAP12 ( A ), Syk ( B ), and PLC?1 ( C ) and analyzed for activation by blotting for phosphotyrosine (pTyr). After stripping, the membranes were re-blotted with the specific antibodies used for immunoprecipitations. In ( D ) and ( E ), cells were pre-treated with the indicated concentrations or with 10 ?M of the Syk inhibitor Piceatannol. In ( F ) and ( G ), cells were pretreated with Piceatannol or the active or inactive forms of PLC?1 inhibitor (U73122/U73343) and antigen uptake was assessed by pulsing DC with FITC-conjugated ovalbumin and measuring intracellular fluorescence 16 hours later in CD11c+ cells by flow cytometry. Data are representative of 3 or more experiments. Figure 3 DC<sup>XAb</sup>-induced tumor protection in mice requires activation of Syk Bone marrow derived mDC were pulsed with B16 melanoma tumor lysate and control antibody (?) or B7-DC XAb (•) in the absence ( A ) or presence of the Syk inhibitor Picetannol ( B ) prior to adoptive transfer into mice. Day 7 after transfer, splenocytes from mice were analyzed for the ability to kill the B16 targets in a chromium release assay (performed in triplicate using spleens pooled from 3 mice per group). C , mDC were pulsed with the tumor cell lysate and treated with control antibody (?), B7-DC XAb (•), or B7-DC XAb plus Piceatannol (?) prior to adoptive transfer into mice at the same time they were injected with B16 live tumor (5 mice per group). Mice were monitored for tumor growth (presented as the average size in mm plus or minus deviation from the mean). Mice with tumor size of 17×17mm were euthanized. D , mDC or mDC pretreated with Piceatannol were pulsed with OT-II specific peptide (ISQAVHAAHAEINEAGR) and control antibody or B7-DC XAb and incubated for 3 days in titrated doses with 3 × 105 OT-II naïve T cells. The cultures were pulsed with 3H-thymidine 18 h prior to harvest. Error bars represent the standard deviation from the mean of triplicate samples. Figure 4 B7-DC XAb causes formation of multi-molecular caps on the cell surface of mouse and human mDC A , Mouse mDC were tagged with fluorochrome-labeled antibody specific for MHC I-Ab (25?9?17-FITC) and CD80/CD86 (16.10A1-PE and GL-1-PE) 15 minutes prior to activation with B7-DC XAb or control IgM antibody for 15 minutes. PE, FITC (APC), DAPI, and merged confocal images are shown and are representative of the entire field. White bars indicate 20 microns. B , Same as in ( A ), except human cells were labeled with HLA-DR, DP, DQ-FITC (TU39), CD80 (2D10.4-PE) and CD86 (IT2.2-PE). Arrows indicate cap structures. Figure 5 Reorganization of DC<sup>XAb</sup> cell surface results in close membrane clustering between Class II-CD80-CD86 The distribution of class II (labeled with APC-conjugated antibody) and CD80/CD86 molecules (labeled with PE-conjugated antibodies) was visualized over time by FRET following treatment of human ( A ) or mouse ( B ) mDC with B7-DC XAb (open histograms) or with isotype control antibody (filled histograms). C , Lack of induction of FRET of CD86-APC and CD80-PE in mouse mDC by the I-Ab specific IgM antibody 25?9?3 (open dark histograms) and isotype control antibody treated samples (filled histograms). Binding of the class II specific IgM antibody to the mouse mDC analyzed is also shown (far right panel). D , Inhibition of B7-DC XAb-induced FRET by B7-DC-specific IgG (green open histogram) compared to no IgG as control (red open histogram). Absence of FRET induced by isotype control antibody is also shown (filled histograms). E , Top: Class II-APC/CD11c-PE FRET in mDC from CD80?/?/CD86?/? mice. Left panel shows FRET signal at zero minutes after treatment with control antibody (filled histogram, MFI 80) or B7-DC XAb (open histogram, MFI 98). Right panel shows FRET signal 15 minutes after stimulation with isotype-matched control antibody (filled histogram, MFI 87) or B7-DC XAb (open histogram, MFI 190). Bottom: CD80-APC/CD86-PE FRET signal from class II?/? mDC. Left panel shows FRET signal at 0 minutes after stimulation with control antibody (filled histogram, MFI 13) or B7-DC XAb (open histogram, MFI 10). Right panel depicts FRET signal 15 minutes after stimulation with isotype-matched control antibody (filled histogram, MFI 12.5) or B7-DC XAb (open histogram, MFI 115). Data are representative of 3 or more experiments. Figure 6 TREM-2 is recruited into B7-DC XAb-induced cap and is required for phosphorylation of DAP-12 and Syk A , Class II-APC/TREM2-PE FRET was measured using six-day cultures of mouse mDC before (0’) or after stimulation with B7-DC XAb (open histograms) or isotype control antibody (filled histograms) for 5, 10, 15, or 30 min as labeled for five panels. Bottom panel shows expression of TREM-2 on unstimulated cells by staining with 237916-PE antibody (open histogram) compared to control (filled histogram). B , Class II complexes were immunoprecipitated from B7-DC XAb- or control antibody-treated mDC using biotin tagged I-Ab-specific KH74 antibody and analyzed for the presence of TREM-2 by Western blot. C , TREM-2 expression on myeloid dendritic cells transduced with virus encoding scrambled RNA (left panel) showing staining with TREM-2 antibody (green open histogram) or isotype control (filled histogram) in comparison to mDC transduced with virus encoding TREM-2 shRNA (right panel, orange histogram), scrambled RNA (right panel, green histogram), or uninfected DC probed with isotype control antibody (right panel, filled histogram). D and E , Tyrosine phosphorylation of Syk or DAP12 in mouse mDC transduced with shRNA specific for TREM-2 or a scrambled control sequence and activated with isotype control antibody or B7-DC XAb for 5 minutes. F , Uptake of OVA-APC by matured mDC. Left: mDC were transduced with the scrambled shRNA vector and treated with isotype control antibody (grey histogram) or with the B7-DC XAb (green histogram). Right: mDC were transduced with TREM-2 shRNA and treated with control antibody (grey histogram) or B7-DC XAb (orange histogram). Data are representative of 3 or more experiments. Figure 7 TREM-2 is required for B7-DC XAb-induced activation of antigen uptake in mature mDC Tyrosine phosphorylation of DAP12 ( A ) or Syk ( B ) immunoprecipitated from myeloid dendritic cells derived from wildtype (WT) or TREM-2?/? (KO) mice after incubation with B7-DC XAb or isotype control. C , OVA-FITC uptake induced by the control antibody (filled histograms) or B7-DC XAb (open histograms) in matured mDC from wildtype (WT, left panel) or TREM-2?/? (KO, right panel) mice. Data are representative of 3 or more experiments.  Figures Figure 1 Kinase and cytoskeleton reorganization inhibitors affect OVA-FITC uptake by matured human mDC A , Human mDC were left untreated (black filled histogram) or were matured overnight with poly I:C. On day six, the mDC cultures were activated the isotype control antibody (grey unfilled histograms) or with B7-DC XAb (white unfilled histogram) and pulsed with OVA-FITC. Uptake of OVA-FITC was assessed 24 hours later by flow cytometry. B and C , Day 6 matured mDC were pre-incubated without or with the Src kinase inhibitor PP2 (0.3, 1, 3, or 10 ?M), the PKC inhibitor Bim (50 nM), Rho A inhibitor Y-27632 (25 ?M), PI3 kinase inhibitor LY294002 (10 ?M), PLC? inhibitor U73122 (10 ?M), MEK inhibitor PD98059 (10 ?M), p38 MAP kinase inhibitor SB203580 (1 ?M), or Rac1 inhibitor NSC23766 (50 ?M) prior to activation with isotype control antibody or B7-DC XAb. All cells were pulsed with OVA-FITC at the time of treatment and analyzed for OVA-FITC uptake 24 hours later by flow cytometry. Data are representative of 3 or more experiments. Figure 2 The DAP12-Syk-PLC? is activated by B7-DC XAb and is required for regained antigen uptake in matured mDC Matured human mDC were treated with the B7-DC XAb for varying times. Immunoprecipitates were prepared using antibodies specific for DAP12 ( A ), Syk ( B ), and PLC?1 ( C ) and analyzed for activation by blotting for phosphotyrosine (pTyr). After stripping, the membranes were re-blotted with the specific antibodies used for immunoprecipitations. In ( D ) and ( E ), cells were pre-treated with the indicated concentrations or with 10 ?M of the Syk inhibitor Piceatannol. In ( F ) and ( G ), cells were pretreated with Piceatannol or the active or inactive forms of PLC?1 inhibitor (U73122/U73343) and antigen uptake was assessed by pulsing DC with FITC-conjugated ovalbumin and measuring intracellular fluorescence 16 hours later in CD11c+ cells by flow cytometry. Data are representative of 3 or more experiments. Figure 3 DC<sup>XAb</sup>-induced tumor protection in mice requires activation of Syk Bone marrow derived mDC were pulsed with B16 melanoma tumor lysate and control antibody (?) or B7-DC XAb (•) in the absence ( A ) or presence of the Syk inhibitor Picetannol ( B ) prior to adoptive transfer into mice. Day 7 after transfer, splenocytes from mice were analyzed for the ability to kill the B16 targets in a chromium release assay (performed in triplicate using spleens pooled from 3 mice per group). C , mDC were pulsed with the tumor cell lysate and treated with control antibody (?), B7-DC XAb (•), or B7-DC XAb plus Piceatannol (?) prior to adoptive transfer into mice at the same time they were injected with B16 live tumor (5 mice per group). Mice were monitored for tumor growth (presented as the average size in mm plus or minus deviation from the mean). Mice with tumor size of 17×17mm were euthanized. D , mDC or mDC pretreated with Piceatannol were pulsed with OT-II specific peptide (ISQAVHAAHAEINEAGR) and control antibody or B7-DC XAb and incubated for 3 days in titrated doses with 3 × 105 OT-II naïve T cells. The cultures were pulsed with 3H-thymidine 18 h prior to harvest. Error bars represent the standard deviation from the mean of triplicate samples. Figure 4 B7-DC XAb causes formation of multi-molecular caps on the cell surface of mouse and human mDC A , Mouse mDC were tagged with fluorochrome-labeled antibody specific for MHC I-Ab (25?9?17-FITC) and CD80/CD86 (16.10A1-PE and GL-1-PE) 15 minutes prior to activation with B7-DC XAb or control IgM antibody for 15 minutes. PE, FITC (APC), DAPI, and merged confocal images are shown and are representative of the entire field. White bars indicate 20 microns. B , Same as in ( A ), except human cells were labeled with HLA-DR, DP, DQ-FITC (TU39), CD80 (2D10.4-PE) and CD86 (IT2.2-PE). Arrows indicate cap structures. Figure 5 Reorganization of DC<sup>XAb</sup> cell surface results in close membrane clustering between Class II-CD80-CD86 The distribution of class II (labeled with APC-conjugated antibody) and CD80/CD86 molecules (labeled with PE-conjugated antibodies) was visualized over time by FRET following treatment of human ( A ) or mouse ( B ) mDC with B7-DC XAb (open histograms) or with isotype control antibody (filled histograms). C , Lack of induction of FRET of CD86-APC and CD80-PE in mouse mDC by the I-Ab specific IgM antibody 25?9?3 (open dark histograms) and isotype control antibody treated samples (filled histograms). Binding of the class II specific IgM antibody to the mouse mDC analyzed is also shown (far right panel). D , Inhibition of B7-DC XAb-induced FRET by B7-DC-specific IgG (green open histogram) compared to no IgG as control (red open histogram). Absence of FRET induced by isotype control antibody is also shown (filled histograms). E , Top: Class II-APC/CD11c-PE FRET in mDC from CD80?/?/CD86?/? mice. Left panel shows FRET signal at zero minutes after treatment with control antibody (filled histogram, MFI 80) or B7-DC XAb (open histogram, MFI 98). Right panel shows FRET signal 15 minutes after stimulation with isotype-matched control antibody (filled histogram, MFI 87) or B7-DC XAb (open histogram, MFI 190). Bottom: CD80-APC/CD86-PE FRET signal from class II?/? mDC. Left panel shows FRET signal at 0 minutes after stimulation with control antibody (filled histogram, MFI 13) or B7-DC XAb (open histogram, MFI 10). Right panel depicts FRET signal 15 minutes after stimulation with isotype-matched control antibody (filled histogram, MFI 12.5) or B7-DC XAb (open histogram, MFI 115). Data are representative of 3 or more experiments. Figure 6 TREM-2 is recruited into B7-DC XAb-induced cap and is required for phosphorylation of DAP-12 and Syk A , Class II-APC/TREM2-PE FRET was measured using six-day cultures of mouse mDC before (0’) or after stimulation with B7-DC XAb (open histograms) or isotype control antibody (filled histograms) for 5, 10, 15, or 30 min as labeled for five panels. Bottom panel shows expression of TREM-2 on unstimulated cells by staining with 237916-PE antibody (open histogram) compared to control (filled histogram). B , Class II complexes were immunoprecipitated from B7-DC XAb- or control antibody-treated mDC using biotin tagged I-Ab-specific KH74 antibody and analyzed for the presence of TREM-2 by Western blot. C , TREM-2 expression on myeloid dendritic cells transduced with virus encoding scrambled RNA (left panel) showing staining with TREM-2 antibody (green open histogram) or isotype control (filled histogram) in comparison to mDC transduced with virus encoding TREM-2 shRNA (right panel, orange histogram), scrambled RNA (right panel, green histogram), or uninfected DC probed with isotype control antibody (right panel, filled histogram). D and E , Tyrosine phosphorylation of Syk or DAP12 in mouse mDC transduced with shRNA specific for TREM-2 or a scrambled control sequence and activated with isotype control antibody or B7-DC XAb for 5 minutes. F , Uptake of OVA-APC by matured mDC. Left: mDC were transduced with the scrambled shRNA vector and treated with isotype control antibody (grey histogram) or with the B7-DC XAb (green histogram). Right: mDC were transduced with TREM-2 shRNA and treated with control antibody (grey histogram) or B7-DC XAb (orange histogram). Data are representative of 3 or more experiments. Figure 7 TREM-2 is required for B7-DC XAb-induced activation of antigen uptake in mature mDC Tyrosine phosphorylation of DAP12 ( A ) or Syk ( B ) immunoprecipitated from myeloid dendritic cells derived from wildtype (WT) or TREM-2?/? (KO) mice after incubation with B7-DC XAb or isotype control. C , OVA-FITC uptake induced by the control antibody (filled histograms) or B7-DC XAb (open histograms) in matured mDC from wildtype (WT, left panel) or TREM-2?/? (KO, right panel) mice. Data are representative of 3 or more experiments. 