Polymorphisms and Clinical Outcome in Recurrent Ovarian Cancer Treated with Cyclophosphamide and Bevacizumab Purpose This study was designed to evaluate the associations between angiogenesis gene polymorphisms and clinical outcome in ovarian cancer patients treated with low dose Cyclophosphamide and Bevacizumab. Experimental Design Seventy recurrent/metastatic epithelial ovarian cancer patients were enrolled in a phase II clinical trial. Genomic DNA (gDNA) was available from 53 blood samples. Polymorphisms were analyzed using the PCR-RFLP protocol. A 5? end 33p ?ATP labeled PCR protocol was used to analyze dinucleotide repeats. Results Patients genotyped A/A or A/T for IL-8 T-251A gene polymorphism had a statistically significant lower response rate (19%; 0%) than those homozygous T/T (50%) (p=0.006, Fisher’s exact test). Patients carrying minimum one C allele (C/C;C/T) of CXCR2 C+785T polymorphism showed a median PFS of 7.4 months compared to those homozygous T/T; PFS of 3.7 months (p=0.026, log-rank test). Patients with VEGF C+936T polymorphism C/T genotype had a longer median PFS of 11.8 months, compared to those with C/C and T/T genotype, which had median PFS of 5.5 months, and 3.2 months, respectively (p=0.061, log-rank test). Patients carrying both AM 3? end alleles <14CA repeats had shortest median PFS of 3.4 months; patients with at least one allele >14 repeats or both alleles >14 repeats showed a median PFS of 6.4 months and 7.2 months, respectively (p=0.008 log-rank test). Conclusion Our data suggest, the IL-8 A-251T polymorphism may be a molecular predictor of response to Bevacizumab based chemotherapy. The CXCR2 C+785T, VEGF C+936T single nucleotide polymorphisms and the AM 3? dinucleotide repeat polymorphisms may be molecular markers for PFS in ovarian cancer patients.  INTRODUCTION Ovarian cancer is the fourth most common cancer in women and the leading cause of death in gynecologic malignancies in the United States. An estimate of approximately 21,650 new cases will occur in 2008 and more than 15,520 women are expected to die of this disease ( 1 ). Due to lack of early symptoms, approximately 70% of ovarian cancers are diagnosed in FIGO (International Federation of Gynecologic and Obstetric) stage 3 and 4 ( 2 , 3 ). Advances in surgical technique, chemotherapy and supportive care, have all contributed to an improved five year survival rate approaching 45%. The standard initial chemotherapy for patients with ovarian cancer involves a platinum-paclitaxel regimen. About 70% of patients will achieve a clinical response to this therapy. However, the rate of recurrence is 62% and less than 20% of the patients with stage 3 and 4 disease survive long term ( 2 , 4 ), implicating the need for better treatment options. Like normal tissues, tumors require an adequate supply of oxygen, metabolites and an effective way to remove waste products. Therefore, gaining access to the host vascular system and the generation of a tumor blood supply are rate-limiting steps in tumor growth and progression. Tumors start as avascular masses which can initially thrive on pre-existent vasculature within the microenvironment. When a tumor grows beyond a size of approximately 2–3 mm ( 5 ), as consequence, it requires its own new and dedicated vasculature. The so called “angiogenic switch”, the induction of tumor vasculature is considered a hallmark of the malignant process and is required for tumor propagation and progression. The highly complex angiogenic process is regulated by a number of pro- and anti-angiogenic factors and also occurs in embryogenesis, organ growth, wound healing, and many others. These physiological processes differ from pathological angiogenesis in which the balance of pro- and anti-angiogenic signals is tightly regulated. Tumors have lost the appropriate balance between positive and negative control by inducing mainly pro-angiogenic factors. Tumor vascularization and tumor expression of pro-angiogenic factors have been associated with advanced tumor stage and poor prognosis in a variety of human cancers ( 6 – 8 ). Many pro-angiogenic factors have been identified; in fact, the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and its receptors are among the most important activators. Activation of the VEGF/VEGF-receptor axis triggers multiple signaling transduction networks that result in endothelial cell survival, mitogenesis, migration, differentiation, vascular permeability and mobilization of endothelial progenitor cells ( 5 ). Induction of VEGF expression can occur through several stimuli. Hypoxia, one of the most common stimuli induces the expression of various transcription factors ( 9 ), (e.g. Hypoxia Inducible Factor 1? (HIF-1?) which has been also closely linked to the regulation of hypoxia driven angiogenesis and tumor growth) ( 9 – 11 ). Over-expression of VEGF has been associated with tumor progression and poor prognosis in several different malignancies, including colorectal carcinoma, gastric carcinoma, pancreatic carcinoma, breast, prostate and lung cancer and melanoma ( 3 , 5 , 9 ). Preclinical studies suggest that VEGF mediated angiogenesis is important in initiating and mediating growth of ovarian cancers ( 9 , 12 , 13 ) and has been shown to be a marker of poor prognosis in these patients ( 6 , 7 ). In xenograft models of human epithelial ovarian cancer, an over-expression of VEGF was directly correlated to microvessel density ( 14 ). It is becoming increasingly apparent that ovarian cancer is a highly angiogenic tumor. Therefore, it is regarded as a promising clinical model for the use of anti-angiogenic therapies. Chemotherapeutics, such as Cyclophosphamide, do not specifically target tumor cells, but rather interfere with cell division and therefore also target normal dividing cells of the vasculature. Elimination of these dividing endothelial cells, or inhibition of mitosis, would presumably lead to an anti-angiogenic effect. The efficiency of anti-angiogenic chemotherapy seems to be optimized when administered at comparatively low doses on a frequent, continuous schedule with no extended interruptions, also referred to as metronomic chemotherapy ( 14 , 15 ). This anti-angiogenic effect is further escalated with the addition of specific anti-angiogenic drugs, such as antibodies against VEGF ( 15 ). In February 2004, Bevacizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody, targeting VEGF, was first approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for metastatic colorectal cancer. Since then, Bevacizumab has been shown to have promising activity, when combined with standard chemotherapy, in many tumor types, including lung renal, breast, brain and pancreatic cancers ( 16 ). Nevertheless, disease progression eventually occurs in many patients. This raises the issue that VEGF independent pathways may compensate for the loss of VEGF and therefore mediate sustained tumor angiogenesis. The identification of such pathways will help in furthering our ability to both understand mechanisms of resistance to anti-VEGF therapies and to develop more effective anti-angiogenic therapies ( 17 ). In the postgenomic era, the possibility of individualizing cancer treatment by using molecular markers (e.g. germline polymorphisms) that predict efficacy of chemotherapy is gaining wide acceptance. In our study we examined 33 germline polymorphisms within 30 genes involved in the angiogenic pathway. We analyzed genes that encode for molecules a) with direct pro-angiogenic potential and/or their receptors (VEGF, Placental Growth Factor (PLGF), VEGF-receptor2/KDR, Neuropilin 1 (Nrp1), Adrenomedullin (AM), Leptin, Interleukin-8 (IL-8), Interleukin Receptor 1 and 2 (CXCR1, CXCR2), Insulin Like Growth Factor 2 (IGF2), Insulin Like Growth Factor Receptor (IGFR), Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor 4 (FGFR4), Tissue Factor (TF), and b) with supportive effects (Matrix Metalloproteinases (MMP2, MMP9, MMP7), Intercellular-Adhesion-Molecule-1 (ICAM1)) and c) which stimulate/influence the release of direct pro-angiogenic factors (Epidermal-Growth-Factor (EGF), EGF-receptor (EGFR), HIF1?, ARNT, Interleukin-6 (IL-6), Nuclear-Factor-kappa-b (NFkb), Tumor-Necrosis-Factor-alpha (TNF?), Ineterleukin-1 beta (IL-1?), Interleukin-1-receptor-antagonist (IL-1Ra), Murine-double-munit-2 (MDM2), p53, Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX2), Stromal-cell-derived Factor-1 (SDF1) ( Table 1 ).  PATIENTS AND METHODS Patients Seventy patients with histo-pathologically documented recurrent epithelial ovarian carcinoma (EOC) or primary peritoneal carcinoma with measurable disease by Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors (RECIST) criteria were enrolled in a multi-center Phase-II clinical trial (PH-II 45) ( 18 ). All patients signed a provided written informed consent consistent with current institutional, state and federal regulations before entering the study. To participate in this study, patients were furthermore required to have received a platinum containing regimen for primary disease and up to two distinct prior regimens for recurrent disease. Patients with an initial treatment-free interval of more than 12 months were required to be treated with a platinum-based regimen. Prior therapy with a taxane was not required. Performance status for each patient was classified in accordance with the SWOG (Southwest Oncology Group) criteria and patients with status >2 were not eligible for this study. Projected life expectancy had to be at least three months. Prior treatment with an anti-angiogenic agent was not allowed. All eligible patients were included in the analyses of response, toxicity, progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS). Blood samples from 53 patients were available for the present molecular correlates study. All samples were collected prior to chemotherapy start. There was no significant difference in age, ethnicity, SWOG performance status, platinum sensitivity, and clinical outcome (tumor response, progression-free survival, overall survival and grade 3–4 toxicity) between the 53 patients analyzed and the remaining 17 patients (out of 70), with no blood samples available. The median age of the patients was 59 years (range: 31–83 years). Forty-five patients were Caucasian, 3 Asian, 3 African-American and 2 Hispanic. SWOG performance status was as following: 0: 27 patients; 1: 22 patients and 2: 4 patients. Detailed demographic, clinical characteristics and clinical outcome of study patients are summarized in table 2 . Treatment protocol All patients were treated with intravenous Bevacizumab and oral Cyclophosphamide. During the first three weeks of treatment, Bevacizumab was administered intravenously at a dose of 10mg/kg every week followed by administration every two weeks. Oral Cyclophosphamide was taken at a daily dose of 50 mg. A cycle of treatment lasted 28 days. Treatment was continued until the patient experienced tumor progression, toxicity or patient request/physician discretion. Evaluation of toxicity took place every 2 weeks and was graded according to the National Institutes of Health common toxicity criteria, version 3.0. Assessment of response was evaluated after every two cycles of treatment. Candidate Polymorphisms The polymorphisms we tested were selected via a “horizontal” and “vertical” pathway approach with the goal of selecting genes known to modulate VEGF and VEGF independent angiogenesis ( Table 1 and Supplementary Table 1 ). We used the following criteria to select genes for study: (a) that the gene be part of a pathway for which there is a credible scientific basis to support its involvement in the angiogenesis signaling pathway; (b) that the gene has an established, well-documented genetic polymorphism; (c) that the frequency of the polymorphism is high enough that its impact on clinical outcome will be meaningful; and/or ( 4 ) that the polymorphism has some degree of likelihood to alter the function of the gene in a biologically relevant manner. Genotyping Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral white blood cells using the QIAamp kit (Qiagen, CA, USA). The samples were tested using a polymerase chain reaction restriction fragment length polymorphism technique. Briefly, forward and reverse primers were used for PCR amplification; PCR products were digested by restriction enzymes (New England Biolab, Massachussetts, USA); alleles were separated on 4% NuSieve ethidium bromide stained agarose gel and/or samples were analyzed by direct sequencing. The dinucleotide polymorphisms were determined by a 5?-end 33p ?ATP labeled PCR protocol with a few modifications. In summary: DNA template, dNTPs, 5?-end 33p ?ATP labeled primer, unlabelled complementary primer, Taq Polymerase (Perkin Elmer Inc, Connecticut, USA) and PCR Buffer were used together in a final PCR. The reaction was carried out and the reaction products were separated on a 6% denaturing polyacrylamid DNA sequencing gel, which then was vacuum blotted for 1h at 80°C and exposed to an XAR film (Eastman-Kodak Co. New York, USA) overnight. In addition, the exact number of repeats was confirmed by direct sequencing. Statistical analysis The primary objective of this trial was to determine progression free survival (PFS) after 6 months. The primary endpoint of this study was PFS (defined as the period beginning on the first day of treatment and ending with the first observation of disease progression or death from any cause). If a patient had not progressed or died, progression free survival was censored at the time of the last follow-up. The secondary endpoints included the response rate, toxicity and overall survival. Our study considered the additive effects on clinical outcome of the genotypes for all of the single nucleotide polymorphisms tested. The Adrenomedullin (CA)n repeat was analyzed by categorizing the patients into three groups: 1) patients carrying both alleles <14 repeats; 2) patients carrying one allele <14; and 3) patients carrying both alleles ?14 repeats. Association between each gene polymorphism and response was evaluated by Fisher’s exact test. The association between polymorphisms and progression-free survival and overall survival was examined using Kaplan-Meier plots and log-rank test. In the univariate survival analysis, the Pike estimate of relative risk (RR) and its associated 95% confidence interval (95% CI) were based on the log-rank test. Probability of PFS at 6 months and its Greenwood SE and median PFS and its 95% CI were calculated. Cox proportional hazards regression model was used to re-evaluate the association between each polymorphism and PFS, stratified by sensitivity to previous platinum-based therapy. No adjustment for multiple comparisons was performed because this study was exploratory in nature and conducted to generate hypothesis for future studies. All findings should be confirmed in large independent and prospective studies before they are used to guide patient care. All statistical tests were two-sided. Analyses were performed using the SAS statistical package version 9.1 (SAS Institute Inc. Cary, North Carolina, USA)  Patients Seventy patients with histo-pathologically documented recurrent epithelial ovarian carcinoma (EOC) or primary peritoneal carcinoma with measurable disease by Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors (RECIST) criteria were enrolled in a multi-center Phase-II clinical trial (PH-II 45) ( 18 ). All patients signed a provided written informed consent consistent with current institutional, state and federal regulations before entering the study. To participate in this study, patients were furthermore required to have received a platinum containing regimen for primary disease and up to two distinct prior regimens for recurrent disease. Patients with an initial treatment-free interval of more than 12 months were required to be treated with a platinum-based regimen. Prior therapy with a taxane was not required. Performance status for each patient was classified in accordance with the SWOG (Southwest Oncology Group) criteria and patients with status >2 were not eligible for this study. Projected life expectancy had to be at least three months. Prior treatment with an anti-angiogenic agent was not allowed. All eligible patients were included in the analyses of response, toxicity, progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS). Blood samples from 53 patients were available for the present molecular correlates study. All samples were collected prior to chemotherapy start. There was no significant difference in age, ethnicity, SWOG performance status, platinum sensitivity, and clinical outcome (tumor response, progression-free survival, overall survival and grade 3–4 toxicity) between the 53 patients analyzed and the remaining 17 patients (out of 70), with no blood samples available. The median age of the patients was 59 years (range: 31–83 years). Forty-five patients were Caucasian, 3 Asian, 3 African-American and 2 Hispanic. SWOG performance status was as following: 0: 27 patients; 1: 22 patients and 2: 4 patients. Detailed demographic, clinical characteristics and clinical outcome of study patients are summarized in table 2 .  Treatment protocol All patients were treated with intravenous Bevacizumab and oral Cyclophosphamide. During the first three weeks of treatment, Bevacizumab was administered intravenously at a dose of 10mg/kg every week followed by administration every two weeks. Oral Cyclophosphamide was taken at a daily dose of 50 mg. A cycle of treatment lasted 28 days. Treatment was continued until the patient experienced tumor progression, toxicity or patient request/physician discretion. Evaluation of toxicity took place every 2 weeks and was graded according to the National Institutes of Health common toxicity criteria, version 3.0. Assessment of response was evaluated after every two cycles of treatment.  Candidate Polymorphisms The polymorphisms we tested were selected via a “horizontal” and “vertical” pathway approach with the goal of selecting genes known to modulate VEGF and VEGF independent angiogenesis ( Table 1 and Supplementary Table 1 ). We used the following criteria to select genes for study: (a) that the gene be part of a pathway for which there is a credible scientific basis to support its involvement in the angiogenesis signaling pathway; (b) that the gene has an established, well-documented genetic polymorphism; (c) that the frequency of the polymorphism is high enough that its impact on clinical outcome will be meaningful; and/or ( 4 ) that the polymorphism has some degree of likelihood to alter the function of the gene in a biologically relevant manner.  Genotyping Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral white blood cells using the QIAamp kit (Qiagen, CA, USA). The samples were tested using a polymerase chain reaction restriction fragment length polymorphism technique. Briefly, forward and reverse primers were used for PCR amplification; PCR products were digested by restriction enzymes (New England Biolab, Massachussetts, USA); alleles were separated on 4% NuSieve ethidium bromide stained agarose gel and/or samples were analyzed by direct sequencing. The dinucleotide polymorphisms were determined by a 5?-end 33p ?ATP labeled PCR protocol with a few modifications. In summary: DNA template, dNTPs, 5?-end 33p ?ATP labeled primer, unlabelled complementary primer, Taq Polymerase (Perkin Elmer Inc, Connecticut, USA) and PCR Buffer were used together in a final PCR. The reaction was carried out and the reaction products were separated on a 6% denaturing polyacrylamid DNA sequencing gel, which then was vacuum blotted for 1h at 80°C and exposed to an XAR film (Eastman-Kodak Co. New York, USA) overnight. In addition, the exact number of repeats was confirmed by direct sequencing.  Statistical analysis The primary objective of this trial was to determine progression free survival (PFS) after 6 months. The primary endpoint of this study was PFS (defined as the period beginning on the first day of treatment and ending with the first observation of disease progression or death from any cause). If a patient had not progressed or died, progression free survival was censored at the time of the last follow-up. The secondary endpoints included the response rate, toxicity and overall survival. Our study considered the additive effects on clinical outcome of the genotypes for all of the single nucleotide polymorphisms tested. The Adrenomedullin (CA)n repeat was analyzed by categorizing the patients into three groups: 1) patients carrying both alleles <14 repeats; 2) patients carrying one allele <14; and 3) patients carrying both alleles ?14 repeats. Association between each gene polymorphism and response was evaluated by Fisher’s exact test. The association between polymorphisms and progression-free survival and overall survival was examined using Kaplan-Meier plots and log-rank test. In the univariate survival analysis, the Pike estimate of relative risk (RR) and its associated 95% confidence interval (95% CI) were based on the log-rank test. Probability of PFS at 6 months and its Greenwood SE and median PFS and its 95% CI were calculated. Cox proportional hazards regression model was used to re-evaluate the association between each polymorphism and PFS, stratified by sensitivity to previous platinum-based therapy. No adjustment for multiple comparisons was performed because this study was exploratory in nature and conducted to generate hypothesis for future studies. All findings should be confirmed in large independent and prospective studies before they are used to guide patient care. All statistical tests were two-sided. Analyses were performed using the SAS statistical package version 9.1 (SAS Institute Inc. Cary, North Carolina, USA)  RESULTS Clinical outcome Twelve out of 53 (23%) patients had a partial response (PR). Forty-one patients were non responders among them, 33 patients (62%) had stable disease (SD) and 8 (15%) patients had progressive disease (PD). The median progression-free survival for 53 patients was 6.6 months (95% CI: 3.9–8.2 months). The median overall survival was 14.4 months (95% CI: 11.1–21.2 months) with median follow up of 32.2 months (range 3.7–36.6 months) ( Table 2 ). Progression Free Survival (PFS) associated with the CXCR2 C+785T polymorphism Twenty-one of 53 (40%) patients were homozygous C/C at the CXCR2 C+785T gene locus; 18 patients (34%) were heterozygous C/T, and 14 patients (26%) were homozygous for the T/T variation. Patients carrying at least one C allele (C/C; C/T) showed a median PFS of 7.4 months. Patients that were homozygous T/T had a PFS of only 3.7 months (P= 0.026, log-rank test) Figure 1A ; Supplementary Table 1 ). Progression Free Survival (PFS) associated with the VEGF C+936T polymorphism Thirty-seven out of 53 patients (69.8%) were homozygous for the C/C genotype, 14 (26,4%) were heterozygous C/T and 2 patients were homozygous T/T. Patients heterozygous (C/T) had a median PFS of 11.8 months, patients being homozygous C/C had a median PFS of 5.5 months; patients being homozygous T/T had a PFS of 3.2 months (P=0.061 log-rank test) Figure 1B ; Supplementary Table 1 . Progression Free Survival (PFS) associated with the AM Repeat Polymorphism The dinucleotide repeat polymorphism showed a range between 11 and 21 repeats. Nine out of 53 patients (17%) were positive for both alleles <14 CA repeats, 16 patients (30%) had at least one allele <14 repeats (the other one could have 14 or more repeats), and 28 patients (53%) were genotyped with both alleles ?14 CA repeats. Patients carrying both AM 3? end alleles <14CA repeats had a median PFS of 3.4 months; patients with at least one allele ?14 CA repeats showed a median PFS of 6.4 months; for both alleles ?14 CA repeats, patients showed 7.2 months of median PFS (P=0.008 log-rank test) ( Figure 1C ) ( Supplementary Table 1 ) Association between IL-8 T-251A polymorphism and Response to Chemotherapy Thirteen out of 53 patients were homozygous A/A (24.6%), 26 patients were heterozygous A/T (49%), and 14 patients were homozygous T/T (26.4%). Patients with A/A or A/T genotype at the ?251 locus of the IL-8 gene had a statistically significant lower response rate than those who were homozygous T/T (P=0.006 Fisher’s exact test) ( Figure 2 ) Supplementary Table 1 . Association between the Germline Polymorphisms and Overall Survival and Toxicity No statistically significant association was found between overall-survival or toxicity of any of the tested polymorphisms.  RESULTS Clinical outcome Twelve out of 53 (23%) patients had a partial response (PR). Forty-one patients were non responders among them, 33 patients (62%) had stable disease (SD) and 8 (15%) patients had progressive disease (PD). The median progression-free survival for 53 patients was 6.6 months (95% CI: 3.9–8.2 months). The median overall survival was 14.4 months (95% CI: 11.1–21.2 months) with median follow up of 32.2 months (range 3.7–36.6 months) ( Table 2 ). Progression Free Survival (PFS) associated with the CXCR2 C+785T polymorphism Twenty-one of 53 (40%) patients were homozygous C/C at the CXCR2 C+785T gene locus; 18 patients (34%) were heterozygous C/T, and 14 patients (26%) were homozygous for the T/T variation. Patients carrying at least one C allele (C/C; C/T) showed a median PFS of 7.4 months. Patients that were homozygous T/T had a PFS of only 3.7 months (P= 0.026, log-rank test) Figure 1A ; Supplementary Table 1 ). Progression Free Survival (PFS) associated with the VEGF C+936T polymorphism Thirty-seven out of 53 patients (69.8%) were homozygous for the C/C genotype, 14 (26,4%) were heterozygous C/T and 2 patients were homozygous T/T. Patients heterozygous (C/T) had a median PFS of 11.8 months, patients being homozygous C/C had a median PFS of 5.5 months; patients being homozygous T/T had a PFS of 3.2 months (P=0.061 log-rank test) Figure 1B ; Supplementary Table 1 . Progression Free Survival (PFS) associated with the AM Repeat Polymorphism The dinucleotide repeat polymorphism showed a range between 11 and 21 repeats. Nine out of 53 patients (17%) were positive for both alleles <14 CA repeats, 16 patients (30%) had at least one allele <14 repeats (the other one could have 14 or more repeats), and 28 patients (53%) were genotyped with both alleles ?14 CA repeats. Patients carrying both AM 3? end alleles <14CA repeats had a median PFS of 3.4 months; patients with at least one allele ?14 CA repeats showed a median PFS of 6.4 months; for both alleles ?14 CA repeats, patients showed 7.2 months of median PFS (P=0.008 log-rank test) ( Figure 1C ) ( Supplementary Table 1 ) Association between IL-8 T-251A polymorphism and Response to Chemotherapy Thirteen out of 53 patients were homozygous A/A (24.6%), 26 patients were heterozygous A/T (49%), and 14 patients were homozygous T/T (26.4%). Patients with A/A or A/T genotype at the ?251 locus of the IL-8 gene had a statistically significant lower response rate than those who were homozygous T/T (P=0.006 Fisher’s exact test) ( Figure 2 ) Supplementary Table 1 . Association between the Germline Polymorphisms and Overall Survival and Toxicity No statistically significant association was found between overall-survival or toxicity of any of the tested polymorphisms.  Clinical outcome Twelve out of 53 (23%) patients had a partial response (PR). Forty-one patients were non responders among them, 33 patients (62%) had stable disease (SD) and 8 (15%) patients had progressive disease (PD). The median progression-free survival for 53 patients was 6.6 months (95% CI: 3.9–8.2 months). The median overall survival was 14.4 months (95% CI: 11.1–21.2 months) with median follow up of 32.2 months (range 3.7–36.6 months) ( Table 2 ).  Clinical outcome Twelve out of 53 (23%) patients had a partial response (PR). Forty-one patients were non responders among them, 33 patients (62%) had stable disease (SD) and 8 (15%) patients had progressive disease (PD). The median progression-free survival for 53 patients was 6.6 months (95% CI: 3.9–8.2 months). The median overall survival was 14.4 months (95% CI: 11.1–21.2 months) with median follow up of 32.2 months (range 3.7–36.6 months) ( Table 2 ).  Progression Free Survival (PFS) associated with the CXCR2 C+785T polymorphism Twenty-one of 53 (40%) patients were homozygous C/C at the CXCR2 C+785T gene locus; 18 patients (34%) were heterozygous C/T, and 14 patients (26%) were homozygous for the T/T variation. Patients carrying at least one C allele (C/C; C/T) showed a median PFS of 7.4 months. Patients that were homozygous T/T had a PFS of only 3.7 months (P= 0.026, log-rank test) Figure 1A ; Supplementary Table 1 ).  Progression Free Survival (PFS) associated with the CXCR2 C+785T polymorphism Twenty-one of 53 (40%) patients were homozygous C/C at the CXCR2 C+785T gene locus; 18 patients (34%) were heterozygous C/T, and 14 patients (26%) were homozygous for the T/T variation. Patients carrying at least one C allele (C/C; C/T) showed a median PFS of 7.4 months. Patients that were homozygous T/T had a PFS of only 3.7 months (P= 0.026, log-rank test) Figure 1A ; Supplementary Table 1 ).  Progression Free Survival (PFS) associated with the VEGF C+936T polymorphism Thirty-seven out of 53 patients (69.8%) were homozygous for the C/C genotype, 14 (26,4%) were heterozygous C/T and 2 patients were homozygous T/T. Patients heterozygous (C/T) had a median PFS of 11.8 months, patients being homozygous C/C had a median PFS of 5.5 months; patients being homozygous T/T had a PFS of 3.2 months (P=0.061 log-rank test) Figure 1B ; Supplementary Table 1 .  Progression Free Survival (PFS) associated with the VEGF C+936T polymorphism Thirty-seven out of 53 patients (69.8%) were homozygous for the C/C genotype, 14 (26,4%) were heterozygous C/T and 2 patients were homozygous T/T. Patients heterozygous (C/T) had a median PFS of 11.8 months, patients being homozygous C/C had a median PFS of 5.5 months; patients being homozygous T/T had a PFS of 3.2 months (P=0.061 log-rank test) Figure 1B ; Supplementary Table 1 .  Progression Free Survival (PFS) associated with the AM Repeat Polymorphism The dinucleotide repeat polymorphism showed a range between 11 and 21 repeats. Nine out of 53 patients (17%) were positive for both alleles <14 CA repeats, 16 patients (30%) had at least one allele <14 repeats (the other one could have 14 or more repeats), and 28 patients (53%) were genotyped with both alleles ?14 CA repeats. Patients carrying both AM 3? end alleles <14CA repeats had a median PFS of 3.4 months; patients with at least one allele ?14 CA repeats showed a median PFS of 6.4 months; for both alleles ?14 CA repeats, patients showed 7.2 months of median PFS (P=0.008 log-rank test) ( Figure 1C ) ( Supplementary Table 1 )  Progression Free Survival (PFS) associated with the AM Repeat Polymorphism The dinucleotide repeat polymorphism showed a range between 11 and 21 repeats. Nine out of 53 patients (17%) were positive for both alleles <14 CA repeats, 16 patients (30%) had at least one allele <14 repeats (the other one could have 14 or more repeats), and 28 patients (53%) were genotyped with both alleles ?14 CA repeats. Patients carrying both AM 3? end alleles <14CA repeats had a median PFS of 3.4 months; patients with at least one allele ?14 CA repeats showed a median PFS of 6.4 months; for both alleles ?14 CA repeats, patients showed 7.2 months of median PFS (P=0.008 log-rank test) ( Figure 1C ) ( Supplementary Table 1 )  Association between IL-8 T-251A polymorphism and Response to Chemotherapy Thirteen out of 53 patients were homozygous A/A (24.6%), 26 patients were heterozygous A/T (49%), and 14 patients were homozygous T/T (26.4%). Patients with A/A or A/T genotype at the ?251 locus of the IL-8 gene had a statistically significant lower response rate than those who were homozygous T/T (P=0.006 Fisher’s exact test) ( Figure 2 ) Supplementary Table 1 .  Association between IL-8 T-251A polymorphism and Response to Chemotherapy Thirteen out of 53 patients were homozygous A/A (24.6%), 26 patients were heterozygous A/T (49%), and 14 patients were homozygous T/T (26.4%). Patients with A/A or A/T genotype at the ?251 locus of the IL-8 gene had a statistically significant lower response rate than those who were homozygous T/T (P=0.006 Fisher’s exact test) ( Figure 2 ) Supplementary Table 1 .  Association between the Germline Polymorphisms and Overall Survival and Toxicity No statistically significant association was found between overall-survival or toxicity of any of the tested polymorphisms.  Association between the Germline Polymorphisms and Overall Survival and Toxicity No statistically significant association was found between overall-survival or toxicity of any of the tested polymorphisms.  DISCUSSION The purpose of this study was to evaluate the significance of genomic variations of different genes involved in the angiogenesis pathway that may be associated with therapy efficacy. Our pilot study showed that a germline polymorphism in the IL-8 gene, which consists of a T to A substitution at position ?251, was associated with response to metronomic Cyclophosphamide and Bevacizumab based chemotherapy in patients with recurrent ovarian cancer or primary peritoneal carcinoma. Previously, Hull et al. had found that the A variant of this polymorphism was associated with increased IL-8 production ( 19 ). These findings correlate with our data showing that patients carrying at least one A allele, hypothesized having increased Il-8 production, had a statistically significant lower response rate than those being homozygous for the wild type (T-allele). As previously demonstrated by our group, IL-8 T-251A and its receptor CXCR-1 were associated with clinical outcome in colorectal cancer patients. High-expression variants of IL-8 T-251A were found to be significantly associated with risk of recurrence in colon and rectal cancer patients in both univariate and multivariable analysis ( 20 , 21 ). Other studies reported that IL-8 plays a significant role in mediating human ovarian carcinoma-derived angiogenesis and tumorigenesis ( 22 ). Il-8 exerts its potent angiogenic properties on endothelial cells through interaction with its cognate receptors CXCR1 and CXCR2 ( 17 , 22 – 24 ). Induction of IL-8 preserved the angiogenic response in HIF-1? deficient colon cancer cells, suggesting that IL-8 mediates angiogenesis, independently of VEGF ( 25 ). These studies support our hypothesis that over-expression of IL-8 may be responsible for resistance to Bevacizumab based chemotherapy. Therefore, Il-8 may be a promising novel target for drug development. In vitro and in vivo data suggest that the combination of VEGF and IL-8 antibodies has a synergistic effect ( 24 ), further supporting the significance of IL-8. In addition, we showed that the CXCR2 C+785T polymorphism was associated with PFS in our patient cohort. CXCR2 functions as a receptor for Il-8 on endothelial cells, thus providing more evidence for IL-8 induced angiogenesis. Furthermore in human intestinal micro vascular endothelial cells, Il-8 mediated its angiogenic potential via CXCR2 signaling ( 23 ). CXCR2 knock-out mice, in a murine model of lung cancer, demonstrated reduced tumor growth, increased tumor associated necrosis and reduced metastatic potential in an angiogenesis-dependent manner, again supporting the role of IL-8 and CXCR2 in angiogenesis ( 22 ). Inhibition of this chemokine receptor decreased pancreatic cancer cell-induced angiogenesis. Strong expression of CXCR2 was found on ovarian cancer cells ( 17 ), indicating that IL-8 and its receptor signaling induced angiogenesis play a role in ovarian cancer. So far, the functional significance of the CXCR2 C+785T polymorphism remains unclear. However, previous studies have reported an association between this polymorphism and systemic sclerosis and cryptogenic fibrosing alveolitis ( 26 ). However this polymorphism may be in linkage disequilibrium with other functional polymorphisms which are responsible for this significant association. Taken together, these data suggest the importance of the IL-8 pathways in angiogenesis of ovarian tumors. We could also show an association between a polymorphism in the gene encoding for Adrenomedullin and PFS, indicating a potential role of Adrenomedullin in ovarian cancer angiogenesis. Adrenomedullin (AM), which was originally identified as a vasodilatatory peptide, has been later described as an pro-angiogenic factor ( 27 ). Previously, Nikitenko et al. described the role of AM in tumor angiogenesis ( 28 , 29 ). AM mediates its signals via a G-protein coupled receptor, calcitonin receptor-like receptor (CRLR), and receptor activity modifying proteins (RAMPs) have been recognized as integral components of the AM signaling system. Recent studies have shown that AM activates, the PIK/Akt-dependent pathway in vascular endothelial cells, independently of VEGF. This pathway is considered to regulate endothelial cell survival, proliferation, migration and capillary-like structure formation ( 30 ). VEGF and AM have been found to act synergistically to induce angiogenic-related effects on endothelial cells in vitro ( 30 ). However, blockade of VEGF with antibodies could not inhibit AM-induced capillary tube formation by HUVECs ( 30 ), suggesting the VEGF independent role of AM in tumor associated angiogenesis. AM over-expressing tumors are characterized by increased vascularity. In fact, increased expression of AM mRNA in ovarian tumors has been associated with poor prognosis and histo-pathological grade ( 2 , 31 ). In our study, we examined a CA dinucleotide repeat polymorphism in the 3?-UTR region of the gene. This polymorphism was found to be associated with a genetic predisposition to essential hypertension and type 2 diabetes in patients with renal failure ( 32 , 33 ). So far, there is no data available concerning the exact function of this repeat. Nevertheless, our data indicate that AM may play a role in VEGF-independent angiogenesis of ovarian tumors. VEGF regulates blood and lymphatic vessel development and homeostasis. Under non-malignant conditions, it is predominantly produced by endothelial, hematopoietic and stromal cells in response to hypoxia and upon stimulation with growth factors such as TGF, Interleukins and/or PDGF. VEGF, specifically the VEGF165 isoform, is a major regulator of tumor-associated angiogenesis and promotes tumor growth, invasion and metastasis. Its expression level in cancer cells directly correlates with tumor size, metastasis and poor prognosis in many types of solid and hematological tumors ( 34 , 35 ). Several functional polymorphisms in the VEGF-gene have been described ( 36 ). In our study, we found an association of the VEGF C+936T polymorphism and PFS. This polymorphism is located in the 3?-UTR of the gene. The T variant of this polymorphism was associated with significantly lower VEGF plasma levels ( 37 ). In our study, patients carrying both alleles of the T variant had a significant shorter median PFS than those being homozygous or heterozygous for the wild type (C/T, C/C). Even though conflicting results have been reported ( 38 ), a recent study demonstrated that the prevalence of the VEGF C+936T T-allele, which is associated with decreased plasma levels of VEGF, was less common in breast cancer patients than in healthy subjects, indicating that this genetic variant may be protective against breast cancer ( 39 ). In addition, VEGF gene polymorphisms were found to be an independent prognostic marker in patients with surgically resected gastric, lung and colon cancer ( 21 , 40 , 41 ). These findings support the hypothesis that the expression of VEGF and specifically functional polymorphisms in the VEGF gene may play a role in the efficacy of anti-VEGF therapies. In this pilot study we showed for the first time, that genetic variations in genes involved in ovarian tumor angiogenesis are associated with response and progression free survival in patients treated with Bevacizumab based chemotherapy, independent of platinum sensitivity of initial platinum-based therapy ( Table 3 ). Furthermore our data suggest an important role of genes independent of VEGF to play a critical role in the mechanism of resistance to anti-VEGF therapy. Larger prospective clinical trials are needed to confirm and validate our preliminary findings.  DISCUSSION The purpose of this study was to evaluate the significance of genomic variations of different genes involved in the angiogenesis pathway that may be associated with therapy efficacy. Our pilot study showed that a germline polymorphism in the IL-8 gene, which consists of a T to A substitution at position ?251, was associated with response to metronomic Cyclophosphamide and Bevacizumab based chemotherapy in patients with recurrent ovarian cancer or primary peritoneal carcinoma. Previously, Hull et al. had found that the A variant of this polymorphism was associated with increased IL-8 production ( 19 ). These findings correlate with our data showing that patients carrying at least one A allele, hypothesized having increased Il-8 production, had a statistically significant lower response rate than those being homozygous for the wild type (T-allele). As previously demonstrated by our group, IL-8 T-251A and its receptor CXCR-1 were associated with clinical outcome in colorectal cancer patients. High-expression variants of IL-8 T-251A were found to be significantly associated with risk of recurrence in colon and rectal cancer patients in both univariate and multivariable analysis ( 20 , 21 ). Other studies reported that IL-8 plays a significant role in mediating human ovarian carcinoma-derived angiogenesis and tumorigenesis ( 22 ). Il-8 exerts its potent angiogenic properties on endothelial cells through interaction with its cognate receptors CXCR1 and CXCR2 ( 17 , 22 – 24 ). Induction of IL-8 preserved the angiogenic response in HIF-1? deficient colon cancer cells, suggesting that IL-8 mediates angiogenesis, independently of VEGF ( 25 ). These studies support our hypothesis that over-expression of IL-8 may be responsible for resistance to Bevacizumab based chemotherapy. Therefore, Il-8 may be a promising novel target for drug development. In vitro and in vivo data suggest that the combination of VEGF and IL-8 antibodies has a synergistic effect ( 24 ), further supporting the significance of IL-8. In addition, we showed that the CXCR2 C+785T polymorphism was associated with PFS in our patient cohort. CXCR2 functions as a receptor for Il-8 on endothelial cells, thus providing more evidence for IL-8 induced angiogenesis. Furthermore in human intestinal micro vascular endothelial cells, Il-8 mediated its angiogenic potential via CXCR2 signaling ( 23 ). CXCR2 knock-out mice, in a murine model of lung cancer, demonstrated reduced tumor growth, increased tumor associated necrosis and reduced metastatic potential in an angiogenesis-dependent manner, again supporting the role of IL-8 and CXCR2 in angiogenesis ( 22 ). Inhibition of this chemokine receptor decreased pancreatic cancer cell-induced angiogenesis. Strong expression of CXCR2 was found on ovarian cancer cells ( 17 ), indicating that IL-8 and its receptor signaling induced angiogenesis play a role in ovarian cancer. So far, the functional significance of the CXCR2 C+785T polymorphism remains unclear. However, previous studies have reported an association between this polymorphism and systemic sclerosis and cryptogenic fibrosing alveolitis ( 26 ). However this polymorphism may be in linkage disequilibrium with other functional polymorphisms which are responsible for this significant association. Taken together, these data suggest the importance of the IL-8 pathways in angiogenesis of ovarian tumors. We could also show an association between a polymorphism in the gene encoding for Adrenomedullin and PFS, indicating a potential role of Adrenomedullin in ovarian cancer angiogenesis. Adrenomedullin (AM), which was originally identified as a vasodilatatory peptide, has been later described as an pro-angiogenic factor ( 27 ). Previously, Nikitenko et al. described the role of AM in tumor angiogenesis ( 28 , 29 ). AM mediates its signals via a G-protein coupled receptor, calcitonin receptor-like receptor (CRLR), and receptor activity modifying proteins (RAMPs) have been recognized as integral components of the AM signaling system. Recent studies have shown that AM activates, the PIK/Akt-dependent pathway in vascular endothelial cells, independently of VEGF. This pathway is considered to regulate endothelial cell survival, proliferation, migration and capillary-like structure formation ( 30 ). VEGF and AM have been found to act synergistically to induce angiogenic-related effects on endothelial cells in vitro ( 30 ). However, blockade of VEGF with antibodies could not inhibit AM-induced capillary tube formation by HUVECs ( 30 ), suggesting the VEGF independent role of AM in tumor associated angiogenesis. AM over-expressing tumors are characterized by increased vascularity. In fact, increased expression of AM mRNA in ovarian tumors has been associated with poor prognosis and histo-pathological grade ( 2 , 31 ). In our study, we examined a CA dinucleotide repeat polymorphism in the 3?-UTR region of the gene. This polymorphism was found to be associated with a genetic predisposition to essential hypertension and type 2 diabetes in patients with renal failure ( 32 , 33 ). So far, there is no data available concerning the exact function of this repeat. Nevertheless, our data indicate that AM may play a role in VEGF-independent angiogenesis of ovarian tumors. VEGF regulates blood and lymphatic vessel development and homeostasis. Under non-malignant conditions, it is predominantly produced by endothelial, hematopoietic and stromal cells in response to hypoxia and upon stimulation with growth factors such as TGF, Interleukins and/or PDGF. VEGF, specifically the VEGF165 isoform, is a major regulator of tumor-associated angiogenesis and promotes tumor growth, invasion and metastasis. Its expression level in cancer cells directly correlates with tumor size, metastasis and poor prognosis in many types of solid and hematological tumors ( 34 , 35 ). Several functional polymorphisms in the VEGF-gene have been described ( 36 ). In our study, we found an association of the VEGF C+936T polymorphism and PFS. This polymorphism is located in the 3?-UTR of the gene. The T variant of this polymorphism was associated with significantly lower VEGF plasma levels ( 37 ). In our study, patients carrying both alleles of the T variant had a significant shorter median PFS than those being homozygous or heterozygous for the wild type (C/T, C/C). Even though conflicting results have been reported ( 38 ), a recent study demonstrated that the prevalence of the VEGF C+936T T-allele, which is associated with decreased plasma levels of VEGF, was less common in breast cancer patients than in healthy subjects, indicating that this genetic variant may be protective against breast cancer ( 39 ). In addition, VEGF gene polymorphisms were found to be an independent prognostic marker in patients with surgically resected gastric, lung and colon cancer ( 21 , 40 , 41 ). These findings support the hypothesis that the expression of VEGF and specifically functional polymorphisms in the VEGF gene may play a role in the efficacy of anti-VEGF therapies. In this pilot study we showed for the first time, that genetic variations in genes involved in ovarian tumor angiogenesis are associated with response and progression free survival in patients treated with Bevacizumab based chemotherapy, independent of platinum sensitivity of initial platinum-based therapy ( Table 3 ). Furthermore our data suggest an important role of genes independent of VEGF to play a critical role in the mechanism of resistance to anti-VEGF therapy. Larger prospective clinical trials are needed to confirm and validate our preliminary findings.  Supplementary Material  Supplementary Material  Figures and Tables Figure 1 PFS associated with ( A ) CXCR2 C+785T, ( B ) VEGF C+936T, and ( C ) AM (CA)n dinucleotide repeat polymorphisms.. Vertical hash marks indicate the time of last follow-up for those patients who have not progressed or died at the time of the analysis of data. All censored patients and those who showed progressive disease are accounted for. Figure 2 Response to Cyclophosphamide and Bevacizumab treatment associated with IL-8 T-251A polymorphism. Response rate of patients with ovarian cancer by IL-8 T-251A polymorphism Table 1 Analyzed polymorphisms and their functional significance Gene General function Role in ovarian cancer Location of Polymorphism Function of Polymorphsim VEGF regulation of blood an lymphatic vessel development important in initiating and mediating growth of ovarian tumors; over-expressed in the tumor 5?UTR C+405G/C-634G 3?UTR C+936T C allele – decreased VEGF plasma levels T allele – decreased VEGF plasma levels PLGF member of VEGF family; important role in tumor vasculogenesis mRNA level increased in tumor cells of EOC 3?UTR G>A (rs8185) 3?UTR T>A (rs12411) unknown KDR receptor for VEGF 11–14 AC repeat +4422 ARNT binding site 11/11 genotype higher expression level Nrp1 receptor for class-3 semaphorins; bind certain isoforms of VEGF(e.g.165); co-receptor for KDR in EC expressed on ovarian tumors 3?UTR C>T unknown AM vasodilatatory peptide, angiogenic potential in tumor vascularization AM mRNA expression associated with poor prognosis; AM gene expression associated with histo-pathological grade 3? end CA dinucleotide repeat; range 11–21 unknown; may influence expression of nearly located genes; associated with hypertension and type 2 diabetes Leptin regulates body weight homeostasis; angiogenic activity; regulates expression of MMPs elevated serum levels in patients with EOC compared to healthy controls G-2548A increased risk and poor prognosis in breast carcinomas; A genotype associated with higher serum levels of leptin IL-8 chemokine; regulates immunity; regulates expression of MMPs; VEGF independent mediator of tumor assocaited angiogenesis serum titer increased in 90% of EOC; sign role in mediating human ovarian carcinoma derived angiogenesis T-251A A allele increased Il-8 production CXCR1 receptor for IL-8 strongly expressed in ovarian cancer cells G+2607C associated with TTP in CRC patients treated with oxaliplatin based chemotherapy; conservative AA change from Serine to Threonine CXCR2 receptor for Il-8; mediates angiogenic potential of Il-8 strongly expressed in ovarian cancer cells C+785T C/C associated with increased frequency of systemic sclerosis; associated with airway disease IGF2 associated of proliferation and apoptosis; angiogenic potential elevated expression in EOC G4205A A allele related with progression in oral cancer IGFR receptor for IGF; involved in regulation of cell proliferation, anti-apoptosis, differentiation and cell motility; involved in tumor angiogenesis receptor is present on all ovarian cancer cells exon 16; G3174A A allele associated with lower levels of IGF1 FGFR4 member of the FGFR family expressed in ovarian tumors codon 388Gly>Arg (G>A) Arg allele associated with high FGFR4 expression TF primary cellular initiator of blood coagulation; involved in tumor growth, angiogenesis and metastasis; reported to regulate the balance of pro-angiogenic and anti-angiogenic properties of tumor cells up-regulated in EOC 5?UTR A-603G mRNA expression higher in carriers of G allele MMP2 degradation enzyme of ECM; involved in tumor angiogenesis-production regulated by EC; expression ass. with tumor vascularisation high stromal and epithelial expression ass. with shorter disease specific survival promoter C-1306T T variant lower promoter activity MMP9 triggers angiogenic switch during carcinogenesis high stromal and epithelial expression associated with shorter disease specific survival promoter C-1562T T allele higher promoter activity MMP7 broad proteolytic activity against a variety of ECM substrates promotes invasion of ovarian cancer cells; over-expressed in ovarian cancer cell lines; secretion stimulated by VEGF and IL8 promoter A-181G promoter activity of G allele 2–3 fold higher compared to A allele ICAM1 adhesion molecule; important for maintaining cell- cell contact; thought to have effect on tumor progression; VEGF up-regulated; influence on EPC recruitment serum ICAM levels elevated in malignant tumors; reduced expression of ICAM1 in ovarian adenocarcinomas G241A A allele showed lower soluble ICAM levels EGF growth factor 5?UTR A61G A/A genotype less EGF production EGFR receptor for EGF G497A variation thought to attenuate ligand binding, growth stimulation, tyrosine kinase activation HIF-1? oxygen dependent up-regulation of genes HIF1? expression increased in advanced stage EOC C1772T; oxygen-dependent-domain variant revealed significantly higher transcription activity ARNT HIF-1? subunit; absolutely required for gene activation by hypoxia expressed on ovarian tissue located in domain know to be important of function of gene (PAS domain) G>C (rs 2228099) unknown; frequent in caucasian population IL-6 inflammatory cytokine; pleiotropic function; main sources monocytes, fibroblast and endothelial cells; suggested to play role as tumor growth factor; regulatory molecule in physiologic and pathologic angiogenesis; induced VEGF expression; production stimulated by IL1 and TNF? secreted by human ovarian carcinoma cells where it acts as potent pro-angiogenic cytokine promoter region G-174C G allele higher plasma levels of IL-6 NFkb transcription factor involved in mediating immune response; thought to activate IL 8 release in HIF knock out CA dinucleotide repeat range: 120–154 base pairs (A1–A18) unknown; associated with type 1 diabetes TNF? Cytokine; wide range of pro-inflammatory activities; stimulates release of Nfkb; role in angiogenesis in EOC increased serum levels in EOC G-308A substitution guanine by adenosine; rare allele high TNF? production; associated with airway disease IL-1? pro-inflammatory cytokine influences production of angiogenic factors induced expression of AM mRNA; up-regulated IL8 promoter T-511C exon 5 C3954T T allele higher secretion of IL1? T allele higher production of IL1? IL-1Ra member of Il-1 family; anti-inflammatory effect by binding to Il-1R intron 2 86 base pair repeat role in occurrence of ovarian carcinoma MDM2 degrades p53; targeted by p53; mediates VEGF transcriptional activation; protein up-regulated by IGF-1 stimulation expression related to clinical outcome in ovarian cancer promoter T>G SNP309 associated with acceleration in tumor formation P53 tumor suppressor gene; interaction with HIF1 either directly or via MDM2; regulates tumor angiogenesis by degradation of HIF1 expression related to clinical outcome in ovarian cancer codon 72 Pro-Arg (C>G) Pro stronger inducer of transcription COX2 pivotal role in inflammation and neoplastic progression; up-regulated by cytokines, growth factors and tumor promoters correlation between microvessel count and cox-2 levels 3?UTR T8473C C variant associated with increased risk for breast cancer and NSCLC SDF1/CXCL12 chemokine induces angiogenesis; large amount of SDF1 produced by ovarian tumors; receptor widely over-expressed 3?UTR G-801A A genotype up-regulation of SDF1 protein Table 2 Demographic, clinical characteristics, and outcome of study patients in subset and overall phase II trial population Characteristic Subset population * Overall phase II study N 53 70 Age at treatment, years ?Median 59 60 ?Range 31–83 31–83 Performance status ?0 51% 44% ?1 42% 50% ?2 8% 6% Histology ?Serous 66% 66% ?Adenocarcinoma NOS 26% 29% ?Clear cell 8% 6% Prior chemotherapy ?Platinum 100% 100% ?Paclitaxel or docetaxel 100% 100% ?Liposomal doxorubicin 26% 27% ?Topotecan 19% 23% ?Gemcitabine 19% 19% No of prior chemotherapy regimens ?Median 2 2 ?Range 1–3 1–3 Platinum sensitivity ?Sensitive 62% 60% ?Resistant 38% 40% Response rate 23% 24% Median time to progression (months) 6.6 7.2 Median survival (months) 14.4 16.9 * Patients with specimen available for genotyping Table 3 Multivariable Analysis of Genomic polymorphisms and Progression-Free Survival N Relative Risk (95% CI) * P value VEGF+936 0.26 ?C/C 37 1 (Reference) ?C/T 14 0.64 (0.33, 1.26) ?T/T 2 2.07 (0.43, 9.85) Nrp1 3?UTR 0.046 ?C/C 15 1 (Reference) ?C/T 27 2.30 (1.09, 4.86) ?T/T 11 2.39 (0.99, 5.76) AM 0.037 ?<14/<14 9 1 (Reference) ?<14/14+ 16 0.50 (0.19, 1.32) ?14+/14+ 28 0.32 (0.13, 0.77) IL8 0.093 ?A/A 13 1 (Reference) ?A/T 26 1.59 (0.77, 3.29) ?T/T 14 0.75 (0.32, 1.73) CXCR2 0.11 ?C/C 21 1 (Reference) ?C/T 18 0.86 (0.44, 1.69) ?T/T 14 1.97 (0.94, 4.10) * Stratified by platinum sensitivity of initial platinum-based therapy using Cox proportional hazards model  Figures and Tables Figure 1 PFS associated with ( A ) CXCR2 C+785T, ( B ) VEGF C+936T, and ( C ) AM (CA)n dinucleotide repeat polymorphisms.. Vertical hash marks indicate the time of last follow-up for those patients who have not progressed or died at the time of the analysis of data. All censored patients and those who showed progressive disease are accounted for. Figure 2 Response to Cyclophosphamide and Bevacizumab treatment associated with IL-8 T-251A polymorphism. Response rate of patients with ovarian cancer by IL-8 T-251A polymorphism Table 1 Analyzed polymorphisms and their functional significance Gene General function Role in ovarian cancer Location of Polymorphism Function of Polymorphsim VEGF regulation of blood an lymphatic vessel development important in initiating and mediating growth of ovarian tumors; over-expressed in the tumor 5?UTR C+405G/C-634G 3?UTR C+936T C allele – decreased VEGF plasma levels T allele – decreased VEGF plasma levels PLGF member of VEGF family; important role in tumor vasculogenesis mRNA level increased in tumor cells of EOC 3?UTR G>A (rs8185) 3?UTR T>A (rs12411) unknown KDR receptor for VEGF 11–14 AC repeat +4422 ARNT binding site 11/11 genotype higher expression level Nrp1 receptor for class-3 semaphorins; bind certain isoforms of VEGF(e.g.165); co-receptor for KDR in EC expressed on ovarian tumors 3?UTR C>T unknown AM vasodilatatory peptide, angiogenic potential in tumor vascularization AM mRNA expression associated with poor prognosis; AM gene expression associated with histo-pathological grade 3? end CA dinucleotide repeat; range 11–21 unknown; may influence expression of nearly located genes; associated with hypertension and type 2 diabetes Leptin regulates body weight homeostasis; angiogenic activity; regulates expression of MMPs elevated serum levels in patients with EOC compared to healthy controls G-2548A increased risk and poor prognosis in breast carcinomas; A genotype associated with higher serum levels of leptin IL-8 chemokine; regulates immunity; regulates expression of MMPs; VEGF independent mediator of tumor assocaited angiogenesis serum titer increased in 90% of EOC; sign role in mediating human ovarian carcinoma derived angiogenesis T-251A A allele increased Il-8 production CXCR1 receptor for IL-8 strongly expressed in ovarian cancer cells G+2607C associated with TTP in CRC patients treated with oxaliplatin based chemotherapy; conservative AA change from Serine to Threonine CXCR2 receptor for Il-8; mediates angiogenic potential of Il-8 strongly expressed in ovarian cancer cells C+785T C/C associated with increased frequency of systemic sclerosis; associated with airway disease IGF2 associated of proliferation and apoptosis; angiogenic potential elevated expression in EOC G4205A A allele related with progression in oral cancer IGFR receptor for IGF; involved in regulation of cell proliferation, anti-apoptosis, differentiation and cell motility; involved in tumor angiogenesis receptor is present on all ovarian cancer cells exon 16; G3174A A allele associated with lower levels of IGF1 FGFR4 member of the FGFR family expressed in ovarian tumors codon 388Gly>Arg (G>A) Arg allele associated with high FGFR4 expression TF primary cellular initiator of blood coagulation; involved in tumor growth, angiogenesis and metastasis; reported to regulate the balance of pro-angiogenic and anti-angiogenic properties of tumor cells up-regulated in EOC 5?UTR A-603G mRNA expression higher in carriers of G allele MMP2 degradation enzyme of ECM; involved in tumor angiogenesis-production regulated by EC; expression ass. with tumor vascularisation high stromal and epithelial expression ass. with shorter disease specific survival promoter C-1306T T variant lower promoter activity MMP9 triggers angiogenic switch during carcinogenesis high stromal and epithelial expression associated with shorter disease specific survival promoter C-1562T T allele higher promoter activity MMP7 broad proteolytic activity against a variety of ECM substrates promotes invasion of ovarian cancer cells; over-expressed in ovarian cancer cell lines; secretion stimulated by VEGF and IL8 promoter A-181G promoter activity of G allele 2–3 fold higher compared to A allele ICAM1 adhesion molecule; important for maintaining cell- cell contact; thought to have effect on tumor progression; VEGF up-regulated; influence on EPC recruitment serum ICAM levels elevated in malignant tumors; reduced expression of ICAM1 in ovarian adenocarcinomas G241A A allele showed lower soluble ICAM levels EGF growth factor 5?UTR A61G A/A genotype less EGF production EGFR receptor for EGF G497A variation thought to attenuate ligand binding, growth stimulation, tyrosine kinase activation HIF-1? oxygen dependent up-regulation of genes HIF1? expression increased in advanced stage EOC C1772T; oxygen-dependent-domain variant revealed significantly higher transcription activity ARNT HIF-1? subunit; absolutely required for gene activation by hypoxia expressed on ovarian tissue located in domain know to be important of function of gene (PAS domain) G>C (rs 2228099) unknown; frequent in caucasian population IL-6 inflammatory cytokine; pleiotropic function; main sources monocytes, fibroblast and endothelial cells; suggested to play role as tumor growth factor; regulatory molecule in physiologic and pathologic angiogenesis; induced VEGF expression; production stimulated by IL1 and TNF? secreted by human ovarian carcinoma cells where it acts as potent pro-angiogenic cytokine promoter region G-174C G allele higher plasma levels of IL-6 NFkb transcription factor involved in mediating immune response; thought to activate IL 8 release in HIF knock out CA dinucleotide repeat range: 120–154 base pairs (A1–A18) unknown; associated with type 1 diabetes TNF? Cytokine; wide range of pro-inflammatory activities; stimulates release of Nfkb; role in angiogenesis in EOC increased serum levels in EOC G-308A substitution guanine by adenosine; rare allele high TNF? production; associated with airway disease IL-1? pro-inflammatory cytokine influences production of angiogenic factors induced expression of AM mRNA; up-regulated IL8 promoter T-511C exon 5 C3954T T allele higher secretion of IL1? T allele higher production of IL1? IL-1Ra member of Il-1 family; anti-inflammatory effect by binding to Il-1R intron 2 86 base pair repeat role in occurrence of ovarian carcinoma MDM2 degrades p53; targeted by p53; mediates VEGF transcriptional activation; protein up-regulated by IGF-1 stimulation expression related to clinical outcome in ovarian cancer promoter T>G SNP309 associated with acceleration in tumor formation P53 tumor suppressor gene; interaction with HIF1 either directly or via MDM2; regulates tumor angiogenesis by degradation of HIF1 expression related to clinical outcome in ovarian cancer codon 72 Pro-Arg (C>G) Pro stronger inducer of transcription COX2 pivotal role in inflammation and neoplastic progression; up-regulated by cytokines, growth factors and tumor promoters correlation between microvessel count and cox-2 levels 3?UTR T8473C C variant associated with increased risk for breast cancer and NSCLC SDF1/CXCL12 chemokine induces angiogenesis; large amount of SDF1 produced by ovarian tumors; receptor widely over-expressed 3?UTR G-801A A genotype up-regulation of SDF1 protein Table 2 Demographic, clinical characteristics, and outcome of study patients in subset and overall phase II trial population Characteristic Subset population * Overall phase II study N 53 70 Age at treatment, years ?Median 59 60 ?Range 31–83 31–83 Performance status ?0 51% 44% ?1 42% 50% ?2 8% 6% Histology ?Serous 66% 66% ?Adenocarcinoma NOS 26% 29% ?Clear cell 8% 6% Prior chemotherapy ?Platinum 100% 100% ?Paclitaxel or docetaxel 100% 100% ?Liposomal doxorubicin 26% 27% ?Topotecan 19% 23% ?Gemcitabine 19% 19% No of prior chemotherapy regimens ?Median 2 2 ?Range 1–3 1–3 Platinum sensitivity ?Sensitive 62% 60% ?Resistant 38% 40% Response rate 23% 24% Median time to progression (months) 6.6 7.2 Median survival (months) 14.4 16.9 * Patients with specimen available for genotyping Table 3 Multivariable Analysis of Genomic polymorphisms and Progression-Free Survival N Relative Risk (95% CI) * P value VEGF+936 0.26 ?C/C 37 1 (Reference) ?C/T 14 0.64 (0.33, 1.26) ?T/T 2 2.07 (0.43, 9.85) Nrp1 3?UTR 0.046 ?C/C 15 1 (Reference) ?C/T 27 2.30 (1.09, 4.86) ?T/T 11 2.39 (0.99, 5.76) AM 0.037 ?<14/<14 9 1 (Reference) ?<14/14+ 16 0.50 (0.19, 1.32) ?14+/14+ 28 0.32 (0.13, 0.77) IL8 0.093 ?A/A 13 1 (Reference) ?A/T 26 1.59 (0.77, 3.29) ?T/T 14 0.75 (0.32, 1.73) CXCR2 0.11 ?C/C 21 1 (Reference) ?C/T 18 0.86 (0.44, 1.69) ?T/T 14 1.97 (0.94, 4.10) * Stratified by platinum sensitivity of initial platinum-based therapy using Cox proportional hazards model 