Antagonism of BMP4 Signaling Disrupts Smooth Muscle Investment of the Ureter and Ureteropelvic Junction Purpose Congenital ureteropelvic junction obstruction has been associated with aberrant ureteral smooth muscle organization. Recent evidence has shown that BMP4 may be involved in ureteral morphogenesis. We determined whether the disruption of BMP4 signaling results in abnormal smooth muscle investment of the ureter and ureteropelvic junction. Materials and Methods We used a Cre mediated Bmp4 knockout system to conditionally excise the Bmp4 gene in developing mouse embryos. Kidney rudiments were isolated from embryos at varying gestational ages from WT and conditional knockout mice. Metanephric kidney explants were cultured in the presence or absence of the BMP antagonist Noggin. Agarose beads pre-incubated with Gremlin, another BMP antagonist, were used for localized disruption of BMP signaling. Frozen sections and whole metanephric explants were then analyzed by immunofluorescence. Results Bmp4 gene excision resulted in a dose dependent loss of ureteral smooth muscle. Antagonism of BMP signaling inhibited ureteral smooth muscle investment in a dose dependent manner and was paralleled by a dose dependent decrease in the immediate downstream targets of BMP signaling, phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8. Localized antagonism of BMP resulted in the focal disruption of ureteral smooth muscle investment. Conclusions We report that decreased BMP signaling, whether by the loss of BMP4 in vivo or direct antagonism in vitro, results in a gradual reduction of the normal, well organized coat of smooth muscle surrounding the ureter. Our results also suggest that this occurs via a direct Smad dependent pathway. This raises the possibility that abnormalities in BMP4 signaling may have a role in the development of congenital ureteropelvic junction obstruction.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Animals Timed pregnant Swiss Webster female mice (Taconic Farms, Germantown, New York) were housed at the Cornell Animal Facility and treated according to research animal resource center guidelines. Mice homozygous for the Bmp4 conditional allele created by the introduction of Cre recombinase (loxP) sites into the Bmp4 locus 12 were also used. Our procedure to conditionally excise the Bmp4 gene has been described previously. 10 Briefly, Bmp4flox/flox females were mated with Cre/Esr1 heterozygous male mice 13 (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, Maine). Bmp4flox/+ male offspring carrying the Cre recombinase transgene were selected and mated with Bmp4flox/flox females to generate Bmp4flox/flox; Cre/Esr1 embryos. Complete Bmp4 excision was confirmed using in situ hybridization. As reported previously, BMP4 is required for embryonic viability. 12 Bmp4flox/flox embryos carrying the Cre transgene died in utero approximately 24 hours after timed pregnant dams were injected with 5 mg tamoxifen (Sigma®). 13 Metanephric Explant Cultures Kidney rudiments were isolated from mouse embryos at the gestational stages noted. Appearance of a vaginal plug was designated as E0.5. Our explant culture system has been described previously. 14 Recombinant BMP4, Noggin and Gremlin were used (R & D Systems®). Immunofluorescence Frozen sections and kidney explants were used for immunofluorescent analysis using previously described protocols. 14 Specimens were analyzed using a C4742-95 digital camera (Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, Japan) and a MetaMorph® Image capturing system. The primary and secondary antibodies used were Cy3 conjugated mouse monoclonal SMA (Sigma) (1:400), E-cadherin (R & D Systems) (1:200) and donkey anti-goat (1:200) as the secondary antibody, phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 (Cell Signaling Technologies®) (1:100), and donkey anti-rabbit (1:200) as the secondary antibody, and DAPI (Sigma, 1:1,000).  Animals Timed pregnant Swiss Webster female mice (Taconic Farms, Germantown, New York) were housed at the Cornell Animal Facility and treated according to research animal resource center guidelines. Mice homozygous for the Bmp4 conditional allele created by the introduction of Cre recombinase (loxP) sites into the Bmp4 locus 12 were also used. Our procedure to conditionally excise the Bmp4 gene has been described previously. 10 Briefly, Bmp4flox/flox females were mated with Cre/Esr1 heterozygous male mice 13 (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, Maine). Bmp4flox/+ male offspring carrying the Cre recombinase transgene were selected and mated with Bmp4flox/flox females to generate Bmp4flox/flox; Cre/Esr1 embryos. Complete Bmp4 excision was confirmed using in situ hybridization. As reported previously, BMP4 is required for embryonic viability. 12 Bmp4flox/flox embryos carrying the Cre transgene died in utero approximately 24 hours after timed pregnant dams were injected with 5 mg tamoxifen (Sigma®). 13  Metanephric Explant Cultures Kidney rudiments were isolated from mouse embryos at the gestational stages noted. Appearance of a vaginal plug was designated as E0.5. Our explant culture system has been described previously. 14 Recombinant BMP4, Noggin and Gremlin were used (R & D Systems®).  Immunofluorescence Frozen sections and kidney explants were used for immunofluorescent analysis using previously described protocols. 14 Specimens were analyzed using a C4742-95 digital camera (Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, Japan) and a MetaMorph® Image capturing system. The primary and secondary antibodies used were Cy3 conjugated mouse monoclonal SMA (Sigma) (1:400), E-cadherin (R & D Systems) (1:200) and donkey anti-goat (1:200) as the secondary antibody, phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 (Cell Signaling Technologies®) (1:100), and donkey anti-rabbit (1:200) as the secondary antibody, and DAPI (Sigma, 1:1,000).  RESULTS <italic>Bmp4</italic> Gene Dose Correlated With Ureteral Smooth Muscle Coat Thickness We used a transgenic approach to delete BMP4 signaling in the developing urinary tract. Female mice harboring floxed Bmp4 alleles were mated with males carrying a transgene encoding a fusion protein of Cre recombinase and Esr1 (Cre/Esr1). As described previously, maternal administration of the synthetic estrogen tamoxifen results in Cre mediated excision of the floxed Bmp4 alleles. 10 , 13 Timed pregnant mice were injected with tamoxifen at E12 and embryos were harvested 6 hours after injection. 13 When assayed for the expression of E-cadherin and SMA, control embryos harboring floxed Bmp4 alleles in the absence of the Cre transgene ( Bmp4 flox/flox ) demonstrated E-cadherin expression by the epithelium of the ureter and the intrarenal collecting tubules as well as a thick, well organized circumferential coat of SMA positive cells surrounding the ureter ( fig. 1, A ). Mice heterozygous for the floxed Bmp4 allele carrying the Cre transgene ( Bmp4 flox/ + , Cre/Esr1 ) demonstrated a less robust coat of SMA positive cells investing the ureter ( fig. 1, B ). This was confirmed quantitatively since the width of the smooth muscle coat surrounding the ureter was decreased in heterozygous Bmp4 flox/ + , Cre/Esr1 mice compared to that in controls (32 vs 37 ? m, p = 0.002, fig. 2 ). Mice homozygous for the floxed Bmp4 alleles carrying the Cre transgene ( Bmp4 flox/flox , Cre/Esr1 ) had minimal, scattered SMA positive cells that did not form a well organized coat around the ureter ( fig. 1, C ). Cre mediated Bmp4 excision was documented by polymerase chain reaction and confirmed by in situ hybridization. These data suggest that the Bmp4 gene dose may have a role in determining the width of the ureteral smooth muscle coat. Antagonism of BMP Signaling Inhibited Ureteral Smooth Muscle Investment in a Dose Dependent Manner To better delineate the relationship between the Bmp4 gene dose and ureteral smooth muscle investment we used the soluble BMP antagonist Noggin 15 to titrate the level of BMP signaling in the developing ureter in vitro. Kidney rudiments were isolated at E12.5 and cultured in the presence of 1, 5 and 10 ? g/ml recombinant Noggin for 5 days. Rudiments were assayed for E-cadherin and SMA expression. Controls demonstrated a thick, well organized coat of SMA positive cells surrounding the ureter ( fig. 3, A, E and I ). Cultures supplemented with 1 ? g/ml Noggin had SMA positive cells surrounding the ureter but smooth muscle coat thickness was decreased ( fig. 3, B, F and J ). At 5 ? g/ml Noggin even fewer SMA expressing cells were found surrounding the ureter ( fig. 3, C, G and K ). Finally, at 10 ? g/ml Noggin few scattered SMA positive cells could be seen but they did not form a well organized circumferential coat ( fig. 3, D, H and L ). Collectively these results indicate that the number and organization of myocytes present in the ureteral smooth muscle coat are regulated in part by the level of BMP signaling. Phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 Expression Paralleled Smooth Muscle Investment Loss in a Dose Dependent Manner Smad1, 5 and 8, which are the immediate downstream targets of BMP receptors, have a vital role in BMP signal transduction. 11 Therefore, we determined whether the decrease in ureteral smooth muscle investment due to BMP4 antagonism would induce a dose dependent decrease in Smad1, 5 and 8 phosphorylation. Rudiments were isolated at E12.5, cultured in the presence of recombinant BMP4 or Noggin (1, 5 and 10 ? g/ml) for 5 days and then assayed for the expression of E-cadherin, and phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8. Control cultures demonstrated abundant phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 expression in the mesenchyma surrounding the ureter and medullary interstitium with minimal to no expression in the ureteral epithelium ( fig. 4, A and F ). When cultures were supplemented with 250 ng/ml BMP4 ( fig. 4, B and G ), an increase in phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 expression was seen. In contrast, cultures supplemented with Noggin demonstrated a dose dependent decrease in phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 expression ( fig. 4, C to E and H to J ). At 1 ? g/ml Noggin phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 activity was decreased compared to that in controls but it was again seen in the mesenchyma surrounding the ureter but not in the ureteral epithelium ( fig. 4, C and H ). Importantly the number of cells present in the periureteral mesenchyma was similar under all experimental conditions, as determined by nuclear DAPI staining ( fig. 4, K to M ). Thus, the decreased levels of phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 were not due to a decrease in the overall number of cells in the mesenchyma surrounding the ureter, but rather to a decrease in the number of cells responding to BMP signaling. Localized Antagonism of BMP Signaling Resulted in Focal Disruption of Ureteral Smooth Muscle Investment Congenital UPJ obstruction in humans is characterized by a focal rather than a global disruption in ureteral smooth muscle. 6 Therefore, we tested whether localized perturbation of BMP signaling mimics the focal character of UPJ obstruction. Kidney rudiments were isolated at E12.5 and cultured for 5 days in the presence or absence of agarose beads pre-incubated with the BMP antagonist Gremlin, 15 as described by Vainio et al. 16 Gremlin was used because it has higher specific activity than recombinant Noggin and, therefore, it is better suited for focal inhibition. Specimens with implanted beads were assayed for E-cadherin and SMA expression. Controls demonstrated a thick, well organized coat of SMA positive cells investing the ureter ( fig. 5, A ). Cultures in which agarose beads were pre-incubated in PBS showed a thick coat of SMA positive cells, similar to that seen in controls ( fig. 5, B ). In contrast, Gremlin coated beads induced focal disruption of the thick, well organized coat of SMA positive cells seen in controls ( fig. 5, C ).  RESULTS <italic>Bmp4</italic> Gene Dose Correlated With Ureteral Smooth Muscle Coat Thickness We used a transgenic approach to delete BMP4 signaling in the developing urinary tract. Female mice harboring floxed Bmp4 alleles were mated with males carrying a transgene encoding a fusion protein of Cre recombinase and Esr1 (Cre/Esr1). As described previously, maternal administration of the synthetic estrogen tamoxifen results in Cre mediated excision of the floxed Bmp4 alleles. 10 , 13 Timed pregnant mice were injected with tamoxifen at E12 and embryos were harvested 6 hours after injection. 13 When assayed for the expression of E-cadherin and SMA, control embryos harboring floxed Bmp4 alleles in the absence of the Cre transgene ( Bmp4 flox/flox ) demonstrated E-cadherin expression by the epithelium of the ureter and the intrarenal collecting tubules as well as a thick, well organized circumferential coat of SMA positive cells surrounding the ureter ( fig. 1, A ). Mice heterozygous for the floxed Bmp4 allele carrying the Cre transgene ( Bmp4 flox/ + , Cre/Esr1 ) demonstrated a less robust coat of SMA positive cells investing the ureter ( fig. 1, B ). This was confirmed quantitatively since the width of the smooth muscle coat surrounding the ureter was decreased in heterozygous Bmp4 flox/ + , Cre/Esr1 mice compared to that in controls (32 vs 37 ? m, p = 0.002, fig. 2 ). Mice homozygous for the floxed Bmp4 alleles carrying the Cre transgene ( Bmp4 flox/flox , Cre/Esr1 ) had minimal, scattered SMA positive cells that did not form a well organized coat around the ureter ( fig. 1, C ). Cre mediated Bmp4 excision was documented by polymerase chain reaction and confirmed by in situ hybridization. These data suggest that the Bmp4 gene dose may have a role in determining the width of the ureteral smooth muscle coat. Antagonism of BMP Signaling Inhibited Ureteral Smooth Muscle Investment in a Dose Dependent Manner To better delineate the relationship between the Bmp4 gene dose and ureteral smooth muscle investment we used the soluble BMP antagonist Noggin 15 to titrate the level of BMP signaling in the developing ureter in vitro. Kidney rudiments were isolated at E12.5 and cultured in the presence of 1, 5 and 10 ? g/ml recombinant Noggin for 5 days. Rudiments were assayed for E-cadherin and SMA expression. Controls demonstrated a thick, well organized coat of SMA positive cells surrounding the ureter ( fig. 3, A, E and I ). Cultures supplemented with 1 ? g/ml Noggin had SMA positive cells surrounding the ureter but smooth muscle coat thickness was decreased ( fig. 3, B, F and J ). At 5 ? g/ml Noggin even fewer SMA expressing cells were found surrounding the ureter ( fig. 3, C, G and K ). Finally, at 10 ? g/ml Noggin few scattered SMA positive cells could be seen but they did not form a well organized circumferential coat ( fig. 3, D, H and L ). Collectively these results indicate that the number and organization of myocytes present in the ureteral smooth muscle coat are regulated in part by the level of BMP signaling. Phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 Expression Paralleled Smooth Muscle Investment Loss in a Dose Dependent Manner Smad1, 5 and 8, which are the immediate downstream targets of BMP receptors, have a vital role in BMP signal transduction. 11 Therefore, we determined whether the decrease in ureteral smooth muscle investment due to BMP4 antagonism would induce a dose dependent decrease in Smad1, 5 and 8 phosphorylation. Rudiments were isolated at E12.5, cultured in the presence of recombinant BMP4 or Noggin (1, 5 and 10 ? g/ml) for 5 days and then assayed for the expression of E-cadherin, and phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8. Control cultures demonstrated abundant phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 expression in the mesenchyma surrounding the ureter and medullary interstitium with minimal to no expression in the ureteral epithelium ( fig. 4, A and F ). When cultures were supplemented with 250 ng/ml BMP4 ( fig. 4, B and G ), an increase in phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 expression was seen. In contrast, cultures supplemented with Noggin demonstrated a dose dependent decrease in phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 expression ( fig. 4, C to E and H to J ). At 1 ? g/ml Noggin phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 activity was decreased compared to that in controls but it was again seen in the mesenchyma surrounding the ureter but not in the ureteral epithelium ( fig. 4, C and H ). Importantly the number of cells present in the periureteral mesenchyma was similar under all experimental conditions, as determined by nuclear DAPI staining ( fig. 4, K to M ). Thus, the decreased levels of phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 were not due to a decrease in the overall number of cells in the mesenchyma surrounding the ureter, but rather to a decrease in the number of cells responding to BMP signaling. Localized Antagonism of BMP Signaling Resulted in Focal Disruption of Ureteral Smooth Muscle Investment Congenital UPJ obstruction in humans is characterized by a focal rather than a global disruption in ureteral smooth muscle. 6 Therefore, we tested whether localized perturbation of BMP signaling mimics the focal character of UPJ obstruction. Kidney rudiments were isolated at E12.5 and cultured for 5 days in the presence or absence of agarose beads pre-incubated with the BMP antagonist Gremlin, 15 as described by Vainio et al. 16 Gremlin was used because it has higher specific activity than recombinant Noggin and, therefore, it is better suited for focal inhibition. Specimens with implanted beads were assayed for E-cadherin and SMA expression. Controls demonstrated a thick, well organized coat of SMA positive cells investing the ureter ( fig. 5, A ). Cultures in which agarose beads were pre-incubated in PBS showed a thick coat of SMA positive cells, similar to that seen in controls ( fig. 5, B ). In contrast, Gremlin coated beads induced focal disruption of the thick, well organized coat of SMA positive cells seen in controls ( fig. 5, C ).  <italic>Bmp4</italic> Gene Dose Correlated With Ureteral Smooth Muscle Coat Thickness We used a transgenic approach to delete BMP4 signaling in the developing urinary tract. Female mice harboring floxed Bmp4 alleles were mated with males carrying a transgene encoding a fusion protein of Cre recombinase and Esr1 (Cre/Esr1). As described previously, maternal administration of the synthetic estrogen tamoxifen results in Cre mediated excision of the floxed Bmp4 alleles. 10 , 13 Timed pregnant mice were injected with tamoxifen at E12 and embryos were harvested 6 hours after injection. 13 When assayed for the expression of E-cadherin and SMA, control embryos harboring floxed Bmp4 alleles in the absence of the Cre transgene ( Bmp4 flox/flox ) demonstrated E-cadherin expression by the epithelium of the ureter and the intrarenal collecting tubules as well as a thick, well organized circumferential coat of SMA positive cells surrounding the ureter ( fig. 1, A ). Mice heterozygous for the floxed Bmp4 allele carrying the Cre transgene ( Bmp4 flox/ + , Cre/Esr1 ) demonstrated a less robust coat of SMA positive cells investing the ureter ( fig. 1, B ). This was confirmed quantitatively since the width of the smooth muscle coat surrounding the ureter was decreased in heterozygous Bmp4 flox/ + , Cre/Esr1 mice compared to that in controls (32 vs 37 ? m, p = 0.002, fig. 2 ). Mice homozygous for the floxed Bmp4 alleles carrying the Cre transgene ( Bmp4 flox/flox , Cre/Esr1 ) had minimal, scattered SMA positive cells that did not form a well organized coat around the ureter ( fig. 1, C ). Cre mediated Bmp4 excision was documented by polymerase chain reaction and confirmed by in situ hybridization. These data suggest that the Bmp4 gene dose may have a role in determining the width of the ureteral smooth muscle coat.  <italic>Bmp4</italic> Gene Dose Correlated With Ureteral Smooth Muscle Coat Thickness We used a transgenic approach to delete BMP4 signaling in the developing urinary tract. Female mice harboring floxed Bmp4 alleles were mated with males carrying a transgene encoding a fusion protein of Cre recombinase and Esr1 (Cre/Esr1). As described previously, maternal administration of the synthetic estrogen tamoxifen results in Cre mediated excision of the floxed Bmp4 alleles. 10 , 13 Timed pregnant mice were injected with tamoxifen at E12 and embryos were harvested 6 hours after injection. 13 When assayed for the expression of E-cadherin and SMA, control embryos harboring floxed Bmp4 alleles in the absence of the Cre transgene ( Bmp4 flox/flox ) demonstrated E-cadherin expression by the epithelium of the ureter and the intrarenal collecting tubules as well as a thick, well organized circumferential coat of SMA positive cells surrounding the ureter ( fig. 1, A ). Mice heterozygous for the floxed Bmp4 allele carrying the Cre transgene ( Bmp4 flox/ + , Cre/Esr1 ) demonstrated a less robust coat of SMA positive cells investing the ureter ( fig. 1, B ). This was confirmed quantitatively since the width of the smooth muscle coat surrounding the ureter was decreased in heterozygous Bmp4 flox/ + , Cre/Esr1 mice compared to that in controls (32 vs 37 ? m, p = 0.002, fig. 2 ). Mice homozygous for the floxed Bmp4 alleles carrying the Cre transgene ( Bmp4 flox/flox , Cre/Esr1 ) had minimal, scattered SMA positive cells that did not form a well organized coat around the ureter ( fig. 1, C ). Cre mediated Bmp4 excision was documented by polymerase chain reaction and confirmed by in situ hybridization. These data suggest that the Bmp4 gene dose may have a role in determining the width of the ureteral smooth muscle coat.  Antagonism of BMP Signaling Inhibited Ureteral Smooth Muscle Investment in a Dose Dependent Manner To better delineate the relationship between the Bmp4 gene dose and ureteral smooth muscle investment we used the soluble BMP antagonist Noggin 15 to titrate the level of BMP signaling in the developing ureter in vitro. Kidney rudiments were isolated at E12.5 and cultured in the presence of 1, 5 and 10 ? g/ml recombinant Noggin for 5 days. Rudiments were assayed for E-cadherin and SMA expression. Controls demonstrated a thick, well organized coat of SMA positive cells surrounding the ureter ( fig. 3, A, E and I ). Cultures supplemented with 1 ? g/ml Noggin had SMA positive cells surrounding the ureter but smooth muscle coat thickness was decreased ( fig. 3, B, F and J ). At 5 ? g/ml Noggin even fewer SMA expressing cells were found surrounding the ureter ( fig. 3, C, G and K ). Finally, at 10 ? g/ml Noggin few scattered SMA positive cells could be seen but they did not form a well organized circumferential coat ( fig. 3, D, H and L ). Collectively these results indicate that the number and organization of myocytes present in the ureteral smooth muscle coat are regulated in part by the level of BMP signaling.  Antagonism of BMP Signaling Inhibited Ureteral Smooth Muscle Investment in a Dose Dependent Manner To better delineate the relationship between the Bmp4 gene dose and ureteral smooth muscle investment we used the soluble BMP antagonist Noggin 15 to titrate the level of BMP signaling in the developing ureter in vitro. Kidney rudiments were isolated at E12.5 and cultured in the presence of 1, 5 and 10 ? g/ml recombinant Noggin for 5 days. Rudiments were assayed for E-cadherin and SMA expression. Controls demonstrated a thick, well organized coat of SMA positive cells surrounding the ureter ( fig. 3, A, E and I ). Cultures supplemented with 1 ? g/ml Noggin had SMA positive cells surrounding the ureter but smooth muscle coat thickness was decreased ( fig. 3, B, F and J ). At 5 ? g/ml Noggin even fewer SMA expressing cells were found surrounding the ureter ( fig. 3, C, G and K ). Finally, at 10 ? g/ml Noggin few scattered SMA positive cells could be seen but they did not form a well organized circumferential coat ( fig. 3, D, H and L ). Collectively these results indicate that the number and organization of myocytes present in the ureteral smooth muscle coat are regulated in part by the level of BMP signaling.  Phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 Expression Paralleled Smooth Muscle Investment Loss in a Dose Dependent Manner Smad1, 5 and 8, which are the immediate downstream targets of BMP receptors, have a vital role in BMP signal transduction. 11 Therefore, we determined whether the decrease in ureteral smooth muscle investment due to BMP4 antagonism would induce a dose dependent decrease in Smad1, 5 and 8 phosphorylation. Rudiments were isolated at E12.5, cultured in the presence of recombinant BMP4 or Noggin (1, 5 and 10 ? g/ml) for 5 days and then assayed for the expression of E-cadherin, and phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8. Control cultures demonstrated abundant phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 expression in the mesenchyma surrounding the ureter and medullary interstitium with minimal to no expression in the ureteral epithelium ( fig. 4, A and F ). When cultures were supplemented with 250 ng/ml BMP4 ( fig. 4, B and G ), an increase in phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 expression was seen. In contrast, cultures supplemented with Noggin demonstrated a dose dependent decrease in phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 expression ( fig. 4, C to E and H to J ). At 1 ? g/ml Noggin phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 activity was decreased compared to that in controls but it was again seen in the mesenchyma surrounding the ureter but not in the ureteral epithelium ( fig. 4, C and H ). Importantly the number of cells present in the periureteral mesenchyma was similar under all experimental conditions, as determined by nuclear DAPI staining ( fig. 4, K to M ). Thus, the decreased levels of phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 were not due to a decrease in the overall number of cells in the mesenchyma surrounding the ureter, but rather to a decrease in the number of cells responding to BMP signaling.  Phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 Expression Paralleled Smooth Muscle Investment Loss in a Dose Dependent Manner Smad1, 5 and 8, which are the immediate downstream targets of BMP receptors, have a vital role in BMP signal transduction. 11 Therefore, we determined whether the decrease in ureteral smooth muscle investment due to BMP4 antagonism would induce a dose dependent decrease in Smad1, 5 and 8 phosphorylation. Rudiments were isolated at E12.5, cultured in the presence of recombinant BMP4 or Noggin (1, 5 and 10 ? g/ml) for 5 days and then assayed for the expression of E-cadherin, and phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8. Control cultures demonstrated abundant phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 expression in the mesenchyma surrounding the ureter and medullary interstitium with minimal to no expression in the ureteral epithelium ( fig. 4, A and F ). When cultures were supplemented with 250 ng/ml BMP4 ( fig. 4, B and G ), an increase in phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 expression was seen. In contrast, cultures supplemented with Noggin demonstrated a dose dependent decrease in phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 expression ( fig. 4, C to E and H to J ). At 1 ? g/ml Noggin phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 activity was decreased compared to that in controls but it was again seen in the mesenchyma surrounding the ureter but not in the ureteral epithelium ( fig. 4, C and H ). Importantly the number of cells present in the periureteral mesenchyma was similar under all experimental conditions, as determined by nuclear DAPI staining ( fig. 4, K to M ). Thus, the decreased levels of phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 were not due to a decrease in the overall number of cells in the mesenchyma surrounding the ureter, but rather to a decrease in the number of cells responding to BMP signaling.  Localized Antagonism of BMP Signaling Resulted in Focal Disruption of Ureteral Smooth Muscle Investment Congenital UPJ obstruction in humans is characterized by a focal rather than a global disruption in ureteral smooth muscle. 6 Therefore, we tested whether localized perturbation of BMP signaling mimics the focal character of UPJ obstruction. Kidney rudiments were isolated at E12.5 and cultured for 5 days in the presence or absence of agarose beads pre-incubated with the BMP antagonist Gremlin, 15 as described by Vainio et al. 16 Gremlin was used because it has higher specific activity than recombinant Noggin and, therefore, it is better suited for focal inhibition. Specimens with implanted beads were assayed for E-cadherin and SMA expression. Controls demonstrated a thick, well organized coat of SMA positive cells investing the ureter ( fig. 5, A ). Cultures in which agarose beads were pre-incubated in PBS showed a thick coat of SMA positive cells, similar to that seen in controls ( fig. 5, B ). In contrast, Gremlin coated beads induced focal disruption of the thick, well organized coat of SMA positive cells seen in controls ( fig. 5, C ).  Localized Antagonism of BMP Signaling Resulted in Focal Disruption of Ureteral Smooth Muscle Investment Congenital UPJ obstruction in humans is characterized by a focal rather than a global disruption in ureteral smooth muscle. 6 Therefore, we tested whether localized perturbation of BMP signaling mimics the focal character of UPJ obstruction. Kidney rudiments were isolated at E12.5 and cultured for 5 days in the presence or absence of agarose beads pre-incubated with the BMP antagonist Gremlin, 15 as described by Vainio et al. 16 Gremlin was used because it has higher specific activity than recombinant Noggin and, therefore, it is better suited for focal inhibition. Specimens with implanted beads were assayed for E-cadherin and SMA expression. Controls demonstrated a thick, well organized coat of SMA positive cells investing the ureter ( fig. 5, A ). Cultures in which agarose beads were pre-incubated in PBS showed a thick coat of SMA positive cells, similar to that seen in controls ( fig. 5, B ). In contrast, Gremlin coated beads induced focal disruption of the thick, well organized coat of SMA positive cells seen in controls ( fig. 5, C ).  DISCUSSION Previous studies of congenitally obstructed UPJ segments have demonstrated an aperistaltic segment with varying levels of absent, deficient or maloriented smooth muscle fibers. 5 , 6 To our knowledge the mechanism by which this develops is unknown. Our findings using a Cre mediated Bmp4 conditional knockout demonstrate that the thickness of the smooth muscle coat surrounding the ureter is related to the Bmp4 gene dose. To better delineate the relationship between the level of BMP signaling and ureteral smooth muscle morphology we cultured metanephric kidney explants in increasing doses of the BMP antagonist Noggin. We found a dose dependent decrease in smooth muscle investment of the ureter at increasing Noggin doses. Additionally, we noted that the downstream targets of BMP signaling, phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8, similarly decreased in a dose dependent manner with increasing BMP signaling antagonism and this expression occurred predominantly in the mesenchyma surrounding the ureter but not in the ureteral epithelium. Therefore, our results suggest that BMP4 may induce mesenchymal smooth muscle differentiation via a direct Smad dependent pathway. Finally, we found that localized antagonism of BMP signaling with Gremlin resulted in deficient and maloriented SMA positive cells surrounding the ureter in a manner similar to that observed in previous investigations of obstructed UPJ segments. 5 , 6 Our results in conjunction with those of previous studies 4 further implicate BMP signaling in normal smooth muscle investment of the ureter and raise the possibility that a disruption of BMP4 signaling during ureteral development may have a role in the pathogenesis of congenital UPJ obstruction. BMP signaling is mediated by types I and II BMP receptors as well as by their downstream targets Smad1, 5 and 8. Phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 form a complex with Smad4 and are then translocated to the nucleus to affect transcription. 11 Interestingly Oxburgh et al reported that targeted deletion of Smad4 in the epithelium of the nascent ureter did not grossly affect ureteral epithelial differentiation in vivo. 17 However, it is not clear what effect the deletion of Smad4 would have on the mesenchymal population surrounding the nascent ureter and whether this would result in abnormal ureteral smooth muscle investment. Our results demonstrate that loss of BMP4 is associated with a dose dependent decrease in SMA positive cells investing the ureter as well as in a parallel decrease in phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 expression in the surrounding mesenchyma. Therefore, targeted deletion of Smad4 in the epithelium of the nascent ureter may have no effect on ureteral smooth muscle development if BMP4 acts via a direct pathway to induce the surrounding mesenchyma to differentiate into smooth muscle. While our data suggest that the role of BMP4 in normal smooth muscle investment of the ureter occurs via a direct Smad dependent pathway, further functional studies of Smad4 deletion are required to elucidate the mechanism by which BMP4 regulates ureteral smooth muscle development. Furthermore, Foletta et al recently noted in an experimental model of pulmonary hypertension that the downstream effects of BMP4 activation of the type II BMP receptor are mediated by Smad independent pathways, in which the cytoskeletal regulator LIMK1 mediates smooth muscle proliferation. 18 Therefore, further studies are necessary to investigate whether BMP4 mediated smooth muscle investment of the ureter may be regulated by Smad independent pathways, such as LIMK1 signal transduction. Recently Hoshino et al generated a Gata2 hypomorphic mutant mouse model to determine whether the loss of GATA-2 activity would result in decreased Bmp4 expression in the intermediate mesoderm at the time of murine UB emergence. 19 Phenotypically these mice demonstrated hydro-ureteronephrosis in a manner similar to that seen in human congenital anomalies of the kidney and ureter. Our data complement these findings and suggest that GATA-2 may regulate Bmp4 transcription and disruption of this signaling pathway may contribute to congenital anomalies of the kidney and ureter, including but not limited to UPJ obstruction. A limitation of our study is that Noggin is a soluble antagonist against all BMPs, not only BMP4. 10 , 11 , 15 , 17 In this family of signaling proteins BMP7 and BMP4 are the major BMPs involved in renal and ureteral development. 11 , 15 Therefore, it is important to address whether the disruption of ureteral smooth muscle development that we observed is due to antagonism of BMP4 and/or BMP7. We have previously reported that BMP7 is not expressed in the mesenchyma surrounding the nascent ureter at the time point (E11.5) required for normal smooth muscle investment of the ureter. 10 Using in situ hybridization we observed that of all BMPs only Bmp4 mRNA is expressed in the peri-ureteral mesenchyma at the initiation of murine ureteral smooth muscle investment. 10 Finally, we also noted that ectopic BMP4 but not ectopic BMP7 is sufficient to induce ureteral morphogenesis in the proximal UB zones that are normally fated to become intrarenal collecting tubules. 10 Therefore, while Noggin could exert its effects by antagonizing any combination of BMPs, including but not limited to BMP4 and BMP7, we believe that our findings taken together with our previous studies and our conditional Bmp4 knockout model provide initial evidence for the role of BMP4 in ureteral smooth muscle development. The ureter and the intrarenal collecting tubules are derived from the same epithelial primordium, called the UB. The UB has a proximal domain from which the intrarenal collecting tubules are derived and a distal domain that becomes the ureter. We have previously reported that spatially restricted Bmp4 expression in the mesenchyma surrounding the distal but not the proximal UB is necessary for ureteral morphogenesis. 10 However, to our knowledge the mechanism by which BMP4 signaling is restricted to the distal but the not proximal UB is not understood. In the current study we noted that localized antagonism of BMP4 with agarose beads incubated in Gremlin resulted in focal disruption of ureteral smooth muscle investment. Previously Michos et al observed that Gremlin-1 is expressed in vivo by the metanephric mesenchyma surrounding the proximal UB and Gremlin mediated antagonism of BMP signaling is essential to induce metanephric kidney development. 20 This raises the possibility that endogenous Gremlin signaling may be spatially restricted to the mesenchyma surrounding the proximal UB, while BMP4 expression is restricted to the distal UB. Since the UPJ arises from the border between the proximal and the distal UB, it is possible that congenital UPJ obstruction may be a result of focal aberrant Gremlin expression in the mesenchyma surrounding the affected ureteral segment. To address this question further characterization of Gremlin expression in the metanephric mesenchyma during UB differentiation is required. We report that decreased BMP4 signaling, whether by direct antagonism in vitro or by BMP4 loss in vivo, results in a gradual loss of ureteral smooth muscle investment. Our results also suggest that this may occur via a direct Smad dependent pathway. Therefore, it is possible that congenital UPJ obstruction may in part be due to absent or insufficient BMP4 signaling at the obstruction site, resulting in a segment with abnormal smooth muscle function. To our knowledge whether this defect is due to errors in mesenchymal migration, to ectopic Gremlin signaling or insufficient BMP4 signaling at the obstruction site, or to downstream defects in the signaling pathways mediating UB differentiation is not known. Nevertheless, our findings further elucidate the complex mechanisms underlying ureteral smooth muscle investment and, therefore, they may provide insight into the pathophysiology of congenital UPJ obstruction.  DISCUSSION Previous studies of congenitally obstructed UPJ segments have demonstrated an aperistaltic segment with varying levels of absent, deficient or maloriented smooth muscle fibers. 5 , 6 To our knowledge the mechanism by which this develops is unknown. Our findings using a Cre mediated Bmp4 conditional knockout demonstrate that the thickness of the smooth muscle coat surrounding the ureter is related to the Bmp4 gene dose. To better delineate the relationship between the level of BMP signaling and ureteral smooth muscle morphology we cultured metanephric kidney explants in increasing doses of the BMP antagonist Noggin. We found a dose dependent decrease in smooth muscle investment of the ureter at increasing Noggin doses. Additionally, we noted that the downstream targets of BMP signaling, phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8, similarly decreased in a dose dependent manner with increasing BMP signaling antagonism and this expression occurred predominantly in the mesenchyma surrounding the ureter but not in the ureteral epithelium. Therefore, our results suggest that BMP4 may induce mesenchymal smooth muscle differentiation via a direct Smad dependent pathway. Finally, we found that localized antagonism of BMP signaling with Gremlin resulted in deficient and maloriented SMA positive cells surrounding the ureter in a manner similar to that observed in previous investigations of obstructed UPJ segments. 5 , 6 Our results in conjunction with those of previous studies 4 further implicate BMP signaling in normal smooth muscle investment of the ureter and raise the possibility that a disruption of BMP4 signaling during ureteral development may have a role in the pathogenesis of congenital UPJ obstruction. BMP signaling is mediated by types I and II BMP receptors as well as by their downstream targets Smad1, 5 and 8. Phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 form a complex with Smad4 and are then translocated to the nucleus to affect transcription. 11 Interestingly Oxburgh et al reported that targeted deletion of Smad4 in the epithelium of the nascent ureter did not grossly affect ureteral epithelial differentiation in vivo. 17 However, it is not clear what effect the deletion of Smad4 would have on the mesenchymal population surrounding the nascent ureter and whether this would result in abnormal ureteral smooth muscle investment. Our results demonstrate that loss of BMP4 is associated with a dose dependent decrease in SMA positive cells investing the ureter as well as in a parallel decrease in phosphorylated Smad1, 5 and 8 expression in the surrounding mesenchyma. Therefore, targeted deletion of Smad4 in the epithelium of the nascent ureter may have no effect on ureteral smooth muscle development if BMP4 acts via a direct pathway to induce the surrounding mesenchyma to differentiate into smooth muscle. While our data suggest that the role of BMP4 in normal smooth muscle investment of the ureter occurs via a direct Smad dependent pathway, further functional studies of Smad4 deletion are required to elucidate the mechanism by which BMP4 regulates ureteral smooth muscle development. Furthermore, Foletta et al recently noted in an experimental model of pulmonary hypertension that the downstream effects of BMP4 activation of the type II BMP receptor are mediated by Smad independent pathways, in which the cytoskeletal regulator LIMK1 mediates smooth muscle proliferation. 18 Therefore, further studies are necessary to investigate whether BMP4 mediated smooth muscle investment of the ureter may be regulated by Smad independent pathways, such as LIMK1 signal transduction. Recently Hoshino et al generated a Gata2 hypomorphic mutant mouse model to determine whether the loss of GATA-2 activity would result in decreased Bmp4 expression in the intermediate mesoderm at the time of murine UB emergence. 19 Phenotypically these mice demonstrated hydro-ureteronephrosis in a manner similar to that seen in human congenital anomalies of the kidney and ureter. Our data complement these findings and suggest that GATA-2 may regulate Bmp4 transcription and disruption of this signaling pathway may contribute to congenital anomalies of the kidney and ureter, including but not limited to UPJ obstruction. A limitation of our study is that Noggin is a soluble antagonist against all BMPs, not only BMP4. 10 , 11 , 15 , 17 In this family of signaling proteins BMP7 and BMP4 are the major BMPs involved in renal and ureteral development. 11 , 15 Therefore, it is important to address whether the disruption of ureteral smooth muscle development that we observed is due to antagonism of BMP4 and/or BMP7. We have previously reported that BMP7 is not expressed in the mesenchyma surrounding the nascent ureter at the time point (E11.5) required for normal smooth muscle investment of the ureter. 10 Using in situ hybridization we observed that of all BMPs only Bmp4 mRNA is expressed in the peri-ureteral mesenchyma at the initiation of murine ureteral smooth muscle investment. 10 Finally, we also noted that ectopic BMP4 but not ectopic BMP7 is sufficient to induce ureteral morphogenesis in the proximal UB zones that are normally fated to become intrarenal collecting tubules. 10 Therefore, while Noggin could exert its effects by antagonizing any combination of BMPs, including but not limited to BMP4 and BMP7, we believe that our findings taken together with our previous studies and our conditional Bmp4 knockout model provide initial evidence for the role of BMP4 in ureteral smooth muscle development. The ureter and the intrarenal collecting tubules are derived from the same epithelial primordium, called the UB. The UB has a proximal domain from which the intrarenal collecting tubules are derived and a distal domain that becomes the ureter. We have previously reported that spatially restricted Bmp4 expression in the mesenchyma surrounding the distal but not the proximal UB is necessary for ureteral morphogenesis. 10 However, to our knowledge the mechanism by which BMP4 signaling is restricted to the distal but the not proximal UB is not understood. In the current study we noted that localized antagonism of BMP4 with agarose beads incubated in Gremlin resulted in focal disruption of ureteral smooth muscle investment. Previously Michos et al observed that Gremlin-1 is expressed in vivo by the metanephric mesenchyma surrounding the proximal UB and Gremlin mediated antagonism of BMP signaling is essential to induce metanephric kidney development. 20 This raises the possibility that endogenous Gremlin signaling may be spatially restricted to the mesenchyma surrounding the proximal UB, while BMP4 expression is restricted to the distal UB. Since the UPJ arises from the border between the proximal and the distal UB, it is possible that congenital UPJ obstruction may be a result of focal aberrant Gremlin expression in the mesenchyma surrounding the affected ureteral segment. To address this question further characterization of Gremlin expression in the metanephric mesenchyma during UB differentiation is required. We report that decreased BMP4 signaling, whether by direct antagonism in vitro or by BMP4 loss in vivo, results in a gradual loss of ureteral smooth muscle investment. Our results also suggest that this may occur via a direct Smad dependent pathway. Therefore, it is possible that congenital UPJ obstruction may in part be due to absent or insufficient BMP4 signaling at the obstruction site, resulting in a segment with abnormal smooth muscle function. To our knowledge whether this defect is due to errors in mesenchymal migration, to ectopic Gremlin signaling or insufficient BMP4 signaling at the obstruction site, or to downstream defects in the signaling pathways mediating UB differentiation is not known. Nevertheless, our findings further elucidate the complex mechanisms underlying ureteral smooth muscle investment and, therefore, they may provide insight into the pathophysiology of congenital UPJ obstruction.  CONCLUSIONS We report that decreased BMP4 signaling, whether by loss of BMP4 in vivo or by direct antagonism in vitro, results in a gradual decrease in the well organized coat of smooth muscle that normally surrounds the ureter. Our results suggest that this may occur via a direct Smad dependent pathway. This raises the possibility that abnormalities in BMP4 signaling may have a role in the development of congenital UPJ obstruction. 