CD40-Induced Signaling in Human Endothelial Cells Results in mTORC2- and Akt-Dependent Expression of Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor In Vitro and In Vivo 1 We have examined CD40-dependent signals in endothelial cells (EC) mediating the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and VEGF-induced angiogenesis. We treated confluent cultures of EC with soluble CD40L (sCD40L), and by Western blot found a marked increase in the phosphorylation of Akt, 4EBP-1, and S6K1, compared with untreated cells. EC were transfected with a full-length VEGF promoter-luciferase construct and cultured in the absence or presence of rapamycin and sCD40L. We found that rapamycin, which blocks mTORC1 and mTORC2 signaling, inhibited sCD40L-mediated transactivation of VEGF. In addition, by Western blot, we found that the transfection of EC with small interfering RNA (siRNA) to rictor (to inhibit mTORC2), and not raptor (to inhibit mTORC1), inhibited sCD40L-dependent protein expression of VEGF. In addition, we found that basal levels of phosphorylated Akt as well as VEGF were increased in EC transfected with the raptor siRNA. Also, rapamycin failed to inhibit VEGF promoter activation, as well as VEGF protein expression in EC transfected with a constitutively active construct of Akt, further demonstrating that mTORC1 is not necessary for CD40- and Akt-induced expression of VEGF. Finally, we injected human CD40L-transfected fibroblasts or mock transfectants into human skin on SCID mice. We found that the injection of CD40L transfectants, but not mock cells, resulted in VEGF expression and mediated a marked angiogenesis reaction, and this response was reduced in mice treated with rapamycin. Together, these observations indicate that mTORC2 and Akt facilitate CD40-inducible expression of VEGF in EC, which is of clinical importance in tumor growth and the progression of chronic inflammatory diseases.  Materials and Methods Reagents Soluble CD40L was purchased from Ancell. Abs against S6K1, phosphorylated S6K1, 4E-BP1, phosphorylated 4E-BP1, Akt, phosphorylated Akt, mTOR, and raptor were purchased from Cell Signaling Technologies, anti-VEGF was obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, and the anti-rictor Ab was purchased from Bethyl Laboratories as well as Cell Signaling Technologies. LY294002 was purchased from Calbiochem and rapamycin was gifted to the laboratory by Wyeth-Ayest Research. Cell culture Human umbilical endothelial cells were isolated from umbilical cords as previously described ( 12 ) and cultured in M199 (Cambrex), supplemented with 20% FBS (Life Technologies-BRL Products), endothelial growth supplement, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, L-glutamine, and heparin. Cultured EC were used for our studies at passages 2–4. Plasmids A VEGF promoter luciferase construct containing the 2.6 kb full-length VEGF promoter sequence was gifted to the laboratory by Debabrata Mukhopadhyay, (Mayo Clinic, Minneapolis, MN) and was used as we previously described ( 16 , 17 ). The dominant negative mutant of PI3K, wild-type Akt construct, dominant negative mutant Akt (T308A, S473A) were gifted to the laboratory and used as described ( 16 , 25 ). The constitutive dominant active mutant of Akt (T308D, S473D) was generated and used as we described ( 24 ). In pilot studies, we found that the transfection of either 100 ng or 1 ? g of plasmid DNA resulted in high levels of expression of each construct within transfected EC. All current studies were performed using 100 ng of DNA. In addition, in each experiment, EC were transfected with the empty expression vector (pcDNA3) as a control. In some controls, expression of the desired protein (PI3K or Akt) in transfected cells was examined by Western blot. VEGF protein assays In pilot studies, we found that the quantification of secreted VEGF in our serum-starved EC cell cultures using ELISA gave inconsistent results, even in circumstances where secreted VEGF was functional for endothelial proliferation ( 12 ). In contrast, in previous studies, we have found that the quantification of VEGF protein expression in our cultured EC is optimal using Western blot ( 16 ). Thus, in these studies, we have evaluated the regulation of VEGF protein expression using Western blot. EC were washed in PBS and lysed with ice-cold RIPA buffer (Boston Bioproducts) as described ( 16 , 24 ). Lysates were centrifuged at 4°C for 30 min and samples containing 50 ? g of protein were separated on a polyacrylamide gel with Tris-glycine-SDS running buffer (Bio-Rad), and were subsequently transferred onto a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (NEN) for 1 h. Membranes were blocked with 5% milk in TBS-Tween 20 and incubated with the primary Ab overnight. Membranes were washed and incubated with a secondary peroxidase linked Ab and the reactive bands were detected by chemiluminescence (Pierce). Transfection assays Transfection assays were performed using the Effectene transfection reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Qiagen) and as described ( 25 ). Promoter luciferase activity was measured using a standard assay kit (Promega), and the difference between experimental samples were calculated as the fold change in luciferase counts, compared with untreated cells. As a positive control for transfection efficiency, in occasional cultures, we transfected cells with the ? -galactosidase gene under control of cytomegalovirus immediate early promoter and assessed ? -galactosidase activity as we described ( 16 ). siRNA mTOR small interfering RNA (siRNA) and control siRNA were purchased from Qiagen. Rictor and raptor were purchased from Dharmacon. Transfection of EC with siRNA (40 nM) was performed using lipofectamine 2000 according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen). In brief, subconfluent EC, grown in six-well plates, were cultured in serum free medium with siRNA and after 6 h of transfection, the cells were washed one time and cultured in regular medium. Expression of target genes were assessed by Western blot to confirm the efficiency of siRNA transfection and knockdown vs control siRNA transfected cells. In vivo assessment of angiogenesis Full-thickness human neonatal foreskin grafts were transplanted onto CB17 SCID beige mice (Taconic Farms) as previously described ( 13 , 26 ). Following engraftment for 4 – 6 wk, the human skin was injected intracutaneously with 35 ? l of growth factor reduced Matrigel (BD Biosciences) mixed with either 2.5 × 106 murine fibroblasts stably transfected with human CD40L (CD40L cells) or mock transfectants (gifted by Cees Van Kooten, University of Leiden, Leiden, The Netherlands) each suspended in 35 ? l saline (total volume of 70 ? l). Before injection, the transfectants were irradiated at 7500 rads. Rapamycin (0.3 mg/kg/day or 1.5 mg/kg/day) was administered to the SCID mice by i.p. injection and the human skin grafts were harvested 7 days later. Immunohistochemistry was performed for the evaluation of vWF as described ( 13 , 26 ). Immunohistochemistry Four micron cryostat cut frozen sections were fixed in acetone for 5 min and incubated with a rabbit anti-human vWF Ab (DakoCytomation) in PBS with 3% human serum for 1 h at room temperature. Subsequently, the specimens were incubated with a species-specific peroxidase-conjugated secondary Ab (Jackson Immuno Research) and were developed with 0.25 mg/ml 3-amino-ethylcarbazole in 2% N,N-dimethylformamide and 0.1 mol/L sodium acetate buffer (pH 5.2) with 0.03% hydrogen peroxide as described ( 13 , 26 ). Finally, sections were counterstained in hematoxylin and mounted in glycerol gelatin. Quantification of angiogenesis Vessels identified by vWF staining were counted using a standard grid-counting method at ×400 magnification by light microscopy, as previously described ( 13 , 26 ). For each group, the vessels within four to six adjacent nonoverlapping fields of each skin specimen were counted by two independent observers in a blinded manner, and the mean vessel counts for each specimen was calculated. Statistics Data were compared using the Student’s t test or the Mann-Whitney U test as indicated. p values <0.05 were considered statistically significant.  Materials and Methods Reagents Soluble CD40L was purchased from Ancell. Abs against S6K1, phosphorylated S6K1, 4E-BP1, phosphorylated 4E-BP1, Akt, phosphorylated Akt, mTOR, and raptor were purchased from Cell Signaling Technologies, anti-VEGF was obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, and the anti-rictor Ab was purchased from Bethyl Laboratories as well as Cell Signaling Technologies. LY294002 was purchased from Calbiochem and rapamycin was gifted to the laboratory by Wyeth-Ayest Research. Cell culture Human umbilical endothelial cells were isolated from umbilical cords as previously described ( 12 ) and cultured in M199 (Cambrex), supplemented with 20% FBS (Life Technologies-BRL Products), endothelial growth supplement, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, L-glutamine, and heparin. Cultured EC were used for our studies at passages 2–4. Plasmids A VEGF promoter luciferase construct containing the 2.6 kb full-length VEGF promoter sequence was gifted to the laboratory by Debabrata Mukhopadhyay, (Mayo Clinic, Minneapolis, MN) and was used as we previously described ( 16 , 17 ). The dominant negative mutant of PI3K, wild-type Akt construct, dominant negative mutant Akt (T308A, S473A) were gifted to the laboratory and used as described ( 16 , 25 ). The constitutive dominant active mutant of Akt (T308D, S473D) was generated and used as we described ( 24 ). In pilot studies, we found that the transfection of either 100 ng or 1 ? g of plasmid DNA resulted in high levels of expression of each construct within transfected EC. All current studies were performed using 100 ng of DNA. In addition, in each experiment, EC were transfected with the empty expression vector (pcDNA3) as a control. In some controls, expression of the desired protein (PI3K or Akt) in transfected cells was examined by Western blot. VEGF protein assays In pilot studies, we found that the quantification of secreted VEGF in our serum-starved EC cell cultures using ELISA gave inconsistent results, even in circumstances where secreted VEGF was functional for endothelial proliferation ( 12 ). In contrast, in previous studies, we have found that the quantification of VEGF protein expression in our cultured EC is optimal using Western blot ( 16 ). Thus, in these studies, we have evaluated the regulation of VEGF protein expression using Western blot. EC were washed in PBS and lysed with ice-cold RIPA buffer (Boston Bioproducts) as described ( 16 , 24 ). Lysates were centrifuged at 4°C for 30 min and samples containing 50 ? g of protein were separated on a polyacrylamide gel with Tris-glycine-SDS running buffer (Bio-Rad), and were subsequently transferred onto a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (NEN) for 1 h. Membranes were blocked with 5% milk in TBS-Tween 20 and incubated with the primary Ab overnight. Membranes were washed and incubated with a secondary peroxidase linked Ab and the reactive bands were detected by chemiluminescence (Pierce). Transfection assays Transfection assays were performed using the Effectene transfection reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Qiagen) and as described ( 25 ). Promoter luciferase activity was measured using a standard assay kit (Promega), and the difference between experimental samples were calculated as the fold change in luciferase counts, compared with untreated cells. As a positive control for transfection efficiency, in occasional cultures, we transfected cells with the ? -galactosidase gene under control of cytomegalovirus immediate early promoter and assessed ? -galactosidase activity as we described ( 16 ). siRNA mTOR small interfering RNA (siRNA) and control siRNA were purchased from Qiagen. Rictor and raptor were purchased from Dharmacon. Transfection of EC with siRNA (40 nM) was performed using lipofectamine 2000 according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen). In brief, subconfluent EC, grown in six-well plates, were cultured in serum free medium with siRNA and after 6 h of transfection, the cells were washed one time and cultured in regular medium. Expression of target genes were assessed by Western blot to confirm the efficiency of siRNA transfection and knockdown vs control siRNA transfected cells. In vivo assessment of angiogenesis Full-thickness human neonatal foreskin grafts were transplanted onto CB17 SCID beige mice (Taconic Farms) as previously described ( 13 , 26 ). Following engraftment for 4 – 6 wk, the human skin was injected intracutaneously with 35 ? l of growth factor reduced Matrigel (BD Biosciences) mixed with either 2.5 × 106 murine fibroblasts stably transfected with human CD40L (CD40L cells) or mock transfectants (gifted by Cees Van Kooten, University of Leiden, Leiden, The Netherlands) each suspended in 35 ? l saline (total volume of 70 ? l). Before injection, the transfectants were irradiated at 7500 rads. Rapamycin (0.3 mg/kg/day or 1.5 mg/kg/day) was administered to the SCID mice by i.p. injection and the human skin grafts were harvested 7 days later. Immunohistochemistry was performed for the evaluation of vWF as described ( 13 , 26 ). Immunohistochemistry Four micron cryostat cut frozen sections were fixed in acetone for 5 min and incubated with a rabbit anti-human vWF Ab (DakoCytomation) in PBS with 3% human serum for 1 h at room temperature. Subsequently, the specimens were incubated with a species-specific peroxidase-conjugated secondary Ab (Jackson Immuno Research) and were developed with 0.25 mg/ml 3-amino-ethylcarbazole in 2% N,N-dimethylformamide and 0.1 mol/L sodium acetate buffer (pH 5.2) with 0.03% hydrogen peroxide as described ( 13 , 26 ). Finally, sections were counterstained in hematoxylin and mounted in glycerol gelatin. Quantification of angiogenesis Vessels identified by vWF staining were counted using a standard grid-counting method at ×400 magnification by light microscopy, as previously described ( 13 , 26 ). For each group, the vessels within four to six adjacent nonoverlapping fields of each skin specimen were counted by two independent observers in a blinded manner, and the mean vessel counts for each specimen was calculated. Statistics Data were compared using the Student’s t test or the Mann-Whitney U test as indicated. p values <0.05 were considered statistically significant.  Reagents Soluble CD40L was purchased from Ancell. Abs against S6K1, phosphorylated S6K1, 4E-BP1, phosphorylated 4E-BP1, Akt, phosphorylated Akt, mTOR, and raptor were purchased from Cell Signaling Technologies, anti-VEGF was obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, and the anti-rictor Ab was purchased from Bethyl Laboratories as well as Cell Signaling Technologies. LY294002 was purchased from Calbiochem and rapamycin was gifted to the laboratory by Wyeth-Ayest Research.  Reagents Soluble CD40L was purchased from Ancell. Abs against S6K1, phosphorylated S6K1, 4E-BP1, phosphorylated 4E-BP1, Akt, phosphorylated Akt, mTOR, and raptor were purchased from Cell Signaling Technologies, anti-VEGF was obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, and the anti-rictor Ab was purchased from Bethyl Laboratories as well as Cell Signaling Technologies. LY294002 was purchased from Calbiochem and rapamycin was gifted to the laboratory by Wyeth-Ayest Research.  Cell culture Human umbilical endothelial cells were isolated from umbilical cords as previously described ( 12 ) and cultured in M199 (Cambrex), supplemented with 20% FBS (Life Technologies-BRL Products), endothelial growth supplement, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, L-glutamine, and heparin. Cultured EC were used for our studies at passages 2–4.  Cell culture Human umbilical endothelial cells were isolated from umbilical cords as previously described ( 12 ) and cultured in M199 (Cambrex), supplemented with 20% FBS (Life Technologies-BRL Products), endothelial growth supplement, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, L-glutamine, and heparin. Cultured EC were used for our studies at passages 2–4.  Plasmids A VEGF promoter luciferase construct containing the 2.6 kb full-length VEGF promoter sequence was gifted to the laboratory by Debabrata Mukhopadhyay, (Mayo Clinic, Minneapolis, MN) and was used as we previously described ( 16 , 17 ). The dominant negative mutant of PI3K, wild-type Akt construct, dominant negative mutant Akt (T308A, S473A) were gifted to the laboratory and used as described ( 16 , 25 ). The constitutive dominant active mutant of Akt (T308D, S473D) was generated and used as we described ( 24 ). In pilot studies, we found that the transfection of either 100 ng or 1 ? g of plasmid DNA resulted in high levels of expression of each construct within transfected EC. All current studies were performed using 100 ng of DNA. In addition, in each experiment, EC were transfected with the empty expression vector (pcDNA3) as a control. In some controls, expression of the desired protein (PI3K or Akt) in transfected cells was examined by Western blot.  Plasmids A VEGF promoter luciferase construct containing the 2.6 kb full-length VEGF promoter sequence was gifted to the laboratory by Debabrata Mukhopadhyay, (Mayo Clinic, Minneapolis, MN) and was used as we previously described ( 16 , 17 ). The dominant negative mutant of PI3K, wild-type Akt construct, dominant negative mutant Akt (T308A, S473A) were gifted to the laboratory and used as described ( 16 , 25 ). The constitutive dominant active mutant of Akt (T308D, S473D) was generated and used as we described ( 24 ). In pilot studies, we found that the transfection of either 100 ng or 1 ? g of plasmid DNA resulted in high levels of expression of each construct within transfected EC. All current studies were performed using 100 ng of DNA. In addition, in each experiment, EC were transfected with the empty expression vector (pcDNA3) as a control. In some controls, expression of the desired protein (PI3K or Akt) in transfected cells was examined by Western blot.  VEGF protein assays In pilot studies, we found that the quantification of secreted VEGF in our serum-starved EC cell cultures using ELISA gave inconsistent results, even in circumstances where secreted VEGF was functional for endothelial proliferation ( 12 ). In contrast, in previous studies, we have found that the quantification of VEGF protein expression in our cultured EC is optimal using Western blot ( 16 ). Thus, in these studies, we have evaluated the regulation of VEGF protein expression using Western blot. EC were washed in PBS and lysed with ice-cold RIPA buffer (Boston Bioproducts) as described ( 16 , 24 ). Lysates were centrifuged at 4°C for 30 min and samples containing 50 ? g of protein were separated on a polyacrylamide gel with Tris-glycine-SDS running buffer (Bio-Rad), and were subsequently transferred onto a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (NEN) for 1 h. Membranes were blocked with 5% milk in TBS-Tween 20 and incubated with the primary Ab overnight. Membranes were washed and incubated with a secondary peroxidase linked Ab and the reactive bands were detected by chemiluminescence (Pierce).  VEGF protein assays In pilot studies, we found that the quantification of secreted VEGF in our serum-starved EC cell cultures using ELISA gave inconsistent results, even in circumstances where secreted VEGF was functional for endothelial proliferation ( 12 ). In contrast, in previous studies, we have found that the quantification of VEGF protein expression in our cultured EC is optimal using Western blot ( 16 ). Thus, in these studies, we have evaluated the regulation of VEGF protein expression using Western blot. EC were washed in PBS and lysed with ice-cold RIPA buffer (Boston Bioproducts) as described ( 16 , 24 ). Lysates were centrifuged at 4°C for 30 min and samples containing 50 ? g of protein were separated on a polyacrylamide gel with Tris-glycine-SDS running buffer (Bio-Rad), and were subsequently transferred onto a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (NEN) for 1 h. Membranes were blocked with 5% milk in TBS-Tween 20 and incubated with the primary Ab overnight. Membranes were washed and incubated with a secondary peroxidase linked Ab and the reactive bands were detected by chemiluminescence (Pierce).  Transfection assays Transfection assays were performed using the Effectene transfection reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Qiagen) and as described ( 25 ). Promoter luciferase activity was measured using a standard assay kit (Promega), and the difference between experimental samples were calculated as the fold change in luciferase counts, compared with untreated cells. As a positive control for transfection efficiency, in occasional cultures, we transfected cells with the ? -galactosidase gene under control of cytomegalovirus immediate early promoter and assessed ? -galactosidase activity as we described ( 16 ).  Transfection assays Transfection assays were performed using the Effectene transfection reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Qiagen) and as described ( 25 ). Promoter luciferase activity was measured using a standard assay kit (Promega), and the difference between experimental samples were calculated as the fold change in luciferase counts, compared with untreated cells. As a positive control for transfection efficiency, in occasional cultures, we transfected cells with the ? -galactosidase gene under control of cytomegalovirus immediate early promoter and assessed ? -galactosidase activity as we described ( 16 ).  siRNA mTOR small interfering RNA (siRNA) and control siRNA were purchased from Qiagen. Rictor and raptor were purchased from Dharmacon. Transfection of EC with siRNA (40 nM) was performed using lipofectamine 2000 according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen). In brief, subconfluent EC, grown in six-well plates, were cultured in serum free medium with siRNA and after 6 h of transfection, the cells were washed one time and cultured in regular medium. Expression of target genes were assessed by Western blot to confirm the efficiency of siRNA transfection and knockdown vs control siRNA transfected cells.  siRNA mTOR small interfering RNA (siRNA) and control siRNA were purchased from Qiagen. Rictor and raptor were purchased from Dharmacon. Transfection of EC with siRNA (40 nM) was performed using lipofectamine 2000 according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen). In brief, subconfluent EC, grown in six-well plates, were cultured in serum free medium with siRNA and after 6 h of transfection, the cells were washed one time and cultured in regular medium. Expression of target genes were assessed by Western blot to confirm the efficiency of siRNA transfection and knockdown vs control siRNA transfected cells.  In vivo assessment of angiogenesis Full-thickness human neonatal foreskin grafts were transplanted onto CB17 SCID beige mice (Taconic Farms) as previously described ( 13 , 26 ). Following engraftment for 4 – 6 wk, the human skin was injected intracutaneously with 35 ? l of growth factor reduced Matrigel (BD Biosciences) mixed with either 2.5 × 106 murine fibroblasts stably transfected with human CD40L (CD40L cells) or mock transfectants (gifted by Cees Van Kooten, University of Leiden, Leiden, The Netherlands) each suspended in 35 ? l saline (total volume of 70 ? l). Before injection, the transfectants were irradiated at 7500 rads. Rapamycin (0.3 mg/kg/day or 1.5 mg/kg/day) was administered to the SCID mice by i.p. injection and the human skin grafts were harvested 7 days later. Immunohistochemistry was performed for the evaluation of vWF as described ( 13 , 26 ).  In vivo assessment of angiogenesis Full-thickness human neonatal foreskin grafts were transplanted onto CB17 SCID beige mice (Taconic Farms) as previously described ( 13 , 26 ). Following engraftment for 4 – 6 wk, the human skin was injected intracutaneously with 35 ? l of growth factor reduced Matrigel (BD Biosciences) mixed with either 2.5 × 106 murine fibroblasts stably transfected with human CD40L (CD40L cells) or mock transfectants (gifted by Cees Van Kooten, University of Leiden, Leiden, The Netherlands) each suspended in 35 ? l saline (total volume of 70 ? l). Before injection, the transfectants were irradiated at 7500 rads. Rapamycin (0.3 mg/kg/day or 1.5 mg/kg/day) was administered to the SCID mice by i.p. injection and the human skin grafts were harvested 7 days later. Immunohistochemistry was performed for the evaluation of vWF as described ( 13 , 26 ).  Immunohistochemistry Four micron cryostat cut frozen sections were fixed in acetone for 5 min and incubated with a rabbit anti-human vWF Ab (DakoCytomation) in PBS with 3% human serum for 1 h at room temperature. Subsequently, the specimens were incubated with a species-specific peroxidase-conjugated secondary Ab (Jackson Immuno Research) and were developed with 0.25 mg/ml 3-amino-ethylcarbazole in 2% N,N-dimethylformamide and 0.1 mol/L sodium acetate buffer (pH 5.2) with 0.03% hydrogen peroxide as described ( 13 , 26 ). Finally, sections were counterstained in hematoxylin and mounted in glycerol gelatin.  Immunohistochemistry Four micron cryostat cut frozen sections were fixed in acetone for 5 min and incubated with a rabbit anti-human vWF Ab (DakoCytomation) in PBS with 3% human serum for 1 h at room temperature. Subsequently, the specimens were incubated with a species-specific peroxidase-conjugated secondary Ab (Jackson Immuno Research) and were developed with 0.25 mg/ml 3-amino-ethylcarbazole in 2% N,N-dimethylformamide and 0.1 mol/L sodium acetate buffer (pH 5.2) with 0.03% hydrogen peroxide as described ( 13 , 26 ). Finally, sections were counterstained in hematoxylin and mounted in glycerol gelatin.  Quantification of angiogenesis Vessels identified by vWF staining were counted using a standard grid-counting method at ×400 magnification by light microscopy, as previously described ( 13 , 26 ). For each group, the vessels within four to six adjacent nonoverlapping fields of each skin specimen were counted by two independent observers in a blinded manner, and the mean vessel counts for each specimen was calculated.  Quantification of angiogenesis Vessels identified by vWF staining were counted using a standard grid-counting method at ×400 magnification by light microscopy, as previously described ( 13 , 26 ). For each group, the vessels within four to six adjacent nonoverlapping fields of each skin specimen were counted by two independent observers in a blinded manner, and the mean vessel counts for each specimen was calculated.  Statistics Data were compared using the Student’s t test or the Mann-Whitney U test as indicated. p values <0.05 were considered statistically significant.  Statistics Data were compared using the Student’s t test or the Mann-Whitney U test as indicated. p values <0.05 were considered statistically significant.  Results Ligation of CD40 by CD40L activates mTORC1 in endothelial cells We first evaluated the phosphorylation of mTOR (Ser2448) as well as 4E-BP1 (Ser 65) and S6K1 (Thr 389), (two well-established downstream targets of mTORC1 ( 27 )) in EC following stimulation by soluble CD40L (sCD40L). By Western blot, we found that the phosphorylation of mTOR increased following treatment of EC with sCD40L, peaking in expression after 15 min and persisting for greater than 1 h. In contrast, the phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 and S6K1 increased after 15 min, peaked after 30 min and decreased 60 min following treatment ( Fig. 1 A ). To demonstrate that the phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 and S6K1 was mediated by mTORC1, we pretreated EC with the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin before stimulation with sCD40L, and found that it prevented sCD40L-mediated expression of p4E-BP1 and pS6K1 as assessed by Western blot ( Fig. 1 B ). Because it is known that treatment of EC with sCD40L results in the activation of PI3K and Akt ( 16 , 18 ), we next wished to evaluate whether these kinases are intermediaries in CD40-inducible mTORC1 activation. We transiently transfected EC with dominant negative (DN) mutants of either PI3K or Akt, and subsequently treated the cells with sCD40L and evaluated S6K1 phosphorylation by Western blot. As illustrated in Fig. 1, C and D , we found that each DN mutant significantly reduced sCD40L-inducible phosphorylation of S6K1 as compared with the response in EC transfected with the empty expression vector (pcDNA3). In addition, we treated EC with LY294002, a pharmacological PI3K inhibitor, before treatment with sCD40L, and again we found a reduction in S6K1 phosphorylation ( Fig. 1 E ). Therefore, CD40-induced signaling in EC results in the activation of PI-3K and Akt, and mediates signaling via mTORC1. mTORC2 and CD40-mediated signaling in EC We have recently reported that the treatment of EC with the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin reduces Akt phosphorylation as well as its kinase activity via inhibition of mTORC2 ( 24 ). Furthermore, it is known that rapamycin can inhibit mTORC1-mediated responses in EC ( 19 , 24 ). Next, we used siRNAs to knockdown rictor or raptor and disrupt mTORC2 or mTORC1 assembly respectively, before treatment with sCD40L. Following transfection of EC with each siRNA and stimulation with sCD40L, the phosphorylation of Akt was evaluated by Western blot. As expected ( 16 ), we observed that treatment with sCD40L resulted in an induction in Akt phosphorylation in control siRNA transfected EC ( Fig. 2 A ). Moreover, we found that knockdown of mTOR and rictor, but not raptor, markedly blocked basal levels of pAkt expression as well as sCD40L-induced phosphorylation of Akt ( Fig. 2 A ). The efficiency of knockdown following transfection with our siRNAs (including raptor) was confirmed in control blots ( Fig. 2 B ). Therefore, we interpret these observations to indicate that mTORC2, and not mTORC1, mediates the activation of Akt in response to CD40 signaling. Furthermore, as illustrated in Fig. 2 C , we found that pretreatment of EC with rapamycin for 12 h (to disrupt assembly of mTORC2; Ref. 24 ) inhibited the phosphorylation of Akt, including both basal and sCD40L-inducible levels of expression. Thus, the ligation of CD40 on EC results in rictor-dependent (and thus, mTORC2-associated) phosphorylation of Akt, thereby eliciting Akt-induced responses. CD40-induced expression of VEGF involves mTORC2-dependent signals As discussed above, the ligation of CD40 on EC results in mTORC1- and mTORC2-dependent signaling. Further, these signals result in VEGF expression and VEGF-dependent angiogenesis ( 12 ). To next investigate the function of mTORC1 and mTORC2 in CD40-inducible expression of VEGF, EC were transfected with our full-length VEGF promoter-luciferase construct ( 12 , 17 ) and cultured in the absence or presence of rapamycin and sCD40L. As expected ( 12 ), treatment with sCD40L augmented VEGF promoter activity, and we found that this activity was totally blocked by rapamycin ( Fig. 3 A ). Similarly, by Western blot, we observed that rapamycin blocked sCD40L-mediated induction of VEGF protein expression ( Fig. 3 B ). To further evaluate which mTOR complex regulates the expression of VEGF, we next transfected EC with mTOR, rictor, or raptor siRNAs and cultured them in the absence or presence of sCD40L. Similar to that observed with rapamycin, we found that sCD40L failed to induce VEGF expression in EC transfected with the mTOR siRNA ( Fig. 3 C ). In addition, by Western blot, we found that knockdown of rictor significantly inhibited sCD40L-mediated expression VEGF. However, sCD40-induced expression of VEGF was similar to controls in EC transfected with the raptor siRNA ( Fig. 3 C and data not shown). We also found that the endogenous expression of VEGF was reduced in EC transfected with the rictor siRNA. In contrast, we repeatedly observed that basal levels of VEGF were increased in EC transfected with the raptor siRNA ( Fig. 3 C ). These data indicate that mTORC2, and not mTORC1 is functional in both basal as well as CD40-inducible expression of VEGF. Furthermore, these observations suggest that mTORC1 may regulate a negative signaling loop for endogenous VEGF expression. To further determine the function(s) of mTORC2 and Akt in CD40L-CD40-inducible expression of VEGF, we first cotransfected EC with our full-length VEGF promoter-luciferase construct and a DN mutant of Akt, or an empty vector as a control. We found that the DN mutant of Akt significantly inhibited the ability of sCD40L to increase VEGF transcriptional activity ( Fig. 4 A ). Furthermore, by Western blot, we found that sCD40L-inducible protein expression of VEGF was reduced in EC transfected with the DN mutant of Akt, as compared with empty vector transfected cells ( Fig. 4 B ). We next transiently transfected EC with an Akt expression vector in which the S473 and T308 sites of Akt were mutated to encode a constitutively active (and mTORC2-independent) form of the kinase (called 2DAkt) ( 24 ). As illustrated in Fig. 4 C , we found that the transfection of EC with the 2DAkt construct resulted in the transactivation of VEGF, and further, we found that this response was not inhibited by rapamycin. By Western blot, we additionally observed that the transfection of EC with 2DAkt increased VEGF protein expression, and that rapamycin failed to inhibit the response ( Fig. 4 D ). Thus, while mTORC1 may be sufficient to mediate VEGF expression, for instance under conditions of hypoxia ( 28 , 29 ), it is not necessary for endogenous or CD40-inducible expression. Function of mTOR in CD40-inducible angiogenesis in vivo To evaluate the physiological relevance of our in vitro observations, we next assessed whether pharmacological inhibition of mTOR in vivo prevents CD40L-mediated angiogenesis. For these studies, we used an established model of human angiogenesis in human skin ( 13 , 26 ). Neonatal foreskin was transplanted onto SCID beige mice, using standard procedures and was allowed to heal for 4 – 6 wk. We have previously found that this period of healing is sufficient to enable stabilization of the healing angiogenesis reaction in the skin graft, and that ~50% of EC in the healed skin remain of human origin ( 30 ). Untransfected murine fibroblasts (mock cells) or murine fibroblasts stably expressing human CD40L (CD40L cells) were injected intracutaneously into the human skin on the SCID mice, and the mice were divided into three groups: untreated or treated with rapamycin 0.3 mg/kg/day or 1.5 mg/kg/day ( Fig. 5, A and B ). The skins were harvested after 7 days and were evaluated for the development of angiogenesis by immunostaining with anti-vWF and standard quantitative grid counting analysis. We found that the mean vessel density in the skins injected with mock cells was identical with that observed in untreated skins (data not shown and Ref. 13 ). In addition, as expected, mean vessel density was significantly increased in the skins injected with CD40L (1.7 fold increase vs mock cells, p < 0.05, Fig. 5 B ), whereas the vessel density observed in skins harvested from SCID mice treated with rapamycin (1.5 mg/kg/ day) was similar to that found in untreated mice and negative controls ( p < 0.05 vs untreated mice, Fig. 5 B ***********). Lower doses of rapamycin (0.3 mg/kg/day) did not visibly inhibit the angiogenesis reaction. Finally, we evaluated the expression of VEGF by Western blot in skins following injection of mock or CD40L-expressing cells. As illustrated in Fig. 5 C , we found that VEGF expression was marginally increased in skins injected with CD40L cells, as compared with those injected with mock cells. Moreover, we found that both baseline as well as induced expression of VEGF was decreased in the skins harvested from mice that were treated with rapamycin (1.5 mg/kg/d). We conclude that the inhibition of mTOR with rapamycin is sufficient to block both CD40L-inducible expression of VEGF and CD40L-mediated angiogenesis in vivo.  Results Ligation of CD40 by CD40L activates mTORC1 in endothelial cells We first evaluated the phosphorylation of mTOR (Ser2448) as well as 4E-BP1 (Ser 65) and S6K1 (Thr 389), (two well-established downstream targets of mTORC1 ( 27 )) in EC following stimulation by soluble CD40L (sCD40L). By Western blot, we found that the phosphorylation of mTOR increased following treatment of EC with sCD40L, peaking in expression after 15 min and persisting for greater than 1 h. In contrast, the phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 and S6K1 increased after 15 min, peaked after 30 min and decreased 60 min following treatment ( Fig. 1 A ). To demonstrate that the phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 and S6K1 was mediated by mTORC1, we pretreated EC with the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin before stimulation with sCD40L, and found that it prevented sCD40L-mediated expression of p4E-BP1 and pS6K1 as assessed by Western blot ( Fig. 1 B ). Because it is known that treatment of EC with sCD40L results in the activation of PI3K and Akt ( 16 , 18 ), we next wished to evaluate whether these kinases are intermediaries in CD40-inducible mTORC1 activation. We transiently transfected EC with dominant negative (DN) mutants of either PI3K or Akt, and subsequently treated the cells with sCD40L and evaluated S6K1 phosphorylation by Western blot. As illustrated in Fig. 1, C and D , we found that each DN mutant significantly reduced sCD40L-inducible phosphorylation of S6K1 as compared with the response in EC transfected with the empty expression vector (pcDNA3). In addition, we treated EC with LY294002, a pharmacological PI3K inhibitor, before treatment with sCD40L, and again we found a reduction in S6K1 phosphorylation ( Fig. 1 E ). Therefore, CD40-induced signaling in EC results in the activation of PI-3K and Akt, and mediates signaling via mTORC1. mTORC2 and CD40-mediated signaling in EC We have recently reported that the treatment of EC with the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin reduces Akt phosphorylation as well as its kinase activity via inhibition of mTORC2 ( 24 ). Furthermore, it is known that rapamycin can inhibit mTORC1-mediated responses in EC ( 19 , 24 ). Next, we used siRNAs to knockdown rictor or raptor and disrupt mTORC2 or mTORC1 assembly respectively, before treatment with sCD40L. Following transfection of EC with each siRNA and stimulation with sCD40L, the phosphorylation of Akt was evaluated by Western blot. As expected ( 16 ), we observed that treatment with sCD40L resulted in an induction in Akt phosphorylation in control siRNA transfected EC ( Fig. 2 A ). Moreover, we found that knockdown of mTOR and rictor, but not raptor, markedly blocked basal levels of pAkt expression as well as sCD40L-induced phosphorylation of Akt ( Fig. 2 A ). The efficiency of knockdown following transfection with our siRNAs (including raptor) was confirmed in control blots ( Fig. 2 B ). Therefore, we interpret these observations to indicate that mTORC2, and not mTORC1, mediates the activation of Akt in response to CD40 signaling. Furthermore, as illustrated in Fig. 2 C , we found that pretreatment of EC with rapamycin for 12 h (to disrupt assembly of mTORC2; Ref. 24 ) inhibited the phosphorylation of Akt, including both basal and sCD40L-inducible levels of expression. Thus, the ligation of CD40 on EC results in rictor-dependent (and thus, mTORC2-associated) phosphorylation of Akt, thereby eliciting Akt-induced responses. CD40-induced expression of VEGF involves mTORC2-dependent signals As discussed above, the ligation of CD40 on EC results in mTORC1- and mTORC2-dependent signaling. Further, these signals result in VEGF expression and VEGF-dependent angiogenesis ( 12 ). To next investigate the function of mTORC1 and mTORC2 in CD40-inducible expression of VEGF, EC were transfected with our full-length VEGF promoter-luciferase construct ( 12 , 17 ) and cultured in the absence or presence of rapamycin and sCD40L. As expected ( 12 ), treatment with sCD40L augmented VEGF promoter activity, and we found that this activity was totally blocked by rapamycin ( Fig. 3 A ). Similarly, by Western blot, we observed that rapamycin blocked sCD40L-mediated induction of VEGF protein expression ( Fig. 3 B ). To further evaluate which mTOR complex regulates the expression of VEGF, we next transfected EC with mTOR, rictor, or raptor siRNAs and cultured them in the absence or presence of sCD40L. Similar to that observed with rapamycin, we found that sCD40L failed to induce VEGF expression in EC transfected with the mTOR siRNA ( Fig. 3 C ). In addition, by Western blot, we found that knockdown of rictor significantly inhibited sCD40L-mediated expression VEGF. However, sCD40-induced expression of VEGF was similar to controls in EC transfected with the raptor siRNA ( Fig. 3 C and data not shown). We also found that the endogenous expression of VEGF was reduced in EC transfected with the rictor siRNA. In contrast, we repeatedly observed that basal levels of VEGF were increased in EC transfected with the raptor siRNA ( Fig. 3 C ). These data indicate that mTORC2, and not mTORC1 is functional in both basal as well as CD40-inducible expression of VEGF. Furthermore, these observations suggest that mTORC1 may regulate a negative signaling loop for endogenous VEGF expression. To further determine the function(s) of mTORC2 and Akt in CD40L-CD40-inducible expression of VEGF, we first cotransfected EC with our full-length VEGF promoter-luciferase construct and a DN mutant of Akt, or an empty vector as a control. We found that the DN mutant of Akt significantly inhibited the ability of sCD40L to increase VEGF transcriptional activity ( Fig. 4 A ). Furthermore, by Western blot, we found that sCD40L-inducible protein expression of VEGF was reduced in EC transfected with the DN mutant of Akt, as compared with empty vector transfected cells ( Fig. 4 B ). We next transiently transfected EC with an Akt expression vector in which the S473 and T308 sites of Akt were mutated to encode a constitutively active (and mTORC2-independent) form of the kinase (called 2DAkt) ( 24 ). As illustrated in Fig. 4 C , we found that the transfection of EC with the 2DAkt construct resulted in the transactivation of VEGF, and further, we found that this response was not inhibited by rapamycin. By Western blot, we additionally observed that the transfection of EC with 2DAkt increased VEGF protein expression, and that rapamycin failed to inhibit the response ( Fig. 4 D ). Thus, while mTORC1 may be sufficient to mediate VEGF expression, for instance under conditions of hypoxia ( 28 , 29 ), it is not necessary for endogenous or CD40-inducible expression. Function of mTOR in CD40-inducible angiogenesis in vivo To evaluate the physiological relevance of our in vitro observations, we next assessed whether pharmacological inhibition of mTOR in vivo prevents CD40L-mediated angiogenesis. For these studies, we used an established model of human angiogenesis in human skin ( 13 , 26 ). Neonatal foreskin was transplanted onto SCID beige mice, using standard procedures and was allowed to heal for 4 – 6 wk. We have previously found that this period of healing is sufficient to enable stabilization of the healing angiogenesis reaction in the skin graft, and that ~50% of EC in the healed skin remain of human origin ( 30 ). Untransfected murine fibroblasts (mock cells) or murine fibroblasts stably expressing human CD40L (CD40L cells) were injected intracutaneously into the human skin on the SCID mice, and the mice were divided into three groups: untreated or treated with rapamycin 0.3 mg/kg/day or 1.5 mg/kg/day ( Fig. 5, A and B ). The skins were harvested after 7 days and were evaluated for the development of angiogenesis by immunostaining with anti-vWF and standard quantitative grid counting analysis. We found that the mean vessel density in the skins injected with mock cells was identical with that observed in untreated skins (data not shown and Ref. 13 ). In addition, as expected, mean vessel density was significantly increased in the skins injected with CD40L (1.7 fold increase vs mock cells, p < 0.05, Fig. 5 B ), whereas the vessel density observed in skins harvested from SCID mice treated with rapamycin (1.5 mg/kg/ day) was similar to that found in untreated mice and negative controls ( p < 0.05 vs untreated mice, Fig. 5 B ***********). Lower doses of rapamycin (0.3 mg/kg/day) did not visibly inhibit the angiogenesis reaction. Finally, we evaluated the expression of VEGF by Western blot in skins following injection of mock or CD40L-expressing cells. As illustrated in Fig. 5 C , we found that VEGF expression was marginally increased in skins injected with CD40L cells, as compared with those injected with mock cells. Moreover, we found that both baseline as well as induced expression of VEGF was decreased in the skins harvested from mice that were treated with rapamycin (1.5 mg/kg/d). We conclude that the inhibition of mTOR with rapamycin is sufficient to block both CD40L-inducible expression of VEGF and CD40L-mediated angiogenesis in vivo.  Ligation of CD40 by CD40L activates mTORC1 in endothelial cells We first evaluated the phosphorylation of mTOR (Ser2448) as well as 4E-BP1 (Ser 65) and S6K1 (Thr 389), (two well-established downstream targets of mTORC1 ( 27 )) in EC following stimulation by soluble CD40L (sCD40L). By Western blot, we found that the phosphorylation of mTOR increased following treatment of EC with sCD40L, peaking in expression after 15 min and persisting for greater than 1 h. In contrast, the phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 and S6K1 increased after 15 min, peaked after 30 min and decreased 60 min following treatment ( Fig. 1 A ). To demonstrate that the phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 and S6K1 was mediated by mTORC1, we pretreated EC with the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin before stimulation with sCD40L, and found that it prevented sCD40L-mediated expression of p4E-BP1 and pS6K1 as assessed by Western blot ( Fig. 1 B ). Because it is known that treatment of EC with sCD40L results in the activation of PI3K and Akt ( 16 , 18 ), we next wished to evaluate whether these kinases are intermediaries in CD40-inducible mTORC1 activation. We transiently transfected EC with dominant negative (DN) mutants of either PI3K or Akt, and subsequently treated the cells with sCD40L and evaluated S6K1 phosphorylation by Western blot. As illustrated in Fig. 1, C and D , we found that each DN mutant significantly reduced sCD40L-inducible phosphorylation of S6K1 as compared with the response in EC transfected with the empty expression vector (pcDNA3). In addition, we treated EC with LY294002, a pharmacological PI3K inhibitor, before treatment with sCD40L, and again we found a reduction in S6K1 phosphorylation ( Fig. 1 E ). Therefore, CD40-induced signaling in EC results in the activation of PI-3K and Akt, and mediates signaling via mTORC1.  Ligation of CD40 by CD40L activates mTORC1 in endothelial cells We first evaluated the phosphorylation of mTOR (Ser2448) as well as 4E-BP1 (Ser 65) and S6K1 (Thr 389), (two well-established downstream targets of mTORC1 ( 27 )) in EC following stimulation by soluble CD40L (sCD40L). By Western blot, we found that the phosphorylation of mTOR increased following treatment of EC with sCD40L, peaking in expression after 15 min and persisting for greater than 1 h. In contrast, the phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 and S6K1 increased after 15 min, peaked after 30 min and decreased 60 min following treatment ( Fig. 1 A ). To demonstrate that the phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 and S6K1 was mediated by mTORC1, we pretreated EC with the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin before stimulation with sCD40L, and found that it prevented sCD40L-mediated expression of p4E-BP1 and pS6K1 as assessed by Western blot ( Fig. 1 B ). Because it is known that treatment of EC with sCD40L results in the activation of PI3K and Akt ( 16 , 18 ), we next wished to evaluate whether these kinases are intermediaries in CD40-inducible mTORC1 activation. We transiently transfected EC with dominant negative (DN) mutants of either PI3K or Akt, and subsequently treated the cells with sCD40L and evaluated S6K1 phosphorylation by Western blot. As illustrated in Fig. 1, C and D , we found that each DN mutant significantly reduced sCD40L-inducible phosphorylation of S6K1 as compared with the response in EC transfected with the empty expression vector (pcDNA3). In addition, we treated EC with LY294002, a pharmacological PI3K inhibitor, before treatment with sCD40L, and again we found a reduction in S6K1 phosphorylation ( Fig. 1 E ). Therefore, CD40-induced signaling in EC results in the activation of PI-3K and Akt, and mediates signaling via mTORC1.  mTORC2 and CD40-mediated signaling in EC We have recently reported that the treatment of EC with the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin reduces Akt phosphorylation as well as its kinase activity via inhibition of mTORC2 ( 24 ). Furthermore, it is known that rapamycin can inhibit mTORC1-mediated responses in EC ( 19 , 24 ). Next, we used siRNAs to knockdown rictor or raptor and disrupt mTORC2 or mTORC1 assembly respectively, before treatment with sCD40L. Following transfection of EC with each siRNA and stimulation with sCD40L, the phosphorylation of Akt was evaluated by Western blot. As expected ( 16 ), we observed that treatment with sCD40L resulted in an induction in Akt phosphorylation in control siRNA transfected EC ( Fig. 2 A ). Moreover, we found that knockdown of mTOR and rictor, but not raptor, markedly blocked basal levels of pAkt expression as well as sCD40L-induced phosphorylation of Akt ( Fig. 2 A ). The efficiency of knockdown following transfection with our siRNAs (including raptor) was confirmed in control blots ( Fig. 2 B ). Therefore, we interpret these observations to indicate that mTORC2, and not mTORC1, mediates the activation of Akt in response to CD40 signaling. Furthermore, as illustrated in Fig. 2 C , we found that pretreatment of EC with rapamycin for 12 h (to disrupt assembly of mTORC2; Ref. 24 ) inhibited the phosphorylation of Akt, including both basal and sCD40L-inducible levels of expression. Thus, the ligation of CD40 on EC results in rictor-dependent (and thus, mTORC2-associated) phosphorylation of Akt, thereby eliciting Akt-induced responses.  mTORC2 and CD40-mediated signaling in EC We have recently reported that the treatment of EC with the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin reduces Akt phosphorylation as well as its kinase activity via inhibition of mTORC2 ( 24 ). Furthermore, it is known that rapamycin can inhibit mTORC1-mediated responses in EC ( 19 , 24 ). Next, we used siRNAs to knockdown rictor or raptor and disrupt mTORC2 or mTORC1 assembly respectively, before treatment with sCD40L. Following transfection of EC with each siRNA and stimulation with sCD40L, the phosphorylation of Akt was evaluated by Western blot. As expected ( 16 ), we observed that treatment with sCD40L resulted in an induction in Akt phosphorylation in control siRNA transfected EC ( Fig. 2 A ). Moreover, we found that knockdown of mTOR and rictor, but not raptor, markedly blocked basal levels of pAkt expression as well as sCD40L-induced phosphorylation of Akt ( Fig. 2 A ). The efficiency of knockdown following transfection with our siRNAs (including raptor) was confirmed in control blots ( Fig. 2 B ). Therefore, we interpret these observations to indicate that mTORC2, and not mTORC1, mediates the activation of Akt in response to CD40 signaling. Furthermore, as illustrated in Fig. 2 C , we found that pretreatment of EC with rapamycin for 12 h (to disrupt assembly of mTORC2; Ref. 24 ) inhibited the phosphorylation of Akt, including both basal and sCD40L-inducible levels of expression. Thus, the ligation of CD40 on EC results in rictor-dependent (and thus, mTORC2-associated) phosphorylation of Akt, thereby eliciting Akt-induced responses.  CD40-induced expression of VEGF involves mTORC2-dependent signals As discussed above, the ligation of CD40 on EC results in mTORC1- and mTORC2-dependent signaling. Further, these signals result in VEGF expression and VEGF-dependent angiogenesis ( 12 ). To next investigate the function of mTORC1 and mTORC2 in CD40-inducible expression of VEGF, EC were transfected with our full-length VEGF promoter-luciferase construct ( 12 , 17 ) and cultured in the absence or presence of rapamycin and sCD40L. As expected ( 12 ), treatment with sCD40L augmented VEGF promoter activity, and we found that this activity was totally blocked by rapamycin ( Fig. 3 A ). Similarly, by Western blot, we observed that rapamycin blocked sCD40L-mediated induction of VEGF protein expression ( Fig. 3 B ). To further evaluate which mTOR complex regulates the expression of VEGF, we next transfected EC with mTOR, rictor, or raptor siRNAs and cultured them in the absence or presence of sCD40L. Similar to that observed with rapamycin, we found that sCD40L failed to induce VEGF expression in EC transfected with the mTOR siRNA ( Fig. 3 C ). In addition, by Western blot, we found that knockdown of rictor significantly inhibited sCD40L-mediated expression VEGF. However, sCD40-induced expression of VEGF was similar to controls in EC transfected with the raptor siRNA ( Fig. 3 C and data not shown). We also found that the endogenous expression of VEGF was reduced in EC transfected with the rictor siRNA. In contrast, we repeatedly observed that basal levels of VEGF were increased in EC transfected with the raptor siRNA ( Fig. 3 C ). These data indicate that mTORC2, and not mTORC1 is functional in both basal as well as CD40-inducible expression of VEGF. Furthermore, these observations suggest that mTORC1 may regulate a negative signaling loop for endogenous VEGF expression. To further determine the function(s) of mTORC2 and Akt in CD40L-CD40-inducible expression of VEGF, we first cotransfected EC with our full-length VEGF promoter-luciferase construct and a DN mutant of Akt, or an empty vector as a control. We found that the DN mutant of Akt significantly inhibited the ability of sCD40L to increase VEGF transcriptional activity ( Fig. 4 A ). Furthermore, by Western blot, we found that sCD40L-inducible protein expression of VEGF was reduced in EC transfected with the DN mutant of Akt, as compared with empty vector transfected cells ( Fig. 4 B ). We next transiently transfected EC with an Akt expression vector in which the S473 and T308 sites of Akt were mutated to encode a constitutively active (and mTORC2-independent) form of the kinase (called 2DAkt) ( 24 ). As illustrated in Fig. 4 C , we found that the transfection of EC with the 2DAkt construct resulted in the transactivation of VEGF, and further, we found that this response was not inhibited by rapamycin. By Western blot, we additionally observed that the transfection of EC with 2DAkt increased VEGF protein expression, and that rapamycin failed to inhibit the response ( Fig. 4 D ). Thus, while mTORC1 may be sufficient to mediate VEGF expression, for instance under conditions of hypoxia ( 28 , 29 ), it is not necessary for endogenous or CD40-inducible expression.  CD40-induced expression of VEGF involves mTORC2-dependent signals As discussed above, the ligation of CD40 on EC results in mTORC1- and mTORC2-dependent signaling. Further, these signals result in VEGF expression and VEGF-dependent angiogenesis ( 12 ). To next investigate the function of mTORC1 and mTORC2 in CD40-inducible expression of VEGF, EC were transfected with our full-length VEGF promoter-luciferase construct ( 12 , 17 ) and cultured in the absence or presence of rapamycin and sCD40L. As expected ( 12 ), treatment with sCD40L augmented VEGF promoter activity, and we found that this activity was totally blocked by rapamycin ( Fig. 3 A ). Similarly, by Western blot, we observed that rapamycin blocked sCD40L-mediated induction of VEGF protein expression ( Fig. 3 B ). To further evaluate which mTOR complex regulates the expression of VEGF, we next transfected EC with mTOR, rictor, or raptor siRNAs and cultured them in the absence or presence of sCD40L. Similar to that observed with rapamycin, we found that sCD40L failed to induce VEGF expression in EC transfected with the mTOR siRNA ( Fig. 3 C ). In addition, by Western blot, we found that knockdown of rictor significantly inhibited sCD40L-mediated expression VEGF. However, sCD40-induced expression of VEGF was similar to controls in EC transfected with the raptor siRNA ( Fig. 3 C and data not shown). We also found that the endogenous expression of VEGF was reduced in EC transfected with the rictor siRNA. In contrast, we repeatedly observed that basal levels of VEGF were increased in EC transfected with the raptor siRNA ( Fig. 3 C ). These data indicate that mTORC2, and not mTORC1 is functional in both basal as well as CD40-inducible expression of VEGF. Furthermore, these observations suggest that mTORC1 may regulate a negative signaling loop for endogenous VEGF expression. To further determine the function(s) of mTORC2 and Akt in CD40L-CD40-inducible expression of VEGF, we first cotransfected EC with our full-length VEGF promoter-luciferase construct and a DN mutant of Akt, or an empty vector as a control. We found that the DN mutant of Akt significantly inhibited the ability of sCD40L to increase VEGF transcriptional activity ( Fig. 4 A ). Furthermore, by Western blot, we found that sCD40L-inducible protein expression of VEGF was reduced in EC transfected with the DN mutant of Akt, as compared with empty vector transfected cells ( Fig. 4 B ). We next transiently transfected EC with an Akt expression vector in which the S473 and T308 sites of Akt were mutated to encode a constitutively active (and mTORC2-independent) form of the kinase (called 2DAkt) ( 24 ). As illustrated in Fig. 4 C , we found that the transfection of EC with the 2DAkt construct resulted in the transactivation of VEGF, and further, we found that this response was not inhibited by rapamycin. By Western blot, we additionally observed that the transfection of EC with 2DAkt increased VEGF protein expression, and that rapamycin failed to inhibit the response ( Fig. 4 D ). Thus, while mTORC1 may be sufficient to mediate VEGF expression, for instance under conditions of hypoxia ( 28 , 29 ), it is not necessary for endogenous or CD40-inducible expression.  Function of mTOR in CD40-inducible angiogenesis in vivo To evaluate the physiological relevance of our in vitro observations, we next assessed whether pharmacological inhibition of mTOR in vivo prevents CD40L-mediated angiogenesis. For these studies, we used an established model of human angiogenesis in human skin ( 13 , 26 ). Neonatal foreskin was transplanted onto SCID beige mice, using standard procedures and was allowed to heal for 4 – 6 wk. We have previously found that this period of healing is sufficient to enable stabilization of the healing angiogenesis reaction in the skin graft, and that ~50% of EC in the healed skin remain of human origin ( 30 ). Untransfected murine fibroblasts (mock cells) or murine fibroblasts stably expressing human CD40L (CD40L cells) were injected intracutaneously into the human skin on the SCID mice, and the mice were divided into three groups: untreated or treated with rapamycin 0.3 mg/kg/day or 1.5 mg/kg/day ( Fig. 5, A and B ). The skins were harvested after 7 days and were evaluated for the development of angiogenesis by immunostaining with anti-vWF and standard quantitative grid counting analysis. We found that the mean vessel density in the skins injected with mock cells was identical with that observed in untreated skins (data not shown and Ref. 13 ). In addition, as expected, mean vessel density was significantly increased in the skins injected with CD40L (1.7 fold increase vs mock cells, p < 0.05, Fig. 5 B ), whereas the vessel density observed in skins harvested from SCID mice treated with rapamycin (1.5 mg/kg/ day) was similar to that found in untreated mice and negative controls ( p < 0.05 vs untreated mice, Fig. 5 B ***********). Lower doses of rapamycin (0.3 mg/kg/day) did not visibly inhibit the angiogenesis reaction. Finally, we evaluated the expression of VEGF by Western blot in skins following injection of mock or CD40L-expressing cells. As illustrated in Fig. 5 C , we found that VEGF expression was marginally increased in skins injected with CD40L cells, as compared with those injected with mock cells. Moreover, we found that both baseline as well as induced expression of VEGF was decreased in the skins harvested from mice that were treated with rapamycin (1.5 mg/kg/d). We conclude that the inhibition of mTOR with rapamycin is sufficient to block both CD40L-inducible expression of VEGF and CD40L-mediated angiogenesis in vivo.  Function of mTOR in CD40-inducible angiogenesis in vivo To evaluate the physiological relevance of our in vitro observations, we next assessed whether pharmacological inhibition of mTOR in vivo prevents CD40L-mediated angiogenesis. For these studies, we used an established model of human angiogenesis in human skin ( 13 , 26 ). Neonatal foreskin was transplanted onto SCID beige mice, using standard procedures and was allowed to heal for 4 – 6 wk. We have previously found that this period of healing is sufficient to enable stabilization of the healing angiogenesis reaction in the skin graft, and that ~50% of EC in the healed skin remain of human origin ( 30 ). Untransfected murine fibroblasts (mock cells) or murine fibroblasts stably expressing human CD40L (CD40L cells) were injected intracutaneously into the human skin on the SCID mice, and the mice were divided into three groups: untreated or treated with rapamycin 0.3 mg/kg/day or 1.5 mg/kg/day ( Fig. 5, A and B ). The skins were harvested after 7 days and were evaluated for the development of angiogenesis by immunostaining with anti-vWF and standard quantitative grid counting analysis. We found that the mean vessel density in the skins injected with mock cells was identical with that observed in untreated skins (data not shown and Ref. 13 ). In addition, as expected, mean vessel density was significantly increased in the skins injected with CD40L (1.7 fold increase vs mock cells, p < 0.05, Fig. 5 B ), whereas the vessel density observed in skins harvested from SCID mice treated with rapamycin (1.5 mg/kg/ day) was similar to that found in untreated mice and negative controls ( p < 0.05 vs untreated mice, Fig. 5 B ***********). Lower doses of rapamycin (0.3 mg/kg/day) did not visibly inhibit the angiogenesis reaction. Finally, we evaluated the expression of VEGF by Western blot in skins following injection of mock or CD40L-expressing cells. As illustrated in Fig. 5 C , we found that VEGF expression was marginally increased in skins injected with CD40L cells, as compared with those injected with mock cells. Moreover, we found that both baseline as well as induced expression of VEGF was decreased in the skins harvested from mice that were treated with rapamycin (1.5 mg/kg/d). We conclude that the inhibition of mTOR with rapamycin is sufficient to block both CD40L-inducible expression of VEGF and CD40L-mediated angiogenesis in vivo.  Discussion In this report, we define mTOR and mTOR-dependent regulation of Akt in EC as a critical signal for basal as well as CD40L-CD40-inducible expression of VEGF in vitro. Further, we demonstrate the possibility of a feedback signaling loop whereby mTORC1 negatively regulates both Akt activity and VEGF overexpression. A model of our observations is illustrated as a cartoon in Fig. 6 . We also find that rapamycin (which targets mTORC2 and Akt in EC; Ref. 24 ) inhibits sCD40L-inducible expression of VEGF as well as the associated angiogenesis reaction in vivo. Collectively, these observations define mTOR as a critical signaling molecule for CD40L-CD40 mediated angiogenesis, which is of clinical importance in tumor growth and in the progression of chronic inflammatory diseases. It is well established that Akt-induced responses in EC are potent to facilitate angiogenesis ( 19 , 31 ). Although some reports have partially elucidated a role for mTOR and mTORC1 in the inducible expression of VEGF ( 28 ), our studies have demonstrated that the CD40-induced response involves mTORC2. Because the ligation of CD40 on EC mediates the activation of Akt, and since Akt induces the proliferation of EC in part via mTORC1 and S6K, one possibility is that some of the proangiogenic effects of CD40 may also involve mTORC1-inducible signals. mTORC1 has been found to regulate HIF-1 ? , which faciliates the transactivation of VEGF expression ( 28 ). However, our previous studies determined that CD40-inducible transactivation of VEGF is independent of HIF-1 ? ( 17 ). Using VEGF promoter deletion constructs, we found that CD40-inducible activation of VEGF was similar using either our full-length VEGF promoter construct or the HIF-1 promoter deletion construct. Further, using promoter deletion constructs, we found that CD40-inducible expression of VEGF involves other transactivators, and/or involves novel signaling molecules such as the transcriptional repressor protein MeCP2 ( 17 ). Our findings in this report are supportive of this mechanism, and demonstrate that factor(s) leading to the transactivation of VEGF are regulated by mTORC2 and Akt, and not mTORC1. Knockdown of rictor using siRNA (to inhibit mTORC2 assembly), but not knockdown of raptor (to inhibit mTORC1), prevented sCD40L-mediated VEGF expression. Therefore, although mTORC1 may be sufficient to mediate VEGF expression (for instance via HIF-1 ? and/or other transcription factors; Refs. 28 , 29 ), we suggest that mTORC2 is both necessary and sufficient for CD40-inducible expression. Further, our observations indicate that this mTORC2-mediated response is also dependent on the activation of Akt, and that Akt-inducible signaling is of major importance for both baseline as well as inducible expression of VEGF. Interestingly, we found that inhibition of mTORC1-mediated responses increased basal levels of pAkt, as well as VEGF protein expression. Also, although not as notable, there was also some minimal effect on CD40-inducible levels of VEGF expression ( Figs. 2 and 3 , and data not shown). Although this observation is again consistent with a critical role for mTORC2 and Akt in the inducible expression of VEGF, it also suggests that mTORC1 regulates negative feedback signaling loops (illustrated in Fig. 6 ). For instance, blockade of mTORC1 may result in the inhibition of S6K-mediated down-regulation of IRS-1 activity, which positively regulates PI3K and Akt-inducible signaling, and subsequently results in an increase in pAkt levels and VEGF expression. Alternatively, it is possible that blockade of mTORC1 may feed back to inhibit other regulators of Akt activation (such as PTEN), so that the phosphorylation of Akt is increased. Nevertheless, these findings are consistent with our observations that mTORC2 and Akt are the key regulatory signaling molecules for CD40-induced expression of VEGF. Activated T cells and platelets express CD40L, and CD40 is expressed on many cell types within most tissue beds ( 1 – 4 ). In our previous studies using our human skin transplant/SCID mouse model, we observed that CD40 is expressed on resident EC, macrophages, and keratinocytes, as well as other cell types within human skin grafts ( 13 ). Therefore, it is possible that the local injection of CD40L-expressing cells into the human skin results in interactions between CD40L and CD40 on non-EC. Nevertheless, we found that the associated angiogenesis reaction is dependent on CD40L-inducible expression of VEGF, since treatment of the SCID mice with a blocking anti-human VEGF Ab significantly inhibited the effect of CD40L on the response ( 13 ). In the current study, we find that treatment of mice with rapamycin inhibits both CD40L-inducible expression of VEGF in vivo and the associated angiogenesis response. Therefore, we suggest that the local infiltration of tissues with CD40L-expressing cells can mediate VEGF expression and angiogenesis via mTOR-dependent signaling pathways in both EC and non-EC. The observations identified in this study may have significant therapeutic implications. For instance, CD40L blockade (using the platelet inhibitor clodipogel) has been shown to inhibit angiogenesis and to slow the growth of breast tumors by inhibiting CD40-dependent responses in EC ( 14 , 15 ). Our findings are suggestive that mTOR inhibitors alone or in combination with platelet antagonists may be additive in this effect, and thus may warrant consideration in the development of future therapeutics. In addition, several chronic immune inflammatory diseases (such as arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, asthma, and chronic allograft rejection) are known to be associated with increases in local CD40 and VEGF expression ( 32 – 38 ), and blockade of VEGF has been found to attenuate disease activity ( 39 – 42 ). Thus, the identification of mTOR as a key intermediary in CD40-inducible and proangiogenic signaling in EC ( 13 ) could also lead to clinically relevant therapeutic interventions for immune-mediated angiogenic diseases in the future.  Discussion In this report, we define mTOR and mTOR-dependent regulation of Akt in EC as a critical signal for basal as well as CD40L-CD40-inducible expression of VEGF in vitro. Further, we demonstrate the possibility of a feedback signaling loop whereby mTORC1 negatively regulates both Akt activity and VEGF overexpression. A model of our observations is illustrated as a cartoon in Fig. 6 . We also find that rapamycin (which targets mTORC2 and Akt in EC; Ref. 24 ) inhibits sCD40L-inducible expression of VEGF as well as the associated angiogenesis reaction in vivo. Collectively, these observations define mTOR as a critical signaling molecule for CD40L-CD40 mediated angiogenesis, which is of clinical importance in tumor growth and in the progression of chronic inflammatory diseases. It is well established that Akt-induced responses in EC are potent to facilitate angiogenesis ( 19 , 31 ). Although some reports have partially elucidated a role for mTOR and mTORC1 in the inducible expression of VEGF ( 28 ), our studies have demonstrated that the CD40-induced response involves mTORC2. Because the ligation of CD40 on EC mediates the activation of Akt, and since Akt induces the proliferation of EC in part via mTORC1 and S6K, one possibility is that some of the proangiogenic effects of CD40 may also involve mTORC1-inducible signals. mTORC1 has been found to regulate HIF-1 ? , which faciliates the transactivation of VEGF expression ( 28 ). However, our previous studies determined that CD40-inducible transactivation of VEGF is independent of HIF-1 ? ( 17 ). Using VEGF promoter deletion constructs, we found that CD40-inducible activation of VEGF was similar using either our full-length VEGF promoter construct or the HIF-1 promoter deletion construct. Further, using promoter deletion constructs, we found that CD40-inducible expression of VEGF involves other transactivators, and/or involves novel signaling molecules such as the transcriptional repressor protein MeCP2 ( 17 ). Our findings in this report are supportive of this mechanism, and demonstrate that factor(s) leading to the transactivation of VEGF are regulated by mTORC2 and Akt, and not mTORC1. Knockdown of rictor using siRNA (to inhibit mTORC2 assembly), but not knockdown of raptor (to inhibit mTORC1), prevented sCD40L-mediated VEGF expression. Therefore, although mTORC1 may be sufficient to mediate VEGF expression (for instance via HIF-1 ? and/or other transcription factors; Refs. 28 , 29 ), we suggest that mTORC2 is both necessary and sufficient for CD40-inducible expression. Further, our observations indicate that this mTORC2-mediated response is also dependent on the activation of Akt, and that Akt-inducible signaling is of major importance for both baseline as well as inducible expression of VEGF. Interestingly, we found that inhibition of mTORC1-mediated responses increased basal levels of pAkt, as well as VEGF protein expression. Also, although not as notable, there was also some minimal effect on CD40-inducible levels of VEGF expression ( Figs. 2 and 3 , and data not shown). Although this observation is again consistent with a critical role for mTORC2 and Akt in the inducible expression of VEGF, it also suggests that mTORC1 regulates negative feedback signaling loops (illustrated in Fig. 6 ). For instance, blockade of mTORC1 may result in the inhibition of S6K-mediated down-regulation of IRS-1 activity, which positively regulates PI3K and Akt-inducible signaling, and subsequently results in an increase in pAkt levels and VEGF expression. Alternatively, it is possible that blockade of mTORC1 may feed back to inhibit other regulators of Akt activation (such as PTEN), so that the phosphorylation of Akt is increased. Nevertheless, these findings are consistent with our observations that mTORC2 and Akt are the key regulatory signaling molecules for CD40-induced expression of VEGF. Activated T cells and platelets express CD40L, and CD40 is expressed on many cell types within most tissue beds ( 1 – 4 ). In our previous studies using our human skin transplant/SCID mouse model, we observed that CD40 is expressed on resident EC, macrophages, and keratinocytes, as well as other cell types within human skin grafts ( 13 ). Therefore, it is possible that the local injection of CD40L-expressing cells into the human skin results in interactions between CD40L and CD40 on non-EC. Nevertheless, we found that the associated angiogenesis reaction is dependent on CD40L-inducible expression of VEGF, since treatment of the SCID mice with a blocking anti-human VEGF Ab significantly inhibited the effect of CD40L on the response ( 13 ). In the current study, we find that treatment of mice with rapamycin inhibits both CD40L-inducible expression of VEGF in vivo and the associated angiogenesis response. Therefore, we suggest that the local infiltration of tissues with CD40L-expressing cells can mediate VEGF expression and angiogenesis via mTOR-dependent signaling pathways in both EC and non-EC. The observations identified in this study may have significant therapeutic implications. For instance, CD40L blockade (using the platelet inhibitor clodipogel) has been shown to inhibit angiogenesis and to slow the growth of breast tumors by inhibiting CD40-dependent responses in EC ( 14 , 15 ). Our findings are suggestive that mTOR inhibitors alone or in combination with platelet antagonists may be additive in this effect, and thus may warrant consideration in the development of future therapeutics. In addition, several chronic immune inflammatory diseases (such as arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, asthma, and chronic allograft rejection) are known to be associated with increases in local CD40 and VEGF expression ( 32 – 38 ), and blockade of VEGF has been found to attenuate disease activity ( 39 – 42 ). Thus, the identification of mTOR as a key intermediary in CD40-inducible and proangiogenic signaling in EC ( 13 ) could also lead to clinically relevant therapeutic interventions for immune-mediated angiogenic diseases in the future. 