Par complex in cancer: A regulator of normal cell polarity joins the dark side  Conclusions and perspectives The Par complex had been traditionally involved in different types of polarization, from embryonic development to epithelial morphogenesis to migration. Recent studies are showing that this protein complex can play different functions provided by the combinatorial nature of the signaling elicited by it. The Par complex is emerging as a crucial signaling module that integrates external and internal inputs with different polarization processes. The outcome contributes to the homeostasis of normal cells and prevents aberrant, disorganized growth or movement. Consistent with this, studies depicting the stepwise process of tumorigenesis have shown that deregulation of Par complex activity is a key factor for initiation of transformation. However, recent data has uncovered a pro-oncogenic role for aPKC, and for the Par6-aPKC module downstream of oncogenic signaling. Thus, during transformation, the Par complex is likely to be affected in two opposite ways: negative regulation of its polarization activity and recruitment as a positive mediator for oncogenic pathways. The ability of Par6 and Par3 to scaffold adaptors and effectors to activate many different pathways provides spatial regulation, as well as quantitative activation and substrate specificity for the enzymatic activity of the complex. It will be important to achieve a systematic characterization of the binding partners that determine the outcome of Par complex activity. One of the aspects that are likely to provide better insights is the study of Par complex interplay with GTPase signaling. New data are also strengthening the connection between the Par complex and diverse aspects of GTPase signaling, suggesting that Par6, and Par3, can also modulate GTPase activity as a downstream effector of polarized signaling. What determines the binding of a specific GTPase, or the recruitment of GEF and GAP factors to Par6 and Par3 is a question that promises exciting answers. From the expanding Par complex signaling network, a common node arises. Regulation of aPKC phosphorylation activity is likely to be the main downstream effect of the Par complex. The activity of this Ser/Thr kinase seems increasingly like a double-edged sword: it is required for normal polarization but it is also a positive regulator of oncogenic signaling, and can drive transformation on its own. Recent findings linking aPKC to tumorigenesis are expanding our view of the polarity machinery from a potential tumor suppressor factor into a more dynamic pathway deeply engraved in many aspects of oncogenic signaling. Targeting aPKC may represent a novel interesting approach to stop tumor progression, even at an early stage. The use of an aPKC inhibitor that selectively targets Par6-aPKC interaction shows promising results in ovarian carcinoma ( Fields et al. , 2007 ; Jin et al. , 2008 ; Regala et al. , 2008 ; Stallings-Mann et al. , 2006 ) and spearheads the many therapeutic opportunities that Par complex may offer. More interesting targets are bound to be identified as oncogenesis-specific Par complex partners are being discovered. The work describing the role of Par complex in oncogenesis expands our vision of how, and why, cellular transformation takes place. It also highlights the need to parse our genetic data and redraw our signaling pathways to keep discovering novel aspects that may help us understand and stop tumor progression.  Figure Figure 1 The Par complex and normal polarized signaling Par complex activity is involved in multiple polarization processes that are part of normal cell physiology. The complex integrates extracellular stimuli into the polarized cell program and interprets spatial cues to maintain differentiated homeostasis. It has been shown that some oncogenes can directly recruit or deregulate the Par complex to promote oncogenesis by two mechanisms. Disruption of normal polarity functions can induce transformation, and also Par complex components can participate in oncogenic signaling pathways. This oncogenic role is dictated by qualitative and quantitative changes in the complex composition and localization. 