EARLY PREDICTION OF OUTCOME IN ADVANCED HEAD AND NECK CANCER BASED ON TUMOR BLOOD VOLUME ALTERATIONS DURING THERAPY: A PROSPECTIVE STUDY Purpose To assess whether alterations in tumor blood volume (BV) and flow (BF) during the early course of chemo-radiation therapy (RT) for head and neck cancer (HNC) predict treatment outcome. Methods Fourteen patients receiving concomitant chemo-RT for non-resectable, locally advanced HNC underwent dynamic-contrast enhanced (DCE) MRI scans pre-therapy and two weeks after initiation of chemo-RT. BV and BF were quantified from DCE MRI. Pre-RT BV and BF as well as their changes during RT were evaluated separately in the primary gross tumor volume (GTV) and nodal GTV for association with outcomes. Results At a median follow-up of ten months (range of 5 – 27 months), nine patients had local-regional controlled disease (LRC). One patient had regional failure (RF), three had local failures (LF) and one had local-regional failure (LRF). Reduction in tumor volume after 2 weeks of chemo-RT did not predict for local control. In contrast, the BV in the primary GTV after 2 weeks of chemo-RT was increased significantly in the LC patients compared to the LF patients (p<0.03). Conclusions Our data suggest that an increase in available primary tumor blood for oxygen extraction during the early course of RT is associated with local control, thus yielding a predictor with potential to modify treatment. These findings require validation in larger studies.  METHODS Patients Following Institutional Review Board approval, fourteen patients were enrolled in this study. Patients and disease characteristics are described in Table 1 . All patients received a total of 70 Gy to the gross tumor volume (GTV) by intensity-modulated (12 patients) or 3D conformal (2 patients) RT. In 13 patients RT was delivered once daily at 2 Gy fractions to the GTVs, and in one patient at 1.25 Gy fractions, twice daily. The chemotherapy regimens included carboplatin (1 area under the curve) and paclitaxel 30 mg/sq m (8 patients) given weekly, or cisplatin, 100 mg/sq mm (5 patients) administered once every three weeks. One patient received a loading dose of 400 mg/sq m followed by weekly cetuximab 250 mg/sq m. DCE MRI T1-weighted DCE MR imaging that covered the whole tumor and involved nodal GTVs was acquired prior to RT and 2 weeks after the start of RT. Blood volume (BV) images were estimated by using the general Toft model, by which the BV was corrected for vascular permeability.( 12 ) Blood flow (BF) images were estimated using the method described by Mullani ( 13 ) and applied to assessment of HN cancer perfusion by Hermans.( 14 ) The BV and BF images were geometrically co-registered with post-Gd T1-weighted MR images and the treatment planning CT. Gross Tumor Volumes GTVs were defined on pre-RT post-Gd T1-weighted images as well as during-RT images, cross-referenced with the treatment planning CT and diagnostic PET if available. Considering possible different responses to chemo-RT, the primary and nodal GTVs were drawn separately. Large vessels near and within the nodal GTVs were excluded. The average BV and BF in the primary and nodal GTVs prior to RT and during RT, as well as the alterations between these measures, were calculated. The pre-RT BV and BF in the primary and nodal GTVs and their changes during the course of RT were stratified based upon local and regional control, respectively. Differences of perfusion parameters between the two subgroups were tested by Mann-Whitney U test. Two-tailed p value <0.05 was considered significant.  Patients Following Institutional Review Board approval, fourteen patients were enrolled in this study. Patients and disease characteristics are described in Table 1 . All patients received a total of 70 Gy to the gross tumor volume (GTV) by intensity-modulated (12 patients) or 3D conformal (2 patients) RT. In 13 patients RT was delivered once daily at 2 Gy fractions to the GTVs, and in one patient at 1.25 Gy fractions, twice daily. The chemotherapy regimens included carboplatin (1 area under the curve) and paclitaxel 30 mg/sq m (8 patients) given weekly, or cisplatin, 100 mg/sq mm (5 patients) administered once every three weeks. One patient received a loading dose of 400 mg/sq m followed by weekly cetuximab 250 mg/sq m.  DCE MRI T1-weighted DCE MR imaging that covered the whole tumor and involved nodal GTVs was acquired prior to RT and 2 weeks after the start of RT. Blood volume (BV) images were estimated by using the general Toft model, by which the BV was corrected for vascular permeability.( 12 ) Blood flow (BF) images were estimated using the method described by Mullani ( 13 ) and applied to assessment of HN cancer perfusion by Hermans.( 14 ) The BV and BF images were geometrically co-registered with post-Gd T1-weighted MR images and the treatment planning CT.  Gross Tumor Volumes GTVs were defined on pre-RT post-Gd T1-weighted images as well as during-RT images, cross-referenced with the treatment planning CT and diagnostic PET if available. Considering possible different responses to chemo-RT, the primary and nodal GTVs were drawn separately. Large vessels near and within the nodal GTVs were excluded. The average BV and BF in the primary and nodal GTVs prior to RT and during RT, as well as the alterations between these measures, were calculated. The pre-RT BV and BF in the primary and nodal GTVs and their changes during the course of RT were stratified based upon local and regional control, respectively. Differences of perfusion parameters between the two subgroups were tested by Mann-Whitney U test. Two-tailed p value <0.05 was considered significant.  RESULTS Median follow up for the 10 living patients was 9.7 months (range 5.3–27 months). Nine patients had local-regional controlled disease (LRC). One patient had regional failure (RF), three had local failures (LF) and one had local-regional failure (LRF), see Table 1 . Three of the four patients with LF had distant metastases at the time of or after LF. All four patients with LF died. Tumor volumes and their percentage changes from pre to during-therapy are detailed in Table 2 for the primary tumors and lymph node metastases. The median of the pre-RT primary GTVs for the patients with LC was 15.8 cc (range: 5.3 – 97.5 cc), significantly smaller (p=0.046) than the median of 74.3 cc (range: 19.6 – 120.1 cc) for the patients with LF. The early responses of the primary tumor volume to 2 weeks of fractionated RT and chemotherapy did not differ significantly between the patients with LC and LF, with a median reduction of 28% and 21%, respectively ( Table 2 ). The pre-RT nodal GTVs of the two patients with RF were 46 cc and 166 cc, greater than the median (33 cc) of the pre-RT nodal GTVs of the patients with regional control. The nodal GTVs in the patients with RF changed slightly in one and was reduced by 34% in another after 2 weeks of chemo-RT ( Table 2 ), compared with a median reduction of 38% in the lymphatic GTVs of patients with regionally controlled disease. The pre-therapy BV and BF in the primary GTVs did not differ significantly between the patients with LC and LF ( Table 3 , Figure 1 ). However, after 2 weeks of RT, the BV in the primary GTV increased significantly, by a median of 5.1 ml/100g (range: ?0.6 to 13.2), in the patients with LC, compared to the patients with LF in whom there was little change (median change of 1.0 mL/100g; p=0.03). In comparison, for the BF of the primary GTV, there were no significant differences either in the pre-RT values or in the changes during RT between the patients with LC and LF ( Table 3 ). In the nodal GTVs, the pre-RT values of BV and BF of the two patients with RF were similar to those of the patients with regional control ( Table 3 ). There was little change in either BV or BF of the nodal GTVs after 2 weeks of fractionated RT for the patients with or without regional control.  RESULTS Median follow up for the 10 living patients was 9.7 months (range 5.3–27 months). Nine patients had local-regional controlled disease (LRC). One patient had regional failure (RF), three had local failures (LF) and one had local-regional failure (LRF), see Table 1 . Three of the four patients with LF had distant metastases at the time of or after LF. All four patients with LF died. Tumor volumes and their percentage changes from pre to during-therapy are detailed in Table 2 for the primary tumors and lymph node metastases. The median of the pre-RT primary GTVs for the patients with LC was 15.8 cc (range: 5.3 – 97.5 cc), significantly smaller (p=0.046) than the median of 74.3 cc (range: 19.6 – 120.1 cc) for the patients with LF. The early responses of the primary tumor volume to 2 weeks of fractionated RT and chemotherapy did not differ significantly between the patients with LC and LF, with a median reduction of 28% and 21%, respectively ( Table 2 ). The pre-RT nodal GTVs of the two patients with RF were 46 cc and 166 cc, greater than the median (33 cc) of the pre-RT nodal GTVs of the patients with regional control. The nodal GTVs in the patients with RF changed slightly in one and was reduced by 34% in another after 2 weeks of chemo-RT ( Table 2 ), compared with a median reduction of 38% in the lymphatic GTVs of patients with regionally controlled disease. The pre-therapy BV and BF in the primary GTVs did not differ significantly between the patients with LC and LF ( Table 3 , Figure 1 ). However, after 2 weeks of RT, the BV in the primary GTV increased significantly, by a median of 5.1 ml/100g (range: ?0.6 to 13.2), in the patients with LC, compared to the patients with LF in whom there was little change (median change of 1.0 mL/100g; p=0.03). In comparison, for the BF of the primary GTV, there were no significant differences either in the pre-RT values or in the changes during RT between the patients with LC and LF ( Table 3 ). In the nodal GTVs, the pre-RT values of BV and BF of the two patients with RF were similar to those of the patients with regional control ( Table 3 ). There was little change in either BV or BF of the nodal GTVs after 2 weeks of fractionated RT for the patients with or without regional control.  DISCUSSION This study suggests an increase in BV of the primary tumor volume early in the course of RT in patients with LC. This increase is significantly higher than the change in BV of patients with LF. The changes in the primary tumor volume were similar between the two groups, and could not serve as early indication of local control. This finding suggests that a local blood supply increase, potentially a source of increased oxygenation, may be a positive indicator for therapeutic response at the primary tumor site. Thus, it may help individualize treatments, in addition to pre-therapy clinical factors like GTV size (which was a significant factor in our study) or molecular predictive factors.1,( 15 ) It should be noted that the increase in tumor blood volumes occurring early during chemo-RT in our patients with good outcomes is opposite that reported in patients with good responses to induction chemotherapy.( 6 ) This dichotomy could be due to the different treatment modalities, as well as the different endpoints for local control (tumor volume reduction vs. local tumor control). Also, CT perfusion imaging as reported in the chemotherapy study only allows assessment of a portion of the tumor, while DCE MRI used in our study enables an evaluation of the whole tumor. Furthermore, the different perfusion characteristics between the primary tumor and affected nodes require separate evaluations in the alterations of perfusion and blood supply of the two entities. The sources of these discrepancies should be investigated further in a larger patient population and a longer follow-up. In conclusion, this study suggests that early changes in tumor blood volume of the primary tumor site may help predict local control for patients undergoing chemo-RT. Larger scale studies, perhaps coupled with other biomarker investigations, can help better establish our ability to alter a treatment course based on early assessment.  DISCUSSION This study suggests an increase in BV of the primary tumor volume early in the course of RT in patients with LC. This increase is significantly higher than the change in BV of patients with LF. The changes in the primary tumor volume were similar between the two groups, and could not serve as early indication of local control. This finding suggests that a local blood supply increase, potentially a source of increased oxygenation, may be a positive indicator for therapeutic response at the primary tumor site. Thus, it may help individualize treatments, in addition to pre-therapy clinical factors like GTV size (which was a significant factor in our study) or molecular predictive factors.1,( 15 ) It should be noted that the increase in tumor blood volumes occurring early during chemo-RT in our patients with good outcomes is opposite that reported in patients with good responses to induction chemotherapy.( 6 ) This dichotomy could be due to the different treatment modalities, as well as the different endpoints for local control (tumor volume reduction vs. local tumor control). Also, CT perfusion imaging as reported in the chemotherapy study only allows assessment of a portion of the tumor, while DCE MRI used in our study enables an evaluation of the whole tumor. Furthermore, the different perfusion characteristics between the primary tumor and affected nodes require separate evaluations in the alterations of perfusion and blood supply of the two entities. The sources of these discrepancies should be investigated further in a larger patient population and a longer follow-up. In conclusion, this study suggests that early changes in tumor blood volume of the primary tumor site may help predict local control for patients undergoing chemo-RT. Larger scale studies, perhaps coupled with other biomarker investigations, can help better establish our ability to alter a treatment course based on early assessment. 