Spatial Alignment over Retinal Scotomas Purpose Perceptual completion can mask the presence of physiological and pathologic retinal scotomas. This psychophysical study used a spatial alignment task to examine the processes underlying this perceptual completion. Similarities between the completion of pathologic and physiological scotomas would be consistent with large-scale reorganization of the visual system in eye disease Methods In five control subjects with no eye disease, Vernier alignment thresholds were measured over the physiological blind spot at the optic nerve head and over equally eccentric temporal retina. For nine subjects with retinal scotomas, alignment thresholds were measured over the maximum vertical extent of the larger scotoma in one eye and at an equal separation and eccentricity in the eye with a smaller or no scotoma Results In control subjects, alignment thresholds were better over the physiological blind spot than over equally eccentric temporal retina ( P < 0.05). Alignment thresholds were no better over pathologic retinal scotomas than more intact, equally eccentric retina ( P = 0.9) Conclusions These quantitative differences implicate different mechanisms for perceptual completion over pathologic and physiological retinal scotomas. Filling in across pathologic scotomas appears to involve higher level image processing-based mechanisms that operate even when their input is interrupted. Filling-in at the optic nerve head involves additional low-level processes that may be hardwired, in which receptive fields span the blind spot and support fine orientation discriminations. These results argue against low-level reorganization of the visual system in people with retinal disease.  Results Alignment over the Physiological Blind Spot Mean alignment thresholds were 0.36° for lines projected over the physiological blind spot and 0.63° for those over the intact temporal retina. This difference was statistically significant (matched pairs; P < 0.05; Figure 2 ). Alignment over Pathologic Retinal Scotomas In subjects with age-related macular disease, no significant difference was observed in alignment thresholds in better eyes and poorer eyes (matched pairs; P = 0.9). Two showed lower alignment thresholds in the eye with the larger scotoma, and three showed lower alignment thresholds in the better eye. For the two observers with juvenile macular disease, alignment thresholds were better in the better eye, though this difference did not reach statistical significance (0.22° vs. 0.39°; matched pairs; P < 0.33). Subjects with lifelong scotomas (U1, U2) also had better alignment thresholds in their better eyes. These data can be seen in Figure 3 .  Results Alignment over the Physiological Blind Spot Mean alignment thresholds were 0.36° for lines projected over the physiological blind spot and 0.63° for those over the intact temporal retina. This difference was statistically significant (matched pairs; P < 0.05; Figure 2 ). Alignment over Pathologic Retinal Scotomas In subjects with age-related macular disease, no significant difference was observed in alignment thresholds in better eyes and poorer eyes (matched pairs; P = 0.9). Two showed lower alignment thresholds in the eye with the larger scotoma, and three showed lower alignment thresholds in the better eye. For the two observers with juvenile macular disease, alignment thresholds were better in the better eye, though this difference did not reach statistical significance (0.22° vs. 0.39°; matched pairs; P < 0.33). Subjects with lifelong scotomas (U1, U2) also had better alignment thresholds in their better eyes. These data can be seen in Figure 3 .  Alignment over the Physiological Blind Spot Mean alignment thresholds were 0.36° for lines projected over the physiological blind spot and 0.63° for those over the intact temporal retina. This difference was statistically significant (matched pairs; P < 0.05; Figure 2 ).  Alignment over the Physiological Blind Spot Mean alignment thresholds were 0.36° for lines projected over the physiological blind spot and 0.63° for those over the intact temporal retina. This difference was statistically significant (matched pairs; P < 0.05; Figure 2 ).  Alignment over Pathologic Retinal Scotomas In subjects with age-related macular disease, no significant difference was observed in alignment thresholds in better eyes and poorer eyes (matched pairs; P = 0.9). Two showed lower alignment thresholds in the eye with the larger scotoma, and three showed lower alignment thresholds in the better eye. For the two observers with juvenile macular disease, alignment thresholds were better in the better eye, though this difference did not reach statistical significance (0.22° vs. 0.39°; matched pairs; P < 0.33). Subjects with lifelong scotomas (U1, U2) also had better alignment thresholds in their better eyes. These data can be seen in Figure 3 .  Alignment over Pathologic Retinal Scotomas In subjects with age-related macular disease, no significant difference was observed in alignment thresholds in better eyes and poorer eyes (matched pairs; P = 0.9). Two showed lower alignment thresholds in the eye with the larger scotoma, and three showed lower alignment thresholds in the better eye. For the two observers with juvenile macular disease, alignment thresholds were better in the better eye, though this difference did not reach statistical significance (0.22° vs. 0.39°; matched pairs; P < 0.33). Subjects with lifelong scotomas (U1, U2) also had better alignment thresholds in their better eyes. These data can be seen in Figure 3 .  Discussion Alignment over the Physiological Blind Spot Figure 2 shows that for normally sighted control subjects, alignment thresholds were significantly lower (performance is better) over the physiological blind spot than the same distance over intact retina. These data suggest that filling-in of the physiological blind spot is mediated at least in part by a low-level mechanism limited by the orientation sensitivity of the smallest receptive field in the location of the lines. 33 The observation that thresholds are lower across the blind spot than the same distance in the sighted temporal visual field suggests that receptive fields in this location span the optic disc and support fine-orientation discrimination. These results initially appear to conflict with those of two previous studies. Tripathy et al. 39 found that alignment thresholds were comparable over the physiological blind spot and the corresponding sighted visual field of temporal retina in the other eye. Similarly, Maertens and Pollmann 35 found that orientation discrimination thresholds were higher for aligned than for misaligned Kaniza squares that overlapped the blind spot. In contrast, our line stimuli deliberately abutted the edge of the blind spot. Behavioral 9 and physiological 40 studies have shown that contour completion requires that line segments abut the boundary of the blind spot; otherwise, the blind spot is (understandably) completed with the background pattern. If the blind spot is completed with the background, it is not surprising that thresholds for the two conditions are the same. Both cover the same perceived visual area. We suggest that our stimuli promote filling-in of the stimulus lines rather than the background, so that our initial hypotheses can be compared. To examine the role of such background filling-in, we conducted a control experiment with four subjects at an increased line center-to-center separation of 15° between the Vernier lines. This generated a gap size of 13° between the tips of the lines. In this condition, no significant difference was found between alignment over the optic nerve head and temporal retina (physiological blind spot, 0.64°; temporal retina, 0.52°; matched pairs, P < 0.64). We also replicated the experiment of Tripathy et al. 39 and did not find any significant difference in alignment thresholds over the blind spot and over temporal retina, confirming the results of their study. These control studies highlight the importance of the stimulus at the boundary of the scotoma, because it is this that determines what is filled in across the scotoma and defines the spatial structure that can be integrated around its edges. These results suggest that filling in across the physiological blind spot involves (at least in part) low-level receptive field organization. It is possible (and indeed likely) that filling in across the physiological blind spot also involves higher level mechanisms; however, the present study does not provide direct evidence for or against this. Alignment over Pathologic Retinal Scotomas Figure 3 shows that alignment thresholds over pathologic retinal scotomas were not significantly lower than thresholds measured across equally eccentric retina in the more healthy fellow eye. This suggests that the filling-in experienced over pathologic retinal scotomas does not include low-level receptive field reorganization but instead involves higher-level processes of image completion. Some of our subjects described the Vernier lines as tilted, distorted, or hazy during the experiment, which may indicate metamorphopsia around the scotoma boundary (as described around the boundary of macular holes by Kroyer and colleagues 41 ). Metamorphopsia in these patients could explain their elevated Vernier alignment thresholds. It is well known that people with macular disease often demonstrate poorer performance on tasks in apparently healthy retina well beyond the boundary of the scotoma observed on funduscopy. For example, reading speed is lower 42 and temporal processing is slower 43 than at equivalent locations in normally sighted control subjects. It may be that any advantage in alignment tasks conferred by filling-in is counteracted by preclinical changes in retinal disease beyond the region of measurable scotoma. It is also known that fixation stability is significantly worse in people with macular disease. 44 This retinal motion may affect the spatial precision of position encoding in peripheral vision, ameliorating the effects of filling- in. However, in normally sighted subjects, Vernier 45 and letter acuity 46 are invariant of very large levels of random positional jitter. Neither of these explanations can account for the higher thresholds of subjects U1 and U2 across their pathologic scotomas, both of whom have normal values of fixation stability, as determined by post hoc examination of fixation data collected on the microperimeter. An important limitation of our experimental design is that the fundus was not imaged during the alignment task. We have assumed that the retinal location used for fixating the cross target in the alignment task is the same as that used in the microperimeter. Although it is possible that patients used different retinal loci for these two tasks, a red ellipse was presented within the area of the physiological blind spot during all trials. If fixation moved by a significant amount between these conditions, the red disc would have been visible to participants during the experiment and subjects would have reported that they had seen it. This red marker also acts as a simple fixation control: if participants had extremely poor fixation stability, the dot would be visible in many trials. Note that this cannot account for the higher thresholds in subjects U1 and U2 whose scotomas were eccentric and who fixated foveally. A further limitation of our design is that the exact location of the foveal center can be difficult to determine in the eyes with central scotomas, so a small error may exist in the presentation position of the Vernier lines in the healthier eye. No clear relationship was found between the eccentricity of the Vernier lines and alignment threshold. Although it may be that completion acts differently in the peripheral retina from across the foveal center, our sample size is not large enough to allow a detailed analysis of the effects of retinal position on perceptual completion. The quantitative difference between Vernier alignment thresholds of the physiological blind spot and pathologic retinal scotomas are likely to reflect structural differences between the areas surrounding the optic nerve head and areas surrounding a pathologic scotoma, either in the retina or later in the visual system. If significant cortical plasticity exists, we would expect alignment thresholds over a pathologic scotoma to be improved in a manner similar to that over a physiological scotoma. Our results argue against large-scale reorganization of visual cortex in people with eye disease. In functional imaging studies, some of the debate over whether reorganization does 12 or does not 13 occur after development of a retinal scotoma is thought to be attributed to the type of task used and whether stimulus viewing is an active or a passive process. 47 An advantage of a psychophysical paradigm such as ours is that this distinction does not apply. It is particularly surprising that Vernier alignment thresholds across the lifelong scotoma experienced by subjects U1 and U2 were not as low as those over physiological blind spots. In both subjects, the scotomas were in peripheral visual field locations broadly similar to the physiological blind spot (30° superior retina and approximately 15° in diameter in U1 and 22° inferior retina and approximately 6.7° in diameter in U2). Both subjects were unaware of their scotomas until they were detected during routine eye examinations with an optometrist. Although there are not thought to be significant structural changes in visual cortex around the physiological blind spot, 48 some classical and extraclassical receptive fields are known to encompass retina from opposite sides of the optic disc. 40 , 49 , 50 We suggest that the presence and organization of this class of receptive field is the basis of the improved alignment performance over the optic disc. Quantitative differences in filling-in of pathologic and physiological scotomas may guide the future development of tests to identify retinal disease not confounded by the presence of filling-in. For example, the Vernier targets used in this experiment were perceived as filled-in across the physiological blind spot. However, although all our subjects with retinal disease experienced completion of their scotomas on an Amsler chart, not all subjects experienced completion during our Vernier task, possibly because of the tachistoscopic presentation techniques and aperiodic stimului used here. This type of stimulus presentation could be explored further as a tool to identify the presence of retinal scotomas, perhaps by enabling patients to “see” their own areas of scotoma. We have shown that although pathologic and physiological scotomas appear filled-in, this perceptual completion confers a spatial alignment advantage only over the physiological blind spot, suggesting that receptive fields around the optic nerve head are capable of integrating spatial structure on opposite sides of the physiological blind spot. However, after retinal insult, even if lifelong, we find no evidence that receptive fields reorganize in an equivalent manner for pathologic blind spots.  Discussion Alignment over the Physiological Blind Spot Figure 2 shows that for normally sighted control subjects, alignment thresholds were significantly lower (performance is better) over the physiological blind spot than the same distance over intact retina. These data suggest that filling-in of the physiological blind spot is mediated at least in part by a low-level mechanism limited by the orientation sensitivity of the smallest receptive field in the location of the lines. 33 The observation that thresholds are lower across the blind spot than the same distance in the sighted temporal visual field suggests that receptive fields in this location span the optic disc and support fine-orientation discrimination. These results initially appear to conflict with those of two previous studies. Tripathy et al. 39 found that alignment thresholds were comparable over the physiological blind spot and the corresponding sighted visual field of temporal retina in the other eye. Similarly, Maertens and Pollmann 35 found that orientation discrimination thresholds were higher for aligned than for misaligned Kaniza squares that overlapped the blind spot. In contrast, our line stimuli deliberately abutted the edge of the blind spot. Behavioral 9 and physiological 40 studies have shown that contour completion requires that line segments abut the boundary of the blind spot; otherwise, the blind spot is (understandably) completed with the background pattern. If the blind spot is completed with the background, it is not surprising that thresholds for the two conditions are the same. Both cover the same perceived visual area. We suggest that our stimuli promote filling-in of the stimulus lines rather than the background, so that our initial hypotheses can be compared. To examine the role of such background filling-in, we conducted a control experiment with four subjects at an increased line center-to-center separation of 15° between the Vernier lines. This generated a gap size of 13° between the tips of the lines. In this condition, no significant difference was found between alignment over the optic nerve head and temporal retina (physiological blind spot, 0.64°; temporal retina, 0.52°; matched pairs, P < 0.64). We also replicated the experiment of Tripathy et al. 39 and did not find any significant difference in alignment thresholds over the blind spot and over temporal retina, confirming the results of their study. These control studies highlight the importance of the stimulus at the boundary of the scotoma, because it is this that determines what is filled in across the scotoma and defines the spatial structure that can be integrated around its edges. These results suggest that filling in across the physiological blind spot involves (at least in part) low-level receptive field organization. It is possible (and indeed likely) that filling in across the physiological blind spot also involves higher level mechanisms; however, the present study does not provide direct evidence for or against this. Alignment over Pathologic Retinal Scotomas Figure 3 shows that alignment thresholds over pathologic retinal scotomas were not significantly lower than thresholds measured across equally eccentric retina in the more healthy fellow eye. This suggests that the filling-in experienced over pathologic retinal scotomas does not include low-level receptive field reorganization but instead involves higher-level processes of image completion. Some of our subjects described the Vernier lines as tilted, distorted, or hazy during the experiment, which may indicate metamorphopsia around the scotoma boundary (as described around the boundary of macular holes by Kroyer and colleagues 41 ). Metamorphopsia in these patients could explain their elevated Vernier alignment thresholds. It is well known that people with macular disease often demonstrate poorer performance on tasks in apparently healthy retina well beyond the boundary of the scotoma observed on funduscopy. For example, reading speed is lower 42 and temporal processing is slower 43 than at equivalent locations in normally sighted control subjects. It may be that any advantage in alignment tasks conferred by filling-in is counteracted by preclinical changes in retinal disease beyond the region of measurable scotoma. It is also known that fixation stability is significantly worse in people with macular disease. 44 This retinal motion may affect the spatial precision of position encoding in peripheral vision, ameliorating the effects of filling- in. However, in normally sighted subjects, Vernier 45 and letter acuity 46 are invariant of very large levels of random positional jitter. Neither of these explanations can account for the higher thresholds of subjects U1 and U2 across their pathologic scotomas, both of whom have normal values of fixation stability, as determined by post hoc examination of fixation data collected on the microperimeter. An important limitation of our experimental design is that the fundus was not imaged during the alignment task. We have assumed that the retinal location used for fixating the cross target in the alignment task is the same as that used in the microperimeter. Although it is possible that patients used different retinal loci for these two tasks, a red ellipse was presented within the area of the physiological blind spot during all trials. If fixation moved by a significant amount between these conditions, the red disc would have been visible to participants during the experiment and subjects would have reported that they had seen it. This red marker also acts as a simple fixation control: if participants had extremely poor fixation stability, the dot would be visible in many trials. Note that this cannot account for the higher thresholds in subjects U1 and U2 whose scotomas were eccentric and who fixated foveally. A further limitation of our design is that the exact location of the foveal center can be difficult to determine in the eyes with central scotomas, so a small error may exist in the presentation position of the Vernier lines in the healthier eye. No clear relationship was found between the eccentricity of the Vernier lines and alignment threshold. Although it may be that completion acts differently in the peripheral retina from across the foveal center, our sample size is not large enough to allow a detailed analysis of the effects of retinal position on perceptual completion. The quantitative difference between Vernier alignment thresholds of the physiological blind spot and pathologic retinal scotomas are likely to reflect structural differences between the areas surrounding the optic nerve head and areas surrounding a pathologic scotoma, either in the retina or later in the visual system. If significant cortical plasticity exists, we would expect alignment thresholds over a pathologic scotoma to be improved in a manner similar to that over a physiological scotoma. Our results argue against large-scale reorganization of visual cortex in people with eye disease. In functional imaging studies, some of the debate over whether reorganization does 12 or does not 13 occur after development of a retinal scotoma is thought to be attributed to the type of task used and whether stimulus viewing is an active or a passive process. 47 An advantage of a psychophysical paradigm such as ours is that this distinction does not apply. It is particularly surprising that Vernier alignment thresholds across the lifelong scotoma experienced by subjects U1 and U2 were not as low as those over physiological blind spots. In both subjects, the scotomas were in peripheral visual field locations broadly similar to the physiological blind spot (30° superior retina and approximately 15° in diameter in U1 and 22° inferior retina and approximately 6.7° in diameter in U2). Both subjects were unaware of their scotomas until they were detected during routine eye examinations with an optometrist. Although there are not thought to be significant structural changes in visual cortex around the physiological blind spot, 48 some classical and extraclassical receptive fields are known to encompass retina from opposite sides of the optic disc. 40 , 49 , 50 We suggest that the presence and organization of this class of receptive field is the basis of the improved alignment performance over the optic disc. Quantitative differences in filling-in of pathologic and physiological scotomas may guide the future development of tests to identify retinal disease not confounded by the presence of filling-in. For example, the Vernier targets used in this experiment were perceived as filled-in across the physiological blind spot. However, although all our subjects with retinal disease experienced completion of their scotomas on an Amsler chart, not all subjects experienced completion during our Vernier task, possibly because of the tachistoscopic presentation techniques and aperiodic stimului used here. This type of stimulus presentation could be explored further as a tool to identify the presence of retinal scotomas, perhaps by enabling patients to “see” their own areas of scotoma. We have shown that although pathologic and physiological scotomas appear filled-in, this perceptual completion confers a spatial alignment advantage only over the physiological blind spot, suggesting that receptive fields around the optic nerve head are capable of integrating spatial structure on opposite sides of the physiological blind spot. However, after retinal insult, even if lifelong, we find no evidence that receptive fields reorganize in an equivalent manner for pathologic blind spots.  Alignment over the Physiological Blind Spot Figure 2 shows that for normally sighted control subjects, alignment thresholds were significantly lower (performance is better) over the physiological blind spot than the same distance over intact retina. These data suggest that filling-in of the physiological blind spot is mediated at least in part by a low-level mechanism limited by the orientation sensitivity of the smallest receptive field in the location of the lines. 33 The observation that thresholds are lower across the blind spot than the same distance in the sighted temporal visual field suggests that receptive fields in this location span the optic disc and support fine-orientation discrimination. These results initially appear to conflict with those of two previous studies. Tripathy et al. 39 found that alignment thresholds were comparable over the physiological blind spot and the corresponding sighted visual field of temporal retina in the other eye. Similarly, Maertens and Pollmann 35 found that orientation discrimination thresholds were higher for aligned than for misaligned Kaniza squares that overlapped the blind spot. In contrast, our line stimuli deliberately abutted the edge of the blind spot. Behavioral 9 and physiological 40 studies have shown that contour completion requires that line segments abut the boundary of the blind spot; otherwise, the blind spot is (understandably) completed with the background pattern. If the blind spot is completed with the background, it is not surprising that thresholds for the two conditions are the same. Both cover the same perceived visual area. We suggest that our stimuli promote filling-in of the stimulus lines rather than the background, so that our initial hypotheses can be compared. To examine the role of such background filling-in, we conducted a control experiment with four subjects at an increased line center-to-center separation of 15° between the Vernier lines. This generated a gap size of 13° between the tips of the lines. In this condition, no significant difference was found between alignment over the optic nerve head and temporal retina (physiological blind spot, 0.64°; temporal retina, 0.52°; matched pairs, P < 0.64). We also replicated the experiment of Tripathy et al. 39 and did not find any significant difference in alignment thresholds over the blind spot and over temporal retina, confirming the results of their study. These control studies highlight the importance of the stimulus at the boundary of the scotoma, because it is this that determines what is filled in across the scotoma and defines the spatial structure that can be integrated around its edges. These results suggest that filling in across the physiological blind spot involves (at least in part) low-level receptive field organization. It is possible (and indeed likely) that filling in across the physiological blind spot also involves higher level mechanisms; however, the present study does not provide direct evidence for or against this.  Alignment over the Physiological Blind Spot Figure 2 shows that for normally sighted control subjects, alignment thresholds were significantly lower (performance is better) over the physiological blind spot than the same distance over intact retina. These data suggest that filling-in of the physiological blind spot is mediated at least in part by a low-level mechanism limited by the orientation sensitivity of the smallest receptive field in the location of the lines. 33 The observation that thresholds are lower across the blind spot than the same distance in the sighted temporal visual field suggests that receptive fields in this location span the optic disc and support fine-orientation discrimination. These results initially appear to conflict with those of two previous studies. Tripathy et al. 39 found that alignment thresholds were comparable over the physiological blind spot and the corresponding sighted visual field of temporal retina in the other eye. Similarly, Maertens and Pollmann 35 found that orientation discrimination thresholds were higher for aligned than for misaligned Kaniza squares that overlapped the blind spot. In contrast, our line stimuli deliberately abutted the edge of the blind spot. Behavioral 9 and physiological 40 studies have shown that contour completion requires that line segments abut the boundary of the blind spot; otherwise, the blind spot is (understandably) completed with the background pattern. If the blind spot is completed with the background, it is not surprising that thresholds for the two conditions are the same. Both cover the same perceived visual area. We suggest that our stimuli promote filling-in of the stimulus lines rather than the background, so that our initial hypotheses can be compared. To examine the role of such background filling-in, we conducted a control experiment with four subjects at an increased line center-to-center separation of 15° between the Vernier lines. This generated a gap size of 13° between the tips of the lines. In this condition, no significant difference was found between alignment over the optic nerve head and temporal retina (physiological blind spot, 0.64°; temporal retina, 0.52°; matched pairs, P < 0.64). We also replicated the experiment of Tripathy et al. 39 and did not find any significant difference in alignment thresholds over the blind spot and over temporal retina, confirming the results of their study. These control studies highlight the importance of the stimulus at the boundary of the scotoma, because it is this that determines what is filled in across the scotoma and defines the spatial structure that can be integrated around its edges. These results suggest that filling in across the physiological blind spot involves (at least in part) low-level receptive field organization. It is possible (and indeed likely) that filling in across the physiological blind spot also involves higher level mechanisms; however, the present study does not provide direct evidence for or against this.  Alignment over Pathologic Retinal Scotomas Figure 3 shows that alignment thresholds over pathologic retinal scotomas were not significantly lower than thresholds measured across equally eccentric retina in the more healthy fellow eye. This suggests that the filling-in experienced over pathologic retinal scotomas does not include low-level receptive field reorganization but instead involves higher-level processes of image completion. Some of our subjects described the Vernier lines as tilted, distorted, or hazy during the experiment, which may indicate metamorphopsia around the scotoma boundary (as described around the boundary of macular holes by Kroyer and colleagues 41 ). Metamorphopsia in these patients could explain their elevated Vernier alignment thresholds. It is well known that people with macular disease often demonstrate poorer performance on tasks in apparently healthy retina well beyond the boundary of the scotoma observed on funduscopy. For example, reading speed is lower 42 and temporal processing is slower 43 than at equivalent locations in normally sighted control subjects. It may be that any advantage in alignment tasks conferred by filling-in is counteracted by preclinical changes in retinal disease beyond the region of measurable scotoma. It is also known that fixation stability is significantly worse in people with macular disease. 44 This retinal motion may affect the spatial precision of position encoding in peripheral vision, ameliorating the effects of filling- in. However, in normally sighted subjects, Vernier 45 and letter acuity 46 are invariant of very large levels of random positional jitter. Neither of these explanations can account for the higher thresholds of subjects U1 and U2 across their pathologic scotomas, both of whom have normal values of fixation stability, as determined by post hoc examination of fixation data collected on the microperimeter. An important limitation of our experimental design is that the fundus was not imaged during the alignment task. We have assumed that the retinal location used for fixating the cross target in the alignment task is the same as that used in the microperimeter. Although it is possible that patients used different retinal loci for these two tasks, a red ellipse was presented within the area of the physiological blind spot during all trials. If fixation moved by a significant amount between these conditions, the red disc would have been visible to participants during the experiment and subjects would have reported that they had seen it. This red marker also acts as a simple fixation control: if participants had extremely poor fixation stability, the dot would be visible in many trials. Note that this cannot account for the higher thresholds in subjects U1 and U2 whose scotomas were eccentric and who fixated foveally. A further limitation of our design is that the exact location of the foveal center can be difficult to determine in the eyes with central scotomas, so a small error may exist in the presentation position of the Vernier lines in the healthier eye. No clear relationship was found between the eccentricity of the Vernier lines and alignment threshold. Although it may be that completion acts differently in the peripheral retina from across the foveal center, our sample size is not large enough to allow a detailed analysis of the effects of retinal position on perceptual completion. The quantitative difference between Vernier alignment thresholds of the physiological blind spot and pathologic retinal scotomas are likely to reflect structural differences between the areas surrounding the optic nerve head and areas surrounding a pathologic scotoma, either in the retina or later in the visual system. If significant cortical plasticity exists, we would expect alignment thresholds over a pathologic scotoma to be improved in a manner similar to that over a physiological scotoma. Our results argue against large-scale reorganization of visual cortex in people with eye disease. In functional imaging studies, some of the debate over whether reorganization does 12 or does not 13 occur after development of a retinal scotoma is thought to be attributed to the type of task used and whether stimulus viewing is an active or a passive process. 47 An advantage of a psychophysical paradigm such as ours is that this distinction does not apply. It is particularly surprising that Vernier alignment thresholds across the lifelong scotoma experienced by subjects U1 and U2 were not as low as those over physiological blind spots. In both subjects, the scotomas were in peripheral visual field locations broadly similar to the physiological blind spot (30° superior retina and approximately 15° in diameter in U1 and 22° inferior retina and approximately 6.7° in diameter in U2). Both subjects were unaware of their scotomas until they were detected during routine eye examinations with an optometrist. Although there are not thought to be significant structural changes in visual cortex around the physiological blind spot, 48 some classical and extraclassical receptive fields are known to encompass retina from opposite sides of the optic disc. 40 , 49 , 50 We suggest that the presence and organization of this class of receptive field is the basis of the improved alignment performance over the optic disc. Quantitative differences in filling-in of pathologic and physiological scotomas may guide the future development of tests to identify retinal disease not confounded by the presence of filling-in. For example, the Vernier targets used in this experiment were perceived as filled-in across the physiological blind spot. However, although all our subjects with retinal disease experienced completion of their scotomas on an Amsler chart, not all subjects experienced completion during our Vernier task, possibly because of the tachistoscopic presentation techniques and aperiodic stimului used here. This type of stimulus presentation could be explored further as a tool to identify the presence of retinal scotomas, perhaps by enabling patients to “see” their own areas of scotoma. We have shown that although pathologic and physiological scotomas appear filled-in, this perceptual completion confers a spatial alignment advantage only over the physiological blind spot, suggesting that receptive fields around the optic nerve head are capable of integrating spatial structure on opposite sides of the physiological blind spot. However, after retinal insult, even if lifelong, we find no evidence that receptive fields reorganize in an equivalent manner for pathologic blind spots.  Alignment over Pathologic Retinal Scotomas Figure 3 shows that alignment thresholds over pathologic retinal scotomas were not significantly lower than thresholds measured across equally eccentric retina in the more healthy fellow eye. This suggests that the filling-in experienced over pathologic retinal scotomas does not include low-level receptive field reorganization but instead involves higher-level processes of image completion. Some of our subjects described the Vernier lines as tilted, distorted, or hazy during the experiment, which may indicate metamorphopsia around the scotoma boundary (as described around the boundary of macular holes by Kroyer and colleagues 41 ). Metamorphopsia in these patients could explain their elevated Vernier alignment thresholds. It is well known that people with macular disease often demonstrate poorer performance on tasks in apparently healthy retina well beyond the boundary of the scotoma observed on funduscopy. For example, reading speed is lower 42 and temporal processing is slower 43 than at equivalent locations in normally sighted control subjects. It may be that any advantage in alignment tasks conferred by filling-in is counteracted by preclinical changes in retinal disease beyond the region of measurable scotoma. It is also known that fixation stability is significantly worse in people with macular disease. 44 This retinal motion may affect the spatial precision of position encoding in peripheral vision, ameliorating the effects of filling- in. However, in normally sighted subjects, Vernier 45 and letter acuity 46 are invariant of very large levels of random positional jitter. Neither of these explanations can account for the higher thresholds of subjects U1 and U2 across their pathologic scotomas, both of whom have normal values of fixation stability, as determined by post hoc examination of fixation data collected on the microperimeter. An important limitation of our experimental design is that the fundus was not imaged during the alignment task. We have assumed that the retinal location used for fixating the cross target in the alignment task is the same as that used in the microperimeter. Although it is possible that patients used different retinal loci for these two tasks, a red ellipse was presented within the area of the physiological blind spot during all trials. If fixation moved by a significant amount between these conditions, the red disc would have been visible to participants during the experiment and subjects would have reported that they had seen it. This red marker also acts as a simple fixation control: if participants had extremely poor fixation stability, the dot would be visible in many trials. Note that this cannot account for the higher thresholds in subjects U1 and U2 whose scotomas were eccentric and who fixated foveally. A further limitation of our design is that the exact location of the foveal center can be difficult to determine in the eyes with central scotomas, so a small error may exist in the presentation position of the Vernier lines in the healthier eye. No clear relationship was found between the eccentricity of the Vernier lines and alignment threshold. Although it may be that completion acts differently in the peripheral retina from across the foveal center, our sample size is not large enough to allow a detailed analysis of the effects of retinal position on perceptual completion. The quantitative difference between Vernier alignment thresholds of the physiological blind spot and pathologic retinal scotomas are likely to reflect structural differences between the areas surrounding the optic nerve head and areas surrounding a pathologic scotoma, either in the retina or later in the visual system. If significant cortical plasticity exists, we would expect alignment thresholds over a pathologic scotoma to be improved in a manner similar to that over a physiological scotoma. Our results argue against large-scale reorganization of visual cortex in people with eye disease. In functional imaging studies, some of the debate over whether reorganization does 12 or does not 13 occur after development of a retinal scotoma is thought to be attributed to the type of task used and whether stimulus viewing is an active or a passive process. 47 An advantage of a psychophysical paradigm such as ours is that this distinction does not apply. It is particularly surprising that Vernier alignment thresholds across the lifelong scotoma experienced by subjects U1 and U2 were not as low as those over physiological blind spots. In both subjects, the scotomas were in peripheral visual field locations broadly similar to the physiological blind spot (30° superior retina and approximately 15° in diameter in U1 and 22° inferior retina and approximately 6.7° in diameter in U2). Both subjects were unaware of their scotomas until they were detected during routine eye examinations with an optometrist. Although there are not thought to be significant structural changes in visual cortex around the physiological blind spot, 48 some classical and extraclassical receptive fields are known to encompass retina from opposite sides of the optic disc. 40 , 49 , 50 We suggest that the presence and organization of this class of receptive field is the basis of the improved alignment performance over the optic disc. Quantitative differences in filling-in of pathologic and physiological scotomas may guide the future development of tests to identify retinal disease not confounded by the presence of filling-in. For example, the Vernier targets used in this experiment were perceived as filled-in across the physiological blind spot. However, although all our subjects with retinal disease experienced completion of their scotomas on an Amsler chart, not all subjects experienced completion during our Vernier task, possibly because of the tachistoscopic presentation techniques and aperiodic stimului used here. This type of stimulus presentation could be explored further as a tool to identify the presence of retinal scotomas, perhaps by enabling patients to “see” their own areas of scotoma. We have shown that although pathologic and physiological scotomas appear filled-in, this perceptual completion confers a spatial alignment advantage only over the physiological blind spot, suggesting that receptive fields around the optic nerve head are capable of integrating spatial structure on opposite sides of the physiological blind spot. However, after retinal insult, even if lifelong, we find no evidence that receptive fields reorganize in an equivalent manner for pathologic blind spots. 