Rethinking the Stalk Effect: A New Hypothesis Explaining Suprasellar Tumor-Induced Hyperprolactinemia The pars tuberalis is a distinct subdivision of the pituitary gland but its function remains poorly understood. Suprasellar tumors in this pars tuberalis region are frequently accompanied by hyperprolactinemia. As these tumors do not immunoreact for any of the established pituitary hormones, they are classified as non-secretory. It has been postulated that these suprasellar tumors induce hyperprolactinemia by compressing the pituitary stalk, resulting in impaired dopamine delivery to the pituitary and, consequently, disinhibition of the lactotropes. An alternative hypothesis proposed is that suprasellar tumors secrete a specific pars tuberalis factor that stimulates prolactin secretion. Hypothesized candidates are the preprotachykinin A derived tachykinins, substance P and/or neurokinin A.  Implications of the hypothesis The “stalk effect” hypothesis arose primarily due to an inability to demonstrate a known pituitary hormone in the pars tuberalis and these tumors have been classified as chromophobic or non-secreting. Identification of a pars tuberalis factor(s) that drives prolactin release may lead to novel therapeutic interventions in hyperprolactinemia. Here we hypothesize that one candidate may be a tachykinin.  Implications of the hypothesis The “stalk effect” hypothesis arose primarily due to an inability to demonstrate a known pituitary hormone in the pars tuberalis and these tumors have been classified as chromophobic or non-secreting. Identification of a pars tuberalis factor(s) that drives prolactin release may lead to novel therapeutic interventions in hyperprolactinemia. Here we hypothesize that one candidate may be a tachykinin.  Figure Figure 1 Photomicrographs of substance P (green; antibody # T-5019; Peninsula Laboratories, San Carlos, CA) and neurokinin A (red; antibody # PA-623-9; Austral Biologicals, San Ramon, CA) immunolabeling in a suprasellar tumor obtained from a 64 year-old male. The nucleus was devoid of labeling for both tachykinins.  Figure Figure 1 Photomicrographs of substance P (green; antibody # T-5019; Peninsula Laboratories, San Carlos, CA) and neurokinin A (red; antibody # PA-623-9; Austral Biologicals, San Ramon, CA) immunolabeling in a suprasellar tumor obtained from a 64 year-old male. The nucleus was devoid of labeling for both tachykinins. 