Notch, Neural Stem Cells, and Brain Tumors The Notch pathway has a fundamental role during cell-fate specification in the developing mammalian nervous system. During neocortical development, Notch signaling inhibits neuronal differentiation and maintains the neural stem/progenitor cell pool to permit successive waves of neurogenesis, which are followed by gliogenesis. In addition, recent evidence suggests that Notch signaling is not uniformly used among distinct proliferative neural cells types, with the canonical cascade functional in neural stem cells but attenuated in neurogenic progenitors. Although the role of Notch in neural development is increasingly well understood, it has recently become evident that Notch also has a role in brain tumor biology. Notch receptors are overexpressed in many different brain tumor types, and they may have an initiating role in some. Stem-like cells in brain tumors share many similarities with neural stem/progenitor cells and may require Notch for their survival and growth. Understanding the role of Notch signaling in neoplastic and non-neoplastic stem/progenitor populations will advance our understanding of basic principles regulating developmental and stem cell biology and may also lead to more effective therapies for brain tumors.  CONCLUSIONS The Notch signaling pathway has not only a vital role in the developing mammalian nervous system, but also an important role in oncogenesis. In neural development, molecular interactions among progenitors and/or more differentiated cells activate Notch receptors to maintain a neural stem/progenitor state and inhibit neuronal differentiation. Notch signaling has also been implicated in many cancers, including brain cancer, where pathway components are aberrantly expressed. The pathway appears in most cases to promote brain tumor formation and growth, but in some contexts, Notch signaling may suppress tumors or help to define a subset of patients with less aggressive disease. Although the data we have reviewed summarize much of what is known about Notch in neural progenitors during development, and Notch in brain tumors, it is currently not clear how to connect these two aspects of Notch signaling directly. It is tempting to speculate, based on the cancer stem cell model, that Notch signaling contributes to brain cancer formation by regulating brain tumor stem cells in a manner akin to how the pathway normally regulates neural progenitors (see Fig. 6 ). Aberrant Notch signaling could maintain an undifferentiated and proliferative active state that would contribute to tumor formation and growth. Furthermore, our recent findings that (1) canonical Notch signaling is used in embryonic neural stem cells (i.e., RGCs) but not in more restricted neurogenic progenitors (INPs) ( Mizutani et al. 2007 ) and (2) Notch inhibition preferentially ablates stem-like tumor cells while sparing other proliferating cell types ( Fan et al. 2006 ) suggest that understanding the heterogeneous nature of neural stem/progenitor cells in normal and neoplastic contexts is likely to provide insight directly relevant to the eventual eradication of brain cancer. 