Cell polarity proteins: common targets for tumorigenic human viruses Loss of polarity and disruption of cell junctions are common features of epithelial-derived cancer cells, and mounting evidence indicates that such defects have a direct function in the pathology of cancer. Supporting this idea, results with several different human tumor viruses indicate that their oncogenic potential depends in part on a common ability to inactivate key cell polarity proteins. For example, adenovirus (Ad) type 9 is unique among human Ads by causing exclusively estrogen-dependent mammary tumors in experimental animals and in having E4 region -encoded open reading frame 1 (E4-ORF1) as its primary oncogenic determinant. The 125-residue E4-ORF1 protein consists of two separate protein-interaction elements, one of which defines a PDZ domain-binding motif (PBM) required for E4-ORF1 to induce both cellular transformation in vitro and tumorigenesis in vivo . Most notably, the E4-ORF1 PBM mediates interactions with a selected group of cellular PDZ proteins, three of which include the cell polarity proteins Dlg1, PATJ and ZO-2. Data further indicate that these interactions promote disruption of cell junctions and a loss of cell polarity. In addition, one or more of the E4-ORF1-interacting cell polarity proteins, as well as the cell polarity protein Scribble, are common targets for the high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) E6 or human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) Tax oncoproteins. Underscoring the significance of these observations, in humans, high-risk HPV and HTLV-1 are causative agents for cervical cancer and adult T-cell leukemia, respectively. Consequently, human tumor viruses should serve as powerful tools for deciphering mechanisms whereby disruption of cell junctions and loss of cell polarity contribute to the development of many human cancers. This review article discusses evidence supporting this hypothesis, with an emphasis on the human Ad E4-ORF1 oncoprotein.  Conclusion Findings suggest that key PDZ domain-containing polarity proteins are common cellular targets for inactivation by human virus oncoproteins and that such interactions contribute to virus-mediated tumorigenesis. In fact, available data support the notion that inhibition of proper cell polarity establishment may be the primary mechanism whereby the Ad9 E4-ORF1 oncoprotein induces mammary tumors in experimental animals. With respect to this idea, identification of Ad9 E4- ORF1 D2-interacting cellular proteins may reveal that they too are required for establishment of proper cell polarity and that the Ad9 E4-ORF1 oncoprotein likewise blocks their function. In addition, the essential function of Dlg1 in E4-ORF1-induced oncogenic PI3K activation predicts that Dlg1-mediated establishment of anterior–posterior cell polarity in part may depend on an ability of Dlg1 to promote spatially restricted PI3K activation at the plasma membrane of cells. Future experiments should explore this hypothesis. Also worth mentioning is the suggestion that viral oncoproteins have evolved diverse mechanisms to perturb cell polarity pathways, as evidenced by the report of TJ disruption in polarized epithelial cells expressing the SV40 polyomavirus small t antigen oncoprotein ( Nunbhakdi-Craig et al ., 2002 , 2003 ), which due to the lack of a PBM is unable to interact with cellular PDZ proteins. This observation hints that cell polarity loss may have an even greater function in virus-mediated tumorigenesis than was thought previously. In this regard, it will be important to determine whether small t antigen expressed by the newly discovered Merkel cell polyomavirus associated with Merkel cell carcinoma ( Feng et al ., 2008 ), a rare but aggressive human skin cancer of neuroendocrine origin, disrupts the tight junction and causes a loss of apical–basal polarity in epithelial cells. Additionally, although research to date has primarily focused on functions of polarity loss in the development of epithelial-derived carcinomas, the fact that Ad9, high-risk HPV and HTLV-1 promote sarcomas, carcinomas or leukemias, respectively, may indicate that loss of cell polarity is a contributing factor not only for carcinoma development, but also for the development of many other types of malignancies. This idea clearly warrants investigation. It is important to mention that cell polarity loss is likewise implicated in the development of human cancers lacking an association with viral agents. For example, several different signaling pathways (for example, ErbB2, transforming growth factor-?, mammalian target of rapamycin) with involvement in human cancers coordinately regulate both apical–basal cell polarity and cellular proliferation, and evidence suggests that combined dysregulation of these processes cooperates to instigate malignant cellular transformation ( Wodarz and Nathke, 2007 ). Moreover, the loss of apical–basal cell polarity and disruption of cell junctions is a hallmark of malignant human tumors. Thus, the development of drugs designed to inhibit cellular pathways that promote the loss of polarity represents a promising area for future cancer research. It is presently unclear how cell polarity loss contributes to the development of cancer, although some reports have provided potentially important clues. For example, TJ disruption and loss of polarity in epithelial cells can activate a basolateral membrane-localized growth factor receptor by permitting inappropriate intermixing with its cognate apical membrane-localized growth factor ( Vermeer et al ., 2003 ) and can also release growth-stimulatory transcription factors from the TJ and promote their translocation into the nucleus ( Balda et al ., 2003 ; Betanzos et al ., 2004 ). Exciting results in Drosophila further show that perturbations in the establishment of anterior–posterior polarity required for asymmetric cell division increase the production of cancer stem cells ( Wodarz and Nathke, 2007 ). Clearly, future research must explore the mechanisms by which polarity loss contributes to abnormal cellular proliferation that provokes the development of cancer. Studies of human tumor viruses and their oncogenic determinants promise to serve as powerful tools to understand this important disease process. 