Absence of germline BRCA1 mutations in Familial Pancreatic Cancer Patients Recent studies have suggested that germ line mutations in the BRCA1 gene may confer an increased risk of developing pancreatic cancer. To determine if BRCA1 mutations explain a significant proportion of familial pancreatic cancer, we sequenced the BRCA1 gene in a large series of well-characterized patients with familial pancreatic cancer and we evaluated the pathology of breast neoplasms that developed in relatives of pancreatic cancer patients. The BRCA1 gene was fully sequenced in 66 pancreatic cancer patients enrolled in the National Familial Pancreas Tumor Registry who had at least two additional relatives with pancreatic cancer. None of the 66 (0/66: 97.5% one-side CI 0–0.054%) familial pancreatic cancer patients were found to have a deleterious mutation in the BRCA1 gene. While patients were not selected based upon their family history of breast and ovarian cancer, over half of the patients whose samples were sequenced reported a family history of breast and/or ovarian cancer. Our findings suggest that mutations in the BRCA1 gene are not highly, or even moderately, prevalent in families with a clustering of pancreatic cancer, including pancreatic cancer families who report a family history of breast and/or ovarian cancer.  INTRODUCTION In 2008, it is estimated that 37,680 individuals in the United States will develop pancreatic cancer and 34,290 will die from it, making pancreatic cancer the 4th leading cause of cancer death in the United States [ 1 ]. An estimated 5–10% of pancreatic cancer has a familial basis [ 2 , 3 ] and individuals with a family history of pancreatic cancer are themselves at high-risk of developing pancreatic cancer [ 4 ]. Inherited mutations in the BRCA2 gene have been shown to increase risk of pancreatic cancer, and approximately 17% of pancreatic cancer patients from kindreds in which at least three family members have been diagnosed with pancreatic cancer carry deleterious mutations in the BRCA2 gene [ 5 ]. The prevalence of BRCA2 mutations in pancreatic cancer patients from kindreds with 2 first-degree relatives with pancreatic cancer is estimated to be 6–12%[ 6 , 7 ], and germ line BRCA2 mutations also explain a portion of apparently sporadic pancreatic cancers [ 8 ]. Germ-line mutations in the p16 / CDKN2A, PRSS1 and STK11/LKB1 genes have also been shown to increase of pancreatic cancer risk [ 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 ]. Mutations in these latter genes, however, explain only a small fraction (~1%) of the clustering of pancreatic cancer in families. Thus, much of the genetic basis for familial clustering of pancreatic cancer remains unknown. One potential candidate for the familial pancreatic cancer gene is BRCA1 . The Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium (BCLC) examined 11,847 individuals in 699 families with a BRCA1 gene mutation and found a 2.26-fold (95% CI 1.26 – 4.06) increased risk of pancreatic cancer [ 14 ]. This estimate is about half of the 3.5-fold (95% CI 1.9 – 6.6) increased risk of pancreatic cancer reported in BRCA2 gene mutation carriers [ 15 ]. Similarly, Brose and colleagues reported a 3-fold higher lifetime risk of pancreatic cancer in BRCA1 gene carriers [ 16 ]. In addition to these studies, familial breast cancer registries in the United States and Israel have evaluated the mutation status of families that reported pancreatic cancer in addition to breast cancer and ovarian cancer. In the US study, of 19 families with either a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation and pancreatic cancer, 15 carried a deleterious mutation in BRCA1 and 4 in BRCA2 [ 17 ], whereas, the Israeli study reported an equal number of BRCA1 and BRCA2 families among the known carrier families [ 18 ]. Lal et. al. did report a single Ashkenazi Jewish pancreatic cancer family with a 5382insC mutation in BRCA1 this family also had a history of young onset breast cancer and BRCA1 genetic analysis was limited to families with a history of breast and ovarian cancer [ 19 ]. Recently, loss of heterozygosity at the BRCA1 locus has been demonstrated in pancreatic cancers that developed in BRCA1 carriers [ 20 ]. While these studies do suggestion that the BRCA1 gene may increase the risk of pancreatic cancer, the relative importance of BRCA1 as a cause of familial pancreatic cancer remains unclear. These studies examined cohorts of families selected due to clustering of breast and/or ovarian cancer. Thus, these results may not be directly applicable to families identified based on the clustering of pancreatic cancer alone. Furthermore, many of the individuals who developed pancreatic cancer in these families were not directly genetically tested for BRCA1 ; rather, estimates were weighted by carrier probabilities such that the precise burden of pancreatic cancer due to BRCA1 gene mutations is unclear. A more powerful approach to define the role of BRCA1 specifically in pancreatic cancer would be to examine a cohort of familial pancreatic cancer kindreds for BRCA1 gene mutations by directly sequencing BRCA1 in familial pancreatic cancer patients. This approach would overcome the limitation of studying only breast cancer kindreds for pancreatic cancer risk, because the increased risk of pancreatic cancer in breast cancer kindreds could be due to co-aggregation of other risk factors (e.g. Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry) that impact both breast and pancreatic cancer risk. Invasive breast carcinomas that develop in individuals with a germ line BRCA1 mutation tend to be high-grade, basal-like carcinomas. These carcinomas are generally estrogen receptor (ER) negative, progesterone receptor (PR) negative, HER2-Neu (ERBB-2) negative (“triple negative”), and cytokeratin 5/6 (CK5/6) positive. These carcinomas also tend to have pushing margins, and a lymphocytic infiltrate [ 21 , 22 ]. Large scale studies to examine the predictive value of these markers, conducted by the BCLC, demonstrated high sensitivity of ER status in detecting BRCA1 mutations (approximately 90%) and increased specificity when ER status is combined with cytokeratins CK5/6 expression such that 28% of breast cancer patients from high-risk breast cancer families who are ER negative and CK5/6 positive carry a deleterious BRCA1 mutation [ 21 , 22 ]. These markers are such powerful predictors of mutation status that they are now used in genetic risk assessment for breast and ovarian cancer [ 23 ], and directly incorporated into risk prediction software [ 24 ]. The National Familial Pancreas Tumor Registry (NFPTR) was established in 1994 in order to understand the causes of pancreatic cancer. Currently, it is one of the largest registries of familial pancreatic cancer in the world with an enrollment of over 2,840 families in which at least one member has been diagnosed with pancreatic cancer (as of May 13, 2008). Families enter the registry either because they are diagnosed with pancreatic cancer at the Johns Hopkins Hospital, they are self-referred through our study web site ( http://pathology.jhu.edu/pancreas/PartNFPTR.php ), or they are referred by a non-Johns Hopkins health care provider. Over 992 of the families enrolled in the NFPTR have at least a pair of first-degree relatives with pancreatic cancer. Previously, we applied segregation models to a subset of NFPTR families and demonstrated that there is statistical evidence for a major gene, or genes, that contribute to pancreatic cancer susceptibility [ 25 ]. Additionally, we have shown unaffected members of families in which a pair of first-degree relatives has been diagnosed with pancreatic cancer (FPC) have a 9-fold (95% CI 4.5–16.1) increased risk of developing pancreatic cancer themselves [ 4 ]. In order to estimate the prevalence of BRCA1 gene mutations familial pancreatic cancer patients, we analyzed the full BRCA1 gene sequence in patients with familial pancreatic cancer. Furthermore, because an over-representation of basal-like breast carcinomas in high-risk pancreatic cancer families may point to an increased prevalence of BRCA1 gene mutations, we examined the pathology of all breast carcinomas in the NFPTR that developed in pancreatic cancer patients or their relatives.  METHODS Patient information, including family history, DNA for genetic analysis, and paraffin embedded tissue for histological examination was collected as part of the National Familial Pancreas Tumor Registry (NFPTR). Informed consent was obtained from all study participants. Approval for this research was obtained from the Institutional Review Board at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. Study Participants The recruitment and follow-up methods of the NFPTR have been described in detail elsewhere [ 4 ],[ 25 ] In brief, after informed consent is obtained, a questionnaire is completed by either the pancreatic cancer patient or by a proxy. The questionnaire collects demographic details, cancer history, a three-generation family history, smoking and environmental exposures. If necessary, the individual who completed the questionnaire is contacted by the study coordinator to clarify questionnaire responses. Whenever possible, all cancers, including the patient’s pancreatic cancer and any other cancers reported in the patient or family members, are confirmed from pathology blocks, slides, pathology reports, medical records or death certificates. DNA for BRCA1 sequence analysis was extracted from lymphoblastoid cell lines that were generated from blood samples provided by the patients. Samples from pancreatic adenocarcinoma patients reporting two additional cases of pancreatic cancer in their blood relatives were selected for full-sequence analysis. Only one family member from each kindred was genetically tested. Pancreatic cancer patients from families with a documented BRCA2 gene mutation were excluded. All available pathology specimens from breast carcinomas that developed in individuals with pancreatic cancer or individuals with at least one biological relative with pancreatic cancer were evaluated. DNA extraction DNA was isolated using DNAeasy kits from Qiagen as previously described [ 26 ]. <italic>BRCA1</italic> gene sequence analysis Analysis was performed by Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc., a CLIA-approved laboratory. Full sequence analysis was conducted of the BRCA1 gene in both the forward and backward direction of the 5,400 base pairs comprising the 22 coding exons and 750 adjacent base pairs in introns. The analysis also included five common large rearrangements (referred to as “the 5-site rearrangement panel”). Pathology H&E stains were reviewed and immunohistochemical labeling was performed for the following markers: estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), HER-2 and cytokeratin 5/6 (CK5/6). If the original blocks were not available, the original H&E slides, any other slides (ER, PR, HER2) and pathology reports were reviewed. The following antibody sources and dilutions were used: ER clone 6F11, prediluted from NCL-Leica, PR clone P16 prediluted from NCL-Leica, HER2 KIT from DAKO (Ref. # K5204) and CK5/6 prediluted from Cell Marque (cat# ORG8721). Only cases with information on at least two of the immunohistochemical markers were included in the analysis. For ER, PR and CK5/6, labeling was evaluated on a 4-point scale (0, 1+, 2+, 3+) on the basis of the percentage of positively-labeling cells (0=negative, 1+= 1–33%, 2+= 34–66%, 3+ 67–100%). A score of 0 was interpreted as negative, while all others ere positive. HER-2 was scored on a scale of 0–3+ using criteria established by the College of American Pathologists [ 27 ]. For HER-2, 0 and 1+ were interpreted as negative, 2+ equivocal and 3+ positive. All slides of breast cancer and/or pathology reports were reviewed by one author. (P.A.). Data Analysis Prevalence and 95% confidence intervals of BRCA1 mutations, as well as analysis of pathological and family history data, was performed using STATA v9.0. Exact binomial probabilities were used to construct confidence intervals.  Study Participants The recruitment and follow-up methods of the NFPTR have been described in detail elsewhere [ 4 ],[ 25 ] In brief, after informed consent is obtained, a questionnaire is completed by either the pancreatic cancer patient or by a proxy. The questionnaire collects demographic details, cancer history, a three-generation family history, smoking and environmental exposures. If necessary, the individual who completed the questionnaire is contacted by the study coordinator to clarify questionnaire responses. Whenever possible, all cancers, including the patient’s pancreatic cancer and any other cancers reported in the patient or family members, are confirmed from pathology blocks, slides, pathology reports, medical records or death certificates. DNA for BRCA1 sequence analysis was extracted from lymphoblastoid cell lines that were generated from blood samples provided by the patients. Samples from pancreatic adenocarcinoma patients reporting two additional cases of pancreatic cancer in their blood relatives were selected for full-sequence analysis. Only one family member from each kindred was genetically tested. Pancreatic cancer patients from families with a documented BRCA2 gene mutation were excluded. All available pathology specimens from breast carcinomas that developed in individuals with pancreatic cancer or individuals with at least one biological relative with pancreatic cancer were evaluated.  DNA extraction DNA was isolated using DNAeasy kits from Qiagen as previously described [ 26 ].  <italic>BRCA1</italic> gene sequence analysis Analysis was performed by Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc., a CLIA-approved laboratory. Full sequence analysis was conducted of the BRCA1 gene in both the forward and backward direction of the 5,400 base pairs comprising the 22 coding exons and 750 adjacent base pairs in introns. The analysis also included five common large rearrangements (referred to as “the 5-site rearrangement panel”).  Pathology H&E stains were reviewed and immunohistochemical labeling was performed for the following markers: estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), HER-2 and cytokeratin 5/6 (CK5/6). If the original blocks were not available, the original H&E slides, any other slides (ER, PR, HER2) and pathology reports were reviewed. The following antibody sources and dilutions were used: ER clone 6F11, prediluted from NCL-Leica, PR clone P16 prediluted from NCL-Leica, HER2 KIT from DAKO (Ref. # K5204) and CK5/6 prediluted from Cell Marque (cat# ORG8721). Only cases with information on at least two of the immunohistochemical markers were included in the analysis. For ER, PR and CK5/6, labeling was evaluated on a 4-point scale (0, 1+, 2+, 3+) on the basis of the percentage of positively-labeling cells (0=negative, 1+= 1–33%, 2+= 34–66%, 3+ 67–100%). A score of 0 was interpreted as negative, while all others ere positive. HER-2 was scored on a scale of 0–3+ using criteria established by the College of American Pathologists [ 27 ]. For HER-2, 0 and 1+ were interpreted as negative, 2+ equivocal and 3+ positive. All slides of breast cancer and/or pathology reports were reviewed by one author. (P.A.).  Data Analysis Prevalence and 95% confidence intervals of BRCA1 mutations, as well as analysis of pathological and family history data, was performed using STATA v9.0. Exact binomial probabilities were used to construct confidence intervals.  RESULTS A total of sixty-six pancreatic cancer patients with at least two additional blood relatives with pancreatic cancer underwent full sequence analysis of the BRCA1 gene. In addition to the demographics reported in Table 1 , four of the 66 patients (all female) reported having had a breast cancer prior to developing pancreatic cancer. The diagnosis of pancreatic cancer was confirmed for 95% (63/66) of the patients. The mean age at diagnosis was 65.4 years (range 39–84), and 18 of the 66 patients were under age 60 years at diagnosis. Of the 66 patients tested, 24 had previously undergone sequence analysis of the BRCA2 gene at Myriad Genetics, 15 underwent functional analysis of the BRCA2 gene in a research laboratory [ 7 ] and 27 have not undergone testing. None (0%) of the 66 familial pancreatic cancer patients (0/66) were found to have a deleterious BRCA1 gene mutation (one-sided 97.5% CI 0–0.054). Based upon these results, there is a 97.5% chance that the true prevalence of BRCA1 gene mutations is less than 5.4% in this population. Three patients were reported to have BRCA1 gene variants of uncertain significance. All of these patients were over age 60 years when diagnosed with pancreatic cancer. The variants reported were IVS20-14C>G, S1217P and R496S. Of the patients with variants of uncertain significance, two reported Caucasian ancestry and one was of African-American descent. One patient with a variant reported two maternal aunts with ovarian cancer, and a paternal uncle with pancreatic cancer. Of the other two patients with uncertain variants, one had a diagnosis of breast cancer prior to pancreatic cancer, and the other reported no family history of breast or ovarian cancer. We also examined the pathology of 23 breast carcinomas that were diagnosed in a blood relative of a pancreatic cancer patient enrolled in the NFPTR ( Table 2 ). We were able to obtain a tissue block, outside slides with ER/PR/HER-2 staining, or a pathology report listing ER/PR/HER-2 status from all 23. Two of the families included a member who had been tested (one via sequence analysis and one via a functional assay) for BRCA2 , and no mutations were found. Of these 23 breast cancer patients, six reported one relative with pancreatic cancer, eleven reported two relatives with pancreatic cancers and six reported three or more relatives with pancreatic cancer. Three of these patients developed pancreatic cancer subsequent to their diagnosis of breast cancer, including one male with breast cancer, and none of these have been genetically tested for BRCA2 mutations. Overall, 5 of the 23 (21.8%) carcinomas were ER-negative, 7 of the 22 (31.9%) were PR-negative, and 15 of the 21 (71.4%) were HER-2 negative. HER-2 status was available for all ER negative carcinomas, and three samples were “triple negative” (i.e. negative for ER\PR\HER-2). Overall, 3 of the 15 (20.0%) carcinomas were CK5/6-positive; this included one triple-negative cancer. The triple-negative, CK 5/6-positive carcinoma was a metaplastic carcinoma that developed in a 65-year-old woman. This woman reported a mother and a maternal aunt with pancreatic cancer; however, there was no family history of breast or ovarian cancer in the patient’s mother and five maternal aunts. Overall, 43.5% of breast carcinomas where high-grade (grade III).  RESULTS A total of sixty-six pancreatic cancer patients with at least two additional blood relatives with pancreatic cancer underwent full sequence analysis of the BRCA1 gene. In addition to the demographics reported in Table 1 , four of the 66 patients (all female) reported having had a breast cancer prior to developing pancreatic cancer. The diagnosis of pancreatic cancer was confirmed for 95% (63/66) of the patients. The mean age at diagnosis was 65.4 years (range 39–84), and 18 of the 66 patients were under age 60 years at diagnosis. Of the 66 patients tested, 24 had previously undergone sequence analysis of the BRCA2 gene at Myriad Genetics, 15 underwent functional analysis of the BRCA2 gene in a research laboratory [ 7 ] and 27 have not undergone testing. None (0%) of the 66 familial pancreatic cancer patients (0/66) were found to have a deleterious BRCA1 gene mutation (one-sided 97.5% CI 0–0.054). Based upon these results, there is a 97.5% chance that the true prevalence of BRCA1 gene mutations is less than 5.4% in this population. Three patients were reported to have BRCA1 gene variants of uncertain significance. All of these patients were over age 60 years when diagnosed with pancreatic cancer. The variants reported were IVS20-14C>G, S1217P and R496S. Of the patients with variants of uncertain significance, two reported Caucasian ancestry and one was of African-American descent. One patient with a variant reported two maternal aunts with ovarian cancer, and a paternal uncle with pancreatic cancer. Of the other two patients with uncertain variants, one had a diagnosis of breast cancer prior to pancreatic cancer, and the other reported no family history of breast or ovarian cancer. We also examined the pathology of 23 breast carcinomas that were diagnosed in a blood relative of a pancreatic cancer patient enrolled in the NFPTR ( Table 2 ). We were able to obtain a tissue block, outside slides with ER/PR/HER-2 staining, or a pathology report listing ER/PR/HER-2 status from all 23. Two of the families included a member who had been tested (one via sequence analysis and one via a functional assay) for BRCA2 , and no mutations were found. Of these 23 breast cancer patients, six reported one relative with pancreatic cancer, eleven reported two relatives with pancreatic cancers and six reported three or more relatives with pancreatic cancer. Three of these patients developed pancreatic cancer subsequent to their diagnosis of breast cancer, including one male with breast cancer, and none of these have been genetically tested for BRCA2 mutations. Overall, 5 of the 23 (21.8%) carcinomas were ER-negative, 7 of the 22 (31.9%) were PR-negative, and 15 of the 21 (71.4%) were HER-2 negative. HER-2 status was available for all ER negative carcinomas, and three samples were “triple negative” (i.e. negative for ER\PR\HER-2). Overall, 3 of the 15 (20.0%) carcinomas were CK5/6-positive; this included one triple-negative cancer. The triple-negative, CK 5/6-positive carcinoma was a metaplastic carcinoma that developed in a 65-year-old woman. This woman reported a mother and a maternal aunt with pancreatic cancer; however, there was no family history of breast or ovarian cancer in the patient’s mother and five maternal aunts. Overall, 43.5% of breast carcinomas where high-grade (grade III).  Discussion Our results suggest that germ line BRCA1 mutations are not a major cause of the aggregation of pancreatic cancer in families. Furthermore, since over half of our study population reported a family history of breast cancer and/or ovarian cancer in addition to pancreatic cancer, our findings also suggest that germ line BRCA1 mutations do not explain the co-aggregation of breast and pancreatic cancer in familial pancreatic cancer kindreds. Indeed, when we looked at the subgroup of pancreatic cancer patients who reported breast and/or ovarian cancers in addition to pancreatic cancer, the prevalence of BRCA1 mutations upon full sequencing was 0 of 34 (97.5% one-sided CI 0-0.102), which suggests there is only a 2.5% chance that the true prevalence of BRCA1 mutations is greater than 10% in this group. Our analyses of the morphology of breast carcinomas that arise in pancreatic cancer kindreds also suggest that germ-line BRCA1 mutations are not a substantial cause of breast cancer in familial pancreatic cancer kindreds. While we detected one patient with metaplastic carcinoma that was negative for ER, PR and HER-2 and positive for CK5/6, only 28% of breast cancer patients from high-risk breast cancer families who are ER-negative and CK5/6-positive carry a deleterious BRCA1 mutation [ 21 ]. Thus, these data along with our sequencing results suggest there is at most a very small effect of BRCA1 on familial pancreatic cancer risk. The unique resource of the National Familial Pancreas Tumor Registry gave us the ability to include a large number of families in which three or more family members have been diagnosed with pancreatic cancer, and members of these families are likely representative of individuals who seek genetic counseling and screening based upon their familial risk of pancreatic cancer. Furthermore, genetic abnormalities that increase the risk of pancreatic cancer are most prevalent in highly aggregated families; thus, we had over 80% power to detect a prevalence of deleterious BRCA1 mutations of 2% or greater in this study population (assuming a frequency of <0.001% for BRCA1 gene mutations in the general population). Our study had the added strength of using full gene sequencing, which is the most sensitive genetic testing technology currently available. Additionally, testing was conducted at a CLIA-approved laboratory to allow for the most up-to-date clinical interpretation of any alterations detected. Pancreatic cancer is, in most cases, a rapidly fatal disease and DNA samples were therefore usually not available from multiple pedigree members with pancreatic cancer or other cancers. We were therefore unable to conduct co-segregation analyses on the variants of uncertain significance detected, or in the family with the triple negative, CK5/6-positive metaplastic breast carcinoma. The findings of this study have direct translational impact on patient care. First, many familial pancreatic cancer patients and their family members currently choose to undergo genetic counseling [ 28 ]. Because we did not select families for the current study on the basis of breast and/or ovarian cancers, our findings are directly applicable to families seeking genetic counseling specifically because of their family history of pancreatic cancer. Our results suggest that testing for BRCA1 gene mutations may not beneficial for familial pancreatic cancer kindreds because prevalence of BRCA1 gene mutations in familial pancreatic kindreds is quite low, even among kindreds that also report breast and or ovarian cancer. Even in the unlikely scenario that a deleterious mutation in BRCA1 is detected, the cause of pancreatic cancer in that individual will remain ambiguous. This is because a second, higher-penetrance pancreatic cancer susceptibility gene may be the direct cause of the pancreatic cancer in the kindred. As a result, members of these families who do not carry a deleterious BRCA1 gene mutation may still be at an increased risk of pancreatic cancer, and should receive counseling and risk assessment [ 29 ] regarding this potential risk. Using BRCA1 status to define pancreatic cancer risk, and resulting screening recommendations, is precarious. In addition to genetic counseling, individuals at high-risk of developing pancreatic cancer are choosing to participate in early detection screening studies [ 30 , 31 ]. The ultimate goal of this screening is to detect pre-malignant changes in the pancreas and to surgically resect the affected portion of the pancreas before an invasive carcinoma develops. Our current study does not support screening of BRCA1 carriers for pancreatic cancer based upon their mutation status alone. Our results, combined with those of the Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium, suggest that the risk of pancreatic cancer may be substantially lower in BRCA1 mutation carriers as compared with BRCA2 mutation carriers. While it has been suggested that BRCA2 mutation carriers may have up to a 10% life-time risk of pancreatic cancer, patients with BRCA1 gene mutations have only been shown to be at 2-fold greater risk than that of the general population; this translates to a lifetime risk of only 1–2%. Because of this lower risk, early detection screening efforts aimed at BRCA1 mutation carriers will likely require significantly greater specificity than would efforts aimed at screening higher risk groups. For example, if the prevalence of detectable precancerous lesions was as high as 0.5% in BRCA1 carriers at the time of screening (which is about 2- to 5-fold above the general population risk), a test with 99% sensitivity and 99% specificity would result in a positive predictive value of 23%; thus, over 77% of those who test “positive” will not have pancreatic cancer. In summary, inherited BRCA1 gene mutations do not explain a significant proportion of the aggregation of pancreatic cancer in families. Given the basis of familial pancreatic cancer remains poorly understood, genetic testing for BRCA1 mutations in familial pancreatic cancer, based upon pancreatic cancer clustering alone, will likely be of limited clinical utility.  Discussion Our results suggest that germ line BRCA1 mutations are not a major cause of the aggregation of pancreatic cancer in families. Furthermore, since over half of our study population reported a family history of breast cancer and/or ovarian cancer in addition to pancreatic cancer, our findings also suggest that germ line BRCA1 mutations do not explain the co-aggregation of breast and pancreatic cancer in familial pancreatic cancer kindreds. Indeed, when we looked at the subgroup of pancreatic cancer patients who reported breast and/or ovarian cancers in addition to pancreatic cancer, the prevalence of BRCA1 mutations upon full sequencing was 0 of 34 (97.5% one-sided CI 0-0.102), which suggests there is only a 2.5% chance that the true prevalence of BRCA1 mutations is greater than 10% in this group. Our analyses of the morphology of breast carcinomas that arise in pancreatic cancer kindreds also suggest that germ-line BRCA1 mutations are not a substantial cause of breast cancer in familial pancreatic cancer kindreds. While we detected one patient with metaplastic carcinoma that was negative for ER, PR and HER-2 and positive for CK5/6, only 28% of breast cancer patients from high-risk breast cancer families who are ER-negative and CK5/6-positive carry a deleterious BRCA1 mutation [ 21 ]. Thus, these data along with our sequencing results suggest there is at most a very small effect of BRCA1 on familial pancreatic cancer risk. The unique resource of the National Familial Pancreas Tumor Registry gave us the ability to include a large number of families in which three or more family members have been diagnosed with pancreatic cancer, and members of these families are likely representative of individuals who seek genetic counseling and screening based upon their familial risk of pancreatic cancer. Furthermore, genetic abnormalities that increase the risk of pancreatic cancer are most prevalent in highly aggregated families; thus, we had over 80% power to detect a prevalence of deleterious BRCA1 mutations of 2% or greater in this study population (assuming a frequency of <0.001% for BRCA1 gene mutations in the general population). Our study had the added strength of using full gene sequencing, which is the most sensitive genetic testing technology currently available. Additionally, testing was conducted at a CLIA-approved laboratory to allow for the most up-to-date clinical interpretation of any alterations detected. Pancreatic cancer is, in most cases, a rapidly fatal disease and DNA samples were therefore usually not available from multiple pedigree members with pancreatic cancer or other cancers. We were therefore unable to conduct co-segregation analyses on the variants of uncertain significance detected, or in the family with the triple negative, CK5/6-positive metaplastic breast carcinoma. The findings of this study have direct translational impact on patient care. First, many familial pancreatic cancer patients and their family members currently choose to undergo genetic counseling [ 28 ]. Because we did not select families for the current study on the basis of breast and/or ovarian cancers, our findings are directly applicable to families seeking genetic counseling specifically because of their family history of pancreatic cancer. Our results suggest that testing for BRCA1 gene mutations may not beneficial for familial pancreatic cancer kindreds because prevalence of BRCA1 gene mutations in familial pancreatic kindreds is quite low, even among kindreds that also report breast and or ovarian cancer. Even in the unlikely scenario that a deleterious mutation in BRCA1 is detected, the cause of pancreatic cancer in that individual will remain ambiguous. This is because a second, higher-penetrance pancreatic cancer susceptibility gene may be the direct cause of the pancreatic cancer in the kindred. As a result, members of these families who do not carry a deleterious BRCA1 gene mutation may still be at an increased risk of pancreatic cancer, and should receive counseling and risk assessment [ 29 ] regarding this potential risk. Using BRCA1 status to define pancreatic cancer risk, and resulting screening recommendations, is precarious. In addition to genetic counseling, individuals at high-risk of developing pancreatic cancer are choosing to participate in early detection screening studies [ 30 , 31 ]. The ultimate goal of this screening is to detect pre-malignant changes in the pancreas and to surgically resect the affected portion of the pancreas before an invasive carcinoma develops. Our current study does not support screening of BRCA1 carriers for pancreatic cancer based upon their mutation status alone. Our results, combined with those of the Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium, suggest that the risk of pancreatic cancer may be substantially lower in BRCA1 mutation carriers as compared with BRCA2 mutation carriers. While it has been suggested that BRCA2 mutation carriers may have up to a 10% life-time risk of pancreatic cancer, patients with BRCA1 gene mutations have only been shown to be at 2-fold greater risk than that of the general population; this translates to a lifetime risk of only 1–2%. Because of this lower risk, early detection screening efforts aimed at BRCA1 mutation carriers will likely require significantly greater specificity than would efforts aimed at screening higher risk groups. For example, if the prevalence of detectable precancerous lesions was as high as 0.5% in BRCA1 carriers at the time of screening (which is about 2- to 5-fold above the general population risk), a test with 99% sensitivity and 99% specificity would result in a positive predictive value of 23%; thus, over 77% of those who test “positive” will not have pancreatic cancer. In summary, inherited BRCA1 gene mutations do not explain a significant proportion of the aggregation of pancreatic cancer in families. Given the basis of familial pancreatic cancer remains poorly understood, genetic testing for BRCA1 mutations in familial pancreatic cancer, based upon pancreatic cancer clustering alone, will likely be of limited clinical utility.  Tables Table 1 Demographics of pancreatic cancer patients who underwent BRCA1 gene sequence analysis Number of Patients Percent Age at diagnosis (mean) 66 65.4 years (St.Dev 10.3) Number of pancreatic cancers in family (including the individual sequenced) 3 35 53.3% 4 19 28.8% 5+ 12 18.9% Sex Male 23 34.8% Female 43 65.2% Race\Ethnicity Caucasian 62 93.9% Hispanic 1 1.5% African 2 3.0% American Other 1 1.5% Ashkenazi Jewish Ancestry No 46 69.7% Yes 9 13.6% Not 8 12.1% Reported Family History of other cancers Breast 26 39.4% Ovarian 4 * 6.0% Breast & Ovarian 4 6.0% * in two of these families the ovarian cancer was on the opposite branch of the family from the pancreatic cancers Table 2 Overview of breast cancers examined Number of Patients Percent Age at diagnosis (mean) 23 58.3 years (St. Dev. 11.6) Number of relatives with pancreatic cancer 1 6 26.1% 2 12 52.2% 3+ 5 21.7% Sex Male 1 4.3% Female 22 95.7% Race\Ethnicity Caucasian 22 95.7% African American 1 4.3% Ashkenazi Jewish Ancestry Yes 1 4.3% No 12 52.2 % Not Reported 10 43.3% ?Pathology Positive 18 78.2% ??ER Negative 5 21.8% ??PR Positive 15 68.2% Negative 7 31.8% ??HER2 Positive 4 19.0% Equivocal 2 9.5% Negative 15 71.4% ??CK5/6 Positive 3 20.0% Negative 12 80.0% ??GRADE I 3 13.0% II 10 43.5% III 10 43.5%  Tables Table 1 Demographics of pancreatic cancer patients who underwent BRCA1 gene sequence analysis Number of Patients Percent Age at diagnosis (mean) 66 65.4 years (St.Dev 10.3) Number of pancreatic cancers in family (including the individual sequenced) 3 35 53.3% 4 19 28.8% 5+ 12 18.9% Sex Male 23 34.8% Female 43 65.2% Race\Ethnicity Caucasian 62 93.9% Hispanic 1 1.5% African 2 3.0% American Other 1 1.5% Ashkenazi Jewish Ancestry No 46 69.7% Yes 9 13.6% Not 8 12.1% Reported Family History of other cancers Breast 26 39.4% Ovarian 4 * 6.0% Breast & Ovarian 4 6.0% * in two of these families the ovarian cancer was on the opposite branch of the family from the pancreatic cancers Table 2 Overview of breast cancers examined Number of Patients Percent Age at diagnosis (mean) 23 58.3 years (St. Dev. 11.6) Number of relatives with pancreatic cancer 1 6 26.1% 2 12 52.2% 3+ 5 21.7% Sex Male 1 4.3% Female 22 95.7% Race\Ethnicity Caucasian 22 95.7% African American 1 4.3% Ashkenazi Jewish Ancestry Yes 1 4.3% No 12 52.2 % Not Reported 10 43.3% ?Pathology Positive 18 78.2% ??ER Negative 5 21.8% ??PR Positive 15 68.2% Negative 7 31.8% ??HER2 Positive 4 19.0% Equivocal 2 9.5% Negative 15 71.4% ??CK5/6 Positive 3 20.0% Negative 12 80.0% ??GRADE I 3 13.0% II 10 43.5% III 10 43.5% 