PROTEOMIC AND METABOLOMIC ANALYSIS OF CARDIOPROTECTION: INTERPLAY BETWEEN PROTEIN KINASE C EPSILON AND DELTA IN REGULATING GLUCOSE METABOLISM OF MURINE HEARTS We applied a combined proteomic and metabolomic approach to obtain novel mechanistic insights in PKC?-mediated cardioprotection. Mitochondrial and cytosolic proteins from control and transgenic hearts with constitutively active or dominant negative PKC? were analyzed using difference in-gel electrophoresis (DIGE). Among the differentially expressed proteins were creatine kinase, pyruvate kinase, lactate dehydrogenase, and the cytosolic isoforms of aspartate amino transferase and malate dehydrogenase, the two enzymatic components of the malate aspartate shuttle, which is required for the import of reducing equivalents from glycolysis across the inner mitochondrial membrane. These enzymatic changes appeared to be dependent on PKC? activity, as they were not observed in mice expressing inactive PKC?. High-resolution proton nuclear magnetic resonance (1H-NMR) spectroscopy confirmed a pronounced effect of PKC? activity on cardiac glucose and energy metabolism: normoxic hearts with constitutively active PKC? had significantly lower concentrations of glucose, lactate, glutamine and creatine, but higher levels of choline, glutamate and total adenosine nucleotides. Moreover, the depletion of cardiac energy metabolites was slower during ischemia/reperfusion injury and glucose metabolism recovered faster upon reperfusion in transgenic hearts with active PKC?. Notably, inhibition of PKC? resulted in compensatory phosphorylation and mitochondrial translocation of PKC?. Taken together, our findings are the first evidence that PKC? activity modulates cardiac glucose metabolism and provide a possible explanation for the synergistic effect of PKC? and PKC? in cardioprotection.  Methods Detailed methodology is provided in the online data supplement. Transgenic mice Animals used in the present study were PKC? transgenic mice (ICR background) generated using a cDNA of active PKC? driven by the ?-myosin heavy chain promoter to achieve cardiac-specific expression [ 12 , 18 ]. AE PKC? transgenic mice express a PKC? molecule that favors the open and active conformation (A to E mutation at A159), whereas DN PKC? mice express a dominant negative form of the same molecule (A to E mutation at A159 and K to R mutation at K436). The hearts of AE PKC? mice exhibit a 6-fold overexpression of PKC? and an inherent resistance to infarction (as compared to wild type, ICR controls) that is not observed in the DN PKC? mice [ 12 ]. Transgenic and control mice were sacrificed at the age of 6 months. Only male animals were used in all the experiments. Hearts from 8-week-old PKC?-deficient mice served as controls for validating the antibody specificity [ 19 ]. Subcellular fractionation Isolation of mitochondria was performed in the cold room at 4°C. Freshly-harvested mouse hearts were minced in 250mM sucrose, 1mM EGTA, 20mM Hepes, pH 7.5 with a glass homogenizer. Nuclei and unbroken cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 1,000g for 10min. The crude mitochondrial and cytosolic fraction was obtained from the supernatant by centrifugation at 4,000g for 30min. The membrane fraction was obtained by centrifugation of the cytosolic fraction at 100,000g for 1hr. Proteomics Key techniques involved adaptations of previously published protocols, including those for difference in-gel electrophoresis (DIGE) [ 20 ], and nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nano-LC MS/MS) [ 21 ]. Methods are described online. A detailed methodology is also available on our website http://www.vascular-proteomics.com . For proteomic analysis, mitochondrial and cytosolic protein extracts were prepared from 16 murine hearts (n=6 for control and AE mice, n=4 for DN mice). Two samples were pooled for each gel to obtain sufficient material for proteomic analysis. Differences in protein expression were analyzed using the Decyder software (Version 6.5, GE healthcare). Murine Model of Regional Myocardial Ischemic Injury Myocardial infarction was induced in the anesthetized mouse using an established protocol of regional ischemic injury[ 22 ]. Briefly, male ICR mice were subjected to a 30-min left anterior descending coronary artery occlusion followed by 30min of reperfusion. Sham control group was subjected to open chest surgery without coronary occlusion. Metabolomics For metabolomic analysis, metabolite extracts were prepared from 29 murine hearts (n=5 for normoxic control and AE PKC? mice, n=4 for control and n=3 for AE PKC? mice after ischemia, and n=4 for control, AE and DN PKC? mice after 30 min reperfusion, respectively). Water-soluble metabolites were extracted in 6% perchloric acid and proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-NMR) was performed as described online [ 23 ]. Statistical analysis Statistical analysis was performed using the analysis of variance (ANOVA) and unpaired Student’s t -test. Pairwise comparisons between metabolites were performed using the Bonferroni/Dunn test. Results were given as means±SE. A P value <0.05 was considered significant. Principal component analysis (PCA) was used for the analysis of the multivariate data produced by proteomic and metabolomic technologies, which reduces the data dimensionality. For proteomic datasets, DIGE gels were analysed using the extended data analysis (EDA) module of the Decyder software (GE healthcare). For metabolite profiles, the 1H-NMR spectra were used for generating bucket tables for PCA analysis.  Transgenic mice Animals used in the present study were PKC? transgenic mice (ICR background) generated using a cDNA of active PKC? driven by the ?-myosin heavy chain promoter to achieve cardiac-specific expression [ 12 , 18 ]. AE PKC? transgenic mice express a PKC? molecule that favors the open and active conformation (A to E mutation at A159), whereas DN PKC? mice express a dominant negative form of the same molecule (A to E mutation at A159 and K to R mutation at K436). The hearts of AE PKC? mice exhibit a 6-fold overexpression of PKC? and an inherent resistance to infarction (as compared to wild type, ICR controls) that is not observed in the DN PKC? mice [ 12 ]. Transgenic and control mice were sacrificed at the age of 6 months. Only male animals were used in all the experiments. Hearts from 8-week-old PKC?-deficient mice served as controls for validating the antibody specificity [ 19 ].  Subcellular fractionation Isolation of mitochondria was performed in the cold room at 4°C. Freshly-harvested mouse hearts were minced in 250mM sucrose, 1mM EGTA, 20mM Hepes, pH 7.5 with a glass homogenizer. Nuclei and unbroken cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 1,000g for 10min. The crude mitochondrial and cytosolic fraction was obtained from the supernatant by centrifugation at 4,000g for 30min. The membrane fraction was obtained by centrifugation of the cytosolic fraction at 100,000g for 1hr.  Proteomics Key techniques involved adaptations of previously published protocols, including those for difference in-gel electrophoresis (DIGE) [ 20 ], and nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nano-LC MS/MS) [ 21 ]. Methods are described online. A detailed methodology is also available on our website http://www.vascular-proteomics.com . For proteomic analysis, mitochondrial and cytosolic protein extracts were prepared from 16 murine hearts (n=6 for control and AE mice, n=4 for DN mice). Two samples were pooled for each gel to obtain sufficient material for proteomic analysis. Differences in protein expression were analyzed using the Decyder software (Version 6.5, GE healthcare).  Murine Model of Regional Myocardial Ischemic Injury Myocardial infarction was induced in the anesthetized mouse using an established protocol of regional ischemic injury[ 22 ]. Briefly, male ICR mice were subjected to a 30-min left anterior descending coronary artery occlusion followed by 30min of reperfusion. Sham control group was subjected to open chest surgery without coronary occlusion.  Metabolomics For metabolomic analysis, metabolite extracts were prepared from 29 murine hearts (n=5 for normoxic control and AE PKC? mice, n=4 for control and n=3 for AE PKC? mice after ischemia, and n=4 for control, AE and DN PKC? mice after 30 min reperfusion, respectively). Water-soluble metabolites were extracted in 6% perchloric acid and proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-NMR) was performed as described online [ 23 ].  Statistical analysis Statistical analysis was performed using the analysis of variance (ANOVA) and unpaired Student’s t -test. Pairwise comparisons between metabolites were performed using the Bonferroni/Dunn test. Results were given as means±SE. A P value <0.05 was considered significant. Principal component analysis (PCA) was used for the analysis of the multivariate data produced by proteomic and metabolomic technologies, which reduces the data dimensionality. For proteomic datasets, DIGE gels were analysed using the extended data analysis (EDA) module of the Decyder software (GE healthcare). For metabolite profiles, the 1H-NMR spectra were used for generating bucket tables for PCA analysis.  Metabolomic analysis of normoxic PKC? transgenic hearts To prove the functional relevance of the described enzymatic changes, we applied high-resolution 1H-NMR spectroscopy to measure cardiac metabolites. A representative 1H-NMR spectrum of control and AE PKC? transgenic hearts is shown in Figure 4 . A principal component (PCA) and a linear discriminant analysis (LDA) were performed to investigate the global variation of the cardiac samples in the 25-dimensional metabolite space. AE PKC? and control hearts were dissimilar enough that principal component 1 (PC1) alone gave good discrimination (Supplemental Figure 4A). 9/10 samples were correctly classified, with 1 control misclassified (LDA, leave one out). The scores on PC1 were ?0.0565, ?0.0039, ?0.0420, ?0.0321, 0.0015 for control and 0.0256, 0.0363, 0.0236, 0.0169, 0.0307 for AE PKC? hearts. The difference between the two means (blue) and PC1 (green) is plotted in the bottom panel of Figure 4 . The fact that the difference between the 2 means and the direction of largest variance (PC1) is so small suggests that the two groups are well separated, which is confirmed by the cross-validated classification. Metabolites responsible for the discrimination between the two groups have been assigned. The quantitative data are included as Online Table IV. Levels of lactate, glucose, glutamine, leucine, taurine and total creatine were significantly lower in cardioprotected AE PKC? transgenic hearts, while choline, glutamate and adenosine nucleotides were higher compared to controls ( Figure 5A ).  Metabolomic analysis after ischemia/reperfusion injury To trace metabolite changes during ischemia/reperfusion injury, we measured cardiac metabolites after 30 min of ischemia and 30 min reperfusion. Strikingly, no significant metabolite changes were detected between control and AE PKC ? transgenic hearts immediately after ischemia (Supplemental Table V), but differences reappeared upon reperfusion (Supplemental Table VI, Supplemental Figure 4B): After only 30 min of reperfusion, the adenosine nucleotide pool was significantly higher in AE PKC? transgenic hearts. Similarly, the decline of the total creatine pool during schemia/reperfusion injury was less pronounced. This maintenance of cardiac energy metabolites in AE PKC? transgenic hearts coincided with a faster recovery of glucose metabolites ( Figure 5B ). A comparison of average metabolite concentrations in control, AE and DN PKC? transgenic hearts provides further evidence that the activity of PKC? correlates with metabolic recovery upon reperfusion ( Figure 6 ).  Mitochondrial translocation of PKC? in PKC? transgenic hearts While cardiac glucose metabolism was clearly affected by PKC? activity, it remained to be determined whether there was a cross-talk between the PKC? and the PKC? isoform[ 25 ]. Figure 7 provides evidence that activation of PKC? did not lead to a compensatory change in PKC? expression. Inhibition of PKC?, however, markedly increased phosphorylation of PKC? at Thr505 and promoted translocation of PKC? to the cardiac mitochondria ( Figure 7A ). The specificity of the antibodies was confirmed by using PKC?–deficient hearts ( Figure 7B, C ). These results provide additional support for the differential expression of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex in DN PKC? hearts (Supplemental Table II), as PKC? Thr505 phosphorylation is known to alter substrate specificity[ 26 ] and the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex is one of the likely targets of PKC? on cardiac mitochondria[ 16 , 17 , 27 ]. Thus, the activation state of PKC? influences PKC? and the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, the key enzyme linking glycolysis to mitochondrial respiration.  Limitations of the study Although proteomics and metabolomics offer a suite of tools to interrogate tissue metabolism [ 29 , 37 , 42 ], it is important to acknowledge that both techniques are biased to high-abundant components. Moreover, metabolites were extracted directly from snap-frozen hearts and a reduction of a metabolite as measured by 1H-NMR spectroscopy may be the consequence of increased consumption or decreased production. As enzymatic activity in tissues is reflected in the expression and post-translational modifications of enzymes [ 43 ], 2-DE offers a particular advantage by visualizing posttranslational modifications of high abundant enzymes as a shift in isoelectric point or molecular weight [ 44 ]. In combination, these emerging technologies contribute to a better understanding of enzymatic and metabolite changes associated with PKC?-mediated cardioprotection.  Results The proteome of PKC? transgenic hearts To provide insights into potential cellular targets of PKC?, we compared the mitochondrial and cytosolic proteome of control hearts and transgenic hearts with constitutively active (AE) and dominant negative (DN) PKC? by DIGE. The quality of subcellular fractionation was assessed by immunoblotting ( Figure 1 ). The intactness of mitochondria was verified by the calcium swelling assay as described [ 24 ]. A representative image of the cardiac mitochondrial and cytosolic fraction as separated by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE, pH 3–10 nonlinear) is presented in Figure 2 . Differentially expressed spots are numbered and protein identifications as obtained by nano-LC MS/MS analysis are listed in online Table I–III. Only a few mitochondrial proteins in AE transgenic hearts were consistently different from control as well as DN transgenic hearts, including mitofilin (Supplemental Figure 1A), an inner mitochondrial membrane protein and regulator of metabolic flux, and manganese superoxide dismutase, an important mitochondrial antioxidant (Supplemental Table I). The latter was subsequently confirmed by immunoblotting (Supplemental Figure 2). No difference in net expression was observed for mitofillin because post-translational modifications as well as changes in net expression can be visualized on 2-DE gels (Supplemental Figure 1A). Besides mitochondria, several cytosolic enzymes related to glucose and energy metabolism were profoundly influenced by PKC? activation (Supplemental Table III, Supplemental Figure 1B), including pyruvate kinase, enolase, lactate dehydrogenase, creatine kinase as well as cytosolic malate dehydrogenase and cytosolic aspartate aminotransferase. The latter two enzymes constitute the components of the malate-aspartate shuttle, which exchanges cytoplasmic malate for mitochondrial aspartate and allows the transport of glycolytically-derived reducing equivalents across the inner mitochondrial membrane. When cross-validation was performed using principal component analysis (PCA) to investigate the global variation in the proteomic space, the differentially expressed cytosolic proteins allowed a clear separation of control and transgenic hearts ( Figure 3A–C ). Unexpectedly, the proteomic experiments also revealed a pronounced effect of PKC? inhibition on the mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (supplemental Table II). The latter consists of E1 [the pyruvate dehydrogenase (decarboxylating) (alpha)2/(beta)2 heterotetramer], E2 (the lipoyl acetyltransferase) and E3 (the dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase). Component X is an E3-binding protein and/or an E2 ancillary subunit with E2-like activity. Given that a 1:1 stoichiometry should exist between E1-alpha and E1-beta, the opposing directionality in changes observed in the proteomic experiment, suggests a post-translational modification. This was further substantiated by our finding that pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4, an inducible regulatory component, was identified within the protein spot containing E1-alpha. Phosphorylation of E1 by pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK) inactivates E1 and subsequently the entire pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. No statistically significant differences were found for cytosolic proteins. When the differentially expressed proteins were submitted to Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Ingenuity System, Mountain View, CA), the computational algorithms built two dominant protein association networks (Supplemental Figure 3) and returned pyruvate metabolism as the top canonical pathway. Thus, our proteomic data provide strong evidence for a previously unrecognized effect of PKC? activity on cardiac glucose metabolism. Metabolomic analysis of normoxic PKC? transgenic hearts To prove the functional relevance of the described enzymatic changes, we applied high-resolution 1H-NMR spectroscopy to measure cardiac metabolites. A representative 1H-NMR spectrum of control and AE PKC? transgenic hearts is shown in Figure 4 . A principal component (PCA) and a linear discriminant analysis (LDA) were performed to investigate the global variation of the cardiac samples in the 25-dimensional metabolite space. AE PKC? and control hearts were dissimilar enough that principal component 1 (PC1) alone gave good discrimination (Supplemental Figure 4A). 9/10 samples were correctly classified, with 1 control misclassified (LDA, leave one out). The scores on PC1 were ?0.0565, ?0.0039, ?0.0420, ?0.0321, 0.0015 for control and 0.0256, 0.0363, 0.0236, 0.0169, 0.0307 for AE PKC? hearts. The difference between the two means (blue) and PC1 (green) is plotted in the bottom panel of Figure 4 . The fact that the difference between the 2 means and the direction of largest variance (PC1) is so small suggests that the two groups are well separated, which is confirmed by the cross-validated classification. Metabolites responsible for the discrimination between the two groups have been assigned. The quantitative data are included as Online Table IV. Levels of lactate, glucose, glutamine, leucine, taurine and total creatine were significantly lower in cardioprotected AE PKC? transgenic hearts, while choline, glutamate and adenosine nucleotides were higher compared to controls ( Figure 5A ). Metabolomic analysis after ischemia/reperfusion injury To trace metabolite changes during ischemia/reperfusion injury, we measured cardiac metabolites after 30 min of ischemia and 30 min reperfusion. Strikingly, no significant metabolite changes were detected between control and AE PKC ? transgenic hearts immediately after ischemia (Supplemental Table V), but differences reappeared upon reperfusion (Supplemental Table VI, Supplemental Figure 4B): After only 30 min of reperfusion, the adenosine nucleotide pool was significantly higher in AE PKC? transgenic hearts. Similarly, the decline of the total creatine pool during schemia/reperfusion injury was less pronounced. This maintenance of cardiac energy metabolites in AE PKC? transgenic hearts coincided with a faster recovery of glucose metabolites ( Figure 5B ). A comparison of average metabolite concentrations in control, AE and DN PKC? transgenic hearts provides further evidence that the activity of PKC? correlates with metabolic recovery upon reperfusion ( Figure 6 ). Mitochondrial translocation of PKC? in PKC? transgenic hearts While cardiac glucose metabolism was clearly affected by PKC? activity, it remained to be determined whether there was a cross-talk between the PKC? and the PKC? isoform[ 25 ]. Figure 7 provides evidence that activation of PKC? did not lead to a compensatory change in PKC? expression. Inhibition of PKC?, however, markedly increased phosphorylation of PKC? at Thr505 and promoted translocation of PKC? to the cardiac mitochondria ( Figure 7A ). The specificity of the antibodies was confirmed by using PKC?–deficient hearts ( Figure 7B, C ). These results provide additional support for the differential expression of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex in DN PKC? hearts (Supplemental Table II), as PKC? Thr505 phosphorylation is known to alter substrate specificity[ 26 ] and the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex is one of the likely targets of PKC? on cardiac mitochondria[ 16 , 17 , 27 ]. Thus, the activation state of PKC? influences PKC? and the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, the key enzyme linking glycolysis to mitochondrial respiration.  Results The proteome of PKC? transgenic hearts To provide insights into potential cellular targets of PKC?, we compared the mitochondrial and cytosolic proteome of control hearts and transgenic hearts with constitutively active (AE) and dominant negative (DN) PKC? by DIGE. The quality of subcellular fractionation was assessed by immunoblotting ( Figure 1 ). The intactness of mitochondria was verified by the calcium swelling assay as described [ 24 ]. A representative image of the cardiac mitochondrial and cytosolic fraction as separated by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE, pH 3–10 nonlinear) is presented in Figure 2 . Differentially expressed spots are numbered and protein identifications as obtained by nano-LC MS/MS analysis are listed in online Table I–III. Only a few mitochondrial proteins in AE transgenic hearts were consistently different from control as well as DN transgenic hearts, including mitofilin (Supplemental Figure 1A), an inner mitochondrial membrane protein and regulator of metabolic flux, and manganese superoxide dismutase, an important mitochondrial antioxidant (Supplemental Table I). The latter was subsequently confirmed by immunoblotting (Supplemental Figure 2). No difference in net expression was observed for mitofillin because post-translational modifications as well as changes in net expression can be visualized on 2-DE gels (Supplemental Figure 1A). Besides mitochondria, several cytosolic enzymes related to glucose and energy metabolism were profoundly influenced by PKC? activation (Supplemental Table III, Supplemental Figure 1B), including pyruvate kinase, enolase, lactate dehydrogenase, creatine kinase as well as cytosolic malate dehydrogenase and cytosolic aspartate aminotransferase. The latter two enzymes constitute the components of the malate-aspartate shuttle, which exchanges cytoplasmic malate for mitochondrial aspartate and allows the transport of glycolytically-derived reducing equivalents across the inner mitochondrial membrane. When cross-validation was performed using principal component analysis (PCA) to investigate the global variation in the proteomic space, the differentially expressed cytosolic proteins allowed a clear separation of control and transgenic hearts ( Figure 3A–C ). Unexpectedly, the proteomic experiments also revealed a pronounced effect of PKC? inhibition on the mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (supplemental Table II). The latter consists of E1 [the pyruvate dehydrogenase (decarboxylating) (alpha)2/(beta)2 heterotetramer], E2 (the lipoyl acetyltransferase) and E3 (the dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase). Component X is an E3-binding protein and/or an E2 ancillary subunit with E2-like activity. Given that a 1:1 stoichiometry should exist between E1-alpha and E1-beta, the opposing directionality in changes observed in the proteomic experiment, suggests a post-translational modification. This was further substantiated by our finding that pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4, an inducible regulatory component, was identified within the protein spot containing E1-alpha. Phosphorylation of E1 by pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK) inactivates E1 and subsequently the entire pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. No statistically significant differences were found for cytosolic proteins. When the differentially expressed proteins were submitted to Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Ingenuity System, Mountain View, CA), the computational algorithms built two dominant protein association networks (Supplemental Figure 3) and returned pyruvate metabolism as the top canonical pathway. Thus, our proteomic data provide strong evidence for a previously unrecognized effect of PKC? activity on cardiac glucose metabolism. Metabolomic analysis of normoxic PKC? transgenic hearts To prove the functional relevance of the described enzymatic changes, we applied high-resolution 1H-NMR spectroscopy to measure cardiac metabolites. A representative 1H-NMR spectrum of control and AE PKC? transgenic hearts is shown in Figure 4 . A principal component (PCA) and a linear discriminant analysis (LDA) were performed to investigate the global variation of the cardiac samples in the 25-dimensional metabolite space. AE PKC? and control hearts were dissimilar enough that principal component 1 (PC1) alone gave good discrimination (Supplemental Figure 4A). 9/10 samples were correctly classified, with 1 control misclassified (LDA, leave one out). The scores on PC1 were ?0.0565, ?0.0039, ?0.0420, ?0.0321, 0.0015 for control and 0.0256, 0.0363, 0.0236, 0.0169, 0.0307 for AE PKC? hearts. The difference between the two means (blue) and PC1 (green) is plotted in the bottom panel of Figure 4 . The fact that the difference between the 2 means and the direction of largest variance (PC1) is so small suggests that the two groups are well separated, which is confirmed by the cross-validated classification. Metabolites responsible for the discrimination between the two groups have been assigned. The quantitative data are included as Online Table IV. Levels of lactate, glucose, glutamine, leucine, taurine and total creatine were significantly lower in cardioprotected AE PKC? transgenic hearts, while choline, glutamate and adenosine nucleotides were higher compared to controls ( Figure 5A ). Metabolomic analysis after ischemia/reperfusion injury To trace metabolite changes during ischemia/reperfusion injury, we measured cardiac metabolites after 30 min of ischemia and 30 min reperfusion. Strikingly, no significant metabolite changes were detected between control and AE PKC ? transgenic hearts immediately after ischemia (Supplemental Table V), but differences reappeared upon reperfusion (Supplemental Table VI, Supplemental Figure 4B): After only 30 min of reperfusion, the adenosine nucleotide pool was significantly higher in AE PKC? transgenic hearts. Similarly, the decline of the total creatine pool during schemia/reperfusion injury was less pronounced. This maintenance of cardiac energy metabolites in AE PKC? transgenic hearts coincided with a faster recovery of glucose metabolites ( Figure 5B ). A comparison of average metabolite concentrations in control, AE and DN PKC? transgenic hearts provides further evidence that the activity of PKC? correlates with metabolic recovery upon reperfusion ( Figure 6 ). Mitochondrial translocation of PKC? in PKC? transgenic hearts While cardiac glucose metabolism was clearly affected by PKC? activity, it remained to be determined whether there was a cross-talk between the PKC? and the PKC? isoform[ 25 ]. Figure 7 provides evidence that activation of PKC? did not lead to a compensatory change in PKC? expression. Inhibition of PKC?, however, markedly increased phosphorylation of PKC? at Thr505 and promoted translocation of PKC? to the cardiac mitochondria ( Figure 7A ). The specificity of the antibodies was confirmed by using PKC?–deficient hearts ( Figure 7B, C ). These results provide additional support for the differential expression of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex in DN PKC? hearts (Supplemental Table II), as PKC? Thr505 phosphorylation is known to alter substrate specificity[ 26 ] and the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex is one of the likely targets of PKC? on cardiac mitochondria[ 16 , 17 , 27 ]. Thus, the activation state of PKC? influences PKC? and the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, the key enzyme linking glycolysis to mitochondrial respiration.  The proteome of PKC? transgenic hearts To provide insights into potential cellular targets of PKC?, we compared the mitochondrial and cytosolic proteome of control hearts and transgenic hearts with constitutively active (AE) and dominant negative (DN) PKC? by DIGE. The quality of subcellular fractionation was assessed by immunoblotting ( Figure 1 ). The intactness of mitochondria was verified by the calcium swelling assay as described [ 24 ]. A representative image of the cardiac mitochondrial and cytosolic fraction as separated by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE, pH 3–10 nonlinear) is presented in Figure 2 . Differentially expressed spots are numbered and protein identifications as obtained by nano-LC MS/MS analysis are listed in online Table I–III. Only a few mitochondrial proteins in AE transgenic hearts were consistently different from control as well as DN transgenic hearts, including mitofilin (Supplemental Figure 1A), an inner mitochondrial membrane protein and regulator of metabolic flux, and manganese superoxide dismutase, an important mitochondrial antioxidant (Supplemental Table I). The latter was subsequently confirmed by immunoblotting (Supplemental Figure 2). No difference in net expression was observed for mitofillin because post-translational modifications as well as changes in net expression can be visualized on 2-DE gels (Supplemental Figure 1A). Besides mitochondria, several cytosolic enzymes related to glucose and energy metabolism were profoundly influenced by PKC? activation (Supplemental Table III, Supplemental Figure 1B), including pyruvate kinase, enolase, lactate dehydrogenase, creatine kinase as well as cytosolic malate dehydrogenase and cytosolic aspartate aminotransferase. The latter two enzymes constitute the components of the malate-aspartate shuttle, which exchanges cytoplasmic malate for mitochondrial aspartate and allows the transport of glycolytically-derived reducing equivalents across the inner mitochondrial membrane. When cross-validation was performed using principal component analysis (PCA) to investigate the global variation in the proteomic space, the differentially expressed cytosolic proteins allowed a clear separation of control and transgenic hearts ( Figure 3A–C ). Unexpectedly, the proteomic experiments also revealed a pronounced effect of PKC? inhibition on the mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (supplemental Table II). The latter consists of E1 [the pyruvate dehydrogenase (decarboxylating) (alpha)2/(beta)2 heterotetramer], E2 (the lipoyl acetyltransferase) and E3 (the dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase). Component X is an E3-binding protein and/or an E2 ancillary subunit with E2-like activity. Given that a 1:1 stoichiometry should exist between E1-alpha and E1-beta, the opposing directionality in changes observed in the proteomic experiment, suggests a post-translational modification. This was further substantiated by our finding that pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4, an inducible regulatory component, was identified within the protein spot containing E1-alpha. Phosphorylation of E1 by pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK) inactivates E1 and subsequently the entire pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. No statistically significant differences were found for cytosolic proteins. When the differentially expressed proteins were submitted to Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Ingenuity System, Mountain View, CA), the computational algorithms built two dominant protein association networks (Supplemental Figure 3) and returned pyruvate metabolism as the top canonical pathway. Thus, our proteomic data provide strong evidence for a previously unrecognized effect of PKC? activity on cardiac glucose metabolism.  The proteome of PKC? transgenic hearts To provide insights into potential cellular targets of PKC?, we compared the mitochondrial and cytosolic proteome of control hearts and transgenic hearts with constitutively active (AE) and dominant negative (DN) PKC? by DIGE. The quality of subcellular fractionation was assessed by immunoblotting ( Figure 1 ). The intactness of mitochondria was verified by the calcium swelling assay as described [ 24 ]. A representative image of the cardiac mitochondrial and cytosolic fraction as separated by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE, pH 3–10 nonlinear) is presented in Figure 2 . Differentially expressed spots are numbered and protein identifications as obtained by nano-LC MS/MS analysis are listed in online Table I–III. Only a few mitochondrial proteins in AE transgenic hearts were consistently different from control as well as DN transgenic hearts, including mitofilin (Supplemental Figure 1A), an inner mitochondrial membrane protein and regulator of metabolic flux, and manganese superoxide dismutase, an important mitochondrial antioxidant (Supplemental Table I). The latter was subsequently confirmed by immunoblotting (Supplemental Figure 2). No difference in net expression was observed for mitofillin because post-translational modifications as well as changes in net expression can be visualized on 2-DE gels (Supplemental Figure 1A). Besides mitochondria, several cytosolic enzymes related to glucose and energy metabolism were profoundly influenced by PKC? activation (Supplemental Table III, Supplemental Figure 1B), including pyruvate kinase, enolase, lactate dehydrogenase, creatine kinase as well as cytosolic malate dehydrogenase and cytosolic aspartate aminotransferase. The latter two enzymes constitute the components of the malate-aspartate shuttle, which exchanges cytoplasmic malate for mitochondrial aspartate and allows the transport of glycolytically-derived reducing equivalents across the inner mitochondrial membrane. When cross-validation was performed using principal component analysis (PCA) to investigate the global variation in the proteomic space, the differentially expressed cytosolic proteins allowed a clear separation of control and transgenic hearts ( Figure 3A–C ). Unexpectedly, the proteomic experiments also revealed a pronounced effect of PKC? inhibition on the mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (supplemental Table II). The latter consists of E1 [the pyruvate dehydrogenase (decarboxylating) (alpha)2/(beta)2 heterotetramer], E2 (the lipoyl acetyltransferase) and E3 (the dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase). Component X is an E3-binding protein and/or an E2 ancillary subunit with E2-like activity. Given that a 1:1 stoichiometry should exist between E1-alpha and E1-beta, the opposing directionality in changes observed in the proteomic experiment, suggests a post-translational modification. This was further substantiated by our finding that pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4, an inducible regulatory component, was identified within the protein spot containing E1-alpha. Phosphorylation of E1 by pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK) inactivates E1 and subsequently the entire pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. No statistically significant differences were found for cytosolic proteins. When the differentially expressed proteins were submitted to Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Ingenuity System, Mountain View, CA), the computational algorithms built two dominant protein association networks (Supplemental Figure 3) and returned pyruvate metabolism as the top canonical pathway. Thus, our proteomic data provide strong evidence for a previously unrecognized effect of PKC? activity on cardiac glucose metabolism.  Discussion In previous studies, our laboratory has shown that transgenic activation of PKC? in the heart is sufficient to significantly reduce myocardial infarction after coronary artery occlusion [ 12 , 28 ]. In the present study, we used a novel combination of gel-based proteomics and high-resolution 1H-NMR spectroscopy-based metabolomics [ 29 ], to investigate mechanisms of PKC?-mediated cardioprotection. This comprehensive analysis revealed that PKC? activation has a previously unrecognized effect on cardiac glucose metabolism [ 30 , 31 ]. PKC? and cardiac metabolism Despite abundant information on PKC? signalling networks in the heart [ 12 – 14 , 32 ], the manner in which the actions of these various signalling molecules integrate into cardiac metabolism is still not well understood. To our knowledge, only two papers have previously addressed the effects of PKC? activation on cardiac metabolism: Cross et al [ 33 ] used 31P-NMR spectroscopy to measure phosphorus metabolites during ischemia reperfusion injury in Langendorff-perfused hearts. Despite maintaining a greater level of myocardial ATP during ischemia and reperfusion, the phosphocreatine content in AE PKC? transgenic hearts was similar to controls. McCarthy [ 34 ] et al subsequently evaluated this phenotype in isolated mitochondria: they described a modest basal hyperpolarization in mitochondria from AE PKC? transgenic hearts versus controls. While no difference was observed in basal mitochondrial respiratory function by measuring oxygen consumption, respiratory-control index, and the rate of ATP production, PKC? activation augmented mitochondrial respiratory capacity in response to anoxia-reoxygenation. However, many issues of metabolism in AE PKC? hearts remain unresolved, especially with respect to the hearts in vivo . Proteomics and metabolomics combined Previous proteomic analyses of cardiac PKC? signaling complexes revealed metabolic enzymes as potential interacting partners of this serine/threonine kinase [ 13 , 32 ]. We now demonstrate that some of the previously identified PKC? targets, i.e. creatine kinase, enolase, and the mitochondrial malate carrier, are indeed among the differentially expressed proteins in AE PKC? transgenic hearts. Moreover, as no data were available on how these interactions between PKC? and metabolic enzymes influence cardiac metabolism, we quantified cardiac metabolites in control and transgenic hearts under normoxia, after ischemia and after reperfusion injury. Our 1H-NMR data on extracted cardiac metabolites not only confirmed the 31P-NMR data on Langendorff-perfused hearts [ 33 ] in that cardiac energy metabolites were better preserved in AE PKC? transgenic hearts, but also provide a mechanistic underpinning for the observed cardioprotective phenotype: activation of PKC? resulted in lower lactate levels and a similar downregulation of cytosolic malate dehydrogenase isoforms as previously observed in preconditioned wildtype hearts[ 16 ]. Thus, PKC? activation induces proteomic and metabolic characteristics of a preconditioned cardiac phenotype, which were previously found to be abolished in hearts with targeted disruption of the PKC? gene [ 16 ]. Cross-talk between PKC? and PKC? The striking consistency between different genetically engineered mouse models suggests that the metabolic effects of PKC? may, at least partially, be interrelated with PKC?. Subsequent experiments confirmed a pronounced effect of PKC? activity on PKC? translocation to cardiac mitochondria. Previously, increased expression and activation of PKC? was observed in PKC??/? mice [ 35 , 36 ]. However, increased PKC? activity in the complete absence of PKC? did not result in mitochondrial translocation of the PKC? isoform. In our study, cardiac-specific manipulation of PKC? activity did not alter PKC? expression, but inhibition of PKC? was associated with increased PKC? loop phosphorylation, mitochondrial translocation and differential expression of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. These data confirm our previous results in PKC?-deficient mice, where altered activity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex was postulated to be a likely explanation for the observed metabolic effects after deletion of the PKC? gene [ 16 , 17 , 37 ]. Notably, despite increased PKC? on mitochondria, transgenic hearts with DN PKC? showed no cardioprotective phenotype, which may be consistent with previous reports claiming that translocation of PKC? is required for mediating cardioprotection after pharmacological[ 38 ], but not ischemic preconditioning [ 39 ]. On the other hand, a moderate increase in mitochondrial PKC? was also observed in AE PKC? hearts and similar to mice deficient for PKC? [ 35 ], PKC? knockout mice lost cardioprotection in response to ischemic preconditioning [ 16 ]. In fact, cardiac damage was even exaggerated by ischemic preconditioning in the absence of PKC? [ 16 ]. This finding is in line with a recent clinical trial [ 40 ], demonstrating that the intra-coronary application of high doses of a PKC? inhibitor during primary percutaneous coronary intervention were associated with an increase, rather than a decrease, in infarct size [ 41 ]. Thus, deficiency for either PKC? or PKC? was sufficient to abrogate the cardioprotective effects of ischemic preconditioning, indicating that an individual PKC isoform may not be cardioprotective per se , but that cardioprotection may require the interaction of both PKC isoforms and that the cardioprotective effect may be the consequence of their combined orchestration of cardiac glucose and energy metabolism ( Figure 8 ). Limitations of the study Although proteomics and metabolomics offer a suite of tools to interrogate tissue metabolism [ 29 , 37 , 42 ], it is important to acknowledge that both techniques are biased to high-abundant components. Moreover, metabolites were extracted directly from snap-frozen hearts and a reduction of a metabolite as measured by 1H-NMR spectroscopy may be the consequence of increased consumption or decreased production. As enzymatic activity in tissues is reflected in the expression and post-translational modifications of enzymes [ 43 ], 2-DE offers a particular advantage by visualizing posttranslational modifications of high abundant enzymes as a shift in isoelectric point or molecular weight [ 44 ]. In combination, these emerging technologies contribute to a better understanding of enzymatic and metabolite changes associated with PKC?-mediated cardioprotection. Conclusion While activation of PKC? and inhibition of PKC? were known to be cardioprotective against ischemia/reperfusion injury, the common denominator in cardioprotective signalling between the two PKC isoforms remained unknown. Our studies demonstrate that PKC? and PKC? influence key steps in glucose metabolism of murine hearts. Thus, these kinases appear to be uniquely positioned to integrate signaling with metabolism, a central determinant of cardiomyocyte life and death. Future studies will have to address whether a similar interplay between the two PKC isoforms is also observed in human hearts and other experimental models of cardioprotection.  PKC? and cardiac metabolism Despite abundant information on PKC? signalling networks in the heart [ 12 – 14 , 32 ], the manner in which the actions of these various signalling molecules integrate into cardiac metabolism is still not well understood. To our knowledge, only two papers have previously addressed the effects of PKC? activation on cardiac metabolism: Cross et al [ 33 ] used 31P-NMR spectroscopy to measure phosphorus metabolites during ischemia reperfusion injury in Langendorff-perfused hearts. Despite maintaining a greater level of myocardial ATP during ischemia and reperfusion, the phosphocreatine content in AE PKC? transgenic hearts was similar to controls. McCarthy [ 34 ] et al subsequently evaluated this phenotype in isolated mitochondria: they described a modest basal hyperpolarization in mitochondria from AE PKC? transgenic hearts versus controls. While no difference was observed in basal mitochondrial respiratory function by measuring oxygen consumption, respiratory-control index, and the rate of ATP production, PKC? activation augmented mitochondrial respiratory capacity in response to anoxia-reoxygenation. However, many issues of metabolism in AE PKC? hearts remain unresolved, especially with respect to the hearts in vivo .  Proteomics and metabolomics combined Previous proteomic analyses of cardiac PKC? signaling complexes revealed metabolic enzymes as potential interacting partners of this serine/threonine kinase [ 13 , 32 ]. We now demonstrate that some of the previously identified PKC? targets, i.e. creatine kinase, enolase, and the mitochondrial malate carrier, are indeed among the differentially expressed proteins in AE PKC? transgenic hearts. Moreover, as no data were available on how these interactions between PKC? and metabolic enzymes influence cardiac metabolism, we quantified cardiac metabolites in control and transgenic hearts under normoxia, after ischemia and after reperfusion injury. Our 1H-NMR data on extracted cardiac metabolites not only confirmed the 31P-NMR data on Langendorff-perfused hearts [ 33 ] in that cardiac energy metabolites were better preserved in AE PKC? transgenic hearts, but also provide a mechanistic underpinning for the observed cardioprotective phenotype: activation of PKC? resulted in lower lactate levels and a similar downregulation of cytosolic malate dehydrogenase isoforms as previously observed in preconditioned wildtype hearts[ 16 ]. Thus, PKC? activation induces proteomic and metabolic characteristics of a preconditioned cardiac phenotype, which were previously found to be abolished in hearts with targeted disruption of the PKC? gene [ 16 ].  Cross-talk between PKC? and PKC? The striking consistency between different genetically engineered mouse models suggests that the metabolic effects of PKC? may, at least partially, be interrelated with PKC?. Subsequent experiments confirmed a pronounced effect of PKC? activity on PKC? translocation to cardiac mitochondria. Previously, increased expression and activation of PKC? was observed in PKC??/? mice [ 35 , 36 ]. However, increased PKC? activity in the complete absence of PKC? did not result in mitochondrial translocation of the PKC? isoform. In our study, cardiac-specific manipulation of PKC? activity did not alter PKC? expression, but inhibition of PKC? was associated with increased PKC? loop phosphorylation, mitochondrial translocation and differential expression of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. These data confirm our previous results in PKC?-deficient mice, where altered activity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex was postulated to be a likely explanation for the observed metabolic effects after deletion of the PKC? gene [ 16 , 17 , 37 ]. Notably, despite increased PKC? on mitochondria, transgenic hearts with DN PKC? showed no cardioprotective phenotype, which may be consistent with previous reports claiming that translocation of PKC? is required for mediating cardioprotection after pharmacological[ 38 ], but not ischemic preconditioning [ 39 ]. On the other hand, a moderate increase in mitochondrial PKC? was also observed in AE PKC? hearts and similar to mice deficient for PKC? [ 35 ], PKC? knockout mice lost cardioprotection in response to ischemic preconditioning [ 16 ]. In fact, cardiac damage was even exaggerated by ischemic preconditioning in the absence of PKC? [ 16 ]. This finding is in line with a recent clinical trial [ 40 ], demonstrating that the intra-coronary application of high doses of a PKC? inhibitor during primary percutaneous coronary intervention were associated with an increase, rather than a decrease, in infarct size [ 41 ]. Thus, deficiency for either PKC? or PKC? was sufficient to abrogate the cardioprotective effects of ischemic preconditioning, indicating that an individual PKC isoform may not be cardioprotective per se , but that cardioprotection may require the interaction of both PKC isoforms and that the cardioprotective effect may be the consequence of their combined orchestration of cardiac glucose and energy metabolism ( Figure 8 ).  Conclusion While activation of PKC? and inhibition of PKC? were known to be cardioprotective against ischemia/reperfusion injury, the common denominator in cardioprotective signalling between the two PKC isoforms remained unknown. Our studies demonstrate that PKC? and PKC? influence key steps in glucose metabolism of murine hearts. Thus, these kinases appear to be uniquely positioned to integrate signaling with metabolism, a central determinant of cardiomyocyte life and death. Future studies will have to address whether a similar interplay between the two PKC isoforms is also observed in human hearts and other experimental models of cardioprotection. 