A role for leukocyte-endothelial adhesion mechanisms in epilepsy The mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of epilepsy, a chronic neurological disorder that affects approximately 1 percent of the world population, are not well understood1–3. Using a mouse model of epilepsy, we show that seizures induce elevated expression of vascular cell adhesion molecules and enhanced leukocyte rolling and arrest in brain vessels mediated by the leukocyte mucin P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL-1) and leukocyte integrins ?4?1 and ?L?2. Inhibition of leukocyte-vascular interactions either with blocking antibodies, or in mice genetically deficient in functional PSGL-1, dramatically reduced seizures. Treatment with blocking antibodies following acute seizures prevented the development of epilepsy. Neutrophil depletion also inhibited acute seizure induction and chronic spontaneous recurrent seizures. Blood-brain barrier (BBB) leakage, which is known to enhance neuronal excitability, was induced by acute seizure activity but was prevented by blockade of leukocyte-vascular adhesion, suggesting a pathogenetic link between leukocyte-vascular interactions, BBB damage and seizure generation. Consistent with potential leukocyte involvement in the human, leukocytes were more abundant in brains of epileptics than of controls. Our results suggest leukocyte-endothelial interaction as a potential target for the prevention and treatment of epilepsy.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Reagents MAbs anti-?4 integrin PS/2, anti-VCAM-1 MK 2.7, anti-ICAM-1 YN 1.1.7.4, anti-LFA-1 TJB 213, anti-MAdCAM-1 MECA 367, anti-CD45 30G12 were from American Type Culture Collection or were produced in our labs. Anti-PSGL-1 (4RA10) was kindly provided by Dr. D. Vestweber, Max Plank Institute, Muenster, Germany. Mice C57Bl/6 young males were obtained from Charles River, Italy. Fut4 ?/? and Fut7 ?/? mice were obtained as previously described 24 , 25 . Psgl-1 ?/? mice were prepared as described 26 . Psgl-1 ?/? and Fut7 ?/? mice were on a C57Bl/6 genetic background (backcrossed for at least 9 generations). Mice were housed and used according to current European Community rules. Experiments on mice were approved by the research committees from the University of Verona and Italian National Institute of Health. Induction of seizures and epilepsy We employed young male C57BL/6 mice (30–50 days of age, weight range: 19–23 gr) were obtained from Harlan and maintained on a 12 h light/dark inverted schedule, with access to food and water ad libitum , and habituated to the experimenters for at least two weeks prior to the procedures employed in the present study. The experiments received authorization from the Italian Ministry of Health, and were conducted following the principles of the NIH Guide for the Use and Care of Laboratory Animals, and the European Community Council (86/609/EEC) directive. All animals injected with pilocarpine were pretreated with methyl-scopolamine (1 mg/kg, i.p., Sigma, Germany) to minimize peripheral muscarinic effects. Thirty minutes later, mice received 300 mg/kg pilocarpine (Sigma, Germany) i.p. diluted in 0.01 M phosphate-buffered saline, pH 7.4 (PBS). Systemic administration of pilocarpine induced status epilepticus (SE) in mice with continuous seizure activity usually lasting 1–2 h. Behavioral observations of pilocarpine-induce seizures during SE were evaluated according to a modified version of Racine scale using categories 1–5, with 5 being the most severe 12 , 18 . Then after a latent (seizure-free) phase of 1–2 weeks, mice go on to develop chronic epilepsy characterized by spontaneous convulsions (SC) 12 , 13 . All mice that developed SE also developed spontaneous seizures as previously shown in C57Bl/6 mice 12 . Experiments in which more that 30% of the control animals died or did not develop SE after pilocarpine injection were not considered in this study. For in vivo staining studies of endothelial adhesion molecules, some mice were injected with Diazepam i.p. (3 mg/Kg) 20 min before pilocarpine administration to prevent SE. Mice with convulsions at 2 h after SE onset were injected with Diazepam to uniform SE duration to 2 h in all experimental groups. Determination of BBB permeability by MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) analysis<xref ref-type="bibr" rid="R27">27</xref> MRI experiments were performed using a Bruker Biospec Tomograph equipped with an Oxford, 33-cm-bore. Animals were anaesthetized and placed in prone position into a 7.2 cm transmitter birdcage coil. The signal was acquired by a 1.5 cm actively decoupled surface coil. The tail vein was cannulated for injection of contrast agent (Magnevist, Schering 100 micromol/kg). Multislice, T1-weighted Spin Echo images were acquired before and up to 24 min after injection of Magnevist. The acquisition parameters were: TR=350 ms; TE=14.4 ms; matrix size=128×128;FOV=3×3cm2. Twelve contiguous, 1 mm-thick slices were acquired to cover the whole-brain. Determination of BBB permeability by Evans blue staining<xref ref-type="bibr" rid="R8">8</xref> Evans Blue (EB) was intravenously (i.v.) administered via the tail vein (100 mg/kg i.v., Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) in awake, restrained animals (anesthesia was avoided in order to exclude artifact due to the direct effect of the anesthetic itself on the endothelium and blood flow). EB injection was performed 18–24 h after pilocarpine injection. Briefly, 30 min after the i.v. EB injection, animals were perfused by a solution of mixed aldehydes containing 4% paraformaldehyde and 0.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer, pH 7.4 (PBS). Brains were then removed excluding meninges and photographed on a stereo-microscope. PMN preparation Mouse bone marrow PMNs were isolated from femurs and tibias as previously described 28 . Briefly marrow cells were flushed from the bones using Hank’s balanced salt solution without Ca2+ and Mg2+ . After hypotonic lysis of erythrocytes cells were loaded on top of a Percoll discontinuous density gradient and, after centrifugation cells were harvested and washed before use. >80% of the isolated cells were Gr-1 positive cells in flow cytometry (data not shown). Intravital microscopy<xref ref-type="bibr" rid="R15">15</xref>, <xref ref-type="bibr" rid="R29">29</xref> C56Bl/6 young males were purchased from Harlan-Nossan (Udine, Italy). At 6 h and 24 h after the onset of status epilepticus , mice were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection (10 ml/kg) of physiologic saline containing with ketamine (5 mg/ml) and xylazine (1 mg/ml). The recipient was maintained at 37 °C by a stage mounted strip heater Linkam CO102 (Olympus). A heparinized PE-10 polyethylene catheter was inserted into the right common carotid artery toward the brain. In order to exclude from the analysis the non cerebral vessels, the right external carotid artery and pterygopalatine artery, a branch from the internal carotid, were ligated. The scalp was reflected and the skull was bathed with sterile saline, and a 24 mm × 24mm coverslip was applied and fixed with silicon grease. A round chamber with 11 mm internal diameter was attached on the cover slip and filled with water. The preparation was placed on a Olympus BX50WI microscope and a water immersion objective with long focal distance (Olympus Achroplan, focal distance 3.3 mm, NA 0.5 ?) was used. More details regarding intravital microscopy studies are provided at Supplementary methods . Statistics Statistical analysis of the results, was performed by using Prism software. A two-tailed Student's t test was employed for statistical comparison of two samples. Multiple comparisons were performed employing Kruskall-Wallis test with the Bonferroni correction of P or by using ANOVA. Velocity histograms were compared using Man-Whitney U-test and Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Differences were regarded significant with a value of P <0.05. The following methods are provided at Supplementary information : in vivo staining of endothelial adhesion molecules, in vitro adhesion assays, telemetry EEG, behavioral assessment, production of murine TH1 and TH2 cells, immunohistochemistry and human samples. A scheme of the experimental procedures performed in mice is provided in Supplementary Fig. 3b .  Reagents MAbs anti-?4 integrin PS/2, anti-VCAM-1 MK 2.7, anti-ICAM-1 YN 1.1.7.4, anti-LFA-1 TJB 213, anti-MAdCAM-1 MECA 367, anti-CD45 30G12 were from American Type Culture Collection or were produced in our labs. Anti-PSGL-1 (4RA10) was kindly provided by Dr. D. Vestweber, Max Plank Institute, Muenster, Germany.  Mice C57Bl/6 young males were obtained from Charles River, Italy. Fut4 ?/? and Fut7 ?/? mice were obtained as previously described 24 , 25 . Psgl-1 ?/? mice were prepared as described 26 . Psgl-1 ?/? and Fut7 ?/? mice were on a C57Bl/6 genetic background (backcrossed for at least 9 generations). Mice were housed and used according to current European Community rules. Experiments on mice were approved by the research committees from the University of Verona and Italian National Institute of Health.  Induction of seizures and epilepsy We employed young male C57BL/6 mice (30–50 days of age, weight range: 19–23 gr) were obtained from Harlan and maintained on a 12 h light/dark inverted schedule, with access to food and water ad libitum , and habituated to the experimenters for at least two weeks prior to the procedures employed in the present study. The experiments received authorization from the Italian Ministry of Health, and were conducted following the principles of the NIH Guide for the Use and Care of Laboratory Animals, and the European Community Council (86/609/EEC) directive. All animals injected with pilocarpine were pretreated with methyl-scopolamine (1 mg/kg, i.p., Sigma, Germany) to minimize peripheral muscarinic effects. Thirty minutes later, mice received 300 mg/kg pilocarpine (Sigma, Germany) i.p. diluted in 0.01 M phosphate-buffered saline, pH 7.4 (PBS). Systemic administration of pilocarpine induced status epilepticus (SE) in mice with continuous seizure activity usually lasting 1–2 h. Behavioral observations of pilocarpine-induce seizures during SE were evaluated according to a modified version of Racine scale using categories 1–5, with 5 being the most severe 12 , 18 . Then after a latent (seizure-free) phase of 1–2 weeks, mice go on to develop chronic epilepsy characterized by spontaneous convulsions (SC) 12 , 13 . All mice that developed SE also developed spontaneous seizures as previously shown in C57Bl/6 mice 12 . Experiments in which more that 30% of the control animals died or did not develop SE after pilocarpine injection were not considered in this study. For in vivo staining studies of endothelial adhesion molecules, some mice were injected with Diazepam i.p. (3 mg/Kg) 20 min before pilocarpine administration to prevent SE. Mice with convulsions at 2 h after SE onset were injected with Diazepam to uniform SE duration to 2 h in all experimental groups.  Determination of BBB permeability by MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) analysis<xref ref-type="bibr" rid="R27">27</xref> MRI experiments were performed using a Bruker Biospec Tomograph equipped with an Oxford, 33-cm-bore. Animals were anaesthetized and placed in prone position into a 7.2 cm transmitter birdcage coil. The signal was acquired by a 1.5 cm actively decoupled surface coil. The tail vein was cannulated for injection of contrast agent (Magnevist, Schering 100 micromol/kg). Multislice, T1-weighted Spin Echo images were acquired before and up to 24 min after injection of Magnevist. The acquisition parameters were: TR=350 ms; TE=14.4 ms; matrix size=128×128;FOV=3×3cm2. Twelve contiguous, 1 mm-thick slices were acquired to cover the whole-brain.  Determination of BBB permeability by Evans blue staining<xref ref-type="bibr" rid="R8">8</xref> Evans Blue (EB) was intravenously (i.v.) administered via the tail vein (100 mg/kg i.v., Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) in awake, restrained animals (anesthesia was avoided in order to exclude artifact due to the direct effect of the anesthetic itself on the endothelium and blood flow). EB injection was performed 18–24 h after pilocarpine injection. Briefly, 30 min after the i.v. EB injection, animals were perfused by a solution of mixed aldehydes containing 4% paraformaldehyde and 0.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer, pH 7.4 (PBS). Brains were then removed excluding meninges and photographed on a stereo-microscope.  PMN preparation Mouse bone marrow PMNs were isolated from femurs and tibias as previously described 28 . Briefly marrow cells were flushed from the bones using Hank’s balanced salt solution without Ca2+ and Mg2+ . After hypotonic lysis of erythrocytes cells were loaded on top of a Percoll discontinuous density gradient and, after centrifugation cells were harvested and washed before use. >80% of the isolated cells were Gr-1 positive cells in flow cytometry (data not shown).  Intravital microscopy<xref ref-type="bibr" rid="R15">15</xref>, <xref ref-type="bibr" rid="R29">29</xref> C56Bl/6 young males were purchased from Harlan-Nossan (Udine, Italy). At 6 h and 24 h after the onset of status epilepticus , mice were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection (10 ml/kg) of physiologic saline containing with ketamine (5 mg/ml) and xylazine (1 mg/ml). The recipient was maintained at 37 °C by a stage mounted strip heater Linkam CO102 (Olympus). A heparinized PE-10 polyethylene catheter was inserted into the right common carotid artery toward the brain. In order to exclude from the analysis the non cerebral vessels, the right external carotid artery and pterygopalatine artery, a branch from the internal carotid, were ligated. The scalp was reflected and the skull was bathed with sterile saline, and a 24 mm × 24mm coverslip was applied and fixed with silicon grease. A round chamber with 11 mm internal diameter was attached on the cover slip and filled with water. The preparation was placed on a Olympus BX50WI microscope and a water immersion objective with long focal distance (Olympus Achroplan, focal distance 3.3 mm, NA 0.5 ?) was used. More details regarding intravital microscopy studies are provided at Supplementary methods .  Statistics Statistical analysis of the results, was performed by using Prism software. A two-tailed Student's t test was employed for statistical comparison of two samples. Multiple comparisons were performed employing Kruskall-Wallis test with the Bonferroni correction of P or by using ANOVA. Velocity histograms were compared using Man-Whitney U-test and Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Differences were regarded significant with a value of P <0.05. The following methods are provided at Supplementary information : in vivo staining of endothelial adhesion molecules, in vitro adhesion assays, telemetry EEG, behavioral assessment, production of murine TH1 and TH2 cells, immunohistochemistry and human samples. A scheme of the experimental procedures performed in mice is provided in Supplementary Fig. 3b .  Supplementary Material Supplementary data  Figures Figure 1 Alpha4 integrin, VCAM-1 and PSGL-1 dependence of PMN and T<sub>H</sub>1 cell interactions with brain endothelium after SE a, b . Expression of adhesion molecules in cortical vessels was evaluated by in vivo staining and fluorescence microscopy before (Baseline) ( a ) and 6 h after the onset of seizure activity induced by pilocarpine ( b ). Isotype-matched mAb served as a control. Suppression of SE was achieved by administration of 3 mg/Kg Diazepam i.p. 20 min before pilocarpine injection (Diazepam) ( b ). Scale bar: 200 µm. c, e, f . The frequency of rolling interactions or sticking behavior of fluorescently labeled PMNs and lymphocyte subpopulations in cortical venules was studied before pilocarpine injection (0 h) and at 6 h and 24 h after SE onset by in situ videomicroscopy 15 . The percentage of total cells shown on Y axis was calculated as described in Supplementary methods . The number of venules and animals per group analyzed are provided in Supplementary Table 1b, c . Mean ± SEM are shown. PLNs, freshly isolated peripheral lymph node cells (resting lymphocytes). d . Adherent PMNs 6 h post-SE and TH1 cells at 24 h post SE are shown in cerebral vessels (arrows). Scale bar: 100 µm. e, f . Anti-adhesion molecule mAbs were used to block leukocyte or endothelial adhesion molecules at 6 h after SE as described at Supplementary methods (Intravital microscopy subsection). PMNs are shown in e and TH1 cells are shown in f . Groups were compared with control using Kruskall-Wallis test followed by Bonferoni correction of P . ** P <0.01; * P <0.001. Figure 2 Effect of blockade or deficiency in leukocyte adhesion mechanisms on convulsions and seizures In a - c visual monitoring of mean number of daily spontaneous convulsions (SC) per mouse was performed from day 5–20 after pilocarpine administration. Pilocarpine treated WT mice received no treatment (“epileptic mice”), or were injected i.p. either 1 h after SE-onset with 400 µg ?4 integrin-specific mAb or with 150 µg VCAM-1-specific mAb, to model therapy; or 2 h prior to pilocarpine injection with 400 µg ?4 integrin-specific mAb (pre-treatment regimen). In both instances treated mice also received antibody (200 µg anti-?4 or control mAb and 150 µg anti-VCAM-1) every other day for 20 days. An isotype-matched control antibody was used as control ( a ). 10–12 animals/group were monitored for SC for 6 h/day between day 5 and 20 after SE. One representative experiment from a series of 4 ( a ), 2 ( b ) and 3 ( c ) with similar results is shown. In d–f EEGs for each animal were acquired 24 h/day from day 0–20 after pilocarpine administration. Behaviorally, SRS were characterized in our mice by head nodding, forelimb clonus, rearing, and falling. d, days, s, seconds ( g ) Twenty-sec EEG recordings early after initial seizures and at the end of the second h are shown. Theta activity was occasionally observed in Psgl-1 ?/? animals (asterisk, fourth column, second line). ( h ) Recordings of representative SRS are shown. For d–h data are representative from one experiment with 3 mice/group from two experiments with similar results. *** P <0.001. Figure 3 Effect of blockade or deficiency in leukocyte adhesion mechanisms on CNS histopathology Epilepsy-induced structural changes and effects on neuronal cell density alterations were analyzed at 30 days after SE in healthy animals and in mice injected with pilocarpine: control (C57Bl/6, WT) mice, anti-?4 treated animals and Psgl-1 ?/? and Fut7 ?/? mice. For quantitative evaluation, the number of Nissl stained cell bodies was counted in four sections/animal (3 animals/group) using regions of interest (ROI) sampling. The ROI was delimited by a rectangular frame which was placed within the sampled cortical and hippocampal areas, using upper-left exclusion lines. In the somatosensory (SS) cortex, the rectangular frame was placed vertically throughout the cortical thickness, superficial (II-III) (SS1) and deep (V-VI) layers (SS2) of the cortex. See also the Supplementary Methods for details. Mean ± SEM are shown for stereological counts. Statistical comparison of anti-?4-treated groups or Psgl-1 ?/? and Fut7 ?/? groups with Control/WT epileptic condition was performed using a two-tail t -test. * P <0.04. CA, corpus ammonis. Scale bar corresponds to 30 µm. Figure 4 Inhibition or deficiency of leukocyte adhesion pathways maintains the integrity of the BBB ( a ) Evans Blue (EB) extravasation was evaluated 18–24 h after pilocarpine injection. In WT (control) mice, EB leakage (asterisks) was observed macroscopically in brains, after removal of the meninges, in the parietal cortex and in particular in the territories relative to the medial cerebral artery (black asterisks) in the superior and lateral views; in the pituitary gland pedunculus (where the BBB is more permeable) in the inferior view; and, finally, in the choroid plexus of the lateral ventricles and in the fourth ventricle as in the sagittal view. WT animals injected only with methylscopolamine did not show any leakage (data not shown). Anti-?4 pretreatment as well as PSGL1- or FucT-VII deficiency ( Psgl-1 ?/? and Fut7 ?/? mice) prevented BBB leakage. Representative brains are shown from one of 2 experiments, 3 mice/condition, with similar results. Scale bar: 4 mm. ( b ) BBB alterations post-SE were studied in control (C57Bl/6/, WT mice), and anti-?4 treated animals and in Psgl-1 ?/? and Fut ?/? mice at 24 h after pilocarpine injection. BBB permeability was studied by the mean of intravenously administered Magnevist® (Nmethylglucamine salt of gadolinium complex of diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid) a paramagnetic iron oxide contrast agent in MRI. Pseudo-color maps evidencing contrast agent spreading are shown. Representative brains are shown from one of two experiments (3mice/condition) with similar results. Scale bar: 2 mm. 