Metabolomics of Neural Progenitor Cells: A Novel Approach to Biomarker Discovery Finding biomarkers of human neurological diseases is one of the most pressing goals of modern medicine. Most neurological disorders are recognized too late because of the lack of biomarkers that can identify early pathological processes in the living brain. Late diagnosis leads to late therapy and poor prognosis. Therefore, during the past decade, a major endeavor of clinical investigations in neurology has been the search for diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers of brain disease. Recently, a new field of metabolomics has emerged, aiming to investigate metabolites within the cell/tissue/organism as possible biomarkers. Similarly to other “omics” fields, metabolomics offers substantial information about the status of the organism at a given time point. However, metabolomics also provides functional insight into the biochemical status of a tissue, which results from the environmental effects on its genome background. Recently, we have adopted metabolomics techniques to develop an approach that combines both in vitro analysis of cellular samples and in vivo analysis of the mammalian brain. Using proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy, we have discovered a metabolic biomarker of neural stem/progenitor cells (NPCs) that allows the analysis of these cells in the live human brain. We have developed signal-processing algorithms that can detect metabolites present at very low concentration in the live human brain and can indicate possible pathways impaired in specific diseases. Herein, we present our strategy for both cellular and systems metabolomics, based on an integrative processing of the spectroscopy data that uses analytical tools from both metabolomic and spectroscopy fields. As an example of biomarker discovery using our approach, we present new data and discuss our previous findings on the NPC biomarker. Our studies link systems and cellular neuroscience through the functions of specific metabolites. Therefore, they provide a functional insight into the brain, which might eventually lead to discoveries of clinically useful biomarkers of the disease.  Conclusion One of the biggest challenges in biomedical science is the translation of basic scientific accomplishments to clinical practice. Although drug or device developments have established principles of transition from in vitro to animal in vivo to human applications, other fields of medicine have not yet provided the means of clear transference. Our outlined strategy for experimental design and signal processing using metabolomics and spectroscopy tools might offer such means and a direct translation of biomarkers characterized in vitro to clinical applications in vivo. Similarly, our approach can provide an unprecedented insight into the functional status of live human brain tissue and can translate this information to more readily available validation models, such as animal models and studies at the cellular level. Furthermore, although a well-known correlate of high-resolution NMR, 1H-MRS spectroscopy has never been scrutinized using complex data analysis paradigms well established for 1H-NMR metabolomics. Application of metabolomics analytical methods to 1H-MRS in conjunction with other spectroscopy signal-processing tools might therefore lead to a potential wealth of functional human brain 1H-MRS tissue-profiling data. We hope that our introduction of the concept of cross-fertilization among different disciplines, such as metabolomics and 1H-MRS, in terms of signal processing and data correlation, will prompt further research in these areas, which ultimately may lead to new discoveries that will improve our understanding of human brain diseases. 