Silencing of MGMT expression by promoter hypermethylation in the metaplasia–dysplasia–carcinoma sequence of Barrett’s esophagus To determine the relevance of MGMT in Barrett’s carcinogenesis, we analyzed promotor hypermethylation and expression of MGMT in Barrett’s adenocarcinomas and its paired precursor lesions from 133 patients using a methylation-specific PCR, real-time RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry. Hypermethylation was detected in 78.9% of esophageal adenocarcinomas, in 100% of Barrett’s intraepithelial neoplasia, in 88.9% of Barrett’s metaplasia, but only in 21.4% of normal esophageal mucosa samples ( P < 0.001) and correlated significantly with downregulation of MGMT transcripts ( P = 0.048) and protein expression ( P = 0.02). Decrease of protein expression was significantly correlated with progressed stage of disease, lymph node invasion and tumor size. We conclude, that aberrant promoter methylation of MGMT is a frequent and early event during tumorigenesis of Barrett’s esophagus. High prevalence of MGMT hypermethylation may represent a candidate marker for improved diagnosis and targeted therapy in Barrett’s adenocarcinoma.  3. Results 3.1. MGMT promoter hypermethylation To assess the methylation status of the MGMT promoter in BA and its precursor lesions and in non-neoplastic esophageal squamous mucosa, 115 samples from 71 cases were analyzed. Representative examples of the MSP products analyzed for the MGMT gene are displayed in Fig. 1B . In all methylated cases, unmethylated bands were also visible in the samples investigated, which may result from methylation of only one allele, heterogeneity in tumor cell populations, or admixed normal cells within or adjacent to the lesions of interest. MGMT showed promotor hypermethylation among all groups ( Table 1 and Fig. 1A ). In BA, MGMT methylation was detected in 37/47 cases (78.9%), whereas the epigenetic modification of the gene promoter occurred only in 6/29 cases (21.4%) of the non-dysplastic esophageal squamous mucosa ( P < 0.001). In BE without or with intraepithelial neoplasia, MGMT methylation occurred in 24/27 cases (88.9%) and in 13/13 cases (100%), respectively. Among 27 paired BA and their adjacent metaplastic BE and/or normal esophageal squamous mucosa, 22 BA exhibited MGMT promoter hypermethylation. Of these, only 33% also had this change in their adjacent normal tissue compared to 100% of the paired non-neoplastic BE. As expected, among the remaining five BA without methylation, all cases were unmethylated in their matched metaplastic or normal tissue samples. Although the difference among BE, IN and BA was not statistically significant, methylation occurred with an increasing frequency along neoplastic progression, with the largest increase found between NT and non-dysplastic BE, and a further increase in the development of intraepithelial neoplasia and BA. 3.2. Association between MGMT promoter methylation and its mRNA and protein expression To determine the significance of promoter CpG island methylation for gene expression, MGMT expression was analyzed both at the mRNA and the protein level. In general, hypermethylation was tightly correlated with the loss of MGMT mRNA and protein expression, underlining the validity of our methylation analysis. Methylation of the MGMT promoter in BA was associated with a concomitant decrease in the level of MGMT mRNA expression compared to unmethylated samples ( Fig. 1C and Table 1 ). Statistical analysis was not performed due to the low number of unmethylated cases investigated. Fig. 2 shows representative immunohistochemical staining patterns of MGMT in NT, BE, IN and BA. Within a given lesion, a nearly homogeneous expression was demonstrated. MGMT was detectable by immunohistochemistry in all unmethylated specimens examined. Regarding interobserver reliability, there was a kappa coefficient with linear weighting of 0.79 (95% CI 0.44 – 1.15) for the two observers. Inverse correlation was found between methylation and immunohistochemical protein expression with a significant reduction of the MGMT protein level in methylated samples compared to unmethylated samples ( P = 0.02, Fig. 1D ). In the group of methylated lesions, 5/27 cases of BE, 3/13 cases of IN and 7/47 cases of BA appeared to be completely immunonegative. Western blot-analysis of each three samples of methylated and unmethylated BA clearly reduced MGMT protein expression, which indicates that the results of the immunohistochemistry studies are reliable ( Fig. 1E ). But a selected change with functional consequences. 3.3. Correlation with clinicopathological data Because the majority of the carcinomas of group A ( n = 35) available both for methylation and immunohistochemical protein expression were in a very early tumor stage, we performed an immunohistochemical study of 62 additional cases with advanced tumor stages (group B, n = 62). Available clinicopathological data on all merged patients investigated by immunohistochemistry ( n = 97) and their tumor characteristics at the time of resection were reviewed and correlated with MGMT protein expression. Clinical data and immunoreactive scores are summarized in Table 2 . The major results are depicted in Fig. 3 . Reduced MGMT protein expression was detected more frequently in poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas than in well and moderately differentiated adenocarcinomas ( P = 0.04). For clinicopathological correlation we merged the TNM and pT category into early stage (?stage II; ?pT2) and late stage (>stage II; >pT3). In cancers demonstrating advanced local invasion and progressed tumor spread, the incidence of reduced MGMT expression was higher than in less invasive carcinomas and carcinomas at early tumor stage (pT1/2 vs pT3/4, P = 0.04; stage I/II vs stage III/IV, P = 0.021). Furthermore, loss of protein expression was present more frequently in carcinomas with than in those without lymph vessel invasion ( P = 0.025). In contrast, differences in MGMT expression regarding gender, age, evidence of lymph node metastasis or distant metastasis did not exist ( P = 0.397, P = 0.196, P = 0.839 and P = 0.23, respectively).  3.1. MGMT promoter hypermethylation To assess the methylation status of the MGMT promoter in BA and its precursor lesions and in non-neoplastic esophageal squamous mucosa, 115 samples from 71 cases were analyzed. Representative examples of the MSP products analyzed for the MGMT gene are displayed in Fig. 1B . In all methylated cases, unmethylated bands were also visible in the samples investigated, which may result from methylation of only one allele, heterogeneity in tumor cell populations, or admixed normal cells within or adjacent to the lesions of interest. MGMT showed promotor hypermethylation among all groups ( Table 1 and Fig. 1A ). In BA, MGMT methylation was detected in 37/47 cases (78.9%), whereas the epigenetic modification of the gene promoter occurred only in 6/29 cases (21.4%) of the non-dysplastic esophageal squamous mucosa ( P < 0.001). In BE without or with intraepithelial neoplasia, MGMT methylation occurred in 24/27 cases (88.9%) and in 13/13 cases (100%), respectively. Among 27 paired BA and their adjacent metaplastic BE and/or normal esophageal squamous mucosa, 22 BA exhibited MGMT promoter hypermethylation. Of these, only 33% also had this change in their adjacent normal tissue compared to 100% of the paired non-neoplastic BE. As expected, among the remaining five BA without methylation, all cases were unmethylated in their matched metaplastic or normal tissue samples. Although the difference among BE, IN and BA was not statistically significant, methylation occurred with an increasing frequency along neoplastic progression, with the largest increase found between NT and non-dysplastic BE, and a further increase in the development of intraepithelial neoplasia and BA.  3.2. Association between MGMT promoter methylation and its mRNA and protein expression To determine the significance of promoter CpG island methylation for gene expression, MGMT expression was analyzed both at the mRNA and the protein level. In general, hypermethylation was tightly correlated with the loss of MGMT mRNA and protein expression, underlining the validity of our methylation analysis. Methylation of the MGMT promoter in BA was associated with a concomitant decrease in the level of MGMT mRNA expression compared to unmethylated samples ( Fig. 1C and Table 1 ). Statistical analysis was not performed due to the low number of unmethylated cases investigated. Fig. 2 shows representative immunohistochemical staining patterns of MGMT in NT, BE, IN and BA. Within a given lesion, a nearly homogeneous expression was demonstrated. MGMT was detectable by immunohistochemistry in all unmethylated specimens examined. Regarding interobserver reliability, there was a kappa coefficient with linear weighting of 0.79 (95% CI 0.44 – 1.15) for the two observers. Inverse correlation was found between methylation and immunohistochemical protein expression with a significant reduction of the MGMT protein level in methylated samples compared to unmethylated samples ( P = 0.02, Fig. 1D ). In the group of methylated lesions, 5/27 cases of BE, 3/13 cases of IN and 7/47 cases of BA appeared to be completely immunonegative. Western blot-analysis of each three samples of methylated and unmethylated BA clearly reduced MGMT protein expression, which indicates that the results of the immunohistochemistry studies are reliable ( Fig. 1E ). But a selected change with functional consequences.  3.3. Correlation with clinicopathological data Because the majority of the carcinomas of group A ( n = 35) available both for methylation and immunohistochemical protein expression were in a very early tumor stage, we performed an immunohistochemical study of 62 additional cases with advanced tumor stages (group B, n = 62). Available clinicopathological data on all merged patients investigated by immunohistochemistry ( n = 97) and their tumor characteristics at the time of resection were reviewed and correlated with MGMT protein expression. Clinical data and immunoreactive scores are summarized in Table 2 . The major results are depicted in Fig. 3 . Reduced MGMT protein expression was detected more frequently in poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas than in well and moderately differentiated adenocarcinomas ( P = 0.04). For clinicopathological correlation we merged the TNM and pT category into early stage (?stage II; ?pT2) and late stage (>stage II; >pT3). In cancers demonstrating advanced local invasion and progressed tumor spread, the incidence of reduced MGMT expression was higher than in less invasive carcinomas and carcinomas at early tumor stage (pT1/2 vs pT3/4, P = 0.04; stage I/II vs stage III/IV, P = 0.021). Furthermore, loss of protein expression was present more frequently in carcinomas with than in those without lymph vessel invasion ( P = 0.025). In contrast, differences in MGMT expression regarding gender, age, evidence of lymph node metastasis or distant metastasis did not exist ( P = 0.397, P = 0.196, P = 0.839 and P = 0.23, respectively).  4. Discussion There is increasing evidence that inactivation and loss of MGMT are involved in the pathogenesis of different gastrointestinal malignancies [ 11 , 16 , 21 – 24 ]. For Barrett’s adenocarcinoma, it has been accepted that genetic and epigenetic events, including promoter hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes, are frequent in the multistep process of Barrett’s carcinogenesis [ 3 – 6 ], and play a critical role not only in tumorigenesis but also in clinical progression, as well as in their responsiveness to therapy. We report a methylation frequency of MGMT of 21.4% for NT, 88.9% for BE, 100% for IN and 78.9% for BA. Our results, which demonstrate that promoter hypermethylation is a very frequent event in Barrett’s carcinogenesis, are in good agreement with reported prevalences of MGMT hypermethylation in BA found in other series [ 25 – 29 ]. The number of methylated NT samples in our cohort is in line with previous reports about Barrett’s esophagus in the literature [ 26 , 28 ]. Also, in other tumors, such as esophageal squamous mucosa, promoter hypermethylation of MGMT occurred in histologically normal-appearing tissue adjacent to the tumors [ 21 ]. It still needs to be clarified in future studies whether methylation of normal mucosa reflects an epigenetic field effect in the surrounding areas of cancer or points towards an elevated risk of developing into metaplastic and neoplastic lesions. The slightly higher frequency of MGMT hypermethylation for intraepithelial neoplasia compared to BA in our study may be attributed to the fact that the samples were microdissected from paraffin sections, and there were a lower number of unmethylated stromal cells in the samples compared to BA. Only one previous study has evaluated the methylation of MGMT across the histological progression of normal, Barrett’s metaplasia, IN and BA tumor tissues [ 5 ]. Remarkably, these authors found comparable methylation frequencies for all stages of Barrett’s carcinogenesis, but they did not investigate progression within one patient. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report investigating MGMT promoter hypermethylation in a series of BA and paired Barrett’s mucosas and dysplastic lesions, as well as in normal esophageal mucosa. Interestingly, for samples obtained within one individual, MGMT hypermethylation tended to increase in prevalence with increasing histological severity of disease. Furthermore, most of the analyzed BA exhibited a significantly lower MGMT protein expression than the corresponding normal, metaplastic or dysplastic lesion obtained from the same individual. Hypermethylation in normal tissue was always accompanied by MGMT methylation in matching tumor tissue. However, due to the relatively small sample size, differences could not be tested statistically. We report an accumulation of hypermethylation during the metaplasia-dysplasia-carcinoma sequence in Barrett’s esophagus. Methylation of MGMT tended to increase with histological progression, the clearest and most consistent increase occurs between NT and BE. Our findings suggest that MGMT methylation occurs at the metaplastic step, rather than being cancer-specific. Because MGMT methylation occurs commonly and early in Barrett’s metaplasia, it may be specific to transformed premalignant or malignant epithelium. Furthermore, the findings of our current study emphasize that MGMT inactivation is an early event in Barrett’s carcinogenesis and support the functional role MGMT hypermethylation seems to play in esophageal neoplastic transformation in the pathogenesis of BA. In view of the poor prognosis of BA and the risk of malignant transformation of BE to dysplasia and BA, recent research has focused on markers of progression in Barrett’s esophagus. The identification of genes inactivated by promotor hypermethylation in BA and its precursor lesions might enable focused screening of risk patients and could contribute to the improvement of diagnosis and prognosis. In our study, we could show a gradual increase in the frequency of MGMT hypermethylation with histopathological and clinical progression of the disease. These data suggest that loss of MGMT may promote tumorigenesis and implies a possible prognostic value of promoter hypermethylation of a certain gene profile which might include MGMT. Because MGMT is frequently methylated in BE, DYS and BA, it may find application in screening or surveillance as part of a panel of markers. However, to identify patients with Barrett’s esophagus at increased risk of progression to dysplasia or BA, and to explore the value of methylated MGMT as an independent risk factor for Barrett’s esophagus and BA, further methylation studies containing a detailed endoscopic surveillance program are needed. It is now firmly believed that promoter CpG island hypermethylation represents an alternative mechanism, as opposed to genetic factors, in the inactivation of important genes. Loss of MGMT protein expression is not commonly caused by deletion, mutation or rearrangement of the MGMT gene or mRNA instability [ 31 – 33 ]. In parallel, MGMT has been frequently observed to be down-regulated by promoter hypermethylation [ 11 , 16 , 17 , 21 , 22 , 24 ] and is an early epigenetic alteration in a wide variety of human tumor malignancies [ 4 , 34 , 35 ]. Our data provide compelling evidence for the strong relationship between MGMT promoter methylation and gene silencing in Barrett’s adenocarcinoma. Interestingly, in our study, loss of MGMT protein expression was significantly associated with lymph vessel invasion, progressed tumor stage and depth of invasion. Since methylation of MGMT in general is a frequent event of already early tumor stages, further loss of protein expression in progressed tumor stages might be caused by additional epigenetic or genetic alterations of the MGMT expression, by an increase in the number of tumor cells methylated, and/or by certain methylation pattern within the MGMT promoter. To clarify this issue, further studies using quantitative methylation methods such as COBRA or Methyl-Light might be useful. Based on our observation of a correlation between promoter methylation and decreased protein expression of MGMT, increase in the methylation frequency and quantity of MGMT might be correlated with a more aggressive biological behavior of BA. Also for gastric cancer, a significant association of MGMT methylation with progressed disease could be shown, but methylation was not an independent predictor of survival in multivariate analysis [ 11 , 36 ]. In contrast, for non-small cell lung cancer and head and neck cancer, MGMT hypermeythylation proved to be a useful prognostic marker for tumor outcome and patient’s survival, and was associated with poorer prognosis [ 17 , 34 , 37 ]. Furthermore, in a complex methylation study of BA, there was a strong trend towards poorer survival and earlier tumor recurrence for patients, whose tumors were methylated for a group of genes, including MGMT [ 29 ]. In our study, regarding survival and the prognostic value of MGMT hypermethylation, no definitive conclusions could be drawn since follow-up of the cohort was still ongoing, and survival data are not available yet. Alkylating agents are highly reactive mutagens and carcinogens, and their analogous compounds are used for the treatment of human malignancies. The lethal and mutagenic effects of these compounds are inhibited by the cellular DNA repair enzyme MGMT. Conversely, MGMT silencing through methylation of its promoter induces low expression of MGMT protein and decreases its DNA repair activity. Several experimental studies have shown that tumor cell lines with MGMT promoter methylation and/or lacking MGMT activity are highly sensitive to the toxic effect of chemotherapeutic alkylating agents [ 38 , 39 ]. MGMT is most probably the major player in NF-?B-mediated chemoresistance to alkylating agents [ 40 ]. MGMT gene expression is known as a major contributing factor for the development of resistance to alkylating chemotherapeutic agents, and MGMT inactivation is accepted as a relevant prognostic marker and predictor of chemosensitivity in glioblastomas, head and neck cancer, and lymphomas [ 34 , 35 , 38 , 39 , 41 , 42 ]. Thus, targeted inactivation of MGMT could improve the effectiveness of currently used alkylating agents against cancer [ 43 ]. For BA, the high prevalence of MGMT promoter hypermethylation in progressed tumor stages may suggest a more favorable response of these tumors, which should be treated by alkylating chemotherapeutic agents. We conclude that, MGMT promoter hypermethylation is an early event in Barrett’s multistep carcinogenesis and therefore plays a critical role in the tumorigenesis. Detection of MGMT inactivation by promoter methylation might potentially provide new targets for both chemotherapeutic intervention and improved diagnosis of Barrett’s adenocarcinoma. 