Are they really that happy? Exploring scale recalibration in estimates of well-being Objective We address a lingering concern in research on hedonic adaptation to adverse circumstances. This research typically relies on self-report measures of well-being, which are subjective and depend on the standards that people use in making judgments. We employed a novel method to test for, and rule out, such scale recalibration in self-reports of well-being. Design We asked patients with chronic illness (either lung disease or diabetes) and non-patients to evaluate quality of life (QoL) for the patients’ disease. In addition, we also asked them to rank and rate the aversiveness of a diverse set of adverse circumstances, allowing us to examine both the numerical ratings and ordering among items. Main Outcome Measures We compared patients’ and non-patients’ ratings and rankings for the patients’ disease and other conditions. Results and Conclusion We found that patients not only assigned higher numerical quality QoL ratings to their own disease than did non-patients, but also ranked it higher among the broad set of conditions. These results suggest that scale recalibration cannot account for discrepant QoL ratings between patients and non-patients. More generally, this study presents a new approach for measuring well-being that is not subject to the problem of scale recalibration.  Methods Participants Study participants were drawn from a panel of Internet users who volunteered to receive invitations to complete questionnaires, administered by Survey Sampling International (SSI). Upon completion, participants were entered into a drawing administered by SSI for cash prizes totaling $10,000. Email invitations were sent to a random sample of panel members who had previously identified themselves to SSI as 1) suffering from Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD), b) suffering from Type 1 or Type 2 Diabetes, or 3) suffering from neither of these health conditions. We used demographic information supplied by SSI about their panel members to estimate the makeup of the patient groups in terms of age, gender, and ethnicity, and we used these estimates to establish target response levels for demographic sub-samples within the non-patient group. The number of email invitations was dynamically adjusted until all quotas were completed for each group. To confirm the patient status of participants recruited through SSI, each participant who logged onto the survey was asked to indicate whether they had ever experienced lung disease or diabetes. Participants were designated as lung disease patients if they indicated experience with lung disease only, as diabetes patients if they indicated experience with diabetes only, and as non-patients if they indicated experience with neither. 1 The final pool of participants included 265 lung disease patients, 366 diabetes patients, and 456 non-patients. Patients in our sample were significantly older ( M =54.4 years, SD =12.0) than non-patients ( M =49.3 years, SD =12.6), t (1069)=6.75, p <.001, and were significantly less likely to have attended at least some college (37.8%) than non-patients (45.4%), ?2(1, N =1072)=6.31, p =.01. These differences reflect population differences between these patient groups and non-patients. Riis and colleagues (2005) have previously demonstrated that neither of these characteristics can account for discrepancies in patients’ and non-patients’ well-being estimates. Our patients and non-patients did not differ in gender ?2(1, N =1068)=.09, p =.77 (70.5% female across groups) or ethnicity, ?2(1, N =1055)=.65, p =.42, (90.5% Caucasian across groups). Questionnaire Design All participants saw a list of 23 conditions spanning a wide range of severity (e.g., from having dandruff to being paralyzed from the neck down ), including 11 health-related conditions and 12 conditions unrelated to health (see Table 1 ). Participants were then asked to estimate the QoL of each condition on a scale from 0 ( a quality of life that is no better than death ) to 100 ( an ideal quality of life ). The items had been generated through pilot testing with the goal of developing a full set that would be rated with a relatively even distribution across the 0 to 100 scale. An initial set of items was generated and tested with pilot participants. Items were removed if they clustered too closely with adjacent items, and new items were added to fill large gaps between adjacent items. This process was repeated four times, until an evenly distributed set of items emerged. Next, participants read two brief scenarios, one describing a lung condition and the other describing diabetes, and were asked to rate it on the same 0 to 100 scale. The scenarios gave brief descriptions of some of the difficulties associated with each disease (see Appendix ). Participants in each patient group rated the scenario corresponding to their own health condition first, and non-patients were randomly assigned to rate either lung disease or diabetes first. The full set of 25 rated conditions (the initial set of 23, plus lung disease and diabetes) was presented again with the participants’ QoL ratings, arranged in rank order from highest to lowest, and participants were given an opportunity to alter their ratings (which could lead to a change in rankings). Finally, all participants were asked to rate their own QoL using the same rating scale. Participants from each patient group were also asked to compare their own health condition with the scenario describing their disease. Patients indicated whether their own condition was better than the scenario, about the same as the scenario, or worse than the scenario.  Participants Study participants were drawn from a panel of Internet users who volunteered to receive invitations to complete questionnaires, administered by Survey Sampling International (SSI). Upon completion, participants were entered into a drawing administered by SSI for cash prizes totaling $10,000. Email invitations were sent to a random sample of panel members who had previously identified themselves to SSI as 1) suffering from Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD), b) suffering from Type 1 or Type 2 Diabetes, or 3) suffering from neither of these health conditions. We used demographic information supplied by SSI about their panel members to estimate the makeup of the patient groups in terms of age, gender, and ethnicity, and we used these estimates to establish target response levels for demographic sub-samples within the non-patient group. The number of email invitations was dynamically adjusted until all quotas were completed for each group. To confirm the patient status of participants recruited through SSI, each participant who logged onto the survey was asked to indicate whether they had ever experienced lung disease or diabetes. Participants were designated as lung disease patients if they indicated experience with lung disease only, as diabetes patients if they indicated experience with diabetes only, and as non-patients if they indicated experience with neither. 1 The final pool of participants included 265 lung disease patients, 366 diabetes patients, and 456 non-patients. Patients in our sample were significantly older ( M =54.4 years, SD =12.0) than non-patients ( M =49.3 years, SD =12.6), t (1069)=6.75, p <.001, and were significantly less likely to have attended at least some college (37.8%) than non-patients (45.4%), ?2(1, N =1072)=6.31, p =.01. These differences reflect population differences between these patient groups and non-patients. Riis and colleagues (2005) have previously demonstrated that neither of these characteristics can account for discrepancies in patients’ and non-patients’ well-being estimates. Our patients and non-patients did not differ in gender ?2(1, N =1068)=.09, p =.77 (70.5% female across groups) or ethnicity, ?2(1, N =1055)=.65, p =.42, (90.5% Caucasian across groups).  Questionnaire Design All participants saw a list of 23 conditions spanning a wide range of severity (e.g., from having dandruff to being paralyzed from the neck down ), including 11 health-related conditions and 12 conditions unrelated to health (see Table 1 ). Participants were then asked to estimate the QoL of each condition on a scale from 0 ( a quality of life that is no better than death ) to 100 ( an ideal quality of life ). The items had been generated through pilot testing with the goal of developing a full set that would be rated with a relatively even distribution across the 0 to 100 scale. An initial set of items was generated and tested with pilot participants. Items were removed if they clustered too closely with adjacent items, and new items were added to fill large gaps between adjacent items. This process was repeated four times, until an evenly distributed set of items emerged. Next, participants read two brief scenarios, one describing a lung condition and the other describing diabetes, and were asked to rate it on the same 0 to 100 scale. The scenarios gave brief descriptions of some of the difficulties associated with each disease (see Appendix ). Participants in each patient group rated the scenario corresponding to their own health condition first, and non-patients were randomly assigned to rate either lung disease or diabetes first. The full set of 25 rated conditions (the initial set of 23, plus lung disease and diabetes) was presented again with the participants’ QoL ratings, arranged in rank order from highest to lowest, and participants were given an opportunity to alter their ratings (which could lead to a change in rankings). Finally, all participants were asked to rate their own QoL using the same rating scale. Participants from each patient group were also asked to compare their own health condition with the scenario describing their disease. Patients indicated whether their own condition was better than the scenario, about the same as the scenario, or worse than the scenario.  Results As noted, rating scores ranged from 0 to 100, with higher numbers indicating more positive evaluations. QoL ratings for all scenarios were compared across groups using oneway ANOVAs with planned contrasts. Ranking scores range from 1 (best) to 25 (worst), with lower numbers representing more positive evaluations. Rankings were calculated for each participant by assigning a rank of “1” to the item with the highest rating, a rank of “2” to the next highest rating, and so on. The mean rank score was used to resolve ties when multiple items received the same rating. Rankings were compared across groups using the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test. Self-reported QoL was compared across groups, and compared with scenario ratings, using independent-samples t-tests. An alpha level of .05 was used for all comparisons. Because the existing literature and our own pilot testing allow us to make directional predictions for the patients’ disease (i.e., diabetes patients ratings and rankings should be higher than non-patients’), we used one-tailed significance tests to make these comparisons. We used two-tailed significance tests for all other comparisons. Do patients rate their own health condition differently from non-patients? Figure 1 presents the ratings for lung disease and diabetes. As predicted, lung disease patients rated their own condition significantly higher than did non-patients, t (1084)=1.79, p =.04. Diabetes patients also rated their own condition significantly higher than did non-patients, t (1084)=5.86, p <.001. Do patients and non-patients use the rating scale differently? If the discrepancies in ratings resulted from scale recalibration, then the higher ratings that patients gave to their own disease should be accompanied by higher ratings for all items. Patients would be expected to shift all of their responses to a higher level on the scale, and two consequences would follow: 1) the relative position of the patients’ disease among other conditions (i.e., it’s rank) would not differ for patients and non-patients, and 2) the mean rating across all items would be higher for patients than for non-patients. Every condition’s rating would be increased, but the patients’ own disease would not shift any more than other conditions. We found no evidence that scale recalibration occurred. First, as Figure 2 shows, lung disease patients ranked lung disease significantly higher than did non-patients, U =52937, p =.003, and diabetes patients ranked diabetes significantly higher than did non-patients, U =54145, p <.001. Thus, the ranking analysis revealed the same discrepancies between patients and non-patients that we observed in the numerical ratings; patients’ perceptions of lung disease or diabetes led them to assign a higher QoL to their own illness, relative to other conditions. These results are inconsistent with a scale recalibration explanation for the QoL discrepancy, which predicts a similar ratings shift for all items and no reordering among them. Second, comparisons across the full set of rated items suggest that the patient groups did not use the rating scale differently from the non-patients. As shown in the right-hand group of bars in Figure 1 , all three groups gave equivalent ratings, on average, across the full set of items, F (2, 1084)=.48, p =.62. We further compared the three groups on a number of descriptive statistics and found no differences that would suggest different scale usage (see Table 2 ). In addition to equivalent mean ratings across items, the groups did not differ in their variance in ratings across items, F (2, 1084)=.96, p =.38, their mean range across ratings F (2,1084)=.17, p =.85, their mean maximum ratings, F (2, 1084)=.07, p =.93, or their mean minimum ratings, F (2,1084)=.34, p =.71. Finally, we found that each patient group differed from non-patients in ratings and rankings for their own health condition, but not for each others’ condition. Lung disease patients neither rated ( M =65.1, SD =24.3), t (1084)=.83, p =.41, nor ranked ( M =9.1, SD =4.8), U =57485, p =.28, diabetes differently than did non-patients. Similarly, diabetes patients neither rated ( M =54.8, SD =24.2), t (1084)=.23, p =.82, nor ranked ( M =11.9, SD =5.4), U =78755, p =.17, lung disease differently than did non-patients. These results provide further evidence that experience with a particular health condition results in more positive evaluations of that health condition, but does not influence evaluations of other conditions. Though patients rated and ranked their own health condition more positively than did non-patients, it is important to note that when asked about their own current QoL, non-patients ( M =82.7, SD =18.1) rated themselves higher than both lung disease patients ( M =73.0, SD=21.7), t (1084)=6.45, p <.001, and diabetes patients ( M =78.5, SD = 19.0), t (1084)=3.08, p =.002. However, non-patients’ ratings for the lung disease scenario ( M =54.4, SD =23.9) were significantly lower than the self-reported QoL for the lung disease group as a whole, t (1087)=10.20, p <.001, and for the 115 lung disease patients who indicated that their own health condition was similar to the lung scenario ( M =72.3, SD =21.0), t (569)=7.32, p <.001. Similarly, non-patients’ ratings for the diabetes scenario ( M =63.6, SD =24.0) was significantly lower than the self-reported QoL for the diabetes group as a whole, t (1086)=9.39, p <.001, and for the 80 lung disease patients who indicated that their own health condition was similar to the diabetes scenario ( M =75.9, SD =20.5), t (534)=4.33, p <.001. In other words, the self-report QoL ratings indicate that QoL does suffer as a result of chronic disease, but not as much as non-patients imagine. In summary, we found no evidence that scale recalibration accounts for discrepant QoL ratings between patients and non-patients. Not only did lung disease patients and diabetes patients both rate their own health condition more favorably than did non-patients, but they also ranked them higher among a broader set of life conditions. Patient vs. non-patient discrepancies were not found when patients were rating a health condition other than their own (i.e., when lung disease patients rated diabetes, or vice versa), nor were discrepancies found for the general set of rated items. There was no evidence to suggest that patients used the rating scale differently than did non-patients, neither shifting their set of responses up or down the rating scale, nor stretching or shrinking their responses across a different range on the rating scale.  Results As noted, rating scores ranged from 0 to 100, with higher numbers indicating more positive evaluations. QoL ratings for all scenarios were compared across groups using oneway ANOVAs with planned contrasts. Ranking scores range from 1 (best) to 25 (worst), with lower numbers representing more positive evaluations. Rankings were calculated for each participant by assigning a rank of “1” to the item with the highest rating, a rank of “2” to the next highest rating, and so on. The mean rank score was used to resolve ties when multiple items received the same rating. Rankings were compared across groups using the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test. Self-reported QoL was compared across groups, and compared with scenario ratings, using independent-samples t-tests. An alpha level of .05 was used for all comparisons. Because the existing literature and our own pilot testing allow us to make directional predictions for the patients’ disease (i.e., diabetes patients ratings and rankings should be higher than non-patients’), we used one-tailed significance tests to make these comparisons. We used two-tailed significance tests for all other comparisons. Do patients rate their own health condition differently from non-patients? Figure 1 presents the ratings for lung disease and diabetes. As predicted, lung disease patients rated their own condition significantly higher than did non-patients, t (1084)=1.79, p =.04. Diabetes patients also rated their own condition significantly higher than did non-patients, t (1084)=5.86, p <.001. Do patients and non-patients use the rating scale differently? If the discrepancies in ratings resulted from scale recalibration, then the higher ratings that patients gave to their own disease should be accompanied by higher ratings for all items. Patients would be expected to shift all of their responses to a higher level on the scale, and two consequences would follow: 1) the relative position of the patients’ disease among other conditions (i.e., it’s rank) would not differ for patients and non-patients, and 2) the mean rating across all items would be higher for patients than for non-patients. Every condition’s rating would be increased, but the patients’ own disease would not shift any more than other conditions. We found no evidence that scale recalibration occurred. First, as Figure 2 shows, lung disease patients ranked lung disease significantly higher than did non-patients, U =52937, p =.003, and diabetes patients ranked diabetes significantly higher than did non-patients, U =54145, p <.001. Thus, the ranking analysis revealed the same discrepancies between patients and non-patients that we observed in the numerical ratings; patients’ perceptions of lung disease or diabetes led them to assign a higher QoL to their own illness, relative to other conditions. These results are inconsistent with a scale recalibration explanation for the QoL discrepancy, which predicts a similar ratings shift for all items and no reordering among them. Second, comparisons across the full set of rated items suggest that the patient groups did not use the rating scale differently from the non-patients. As shown in the right-hand group of bars in Figure 1 , all three groups gave equivalent ratings, on average, across the full set of items, F (2, 1084)=.48, p =.62. We further compared the three groups on a number of descriptive statistics and found no differences that would suggest different scale usage (see Table 2 ). In addition to equivalent mean ratings across items, the groups did not differ in their variance in ratings across items, F (2, 1084)=.96, p =.38, their mean range across ratings F (2,1084)=.17, p =.85, their mean maximum ratings, F (2, 1084)=.07, p =.93, or their mean minimum ratings, F (2,1084)=.34, p =.71. Finally, we found that each patient group differed from non-patients in ratings and rankings for their own health condition, but not for each others’ condition. Lung disease patients neither rated ( M =65.1, SD =24.3), t (1084)=.83, p =.41, nor ranked ( M =9.1, SD =4.8), U =57485, p =.28, diabetes differently than did non-patients. Similarly, diabetes patients neither rated ( M =54.8, SD =24.2), t (1084)=.23, p =.82, nor ranked ( M =11.9, SD =5.4), U =78755, p =.17, lung disease differently than did non-patients. These results provide further evidence that experience with a particular health condition results in more positive evaluations of that health condition, but does not influence evaluations of other conditions. Though patients rated and ranked their own health condition more positively than did non-patients, it is important to note that when asked about their own current QoL, non-patients ( M =82.7, SD =18.1) rated themselves higher than both lung disease patients ( M =73.0, SD=21.7), t (1084)=6.45, p <.001, and diabetes patients ( M =78.5, SD = 19.0), t (1084)=3.08, p =.002. However, non-patients’ ratings for the lung disease scenario ( M =54.4, SD =23.9) were significantly lower than the self-reported QoL for the lung disease group as a whole, t (1087)=10.20, p <.001, and for the 115 lung disease patients who indicated that their own health condition was similar to the lung scenario ( M =72.3, SD =21.0), t (569)=7.32, p <.001. Similarly, non-patients’ ratings for the diabetes scenario ( M =63.6, SD =24.0) was significantly lower than the self-reported QoL for the diabetes group as a whole, t (1086)=9.39, p <.001, and for the 80 lung disease patients who indicated that their own health condition was similar to the diabetes scenario ( M =75.9, SD =20.5), t (534)=4.33, p <.001. In other words, the self-report QoL ratings indicate that QoL does suffer as a result of chronic disease, but not as much as non-patients imagine. In summary, we found no evidence that scale recalibration accounts for discrepant QoL ratings between patients and non-patients. Not only did lung disease patients and diabetes patients both rate their own health condition more favorably than did non-patients, but they also ranked them higher among a broader set of life conditions. Patient vs. non-patient discrepancies were not found when patients were rating a health condition other than their own (i.e., when lung disease patients rated diabetes, or vice versa), nor were discrepancies found for the general set of rated items. There was no evidence to suggest that patients used the rating scale differently than did non-patients, neither shifting their set of responses up or down the rating scale, nor stretching or shrinking their responses across a different range on the rating scale.  Do patients rate their own health condition differently from non-patients? Figure 1 presents the ratings for lung disease and diabetes. As predicted, lung disease patients rated their own condition significantly higher than did non-patients, t (1084)=1.79, p =.04. Diabetes patients also rated their own condition significantly higher than did non-patients, t (1084)=5.86, p <.001.  Do patients rate their own health condition differently from non-patients? Figure 1 presents the ratings for lung disease and diabetes. As predicted, lung disease patients rated their own condition significantly higher than did non-patients, t (1084)=1.79, p =.04. Diabetes patients also rated their own condition significantly higher than did non-patients, t (1084)=5.86, p <.001.  Do patients and non-patients use the rating scale differently? If the discrepancies in ratings resulted from scale recalibration, then the higher ratings that patients gave to their own disease should be accompanied by higher ratings for all items. Patients would be expected to shift all of their responses to a higher level on the scale, and two consequences would follow: 1) the relative position of the patients’ disease among other conditions (i.e., it’s rank) would not differ for patients and non-patients, and 2) the mean rating across all items would be higher for patients than for non-patients. Every condition’s rating would be increased, but the patients’ own disease would not shift any more than other conditions. We found no evidence that scale recalibration occurred. First, as Figure 2 shows, lung disease patients ranked lung disease significantly higher than did non-patients, U =52937, p =.003, and diabetes patients ranked diabetes significantly higher than did non-patients, U =54145, p <.001. Thus, the ranking analysis revealed the same discrepancies between patients and non-patients that we observed in the numerical ratings; patients’ perceptions of lung disease or diabetes led them to assign a higher QoL to their own illness, relative to other conditions. These results are inconsistent with a scale recalibration explanation for the QoL discrepancy, which predicts a similar ratings shift for all items and no reordering among them. Second, comparisons across the full set of rated items suggest that the patient groups did not use the rating scale differently from the non-patients. As shown in the right-hand group of bars in Figure 1 , all three groups gave equivalent ratings, on average, across the full set of items, F (2, 1084)=.48, p =.62. We further compared the three groups on a number of descriptive statistics and found no differences that would suggest different scale usage (see Table 2 ). In addition to equivalent mean ratings across items, the groups did not differ in their variance in ratings across items, F (2, 1084)=.96, p =.38, their mean range across ratings F (2,1084)=.17, p =.85, their mean maximum ratings, F (2, 1084)=.07, p =.93, or their mean minimum ratings, F (2,1084)=.34, p =.71. Finally, we found that each patient group differed from non-patients in ratings and rankings for their own health condition, but not for each others’ condition. Lung disease patients neither rated ( M =65.1, SD =24.3), t (1084)=.83, p =.41, nor ranked ( M =9.1, SD =4.8), U =57485, p =.28, diabetes differently than did non-patients. Similarly, diabetes patients neither rated ( M =54.8, SD =24.2), t (1084)=.23, p =.82, nor ranked ( M =11.9, SD =5.4), U =78755, p =.17, lung disease differently than did non-patients. These results provide further evidence that experience with a particular health condition results in more positive evaluations of that health condition, but does not influence evaluations of other conditions. Though patients rated and ranked their own health condition more positively than did non-patients, it is important to note that when asked about their own current QoL, non-patients ( M =82.7, SD =18.1) rated themselves higher than both lung disease patients ( M =73.0, SD=21.7), t (1084)=6.45, p <.001, and diabetes patients ( M =78.5, SD = 19.0), t (1084)=3.08, p =.002. However, non-patients’ ratings for the lung disease scenario ( M =54.4, SD =23.9) were significantly lower than the self-reported QoL for the lung disease group as a whole, t (1087)=10.20, p <.001, and for the 115 lung disease patients who indicated that their own health condition was similar to the lung scenario ( M =72.3, SD =21.0), t (569)=7.32, p <.001. Similarly, non-patients’ ratings for the diabetes scenario ( M =63.6, SD =24.0) was significantly lower than the self-reported QoL for the diabetes group as a whole, t (1086)=9.39, p <.001, and for the 80 lung disease patients who indicated that their own health condition was similar to the diabetes scenario ( M =75.9, SD =20.5), t (534)=4.33, p <.001. In other words, the self-report QoL ratings indicate that QoL does suffer as a result of chronic disease, but not as much as non-patients imagine. In summary, we found no evidence that scale recalibration accounts for discrepant QoL ratings between patients and non-patients. Not only did lung disease patients and diabetes patients both rate their own health condition more favorably than did non-patients, but they also ranked them higher among a broader set of life conditions. Patient vs. non-patient discrepancies were not found when patients were rating a health condition other than their own (i.e., when lung disease patients rated diabetes, or vice versa), nor were discrepancies found for the general set of rated items. There was no evidence to suggest that patients used the rating scale differently than did non-patients, neither shifting their set of responses up or down the rating scale, nor stretching or shrinking their responses across a different range on the rating scale.  Do patients and non-patients use the rating scale differently? If the discrepancies in ratings resulted from scale recalibration, then the higher ratings that patients gave to their own disease should be accompanied by higher ratings for all items. Patients would be expected to shift all of their responses to a higher level on the scale, and two consequences would follow: 1) the relative position of the patients’ disease among other conditions (i.e., it’s rank) would not differ for patients and non-patients, and 2) the mean rating across all items would be higher for patients than for non-patients. Every condition’s rating would be increased, but the patients’ own disease would not shift any more than other conditions. We found no evidence that scale recalibration occurred. First, as Figure 2 shows, lung disease patients ranked lung disease significantly higher than did non-patients, U =52937, p =.003, and diabetes patients ranked diabetes significantly higher than did non-patients, U =54145, p <.001. Thus, the ranking analysis revealed the same discrepancies between patients and non-patients that we observed in the numerical ratings; patients’ perceptions of lung disease or diabetes led them to assign a higher QoL to their own illness, relative to other conditions. These results are inconsistent with a scale recalibration explanation for the QoL discrepancy, which predicts a similar ratings shift for all items and no reordering among them. Second, comparisons across the full set of rated items suggest that the patient groups did not use the rating scale differently from the non-patients. As shown in the right-hand group of bars in Figure 1 , all three groups gave equivalent ratings, on average, across the full set of items, F (2, 1084)=.48, p =.62. We further compared the three groups on a number of descriptive statistics and found no differences that would suggest different scale usage (see Table 2 ). In addition to equivalent mean ratings across items, the groups did not differ in their variance in ratings across items, F (2, 1084)=.96, p =.38, their mean range across ratings F (2,1084)=.17, p =.85, their mean maximum ratings, F (2, 1084)=.07, p =.93, or their mean minimum ratings, F (2,1084)=.34, p =.71. Finally, we found that each patient group differed from non-patients in ratings and rankings for their own health condition, but not for each others’ condition. Lung disease patients neither rated ( M =65.1, SD =24.3), t (1084)=.83, p =.41, nor ranked ( M =9.1, SD =4.8), U =57485, p =.28, diabetes differently than did non-patients. Similarly, diabetes patients neither rated ( M =54.8, SD =24.2), t (1084)=.23, p =.82, nor ranked ( M =11.9, SD =5.4), U =78755, p =.17, lung disease differently than did non-patients. These results provide further evidence that experience with a particular health condition results in more positive evaluations of that health condition, but does not influence evaluations of other conditions. Though patients rated and ranked their own health condition more positively than did non-patients, it is important to note that when asked about their own current QoL, non-patients ( M =82.7, SD =18.1) rated themselves higher than both lung disease patients ( M =73.0, SD=21.7), t (1084)=6.45, p <.001, and diabetes patients ( M =78.5, SD = 19.0), t (1084)=3.08, p =.002. However, non-patients’ ratings for the lung disease scenario ( M =54.4, SD =23.9) were significantly lower than the self-reported QoL for the lung disease group as a whole, t (1087)=10.20, p <.001, and for the 115 lung disease patients who indicated that their own health condition was similar to the lung scenario ( M =72.3, SD =21.0), t (569)=7.32, p <.001. Similarly, non-patients’ ratings for the diabetes scenario ( M =63.6, SD =24.0) was significantly lower than the self-reported QoL for the diabetes group as a whole, t (1086)=9.39, p <.001, and for the 80 lung disease patients who indicated that their own health condition was similar to the diabetes scenario ( M =75.9, SD =20.5), t (534)=4.33, p <.001. In other words, the self-report QoL ratings indicate that QoL does suffer as a result of chronic disease, but not as much as non-patients imagine. In summary, we found no evidence that scale recalibration accounts for discrepant QoL ratings between patients and non-patients. Not only did lung disease patients and diabetes patients both rate their own health condition more favorably than did non-patients, but they also ranked them higher among a broader set of life conditions. Patient vs. non-patient discrepancies were not found when patients were rating a health condition other than their own (i.e., when lung disease patients rated diabetes, or vice versa), nor were discrepancies found for the general set of rated items. There was no evidence to suggest that patients used the rating scale differently than did non-patients, neither shifting their set of responses up or down the rating scale, nor stretching or shrinking their responses across a different range on the rating scale.  Discussion While many studies support the claim that well-being adapts to circumstance, the strength of the evidence has been limited by the failure of previous studies to rule out scale recalibration. Self-reports of happiness, life satisfaction, and quality of life are all potentially subject to individual interpretation and shifting standards, depending on the experiences of the rater, casting doubt on the conclusions that have been drawn about well-being and its relationship to life circumstances. This methodological vulnerability has inspired efforts to create objective, systematic standards for well-being measures, such as Hsee and Tang’s (2007) modulus-based measure in which participants are given some universal standard (e.g., a sunny day) and asked to evaluate their happiness relative to this standard, an approach that may be less prone to scale recalibration. We were similarly motivated to develop a new measure that would allow us to detect scale recalibration in QoL measures if they occur. We used ranking comparisons to explore the gap between patients’ and non-patients’ QoL estimates for health conditions and we found no evidence that this gap results from scale recalibration. Patients with chronic lung disease or diabetes evaluated their own disease more positively than did non-patients without evaluating other diseases and life conditions any differently, and without using the rating scale differently. The hybrid ranking/rating approach outlined here could easily be applied to other domains. For example, it is notorious that jury awards for pain and suffering tend to be capricious, with amounts awarded displaying both 'horizontal' inequities in which people with similar injuries receive vastly different awards and 'vertical' inequities in which people with injuries of obviously different severity receive similar awards ( Abel 2006 ). The problem of determining a money value for a victim's pain and suffering is no easier, and very possibly more difficult, than the problem of evaluating the quality of life associated with a medical condition on a 0–100 scale, and a hybrid ranking/rating task of the type introduced here could help to simplify it. Elsewhere, two of the authors ( Ubel and Loewenstien, In Press ) have argued that juries in torte cases, instead of deciding on monetary reward values, should evaluate noneconomic damages by ranking the severity of the plaintiff's damages relative to a standardized graded list of possible damages. Money values could then be determined by the position within the list. Likewise, there is considerable evidence that 'contingent valuation' measures of the value that people place on environmental amenities display a variety of undesirable properties, such as scope insensitivity (in which environmental amenities of vastly different scales are valued similarly). Again, a ranking task can provide a superior measure of environmental value or damage. Thus, for example, although people might state about the same willingness to pay to clean up a single polluted lake or to clean up all the lakes in a state, they will rank the pollution of a single lake as less severe than some third environmental problem, and rank the pollution of multiple lakes as worse than the third problem ( Fischhoff et al., 1993 ). It would be easy to design a tool to evaluate the severity of environmental problems, much as we have done for health problems, by having people position their severity relative to a graded list of environmental problems ranging from the most trivial (e.g., debris in a city park) to the most momentous (e.g., the destruction of an ecosystem). Further research is necessary to determine whether this approach translates successfully to these issues. If so, the benefits of the methodology may go beyond simply showing that the discrepancy between the patient and nonpatients evaluations of the QoL of patients is not due to scale recalibration.  Discussion While many studies support the claim that well-being adapts to circumstance, the strength of the evidence has been limited by the failure of previous studies to rule out scale recalibration. Self-reports of happiness, life satisfaction, and quality of life are all potentially subject to individual interpretation and shifting standards, depending on the experiences of the rater, casting doubt on the conclusions that have been drawn about well-being and its relationship to life circumstances. This methodological vulnerability has inspired efforts to create objective, systematic standards for well-being measures, such as Hsee and Tang’s (2007) modulus-based measure in which participants are given some universal standard (e.g., a sunny day) and asked to evaluate their happiness relative to this standard, an approach that may be less prone to scale recalibration. We were similarly motivated to develop a new measure that would allow us to detect scale recalibration in QoL measures if they occur. We used ranking comparisons to explore the gap between patients’ and non-patients’ QoL estimates for health conditions and we found no evidence that this gap results from scale recalibration. Patients with chronic lung disease or diabetes evaluated their own disease more positively than did non-patients without evaluating other diseases and life conditions any differently, and without using the rating scale differently. The hybrid ranking/rating approach outlined here could easily be applied to other domains. For example, it is notorious that jury awards for pain and suffering tend to be capricious, with amounts awarded displaying both 'horizontal' inequities in which people with similar injuries receive vastly different awards and 'vertical' inequities in which people with injuries of obviously different severity receive similar awards ( Abel 2006 ). The problem of determining a money value for a victim's pain and suffering is no easier, and very possibly more difficult, than the problem of evaluating the quality of life associated with a medical condition on a 0–100 scale, and a hybrid ranking/rating task of the type introduced here could help to simplify it. Elsewhere, two of the authors ( Ubel and Loewenstien, In Press ) have argued that juries in torte cases, instead of deciding on monetary reward values, should evaluate noneconomic damages by ranking the severity of the plaintiff's damages relative to a standardized graded list of possible damages. Money values could then be determined by the position within the list. Likewise, there is considerable evidence that 'contingent valuation' measures of the value that people place on environmental amenities display a variety of undesirable properties, such as scope insensitivity (in which environmental amenities of vastly different scales are valued similarly). Again, a ranking task can provide a superior measure of environmental value or damage. Thus, for example, although people might state about the same willingness to pay to clean up a single polluted lake or to clean up all the lakes in a state, they will rank the pollution of a single lake as less severe than some third environmental problem, and rank the pollution of multiple lakes as worse than the third problem ( Fischhoff et al., 1993 ). It would be easy to design a tool to evaluate the severity of environmental problems, much as we have done for health problems, by having people position their severity relative to a graded list of environmental problems ranging from the most trivial (e.g., debris in a city park) to the most momentous (e.g., the destruction of an ecosystem). Further research is necessary to determine whether this approach translates successfully to these issues. If so, the benefits of the methodology may go beyond simply showing that the discrepancy between the patient and nonpatients evaluations of the QoL of patients is not due to scale recalibration.  Lung Disease Scenario Please consider the following condition: Having a lung condition that causes you to become short of breath after walking briskly for 2 blocks or walking up one flight of stairs.  Lung Disease Scenario Please consider the following condition: Having a lung condition that causes you to become short of breath after walking briskly for 2 blocks or walking up one flight of stairs.  Diabetes Scenario Please consider the following condition: Having Diabetes that requires you to check your blood sugar level by sticking your finger with a small needle several times a day, and requires you to use a syringe to give yourself insulin shots in the abdomen three times a day. Imagine that you have no complications of your diabetes. That means your diabetes has not caused problems with your eyes, heart, kidneys, blood vessels, or nerves.  Diabetes Scenario Please consider the following condition: Having Diabetes that requires you to check your blood sugar level by sticking your finger with a small needle several times a day, and requires you to use a syringe to give yourself insulin shots in the abdomen three times a day. Imagine that you have no complications of your diabetes. That means your diabetes has not caused problems with your eyes, heart, kidneys, blood vessels, or nerves. 