Pathological satiety caused by brainstem hemangioblastoma Because of the multiplicity and saltatory growth pattern associated with central nervous system hemangioblastomas in von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease, resection of individual tumors is usually reserved until symptoms occur, to avoid unnecessary surgery over the lifetime of a patient. Brainstem hemangioblastomas in VHL typically cause lower cranial nerve dysfunction, long-tract signs, sensory impairment, and gait abnormalities. The authors report on a 16-year-old girl with VHL who presented with abnormal early satiety resulting in growth and developmental arrest associated with a growing obex hemangioblastoma. Tumor resection resulted in restoration of appetite, with rapid weight gain, growth in stature, and onset of menses. These findings indicate that caudal brainstem-mediated mechanisms have a profound effect on satiety. Moreover, brainstem hemangioblastomas may present with abnormalities in satiety and feeding that can be effectively reversed with resection.  Discussion Previous Cases There have been 3 previously reported cases of brainstem hemangioblastomas presenting with appetite or feeding disturbances ( Table 1 ). The previous cases all occurred in postpubertal females with VHL disease who exhibited food aversion and weight loss 4–6 years before the onset of localizing neurological signs and symptoms referable to their brainstem hemangioblastomas occurred. 6 , 11 The average age at discovery of brainstem hemangioblastoma was 24.3 years (range 18–28 years) in the previously reported cases. Similar to our patient, the previously described cases were associated with brainstem tumors located in the obex. Two of the 3 reported patients underwent resection that resulted in normalization of appetite and weight gain. Mechanism of Pathological Satiety The findings from this patient provide insight into mechanisms of energy homeostasis and satiety. Energy homeostasis is maintained by the amount of energy (food) consumed. The quantity of food consumed is determined by the frequency and size of meals. Whereas the frequency of meals is controlled by a variety of internal and external factors (for example, emotional state, time of day, availability of food, environment, palatability), the size of meals is a biologically controlled process. 13 Recent observations indicate that signals involved in energy homeostasis control food intake by adjusting meal size. The primary process that controls individual meal size involves mechanisms of satiety. 12 Emerging evidence, including the findings in this patient, suggests that satiety may be controlled via brainstem centers. Although the hypothalamus plays a major role in energy homeostasis by mediating responses to adiposity, the caudal brainstem, based on animal studies, appears to be the principal control site for satiety. 10 , 13 Specifically, satiety information during the course of a meal is relayed to the caudal brainstem by vagal nerve afferents from the stomach and upper gastrointestinal tract. 12 , 14 This information is integrated with taste sensory afferents in the nucleus tractus solitarius. 14 Mechanical and chemical stimulation of the gastrointestinal tract and humoral signals released on nutrient stimulation conveyed by vagal afferents converge on the nucleus tractus solitarius to induce satiety. 4 , 5 , 9 The findings in this patient support the previous data from animal models regarding the importance of brainstem control of satiety pathways in humans. Tumor-induced dysfunction of afferent and/or efferent pathways and caudal brainstem satiety centers (vagal fibers/nucleus and nucleus tractus solitarius) led to the development of early satiety in this patient, in turn leading to anorexia. Clinical Findings Several features of this case give critical insight into the clinical findings associated with brainstem hemangioblastomas and their effects on normal feeding mechanisms. First, the earliest finding associated with brainstem hemangioblastomas can be early satiety. Early pathological satiety preceded other signs of lower brainstem dysfunction (that is, hiccupping, dysarthria, diminished gag reflex, and swallowing difficulties) by 7 years in our patient. Second, weight loss or inability to gain weight can be the earliest and most sensitive indicator of impaired satiety. Early pathological satiety leading to poor food intake resulted in weight loss that preceded growth arrest in this prepubertal patient. Moreover, following hemangioblastoma resection and normalization of appetite, the rate and relative amount of weight gain exceeded the growth in stature. Third, despite presenting with clinical and laboratory findings consistent with anorexia, our patient had no concomitant fear of obesity or dysmorphic body image to indicate true anorexia nervosa. Patients with anorexia but no associated psychopathological characteristics are classified as having atypical anorexia and may represent individuals with brainstem tumors (particularly in the context of a familial neoplasia syndrome with a known propensity for development of brainstem tumors). 2 , 15 Finally, because of undernutrition, a secondary endocrinopathy developed in our patient that further confounded diagnosis. Four years after presenting with early satiety and inability to gain weight, laboratory evaluation revealed a low level of insulin-like growth factor–I. A nonspecific abnormality of GH secretion was diagnosed, and GH supplementation was initiated, but was not effective in reversing growth arrest. 11 Treatment Implications Because of the multiplicity and saltatory growth patterns associated with CNS hemangioblastomas in patients with VHL disease, resection of individual tumors is typically reserved until they become symptomatic, to avoid unnecessary surgery over a patient’s lifetime. 1 , 16 Signs and symptoms typically associated with brainstem hemangioblastomas include long-tract signs, gait disturbances, excessive hiccupping or coughing, and lower cranial neuropathies that manifest most often as swallowing/speech abnormalities. 17 Our patient did not develop objective signs of lower brainstem dysfunction until 7 years after her subjective complaint of early satiety that was associated with poor weight gain. The reversal of abnormal satiety and associated anorexia, growth arrest, and developmental arrest after brainstem hemangioblastoma resection indicate that these findings are indications for resection in the absence of other more common neurological signs. 11 , 15  Discussion Previous Cases There have been 3 previously reported cases of brainstem hemangioblastomas presenting with appetite or feeding disturbances ( Table 1 ). The previous cases all occurred in postpubertal females with VHL disease who exhibited food aversion and weight loss 4–6 years before the onset of localizing neurological signs and symptoms referable to their brainstem hemangioblastomas occurred. 6 , 11 The average age at discovery of brainstem hemangioblastoma was 24.3 years (range 18–28 years) in the previously reported cases. Similar to our patient, the previously described cases were associated with brainstem tumors located in the obex. Two of the 3 reported patients underwent resection that resulted in normalization of appetite and weight gain. Mechanism of Pathological Satiety The findings from this patient provide insight into mechanisms of energy homeostasis and satiety. Energy homeostasis is maintained by the amount of energy (food) consumed. The quantity of food consumed is determined by the frequency and size of meals. Whereas the frequency of meals is controlled by a variety of internal and external factors (for example, emotional state, time of day, availability of food, environment, palatability), the size of meals is a biologically controlled process. 13 Recent observations indicate that signals involved in energy homeostasis control food intake by adjusting meal size. The primary process that controls individual meal size involves mechanisms of satiety. 12 Emerging evidence, including the findings in this patient, suggests that satiety may be controlled via brainstem centers. Although the hypothalamus plays a major role in energy homeostasis by mediating responses to adiposity, the caudal brainstem, based on animal studies, appears to be the principal control site for satiety. 10 , 13 Specifically, satiety information during the course of a meal is relayed to the caudal brainstem by vagal nerve afferents from the stomach and upper gastrointestinal tract. 12 , 14 This information is integrated with taste sensory afferents in the nucleus tractus solitarius. 14 Mechanical and chemical stimulation of the gastrointestinal tract and humoral signals released on nutrient stimulation conveyed by vagal afferents converge on the nucleus tractus solitarius to induce satiety. 4 , 5 , 9 The findings in this patient support the previous data from animal models regarding the importance of brainstem control of satiety pathways in humans. Tumor-induced dysfunction of afferent and/or efferent pathways and caudal brainstem satiety centers (vagal fibers/nucleus and nucleus tractus solitarius) led to the development of early satiety in this patient, in turn leading to anorexia. Clinical Findings Several features of this case give critical insight into the clinical findings associated with brainstem hemangioblastomas and their effects on normal feeding mechanisms. First, the earliest finding associated with brainstem hemangioblastomas can be early satiety. Early pathological satiety preceded other signs of lower brainstem dysfunction (that is, hiccupping, dysarthria, diminished gag reflex, and swallowing difficulties) by 7 years in our patient. Second, weight loss or inability to gain weight can be the earliest and most sensitive indicator of impaired satiety. Early pathological satiety leading to poor food intake resulted in weight loss that preceded growth arrest in this prepubertal patient. Moreover, following hemangioblastoma resection and normalization of appetite, the rate and relative amount of weight gain exceeded the growth in stature. Third, despite presenting with clinical and laboratory findings consistent with anorexia, our patient had no concomitant fear of obesity or dysmorphic body image to indicate true anorexia nervosa. Patients with anorexia but no associated psychopathological characteristics are classified as having atypical anorexia and may represent individuals with brainstem tumors (particularly in the context of a familial neoplasia syndrome with a known propensity for development of brainstem tumors). 2 , 15 Finally, because of undernutrition, a secondary endocrinopathy developed in our patient that further confounded diagnosis. Four years after presenting with early satiety and inability to gain weight, laboratory evaluation revealed a low level of insulin-like growth factor–I. A nonspecific abnormality of GH secretion was diagnosed, and GH supplementation was initiated, but was not effective in reversing growth arrest. 11 Treatment Implications Because of the multiplicity and saltatory growth patterns associated with CNS hemangioblastomas in patients with VHL disease, resection of individual tumors is typically reserved until they become symptomatic, to avoid unnecessary surgery over a patient’s lifetime. 1 , 16 Signs and symptoms typically associated with brainstem hemangioblastomas include long-tract signs, gait disturbances, excessive hiccupping or coughing, and lower cranial neuropathies that manifest most often as swallowing/speech abnormalities. 17 Our patient did not develop objective signs of lower brainstem dysfunction until 7 years after her subjective complaint of early satiety that was associated with poor weight gain. The reversal of abnormal satiety and associated anorexia, growth arrest, and developmental arrest after brainstem hemangioblastoma resection indicate that these findings are indications for resection in the absence of other more common neurological signs. 11 , 15  Previous Cases There have been 3 previously reported cases of brainstem hemangioblastomas presenting with appetite or feeding disturbances ( Table 1 ). The previous cases all occurred in postpubertal females with VHL disease who exhibited food aversion and weight loss 4–6 years before the onset of localizing neurological signs and symptoms referable to their brainstem hemangioblastomas occurred. 6 , 11 The average age at discovery of brainstem hemangioblastoma was 24.3 years (range 18–28 years) in the previously reported cases. Similar to our patient, the previously described cases were associated with brainstem tumors located in the obex. Two of the 3 reported patients underwent resection that resulted in normalization of appetite and weight gain.  Previous Cases There have been 3 previously reported cases of brainstem hemangioblastomas presenting with appetite or feeding disturbances ( Table 1 ). The previous cases all occurred in postpubertal females with VHL disease who exhibited food aversion and weight loss 4–6 years before the onset of localizing neurological signs and symptoms referable to their brainstem hemangioblastomas occurred. 6 , 11 The average age at discovery of brainstem hemangioblastoma was 24.3 years (range 18–28 years) in the previously reported cases. Similar to our patient, the previously described cases were associated with brainstem tumors located in the obex. Two of the 3 reported patients underwent resection that resulted in normalization of appetite and weight gain.  Mechanism of Pathological Satiety The findings from this patient provide insight into mechanisms of energy homeostasis and satiety. Energy homeostasis is maintained by the amount of energy (food) consumed. The quantity of food consumed is determined by the frequency and size of meals. Whereas the frequency of meals is controlled by a variety of internal and external factors (for example, emotional state, time of day, availability of food, environment, palatability), the size of meals is a biologically controlled process. 13 Recent observations indicate that signals involved in energy homeostasis control food intake by adjusting meal size. The primary process that controls individual meal size involves mechanisms of satiety. 12 Emerging evidence, including the findings in this patient, suggests that satiety may be controlled via brainstem centers. Although the hypothalamus plays a major role in energy homeostasis by mediating responses to adiposity, the caudal brainstem, based on animal studies, appears to be the principal control site for satiety. 10 , 13 Specifically, satiety information during the course of a meal is relayed to the caudal brainstem by vagal nerve afferents from the stomach and upper gastrointestinal tract. 12 , 14 This information is integrated with taste sensory afferents in the nucleus tractus solitarius. 14 Mechanical and chemical stimulation of the gastrointestinal tract and humoral signals released on nutrient stimulation conveyed by vagal afferents converge on the nucleus tractus solitarius to induce satiety. 4 , 5 , 9 The findings in this patient support the previous data from animal models regarding the importance of brainstem control of satiety pathways in humans. Tumor-induced dysfunction of afferent and/or efferent pathways and caudal brainstem satiety centers (vagal fibers/nucleus and nucleus tractus solitarius) led to the development of early satiety in this patient, in turn leading to anorexia.  Mechanism of Pathological Satiety The findings from this patient provide insight into mechanisms of energy homeostasis and satiety. Energy homeostasis is maintained by the amount of energy (food) consumed. The quantity of food consumed is determined by the frequency and size of meals. Whereas the frequency of meals is controlled by a variety of internal and external factors (for example, emotional state, time of day, availability of food, environment, palatability), the size of meals is a biologically controlled process. 13 Recent observations indicate that signals involved in energy homeostasis control food intake by adjusting meal size. The primary process that controls individual meal size involves mechanisms of satiety. 12 Emerging evidence, including the findings in this patient, suggests that satiety may be controlled via brainstem centers. Although the hypothalamus plays a major role in energy homeostasis by mediating responses to adiposity, the caudal brainstem, based on animal studies, appears to be the principal control site for satiety. 10 , 13 Specifically, satiety information during the course of a meal is relayed to the caudal brainstem by vagal nerve afferents from the stomach and upper gastrointestinal tract. 12 , 14 This information is integrated with taste sensory afferents in the nucleus tractus solitarius. 14 Mechanical and chemical stimulation of the gastrointestinal tract and humoral signals released on nutrient stimulation conveyed by vagal afferents converge on the nucleus tractus solitarius to induce satiety. 4 , 5 , 9 The findings in this patient support the previous data from animal models regarding the importance of brainstem control of satiety pathways in humans. Tumor-induced dysfunction of afferent and/or efferent pathways and caudal brainstem satiety centers (vagal fibers/nucleus and nucleus tractus solitarius) led to the development of early satiety in this patient, in turn leading to anorexia.  Clinical Findings Several features of this case give critical insight into the clinical findings associated with brainstem hemangioblastomas and their effects on normal feeding mechanisms. First, the earliest finding associated with brainstem hemangioblastomas can be early satiety. Early pathological satiety preceded other signs of lower brainstem dysfunction (that is, hiccupping, dysarthria, diminished gag reflex, and swallowing difficulties) by 7 years in our patient. Second, weight loss or inability to gain weight can be the earliest and most sensitive indicator of impaired satiety. Early pathological satiety leading to poor food intake resulted in weight loss that preceded growth arrest in this prepubertal patient. Moreover, following hemangioblastoma resection and normalization of appetite, the rate and relative amount of weight gain exceeded the growth in stature. Third, despite presenting with clinical and laboratory findings consistent with anorexia, our patient had no concomitant fear of obesity or dysmorphic body image to indicate true anorexia nervosa. Patients with anorexia but no associated psychopathological characteristics are classified as having atypical anorexia and may represent individuals with brainstem tumors (particularly in the context of a familial neoplasia syndrome with a known propensity for development of brainstem tumors). 2 , 15 Finally, because of undernutrition, a secondary endocrinopathy developed in our patient that further confounded diagnosis. Four years after presenting with early satiety and inability to gain weight, laboratory evaluation revealed a low level of insulin-like growth factor–I. A nonspecific abnormality of GH secretion was diagnosed, and GH supplementation was initiated, but was not effective in reversing growth arrest. 11  Clinical Findings Several features of this case give critical insight into the clinical findings associated with brainstem hemangioblastomas and their effects on normal feeding mechanisms. First, the earliest finding associated with brainstem hemangioblastomas can be early satiety. Early pathological satiety preceded other signs of lower brainstem dysfunction (that is, hiccupping, dysarthria, diminished gag reflex, and swallowing difficulties) by 7 years in our patient. Second, weight loss or inability to gain weight can be the earliest and most sensitive indicator of impaired satiety. Early pathological satiety leading to poor food intake resulted in weight loss that preceded growth arrest in this prepubertal patient. Moreover, following hemangioblastoma resection and normalization of appetite, the rate and relative amount of weight gain exceeded the growth in stature. Third, despite presenting with clinical and laboratory findings consistent with anorexia, our patient had no concomitant fear of obesity or dysmorphic body image to indicate true anorexia nervosa. Patients with anorexia but no associated psychopathological characteristics are classified as having atypical anorexia and may represent individuals with brainstem tumors (particularly in the context of a familial neoplasia syndrome with a known propensity for development of brainstem tumors). 2 , 15 Finally, because of undernutrition, a secondary endocrinopathy developed in our patient that further confounded diagnosis. Four years after presenting with early satiety and inability to gain weight, laboratory evaluation revealed a low level of insulin-like growth factor–I. A nonspecific abnormality of GH secretion was diagnosed, and GH supplementation was initiated, but was not effective in reversing growth arrest. 11  Treatment Implications Because of the multiplicity and saltatory growth patterns associated with CNS hemangioblastomas in patients with VHL disease, resection of individual tumors is typically reserved until they become symptomatic, to avoid unnecessary surgery over a patient’s lifetime. 1 , 16 Signs and symptoms typically associated with brainstem hemangioblastomas include long-tract signs, gait disturbances, excessive hiccupping or coughing, and lower cranial neuropathies that manifest most often as swallowing/speech abnormalities. 17 Our patient did not develop objective signs of lower brainstem dysfunction until 7 years after her subjective complaint of early satiety that was associated with poor weight gain. The reversal of abnormal satiety and associated anorexia, growth arrest, and developmental arrest after brainstem hemangioblastoma resection indicate that these findings are indications for resection in the absence of other more common neurological signs. 11 , 15  Treatment Implications Because of the multiplicity and saltatory growth patterns associated with CNS hemangioblastomas in patients with VHL disease, resection of individual tumors is typically reserved until they become symptomatic, to avoid unnecessary surgery over a patient’s lifetime. 1 , 16 Signs and symptoms typically associated with brainstem hemangioblastomas include long-tract signs, gait disturbances, excessive hiccupping or coughing, and lower cranial neuropathies that manifest most often as swallowing/speech abnormalities. 17 Our patient did not develop objective signs of lower brainstem dysfunction until 7 years after her subjective complaint of early satiety that was associated with poor weight gain. The reversal of abnormal satiety and associated anorexia, growth arrest, and developmental arrest after brainstem hemangioblastoma resection indicate that these findings are indications for resection in the absence of other more common neurological signs. 11 , 15  Conclusions The findings in this patient indicate that caudal brainstem-mediated mechanisms have a profound effect on satiety. The only neurological finding related to a brainstem hemangioblastoma may be abnormalities in satiety or feeding. This neurological finding can be effectively reversed with resection.  Figures and Table Fig. 1 Chart demonstrating the patient’s weight and height at various ages. At 9 years of age, the patient’s weight and height were slightly below the 3rd percentile for age. She then had a marked deceleration and arrest in weight gain and growth. At 15 years of age, both her weight and height were significantly below the 3rd percentiles when she presented to the National Institutes of Health. She underwent resection of her brainstem tumor at the age of 16 years and 7 months (dotted line) . There was a rapid reversal of her growth arrest following surgery, and the patient’s weight was just under the 50th percentile at her 12-month follow-up examination. Inset: Magnified view of the patient’s weight levels before and after surgery. The dotted line denotes the time point of her brainstem tumor resection. Fig. 2 Left: Preoperative midsagittal, T1-weighted, contrast-enhanced MR imaging study of the obex hemangioblastoma obtained in the patient with VHL disease. Right: Postoperative midsagittal, T1-weighted, contrast-enhanced MR imaging study revealing complete resection of the hemangioblastoma. TABLE 1 Literature review of brainstem hemangioblastomas presenting with eating disorders in patients with VHL disease Authors & Year Patient Age (yrs), Sex Lesion Location Op Signs & Symptoms Outcome Liebner, 1957 28, F obex no anorexia nervosa, vomiting ? patient died w/o resection of tumor Pavesi et al., 2006 18, F obex yes anorexia nervosa, vomiting, headache, ?swallowing difficulty, blurred vision, ?nystagmus, papilledema normalization of feeding habits after resec- ?tion 27, F obex yes food aversion, ataxia, headache, vomiting, ?opisthotonic seizures normalization of appetite & body weight ? after resection present study 16, F obex yes early satiety, growth arrest, developmen- ?tal arrest, hiccupping, nausea, dysar- ?thria, dysphagia reversal of early satiety & growth arrest; ? weight gain & completion of puberty 