Genetic Signature for Human Risk Assessment: Lessons from Trichloroethylene Trichloroethylene (TCE), an organic solvent commonly used for metal degreasing and as a chemical additive, is a significant environmental contaminant that poses health concerns in humans. The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is currently revising the 2001 TCE human risk assessment draft. The next draft is expected to be ready in 2008. TCE metabolites are detectable in humans and carry varying potencies for induction of cancers in animals. Genomic mechanisms have been explored in animals and in humans to link TCE to carcinogenesis. DNA analysis provides an opportunity for detection of unique genetic alterations representing a signature of TCE exposure. These alterations can arise from genotoxic and non-genotoxic pathways at multiple points throughout tumorigenesis. Although fixation of alterations may require several stages of selection and modification, the spectra can be specific to TCE. Only a fraction of these alterations eventually lead to tumor formation and some contribute to tumor progression. Genetic events in two major TCE target organs are reviewed, including the VHL gene in kidney, and the Ras gene and genome-wide hypomethylation in liver. Attempts to identify a genetic signature of TCE exposure are challenged by inconsistent findings, lack of evidence of promutagenic lesions, biological relevance of specific genomic changes, and likelihood of coexposures. For human risk assessment, genome-wide screening is useful and is possible with the development of new DNA sequencing technologies. Genetic screening for preneoplastic and tumor tissues from high-risk population is proposed to exclude the noise of passenger mutations and genetic polymorphisms.  INTRODUCTION Trichloroethylene (TCE), a chlorinated solvent, is widely used as a metal-degreasing agent and is also an additive in adhesives, lubricants, paints, and pesticides [ International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) 1995 ; National Toxicology Program (NTP) 2005 ]. It is released and leaked mainly from factories and waste sites, and is a common contaminant in the atmosphere, water, and soil. Workers in the degreasing industry are most heavily exposed to TCE, especially by inhalation. TCE is “probably” and “reasonably anticipated to be” carcinogenic to humans according to IARC [1995] and NTP [2005] , respectively. These conclusions are based on limited evidence of carcinogenicity in humans but sufficient evidence of carcinogenicity in experimental animals. Many scientific issues have been raised since the release of the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) draft for TCE human risk assessment in August 2001 [ US EPA 2005 ]. An EPA Science Advisory Board independent peer-review was published in December 2002. In February 2004, the EPA also organized the Symposium on New Scientific Research Related to the Health Effects of TCE to update the scientific evidence of TCE-associated health issues. Because of the complexity of scientific findings, the EPA, along with the Department of Defense, Department of Energy, and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, co-sponsored a consultation on TCE scientific issues by the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) Board on Environmental Studies and Toxicology in September 2004. Four key scientific issues were submitted by the EPA in February 2005 to assist the NAS’s recommendation. A Congressional Briefing on the NAS report was held on July 26, 2006. The report is available from the NAS website [ NAS 2006 ]. The next EPA draft on TCE human risk assessment is expected to be completed in 2008. Genetic Signature for Environmental Exposure Tumors are marked by multiple alterations in the genome [ Schinzel and Hahn 2008 ]. These genetic changes can result from genotoxic or non-genotoxic mechanisms, but not all changes are tumorigenic. Passenger mutations, which do not contribute to tumor phenotype, can be separated from driver mutations that lead to tumor growth advantage, using mathematic modeling [ Greenman et al. 2006 ]. Direct evidence of tumorigenic potential still requires functional analysis of specific mutations. Genotoxic agents can induce specific mutations that are retained throughout tumorigenesis, and therefore, can generate a genetic fingerprint in the genome. Table 1 lists known genetic lesions that are promutagenic for unique mutation spectra. Some agents can produce more than one type of DNA damage. Although many types of DNA damage can produce the same mutation spectrum, specific mutations may lead to the discovery of promutagenic DNA damage and rationalize the link between exposure and genetic mutations. Nitric oxide is known to induce C to T mutation by deamination [ Wink et al. 1991 ], preferentially at CpG sites when cytosine is also methylated [ Rideout et al., 1990 ; Mirvish 1995 ]. N-nitrosamines, present in tobacco smoke and potent kidney carcinogens in rats, can alkylate the O6 position of guanine and produce G to A alterations [ Nicoll et al. 1975 ; Singer 1996 ]. The human P53 gene has been extensively examined in this context; for example, UV-induced CC to TT dinucleotide changes in skin tumors, G to T mutation at the third position of codon 249 due to aflatoxin B1-DNA adduct in liver cancers [ Hussain et al. 2000 ], and G to T base changes from benzo(a)pyrene-DNA adducts at codons 157, 248, and 273 in tobacco smoke-related lung cancers [ Denissenko et al. 1996 ]. The benzo(a)pyrene and aflatoxin B1 bulky adducts of guanine tend to induce depurination which may lead to G to T mutations [ Loeb and Preston, 1986 ]. Vinyl chloride can generate G to A and A to T alterations in human angiosarcoma of the liver, and the G to A mutation has been experimentally demonstrated to be derived from promutagenic N2,3-ethenoguanine [ Kielhorn et al. 2000 ]. Oxidative damage can produce spectra consisting of G to T, A to C, and G to C changes [ Cheng et al. 1992 ; Reid et al. 1994]. Epigenetic changes, such as hypomethylation, which do not directly change gene sequence, can also lead to chromosomal alterations. It has been demonstrated that reduction of genome-wide DNA methylation as a result of knock-down of the DNA methyltransferase 1 gene increases the frequency of chromosomal 15 trisomy in T-cell lymphomas [ Gaudet et al. 2003 ] and loss of heterozygosity at the Apc locus in liver tumors [ Yamada et al. 2005 ] in experimental animals. The chromosomal abnormality is likely contributed by reactivation of transposition of transposable elements, such as an endogenous retroviral sequence [Howard et al. 2007]. Thus, global hypomethylation, though intrinsically non-genotoxic, has the potential to lead to gene structure alterations in human and animal tumors. Several TCE metabolites have been identified as potent liver and kidney carcinogens in animals [ Lash et al., 2000 ; Caldwell and Keshava 2006 ]. TCE can be metabolized via cytochrome P450 oxidative and glutathione S-transferase conjugation pathways, producing dichloroacetate (DCA), trichloroacetate (TCA), and S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-L-cysteine (DCVC). These oxidative and conjugate-derived metabolites might act through genotoxic and non-genotoxic mechanisms to induce tumors. Kidney and liver are also two major target organs for TCE in humans [ Scott and Chiu, 2006 ]. Although contributions of TCE metabolites to genetic changes are still unclear, TCE-related genetic signatures have been explored in the VHL gene for human kidney cancer, and alterations in the H-ras and K-ras oncogenes and hypomethylation have been characterized in animal liver tumors induced by TCE [ Moore and Harrington-Brock 2000 ]. Other mechanisms, such as differential gene expression, activation of various intracellular signaling pathways, and actions of TCE metabolites, are not discussed here.  Genetic Signature for Environmental Exposure Tumors are marked by multiple alterations in the genome [ Schinzel and Hahn 2008 ]. These genetic changes can result from genotoxic or non-genotoxic mechanisms, but not all changes are tumorigenic. Passenger mutations, which do not contribute to tumor phenotype, can be separated from driver mutations that lead to tumor growth advantage, using mathematic modeling [ Greenman et al. 2006 ]. Direct evidence of tumorigenic potential still requires functional analysis of specific mutations. Genotoxic agents can induce specific mutations that are retained throughout tumorigenesis, and therefore, can generate a genetic fingerprint in the genome. Table 1 lists known genetic lesions that are promutagenic for unique mutation spectra. Some agents can produce more than one type of DNA damage. Although many types of DNA damage can produce the same mutation spectrum, specific mutations may lead to the discovery of promutagenic DNA damage and rationalize the link between exposure and genetic mutations. Nitric oxide is known to induce C to T mutation by deamination [ Wink et al. 1991 ], preferentially at CpG sites when cytosine is also methylated [ Rideout et al., 1990 ; Mirvish 1995 ]. N-nitrosamines, present in tobacco smoke and potent kidney carcinogens in rats, can alkylate the O6 position of guanine and produce G to A alterations [ Nicoll et al. 1975 ; Singer 1996 ]. The human P53 gene has been extensively examined in this context; for example, UV-induced CC to TT dinucleotide changes in skin tumors, G to T mutation at the third position of codon 249 due to aflatoxin B1-DNA adduct in liver cancers [ Hussain et al. 2000 ], and G to T base changes from benzo(a)pyrene-DNA adducts at codons 157, 248, and 273 in tobacco smoke-related lung cancers [ Denissenko et al. 1996 ]. The benzo(a)pyrene and aflatoxin B1 bulky adducts of guanine tend to induce depurination which may lead to G to T mutations [ Loeb and Preston, 1986 ]. Vinyl chloride can generate G to A and A to T alterations in human angiosarcoma of the liver, and the G to A mutation has been experimentally demonstrated to be derived from promutagenic N2,3-ethenoguanine [ Kielhorn et al. 2000 ]. Oxidative damage can produce spectra consisting of G to T, A to C, and G to C changes [ Cheng et al. 1992 ; Reid et al. 1994]. Epigenetic changes, such as hypomethylation, which do not directly change gene sequence, can also lead to chromosomal alterations. It has been demonstrated that reduction of genome-wide DNA methylation as a result of knock-down of the DNA methyltransferase 1 gene increases the frequency of chromosomal 15 trisomy in T-cell lymphomas [ Gaudet et al. 2003 ] and loss of heterozygosity at the Apc locus in liver tumors [ Yamada et al. 2005 ] in experimental animals. The chromosomal abnormality is likely contributed by reactivation of transposition of transposable elements, such as an endogenous retroviral sequence [Howard et al. 2007]. Thus, global hypomethylation, though intrinsically non-genotoxic, has the potential to lead to gene structure alterations in human and animal tumors. Several TCE metabolites have been identified as potent liver and kidney carcinogens in animals [ Lash et al., 2000 ; Caldwell and Keshava 2006 ]. TCE can be metabolized via cytochrome P450 oxidative and glutathione S-transferase conjugation pathways, producing dichloroacetate (DCA), trichloroacetate (TCA), and S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-L-cysteine (DCVC). These oxidative and conjugate-derived metabolites might act through genotoxic and non-genotoxic mechanisms to induce tumors. Kidney and liver are also two major target organs for TCE in humans [ Scott and Chiu, 2006 ]. Although contributions of TCE metabolites to genetic changes are still unclear, TCE-related genetic signatures have been explored in the VHL gene for human kidney cancer, and alterations in the H-ras and K-ras oncogenes and hypomethylation have been characterized in animal liver tumors induced by TCE [ Moore and Harrington-Brock 2000 ]. Other mechanisms, such as differential gene expression, activation of various intracellular signaling pathways, and actions of TCE metabolites, are not discussed here.  KIDNEY CANCER AND <italic>VHL</italic> GENE MUTATIONS The VHL gene is commonly altered in human kidney tumors, especially of the clear cell phenotypes [ Shiao 2003 ]. The alterations include loss of all or most of the gene (>90%) and small base changes (30–60%), including insertion, deletion, and point mutations. These changes can lead to reduction of protein expression (deletion), protein truncation (frameshift mutation), and substitution of amino acids in the protein (missense mutation). Consequently, wild-type functions of the VHL are inactivated. The VHL is known to be a tumor suppressor gene. Suppression of tumor growth was demonstrated in animals injected with a VHL -deficient human kidney cell line after re-introduction of the wild-type VHL gene [ Iliopoulos et al., 1995 ]. Inactivation of this gene has the potential to initiate or to promote tumor development. However, different mutations may each have distinct tumorigenic potential, as discussed in a later section of this review. Utility of <italic>VHL</italic> Mutation Spectra Frequent and diverse VHL mutations in sporadic renal cell carcinomas provide sizable mutation spectra that can be utilized to correlate with environmental exposures. The rationale for using a genetic signature as a marker of environmental exposure has been exemplified for the P53 gene and has been reviewed by others [ Hussain et al. 2000 ; Olivier et al, 2004 ]. Correlation of specific mutation in the VHL gene with a particular environmental exposure may support mutagenicity of the agent, but does not constitute proof of the causation of mutation by the agent. Identification of DNA damage, such as DNA adducts and modifications described above, is necessary to prove the mutagenic capability, although not necessarily carcinogenicity, of an environmental agent. The Universal Mutation Database, maintained by Beroud et al. [2005] , compiles VHL mutations in sporadic renal cell carcinomas around the globe and includes software for calculating mutation frequency. The database (current up to early 2007) showed that missense mutations constitute about 34% of all mutations and the large majority of DNA sequence alterations (66%) are non-missense, including insertions, deletions and frameshift mutations ( Table 2 ). When only missense mutations were determined, G:C to A:T alterations were most prevalent (27%) compared to other base changes. Although other exposures may also generate a similar mutation spectrum, the preferential G:C to A:T changes are consistent with exposure to N-nitroso compounds, which are detected in tobacco smokers, diuretic drug users, and dialysis patients, all of whom are known to be at high risk for renal cell carcinomas [ Shiao 2006 ]. N-nitroso compounds form adducts with DNA through alkylating reactions and induce base substitutions in favor of G to A from O6-alkyl G and T to C from O4-alkyl T adduct in in vitro and in vivo experiments [ Singer, 1996 ]. Since N-nitroso compounds are not the only carcinogens encountered by those high-risk populations, demonstration that these compounds are implicated in mutations in the VHL gene in human kidney tumors is impossible. An experimental animal model offers an alternative biological system to examine the mutagenic potency and specificity of N-nitroso compounds for the VHL gene. N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), a strong nephrocarcinogen in rats, forms an O6-methylguanine promutagenic lesion in kidney DNA [ Nicoll et al. 1975 ]. Predominant G:C to A:T changes in the Vhl gene in NDMA-induced rat clear cell kidney tumors strengthens the putative link between tobacco smoke, hypertension, and/or chronic kidney failure with human renal cell carcinomas, of which 80% have a clear cell phenotype and G:C to A:T substitutions are the most frequent missense mutations [ Shiao et al. 1998 ]. Although other constituents of tobacco smoke, and unknown endogenous chemicals in kidney, may produce the same mutation spectrum, N-nitroso compounds clearly have the necessary potency in the mutagenic process. The possible involvement of N-nitroso compounds in human renal cell carcinomas is also reinforced by their clastogenic effects after forming adducts on the phosphate backbone of DNA strands [ Robbiano et al. 1997 ], consistent with non-missense mutation spectrum. <italic>VHL</italic> Mutation Spectrum and TCE Exposure G:C to A:T primary and G:C to T:A secondary mutations in the hisG46 allele have been observed in bacteria treated with DCA [ DeMarini et al. 1994 ]. However, no DNA adducts have been identified to explain the mutation spectrum. Several DNA adducts on adenine, cytosine, and guanine from chlorothioketene, a reactive intermediate of the S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-L-cysteine TCE metabolite, were detected in solution, but the reaction occurred only in the presence of organic solvents [ Volkel and Dekant 1998 ], indicating that those adducts are less likely to be present under physiological conditions. C14-labeled TCE (4.1 mg/kg body weight) injected intraperitoneally into male B6C3F1 mice was bound to liver DNA at levels of 75 pg/g DNA at 4 hours and 120 pg/g DNA between 24 and 72 hours [Kautiainer et al. 1997]. The level declined sharply to nearly background after 120 hours. However, specific DNA adducts were not examined in this study. Identification of the promutagenic adducts responsible for G:C to A:T and G:C to T:A base changes, observed in bacteria treated with TCE, may help in extrapolation to the mutation spectrum in human renal cell carcinomas. Bruning et al. [1997] and Brauch et al. [1999 ; 2004 ] have reported that increase of VHL missense mutations, predominantly G:C to A:T base changes, and a hot spot mutation at nucleotide 454 were correlated with TCE exposure ( Table 2 ). The three reports of TCE exposure from the same group concluded that TCE increases VHL mutations and generates a unique genetic signature of the exposure, which in turn lead to the development of renal cell carcinomas. Although the findings are of great interest, a similar study in a French population has not been able to reproduce the VHL mutation spectra [ Charbotel et al. 2007 ]. It should be noted that this French study completed VHL mutation analysis for only 26 of 48 clear cell renal carcinomas and spectra may be different between ethnic groups. More studies from other demographic areas and larger sample sizes are needed for validating mutation spectra from TCE-exposed populations. In order to strengthen the link between TCE and VHL mutations, identification of DNA lesions that are promutagenic for the observed VHL mutations from kidney cells will certainly be the next logical step, following the example for the P53 gene, although these data would still not prove tumorigenic potency. To provide further evidence of exposure-related hot spot mutations in the P53 , as mentioned in the previous section, DNA lesions at CC dinucleotides and at codons 157, 248, 249, and 273 of the P53 gene have been identified by chemical analysis in human cancers [ Denissenko et al. 1996 ; Hussain et al. 2000 ]. The link of TCE exposure to VHL mutation in humans would be significantly enhanced by isolation of a specific DNA lesion at the nucleotide 454 site. Furthermore, N-nitroso compounds that are surrogates for tobacco smoke, hypertension, and chronic kidney failure risk factors described above, produce the same G:C to A:T base changes in the Vhl gene in a subset of rat kidney tumors with phenotype mimicking human clear cell renal carcinomas [ Shiao, 2006 ]. It is important to categorize patients in TCE studies according to the status of their co-exposure to those major risk factors for comparison of the VHL mutation spectra. Unfortunately, information regarding these major risk factors was not included for the VHL mutation studies in TCE-exposed populations. Future studies should provide this information for adjustment in statistical analysis. This may also open opportunities to identify mutation spectra unique to a single major or to multiple exposures. In addition to the correlation of TCE to a specific VHL mutation spectrum, the tumorigenic potential of specific gene mutations also needs to be demonstrated, because mutated VHL bases may not always be tumorigenic in kidney. This is exemplified by the evidence that germline missense VHL mutations are not correlated with the occurrence of renal cell carcinomas in familial VHL disease, described in the next section. Another germline missense mutation of C to T at codon 200 of the VHL only predisposes patients to Chuvash polycythemia, characterized by elevation of serum erythropoietin and hypersensitivity of red blood cells to erythropoietin; cancers were not increased [ Ang et al., 2002 ]. Tumorigenicity of <italic>VHL</italic> Mutations Identification of VHL as a cancer-causing gene comes from the study of hereditary VHL disease. The VHL family members inherit a defective VHL gene and are susceptible to development of various tumors, including retinal hemangioblastoma, hemangioblastoma of the central nervous system, renal cell carcinoma, and pheochromocytoma [ Lonser et al. 2003 ]. Genetic testing for VHL families has verified concordance of VHL genotypes and tumor phenotypes ( Table 3 ). VHL families that carry non-missense mutations are prone to develop renal cell carcinomas compared with missense mutations, which tend to be associated with high risk for pheochromocytoma [ Sims 2001 ]. This suggests that different VHL mutations may have distinct biological functions and lead to organ-specific tumor development. Predominant non-missense mutations in sporadic renal cell carcinomas support the tumorigenic potential of this VHL mutation subtype ( Table 2 ). Biological heterogeneity of different mutants has also been observed for human P53 gene both in vitro and in vivo [ Soussi and Wiman, 2007 ]. Some mutant P53 proteins show loss of transcriptional transactivating activity and others retain such activity [ Kato et al., 2003 ]. Mice expressing two hot spot p53 mutations at codons 172 and 270 developed a tumor spectrum different from the p53 -null mice [ Olive et al., 2004 ; Lang et al. 2004 ]. Also, tissue type may have played a role in selecting specific P53 mutations, such as codon 249 in human liver cancer and codon 337 in pediatric adrenal cortical carcinoma [ Soussi and Wiman, 2007 ]. At present, it is still unclear what types of VHL gene alterations can trigger the tumorigenic process in kidney. Many Vhl -knockout mouse models, either embryonic or organ-specific, fail to demonstrate a tumor end-point similar to hereditary VHL disease [ Shiao 2006 ]. In mice, homozygous knockout ( Vhl ?/?) was lethal at 10.5 to 12.5 days of gestation, while Vhl +/? heterozygous animals were phenotypically normal [ Gnarra et al., 1997 ]. Conditional knockouts, initiated by activation of recombinase-induced homozygous deletion in selected organs, resulted in only vascular lesions with a characteristic of blood vessel dilation primarily in liver [ Haase et al, 2001 ; Ma et al., 2003 ]. The most relevant lesion is renal cyst from conditional Vhl -knockout in mouse kidney [ Rankin et al. 2006 ]. There is increasing evidence that partial deletion of the VHL gene increases the risk of human renal cell carcinomas [ Maranchie et al. 2004 ; Ong et al. 2007 ]. Further animal experiments to characterize this mutation type are certainly needed to test the hypothesis of non-missense Vhl mutation in the causation of kidney tumors.  Utility of <italic>VHL</italic> Mutation Spectra Frequent and diverse VHL mutations in sporadic renal cell carcinomas provide sizable mutation spectra that can be utilized to correlate with environmental exposures. The rationale for using a genetic signature as a marker of environmental exposure has been exemplified for the P53 gene and has been reviewed by others [ Hussain et al. 2000 ; Olivier et al, 2004 ]. Correlation of specific mutation in the VHL gene with a particular environmental exposure may support mutagenicity of the agent, but does not constitute proof of the causation of mutation by the agent. Identification of DNA damage, such as DNA adducts and modifications described above, is necessary to prove the mutagenic capability, although not necessarily carcinogenicity, of an environmental agent. The Universal Mutation Database, maintained by Beroud et al. [2005] , compiles VHL mutations in sporadic renal cell carcinomas around the globe and includes software for calculating mutation frequency. The database (current up to early 2007) showed that missense mutations constitute about 34% of all mutations and the large majority of DNA sequence alterations (66%) are non-missense, including insertions, deletions and frameshift mutations ( Table 2 ). When only missense mutations were determined, G:C to A:T alterations were most prevalent (27%) compared to other base changes. Although other exposures may also generate a similar mutation spectrum, the preferential G:C to A:T changes are consistent with exposure to N-nitroso compounds, which are detected in tobacco smokers, diuretic drug users, and dialysis patients, all of whom are known to be at high risk for renal cell carcinomas [ Shiao 2006 ]. N-nitroso compounds form adducts with DNA through alkylating reactions and induce base substitutions in favor of G to A from O6-alkyl G and T to C from O4-alkyl T adduct in in vitro and in vivo experiments [ Singer, 1996 ]. Since N-nitroso compounds are not the only carcinogens encountered by those high-risk populations, demonstration that these compounds are implicated in mutations in the VHL gene in human kidney tumors is impossible. An experimental animal model offers an alternative biological system to examine the mutagenic potency and specificity of N-nitroso compounds for the VHL gene. N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), a strong nephrocarcinogen in rats, forms an O6-methylguanine promutagenic lesion in kidney DNA [ Nicoll et al. 1975 ]. Predominant G:C to A:T changes in the Vhl gene in NDMA-induced rat clear cell kidney tumors strengthens the putative link between tobacco smoke, hypertension, and/or chronic kidney failure with human renal cell carcinomas, of which 80% have a clear cell phenotype and G:C to A:T substitutions are the most frequent missense mutations [ Shiao et al. 1998 ]. Although other constituents of tobacco smoke, and unknown endogenous chemicals in kidney, may produce the same mutation spectrum, N-nitroso compounds clearly have the necessary potency in the mutagenic process. The possible involvement of N-nitroso compounds in human renal cell carcinomas is also reinforced by their clastogenic effects after forming adducts on the phosphate backbone of DNA strands [ Robbiano et al. 1997 ], consistent with non-missense mutation spectrum.  <italic>VHL</italic> Mutation Spectrum and TCE Exposure G:C to A:T primary and G:C to T:A secondary mutations in the hisG46 allele have been observed in bacteria treated with DCA [ DeMarini et al. 1994 ]. However, no DNA adducts have been identified to explain the mutation spectrum. Several DNA adducts on adenine, cytosine, and guanine from chlorothioketene, a reactive intermediate of the S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-L-cysteine TCE metabolite, were detected in solution, but the reaction occurred only in the presence of organic solvents [ Volkel and Dekant 1998 ], indicating that those adducts are less likely to be present under physiological conditions. C14-labeled TCE (4.1 mg/kg body weight) injected intraperitoneally into male B6C3F1 mice was bound to liver DNA at levels of 75 pg/g DNA at 4 hours and 120 pg/g DNA between 24 and 72 hours [Kautiainer et al. 1997]. The level declined sharply to nearly background after 120 hours. However, specific DNA adducts were not examined in this study. Identification of the promutagenic adducts responsible for G:C to A:T and G:C to T:A base changes, observed in bacteria treated with TCE, may help in extrapolation to the mutation spectrum in human renal cell carcinomas. Bruning et al. [1997] and Brauch et al. [1999 ; 2004 ] have reported that increase of VHL missense mutations, predominantly G:C to A:T base changes, and a hot spot mutation at nucleotide 454 were correlated with TCE exposure ( Table 2 ). The three reports of TCE exposure from the same group concluded that TCE increases VHL mutations and generates a unique genetic signature of the exposure, which in turn lead to the development of renal cell carcinomas. Although the findings are of great interest, a similar study in a French population has not been able to reproduce the VHL mutation spectra [ Charbotel et al. 2007 ]. It should be noted that this French study completed VHL mutation analysis for only 26 of 48 clear cell renal carcinomas and spectra may be different between ethnic groups. More studies from other demographic areas and larger sample sizes are needed for validating mutation spectra from TCE-exposed populations. In order to strengthen the link between TCE and VHL mutations, identification of DNA lesions that are promutagenic for the observed VHL mutations from kidney cells will certainly be the next logical step, following the example for the P53 gene, although these data would still not prove tumorigenic potency. To provide further evidence of exposure-related hot spot mutations in the P53 , as mentioned in the previous section, DNA lesions at CC dinucleotides and at codons 157, 248, 249, and 273 of the P53 gene have been identified by chemical analysis in human cancers [ Denissenko et al. 1996 ; Hussain et al. 2000 ]. The link of TCE exposure to VHL mutation in humans would be significantly enhanced by isolation of a specific DNA lesion at the nucleotide 454 site. Furthermore, N-nitroso compounds that are surrogates for tobacco smoke, hypertension, and chronic kidney failure risk factors described above, produce the same G:C to A:T base changes in the Vhl gene in a subset of rat kidney tumors with phenotype mimicking human clear cell renal carcinomas [ Shiao, 2006 ]. It is important to categorize patients in TCE studies according to the status of their co-exposure to those major risk factors for comparison of the VHL mutation spectra. Unfortunately, information regarding these major risk factors was not included for the VHL mutation studies in TCE-exposed populations. Future studies should provide this information for adjustment in statistical analysis. This may also open opportunities to identify mutation spectra unique to a single major or to multiple exposures. In addition to the correlation of TCE to a specific VHL mutation spectrum, the tumorigenic potential of specific gene mutations also needs to be demonstrated, because mutated VHL bases may not always be tumorigenic in kidney. This is exemplified by the evidence that germline missense VHL mutations are not correlated with the occurrence of renal cell carcinomas in familial VHL disease, described in the next section. Another germline missense mutation of C to T at codon 200 of the VHL only predisposes patients to Chuvash polycythemia, characterized by elevation of serum erythropoietin and hypersensitivity of red blood cells to erythropoietin; cancers were not increased [ Ang et al., 2002 ].  Tumorigenicity of <italic>VHL</italic> Mutations Identification of VHL as a cancer-causing gene comes from the study of hereditary VHL disease. The VHL family members inherit a defective VHL gene and are susceptible to development of various tumors, including retinal hemangioblastoma, hemangioblastoma of the central nervous system, renal cell carcinoma, and pheochromocytoma [ Lonser et al. 2003 ]. Genetic testing for VHL families has verified concordance of VHL genotypes and tumor phenotypes ( Table 3 ). VHL families that carry non-missense mutations are prone to develop renal cell carcinomas compared with missense mutations, which tend to be associated with high risk for pheochromocytoma [ Sims 2001 ]. This suggests that different VHL mutations may have distinct biological functions and lead to organ-specific tumor development. Predominant non-missense mutations in sporadic renal cell carcinomas support the tumorigenic potential of this VHL mutation subtype ( Table 2 ). Biological heterogeneity of different mutants has also been observed for human P53 gene both in vitro and in vivo [ Soussi and Wiman, 2007 ]. Some mutant P53 proteins show loss of transcriptional transactivating activity and others retain such activity [ Kato et al., 2003 ]. Mice expressing two hot spot p53 mutations at codons 172 and 270 developed a tumor spectrum different from the p53 -null mice [ Olive et al., 2004 ; Lang et al. 2004 ]. Also, tissue type may have played a role in selecting specific P53 mutations, such as codon 249 in human liver cancer and codon 337 in pediatric adrenal cortical carcinoma [ Soussi and Wiman, 2007 ]. At present, it is still unclear what types of VHL gene alterations can trigger the tumorigenic process in kidney. Many Vhl -knockout mouse models, either embryonic or organ-specific, fail to demonstrate a tumor end-point similar to hereditary VHL disease [ Shiao 2006 ]. In mice, homozygous knockout ( Vhl ?/?) was lethal at 10.5 to 12.5 days of gestation, while Vhl +/? heterozygous animals were phenotypically normal [ Gnarra et al., 1997 ]. Conditional knockouts, initiated by activation of recombinase-induced homozygous deletion in selected organs, resulted in only vascular lesions with a characteristic of blood vessel dilation primarily in liver [ Haase et al, 2001 ; Ma et al., 2003 ]. The most relevant lesion is renal cyst from conditional Vhl -knockout in mouse kidney [ Rankin et al. 2006 ]. There is increasing evidence that partial deletion of the VHL gene increases the risk of human renal cell carcinomas [ Maranchie et al. 2004 ; Ong et al. 2007 ]. Further animal experiments to characterize this mutation type are certainly needed to test the hypothesis of non-missense Vhl mutation in the causation of kidney tumors.  LIVER CANCER, THE <italic>Ras</italic> GENE, AND HYPOMETHYLATION A possible genetic signature in TCE-related liver carcinogenesis has not been explored in humans. Frequent genetic targets in human hepatocellular carcinomas include P53 , RAS , and ?-CATENIN genes [ Teufel et al. 2007 ]. Specific mutation signatures and adduct formation in the P53 and KRAS genes strengthen the causative contribution of aflatoxin B1 to hepatocellular carcinomas and of vinyl chloride to liver angiosarcoma, respectively, in humans [ Hussain et al. 2000 ; Kielhorn et al. 2000 ]. The K-ras and H-ras genes have been commonly examined in TCE-, DCA-, and TCA-induced liver tumors in mice [ Moore and Harrington-Brock 2000 ; Caldwell and Keshava 2006 ]. K-ras mutation is rare in these tumors. Possible increase of CAA to CTA and CGA in DCA- and TCE-related tumors, and from CAA to AAA in TCA-generated tumors have been observed in H-ras codon 61 [ Anna et al., 1994 ; Ferreira-Gonzalez et al., 1995 ; Bull et al., 2002 ]; however, the overall mutation frequency was similar to, or lower than, that in the tumors from historical untreated controls, suggesting that TCE may not induce mutations in the Ras gene directly. High frequency of spontaneous mutations of the H-ras gene in commonly used mouse strain tends to exclude the utility of Ras mutation spectra for the study of molecular events induced by TCE exposure. Evidently, analyses of genes other than the Ras in mouse liver tumors are required to identify a mutation signature unique to TCE exposure. Genetic analysis of human hepatocellular carcinomas from a TCE-exposed population is also essential to provide a comparative mutation map. With regard to epigenetic changes, global hypomethylation has been reported in DCA- and TCA-induced liver tumors in mice [ Tao et al. 2004 ]. This change appears to correlate with loss of heterozygosity on mouse chromosome 6, observed in a previous study by the same group [ Tao et al., 1996 ]. The genome-wide hypomethylation appears to be a general epigenetic change in both human and animal malignancies regardless of exposures. A gene-targeting approach to knock-down subtypes of the DNA methyltransferases results in genomic hypomethylation and subsequent chromosomal instability, which generates unique genetic changes [Howard et al. 2007], as described above. These animal studies provide evidence that TCE may alter genomic methylation status via non-genotoxic pathway, which may consequently lead to chromosomal abnormality. Amplifications of chromosomes 1q, 6p, 8q, and 17q, and losses of 4q, 8p, 13q, 16q, and 17p are observed in human hepatocellular carcinomas [ Teufel et al. 2007 ], suggesting that chromosomal abnormalities are important in liver tumorigenesis. Further examination in TCE-exposed and control populations may offer a clue whether TCE is associated with increases of chromosomal abnormalities.  CHALLENGES AND SUGGESTIONS Determination of TCE as a causative agent in human tumors is challenging, partly due to inconsistent epidemiological findings [ Scott and Chiu 2006 ]. Although moderate elevation of cancer risk in kidney and liver is suggested, many of the studies do not reach the statistically significant level. Experimental animals continue to play a major role in human risk assessment and careful extrapolation of animal data is crucial due to differences between species. As reviewed by Maronpot et al. [2004] , it is important to factor in the similarities and disparities in genome, metabolism, target organs, natural history of neoplasia, and tumor pathology between species when interpreting animal data for human risk. With the availability of high-quality sequences from human, mouse, and rat genome projects [ Lander et al., 2001 ; Venter et al., 2001 ; Waterston et al., 2002 ; Gibbs et al., 2004 ], sequence similarities are readily detectable by proper computer algorithms. Sequence alignment among these 3 organisms predicts orthologous genes in about 40% of the euchromatic genome between any two of these species [ Gibbs et al., 2004 ]. These 10,000+ orthologous genes presumably carry the same function in the three biological systems. Although the other 60% of the genome may also influence tumorigenesis, genetic alterations, if seen, in these diverse regions may still be controversial regarding their relevance to human cancer risk. The genome information provides opportunity to focus on orthologous gene sequence changes in human cancers and their counterparts in animals. Once involvement of orthologous genes is consistently observed in both human and animal tumors, subsequent experiments with genetically modified cells and animals can be applied to test the tumorigenic potential of a specific alteration. Lucas and McMichael [2005] stated that “Causation is an interpretation, not an entity”. They reviewed the criteria for causation, originally proposed by Bradford Hill [ Hill 1965 ]. The first four criteria are 1) strength: strong association between exposure and health status, 2) consistency: repeated observation, 3) specificity: association of disease to single exposure, and 4) temporality: exposure preceding disease outcome. Diseases that involve multiple exposures (or confounders) showed very weak association with these four criteria. Human risk from TCE apparently falls under this category. Potential TCE coexposures include many other organic solvents and chemicals [Caldwell et al., 2007]. The status of tobacco smoking, hypertension, and chronic kidney failure in kidney cancers, and hepatitis and aflatoxin B1 exposure in liver cancer have not been included in previous TCE studies, but should be considered in the future. As for the vinyl chloride-induced angiosarcoma of the liver, causation can be established without knowing the natural history of tumor biology because of its compliance to the criteria. Since the first four criteria are not applicable to TCE, Hill’s 5th to 8th criteria, biological gradient (or quantitative host response), plausibility (or biological relevance), coherence (or agreement with the natural history and biology of the disease), and experimentation (or test of cause-effect relationship), become extremely important for inference of cause. Genome-wide alterations, including genetic and epigenetic mechanisms, are essential for tumor development. Projects to re-sequence the genome in various human cancers have identified many passenger and driver mutations [ Sjoblom et al., 2006 ; Greenman et al., 2007 ]. Utility of differential gene expression, a consequence of epigenetic changes, to identify tumorigenic pathways has also been explored to some extent and its challenges have been reviewed by others [ Hall et al. 2007 ]. Examination of the genome has the potential to identify a genetic fingerprint for TCE exposure and to elucidate driver mutations that are relevant to tumor formation. However, identification of a genetic signature may be complicated by the multi-step carcinogenesis process illustrated in Figure 1 . The genome goes through serial and accumulated insults, adaptation and selection, and structural alterations that are tumorigenic. The alterations are dynamic and the mutation spectra may be different at various time points of tumorigenesis, even after excluding the genetic polymorphisms. This makes the comparison of mutation spectra between exposed and unexposed population extremely challenging. Ideally, biological samples are collected throughout multiple stages of tumorigenesis for genomic analyses. Individual-based mutation profiles can be obtained from somatic cells and compared to inherited genetic background derived from germ cells. With this genetic profile, the first four criteria of Bradford Hill can then be applied to infer the cause. To accomplish this, methods for personalized genome-wide sequence screening are greatly needed. The next-generation sequencing, capable of performing simultaneous sequence reads for hundreds of thousands to tens of millions solid-phase amplified DNA fragments, are currently available but still have a high cost of more than $100,000 per genome [ Mardis, 2008 ]. There is a proposal for development of a new generation of DNA sequencing technology with much lower cost and a goal of $1000 per genome [ Bennett et al. 2005 ]. This new technology, expected to be available within 10 years, will deliver affordable and timely genome sequence information for individuals.  CONCLUSION The TCE studies exemplify the challenges of human risk assessment. Application of genetic sequence for risk assessment is on the horizon. Genetic alterations, including passenger and driver mutations, arise from environmental exposure(s). The alterations can result from either genotoxic or non-genotoxic pathways. Identification of DNA lesions specific to a given exposure and a characteristic mutation spectrum can strengthen interpretation of genotoxic mechanism. Some of these changes are unique to exposure but only driver mutations are capable of contributing to tumor development. Consistent genetic change may represent a signature for exposure and/or tumorigenesis. Differentiation of the genetic signature between exposure and tumorigenicity is essential to infer the cause for disease outcome. Advance of genetic technologies makes whole genome sequencing feasible. This opens a new avenue to utilization of a genomic signature from the approximately 3-billion base-pair nucleotides as a surrogate for environmental exposure(s). In theory, single major, or multiple, exposures can generate unique genetic signatures. This signature can then be tested for tumorigenic potential.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Multi-step carcinogenesis and dynamic genome changes contributed by interaction of host genome to multiple endogenous and/or exogenous exposures at various time points. The letter A in bold represents the investigated factor, such as TCE. Table 1 Mutation spectra indicative of exposures and specific types of DNA damage Base change a Possible causes Transition   G:C to A:T Deamination of 5-methyl-C (at CpG sites) or C Mispairing with T: O6-alkyl-G; N2,3-ethenoguanine   A:T to G:C Mispairing with C: Deamination of A Mispairing with G: O2-alkyl-T or O4-alkyl-T Transversion   G:C to T:A Mispairing with A: 8-OH-G; apurinic G   A:T to T:A Mispairing with A: apurinic A   A:T to C:G Mispairing with A in DNA strand: 8-OH-G; error-prone repair of O2- or O4-alkyl T   G:C to C:G Mispairing with G: oxidatively-damaged G a Base changes are commonly presented as found in double-stranded DNA, such as G:C to A:T for G to A on one strand and C to T on the complementary strand. Table 2 VHL mutations in sporadic renal cell carcinomas Exposure TCE a TCE b Non-TCE b TCE c Non-TCE c TCE d Non-TCE d Unspecified e No. patient 23 44 73 17 21 25 23 Mutation rate f 23 (100%) 33 (75%) 42 (58%) 14 (82%) 2 (10%) 2 (8%) 2 (9%) No. sequenced mutations 4 50 42 24 2 2 2 374 Missense 1 27/50 (54%) NA 17/24 (71%) 2/2 (100%) 1/2 (50%) 1/2 (50%) 127/374 (34%) GC to AT 1 21/27 (78%) NA 12/17 (71%) 1/2 (50%) 1 41/153 (27%) (C to T at 454) 13/44 (30%) 0/107 9/17 (53%) 0/21 (0%) NA GC to TA 0 NA 0 0 29/153 (19%) GC to CG 5/27 (19%) NA 4/17 (24%) 0 30/153 (20%) AT to TA 1/27 (4%) NA 1/17 (6%) 0 19/153 (12%) AT to GC 0 NA 0 1/2 (50%) 1 25/153 (16%) AT to CG 0 NA 0 0 9/153 (6%) Non-missense 3 23/50 (46%) NA 7/24 (29%) 0 (0%) 1/2 (50%) 1/2 (50%) 247/374 (66%) a Bruning et al. 1997 b Brauch et al. 1999 c Brauch et al. 2004 d Charbotel et al. 2007 e Beroud et al. 2005 f Determined by DNA sequencing except the study by Bruning et al. 1997 using single-strand conformation polymorphism technique Table 3 Concordance of VHL genotype and tumor phenotype in VHL families Type of VHL disease a VHL genotype Tumor phenotype Type 1 Deletion Renal cell carcinomas Frameshift CNS hemangioblastomas (also called non-missense) Retinal hemangioblastomas Pancreatic tumors Type 2A Missense CNS hemangioblastomas Retinal hemangioblastoma Pheochromocytomas Type 2B Deletion Renal cell carcinomas Frameshift CNS hemangioblastomas Missense Retinal hemangioblastomas Pancreatic tumors Pheochromocytomas Type 2C Missense Pheochromocytomas a Defined by the tumor types in each VHL family. 