LIVER INVOLVEMENT IN CELIAC DISEASE Celiac disease is a chronic immune-mediated multisystem disorder that may affect several organs. Liver abnormalities are common extraintestinal manifestations of celiac disease. Isolated hypertransaminasemia, with mild or nonspecific histologic changes in the liver biopsy, also known as “celiac hepatitis”, is the most frequent presentation of liver injury in celiac disease. Both, histologic changes and liver enzymes reverse to normal after treatment with a gluten-free diet in most patients. Celiac disease may also be associated with severe forms of liver disease and/or coexist with other chronic liver disorders (i.e., autoimmune liver diseases). The mechanisms underlying liver injury in celiac disease are poorly understood. Predisposition to autoimmunity by shared genetic factors (i.e., HLA genes) as well as the systemic effects of abnormal intestinal permeability, cytokines, autoantibodies, and/or other yet undefined biologic mediators induced by gluten exposure in susceptible persons may play a pathogenic role. The aims of this article are 1) to review the spectrum of liver injury related to celiac disease and 2) to understand the clinical implications of celiac disease in patients with chronic liver disorders.  Conclusions Celiac disease interacts with the liver by either cause injury itself or by modulates the impact of other disorders of the liver when they coexist. The liver injury in CD has a wide spectrum ranging from asymptomatic elevation of liver chemistries to severe liver failure. Celiac hepatitis is the most common “hepatic” presentation of CD and gluten exclusion is the treatment of choice. The prevalence of CD is higher in patients with several chronic liver disorders than the prevalence found in the general population but an association has been clearly demonstrated epidemiologically in a few primarily immune-mediated liver disorders. Clinicians need to be aware of these associations of CD to improve detection rate of CD in patients with those liver diseases. The diagnosis of CD in patients with chronic liver disorders is complicated by the low diagnostic accuracy of most serologic tests than in subjects without liver disease. Larger, prospective, and probably multicenter, randomized trials are needed to clarify the effect of a GFD in the long-term outcome of liver disorders that may coexist with CD. 