Targeting the ubiquitin-proteasome system for cancer therapy Summary The ubiquitin-proteasome system plays a critical role in controlling the level, activity, and location of various cellular proteins. Significant progress has been made in investigating the molecular mechanisms of ubiquitination, particularly in understanding the structure of the ubiquitination machinery and identifying ubiquitin protein ligases, the primary specificity-determining enzymes. Therefore, it is now possible to target specific molecules involved in the ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation to regulate many cellular processes such as signal transduction, proliferation and apoptosis. In particular, alterations in ubiquitination are observed in most, if not all, cancer cells. This is manifested by destabilization of tumor suppressors, such as p53, and overexpression of oncogenes such as c-Myc and c-Jun. In addition to the development and clinical validation of proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib in myeloma therapy, recent studies have demonstrated that it is possible to develop inhibitors for specific ubiquitination and deubiquitination enzymes. With the help of structural studies, rational design, and chemical synthesis, it is conceivable that we will be able to use “druggable” inhibitors of the ubiquitin system to evaluate their effects in animal tumor models in the not-so-distant future.  Conclusions The ubiquitin system has emerged as the focus of molecular targeting in developing cancer therapeutics ( Table 2 ). Because E3 plays a major role in determining the specificity of ubiquitination, it is regarded as a preferred target for therapeutic intervention. With the development of Nutlins, it appears that blocking the interaction between E3s and their substrates can be an effective strategy to inhibit the degradation of specific proteins ( 69 ). However, this approach depends on a clear understanding of the structural basis of E3-substrate interactions, which are not readily available for most of the E3s, and is more effective when the interaction involves limited contact and a deep “pocket”. Thus, we have been interested in targeting the activity of ubiquitin ligase. Although it is still debatable whether it is possible to specifically inhibit activities of RING E3s due to their structural similarity, we have shown that HLI98s and analogs are selectively inhibitors of Hdm2 activity ( 66 ). While E3s are not conventional enzymes, E1s for ubiquitin or Ubls, E2s, and proteases in proteasome are classic drug targets. Inhibition of these enzymes affects nonspecifically the regulation and degradation of many proteins, most notably Hdm2 and p53 ( Figure 2 ). Nevertheless, proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib has been used successfully in the treatment of certain cancers ( 59 ). Our studies with E1 inhibitors, which target an even greater range of cellular processes than proteasome inhibitors and differentially kill tumor cells that retain wild-type p53 ( 68 ), indicating that transformed cells are more sensitive to the interruption of the ubiquitin-proteasome system. It is also worth noting that geldanamycin and derivatives, which are being evaluated in patients with advanced cancers in the clinic, target Hsp90, a chaperone that affects the folding and function of many proteins ( 70 , 71 ). Thus, while specificity is the foundation of target therapies, drugs that have more general effects on protein function and fate may be used successfully as cancer therapeutics.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 The ubiquitination cascade. Ubiquitin (Ub) is activated by E1 and conjugated to the active Cys of E1 through thioester bond. Activated Ub is then transferred to E2 that can bind with E3. An RING-containing E3 facilitates the transfer of activated Ub to substrate from E2 directly, whereas a HECT domain E3 forms thioester bond with activated Ub and then transfer it to substrate. Monoubiquitination of target protein enable its recognition by many Ub-recognizing domains in cells, leading to alteration of protein activity and location in cells. Formation of K48-linked polyubiquitin chains on substrate proteins result in their degradation in proteasomes. Formation of K63-linked polyubiquitin chains are involved in cellular processes such as signal transduction and DNA repair. Figure 2 Inhibitors that block the Hdm2-mdeiated ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of p53. Table 1 Aberrations of the ubiquitin ligases in human cancers Protein Physiological Function Pathological Change Molecular Mechanism Hdm2 RING finger-containing E3 for p53 Overexpression Suppression of p53 activation in response to oncogenic stimuli E6-AP HECT domain-containing E3 for p53 Activation by HPV encoded E6 Suppression of p53 activation in response to oncogenic stimuli VHL Substrate-binding component of complex E3 VCB-Cul2-VHL Loss of function mutation Increased expression of critical VCB-Cul2 substrates e.g. HIF-1? Skp2 Substrate-binding component of complex E3 SCF-Skp2 Overexpression Down regulation of substrates, including Cdk inhibitor p27kip1 Fbw7 Substrate-binding component of complex E3 SCF-Fbw7 Loss of function mutation Upregulation of substrates, including cyclin E, c- Myc, and c-Jun BRCA1 RING finger-containing E3 Loss of function mutation Impairment of cellular DNA repair response FANCs Complex E3 for the monoubiquitination of FANCD2 Loss of function mutation Impairment of cellular DNA repair response CYLD Deubiquitinating enzyme Loss of function mutation Reduction of the inhibition on ubiquitin-dependent NF?B activation Table 2 Inhibitors of the ubiquitin-proteasome system Target Inhibitors Biological Effects Ubiquitin E1 PYR-41 Inhibiting the activation of ubiquitin and blocking the initiation of ubiquitination Hdm2 activity HLI98s, HLI373 Sempervirine Inhibiting the E3 activity of Hdm2, leading to accumulation and activation of p53 Hdm2/p53 interaction Peptide derivatives, Nutlins, RITA, MI- 63, Syl-155 Blocking the recognition of p53 by Hdm2, resulting in accumulation of p53 DUBs Cyclopentenone PGs of the J series Preventing proteasomal degradation of ubiquitinated proteins Proteasome recognition Ubistatins Blocking the degradation of proteins conjugated with K48- linked polyubiquitin chains Proteasome degradation Peptide aldehyde, epoxyketone, and boronate; ?-Lactone Preventing proteasomal degradation of ubiquitinated proteins 