Ascites Specific Inhibition of CD1d-Mediated Activation of NKT cells Purpose Natural killer T (NKT) cells recognize lipid antigen presented by CD1 molecules. NKT cells can both directly, through cytotoxicity, and indirectly, through activation of other effector cells, mediate anti-tumor immunity. However, it has been shown that tumor associated lipids are frequently shed into the tumor microenvironment, which can mediate immunosuppressive activity. Given that ovarian cancer associated ascites has been reported to have increased levels of gangliosides, we examined the effect of tumor associated and other ascites on CD1d-mediated antigen presentation to NKT cells. Experimental Design To investigate the effects of ascites on NKT cell activation, we pretreated CD1d-expressing cells with the ascites and measured their ability to stimulate cytokine production in NKT cells. To determine whether antigen processing or editing was necessary, CD1d-Ig-based artificial Antigen Presenting Cells (aAPC) were also incubated with ascites. In addition, to examine specificity, we analyzed whether ascites fluid could influence the activation of classical CD8+ T cells. Results Pretreatment of CD1d-expressing cells with ascites from the majority of patients inhibited the cells’ ability to stimulate/activate NKT cells in a dose-dependent manner. Ascites treatment also partially blocked the ability of ?-GalCer loaded CD1d-Ig-based artificial Antigen Presenting Cells (aAPC) to activate NKT cells. In addition, our data demonstrate that treatment with ascites does not inhibit HLA-A2 mediated activation of classical CD8+ T cells. Conclusions Together, these data suggest that ovarian and other cancers may have developed immune evasion mechanisms specifically targeting the CD1/NKT cell system.  Introduction In the United States, ovarian cancer ranks fifth as a cause of cancer related deaths among females. In fact, it has the highest mortality rate among gynecological tumors. Unfortunately, the majority of cases are diagnosed at an advanced stage. Despite optimal cytoreductive surgery and primary chemotherapy, five year survival rates of patients with advanced ovarian cancer remain less than 30% ( 1 , 2 ). Therefore, novel approaches to treatment are essential for effective, durable therapy. Recent studies have focused on the role of adaptive immunity in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) ( 3 , 4 ). In fact, the presence or absence of specific T cells subsets has been correlated to survival. Zhang, et al. ( 5 ) have demonstrated that the presence of intratumoral T cells in EOC was associated with improved survival. Conversely, work by Curiel, et al ( 6 ) has shown that tumor infiltration by regulatory T cells (CD4+CD25+ T cells), is indicative of reduced survival in EOC. Lastly, a study by Sato, et al. ( 7 ) suggests that intraepithelial CD8+ T cells are associated with favorable prognosis in ovarian cancer. While several groups have reported immune responses against ovarian cancer ( 3 , 4 ); historically, these studies involving antigen processing and presentation have focused on antigen presentation by the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules to classical CD8+ T cells. However, unlike MHC class I molecules that present peptide antigens to T cells, CD1d molecules primarily present non-peptidic ligands (mainly lipid antigens) to a subpopulation of T cells called Natural Killer T (NKT) cells (reviewed in ( 8 )). Following activation, NKT cells rapidly secrete both Th1 and Th2 cytokines and can mediate cytolytic activity ( 9 ). Classic NKT cells express a restricted TCR that recognizes lipids in the context of CD1d. The majority of these NKT cells express an invariant TCR? chain rearrangement: V?14J?18 in mice and V?24J?18 in human, which is associated with V? chains of limited diversity ( 10 – 13 ), and are now referred to as canonical or invariant NKT ( i NKT) cells. Other CD1d- specific T cells expressing different TCR? chains are called non-canonical or non-classical NKT cells. NKT cells are important in regulating immune responses to infection and autoimmune diseases, as well as to tumors ( 14 , 15 ). In fact, circulating numbers of NKT cells are markedly decreased in cancer patients ( 14 , 16 ). Moreover, NKT cells are reduced in both function and number, regardless of cancer type ( 16 ). However, while numerous studies have examined the role of NKT cells in cancer in general, the specific role of these cells in the pathogenesis of ovarian cancer has yet to be elucidated. It has been reported that ovarian malignancies may alter the local environment resulting in a suppression of the immune system ( 17 ). Many advanced ovarian cancer patients have a local accumulation of fluid called ascites that contains cellular components of the immune system such as lymphocytes and regulatory factors such as cytokines. Moreover, patients with advanced ovarian cancer have been reported to have higher levels of gangliosides in their plasma and ascites compared to the plasma samples of controls ( 18 ). Since NKT cells have been reported to recognize gangliosides in the context of CD1d ( 19 , 20 ), we investigated whether ascites treatment of CDd1-expressing cells could alter their ability to activate NKT cells. In addition, our group has developed non-cellular, bead based, artificial Antigen Presenting cells (aAPC), made by coupling HLA-Ig, along with other costimulatory molecules, onto magnetic beads. aAPC have been shown to effectively expand CMV and MART-1 specific CTL (Oelke, 2003 #5463). In this study we have developed CD1d-Ig based aAPC. It has been reported that soluble forms of CD1d molecules loaded with lipid antigen are directly able to activate NKT cells ( 21 – 23 ). Since the engagement of the T cell receptor (TCR) by the CD1d-antigen complexes is a fundamental requirement of NKT cell activation, antigenCD1d-Ig complexes offer a method to assess NKT cell activation in the absence of antigen processing or other cellular factors. In these studies, we sought to determine if treatment with ovarian cancer-associated ascites altered CD1d-mediated activation of NKT cells. Here, we report that treatment of CD1d-expressing cells with ascites from ovarian cancer patients and others abrogated their ability to activate both canonical and noncanonical NKT cells. This is the first report that ascites specifically inhibits the CD1d/NKT cell system.  Materials and Methods Patient samples Ovarian cancer associated ascites and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were collected from patients undergoing primary cytoreductive surgery by the Kelly Gynecologic Oncology Service at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions. Ascites was also collected from patients with hepatitis. All donors gave written informed consent before enrolling in the study. The Institutional Review Board of Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions approved this investigation. Cell Lines Murine L cells transfected with vector alone or the WT cd1d1 cDNA in pcDNA3.1-neo (Invitrogen) (LCD1dwt) were kindly provided by R.R. Brutkiewicz (Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN) ( 24 ), and were cultured in DMEM media, supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine (BioWhittaker), 10% FBS (HyClone), and ciprofloxacin (Serologicals Proteins). TAP (transporter associated with antigen processing)-deficient 174CEM.T2 (T2) cells were maintained in Iscove’s modified Dulbecco’s media (IMDM), with the same supplements described above. NKT Cells The V?14+ NKT cell hybridoma cell lines DN32.D3, ( 25 , 26 ), N38-2C12, N38-2H4, N38-3C3, and the CD1d1-specific NKT cell hybridoma N37-1A12 (V?5+), have all been described ( 27 ) and were cultured in IMDM medium supplemented with 5% FBS and 2 mM L-glutamine. For primary mouse NKT cells, liver mononuclear cells were isolated as described previously ( 28 ), then the cells were stained with antibodies against CD3 and NK1.1 (Pharmingen), and sorted using a FACS Aria. Primary human NKT cells were isolated from PBMC using the CD3+CD56+ isolation kit (Miltenyi). Generation of artificial Antigen Presenting Cells The preparation of CD1d-Ig based aAPC was performed according to the previously described method ( 29 ). Briefly, to conjugate hCD1d-Ig dimer molecules to beads, 50 ?g of hCD1d-Ig (Pharmingen) was added to 0.5 ml of epoxy beads (Dynabeads, M-450, Expoxy, 4×108 beads/ml) (Dynal) in sterile 0.1M Borate buffer, pH 7.0–7.4. The bead protein mixture was mixed with rotation and incubated for 24h at 4°C. Then the beads were washed and the hCD1d molecules were loaded with lipid antigen, ?-Galactosylceramide (?-GalCer), (5 ?g/ml in 1 ml PBS containing 5 × 107 beads) (Axxora, LLC). Generation of CMV specific CTL CMV specific CTL were generated using peptide-pulsed HLA-A2-Ig based aAPCs, as previously described ( 29 ). Treatment of Cells with Tumor Associated Ascites The ascites was cleared of cellular debris by centrifugation at 250 × g for 10 min. The clarified supernatants were then stored at ?20°C. For experiments, the supernatants were thawed at 4°C overnight, then L-vector, L-CDd1wt, CMV-peptide pulsed T2 cells, or aAPC were incubated with ascites (2–5 × 106 cells per ml of ascites) for 4 h at 37°C. The cells were subsequently washed three times with 10 ml PBS, resuspended in IMDM medium, supplemented with 5% FBS and 2 mM L-glutamine and co-cultured with or without the indicated NKT hybridomas for 20–24 h at 37°C. The co-cultures with the primary T and NKT cells were incubated for 72 or 48 h, respectively. Cytokine release (IL-2, GM-CSF, or IFN-?) was measured as an indication of NKT/T cell activation and was measured by standard sandwich ELISA.  Patient samples Ovarian cancer associated ascites and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were collected from patients undergoing primary cytoreductive surgery by the Kelly Gynecologic Oncology Service at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions. Ascites was also collected from patients with hepatitis. All donors gave written informed consent before enrolling in the study. The Institutional Review Board of Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions approved this investigation.  Cell Lines Murine L cells transfected with vector alone or the WT cd1d1 cDNA in pcDNA3.1-neo (Invitrogen) (LCD1dwt) were kindly provided by R.R. Brutkiewicz (Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN) ( 24 ), and were cultured in DMEM media, supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine (BioWhittaker), 10% FBS (HyClone), and ciprofloxacin (Serologicals Proteins). TAP (transporter associated with antigen processing)-deficient 174CEM.T2 (T2) cells were maintained in Iscove’s modified Dulbecco’s media (IMDM), with the same supplements described above.  NKT Cells The V?14+ NKT cell hybridoma cell lines DN32.D3, ( 25 , 26 ), N38-2C12, N38-2H4, N38-3C3, and the CD1d1-specific NKT cell hybridoma N37-1A12 (V?5+), have all been described ( 27 ) and were cultured in IMDM medium supplemented with 5% FBS and 2 mM L-glutamine. For primary mouse NKT cells, liver mononuclear cells were isolated as described previously ( 28 ), then the cells were stained with antibodies against CD3 and NK1.1 (Pharmingen), and sorted using a FACS Aria. Primary human NKT cells were isolated from PBMC using the CD3+CD56+ isolation kit (Miltenyi).  Generation of artificial Antigen Presenting Cells The preparation of CD1d-Ig based aAPC was performed according to the previously described method ( 29 ). Briefly, to conjugate hCD1d-Ig dimer molecules to beads, 50 ?g of hCD1d-Ig (Pharmingen) was added to 0.5 ml of epoxy beads (Dynabeads, M-450, Expoxy, 4×108 beads/ml) (Dynal) in sterile 0.1M Borate buffer, pH 7.0–7.4. The bead protein mixture was mixed with rotation and incubated for 24h at 4°C. Then the beads were washed and the hCD1d molecules were loaded with lipid antigen, ?-Galactosylceramide (?-GalCer), (5 ?g/ml in 1 ml PBS containing 5 × 107 beads) (Axxora, LLC).  Generation of CMV specific CTL CMV specific CTL were generated using peptide-pulsed HLA-A2-Ig based aAPCs, as previously described ( 29 ).  Treatment of Cells with Tumor Associated Ascites The ascites was cleared of cellular debris by centrifugation at 250 × g for 10 min. The clarified supernatants were then stored at ?20°C. For experiments, the supernatants were thawed at 4°C overnight, then L-vector, L-CDd1wt, CMV-peptide pulsed T2 cells, or aAPC were incubated with ascites (2–5 × 106 cells per ml of ascites) for 4 h at 37°C. The cells were subsequently washed three times with 10 ml PBS, resuspended in IMDM medium, supplemented with 5% FBS and 2 mM L-glutamine and co-cultured with or without the indicated NKT hybridomas for 20–24 h at 37°C. The co-cultures with the primary T and NKT cells were incubated for 72 or 48 h, respectively. Cytokine release (IL-2, GM-CSF, or IFN-?) was measured as an indication of NKT/T cell activation and was measured by standard sandwich ELISA.  Results Pretreatment with tumor associated ascites inhibits CD1d-mediated activation of NKT cells Ascites from a panel of ovarian cancer patients was used to treat CD1d expressing cells (LCD1dwt) and the effect on CD1d mediated antigen presentation was assessed ( Table 1 ). Following treatment with ascites, LCD1dwt cells were washed extensively and co-cultured with NKT cells. We evaluated the ability of the pretreated CD1d expressing cells to stimulate the NKT cells by measuring the IL-2 released in the co-culture supernatants by ELISA. We found that the ability of the CD1d-expressing cells to induce NKT cell cytokine production was reduced by 10–>95% following treatment with the majority of ascites samples examined, as shown in Table 1 and Fig. 1A . Interestingly, we found that antigen presentation to both canonical (V?14+) DN32.D3, N38-3C3, N38-2C12, N38-2H4 and noncanonical (V?5+) N37-1A12 NKT cell hybridomas was inhibited by pretreatment with ascites ( Fig. 1A ). Next, we sought to examine whether non-malignant ascites also contained immunosuppressive properties. Thus, we obtained portal hypertension ascites from patients with hepatitis C. As shown in Table 1 , we found that half of the ascites (3/6) did not inhibit the ability of the CD1d expressing cells to stimulate the NKT cells. In fact, treatment with only 1 sample from the patients with hepatitis C resulted in greater than 50% inhibition. Treatment with non-malignant ascites can have an effect on CD1d-mediated NKT cell activation; therefore, it will require many more samples to clearly establish if non-malignant ascites can regularly alter CD1d-mediated NKT cell activation. To examine the specificity of inhibition, we analyzed the ability of NKT cells to produce other cytokines. NKT cell hybridomas have been reported to secrete GM-CSF ( 30 ), which is important for their maturation and effector functions ( 31 , 32 ). We found that production of GM-CSF was also suppressed by the majority of the ascites samples tested, as shown with samples OC-60 and OC-63 ( Fig. 1B ). Ascites treatment of stimulatory cells not only inhibited NKT hybridoma cell lines, but even more importantly it also inhibited the activation of primary mouse NKT cells ( Fig. 1C ) and primary human NKT cells ( Fig. 1D ). Taken together, these data demonstrate that ovarian cancer associated ascites can profoundly effect the ability of antigen presenting cells to activate NKT cells. Pretreatment with serum does not inhibit CD1d-mediated activation of NKT cells Numerous reports have demonstrated that cancer patients have a reduction in NKT cell number and function. As we have found that pretreatment with ovarian cancer associated ascites can reduce the stimulatory capacity of CD1d molecules, it is possible that this effect is not limited locally to the ascites. Therefore, to further analyze if the observed inhibitory effect is limited to the ascites or if it is a more global effect we analyzed the inhibitory capacity of matched serum samples. As shown in Figure 2 , pretreatment with serum from patients or controls (human AB serum and FBS), did not result in decreased stimulation/activation of NKT cells. Moreover, we found that serum pretreatment in some cases even augmented the ability of the antigen presenting cells to induce cytokine production from the NKT cells. Tumor associated ascites inhibits presentation of ?-GalCer by artificial Antigen Presenting cells (aAPC) We developed bead based-CD1d expressing artificial antigen presenting cells (aAPC) ( Fig. 3A ). The system is based on directly coupling CD1d-Ig to magnetic beads and using them to stimulate the NKT cell hybridomas. Using this cell free tool we can load CD1d-aAPC with alpha- galactosylceramide (?-GalCer), a potent stimulator of NKT cells and determine if antigen processing or editing is necessary for the ascites mediated inhibition. After establishing the system, the ?-GalCer loaded aAPC were treated with media or ascites for 4 h, washed extensively, and co-cultured with ?-GalCer specific NKT cells. Ascites treatment inhibited ?-GalCer presentation by aAPC while mock treatment with media did not affect the aAPC mediated NKT cell activation ( Fig. 3B ). Thus, these data demonstrate that antigen processing is not necessary for the ascites inhibition. Moreover, the inhibition is not a simply an issue of decreased cell viability. The inhibitory effect mediated by ascites treatment is CD1d-specific We next examined whether the immunosuppressive effect of ascites was limited to NKT cell activation or if treatment with ascites fluid also inhibited MHC class I mediated activation of CD8+ CTL. To address this question, we investigated whether ascites fluid could inhibit the activation of HLA-A2 restricted CMV-specific CTL. In these studies, we used pretreated peptide loaded target cells (T2) to stimulate CMV-specific CD8+ T cells and measured IFN-? release. It is possible that slight alterations in antigen presentation could be masked in the presence of strong stimuli. Therefore, in order to better monitor the effect of treating the target cells with ascites we set up several effector to target cell (E:T) ratios. As shown in Figure 4A , ascites pretreatment did not inhibit activation of classical CD8+ T cells at any ratio examined. In parallel, CD1d-expressing cells were treated with the same ascites samples and their ability to stimulate NKT cells was assessed ( Fig. 4B ). While there was no effect observed in IFN-? production by classical CMV-specific CTL, pretreatment with the same ascites samples resulted in an almost complete abrogation of cytokine production by NKT cells. Taken together, these data show that inhibition of antigen presentation by tumor associated ascites is CD1d-specific. Pretreatment with ascites results in a dose-dependent inhibition of NKT cell activation Further analysis of the ability of ascites to mediate inhibition of antigen presentation by CD1d was necessary to characterize the effect. We diluted the ascites with cell culture media and treated the LCD1dwt stimulator cells for 4 h, washed extensively and co-cultured them with NKT cells as described above. As shown in Figures 5A–D , increasing concentrations of ascites resulted in a concomitant reduction in NKT cell activation, as measured by cytokine release, in all NKT cell hybridomas examined. Even when the antigen presenting cells were treated with 25% ascites fluid or less the blocking effect on NKT cell activation was still observed. While all of the NKT cell lines are CD1d-restricted, they vary in their antigen specificity. Namely, the noncanonical NKT cell hybridoma, N37-1A12, does not recognize ?-GalCer in the context of CD1d molecules; however, its activation is similarly reduced in a dose-dependent manner. Interestingly, the dose curves are markedly different for each cell line. In addition, the ascites was passed through 40 micron filters to further characterize its inhibitory effects. There was no change its ability to block CD1d-mediated activation of NKT cells (data not shown). Collectively, these data demonstrate that ovarian cancer associated ascites treatment can block CD1d-mediated activation of NKT cells.  Results Pretreatment with tumor associated ascites inhibits CD1d-mediated activation of NKT cells Ascites from a panel of ovarian cancer patients was used to treat CD1d expressing cells (LCD1dwt) and the effect on CD1d mediated antigen presentation was assessed ( Table 1 ). Following treatment with ascites, LCD1dwt cells were washed extensively and co-cultured with NKT cells. We evaluated the ability of the pretreated CD1d expressing cells to stimulate the NKT cells by measuring the IL-2 released in the co-culture supernatants by ELISA. We found that the ability of the CD1d-expressing cells to induce NKT cell cytokine production was reduced by 10–>95% following treatment with the majority of ascites samples examined, as shown in Table 1 and Fig. 1A . Interestingly, we found that antigen presentation to both canonical (V?14+) DN32.D3, N38-3C3, N38-2C12, N38-2H4 and noncanonical (V?5+) N37-1A12 NKT cell hybridomas was inhibited by pretreatment with ascites ( Fig. 1A ). Next, we sought to examine whether non-malignant ascites also contained immunosuppressive properties. Thus, we obtained portal hypertension ascites from patients with hepatitis C. As shown in Table 1 , we found that half of the ascites (3/6) did not inhibit the ability of the CD1d expressing cells to stimulate the NKT cells. In fact, treatment with only 1 sample from the patients with hepatitis C resulted in greater than 50% inhibition. Treatment with non-malignant ascites can have an effect on CD1d-mediated NKT cell activation; therefore, it will require many more samples to clearly establish if non-malignant ascites can regularly alter CD1d-mediated NKT cell activation. To examine the specificity of inhibition, we analyzed the ability of NKT cells to produce other cytokines. NKT cell hybridomas have been reported to secrete GM-CSF ( 30 ), which is important for their maturation and effector functions ( 31 , 32 ). We found that production of GM-CSF was also suppressed by the majority of the ascites samples tested, as shown with samples OC-60 and OC-63 ( Fig. 1B ). Ascites treatment of stimulatory cells not only inhibited NKT hybridoma cell lines, but even more importantly it also inhibited the activation of primary mouse NKT cells ( Fig. 1C ) and primary human NKT cells ( Fig. 1D ). Taken together, these data demonstrate that ovarian cancer associated ascites can profoundly effect the ability of antigen presenting cells to activate NKT cells. Pretreatment with serum does not inhibit CD1d-mediated activation of NKT cells Numerous reports have demonstrated that cancer patients have a reduction in NKT cell number and function. As we have found that pretreatment with ovarian cancer associated ascites can reduce the stimulatory capacity of CD1d molecules, it is possible that this effect is not limited locally to the ascites. Therefore, to further analyze if the observed inhibitory effect is limited to the ascites or if it is a more global effect we analyzed the inhibitory capacity of matched serum samples. As shown in Figure 2 , pretreatment with serum from patients or controls (human AB serum and FBS), did not result in decreased stimulation/activation of NKT cells. Moreover, we found that serum pretreatment in some cases even augmented the ability of the antigen presenting cells to induce cytokine production from the NKT cells. Tumor associated ascites inhibits presentation of ?-GalCer by artificial Antigen Presenting cells (aAPC) We developed bead based-CD1d expressing artificial antigen presenting cells (aAPC) ( Fig. 3A ). The system is based on directly coupling CD1d-Ig to magnetic beads and using them to stimulate the NKT cell hybridomas. Using this cell free tool we can load CD1d-aAPC with alpha- galactosylceramide (?-GalCer), a potent stimulator of NKT cells and determine if antigen processing or editing is necessary for the ascites mediated inhibition. After establishing the system, the ?-GalCer loaded aAPC were treated with media or ascites for 4 h, washed extensively, and co-cultured with ?-GalCer specific NKT cells. Ascites treatment inhibited ?-GalCer presentation by aAPC while mock treatment with media did not affect the aAPC mediated NKT cell activation ( Fig. 3B ). Thus, these data demonstrate that antigen processing is not necessary for the ascites inhibition. Moreover, the inhibition is not a simply an issue of decreased cell viability. The inhibitory effect mediated by ascites treatment is CD1d-specific We next examined whether the immunosuppressive effect of ascites was limited to NKT cell activation or if treatment with ascites fluid also inhibited MHC class I mediated activation of CD8+ CTL. To address this question, we investigated whether ascites fluid could inhibit the activation of HLA-A2 restricted CMV-specific CTL. In these studies, we used pretreated peptide loaded target cells (T2) to stimulate CMV-specific CD8+ T cells and measured IFN-? release. It is possible that slight alterations in antigen presentation could be masked in the presence of strong stimuli. Therefore, in order to better monitor the effect of treating the target cells with ascites we set up several effector to target cell (E:T) ratios. As shown in Figure 4A , ascites pretreatment did not inhibit activation of classical CD8+ T cells at any ratio examined. In parallel, CD1d-expressing cells were treated with the same ascites samples and their ability to stimulate NKT cells was assessed ( Fig. 4B ). While there was no effect observed in IFN-? production by classical CMV-specific CTL, pretreatment with the same ascites samples resulted in an almost complete abrogation of cytokine production by NKT cells. Taken together, these data show that inhibition of antigen presentation by tumor associated ascites is CD1d-specific. Pretreatment with ascites results in a dose-dependent inhibition of NKT cell activation Further analysis of the ability of ascites to mediate inhibition of antigen presentation by CD1d was necessary to characterize the effect. We diluted the ascites with cell culture media and treated the LCD1dwt stimulator cells for 4 h, washed extensively and co-cultured them with NKT cells as described above. As shown in Figures 5A–D , increasing concentrations of ascites resulted in a concomitant reduction in NKT cell activation, as measured by cytokine release, in all NKT cell hybridomas examined. Even when the antigen presenting cells were treated with 25% ascites fluid or less the blocking effect on NKT cell activation was still observed. While all of the NKT cell lines are CD1d-restricted, they vary in their antigen specificity. Namely, the noncanonical NKT cell hybridoma, N37-1A12, does not recognize ?-GalCer in the context of CD1d molecules; however, its activation is similarly reduced in a dose-dependent manner. Interestingly, the dose curves are markedly different for each cell line. In addition, the ascites was passed through 40 micron filters to further characterize its inhibitory effects. There was no change its ability to block CD1d-mediated activation of NKT cells (data not shown). Collectively, these data demonstrate that ovarian cancer associated ascites treatment can block CD1d-mediated activation of NKT cells.  Pretreatment with tumor associated ascites inhibits CD1d-mediated activation of NKT cells Ascites from a panel of ovarian cancer patients was used to treat CD1d expressing cells (LCD1dwt) and the effect on CD1d mediated antigen presentation was assessed ( Table 1 ). Following treatment with ascites, LCD1dwt cells were washed extensively and co-cultured with NKT cells. We evaluated the ability of the pretreated CD1d expressing cells to stimulate the NKT cells by measuring the IL-2 released in the co-culture supernatants by ELISA. We found that the ability of the CD1d-expressing cells to induce NKT cell cytokine production was reduced by 10–>95% following treatment with the majority of ascites samples examined, as shown in Table 1 and Fig. 1A . Interestingly, we found that antigen presentation to both canonical (V?14+) DN32.D3, N38-3C3, N38-2C12, N38-2H4 and noncanonical (V?5+) N37-1A12 NKT cell hybridomas was inhibited by pretreatment with ascites ( Fig. 1A ). Next, we sought to examine whether non-malignant ascites also contained immunosuppressive properties. Thus, we obtained portal hypertension ascites from patients with hepatitis C. As shown in Table 1 , we found that half of the ascites (3/6) did not inhibit the ability of the CD1d expressing cells to stimulate the NKT cells. In fact, treatment with only 1 sample from the patients with hepatitis C resulted in greater than 50% inhibition. Treatment with non-malignant ascites can have an effect on CD1d-mediated NKT cell activation; therefore, it will require many more samples to clearly establish if non-malignant ascites can regularly alter CD1d-mediated NKT cell activation. To examine the specificity of inhibition, we analyzed the ability of NKT cells to produce other cytokines. NKT cell hybridomas have been reported to secrete GM-CSF ( 30 ), which is important for their maturation and effector functions ( 31 , 32 ). We found that production of GM-CSF was also suppressed by the majority of the ascites samples tested, as shown with samples OC-60 and OC-63 ( Fig. 1B ). Ascites treatment of stimulatory cells not only inhibited NKT hybridoma cell lines, but even more importantly it also inhibited the activation of primary mouse NKT cells ( Fig. 1C ) and primary human NKT cells ( Fig. 1D ). Taken together, these data demonstrate that ovarian cancer associated ascites can profoundly effect the ability of antigen presenting cells to activate NKT cells.  Pretreatment with tumor associated ascites inhibits CD1d-mediated activation of NKT cells Ascites from a panel of ovarian cancer patients was used to treat CD1d expressing cells (LCD1dwt) and the effect on CD1d mediated antigen presentation was assessed ( Table 1 ). Following treatment with ascites, LCD1dwt cells were washed extensively and co-cultured with NKT cells. We evaluated the ability of the pretreated CD1d expressing cells to stimulate the NKT cells by measuring the IL-2 released in the co-culture supernatants by ELISA. We found that the ability of the CD1d-expressing cells to induce NKT cell cytokine production was reduced by 10–>95% following treatment with the majority of ascites samples examined, as shown in Table 1 and Fig. 1A . Interestingly, we found that antigen presentation to both canonical (V?14+) DN32.D3, N38-3C3, N38-2C12, N38-2H4 and noncanonical (V?5+) N37-1A12 NKT cell hybridomas was inhibited by pretreatment with ascites ( Fig. 1A ). Next, we sought to examine whether non-malignant ascites also contained immunosuppressive properties. Thus, we obtained portal hypertension ascites from patients with hepatitis C. As shown in Table 1 , we found that half of the ascites (3/6) did not inhibit the ability of the CD1d expressing cells to stimulate the NKT cells. In fact, treatment with only 1 sample from the patients with hepatitis C resulted in greater than 50% inhibition. Treatment with non-malignant ascites can have an effect on CD1d-mediated NKT cell activation; therefore, it will require many more samples to clearly establish if non-malignant ascites can regularly alter CD1d-mediated NKT cell activation. To examine the specificity of inhibition, we analyzed the ability of NKT cells to produce other cytokines. NKT cell hybridomas have been reported to secrete GM-CSF ( 30 ), which is important for their maturation and effector functions ( 31 , 32 ). We found that production of GM-CSF was also suppressed by the majority of the ascites samples tested, as shown with samples OC-60 and OC-63 ( Fig. 1B ). Ascites treatment of stimulatory cells not only inhibited NKT hybridoma cell lines, but even more importantly it also inhibited the activation of primary mouse NKT cells ( Fig. 1C ) and primary human NKT cells ( Fig. 1D ). Taken together, these data demonstrate that ovarian cancer associated ascites can profoundly effect the ability of antigen presenting cells to activate NKT cells.  Pretreatment with serum does not inhibit CD1d-mediated activation of NKT cells Numerous reports have demonstrated that cancer patients have a reduction in NKT cell number and function. As we have found that pretreatment with ovarian cancer associated ascites can reduce the stimulatory capacity of CD1d molecules, it is possible that this effect is not limited locally to the ascites. Therefore, to further analyze if the observed inhibitory effect is limited to the ascites or if it is a more global effect we analyzed the inhibitory capacity of matched serum samples. As shown in Figure 2 , pretreatment with serum from patients or controls (human AB serum and FBS), did not result in decreased stimulation/activation of NKT cells. Moreover, we found that serum pretreatment in some cases even augmented the ability of the antigen presenting cells to induce cytokine production from the NKT cells.  Pretreatment with serum does not inhibit CD1d-mediated activation of NKT cells Numerous reports have demonstrated that cancer patients have a reduction in NKT cell number and function. As we have found that pretreatment with ovarian cancer associated ascites can reduce the stimulatory capacity of CD1d molecules, it is possible that this effect is not limited locally to the ascites. Therefore, to further analyze if the observed inhibitory effect is limited to the ascites or if it is a more global effect we analyzed the inhibitory capacity of matched serum samples. As shown in Figure 2 , pretreatment with serum from patients or controls (human AB serum and FBS), did not result in decreased stimulation/activation of NKT cells. Moreover, we found that serum pretreatment in some cases even augmented the ability of the antigen presenting cells to induce cytokine production from the NKT cells.  Tumor associated ascites inhibits presentation of ?-GalCer by artificial Antigen Presenting cells (aAPC) We developed bead based-CD1d expressing artificial antigen presenting cells (aAPC) ( Fig. 3A ). The system is based on directly coupling CD1d-Ig to magnetic beads and using them to stimulate the NKT cell hybridomas. Using this cell free tool we can load CD1d-aAPC with alpha- galactosylceramide (?-GalCer), a potent stimulator of NKT cells and determine if antigen processing or editing is necessary for the ascites mediated inhibition. After establishing the system, the ?-GalCer loaded aAPC were treated with media or ascites for 4 h, washed extensively, and co-cultured with ?-GalCer specific NKT cells. Ascites treatment inhibited ?-GalCer presentation by aAPC while mock treatment with media did not affect the aAPC mediated NKT cell activation ( Fig. 3B ). Thus, these data demonstrate that antigen processing is not necessary for the ascites inhibition. Moreover, the inhibition is not a simply an issue of decreased cell viability.  Tumor associated ascites inhibits presentation of ?-GalCer by artificial Antigen Presenting cells (aAPC) We developed bead based-CD1d expressing artificial antigen presenting cells (aAPC) ( Fig. 3A ). The system is based on directly coupling CD1d-Ig to magnetic beads and using them to stimulate the NKT cell hybridomas. Using this cell free tool we can load CD1d-aAPC with alpha- galactosylceramide (?-GalCer), a potent stimulator of NKT cells and determine if antigen processing or editing is necessary for the ascites mediated inhibition. After establishing the system, the ?-GalCer loaded aAPC were treated with media or ascites for 4 h, washed extensively, and co-cultured with ?-GalCer specific NKT cells. Ascites treatment inhibited ?-GalCer presentation by aAPC while mock treatment with media did not affect the aAPC mediated NKT cell activation ( Fig. 3B ). Thus, these data demonstrate that antigen processing is not necessary for the ascites inhibition. Moreover, the inhibition is not a simply an issue of decreased cell viability.  The inhibitory effect mediated by ascites treatment is CD1d-specific We next examined whether the immunosuppressive effect of ascites was limited to NKT cell activation or if treatment with ascites fluid also inhibited MHC class I mediated activation of CD8+ CTL. To address this question, we investigated whether ascites fluid could inhibit the activation of HLA-A2 restricted CMV-specific CTL. In these studies, we used pretreated peptide loaded target cells (T2) to stimulate CMV-specific CD8+ T cells and measured IFN-? release. It is possible that slight alterations in antigen presentation could be masked in the presence of strong stimuli. Therefore, in order to better monitor the effect of treating the target cells with ascites we set up several effector to target cell (E:T) ratios. As shown in Figure 4A , ascites pretreatment did not inhibit activation of classical CD8+ T cells at any ratio examined. In parallel, CD1d-expressing cells were treated with the same ascites samples and their ability to stimulate NKT cells was assessed ( Fig. 4B ). While there was no effect observed in IFN-? production by classical CMV-specific CTL, pretreatment with the same ascites samples resulted in an almost complete abrogation of cytokine production by NKT cells. Taken together, these data show that inhibition of antigen presentation by tumor associated ascites is CD1d-specific.  The inhibitory effect mediated by ascites treatment is CD1d-specific We next examined whether the immunosuppressive effect of ascites was limited to NKT cell activation or if treatment with ascites fluid also inhibited MHC class I mediated activation of CD8+ CTL. To address this question, we investigated whether ascites fluid could inhibit the activation of HLA-A2 restricted CMV-specific CTL. In these studies, we used pretreated peptide loaded target cells (T2) to stimulate CMV-specific CD8+ T cells and measured IFN-? release. It is possible that slight alterations in antigen presentation could be masked in the presence of strong stimuli. Therefore, in order to better monitor the effect of treating the target cells with ascites we set up several effector to target cell (E:T) ratios. As shown in Figure 4A , ascites pretreatment did not inhibit activation of classical CD8+ T cells at any ratio examined. In parallel, CD1d-expressing cells were treated with the same ascites samples and their ability to stimulate NKT cells was assessed ( Fig. 4B ). While there was no effect observed in IFN-? production by classical CMV-specific CTL, pretreatment with the same ascites samples resulted in an almost complete abrogation of cytokine production by NKT cells. Taken together, these data show that inhibition of antigen presentation by tumor associated ascites is CD1d-specific.  Pretreatment with ascites results in a dose-dependent inhibition of NKT cell activation Further analysis of the ability of ascites to mediate inhibition of antigen presentation by CD1d was necessary to characterize the effect. We diluted the ascites with cell culture media and treated the LCD1dwt stimulator cells for 4 h, washed extensively and co-cultured them with NKT cells as described above. As shown in Figures 5A–D , increasing concentrations of ascites resulted in a concomitant reduction in NKT cell activation, as measured by cytokine release, in all NKT cell hybridomas examined. Even when the antigen presenting cells were treated with 25% ascites fluid or less the blocking effect on NKT cell activation was still observed. While all of the NKT cell lines are CD1d-restricted, they vary in their antigen specificity. Namely, the noncanonical NKT cell hybridoma, N37-1A12, does not recognize ?-GalCer in the context of CD1d molecules; however, its activation is similarly reduced in a dose-dependent manner. Interestingly, the dose curves are markedly different for each cell line. In addition, the ascites was passed through 40 micron filters to further characterize its inhibitory effects. There was no change its ability to block CD1d-mediated activation of NKT cells (data not shown). Collectively, these data demonstrate that ovarian cancer associated ascites treatment can block CD1d-mediated activation of NKT cells.  Pretreatment with ascites results in a dose-dependent inhibition of NKT cell activation Further analysis of the ability of ascites to mediate inhibition of antigen presentation by CD1d was necessary to characterize the effect. We diluted the ascites with cell culture media and treated the LCD1dwt stimulator cells for 4 h, washed extensively and co-cultured them with NKT cells as described above. As shown in Figures 5A–D , increasing concentrations of ascites resulted in a concomitant reduction in NKT cell activation, as measured by cytokine release, in all NKT cell hybridomas examined. Even when the antigen presenting cells were treated with 25% ascites fluid or less the blocking effect on NKT cell activation was still observed. While all of the NKT cell lines are CD1d-restricted, they vary in their antigen specificity. Namely, the noncanonical NKT cell hybridoma, N37-1A12, does not recognize ?-GalCer in the context of CD1d molecules; however, its activation is similarly reduced in a dose-dependent manner. Interestingly, the dose curves are markedly different for each cell line. In addition, the ascites was passed through 40 micron filters to further characterize its inhibitory effects. There was no change its ability to block CD1d-mediated activation of NKT cells (data not shown). Collectively, these data demonstrate that ovarian cancer associated ascites treatment can block CD1d-mediated activation of NKT cells.  Discussion In this study we have found that treatment of CD1d expressing stimulator cells with ovarian cancer associated ascites inhibited CD1d-mediated activation of NKT cells in vitro . This inhibition resulted in decreased production of multiple cytokines, IL-2, GM-CSF (in murine NKT cells, Figs. 1A, B, C ) and IFN-? (in primary human NKT cells, Fig. 1D ). Interestingly, we found that this effect was limited to the ascites, as it was not found in the following treatment with serum-matched samples from the same patients ( Fig. 2 ). Ascites treatment of ?–GalCer loaded aAPC, impaired their ability to activate NKT cells, which further suggests that the inhibition is independent of antigen processing ( Fig. 3 ). Notably, in these studies we used human CD1d:Ig dimers to generate aAPC. Thus our studies demonstrate an inhibitory effect of ascites fluid on both mouse CD1d molecules (expressed on LCD1d1wt cells), and human CD1d molecules (immobilized on aAPC). Moreover, since ?GalCer has been well-characterized as a high affinity ligand and potent stimulator of NKT cells, the level of inhibition observed following treatment with ovarian cancer associated ascites suggests that the putative inhibitory ligand has a very high affinity for CD1d. Other groups have implicated a role for the shedding of glycolipids as a method of tumor cell evasion from immune detection ( 33 ). While inhibition of CD1d-mediated antigen presentation by a glycosphingolipid (Gg3Cer) shedding from a murine lymphoma has been previously reported ( 24 ), the inhibition mediated by Gg3Cer was specific to the invariant, canonical NKT cell population. In our studies we have found dose dependent inhibition of CD1d-mediated antigen presentation to both canconical and noncanonical NKT cells following pretreatment with ovarian tumor associated ascites ( Figs. 5A–D ). While CD1d molecules are known to traffic through endocytic compartments in order to present endogenous antigen to canonical NKT cells ( 34 ), presentation to noncanonical NKT cells (i.e. N37-1A12) is not dependent on antigen processing( 35 ); these studies suggest that treatment with ascites does not interfere with antigen processing, but rather may result in alterations in the expression of functional antigen-CD1d complexes on the cell surface. Our data using the ?-GalCer loaded aAPC ( Fig. 3B ) strongly support this hypothesis. Moreover, our findings in Figs 5A–D are intriguing because the dose curves are markedly different for each NKT cell line examined. These data suggest that the discovery of natural ligands for NKT cells may reveal subtle differences in their antigen specificities that are not obvious with the potent agonist, ?–GalCer. Furthermore, the ?-GalCer loaded aAPC data ( Fig. 3B ), along with experiments showing that antigen presentation by HLA-A2 to classical T cells was not affected ( Fig. 4 ), confirm that the reduction in antigen presentation is not due to the overall toxicity of the ascites or death of the treated stimulator cells. It is known that ovarian cancer patient ascites is rich in gangliosides ( 18 ), some which have been previously shown to be presented by CD1d molecules ( 19 , 20 ). We hypothesize that the mechanism of inhibition is the result of the binding of one or more gangliosides to the hydrophobic groove of CD1d, which blocks, covers or competes with the binding of the endogenous ligand. This would explain the reduction in antigen presentation to all NKT cells examined (but not classical CTL) and account for the reversal of NKT cell activation using ascites treated ?–GalCer loaded aAPC ( Fig. 3B ). It will be interesting to determine if ovarian cancer associated ascites contains a specific family of gangliosides which mediate the inhibitory effects observed. Studies to identify the described inhibitory agent in the ascites are currently ongoing in the laboratory. To our knowledge this is the first report demonstrating that human tumor ascites specifically suppresses the CD1d/NKT system. Here, we present evidence which demonstrate that ascites, from cancer patients and possibly others, contain inhibitory substances (conceivably lipid antigens) which block CD1d mediated activation of NKT cells. Thus, the presence of activated NKT cells may be a critical prognostic factor for ovarian cancer and more importantly, restoration of their function could be an effective therapeutic strategy.  Discussion In this study we have found that treatment of CD1d expressing stimulator cells with ovarian cancer associated ascites inhibited CD1d-mediated activation of NKT cells in vitro . This inhibition resulted in decreased production of multiple cytokines, IL-2, GM-CSF (in murine NKT cells, Figs. 1A, B, C ) and IFN-? (in primary human NKT cells, Fig. 1D ). Interestingly, we found that this effect was limited to the ascites, as it was not found in the following treatment with serum-matched samples from the same patients ( Fig. 2 ). Ascites treatment of ?–GalCer loaded aAPC, impaired their ability to activate NKT cells, which further suggests that the inhibition is independent of antigen processing ( Fig. 3 ). Notably, in these studies we used human CD1d:Ig dimers to generate aAPC. Thus our studies demonstrate an inhibitory effect of ascites fluid on both mouse CD1d molecules (expressed on LCD1d1wt cells), and human CD1d molecules (immobilized on aAPC). Moreover, since ?GalCer has been well-characterized as a high affinity ligand and potent stimulator of NKT cells, the level of inhibition observed following treatment with ovarian cancer associated ascites suggests that the putative inhibitory ligand has a very high affinity for CD1d. Other groups have implicated a role for the shedding of glycolipids as a method of tumor cell evasion from immune detection ( 33 ). While inhibition of CD1d-mediated antigen presentation by a glycosphingolipid (Gg3Cer) shedding from a murine lymphoma has been previously reported ( 24 ), the inhibition mediated by Gg3Cer was specific to the invariant, canonical NKT cell population. In our studies we have found dose dependent inhibition of CD1d-mediated antigen presentation to both canconical and noncanonical NKT cells following pretreatment with ovarian tumor associated ascites ( Figs. 5A–D ). While CD1d molecules are known to traffic through endocytic compartments in order to present endogenous antigen to canonical NKT cells ( 34 ), presentation to noncanonical NKT cells (i.e. N37-1A12) is not dependent on antigen processing( 35 ); these studies suggest that treatment with ascites does not interfere with antigen processing, but rather may result in alterations in the expression of functional antigen-CD1d complexes on the cell surface. Our data using the ?-GalCer loaded aAPC ( Fig. 3B ) strongly support this hypothesis. Moreover, our findings in Figs 5A–D are intriguing because the dose curves are markedly different for each NKT cell line examined. These data suggest that the discovery of natural ligands for NKT cells may reveal subtle differences in their antigen specificities that are not obvious with the potent agonist, ?–GalCer. Furthermore, the ?-GalCer loaded aAPC data ( Fig. 3B ), along with experiments showing that antigen presentation by HLA-A2 to classical T cells was not affected ( Fig. 4 ), confirm that the reduction in antigen presentation is not due to the overall toxicity of the ascites or death of the treated stimulator cells. It is known that ovarian cancer patient ascites is rich in gangliosides ( 18 ), some which have been previously shown to be presented by CD1d molecules ( 19 , 20 ). We hypothesize that the mechanism of inhibition is the result of the binding of one or more gangliosides to the hydrophobic groove of CD1d, which blocks, covers or competes with the binding of the endogenous ligand. This would explain the reduction in antigen presentation to all NKT cells examined (but not classical CTL) and account for the reversal of NKT cell activation using ascites treated ?–GalCer loaded aAPC ( Fig. 3B ). It will be interesting to determine if ovarian cancer associated ascites contains a specific family of gangliosides which mediate the inhibitory effects observed. Studies to identify the described inhibitory agent in the ascites are currently ongoing in the laboratory. To our knowledge this is the first report demonstrating that human tumor ascites specifically suppresses the CD1d/NKT system. Here, we present evidence which demonstrate that ascites, from cancer patients and possibly others, contain inhibitory substances (conceivably lipid antigens) which block CD1d mediated activation of NKT cells. Thus, the presence of activated NKT cells may be a critical prognostic factor for ovarian cancer and more importantly, restoration of their function could be an effective therapeutic strategy.  Figures and Table FIGURE 1 Treatment with ascites from ovarian cancer patient inhibits CD1d-mediated antigen presentation (A) LCD1dwt cells were treated with media or ascites from the indicated patients for 4 h, washed extensively and then co-cultured with a panel of NKT cell hybridomas, DN32.D3, N37-1A12, N38-3C3, N38-2C12, and N38-2H4. IL-2 was measured by standard cytokine ELISA, and data is shown as percent inhibition, normalized to cells treated with culture media as 100% or the maximum level of stimulation. The results are representative of more than 15 experiments, in which 3– 12 patients samples were tested in each experiment and each sample repeated at least twice. (B) The ascites treated LCD1d1wt cells were co-cultured with the V?14+ NKT cell hybridomas, DN32.D3, N38-2H4, (C) primary mouse NKT cells, or (D) primary human NKT cells and recognition of CD1d was assessed by measuring cytokine production in the supernatants by ELISA. NKT cells were co-cultured in media alone or with L cells transfected with vector alone as controls. Spontaneous cytokine release and background levels of cytokine production (as measured by co-culturing NKT cells with L cells containing vector alone) were subtracted before calculating percent inhibition. FIGURE 2 Treatment with serum from ovarian cancer patient does not inhibit CD1d-mediated antigen presentation LCD1dwt cells were treated with 1 ml media containing 5% FBS, FBS, human AB serum or serum from the indicated patients for 3–4 h, washed extensively and then co-cultured with N37-1A12 and N38-3C3 NKT cell hybridomas. IL-2 was measured by standard cytokine ELISA, and data is shown as percent control, normalized to cells treated with culture media as 100% or the maximum level of stimulation. FIGURE 3 (A) Generation of CD1d-based aAPC. aAPC were made by coupling CD1d-Ig and anti-CD28 Abs to magnetic beads. In this system, CD1d-Ig is used to provide the cognate antigen specific signal through the TCR. (B) Ascites treatment of ?-GalCer loaded aAPC inhibits antigen presentation by CD1d molecules. ?-GalCer loaded aAPC were incubated for 4h with either media or ascites from patients (a representative patient [OC-47] is shown). The aAPC (1 × 105 cells/well) were washed extensively and then co-cultured with the V?14+ NKT cell hybridomas, DN32.D3 (5 × 104) or N38-2H4 (1 × 105). NKT cell recognition of CD1d1 was assessed by measuring IL-2 production in the supernatants by ELISA. FIGURE 4 Treatment with ovarian cancer associated ascites has no effect on HLA-A2 mediated antigen presentation (A) T2 cells were pulsed with CMV peptide, treated with media (CMV-T2) or ascites (OC47 & OC57) for 4 h, washed and cocultured with CMV-specific CD8+T cells (1 × 105 cells/well) at the indicated ratios. IFN-? released was measured by ELISA. (B) LCD1d1wt cells were treated with ascites and then co-cultured with the V?14+ NKT cell hybridomas, DN32.D3, N38-2H4, and the V?14? NKT cell hybridoma, N37-1A12. NKT cell recognition of CD1d was assessed by measuring IL-2 production in the supernatants by ELISA. The results are representative of three experiments with similar results. FIGURE 5 NKT cell recognition of CD1d1 molecules is inhibited by treatment with ascites LCD1d1wt cells were incubated for 4 h in the presence or absence of the indicated concentrations of ascites from patient OC-47. The cells were then co-cultured with the V?14+ NKT cell hybridomas, (A) DN32.D3, (B) N38-2H4, (C) V?14? NKT cell hybridoma, N37-1A12, and the V?14+ NKT cell hybridoma (D) N38-2C12. NKT cell recognition of CD1d1 was assessed by measuring IL-2 production in the supernatants by ELISA. The results are representative of two experiments with patient OC-47 ascites. Similar results were obtained when the experiment was performed with ascites from another patient (OC-40). Table 1 Code Diagnosis Histology DN32.D3 * N37-1A12 * N38-2C12 * OC-4 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ? ++ +++ OC-6 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ++ +++ ? OC-18 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma +++ ++ ++ OC-23 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ++ ? ++ OC-34 Ovarian cancer High-grade clear cell carcinoma +++ ++++ ++++ OC-36 Fallopian tube carcinoma High-grade serous carcinoma ++++ ++++ ++ OC-37 Ovarian cancer Mixed clear cell and low grade serous carcinoma ? ++ ++ OC-38 Fallopian tube carcinoma Moderately differentiated serous carcinoma ++++ ++++ ++++ OC-40 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous and clear cell carcinoma ++++ ++ +++ OC-46 Ovarian cancer Atypical proliferative (borderline) serous tumor ++ ? ++ OC-47 Ovarian cancer MMMT, carcinosarcoma ++++ ++++ ++++ OC-48 Ovarian cancer Well differentiated endometrioid carcinoma ? ? ++ OC-56 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ++++ ++++ ++++ OC-57 Primary peritoneal cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ++++ ++++ N.D. OC-58 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ? ? N.D. OC-59 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ++++ ++++ N.D. OC-60 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ++++ ? N.D. OC-62 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ? +++ N.D. OC-63 Ovarian cancer High-grade adenocarcinoma ++ ++ N.D. OC-64 Uterine cancer High-grade serous carcinoma +++ ++++ N.D. OC65 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma + ++++ N.D. OC66 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ++++ ++++ N.D. OC67 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ++++ + N.D. OC68 Ovarian cancer High-grade endometrioid carcinoma ++ + N.D. OC69 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ++ + N.D. LP3 Hepatitis C ? ? N.D. LP4 Hepatitis C ++++ ++++ N.D. LP5 Hepatitis C ? ? N.D. LP6 Hepatitis C +++ ++ N.D. LP7 Hepatitis C ? ? N.D. LP8 Hepatitis C + ++ N.D. * Percent maximum inhibition of IL-2 production is shown as: No inhibition = ? <10% = + 10–30 = ++ 31–50 = +++ >51% = ++++ N.D. = not determined  Figures and Table FIGURE 1 Treatment with ascites from ovarian cancer patient inhibits CD1d-mediated antigen presentation (A) LCD1dwt cells were treated with media or ascites from the indicated patients for 4 h, washed extensively and then co-cultured with a panel of NKT cell hybridomas, DN32.D3, N37-1A12, N38-3C3, N38-2C12, and N38-2H4. IL-2 was measured by standard cytokine ELISA, and data is shown as percent inhibition, normalized to cells treated with culture media as 100% or the maximum level of stimulation. The results are representative of more than 15 experiments, in which 3– 12 patients samples were tested in each experiment and each sample repeated at least twice. (B) The ascites treated LCD1d1wt cells were co-cultured with the V?14+ NKT cell hybridomas, DN32.D3, N38-2H4, (C) primary mouse NKT cells, or (D) primary human NKT cells and recognition of CD1d was assessed by measuring cytokine production in the supernatants by ELISA. NKT cells were co-cultured in media alone or with L cells transfected with vector alone as controls. Spontaneous cytokine release and background levels of cytokine production (as measured by co-culturing NKT cells with L cells containing vector alone) were subtracted before calculating percent inhibition. FIGURE 2 Treatment with serum from ovarian cancer patient does not inhibit CD1d-mediated antigen presentation LCD1dwt cells were treated with 1 ml media containing 5% FBS, FBS, human AB serum or serum from the indicated patients for 3–4 h, washed extensively and then co-cultured with N37-1A12 and N38-3C3 NKT cell hybridomas. IL-2 was measured by standard cytokine ELISA, and data is shown as percent control, normalized to cells treated with culture media as 100% or the maximum level of stimulation. FIGURE 3 (A) Generation of CD1d-based aAPC. aAPC were made by coupling CD1d-Ig and anti-CD28 Abs to magnetic beads. In this system, CD1d-Ig is used to provide the cognate antigen specific signal through the TCR. (B) Ascites treatment of ?-GalCer loaded aAPC inhibits antigen presentation by CD1d molecules. ?-GalCer loaded aAPC were incubated for 4h with either media or ascites from patients (a representative patient [OC-47] is shown). The aAPC (1 × 105 cells/well) were washed extensively and then co-cultured with the V?14+ NKT cell hybridomas, DN32.D3 (5 × 104) or N38-2H4 (1 × 105). NKT cell recognition of CD1d1 was assessed by measuring IL-2 production in the supernatants by ELISA. FIGURE 4 Treatment with ovarian cancer associated ascites has no effect on HLA-A2 mediated antigen presentation (A) T2 cells were pulsed with CMV peptide, treated with media (CMV-T2) or ascites (OC47 & OC57) for 4 h, washed and cocultured with CMV-specific CD8+T cells (1 × 105 cells/well) at the indicated ratios. IFN-? released was measured by ELISA. (B) LCD1d1wt cells were treated with ascites and then co-cultured with the V?14+ NKT cell hybridomas, DN32.D3, N38-2H4, and the V?14? NKT cell hybridoma, N37-1A12. NKT cell recognition of CD1d was assessed by measuring IL-2 production in the supernatants by ELISA. The results are representative of three experiments with similar results. FIGURE 5 NKT cell recognition of CD1d1 molecules is inhibited by treatment with ascites LCD1d1wt cells were incubated for 4 h in the presence or absence of the indicated concentrations of ascites from patient OC-47. The cells were then co-cultured with the V?14+ NKT cell hybridomas, (A) DN32.D3, (B) N38-2H4, (C) V?14? NKT cell hybridoma, N37-1A12, and the V?14+ NKT cell hybridoma (D) N38-2C12. NKT cell recognition of CD1d1 was assessed by measuring IL-2 production in the supernatants by ELISA. The results are representative of two experiments with patient OC-47 ascites. Similar results were obtained when the experiment was performed with ascites from another patient (OC-40). Table 1 Code Diagnosis Histology DN32.D3 * N37-1A12 * N38-2C12 * OC-4 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ? ++ +++ OC-6 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ++ +++ ? OC-18 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma +++ ++ ++ OC-23 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ++ ? ++ OC-34 Ovarian cancer High-grade clear cell carcinoma +++ ++++ ++++ OC-36 Fallopian tube carcinoma High-grade serous carcinoma ++++ ++++ ++ OC-37 Ovarian cancer Mixed clear cell and low grade serous carcinoma ? ++ ++ OC-38 Fallopian tube carcinoma Moderately differentiated serous carcinoma ++++ ++++ ++++ OC-40 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous and clear cell carcinoma ++++ ++ +++ OC-46 Ovarian cancer Atypical proliferative (borderline) serous tumor ++ ? ++ OC-47 Ovarian cancer MMMT, carcinosarcoma ++++ ++++ ++++ OC-48 Ovarian cancer Well differentiated endometrioid carcinoma ? ? ++ OC-56 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ++++ ++++ ++++ OC-57 Primary peritoneal cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ++++ ++++ N.D. OC-58 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ? ? N.D. OC-59 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ++++ ++++ N.D. OC-60 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ++++ ? N.D. OC-62 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ? +++ N.D. OC-63 Ovarian cancer High-grade adenocarcinoma ++ ++ N.D. OC-64 Uterine cancer High-grade serous carcinoma +++ ++++ N.D. OC65 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma + ++++ N.D. OC66 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ++++ ++++ N.D. OC67 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ++++ + N.D. OC68 Ovarian cancer High-grade endometrioid carcinoma ++ + N.D. OC69 Ovarian cancer High-grade serous carcinoma ++ + N.D. LP3 Hepatitis C ? ? N.D. LP4 Hepatitis C ++++ ++++ N.D. LP5 Hepatitis C ? ? N.D. LP6 Hepatitis C +++ ++ N.D. LP7 Hepatitis C ? ? N.D. LP8 Hepatitis C + ++ N.D. * Percent maximum inhibition of IL-2 production is shown as: No inhibition = ? <10% = + 10–30 = ++ 31–50 = +++ >51% = ++++ N.D. = not determined 