Recent Advances in Molecular Biology of Thyroid Cancer and Their Clinical Implications Synopsis Thyroid cancer is the most common endocrine malignancy with a rapid rising incidence in recent years. Novel efficient management strategies are increasingly needed for this cancer. Remarkable advances have occurred in recent years in understanding the molecular biology of thyroid cancer. This is reflected in several major biological areas of thyroid cancer, including the molecular alterations for the loss of radioiodine avidity of thyroid cancer, the pathogenic role of the MAP kinase and PI3K/Akt pathways and their related genetic alterations, and the aberrant methylation of functionally important genes in thyroid tumorigenesis and pathogenesis. These exciting advances in molecular biology of thyroid cancer provide unprecedented opportunities for the development of molecular-based novel diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic strategies for this cancer.  Summary Thyroid cancer is the most common endocrine malignancy associated with several major diagnostic and therapeutic challenges. The recent advance in understanding the molecular biology of this cancer provides opportunities for the development of molecular-based strategies to tackle these challenges. This is particularly reflected in the following several areas: 1) Discovery of the aberrant silencing of thyroid iodide-handling genes through aberrant gene methylation coupled to major signaling pathways, such as the MAP kinase pathway, represents a major step in understanding the molecular defects associated with the loss of radioiodine avidity of thyroid cancer. It may now be possible to develop therapeutic strategies targeting at these molecular abnormalities to restore the radioiodine avidity of thyroid cancer. 2) Discovery of novel genetic alterations in the MAP kinase pathway, particularly the BRAF mutation, represents a major breakthrough in understanding the molecular mechanism of PTC pathogenesis. It represents not only a novel effective therapeutic target but also a valuable molecular marker that can even be examined preoperatively on FNAB specimens for risk estimation for thyroid cancer. This is expected to have a major impact on surgical and medical managements of thyroid cancer through achieving better risk stratification. 3) Discovery of the genetic alterations in the PI3K/Akt pathway, particularly their high prevalence and co-existence with genetic alterations in the MAP kinase pathway, represents another major advance in understanding the molecular mechanism of thyroid cancer. This provides a strong genetic basis for an extensive role of the PI3K/Akt pathway and the role of the dual involvement of this and the MAP kinase pathways in thyroid tumorigenesis. Consequently, therapeutic strategies dually targeting the two pathways can be tested for the effective treatment of thyroid cancer. 4) Epigenetic gene alterations, particularly aberrant gene methylation, is another fundamental molecular mechanism in thyroid cancer pathogenesis. Aberrant gene methylation-related molecular abnormalities may not only represent potential therapeutic targets but also represent promising novel diagnostic and prognostic molecular markers for thyroid cancer. Given these exciting advances in understanding the molecular biology of thyroid cancer in recent years, we are now at the verge of the development of novel diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic strategies for this common endocrine malignancy. 