Binge eating and weight loss outcomes in overweight and obese individuals with type 2 diabetes: Results from the Look AHEAD trial Context Binge eating (BE) is common in overweight and obese individuals with type 2 diabetes yet little is known about how BE affects weight loss in this population. Objective To determine whether BE was related to 1-year weight losses in overweight and obese individuals with type 2 diabetes participating in an ongoing clinical trial. Design and Setting Look AHEAD is a randomized controlled trial examining the long-term effect of intentional weight loss on CVD in overweight and obese adults with type 2 diabetes. Participants Overweight and obese individuals, 45–76 years old, with type 2 diabetes (n=5145). Interventions Participants were randomly assigned to an intensive lifestyle intervention (ILI) or to enhanced usual care (DSE). Main outcome measures At baseline and 1-year, participants had their weight measured and completed a fitness test and self-report measures of BE and dietary intake. Four groups were created based on BE status at baseline and 1-year (Yes/Yes, No/No, Yes/No, No/Yes). Analyses controlled for baseline differences between binge eaters and non-binge eaters. Results Most individuals (85.4%) did not report BE at baseline or 1-year, 7.5% reported BE only at baseline, 3.7% reported BE at both times, and 3.4% reported BE only at 1-year, with no differences between ILI and DSE conditions (p=.14). Across ILI and DSE, greater weight losses were observed in participants who stopped BE at 1-year (5.3±.4 kg) and in those who reported no BE at either time point (4.8±.1 kg) than in those who continued to BE (3.1±.6 kg) and those who began BE at 1-year (3.0±.6 kg) (p=.0003). Post hoc analyses suggested these differences were due to changes in caloric intake. Conclusions Overweight and obese individuals with type 2 diabetes who stop binge eating appear just as successful at weight loss as non-binge eaters after one year of treatment.  Measures Participants completed the following assessments. Demographics and anthropometric characteristics Participants provided basic demographic information regarding gender, race/ethnicity, marital status, and educational background at baseline. Weight was measured at baseline and 1-year on a digital scale in light weight clothing. Height was measured at baseline on a wall-mounted stadiometer. Diabetes variables At baseline, participants indicated the number of years since being diagnosed with diabetes and their current diabetes treatment regimen (i.e., diet only, oral medications without insulin, or insulin). Plasma was collected at baseline and glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c; measured by a dedicated ion exchange high-performance liquid chromatography instrument, Biorad Variant 11) was used as a measure of glycemic control over the past three-month period. Dietary intake Reported dietary intake was assessed on a subsample of the Look Ahead participants (n=2411) using a self-administered 130-item food frequency questionnaire, modified from the Insulin Resistance Atherosclerosis Study 24 that assessed usual consumption over the prior six-month period. We examined reported daily intake of energy as well as percent energy intake from fat, protein, and carbohydrate for those participants included in the subsample at baseline and 1-year. Fitness level Participants completed a graded exercise test that was designed to elicit a maximal effort at baseline and submaximal effort at 1-year. 25 Peak exercise capacity expressed as METS (metabolic equivalents) was estimated from treadmill speed and grade. Weight history At baseline, participants indicated the number of times (0, 1–2, 3–4, 5–6, or 7 or more times) they had intentional weight losses of 5–9 lb, 10–19 lb, 20–49 lb, 50–79 lb, 80–99 lb, and 100 lb or more. We examined the number of previous weight loss attempts (using the lower end of the frequency intervals, summed across categories) and the total amount of past intentional weight loss (defined as the frequency of weight loss attempts multiplied by the amount of weight loss achieved, using the lower end of the frequency and amount intervals and summing across categories). 26 Mood and general health The Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II) was used to measure depressive symptomatology. 26 The BDI-II has been shown to have high internal consistency, test-retest reliability, and construct validity. 27 The Short Form (SF) 36 version 2, a widely used validated measure, was used to assess general health 28 and participants also reported the number of prescription medications they were currently taking. These measures were assessed at baseline. Tobacco and alcohol use Tobacco and alcohol use was assessed at baseline and 1-year by self-report. Participants indicated whether they were a current smoker, a former smoker, or had never smoked cigarettes. Participants also reported how many alcoholic drinks (including wine, beer, and hard liquor) they typically consume per week. Binge drinking was assessed with a single item that asked participants how many days during the past month they had five or more drinks on the same occasion.  Demographics and anthropometric characteristics Participants provided basic demographic information regarding gender, race/ethnicity, marital status, and educational background at baseline. Weight was measured at baseline and 1-year on a digital scale in light weight clothing. Height was measured at baseline on a wall-mounted stadiometer.  Diabetes variables At baseline, participants indicated the number of years since being diagnosed with diabetes and their current diabetes treatment regimen (i.e., diet only, oral medications without insulin, or insulin). Plasma was collected at baseline and glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c; measured by a dedicated ion exchange high-performance liquid chromatography instrument, Biorad Variant 11) was used as a measure of glycemic control over the past three-month period.  Dietary intake Reported dietary intake was assessed on a subsample of the Look Ahead participants (n=2411) using a self-administered 130-item food frequency questionnaire, modified from the Insulin Resistance Atherosclerosis Study 24 that assessed usual consumption over the prior six-month period. We examined reported daily intake of energy as well as percent energy intake from fat, protein, and carbohydrate for those participants included in the subsample at baseline and 1-year.  Fitness level Participants completed a graded exercise test that was designed to elicit a maximal effort at baseline and submaximal effort at 1-year. 25 Peak exercise capacity expressed as METS (metabolic equivalents) was estimated from treadmill speed and grade.  Weight history At baseline, participants indicated the number of times (0, 1–2, 3–4, 5–6, or 7 or more times) they had intentional weight losses of 5–9 lb, 10–19 lb, 20–49 lb, 50–79 lb, 80–99 lb, and 100 lb or more. We examined the number of previous weight loss attempts (using the lower end of the frequency intervals, summed across categories) and the total amount of past intentional weight loss (defined as the frequency of weight loss attempts multiplied by the amount of weight loss achieved, using the lower end of the frequency and amount intervals and summing across categories). 26  Mood and general health The Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II) was used to measure depressive symptomatology. 26 The BDI-II has been shown to have high internal consistency, test-retest reliability, and construct validity. 27 The Short Form (SF) 36 version 2, a widely used validated measure, was used to assess general health 28 and participants also reported the number of prescription medications they were currently taking. These measures were assessed at baseline.  Tobacco and alcohol use Tobacco and alcohol use was assessed at baseline and 1-year by self-report. Participants indicated whether they were a current smoker, a former smoker, or had never smoked cigarettes. Participants also reported how many alcoholic drinks (including wine, beer, and hard liquor) they typically consume per week. Binge drinking was assessed with a single item that asked participants how many days during the past month they had five or more drinks on the same occasion.  Statistical analyses Baseline characteristics were compared between binge eaters and non-binge eaters with the use of t-tests for continuous variables and chi-square tests for categorical variables. To examine change in self-reported binge eating status over time, participants were classified according to binge eating status at baseline and 1-year, yielding four categories: those who indicated no binge eating at both time points (No/No), those who reported binge eating at baseline but not at 1-year (Yes/No), those who indicated no binge eating at baseline and reported it at 1-year (No/Yes) and those who reported binge eating at both time points (Yes/Yes). Multiple logistic regression was employed to examine the relationship between binge eating at 1-year and treatment group assignment. We determined the odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (95% CI) of binge eating at 1-year associated with treatment group assignment, controlling for baseline binge eating separately and in combination with age, race, gender, education level, baseline weight, number of previous weight loss attempts, total amount of weight lost, depressive symptoms, self-reported general health, number of prescription medications, and binge drinking. Multiple linear regression was used to model the effect of binge eating status on weight loss at one year, controlling for age, race/ethnicity, gender, education level, baseline weight, number of previous weight loss attempts, total amount of weight lost, depressive symptoms, self-reported general health, number of prescription medications, maximum METS, and binge drinking. Models were fitted for the overall cohort (also controlling for intervention group) and separately by treatment group assignment. In addition, the same models were fitted controlling for dietary covariates (reported caloric intake, percent fat intake, and percent carbohydrate intake) for the sub-sample of participants furnishing baseline dietary data. To further explore the weight loss differences detected among the binge eating status groups, we modeled the effect of binge eating status on change in total reported caloric intake and change in fitness controlling for the same variables noted above. We also ran the primary model examining the association between binge eating status and weight loss outcomes using DSM-IV BED criteria, rather than binge eating behavior. The patterns of weight losses were identical between the two models; however, because of reduced sample size the BED model was not significant (p=.09) and the data are not presented. Additionally, among those reporting binge eating at baseline, we used the primary model to determine the relationship between baseline binge eating frequency and weight loss at one year as well as the relationship between baseline binge eating frequency and change in reported caloric intake. Statistical analyses were performed with SAS statistical software, version 9 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC).  Methods Participants The Look AHEAD trial design and study participants have been described in detail elsewhere. 20 Briefly, individuals with type 2 diabetes interested in weight loss were recruited from 16 clinical centers in the United States. To participate, individuals had to be 45–76 years old and have a BMI ? 25 kg/m2 (?27 kg/m2 if on insulin). Individuals with inadequate diabetes control (i.e., HbA1c > 11%) or with factors likely to impact intervention adherence, safety (e.g., underlying serious medical or psychological conditions) or retention (e.g., plans to move out of the area) were excluded from the trial. All participants provided informed consent, as approved by each site’s Institutional Review Board. Eligible participants (n=5145) were randomly assigned to an intensive lifestyle intervention (ILI) or to a diabetes support and education control condition (DSE). The ILI was modeled after the Diabetes Prevention Program lifestyle intervention. 21 The goals of the intervention were to produce a mean weight loss of ? 7% of initial weight through caloric restriction (i.e., diet of 1200 – 1500 kcal/day) and increased physical activity (? 175 minutes per week of moderately intense activity). 22 To achieve these goals, ILI participants received 3 group meetings and 1 individual meeting each month during months 1–6 and 2 group meetings and 1 individual session per month during months 7–12. DSE participants were offered 3 group meetings per year and were given basic information on diabetes, nutrition, and physical activity. Definition of binge eating groups Binge eating was assessed via a self-report questionnaire based on the Questionnaire on Eating and Weight Patterns. 23 We identified participants who indicated having any episode(s) of eating a large amount of food in a short amount of time, reported feeling out of control, and who denied any compensatory behaviors (n=559; 10.9%) during the past six months. For the comparison group, we identified participants who reported no binge episodes or compensatory behaviors (n=4222; 82.1%). Individuals who reported compensatory behaviors (i.e., purging, excessive exercise; n=332; 6.5%) or who were missing data on the items used to determine binge eating behavior (n=32; 0.6%) were excluded. We chose to examine binge eating behavior as opposed to full-criteria BED as defined by the DSM-IV for several reasons. First, many more participants reported binge eating behavior (11.7%) than met DSM-IV criteria for BED (1.6%) allowing for more power to complete analyses. In addition, very little research has examined the effects of these behaviors (in the absence of an eating disorder) in the context of a behavioral weight study among type 2 diabetics. Also, examining binge eating behavior, which is easily assessed via self-report, rather than a diagnosis of BED, which is best done via structured interview, may have more clinical applications among health care professionals. Measures Participants completed the following assessments. Demographics and anthropometric characteristics Participants provided basic demographic information regarding gender, race/ethnicity, marital status, and educational background at baseline. Weight was measured at baseline and 1-year on a digital scale in light weight clothing. Height was measured at baseline on a wall-mounted stadiometer. Diabetes variables At baseline, participants indicated the number of years since being diagnosed with diabetes and their current diabetes treatment regimen (i.e., diet only, oral medications without insulin, or insulin). Plasma was collected at baseline and glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c; measured by a dedicated ion exchange high-performance liquid chromatography instrument, Biorad Variant 11) was used as a measure of glycemic control over the past three-month period. Dietary intake Reported dietary intake was assessed on a subsample of the Look Ahead participants (n=2411) using a self-administered 130-item food frequency questionnaire, modified from the Insulin Resistance Atherosclerosis Study 24 that assessed usual consumption over the prior six-month period. We examined reported daily intake of energy as well as percent energy intake from fat, protein, and carbohydrate for those participants included in the subsample at baseline and 1-year. Fitness level Participants completed a graded exercise test that was designed to elicit a maximal effort at baseline and submaximal effort at 1-year. 25 Peak exercise capacity expressed as METS (metabolic equivalents) was estimated from treadmill speed and grade. Weight history At baseline, participants indicated the number of times (0, 1–2, 3–4, 5–6, or 7 or more times) they had intentional weight losses of 5–9 lb, 10–19 lb, 20–49 lb, 50–79 lb, 80–99 lb, and 100 lb or more. We examined the number of previous weight loss attempts (using the lower end of the frequency intervals, summed across categories) and the total amount of past intentional weight loss (defined as the frequency of weight loss attempts multiplied by the amount of weight loss achieved, using the lower end of the frequency and amount intervals and summing across categories). 26 Mood and general health The Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II) was used to measure depressive symptomatology. 26 The BDI-II has been shown to have high internal consistency, test-retest reliability, and construct validity. 27 The Short Form (SF) 36 version 2, a widely used validated measure, was used to assess general health 28 and participants also reported the number of prescription medications they were currently taking. These measures were assessed at baseline. Tobacco and alcohol use Tobacco and alcohol use was assessed at baseline and 1-year by self-report. Participants indicated whether they were a current smoker, a former smoker, or had never smoked cigarettes. Participants also reported how many alcoholic drinks (including wine, beer, and hard liquor) they typically consume per week. Binge drinking was assessed with a single item that asked participants how many days during the past month they had five or more drinks on the same occasion. Statistical analyses Baseline characteristics were compared between binge eaters and non-binge eaters with the use of t-tests for continuous variables and chi-square tests for categorical variables. To examine change in self-reported binge eating status over time, participants were classified according to binge eating status at baseline and 1-year, yielding four categories: those who indicated no binge eating at both time points (No/No), those who reported binge eating at baseline but not at 1-year (Yes/No), those who indicated no binge eating at baseline and reported it at 1-year (No/Yes) and those who reported binge eating at both time points (Yes/Yes). Multiple logistic regression was employed to examine the relationship between binge eating at 1-year and treatment group assignment. We determined the odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (95% CI) of binge eating at 1-year associated with treatment group assignment, controlling for baseline binge eating separately and in combination with age, race, gender, education level, baseline weight, number of previous weight loss attempts, total amount of weight lost, depressive symptoms, self-reported general health, number of prescription medications, and binge drinking. Multiple linear regression was used to model the effect of binge eating status on weight loss at one year, controlling for age, race/ethnicity, gender, education level, baseline weight, number of previous weight loss attempts, total amount of weight lost, depressive symptoms, self-reported general health, number of prescription medications, maximum METS, and binge drinking. Models were fitted for the overall cohort (also controlling for intervention group) and separately by treatment group assignment. In addition, the same models were fitted controlling for dietary covariates (reported caloric intake, percent fat intake, and percent carbohydrate intake) for the sub-sample of participants furnishing baseline dietary data. To further explore the weight loss differences detected among the binge eating status groups, we modeled the effect of binge eating status on change in total reported caloric intake and change in fitness controlling for the same variables noted above. We also ran the primary model examining the association between binge eating status and weight loss outcomes using DSM-IV BED criteria, rather than binge eating behavior. The patterns of weight losses were identical between the two models; however, because of reduced sample size the BED model was not significant (p=.09) and the data are not presented. Additionally, among those reporting binge eating at baseline, we used the primary model to determine the relationship between baseline binge eating frequency and weight loss at one year as well as the relationship between baseline binge eating frequency and change in reported caloric intake. Statistical analyses were performed with SAS statistical software, version 9 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC).  Participants The Look AHEAD trial design and study participants have been described in detail elsewhere. 20 Briefly, individuals with type 2 diabetes interested in weight loss were recruited from 16 clinical centers in the United States. To participate, individuals had to be 45–76 years old and have a BMI ? 25 kg/m2 (?27 kg/m2 if on insulin). Individuals with inadequate diabetes control (i.e., HbA1c > 11%) or with factors likely to impact intervention adherence, safety (e.g., underlying serious medical or psychological conditions) or retention (e.g., plans to move out of the area) were excluded from the trial. All participants provided informed consent, as approved by each site’s Institutional Review Board. Eligible participants (n=5145) were randomly assigned to an intensive lifestyle intervention (ILI) or to a diabetes support and education control condition (DSE). The ILI was modeled after the Diabetes Prevention Program lifestyle intervention. 21 The goals of the intervention were to produce a mean weight loss of ? 7% of initial weight through caloric restriction (i.e., diet of 1200 – 1500 kcal/day) and increased physical activity (? 175 minutes per week of moderately intense activity). 22 To achieve these goals, ILI participants received 3 group meetings and 1 individual meeting each month during months 1–6 and 2 group meetings and 1 individual session per month during months 7–12. DSE participants were offered 3 group meetings per year and were given basic information on diabetes, nutrition, and physical activity. Definition of binge eating groups Binge eating was assessed via a self-report questionnaire based on the Questionnaire on Eating and Weight Patterns. 23 We identified participants who indicated having any episode(s) of eating a large amount of food in a short amount of time, reported feeling out of control, and who denied any compensatory behaviors (n=559; 10.9%) during the past six months. For the comparison group, we identified participants who reported no binge episodes or compensatory behaviors (n=4222; 82.1%). Individuals who reported compensatory behaviors (i.e., purging, excessive exercise; n=332; 6.5%) or who were missing data on the items used to determine binge eating behavior (n=32; 0.6%) were excluded. We chose to examine binge eating behavior as opposed to full-criteria BED as defined by the DSM-IV for several reasons. First, many more participants reported binge eating behavior (11.7%) than met DSM-IV criteria for BED (1.6%) allowing for more power to complete analyses. In addition, very little research has examined the effects of these behaviors (in the absence of an eating disorder) in the context of a behavioral weight study among type 2 diabetics. Also, examining binge eating behavior, which is easily assessed via self-report, rather than a diagnosis of BED, which is best done via structured interview, may have more clinical applications among health care professionals.  Definition of binge eating groups Binge eating was assessed via a self-report questionnaire based on the Questionnaire on Eating and Weight Patterns. 23 We identified participants who indicated having any episode(s) of eating a large amount of food in a short amount of time, reported feeling out of control, and who denied any compensatory behaviors (n=559; 10.9%) during the past six months. For the comparison group, we identified participants who reported no binge episodes or compensatory behaviors (n=4222; 82.1%). Individuals who reported compensatory behaviors (i.e., purging, excessive exercise; n=332; 6.5%) or who were missing data on the items used to determine binge eating behavior (n=32; 0.6%) were excluded. We chose to examine binge eating behavior as opposed to full-criteria BED as defined by the DSM-IV for several reasons. First, many more participants reported binge eating behavior (11.7%) than met DSM-IV criteria for BED (1.6%) allowing for more power to complete analyses. In addition, very little research has examined the effects of these behaviors (in the absence of an eating disorder) in the context of a behavioral weight study among type 2 diabetics. Also, examining binge eating behavior, which is easily assessed via self-report, rather than a diagnosis of BED, which is best done via structured interview, may have more clinical applications among health care professionals.  Results At baseline, 11.7% of our cohort reported having one or more episodes in the past 6 months when they ate a large amount of food in a short period of time and felt they could not control what or how much they were eating. Of those who reported binge episodes, 41.3% did so less than one day per week, 49.6% reported binge episodes on 1–3 days per week, and 9.2% reported binge episodes on 4 or more days per week in the past 6 months. Only 1.6% (n=80) of the full sample met DSM-IV criteria for binge eating disorder based on self-report. Baseline differences Individuals who reported any episodes of binge eating at baseline were younger (p<0.0001), more likely to be female (p<0.01), Caucasian (p<0.0001), and college educated (p<0.01) than their non-binge eating counterparts ( Table 1 ). Individuals who reported binge eating were also heavier (p<0.0001) at entry into Look AHEAD and had a more extensive weight loss history, both in terms of number of weight loss attempts (p<0.0001) and total amount lost (p<0.0001) ( Table 2 ). Baseline dietary intake differed between the two groups, with binge eaters reporting a higher daily caloric intake (p<0.0001) and a greater percentage of calories from fat (p<0.05). Fitness levels did not differ between the groups ( Table 2 ). Individuals reporting binge eating drank fewer alcoholic beverages per week (p=0.02) and were less likely to report binge drinking (p=0.02) than individuals who indicated no binge eating. Individuals reporting binge eating at baseline also had higher levels of depressive symptoms (p<0.0001), reported worse general health (p<0.0001), and were taking more medications than individuals who indicated no binge eating (p<0.05), but there were no group differences in HBA1c levels, number of years since diabetes diagnosis, or current diabetes treatment regimen ( Table 3 ). One-Year Outcomes At one year, weight data was available on 96.4% of participants and weight and questionnaire data were available on 88.3% of participants. Individuals reporting binge eating at baseline were less likely to complete the full one-year assessment (weight and questionnaire data) compared to non-binge eaters (85.2% vs. 88.7%, p<0.02). Most individuals (85.4% overall; 84.9% ILI, 85.9% DSE) reported no binge eating at baseline or 1-year (No/No), 7.5% reported binge eating at baseline but not at 1-year (Yes/No; 8.3% ILI, 6.8% DSE), 3.7% reported binge eating at both time points (Yes/Yes; 4.0% ILI, 3.5% DSE), and 3.4% did not report binge eating at baseline but did at 1-year (No/Yes; 2.9% ILI, 3.8% DSE). These patterns did not differ between the ILI and DSE conditions (p=0.14). Overall, of those individuals who reported binge eating at baseline, the majority (66.8% overall; 67.6% ILI, 65.9% DSE) did not report the behavior at 1-year. The frequency of binge eating behavior at baseline (less than 2 days per week vs. 2 or more days per week) was not associated with whether binge eating continued at 1-year (p=0.12). Participants randomly assigned to ILI were no more likely to be binge eating at 1-year than those randomized to DSE (OR for ILI compared to DSE, 0.85; 95% CI, 0.66–1.09; p=0.20), controlling for baseline binge eating. After adjusting for additional covariates, ILI participants were marginally less likely to be binge eating at 1-year compared to DSE (OR, 0.77; 95% CI, 0.59–1.01; p=0.06). As expected, baseline binge eating was the most important predictor of behavior at 1-year (p< 0.0001). As shown in Figure 1 , after controlling for baseline differences between binge eaters and non-binge eaters, there were statistically significant differences in one-year weight losses based on binge eating behavior over time (p=0.0002; Table 4 ). Specifically, individuals who were binge eating at baseline but had stopped at 1-year (Yes/No) and individuals who reported no binge eating at either time point (No/No) had significantly better weight losses than those who continued to binge (Yes/Yes) and those who began binge eating by 1-year (No/Yes) (p<0.0001). There were no weight loss differences between those who reported no binge eating at either time point and those that reported binge eating at baseline but not at 1-year (p=0.21). Similar patterns were observed when looking separately at the ILI and DSE conditions. Given the differences in weight loss across the binge eating status groups, post hoc analyses were conducted to examine group differences in self-reported caloric change from baseline to 1-year in the subsample (N=1954) who completed the dietary measure. As shown in Figure 2 , participants who reported no binge eating at either time point (No/No) and those participants who reported binge eating at baseline but not at 1-year (Yes/No) reported greater decreases in caloric intake from baseline to 1-year than those who were binge eating at both time points (Yes/Yes) or those who were not binge eating at baseline but were at 1-year (No/Yes) (p<0.0001 for specific contrast and over all; Table 4 ). The pattern was similar when looking separately at the ILI and DSE conditions, although some of the comparisons between binge eating categories were no longer significant. In addition to dietary data, we also conducted post hoc analyses to examine whether there were group differences in changes in fitness levels; however, no group differences were observed (p=0.43; Table 4 ). Among those who reported binge eating at baseline, there was a significant association showing that higher frequencies of self-reported binge episodes were associated with smaller one-year weight losses (p=0.029); this pattern held true when examining the ILI condition separately (p=0.048) but was not found in the DSE condition (p=0.620). In the subsample providing dietary intake information, there was also a trend for higher baseline binge eating frequency to be associated with greater caloric declines over the one year period among those reporting baseline binge eating (p=0.054). This trend was more evident in the ILI condition (p=0.044) than in the DSE condition (p=0.35). Finally, because of the influence substance use can have on weight, we examined whether the binge eating groups differed at 1-year in tobacco and alcohol use. There were no differences among the binge eating status groups at 1-year in the percentage of individuals who were currently smoking (p=0.40) or who reported binge drinking in the past month (p=0.19).  Results At baseline, 11.7% of our cohort reported having one or more episodes in the past 6 months when they ate a large amount of food in a short period of time and felt they could not control what or how much they were eating. Of those who reported binge episodes, 41.3% did so less than one day per week, 49.6% reported binge episodes on 1–3 days per week, and 9.2% reported binge episodes on 4 or more days per week in the past 6 months. Only 1.6% (n=80) of the full sample met DSM-IV criteria for binge eating disorder based on self-report. Baseline differences Individuals who reported any episodes of binge eating at baseline were younger (p<0.0001), more likely to be female (p<0.01), Caucasian (p<0.0001), and college educated (p<0.01) than their non-binge eating counterparts ( Table 1 ). Individuals who reported binge eating were also heavier (p<0.0001) at entry into Look AHEAD and had a more extensive weight loss history, both in terms of number of weight loss attempts (p<0.0001) and total amount lost (p<0.0001) ( Table 2 ). Baseline dietary intake differed between the two groups, with binge eaters reporting a higher daily caloric intake (p<0.0001) and a greater percentage of calories from fat (p<0.05). Fitness levels did not differ between the groups ( Table 2 ). Individuals reporting binge eating drank fewer alcoholic beverages per week (p=0.02) and were less likely to report binge drinking (p=0.02) than individuals who indicated no binge eating. Individuals reporting binge eating at baseline also had higher levels of depressive symptoms (p<0.0001), reported worse general health (p<0.0001), and were taking more medications than individuals who indicated no binge eating (p<0.05), but there were no group differences in HBA1c levels, number of years since diabetes diagnosis, or current diabetes treatment regimen ( Table 3 ). One-Year Outcomes At one year, weight data was available on 96.4% of participants and weight and questionnaire data were available on 88.3% of participants. Individuals reporting binge eating at baseline were less likely to complete the full one-year assessment (weight and questionnaire data) compared to non-binge eaters (85.2% vs. 88.7%, p<0.02). Most individuals (85.4% overall; 84.9% ILI, 85.9% DSE) reported no binge eating at baseline or 1-year (No/No), 7.5% reported binge eating at baseline but not at 1-year (Yes/No; 8.3% ILI, 6.8% DSE), 3.7% reported binge eating at both time points (Yes/Yes; 4.0% ILI, 3.5% DSE), and 3.4% did not report binge eating at baseline but did at 1-year (No/Yes; 2.9% ILI, 3.8% DSE). These patterns did not differ between the ILI and DSE conditions (p=0.14). Overall, of those individuals who reported binge eating at baseline, the majority (66.8% overall; 67.6% ILI, 65.9% DSE) did not report the behavior at 1-year. The frequency of binge eating behavior at baseline (less than 2 days per week vs. 2 or more days per week) was not associated with whether binge eating continued at 1-year (p=0.12). Participants randomly assigned to ILI were no more likely to be binge eating at 1-year than those randomized to DSE (OR for ILI compared to DSE, 0.85; 95% CI, 0.66–1.09; p=0.20), controlling for baseline binge eating. After adjusting for additional covariates, ILI participants were marginally less likely to be binge eating at 1-year compared to DSE (OR, 0.77; 95% CI, 0.59–1.01; p=0.06). As expected, baseline binge eating was the most important predictor of behavior at 1-year (p< 0.0001). As shown in Figure 1 , after controlling for baseline differences between binge eaters and non-binge eaters, there were statistically significant differences in one-year weight losses based on binge eating behavior over time (p=0.0002; Table 4 ). Specifically, individuals who were binge eating at baseline but had stopped at 1-year (Yes/No) and individuals who reported no binge eating at either time point (No/No) had significantly better weight losses than those who continued to binge (Yes/Yes) and those who began binge eating by 1-year (No/Yes) (p<0.0001). There were no weight loss differences between those who reported no binge eating at either time point and those that reported binge eating at baseline but not at 1-year (p=0.21). Similar patterns were observed when looking separately at the ILI and DSE conditions. Given the differences in weight loss across the binge eating status groups, post hoc analyses were conducted to examine group differences in self-reported caloric change from baseline to 1-year in the subsample (N=1954) who completed the dietary measure. As shown in Figure 2 , participants who reported no binge eating at either time point (No/No) and those participants who reported binge eating at baseline but not at 1-year (Yes/No) reported greater decreases in caloric intake from baseline to 1-year than those who were binge eating at both time points (Yes/Yes) or those who were not binge eating at baseline but were at 1-year (No/Yes) (p<0.0001 for specific contrast and over all; Table 4 ). The pattern was similar when looking separately at the ILI and DSE conditions, although some of the comparisons between binge eating categories were no longer significant. In addition to dietary data, we also conducted post hoc analyses to examine whether there were group differences in changes in fitness levels; however, no group differences were observed (p=0.43; Table 4 ). Among those who reported binge eating at baseline, there was a significant association showing that higher frequencies of self-reported binge episodes were associated with smaller one-year weight losses (p=0.029); this pattern held true when examining the ILI condition separately (p=0.048) but was not found in the DSE condition (p=0.620). In the subsample providing dietary intake information, there was also a trend for higher baseline binge eating frequency to be associated with greater caloric declines over the one year period among those reporting baseline binge eating (p=0.054). This trend was more evident in the ILI condition (p=0.044) than in the DSE condition (p=0.35). Finally, because of the influence substance use can have on weight, we examined whether the binge eating groups differed at 1-year in tobacco and alcohol use. There were no differences among the binge eating status groups at 1-year in the percentage of individuals who were currently smoking (p=0.40) or who reported binge drinking in the past month (p=0.19).  Baseline differences Individuals who reported any episodes of binge eating at baseline were younger (p<0.0001), more likely to be female (p<0.01), Caucasian (p<0.0001), and college educated (p<0.01) than their non-binge eating counterparts ( Table 1 ). Individuals who reported binge eating were also heavier (p<0.0001) at entry into Look AHEAD and had a more extensive weight loss history, both in terms of number of weight loss attempts (p<0.0001) and total amount lost (p<0.0001) ( Table 2 ). Baseline dietary intake differed between the two groups, with binge eaters reporting a higher daily caloric intake (p<0.0001) and a greater percentage of calories from fat (p<0.05). Fitness levels did not differ between the groups ( Table 2 ). Individuals reporting binge eating drank fewer alcoholic beverages per week (p=0.02) and were less likely to report binge drinking (p=0.02) than individuals who indicated no binge eating. Individuals reporting binge eating at baseline also had higher levels of depressive symptoms (p<0.0001), reported worse general health (p<0.0001), and were taking more medications than individuals who indicated no binge eating (p<0.05), but there were no group differences in HBA1c levels, number of years since diabetes diagnosis, or current diabetes treatment regimen ( Table 3 ).  Baseline differences Individuals who reported any episodes of binge eating at baseline were younger (p<0.0001), more likely to be female (p<0.01), Caucasian (p<0.0001), and college educated (p<0.01) than their non-binge eating counterparts ( Table 1 ). Individuals who reported binge eating were also heavier (p<0.0001) at entry into Look AHEAD and had a more extensive weight loss history, both in terms of number of weight loss attempts (p<0.0001) and total amount lost (p<0.0001) ( Table 2 ). Baseline dietary intake differed between the two groups, with binge eaters reporting a higher daily caloric intake (p<0.0001) and a greater percentage of calories from fat (p<0.05). Fitness levels did not differ between the groups ( Table 2 ). Individuals reporting binge eating drank fewer alcoholic beverages per week (p=0.02) and were less likely to report binge drinking (p=0.02) than individuals who indicated no binge eating. Individuals reporting binge eating at baseline also had higher levels of depressive symptoms (p<0.0001), reported worse general health (p<0.0001), and were taking more medications than individuals who indicated no binge eating (p<0.05), but there were no group differences in HBA1c levels, number of years since diabetes diagnosis, or current diabetes treatment regimen ( Table 3 ).  One-Year Outcomes At one year, weight data was available on 96.4% of participants and weight and questionnaire data were available on 88.3% of participants. Individuals reporting binge eating at baseline were less likely to complete the full one-year assessment (weight and questionnaire data) compared to non-binge eaters (85.2% vs. 88.7%, p<0.02). Most individuals (85.4% overall; 84.9% ILI, 85.9% DSE) reported no binge eating at baseline or 1-year (No/No), 7.5% reported binge eating at baseline but not at 1-year (Yes/No; 8.3% ILI, 6.8% DSE), 3.7% reported binge eating at both time points (Yes/Yes; 4.0% ILI, 3.5% DSE), and 3.4% did not report binge eating at baseline but did at 1-year (No/Yes; 2.9% ILI, 3.8% DSE). These patterns did not differ between the ILI and DSE conditions (p=0.14). Overall, of those individuals who reported binge eating at baseline, the majority (66.8% overall; 67.6% ILI, 65.9% DSE) did not report the behavior at 1-year. The frequency of binge eating behavior at baseline (less than 2 days per week vs. 2 or more days per week) was not associated with whether binge eating continued at 1-year (p=0.12). Participants randomly assigned to ILI were no more likely to be binge eating at 1-year than those randomized to DSE (OR for ILI compared to DSE, 0.85; 95% CI, 0.66–1.09; p=0.20), controlling for baseline binge eating. After adjusting for additional covariates, ILI participants were marginally less likely to be binge eating at 1-year compared to DSE (OR, 0.77; 95% CI, 0.59–1.01; p=0.06). As expected, baseline binge eating was the most important predictor of behavior at 1-year (p< 0.0001). As shown in Figure 1 , after controlling for baseline differences between binge eaters and non-binge eaters, there were statistically significant differences in one-year weight losses based on binge eating behavior over time (p=0.0002; Table 4 ). Specifically, individuals who were binge eating at baseline but had stopped at 1-year (Yes/No) and individuals who reported no binge eating at either time point (No/No) had significantly better weight losses than those who continued to binge (Yes/Yes) and those who began binge eating by 1-year (No/Yes) (p<0.0001). There were no weight loss differences between those who reported no binge eating at either time point and those that reported binge eating at baseline but not at 1-year (p=0.21). Similar patterns were observed when looking separately at the ILI and DSE conditions. Given the differences in weight loss across the binge eating status groups, post hoc analyses were conducted to examine group differences in self-reported caloric change from baseline to 1-year in the subsample (N=1954) who completed the dietary measure. As shown in Figure 2 , participants who reported no binge eating at either time point (No/No) and those participants who reported binge eating at baseline but not at 1-year (Yes/No) reported greater decreases in caloric intake from baseline to 1-year than those who were binge eating at both time points (Yes/Yes) or those who were not binge eating at baseline but were at 1-year (No/Yes) (p<0.0001 for specific contrast and over all; Table 4 ). The pattern was similar when looking separately at the ILI and DSE conditions, although some of the comparisons between binge eating categories were no longer significant. In addition to dietary data, we also conducted post hoc analyses to examine whether there were group differences in changes in fitness levels; however, no group differences were observed (p=0.43; Table 4 ). Among those who reported binge eating at baseline, there was a significant association showing that higher frequencies of self-reported binge episodes were associated with smaller one-year weight losses (p=0.029); this pattern held true when examining the ILI condition separately (p=0.048) but was not found in the DSE condition (p=0.620). In the subsample providing dietary intake information, there was also a trend for higher baseline binge eating frequency to be associated with greater caloric declines over the one year period among those reporting baseline binge eating (p=0.054). This trend was more evident in the ILI condition (p=0.044) than in the DSE condition (p=0.35). Finally, because of the influence substance use can have on weight, we examined whether the binge eating groups differed at 1-year in tobacco and alcohol use. There were no differences among the binge eating status groups at 1-year in the percentage of individuals who were currently smoking (p=0.40) or who reported binge drinking in the past month (p=0.19).  One-Year Outcomes At one year, weight data was available on 96.4% of participants and weight and questionnaire data were available on 88.3% of participants. Individuals reporting binge eating at baseline were less likely to complete the full one-year assessment (weight and questionnaire data) compared to non-binge eaters (85.2% vs. 88.7%, p<0.02). Most individuals (85.4% overall; 84.9% ILI, 85.9% DSE) reported no binge eating at baseline or 1-year (No/No), 7.5% reported binge eating at baseline but not at 1-year (Yes/No; 8.3% ILI, 6.8% DSE), 3.7% reported binge eating at both time points (Yes/Yes; 4.0% ILI, 3.5% DSE), and 3.4% did not report binge eating at baseline but did at 1-year (No/Yes; 2.9% ILI, 3.8% DSE). These patterns did not differ between the ILI and DSE conditions (p=0.14). Overall, of those individuals who reported binge eating at baseline, the majority (66.8% overall; 67.6% ILI, 65.9% DSE) did not report the behavior at 1-year. The frequency of binge eating behavior at baseline (less than 2 days per week vs. 2 or more days per week) was not associated with whether binge eating continued at 1-year (p=0.12). Participants randomly assigned to ILI were no more likely to be binge eating at 1-year than those randomized to DSE (OR for ILI compared to DSE, 0.85; 95% CI, 0.66–1.09; p=0.20), controlling for baseline binge eating. After adjusting for additional covariates, ILI participants were marginally less likely to be binge eating at 1-year compared to DSE (OR, 0.77; 95% CI, 0.59–1.01; p=0.06). As expected, baseline binge eating was the most important predictor of behavior at 1-year (p< 0.0001). As shown in Figure 1 , after controlling for baseline differences between binge eaters and non-binge eaters, there were statistically significant differences in one-year weight losses based on binge eating behavior over time (p=0.0002; Table 4 ). Specifically, individuals who were binge eating at baseline but had stopped at 1-year (Yes/No) and individuals who reported no binge eating at either time point (No/No) had significantly better weight losses than those who continued to binge (Yes/Yes) and those who began binge eating by 1-year (No/Yes) (p<0.0001). There were no weight loss differences between those who reported no binge eating at either time point and those that reported binge eating at baseline but not at 1-year (p=0.21). Similar patterns were observed when looking separately at the ILI and DSE conditions. Given the differences in weight loss across the binge eating status groups, post hoc analyses were conducted to examine group differences in self-reported caloric change from baseline to 1-year in the subsample (N=1954) who completed the dietary measure. As shown in Figure 2 , participants who reported no binge eating at either time point (No/No) and those participants who reported binge eating at baseline but not at 1-year (Yes/No) reported greater decreases in caloric intake from baseline to 1-year than those who were binge eating at both time points (Yes/Yes) or those who were not binge eating at baseline but were at 1-year (No/Yes) (p<0.0001 for specific contrast and over all; Table 4 ). The pattern was similar when looking separately at the ILI and DSE conditions, although some of the comparisons between binge eating categories were no longer significant. In addition to dietary data, we also conducted post hoc analyses to examine whether there were group differences in changes in fitness levels; however, no group differences were observed (p=0.43; Table 4 ). Among those who reported binge eating at baseline, there was a significant association showing that higher frequencies of self-reported binge episodes were associated with smaller one-year weight losses (p=0.029); this pattern held true when examining the ILI condition separately (p=0.048) but was not found in the DSE condition (p=0.620). In the subsample providing dietary intake information, there was also a trend for higher baseline binge eating frequency to be associated with greater caloric declines over the one year period among those reporting baseline binge eating (p=0.054). This trend was more evident in the ILI condition (p=0.044) than in the DSE condition (p=0.35). Finally, because of the influence substance use can have on weight, we examined whether the binge eating groups differed at 1-year in tobacco and alcohol use. There were no differences among the binge eating status groups at 1-year in the percentage of individuals who were currently smoking (p=0.40) or who reported binge drinking in the past month (p=0.19).  Discussion Approximately 1 in 10 overweight and obese individuals with type 2 diabetes participating in the Look AHEAD trial reported having 1 or more episodes of binge eating in the 6 months prior to study entry. These individuals were younger and more likely to be female, Caucasian, and college educated than their non-binge eating counterparts; demographic differences that are consistent with prior reports of binge eating in individuals with type 2 diabetes. 13 , 15 , 16 As reported by others, 5 , 15 individuals reporting binge eating at study entry had more difficulties with weight control and were heavier and had more extensive weight loss histories. They also consumed a diet higher in total calories and fat, replicating prior work by Yanovski and colleagues. 29 , 30 Individuals reporting binge eating in our sample reported higher levels of depressive symptomatology, again consistent with the existing binge eating literature; 5 , 13 , 16 however, depression levels in this sample were quite low even among individuals reporting binge eating. Binge drinking was also infrequent in this sample. Of interest, however, is that at study entry we found significantly lower rates of binge drinking in binge eaters compared to non-binge eaters, a finding that supports a recent report that obese individuals are less likely to suffer from substance use disorders than non-obese individuals. 31 While concerns have been raised about “shifting addictions” or symptom substitution, such that the dietary restrictions accompanying weight loss may lead to increases in substance use 32 , our study suggests that the modest weight losses produced by a behavioral intervention are not associated with increases in either alcohol or tobacco use. Individuals reporting binge eating at study entry had worse physical health, both by self-report and by medication usage, than non-binge eaters, yet there were no differences in HBA1c, years since diabetes diagnosis, or diabetes treatment regimens. Studies to date examining the connection between binge eating and glycemic control have found mixed results. 13 , 15 , 16 The present study, which examines this relationship in a much larger and more demographically diverse sample, indicates that while overall physical health may be affected by binge eating, diabetes control per se is not. Fewer than 4% of participants in either the intensive lifestyle intervention or diabetes support and education groups who reported no binge eating at baseline reported the behavior at 1-year follow-up, suggesting as others have found 9 , 14 that behavioral weight loss treatment does not generally lead to initiation of binge eating behavior. In fact, those who participated in the intensive lifestyle intervention were marginally less likely to be engaging in binge eating behavior at 1-year than those completing the diabetes support and education groups. In addition, in both conditions, the majority of individuals (66.8%) who reported binge eating at baseline were no longer engaging in the behavior at 1-year. The reason for the instability of binge eating behavior is not clear. It could reflect a true improvement in binge eating as a result of participating in a structured program or it could mirror the natural course of binge eating, which has been shown to remit without treatment in many individuals in community samples. 33 , 34 Perhaps most interesting is that 1-year weight losses were equivalent in individuals who indicated no binge eating at either baseline or 1-year and in individuals who reported binge eating at baseline but had ceased binge eating at 1-year. Weight losses in both of these groups were significantly better than in individuals who reported binge eating at both time points or who started binge eating over the 1-year period, suggesting that binge eating is only problematic if it persists, or starts, during treatment. The differences in weight loss between those who stopped binge eating and those who continued or started binge eating, while relatively small (2 kg), may have important health implications, particularly if maintained long term. These improved weight losses appear to be explained by greater decreases in caloric intake in those did not binge eat and those who stopped during treatment. Many prior studies have assessed binge eating at the start of treatment only, perhaps accounting for some of the mixed weight loss results reported in the literature. Our findings confirm current recommendations 14 that individuals who binge eat should not be discouraged from entering behavioral weight loss programs. It also supports other studies that suggest abstinence from binge eating is associated with better weight loss outcomes at one year compared with those who continue binge eating 35 . Given that individuals who continued to binge eat and those who started to binge eating during treatment did not fare as well, it would appear useful to assess binge eating throughout treatment, not simply at entry into a program, and provide additional support as needed. A limitation of this study is that we relied on a self-report measure of binge eating behavior. The gold standard for the assessment of binge eating is the Eating Disorder Examination interview 36 . Self-report measures of binge eating are most appropriately utilized as a screening measure for binge eating behavior as opposed to a diagnostic tool. However, the brevity and minimal cost of the self-report tool used in the present study increases the likelihood that screening for binge eating could be conducted in primary care settings or repeatedly throughout a weight loss program. In addition, self-reported binge eating has been shown to be consistent with the EDE interview in overweight individuals who binge eat. 37 , 38 It is also important to note that our sample was comprised entirely of overweight individuals with type 2 diabetes who were seeking help to lose weight and were willing and able to participate in a long-term study. These individuals were likely very motivated to change their eating behaviors to improve their health and may not be representative of overweight individuals with type 2 diabetes as a whole. Moreover, because of the Look AHEAD trial’s focus on cardiovascular outcomes, participants were required to be between the ages of 45–76, a group that may be less prone to binge eating than younger individuals 16 , 39 . These individuals had also been diagnosed with diabetes on average 7 years prior to study entry and may differ from newly diagnosed patients in eating habits and diabetes management. Our results should be interpreted with these limitations in mind. This study adds to the literature by showing that binge eating still occurs with some frequency in older, overweight and obese adults with type 2 diabetes. Although individuals reporting binge eating also reported a more depressed mood and worse physical health than their non-binge eating peers, their diabetes control and management did not differ. Most individuals who reported binge eating at baseline stopped by 1-year and these individuals were just as successful at weight loss as those individuals who reported no binge eating on both occasions. Also, few individuals started binge eating during the one year period. This study lends further support to the recommendation that binge eating is not exacerbated by behavioral weight loss treatment and in fact may be improved by participating in a structured weight loss program targeting lifestyle changes.  Discussion Approximately 1 in 10 overweight and obese individuals with type 2 diabetes participating in the Look AHEAD trial reported having 1 or more episodes of binge eating in the 6 months prior to study entry. These individuals were younger and more likely to be female, Caucasian, and college educated than their non-binge eating counterparts; demographic differences that are consistent with prior reports of binge eating in individuals with type 2 diabetes. 13 , 15 , 16 As reported by others, 5 , 15 individuals reporting binge eating at study entry had more difficulties with weight control and were heavier and had more extensive weight loss histories. They also consumed a diet higher in total calories and fat, replicating prior work by Yanovski and colleagues. 29 , 30 Individuals reporting binge eating in our sample reported higher levels of depressive symptomatology, again consistent with the existing binge eating literature; 5 , 13 , 16 however, depression levels in this sample were quite low even among individuals reporting binge eating. Binge drinking was also infrequent in this sample. Of interest, however, is that at study entry we found significantly lower rates of binge drinking in binge eaters compared to non-binge eaters, a finding that supports a recent report that obese individuals are less likely to suffer from substance use disorders than non-obese individuals. 31 While concerns have been raised about “shifting addictions” or symptom substitution, such that the dietary restrictions accompanying weight loss may lead to increases in substance use 32 , our study suggests that the modest weight losses produced by a behavioral intervention are not associated with increases in either alcohol or tobacco use. Individuals reporting binge eating at study entry had worse physical health, both by self-report and by medication usage, than non-binge eaters, yet there were no differences in HBA1c, years since diabetes diagnosis, or diabetes treatment regimens. Studies to date examining the connection between binge eating and glycemic control have found mixed results. 13 , 15 , 16 The present study, which examines this relationship in a much larger and more demographically diverse sample, indicates that while overall physical health may be affected by binge eating, diabetes control per se is not. Fewer than 4% of participants in either the intensive lifestyle intervention or diabetes support and education groups who reported no binge eating at baseline reported the behavior at 1-year follow-up, suggesting as others have found 9 , 14 that behavioral weight loss treatment does not generally lead to initiation of binge eating behavior. In fact, those who participated in the intensive lifestyle intervention were marginally less likely to be engaging in binge eating behavior at 1-year than those completing the diabetes support and education groups. In addition, in both conditions, the majority of individuals (66.8%) who reported binge eating at baseline were no longer engaging in the behavior at 1-year. The reason for the instability of binge eating behavior is not clear. It could reflect a true improvement in binge eating as a result of participating in a structured program or it could mirror the natural course of binge eating, which has been shown to remit without treatment in many individuals in community samples. 33 , 34 Perhaps most interesting is that 1-year weight losses were equivalent in individuals who indicated no binge eating at either baseline or 1-year and in individuals who reported binge eating at baseline but had ceased binge eating at 1-year. Weight losses in both of these groups were significantly better than in individuals who reported binge eating at both time points or who started binge eating over the 1-year period, suggesting that binge eating is only problematic if it persists, or starts, during treatment. The differences in weight loss between those who stopped binge eating and those who continued or started binge eating, while relatively small (2 kg), may have important health implications, particularly if maintained long term. These improved weight losses appear to be explained by greater decreases in caloric intake in those did not binge eat and those who stopped during treatment. Many prior studies have assessed binge eating at the start of treatment only, perhaps accounting for some of the mixed weight loss results reported in the literature. Our findings confirm current recommendations 14 that individuals who binge eat should not be discouraged from entering behavioral weight loss programs. It also supports other studies that suggest abstinence from binge eating is associated with better weight loss outcomes at one year compared with those who continue binge eating 35 . Given that individuals who continued to binge eat and those who started to binge eating during treatment did not fare as well, it would appear useful to assess binge eating throughout treatment, not simply at entry into a program, and provide additional support as needed. A limitation of this study is that we relied on a self-report measure of binge eating behavior. The gold standard for the assessment of binge eating is the Eating Disorder Examination interview 36 . Self-report measures of binge eating are most appropriately utilized as a screening measure for binge eating behavior as opposed to a diagnostic tool. However, the brevity and minimal cost of the self-report tool used in the present study increases the likelihood that screening for binge eating could be conducted in primary care settings or repeatedly throughout a weight loss program. In addition, self-reported binge eating has been shown to be consistent with the EDE interview in overweight individuals who binge eat. 37 , 38 It is also important to note that our sample was comprised entirely of overweight individuals with type 2 diabetes who were seeking help to lose weight and were willing and able to participate in a long-term study. These individuals were likely very motivated to change their eating behaviors to improve their health and may not be representative of overweight individuals with type 2 diabetes as a whole. Moreover, because of the Look AHEAD trial’s focus on cardiovascular outcomes, participants were required to be between the ages of 45–76, a group that may be less prone to binge eating than younger individuals 16 , 39 . These individuals had also been diagnosed with diabetes on average 7 years prior to study entry and may differ from newly diagnosed patients in eating habits and diabetes management. Our results should be interpreted with these limitations in mind. This study adds to the literature by showing that binge eating still occurs with some frequency in older, overweight and obese adults with type 2 diabetes. Although individuals reporting binge eating also reported a more depressed mood and worse physical health than their non-binge eating peers, their diabetes control and management did not differ. Most individuals who reported binge eating at baseline stopped by 1-year and these individuals were just as successful at weight loss as those individuals who reported no binge eating on both occasions. Also, few individuals started binge eating during the one year period. This study lends further support to the recommendation that binge eating is not exacerbated by behavioral weight loss treatment and in fact may be improved by participating in a structured weight loss program targeting lifestyle changes.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 One year weight loss by binge eating status Note: Yes/No = reported binge eating at baseline but not 1-year; No/No = did not report binge eating at either time point; Yes/Yes = reported binge eating at both time points; No/Yes = did not report binge eating at baseline but did at 1-year. Figure 2 One year change in reported caloric intake by binge eating status Note: Yes/No = endorsed binge eating at baseline but not 1-year; No/No = did not endorse binge eating at either time point; Yes/Yes = endorsed binge eating at both time points; No/Yes = did not endorse binge eating at baseline but did at 1-year. Table 1 Demographic characteristics of study sample Characteristic Non-Binge Eater N = 4222 (88.3%) Binge Eater N = 559 (11.7%) P-value Age, mean years±sd 59.1±6.8 57.3±6.6 <0.0001 Gender, N (%) 0.008 ?Male 1744 (41.3) 198 (35.4) ?Female 2478 (58.7) 361 (64.6) Race, N (%) <0.0001 ?White 2650 (62.8) 419 (75.0) ?Hispanic 576 (13.6) 54 (9.7) ?African American 663 (15.7) 55 (9.8) ?Native American 208 (4.9) 15 (2.7) ?Other 125 (3.0) 16 (2.9) Education, N (%) 0.003 ?Less than high school 301 (7.3) 21 (3.9) ?High school graduate 746 (18.1) 87 (15.9) ?College graduate 3081 (74.6) 438 (80.2) Marital status, N (% married) 2861 (67.8) 378 (67.6) 0.43 Note: Binge eating defined as reporting any episodes of binge eating and no compensatory behaviors in the past 6 months. Table 2 Baseline weight, diet, and fitness levels Characteristic Non-Binge Eater Binge Eater P-value Mean ± Standard Deviation BMI 35.7±5.8 37.2±6.1 <0.0001 # of previous weight loss attempts 5.5±5.4 8.2±6.5 <0.0001 Amount of previous weight loss 93.5±114.9 144.8±144.8 <0.0001 Daily caloric intake (kcal) 1922.4±857.0 2378.7±1014.9 <0.0001 % calories from fat 40.0±7.0 40.9±6.5 0.03 % calories from protein 17.2±2.9 16.9±2.7 0.18 % calories from carbohydrates 43.7±7.7 43.1±7.1 0.21 Max METs 7.2±2.0 7.1±2.0 0.66 Note: Binge eating defined as reporting any episodes of binge eating and no compensatory behaviors in the past 6 months. Table 3 Baseline psychological and physical health variables Variable Non-Binge Eater Binge Eater P-value BDI 5.2±4.7 7.8±5.5 <0.0001 Alcoholic drinks/week 1.4±3.3 1.1±2.7 0.02 Smoking, N (%) 0.12 ?Current 192 (4.6) 19 (3.4) ?Former 1885 (44.7) 273 (48.9) ?Never 2138 (50.7) 266 (47.7) Binge-drinking, N (%) 217 (5.1) 16 (2.9) 0.02 General health 47.8±8.7 43.4±9.4 <0.0001 Diabetes duration, years 6.8±6.5 7.1±6.3 0.22 HBA1c 7.3±1.2 7.3±1.1 0.71 # of medications 5.5±3.0 5.8±3.1 0.03 Diabetes treatment, N (%) 0.94 ?Diet only 525 (12.6) 71 (12.9) ?Oral meds without insulin 2847 (68.3) 371 (67.6) ?Insulin 795 (19.1) 107 (19.5) Note: Binge eating defined as reporting any episodes of binge eating and no compensatory behaviors in the past 6 months. Table 4 Relationship of one-year weight loss, caloric intake decline, and fitness change to binge eating behavior at baseline and one year: adjusted mean (standard error) Variable and model N Binge eating behavior at baseline/one year P value No/No No/Yes Yes/No Yes/Yes One-year weight loss, kg Unadjusted Model 1 Model 2 4222 3928 1957 4.63 (0.13) 4.77 (0.11) 4.65 (0.16) 2.88 (0.66) 3.00 (0.58) 3.92 (0.71) 5.91 (0.44) 5.27 (0.39) 5.59 (0.51) 4.01 (0.62) 3.05 (0.56) 3.40 (0.70) 0.0009 0.0002 < 0.05 One-year calorie decline, kcal Unadjusted Model 2 1954 1798 279.3 (18.2) 322.4 (14.8) 163.4 (82.7) 13.1 (65.9) 535.9 (56.9) 330.8 (46.3) 364.0 (76.2) 175.7 (64.6) < 0.0001 < 0.0001 One-year fitness change, METS (one year baseline) Unadjusted Model 1 Model 2 3785 3533 1750 0.58 (0.02) 0.59 (0.02) 0.63 (0.03) 0.48 (0.12) 0.48 (0.11) 0.52 (0.15) 0.59 (0.08) 0.52 (0.07) 0.58 (0.10) 0.56 (0.11) 0.46 (0.10) 0.74 (0.14) 0.85 0.43 0.68 Model 1 is a linear model adjusting for gender, age, race/ethnicity, education, intervention group, baseline weight, weight loss history, Beck Depression Inventory, General Health Score, binge drinking, max METS (except for the METS models), number of prescribed drugs taken at baseline, and baseline measure. Model 2 also adjusts for intake of kilocalories and percentage of calories from fat intake at baseline.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 One year weight loss by binge eating status Note: Yes/No = reported binge eating at baseline but not 1-year; No/No = did not report binge eating at either time point; Yes/Yes = reported binge eating at both time points; No/Yes = did not report binge eating at baseline but did at 1-year. Figure 2 One year change in reported caloric intake by binge eating status Note: Yes/No = endorsed binge eating at baseline but not 1-year; No/No = did not endorse binge eating at either time point; Yes/Yes = endorsed binge eating at both time points; No/Yes = did not endorse binge eating at baseline but did at 1-year. Table 1 Demographic characteristics of study sample Characteristic Non-Binge Eater N = 4222 (88.3%) Binge Eater N = 559 (11.7%) P-value Age, mean years±sd 59.1±6.8 57.3±6.6 <0.0001 Gender, N (%) 0.008 ?Male 1744 (41.3) 198 (35.4) ?Female 2478 (58.7) 361 (64.6) Race, N (%) <0.0001 ?White 2650 (62.8) 419 (75.0) ?Hispanic 576 (13.6) 54 (9.7) ?African American 663 (15.7) 55 (9.8) ?Native American 208 (4.9) 15 (2.7) ?Other 125 (3.0) 16 (2.9) Education, N (%) 0.003 ?Less than high school 301 (7.3) 21 (3.9) ?High school graduate 746 (18.1) 87 (15.9) ?College graduate 3081 (74.6) 438 (80.2) Marital status, N (% married) 2861 (67.8) 378 (67.6) 0.43 Note: Binge eating defined as reporting any episodes of binge eating and no compensatory behaviors in the past 6 months. Table 2 Baseline weight, diet, and fitness levels Characteristic Non-Binge Eater Binge Eater P-value Mean ± Standard Deviation BMI 35.7±5.8 37.2±6.1 <0.0001 # of previous weight loss attempts 5.5±5.4 8.2±6.5 <0.0001 Amount of previous weight loss 93.5±114.9 144.8±144.8 <0.0001 Daily caloric intake (kcal) 1922.4±857.0 2378.7±1014.9 <0.0001 % calories from fat 40.0±7.0 40.9±6.5 0.03 % calories from protein 17.2±2.9 16.9±2.7 0.18 % calories from carbohydrates 43.7±7.7 43.1±7.1 0.21 Max METs 7.2±2.0 7.1±2.0 0.66 Note: Binge eating defined as reporting any episodes of binge eating and no compensatory behaviors in the past 6 months. Table 3 Baseline psychological and physical health variables Variable Non-Binge Eater Binge Eater P-value BDI 5.2±4.7 7.8±5.5 <0.0001 Alcoholic drinks/week 1.4±3.3 1.1±2.7 0.02 Smoking, N (%) 0.12 ?Current 192 (4.6) 19 (3.4) ?Former 1885 (44.7) 273 (48.9) ?Never 2138 (50.7) 266 (47.7) Binge-drinking, N (%) 217 (5.1) 16 (2.9) 0.02 General health 47.8±8.7 43.4±9.4 <0.0001 Diabetes duration, years 6.8±6.5 7.1±6.3 0.22 HBA1c 7.3±1.2 7.3±1.1 0.71 # of medications 5.5±3.0 5.8±3.1 0.03 Diabetes treatment, N (%) 0.94 ?Diet only 525 (12.6) 71 (12.9) ?Oral meds without insulin 2847 (68.3) 371 (67.6) ?Insulin 795 (19.1) 107 (19.5) Note: Binge eating defined as reporting any episodes of binge eating and no compensatory behaviors in the past 6 months. Table 4 Relationship of one-year weight loss, caloric intake decline, and fitness change to binge eating behavior at baseline and one year: adjusted mean (standard error) Variable and model N Binge eating behavior at baseline/one year P value No/No No/Yes Yes/No Yes/Yes One-year weight loss, kg Unadjusted Model 1 Model 2 4222 3928 1957 4.63 (0.13) 4.77 (0.11) 4.65 (0.16) 2.88 (0.66) 3.00 (0.58) 3.92 (0.71) 5.91 (0.44) 5.27 (0.39) 5.59 (0.51) 4.01 (0.62) 3.05 (0.56) 3.40 (0.70) 0.0009 0.0002 < 0.05 One-year calorie decline, kcal Unadjusted Model 2 1954 1798 279.3 (18.2) 322.4 (14.8) 163.4 (82.7) 13.1 (65.9) 535.9 (56.9) 330.8 (46.3) 364.0 (76.2) 175.7 (64.6) < 0.0001 < 0.0001 One-year fitness change, METS (one year baseline) Unadjusted Model 1 Model 2 3785 3533 1750 0.58 (0.02) 0.59 (0.02) 0.63 (0.03) 0.48 (0.12) 0.48 (0.11) 0.52 (0.15) 0.59 (0.08) 0.52 (0.07) 0.58 (0.10) 0.56 (0.11) 0.46 (0.10) 0.74 (0.14) 0.85 0.43 0.68 Model 1 is a linear model adjusting for gender, age, race/ethnicity, education, intervention group, baseline weight, weight loss history, Beck Depression Inventory, General Health Score, binge drinking, max METS (except for the METS models), number of prescribed drugs taken at baseline, and baseline measure. Model 2 also adjusts for intake of kilocalories and percentage of calories from fat intake at baseline. 