ODC1 is a critical determinant of MYCN oncogenesis and a therapeutic target in neuroblastoma Neuroblastoma is a frequently lethal childhood tumor in which MYC gene deregulation, commonly as MYCN amplification, portends poor outcome. Identifying the requisite biopathways downstream of MYC may provide therapeutic opportunities. We used transcriptome analyses to show that MYCN -amplified neuroblastomas have co-ordinately deregulated myriad polyamine enzymes (including ODC1, SRM, SMS, AMD1, OAZ2 , and SMOX ) to enhance polyamine biosynthesis. High-risk tumors without MYCN amplification also overexpress ODC1 , the rate-limiting enzyme in polyamine biosynthesis, when compared with lower risk tumors, suggesting this pathway may be pivotal. Indeed, elevated ODC1 (independent of MYCN amplification) was associated with reduced survival in a large independent neuroblastoma cohort. As polyamines are essential for cell survival and linked to cancer progression, we studied polyamine antagonism to test for metabolic dependence on this pathway in neuroblastoma. The Odc inhibitor ?-difluoromethylornithine (DFMO) inhibited neuroblast proliferation in vitro and suppressed oncogenesis in vivo. DFMO treatment of neuroblastoma-prone genetically-engineered mice ( TH-MYCN GEM) extended tumor latency and survival in homozygous mice, and prevented oncogenesis in hemizygous mice. In the latter, transient Odc ablation permanently prevented tumor onset consistent with a time-limited window for embryonal tumor initiation. Importantly, we show that DFMO augments anti-tumor efficacy of conventional cytotoxics in vivo. This work implicates polyamine biosynthesis as an arbiter of MYCN oncogenesis and demonstrates initial efficacy for polyamine depletion strategies in neuroblastoma, a strategy that may have utility for this and other MYC -driven embryonal tumors.  INTRODUCTION Neuroblastoma is a common childhood tumor arising within the peripheral nervous system. The genetic feature most consistently associated with treatment failure is amplification of the MYCN proto-oncogene that strongly correlates with advanced disease ( 1 , 2 ). Even in otherwise favorable localized disease MYCN amplification portends poor outcome underscoring its biological importance ( 3 ). In high-risk neuroblastomas that lack MYCN amplification, MYC itself may be deregulated ( 4 , 5 ). Myc genes (including MYCN, MYC and MYCL1 ) represent a family of basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper transcription factors that are among the most frequently deregulated genes in cancer. Myc proteins form heterodimers with Max and are recruited to CACGTG (E-box) recognition sequences to transactivate target genes, or enter additional complexes to form repressors [reviewed in ( 6 , 7 )]. It has been estimated that nearly 1/10th of all genes may be directly or indirectly regulated by the Myc:Max axis ( 8 ) yet the determination of those necessary or sufficient to confer oncogenic properties remains empiric. One compelling target that may be decisive in mediating MYC effects is ODC1 ( 9 ), a bona fide oncogene that encodes the rate-limiting enzyme in polyamine synthesis ( 10 ). Polyamines are organic cations that enhance transcription, translation and replication ( 11 ) and support many cellular processes governed by MYC genes. Their maintenance is essential for cell survival as depletion activates growth arrest or apoptotic checkpoints ( 12 ). Thus, intracellular polyamines are kept under tight control through post-transcriptional as well as transcriptional regulation, with the rate-limiting enzymes ODC1 and AMD1 having among the shortest half-lives of any mammalian enzyme as a result ( 13 ). Odc activity is frequently elevated in cancer through deregulation of MYC resulting in higher polyamine content to support rapid tumor cell proliferation ( 11 ). Considerable evidence links elevated polyamines to colon, breast, prostate and skin carcinoma progression ( 14 ) but not embryonal tumors to date. Recently the contribution of Odc activity to MYC -induced lymphomagenesis was investigated using the E?- MYC murine model in which transient biochemical ablation inhibited lymphomagenesis, while restoration of Odc activity allowed for delayed tumor onset ( 15 ). We therefore sought to define whether Odc-mediated polyamine biosynthesis was a requisite metabolic biopathway supporting embryonal tumor initiation or progression. Most children with high-risk neuroblastoma have tumors that manifest a lethal course despite intensive multimodal therapy ( 16 , 17 ). Thus, elucidating novel therapeutic pathways is paramount. We demonstrate that polyamine expansion through broad deregulation of regulatory enzymes, including ODC1 , is a hallmark of neuroblastomas with MYCN amplification. High ODC1 correlates with poor clinical outcome in a large cohort of patients, including those lacking MYCN amplification. Further, we demonstrate that biochemically disabling Odc inhibits neuroblastoma proliferation in vitro and has marked anti-tumor efficacy in a neuroblastoma-prone transgenic mouse model. Together these data support that the adequate provision of polyamines is critical for MYC -driven proliferation and that targeted disruption of this pathway has therapeutic utility.  METHODS Patient samples, expression profiling, array-CGH, and real-time Q-PCR Transcriptome profiles from 101 primary neuroblastomas from COG and the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia were obtained by our groups previously. Clinical and genetic features have been reported ( 18 ). Briefly, risk class was defined using COG criteria: 28 were localized biologically favorable neuroblastoma (low-risk), 21 were intermediate-risk and 52 were high-risk tumors (of which 20 had MYCN amplification). cRNA was hybridized to Affymetrix U95Av2 oligonucleotide arrays containing 12,625 probe sets (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) and statistical modeling of probe set behavior was conducted using Probe Profiler (Corimbia, Berkeley, CA). A quantitative expression score ( e -score) was calculated for each probe set. The data from this experiment are available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/ [accession number GSE3960]. Differential gene expression was measured with the Patterns from Gene Expression (PaGE; ( 19 )) algorithm using binary comparisons of e -scores. All runs were done with 2001 permutations on unlogged data. A confidence level of 0.95 (1-FDR) was used to define differential expression for these analyses. A subset of tumors (N=80) had DNA available for detection of copy number alterations (CNA) and have been applied to a BAC-array-CGH platform. The platform is described in detail in ( 20 ) and its application and methodology for neuroblastoma CNA detection in ( 21 ). Briefly, normalized log2 intensity ratios were averaged within slide for each BAC clone using the DNAcopy package within Bioconductor ( www.bioconductor.org ). A mean log2 ratio >= 1.0 was considered a high-level amplification. Amplification of both the MYCN -containing BAC and the CTD-2603D17 clone that contains ODC1 and was used to define co-amplification. A second independent cohort of 265 neuroblastomas from COG with available RNA was studied. Outcome data was available for 209 (79%). Informed consent was obtained from all subjects. Clinical characteristics and RNA/cDNA isolation procedures were previously described ( 22 ). ODC1 and MYCN expression was determined by real-time quantitative PCR (Q-PCR). The ?2-microglobulin gene served as an internal control and the primers and probe sequences for ?2-microglobulin and MYCN have been reported ( 22 ). ODC1 primer and probe sequences were: ODCF 5?-GATGACTTTTGATAGTGAAGTTGAGTTGA-3?; ODCR 5?-GGCACCGAATTTCACACTGA-3?; ODC Probe 5?-CGGATTGCCACTGATGATTCCAAAGC-3?. Q-PCR data was collected using a Prism 7700 Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems; Foster City, CA) and the level of target gene expression was determined using the ??Ct method ( 22 ). For all tumors in these studies, MYCN status was defined as >4-fold copies of MYCN compared to a 2p reference probe using fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH). Cell lines and tissue culture Neuroblastoma cell lines were obtained from the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia Cell Line Bank courtesy of Garrett M. Brodeur and have been previously reported ( 23 ). Cells were grown in RPMI Media 1640 (Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/ml of penicillin and 100 mcg/ml gentamicin. Tissue culture was at 37° C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 as previously described ( 24 ). Cell line transcriptome profiles were obtained using the Affymetrix U133+2 oligonucleotide array and analyzed as above. Cell line <italic>ODC1</italic> expression Real-time Q-PCR (TaqMan) was used to quantify ODC1 mRNA. Total RNA (2 ?g) was reverse-transcribed in a 20 ?L reaction using the SuperScript III First Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The probe and primer set used for ODC1 detection was Assay-on-Demand Hs00159739_m1 (Applied Biosystems). The genes SDHA and HPRT served as housekeeping genes for normalization. Triplicate reactions were performed and the mean expression values were used for calculating relative expression. Cytotoxicity assays Cells were seeded into multi-well sensor microplates at 3 × 104 cells per well and allowed to adhere overnight. Cell index was obtained for each test condition in duplicate over 96 hours using the real-time cell electronic sensor system (RT-CES, ACEA Biosciences, San Diego, CA). This label-free dynamic monitoring system uses electrical impedance to quantify viable adherent cell number in real time ( 25 ). 2-difluoromethyl-DL-ornithine (DFMO; Eflornithine) was added to culture media at a final concentration of 2.5, 5 or 10 ?M. DFMO for all studies was generously provided by Patrick Woster (Wayne State University) courtesy of ILEX pharmaceuticals (San Antonio, TX). All experiments were replicated three times. <italic>TH-MYCN</italic> mouse trials 129X1/SvJ mice transgenic for the TH-MYCN construct ( 26 - 28 ) were graciously provided by Bill Weiss (Department of Neurology, UCSF) for establishment of TH-MYCN breeding colonies in both Philadelphia and Sydney. All studies were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Utilization Committee at The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia (Philadelphia) and the Animal Care and Ethics Committee of the University of New South Wales (Sydney). Pre-emptive therapy trial (Philadelphia) TH-MYCN hemizygous mice were bred and litters randomized to water or water with 1% DFMO from birth onward. DFMO passes in breast milk so treated pups received DFMO from birth. After weaning at ?day 28 mice continued ad libitum water or water with 1% DFMO as initially randomized through day 70. Mice were genotyped from 1 cm tail-snip isolated DNA. Primers to detect the human MYCN transgene were: 5?-CACAAGGCCCTCAGTACCTC-3? (forward) and 5?-AGGCATCGTTTGAGGATCAG-3? (reverse). Hemizygous or homozygous transgene status was determined using real-time Q-PCR (TaqMan) with the following: TM-MYCNF1 primer 5?-CGACCACAAGGCCCTCAGT-3? (within exon 2) and TM-MYCNF2 primer 5?-AGGAGGAACGCCGCTTCT-3? (exon 3); MYCN probe FAM-ATCGCTCAGGGTGTCCTCTCCGG-TAMRA; murine B-actinF1 primer 5?-TGCGTCTGGACTTGGCTG-3? and murine B-actinR1 5?-TAGCCACGCTCGGTCAGG-3?; and murine B-actin probe VIC-CGGGACCTGACTGACTACCTCATGA-TAMRA. For each analysis, 10 ng template DNA was used. All unknowns, FISH confirmed homozygous and hemizygous TH-MCYN controls, and non-template controls were loaded in triplicate. The average transgene dose was calculated using ??CT and calls made based on comparison to control values within each run. Palpation for intra-abdominal tumors was performed thrice weekly. Animals with palpable tumors underwent serial abdominal ultrasonography under isoflurane sedation to determine in situ tumor volume using a Vevo660 imaging system with 3D Acquisition and Visualization software (VisualSonics; Toronto, Canada). Mice were screened by experienced animal personnel and sacrificed for pathological signs of tumor burden (predominantly hunching and poor mobility). Delayed treatment trial (Sydney) The specific characteristics of the Sydney breeding colony of TH-MYCN transgenic mice, including their maintenance, genotyping, and tumor incidence and latency, have been described previously ( 26 ). Cohorts of mice received plain water or 1% DFMO in their water ad libitum from day 25 (post-weaning) onward. Animals were abdominally-palpated twice weekly by experienced staff. Time to onset of tumor development and time to sacrifice according to well defined humane endpoints was determined for all animals ( 26 ). Combination chemotherapy treatment in TH-MYCN mice Homozygous TH-MYCN mice with palpable tumors of 5-7 mm diameter (N?10 per group) were treated with cisplatin (Pharmacia) intraperitoneally daily × 5 days at 2 mg/kg, or cyclophosphamide IP daily × 5 days at 20 mg/kg. The control groups were treated with chemotherapy alone, while DFMO-treated groups received either continuous 1% DFMO in drinking water after completion of the cisplatin course, or 1% DFMO in drinking water simultaneously with the cisplatin or cyclophosphamide and continuously thereafter. Animals were sacrificed when tumors recurred, according to well-defined humane endpoints ( 26 ), or otherwise at 140 days of age. Tumor histolopathology and polyamine content Animal tumors and tissues were harvested at sacrifice and fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin and paraffin embedded for histologic studies, as well as flash frozen in liquid nitrogen for metabolic assays. Tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin and assessed histologically by a pathologist (B.P.) for confirmation of tumor type, and percentage of necrosis (average of five 40X microscopic fields) and mitotic/karyorrhectic cells (average of five 600X microscopic fields). For immunohistochemistry, 5 ?m sections were stained with antibodies to caspase-3 at a 1:1000 dilution (R&D Systems AF835, Minneapolis MN) and Ki67 at a 1:1000 dilution (Santa Cruz SC-7846, Santa Cruz, CA) on an Autostainer Plus staining system (DAKOCytomation, Carpinteria, CA) using standard methods, including microwave antigen retrieval for 5 minutes in 0.01 M Citrate buffer at pH 7.6. Both Caspase-3 and Ki-67 staining were scored as the percentage of stained tumor nuclei using the average of five 600X microscopic fields. Tumor tissues were frozen in liquid nitrogen, ground to a fine powder, and stored at -80°C. For polyamine analyses, ground tissues were homogenized in 0.2 N perchloric acid and incubated at 4°C overnight. Dansylated polyamines were separated on a reversed-phase C18 HPLC column ( 29 ). Polyamine values were normalized to the amount of DNA in the tissue extracts. Murine paravertebral ganglia studies To study the in vivo effects of perinatal Odc1 inhibition, litters from TH-MYCN mice were randomized and treated with 1% DFMO in maternal drinking water as above. Pups were euthanized at postnatal day 0 (n= 26), 7 (n=40) and 14 (n=26). Additionally, a cohort of pregnant females received DFMO prenatally from embryonic day 14 to 21 and ganglia from pups were obtained at day 0. Tissues were formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded. A histologic audit was performed with each section scored for the presence of ?30-cell neuroblast hyperplasia. Animals were TH-MYCN genotyped as previously described ( 30 ). Paravertebral sympathetic ganglia were dissected from normal and TH-MYCN mice at postnatal day 14 and cultured for 3-5 days as described previously ( 27 ). DFMO (1 mM) was added to half the wells for 7 days. On day 5, cells were washed twice and 10 ?g/ml anti-NGF antibody (Chemicon) or isotype control (Cedarlane Laboratories) was added to alternate wells for 48 hours. The number of neurons surviving withdrawal of NGF was quantitated using immunofluorescent staining for the neuron-specific marker ßIII-tubulin, expressed as a percentage of neurons positive for ßIII-tubulin before and after NGF withdrawal. For Odc1 immunohistochemistry, cells from murine ganglia were cultured as described ( 27 ), then treated with 1 mM DFMO for 7 days. Media was replaced every 2-3 days with complete media containing anti-NGF and DFMO. Cells were fixed with 4% formaldehyde (20 minutes at RT), followed by methanol permeabilization (20 minutes at RT). Immunofluorescent staining was performed using a mouse Odc antibody (clone MP 16-2, Sapphire Biosciences, Sydney) at 1:25 dilution, or isotype control in conjunction with the Vector Labs M.O.M kit (Australian Laboratory Services, Sydney). DFMO competitively inhibits binding of this antibody to Odc1 ( 31 ). Cells were imaged using an Axioplan 2 microscope (Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) using a Sensicam Charged Coupled Device (CCD) camera (PCO Imaging, Kelheim, Bavaria, Germany). Statistical analyses Pearson’s correlation coefficients were calculated to assess gene expression correlations. Two-tailed students T-test was used to test significance unless otherwise stated. Survival analyses were performed according to the method of Kaplan and Meier ( 32 ) with standard errors according to Peto ( 33 ). Comparisons of outcome between subgroups were performed by a 2-sided log-rank test. Event-free survival time was calculated as described previously ( 22 ) and death was the only event considered for the calculation of overall survival time. A continuous range of ODC1 Q-PCR values was used in outcome analyses. To categorize expression as either high or low, the following cut-points were tested: the mean, median, upper quartile and upper decile values ( 34 ). The cut-point that maximized the difference in EFS between the two groups was selected, and that cut-point was applied to analyses of the overall cohort as well as the subgroups.  Patient samples, expression profiling, array-CGH, and real-time Q-PCR Transcriptome profiles from 101 primary neuroblastomas from COG and the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia were obtained by our groups previously. Clinical and genetic features have been reported ( 18 ). Briefly, risk class was defined using COG criteria: 28 were localized biologically favorable neuroblastoma (low-risk), 21 were intermediate-risk and 52 were high-risk tumors (of which 20 had MYCN amplification). cRNA was hybridized to Affymetrix U95Av2 oligonucleotide arrays containing 12,625 probe sets (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) and statistical modeling of probe set behavior was conducted using Probe Profiler (Corimbia, Berkeley, CA). A quantitative expression score ( e -score) was calculated for each probe set. The data from this experiment are available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/ [accession number GSE3960]. Differential gene expression was measured with the Patterns from Gene Expression (PaGE; ( 19 )) algorithm using binary comparisons of e -scores. All runs were done with 2001 permutations on unlogged data. A confidence level of 0.95 (1-FDR) was used to define differential expression for these analyses. A subset of tumors (N=80) had DNA available for detection of copy number alterations (CNA) and have been applied to a BAC-array-CGH platform. The platform is described in detail in ( 20 ) and its application and methodology for neuroblastoma CNA detection in ( 21 ). Briefly, normalized log2 intensity ratios were averaged within slide for each BAC clone using the DNAcopy package within Bioconductor ( www.bioconductor.org ). A mean log2 ratio >= 1.0 was considered a high-level amplification. Amplification of both the MYCN -containing BAC and the CTD-2603D17 clone that contains ODC1 and was used to define co-amplification. A second independent cohort of 265 neuroblastomas from COG with available RNA was studied. Outcome data was available for 209 (79%). Informed consent was obtained from all subjects. Clinical characteristics and RNA/cDNA isolation procedures were previously described ( 22 ). ODC1 and MYCN expression was determined by real-time quantitative PCR (Q-PCR). The ?2-microglobulin gene served as an internal control and the primers and probe sequences for ?2-microglobulin and MYCN have been reported ( 22 ). ODC1 primer and probe sequences were: ODCF 5?-GATGACTTTTGATAGTGAAGTTGAGTTGA-3?; ODCR 5?-GGCACCGAATTTCACACTGA-3?; ODC Probe 5?-CGGATTGCCACTGATGATTCCAAAGC-3?. Q-PCR data was collected using a Prism 7700 Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems; Foster City, CA) and the level of target gene expression was determined using the ??Ct method ( 22 ). For all tumors in these studies, MYCN status was defined as >4-fold copies of MYCN compared to a 2p reference probe using fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH).  Cell lines and tissue culture Neuroblastoma cell lines were obtained from the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia Cell Line Bank courtesy of Garrett M. Brodeur and have been previously reported ( 23 ). Cells were grown in RPMI Media 1640 (Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/ml of penicillin and 100 mcg/ml gentamicin. Tissue culture was at 37° C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 as previously described ( 24 ). Cell line transcriptome profiles were obtained using the Affymetrix U133+2 oligonucleotide array and analyzed as above.  Cell line <italic>ODC1</italic> expression Real-time Q-PCR (TaqMan) was used to quantify ODC1 mRNA. Total RNA (2 ?g) was reverse-transcribed in a 20 ?L reaction using the SuperScript III First Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The probe and primer set used for ODC1 detection was Assay-on-Demand Hs00159739_m1 (Applied Biosystems). The genes SDHA and HPRT served as housekeeping genes for normalization. Triplicate reactions were performed and the mean expression values were used for calculating relative expression.  Cytotoxicity assays Cells were seeded into multi-well sensor microplates at 3 × 104 cells per well and allowed to adhere overnight. Cell index was obtained for each test condition in duplicate over 96 hours using the real-time cell electronic sensor system (RT-CES, ACEA Biosciences, San Diego, CA). This label-free dynamic monitoring system uses electrical impedance to quantify viable adherent cell number in real time ( 25 ). 2-difluoromethyl-DL-ornithine (DFMO; Eflornithine) was added to culture media at a final concentration of 2.5, 5 or 10 ?M. DFMO for all studies was generously provided by Patrick Woster (Wayne State University) courtesy of ILEX pharmaceuticals (San Antonio, TX). All experiments were replicated three times.  <italic>TH-MYCN</italic> mouse trials 129X1/SvJ mice transgenic for the TH-MYCN construct ( 26 - 28 ) were graciously provided by Bill Weiss (Department of Neurology, UCSF) for establishment of TH-MYCN breeding colonies in both Philadelphia and Sydney. All studies were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Utilization Committee at The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia (Philadelphia) and the Animal Care and Ethics Committee of the University of New South Wales (Sydney). Pre-emptive therapy trial (Philadelphia) TH-MYCN hemizygous mice were bred and litters randomized to water or water with 1% DFMO from birth onward. DFMO passes in breast milk so treated pups received DFMO from birth. After weaning at ?day 28 mice continued ad libitum water or water with 1% DFMO as initially randomized through day 70. Mice were genotyped from 1 cm tail-snip isolated DNA. Primers to detect the human MYCN transgene were: 5?-CACAAGGCCCTCAGTACCTC-3? (forward) and 5?-AGGCATCGTTTGAGGATCAG-3? (reverse). Hemizygous or homozygous transgene status was determined using real-time Q-PCR (TaqMan) with the following: TM-MYCNF1 primer 5?-CGACCACAAGGCCCTCAGT-3? (within exon 2) and TM-MYCNF2 primer 5?-AGGAGGAACGCCGCTTCT-3? (exon 3); MYCN probe FAM-ATCGCTCAGGGTGTCCTCTCCGG-TAMRA; murine B-actinF1 primer 5?-TGCGTCTGGACTTGGCTG-3? and murine B-actinR1 5?-TAGCCACGCTCGGTCAGG-3?; and murine B-actin probe VIC-CGGGACCTGACTGACTACCTCATGA-TAMRA. For each analysis, 10 ng template DNA was used. All unknowns, FISH confirmed homozygous and hemizygous TH-MCYN controls, and non-template controls were loaded in triplicate. The average transgene dose was calculated using ??CT and calls made based on comparison to control values within each run. Palpation for intra-abdominal tumors was performed thrice weekly. Animals with palpable tumors underwent serial abdominal ultrasonography under isoflurane sedation to determine in situ tumor volume using a Vevo660 imaging system with 3D Acquisition and Visualization software (VisualSonics; Toronto, Canada). Mice were screened by experienced animal personnel and sacrificed for pathological signs of tumor burden (predominantly hunching and poor mobility). Delayed treatment trial (Sydney) The specific characteristics of the Sydney breeding colony of TH-MYCN transgenic mice, including their maintenance, genotyping, and tumor incidence and latency, have been described previously ( 26 ). Cohorts of mice received plain water or 1% DFMO in their water ad libitum from day 25 (post-weaning) onward. Animals were abdominally-palpated twice weekly by experienced staff. Time to onset of tumor development and time to sacrifice according to well defined humane endpoints was determined for all animals ( 26 ). Combination chemotherapy treatment in TH-MYCN mice Homozygous TH-MYCN mice with palpable tumors of 5-7 mm diameter (N?10 per group) were treated with cisplatin (Pharmacia) intraperitoneally daily × 5 days at 2 mg/kg, or cyclophosphamide IP daily × 5 days at 20 mg/kg. The control groups were treated with chemotherapy alone, while DFMO-treated groups received either continuous 1% DFMO in drinking water after completion of the cisplatin course, or 1% DFMO in drinking water simultaneously with the cisplatin or cyclophosphamide and continuously thereafter. Animals were sacrificed when tumors recurred, according to well-defined humane endpoints ( 26 ), or otherwise at 140 days of age.  Pre-emptive therapy trial (Philadelphia) TH-MYCN hemizygous mice were bred and litters randomized to water or water with 1% DFMO from birth onward. DFMO passes in breast milk so treated pups received DFMO from birth. After weaning at ?day 28 mice continued ad libitum water or water with 1% DFMO as initially randomized through day 70. Mice were genotyped from 1 cm tail-snip isolated DNA. Primers to detect the human MYCN transgene were: 5?-CACAAGGCCCTCAGTACCTC-3? (forward) and 5?-AGGCATCGTTTGAGGATCAG-3? (reverse). Hemizygous or homozygous transgene status was determined using real-time Q-PCR (TaqMan) with the following: TM-MYCNF1 primer 5?-CGACCACAAGGCCCTCAGT-3? (within exon 2) and TM-MYCNF2 primer 5?-AGGAGGAACGCCGCTTCT-3? (exon 3); MYCN probe FAM-ATCGCTCAGGGTGTCCTCTCCGG-TAMRA; murine B-actinF1 primer 5?-TGCGTCTGGACTTGGCTG-3? and murine B-actinR1 5?-TAGCCACGCTCGGTCAGG-3?; and murine B-actin probe VIC-CGGGACCTGACTGACTACCTCATGA-TAMRA. For each analysis, 10 ng template DNA was used. All unknowns, FISH confirmed homozygous and hemizygous TH-MCYN controls, and non-template controls were loaded in triplicate. The average transgene dose was calculated using ??CT and calls made based on comparison to control values within each run. Palpation for intra-abdominal tumors was performed thrice weekly. Animals with palpable tumors underwent serial abdominal ultrasonography under isoflurane sedation to determine in situ tumor volume using a Vevo660 imaging system with 3D Acquisition and Visualization software (VisualSonics; Toronto, Canada). Mice were screened by experienced animal personnel and sacrificed for pathological signs of tumor burden (predominantly hunching and poor mobility).  Delayed treatment trial (Sydney) The specific characteristics of the Sydney breeding colony of TH-MYCN transgenic mice, including their maintenance, genotyping, and tumor incidence and latency, have been described previously ( 26 ). Cohorts of mice received plain water or 1% DFMO in their water ad libitum from day 25 (post-weaning) onward. Animals were abdominally-palpated twice weekly by experienced staff. Time to onset of tumor development and time to sacrifice according to well defined humane endpoints was determined for all animals ( 26 ).  Combination chemotherapy treatment in TH-MYCN mice Homozygous TH-MYCN mice with palpable tumors of 5-7 mm diameter (N?10 per group) were treated with cisplatin (Pharmacia) intraperitoneally daily × 5 days at 2 mg/kg, or cyclophosphamide IP daily × 5 days at 20 mg/kg. The control groups were treated with chemotherapy alone, while DFMO-treated groups received either continuous 1% DFMO in drinking water after completion of the cisplatin course, or 1% DFMO in drinking water simultaneously with the cisplatin or cyclophosphamide and continuously thereafter. Animals were sacrificed when tumors recurred, according to well-defined humane endpoints ( 26 ), or otherwise at 140 days of age.  Tumor histolopathology and polyamine content Animal tumors and tissues were harvested at sacrifice and fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin and paraffin embedded for histologic studies, as well as flash frozen in liquid nitrogen for metabolic assays. Tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin and assessed histologically by a pathologist (B.P.) for confirmation of tumor type, and percentage of necrosis (average of five 40X microscopic fields) and mitotic/karyorrhectic cells (average of five 600X microscopic fields). For immunohistochemistry, 5 ?m sections were stained with antibodies to caspase-3 at a 1:1000 dilution (R&D Systems AF835, Minneapolis MN) and Ki67 at a 1:1000 dilution (Santa Cruz SC-7846, Santa Cruz, CA) on an Autostainer Plus staining system (DAKOCytomation, Carpinteria, CA) using standard methods, including microwave antigen retrieval for 5 minutes in 0.01 M Citrate buffer at pH 7.6. Both Caspase-3 and Ki-67 staining were scored as the percentage of stained tumor nuclei using the average of five 600X microscopic fields. Tumor tissues were frozen in liquid nitrogen, ground to a fine powder, and stored at -80°C. For polyamine analyses, ground tissues were homogenized in 0.2 N perchloric acid and incubated at 4°C overnight. Dansylated polyamines were separated on a reversed-phase C18 HPLC column ( 29 ). Polyamine values were normalized to the amount of DNA in the tissue extracts.  Murine paravertebral ganglia studies To study the in vivo effects of perinatal Odc1 inhibition, litters from TH-MYCN mice were randomized and treated with 1% DFMO in maternal drinking water as above. Pups were euthanized at postnatal day 0 (n= 26), 7 (n=40) and 14 (n=26). Additionally, a cohort of pregnant females received DFMO prenatally from embryonic day 14 to 21 and ganglia from pups were obtained at day 0. Tissues were formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded. A histologic audit was performed with each section scored for the presence of ?30-cell neuroblast hyperplasia. Animals were TH-MYCN genotyped as previously described ( 30 ). Paravertebral sympathetic ganglia were dissected from normal and TH-MYCN mice at postnatal day 14 and cultured for 3-5 days as described previously ( 27 ). DFMO (1 mM) was added to half the wells for 7 days. On day 5, cells were washed twice and 10 ?g/ml anti-NGF antibody (Chemicon) or isotype control (Cedarlane Laboratories) was added to alternate wells for 48 hours. The number of neurons surviving withdrawal of NGF was quantitated using immunofluorescent staining for the neuron-specific marker ßIII-tubulin, expressed as a percentage of neurons positive for ßIII-tubulin before and after NGF withdrawal. For Odc1 immunohistochemistry, cells from murine ganglia were cultured as described ( 27 ), then treated with 1 mM DFMO for 7 days. Media was replaced every 2-3 days with complete media containing anti-NGF and DFMO. Cells were fixed with 4% formaldehyde (20 minutes at RT), followed by methanol permeabilization (20 minutes at RT). Immunofluorescent staining was performed using a mouse Odc antibody (clone MP 16-2, Sapphire Biosciences, Sydney) at 1:25 dilution, or isotype control in conjunction with the Vector Labs M.O.M kit (Australian Laboratory Services, Sydney). DFMO competitively inhibits binding of this antibody to Odc1 ( 31 ). Cells were imaged using an Axioplan 2 microscope (Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) using a Sensicam Charged Coupled Device (CCD) camera (PCO Imaging, Kelheim, Bavaria, Germany).  Statistical analyses Pearson’s correlation coefficients were calculated to assess gene expression correlations. Two-tailed students T-test was used to test significance unless otherwise stated. Survival analyses were performed according to the method of Kaplan and Meier ( 32 ) with standard errors according to Peto ( 33 ). Comparisons of outcome between subgroups were performed by a 2-sided log-rank test. Event-free survival time was calculated as described previously ( 22 ) and death was the only event considered for the calculation of overall survival time. A continuous range of ODC1 Q-PCR values was used in outcome analyses. To categorize expression as either high or low, the following cut-points were tested: the mean, median, upper quartile and upper decile values ( 34 ). The cut-point that maximized the difference in EFS between the two groups was selected, and that cut-point was applied to analyses of the overall cohort as well as the subgroups.  RESULTS <italic>ODC1</italic> expression correlates with survival in neuroblastoma Odc1 is rate-limiting for polyamine biosynthesis, a bona fide oncogene, and direct MYCN target. We therefore compared ODC1 mRNA expression with MYCN gene status, MYCN expression, and outcome in a large cohort of neuroblastoma patients. ODC1 expression was significantly higher in MYCN amplified tumors ( Figure 1A ) and strongly correlated with MYCN expression (r=0.80; p<0.0001). Event-free survival (EFS) for patients with high ODC1 expression (defined as the upper decile and determined by an optimal cut-point analysis) was significantly poorer than that of patients with low ODC1 , with 5-year rates of 38%±11% and 76%±3% ( Figure 1B ). Similarly, worse overall survival (OS) was associated with high ODC1 (p<0.001). High ODC1 was associated with worse EFS and OS when the groups were dichotomised around the mean, median or upper quartile as well (p<0.05 for each). In patients with stage 4 metastatic disease high ODC1 expression was again associated with reduced EFS or OS ( Figure 1C ). Since MYCN amplification has a negative influence on survival through regulation of numerous target genes (in addition to ODC1 ) we assessed tumors without MYCN amplification. Again, high ODC1 was associated with a worse EFS and OS, with 5-year EFS rates of 43%±19% compared to 80%±3% ( Figure 1D ) suggesting a role for ODC1 in promoting an aggressive phenotype (for dichotomization at the mean, median or upper quartile the p value was again ?0.05). In non-amplified neuroblastomas there is no correlation between MYCN expression and outcome so it is unlikely this is a surrogate for MYCN activity ( 30 ). To assess the independent prognostic significance of ODC1 while controlling for known powerful prognostic factors such as tumor stage (stages 1,2,4S versus 3,4), age at diagnosis (<1 year versus ?1 year) and MYCN status these factors were tested in a Cox proportional hazards model with dichotomised ODC1 expression. The addition of ODC1 expression by itself did not add independent significance to this highly prognostic model. Neuroblastomas with <italic>MYCN</italic> amplification demonstrate co-ordinate pathway alterations that enhance polyamine biosynthesis To further explore polyamine metabolism (see pathway, Figure 2A ) we mined transcriptome profiles from neuroblastomas of diverse risk classes ( 17 ). As predicted, MYCN and ODC1 mRNA were significantly higher in HR-A tumors in comparison with all other groups ( Figure 2B ). Odc1 is additionally regulated by antizymes ( OAZs ) that direct its degradation, while OAZIN inhibits this activity. OAZ2 was significantly reduced in HR-A neuroblastomas further promoting Odc activity. Notable were alterations in numerous polyamine regulators in HR-A tumors, all in a direction promoting biosynthesis. Each pro-synthetic enzyme was upregulated (confidence level >0.95) while there was a reduction in SMOX that catabolizes polyamines (note, no PAOX probe sets were on the array). Together these data demonstrate systematic alterations in polyamine metabolism correlated with MYCN amplification. High-risk tumors without MYCN amplification (HR-NA) also had higher ODC1 and reduced OAZ2 compared with low and intermediate risk tumors, suggesting pathway enhancement in these tumors as well. ODC1, SRM , and AMD1 have been posited as Myc targets (Myc Cancer Gene Database; www.myccancergene.org ) and our data support this. ODC1 was strongly correlated with MYCN across the entire cohort (r=0.53; p<0.0001; Figure 2C ). SRM and AMD1 yielded similar correlations (r=0.30; p=0.001 and r=0.59, p=0.001, respectively). SMS , despite no prior evidence as a MYC target, had the strongest correlation (r=0.69, p<0.0001), while OAZ2 was inversely correlated (r= -0.42, p<0.0001; see Supplementary Figure S1 ) though not a previously identified repressed target. Thus, MYCN -amplified neuroblastomas directly or indirectly promote polyamine pool expansion through co-ordinate alteration of multiple polyamine regulators through mechanisms that may include de novo transcriptional initiation or mRNA stability. The correlation between MYCN and ODC1 expression was less evident in tumors with MYCN amplification (compared with other bona fide MYCN targets) due to the presence of outliers with exceptionally high ODC1 ( Figure 2C ). ODC1 maps ?5.5 Mb telomeric to MYCN (2p24) using UCSC Genome Browser coordinates. We sought whether ODC1 was co-amplified with MYCN as has been reported ( 35 ). Eighty of the 101 tumors had DNA available for determination of MYCN and ODC1 genomic copy number using a BAC-array-CGH platform ( 21 ). No tumors without MYCN amplification (N=64) had ODC1 amplification. Sixteen MYCN -amplified tumors (by FISH) were confirmed to have high-level MYCN amplification using array-CGH. Three of these (19%) had high-level ODC1 co-amplification and each was an outlier with extremely high ODC1 expression ( Figure 2C , arrowheads; the fourth outlier did not have DNA for CNA determination). Thus, a subset of neuroblastomas co-amplify both the transcriptional regulator ( MYCN ) and target gene ( ODC1 ) to augment effects on polyamine biosynthesis, a putative “amplification loop” that has not been previously postulated. Disabling <italic>ODC1</italic> in neuroblastoma cell lines inhibits proliferation Across 26 neuroblastoma cell lines there was a trend for higher ODC1 with MYCN -amplification (p=0.10; p=0.06 if NBL-S with prolonged MycN half-life ( 36 ) is included in the “amplified” cohort; Supplemental Figure S2 ). We assessed Odc1 inhibition in vitro using DFMO, an irreversible Odc inhibitor. DFMO-mediated growth inhibition correlated with ODC1 mRNA expression and proliferative rates ( Figure 3A ), were apparent by early time-points (48 hrs), and was seen in cells both with and without MYCN amplification. Indeed, Affymetrix expression data for neuroblastoma cell lines and fetal brain cDNA shows upregulation of polyamine synthetic enzymes and downregulation of catabolic enzymes in non-amplified cells ( Figure 3B ). This growth inhibition is not surprising as most cell types demonstrate cytostasis when Odc is inhibited in vitro, including neuroblasts {Wallick, 2005 #1863}. Tissue culture conditions do not provide the same rescue opportunities present to cells depleted of polyamines in vivo, where many markedly increase polyamine uptake, an option not present in polyamine-poor culture media. We therefore focused on polyamine depletion effects in vivo. Disabling Odc1 prevents <italic>MYCN</italic>-mediated oncogenesis We determined the impact of disabling Odc (to impede polyamine synthesis) on both tumor initiation and progression using a MYCN transgenic mouse model. Mice homozygous for a neural-crest targeted MYCN transgene ( TH-MYCN ) develop tumors with complete penetrance, while hemizygous TH-MYCN mice have reduced (?30%) tumor penetrance ( 27 , 28 ). Tumors develop within hyperplastic rests that are transiently present even in wild-type animals ( 27 ). Their number and persistence correlate with tumor penetrance and MYCN dosage. Tumors share biochemical features and orthologous genomic alterations with human neuroblastomas, suggesting preferred secondary pathways are recapitulated ( 28 , 37 , 38 ). Thus, the model provides a platform for evaluating biopathway targeted therapies ( 39 ). We evaluated whether Odc activity was required for MYCN -initiated oncogenesis by treating mice with DFMO from birth. All mice homozygous for the transgene (highest MYCN ) developed tumors, however, tumor latency (mean 31±2 versus 43±7 days; p<0.001) and overall survival (mean 43±4 versus 59±9 days; p<0.001) were markedly extended by DFMO ( Figure 4A ). Moreover, hemizygous mice (high MYCN ) were protected from tumor initiation. Seven of 16 untreated hemizygous mice (44%) developed tumors, consistent with the penetrance observed historically, whereas only 6 of 38 DFMO-treated mice (16%) developed tumors (p=0.035). Importantly, DFMO was removed at day 70 yet no tumors arose beyond this time-point. This is consistent with a finite vulnerable period for embryonal oncogenesis and suggests that transiently inhibiting Odc1 provides long-lasted tumor protection. Delaying Odc inhibition until after tumor onset also had a measurable effect. In a second trial, DFMO therapy was initiated after weaning when small tumors are invariably present in homozygous animals and in the majority of hemizygous animals ( 27 ). DFMO treatment of homozygous mice again inhibited progression (time to palpable tumor burden: mean 47.5±1.3 days versus 38.6±1.5 days) and time to death (mean 49.2±1.3 days versus 42.6±1.2 days; p=0.001; Figure 4B ). Delayed DFMO treatment in hemizygous mice did not reduce penetrance (as the majority of tumors were present prior to therapy) yet there was a modest trend toward tumor inhibition based on a reduction in penetrance and extended tumor free and overall survival. DFMO enhances the therapeutic effect of chemotherapy DFMO has been shown to induce cell cycle arrest in neuroblasts ( 40 ) and therefore may interfere with chemotherapy effects. We assessed Odc inhibition in combination with cisplatin, vincristine or cyclophosphamide, first-line agents with high single-agent activity in neuroblastoma. TH-MYCN homozygous mice with palpable intra-abdominal tumors (75-150 mm3) were treated with the chemotherapeutic alone or in combination with DFMO. Cisplatin induced transient tumor regression with a mean latency to recurrence of 32 days. DFMO started concurrently or following cisplatin and continued thereafter did not interfere with cisplatin-induced regression and led to an extended relapse-free survival (p<0.01; Figure 4C ). Similar findings were obtained using vincristine (data not shown), and a more marked augmentation of chemotherapy efficacy was seen with cyclophosphamide, where cyclophosphamide alone resulted in long term cure of ?20% of neuroblastoma-bearing mice. Concurrent administration of DFMO with cyclophosphamide increased overall survival to 80% (p=0.03; Figure 4D ). We noted no overt toxicity attributable to DFMO therapy in these trials. Wild-type mice receiving DFMO from birth weighed less than untreated littermates following weaning (?day 28), yet they gained weight at the same rate or better thereafter, despite ongoing DFMO exposure (average weight gain of 0.45 gm/wk in DFMO-treated mice versus 0.28 gm/wk for control mice between weeks 14 and 20; p=0.12; Supplemental Figure 3 ). Mice receiving DFMO delayed until after weaning showed modest growth inhibition through 5 months of life compared with untreated animals (weight gain of 0.92 ± 0.04 versus 1.05 ± 0.04 gm/wk; p=0.034). Odc activity is not required for <italic>MYCN</italic>-mediated death resistance Tumors in TH-MYCN mice arise within hyperplastic rests in sympathetic ganglia. These are transiently present in wild-type mice but are increased in number and persist longer in a MYCN dose-dependent manner ( 27 ). We assessed the effect of DFMO on this process by performing a histologic audit. Prenatal DFMO treatment of pregnant mothers from embryonic day 14-21 did not affect the incidence of hyperplasia noted at day 0 (data not shown). Post-natal DFMO treatment of newborn pups did not have a demonstrable effect on neuroblast hyperplasia by day 7, however, by day 14 homozygote mice (highest MYCN ) treated with DFMO demonstrated a significant reduction ( Figure 5A ). Together with in vivo data, this suggests that Odc activity is not required for basal neuroblast hyperplasia, however, MYCN supported maintenance and progression to tumor is at least partially Odc-dependent. MYCN not only drives cell cycle entry but also protects against deprivation-induced apoptosis in TH-MYCN neural cells. Cultured perinatal ganglia from TH-MYCN mice demonstrate resistance to NGF withdrawal ( 27 ) analogous to that seen in postmitotic sympathetic neurons ( 41 ). Paravertebral ganglia from untreated normal and TH-MYCN homozygote mice at day 14 were cultured in the presence of NGF with or without DFMO for 7 days, after which NGF was withdrawn. While DFMO-mediated Odc inhibition was supported using a conformation-specific antibody ( Figure 5B ) there was no effect on the death resistance of ganglia cells, demonstrating that Odc-mediated polyamine synthesis was not a critical component of MYCN -mediated apoptosis resistance ( Figure 5C ). Neuroblastomas arising under DFMO may circumvent the polyamine depletion barrier We assessed whether tumors arising under Odc inhibition overcame this blockade or took an alternative route to transformation less dependent on polyamines. DFMO-treated and untreated mice developed cellular tumors that were undifferentiated (with the exception of one lymph node that had fibrillary neuropil) similar to poorly differentiated human neuroblastoma. DFMO-treated tumors had larger cells with reduced hemorrhage and necrosis, but no differences in mitosis/karyorrhexis index ( Figure 6A ). Tumors were notable for the large percentage of cycling cells (Ki67+) and caspase activation although neither differed between groups. Serial ultrasonography in homozygous TH-MYCN mice confirmed similar tumor volume at the time of ascertainment (mean 227 ± 61 mm3 versus 232 ± 64 mm3; p=0.83) though tumors arose later in DFMO-treated mice. Tumors grew at similar rates (?volume/week of 166 ± 68 mm3 versus 156 ± 79 mm3 with DFMO; p=0.75) and lethality. Thus, aside from being delayed in onset, DFMO-treated tumors manifested a similar aggressive phenotype in homozygous mice. Polyamine assays from tumors harvested at culling demonstrated reduced putrescine in DFMO-treated tumors, a trend toward reduced spermidine and no effect on spermine ( Figure 6B ). These effects are consistent with experimental models of DFMO-induced Odc inactivation ( 42 ) including effects on NB cell lines ( 40 ) and support that polyamine depletion is at least partially maintained. However, maintenance of spermidine and spermine through enhanced polyamine uptake, compensatory Amd1 induction, or altered metabolism cannot be formally excluded as a mechanism for circumventing the polyamine depletion barrier. Further studies are ongoing to determine whether neuroblastomas circumvent Odc inactivation to support polyamine homeostasis or take an alternate route to oncogenesis.  RESULTS <italic>ODC1</italic> expression correlates with survival in neuroblastoma Odc1 is rate-limiting for polyamine biosynthesis, a bona fide oncogene, and direct MYCN target. We therefore compared ODC1 mRNA expression with MYCN gene status, MYCN expression, and outcome in a large cohort of neuroblastoma patients. ODC1 expression was significantly higher in MYCN amplified tumors ( Figure 1A ) and strongly correlated with MYCN expression (r=0.80; p<0.0001). Event-free survival (EFS) for patients with high ODC1 expression (defined as the upper decile and determined by an optimal cut-point analysis) was significantly poorer than that of patients with low ODC1 , with 5-year rates of 38%±11% and 76%±3% ( Figure 1B ). Similarly, worse overall survival (OS) was associated with high ODC1 (p<0.001). High ODC1 was associated with worse EFS and OS when the groups were dichotomised around the mean, median or upper quartile as well (p<0.05 for each). In patients with stage 4 metastatic disease high ODC1 expression was again associated with reduced EFS or OS ( Figure 1C ). Since MYCN amplification has a negative influence on survival through regulation of numerous target genes (in addition to ODC1 ) we assessed tumors without MYCN amplification. Again, high ODC1 was associated with a worse EFS and OS, with 5-year EFS rates of 43%±19% compared to 80%±3% ( Figure 1D ) suggesting a role for ODC1 in promoting an aggressive phenotype (for dichotomization at the mean, median or upper quartile the p value was again ?0.05). In non-amplified neuroblastomas there is no correlation between MYCN expression and outcome so it is unlikely this is a surrogate for MYCN activity ( 30 ). To assess the independent prognostic significance of ODC1 while controlling for known powerful prognostic factors such as tumor stage (stages 1,2,4S versus 3,4), age at diagnosis (<1 year versus ?1 year) and MYCN status these factors were tested in a Cox proportional hazards model with dichotomised ODC1 expression. The addition of ODC1 expression by itself did not add independent significance to this highly prognostic model. Neuroblastomas with <italic>MYCN</italic> amplification demonstrate co-ordinate pathway alterations that enhance polyamine biosynthesis To further explore polyamine metabolism (see pathway, Figure 2A ) we mined transcriptome profiles from neuroblastomas of diverse risk classes ( 17 ). As predicted, MYCN and ODC1 mRNA were significantly higher in HR-A tumors in comparison with all other groups ( Figure 2B ). Odc1 is additionally regulated by antizymes ( OAZs ) that direct its degradation, while OAZIN inhibits this activity. OAZ2 was significantly reduced in HR-A neuroblastomas further promoting Odc activity. Notable were alterations in numerous polyamine regulators in HR-A tumors, all in a direction promoting biosynthesis. Each pro-synthetic enzyme was upregulated (confidence level >0.95) while there was a reduction in SMOX that catabolizes polyamines (note, no PAOX probe sets were on the array). Together these data demonstrate systematic alterations in polyamine metabolism correlated with MYCN amplification. High-risk tumors without MYCN amplification (HR-NA) also had higher ODC1 and reduced OAZ2 compared with low and intermediate risk tumors, suggesting pathway enhancement in these tumors as well. ODC1, SRM , and AMD1 have been posited as Myc targets (Myc Cancer Gene Database; www.myccancergene.org ) and our data support this. ODC1 was strongly correlated with MYCN across the entire cohort (r=0.53; p<0.0001; Figure 2C ). SRM and AMD1 yielded similar correlations (r=0.30; p=0.001 and r=0.59, p=0.001, respectively). SMS , despite no prior evidence as a MYC target, had the strongest correlation (r=0.69, p<0.0001), while OAZ2 was inversely correlated (r= -0.42, p<0.0001; see Supplementary Figure S1 ) though not a previously identified repressed target. Thus, MYCN -amplified neuroblastomas directly or indirectly promote polyamine pool expansion through co-ordinate alteration of multiple polyamine regulators through mechanisms that may include de novo transcriptional initiation or mRNA stability. The correlation between MYCN and ODC1 expression was less evident in tumors with MYCN amplification (compared with other bona fide MYCN targets) due to the presence of outliers with exceptionally high ODC1 ( Figure 2C ). ODC1 maps ?5.5 Mb telomeric to MYCN (2p24) using UCSC Genome Browser coordinates. We sought whether ODC1 was co-amplified with MYCN as has been reported ( 35 ). Eighty of the 101 tumors had DNA available for determination of MYCN and ODC1 genomic copy number using a BAC-array-CGH platform ( 21 ). No tumors without MYCN amplification (N=64) had ODC1 amplification. Sixteen MYCN -amplified tumors (by FISH) were confirmed to have high-level MYCN amplification using array-CGH. Three of these (19%) had high-level ODC1 co-amplification and each was an outlier with extremely high ODC1 expression ( Figure 2C , arrowheads; the fourth outlier did not have DNA for CNA determination). Thus, a subset of neuroblastomas co-amplify both the transcriptional regulator ( MYCN ) and target gene ( ODC1 ) to augment effects on polyamine biosynthesis, a putative “amplification loop” that has not been previously postulated. Disabling <italic>ODC1</italic> in neuroblastoma cell lines inhibits proliferation Across 26 neuroblastoma cell lines there was a trend for higher ODC1 with MYCN -amplification (p=0.10; p=0.06 if NBL-S with prolonged MycN half-life ( 36 ) is included in the “amplified” cohort; Supplemental Figure S2 ). We assessed Odc1 inhibition in vitro using DFMO, an irreversible Odc inhibitor. DFMO-mediated growth inhibition correlated with ODC1 mRNA expression and proliferative rates ( Figure 3A ), were apparent by early time-points (48 hrs), and was seen in cells both with and without MYCN amplification. Indeed, Affymetrix expression data for neuroblastoma cell lines and fetal brain cDNA shows upregulation of polyamine synthetic enzymes and downregulation of catabolic enzymes in non-amplified cells ( Figure 3B ). This growth inhibition is not surprising as most cell types demonstrate cytostasis when Odc is inhibited in vitro, including neuroblasts {Wallick, 2005 #1863}. Tissue culture conditions do not provide the same rescue opportunities present to cells depleted of polyamines in vivo, where many markedly increase polyamine uptake, an option not present in polyamine-poor culture media. We therefore focused on polyamine depletion effects in vivo. Disabling Odc1 prevents <italic>MYCN</italic>-mediated oncogenesis We determined the impact of disabling Odc (to impede polyamine synthesis) on both tumor initiation and progression using a MYCN transgenic mouse model. Mice homozygous for a neural-crest targeted MYCN transgene ( TH-MYCN ) develop tumors with complete penetrance, while hemizygous TH-MYCN mice have reduced (?30%) tumor penetrance ( 27 , 28 ). Tumors develop within hyperplastic rests that are transiently present even in wild-type animals ( 27 ). Their number and persistence correlate with tumor penetrance and MYCN dosage. Tumors share biochemical features and orthologous genomic alterations with human neuroblastomas, suggesting preferred secondary pathways are recapitulated ( 28 , 37 , 38 ). Thus, the model provides a platform for evaluating biopathway targeted therapies ( 39 ). We evaluated whether Odc activity was required for MYCN -initiated oncogenesis by treating mice with DFMO from birth. All mice homozygous for the transgene (highest MYCN ) developed tumors, however, tumor latency (mean 31±2 versus 43±7 days; p<0.001) and overall survival (mean 43±4 versus 59±9 days; p<0.001) were markedly extended by DFMO ( Figure 4A ). Moreover, hemizygous mice (high MYCN ) were protected from tumor initiation. Seven of 16 untreated hemizygous mice (44%) developed tumors, consistent with the penetrance observed historically, whereas only 6 of 38 DFMO-treated mice (16%) developed tumors (p=0.035). Importantly, DFMO was removed at day 70 yet no tumors arose beyond this time-point. This is consistent with a finite vulnerable period for embryonal oncogenesis and suggests that transiently inhibiting Odc1 provides long-lasted tumor protection. Delaying Odc inhibition until after tumor onset also had a measurable effect. In a second trial, DFMO therapy was initiated after weaning when small tumors are invariably present in homozygous animals and in the majority of hemizygous animals ( 27 ). DFMO treatment of homozygous mice again inhibited progression (time to palpable tumor burden: mean 47.5±1.3 days versus 38.6±1.5 days) and time to death (mean 49.2±1.3 days versus 42.6±1.2 days; p=0.001; Figure 4B ). Delayed DFMO treatment in hemizygous mice did not reduce penetrance (as the majority of tumors were present prior to therapy) yet there was a modest trend toward tumor inhibition based on a reduction in penetrance and extended tumor free and overall survival. DFMO enhances the therapeutic effect of chemotherapy DFMO has been shown to induce cell cycle arrest in neuroblasts ( 40 ) and therefore may interfere with chemotherapy effects. We assessed Odc inhibition in combination with cisplatin, vincristine or cyclophosphamide, first-line agents with high single-agent activity in neuroblastoma. TH-MYCN homozygous mice with palpable intra-abdominal tumors (75-150 mm3) were treated with the chemotherapeutic alone or in combination with DFMO. Cisplatin induced transient tumor regression with a mean latency to recurrence of 32 days. DFMO started concurrently or following cisplatin and continued thereafter did not interfere with cisplatin-induced regression and led to an extended relapse-free survival (p<0.01; Figure 4C ). Similar findings were obtained using vincristine (data not shown), and a more marked augmentation of chemotherapy efficacy was seen with cyclophosphamide, where cyclophosphamide alone resulted in long term cure of ?20% of neuroblastoma-bearing mice. Concurrent administration of DFMO with cyclophosphamide increased overall survival to 80% (p=0.03; Figure 4D ). We noted no overt toxicity attributable to DFMO therapy in these trials. Wild-type mice receiving DFMO from birth weighed less than untreated littermates following weaning (?day 28), yet they gained weight at the same rate or better thereafter, despite ongoing DFMO exposure (average weight gain of 0.45 gm/wk in DFMO-treated mice versus 0.28 gm/wk for control mice between weeks 14 and 20; p=0.12; Supplemental Figure 3 ). Mice receiving DFMO delayed until after weaning showed modest growth inhibition through 5 months of life compared with untreated animals (weight gain of 0.92 ± 0.04 versus 1.05 ± 0.04 gm/wk; p=0.034). Odc activity is not required for <italic>MYCN</italic>-mediated death resistance Tumors in TH-MYCN mice arise within hyperplastic rests in sympathetic ganglia. These are transiently present in wild-type mice but are increased in number and persist longer in a MYCN dose-dependent manner ( 27 ). We assessed the effect of DFMO on this process by performing a histologic audit. Prenatal DFMO treatment of pregnant mothers from embryonic day 14-21 did not affect the incidence of hyperplasia noted at day 0 (data not shown). Post-natal DFMO treatment of newborn pups did not have a demonstrable effect on neuroblast hyperplasia by day 7, however, by day 14 homozygote mice (highest MYCN ) treated with DFMO demonstrated a significant reduction ( Figure 5A ). Together with in vivo data, this suggests that Odc activity is not required for basal neuroblast hyperplasia, however, MYCN supported maintenance and progression to tumor is at least partially Odc-dependent. MYCN not only drives cell cycle entry but also protects against deprivation-induced apoptosis in TH-MYCN neural cells. Cultured perinatal ganglia from TH-MYCN mice demonstrate resistance to NGF withdrawal ( 27 ) analogous to that seen in postmitotic sympathetic neurons ( 41 ). Paravertebral ganglia from untreated normal and TH-MYCN homozygote mice at day 14 were cultured in the presence of NGF with or without DFMO for 7 days, after which NGF was withdrawn. While DFMO-mediated Odc inhibition was supported using a conformation-specific antibody ( Figure 5B ) there was no effect on the death resistance of ganglia cells, demonstrating that Odc-mediated polyamine synthesis was not a critical component of MYCN -mediated apoptosis resistance ( Figure 5C ). Neuroblastomas arising under DFMO may circumvent the polyamine depletion barrier We assessed whether tumors arising under Odc inhibition overcame this blockade or took an alternative route to transformation less dependent on polyamines. DFMO-treated and untreated mice developed cellular tumors that were undifferentiated (with the exception of one lymph node that had fibrillary neuropil) similar to poorly differentiated human neuroblastoma. DFMO-treated tumors had larger cells with reduced hemorrhage and necrosis, but no differences in mitosis/karyorrhexis index ( Figure 6A ). Tumors were notable for the large percentage of cycling cells (Ki67+) and caspase activation although neither differed between groups. Serial ultrasonography in homozygous TH-MYCN mice confirmed similar tumor volume at the time of ascertainment (mean 227 ± 61 mm3 versus 232 ± 64 mm3; p=0.83) though tumors arose later in DFMO-treated mice. Tumors grew at similar rates (?volume/week of 166 ± 68 mm3 versus 156 ± 79 mm3 with DFMO; p=0.75) and lethality. Thus, aside from being delayed in onset, DFMO-treated tumors manifested a similar aggressive phenotype in homozygous mice. Polyamine assays from tumors harvested at culling demonstrated reduced putrescine in DFMO-treated tumors, a trend toward reduced spermidine and no effect on spermine ( Figure 6B ). These effects are consistent with experimental models of DFMO-induced Odc inactivation ( 42 ) including effects on NB cell lines ( 40 ) and support that polyamine depletion is at least partially maintained. However, maintenance of spermidine and spermine through enhanced polyamine uptake, compensatory Amd1 induction, or altered metabolism cannot be formally excluded as a mechanism for circumventing the polyamine depletion barrier. Further studies are ongoing to determine whether neuroblastomas circumvent Odc inactivation to support polyamine homeostasis or take an alternate route to oncogenesis.  <italic>ODC1</italic> expression correlates with survival in neuroblastoma Odc1 is rate-limiting for polyamine biosynthesis, a bona fide oncogene, and direct MYCN target. We therefore compared ODC1 mRNA expression with MYCN gene status, MYCN expression, and outcome in a large cohort of neuroblastoma patients. ODC1 expression was significantly higher in MYCN amplified tumors ( Figure 1A ) and strongly correlated with MYCN expression (r=0.80; p<0.0001). Event-free survival (EFS) for patients with high ODC1 expression (defined as the upper decile and determined by an optimal cut-point analysis) was significantly poorer than that of patients with low ODC1 , with 5-year rates of 38%±11% and 76%±3% ( Figure 1B ). Similarly, worse overall survival (OS) was associated with high ODC1 (p<0.001). High ODC1 was associated with worse EFS and OS when the groups were dichotomised around the mean, median or upper quartile as well (p<0.05 for each). In patients with stage 4 metastatic disease high ODC1 expression was again associated with reduced EFS or OS ( Figure 1C ). Since MYCN amplification has a negative influence on survival through regulation of numerous target genes (in addition to ODC1 ) we assessed tumors without MYCN amplification. Again, high ODC1 was associated with a worse EFS and OS, with 5-year EFS rates of 43%±19% compared to 80%±3% ( Figure 1D ) suggesting a role for ODC1 in promoting an aggressive phenotype (for dichotomization at the mean, median or upper quartile the p value was again ?0.05). In non-amplified neuroblastomas there is no correlation between MYCN expression and outcome so it is unlikely this is a surrogate for MYCN activity ( 30 ). To assess the independent prognostic significance of ODC1 while controlling for known powerful prognostic factors such as tumor stage (stages 1,2,4S versus 3,4), age at diagnosis (<1 year versus ?1 year) and MYCN status these factors were tested in a Cox proportional hazards model with dichotomised ODC1 expression. The addition of ODC1 expression by itself did not add independent significance to this highly prognostic model.  <italic>ODC1</italic> expression correlates with survival in neuroblastoma Odc1 is rate-limiting for polyamine biosynthesis, a bona fide oncogene, and direct MYCN target. We therefore compared ODC1 mRNA expression with MYCN gene status, MYCN expression, and outcome in a large cohort of neuroblastoma patients. ODC1 expression was significantly higher in MYCN amplified tumors ( Figure 1A ) and strongly correlated with MYCN expression (r=0.80; p<0.0001). Event-free survival (EFS) for patients with high ODC1 expression (defined as the upper decile and determined by an optimal cut-point analysis) was significantly poorer than that of patients with low ODC1 , with 5-year rates of 38%±11% and 76%±3% ( Figure 1B ). Similarly, worse overall survival (OS) was associated with high ODC1 (p<0.001). High ODC1 was associated with worse EFS and OS when the groups were dichotomised around the mean, median or upper quartile as well (p<0.05 for each). In patients with stage 4 metastatic disease high ODC1 expression was again associated with reduced EFS or OS ( Figure 1C ). Since MYCN amplification has a negative influence on survival through regulation of numerous target genes (in addition to ODC1 ) we assessed tumors without MYCN amplification. Again, high ODC1 was associated with a worse EFS and OS, with 5-year EFS rates of 43%±19% compared to 80%±3% ( Figure 1D ) suggesting a role for ODC1 in promoting an aggressive phenotype (for dichotomization at the mean, median or upper quartile the p value was again ?0.05). In non-amplified neuroblastomas there is no correlation between MYCN expression and outcome so it is unlikely this is a surrogate for MYCN activity ( 30 ). To assess the independent prognostic significance of ODC1 while controlling for known powerful prognostic factors such as tumor stage (stages 1,2,4S versus 3,4), age at diagnosis (<1 year versus ?1 year) and MYCN status these factors were tested in a Cox proportional hazards model with dichotomised ODC1 expression. The addition of ODC1 expression by itself did not add independent significance to this highly prognostic model.  Neuroblastomas with <italic>MYCN</italic> amplification demonstrate co-ordinate pathway alterations that enhance polyamine biosynthesis To further explore polyamine metabolism (see pathway, Figure 2A ) we mined transcriptome profiles from neuroblastomas of diverse risk classes ( 17 ). As predicted, MYCN and ODC1 mRNA were significantly higher in HR-A tumors in comparison with all other groups ( Figure 2B ). Odc1 is additionally regulated by antizymes ( OAZs ) that direct its degradation, while OAZIN inhibits this activity. OAZ2 was significantly reduced in HR-A neuroblastomas further promoting Odc activity. Notable were alterations in numerous polyamine regulators in HR-A tumors, all in a direction promoting biosynthesis. Each pro-synthetic enzyme was upregulated (confidence level >0.95) while there was a reduction in SMOX that catabolizes polyamines (note, no PAOX probe sets were on the array). Together these data demonstrate systematic alterations in polyamine metabolism correlated with MYCN amplification. High-risk tumors without MYCN amplification (HR-NA) also had higher ODC1 and reduced OAZ2 compared with low and intermediate risk tumors, suggesting pathway enhancement in these tumors as well. ODC1, SRM , and AMD1 have been posited as Myc targets (Myc Cancer Gene Database; www.myccancergene.org ) and our data support this. ODC1 was strongly correlated with MYCN across the entire cohort (r=0.53; p<0.0001; Figure 2C ). SRM and AMD1 yielded similar correlations (r=0.30; p=0.001 and r=0.59, p=0.001, respectively). SMS , despite no prior evidence as a MYC target, had the strongest correlation (r=0.69, p<0.0001), while OAZ2 was inversely correlated (r= -0.42, p<0.0001; see Supplementary Figure S1 ) though not a previously identified repressed target. Thus, MYCN -amplified neuroblastomas directly or indirectly promote polyamine pool expansion through co-ordinate alteration of multiple polyamine regulators through mechanisms that may include de novo transcriptional initiation or mRNA stability. The correlation between MYCN and ODC1 expression was less evident in tumors with MYCN amplification (compared with other bona fide MYCN targets) due to the presence of outliers with exceptionally high ODC1 ( Figure 2C ). ODC1 maps ?5.5 Mb telomeric to MYCN (2p24) using UCSC Genome Browser coordinates. We sought whether ODC1 was co-amplified with MYCN as has been reported ( 35 ). Eighty of the 101 tumors had DNA available for determination of MYCN and ODC1 genomic copy number using a BAC-array-CGH platform ( 21 ). No tumors without MYCN amplification (N=64) had ODC1 amplification. Sixteen MYCN -amplified tumors (by FISH) were confirmed to have high-level MYCN amplification using array-CGH. Three of these (19%) had high-level ODC1 co-amplification and each was an outlier with extremely high ODC1 expression ( Figure 2C , arrowheads; the fourth outlier did not have DNA for CNA determination). Thus, a subset of neuroblastomas co-amplify both the transcriptional regulator ( MYCN ) and target gene ( ODC1 ) to augment effects on polyamine biosynthesis, a putative “amplification loop” that has not been previously postulated.  Neuroblastomas with <italic>MYCN</italic> amplification demonstrate co-ordinate pathway alterations that enhance polyamine biosynthesis To further explore polyamine metabolism (see pathway, Figure 2A ) we mined transcriptome profiles from neuroblastomas of diverse risk classes ( 17 ). As predicted, MYCN and ODC1 mRNA were significantly higher in HR-A tumors in comparison with all other groups ( Figure 2B ). Odc1 is additionally regulated by antizymes ( OAZs ) that direct its degradation, while OAZIN inhibits this activity. OAZ2 was significantly reduced in HR-A neuroblastomas further promoting Odc activity. Notable were alterations in numerous polyamine regulators in HR-A tumors, all in a direction promoting biosynthesis. Each pro-synthetic enzyme was upregulated (confidence level >0.95) while there was a reduction in SMOX that catabolizes polyamines (note, no PAOX probe sets were on the array). Together these data demonstrate systematic alterations in polyamine metabolism correlated with MYCN amplification. High-risk tumors without MYCN amplification (HR-NA) also had higher ODC1 and reduced OAZ2 compared with low and intermediate risk tumors, suggesting pathway enhancement in these tumors as well. ODC1, SRM , and AMD1 have been posited as Myc targets (Myc Cancer Gene Database; www.myccancergene.org ) and our data support this. ODC1 was strongly correlated with MYCN across the entire cohort (r=0.53; p<0.0001; Figure 2C ). SRM and AMD1 yielded similar correlations (r=0.30; p=0.001 and r=0.59, p=0.001, respectively). SMS , despite no prior evidence as a MYC target, had the strongest correlation (r=0.69, p<0.0001), while OAZ2 was inversely correlated (r= -0.42, p<0.0001; see Supplementary Figure S1 ) though not a previously identified repressed target. Thus, MYCN -amplified neuroblastomas directly or indirectly promote polyamine pool expansion through co-ordinate alteration of multiple polyamine regulators through mechanisms that may include de novo transcriptional initiation or mRNA stability. The correlation between MYCN and ODC1 expression was less evident in tumors with MYCN amplification (compared with other bona fide MYCN targets) due to the presence of outliers with exceptionally high ODC1 ( Figure 2C ). ODC1 maps ?5.5 Mb telomeric to MYCN (2p24) using UCSC Genome Browser coordinates. We sought whether ODC1 was co-amplified with MYCN as has been reported ( 35 ). Eighty of the 101 tumors had DNA available for determination of MYCN and ODC1 genomic copy number using a BAC-array-CGH platform ( 21 ). No tumors without MYCN amplification (N=64) had ODC1 amplification. Sixteen MYCN -amplified tumors (by FISH) were confirmed to have high-level MYCN amplification using array-CGH. Three of these (19%) had high-level ODC1 co-amplification and each was an outlier with extremely high ODC1 expression ( Figure 2C , arrowheads; the fourth outlier did not have DNA for CNA determination). Thus, a subset of neuroblastomas co-amplify both the transcriptional regulator ( MYCN ) and target gene ( ODC1 ) to augment effects on polyamine biosynthesis, a putative “amplification loop” that has not been previously postulated.  Disabling <italic>ODC1</italic> in neuroblastoma cell lines inhibits proliferation Across 26 neuroblastoma cell lines there was a trend for higher ODC1 with MYCN -amplification (p=0.10; p=0.06 if NBL-S with prolonged MycN half-life ( 36 ) is included in the “amplified” cohort; Supplemental Figure S2 ). We assessed Odc1 inhibition in vitro using DFMO, an irreversible Odc inhibitor. DFMO-mediated growth inhibition correlated with ODC1 mRNA expression and proliferative rates ( Figure 3A ), were apparent by early time-points (48 hrs), and was seen in cells both with and without MYCN amplification. Indeed, Affymetrix expression data for neuroblastoma cell lines and fetal brain cDNA shows upregulation of polyamine synthetic enzymes and downregulation of catabolic enzymes in non-amplified cells ( Figure 3B ). This growth inhibition is not surprising as most cell types demonstrate cytostasis when Odc is inhibited in vitro, including neuroblasts {Wallick, 2005 #1863}. Tissue culture conditions do not provide the same rescue opportunities present to cells depleted of polyamines in vivo, where many markedly increase polyamine uptake, an option not present in polyamine-poor culture media. We therefore focused on polyamine depletion effects in vivo.  Disabling <italic>ODC1</italic> in neuroblastoma cell lines inhibits proliferation Across 26 neuroblastoma cell lines there was a trend for higher ODC1 with MYCN -amplification (p=0.10; p=0.06 if NBL-S with prolonged MycN half-life ( 36 ) is included in the “amplified” cohort; Supplemental Figure S2 ). We assessed Odc1 inhibition in vitro using DFMO, an irreversible Odc inhibitor. DFMO-mediated growth inhibition correlated with ODC1 mRNA expression and proliferative rates ( Figure 3A ), were apparent by early time-points (48 hrs), and was seen in cells both with and without MYCN amplification. Indeed, Affymetrix expression data for neuroblastoma cell lines and fetal brain cDNA shows upregulation of polyamine synthetic enzymes and downregulation of catabolic enzymes in non-amplified cells ( Figure 3B ). This growth inhibition is not surprising as most cell types demonstrate cytostasis when Odc is inhibited in vitro, including neuroblasts {Wallick, 2005 #1863}. Tissue culture conditions do not provide the same rescue opportunities present to cells depleted of polyamines in vivo, where many markedly increase polyamine uptake, an option not present in polyamine-poor culture media. We therefore focused on polyamine depletion effects in vivo.  Disabling Odc1 prevents <italic>MYCN</italic>-mediated oncogenesis We determined the impact of disabling Odc (to impede polyamine synthesis) on both tumor initiation and progression using a MYCN transgenic mouse model. Mice homozygous for a neural-crest targeted MYCN transgene ( TH-MYCN ) develop tumors with complete penetrance, while hemizygous TH-MYCN mice have reduced (?30%) tumor penetrance ( 27 , 28 ). Tumors develop within hyperplastic rests that are transiently present even in wild-type animals ( 27 ). Their number and persistence correlate with tumor penetrance and MYCN dosage. Tumors share biochemical features and orthologous genomic alterations with human neuroblastomas, suggesting preferred secondary pathways are recapitulated ( 28 , 37 , 38 ). Thus, the model provides a platform for evaluating biopathway targeted therapies ( 39 ). We evaluated whether Odc activity was required for MYCN -initiated oncogenesis by treating mice with DFMO from birth. All mice homozygous for the transgene (highest MYCN ) developed tumors, however, tumor latency (mean 31±2 versus 43±7 days; p<0.001) and overall survival (mean 43±4 versus 59±9 days; p<0.001) were markedly extended by DFMO ( Figure 4A ). Moreover, hemizygous mice (high MYCN ) were protected from tumor initiation. Seven of 16 untreated hemizygous mice (44%) developed tumors, consistent with the penetrance observed historically, whereas only 6 of 38 DFMO-treated mice (16%) developed tumors (p=0.035). Importantly, DFMO was removed at day 70 yet no tumors arose beyond this time-point. This is consistent with a finite vulnerable period for embryonal oncogenesis and suggests that transiently inhibiting Odc1 provides long-lasted tumor protection. Delaying Odc inhibition until after tumor onset also had a measurable effect. In a second trial, DFMO therapy was initiated after weaning when small tumors are invariably present in homozygous animals and in the majority of hemizygous animals ( 27 ). DFMO treatment of homozygous mice again inhibited progression (time to palpable tumor burden: mean 47.5±1.3 days versus 38.6±1.5 days) and time to death (mean 49.2±1.3 days versus 42.6±1.2 days; p=0.001; Figure 4B ). Delayed DFMO treatment in hemizygous mice did not reduce penetrance (as the majority of tumors were present prior to therapy) yet there was a modest trend toward tumor inhibition based on a reduction in penetrance and extended tumor free and overall survival.  Disabling Odc1 prevents <italic>MYCN</italic>-mediated oncogenesis We determined the impact of disabling Odc (to impede polyamine synthesis) on both tumor initiation and progression using a MYCN transgenic mouse model. Mice homozygous for a neural-crest targeted MYCN transgene ( TH-MYCN ) develop tumors with complete penetrance, while hemizygous TH-MYCN mice have reduced (?30%) tumor penetrance ( 27 , 28 ). Tumors develop within hyperplastic rests that are transiently present even in wild-type animals ( 27 ). Their number and persistence correlate with tumor penetrance and MYCN dosage. Tumors share biochemical features and orthologous genomic alterations with human neuroblastomas, suggesting preferred secondary pathways are recapitulated ( 28 , 37 , 38 ). Thus, the model provides a platform for evaluating biopathway targeted therapies ( 39 ). We evaluated whether Odc activity was required for MYCN -initiated oncogenesis by treating mice with DFMO from birth. All mice homozygous for the transgene (highest MYCN ) developed tumors, however, tumor latency (mean 31±2 versus 43±7 days; p<0.001) and overall survival (mean 43±4 versus 59±9 days; p<0.001) were markedly extended by DFMO ( Figure 4A ). Moreover, hemizygous mice (high MYCN ) were protected from tumor initiation. Seven of 16 untreated hemizygous mice (44%) developed tumors, consistent with the penetrance observed historically, whereas only 6 of 38 DFMO-treated mice (16%) developed tumors (p=0.035). Importantly, DFMO was removed at day 70 yet no tumors arose beyond this time-point. This is consistent with a finite vulnerable period for embryonal oncogenesis and suggests that transiently inhibiting Odc1 provides long-lasted tumor protection. Delaying Odc inhibition until after tumor onset also had a measurable effect. In a second trial, DFMO therapy was initiated after weaning when small tumors are invariably present in homozygous animals and in the majority of hemizygous animals ( 27 ). DFMO treatment of homozygous mice again inhibited progression (time to palpable tumor burden: mean 47.5±1.3 days versus 38.6±1.5 days) and time to death (mean 49.2±1.3 days versus 42.6±1.2 days; p=0.001; Figure 4B ). Delayed DFMO treatment in hemizygous mice did not reduce penetrance (as the majority of tumors were present prior to therapy) yet there was a modest trend toward tumor inhibition based on a reduction in penetrance and extended tumor free and overall survival.  DFMO enhances the therapeutic effect of chemotherapy DFMO has been shown to induce cell cycle arrest in neuroblasts ( 40 ) and therefore may interfere with chemotherapy effects. We assessed Odc inhibition in combination with cisplatin, vincristine or cyclophosphamide, first-line agents with high single-agent activity in neuroblastoma. TH-MYCN homozygous mice with palpable intra-abdominal tumors (75-150 mm3) were treated with the chemotherapeutic alone or in combination with DFMO. Cisplatin induced transient tumor regression with a mean latency to recurrence of 32 days. DFMO started concurrently or following cisplatin and continued thereafter did not interfere with cisplatin-induced regression and led to an extended relapse-free survival (p<0.01; Figure 4C ). Similar findings were obtained using vincristine (data not shown), and a more marked augmentation of chemotherapy efficacy was seen with cyclophosphamide, where cyclophosphamide alone resulted in long term cure of ?20% of neuroblastoma-bearing mice. Concurrent administration of DFMO with cyclophosphamide increased overall survival to 80% (p=0.03; Figure 4D ). We noted no overt toxicity attributable to DFMO therapy in these trials. Wild-type mice receiving DFMO from birth weighed less than untreated littermates following weaning (?day 28), yet they gained weight at the same rate or better thereafter, despite ongoing DFMO exposure (average weight gain of 0.45 gm/wk in DFMO-treated mice versus 0.28 gm/wk for control mice between weeks 14 and 20; p=0.12; Supplemental Figure 3 ). Mice receiving DFMO delayed until after weaning showed modest growth inhibition through 5 months of life compared with untreated animals (weight gain of 0.92 ± 0.04 versus 1.05 ± 0.04 gm/wk; p=0.034).  DFMO enhances the therapeutic effect of chemotherapy DFMO has been shown to induce cell cycle arrest in neuroblasts ( 40 ) and therefore may interfere with chemotherapy effects. We assessed Odc inhibition in combination with cisplatin, vincristine or cyclophosphamide, first-line agents with high single-agent activity in neuroblastoma. TH-MYCN homozygous mice with palpable intra-abdominal tumors (75-150 mm3) were treated with the chemotherapeutic alone or in combination with DFMO. Cisplatin induced transient tumor regression with a mean latency to recurrence of 32 days. DFMO started concurrently or following cisplatin and continued thereafter did not interfere with cisplatin-induced regression and led to an extended relapse-free survival (p<0.01; Figure 4C ). Similar findings were obtained using vincristine (data not shown), and a more marked augmentation of chemotherapy efficacy was seen with cyclophosphamide, where cyclophosphamide alone resulted in long term cure of ?20% of neuroblastoma-bearing mice. Concurrent administration of DFMO with cyclophosphamide increased overall survival to 80% (p=0.03; Figure 4D ). We noted no overt toxicity attributable to DFMO therapy in these trials. Wild-type mice receiving DFMO from birth weighed less than untreated littermates following weaning (?day 28), yet they gained weight at the same rate or better thereafter, despite ongoing DFMO exposure (average weight gain of 0.45 gm/wk in DFMO-treated mice versus 0.28 gm/wk for control mice between weeks 14 and 20; p=0.12; Supplemental Figure 3 ). Mice receiving DFMO delayed until after weaning showed modest growth inhibition through 5 months of life compared with untreated animals (weight gain of 0.92 ± 0.04 versus 1.05 ± 0.04 gm/wk; p=0.034).  Odc activity is not required for <italic>MYCN</italic>-mediated death resistance Tumors in TH-MYCN mice arise within hyperplastic rests in sympathetic ganglia. These are transiently present in wild-type mice but are increased in number and persist longer in a MYCN dose-dependent manner ( 27 ). We assessed the effect of DFMO on this process by performing a histologic audit. Prenatal DFMO treatment of pregnant mothers from embryonic day 14-21 did not affect the incidence of hyperplasia noted at day 0 (data not shown). Post-natal DFMO treatment of newborn pups did not have a demonstrable effect on neuroblast hyperplasia by day 7, however, by day 14 homozygote mice (highest MYCN ) treated with DFMO demonstrated a significant reduction ( Figure 5A ). Together with in vivo data, this suggests that Odc activity is not required for basal neuroblast hyperplasia, however, MYCN supported maintenance and progression to tumor is at least partially Odc-dependent. MYCN not only drives cell cycle entry but also protects against deprivation-induced apoptosis in TH-MYCN neural cells. Cultured perinatal ganglia from TH-MYCN mice demonstrate resistance to NGF withdrawal ( 27 ) analogous to that seen in postmitotic sympathetic neurons ( 41 ). Paravertebral ganglia from untreated normal and TH-MYCN homozygote mice at day 14 were cultured in the presence of NGF with or without DFMO for 7 days, after which NGF was withdrawn. While DFMO-mediated Odc inhibition was supported using a conformation-specific antibody ( Figure 5B ) there was no effect on the death resistance of ganglia cells, demonstrating that Odc-mediated polyamine synthesis was not a critical component of MYCN -mediated apoptosis resistance ( Figure 5C ).  Odc activity is not required for <italic>MYCN</italic>-mediated death resistance Tumors in TH-MYCN mice arise within hyperplastic rests in sympathetic ganglia. These are transiently present in wild-type mice but are increased in number and persist longer in a MYCN dose-dependent manner ( 27 ). We assessed the effect of DFMO on this process by performing a histologic audit. Prenatal DFMO treatment of pregnant mothers from embryonic day 14-21 did not affect the incidence of hyperplasia noted at day 0 (data not shown). Post-natal DFMO treatment of newborn pups did not have a demonstrable effect on neuroblast hyperplasia by day 7, however, by day 14 homozygote mice (highest MYCN ) treated with DFMO demonstrated a significant reduction ( Figure 5A ). Together with in vivo data, this suggests that Odc activity is not required for basal neuroblast hyperplasia, however, MYCN supported maintenance and progression to tumor is at least partially Odc-dependent. MYCN not only drives cell cycle entry but also protects against deprivation-induced apoptosis in TH-MYCN neural cells. Cultured perinatal ganglia from TH-MYCN mice demonstrate resistance to NGF withdrawal ( 27 ) analogous to that seen in postmitotic sympathetic neurons ( 41 ). Paravertebral ganglia from untreated normal and TH-MYCN homozygote mice at day 14 were cultured in the presence of NGF with or without DFMO for 7 days, after which NGF was withdrawn. While DFMO-mediated Odc inhibition was supported using a conformation-specific antibody ( Figure 5B ) there was no effect on the death resistance of ganglia cells, demonstrating that Odc-mediated polyamine synthesis was not a critical component of MYCN -mediated apoptosis resistance ( Figure 5C ).  Neuroblastomas arising under DFMO may circumvent the polyamine depletion barrier We assessed whether tumors arising under Odc inhibition overcame this blockade or took an alternative route to transformation less dependent on polyamines. DFMO-treated and untreated mice developed cellular tumors that were undifferentiated (with the exception of one lymph node that had fibrillary neuropil) similar to poorly differentiated human neuroblastoma. DFMO-treated tumors had larger cells with reduced hemorrhage and necrosis, but no differences in mitosis/karyorrhexis index ( Figure 6A ). Tumors were notable for the large percentage of cycling cells (Ki67+) and caspase activation although neither differed between groups. Serial ultrasonography in homozygous TH-MYCN mice confirmed similar tumor volume at the time of ascertainment (mean 227 ± 61 mm3 versus 232 ± 64 mm3; p=0.83) though tumors arose later in DFMO-treated mice. Tumors grew at similar rates (?volume/week of 166 ± 68 mm3 versus 156 ± 79 mm3 with DFMO; p=0.75) and lethality. Thus, aside from being delayed in onset, DFMO-treated tumors manifested a similar aggressive phenotype in homozygous mice. Polyamine assays from tumors harvested at culling demonstrated reduced putrescine in DFMO-treated tumors, a trend toward reduced spermidine and no effect on spermine ( Figure 6B ). These effects are consistent with experimental models of DFMO-induced Odc inactivation ( 42 ) including effects on NB cell lines ( 40 ) and support that polyamine depletion is at least partially maintained. However, maintenance of spermidine and spermine through enhanced polyamine uptake, compensatory Amd1 induction, or altered metabolism cannot be formally excluded as a mechanism for circumventing the polyamine depletion barrier. Further studies are ongoing to determine whether neuroblastomas circumvent Odc inactivation to support polyamine homeostasis or take an alternate route to oncogenesis.  Neuroblastomas arising under DFMO may circumvent the polyamine depletion barrier We assessed whether tumors arising under Odc inhibition overcame this blockade or took an alternative route to transformation less dependent on polyamines. DFMO-treated and untreated mice developed cellular tumors that were undifferentiated (with the exception of one lymph node that had fibrillary neuropil) similar to poorly differentiated human neuroblastoma. DFMO-treated tumors had larger cells with reduced hemorrhage and necrosis, but no differences in mitosis/karyorrhexis index ( Figure 6A ). Tumors were notable for the large percentage of cycling cells (Ki67+) and caspase activation although neither differed between groups. Serial ultrasonography in homozygous TH-MYCN mice confirmed similar tumor volume at the time of ascertainment (mean 227 ± 61 mm3 versus 232 ± 64 mm3; p=0.83) though tumors arose later in DFMO-treated mice. Tumors grew at similar rates (?volume/week of 166 ± 68 mm3 versus 156 ± 79 mm3 with DFMO; p=0.75) and lethality. Thus, aside from being delayed in onset, DFMO-treated tumors manifested a similar aggressive phenotype in homozygous mice. Polyamine assays from tumors harvested at culling demonstrated reduced putrescine in DFMO-treated tumors, a trend toward reduced spermidine and no effect on spermine ( Figure 6B ). These effects are consistent with experimental models of DFMO-induced Odc inactivation ( 42 ) including effects on NB cell lines ( 40 ) and support that polyamine depletion is at least partially maintained. However, maintenance of spermidine and spermine through enhanced polyamine uptake, compensatory Amd1 induction, or altered metabolism cannot be formally excluded as a mechanism for circumventing the polyamine depletion barrier. Further studies are ongoing to determine whether neuroblastomas circumvent Odc inactivation to support polyamine homeostasis or take an alternate route to oncogenesis.  DISCUSSION Most children with high-risk neuroblastoma die from tumor progression and innovative treatment approaches are needed ( 16 , 43 ). We show that neuroblastomas, particularly those with MYCN amplification, have altered polyamine metabolism and may be vulnerable to therapeutic polyamine depletion. Although MYCN amplification has long been associated with poor outcome ( 1 , 2 ) the transcriptional targets governing this remain elusive as MYCN regulates thousands of genes ( 7 ). We show that MYCN amplification is correlated with deregulation of numerous enzymes that drive polyamine expansion, and such concerted alterations may be a hallmark of MYC oncogenesis ( 15 ). Odc1 is rate-limiting in this pathway and, importantly, we show that its biochemical inhibition alone has measurable consequences on tumor progression in a transgenic model. While MYCN amplified tumors deregulate diverse polyamine enzymes, high-risk tumors without MYCN amplification also have elevated ODC1 and reduced Odc antizyme ( OAZ2 ). Deregulation of this rate-limiting step in polyamine biosynthesis may provide a therapeutic vulnerability here as well. This is supported by demonstration that polyamine regulator expression in MYCN non-amplified cells parallel those for amplified cells, and by in vitro data showing DFMO-mediated growth inhibition in non-amplified cells. Of interest, we defined MYCN and ODC1 high-level co-amplification in a subset of MYCN -amplified tumors associated with markedly elevated ODC1 expression. As lesser copy number gain of the ODC1 locus (2p25) is reported in half of high-risk neuroblastomas without MYCN amplification ( 21 ), we speculate that ODC1 gene dosage gain is a potential mechanism for pathway upregulation in this subset. Alternative MYC deregulation in high-risk neuroblastomas may also transcriptionally drive ODC1 expression ( 4 , 5 ). Importantly, we show that ODC1 expression is inversely correlated with survival in a large validation cohort, even in tumors lacking MYCN amplification. Together these data suggest polyamine depletion strategies may be more broadly effective against high-risk tumors rather than selectively synthetic-lethal for MYCN -amplified tumors. Myc genes induce Cks1, a component of the SCFSkp2 E3 ubiquitin ligase complex that degrades p27Kip1 ( 44 ). Since Odc is required both for Myc-induction of Cks1 ( 44 ) and for polyamine biosynthesis, its activity licenses cell cycle entry at multiple steps. In vitro, Odc inhibition causes polyamine depletion, increased p27Kip1 and Rb hypophosphorylation with G1-arrest in neuroblasts ( 40 ). In vivo we show that Odc activity is not required for basal hyperplastic rest formation (pre-neoplastic) nor neuroblast resistance to deprivation-induced apoptosis. However, Odc supports hyperplastic rests and promotes their oncogenic conversion. It is likely that DFMO-enforced growth arrest alters the stoichiometry of cycling cells within the peripheral sympathetic compartment to impede tumor initiation. This selective pressure can prevent tumor onset in TH-MYCN hemizygous mice, in which neuroblastoma initiation requires MYCN transgene amplification indicating a higher threshold of MYCN permissive for oncogenesis ( 27 ). Of greater interest is that transient Odc inhibition through day 70 is capable of providing durable tumor protection. This contrasts with E?- MYC mice where DFMO withdrawal leads to lymphomagenesis at the expected interval from treatment cessation ( 15 ). This is consistent with a finite window for embryonal tumorigenesis beyond which the specific tissue milieu may be incapable of supporting transformation and suggests chronic Odc inhibition may not be required for sustained therapeutic benefit. In homozygous TH-MYCN mice, disabling Odc from birth delays but does not prevent tumors. The polyamine depletion barrier imposed by Odc inactivation may be bypassed as only putrescine remains depressed and the rate of end-stage tumor progression is reminiscent of untreated animals. DFMO-mediated Odc inhibition is often accompanied by compensatory Amd1 upregulation that may partly compensate. Alternatively, Odc inhibition may force pre-malignant neuroblasts to adopt an alternate pathway to transformation, as has been shown for lymphomas arising in E?-MYC:Odc+/- mice ( 15 ). Still, Odc inhibition after tumor onset delays progression and augments sensitivity to cytotoxic stressors, providing clinical relevance to these studies. The utility of therapeutic polyamine depletion has been limited to date ( 14 ). However, DFMO doses sufficient to inhibit Odc are well tolerated chronically and polyamine depletion as an anti-cancer strategy is in the midst of a re-evaluation. Newer targeted agents are under development including those that inhibit polyamine uptake form extra-cellular sources or target additional regulatory enzymes ( 45 - 47 ). That DFMO augments chemotherapy efficacy in our model allays concerns that enforced growth arrest via polyamine depletion will subvert traditional chemotherapeutics. This is reassuring as the entre of polyamine depletion agents into the clinic would likely be in concert with conventional cytotoxics. Interestingly, cisplatinum has been shown to alter AMD1, ODC1, SRM and SAT in directions that antagonize polyamine synthesis ( 48 ). Yet the dramatic responses with vincristine or cyclophosphamide and DFMO, including improved overall survival rates, suggest this effect does not result from a unique synergistic opportunity provided by platinators alone. Taken together, our data strongly support that polyamine depletion may provide an important addition to the neuroblastoma armamentarium, and perhaps other embryonal malignancies governed by MYC . Potentiation of these effects with complimentary polyamine-targeted agents may further improve efficacy and deserve further evaluation.  DISCUSSION Most children with high-risk neuroblastoma die from tumor progression and innovative treatment approaches are needed ( 16 , 43 ). We show that neuroblastomas, particularly those with MYCN amplification, have altered polyamine metabolism and may be vulnerable to therapeutic polyamine depletion. Although MYCN amplification has long been associated with poor outcome ( 1 , 2 ) the transcriptional targets governing this remain elusive as MYCN regulates thousands of genes ( 7 ). We show that MYCN amplification is correlated with deregulation of numerous enzymes that drive polyamine expansion, and such concerted alterations may be a hallmark of MYC oncogenesis ( 15 ). Odc1 is rate-limiting in this pathway and, importantly, we show that its biochemical inhibition alone has measurable consequences on tumor progression in a transgenic model. While MYCN amplified tumors deregulate diverse polyamine enzymes, high-risk tumors without MYCN amplification also have elevated ODC1 and reduced Odc antizyme ( OAZ2 ). Deregulation of this rate-limiting step in polyamine biosynthesis may provide a therapeutic vulnerability here as well. This is supported by demonstration that polyamine regulator expression in MYCN non-amplified cells parallel those for amplified cells, and by in vitro data showing DFMO-mediated growth inhibition in non-amplified cells. Of interest, we defined MYCN and ODC1 high-level co-amplification in a subset of MYCN -amplified tumors associated with markedly elevated ODC1 expression. As lesser copy number gain of the ODC1 locus (2p25) is reported in half of high-risk neuroblastomas without MYCN amplification ( 21 ), we speculate that ODC1 gene dosage gain is a potential mechanism for pathway upregulation in this subset. Alternative MYC deregulation in high-risk neuroblastomas may also transcriptionally drive ODC1 expression ( 4 , 5 ). Importantly, we show that ODC1 expression is inversely correlated with survival in a large validation cohort, even in tumors lacking MYCN amplification. Together these data suggest polyamine depletion strategies may be more broadly effective against high-risk tumors rather than selectively synthetic-lethal for MYCN -amplified tumors. Myc genes induce Cks1, a component of the SCFSkp2 E3 ubiquitin ligase complex that degrades p27Kip1 ( 44 ). Since Odc is required both for Myc-induction of Cks1 ( 44 ) and for polyamine biosynthesis, its activity licenses cell cycle entry at multiple steps. In vitro, Odc inhibition causes polyamine depletion, increased p27Kip1 and Rb hypophosphorylation with G1-arrest in neuroblasts ( 40 ). In vivo we show that Odc activity is not required for basal hyperplastic rest formation (pre-neoplastic) nor neuroblast resistance to deprivation-induced apoptosis. However, Odc supports hyperplastic rests and promotes their oncogenic conversion. It is likely that DFMO-enforced growth arrest alters the stoichiometry of cycling cells within the peripheral sympathetic compartment to impede tumor initiation. This selective pressure can prevent tumor onset in TH-MYCN hemizygous mice, in which neuroblastoma initiation requires MYCN transgene amplification indicating a higher threshold of MYCN permissive for oncogenesis ( 27 ). Of greater interest is that transient Odc inhibition through day 70 is capable of providing durable tumor protection. This contrasts with E?- MYC mice where DFMO withdrawal leads to lymphomagenesis at the expected interval from treatment cessation ( 15 ). This is consistent with a finite window for embryonal tumorigenesis beyond which the specific tissue milieu may be incapable of supporting transformation and suggests chronic Odc inhibition may not be required for sustained therapeutic benefit. In homozygous TH-MYCN mice, disabling Odc from birth delays but does not prevent tumors. The polyamine depletion barrier imposed by Odc inactivation may be bypassed as only putrescine remains depressed and the rate of end-stage tumor progression is reminiscent of untreated animals. DFMO-mediated Odc inhibition is often accompanied by compensatory Amd1 upregulation that may partly compensate. Alternatively, Odc inhibition may force pre-malignant neuroblasts to adopt an alternate pathway to transformation, as has been shown for lymphomas arising in E?-MYC:Odc+/- mice ( 15 ). Still, Odc inhibition after tumor onset delays progression and augments sensitivity to cytotoxic stressors, providing clinical relevance to these studies. The utility of therapeutic polyamine depletion has been limited to date ( 14 ). However, DFMO doses sufficient to inhibit Odc are well tolerated chronically and polyamine depletion as an anti-cancer strategy is in the midst of a re-evaluation. Newer targeted agents are under development including those that inhibit polyamine uptake form extra-cellular sources or target additional regulatory enzymes ( 45 - 47 ). That DFMO augments chemotherapy efficacy in our model allays concerns that enforced growth arrest via polyamine depletion will subvert traditional chemotherapeutics. This is reassuring as the entre of polyamine depletion agents into the clinic would likely be in concert with conventional cytotoxics. Interestingly, cisplatinum has been shown to alter AMD1, ODC1, SRM and SAT in directions that antagonize polyamine synthesis ( 48 ). Yet the dramatic responses with vincristine or cyclophosphamide and DFMO, including improved overall survival rates, suggest this effect does not result from a unique synergistic opportunity provided by platinators alone. Taken together, our data strongly support that polyamine depletion may provide an important addition to the neuroblastoma armamentarium, and perhaps other embryonal malignancies governed by MYC . Potentiation of these effects with complimentary polyamine-targeted agents may further improve efficacy and deserve further evaluation.  Supplementary Material Fig S1 Fig S2 Fig S3 Suppl. legend  Supplementary Material Fig S1 Fig S2 Fig S3 Suppl. legend  Figures Figure 1 <italic>ODC1</italic> expression is correlated with <italic>MYCN</italic> and inversely correlated with survival (A) MYCN and ODC1 expression by Real-time Q-PCR in a set of 265 primary NBs stratified by MYCN amplification status. Data represent the mean ± SE of triplicate assays and two-tailed p-values are indicated. Event Free Survival curves for (B) all 209 neuroblastoma patients with outcome data available, (C) the subset of metastatic stage 4 patients, and (D) the subset with tumors without MYCN amplification (N=183), dichotomised around the upper decile for ODC1 expression (with p-values using the method of Kaplan-Meier). EFS and OS were also significantly reduced in the high ODC1 cohort when dichotomized at the mean, median or upper quartile. Figure 2 Polyamine regulation in neuroblastoma (A) Polyamine metabolism: polyamines (putrescine, spermidine and spermine) are synthesized from ornithine through decarboxylation and condensative processes. Synthetic (green) and catabolic (red) enzymes are shown. Underlined enzymes are highly regulated with the shortest half-lives of any mammalian enzymes. ODC1 , ornithine decarboxylase; AMD1 , S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase; SRM , spermidine synthetase; SMS , spermine synthetase; SAT , spermine/spermidine-N-acetyltransferase; SMOX , spermine oxidase; OAZ1 , ODC antizyme 1; OAZ2 , ODC antizyme 2; OAZIN , ODC antizyme inhibitor. (B) Polyamine regulator expression in primary neuroblastomas: LR, 28 low-risk; IR, 21 intermediate-risk; HR-NA, 32 high-risk tumors without MYCN amplification; HR-A, 20 high-risk tumors with MYCN amplification; *Differential expression between HR-A and HR-NA; **differential expression between HR-A and all others; ***differential expression between HR-NA and LR and IR (all with a confidence level >0.95 using PaGE analyses); filled circle on y-axis, fetal brain (control) expression. (C) Correlation between ODC1 and PTMA with MYCN expression using representative probe-sets. All 101 tumors are shown in left panels; right panels segregate HR-A tumors from the other groups. Pearson correlation coefficient and p-values are given. Arrowheads identify the three tumors that have both high-level MYCN and ODC1 co-amplification. Figure 3 Polyamine dependence in neuroblastoma cell lines (A) DFMO-mediated growth inhibition in vitro. Cell Index, proportional to the viable cell number, was obtained with the RT-CES platform. Viable cell number following short-term exposure to DFMO is shown normalized to no treatment at 72 hours. White bars, control; light grey, 2.5 mM DFMO; dark grey, 5 mM DFMO; black, 10 mM DFMO. Triplicate wells are assessed for each experiment and multiple experiments are done for each condition; error bars represent the standard deviation. (B) Affymetrix expression ( e -score) for polyamine regulatory enzymes in select neuroblastoma cell lines, segregated by MYCN status, and compared with fetal brain cDNA as a normal reference. Both amplified and non-amplified cells have expression alterations in a direction promoting polyamine expansion (more pronounced in the amplified cells). Figure 4 Extended Tumor Free Survival in neuroblastoma-prone mice treated with DFMO (A) Tumor Free Survival curves for homozygous ( TH-MYCN +/+) or hemizygous ( TH-MYCN +/-) mice stratified by DFMO therapy. DFMO-treated mice (blue lines) received DFMO from birth onward (pre-emptive treatment trial). DFMO therapy was stopped at day 70 in tumor-free mice. (B) Delayed treatment trial: TH-MYCN homozygous and hemizygous mice were randomized to DFMO (blue dashed lines) or control (red lines) following weaning at day 25. (C) Tumor Free Survival for TH-MYCN homozygous mice with advanced tumor from the time of treatment with: cisplatin alone (black line), cisplatin followed by DFMO (red line), or cisplatin administered simultaneously with DFMO (blue line), or (D) cyclophosphamide alone or combined with DFMO. P-values using the method of Kaplan-Meier are shown. Figure 5 DFMO inhibits Odc activity and <italic>MYCN</italic>-driven hyperplasia but does not revert the apoptosis resistance provided by <italic>MYCN</italic> (A) Neuroblast hyperplasia following DFMO-mediated Odc1 inhibition in TH-MYCN homozygous (+/+) or hemizygous (+/-) mice, and wild-type (-/-) littermates. The percentage of ganglia with ?30-cell neuroblast hyperplasia at each time-point is shown. DFMO-treated mice differed significantly from untreated mice among homozygotes at P14 (p<0.001), but not hemizygote or normal pups at either time-point. (B) Relative Odc1 activity in normal ganglia following DFMO-mediated inhibition. Protein expression was detected using an Odc activity-specific antibody (clone MP16-2). Green fluorescence represents uninhibited (active) Odc1; blue fluorescence is DAPI nuclear stain; (i) untreated ganglia cells, (ii) DFMO-treated cells, (iii) isotype control. (C) Relative ganglia cell survival in vitro, both before or after NGF withdrawal in normal (white bars) or TH-MYCN homozygote (black bars) cells, in the presence (hatched bars) or absence of 1 mM DFMO. Disabling Odc1 activity with 1 mM DFMO did not diminish the survival advantage governed by MYCN in ganglia cells from homozygote animals. Figure 6 Neuroblastomas arising under Odc blockade differ histologically but maintain partial polyamine depletion Analysis of tumors arising in TH-MYCN +/+ mice with or without polyamine depletion imposed by Odc1 inhibition. (A) DFMO therapy led to tumors with reduced necrosis or hemorrhage as well as larger cell size but no significant alterations in mitosis/karyorrhexis index, proliferation (Ki67 staining), or apoptosis (activated Caspase 3 staining). (B) Evidence for Odc inhibition was apparent by significantly reduced putrescine and a trend toward spermidine reduction in DFMO-treated mice (N=6 per group). This pattern supports an on-target effect of DFMO, although partial circumvention of polyamine synthesis inhibition through uptake of spermidine or spermine cannot be excluded.  Figures Figure 1 <italic>ODC1</italic> expression is correlated with <italic>MYCN</italic> and inversely correlated with survival (A) MYCN and ODC1 expression by Real-time Q-PCR in a set of 265 primary NBs stratified by MYCN amplification status. Data represent the mean ± SE of triplicate assays and two-tailed p-values are indicated. Event Free Survival curves for (B) all 209 neuroblastoma patients with outcome data available, (C) the subset of metastatic stage 4 patients, and (D) the subset with tumors without MYCN amplification (N=183), dichotomised around the upper decile for ODC1 expression (with p-values using the method of Kaplan-Meier). EFS and OS were also significantly reduced in the high ODC1 cohort when dichotomized at the mean, median or upper quartile. Figure 2 Polyamine regulation in neuroblastoma (A) Polyamine metabolism: polyamines (putrescine, spermidine and spermine) are synthesized from ornithine through decarboxylation and condensative processes. Synthetic (green) and catabolic (red) enzymes are shown. Underlined enzymes are highly regulated with the shortest half-lives of any mammalian enzymes. ODC1 , ornithine decarboxylase; AMD1 , S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase; SRM , spermidine synthetase; SMS , spermine synthetase; SAT , spermine/spermidine-N-acetyltransferase; SMOX , spermine oxidase; OAZ1 , ODC antizyme 1; OAZ2 , ODC antizyme 2; OAZIN , ODC antizyme inhibitor. (B) Polyamine regulator expression in primary neuroblastomas: LR, 28 low-risk; IR, 21 intermediate-risk; HR-NA, 32 high-risk tumors without MYCN amplification; HR-A, 20 high-risk tumors with MYCN amplification; *Differential expression between HR-A and HR-NA; **differential expression between HR-A and all others; ***differential expression between HR-NA and LR and IR (all with a confidence level >0.95 using PaGE analyses); filled circle on y-axis, fetal brain (control) expression. (C) Correlation between ODC1 and PTMA with MYCN expression using representative probe-sets. All 101 tumors are shown in left panels; right panels segregate HR-A tumors from the other groups. Pearson correlation coefficient and p-values are given. Arrowheads identify the three tumors that have both high-level MYCN and ODC1 co-amplification. Figure 3 Polyamine dependence in neuroblastoma cell lines (A) DFMO-mediated growth inhibition in vitro. Cell Index, proportional to the viable cell number, was obtained with the RT-CES platform. Viable cell number following short-term exposure to DFMO is shown normalized to no treatment at 72 hours. White bars, control; light grey, 2.5 mM DFMO; dark grey, 5 mM DFMO; black, 10 mM DFMO. Triplicate wells are assessed for each experiment and multiple experiments are done for each condition; error bars represent the standard deviation. (B) Affymetrix expression ( e -score) for polyamine regulatory enzymes in select neuroblastoma cell lines, segregated by MYCN status, and compared with fetal brain cDNA as a normal reference. Both amplified and non-amplified cells have expression alterations in a direction promoting polyamine expansion (more pronounced in the amplified cells). Figure 4 Extended Tumor Free Survival in neuroblastoma-prone mice treated with DFMO (A) Tumor Free Survival curves for homozygous ( TH-MYCN +/+) or hemizygous ( TH-MYCN +/-) mice stratified by DFMO therapy. DFMO-treated mice (blue lines) received DFMO from birth onward (pre-emptive treatment trial). DFMO therapy was stopped at day 70 in tumor-free mice. (B) Delayed treatment trial: TH-MYCN homozygous and hemizygous mice were randomized to DFMO (blue dashed lines) or control (red lines) following weaning at day 25. (C) Tumor Free Survival for TH-MYCN homozygous mice with advanced tumor from the time of treatment with: cisplatin alone (black line), cisplatin followed by DFMO (red line), or cisplatin administered simultaneously with DFMO (blue line), or (D) cyclophosphamide alone or combined with DFMO. P-values using the method of Kaplan-Meier are shown. Figure 5 DFMO inhibits Odc activity and <italic>MYCN</italic>-driven hyperplasia but does not revert the apoptosis resistance provided by <italic>MYCN</italic> (A) Neuroblast hyperplasia following DFMO-mediated Odc1 inhibition in TH-MYCN homozygous (+/+) or hemizygous (+/-) mice, and wild-type (-/-) littermates. The percentage of ganglia with ?30-cell neuroblast hyperplasia at each time-point is shown. DFMO-treated mice differed significantly from untreated mice among homozygotes at P14 (p<0.001), but not hemizygote or normal pups at either time-point. (B) Relative Odc1 activity in normal ganglia following DFMO-mediated inhibition. Protein expression was detected using an Odc activity-specific antibody (clone MP16-2). Green fluorescence represents uninhibited (active) Odc1; blue fluorescence is DAPI nuclear stain; (i) untreated ganglia cells, (ii) DFMO-treated cells, (iii) isotype control. (C) Relative ganglia cell survival in vitro, both before or after NGF withdrawal in normal (white bars) or TH-MYCN homozygote (black bars) cells, in the presence (hatched bars) or absence of 1 mM DFMO. Disabling Odc1 activity with 1 mM DFMO did not diminish the survival advantage governed by MYCN in ganglia cells from homozygote animals. Figure 6 Neuroblastomas arising under Odc blockade differ histologically but maintain partial polyamine depletion Analysis of tumors arising in TH-MYCN +/+ mice with or without polyamine depletion imposed by Odc1 inhibition. (A) DFMO therapy led to tumors with reduced necrosis or hemorrhage as well as larger cell size but no significant alterations in mitosis/karyorrhexis index, proliferation (Ki67 staining), or apoptosis (activated Caspase 3 staining). (B) Evidence for Odc inhibition was apparent by significantly reduced putrescine and a trend toward spermidine reduction in DFMO-treated mice (N=6 per group). This pattern supports an on-target effect of DFMO, although partial circumvention of polyamine synthesis inhibition through uptake of spermidine or spermine cannot be excluded. 