To breed or not to breed? Empirical evaluation of drug effects in adolescent rats The recent upsurge of research on adolescent rats raises the issue of the extent to which different methods of rodent procurement might affect results. Here, we examined the effects of acute and repeated dosing with two antipsychotics, haloperidol and clozapine, and ?9-tetrahydrocannabinol [Experiments 1 and 2, respectively] in adolescent rats of both sexes that differed in shipping status (i.e., shipped from a commercial breeder at weaning or bred in-house). In each experiment, test drugs produced effects that were characteristic for their respective classes in previous studies with adult rodents. Both haloperidol and clozapine produced catalepsy and haloperidol decreased locomotion in shipped and bred rats of both sexes, with sensitization to haloperidol-induced catalepsy developing with repeated dosing. The most prominent between-status difference in this experiment was greater sensitivity of the shipped rats to haloperidol-induced changes in locomotor activity over a wider dose range, an effect that was especially evident in females. In Experiment 2, vehicle levels of motor activity were decreased in bred rats (which did not occur in Experiment 1), resulting in flattening of the?9-tetrahydrocannabinol dose–effect curve for this measure in bred rats of each sex. Acutely, ?9-tetrahydrocannabinol produced antinociception, hypothermia and catalepsy in both groups of rats, with tolerance developing after repeated dosing. Status-related differences were sex-dependent. Whereas bred female rats were more sensitive to ?9-tetrahydrocannabinol’s antinociceptive effects, shipped male rats were more sensitive to its antinociceptive effects as well as to its hypothermic and cataleptic effects. Together, the results of these descriptive experiments suggest that between-status differences tend to be quantitative rather than qualitative. Further, these results suggest that careful attention to issues related to rodent procurement during adolescence is warranted and may help to account for divergent findings in different labs.  1. Methods 1.1. Subjects Two categories of adolescent rats were used for each experiment (i.e., antipsychotics and ?9-THC). The first group consisted of male and female Long–Evans rats that were ordered from a commercial breeder (Harlan, Dublin, VA) as juveniles aged PN 22–25. Upon arrival, these rats were housed in clear plastic cages in same-sex pairs. Rats were allowed at least 3 days to habituate to the vivarium environment before treatment as suggested by the results of several studies ( Capdevila et al., 2007 ; Landi et al., 1982 ). During this time period, rats were left undisturbed in their home cages. In the first group (shipped rats), rats in the different dose groups for each drug were randomly chosen from the rats received in the shipment. In order to maintain similarity to acquisition conditions in most studies with adult rodents, no other controls (e.g., for litter, degree of shipping stress) were instituted. The second category of adolescent rats consisted of rats that were born in our animal room facility. In order to obtain rats for this group, adult female Long–Evans rats (Harlan, Dublin, VA) were impregnated by adult male Long–Evans rats (Harlan, Dublin, VA). After breeding, dams were individually housed in clear plastic cages with plenty of sawdust bedding available in each cage for nesting. The dams were left undisturbed except for providing food, water, and fresh bedding until they gave birth (PN0). Pups were sexed and culled to no more than 10 pups per litter. No other restraints were placed on size of litter. Pups that were not used in this study were used in other independent studies. They remained with their dams until weaning at PN21. On PN21, pups were separated from the dam and were pair-housed with a same-sex rat from another litter that had also been bred and born in our animal facility. In this second group (in-house rats), no more than one male and one female rat pup were chosen from each litter and were randomly assigned to one of the different dose groups for one of the test drugs. Data for males and females were never compared statistically; hence, choosing one pup of each sex did not violate the assumptions of ANOVA for independent samples. All rats in both categories (shipped vs. bred) were housed in a temperature-controlled (20–22 °C) environment with a 12-h light–dark cycle (lights on at 7 a.m.). In addition, all rats remained in their home cages when not being tested and had free access to food and water throughout the experiment. The studies reported in this manuscript were carried out in accordance with guidelines published in guide for the care and use of laboratory animals ( National Research Council, 1996 .) and were approved by our Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. 1.2. Apparatus Clear plastic rat cages (22.5 cm width × 44 cm length × 20 cm height) were housed in sound-attenuating cabinets and were used as locomotor chambers. Each cabinet contained up to 12 chambers, with a maximum of 2 per shelf. Chambers did not contain bedding and were wiped with alcohol solution between sessions. Sessions occurred in darkness (i.e., with the cabinet doors closed). A cage rack system with 4 × 8 equally spaced photocell beams on the X - and Y -axes (Lafayette Instrument, Lafayette, IN) was placed around each chamber (4.5 cm from bottom of cage) and locomotor activity was measured as total number of beam breaks for the entire session. The bar apparatus that was used to measure catalepsy consisted of a 280-mm bolt (10 mm diameter) that was attached to a frame by eyebolts at a height of 98 mm. Each bar apparatus was housed in its own box that was open in the front for experimenter access. Testing in the catalepsy assay was performed in ambient fluorescent lighting conditions in the lab. A tail flick analgesia meter (Columbus Instruments, Columbus, OH) and a Traceable7 digital thermometer (Control Company, Friendsville, TX) were used to measure antinociception and rectal temperature, respectively. The 8 V (6 amp) high intensity light of the tail flick apparatus was set at medium (intensity = 13 in range of 1–25) and the light was turned off after a maximum of 10 s, regardless of whether or not the rat moved its tail. 1.3. Experimental procedures 1.3.1. Experiment 1: antipsychotics Male and female adolescent rats from both groups were randomly assigned to receive daily injections of saline, haloperidol (0.03, 0.1 or 0.3 mg/kg) or clozapine (3, 10 or 30 mg/kg) for 10 consecutive days, PN30–PN39, inclusive. On each day of testing, rats were transported to the laboratory in their home cages at least 30 min before drug administration. Subsequently, each rat was injected intraperitoneally with saline or with their assigned dose of haloperidol or clozapine. Rats were assessed in the bar catalepsy test three times (30, 45 and 60 min) after the initial injection. At each assessment time point, the front paws of the rat were placed on the bar apparatus for 5-min. The total amount of time (in s) that both of the rat’s front paws remained in contact with the bar during the 5-min session was recorded. If both of the rat’s paws dropped from the bar, they were re-positioned as before. The session timer was stopped during the brief time needed for re-positioning. If the rat voluntarily removed its paws from the bar 10 times during the session, the session was stopped and amount of time on bar was recorded as 0. Invariably, this situation occurred during the first minute of the session and was almost always associated with saline treatment. After the final 5-min bar test (i.e., 65 min after injection), rats were placed into the locomotor chamber for a 15-min session. Locomotor activity was measured as total number of beam breaks for the entire session. After the session, rats were returned to their home cages and transported back to the animal facility. This procedure was repeated daily for 10 days. In order to complete all testing during the short duration of adolescence in rats (approximately 2 weeks), habituation to the locomotor chambers prior to drug administration was not included in the study design. Timing and sequence of tests and injections and handling procedures for the adolescent rats from each group were identical during the 10-day assessment period. 1.3.2. Experiment 2: ?<sup>9</sup>-THC Male and female adolescent rats were randomly assigned to receive either vehicle or one of the doses of ?9-THC. Initial tests occurred on PN29. On the day of testing and at least 1 h before the start of the test battery, rats (in their home cages) were transported to the laboratory and baseline temperature was taken. Temperature was measured by insertion of a rectal thermometer probe 40 mm into the rectum. In order to minimize potential stress associated with this procedure, the probe was dipped into mineral oil for lubrication prior to insertion. Baseline tail flick latency was assessed by holding the rat gently and placing its tail in the groove of the tail flick apparatus. The high intensity light was illuminated and latency (in s) to move the tail away from the light source was measured. The light automatically extinguished once the tail was removed (or after 10 s). Immediately after this baseline measurement, rats were injected intraperitoneally with vehicle or with their assigned dose of ?9-THC 30 min before the start of testing. At the end of the 30-min pre-session injection period, each rat was placed in a locomotor chamber for a 10-min session. Forty-five minutes after THC administration, the rat was tested in the tail flick procedure again followed immediately by measurement of rectal temperature. At 1 h post-injection, the front paws of the rat were placed on the bar apparatus for 5-min. Procedural details for the bar test were identical to those described for haloperidol in Experiment 1. Each rat was tested in all four procedures. After these initial tests, rats were returned to the vivarium, where they remained until the next assessment (described below). Beginning the morning after the initial tests, each rat received subcutaneous injections of vehicle or 10 mg/kg ?9-THC twice daily, once in the morning and once in the late afternoon. This dose of ?9-THC has been shown in previous studies to induce substantial tolerance in adult mice without producing residual effects during a subsequent test session ( Bass and Martin, 2000 ; Wiley et al., 2005 ). Other than handling necessary for weighing, injecting and general cage maintenance, the rats remained undisturbed in their home cages in the vivarium during the period of repeated dosing. The twice daily regimen of injections was continued for 9 days (PN30–PN38, inclusive). On the 10th day of repeated injections (PN39), rats were injected only in the morning. Twenty-four hours later (PN40), rats were re-tested following injection with vehicle or with their assigned dose of ?9-THC (i.e., same treatment as on initial test). 1.4. Materials Haloperidol (McNeil Pharmaceutical, Spring House, PA) was prepared by adding saline to a commercially available 5 mg/ml stock solution containing 1.8 mg methyl paraben, 0.2 mg propylparaben, and lactic acid. Clozapine (NIMH Chemical Synthesis Program, Bethesda, MD) was mixed in purified distilled water. ?9-THC (National Institute on Drug Abuse, Bethesda, MD) was mixed in a vehicle of absolute ethanol, Emulphor-620 (Rhone-Poulenc, Inc., Princeton, NJ), and saline in a ratio of 1:1:18. All injections were administered at a volume of 1 ml/kg, with the exception that the 100 mg/kg dose of ?9-THC was volume-adjusted from a 50 mg/ml solution. 1.5. Data analysis Catalepsy was defined as the amount of time the both of the rat’s forepaws were in contact with the elevated bar, as measured during each 5-min session. Catalepsy scores were converted to percentage of the total 5-min session duration. Locomotor activity was assessed as the total number of photocell beam breaks over the 10-min (?9-THC) or 15-min (antipsychotics) session. For the tail flick test, a maximum latency of 10 s was used in order to prevent damage to the tail. Antinociception was calculated as percent of maximum possible effect {%MPE = [(test ? control latency)/(10 ? control)] × 100}. Rectal temperature values were expressed as the difference between control temperature (before injection) and temperatures following drug administration (? °C). For each drug, mean (±S.E.M.) values for each dependent variable were calculated separately for each status (bred in-house or shipped), sex, drug dose, and day. Three-way shipping status × dose × day (repeated) split-plot ANOVAs were used to analyze each dependent variable during sub-chronic dosing for each drug and sex separately. For the antipsychotics, catalepsy scores for each post-injection time point (30, 45, and 60 min) were analyzed separately. Significant multifactor interactions were further analyzed by two-way split-plot ANOVAs (as described in text of the results section) followed by Tukey post hoc tests (? = 0.05) to compare individual means.  1.1. Subjects Two categories of adolescent rats were used for each experiment (i.e., antipsychotics and ?9-THC). The first group consisted of male and female Long–Evans rats that were ordered from a commercial breeder (Harlan, Dublin, VA) as juveniles aged PN 22–25. Upon arrival, these rats were housed in clear plastic cages in same-sex pairs. Rats were allowed at least 3 days to habituate to the vivarium environment before treatment as suggested by the results of several studies ( Capdevila et al., 2007 ; Landi et al., 1982 ). During this time period, rats were left undisturbed in their home cages. In the first group (shipped rats), rats in the different dose groups for each drug were randomly chosen from the rats received in the shipment. In order to maintain similarity to acquisition conditions in most studies with adult rodents, no other controls (e.g., for litter, degree of shipping stress) were instituted. The second category of adolescent rats consisted of rats that were born in our animal room facility. In order to obtain rats for this group, adult female Long–Evans rats (Harlan, Dublin, VA) were impregnated by adult male Long–Evans rats (Harlan, Dublin, VA). After breeding, dams were individually housed in clear plastic cages with plenty of sawdust bedding available in each cage for nesting. The dams were left undisturbed except for providing food, water, and fresh bedding until they gave birth (PN0). Pups were sexed and culled to no more than 10 pups per litter. No other restraints were placed on size of litter. Pups that were not used in this study were used in other independent studies. They remained with their dams until weaning at PN21. On PN21, pups were separated from the dam and were pair-housed with a same-sex rat from another litter that had also been bred and born in our animal facility. In this second group (in-house rats), no more than one male and one female rat pup were chosen from each litter and were randomly assigned to one of the different dose groups for one of the test drugs. Data for males and females were never compared statistically; hence, choosing one pup of each sex did not violate the assumptions of ANOVA for independent samples. All rats in both categories (shipped vs. bred) were housed in a temperature-controlled (20–22 °C) environment with a 12-h light–dark cycle (lights on at 7 a.m.). In addition, all rats remained in their home cages when not being tested and had free access to food and water throughout the experiment. The studies reported in this manuscript were carried out in accordance with guidelines published in guide for the care and use of laboratory animals ( National Research Council, 1996 .) and were approved by our Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.  1.2. Apparatus Clear plastic rat cages (22.5 cm width × 44 cm length × 20 cm height) were housed in sound-attenuating cabinets and were used as locomotor chambers. Each cabinet contained up to 12 chambers, with a maximum of 2 per shelf. Chambers did not contain bedding and were wiped with alcohol solution between sessions. Sessions occurred in darkness (i.e., with the cabinet doors closed). A cage rack system with 4 × 8 equally spaced photocell beams on the X - and Y -axes (Lafayette Instrument, Lafayette, IN) was placed around each chamber (4.5 cm from bottom of cage) and locomotor activity was measured as total number of beam breaks for the entire session. The bar apparatus that was used to measure catalepsy consisted of a 280-mm bolt (10 mm diameter) that was attached to a frame by eyebolts at a height of 98 mm. Each bar apparatus was housed in its own box that was open in the front for experimenter access. Testing in the catalepsy assay was performed in ambient fluorescent lighting conditions in the lab. A tail flick analgesia meter (Columbus Instruments, Columbus, OH) and a Traceable7 digital thermometer (Control Company, Friendsville, TX) were used to measure antinociception and rectal temperature, respectively. The 8 V (6 amp) high intensity light of the tail flick apparatus was set at medium (intensity = 13 in range of 1–25) and the light was turned off after a maximum of 10 s, regardless of whether or not the rat moved its tail.  1.3. Experimental procedures 1.3.1. Experiment 1: antipsychotics Male and female adolescent rats from both groups were randomly assigned to receive daily injections of saline, haloperidol (0.03, 0.1 or 0.3 mg/kg) or clozapine (3, 10 or 30 mg/kg) for 10 consecutive days, PN30–PN39, inclusive. On each day of testing, rats were transported to the laboratory in their home cages at least 30 min before drug administration. Subsequently, each rat was injected intraperitoneally with saline or with their assigned dose of haloperidol or clozapine. Rats were assessed in the bar catalepsy test three times (30, 45 and 60 min) after the initial injection. At each assessment time point, the front paws of the rat were placed on the bar apparatus for 5-min. The total amount of time (in s) that both of the rat’s front paws remained in contact with the bar during the 5-min session was recorded. If both of the rat’s paws dropped from the bar, they were re-positioned as before. The session timer was stopped during the brief time needed for re-positioning. If the rat voluntarily removed its paws from the bar 10 times during the session, the session was stopped and amount of time on bar was recorded as 0. Invariably, this situation occurred during the first minute of the session and was almost always associated with saline treatment. After the final 5-min bar test (i.e., 65 min after injection), rats were placed into the locomotor chamber for a 15-min session. Locomotor activity was measured as total number of beam breaks for the entire session. After the session, rats were returned to their home cages and transported back to the animal facility. This procedure was repeated daily for 10 days. In order to complete all testing during the short duration of adolescence in rats (approximately 2 weeks), habituation to the locomotor chambers prior to drug administration was not included in the study design. Timing and sequence of tests and injections and handling procedures for the adolescent rats from each group were identical during the 10-day assessment period. 1.3.2. Experiment 2: ?<sup>9</sup>-THC Male and female adolescent rats were randomly assigned to receive either vehicle or one of the doses of ?9-THC. Initial tests occurred on PN29. On the day of testing and at least 1 h before the start of the test battery, rats (in their home cages) were transported to the laboratory and baseline temperature was taken. Temperature was measured by insertion of a rectal thermometer probe 40 mm into the rectum. In order to minimize potential stress associated with this procedure, the probe was dipped into mineral oil for lubrication prior to insertion. Baseline tail flick latency was assessed by holding the rat gently and placing its tail in the groove of the tail flick apparatus. The high intensity light was illuminated and latency (in s) to move the tail away from the light source was measured. The light automatically extinguished once the tail was removed (or after 10 s). Immediately after this baseline measurement, rats were injected intraperitoneally with vehicle or with their assigned dose of ?9-THC 30 min before the start of testing. At the end of the 30-min pre-session injection period, each rat was placed in a locomotor chamber for a 10-min session. Forty-five minutes after THC administration, the rat was tested in the tail flick procedure again followed immediately by measurement of rectal temperature. At 1 h post-injection, the front paws of the rat were placed on the bar apparatus for 5-min. Procedural details for the bar test were identical to those described for haloperidol in Experiment 1. Each rat was tested in all four procedures. After these initial tests, rats were returned to the vivarium, where they remained until the next assessment (described below). Beginning the morning after the initial tests, each rat received subcutaneous injections of vehicle or 10 mg/kg ?9-THC twice daily, once in the morning and once in the late afternoon. This dose of ?9-THC has been shown in previous studies to induce substantial tolerance in adult mice without producing residual effects during a subsequent test session ( Bass and Martin, 2000 ; Wiley et al., 2005 ). Other than handling necessary for weighing, injecting and general cage maintenance, the rats remained undisturbed in their home cages in the vivarium during the period of repeated dosing. The twice daily regimen of injections was continued for 9 days (PN30–PN38, inclusive). On the 10th day of repeated injections (PN39), rats were injected only in the morning. Twenty-four hours later (PN40), rats were re-tested following injection with vehicle or with their assigned dose of ?9-THC (i.e., same treatment as on initial test).  1.3.1. Experiment 1: antipsychotics Male and female adolescent rats from both groups were randomly assigned to receive daily injections of saline, haloperidol (0.03, 0.1 or 0.3 mg/kg) or clozapine (3, 10 or 30 mg/kg) for 10 consecutive days, PN30–PN39, inclusive. On each day of testing, rats were transported to the laboratory in their home cages at least 30 min before drug administration. Subsequently, each rat was injected intraperitoneally with saline or with their assigned dose of haloperidol or clozapine. Rats were assessed in the bar catalepsy test three times (30, 45 and 60 min) after the initial injection. At each assessment time point, the front paws of the rat were placed on the bar apparatus for 5-min. The total amount of time (in s) that both of the rat’s front paws remained in contact with the bar during the 5-min session was recorded. If both of the rat’s paws dropped from the bar, they were re-positioned as before. The session timer was stopped during the brief time needed for re-positioning. If the rat voluntarily removed its paws from the bar 10 times during the session, the session was stopped and amount of time on bar was recorded as 0. Invariably, this situation occurred during the first minute of the session and was almost always associated with saline treatment. After the final 5-min bar test (i.e., 65 min after injection), rats were placed into the locomotor chamber for a 15-min session. Locomotor activity was measured as total number of beam breaks for the entire session. After the session, rats were returned to their home cages and transported back to the animal facility. This procedure was repeated daily for 10 days. In order to complete all testing during the short duration of adolescence in rats (approximately 2 weeks), habituation to the locomotor chambers prior to drug administration was not included in the study design. Timing and sequence of tests and injections and handling procedures for the adolescent rats from each group were identical during the 10-day assessment period.  1.3.2. Experiment 2: ?<sup>9</sup>-THC Male and female adolescent rats were randomly assigned to receive either vehicle or one of the doses of ?9-THC. Initial tests occurred on PN29. On the day of testing and at least 1 h before the start of the test battery, rats (in their home cages) were transported to the laboratory and baseline temperature was taken. Temperature was measured by insertion of a rectal thermometer probe 40 mm into the rectum. In order to minimize potential stress associated with this procedure, the probe was dipped into mineral oil for lubrication prior to insertion. Baseline tail flick latency was assessed by holding the rat gently and placing its tail in the groove of the tail flick apparatus. The high intensity light was illuminated and latency (in s) to move the tail away from the light source was measured. The light automatically extinguished once the tail was removed (or after 10 s). Immediately after this baseline measurement, rats were injected intraperitoneally with vehicle or with their assigned dose of ?9-THC 30 min before the start of testing. At the end of the 30-min pre-session injection period, each rat was placed in a locomotor chamber for a 10-min session. Forty-five minutes after THC administration, the rat was tested in the tail flick procedure again followed immediately by measurement of rectal temperature. At 1 h post-injection, the front paws of the rat were placed on the bar apparatus for 5-min. Procedural details for the bar test were identical to those described for haloperidol in Experiment 1. Each rat was tested in all four procedures. After these initial tests, rats were returned to the vivarium, where they remained until the next assessment (described below). Beginning the morning after the initial tests, each rat received subcutaneous injections of vehicle or 10 mg/kg ?9-THC twice daily, once in the morning and once in the late afternoon. This dose of ?9-THC has been shown in previous studies to induce substantial tolerance in adult mice without producing residual effects during a subsequent test session ( Bass and Martin, 2000 ; Wiley et al., 2005 ). Other than handling necessary for weighing, injecting and general cage maintenance, the rats remained undisturbed in their home cages in the vivarium during the period of repeated dosing. The twice daily regimen of injections was continued for 9 days (PN30–PN38, inclusive). On the 10th day of repeated injections (PN39), rats were injected only in the morning. Twenty-four hours later (PN40), rats were re-tested following injection with vehicle or with their assigned dose of ?9-THC (i.e., same treatment as on initial test).  1.4. Materials Haloperidol (McNeil Pharmaceutical, Spring House, PA) was prepared by adding saline to a commercially available 5 mg/ml stock solution containing 1.8 mg methyl paraben, 0.2 mg propylparaben, and lactic acid. Clozapine (NIMH Chemical Synthesis Program, Bethesda, MD) was mixed in purified distilled water. ?9-THC (National Institute on Drug Abuse, Bethesda, MD) was mixed in a vehicle of absolute ethanol, Emulphor-620 (Rhone-Poulenc, Inc., Princeton, NJ), and saline in a ratio of 1:1:18. All injections were administered at a volume of 1 ml/kg, with the exception that the 100 mg/kg dose of ?9-THC was volume-adjusted from a 50 mg/ml solution.  1.5. Data analysis Catalepsy was defined as the amount of time the both of the rat’s forepaws were in contact with the elevated bar, as measured during each 5-min session. Catalepsy scores were converted to percentage of the total 5-min session duration. Locomotor activity was assessed as the total number of photocell beam breaks over the 10-min (?9-THC) or 15-min (antipsychotics) session. For the tail flick test, a maximum latency of 10 s was used in order to prevent damage to the tail. Antinociception was calculated as percent of maximum possible effect {%MPE = [(test ? control latency)/(10 ? control)] × 100}. Rectal temperature values were expressed as the difference between control temperature (before injection) and temperatures following drug administration (? °C). For each drug, mean (±S.E.M.) values for each dependent variable were calculated separately for each status (bred in-house or shipped), sex, drug dose, and day. Three-way shipping status × dose × day (repeated) split-plot ANOVAs were used to analyze each dependent variable during sub-chronic dosing for each drug and sex separately. For the antipsychotics, catalepsy scores for each post-injection time point (30, 45, and 60 min) were analyzed separately. Significant multifactor interactions were further analyzed by two-way split-plot ANOVAs (as described in text of the results section) followed by Tukey post hoc tests (? = 0.05) to compare individual means.  2. Results 2.1. Experiment 1: antipsychotics Fig. 1 shows the effects of haloperidol on percentage of time spent with forepaws on an elevated bar during 5-min sessions in male and female adolescent rats (left and right panels, respectively) at 30, 45 and 60 min after injection (top, middle and bottom panels, respectively). For all groups of rats (regardless of sex or shipping status), the 0.3 mg/kg dose of haloperidol produced significant catalepsy with no evidence of sustained catalepsy at lower (0.03 and 0.1 mg/kg) doses. Given that the emphasis in this manuscript is on differences in the effects of drugs between rats across shipping status, catalepsy data for 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol only were subjected to separate two-way ANOVAs (status × day) for each sex and for each post-injection assessment. Hence, descriptions of differences in subsequent paragraphs refer to the effects of this dose of haloperidol across day in shipped and bred rats of each sex. Separate two-way ANOVAs performed on data for 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol at each of the three post-injection assessment times did not reveal any significant differences in the effects of this dose of haloperidol in bred versus shipped rats of either sex. Post hoc analysis of the main effects of day shown in ANOVAs for the 30 min post-injection assessments (both sexes) and the 60 min post-injection assessment (male only) indicated significantly greater catalepsy at later times (compared to PN30), suggesting development of increased sensitivity to the cataleptic effects of this dose of haloperidol across days. Fig. 2 shows the effects of haloperidol on locomotor activity in male and female adolescent rats that were shipped or bred in-house. Data were analyzed with separate three-way ANOVAs for each sex. Tukey post hoc tests were used to determine significant differences based upon main effects and two-way interactions. Several findings were notable following haloperidol administration. First, ANOVAs indicated a significant main effect of status for both sexes as well as significant status × day (both sexes) and status × dose (females only) interactions. For males, post hoc analysis of the main effect for dose revealed that, compared with saline, 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol decreased activity whereas 0.03 mg/kg haloperidol increased activity (without regard to status). Further, on PN31 and PN36, overall activity (collapsed across doses) was significantly higher in shipped male rats than in male rats bred in-house (status × day interaction). For females, overall activity (collapsed across doses) was significantly lower for shipped rats only on PN37; however, between-status differences in activity were also noted for individual doses. Post hoc analysis of the status × dose interaction revealed that shipped female rats were significantly less active than female rats bred in-house when treated with saline or with 0.1 mg/kg haloperidol. The 0.3 mg/kg dose of haloperidol significantly decreased activity (compared to respective saline) in both shipped and bred female rats; however, 0.03 mg/kg haloperidol significantly increased activity in shipped female rats without producing any significant change in activity in bred female rats. Together, these results suggest that shipped female rats were more sensitive to the effects of haloperidol on activity over a wider range of doses than were bred female rats. Fig. 3 shows the effects of clozapine on percentage of time spent with forepaws on an elevated bar during three 5-min sessions and its effects on motor activity in male adolescent rats that were shipped or bred in-house (top three left and right panels, respectively). The overall three-way ANOVAs for catalepsy showed significant main effects for status and dose. At all three assessment times, 10 and 30 mg/kg clozapine significantly increased time with forearms on the bar in male rats (dose main effects). Further, male rats that were bred in house exhibited greater cataleptic behavior than did shipped male rats at all three assessment times. While significant differences across day were also observed, these differences were not related to shipping status at the 30- and 60-min post-injection assessments (and hence, are not indicated in the figure). At the 45-min assessment time, cataleptic behavior induced by 30 mg/kg clozapine remained elevated in the bred male rats whereas cataleptic behavior induced by this clozapine dose in shipped male rats fluctuated across the dosing period (significant three-way status × dose × day interaction). This visual impression was confirmed through separate follow-up two-way ANOVAs (dose × day) for shipped and bred male rats. For bred male rats, dose was the only significant factor whereas a significant dose × day interaction was observed for shipped male rats. In contrast to its effects on the amount of time male rats spent with their forearms on an elevated bar, none of the clozapine doses significantly affected locomotor activity (compared to saline) [ Fig. 3, bottom panels ]. Fig. 4 shows the effects of clozapine on percentage of time spent with forepaws on an elevated bar during three 5-min sessions and its effects on motor activity in female adolescent rats that were shipped or bred in-house (top three left and right panels, respectively). At all three assessment times, the 30 mg/kg dose of clozapine significantly increased the percentage of time spent on the bar in female adolescent rats (main effect of dose). This effect was most evident upon the second exposure to clozapine (PN31) with subsequent decreases that were most pronounced in the shipped female rats. The effects of clozapine on cataleptic behavior were not affected by shipping status, as ANOVAs showed that status main effects and interactions of status with any combination of the other two variables (dose and day) were not significant. In female adolescent rats, clozapine (10 and 30 mg/kg) significantly decreased locomotor activity (main effect compared to saline); however, other differences revealed by post hoc analysis of the interactions were transient and/or minor in magnitude. Fig. 5 shows the body weights of male and female adolescent rats (top left and right panels, respectively) before (PN30) and after (PN39) treatment with saline, 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol or 30 mg/kg clozapine. Separate two-way ANOVAs (status × treatment condition) were performed on body weight data from PN30 and PN39. Before treatment with saline or an antipsychotic, shipped male rats weighed significantly less than those bred in-house for each treatment condition. After treatment, shipped males in each treatment condition continued to weigh less than those in the same treatment condition that were bred in-house. In the shipped rat group, haloperidol-treated male rats weighed less than those that were saline-treated. In contrast with the males, the weights of female rats were more similar across conditions. While there was a significant difference in the weights of shipped female rats and those bred in-house (shipped rats weighed more) before treatment, the magnitude of the difference was small and it did not persist following treatment. 2.2. Experiment 2: ?<sup>9</sup>-THC Fig. 5 shows the weights of female and male adolescent rats (left and right panels, respectively) before (PN29) and after (PN40) treatment with vehicle or ?9-THC. As in Experiment 1, body weights of only those rats that received vehicle or the highest dose of the treatment drug (i.e., 100 mg/kg ?9-THC) acutely are shown. The only significant factor affecting the weights of female rats in this experiment was day. As expected during this developmental stage, rats gained substantial weight by the end of the experiment, regardless of shipping status or drug received. The weights of male rats bred in-house and those of shipped male rats did not significantly differ from each other before or after treatment. Within the group of shipped rats, however, rats that were to receive ?9-THC weighed more than those that later received vehicle. Fig. 6 shows the effects of ?9-THC on motor activity, antinociception, temperature, and catalepsy in female and male adolescent rats that were shipped from a commercial breeder or were bred in-house. The effects of ?9-THC in the shipped rats were compared to those obtained in adult rats in a previously published manuscript ( Wiley et al., 2007 ) that focused on age differences. Here, data for each measure were analyzed with separate three-way ANOVAs (status × dose × day) for each sex. Tukey post hoc tests were used to determine significant differences based upon main effects and two-way interactions. Analysis focused on determination of differences across shipping status. Following acute injection with ?9-THC, shipped rats of both sexes showed a pattern of dose-dependent effects that is characteristic of psychoactive cannabinoids, including?9-THC ( Martin et al., 1991 ):suppression of motor activity, antinociception, hypothermia and catalepsy. Male and female rats that were bred in-house also exhibited ?9-THC-induced hypothermia, antinociception and catalepsy; however, compared to shipped rats, overall motor activity was suppressed in the male and female adolescent rats that were bred in-house (significant main effect of status in each sex), regardless of whether or not they received ?9-THC. These results suggest that a floor effect may have contributed to the lack of significant decreases in activity following administration of any dose of ?9-THC, although the reason for the decreased baseline activity is unexplained. Despite the similar overall pattern of acute hypothermic, antinociceptive and cataleptic effects of ?9-THC in shipped rats and rats that were bred in-house, significant between-group differences in these measures were also found. Further, these differences were sex-dependent. In females, shipping was associated with less sensitivity to the acute antinociceptive effects of ?9-THC, as evidenced by the downward shift of the overall acute dose–effect curve as compared to that obtained in female rats bred in-house. Status-related differences in the acute effects of ?9-THC on temperature and catalepsy were not observed in female adolescent rats. In contrast, between-status differences in the acute effects of ?9-THC occurred for all three measures in male adolescent rats. In each case, shipped male rats were more sensitive to the acute effects of ?9-THC than were bred male rats, although the magnitude and the nature of the differences were not identical across measures. Increased sensitivity to ?9-THC-induced antinociception was evidenced by the initial appearance of this effect at a lower dose in shipped male rats (10 mg/kg) than in bred male rats (30 mg/kg). Similarly, shipped male rats exhibited nearly maximal catalepsy at a lower ?9-THC dose (30 mg/kg) than did bred rats (100 mg/kg). Finally, efficacy of acute ?9-THC administration for producing hypothermia was greater in shipped male rats than in bred male rats, as seen in the significant downward shift in the acute dose–effect function for temperature. Administration of 10 mg/kg ?9-THC twice daily for 9.5 days produced substantial changes in its pattern of pharmacological effects in both male and female rats, regardless of shipping status. Following repeated dosing, complete tolerance developed in both sexes to the hypothermic, antinociceptive and cataleptic effects of ?9-THC over the dose range tested, such that these effects were no longer present in rats that were injected with ?9-THC doses up to 100 mg/kg. The pattern of ?9-THC-induced alterations of activity that occurred after repeated administration was more complicated and was dependent upon shipping status. The?9-THC dose– effect determinations for locomotor activity in male and female rats that were bred in-house were similar before and after repeated administration. At neither time did ?9-THC produce substantial changes in locomotor activity (compared to vehicle) in these rats, despite producing hypothermia, antinociception and catalepsy in the same rats after acute administration. In contrast, significant alteration of the dose–effect function for activity after repeated administration was noted in shipped rats of both sexes. Whereas ?9-THC decreased activity in a dose-dependent manner following acute administration in shipped rats, the dose–effect functions for both sexes were flattened after repeated administration such that locomotor suppression (compared to vehicle) was not observed with any dose of ?9-THC. Hence, the activity levels of both shipped and bred rats did not differ from vehicle at any ?9-THC dose after sub-chronic administration. Nevertheless, the overall level of activity in shipped rats remained significantly elevated in comparison with bred rats across the dose–effect function (including vehicle).  2. Results 2.1. Experiment 1: antipsychotics Fig. 1 shows the effects of haloperidol on percentage of time spent with forepaws on an elevated bar during 5-min sessions in male and female adolescent rats (left and right panels, respectively) at 30, 45 and 60 min after injection (top, middle and bottom panels, respectively). For all groups of rats (regardless of sex or shipping status), the 0.3 mg/kg dose of haloperidol produced significant catalepsy with no evidence of sustained catalepsy at lower (0.03 and 0.1 mg/kg) doses. Given that the emphasis in this manuscript is on differences in the effects of drugs between rats across shipping status, catalepsy data for 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol only were subjected to separate two-way ANOVAs (status × day) for each sex and for each post-injection assessment. Hence, descriptions of differences in subsequent paragraphs refer to the effects of this dose of haloperidol across day in shipped and bred rats of each sex. Separate two-way ANOVAs performed on data for 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol at each of the three post-injection assessment times did not reveal any significant differences in the effects of this dose of haloperidol in bred versus shipped rats of either sex. Post hoc analysis of the main effects of day shown in ANOVAs for the 30 min post-injection assessments (both sexes) and the 60 min post-injection assessment (male only) indicated significantly greater catalepsy at later times (compared to PN30), suggesting development of increased sensitivity to the cataleptic effects of this dose of haloperidol across days. Fig. 2 shows the effects of haloperidol on locomotor activity in male and female adolescent rats that were shipped or bred in-house. Data were analyzed with separate three-way ANOVAs for each sex. Tukey post hoc tests were used to determine significant differences based upon main effects and two-way interactions. Several findings were notable following haloperidol administration. First, ANOVAs indicated a significant main effect of status for both sexes as well as significant status × day (both sexes) and status × dose (females only) interactions. For males, post hoc analysis of the main effect for dose revealed that, compared with saline, 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol decreased activity whereas 0.03 mg/kg haloperidol increased activity (without regard to status). Further, on PN31 and PN36, overall activity (collapsed across doses) was significantly higher in shipped male rats than in male rats bred in-house (status × day interaction). For females, overall activity (collapsed across doses) was significantly lower for shipped rats only on PN37; however, between-status differences in activity were also noted for individual doses. Post hoc analysis of the status × dose interaction revealed that shipped female rats were significantly less active than female rats bred in-house when treated with saline or with 0.1 mg/kg haloperidol. The 0.3 mg/kg dose of haloperidol significantly decreased activity (compared to respective saline) in both shipped and bred female rats; however, 0.03 mg/kg haloperidol significantly increased activity in shipped female rats without producing any significant change in activity in bred female rats. Together, these results suggest that shipped female rats were more sensitive to the effects of haloperidol on activity over a wider range of doses than were bred female rats. Fig. 3 shows the effects of clozapine on percentage of time spent with forepaws on an elevated bar during three 5-min sessions and its effects on motor activity in male adolescent rats that were shipped or bred in-house (top three left and right panels, respectively). The overall three-way ANOVAs for catalepsy showed significant main effects for status and dose. At all three assessment times, 10 and 30 mg/kg clozapine significantly increased time with forearms on the bar in male rats (dose main effects). Further, male rats that were bred in house exhibited greater cataleptic behavior than did shipped male rats at all three assessment times. While significant differences across day were also observed, these differences were not related to shipping status at the 30- and 60-min post-injection assessments (and hence, are not indicated in the figure). At the 45-min assessment time, cataleptic behavior induced by 30 mg/kg clozapine remained elevated in the bred male rats whereas cataleptic behavior induced by this clozapine dose in shipped male rats fluctuated across the dosing period (significant three-way status × dose × day interaction). This visual impression was confirmed through separate follow-up two-way ANOVAs (dose × day) for shipped and bred male rats. For bred male rats, dose was the only significant factor whereas a significant dose × day interaction was observed for shipped male rats. In contrast to its effects on the amount of time male rats spent with their forearms on an elevated bar, none of the clozapine doses significantly affected locomotor activity (compared to saline) [ Fig. 3, bottom panels ]. Fig. 4 shows the effects of clozapine on percentage of time spent with forepaws on an elevated bar during three 5-min sessions and its effects on motor activity in female adolescent rats that were shipped or bred in-house (top three left and right panels, respectively). At all three assessment times, the 30 mg/kg dose of clozapine significantly increased the percentage of time spent on the bar in female adolescent rats (main effect of dose). This effect was most evident upon the second exposure to clozapine (PN31) with subsequent decreases that were most pronounced in the shipped female rats. The effects of clozapine on cataleptic behavior were not affected by shipping status, as ANOVAs showed that status main effects and interactions of status with any combination of the other two variables (dose and day) were not significant. In female adolescent rats, clozapine (10 and 30 mg/kg) significantly decreased locomotor activity (main effect compared to saline); however, other differences revealed by post hoc analysis of the interactions were transient and/or minor in magnitude. Fig. 5 shows the body weights of male and female adolescent rats (top left and right panels, respectively) before (PN30) and after (PN39) treatment with saline, 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol or 30 mg/kg clozapine. Separate two-way ANOVAs (status × treatment condition) were performed on body weight data from PN30 and PN39. Before treatment with saline or an antipsychotic, shipped male rats weighed significantly less than those bred in-house for each treatment condition. After treatment, shipped males in each treatment condition continued to weigh less than those in the same treatment condition that were bred in-house. In the shipped rat group, haloperidol-treated male rats weighed less than those that were saline-treated. In contrast with the males, the weights of female rats were more similar across conditions. While there was a significant difference in the weights of shipped female rats and those bred in-house (shipped rats weighed more) before treatment, the magnitude of the difference was small and it did not persist following treatment. 2.2. Experiment 2: ?<sup>9</sup>-THC Fig. 5 shows the weights of female and male adolescent rats (left and right panels, respectively) before (PN29) and after (PN40) treatment with vehicle or ?9-THC. As in Experiment 1, body weights of only those rats that received vehicle or the highest dose of the treatment drug (i.e., 100 mg/kg ?9-THC) acutely are shown. The only significant factor affecting the weights of female rats in this experiment was day. As expected during this developmental stage, rats gained substantial weight by the end of the experiment, regardless of shipping status or drug received. The weights of male rats bred in-house and those of shipped male rats did not significantly differ from each other before or after treatment. Within the group of shipped rats, however, rats that were to receive ?9-THC weighed more than those that later received vehicle. Fig. 6 shows the effects of ?9-THC on motor activity, antinociception, temperature, and catalepsy in female and male adolescent rats that were shipped from a commercial breeder or were bred in-house. The effects of ?9-THC in the shipped rats were compared to those obtained in adult rats in a previously published manuscript ( Wiley et al., 2007 ) that focused on age differences. Here, data for each measure were analyzed with separate three-way ANOVAs (status × dose × day) for each sex. Tukey post hoc tests were used to determine significant differences based upon main effects and two-way interactions. Analysis focused on determination of differences across shipping status. Following acute injection with ?9-THC, shipped rats of both sexes showed a pattern of dose-dependent effects that is characteristic of psychoactive cannabinoids, including?9-THC ( Martin et al., 1991 ):suppression of motor activity, antinociception, hypothermia and catalepsy. Male and female rats that were bred in-house also exhibited ?9-THC-induced hypothermia, antinociception and catalepsy; however, compared to shipped rats, overall motor activity was suppressed in the male and female adolescent rats that were bred in-house (significant main effect of status in each sex), regardless of whether or not they received ?9-THC. These results suggest that a floor effect may have contributed to the lack of significant decreases in activity following administration of any dose of ?9-THC, although the reason for the decreased baseline activity is unexplained. Despite the similar overall pattern of acute hypothermic, antinociceptive and cataleptic effects of ?9-THC in shipped rats and rats that were bred in-house, significant between-group differences in these measures were also found. Further, these differences were sex-dependent. In females, shipping was associated with less sensitivity to the acute antinociceptive effects of ?9-THC, as evidenced by the downward shift of the overall acute dose–effect curve as compared to that obtained in female rats bred in-house. Status-related differences in the acute effects of ?9-THC on temperature and catalepsy were not observed in female adolescent rats. In contrast, between-status differences in the acute effects of ?9-THC occurred for all three measures in male adolescent rats. In each case, shipped male rats were more sensitive to the acute effects of ?9-THC than were bred male rats, although the magnitude and the nature of the differences were not identical across measures. Increased sensitivity to ?9-THC-induced antinociception was evidenced by the initial appearance of this effect at a lower dose in shipped male rats (10 mg/kg) than in bred male rats (30 mg/kg). Similarly, shipped male rats exhibited nearly maximal catalepsy at a lower ?9-THC dose (30 mg/kg) than did bred rats (100 mg/kg). Finally, efficacy of acute ?9-THC administration for producing hypothermia was greater in shipped male rats than in bred male rats, as seen in the significant downward shift in the acute dose–effect function for temperature. Administration of 10 mg/kg ?9-THC twice daily for 9.5 days produced substantial changes in its pattern of pharmacological effects in both male and female rats, regardless of shipping status. Following repeated dosing, complete tolerance developed in both sexes to the hypothermic, antinociceptive and cataleptic effects of ?9-THC over the dose range tested, such that these effects were no longer present in rats that were injected with ?9-THC doses up to 100 mg/kg. The pattern of ?9-THC-induced alterations of activity that occurred after repeated administration was more complicated and was dependent upon shipping status. The?9-THC dose– effect determinations for locomotor activity in male and female rats that were bred in-house were similar before and after repeated administration. At neither time did ?9-THC produce substantial changes in locomotor activity (compared to vehicle) in these rats, despite producing hypothermia, antinociception and catalepsy in the same rats after acute administration. In contrast, significant alteration of the dose–effect function for activity after repeated administration was noted in shipped rats of both sexes. Whereas ?9-THC decreased activity in a dose-dependent manner following acute administration in shipped rats, the dose–effect functions for both sexes were flattened after repeated administration such that locomotor suppression (compared to vehicle) was not observed with any dose of ?9-THC. Hence, the activity levels of both shipped and bred rats did not differ from vehicle at any ?9-THC dose after sub-chronic administration. Nevertheless, the overall level of activity in shipped rats remained significantly elevated in comparison with bred rats across the dose–effect function (including vehicle).  2.1. Experiment 1: antipsychotics Fig. 1 shows the effects of haloperidol on percentage of time spent with forepaws on an elevated bar during 5-min sessions in male and female adolescent rats (left and right panels, respectively) at 30, 45 and 60 min after injection (top, middle and bottom panels, respectively). For all groups of rats (regardless of sex or shipping status), the 0.3 mg/kg dose of haloperidol produced significant catalepsy with no evidence of sustained catalepsy at lower (0.03 and 0.1 mg/kg) doses. Given that the emphasis in this manuscript is on differences in the effects of drugs between rats across shipping status, catalepsy data for 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol only were subjected to separate two-way ANOVAs (status × day) for each sex and for each post-injection assessment. Hence, descriptions of differences in subsequent paragraphs refer to the effects of this dose of haloperidol across day in shipped and bred rats of each sex. Separate two-way ANOVAs performed on data for 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol at each of the three post-injection assessment times did not reveal any significant differences in the effects of this dose of haloperidol in bred versus shipped rats of either sex. Post hoc analysis of the main effects of day shown in ANOVAs for the 30 min post-injection assessments (both sexes) and the 60 min post-injection assessment (male only) indicated significantly greater catalepsy at later times (compared to PN30), suggesting development of increased sensitivity to the cataleptic effects of this dose of haloperidol across days. Fig. 2 shows the effects of haloperidol on locomotor activity in male and female adolescent rats that were shipped or bred in-house. Data were analyzed with separate three-way ANOVAs for each sex. Tukey post hoc tests were used to determine significant differences based upon main effects and two-way interactions. Several findings were notable following haloperidol administration. First, ANOVAs indicated a significant main effect of status for both sexes as well as significant status × day (both sexes) and status × dose (females only) interactions. For males, post hoc analysis of the main effect for dose revealed that, compared with saline, 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol decreased activity whereas 0.03 mg/kg haloperidol increased activity (without regard to status). Further, on PN31 and PN36, overall activity (collapsed across doses) was significantly higher in shipped male rats than in male rats bred in-house (status × day interaction). For females, overall activity (collapsed across doses) was significantly lower for shipped rats only on PN37; however, between-status differences in activity were also noted for individual doses. Post hoc analysis of the status × dose interaction revealed that shipped female rats were significantly less active than female rats bred in-house when treated with saline or with 0.1 mg/kg haloperidol. The 0.3 mg/kg dose of haloperidol significantly decreased activity (compared to respective saline) in both shipped and bred female rats; however, 0.03 mg/kg haloperidol significantly increased activity in shipped female rats without producing any significant change in activity in bred female rats. Together, these results suggest that shipped female rats were more sensitive to the effects of haloperidol on activity over a wider range of doses than were bred female rats. Fig. 3 shows the effects of clozapine on percentage of time spent with forepaws on an elevated bar during three 5-min sessions and its effects on motor activity in male adolescent rats that were shipped or bred in-house (top three left and right panels, respectively). The overall three-way ANOVAs for catalepsy showed significant main effects for status and dose. At all three assessment times, 10 and 30 mg/kg clozapine significantly increased time with forearms on the bar in male rats (dose main effects). Further, male rats that were bred in house exhibited greater cataleptic behavior than did shipped male rats at all three assessment times. While significant differences across day were also observed, these differences were not related to shipping status at the 30- and 60-min post-injection assessments (and hence, are not indicated in the figure). At the 45-min assessment time, cataleptic behavior induced by 30 mg/kg clozapine remained elevated in the bred male rats whereas cataleptic behavior induced by this clozapine dose in shipped male rats fluctuated across the dosing period (significant three-way status × dose × day interaction). This visual impression was confirmed through separate follow-up two-way ANOVAs (dose × day) for shipped and bred male rats. For bred male rats, dose was the only significant factor whereas a significant dose × day interaction was observed for shipped male rats. In contrast to its effects on the amount of time male rats spent with their forearms on an elevated bar, none of the clozapine doses significantly affected locomotor activity (compared to saline) [ Fig. 3, bottom panels ]. Fig. 4 shows the effects of clozapine on percentage of time spent with forepaws on an elevated bar during three 5-min sessions and its effects on motor activity in female adolescent rats that were shipped or bred in-house (top three left and right panels, respectively). At all three assessment times, the 30 mg/kg dose of clozapine significantly increased the percentage of time spent on the bar in female adolescent rats (main effect of dose). This effect was most evident upon the second exposure to clozapine (PN31) with subsequent decreases that were most pronounced in the shipped female rats. The effects of clozapine on cataleptic behavior were not affected by shipping status, as ANOVAs showed that status main effects and interactions of status with any combination of the other two variables (dose and day) were not significant. In female adolescent rats, clozapine (10 and 30 mg/kg) significantly decreased locomotor activity (main effect compared to saline); however, other differences revealed by post hoc analysis of the interactions were transient and/or minor in magnitude. Fig. 5 shows the body weights of male and female adolescent rats (top left and right panels, respectively) before (PN30) and after (PN39) treatment with saline, 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol or 30 mg/kg clozapine. Separate two-way ANOVAs (status × treatment condition) were performed on body weight data from PN30 and PN39. Before treatment with saline or an antipsychotic, shipped male rats weighed significantly less than those bred in-house for each treatment condition. After treatment, shipped males in each treatment condition continued to weigh less than those in the same treatment condition that were bred in-house. In the shipped rat group, haloperidol-treated male rats weighed less than those that were saline-treated. In contrast with the males, the weights of female rats were more similar across conditions. While there was a significant difference in the weights of shipped female rats and those bred in-house (shipped rats weighed more) before treatment, the magnitude of the difference was small and it did not persist following treatment.  2.1. Experiment 1: antipsychotics Fig. 1 shows the effects of haloperidol on percentage of time spent with forepaws on an elevated bar during 5-min sessions in male and female adolescent rats (left and right panels, respectively) at 30, 45 and 60 min after injection (top, middle and bottom panels, respectively). For all groups of rats (regardless of sex or shipping status), the 0.3 mg/kg dose of haloperidol produced significant catalepsy with no evidence of sustained catalepsy at lower (0.03 and 0.1 mg/kg) doses. Given that the emphasis in this manuscript is on differences in the effects of drugs between rats across shipping status, catalepsy data for 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol only were subjected to separate two-way ANOVAs (status × day) for each sex and for each post-injection assessment. Hence, descriptions of differences in subsequent paragraphs refer to the effects of this dose of haloperidol across day in shipped and bred rats of each sex. Separate two-way ANOVAs performed on data for 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol at each of the three post-injection assessment times did not reveal any significant differences in the effects of this dose of haloperidol in bred versus shipped rats of either sex. Post hoc analysis of the main effects of day shown in ANOVAs for the 30 min post-injection assessments (both sexes) and the 60 min post-injection assessment (male only) indicated significantly greater catalepsy at later times (compared to PN30), suggesting development of increased sensitivity to the cataleptic effects of this dose of haloperidol across days. Fig. 2 shows the effects of haloperidol on locomotor activity in male and female adolescent rats that were shipped or bred in-house. Data were analyzed with separate three-way ANOVAs for each sex. Tukey post hoc tests were used to determine significant differences based upon main effects and two-way interactions. Several findings were notable following haloperidol administration. First, ANOVAs indicated a significant main effect of status for both sexes as well as significant status × day (both sexes) and status × dose (females only) interactions. For males, post hoc analysis of the main effect for dose revealed that, compared with saline, 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol decreased activity whereas 0.03 mg/kg haloperidol increased activity (without regard to status). Further, on PN31 and PN36, overall activity (collapsed across doses) was significantly higher in shipped male rats than in male rats bred in-house (status × day interaction). For females, overall activity (collapsed across doses) was significantly lower for shipped rats only on PN37; however, between-status differences in activity were also noted for individual doses. Post hoc analysis of the status × dose interaction revealed that shipped female rats were significantly less active than female rats bred in-house when treated with saline or with 0.1 mg/kg haloperidol. The 0.3 mg/kg dose of haloperidol significantly decreased activity (compared to respective saline) in both shipped and bred female rats; however, 0.03 mg/kg haloperidol significantly increased activity in shipped female rats without producing any significant change in activity in bred female rats. Together, these results suggest that shipped female rats were more sensitive to the effects of haloperidol on activity over a wider range of doses than were bred female rats. Fig. 3 shows the effects of clozapine on percentage of time spent with forepaws on an elevated bar during three 5-min sessions and its effects on motor activity in male adolescent rats that were shipped or bred in-house (top three left and right panels, respectively). The overall three-way ANOVAs for catalepsy showed significant main effects for status and dose. At all three assessment times, 10 and 30 mg/kg clozapine significantly increased time with forearms on the bar in male rats (dose main effects). Further, male rats that were bred in house exhibited greater cataleptic behavior than did shipped male rats at all three assessment times. While significant differences across day were also observed, these differences were not related to shipping status at the 30- and 60-min post-injection assessments (and hence, are not indicated in the figure). At the 45-min assessment time, cataleptic behavior induced by 30 mg/kg clozapine remained elevated in the bred male rats whereas cataleptic behavior induced by this clozapine dose in shipped male rats fluctuated across the dosing period (significant three-way status × dose × day interaction). This visual impression was confirmed through separate follow-up two-way ANOVAs (dose × day) for shipped and bred male rats. For bred male rats, dose was the only significant factor whereas a significant dose × day interaction was observed for shipped male rats. In contrast to its effects on the amount of time male rats spent with their forearms on an elevated bar, none of the clozapine doses significantly affected locomotor activity (compared to saline) [ Fig. 3, bottom panels ]. Fig. 4 shows the effects of clozapine on percentage of time spent with forepaws on an elevated bar during three 5-min sessions and its effects on motor activity in female adolescent rats that were shipped or bred in-house (top three left and right panels, respectively). At all three assessment times, the 30 mg/kg dose of clozapine significantly increased the percentage of time spent on the bar in female adolescent rats (main effect of dose). This effect was most evident upon the second exposure to clozapine (PN31) with subsequent decreases that were most pronounced in the shipped female rats. The effects of clozapine on cataleptic behavior were not affected by shipping status, as ANOVAs showed that status main effects and interactions of status with any combination of the other two variables (dose and day) were not significant. In female adolescent rats, clozapine (10 and 30 mg/kg) significantly decreased locomotor activity (main effect compared to saline); however, other differences revealed by post hoc analysis of the interactions were transient and/or minor in magnitude. Fig. 5 shows the body weights of male and female adolescent rats (top left and right panels, respectively) before (PN30) and after (PN39) treatment with saline, 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol or 30 mg/kg clozapine. Separate two-way ANOVAs (status × treatment condition) were performed on body weight data from PN30 and PN39. Before treatment with saline or an antipsychotic, shipped male rats weighed significantly less than those bred in-house for each treatment condition. After treatment, shipped males in each treatment condition continued to weigh less than those in the same treatment condition that were bred in-house. In the shipped rat group, haloperidol-treated male rats weighed less than those that were saline-treated. In contrast with the males, the weights of female rats were more similar across conditions. While there was a significant difference in the weights of shipped female rats and those bred in-house (shipped rats weighed more) before treatment, the magnitude of the difference was small and it did not persist following treatment.  2.2. Experiment 2: ?<sup>9</sup>-THC Fig. 5 shows the weights of female and male adolescent rats (left and right panels, respectively) before (PN29) and after (PN40) treatment with vehicle or ?9-THC. As in Experiment 1, body weights of only those rats that received vehicle or the highest dose of the treatment drug (i.e., 100 mg/kg ?9-THC) acutely are shown. The only significant factor affecting the weights of female rats in this experiment was day. As expected during this developmental stage, rats gained substantial weight by the end of the experiment, regardless of shipping status or drug received. The weights of male rats bred in-house and those of shipped male rats did not significantly differ from each other before or after treatment. Within the group of shipped rats, however, rats that were to receive ?9-THC weighed more than those that later received vehicle. Fig. 6 shows the effects of ?9-THC on motor activity, antinociception, temperature, and catalepsy in female and male adolescent rats that were shipped from a commercial breeder or were bred in-house. The effects of ?9-THC in the shipped rats were compared to those obtained in adult rats in a previously published manuscript ( Wiley et al., 2007 ) that focused on age differences. Here, data for each measure were analyzed with separate three-way ANOVAs (status × dose × day) for each sex. Tukey post hoc tests were used to determine significant differences based upon main effects and two-way interactions. Analysis focused on determination of differences across shipping status. Following acute injection with ?9-THC, shipped rats of both sexes showed a pattern of dose-dependent effects that is characteristic of psychoactive cannabinoids, including?9-THC ( Martin et al., 1991 ):suppression of motor activity, antinociception, hypothermia and catalepsy. Male and female rats that were bred in-house also exhibited ?9-THC-induced hypothermia, antinociception and catalepsy; however, compared to shipped rats, overall motor activity was suppressed in the male and female adolescent rats that were bred in-house (significant main effect of status in each sex), regardless of whether or not they received ?9-THC. These results suggest that a floor effect may have contributed to the lack of significant decreases in activity following administration of any dose of ?9-THC, although the reason for the decreased baseline activity is unexplained. Despite the similar overall pattern of acute hypothermic, antinociceptive and cataleptic effects of ?9-THC in shipped rats and rats that were bred in-house, significant between-group differences in these measures were also found. Further, these differences were sex-dependent. In females, shipping was associated with less sensitivity to the acute antinociceptive effects of ?9-THC, as evidenced by the downward shift of the overall acute dose–effect curve as compared to that obtained in female rats bred in-house. Status-related differences in the acute effects of ?9-THC on temperature and catalepsy were not observed in female adolescent rats. In contrast, between-status differences in the acute effects of ?9-THC occurred for all three measures in male adolescent rats. In each case, shipped male rats were more sensitive to the acute effects of ?9-THC than were bred male rats, although the magnitude and the nature of the differences were not identical across measures. Increased sensitivity to ?9-THC-induced antinociception was evidenced by the initial appearance of this effect at a lower dose in shipped male rats (10 mg/kg) than in bred male rats (30 mg/kg). Similarly, shipped male rats exhibited nearly maximal catalepsy at a lower ?9-THC dose (30 mg/kg) than did bred rats (100 mg/kg). Finally, efficacy of acute ?9-THC administration for producing hypothermia was greater in shipped male rats than in bred male rats, as seen in the significant downward shift in the acute dose–effect function for temperature. Administration of 10 mg/kg ?9-THC twice daily for 9.5 days produced substantial changes in its pattern of pharmacological effects in both male and female rats, regardless of shipping status. Following repeated dosing, complete tolerance developed in both sexes to the hypothermic, antinociceptive and cataleptic effects of ?9-THC over the dose range tested, such that these effects were no longer present in rats that were injected with ?9-THC doses up to 100 mg/kg. The pattern of ?9-THC-induced alterations of activity that occurred after repeated administration was more complicated and was dependent upon shipping status. The?9-THC dose– effect determinations for locomotor activity in male and female rats that were bred in-house were similar before and after repeated administration. At neither time did ?9-THC produce substantial changes in locomotor activity (compared to vehicle) in these rats, despite producing hypothermia, antinociception and catalepsy in the same rats after acute administration. In contrast, significant alteration of the dose–effect function for activity after repeated administration was noted in shipped rats of both sexes. Whereas ?9-THC decreased activity in a dose-dependent manner following acute administration in shipped rats, the dose–effect functions for both sexes were flattened after repeated administration such that locomotor suppression (compared to vehicle) was not observed with any dose of ?9-THC. Hence, the activity levels of both shipped and bred rats did not differ from vehicle at any ?9-THC dose after sub-chronic administration. Nevertheless, the overall level of activity in shipped rats remained significantly elevated in comparison with bred rats across the dose–effect function (including vehicle).  2.2. Experiment 2: ?<sup>9</sup>-THC Fig. 5 shows the weights of female and male adolescent rats (left and right panels, respectively) before (PN29) and after (PN40) treatment with vehicle or ?9-THC. As in Experiment 1, body weights of only those rats that received vehicle or the highest dose of the treatment drug (i.e., 100 mg/kg ?9-THC) acutely are shown. The only significant factor affecting the weights of female rats in this experiment was day. As expected during this developmental stage, rats gained substantial weight by the end of the experiment, regardless of shipping status or drug received. The weights of male rats bred in-house and those of shipped male rats did not significantly differ from each other before or after treatment. Within the group of shipped rats, however, rats that were to receive ?9-THC weighed more than those that later received vehicle. Fig. 6 shows the effects of ?9-THC on motor activity, antinociception, temperature, and catalepsy in female and male adolescent rats that were shipped from a commercial breeder or were bred in-house. The effects of ?9-THC in the shipped rats were compared to those obtained in adult rats in a previously published manuscript ( Wiley et al., 2007 ) that focused on age differences. Here, data for each measure were analyzed with separate three-way ANOVAs (status × dose × day) for each sex. Tukey post hoc tests were used to determine significant differences based upon main effects and two-way interactions. Analysis focused on determination of differences across shipping status. Following acute injection with ?9-THC, shipped rats of both sexes showed a pattern of dose-dependent effects that is characteristic of psychoactive cannabinoids, including?9-THC ( Martin et al., 1991 ):suppression of motor activity, antinociception, hypothermia and catalepsy. Male and female rats that were bred in-house also exhibited ?9-THC-induced hypothermia, antinociception and catalepsy; however, compared to shipped rats, overall motor activity was suppressed in the male and female adolescent rats that were bred in-house (significant main effect of status in each sex), regardless of whether or not they received ?9-THC. These results suggest that a floor effect may have contributed to the lack of significant decreases in activity following administration of any dose of ?9-THC, although the reason for the decreased baseline activity is unexplained. Despite the similar overall pattern of acute hypothermic, antinociceptive and cataleptic effects of ?9-THC in shipped rats and rats that were bred in-house, significant between-group differences in these measures were also found. Further, these differences were sex-dependent. In females, shipping was associated with less sensitivity to the acute antinociceptive effects of ?9-THC, as evidenced by the downward shift of the overall acute dose–effect curve as compared to that obtained in female rats bred in-house. Status-related differences in the acute effects of ?9-THC on temperature and catalepsy were not observed in female adolescent rats. In contrast, between-status differences in the acute effects of ?9-THC occurred for all three measures in male adolescent rats. In each case, shipped male rats were more sensitive to the acute effects of ?9-THC than were bred male rats, although the magnitude and the nature of the differences were not identical across measures. Increased sensitivity to ?9-THC-induced antinociception was evidenced by the initial appearance of this effect at a lower dose in shipped male rats (10 mg/kg) than in bred male rats (30 mg/kg). Similarly, shipped male rats exhibited nearly maximal catalepsy at a lower ?9-THC dose (30 mg/kg) than did bred rats (100 mg/kg). Finally, efficacy of acute ?9-THC administration for producing hypothermia was greater in shipped male rats than in bred male rats, as seen in the significant downward shift in the acute dose–effect function for temperature. Administration of 10 mg/kg ?9-THC twice daily for 9.5 days produced substantial changes in its pattern of pharmacological effects in both male and female rats, regardless of shipping status. Following repeated dosing, complete tolerance developed in both sexes to the hypothermic, antinociceptive and cataleptic effects of ?9-THC over the dose range tested, such that these effects were no longer present in rats that were injected with ?9-THC doses up to 100 mg/kg. The pattern of ?9-THC-induced alterations of activity that occurred after repeated administration was more complicated and was dependent upon shipping status. The?9-THC dose– effect determinations for locomotor activity in male and female rats that were bred in-house were similar before and after repeated administration. At neither time did ?9-THC produce substantial changes in locomotor activity (compared to vehicle) in these rats, despite producing hypothermia, antinociception and catalepsy in the same rats after acute administration. In contrast, significant alteration of the dose–effect function for activity after repeated administration was noted in shipped rats of both sexes. Whereas ?9-THC decreased activity in a dose-dependent manner following acute administration in shipped rats, the dose–effect functions for both sexes were flattened after repeated administration such that locomotor suppression (compared to vehicle) was not observed with any dose of ?9-THC. Hence, the activity levels of both shipped and bred rats did not differ from vehicle at any ?9-THC dose after sub-chronic administration. Nevertheless, the overall level of activity in shipped rats remained significantly elevated in comparison with bred rats across the dose–effect function (including vehicle).  3. Discussion The overall goal of this descriptive study was to determine the degree to which the pharmacological effects of two antipsychotics (haloperidol and clozapine) and a cannabinoid agonist ?9-THC differed in adolescent rats of both sexes that were bred in-house versus shipped from a commercial breeder shortly after weaning. Informal observation of the rats did not reveal any overt differences in their behavior in the home cages or in their physical characteristics, with the exception that the shipped male rats in the antipsychotic experiment were quite a bit smaller than the males in this experiment that were bred in-house despite identical ages. This difference was present before the first antipsychotic injection and persisted throughout the dosing period. A ready explanation of this weight difference is not apparent. Although body weight may vary across litters even with active attempts at control ( Peeling and Looker, 1987 ), the difference reported here is unlikely to be related to a specific litter effect since the number of rats affected ( n = 21) would preclude all of them from being in the same litter. Shipping stress may also affect body weight and other physiological parameters in adult rodents ( Bean-Knudsen and Wagner, 1987 ; Landi et al., 1982 ). Shipping status per se cannot account entirely for the differences in weight observed here, as neither male rats in the ?9-THC experiment nor female rats in either experiment showed similar differences; however, the possibility that an unidentified stressor that occurred during the shipping of these particular rats cannot be eliminated. Finally, litter size and maternal factors (e.g., weight, age, number of previous litters) may also contribute to pup weights ( Rodel et al., 2007 ) and were not controlled in shipped rats. 3.1. Antipsychotic effects Haloperidol is a typical antipsychotic that has high probability of producing extrapyramidal motor side effects in adult humans, particularly at higher doses, whereas clozapine is an atypical antipsychotic that does not usually produce these effects. In adult male rodents, typical and atypical antipsychotics suppress motor activity and typical antipsychotics also reliably induce catalepsy ( Bardin et al., 2006 ; Simon et al., 2000 ; Wiley and Martin, 2003 ). The effects of atypical antipsychotics on catalepsy are inconsistent across procedures and labs ( Hoffman and Donovan, 1995 ; Nowakowska et al., 2006 ; Wiley and Martin, 2003 ). Our results here show that the 0.3 mg/kg dose of haloperidol suppressed activity in all groups of rats. In contrast, clozapine at doses up to 30 mg/kg produced only transient effects on locomotion over the dosing period. Both haloperidol and clozapine significantly increased bar time in shipped and bred rats of both sexes, although the cataleptic effects of clozapine were less pronounced and less persistent over repeated dosing. Shipping status did not significantly alter the dose–effect function for the cataleptic effects of haloperidol in either sex nor did it affect the overall pattern of sensitization to the initial effects that occurred with repeated dosing. Status-based differences in clozapine-induced increases in bar time were also not observed for female adolescent rats. Further, although shipped male adolescent rats exhibited less overall clozapine-induced cataleptic behavior than did bred male adolescent rats at all three assessment times, the magnitude of these differences was small and not consistent across dose, day or assessment time. In contrast, we have observed age differences in the efficacy of 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol and 10 mg/kg clozapine for producing catalepsy, with adult rats of both sexes exhibiting greater overall haloperidol-induced cataleptic response than (shipped) adolescent rats particularly after acute administration ( Wiley and Evans, 2008 ). On the other hand, female adults were less sensitive to the cataleptic effects of clozapine than were female adolescents or male rats of either age. Haloperidol’s cataleptic effects occurred at only a single dose and were similar across shipping status. Its effects on locomotor activity, however, differed in shipped versus bred rats and this difference was dose- and sex-dependent. In shipped rats of both sexes, haloperidol produced a biphasic effect, with increased activity at 0.03 mg/kg and decreased activity at 0.3 mg/kg. In female (but not male) adolescent rats that were bred in-house, haloperidol produced only decreased activity at the 0.3 mg/kg dose and minimal variation from saline levels at other doses. One possible factor that may have contributed to observation of status differences in the effects of haloperidol on locomotor activity, but not on catalepsy, is the nature of the dependent measures. For example, catalepsy and other similar measures have low baseline occurrence. Consequently, drug-induced changes are almost always unidirectional (i.e., increases in occurrence). Under these circumstances, any effect of shipping status would be expressed as a difference in response magnitude. In contrast, locomotor activity is a bidirectional variable. Consequently, status differences in drug effects on activity may be reflected as changes in magnitude and/or direction of the effect, which may result in greater opportunity for detection. 3.2. ?<sup>9</sup>-THC effects In Experiment 2, we investigated the effects of ?9-THC in male and female adolescent rats that were shipped or bred in-house. Despite the fact that rats of both sexes were more similar in weight across status in this experiment than in Experiment 1, baseline levels of activity were significantly lower for both male and female rats bred in-house than for shipped rats (and were also visibly lower than those observed in rats in Experiment 1). Given that each rat in the vehicle group for each sex was from a different litter (hence, low activity was not the result of a litter effect), this observation is surprising, particularly since rats bred in-house for Experiment 1 did not show a similar suppression of activity. Level of spontaneous motor activity in a novel environment (low vs. high responders) has been correlated with a number of behavioral, maternal and neurochemical variables indicative of emotionality ( Antoniou et al., 2008 ; Clinton et al., 2007 ; Mallo et al., 2007 ) and has been used to predict subsequent responsiveness to abused drugs such as opioids and cocaine ( Kalinichev et al., 2004 ; Stoffel and Cunningham, 2008 ). In studies with psychomotor stimulants, for example, low exploratory activity has been associated with less increase in activity following stimulant administration ( Hooks et al., 1991a , b ). A similar effect was observed here with ?9-THC, in that rats of both sexes that were bred in-house exhibited a flattened dose–effect function following acute ?9-THC injection. These results are in contrast not only with those seen in the shipped adolescent rats in this experiment, but also with those typically observed in adult rodents exposed to ?9-THC or other cannabinoids in numerous previous studies ( Bass and Martin, 2000 ; Compton et al., 1990 ; Fan et al., 1994 ). Of note, the adult rodents in these latter studies were shipped from commercial breeders rather than bred in-house. Distinguishing between the contributory influence of differences in stringency of control procedures versus difference in baseline activity to reduction in responsiveness to ?9-THC in the present study is difficult. Interestingly, however, ?9-THC dose-dependently produced catalepsy and antinociception and decreased temperature in the same-bred rats here in which it did not affect activity. These results suggest that low initial activity levels were predictive of drug response only in the locomotor assay and not in all procedures, suggesting task selectivity in the predictive power of baseline activity level in determination of responsiveness to drugs of abuse. [On the other hand, degree of novelty, which has been shown to be related to differentiation of low and high responders ( Bevins and Peterson, 2004 ), was modest in the ?9-THC experiment reported here, leaving open the possibility that higher levels of novelty might produce different results.] Status-related differences in acute sensitivity to the antinociceptive, hypothermic and cataleptic effects of ?9-THC were sex-dependent. In females, ?9-THC dose–effect curves differed across status for only one of the three measures. Whereas maximal ?9-THC-induced antinociception occurred at lower doses in bred female adolescent rats than in shipped female rats, the acute dose– effect curves for hypothermia and catalepsy were statistically indistinguishable. In contrast, shipped male rats were consistently more sensitive to ?9-THC’s pharmacological effects than were bred male rats. This greater sensitivity was indicated by lower threshold doses for producing antinociception and catalepsy and by a significant downward shift in the dose–effect curve for hypothermia. When administered repeatedly to adult rodents, cannabinoids characteristically produce profound tolerance in a variety of in vivo procedures ( Gonzalez et al., 2005 ; Lichtman and Martin, 2005 ). Consistent with these previous findings, complete tolerance to the effects of ?9-THC on temperature and in the tail flick and bar tests occurred here, as hypothermia, antinociception and catalepsy were not observed in any of the groups of rats following repeated dosing. Tolerance to ?9-THC’s effects on motor activity also occurred in shipped rats of both sexes; however, there was no change in activity in the bred rats, probably due to a floor effect created by the low baseline activity and lack of dose-responsiveness to ?9-THC. 3.3. Caveats Several caveats apply to both experiments. First, the aim of this study was to determine the pharmacological effects of antipsychotics and ?9-THC in rats that were obtained via different methods (i.e., shipped vs. bred in-house). Because we wanted to mimic the typical practice of obtaining rats from only one or the other source, only factors that were present after shipping or weaning were held constant or actively controlled, with the exception that each experiment included a maximum of one male and one female rat from a litter born in-house. For example, all rats were housed in same-sexed pairs after arrival (or weaning), apparatus and experimental parameters were identical across shipping status, and assignment to drug dose was randomized within each group. Pre-shipping factors (e.g., litter, shipping conditions) were uncontrolled, as they are for all shipped rats. Second, this study was descriptive. Because of the number of uncontrolled factors, mechanistic determination of the differences that were observed is impossible (and was not our goal for this initial set of experiments). Rather, our goal here was to determine whether the pharmacological effects of selected compounds differed in rats obtained through two distinct procurement methods that have been commonly used in developmental pharmacology studies with adolescent rats. Third, differences in some effects may have been obscured due to the steepness of the dose–effect curves and the resulting possibility of floor or ceiling effects. Fourth, age at testing and number of days of repeated drug exposure co-varied. This confound complicates determination of whether repeated exposure differentially affects shipped versus bred adolescent rats. Finally, conclusions based on these results may not apply to other pharmacological effects produced by the test drugs, including (for example) their effects on operant responding. Similarly, the findings here may not be predictive of the effects of shipping status on rats of all ages or on the effects of other drugs or drug classes on body temperature, antinociception or motor behavior. 3.4. Summary and conclusions Despite these issues, several consistent observations are notable. First, similarities in the pharmacological effects of antipsychotics and ?9-THC across shipping status were prevalent. With the exception of the non-responsiveness of bred rats to the typically observed ?9-THC-induced suppression of activity, each test drug produced a profile of effects that was characteristic of its pharmacological class (based upon previous studies in adult rodents). Between-status differences, when present, were reflected in subtle alterations in efficacy that were most evident with repeated dosing (i.e., quantitative rather than qualitative differences). Further, some of these differences tended to be transitory over the 10-day dosing period. Nevertheless, there were some significant differences. As noted previously, the most prominent between-status difference in the effects produced by the two antipsychotics was greater variability in data from shipped rats. This finding, which occurred in both sexes, was not surprising since shipping may introduce several sources of uncontrolled variance that are not present for rats bred in-house, including potential litter effects and stress from the shipping process. On the other hand, the most prominent between-status difference in data from the ?9-THC experiment was the dramatically lower baseline activity in rats of both sexes that were bred in-house. Greater variability in the data from shipped rats was not noticeable, as it was in haloperidol-treated rats, perhaps partially due to differences in the experimental protocol (e.g., daily testing with haloperidol versus pre- and post-repeated dosing tests with ?9-THC resulted in fewer measurements of ?9-THC’s effects). These results suggest that careful attention to issues related to rodent procurement during adolescence is warranted and may help to explain divergent findings in different labs. They also suggest that in-house breeding, and the associated control of litter effects, may not dramatically alter results as compared to those obtained from shipped rats for some drug classes or assays (e.g., measures of hypothermia, antinociception and catalepsy in the ?9-THC experiment). This point was highlighted in a recent study that examined the effects of selected drugs from several classes in a battery of pharmacological assays in juvenile and adult rats ( Himmel, 2008 ). Age differences in this study resembled between status differences in the present study, in that they tended to be quantitative rather than qualitative and were dependent upon drug class as well as the specific experimental measure. While vulnerability of the adolescent brain to environmental influences, including substance abuse, has been the emphasis of much recent research ( Adriani and Laviola, 2004 ; Crews et al., 2007 ), other research has suggested that adolescents may be less sensitive to environmental variation. For example, Ristuccia and colleagues have reported that ethanol-induced hypothermia in adults, but not in adolescents, was affected by previous handling ( Ristuccia et al., 2007 ). The results of the present study suggest that shipping status may alter the effects induced by some, but not all, drugs in adolescent rats. Further, when present, between-status differences tended to be quantitative rather than qualitative. Although adolescents may be far more resilient than might be expected when faced with environmental challenges such as those that might be encountered during shipping, these results suggest that this variable bears consideration in designing experiments and in interpreting results of studies which examine pharmacological effects of different drug classes in adolescent rodents.  3. Discussion The overall goal of this descriptive study was to determine the degree to which the pharmacological effects of two antipsychotics (haloperidol and clozapine) and a cannabinoid agonist ?9-THC differed in adolescent rats of both sexes that were bred in-house versus shipped from a commercial breeder shortly after weaning. Informal observation of the rats did not reveal any overt differences in their behavior in the home cages or in their physical characteristics, with the exception that the shipped male rats in the antipsychotic experiment were quite a bit smaller than the males in this experiment that were bred in-house despite identical ages. This difference was present before the first antipsychotic injection and persisted throughout the dosing period. A ready explanation of this weight difference is not apparent. Although body weight may vary across litters even with active attempts at control ( Peeling and Looker, 1987 ), the difference reported here is unlikely to be related to a specific litter effect since the number of rats affected ( n = 21) would preclude all of them from being in the same litter. Shipping stress may also affect body weight and other physiological parameters in adult rodents ( Bean-Knudsen and Wagner, 1987 ; Landi et al., 1982 ). Shipping status per se cannot account entirely for the differences in weight observed here, as neither male rats in the ?9-THC experiment nor female rats in either experiment showed similar differences; however, the possibility that an unidentified stressor that occurred during the shipping of these particular rats cannot be eliminated. Finally, litter size and maternal factors (e.g., weight, age, number of previous litters) may also contribute to pup weights ( Rodel et al., 2007 ) and were not controlled in shipped rats. 3.1. Antipsychotic effects Haloperidol is a typical antipsychotic that has high probability of producing extrapyramidal motor side effects in adult humans, particularly at higher doses, whereas clozapine is an atypical antipsychotic that does not usually produce these effects. In adult male rodents, typical and atypical antipsychotics suppress motor activity and typical antipsychotics also reliably induce catalepsy ( Bardin et al., 2006 ; Simon et al., 2000 ; Wiley and Martin, 2003 ). The effects of atypical antipsychotics on catalepsy are inconsistent across procedures and labs ( Hoffman and Donovan, 1995 ; Nowakowska et al., 2006 ; Wiley and Martin, 2003 ). Our results here show that the 0.3 mg/kg dose of haloperidol suppressed activity in all groups of rats. In contrast, clozapine at doses up to 30 mg/kg produced only transient effects on locomotion over the dosing period. Both haloperidol and clozapine significantly increased bar time in shipped and bred rats of both sexes, although the cataleptic effects of clozapine were less pronounced and less persistent over repeated dosing. Shipping status did not significantly alter the dose–effect function for the cataleptic effects of haloperidol in either sex nor did it affect the overall pattern of sensitization to the initial effects that occurred with repeated dosing. Status-based differences in clozapine-induced increases in bar time were also not observed for female adolescent rats. Further, although shipped male adolescent rats exhibited less overall clozapine-induced cataleptic behavior than did bred male adolescent rats at all three assessment times, the magnitude of these differences was small and not consistent across dose, day or assessment time. In contrast, we have observed age differences in the efficacy of 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol and 10 mg/kg clozapine for producing catalepsy, with adult rats of both sexes exhibiting greater overall haloperidol-induced cataleptic response than (shipped) adolescent rats particularly after acute administration ( Wiley and Evans, 2008 ). On the other hand, female adults were less sensitive to the cataleptic effects of clozapine than were female adolescents or male rats of either age. Haloperidol’s cataleptic effects occurred at only a single dose and were similar across shipping status. Its effects on locomotor activity, however, differed in shipped versus bred rats and this difference was dose- and sex-dependent. In shipped rats of both sexes, haloperidol produced a biphasic effect, with increased activity at 0.03 mg/kg and decreased activity at 0.3 mg/kg. In female (but not male) adolescent rats that were bred in-house, haloperidol produced only decreased activity at the 0.3 mg/kg dose and minimal variation from saline levels at other doses. One possible factor that may have contributed to observation of status differences in the effects of haloperidol on locomotor activity, but not on catalepsy, is the nature of the dependent measures. For example, catalepsy and other similar measures have low baseline occurrence. Consequently, drug-induced changes are almost always unidirectional (i.e., increases in occurrence). Under these circumstances, any effect of shipping status would be expressed as a difference in response magnitude. In contrast, locomotor activity is a bidirectional variable. Consequently, status differences in drug effects on activity may be reflected as changes in magnitude and/or direction of the effect, which may result in greater opportunity for detection. 3.2. ?<sup>9</sup>-THC effects In Experiment 2, we investigated the effects of ?9-THC in male and female adolescent rats that were shipped or bred in-house. Despite the fact that rats of both sexes were more similar in weight across status in this experiment than in Experiment 1, baseline levels of activity were significantly lower for both male and female rats bred in-house than for shipped rats (and were also visibly lower than those observed in rats in Experiment 1). Given that each rat in the vehicle group for each sex was from a different litter (hence, low activity was not the result of a litter effect), this observation is surprising, particularly since rats bred in-house for Experiment 1 did not show a similar suppression of activity. Level of spontaneous motor activity in a novel environment (low vs. high responders) has been correlated with a number of behavioral, maternal and neurochemical variables indicative of emotionality ( Antoniou et al., 2008 ; Clinton et al., 2007 ; Mallo et al., 2007 ) and has been used to predict subsequent responsiveness to abused drugs such as opioids and cocaine ( Kalinichev et al., 2004 ; Stoffel and Cunningham, 2008 ). In studies with psychomotor stimulants, for example, low exploratory activity has been associated with less increase in activity following stimulant administration ( Hooks et al., 1991a , b ). A similar effect was observed here with ?9-THC, in that rats of both sexes that were bred in-house exhibited a flattened dose–effect function following acute ?9-THC injection. These results are in contrast not only with those seen in the shipped adolescent rats in this experiment, but also with those typically observed in adult rodents exposed to ?9-THC or other cannabinoids in numerous previous studies ( Bass and Martin, 2000 ; Compton et al., 1990 ; Fan et al., 1994 ). Of note, the adult rodents in these latter studies were shipped from commercial breeders rather than bred in-house. Distinguishing between the contributory influence of differences in stringency of control procedures versus difference in baseline activity to reduction in responsiveness to ?9-THC in the present study is difficult. Interestingly, however, ?9-THC dose-dependently produced catalepsy and antinociception and decreased temperature in the same-bred rats here in which it did not affect activity. These results suggest that low initial activity levels were predictive of drug response only in the locomotor assay and not in all procedures, suggesting task selectivity in the predictive power of baseline activity level in determination of responsiveness to drugs of abuse. [On the other hand, degree of novelty, which has been shown to be related to differentiation of low and high responders ( Bevins and Peterson, 2004 ), was modest in the ?9-THC experiment reported here, leaving open the possibility that higher levels of novelty might produce different results.] Status-related differences in acute sensitivity to the antinociceptive, hypothermic and cataleptic effects of ?9-THC were sex-dependent. In females, ?9-THC dose–effect curves differed across status for only one of the three measures. Whereas maximal ?9-THC-induced antinociception occurred at lower doses in bred female adolescent rats than in shipped female rats, the acute dose– effect curves for hypothermia and catalepsy were statistically indistinguishable. In contrast, shipped male rats were consistently more sensitive to ?9-THC’s pharmacological effects than were bred male rats. This greater sensitivity was indicated by lower threshold doses for producing antinociception and catalepsy and by a significant downward shift in the dose–effect curve for hypothermia. When administered repeatedly to adult rodents, cannabinoids characteristically produce profound tolerance in a variety of in vivo procedures ( Gonzalez et al., 2005 ; Lichtman and Martin, 2005 ). Consistent with these previous findings, complete tolerance to the effects of ?9-THC on temperature and in the tail flick and bar tests occurred here, as hypothermia, antinociception and catalepsy were not observed in any of the groups of rats following repeated dosing. Tolerance to ?9-THC’s effects on motor activity also occurred in shipped rats of both sexes; however, there was no change in activity in the bred rats, probably due to a floor effect created by the low baseline activity and lack of dose-responsiveness to ?9-THC. 3.3. Caveats Several caveats apply to both experiments. First, the aim of this study was to determine the pharmacological effects of antipsychotics and ?9-THC in rats that were obtained via different methods (i.e., shipped vs. bred in-house). Because we wanted to mimic the typical practice of obtaining rats from only one or the other source, only factors that were present after shipping or weaning were held constant or actively controlled, with the exception that each experiment included a maximum of one male and one female rat from a litter born in-house. For example, all rats were housed in same-sexed pairs after arrival (or weaning), apparatus and experimental parameters were identical across shipping status, and assignment to drug dose was randomized within each group. Pre-shipping factors (e.g., litter, shipping conditions) were uncontrolled, as they are for all shipped rats. Second, this study was descriptive. Because of the number of uncontrolled factors, mechanistic determination of the differences that were observed is impossible (and was not our goal for this initial set of experiments). Rather, our goal here was to determine whether the pharmacological effects of selected compounds differed in rats obtained through two distinct procurement methods that have been commonly used in developmental pharmacology studies with adolescent rats. Third, differences in some effects may have been obscured due to the steepness of the dose–effect curves and the resulting possibility of floor or ceiling effects. Fourth, age at testing and number of days of repeated drug exposure co-varied. This confound complicates determination of whether repeated exposure differentially affects shipped versus bred adolescent rats. Finally, conclusions based on these results may not apply to other pharmacological effects produced by the test drugs, including (for example) their effects on operant responding. Similarly, the findings here may not be predictive of the effects of shipping status on rats of all ages or on the effects of other drugs or drug classes on body temperature, antinociception or motor behavior. 3.4. Summary and conclusions Despite these issues, several consistent observations are notable. First, similarities in the pharmacological effects of antipsychotics and ?9-THC across shipping status were prevalent. With the exception of the non-responsiveness of bred rats to the typically observed ?9-THC-induced suppression of activity, each test drug produced a profile of effects that was characteristic of its pharmacological class (based upon previous studies in adult rodents). Between-status differences, when present, were reflected in subtle alterations in efficacy that were most evident with repeated dosing (i.e., quantitative rather than qualitative differences). Further, some of these differences tended to be transitory over the 10-day dosing period. Nevertheless, there were some significant differences. As noted previously, the most prominent between-status difference in the effects produced by the two antipsychotics was greater variability in data from shipped rats. This finding, which occurred in both sexes, was not surprising since shipping may introduce several sources of uncontrolled variance that are not present for rats bred in-house, including potential litter effects and stress from the shipping process. On the other hand, the most prominent between-status difference in data from the ?9-THC experiment was the dramatically lower baseline activity in rats of both sexes that were bred in-house. Greater variability in the data from shipped rats was not noticeable, as it was in haloperidol-treated rats, perhaps partially due to differences in the experimental protocol (e.g., daily testing with haloperidol versus pre- and post-repeated dosing tests with ?9-THC resulted in fewer measurements of ?9-THC’s effects). These results suggest that careful attention to issues related to rodent procurement during adolescence is warranted and may help to explain divergent findings in different labs. They also suggest that in-house breeding, and the associated control of litter effects, may not dramatically alter results as compared to those obtained from shipped rats for some drug classes or assays (e.g., measures of hypothermia, antinociception and catalepsy in the ?9-THC experiment). This point was highlighted in a recent study that examined the effects of selected drugs from several classes in a battery of pharmacological assays in juvenile and adult rats ( Himmel, 2008 ). Age differences in this study resembled between status differences in the present study, in that they tended to be quantitative rather than qualitative and were dependent upon drug class as well as the specific experimental measure. While vulnerability of the adolescent brain to environmental influences, including substance abuse, has been the emphasis of much recent research ( Adriani and Laviola, 2004 ; Crews et al., 2007 ), other research has suggested that adolescents may be less sensitive to environmental variation. For example, Ristuccia and colleagues have reported that ethanol-induced hypothermia in adults, but not in adolescents, was affected by previous handling ( Ristuccia et al., 2007 ). The results of the present study suggest that shipping status may alter the effects induced by some, but not all, drugs in adolescent rats. Further, when present, between-status differences tended to be quantitative rather than qualitative. Although adolescents may be far more resilient than might be expected when faced with environmental challenges such as those that might be encountered during shipping, these results suggest that this variable bears consideration in designing experiments and in interpreting results of studies which examine pharmacological effects of different drug classes in adolescent rodents.  3.1. Antipsychotic effects Haloperidol is a typical antipsychotic that has high probability of producing extrapyramidal motor side effects in adult humans, particularly at higher doses, whereas clozapine is an atypical antipsychotic that does not usually produce these effects. In adult male rodents, typical and atypical antipsychotics suppress motor activity and typical antipsychotics also reliably induce catalepsy ( Bardin et al., 2006 ; Simon et al., 2000 ; Wiley and Martin, 2003 ). The effects of atypical antipsychotics on catalepsy are inconsistent across procedures and labs ( Hoffman and Donovan, 1995 ; Nowakowska et al., 2006 ; Wiley and Martin, 2003 ). Our results here show that the 0.3 mg/kg dose of haloperidol suppressed activity in all groups of rats. In contrast, clozapine at doses up to 30 mg/kg produced only transient effects on locomotion over the dosing period. Both haloperidol and clozapine significantly increased bar time in shipped and bred rats of both sexes, although the cataleptic effects of clozapine were less pronounced and less persistent over repeated dosing. Shipping status did not significantly alter the dose–effect function for the cataleptic effects of haloperidol in either sex nor did it affect the overall pattern of sensitization to the initial effects that occurred with repeated dosing. Status-based differences in clozapine-induced increases in bar time were also not observed for female adolescent rats. Further, although shipped male adolescent rats exhibited less overall clozapine-induced cataleptic behavior than did bred male adolescent rats at all three assessment times, the magnitude of these differences was small and not consistent across dose, day or assessment time. In contrast, we have observed age differences in the efficacy of 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol and 10 mg/kg clozapine for producing catalepsy, with adult rats of both sexes exhibiting greater overall haloperidol-induced cataleptic response than (shipped) adolescent rats particularly after acute administration ( Wiley and Evans, 2008 ). On the other hand, female adults were less sensitive to the cataleptic effects of clozapine than were female adolescents or male rats of either age. Haloperidol’s cataleptic effects occurred at only a single dose and were similar across shipping status. Its effects on locomotor activity, however, differed in shipped versus bred rats and this difference was dose- and sex-dependent. In shipped rats of both sexes, haloperidol produced a biphasic effect, with increased activity at 0.03 mg/kg and decreased activity at 0.3 mg/kg. In female (but not male) adolescent rats that were bred in-house, haloperidol produced only decreased activity at the 0.3 mg/kg dose and minimal variation from saline levels at other doses. One possible factor that may have contributed to observation of status differences in the effects of haloperidol on locomotor activity, but not on catalepsy, is the nature of the dependent measures. For example, catalepsy and other similar measures have low baseline occurrence. Consequently, drug-induced changes are almost always unidirectional (i.e., increases in occurrence). Under these circumstances, any effect of shipping status would be expressed as a difference in response magnitude. In contrast, locomotor activity is a bidirectional variable. Consequently, status differences in drug effects on activity may be reflected as changes in magnitude and/or direction of the effect, which may result in greater opportunity for detection.  3.1. Antipsychotic effects Haloperidol is a typical antipsychotic that has high probability of producing extrapyramidal motor side effects in adult humans, particularly at higher doses, whereas clozapine is an atypical antipsychotic that does not usually produce these effects. In adult male rodents, typical and atypical antipsychotics suppress motor activity and typical antipsychotics also reliably induce catalepsy ( Bardin et al., 2006 ; Simon et al., 2000 ; Wiley and Martin, 2003 ). The effects of atypical antipsychotics on catalepsy are inconsistent across procedures and labs ( Hoffman and Donovan, 1995 ; Nowakowska et al., 2006 ; Wiley and Martin, 2003 ). Our results here show that the 0.3 mg/kg dose of haloperidol suppressed activity in all groups of rats. In contrast, clozapine at doses up to 30 mg/kg produced only transient effects on locomotion over the dosing period. Both haloperidol and clozapine significantly increased bar time in shipped and bred rats of both sexes, although the cataleptic effects of clozapine were less pronounced and less persistent over repeated dosing. Shipping status did not significantly alter the dose–effect function for the cataleptic effects of haloperidol in either sex nor did it affect the overall pattern of sensitization to the initial effects that occurred with repeated dosing. Status-based differences in clozapine-induced increases in bar time were also not observed for female adolescent rats. Further, although shipped male adolescent rats exhibited less overall clozapine-induced cataleptic behavior than did bred male adolescent rats at all three assessment times, the magnitude of these differences was small and not consistent across dose, day or assessment time. In contrast, we have observed age differences in the efficacy of 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol and 10 mg/kg clozapine for producing catalepsy, with adult rats of both sexes exhibiting greater overall haloperidol-induced cataleptic response than (shipped) adolescent rats particularly after acute administration ( Wiley and Evans, 2008 ). On the other hand, female adults were less sensitive to the cataleptic effects of clozapine than were female adolescents or male rats of either age. Haloperidol’s cataleptic effects occurred at only a single dose and were similar across shipping status. Its effects on locomotor activity, however, differed in shipped versus bred rats and this difference was dose- and sex-dependent. In shipped rats of both sexes, haloperidol produced a biphasic effect, with increased activity at 0.03 mg/kg and decreased activity at 0.3 mg/kg. In female (but not male) adolescent rats that were bred in-house, haloperidol produced only decreased activity at the 0.3 mg/kg dose and minimal variation from saline levels at other doses. One possible factor that may have contributed to observation of status differences in the effects of haloperidol on locomotor activity, but not on catalepsy, is the nature of the dependent measures. For example, catalepsy and other similar measures have low baseline occurrence. Consequently, drug-induced changes are almost always unidirectional (i.e., increases in occurrence). Under these circumstances, any effect of shipping status would be expressed as a difference in response magnitude. In contrast, locomotor activity is a bidirectional variable. Consequently, status differences in drug effects on activity may be reflected as changes in magnitude and/or direction of the effect, which may result in greater opportunity for detection.  3.2. ?<sup>9</sup>-THC effects In Experiment 2, we investigated the effects of ?9-THC in male and female adolescent rats that were shipped or bred in-house. Despite the fact that rats of both sexes were more similar in weight across status in this experiment than in Experiment 1, baseline levels of activity were significantly lower for both male and female rats bred in-house than for shipped rats (and were also visibly lower than those observed in rats in Experiment 1). Given that each rat in the vehicle group for each sex was from a different litter (hence, low activity was not the result of a litter effect), this observation is surprising, particularly since rats bred in-house for Experiment 1 did not show a similar suppression of activity. Level of spontaneous motor activity in a novel environment (low vs. high responders) has been correlated with a number of behavioral, maternal and neurochemical variables indicative of emotionality ( Antoniou et al., 2008 ; Clinton et al., 2007 ; Mallo et al., 2007 ) and has been used to predict subsequent responsiveness to abused drugs such as opioids and cocaine ( Kalinichev et al., 2004 ; Stoffel and Cunningham, 2008 ). In studies with psychomotor stimulants, for example, low exploratory activity has been associated with less increase in activity following stimulant administration ( Hooks et al., 1991a , b ). A similar effect was observed here with ?9-THC, in that rats of both sexes that were bred in-house exhibited a flattened dose–effect function following acute ?9-THC injection. These results are in contrast not only with those seen in the shipped adolescent rats in this experiment, but also with those typically observed in adult rodents exposed to ?9-THC or other cannabinoids in numerous previous studies ( Bass and Martin, 2000 ; Compton et al., 1990 ; Fan et al., 1994 ). Of note, the adult rodents in these latter studies were shipped from commercial breeders rather than bred in-house. Distinguishing between the contributory influence of differences in stringency of control procedures versus difference in baseline activity to reduction in responsiveness to ?9-THC in the present study is difficult. Interestingly, however, ?9-THC dose-dependently produced catalepsy and antinociception and decreased temperature in the same-bred rats here in which it did not affect activity. These results suggest that low initial activity levels were predictive of drug response only in the locomotor assay and not in all procedures, suggesting task selectivity in the predictive power of baseline activity level in determination of responsiveness to drugs of abuse. [On the other hand, degree of novelty, which has been shown to be related to differentiation of low and high responders ( Bevins and Peterson, 2004 ), was modest in the ?9-THC experiment reported here, leaving open the possibility that higher levels of novelty might produce different results.] Status-related differences in acute sensitivity to the antinociceptive, hypothermic and cataleptic effects of ?9-THC were sex-dependent. In females, ?9-THC dose–effect curves differed across status for only one of the three measures. Whereas maximal ?9-THC-induced antinociception occurred at lower doses in bred female adolescent rats than in shipped female rats, the acute dose– effect curves for hypothermia and catalepsy were statistically indistinguishable. In contrast, shipped male rats were consistently more sensitive to ?9-THC’s pharmacological effects than were bred male rats. This greater sensitivity was indicated by lower threshold doses for producing antinociception and catalepsy and by a significant downward shift in the dose–effect curve for hypothermia. When administered repeatedly to adult rodents, cannabinoids characteristically produce profound tolerance in a variety of in vivo procedures ( Gonzalez et al., 2005 ; Lichtman and Martin, 2005 ). Consistent with these previous findings, complete tolerance to the effects of ?9-THC on temperature and in the tail flick and bar tests occurred here, as hypothermia, antinociception and catalepsy were not observed in any of the groups of rats following repeated dosing. Tolerance to ?9-THC’s effects on motor activity also occurred in shipped rats of both sexes; however, there was no change in activity in the bred rats, probably due to a floor effect created by the low baseline activity and lack of dose-responsiveness to ?9-THC.  3.2. ?<sup>9</sup>-THC effects In Experiment 2, we investigated the effects of ?9-THC in male and female adolescent rats that were shipped or bred in-house. Despite the fact that rats of both sexes were more similar in weight across status in this experiment than in Experiment 1, baseline levels of activity were significantly lower for both male and female rats bred in-house than for shipped rats (and were also visibly lower than those observed in rats in Experiment 1). Given that each rat in the vehicle group for each sex was from a different litter (hence, low activity was not the result of a litter effect), this observation is surprising, particularly since rats bred in-house for Experiment 1 did not show a similar suppression of activity. Level of spontaneous motor activity in a novel environment (low vs. high responders) has been correlated with a number of behavioral, maternal and neurochemical variables indicative of emotionality ( Antoniou et al., 2008 ; Clinton et al., 2007 ; Mallo et al., 2007 ) and has been used to predict subsequent responsiveness to abused drugs such as opioids and cocaine ( Kalinichev et al., 2004 ; Stoffel and Cunningham, 2008 ). In studies with psychomotor stimulants, for example, low exploratory activity has been associated with less increase in activity following stimulant administration ( Hooks et al., 1991a , b ). A similar effect was observed here with ?9-THC, in that rats of both sexes that were bred in-house exhibited a flattened dose–effect function following acute ?9-THC injection. These results are in contrast not only with those seen in the shipped adolescent rats in this experiment, but also with those typically observed in adult rodents exposed to ?9-THC or other cannabinoids in numerous previous studies ( Bass and Martin, 2000 ; Compton et al., 1990 ; Fan et al., 1994 ). Of note, the adult rodents in these latter studies were shipped from commercial breeders rather than bred in-house. Distinguishing between the contributory influence of differences in stringency of control procedures versus difference in baseline activity to reduction in responsiveness to ?9-THC in the present study is difficult. Interestingly, however, ?9-THC dose-dependently produced catalepsy and antinociception and decreased temperature in the same-bred rats here in which it did not affect activity. These results suggest that low initial activity levels were predictive of drug response only in the locomotor assay and not in all procedures, suggesting task selectivity in the predictive power of baseline activity level in determination of responsiveness to drugs of abuse. [On the other hand, degree of novelty, which has been shown to be related to differentiation of low and high responders ( Bevins and Peterson, 2004 ), was modest in the ?9-THC experiment reported here, leaving open the possibility that higher levels of novelty might produce different results.] Status-related differences in acute sensitivity to the antinociceptive, hypothermic and cataleptic effects of ?9-THC were sex-dependent. In females, ?9-THC dose–effect curves differed across status for only one of the three measures. Whereas maximal ?9-THC-induced antinociception occurred at lower doses in bred female adolescent rats than in shipped female rats, the acute dose– effect curves for hypothermia and catalepsy were statistically indistinguishable. In contrast, shipped male rats were consistently more sensitive to ?9-THC’s pharmacological effects than were bred male rats. This greater sensitivity was indicated by lower threshold doses for producing antinociception and catalepsy and by a significant downward shift in the dose–effect curve for hypothermia. When administered repeatedly to adult rodents, cannabinoids characteristically produce profound tolerance in a variety of in vivo procedures ( Gonzalez et al., 2005 ; Lichtman and Martin, 2005 ). Consistent with these previous findings, complete tolerance to the effects of ?9-THC on temperature and in the tail flick and bar tests occurred here, as hypothermia, antinociception and catalepsy were not observed in any of the groups of rats following repeated dosing. Tolerance to ?9-THC’s effects on motor activity also occurred in shipped rats of both sexes; however, there was no change in activity in the bred rats, probably due to a floor effect created by the low baseline activity and lack of dose-responsiveness to ?9-THC.  3.3. Caveats Several caveats apply to both experiments. First, the aim of this study was to determine the pharmacological effects of antipsychotics and ?9-THC in rats that were obtained via different methods (i.e., shipped vs. bred in-house). Because we wanted to mimic the typical practice of obtaining rats from only one or the other source, only factors that were present after shipping or weaning were held constant or actively controlled, with the exception that each experiment included a maximum of one male and one female rat from a litter born in-house. For example, all rats were housed in same-sexed pairs after arrival (or weaning), apparatus and experimental parameters were identical across shipping status, and assignment to drug dose was randomized within each group. Pre-shipping factors (e.g., litter, shipping conditions) were uncontrolled, as they are for all shipped rats. Second, this study was descriptive. Because of the number of uncontrolled factors, mechanistic determination of the differences that were observed is impossible (and was not our goal for this initial set of experiments). Rather, our goal here was to determine whether the pharmacological effects of selected compounds differed in rats obtained through two distinct procurement methods that have been commonly used in developmental pharmacology studies with adolescent rats. Third, differences in some effects may have been obscured due to the steepness of the dose–effect curves and the resulting possibility of floor or ceiling effects. Fourth, age at testing and number of days of repeated drug exposure co-varied. This confound complicates determination of whether repeated exposure differentially affects shipped versus bred adolescent rats. Finally, conclusions based on these results may not apply to other pharmacological effects produced by the test drugs, including (for example) their effects on operant responding. Similarly, the findings here may not be predictive of the effects of shipping status on rats of all ages or on the effects of other drugs or drug classes on body temperature, antinociception or motor behavior.  3.3. Caveats Several caveats apply to both experiments. First, the aim of this study was to determine the pharmacological effects of antipsychotics and ?9-THC in rats that were obtained via different methods (i.e., shipped vs. bred in-house). Because we wanted to mimic the typical practice of obtaining rats from only one or the other source, only factors that were present after shipping or weaning were held constant or actively controlled, with the exception that each experiment included a maximum of one male and one female rat from a litter born in-house. For example, all rats were housed in same-sexed pairs after arrival (or weaning), apparatus and experimental parameters were identical across shipping status, and assignment to drug dose was randomized within each group. Pre-shipping factors (e.g., litter, shipping conditions) were uncontrolled, as they are for all shipped rats. Second, this study was descriptive. Because of the number of uncontrolled factors, mechanistic determination of the differences that were observed is impossible (and was not our goal for this initial set of experiments). Rather, our goal here was to determine whether the pharmacological effects of selected compounds differed in rats obtained through two distinct procurement methods that have been commonly used in developmental pharmacology studies with adolescent rats. Third, differences in some effects may have been obscured due to the steepness of the dose–effect curves and the resulting possibility of floor or ceiling effects. Fourth, age at testing and number of days of repeated drug exposure co-varied. This confound complicates determination of whether repeated exposure differentially affects shipped versus bred adolescent rats. Finally, conclusions based on these results may not apply to other pharmacological effects produced by the test drugs, including (for example) their effects on operant responding. Similarly, the findings here may not be predictive of the effects of shipping status on rats of all ages or on the effects of other drugs or drug classes on body temperature, antinociception or motor behavior.  3.4. Summary and conclusions Despite these issues, several consistent observations are notable. First, similarities in the pharmacological effects of antipsychotics and ?9-THC across shipping status were prevalent. With the exception of the non-responsiveness of bred rats to the typically observed ?9-THC-induced suppression of activity, each test drug produced a profile of effects that was characteristic of its pharmacological class (based upon previous studies in adult rodents). Between-status differences, when present, were reflected in subtle alterations in efficacy that were most evident with repeated dosing (i.e., quantitative rather than qualitative differences). Further, some of these differences tended to be transitory over the 10-day dosing period. Nevertheless, there were some significant differences. As noted previously, the most prominent between-status difference in the effects produced by the two antipsychotics was greater variability in data from shipped rats. This finding, which occurred in both sexes, was not surprising since shipping may introduce several sources of uncontrolled variance that are not present for rats bred in-house, including potential litter effects and stress from the shipping process. On the other hand, the most prominent between-status difference in data from the ?9-THC experiment was the dramatically lower baseline activity in rats of both sexes that were bred in-house. Greater variability in the data from shipped rats was not noticeable, as it was in haloperidol-treated rats, perhaps partially due to differences in the experimental protocol (e.g., daily testing with haloperidol versus pre- and post-repeated dosing tests with ?9-THC resulted in fewer measurements of ?9-THC’s effects). These results suggest that careful attention to issues related to rodent procurement during adolescence is warranted and may help to explain divergent findings in different labs. They also suggest that in-house breeding, and the associated control of litter effects, may not dramatically alter results as compared to those obtained from shipped rats for some drug classes or assays (e.g., measures of hypothermia, antinociception and catalepsy in the ?9-THC experiment). This point was highlighted in a recent study that examined the effects of selected drugs from several classes in a battery of pharmacological assays in juvenile and adult rats ( Himmel, 2008 ). Age differences in this study resembled between status differences in the present study, in that they tended to be quantitative rather than qualitative and were dependent upon drug class as well as the specific experimental measure. While vulnerability of the adolescent brain to environmental influences, including substance abuse, has been the emphasis of much recent research ( Adriani and Laviola, 2004 ; Crews et al., 2007 ), other research has suggested that adolescents may be less sensitive to environmental variation. For example, Ristuccia and colleagues have reported that ethanol-induced hypothermia in adults, but not in adolescents, was affected by previous handling ( Ristuccia et al., 2007 ). The results of the present study suggest that shipping status may alter the effects induced by some, but not all, drugs in adolescent rats. Further, when present, between-status differences tended to be quantitative rather than qualitative. Although adolescents may be far more resilient than might be expected when faced with environmental challenges such as those that might be encountered during shipping, these results suggest that this variable bears consideration in designing experiments and in interpreting results of studies which examine pharmacological effects of different drug classes in adolescent rodents.  3.4. Summary and conclusions Despite these issues, several consistent observations are notable. First, similarities in the pharmacological effects of antipsychotics and ?9-THC across shipping status were prevalent. With the exception of the non-responsiveness of bred rats to the typically observed ?9-THC-induced suppression of activity, each test drug produced a profile of effects that was characteristic of its pharmacological class (based upon previous studies in adult rodents). Between-status differences, when present, were reflected in subtle alterations in efficacy that were most evident with repeated dosing (i.e., quantitative rather than qualitative differences). Further, some of these differences tended to be transitory over the 10-day dosing period. Nevertheless, there were some significant differences. As noted previously, the most prominent between-status difference in the effects produced by the two antipsychotics was greater variability in data from shipped rats. This finding, which occurred in both sexes, was not surprising since shipping may introduce several sources of uncontrolled variance that are not present for rats bred in-house, including potential litter effects and stress from the shipping process. On the other hand, the most prominent between-status difference in data from the ?9-THC experiment was the dramatically lower baseline activity in rats of both sexes that were bred in-house. Greater variability in the data from shipped rats was not noticeable, as it was in haloperidol-treated rats, perhaps partially due to differences in the experimental protocol (e.g., daily testing with haloperidol versus pre- and post-repeated dosing tests with ?9-THC resulted in fewer measurements of ?9-THC’s effects). These results suggest that careful attention to issues related to rodent procurement during adolescence is warranted and may help to explain divergent findings in different labs. They also suggest that in-house breeding, and the associated control of litter effects, may not dramatically alter results as compared to those obtained from shipped rats for some drug classes or assays (e.g., measures of hypothermia, antinociception and catalepsy in the ?9-THC experiment). This point was highlighted in a recent study that examined the effects of selected drugs from several classes in a battery of pharmacological assays in juvenile and adult rats ( Himmel, 2008 ). Age differences in this study resembled between status differences in the present study, in that they tended to be quantitative rather than qualitative and were dependent upon drug class as well as the specific experimental measure. While vulnerability of the adolescent brain to environmental influences, including substance abuse, has been the emphasis of much recent research ( Adriani and Laviola, 2004 ; Crews et al., 2007 ), other research has suggested that adolescents may be less sensitive to environmental variation. For example, Ristuccia and colleagues have reported that ethanol-induced hypothermia in adults, but not in adolescents, was affected by previous handling ( Ristuccia et al., 2007 ). The results of the present study suggest that shipping status may alter the effects induced by some, but not all, drugs in adolescent rats. Further, when present, between-status differences tended to be quantitative rather than qualitative. Although adolescents may be far more resilient than might be expected when faced with environmental challenges such as those that might be encountered during shipping, these results suggest that this variable bears consideration in designing experiments and in interpreting results of studies which examine pharmacological effects of different drug classes in adolescent rodents.  Figures Fig. 1 Effects of haloperidol on catalepsy at 30, 45 or 60 min post-injection (1st, 2nd and 3rd row panels, respectively) in male (left panels) and female (right panels) as a function of age (PN30–PN39) in adolescent rats that were shipped from breeder (filled symbols) or bred and born in-house (open symbols). Catalepsy was measured as the percentage of time during 5-min session spent with forepaws on an elevated bar. Each point represents the mean (±S.E.M.) value for 5–7 adolescent rats. Status × day ANOVAs were performed on the effects of 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol only. Status main effects and status × day interactions were not significant at any assessment time. + Indicates significant main effect of day (vs. PN30). p < 0.05 for all significant differences. Fig. 2 Effects of haloperidol on locomotor activity (measured as number of photocell beam breaks during a 15-min session) as a function of age (PN30–PN39) in male (top panels) and female (bottom panels) adolescent rats that were shipped from breeder (left panels) or bred and born in-house (right panels). Each point represents the mean (±S.E.M.) value for 5–7 adolescent rats. Three-way (status × dose × day) ANOVA was performed on data for each sex. # Indicates a significant status × dose interaction with post hoc determination of difference between shipped and bred rats in the effects of the specified haloperidol dose on locomotor activity. * Indicates a significant status × dose interaction with post hoc determination of difference in effect of haloperidol dose on activity (vs. saline) for rats of the same status (shipped or bred). $ Indicates significant main effect of haloperidol dose (vs. saline) without regard to shipping status. Circles around a PN day indicate a significant difference in the effects of haloperidol in shipped versus bred rats on that day (status × day interaction). p < 0.05 for all significant differences. Fig. 3 Effects of clozapine on catalepsy at 30, 45 or 60 min post-injection (1st, 2nd and 3rd row panels, respectively) and on locomotor activity at 65 min post-injection (bottom panels) as a function of age (PN30–PN39) in male adolescent rats that were shipped from breeder (left panels) or bred and born in-house (right panels). Catalepsy was measured as the percentage of time during 5-min session spent with forepaws on an elevated bar. Locomotor activity was measured as number of photocell beam breaks during a 15-min session. Each point represents the mean (±S.E.M.) value for 5–7 adolescent rats. At all three catalepsy assessment times, shipped rats showed less catalepsy than rats bred in-house (three-way ANOVA, main effect of status). $ Indicates significant main effect of clozapine dose (vs. saline) without regard to shipping status. p < 0.05 for all significant differences. Fig. 4 Effects of clozapine on catalepsy at 30, 45 or 60 min post-injection (1st, 2nd and 3rd row panels, respectively) and on locomotor activity at 65 min post-injection (bottom panels) as a function of age (PN30–PN39) in female adolescent rats that were shipped from breeder (left panels) or bred and born in-house (right panels). Catalepsy was measured as the percentage of time during 5-min session spent with forepaws on an elevated bar. Locomotor activity was measured as number of photocell beam breaks during a 15-min session. Each point represents the mean (±S.E.M.) value for 5–7 adolescent rats. $ Indicates significant, but transient difference, in locomotor activity between dose and saline groups at indicated day (two-way ANOVA, dose × day interaction). p < 0.05 for all significant differences. Fig. 5 Body weights (in g) of male and female adolescent rats (left and right panels, respectively) that were shipped or bred in-house. Top panels show weights of rats before acute dosing with 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol, 30 mg/kg clozapine or saline (filled bars) and after repeated dosing with indicated treatment (unfilled bars). Bottom panels show weights of rats in the groups that received 100 mg/kg ?9-THC or vehicle before (filled bars) and after repeated dosing ?9-THC (unfilled bars). Each point represents the mean (±S.E.M.) value for 5–7 rats. $ Indicates significant status × drug interaction (at specified PN day) with post hoc difference between weights of in-house bred male rats (vs. shipped rats) that received the same treatment. # Indicates main effect of status for female rats before treatment. * Indicates significant status × drug interaction and post hoc difference between weights in shipped male rats that were to receive vehicle as compared to those that were to receive THC. p < 0.05 for all significant differences. Fig. 6 Effects of ?9-THC on locomotor activity (top panels), antinociception (2nd row panels), body temperature (3rd row panels), and catalepsy-like behavior (bottom panels) in female and male adolescent rats (left and right panels, respectively) that were shipped from breeder (circles) or bred and born in-house (squares). Unfilled symbols show responses before sub-chronic dosing with ?9-THC and filled symbols show catalepsy after sub-chronic dosing ?9-THC. Each point represents the mean (±S.E.M.) value for 5–7 adolescent rats. A significant main effect of status on locomotor activity was noted for both sexes, with bred rats exhibiting less activity than shipped rats regardless of treatment condition. + Indicates a significant difference between shipped and bred rats in the effects of a specific dose of ?9-THC. # Indicates a significant difference between shipped and bred rats in the overall acute dose–effect function of ?9-THC. * Indicates that the specified dose of ?9-THC produced an effect (compared to respective vehicle) in rats of one status but not the other. p < 0.05 for all significant differences.  Figures Fig. 1 Effects of haloperidol on catalepsy at 30, 45 or 60 min post-injection (1st, 2nd and 3rd row panels, respectively) in male (left panels) and female (right panels) as a function of age (PN30–PN39) in adolescent rats that were shipped from breeder (filled symbols) or bred and born in-house (open symbols). Catalepsy was measured as the percentage of time during 5-min session spent with forepaws on an elevated bar. Each point represents the mean (±S.E.M.) value for 5–7 adolescent rats. Status × day ANOVAs were performed on the effects of 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol only. Status main effects and status × day interactions were not significant at any assessment time. + Indicates significant main effect of day (vs. PN30). p < 0.05 for all significant differences. Fig. 2 Effects of haloperidol on locomotor activity (measured as number of photocell beam breaks during a 15-min session) as a function of age (PN30–PN39) in male (top panels) and female (bottom panels) adolescent rats that were shipped from breeder (left panels) or bred and born in-house (right panels). Each point represents the mean (±S.E.M.) value for 5–7 adolescent rats. Three-way (status × dose × day) ANOVA was performed on data for each sex. # Indicates a significant status × dose interaction with post hoc determination of difference between shipped and bred rats in the effects of the specified haloperidol dose on locomotor activity. * Indicates a significant status × dose interaction with post hoc determination of difference in effect of haloperidol dose on activity (vs. saline) for rats of the same status (shipped or bred). $ Indicates significant main effect of haloperidol dose (vs. saline) without regard to shipping status. Circles around a PN day indicate a significant difference in the effects of haloperidol in shipped versus bred rats on that day (status × day interaction). p < 0.05 for all significant differences. Fig. 3 Effects of clozapine on catalepsy at 30, 45 or 60 min post-injection (1st, 2nd and 3rd row panels, respectively) and on locomotor activity at 65 min post-injection (bottom panels) as a function of age (PN30–PN39) in male adolescent rats that were shipped from breeder (left panels) or bred and born in-house (right panels). Catalepsy was measured as the percentage of time during 5-min session spent with forepaws on an elevated bar. Locomotor activity was measured as number of photocell beam breaks during a 15-min session. Each point represents the mean (±S.E.M.) value for 5–7 adolescent rats. At all three catalepsy assessment times, shipped rats showed less catalepsy than rats bred in-house (three-way ANOVA, main effect of status). $ Indicates significant main effect of clozapine dose (vs. saline) without regard to shipping status. p < 0.05 for all significant differences. Fig. 4 Effects of clozapine on catalepsy at 30, 45 or 60 min post-injection (1st, 2nd and 3rd row panels, respectively) and on locomotor activity at 65 min post-injection (bottom panels) as a function of age (PN30–PN39) in female adolescent rats that were shipped from breeder (left panels) or bred and born in-house (right panels). Catalepsy was measured as the percentage of time during 5-min session spent with forepaws on an elevated bar. Locomotor activity was measured as number of photocell beam breaks during a 15-min session. Each point represents the mean (±S.E.M.) value for 5–7 adolescent rats. $ Indicates significant, but transient difference, in locomotor activity between dose and saline groups at indicated day (two-way ANOVA, dose × day interaction). p < 0.05 for all significant differences. Fig. 5 Body weights (in g) of male and female adolescent rats (left and right panels, respectively) that were shipped or bred in-house. Top panels show weights of rats before acute dosing with 0.3 mg/kg haloperidol, 30 mg/kg clozapine or saline (filled bars) and after repeated dosing with indicated treatment (unfilled bars). Bottom panels show weights of rats in the groups that received 100 mg/kg ?9-THC or vehicle before (filled bars) and after repeated dosing ?9-THC (unfilled bars). Each point represents the mean (±S.E.M.) value for 5–7 rats. $ Indicates significant status × drug interaction (at specified PN day) with post hoc difference between weights of in-house bred male rats (vs. shipped rats) that received the same treatment. # Indicates main effect of status for female rats before treatment. * Indicates significant status × drug interaction and post hoc difference between weights in shipped male rats that were to receive vehicle as compared to those that were to receive THC. p < 0.05 for all significant differences. Fig. 6 Effects of ?9-THC on locomotor activity (top panels), antinociception (2nd row panels), body temperature (3rd row panels), and catalepsy-like behavior (bottom panels) in female and male adolescent rats (left and right panels, respectively) that were shipped from breeder (circles) or bred and born in-house (squares). Unfilled symbols show responses before sub-chronic dosing with ?9-THC and filled symbols show catalepsy after sub-chronic dosing ?9-THC. Each point represents the mean (±S.E.M.) value for 5–7 adolescent rats. A significant main effect of status on locomotor activity was noted for both sexes, with bred rats exhibiting less activity than shipped rats regardless of treatment condition. + Indicates a significant difference between shipped and bred rats in the effects of a specific dose of ?9-THC. # Indicates a significant difference between shipped and bred rats in the overall acute dose–effect function of ?9-THC. * Indicates that the specified dose of ?9-THC produced an effect (compared to respective vehicle) in rats of one status but not the other. p < 0.05 for all significant differences. 