Does the effectiveness of the ketogenic diet in different epilepsies yield insights into its mechanisms? Summary The ketogenic diet (KD) has been used successfully in a variety of epilepsy syndromes. This includes syndromes with multiple etiologies, including Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and infantile spasms; developmental syndromes of unknown etiology, such as Landau-Kleffner syndrome; and idiopathic epilepsies, such as myoclonic-astatic (Doose) epilepsy. It also includes syndromes where genetics play a major role, such as Dravet syndrome, tuberous sclerosis, and Rett syndrome. Study of the KD in humans and animals harboring various genetic mutations may yield insights into the diet’s mechanisms. Comparison of the diet’s effectiveness with other treatments in specific syndromes may be another useful tool for mechanistic studies. The diet’s utility in epilepsy syndromes of various etiologies and in some neurodegenerative disorders suggests it may have multiple mechanisms of action.  Conclusion The KD’s utility in a variety of different epilepsy syndromes and other diseases (discussed elsewhere) suggests that like many other neurotherapeutic agents, it may have multiple mechanisms of action, each of which may be more relevant to a specific disease state. For example, the diet induces the liver to generate ketone bodies, which probably serve as an alternative fuel source for children with certain blocks in metabolism such as GLUT-1 deficiency. Ketone bodies might serve a similar function in certain neurodegenerative disorders or in cancer ( Reger et al., 2004 ; Seyfried, this Supplement). Inconsistencies in studies attempting to correlate seizure protection with levels of ketone bodies suggest something other than ketone bodies may be involved in the KD’s beneficial effects in epilepsy ( Huttenlocher 1976 ; Ross et al., 1985 ; Thio et al., 2000 ). The diet’s utility in genetic syndromes and comparisons with medications with known mechanisms are two strategies that offer the possibility of further study of its anticonvulsant (and possibly disease-modifying) effects. Its utility in a variety of different epilepsies suggests that it might have multiple mechanisms of action. 