Molecular pathology of thyroid cancer: diagnostic and clinical implications There is now a reasonably good understanding of the key oncogenic events involved in the initiation and progression of thyroid cancer. Many of these are characteristic of certain tumor types, and their presence conveys diagnostic and prognostic information. It is not yet clear how this information will be applied to clinical practice. Based on preclinical evidence, mutations of genes encoding certain kinases may also predict response to specific tyrosine kinase inhibitors, although this has not yet been explored systematically in clinical trials.  CONCLUSION Use of molecular genetic information for preoperative diagnosis As some of the most prevalent thyroid oncogenes are found exclusively (i.e. BRAF , RET/PTC ) or with high frequency ( RAS , PAX8–PPAR? ) in malignant tumors, several groups have explored whether screening for mutations improves the diagnostic accuracy of cytopathology after fine-needle aspiration of thyroid nodules.( 101 – 106 ) Although molecular diagnostics is controversial in this setting,( 107 ) the preponderance of the evidence suggests that it could become a useful adjunct to traditional morphological cytopathology, at least in selected cases. Other approaches, such as immunohistochemical staining for proteins expressed preferentially in cancer (e.g. galactin 3), have also shown significant potential.( 108 , 109 ) Expression profiling with oligonucleotide microarrays can discriminate between different tumor types with great accuracy by taking advantage of the combinatorial power of globally analyzing patterns of gene expression. Subsets of genes with the greatest discriminatory power can then be selected for development of diagnostic tools. This has been applied to thyroid nodule cytopathology by several groups, with promising results.( 110 – 115 ) At this point it is not clear which of these different approaches, if any, will be applied in clinical practice. In general, DNA-based assays will likely be more robust, but any of these methods could theoretically be optimized and used with some success. Use of molecular genetic information for therapeutic decisions We alluded to the fact that important prognostic information can be obtained from knowing the specific genetic mutations associated with thyroid cancer. The role of BRAF , in particular, is receiving considerable attention, but at this time we cannot provide firm recommendations on how this information should be used in practice. Similarly, several trials of multi-kinase inhibitors in advanced thyroid cancer have recently been reported.( 116 – 118 ) Based on information from other cancer types, where genetic information predicts the response to specific kinase inhibitors – e.g. EGFR and KRAS mutations as positive and negative predictors, respectively, of response to gefinitib or erlotinib in non-small-cell lung cancer( 119 ) – it is likely that this will also be the case in thyroid cancers, but the trials published so far were not designed to address these questions.( 120 )  Use of molecular genetic information for preoperative diagnosis As some of the most prevalent thyroid oncogenes are found exclusively (i.e. BRAF , RET/PTC ) or with high frequency ( RAS , PAX8–PPAR? ) in malignant tumors, several groups have explored whether screening for mutations improves the diagnostic accuracy of cytopathology after fine-needle aspiration of thyroid nodules.( 101 – 106 ) Although molecular diagnostics is controversial in this setting,( 107 ) the preponderance of the evidence suggests that it could become a useful adjunct to traditional morphological cytopathology, at least in selected cases. Other approaches, such as immunohistochemical staining for proteins expressed preferentially in cancer (e.g. galactin 3), have also shown significant potential.( 108 , 109 ) Expression profiling with oligonucleotide microarrays can discriminate between different tumor types with great accuracy by taking advantage of the combinatorial power of globally analyzing patterns of gene expression. Subsets of genes with the greatest discriminatory power can then be selected for development of diagnostic tools. This has been applied to thyroid nodule cytopathology by several groups, with promising results.( 110 – 115 ) At this point it is not clear which of these different approaches, if any, will be applied in clinical practice. In general, DNA-based assays will likely be more robust, but any of these methods could theoretically be optimized and used with some success.  Use of molecular genetic information for therapeutic decisions We alluded to the fact that important prognostic information can be obtained from knowing the specific genetic mutations associated with thyroid cancer. The role of BRAF , in particular, is receiving considerable attention, but at this time we cannot provide firm recommendations on how this information should be used in practice. Similarly, several trials of multi-kinase inhibitors in advanced thyroid cancer have recently been reported.( 116 – 118 ) Based on information from other cancer types, where genetic information predicts the response to specific kinase inhibitors – e.g. EGFR and KRAS mutations as positive and negative predictors, respectively, of response to gefinitib or erlotinib in non-small-cell lung cancer( 119 ) – it is likely that this will also be the case in thyroid cancers, but the trials published so far were not designed to address these questions.( 120 ) 