Age Differences in Dual Information-Processing Modes: Implications for Cancer Decision Making Age differences in affective/experiential and deliberative processes have important theoretical implications for cancer decision making as cancer is often a disease of older adulthood. We examine evidence for adult age differences in affective and deliberative information processes, review the sparse evidence about age differences in decision making and introduce how dual process theories and their findings might be applied to cancer decision making. Age-related declines in the efficiency of deliberative processes predict poorer-quality decisions as we age, particularly when decisions are unfamiliar and the information is numeric. However, age-related adaptive processes, including an increased focus on emotional goals and greater experience, can influence decision making and potentially offset age-related declines. A better understanding of the mechanisms that underlie cancer decision processes in our aging population should ultimately allow us to help older adults to better help themselves.  CONCLUSIONS In the present review we examined age differences in processes related to decision making that have been well studied in younger adults but little studied in older adults. We first reviewed evidence for age-related changes in information processes. The greater quantity of research about age changes in affective and deliberative information processes allows us to draw firmer conclusions than we can for age differences in decision making. Evidence of age-related declines in deliberative processes such as working memory and speed of processing is robust, but it does not provide a complete explanation of age differences in decision making. We also conclude that age differences in affective information processes are minimal but that a positivity effect is shown in memory by older adults when cognitive resources are adequate. More research is needed to clarify the interaction of cognitive resources with the role of affective information in processes important to decision making (e.g., memory, attention). Although for simplicity we have limited the present paper to considering relatively low-intensity affect, Labouvie-Vief 107 speculates that stronger-intensity affect and emotions will act more like a cognitive load on older adults when compared with their younger counterparts. The evidence base for this last hypothesis is not strong at this point, but may be critical for cancer decision making. Finally, mood disorders, such as depression, are relatively common in cancer patients 108 and are likely to influence information processing and, thus, decision making. 27 As a result, interventions for cancer decision making including pharmacologic (e.g., anti-depressants) and behavioral (e.g., therapy, exercise) strategies should be considered for patients who experience these states. In terms of decision making, robust evidence for aging-related declines in deliberative processes predict that older adults will be more likely to show some decision biases, particularly in unfamiliar or less-meaningful situations. Older adults will tend to process less information in decisions more slowly and will demonstrate worse judgments and decisions than younger adults when complex or changing rules must be learned. They will tend to understand numeric information less well. 44 , 109 These findings point to the need to simplify unfamiliar and numeric information important for the decisions of older adults. Clinicians should also expect to give older cancer patients more time to assimilate information and make decisions. Providing written summaries of key information, encouragement to take notes and to bring a partner to the treatment consultation will help the older cancer patient retain and use important information. Age-related adaptive processes, however, influence decision making in at least two ways. First, older adults focus relatively more than do younger adults on emotional content (and sometimes on positive content) in decisions. Decision aids based on highlighting affective meaning (e.g., by providing verbal labels such as excellent and fair) may be particularly helpful as a result. Clinicians should assess whether the older adult patient understands the meaning of information critical to the decision at hand and interpret the information for them as needed. For example, a verbal interpretation of numeric risk information may increase the patient’s ability to understand and use it. Although risk judgments can be influenced by carefully induced specific emotions, 110 older adults may show fewer effects of specific emotions due to greater experiences of mixed emotions. 111 Research focused on the impacts of valenced affect and mixed emotions in the elderly may prove quite fruitful. Second, the accumulated experience and knowledge of older adults compensate in some cases for age-related declines. Decision making for cancer treatment provides its own challenges as decisions are made under elevated levels of distress, conditions of heightened uncertainty, and often under perceived or real time pressure. Age differences in decision making for prostate cancer, as an example of decision making under uncertainty, have not been investigated with regard to deliberative and affective processing. Such research would provide a laboratory to examine the influence of deliberative processes as well as the functions of affect in a realistic setting. Proposals for improving people’s decision-making abilities 30 , 112 are based primarily on research results from young adults. Decision making is essential to life at all ages, however, and older adults are increasingly being asked to make their own decisions about vital life issues. No longer are health decisions left entirely to one trusted person, such as the family doctor. Instead, older adults are faced with more choices and more information conveyed by a greater number of and increasingly specialized physicians than they were in previous generations. This happens at a point in their lives when their abilities to deliberate carefully about important decisions may be declining. Thus, research-based advice on how to improve older adults’ decision making is essential. Finally, understanding the balance of affective and deliberative processes in judgment and choice is fundamental to the study of decision making. Decisions often involve both the head and the heart. In addition, decision makers sometimes have experience in a decision situation and are familiar with the tradeoffs and options; other times they are not. A better understanding of the mechanisms that underlie decision processes in our aging population should ultimately allow us to help older adults to better help themselves. 