Akt-dependent NF-?B activation is required for bile acids to rescue colon cancer cells from stress-induced apoptosis Conjugated secondary bile acids promote human colon cancer cell proliferation by activating EGF receptors (EGFR). We hypothesized that bile acid-induced EGFR activation also mediates cell survival by downstream Akt-regulated activation of NF-?B. Deoxycholyltaurine (DCT) treatment attenuated TNF-?-induced colon cancer cell apoptosis, and stimulated rapid and sustained NF-?B nuclear translocation and transcriptional activity (detected by NF-?B binding to an oligonucleotide consensus sequence and by activation of luciferase reporter gene constructs). Both DCT-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation and attenuation of TNF-?-stimulated apoptosis were dependent on EGFR activation. Inhibitors of nuclear translocation, proteosome activity, and I?B? kinase attenuated NF-?B transcriptional activity. Cell transfection with adenoviral vectors encoding a non-degradable I?Ba ‘super-repressor’ blocked the actions of DCT on both NF-?B activation and TNF-?-induced apoptosis. Likewise, transfection with mutant akt and treatment with a chemical inhibitor of Akt attenuated effects of DCT on NF-?B transcriptional activity and TNF-?-induced apoptosis. Chemical inhibitors of Akt and NF-?B activation also attenuated DCT-induced rescue of H508 cells from ultraviolet radiation-induced apoptosis. Collectively, these observations indicate that, downstream of EGFR, bile acid-induced colon cancer cell survival is mediated by Akt-dependent NF-?B activation. These findings provide a Mechanism whereby bile acids increase resistance of colon cancer to chemotherapy and radiation.  Introduction In industrialized nations, colon cancer is a major cause of morbidity and mortality and ranks in the top three most common lethal malignancies [ 1 ]. Colon cancer risk is increased by a high fat diet, and dietary fat stimulates synthesis and hepatobiliary secretion of bile acids. In the intestine, bacterial actions result in the formation of secondary bile acids that have long been considered tumor promoters [ 2 , 3 ]. Bile acids can induce DNA damage and chromosomal aberrations, and alter gene expression [ 4 ]. Patients with colon adenomas and adenocarcinomas have elevated levels of both serum and fecal secondary bile acids, and modulating the proportion or concentration of secondary bile acids in the intestinal lumen reduces the risk of colon neoplasia [ 5 – 7 ]. A hallmark of neoplasia is disequilibrium between cell proliferation and apoptosis such that tumor growth and survival are favored. From our previous work, it became apparent that selected secondary bile acids, particularly deoxycholic acid conjugates, stimulate colon cancer cell proliferation by activating epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR) and post-EGFR ERK signaling [ 8 , 9 ]. In normal tissue, EGFR, a member of the receptor tyrosine kinase family, mediates growth, development and differentiation [ 10 ]. In colon cancer, EGFR expression is increased relative to adjacent normal mucosa [ 11 , 12 ] and post-EGFR signaling has emerged as an important therapeutic target [ 13 , 14 ]. EGFR can be activated by several ligands, including EGF and heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor (HB-EGF). Recently, in colon cancer cells, we identified a prominent role for HB-EGF in mediating bile acid-induced activation of EGFR [ 9 ]. Ligand interaction with EGFR results in activation of several downstream signaling pathways including ERK and phosphoino-sitol-3-kinase/Akt (PI3K/Akt) [ 15 , 16 ]. Impaired regulation of PI3K/Akt signaling is reported in many cancers [ 17 – 19 ]. In particular, in more than 40% of colon cancers, mutations are present in genes that regulate PI3K/Akt signaling [ 17 ]. Activated Akt phosphorylates several downstream targets that regulate apoptosis, including Bad, caspase-9, and the transcription factors FKHR and NF-?B. NF-?B regulates expression of genes involved in critical biological functions, including inflammation, immunity, cell adhesion, proliferation, and apoptosis (reviewed in [ 20 ]). NF-?B transcription complexes comprise homo- and heterodimers formed by p50, p52, RelA (p65), Rel B and cRel subunits [ 21 – 23 ]. The I?B kinase (IKK) complex, comprised of IKK-? and IKK-? catalytic subunits, and a regulatory subunit (IKK-?/NEMO), regulates NF-?B activity. In the cell cytoplasm, inactive NF-?B dimers are bound to specific inhibitors (I?Bs); nuclear translocation is required for NF-?B to alter gene transcription. Activated Akt can phosphorylate I?B, thereby releasing NF-?B dimers for translocation to the nucleus where they coordinate transcriptional activation of more than 100 target genes [ 24 , 25 ]. Nuclear NF-?B activity is up-regulated in colon neoplasia [ 26 – 28 ] and controls expression of many colon cancer-related genes, including cyclooxygenase-2 and Bcl-2 [ 29 ]. NF-?B activation may also modulate the inflammatory response to colon cancer [ 30 ] and resistance of colon cancer cells to chemotherapy [ 31 , 32 ]. Bile acid-induced activation of NF-?B is reported in gastrointestinal tissues [ 33 , 34 ], including a colon cancer cell line [ 35 ]. However, these investigations commonly tested unconjugated bile acids (e.g. deoxycholic acid) at high concentrations (>200 ?M) that robustly induce apoptosis. Moreover, signaling pathways that regulate NF-?B activation were not elucidated [ 36 ]. Based on our finding that bile acid-induced proliferation of human colon cancer cells is mediated largely by muscarinic receptor-mediated trans-activation of EGFR [ 8 , 9 ], we parsed bile acid actions on signaling downstream of EGFR. We identified a prominent role for PI3K/Akt signaling in mediating bile acid-induced cell survival; Deoxycholyltaurine (DCT)-induced EGFR-dependent activation of PI3K/Akt signaling results in phosphorylation of GSK, BAD and other key downstream targets [ 37 ]. These findings and those of others regarding bile acid-induced activation of NF-?B [ 33 – 35 ], led us to hypothesize that downstream of EGFR, PI3K/Akt signaling and activation of NF-?B is critical for the ability of conjugated secondary bile acids to promote colon cancer cell survival. The present study focuses on elucidating the mechanisms whereby conjugated secondary bile acids are able to protect colon cancer cells from stress-induced apoptosis. The goals were to establish that stress-induced apoptosis is inhibited by bile acids and to confirm that this anti-apoptotic effect is mediated downstream of EGFR by Akt-dependent activation of NF-?B. To verify that bile acid-induced Akt-dependent NF-?B activation is required to rescue colon cancer cells from programmed cell death we used an NF-?B reporter and molecular and chemical approaches to inhibiting NF-?B activity. As reported herein, our novel observations indicate that in two commonly-used human colon cancer cell lines, EGFR signaling and downstream PI3K/Akt-dependent regulation of NF-?B activity are required for bile acids to protect cells from programmed cell death mediated by either the extrinsic (death receptor-mediated) or intrinsic (mitochondria-mediated) pathways.  Materials and methods Materials Disposable culture ware was purchased from Corning Glass works (Corning, NY). Tissue culture medium, RPMI 1640 and McCoy’s 5A Medium, was purchased from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA) and Quality Biological (Gaithersburg, MD). Fetal bovine serum was purchased from Biowhittaker (Walkersville, MD). Deoxycholyltaurine (DCT), obtained from Sigma-aldrich (St. Louis, MO), was maintained as a 0.1 M stock solution in deionized water. Pyrollidine dithiocarbamate (PDTC) was also from Sigma-aldrich. Akt inhibitor (API-2) was obtained from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA) and stock solutions were maintained in Me2SO (DMSO) PD168393, pp2, wortmannin, LY294002, SN50, and MG-132 were from Calbiochem. AG1478, PD98059, Bay11-7082 were from Alexis Biochemicals (San Diego, CA). TNF-? was from Chemicon (Temecula, CA). Anti-?-actin and anti-histone H2A antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA). Antibody to the ligand-binding domain of EGFR (LA1) was from Millipore (Billerica, MA). Anti-NF-?B p65 antibodies were from BD Biosciences (San Jose, CA) and anti-PARP p85 antibodies from Promega (Madison, WI). Unless stated otherwise, all other biochemical reagents were obtained from Fisher and Sigma-aldrich. Cell lines Cell lines were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). H508 human colon cancer cells were maintained in RPMI 1640 and HT-29 cells in McCoy’s 5A Medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Adherent cells were passaged weekly at subconfluence after trypsinization. Cultures were maintained at 37 °C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2 and 95% air. Preparation of cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions Cells were plated in 100-mm Petri plates (9×106 cells/plate) in duplicate and maintained in a humidified environment at 5% CO2 and 37 °C for 24 h followed by overnight serum deprivation. Cells were treated with 100 ?M DCT for 30 min, with and without inhibitors. When inhibitors were used cells were preincubated with agents for 30 min. Control cells were treated with diluent alone. Cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions were separated using the NE-PERR kit (Pierce) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, ice-cold CER I was added to the cell pellet, which was fully resuspended by vortexing. Tubes were incubated on ice for 10 min followed by addition of ice-cold CER II, vortex and incubation on ice for 1 min. Samples were centrifuged for 5 min (~16,000 ×g) and supernatants (cytoplasmic extracts) were immediately transferred to clean pre-chilled tubes. Insoluble (pellet) fractions were re-suspended in ice-cold NER. Samples were repeatedly vortexed for 15 s every 10 min (4 °C) for a total of at least 40 min and Centrifuged. Supernatant (nuclear extract) fractions were immediately transferred to a clean pre-chilled tube. Extracts were stored at ?80 °C until used. Immunoblot analysis Nuclear proteins (10 ?g) were dissolved in SDS sample buffer, boiled for 5 min, and subjected to SDS-PAGE (10% gel, Invitrogen). Resolved proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (Micron Separations) for 1 h and probed with mouse anti-NF-?B p65 antibody overnight at 4 °C. Blots were washed with PBS containing Tween-20 (0.1%) and incubated for 1 h with goat anti-mouse IgG conjugated to peroxidase (1:2000). After extensive washing in PBS-Tween-20, bound antibody was detected by chemiluminescence (Supersignal kit, Pierce). To verify equal protein loading, blots were stripped and re-probed with anti-?-actin and anti-histone H2A antibodies for cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins, respectively. Immunofluorescence microscopy H508 and HT-29 cells were subcultured in 4-well Labtek II chamber slides (5×104 cells/well), incubated for 24 h at 37 °C, and serum-starved overnight. After pre-incubation with PBS for 30 min, cells were incubated with test agents for 30 min at 37 °C. After washing with PBS and PBS containing 2 M NaCl, cells were kept on ice, fixed with cold MeOH for 10 min, treated with 0.1% Triton X-100 for an additional 10 min, and blocked for 30 min with PBS containing 5% serum derived from the same species as the secondary antibody. Cells were incubated at 4 °C overnight with primary antibody (anti-NF-?B p65 antibody). After incubation, cells were washed in PBS and incubated for 30 min at room temperature with secondary antibodies conjugated with tetra-methyl rhodamine isothiocyanate (TRITC). Cells were washed and slides were analyzed using immunofluorescence microscopy (Nikon Eclipse 80 i ). Cell nuclei were visualized by Hoechst staining (Sigma). Measurement of NF-?B-dependent transcriptional activity Activation of the NF-?B p65 subunit in 10 ?g of H508 nuclear extracts was determined using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)-based transcription factor assay kit (TransAM assay, Active Motif Europe) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. This assay measures binding of activated NF-?B to its consensus sequence (5?-GGGACTTCC-3?) attached to a micro-well plate. The anti-NF-?B antibody recognizes a p65 epitope accessible only when NF-?B is activated and bound to its target DNA. Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody was used to provide a sensitive colorimetric readout of NF-?B activation and quantified by spectrophotometry. Jurkat cell nuclear extracts provided with the kit were used as positive controls. Recombinant adenovirus constructs and transfection Recombinant adenoviral vector expressing I?B?-super repressor (mutant I?Ba) was constructed using the Adeno-X expression system (Clontech) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, I?Ba-super repressor (I?BSR) cDNA (S32A/S36A) was cloned into pShuttle by digesting pCMV-I?BaM with BamHI/HindIII and ligating resulting fragments into the Xba 1 site of pShuttle vector [ 38 , 39 ]. The pAdeno-X/I?BSR (AD/?BSR) was constructed by digesting pShuttle constructs with PI-Scel/I-Ceul and ligating the resulting fragments into the PI-Scel/l-Ceul sites of the pAdeno-X adenoviral vector. Recombinant adenoviral plasmids were packaged into infectious adenoviral particles by transfecting HEK-293 cells using Lipofectamine 2000. HEK-293 cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 1% penicillin/streptomycin and 1% L-glutamine (Sigma). Cells were seeded (approximately 105 cells/ml) until 50–80% confluence before infection with virus. Cells were inspected periodically for 1 wk for cytopathic effects (intact but rounded cells that may detach from plates) and transferred to a sterile 15-ml centrifuge tube, washed with PBS and resuspended in 500 ?l PBS. Cells were lysed with three consecutive freeze–thaw cycles, centrifuged And the lysate transferred to a sterile tube and stored at ?80 °C. Adenoviral stock titers were measured using standard plaque assays. Recombinant adenoviruses were screened for expression of I?B? gene product by immunoblotting using anti-I?B? antibody (data not shown). pAdeno-X, the recombinant replication-incompetent adenovirus carrying no I?BSR cDNA insert, grown and purified as described above, served as a control. Plasmid constructs Full-length cDNA of dominant negative akt mutant (DN- akt ), containing a 3? Myc-His tag and substitution of methionine (ATG) for lysine (AAG) at residue 179, was inserted into the Klenow-blunted NheI and PmeI sites of expression vector pUSEamp(+) (Millipore) with a cytomegalovirus promoter [ 38 ]. HT-29 cells were transfected with pUSEamp DN- akt or with pUSEamp(+) vector using the Lipofectamine 2000 kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After 6 h, transfection medium was replaced by standard growth medium containing 10% FBS. Luciferase reporter gene assays The NF-?B-dependent luciferase reporter gene construct containing the synthetic sequence with four tandem copies of NF-?B binding elements was purchased from Clontech. Transient transfection was performed using the Lipofectamine 2000 kit as recommended by the manufacturer (Invitrogen). Briefly, Lipofectamine and plasmid DNA were diluted separately in Opti-MEM I reduced serum medium before combining and incubating for 20 min at room temperature. Complexes were prepared using a 1:2 DNA (?g) to Lipofectamine 2000 (?l) ratio. Cells were transfected using 4 ?g/well reporter plasmid or empty plasmid vector (p-TAL). Internal controls were provided by adding 0.25 ?g/well pRL-TK Renilla luciferase expression vector (Promega). Cells were collected 24 to 48 h after transfection and lysed in 300 ?l/well 1× passive lysis buffer (Promega) for 15 min at room temperature. Lysate (25 ?l) was analyzed in triplicate for firefly luciferase and Renilla luciferase activity using a Mediators PhL luminometer. For each analysis, firefly luciferase signal was normalized to the Renilla luciferase signal. Measurement of apoptosis by PARP degradation TNF-?-induced apoptosis was examined by proteolytic cleavage of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) [ 40 ]. Briefly, H508 and HT-29 cells were grown to near confluence (~106 cells/well) in 6-well plates. Cells were pretreated with or without 100 ?M DCT (with and without inhibitors) for 2 h and stimulated with 100 ng/ml TNF-? for 6 and 24 h (H508 and HT-29 cells respectively) at 37 °C. After treatment, cell extracts were prepared by incubating cells for 30 min on ice in 0.2 ml lysis buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 2 mM EDTA, 250 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, 2 ?g/ml leupeptin, 2 ?g/ml aprotinin, 1 mM PMSF, 0.5 ?g/ml benzamidine and 1 mM DTT. Lysates were centrifuged and supernatants collected. Cell extracts (40 ?g) were resolved in 10% SDS-PAGE, transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes, blotted with rabbit anti-PARP antibody (Promega) and detected by chemiluminescence (ECL; Pierce). Apoptosis was identified by cleavage of 116 kDa PARP to an 85-kDa peptide product. The anti-p85 PARP antibody used does not recognize the intact 116-kDa molecule. Measurement of apoptosis by microscopy After various treatments, cells were photographed with a Nikon inverted microscope at 20× before fixation. Annexin-V staining for apoptosis was performed using a kit (Clontech Laboratories Inc., Palo Alto, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, cells were rinsed with 1× binding buffer and resuspended in 200 ?l 1× binding buffer per well. Annexin-V (5 ?l) and propidium iodide (10 ?l) were added to wells and incubated for 10 to 15 min in the dark. Cells were washed and fixed in 2% formaldehyde. Stained cells were visualized and photographed using a fluorescence microscope with filter settings for FITC and rhodamine, and the percentage of apoptotic cells was measured. Induction of apoptosis by ultraviolet (UV) irradiation H508 cells were plated at a density of 5×104 cells/well in Lab-Tek II chamber slides. Cells were serum-starved overnight before treatment with ultraviolet (UV) light using a UV cross linker (UV Stratalinker 1800; Stratagene) at 254 nm (dose=10 J/m2, unless indicated otherwise). To provide uniform radiation, cell culture medium was removed from dishes during UV treatment. Immediately after radiation, cell culture medium was replenished and culture plates were returned to the CO2 incubator for overnight incubation. Statistical analysis Qualitative data were repeated at least 3 times to ensure reproducibility. Quantitative results are expressed as mean±SE from at least 3 separate experiments. Student’s t -test was used to determine significance of the difference between means (Sigma-Plot, Systat Software Inc., San Jose, CA). p <0.05 was considered significant.  Materials Disposable culture ware was purchased from Corning Glass works (Corning, NY). Tissue culture medium, RPMI 1640 and McCoy’s 5A Medium, was purchased from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA) and Quality Biological (Gaithersburg, MD). Fetal bovine serum was purchased from Biowhittaker (Walkersville, MD). Deoxycholyltaurine (DCT), obtained from Sigma-aldrich (St. Louis, MO), was maintained as a 0.1 M stock solution in deionized water. Pyrollidine dithiocarbamate (PDTC) was also from Sigma-aldrich. Akt inhibitor (API-2) was obtained from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA) and stock solutions were maintained in Me2SO (DMSO) PD168393, pp2, wortmannin, LY294002, SN50, and MG-132 were from Calbiochem. AG1478, PD98059, Bay11-7082 were from Alexis Biochemicals (San Diego, CA). TNF-? was from Chemicon (Temecula, CA). Anti-?-actin and anti-histone H2A antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA). Antibody to the ligand-binding domain of EGFR (LA1) was from Millipore (Billerica, MA). Anti-NF-?B p65 antibodies were from BD Biosciences (San Jose, CA) and anti-PARP p85 antibodies from Promega (Madison, WI). Unless stated otherwise, all other biochemical reagents were obtained from Fisher and Sigma-aldrich.  Cell lines Cell lines were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). H508 human colon cancer cells were maintained in RPMI 1640 and HT-29 cells in McCoy’s 5A Medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Adherent cells were passaged weekly at subconfluence after trypsinization. Cultures were maintained at 37 °C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2 and 95% air.  Preparation of cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions Cells were plated in 100-mm Petri plates (9×106 cells/plate) in duplicate and maintained in a humidified environment at 5% CO2 and 37 °C for 24 h followed by overnight serum deprivation. Cells were treated with 100 ?M DCT for 30 min, with and without inhibitors. When inhibitors were used cells were preincubated with agents for 30 min. Control cells were treated with diluent alone. Cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions were separated using the NE-PERR kit (Pierce) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, ice-cold CER I was added to the cell pellet, which was fully resuspended by vortexing. Tubes were incubated on ice for 10 min followed by addition of ice-cold CER II, vortex and incubation on ice for 1 min. Samples were centrifuged for 5 min (~16,000 ×g) and supernatants (cytoplasmic extracts) were immediately transferred to clean pre-chilled tubes. Insoluble (pellet) fractions were re-suspended in ice-cold NER. Samples were repeatedly vortexed for 15 s every 10 min (4 °C) for a total of at least 40 min and Centrifuged. Supernatant (nuclear extract) fractions were immediately transferred to a clean pre-chilled tube. Extracts were stored at ?80 °C until used.  Immunoblot analysis Nuclear proteins (10 ?g) were dissolved in SDS sample buffer, boiled for 5 min, and subjected to SDS-PAGE (10% gel, Invitrogen). Resolved proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (Micron Separations) for 1 h and probed with mouse anti-NF-?B p65 antibody overnight at 4 °C. Blots were washed with PBS containing Tween-20 (0.1%) and incubated for 1 h with goat anti-mouse IgG conjugated to peroxidase (1:2000). After extensive washing in PBS-Tween-20, bound antibody was detected by chemiluminescence (Supersignal kit, Pierce). To verify equal protein loading, blots were stripped and re-probed with anti-?-actin and anti-histone H2A antibodies for cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins, respectively.  Immunofluorescence microscopy H508 and HT-29 cells were subcultured in 4-well Labtek II chamber slides (5×104 cells/well), incubated for 24 h at 37 °C, and serum-starved overnight. After pre-incubation with PBS for 30 min, cells were incubated with test agents for 30 min at 37 °C. After washing with PBS and PBS containing 2 M NaCl, cells were kept on ice, fixed with cold MeOH for 10 min, treated with 0.1% Triton X-100 for an additional 10 min, and blocked for 30 min with PBS containing 5% serum derived from the same species as the secondary antibody. Cells were incubated at 4 °C overnight with primary antibody (anti-NF-?B p65 antibody). After incubation, cells were washed in PBS and incubated for 30 min at room temperature with secondary antibodies conjugated with tetra-methyl rhodamine isothiocyanate (TRITC). Cells were washed and slides were analyzed using immunofluorescence microscopy (Nikon Eclipse 80 i ). Cell nuclei were visualized by Hoechst staining (Sigma).  Measurement of NF-?B-dependent transcriptional activity Activation of the NF-?B p65 subunit in 10 ?g of H508 nuclear extracts was determined using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)-based transcription factor assay kit (TransAM assay, Active Motif Europe) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. This assay measures binding of activated NF-?B to its consensus sequence (5?-GGGACTTCC-3?) attached to a micro-well plate. The anti-NF-?B antibody recognizes a p65 epitope accessible only when NF-?B is activated and bound to its target DNA. Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody was used to provide a sensitive colorimetric readout of NF-?B activation and quantified by spectrophotometry. Jurkat cell nuclear extracts provided with the kit were used as positive controls.  Recombinant adenovirus constructs and transfection Recombinant adenoviral vector expressing I?B?-super repressor (mutant I?Ba) was constructed using the Adeno-X expression system (Clontech) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, I?Ba-super repressor (I?BSR) cDNA (S32A/S36A) was cloned into pShuttle by digesting pCMV-I?BaM with BamHI/HindIII and ligating resulting fragments into the Xba 1 site of pShuttle vector [ 38 , 39 ]. The pAdeno-X/I?BSR (AD/?BSR) was constructed by digesting pShuttle constructs with PI-Scel/I-Ceul and ligating the resulting fragments into the PI-Scel/l-Ceul sites of the pAdeno-X adenoviral vector. Recombinant adenoviral plasmids were packaged into infectious adenoviral particles by transfecting HEK-293 cells using Lipofectamine 2000. HEK-293 cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 1% penicillin/streptomycin and 1% L-glutamine (Sigma). Cells were seeded (approximately 105 cells/ml) until 50–80% confluence before infection with virus. Cells were inspected periodically for 1 wk for cytopathic effects (intact but rounded cells that may detach from plates) and transferred to a sterile 15-ml centrifuge tube, washed with PBS and resuspended in 500 ?l PBS. Cells were lysed with three consecutive freeze–thaw cycles, centrifuged And the lysate transferred to a sterile tube and stored at ?80 °C. Adenoviral stock titers were measured using standard plaque assays. Recombinant adenoviruses were screened for expression of I?B? gene product by immunoblotting using anti-I?B? antibody (data not shown). pAdeno-X, the recombinant replication-incompetent adenovirus carrying no I?BSR cDNA insert, grown and purified as described above, served as a control.  Plasmid constructs Full-length cDNA of dominant negative akt mutant (DN- akt ), containing a 3? Myc-His tag and substitution of methionine (ATG) for lysine (AAG) at residue 179, was inserted into the Klenow-blunted NheI and PmeI sites of expression vector pUSEamp(+) (Millipore) with a cytomegalovirus promoter [ 38 ]. HT-29 cells were transfected with pUSEamp DN- akt or with pUSEamp(+) vector using the Lipofectamine 2000 kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After 6 h, transfection medium was replaced by standard growth medium containing 10% FBS.  Luciferase reporter gene assays The NF-?B-dependent luciferase reporter gene construct containing the synthetic sequence with four tandem copies of NF-?B binding elements was purchased from Clontech. Transient transfection was performed using the Lipofectamine 2000 kit as recommended by the manufacturer (Invitrogen). Briefly, Lipofectamine and plasmid DNA were diluted separately in Opti-MEM I reduced serum medium before combining and incubating for 20 min at room temperature. Complexes were prepared using a 1:2 DNA (?g) to Lipofectamine 2000 (?l) ratio. Cells were transfected using 4 ?g/well reporter plasmid or empty plasmid vector (p-TAL). Internal controls were provided by adding 0.25 ?g/well pRL-TK Renilla luciferase expression vector (Promega). Cells were collected 24 to 48 h after transfection and lysed in 300 ?l/well 1× passive lysis buffer (Promega) for 15 min at room temperature. Lysate (25 ?l) was analyzed in triplicate for firefly luciferase and Renilla luciferase activity using a Mediators PhL luminometer. For each analysis, firefly luciferase signal was normalized to the Renilla luciferase signal.  Measurement of apoptosis by PARP degradation TNF-?-induced apoptosis was examined by proteolytic cleavage of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) [ 40 ]. Briefly, H508 and HT-29 cells were grown to near confluence (~106 cells/well) in 6-well plates. Cells were pretreated with or without 100 ?M DCT (with and without inhibitors) for 2 h and stimulated with 100 ng/ml TNF-? for 6 and 24 h (H508 and HT-29 cells respectively) at 37 °C. After treatment, cell extracts were prepared by incubating cells for 30 min on ice in 0.2 ml lysis buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 2 mM EDTA, 250 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, 2 ?g/ml leupeptin, 2 ?g/ml aprotinin, 1 mM PMSF, 0.5 ?g/ml benzamidine and 1 mM DTT. Lysates were centrifuged and supernatants collected. Cell extracts (40 ?g) were resolved in 10% SDS-PAGE, transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes, blotted with rabbit anti-PARP antibody (Promega) and detected by chemiluminescence (ECL; Pierce). Apoptosis was identified by cleavage of 116 kDa PARP to an 85-kDa peptide product. The anti-p85 PARP antibody used does not recognize the intact 116-kDa molecule.  Measurement of apoptosis by microscopy After various treatments, cells were photographed with a Nikon inverted microscope at 20× before fixation. Annexin-V staining for apoptosis was performed using a kit (Clontech Laboratories Inc., Palo Alto, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, cells were rinsed with 1× binding buffer and resuspended in 200 ?l 1× binding buffer per well. Annexin-V (5 ?l) and propidium iodide (10 ?l) were added to wells and incubated for 10 to 15 min in the dark. Cells were washed and fixed in 2% formaldehyde. Stained cells were visualized and photographed using a fluorescence microscope with filter settings for FITC and rhodamine, and the percentage of apoptotic cells was measured.  Induction of apoptosis by ultraviolet (UV) irradiation H508 cells were plated at a density of 5×104 cells/well in Lab-Tek II chamber slides. Cells were serum-starved overnight before treatment with ultraviolet (UV) light using a UV cross linker (UV Stratalinker 1800; Stratagene) at 254 nm (dose=10 J/m2, unless indicated otherwise). To provide uniform radiation, cell culture medium was removed from dishes during UV treatment. Immediately after radiation, cell culture medium was replenished and culture plates were returned to the CO2 incubator for overnight incubation.  Statistical analysis Qualitative data were repeated at least 3 times to ensure reproducibility. Quantitative results are expressed as mean±SE from at least 3 separate experiments. Student’s t -test was used to determine significance of the difference between means (Sigma-Plot, Systat Software Inc., San Jose, CA). p <0.05 was considered significant.  Results Bile acids rescue human colon cancer cells from TNF-?-induced apoptosis The focus of the current study was to determine whether activation of NF-?B, a key downstream target of PI3K/Akt signaling, mediates deoxycholyltaurine (DCT)-induced rescue of colon cancer cells from apoptosis. To test this hypothesis, we examined the actions of DCT on survival of two human colon cancer cell lines, H508 and HT-29 cells, that co-express M3R and EGFR and were used by us to explore signaling actions of bile acids [ 8 , 9 , 37 ]. To identify an efficacious chemical stimulant of apoptosis, cells were treated with cycloheximide, hydrogen peroxide, staurosporine, deoxycholic acid, and tumor necrosis factor-? (TNF-?). Both colon cancer cell lines were resistant to most of these agents (data not shown). Nonetheless, as shown in Fig. 1 , in both HT-29 and H508 cells exposure to TNF-? (100 ng/ml) provoked consistent and robust apoptosis. TNF-?, a proinflammatory cytokine, has potent cytotoxic effects on intestinal cells and is widely used to induce apoptosis [ 41 – 43 ]. Although cytotoxic effects of TNF-? on many cells, including intestinal cells, are evident only if protein synthesis is inhibited, usually with cycloheximide [ 41 , 42 , 44 ], this was not necessary to observe the desired effects in colon cancer cells. Hence, to induce apoptosis in the following experiments TNF-? was used alone. Approximately 50% of TNF-?-treated cells showed microscopic features consistent with apoptosis ( Fig. 1Aa ). In H508 cells, typical morphological features of apoptosis were detected within 4 h of exposure to TNF-? and the percentage of apoptotic cells remained in the range of 50 to 60% after 24 h (not shown). Compared to H508 cells, HT-29 cells were more resistant to apoptosis at early time points but between 16 and 24 h demonstrated features of apoptosis that were confirmed by Annexin-V staining ( Fig. 1Ab ); with longer exposure to TNF-? more cells developed apoptosis (up to 80% apoptotic cells) (data not shown). We used HT-29 cells, to examine the dose–response for DCT-induced rescue of colon cancer cells from TNF-?-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 1B ). Concentrations of DCT greater than 1 ?M attenuated TNF-?-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 1B ). The maximal effect was observed with 100 ?M DCT; pre-incubation with 300 ?M DCT did not further reduce TNF-?-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 1B ). Hence, we selected 100 ?M DCT as our test concentration. As shown in Figs. 1B and D , pre-incubation with 100 ?M DCT attenuated TNF-?-induced apoptosis by 40% and 30% in HT-29 and H508 cells, respectively (52.4±3.2% vs. 31.1±3.7% for HT-29 cells; 49.6±1.9% vs. 35.1±2.4% for H508 cells). To increase sensitivity for detecting programmed cell death and to confirm the results of morphological assessment of apoptosis shown in Figs. 1A, B, and D , we used an early biochemical marker of apoptosis, cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), a 116-kDa nuclear DNA-binding protein that detects DNA strand breaks and functions in base excision repair. Caspase-3-activated cleavage of PARP into 85- and 25-kDa fragments is an established biochemical marker of apoptosis [ 40 ]. Time-course experiments in HT-29 cells showed that pre-incubation with DCT reduced PARP degradation at 16 and 24 h ( Fig. 1C ) and delayed the onset of apoptosis from 4 h in control cells to 6 h in DCT-treated H508 cells ( Fig. 1E ). At 6 h, PARP cleavage in H508 cells treated with TNF-? alone was approximately 80% greater than that observed in the presence of TNF-? plus 100 ?M DCT (determined by measuring the intensity of the p85 PARP band relative to the ?-actin loading control) ( Fig. 1E ). These results, using both morphological assessment and biochemical analysis in two colon cancer cell lines, demonstrate that DCT treatment reproducibly delays and attenuates TNF-?-induced apoptosis. DCT induces NF-?B nuclear translocation and activation Previously, we showed that DCT-induced activation of PI3K/Akt signaling alters the function of several downstream mediators of colon cancer cell survival and proliferation [ 37 ]. Here, we focused on NF-?B because the primary role of this molecule is considered to be transcriptional activation of anti-apoptotic genes [ 26 , 45 , 46 ]. To select appropriate bile acid concentrations and incubation times for experiments that follow, we examined both the dose–response and time-course for actions of DCT on NF-?B nuclear translocation and activation. Nuclear localization of NF-?B, stimulated by I?B phosphorylation and degradation, is commonly observed in breast, ovarian, colon, bladder and pancreatic cancer [ 47 , 48 ]. Likewise, nuclear NF-?B was observed in unstimulated H508 and HT-29 colon cancer cells. Hence, to analyze stimulatory effects of DCT, only 10 ?g nuclear protein was required to identify NF-?B by immunoblotting. Histone H2A, a nuclear protein, was used as a loading control. Exposure of H508 and HT-29 cells to 0.1 to 500 ?M DCT for 30 min caused a dose-dependent increase in nuclear NF-?B that was detected with 0.1 ?M DCT in H508 cells and 10 ?M DCT in HT-29 cells ( Fig. 2Aa ); the bile acid is a more potent inducer of NF-?B nuclear translocation in H508 compared to HT-29 cells. NF-?B nuclear translocation was maximal with 100 ?M DCT in H508 cells and 100 to 300 ?M DCT in HT-29 cells, concentrations that are consistent with anti-apoptotic effects of DCT shown in Fig. 1B . Moreover, DCT-induced nuclear translocation of NF-?B was delayed in HT-29 compared to H508 cells ( Fig. 2Ab ). Whereas in H508 cells a robust NF-?B nuclear signal was apparent at 10 min, this was not clearly observed in HT-29 cells until the 30-min time point ( Fig. 2Ab ). Based on data shown in Fig. 2A , for the following experiments in both cell lines, we selected a test dose of 100 ?M DCT and 30 min incubation. Overall, findings depicted in Fig. 2A indicate that DCT stimulates nuclear translocation of NF-?B at concentrations that reproducibly stimulate colon cancer cell proliferation [ 8 , 9 ] and are within the range measured in the normal human cecum [ 49 ]. To confirm that DCT-stimulated nuclear translocation of p65 NF-?B represents NF-?B activation, we used inhibitors of NF-?B activation. SN50, a cell-permeable peptide that blocks the nuclear localization signal for NF-?B, inhibits nuclear translocation [ 50 ]. MG-132 is a proteosome inhibitor [ 51 ]. Bay11-7085 is an I?B? kinase inhibitor. In both H508 and HT-29 cells, DCT-stimulated NF-?B activation was inhibited by these inhibitors of NF-?B activation ( Table 1 shows data for H508 cells). Detection of NF-?B nuclear translocation using immunofluorescence microscopy We examined the effects of EGF, a positive control, and DCT on NF-?B nuclear translocation using immunofluorescence microscopy. As shown in Fig. 2B , after treatment with either EGF or DCT the rhodamine-labeled NF-?B p65 subunit (red), located predominantly in the cytoplasm, was translocated to the nucleus. Counterstaining with Hoechst to highlight cell nuclei (blue) confirmed that the NF-?B signal was localized to the nucleus in these multi-nucleated malignant cells. In conjunction with the nuclear immunoblotting data shown in Fig. 2A , these findings confirm that DCT induces NF-?B nuclear translocation and mimics the actions of EGF. Bile acids enhance NF-?B-mediated transcriptional activity Having demonstrated that DCT stimulates nuclear translocation of NF-?B, it was important to verify that DCT stimulated NF-?B-dependent transcriptional activity. For this purpose, we used two experimental strategies; NF-?B motif binding and NF-?B-dependent promoter luciferase reporter gene assays. p65 NF-?B binding to oligonucleotides containing an NF-?B consensus binding site was quantified by ELISA. Specificity of NF-?B motif binding activity was confirmed by experiments in which adding no oligonucleotide or a mutated oligonucleotide did not alter NF-?B motif binding activity. As expected, binding activity was inhibited when competing wild-type NF-?B oligonucleotide was used (data not shown). In H508 and HT-29 cells treated with the bile acid, NF-?B DNA binding activity increased 1.8- and 2.5-fold, respectively, compared to control (0.11±0.01 vs. 0.20±0.02 in H508 cells; 0.08±0.01 vs. 0.20±0.01 in HT-29 cells) ( Fig. 2C ). Increased binding activity was evident within 30 min and decreased with long-term incubation (4 to 24 h, data not shown), suggesting that DCT-induced NF-?B DNA binding activity is transient. These results indicate that DCT activates NF-?B-induced transcriptional activity in colon cancer cells. Moreover, in H508 cells, attenuation of these effects by NF-?B inhibitors (SN50, MG132, and Bay11-7085; Table 1 , right column), provided further evidence for the specificity of the observed DCT-induced NF-?B activation. Increased levels of NF-?B binding activity in cells exposed to DCT were associated with induction of NF-?B transcriptional activity as measured using NF-?B-dependent promoter luciferase reporter gene assays ( Fig. 2D ). Cells were co-transfected with each reporter construct (NF-?B-Luc or pTAL-Luc) ( Fig. 2Da ) and the Renilla luciferase vector pRL-TK. Luciferase activity ( Fig. 2Db ) was quantified and revealed a 5.5- and 4.6-fold induction in DCT-stimulated HT-29 and H508 cells, respectively, compared to control. Cells transfected with the control reporter vector pTAL-Luc, lacking the NF-?B binding element, were not altered by DCT treatment, thereby demonstrating the specificity of NF-?B-dependent gene transcription. Collectively, these findings indicate that DCT stimulates both NF-?B nuclear translocation and NF-?B-dependent transcriptional activity. TNF-?-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation is prolonged in the presence of bile acids Although TNF-? induces apoptosis, it was reported that TNF-? may activate NF-?B [ 52 – 54 ]. To explore this possibility in colon cancer cells, we examined nuclear translocation of NF-?B following treatment with TNF-?, DCT, and the combination of TNF-? plus DCT. As shown in Fig. 3A , in both HT-29 and H508 cells, at early time points (2 to 4 h), treatment with TNF-? alone stimulated NF-?B nuclear translocation. Diminished nuclear translocation, compared to basal, was observed at later times (>6 h in HT-29 cells and >4 h in H508 cells). Whereas TNF-? robustly induced apoptosis at 24 and 6 h in HT-29 and H508 cells, respectively ( Figs. 1C and E ), NF-?B nuclear translocation was not observed at these times ( Fig. 3 ). Hence, we observed an inverse relationship between TNF-?-induced apoptosis and TNF-?-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation. In both cell lines, treatment with DCT alone also demonstrated NF-?B nuclear translocation primarily at early time points ( Fig. 3 ). Strikingly, in both cell lines, co-treatment with DCT plus TNF-? augmented NF-?B nuclear translocation. Densitometry of the gels shown in Fig. 3A confirmed persistence of the NF-?B nuclear signal following treatment with the combination of TNF-? plus DCT ( Fig. 3B ). Persistent signal for nuclear NF-?B with the combination of TNF-? and DCT occurred at earlier time points in H508 cells (4–6 h) compared to HT-29 cells (16–24 h). Nonetheless, the time-course for augmentation by DCT of NF-?B nuclear translocation ( Fig. 3B ) is compatible with the delay in apoptosis caused by addition of DCT ( Figs. 1C and E ). Inactivation of NF-?B increases susceptibility to apoptosis To determine the relationship between DCT, its anti-apoptotic properties, and activation of NF-?B, we examined the effects of an I?Ba ‘super-repressor’ (AdI?BSR). To compensate for delayed apoptosis in HT-29 compared to H508 cells ( Fig. 1 ) [ 55 , 56 ], H508 cells were incubated with TNF-? for 6 h and HT-29 cells were incubated for 24 h. In both cell lines, induction of NF-?B reporter activity by DCT was attenuated by co-transfection with an adenoviral vector encoding non-degradable I?B? mutant (AdI?BSR) cDNA ( Fig. 4A ); DCT-stimulated NF-?B activation was reduced by >70% in HT-29 cells ( p <0.001) ( Fig. 4Aa ) and reduced to basal levels in H508 cells ( p < 0.01) ( Fig. 4Ab ). Likewise, in DCT-stimulated cells, transfection with AdI?BSR attenuated resistance to TNF-?-induced apoptosis ( Figs. 4B, C and D ). With AdI?BSR, the percentage of DCT-stimulated apoptotic cells increased from 30 to 50% in HT-29 cells ( Fig. 4Ca ) and from 35 to 45% in H508 cells ( Fig. 4Cb ) ( p <0.05 in both cell lines); the values for DCT in the presence of Adl BSR were not significantly different from those with TNF-? alone. Transfection with null adenoviral vector did not alter DCT-stimulated NF-?B activation or resistance to apoptosis ( Fig. 4 ), thereby confirming the specificity of the observed effects. As shown in Fig. 4D , neither AdI?BSR nor DCT treatment alone altered PARP cleavage. In contrast, treatment of HT-29 and H508 cells with TNF-? for 24 and 6 h, respectively, caused robust induction of programmed cell death as evidenced by an intense band for the 85-kDa cleavage product ( Fig. 4D ). Pretreatment with DCT markedly attenuated TNF-?-induced apoptosis; the intensity of the 85-kDa band was reduced by over 70% in H508 cells and by 40% in HT-29 cells. In both cell lines, anti-apoptotic actions of DCT were attenuated in the presence of AdI?BSR (the intensity of the 85-kDa PARP cleavage fragment was nearly the same as that observed with TNF-? alone) ( Fig. 4D ). Collectively, these data provide strong evidence to support the hypothesis that DCT rescues TNF-?-treated cells from apoptosis by an NF-?B-dependent mechanism. Effects of inhibiting post-EGFR signaling on EGF- and bile acid-induced nuclear translocation of NF-?B To confirm in H508 cells that activation of post-EGFR signaling regulates DCT-induced activation of NF-?B we examined the effects of chemical inhibitors. EGF was used as a positive control in all experiments. EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors, PD168393 and AG1478, inhibited basal and DCT-induced NF-?B activation ( Fig. 5A ). As anticipated, two well-characterized PI3K inhibitors, LY294002 and wortmannin, inhibited both EGF- and DCT-induced activation of NF-?B ( Fig. 5B ). In contrast, a MEK (ERK kinase) inhibitor (PD98059) did not alter EGF- or DCT-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation, whereas a Src inhibitor (pp2) had a modest effect ( Fig. 5C ). These findings indicate an important role for PI3K but not ERK signaling in DCT-induced up regulation of NF-?B activity. DCT-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation was attenuated by adding an inhibitor of NF-?B transport through the nuclear membrane (SN50), a proteosome inhibitor (MG-132), and two I?B? kinase inhibitors (Bay11-7082 and PDTC) ( Figs. 5D, E , and Table 1 , left column); all pointing to a key role for NF-?B. Inhibition of EGFR activation attenuates bile acid-induced NF-?B activation and protection from TNF-?-induced apoptosis To confirm that EGFR is required for the anti-apoptotic actions of bile acids, we examined the effect of adding an antibody to the EGFR ligand binding domain (LA1) and a chemical inhibitor of EGFR activation (AG1478). As shown in Fig. 6A , in HT-29 cells, neither LA1 nor AG1478 alone altered basal levels of nuclear NF-?B. In contrast, both means of preventing EGFR activation attenuated bile acid-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation. Likewise, the use of these inhibitors demonstrated that EGFR activation is required for bile acid-induced protection of cells from TNF-?-induced apoptosis (using both the Annexin-V and PARP degradation assays) ( Figs. 6B–D ). In DCT-treated cells, addition of LA1 ( Fig. 6B ) and AG1478 (micrographs not shown) attenuated resistance to TNF-?-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 6B ). With LA1 and AG1478, the percentage of DCT-treated apoptotic cells increased from 33.3% to 47.9% and 46.9%, respectively ( p <0.01 and 0.05, respectively) ( Fig. 6C ). Moreover, the values for DCT in the presence of both inhibitors of EGFR activation were not significantly different from those with TNF-? alone ( Fig. 6C ). As shown in Fig. 6D , neither LA1 nor AG1478 alone altered PARP cleavage. In contrast, treatment of HT-29 cells with DCT plus either LA1 or AG1478 attenuated the anti-apoptotic actions of DCT; the intensity of the 85-kDa PARP cleavage fragment was nearly the same as that observed with TNF-? alone ( Fig. 6D ). Collectively, these data show clearly that EGFR activation is critical for the anti-apoptotic actions of bile acids, including activation of NF-?B. Inhibition of Akt prevents bile acid-induced NF-?B activation The above findings are consistent with a key regulatory role for PI3K/Akt signaling downstream of EGFR in mediating DCT-induced attenuation of apoptosis [ 37 ]. To define further the role of Akt in DCT-dependent NF-?B activation and increased resistance to TNF-?-induced apoptosis, we reduced Akt expression in HT-29 cells using an expression vector encoding dominant negative (DN) akt cDNA with a Myc tag under the control of a cytomegalovirus promoter. Cells transfected with wild-type akt served as a positive control. Transfection with DN- akt reduced nuclear translocation of NF-?B ( Fig. 7Aa ) and NF-?B-dependent luciferase activity ( Fig. 7B ). As shown in Fig. 7Ab , this result was confirmed using API-2, a cell-permeable tricyclic nucleoside that selectively inhibits Akt phosphorylation, thereby inhibiting Akt activation. The luciferase assay showed that inhibition of Akt activation by expression of DN- akt decreased DCT-induced NF-?B activation by 50% compared to that observed in control cells (3.06±0.40 vs. 6.09±0.46 for DN- akt and control, respectively) ( Fig. 7B ). Reduced NF-?B activation was also observed in control cells (i.e. cells without DCT stimulation); basal activity was again inhibited ~50% (0.84± 0.08 vs. 1.94±0.25 for DN- akt and control, respectively) ( Fig. 7B ). These results indicate that in HT-29 cells Akt mediates both basal and DCT-stimulated activation of NF-?B. Bile acid-dependent evasion from apoptosis is both Akt- and NF-?B-dependent To confirm the role of Akt in cell survival, a chemical inhibitor (API-2) was used. In HT-29 cells, inhibition of Akt activation using 5 ?M API-2 resulted in 4-fold enhancement of programmed cell death (from ~2 to 8%; p <0.01) ( Fig. 7D ). This finding provides further evidence for the novel observation that in HT-29 cells Akt mediates basal levels of NF-?B activity. Inhibition of Akt activation with both concentrations of API-2 also attenuated the protective effect of DCT in TNF-?-treated cells ( Figs. 7C and D ). Morphological features and Annexin-V staining in DCT-treated cells pre-incubated with API-2 were indistinguishable from control cells ( Fig. 7C ). Moreover, in cells treated with DCT, pre-incubation with API-2 increased the intensity (~2-fold) of the 85-kDa PARP cleavage fragment ( Fig. 7E ). Together, these results show clearly that bile acid-induced activation of Akt is required for NF-?B activation and reduced apoptosis. Bile acid-dependent evasion from apoptosis induced by ultraviolet (UV) radiation is also Akt- and NF-?B-dependent Stress-induced apoptosis is activated via two major pathways; TNF-? activates transmembrane death receptors and the extrinsic pathway, whereas UV radiation activates the intrinsic (mitochondrial) pathway. To exclude the possibility that the actions of bile acids are limited to TNF-?-induced apoptosis (extrinsic pathway), we examined their actions on UV-radiated cells. UV radiation (10 to 200 J/m2) induces apoptosis in various cell lines [ 57 – 61 ]. To determine the appropriate UV dose in H508 and HT-29 cells, we performed dose–response experiments. As shown in Fig. 8A , increasing doses of UV progressively increased H508 cell apoptosis. A UV dose of 10 J/m2 induced apoptosis in 40.0±3.8% of H508 cells, whereas 50 and 200 J/m2 caused apoptosis in 78.9±3.5 and 86.7±2.3% of cells, respectively ( Fig. 8A ). Because the percentage of apoptotic cells following treatment with 10 J/m2 was similar to that observed following treatment with TNF-? ( Fig. 1D ), we selected this UV dose for subsequent experiments. Without Annexin-V staining, features of apoptosis were evident in H508 cells but less striking than those seen in HT-29 cells (compare Fig. 8Ba to Fig. 1Aa ). After Annexin-V staining, it was apparent that approximately 40% of cells treated with UV were apoptotic ( Fig. 8Bb , middle panel) and that pre-treatment with DCT reduced the number of apoptotic cells ( Fig. 8B , right panel). Compared to H508 cells, the effects of UV radiation and the response to DCT were less consistent in HT-29 cells, perhaps reflecting their increased resistance to apoptosis [ 55 ]. Hence, we focused UV experiments on effects in H508 cells. As shown in Fig. 8C , pre-incubation with 100 ?M DCT reduced UV-induced apoptosis by ~50% (40.0±3.8% vs. 24.8±3.0%). Bay11-7082 (10 ?M), an inhibitor of NF-?B activation, and API-2 (5 ?M), an Akt inhibitor, attenuated the anti-apoptotic effects of the bile acid (24.3±3.0% apoptotic cells with DCT alone; 46.1±4.6% apoptotic cells with DCT plus Bay11-7082; 35.2±4.0% apoptotic cells with DCT plus API-2) ( Fig. 8D ). Likewise, pre-incubation of H508 cells with the bile acid attenuated UV-induced PARP degradation ( Fig. 8E ). In these experiments, because the PARP degradation signal following treatment with a UV dose of 10 J/m2 ( Fig. 8E , left) was less robust than observed with TNF-? ( Figs. 1E , 4D , 6D and 7E ), we also examined the actions of a higher UV dose, 50 J/m2 ( Fig. 8E , right). With both UV doses, inhibitors of NF-?B (Bay11-7082) and Akt (API-2) activation alone did not alter basal PARP degradation. Nonetheless, with both UV doses, NF-?B inhibitors blocked the anti-apoptotic actions of DCT ( Fig. 8E ). In UV-treated cells, adding either Bay11-7082 or API-2 in combination with DCT resulted in an 85-kDa PARP signal that was the same as that observed with UV treatment alone ( Fig. 8E ). Collectively, using two different assays to detect colon cancer cell apoptosis (Annexin-V staining and PARP degradation), these findings indicate that, as observed with TNF-?-induced apoptosis, pro-survival effects of bile acids on UV-treated H508 cells require both Akt and NF-?B activation.  Results Bile acids rescue human colon cancer cells from TNF-?-induced apoptosis The focus of the current study was to determine whether activation of NF-?B, a key downstream target of PI3K/Akt signaling, mediates deoxycholyltaurine (DCT)-induced rescue of colon cancer cells from apoptosis. To test this hypothesis, we examined the actions of DCT on survival of two human colon cancer cell lines, H508 and HT-29 cells, that co-express M3R and EGFR and were used by us to explore signaling actions of bile acids [ 8 , 9 , 37 ]. To identify an efficacious chemical stimulant of apoptosis, cells were treated with cycloheximide, hydrogen peroxide, staurosporine, deoxycholic acid, and tumor necrosis factor-? (TNF-?). Both colon cancer cell lines were resistant to most of these agents (data not shown). Nonetheless, as shown in Fig. 1 , in both HT-29 and H508 cells exposure to TNF-? (100 ng/ml) provoked consistent and robust apoptosis. TNF-?, a proinflammatory cytokine, has potent cytotoxic effects on intestinal cells and is widely used to induce apoptosis [ 41 – 43 ]. Although cytotoxic effects of TNF-? on many cells, including intestinal cells, are evident only if protein synthesis is inhibited, usually with cycloheximide [ 41 , 42 , 44 ], this was not necessary to observe the desired effects in colon cancer cells. Hence, to induce apoptosis in the following experiments TNF-? was used alone. Approximately 50% of TNF-?-treated cells showed microscopic features consistent with apoptosis ( Fig. 1Aa ). In H508 cells, typical morphological features of apoptosis were detected within 4 h of exposure to TNF-? and the percentage of apoptotic cells remained in the range of 50 to 60% after 24 h (not shown). Compared to H508 cells, HT-29 cells were more resistant to apoptosis at early time points but between 16 and 24 h demonstrated features of apoptosis that were confirmed by Annexin-V staining ( Fig. 1Ab ); with longer exposure to TNF-? more cells developed apoptosis (up to 80% apoptotic cells) (data not shown). We used HT-29 cells, to examine the dose–response for DCT-induced rescue of colon cancer cells from TNF-?-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 1B ). Concentrations of DCT greater than 1 ?M attenuated TNF-?-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 1B ). The maximal effect was observed with 100 ?M DCT; pre-incubation with 300 ?M DCT did not further reduce TNF-?-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 1B ). Hence, we selected 100 ?M DCT as our test concentration. As shown in Figs. 1B and D , pre-incubation with 100 ?M DCT attenuated TNF-?-induced apoptosis by 40% and 30% in HT-29 and H508 cells, respectively (52.4±3.2% vs. 31.1±3.7% for HT-29 cells; 49.6±1.9% vs. 35.1±2.4% for H508 cells). To increase sensitivity for detecting programmed cell death and to confirm the results of morphological assessment of apoptosis shown in Figs. 1A, B, and D , we used an early biochemical marker of apoptosis, cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), a 116-kDa nuclear DNA-binding protein that detects DNA strand breaks and functions in base excision repair. Caspase-3-activated cleavage of PARP into 85- and 25-kDa fragments is an established biochemical marker of apoptosis [ 40 ]. Time-course experiments in HT-29 cells showed that pre-incubation with DCT reduced PARP degradation at 16 and 24 h ( Fig. 1C ) and delayed the onset of apoptosis from 4 h in control cells to 6 h in DCT-treated H508 cells ( Fig. 1E ). At 6 h, PARP cleavage in H508 cells treated with TNF-? alone was approximately 80% greater than that observed in the presence of TNF-? plus 100 ?M DCT (determined by measuring the intensity of the p85 PARP band relative to the ?-actin loading control) ( Fig. 1E ). These results, using both morphological assessment and biochemical analysis in two colon cancer cell lines, demonstrate that DCT treatment reproducibly delays and attenuates TNF-?-induced apoptosis. DCT induces NF-?B nuclear translocation and activation Previously, we showed that DCT-induced activation of PI3K/Akt signaling alters the function of several downstream mediators of colon cancer cell survival and proliferation [ 37 ]. Here, we focused on NF-?B because the primary role of this molecule is considered to be transcriptional activation of anti-apoptotic genes [ 26 , 45 , 46 ]. To select appropriate bile acid concentrations and incubation times for experiments that follow, we examined both the dose–response and time-course for actions of DCT on NF-?B nuclear translocation and activation. Nuclear localization of NF-?B, stimulated by I?B phosphorylation and degradation, is commonly observed in breast, ovarian, colon, bladder and pancreatic cancer [ 47 , 48 ]. Likewise, nuclear NF-?B was observed in unstimulated H508 and HT-29 colon cancer cells. Hence, to analyze stimulatory effects of DCT, only 10 ?g nuclear protein was required to identify NF-?B by immunoblotting. Histone H2A, a nuclear protein, was used as a loading control. Exposure of H508 and HT-29 cells to 0.1 to 500 ?M DCT for 30 min caused a dose-dependent increase in nuclear NF-?B that was detected with 0.1 ?M DCT in H508 cells and 10 ?M DCT in HT-29 cells ( Fig. 2Aa ); the bile acid is a more potent inducer of NF-?B nuclear translocation in H508 compared to HT-29 cells. NF-?B nuclear translocation was maximal with 100 ?M DCT in H508 cells and 100 to 300 ?M DCT in HT-29 cells, concentrations that are consistent with anti-apoptotic effects of DCT shown in Fig. 1B . Moreover, DCT-induced nuclear translocation of NF-?B was delayed in HT-29 compared to H508 cells ( Fig. 2Ab ). Whereas in H508 cells a robust NF-?B nuclear signal was apparent at 10 min, this was not clearly observed in HT-29 cells until the 30-min time point ( Fig. 2Ab ). Based on data shown in Fig. 2A , for the following experiments in both cell lines, we selected a test dose of 100 ?M DCT and 30 min incubation. Overall, findings depicted in Fig. 2A indicate that DCT stimulates nuclear translocation of NF-?B at concentrations that reproducibly stimulate colon cancer cell proliferation [ 8 , 9 ] and are within the range measured in the normal human cecum [ 49 ]. To confirm that DCT-stimulated nuclear translocation of p65 NF-?B represents NF-?B activation, we used inhibitors of NF-?B activation. SN50, a cell-permeable peptide that blocks the nuclear localization signal for NF-?B, inhibits nuclear translocation [ 50 ]. MG-132 is a proteosome inhibitor [ 51 ]. Bay11-7085 is an I?B? kinase inhibitor. In both H508 and HT-29 cells, DCT-stimulated NF-?B activation was inhibited by these inhibitors of NF-?B activation ( Table 1 shows data for H508 cells). Detection of NF-?B nuclear translocation using immunofluorescence microscopy We examined the effects of EGF, a positive control, and DCT on NF-?B nuclear translocation using immunofluorescence microscopy. As shown in Fig. 2B , after treatment with either EGF or DCT the rhodamine-labeled NF-?B p65 subunit (red), located predominantly in the cytoplasm, was translocated to the nucleus. Counterstaining with Hoechst to highlight cell nuclei (blue) confirmed that the NF-?B signal was localized to the nucleus in these multi-nucleated malignant cells. In conjunction with the nuclear immunoblotting data shown in Fig. 2A , these findings confirm that DCT induces NF-?B nuclear translocation and mimics the actions of EGF. Bile acids enhance NF-?B-mediated transcriptional activity Having demonstrated that DCT stimulates nuclear translocation of NF-?B, it was important to verify that DCT stimulated NF-?B-dependent transcriptional activity. For this purpose, we used two experimental strategies; NF-?B motif binding and NF-?B-dependent promoter luciferase reporter gene assays. p65 NF-?B binding to oligonucleotides containing an NF-?B consensus binding site was quantified by ELISA. Specificity of NF-?B motif binding activity was confirmed by experiments in which adding no oligonucleotide or a mutated oligonucleotide did not alter NF-?B motif binding activity. As expected, binding activity was inhibited when competing wild-type NF-?B oligonucleotide was used (data not shown). In H508 and HT-29 cells treated with the bile acid, NF-?B DNA binding activity increased 1.8- and 2.5-fold, respectively, compared to control (0.11±0.01 vs. 0.20±0.02 in H508 cells; 0.08±0.01 vs. 0.20±0.01 in HT-29 cells) ( Fig. 2C ). Increased binding activity was evident within 30 min and decreased with long-term incubation (4 to 24 h, data not shown), suggesting that DCT-induced NF-?B DNA binding activity is transient. These results indicate that DCT activates NF-?B-induced transcriptional activity in colon cancer cells. Moreover, in H508 cells, attenuation of these effects by NF-?B inhibitors (SN50, MG132, and Bay11-7085; Table 1 , right column), provided further evidence for the specificity of the observed DCT-induced NF-?B activation. Increased levels of NF-?B binding activity in cells exposed to DCT were associated with induction of NF-?B transcriptional activity as measured using NF-?B-dependent promoter luciferase reporter gene assays ( Fig. 2D ). Cells were co-transfected with each reporter construct (NF-?B-Luc or pTAL-Luc) ( Fig. 2Da ) and the Renilla luciferase vector pRL-TK. Luciferase activity ( Fig. 2Db ) was quantified and revealed a 5.5- and 4.6-fold induction in DCT-stimulated HT-29 and H508 cells, respectively, compared to control. Cells transfected with the control reporter vector pTAL-Luc, lacking the NF-?B binding element, were not altered by DCT treatment, thereby demonstrating the specificity of NF-?B-dependent gene transcription. Collectively, these findings indicate that DCT stimulates both NF-?B nuclear translocation and NF-?B-dependent transcriptional activity. TNF-?-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation is prolonged in the presence of bile acids Although TNF-? induces apoptosis, it was reported that TNF-? may activate NF-?B [ 52 – 54 ]. To explore this possibility in colon cancer cells, we examined nuclear translocation of NF-?B following treatment with TNF-?, DCT, and the combination of TNF-? plus DCT. As shown in Fig. 3A , in both HT-29 and H508 cells, at early time points (2 to 4 h), treatment with TNF-? alone stimulated NF-?B nuclear translocation. Diminished nuclear translocation, compared to basal, was observed at later times (>6 h in HT-29 cells and >4 h in H508 cells). Whereas TNF-? robustly induced apoptosis at 24 and 6 h in HT-29 and H508 cells, respectively ( Figs. 1C and E ), NF-?B nuclear translocation was not observed at these times ( Fig. 3 ). Hence, we observed an inverse relationship between TNF-?-induced apoptosis and TNF-?-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation. In both cell lines, treatment with DCT alone also demonstrated NF-?B nuclear translocation primarily at early time points ( Fig. 3 ). Strikingly, in both cell lines, co-treatment with DCT plus TNF-? augmented NF-?B nuclear translocation. Densitometry of the gels shown in Fig. 3A confirmed persistence of the NF-?B nuclear signal following treatment with the combination of TNF-? plus DCT ( Fig. 3B ). Persistent signal for nuclear NF-?B with the combination of TNF-? and DCT occurred at earlier time points in H508 cells (4–6 h) compared to HT-29 cells (16–24 h). Nonetheless, the time-course for augmentation by DCT of NF-?B nuclear translocation ( Fig. 3B ) is compatible with the delay in apoptosis caused by addition of DCT ( Figs. 1C and E ). Inactivation of NF-?B increases susceptibility to apoptosis To determine the relationship between DCT, its anti-apoptotic properties, and activation of NF-?B, we examined the effects of an I?Ba ‘super-repressor’ (AdI?BSR). To compensate for delayed apoptosis in HT-29 compared to H508 cells ( Fig. 1 ) [ 55 , 56 ], H508 cells were incubated with TNF-? for 6 h and HT-29 cells were incubated for 24 h. In both cell lines, induction of NF-?B reporter activity by DCT was attenuated by co-transfection with an adenoviral vector encoding non-degradable I?B? mutant (AdI?BSR) cDNA ( Fig. 4A ); DCT-stimulated NF-?B activation was reduced by >70% in HT-29 cells ( p <0.001) ( Fig. 4Aa ) and reduced to basal levels in H508 cells ( p < 0.01) ( Fig. 4Ab ). Likewise, in DCT-stimulated cells, transfection with AdI?BSR attenuated resistance to TNF-?-induced apoptosis ( Figs. 4B, C and D ). With AdI?BSR, the percentage of DCT-stimulated apoptotic cells increased from 30 to 50% in HT-29 cells ( Fig. 4Ca ) and from 35 to 45% in H508 cells ( Fig. 4Cb ) ( p <0.05 in both cell lines); the values for DCT in the presence of Adl BSR were not significantly different from those with TNF-? alone. Transfection with null adenoviral vector did not alter DCT-stimulated NF-?B activation or resistance to apoptosis ( Fig. 4 ), thereby confirming the specificity of the observed effects. As shown in Fig. 4D , neither AdI?BSR nor DCT treatment alone altered PARP cleavage. In contrast, treatment of HT-29 and H508 cells with TNF-? for 24 and 6 h, respectively, caused robust induction of programmed cell death as evidenced by an intense band for the 85-kDa cleavage product ( Fig. 4D ). Pretreatment with DCT markedly attenuated TNF-?-induced apoptosis; the intensity of the 85-kDa band was reduced by over 70% in H508 cells and by 40% in HT-29 cells. In both cell lines, anti-apoptotic actions of DCT were attenuated in the presence of AdI?BSR (the intensity of the 85-kDa PARP cleavage fragment was nearly the same as that observed with TNF-? alone) ( Fig. 4D ). Collectively, these data provide strong evidence to support the hypothesis that DCT rescues TNF-?-treated cells from apoptosis by an NF-?B-dependent mechanism. Effects of inhibiting post-EGFR signaling on EGF- and bile acid-induced nuclear translocation of NF-?B To confirm in H508 cells that activation of post-EGFR signaling regulates DCT-induced activation of NF-?B we examined the effects of chemical inhibitors. EGF was used as a positive control in all experiments. EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors, PD168393 and AG1478, inhibited basal and DCT-induced NF-?B activation ( Fig. 5A ). As anticipated, two well-characterized PI3K inhibitors, LY294002 and wortmannin, inhibited both EGF- and DCT-induced activation of NF-?B ( Fig. 5B ). In contrast, a MEK (ERK kinase) inhibitor (PD98059) did not alter EGF- or DCT-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation, whereas a Src inhibitor (pp2) had a modest effect ( Fig. 5C ). These findings indicate an important role for PI3K but not ERK signaling in DCT-induced up regulation of NF-?B activity. DCT-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation was attenuated by adding an inhibitor of NF-?B transport through the nuclear membrane (SN50), a proteosome inhibitor (MG-132), and two I?B? kinase inhibitors (Bay11-7082 and PDTC) ( Figs. 5D, E , and Table 1 , left column); all pointing to a key role for NF-?B. Inhibition of EGFR activation attenuates bile acid-induced NF-?B activation and protection from TNF-?-induced apoptosis To confirm that EGFR is required for the anti-apoptotic actions of bile acids, we examined the effect of adding an antibody to the EGFR ligand binding domain (LA1) and a chemical inhibitor of EGFR activation (AG1478). As shown in Fig. 6A , in HT-29 cells, neither LA1 nor AG1478 alone altered basal levels of nuclear NF-?B. In contrast, both means of preventing EGFR activation attenuated bile acid-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation. Likewise, the use of these inhibitors demonstrated that EGFR activation is required for bile acid-induced protection of cells from TNF-?-induced apoptosis (using both the Annexin-V and PARP degradation assays) ( Figs. 6B–D ). In DCT-treated cells, addition of LA1 ( Fig. 6B ) and AG1478 (micrographs not shown) attenuated resistance to TNF-?-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 6B ). With LA1 and AG1478, the percentage of DCT-treated apoptotic cells increased from 33.3% to 47.9% and 46.9%, respectively ( p <0.01 and 0.05, respectively) ( Fig. 6C ). Moreover, the values for DCT in the presence of both inhibitors of EGFR activation were not significantly different from those with TNF-? alone ( Fig. 6C ). As shown in Fig. 6D , neither LA1 nor AG1478 alone altered PARP cleavage. In contrast, treatment of HT-29 cells with DCT plus either LA1 or AG1478 attenuated the anti-apoptotic actions of DCT; the intensity of the 85-kDa PARP cleavage fragment was nearly the same as that observed with TNF-? alone ( Fig. 6D ). Collectively, these data show clearly that EGFR activation is critical for the anti-apoptotic actions of bile acids, including activation of NF-?B. Inhibition of Akt prevents bile acid-induced NF-?B activation The above findings are consistent with a key regulatory role for PI3K/Akt signaling downstream of EGFR in mediating DCT-induced attenuation of apoptosis [ 37 ]. To define further the role of Akt in DCT-dependent NF-?B activation and increased resistance to TNF-?-induced apoptosis, we reduced Akt expression in HT-29 cells using an expression vector encoding dominant negative (DN) akt cDNA with a Myc tag under the control of a cytomegalovirus promoter. Cells transfected with wild-type akt served as a positive control. Transfection with DN- akt reduced nuclear translocation of NF-?B ( Fig. 7Aa ) and NF-?B-dependent luciferase activity ( Fig. 7B ). As shown in Fig. 7Ab , this result was confirmed using API-2, a cell-permeable tricyclic nucleoside that selectively inhibits Akt phosphorylation, thereby inhibiting Akt activation. The luciferase assay showed that inhibition of Akt activation by expression of DN- akt decreased DCT-induced NF-?B activation by 50% compared to that observed in control cells (3.06±0.40 vs. 6.09±0.46 for DN- akt and control, respectively) ( Fig. 7B ). Reduced NF-?B activation was also observed in control cells (i.e. cells without DCT stimulation); basal activity was again inhibited ~50% (0.84± 0.08 vs. 1.94±0.25 for DN- akt and control, respectively) ( Fig. 7B ). These results indicate that in HT-29 cells Akt mediates both basal and DCT-stimulated activation of NF-?B. Bile acid-dependent evasion from apoptosis is both Akt- and NF-?B-dependent To confirm the role of Akt in cell survival, a chemical inhibitor (API-2) was used. In HT-29 cells, inhibition of Akt activation using 5 ?M API-2 resulted in 4-fold enhancement of programmed cell death (from ~2 to 8%; p <0.01) ( Fig. 7D ). This finding provides further evidence for the novel observation that in HT-29 cells Akt mediates basal levels of NF-?B activity. Inhibition of Akt activation with both concentrations of API-2 also attenuated the protective effect of DCT in TNF-?-treated cells ( Figs. 7C and D ). Morphological features and Annexin-V staining in DCT-treated cells pre-incubated with API-2 were indistinguishable from control cells ( Fig. 7C ). Moreover, in cells treated with DCT, pre-incubation with API-2 increased the intensity (~2-fold) of the 85-kDa PARP cleavage fragment ( Fig. 7E ). Together, these results show clearly that bile acid-induced activation of Akt is required for NF-?B activation and reduced apoptosis. Bile acid-dependent evasion from apoptosis induced by ultraviolet (UV) radiation is also Akt- and NF-?B-dependent Stress-induced apoptosis is activated via two major pathways; TNF-? activates transmembrane death receptors and the extrinsic pathway, whereas UV radiation activates the intrinsic (mitochondrial) pathway. To exclude the possibility that the actions of bile acids are limited to TNF-?-induced apoptosis (extrinsic pathway), we examined their actions on UV-radiated cells. UV radiation (10 to 200 J/m2) induces apoptosis in various cell lines [ 57 – 61 ]. To determine the appropriate UV dose in H508 and HT-29 cells, we performed dose–response experiments. As shown in Fig. 8A , increasing doses of UV progressively increased H508 cell apoptosis. A UV dose of 10 J/m2 induced apoptosis in 40.0±3.8% of H508 cells, whereas 50 and 200 J/m2 caused apoptosis in 78.9±3.5 and 86.7±2.3% of cells, respectively ( Fig. 8A ). Because the percentage of apoptotic cells following treatment with 10 J/m2 was similar to that observed following treatment with TNF-? ( Fig. 1D ), we selected this UV dose for subsequent experiments. Without Annexin-V staining, features of apoptosis were evident in H508 cells but less striking than those seen in HT-29 cells (compare Fig. 8Ba to Fig. 1Aa ). After Annexin-V staining, it was apparent that approximately 40% of cells treated with UV were apoptotic ( Fig. 8Bb , middle panel) and that pre-treatment with DCT reduced the number of apoptotic cells ( Fig. 8B , right panel). Compared to H508 cells, the effects of UV radiation and the response to DCT were less consistent in HT-29 cells, perhaps reflecting their increased resistance to apoptosis [ 55 ]. Hence, we focused UV experiments on effects in H508 cells. As shown in Fig. 8C , pre-incubation with 100 ?M DCT reduced UV-induced apoptosis by ~50% (40.0±3.8% vs. 24.8±3.0%). Bay11-7082 (10 ?M), an inhibitor of NF-?B activation, and API-2 (5 ?M), an Akt inhibitor, attenuated the anti-apoptotic effects of the bile acid (24.3±3.0% apoptotic cells with DCT alone; 46.1±4.6% apoptotic cells with DCT plus Bay11-7082; 35.2±4.0% apoptotic cells with DCT plus API-2) ( Fig. 8D ). Likewise, pre-incubation of H508 cells with the bile acid attenuated UV-induced PARP degradation ( Fig. 8E ). In these experiments, because the PARP degradation signal following treatment with a UV dose of 10 J/m2 ( Fig. 8E , left) was less robust than observed with TNF-? ( Figs. 1E , 4D , 6D and 7E ), we also examined the actions of a higher UV dose, 50 J/m2 ( Fig. 8E , right). With both UV doses, inhibitors of NF-?B (Bay11-7082) and Akt (API-2) activation alone did not alter basal PARP degradation. Nonetheless, with both UV doses, NF-?B inhibitors blocked the anti-apoptotic actions of DCT ( Fig. 8E ). In UV-treated cells, adding either Bay11-7082 or API-2 in combination with DCT resulted in an 85-kDa PARP signal that was the same as that observed with UV treatment alone ( Fig. 8E ). Collectively, using two different assays to detect colon cancer cell apoptosis (Annexin-V staining and PARP degradation), these findings indicate that, as observed with TNF-?-induced apoptosis, pro-survival effects of bile acids on UV-treated H508 cells require both Akt and NF-?B activation.  Bile acids rescue human colon cancer cells from TNF-?-induced apoptosis The focus of the current study was to determine whether activation of NF-?B, a key downstream target of PI3K/Akt signaling, mediates deoxycholyltaurine (DCT)-induced rescue of colon cancer cells from apoptosis. To test this hypothesis, we examined the actions of DCT on survival of two human colon cancer cell lines, H508 and HT-29 cells, that co-express M3R and EGFR and were used by us to explore signaling actions of bile acids [ 8 , 9 , 37 ]. To identify an efficacious chemical stimulant of apoptosis, cells were treated with cycloheximide, hydrogen peroxide, staurosporine, deoxycholic acid, and tumor necrosis factor-? (TNF-?). Both colon cancer cell lines were resistant to most of these agents (data not shown). Nonetheless, as shown in Fig. 1 , in both HT-29 and H508 cells exposure to TNF-? (100 ng/ml) provoked consistent and robust apoptosis. TNF-?, a proinflammatory cytokine, has potent cytotoxic effects on intestinal cells and is widely used to induce apoptosis [ 41 – 43 ]. Although cytotoxic effects of TNF-? on many cells, including intestinal cells, are evident only if protein synthesis is inhibited, usually with cycloheximide [ 41 , 42 , 44 ], this was not necessary to observe the desired effects in colon cancer cells. Hence, to induce apoptosis in the following experiments TNF-? was used alone. Approximately 50% of TNF-?-treated cells showed microscopic features consistent with apoptosis ( Fig. 1Aa ). In H508 cells, typical morphological features of apoptosis were detected within 4 h of exposure to TNF-? and the percentage of apoptotic cells remained in the range of 50 to 60% after 24 h (not shown). Compared to H508 cells, HT-29 cells were more resistant to apoptosis at early time points but between 16 and 24 h demonstrated features of apoptosis that were confirmed by Annexin-V staining ( Fig. 1Ab ); with longer exposure to TNF-? more cells developed apoptosis (up to 80% apoptotic cells) (data not shown). We used HT-29 cells, to examine the dose–response for DCT-induced rescue of colon cancer cells from TNF-?-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 1B ). Concentrations of DCT greater than 1 ?M attenuated TNF-?-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 1B ). The maximal effect was observed with 100 ?M DCT; pre-incubation with 300 ?M DCT did not further reduce TNF-?-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 1B ). Hence, we selected 100 ?M DCT as our test concentration. As shown in Figs. 1B and D , pre-incubation with 100 ?M DCT attenuated TNF-?-induced apoptosis by 40% and 30% in HT-29 and H508 cells, respectively (52.4±3.2% vs. 31.1±3.7% for HT-29 cells; 49.6±1.9% vs. 35.1±2.4% for H508 cells). To increase sensitivity for detecting programmed cell death and to confirm the results of morphological assessment of apoptosis shown in Figs. 1A, B, and D , we used an early biochemical marker of apoptosis, cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), a 116-kDa nuclear DNA-binding protein that detects DNA strand breaks and functions in base excision repair. Caspase-3-activated cleavage of PARP into 85- and 25-kDa fragments is an established biochemical marker of apoptosis [ 40 ]. Time-course experiments in HT-29 cells showed that pre-incubation with DCT reduced PARP degradation at 16 and 24 h ( Fig. 1C ) and delayed the onset of apoptosis from 4 h in control cells to 6 h in DCT-treated H508 cells ( Fig. 1E ). At 6 h, PARP cleavage in H508 cells treated with TNF-? alone was approximately 80% greater than that observed in the presence of TNF-? plus 100 ?M DCT (determined by measuring the intensity of the p85 PARP band relative to the ?-actin loading control) ( Fig. 1E ). These results, using both morphological assessment and biochemical analysis in two colon cancer cell lines, demonstrate that DCT treatment reproducibly delays and attenuates TNF-?-induced apoptosis.  Bile acids rescue human colon cancer cells from TNF-?-induced apoptosis The focus of the current study was to determine whether activation of NF-?B, a key downstream target of PI3K/Akt signaling, mediates deoxycholyltaurine (DCT)-induced rescue of colon cancer cells from apoptosis. To test this hypothesis, we examined the actions of DCT on survival of two human colon cancer cell lines, H508 and HT-29 cells, that co-express M3R and EGFR and were used by us to explore signaling actions of bile acids [ 8 , 9 , 37 ]. To identify an efficacious chemical stimulant of apoptosis, cells were treated with cycloheximide, hydrogen peroxide, staurosporine, deoxycholic acid, and tumor necrosis factor-? (TNF-?). Both colon cancer cell lines were resistant to most of these agents (data not shown). Nonetheless, as shown in Fig. 1 , in both HT-29 and H508 cells exposure to TNF-? (100 ng/ml) provoked consistent and robust apoptosis. TNF-?, a proinflammatory cytokine, has potent cytotoxic effects on intestinal cells and is widely used to induce apoptosis [ 41 – 43 ]. Although cytotoxic effects of TNF-? on many cells, including intestinal cells, are evident only if protein synthesis is inhibited, usually with cycloheximide [ 41 , 42 , 44 ], this was not necessary to observe the desired effects in colon cancer cells. Hence, to induce apoptosis in the following experiments TNF-? was used alone. Approximately 50% of TNF-?-treated cells showed microscopic features consistent with apoptosis ( Fig. 1Aa ). In H508 cells, typical morphological features of apoptosis were detected within 4 h of exposure to TNF-? and the percentage of apoptotic cells remained in the range of 50 to 60% after 24 h (not shown). Compared to H508 cells, HT-29 cells were more resistant to apoptosis at early time points but between 16 and 24 h demonstrated features of apoptosis that were confirmed by Annexin-V staining ( Fig. 1Ab ); with longer exposure to TNF-? more cells developed apoptosis (up to 80% apoptotic cells) (data not shown). We used HT-29 cells, to examine the dose–response for DCT-induced rescue of colon cancer cells from TNF-?-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 1B ). Concentrations of DCT greater than 1 ?M attenuated TNF-?-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 1B ). The maximal effect was observed with 100 ?M DCT; pre-incubation with 300 ?M DCT did not further reduce TNF-?-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 1B ). Hence, we selected 100 ?M DCT as our test concentration. As shown in Figs. 1B and D , pre-incubation with 100 ?M DCT attenuated TNF-?-induced apoptosis by 40% and 30% in HT-29 and H508 cells, respectively (52.4±3.2% vs. 31.1±3.7% for HT-29 cells; 49.6±1.9% vs. 35.1±2.4% for H508 cells). To increase sensitivity for detecting programmed cell death and to confirm the results of morphological assessment of apoptosis shown in Figs. 1A, B, and D , we used an early biochemical marker of apoptosis, cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), a 116-kDa nuclear DNA-binding protein that detects DNA strand breaks and functions in base excision repair. Caspase-3-activated cleavage of PARP into 85- and 25-kDa fragments is an established biochemical marker of apoptosis [ 40 ]. Time-course experiments in HT-29 cells showed that pre-incubation with DCT reduced PARP degradation at 16 and 24 h ( Fig. 1C ) and delayed the onset of apoptosis from 4 h in control cells to 6 h in DCT-treated H508 cells ( Fig. 1E ). At 6 h, PARP cleavage in H508 cells treated with TNF-? alone was approximately 80% greater than that observed in the presence of TNF-? plus 100 ?M DCT (determined by measuring the intensity of the p85 PARP band relative to the ?-actin loading control) ( Fig. 1E ). These results, using both morphological assessment and biochemical analysis in two colon cancer cell lines, demonstrate that DCT treatment reproducibly delays and attenuates TNF-?-induced apoptosis.  DCT induces NF-?B nuclear translocation and activation Previously, we showed that DCT-induced activation of PI3K/Akt signaling alters the function of several downstream mediators of colon cancer cell survival and proliferation [ 37 ]. Here, we focused on NF-?B because the primary role of this molecule is considered to be transcriptional activation of anti-apoptotic genes [ 26 , 45 , 46 ]. To select appropriate bile acid concentrations and incubation times for experiments that follow, we examined both the dose–response and time-course for actions of DCT on NF-?B nuclear translocation and activation. Nuclear localization of NF-?B, stimulated by I?B phosphorylation and degradation, is commonly observed in breast, ovarian, colon, bladder and pancreatic cancer [ 47 , 48 ]. Likewise, nuclear NF-?B was observed in unstimulated H508 and HT-29 colon cancer cells. Hence, to analyze stimulatory effects of DCT, only 10 ?g nuclear protein was required to identify NF-?B by immunoblotting. Histone H2A, a nuclear protein, was used as a loading control. Exposure of H508 and HT-29 cells to 0.1 to 500 ?M DCT for 30 min caused a dose-dependent increase in nuclear NF-?B that was detected with 0.1 ?M DCT in H508 cells and 10 ?M DCT in HT-29 cells ( Fig. 2Aa ); the bile acid is a more potent inducer of NF-?B nuclear translocation in H508 compared to HT-29 cells. NF-?B nuclear translocation was maximal with 100 ?M DCT in H508 cells and 100 to 300 ?M DCT in HT-29 cells, concentrations that are consistent with anti-apoptotic effects of DCT shown in Fig. 1B . Moreover, DCT-induced nuclear translocation of NF-?B was delayed in HT-29 compared to H508 cells ( Fig. 2Ab ). Whereas in H508 cells a robust NF-?B nuclear signal was apparent at 10 min, this was not clearly observed in HT-29 cells until the 30-min time point ( Fig. 2Ab ). Based on data shown in Fig. 2A , for the following experiments in both cell lines, we selected a test dose of 100 ?M DCT and 30 min incubation. Overall, findings depicted in Fig. 2A indicate that DCT stimulates nuclear translocation of NF-?B at concentrations that reproducibly stimulate colon cancer cell proliferation [ 8 , 9 ] and are within the range measured in the normal human cecum [ 49 ]. To confirm that DCT-stimulated nuclear translocation of p65 NF-?B represents NF-?B activation, we used inhibitors of NF-?B activation. SN50, a cell-permeable peptide that blocks the nuclear localization signal for NF-?B, inhibits nuclear translocation [ 50 ]. MG-132 is a proteosome inhibitor [ 51 ]. Bay11-7085 is an I?B? kinase inhibitor. In both H508 and HT-29 cells, DCT-stimulated NF-?B activation was inhibited by these inhibitors of NF-?B activation ( Table 1 shows data for H508 cells).  DCT induces NF-?B nuclear translocation and activation Previously, we showed that DCT-induced activation of PI3K/Akt signaling alters the function of several downstream mediators of colon cancer cell survival and proliferation [ 37 ]. Here, we focused on NF-?B because the primary role of this molecule is considered to be transcriptional activation of anti-apoptotic genes [ 26 , 45 , 46 ]. To select appropriate bile acid concentrations and incubation times for experiments that follow, we examined both the dose–response and time-course for actions of DCT on NF-?B nuclear translocation and activation. Nuclear localization of NF-?B, stimulated by I?B phosphorylation and degradation, is commonly observed in breast, ovarian, colon, bladder and pancreatic cancer [ 47 , 48 ]. Likewise, nuclear NF-?B was observed in unstimulated H508 and HT-29 colon cancer cells. Hence, to analyze stimulatory effects of DCT, only 10 ?g nuclear protein was required to identify NF-?B by immunoblotting. Histone H2A, a nuclear protein, was used as a loading control. Exposure of H508 and HT-29 cells to 0.1 to 500 ?M DCT for 30 min caused a dose-dependent increase in nuclear NF-?B that was detected with 0.1 ?M DCT in H508 cells and 10 ?M DCT in HT-29 cells ( Fig. 2Aa ); the bile acid is a more potent inducer of NF-?B nuclear translocation in H508 compared to HT-29 cells. NF-?B nuclear translocation was maximal with 100 ?M DCT in H508 cells and 100 to 300 ?M DCT in HT-29 cells, concentrations that are consistent with anti-apoptotic effects of DCT shown in Fig. 1B . Moreover, DCT-induced nuclear translocation of NF-?B was delayed in HT-29 compared to H508 cells ( Fig. 2Ab ). Whereas in H508 cells a robust NF-?B nuclear signal was apparent at 10 min, this was not clearly observed in HT-29 cells until the 30-min time point ( Fig. 2Ab ). Based on data shown in Fig. 2A , for the following experiments in both cell lines, we selected a test dose of 100 ?M DCT and 30 min incubation. Overall, findings depicted in Fig. 2A indicate that DCT stimulates nuclear translocation of NF-?B at concentrations that reproducibly stimulate colon cancer cell proliferation [ 8 , 9 ] and are within the range measured in the normal human cecum [ 49 ]. To confirm that DCT-stimulated nuclear translocation of p65 NF-?B represents NF-?B activation, we used inhibitors of NF-?B activation. SN50, a cell-permeable peptide that blocks the nuclear localization signal for NF-?B, inhibits nuclear translocation [ 50 ]. MG-132 is a proteosome inhibitor [ 51 ]. Bay11-7085 is an I?B? kinase inhibitor. In both H508 and HT-29 cells, DCT-stimulated NF-?B activation was inhibited by these inhibitors of NF-?B activation ( Table 1 shows data for H508 cells).  Detection of NF-?B nuclear translocation using immunofluorescence microscopy We examined the effects of EGF, a positive control, and DCT on NF-?B nuclear translocation using immunofluorescence microscopy. As shown in Fig. 2B , after treatment with either EGF or DCT the rhodamine-labeled NF-?B p65 subunit (red), located predominantly in the cytoplasm, was translocated to the nucleus. Counterstaining with Hoechst to highlight cell nuclei (blue) confirmed that the NF-?B signal was localized to the nucleus in these multi-nucleated malignant cells. In conjunction with the nuclear immunoblotting data shown in Fig. 2A , these findings confirm that DCT induces NF-?B nuclear translocation and mimics the actions of EGF.  Detection of NF-?B nuclear translocation using immunofluorescence microscopy We examined the effects of EGF, a positive control, and DCT on NF-?B nuclear translocation using immunofluorescence microscopy. As shown in Fig. 2B , after treatment with either EGF or DCT the rhodamine-labeled NF-?B p65 subunit (red), located predominantly in the cytoplasm, was translocated to the nucleus. Counterstaining with Hoechst to highlight cell nuclei (blue) confirmed that the NF-?B signal was localized to the nucleus in these multi-nucleated malignant cells. In conjunction with the nuclear immunoblotting data shown in Fig. 2A , these findings confirm that DCT induces NF-?B nuclear translocation and mimics the actions of EGF.  Bile acids enhance NF-?B-mediated transcriptional activity Having demonstrated that DCT stimulates nuclear translocation of NF-?B, it was important to verify that DCT stimulated NF-?B-dependent transcriptional activity. For this purpose, we used two experimental strategies; NF-?B motif binding and NF-?B-dependent promoter luciferase reporter gene assays. p65 NF-?B binding to oligonucleotides containing an NF-?B consensus binding site was quantified by ELISA. Specificity of NF-?B motif binding activity was confirmed by experiments in which adding no oligonucleotide or a mutated oligonucleotide did not alter NF-?B motif binding activity. As expected, binding activity was inhibited when competing wild-type NF-?B oligonucleotide was used (data not shown). In H508 and HT-29 cells treated with the bile acid, NF-?B DNA binding activity increased 1.8- and 2.5-fold, respectively, compared to control (0.11±0.01 vs. 0.20±0.02 in H508 cells; 0.08±0.01 vs. 0.20±0.01 in HT-29 cells) ( Fig. 2C ). Increased binding activity was evident within 30 min and decreased with long-term incubation (4 to 24 h, data not shown), suggesting that DCT-induced NF-?B DNA binding activity is transient. These results indicate that DCT activates NF-?B-induced transcriptional activity in colon cancer cells. Moreover, in H508 cells, attenuation of these effects by NF-?B inhibitors (SN50, MG132, and Bay11-7085; Table 1 , right column), provided further evidence for the specificity of the observed DCT-induced NF-?B activation. Increased levels of NF-?B binding activity in cells exposed to DCT were associated with induction of NF-?B transcriptional activity as measured using NF-?B-dependent promoter luciferase reporter gene assays ( Fig. 2D ). Cells were co-transfected with each reporter construct (NF-?B-Luc or pTAL-Luc) ( Fig. 2Da ) and the Renilla luciferase vector pRL-TK. Luciferase activity ( Fig. 2Db ) was quantified and revealed a 5.5- and 4.6-fold induction in DCT-stimulated HT-29 and H508 cells, respectively, compared to control. Cells transfected with the control reporter vector pTAL-Luc, lacking the NF-?B binding element, were not altered by DCT treatment, thereby demonstrating the specificity of NF-?B-dependent gene transcription. Collectively, these findings indicate that DCT stimulates both NF-?B nuclear translocation and NF-?B-dependent transcriptional activity.  Bile acids enhance NF-?B-mediated transcriptional activity Having demonstrated that DCT stimulates nuclear translocation of NF-?B, it was important to verify that DCT stimulated NF-?B-dependent transcriptional activity. For this purpose, we used two experimental strategies; NF-?B motif binding and NF-?B-dependent promoter luciferase reporter gene assays. p65 NF-?B binding to oligonucleotides containing an NF-?B consensus binding site was quantified by ELISA. Specificity of NF-?B motif binding activity was confirmed by experiments in which adding no oligonucleotide or a mutated oligonucleotide did not alter NF-?B motif binding activity. As expected, binding activity was inhibited when competing wild-type NF-?B oligonucleotide was used (data not shown). In H508 and HT-29 cells treated with the bile acid, NF-?B DNA binding activity increased 1.8- and 2.5-fold, respectively, compared to control (0.11±0.01 vs. 0.20±0.02 in H508 cells; 0.08±0.01 vs. 0.20±0.01 in HT-29 cells) ( Fig. 2C ). Increased binding activity was evident within 30 min and decreased with long-term incubation (4 to 24 h, data not shown), suggesting that DCT-induced NF-?B DNA binding activity is transient. These results indicate that DCT activates NF-?B-induced transcriptional activity in colon cancer cells. Moreover, in H508 cells, attenuation of these effects by NF-?B inhibitors (SN50, MG132, and Bay11-7085; Table 1 , right column), provided further evidence for the specificity of the observed DCT-induced NF-?B activation. Increased levels of NF-?B binding activity in cells exposed to DCT were associated with induction of NF-?B transcriptional activity as measured using NF-?B-dependent promoter luciferase reporter gene assays ( Fig. 2D ). Cells were co-transfected with each reporter construct (NF-?B-Luc or pTAL-Luc) ( Fig. 2Da ) and the Renilla luciferase vector pRL-TK. Luciferase activity ( Fig. 2Db ) was quantified and revealed a 5.5- and 4.6-fold induction in DCT-stimulated HT-29 and H508 cells, respectively, compared to control. Cells transfected with the control reporter vector pTAL-Luc, lacking the NF-?B binding element, were not altered by DCT treatment, thereby demonstrating the specificity of NF-?B-dependent gene transcription. Collectively, these findings indicate that DCT stimulates both NF-?B nuclear translocation and NF-?B-dependent transcriptional activity.  TNF-?-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation is prolonged in the presence of bile acids Although TNF-? induces apoptosis, it was reported that TNF-? may activate NF-?B [ 52 – 54 ]. To explore this possibility in colon cancer cells, we examined nuclear translocation of NF-?B following treatment with TNF-?, DCT, and the combination of TNF-? plus DCT. As shown in Fig. 3A , in both HT-29 and H508 cells, at early time points (2 to 4 h), treatment with TNF-? alone stimulated NF-?B nuclear translocation. Diminished nuclear translocation, compared to basal, was observed at later times (>6 h in HT-29 cells and >4 h in H508 cells). Whereas TNF-? robustly induced apoptosis at 24 and 6 h in HT-29 and H508 cells, respectively ( Figs. 1C and E ), NF-?B nuclear translocation was not observed at these times ( Fig. 3 ). Hence, we observed an inverse relationship between TNF-?-induced apoptosis and TNF-?-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation. In both cell lines, treatment with DCT alone also demonstrated NF-?B nuclear translocation primarily at early time points ( Fig. 3 ). Strikingly, in both cell lines, co-treatment with DCT plus TNF-? augmented NF-?B nuclear translocation. Densitometry of the gels shown in Fig. 3A confirmed persistence of the NF-?B nuclear signal following treatment with the combination of TNF-? plus DCT ( Fig. 3B ). Persistent signal for nuclear NF-?B with the combination of TNF-? and DCT occurred at earlier time points in H508 cells (4–6 h) compared to HT-29 cells (16–24 h). Nonetheless, the time-course for augmentation by DCT of NF-?B nuclear translocation ( Fig. 3B ) is compatible with the delay in apoptosis caused by addition of DCT ( Figs. 1C and E ).  TNF-?-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation is prolonged in the presence of bile acids Although TNF-? induces apoptosis, it was reported that TNF-? may activate NF-?B [ 52 – 54 ]. To explore this possibility in colon cancer cells, we examined nuclear translocation of NF-?B following treatment with TNF-?, DCT, and the combination of TNF-? plus DCT. As shown in Fig. 3A , in both HT-29 and H508 cells, at early time points (2 to 4 h), treatment with TNF-? alone stimulated NF-?B nuclear translocation. Diminished nuclear translocation, compared to basal, was observed at later times (>6 h in HT-29 cells and >4 h in H508 cells). Whereas TNF-? robustly induced apoptosis at 24 and 6 h in HT-29 and H508 cells, respectively ( Figs. 1C and E ), NF-?B nuclear translocation was not observed at these times ( Fig. 3 ). Hence, we observed an inverse relationship between TNF-?-induced apoptosis and TNF-?-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation. In both cell lines, treatment with DCT alone also demonstrated NF-?B nuclear translocation primarily at early time points ( Fig. 3 ). Strikingly, in both cell lines, co-treatment with DCT plus TNF-? augmented NF-?B nuclear translocation. Densitometry of the gels shown in Fig. 3A confirmed persistence of the NF-?B nuclear signal following treatment with the combination of TNF-? plus DCT ( Fig. 3B ). Persistent signal for nuclear NF-?B with the combination of TNF-? and DCT occurred at earlier time points in H508 cells (4–6 h) compared to HT-29 cells (16–24 h). Nonetheless, the time-course for augmentation by DCT of NF-?B nuclear translocation ( Fig. 3B ) is compatible with the delay in apoptosis caused by addition of DCT ( Figs. 1C and E ).  Inactivation of NF-?B increases susceptibility to apoptosis To determine the relationship between DCT, its anti-apoptotic properties, and activation of NF-?B, we examined the effects of an I?Ba ‘super-repressor’ (AdI?BSR). To compensate for delayed apoptosis in HT-29 compared to H508 cells ( Fig. 1 ) [ 55 , 56 ], H508 cells were incubated with TNF-? for 6 h and HT-29 cells were incubated for 24 h. In both cell lines, induction of NF-?B reporter activity by DCT was attenuated by co-transfection with an adenoviral vector encoding non-degradable I?B? mutant (AdI?BSR) cDNA ( Fig. 4A ); DCT-stimulated NF-?B activation was reduced by >70% in HT-29 cells ( p <0.001) ( Fig. 4Aa ) and reduced to basal levels in H508 cells ( p < 0.01) ( Fig. 4Ab ). Likewise, in DCT-stimulated cells, transfection with AdI?BSR attenuated resistance to TNF-?-induced apoptosis ( Figs. 4B, C and D ). With AdI?BSR, the percentage of DCT-stimulated apoptotic cells increased from 30 to 50% in HT-29 cells ( Fig. 4Ca ) and from 35 to 45% in H508 cells ( Fig. 4Cb ) ( p <0.05 in both cell lines); the values for DCT in the presence of Adl BSR were not significantly different from those with TNF-? alone. Transfection with null adenoviral vector did not alter DCT-stimulated NF-?B activation or resistance to apoptosis ( Fig. 4 ), thereby confirming the specificity of the observed effects. As shown in Fig. 4D , neither AdI?BSR nor DCT treatment alone altered PARP cleavage. In contrast, treatment of HT-29 and H508 cells with TNF-? for 24 and 6 h, respectively, caused robust induction of programmed cell death as evidenced by an intense band for the 85-kDa cleavage product ( Fig. 4D ). Pretreatment with DCT markedly attenuated TNF-?-induced apoptosis; the intensity of the 85-kDa band was reduced by over 70% in H508 cells and by 40% in HT-29 cells. In both cell lines, anti-apoptotic actions of DCT were attenuated in the presence of AdI?BSR (the intensity of the 85-kDa PARP cleavage fragment was nearly the same as that observed with TNF-? alone) ( Fig. 4D ). Collectively, these data provide strong evidence to support the hypothesis that DCT rescues TNF-?-treated cells from apoptosis by an NF-?B-dependent mechanism.  Inactivation of NF-?B increases susceptibility to apoptosis To determine the relationship between DCT, its anti-apoptotic properties, and activation of NF-?B, we examined the effects of an I?Ba ‘super-repressor’ (AdI?BSR). To compensate for delayed apoptosis in HT-29 compared to H508 cells ( Fig. 1 ) [ 55 , 56 ], H508 cells were incubated with TNF-? for 6 h and HT-29 cells were incubated for 24 h. In both cell lines, induction of NF-?B reporter activity by DCT was attenuated by co-transfection with an adenoviral vector encoding non-degradable I?B? mutant (AdI?BSR) cDNA ( Fig. 4A ); DCT-stimulated NF-?B activation was reduced by >70% in HT-29 cells ( p <0.001) ( Fig. 4Aa ) and reduced to basal levels in H508 cells ( p < 0.01) ( Fig. 4Ab ). Likewise, in DCT-stimulated cells, transfection with AdI?BSR attenuated resistance to TNF-?-induced apoptosis ( Figs. 4B, C and D ). With AdI?BSR, the percentage of DCT-stimulated apoptotic cells increased from 30 to 50% in HT-29 cells ( Fig. 4Ca ) and from 35 to 45% in H508 cells ( Fig. 4Cb ) ( p <0.05 in both cell lines); the values for DCT in the presence of Adl BSR were not significantly different from those with TNF-? alone. Transfection with null adenoviral vector did not alter DCT-stimulated NF-?B activation or resistance to apoptosis ( Fig. 4 ), thereby confirming the specificity of the observed effects. As shown in Fig. 4D , neither AdI?BSR nor DCT treatment alone altered PARP cleavage. In contrast, treatment of HT-29 and H508 cells with TNF-? for 24 and 6 h, respectively, caused robust induction of programmed cell death as evidenced by an intense band for the 85-kDa cleavage product ( Fig. 4D ). Pretreatment with DCT markedly attenuated TNF-?-induced apoptosis; the intensity of the 85-kDa band was reduced by over 70% in H508 cells and by 40% in HT-29 cells. In both cell lines, anti-apoptotic actions of DCT were attenuated in the presence of AdI?BSR (the intensity of the 85-kDa PARP cleavage fragment was nearly the same as that observed with TNF-? alone) ( Fig. 4D ). Collectively, these data provide strong evidence to support the hypothesis that DCT rescues TNF-?-treated cells from apoptosis by an NF-?B-dependent mechanism.  Effects of inhibiting post-EGFR signaling on EGF- and bile acid-induced nuclear translocation of NF-?B To confirm in H508 cells that activation of post-EGFR signaling regulates DCT-induced activation of NF-?B we examined the effects of chemical inhibitors. EGF was used as a positive control in all experiments. EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors, PD168393 and AG1478, inhibited basal and DCT-induced NF-?B activation ( Fig. 5A ). As anticipated, two well-characterized PI3K inhibitors, LY294002 and wortmannin, inhibited both EGF- and DCT-induced activation of NF-?B ( Fig. 5B ). In contrast, a MEK (ERK kinase) inhibitor (PD98059) did not alter EGF- or DCT-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation, whereas a Src inhibitor (pp2) had a modest effect ( Fig. 5C ). These findings indicate an important role for PI3K but not ERK signaling in DCT-induced up regulation of NF-?B activity. DCT-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation was attenuated by adding an inhibitor of NF-?B transport through the nuclear membrane (SN50), a proteosome inhibitor (MG-132), and two I?B? kinase inhibitors (Bay11-7082 and PDTC) ( Figs. 5D, E , and Table 1 , left column); all pointing to a key role for NF-?B.  Effects of inhibiting post-EGFR signaling on EGF- and bile acid-induced nuclear translocation of NF-?B To confirm in H508 cells that activation of post-EGFR signaling regulates DCT-induced activation of NF-?B we examined the effects of chemical inhibitors. EGF was used as a positive control in all experiments. EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors, PD168393 and AG1478, inhibited basal and DCT-induced NF-?B activation ( Fig. 5A ). As anticipated, two well-characterized PI3K inhibitors, LY294002 and wortmannin, inhibited both EGF- and DCT-induced activation of NF-?B ( Fig. 5B ). In contrast, a MEK (ERK kinase) inhibitor (PD98059) did not alter EGF- or DCT-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation, whereas a Src inhibitor (pp2) had a modest effect ( Fig. 5C ). These findings indicate an important role for PI3K but not ERK signaling in DCT-induced up regulation of NF-?B activity. DCT-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation was attenuated by adding an inhibitor of NF-?B transport through the nuclear membrane (SN50), a proteosome inhibitor (MG-132), and two I?B? kinase inhibitors (Bay11-7082 and PDTC) ( Figs. 5D, E , and Table 1 , left column); all pointing to a key role for NF-?B.  Inhibition of EGFR activation attenuates bile acid-induced NF-?B activation and protection from TNF-?-induced apoptosis To confirm that EGFR is required for the anti-apoptotic actions of bile acids, we examined the effect of adding an antibody to the EGFR ligand binding domain (LA1) and a chemical inhibitor of EGFR activation (AG1478). As shown in Fig. 6A , in HT-29 cells, neither LA1 nor AG1478 alone altered basal levels of nuclear NF-?B. In contrast, both means of preventing EGFR activation attenuated bile acid-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation. Likewise, the use of these inhibitors demonstrated that EGFR activation is required for bile acid-induced protection of cells from TNF-?-induced apoptosis (using both the Annexin-V and PARP degradation assays) ( Figs. 6B–D ). In DCT-treated cells, addition of LA1 ( Fig. 6B ) and AG1478 (micrographs not shown) attenuated resistance to TNF-?-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 6B ). With LA1 and AG1478, the percentage of DCT-treated apoptotic cells increased from 33.3% to 47.9% and 46.9%, respectively ( p <0.01 and 0.05, respectively) ( Fig. 6C ). Moreover, the values for DCT in the presence of both inhibitors of EGFR activation were not significantly different from those with TNF-? alone ( Fig. 6C ). As shown in Fig. 6D , neither LA1 nor AG1478 alone altered PARP cleavage. In contrast, treatment of HT-29 cells with DCT plus either LA1 or AG1478 attenuated the anti-apoptotic actions of DCT; the intensity of the 85-kDa PARP cleavage fragment was nearly the same as that observed with TNF-? alone ( Fig. 6D ). Collectively, these data show clearly that EGFR activation is critical for the anti-apoptotic actions of bile acids, including activation of NF-?B.  Inhibition of EGFR activation attenuates bile acid-induced NF-?B activation and protection from TNF-?-induced apoptosis To confirm that EGFR is required for the anti-apoptotic actions of bile acids, we examined the effect of adding an antibody to the EGFR ligand binding domain (LA1) and a chemical inhibitor of EGFR activation (AG1478). As shown in Fig. 6A , in HT-29 cells, neither LA1 nor AG1478 alone altered basal levels of nuclear NF-?B. In contrast, both means of preventing EGFR activation attenuated bile acid-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation. Likewise, the use of these inhibitors demonstrated that EGFR activation is required for bile acid-induced protection of cells from TNF-?-induced apoptosis (using both the Annexin-V and PARP degradation assays) ( Figs. 6B–D ). In DCT-treated cells, addition of LA1 ( Fig. 6B ) and AG1478 (micrographs not shown) attenuated resistance to TNF-?-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 6B ). With LA1 and AG1478, the percentage of DCT-treated apoptotic cells increased from 33.3% to 47.9% and 46.9%, respectively ( p <0.01 and 0.05, respectively) ( Fig. 6C ). Moreover, the values for DCT in the presence of both inhibitors of EGFR activation were not significantly different from those with TNF-? alone ( Fig. 6C ). As shown in Fig. 6D , neither LA1 nor AG1478 alone altered PARP cleavage. In contrast, treatment of HT-29 cells with DCT plus either LA1 or AG1478 attenuated the anti-apoptotic actions of DCT; the intensity of the 85-kDa PARP cleavage fragment was nearly the same as that observed with TNF-? alone ( Fig. 6D ). Collectively, these data show clearly that EGFR activation is critical for the anti-apoptotic actions of bile acids, including activation of NF-?B.  Inhibition of Akt prevents bile acid-induced NF-?B activation The above findings are consistent with a key regulatory role for PI3K/Akt signaling downstream of EGFR in mediating DCT-induced attenuation of apoptosis [ 37 ]. To define further the role of Akt in DCT-dependent NF-?B activation and increased resistance to TNF-?-induced apoptosis, we reduced Akt expression in HT-29 cells using an expression vector encoding dominant negative (DN) akt cDNA with a Myc tag under the control of a cytomegalovirus promoter. Cells transfected with wild-type akt served as a positive control. Transfection with DN- akt reduced nuclear translocation of NF-?B ( Fig. 7Aa ) and NF-?B-dependent luciferase activity ( Fig. 7B ). As shown in Fig. 7Ab , this result was confirmed using API-2, a cell-permeable tricyclic nucleoside that selectively inhibits Akt phosphorylation, thereby inhibiting Akt activation. The luciferase assay showed that inhibition of Akt activation by expression of DN- akt decreased DCT-induced NF-?B activation by 50% compared to that observed in control cells (3.06±0.40 vs. 6.09±0.46 for DN- akt and control, respectively) ( Fig. 7B ). Reduced NF-?B activation was also observed in control cells (i.e. cells without DCT stimulation); basal activity was again inhibited ~50% (0.84± 0.08 vs. 1.94±0.25 for DN- akt and control, respectively) ( Fig. 7B ). These results indicate that in HT-29 cells Akt mediates both basal and DCT-stimulated activation of NF-?B.  Inhibition of Akt prevents bile acid-induced NF-?B activation The above findings are consistent with a key regulatory role for PI3K/Akt signaling downstream of EGFR in mediating DCT-induced attenuation of apoptosis [ 37 ]. To define further the role of Akt in DCT-dependent NF-?B activation and increased resistance to TNF-?-induced apoptosis, we reduced Akt expression in HT-29 cells using an expression vector encoding dominant negative (DN) akt cDNA with a Myc tag under the control of a cytomegalovirus promoter. Cells transfected with wild-type akt served as a positive control. Transfection with DN- akt reduced nuclear translocation of NF-?B ( Fig. 7Aa ) and NF-?B-dependent luciferase activity ( Fig. 7B ). As shown in Fig. 7Ab , this result was confirmed using API-2, a cell-permeable tricyclic nucleoside that selectively inhibits Akt phosphorylation, thereby inhibiting Akt activation. The luciferase assay showed that inhibition of Akt activation by expression of DN- akt decreased DCT-induced NF-?B activation by 50% compared to that observed in control cells (3.06±0.40 vs. 6.09±0.46 for DN- akt and control, respectively) ( Fig. 7B ). Reduced NF-?B activation was also observed in control cells (i.e. cells without DCT stimulation); basal activity was again inhibited ~50% (0.84± 0.08 vs. 1.94±0.25 for DN- akt and control, respectively) ( Fig. 7B ). These results indicate that in HT-29 cells Akt mediates both basal and DCT-stimulated activation of NF-?B.  Bile acid-dependent evasion from apoptosis is both Akt- and NF-?B-dependent To confirm the role of Akt in cell survival, a chemical inhibitor (API-2) was used. In HT-29 cells, inhibition of Akt activation using 5 ?M API-2 resulted in 4-fold enhancement of programmed cell death (from ~2 to 8%; p <0.01) ( Fig. 7D ). This finding provides further evidence for the novel observation that in HT-29 cells Akt mediates basal levels of NF-?B activity. Inhibition of Akt activation with both concentrations of API-2 also attenuated the protective effect of DCT in TNF-?-treated cells ( Figs. 7C and D ). Morphological features and Annexin-V staining in DCT-treated cells pre-incubated with API-2 were indistinguishable from control cells ( Fig. 7C ). Moreover, in cells treated with DCT, pre-incubation with API-2 increased the intensity (~2-fold) of the 85-kDa PARP cleavage fragment ( Fig. 7E ). Together, these results show clearly that bile acid-induced activation of Akt is required for NF-?B activation and reduced apoptosis.  Bile acid-dependent evasion from apoptosis is both Akt- and NF-?B-dependent To confirm the role of Akt in cell survival, a chemical inhibitor (API-2) was used. In HT-29 cells, inhibition of Akt activation using 5 ?M API-2 resulted in 4-fold enhancement of programmed cell death (from ~2 to 8%; p <0.01) ( Fig. 7D ). This finding provides further evidence for the novel observation that in HT-29 cells Akt mediates basal levels of NF-?B activity. Inhibition of Akt activation with both concentrations of API-2 also attenuated the protective effect of DCT in TNF-?-treated cells ( Figs. 7C and D ). Morphological features and Annexin-V staining in DCT-treated cells pre-incubated with API-2 were indistinguishable from control cells ( Fig. 7C ). Moreover, in cells treated with DCT, pre-incubation with API-2 increased the intensity (~2-fold) of the 85-kDa PARP cleavage fragment ( Fig. 7E ). Together, these results show clearly that bile acid-induced activation of Akt is required for NF-?B activation and reduced apoptosis.  Bile acid-dependent evasion from apoptosis induced by ultraviolet (UV) radiation is also Akt- and NF-?B-dependent Stress-induced apoptosis is activated via two major pathways; TNF-? activates transmembrane death receptors and the extrinsic pathway, whereas UV radiation activates the intrinsic (mitochondrial) pathway. To exclude the possibility that the actions of bile acids are limited to TNF-?-induced apoptosis (extrinsic pathway), we examined their actions on UV-radiated cells. UV radiation (10 to 200 J/m2) induces apoptosis in various cell lines [ 57 – 61 ]. To determine the appropriate UV dose in H508 and HT-29 cells, we performed dose–response experiments. As shown in Fig. 8A , increasing doses of UV progressively increased H508 cell apoptosis. A UV dose of 10 J/m2 induced apoptosis in 40.0±3.8% of H508 cells, whereas 50 and 200 J/m2 caused apoptosis in 78.9±3.5 and 86.7±2.3% of cells, respectively ( Fig. 8A ). Because the percentage of apoptotic cells following treatment with 10 J/m2 was similar to that observed following treatment with TNF-? ( Fig. 1D ), we selected this UV dose for subsequent experiments. Without Annexin-V staining, features of apoptosis were evident in H508 cells but less striking than those seen in HT-29 cells (compare Fig. 8Ba to Fig. 1Aa ). After Annexin-V staining, it was apparent that approximately 40% of cells treated with UV were apoptotic ( Fig. 8Bb , middle panel) and that pre-treatment with DCT reduced the number of apoptotic cells ( Fig. 8B , right panel). Compared to H508 cells, the effects of UV radiation and the response to DCT were less consistent in HT-29 cells, perhaps reflecting their increased resistance to apoptosis [ 55 ]. Hence, we focused UV experiments on effects in H508 cells. As shown in Fig. 8C , pre-incubation with 100 ?M DCT reduced UV-induced apoptosis by ~50% (40.0±3.8% vs. 24.8±3.0%). Bay11-7082 (10 ?M), an inhibitor of NF-?B activation, and API-2 (5 ?M), an Akt inhibitor, attenuated the anti-apoptotic effects of the bile acid (24.3±3.0% apoptotic cells with DCT alone; 46.1±4.6% apoptotic cells with DCT plus Bay11-7082; 35.2±4.0% apoptotic cells with DCT plus API-2) ( Fig. 8D ). Likewise, pre-incubation of H508 cells with the bile acid attenuated UV-induced PARP degradation ( Fig. 8E ). In these experiments, because the PARP degradation signal following treatment with a UV dose of 10 J/m2 ( Fig. 8E , left) was less robust than observed with TNF-? ( Figs. 1E , 4D , 6D and 7E ), we also examined the actions of a higher UV dose, 50 J/m2 ( Fig. 8E , right). With both UV doses, inhibitors of NF-?B (Bay11-7082) and Akt (API-2) activation alone did not alter basal PARP degradation. Nonetheless, with both UV doses, NF-?B inhibitors blocked the anti-apoptotic actions of DCT ( Fig. 8E ). In UV-treated cells, adding either Bay11-7082 or API-2 in combination with DCT resulted in an 85-kDa PARP signal that was the same as that observed with UV treatment alone ( Fig. 8E ). Collectively, using two different assays to detect colon cancer cell apoptosis (Annexin-V staining and PARP degradation), these findings indicate that, as observed with TNF-?-induced apoptosis, pro-survival effects of bile acids on UV-treated H508 cells require both Akt and NF-?B activation.  Bile acid-dependent evasion from apoptosis induced by ultraviolet (UV) radiation is also Akt- and NF-?B-dependent Stress-induced apoptosis is activated via two major pathways; TNF-? activates transmembrane death receptors and the extrinsic pathway, whereas UV radiation activates the intrinsic (mitochondrial) pathway. To exclude the possibility that the actions of bile acids are limited to TNF-?-induced apoptosis (extrinsic pathway), we examined their actions on UV-radiated cells. UV radiation (10 to 200 J/m2) induces apoptosis in various cell lines [ 57 – 61 ]. To determine the appropriate UV dose in H508 and HT-29 cells, we performed dose–response experiments. As shown in Fig. 8A , increasing doses of UV progressively increased H508 cell apoptosis. A UV dose of 10 J/m2 induced apoptosis in 40.0±3.8% of H508 cells, whereas 50 and 200 J/m2 caused apoptosis in 78.9±3.5 and 86.7±2.3% of cells, respectively ( Fig. 8A ). Because the percentage of apoptotic cells following treatment with 10 J/m2 was similar to that observed following treatment with TNF-? ( Fig. 1D ), we selected this UV dose for subsequent experiments. Without Annexin-V staining, features of apoptosis were evident in H508 cells but less striking than those seen in HT-29 cells (compare Fig. 8Ba to Fig. 1Aa ). After Annexin-V staining, it was apparent that approximately 40% of cells treated with UV were apoptotic ( Fig. 8Bb , middle panel) and that pre-treatment with DCT reduced the number of apoptotic cells ( Fig. 8B , right panel). Compared to H508 cells, the effects of UV radiation and the response to DCT were less consistent in HT-29 cells, perhaps reflecting their increased resistance to apoptosis [ 55 ]. Hence, we focused UV experiments on effects in H508 cells. As shown in Fig. 8C , pre-incubation with 100 ?M DCT reduced UV-induced apoptosis by ~50% (40.0±3.8% vs. 24.8±3.0%). Bay11-7082 (10 ?M), an inhibitor of NF-?B activation, and API-2 (5 ?M), an Akt inhibitor, attenuated the anti-apoptotic effects of the bile acid (24.3±3.0% apoptotic cells with DCT alone; 46.1±4.6% apoptotic cells with DCT plus Bay11-7082; 35.2±4.0% apoptotic cells with DCT plus API-2) ( Fig. 8D ). Likewise, pre-incubation of H508 cells with the bile acid attenuated UV-induced PARP degradation ( Fig. 8E ). In these experiments, because the PARP degradation signal following treatment with a UV dose of 10 J/m2 ( Fig. 8E , left) was less robust than observed with TNF-? ( Figs. 1E , 4D , 6D and 7E ), we also examined the actions of a higher UV dose, 50 J/m2 ( Fig. 8E , right). With both UV doses, inhibitors of NF-?B (Bay11-7082) and Akt (API-2) activation alone did not alter basal PARP degradation. Nonetheless, with both UV doses, NF-?B inhibitors blocked the anti-apoptotic actions of DCT ( Fig. 8E ). In UV-treated cells, adding either Bay11-7082 or API-2 in combination with DCT resulted in an 85-kDa PARP signal that was the same as that observed with UV treatment alone ( Fig. 8E ). Collectively, using two different assays to detect colon cancer cell apoptosis (Annexin-V staining and PARP degradation), these findings indicate that, as observed with TNF-?-induced apoptosis, pro-survival effects of bile acids on UV-treated H508 cells require both Akt and NF-?B activation.  Discussion Biological actions of bile acids have expanded beyond their traditional role in mediating lipid absorption and cholesterol metabolism. For example, an enlarging body of evidence indicates that cell signaling initiated by interaction of bile acids with plasma membrane receptors stimulates colon cancer cell proliferation [ 8 , 9 , 37 ]. We showed in human colon cancer cells, that bile acids activate M3 muscarinic receptors, thereby inducing activation of EGFR and downstream ERK and PI3K/Akt signaling [ 8 , 9 , 37 ]. The present studies extend these observations in important directions by demonstrating that, downstream of Akt, bile acid-induced activation of NF-?B plays a key role in regulating colon cancer cell apoptosis and survival. We provide strong evidence to support these novel conclusions: (1) Treatment with a bile acid increases resistance of colon cancer cells to both TNF-?- and UV-induced apoptosis ( Figs. 1 and 8 ). (2) Treatment with a bile acid stimulates nuclear translocation and transcriptional activity of NF-?B ( Fig. 2 ; Table 1 ). (3) Inactivation of NF-?B using an I?Ba super-repressor (AdI?BSR) attenuates anti-apoptotic actions of the bile acid ( Fig. 4 ). (4) As anticipated from our previous work [ 8 , 9 , 37 ], bile acid-induced activation of NF-?B and rescue from apoptosis are both EGFR-dependent ( Fig. 6 ). (5) Bile acid-induced NF-?B activation and rescue from apoptosis are regulated by PI3K/Akt signaling downstream of EGFR ( Figs. 5B , 7 and 8 ). (6) Finally, it is evident that bile acid-induced resistance to TNF-?- and UV-stimulated apoptosis requires activation of Akt; both NF-?B activation and the anti-apoptotic actions of the bile acid were attenuated when Akt expression and activation were reduced by transfection with mutant akt or treatment with an Akt inhibitor, respectively ( Figs. 7 and 8 ). The novel findings presented here are important for understanding the role of luminal bile acids in promoting intestinal neoplasia. Whereas unconjugated secondary bile acids, primarily deoxycholic acid, induce apoptosis [ 62 – 66 ], this effect is inconsistent with their overall tumor-promoting properties [ 5 – 7 ]. Limited studies showing possible anti-apoptotic effects of bile acids on gastrointestinal epithelial cells using high, likely supra-physiological concentrations of unconjugated bile acids did not elucidate the underlying signaling mechanisms [ 33 – 35 ]. To our knowledge, our work is the first to show unequivocally that the chain of events leading from bile acid-induced activation of EGFR and PI3K-Akt signaling to activation of the critical cell survival signal NF-?B [ 8 , 9 , 19 , 37 , 67 ] results in colon cancer cell survival. In these studies, we used TNF-? to stimulate apoptosis. TNF-? is a pleiotropic cytokine that regulates many physiological actions, including inflammation, proliferation and cell death, and exerts these effects by activating multiple downstream effectors including NF-?B. Because some NF-?B target genes inhibit apoptosis, TNF-? may not induce cell death unless NF-?B activation is blocked [ 68 ]. For example, in mouse liver, genetic disruption of RelA (p65 NF-?B) is a prerequisite for TNF-?-induced cell death [ 52 ]. In contrast, we found that blocking NF-?B activation was not necessary for TNF-? to serve as a very efficacious stimulant of colon cancer cell apoptosis ( Fig. 1 ). This may be explained in part by the time-course shown in Fig. 3 ; in both colon cancer cell lines TNF-?-induced apoptosis is only detected after the initial TNF-?-induced increase in NF-?B activation has subsided. In TNF-?-treated colon cancer cells, rescue from apoptosis induced by addition of the bile acid correlates temporally with persistent NF-?B activation ( Fig. 3 ). This novel observation supports the key role of NF-?B activation in protecting colon cancer cells from stress-induced programmed cell death. In contrast to the parent unconjugated deoxycholic acid our findings in both HT-29 and H508 human colon cancer cells indicate that DCT, a conjugated secondary bile acid, has robust anti-apoptotic actions. In other organs, additional bile acids have demonstrated anti-apoptotic actions depending on the cell type examined and the stimulant of apoptosis. Examples include cholyltaurine which decreases TNF-?-induced apoptosis and stimulates cholangiocyte proliferation by a PI3K-dependent pathway [ 69 ] and ursodeoxycholyltaurine which reduces myocardial apoptosis [ 70 ]. Likewise, exposure of normal intestinal epithelial IEC-6 cells to chenodeoxycholyltaurine increases NF-?B activation and resistance to TNF-?/cycloheximide-induced apoptosis [ 71 ]. Hence, although we focused our investigation on DCT, a prominent bile acid in the gastrointestinal lumen, other bile acids may also mediate cell survival. Our findings are consistent with anti-apoptotic actions of conjugated bile acids in these other organs. Hence, it is likely that the novel mechanism of EGFR-dependent signaling elucidated herein is relevant to other parts of the gastrointestinal tract exposed to similar concentrations of secondary bile acids. Additional novel findings described herein are that basal activation of NF-?B (constitutive) in colon cancer cells is regulated by Akt ( Fig. 7 ) and that treatment with physiologically-relevant concentrations of a bile acid stimulates an additional increase in NF-?B nuclear translocation, sequence-specific DNA binding activity, and transcriptional activity (inducible). We base these conclusions on dose–response experiments that revealed that adding 1 to 10 ?M DCT, concentrations of DCT achieved in fecal contents of the normal human cecum [ 49 ], induces robust activation of NF-?B ( Fig. 2 ). Hence, particularly for tumors in the proximal colon, it is likely that by activating mechanisms described here, bile acids are important growth factors for neoplastic epithelial cells. In addition to stimulating colon cancer proliferation [ 8 , 9 ], conjugated secondary bile acids promote cell survival by attenuating stress-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 9 ). NF-?B-inducible gene products interfere with key steps in both the extrinsic (death receptor-mediated) and intrinsic (mitochondria-mediated) pathways of apoptosis. The role of NF-?B in regulating apoptosis depends on cell type, stimulants of apoptosis, duration of NF-?B activation, and the activity of other signaling pathways. Our experiments using UV radiation to induce apoptosis address the role of bile acid-induced activation of NF-?B in the intrinsic pathway. In other tissues, NF-?B inactivation increases susceptibility to UV-induced apoptosis [ 60 , 61 ]. Our findings that pre-incubation of colon cancer cells with DCT reduces UV-induced apoptosis by 50% and that apoptosis detected either by Annexin staining or by PARP degradation is restored by Akt (API-2) and NF-?B (Bay11-7082) inhibitors are consistent with Akt- and NF-?B-dependent pro-survival actions of the bile acid ( Fig. 8 ). Cell type-dependent effects are exemplified by similar responses of H508 and HT-29 colon cancer cells to treatment with TNF-?, but different responses to UV radiation. Whereas H508 cells developed consistent UV-induced apoptosis and rescue by DCT, HT-29 cells were relatively resistant to UV and the responses to bile acid treatment were variable. In summary, as illustrated in Fig. 9 , in colon cancer cells a conjugated secondary bile acid, DCT, promotes both cell proliferation and survival by distinct post-EGFR signaling pathways. Downstream of EGFR, activation of ERK signaling promotes cell proliferation [ 8 , 9 ] whereas activation of PI3K signaling and downstream activation of both Akt and NF-?B play critical roles in protecting colon cancer cells from stress (TNF-? and UV radiation)-induced apoptosis. Our work provides novel insights into pro-survival actions of bile acids in colon cancer. Inactivation of NF-?B by AdI?BSR prevented DCT-induced attenuation of TNF-?-stimulated apoptosis ( Fig. 4B ) and restored the intensity of the PARP cleavage product to that obtained with exposure to TNF-? alone ( Fig. 4D ). In the presence of chemical inhibitors of Akt and NF-?B activation, similar effects were observed with both TNF-?- and UV-induced apoptosis ( Table 1 , Figs. 7 and 8 ). These results indicate clearly that DCT-dependent activation of Akt and NF-?B is required for survival of both TNF-?- and UV-treated colon cancer cells. In general, cancer cells are resistant to environmental stimuli that modulate apoptosis. Based on the similarity of DCT effects in two different human colon cancer cell lines, the finding that effective concentrations of the bile acid are in the physiological range [ 49 ] and overlap with those that stimulate colon cancer cell proliferation [ 8 , 9 ], we believe that our observations are applicable to in vivo regulation of colon cancer cell proliferation and survival. DCT-induced rescue of colon cancer cells from stress-induced apoptosis most likely augments resistance to chemotherapy and radiation. Hence, in colon cancer, down-regulating NF-?B activation may diminish the resistance of tumors to commonly used therapies. A major concern in developing such cell signaling-based therapy is that targeting key regulators of normal cell function, like Akt and NF-?B, will result in both anticipated and unforeseen toxicity. Continued elucidation of pathways that mediate responses to distinct stimuli, like bile acids, will facilitate design of more specific and safer cell signaling-based therapy.  Discussion Biological actions of bile acids have expanded beyond their traditional role in mediating lipid absorption and cholesterol metabolism. For example, an enlarging body of evidence indicates that cell signaling initiated by interaction of bile acids with plasma membrane receptors stimulates colon cancer cell proliferation [ 8 , 9 , 37 ]. We showed in human colon cancer cells, that bile acids activate M3 muscarinic receptors, thereby inducing activation of EGFR and downstream ERK and PI3K/Akt signaling [ 8 , 9 , 37 ]. The present studies extend these observations in important directions by demonstrating that, downstream of Akt, bile acid-induced activation of NF-?B plays a key role in regulating colon cancer cell apoptosis and survival. We provide strong evidence to support these novel conclusions: (1) Treatment with a bile acid increases resistance of colon cancer cells to both TNF-?- and UV-induced apoptosis ( Figs. 1 and 8 ). (2) Treatment with a bile acid stimulates nuclear translocation and transcriptional activity of NF-?B ( Fig. 2 ; Table 1 ). (3) Inactivation of NF-?B using an I?Ba super-repressor (AdI?BSR) attenuates anti-apoptotic actions of the bile acid ( Fig. 4 ). (4) As anticipated from our previous work [ 8 , 9 , 37 ], bile acid-induced activation of NF-?B and rescue from apoptosis are both EGFR-dependent ( Fig. 6 ). (5) Bile acid-induced NF-?B activation and rescue from apoptosis are regulated by PI3K/Akt signaling downstream of EGFR ( Figs. 5B , 7 and 8 ). (6) Finally, it is evident that bile acid-induced resistance to TNF-?- and UV-stimulated apoptosis requires activation of Akt; both NF-?B activation and the anti-apoptotic actions of the bile acid were attenuated when Akt expression and activation were reduced by transfection with mutant akt or treatment with an Akt inhibitor, respectively ( Figs. 7 and 8 ). The novel findings presented here are important for understanding the role of luminal bile acids in promoting intestinal neoplasia. Whereas unconjugated secondary bile acids, primarily deoxycholic acid, induce apoptosis [ 62 – 66 ], this effect is inconsistent with their overall tumor-promoting properties [ 5 – 7 ]. Limited studies showing possible anti-apoptotic effects of bile acids on gastrointestinal epithelial cells using high, likely supra-physiological concentrations of unconjugated bile acids did not elucidate the underlying signaling mechanisms [ 33 – 35 ]. To our knowledge, our work is the first to show unequivocally that the chain of events leading from bile acid-induced activation of EGFR and PI3K-Akt signaling to activation of the critical cell survival signal NF-?B [ 8 , 9 , 19 , 37 , 67 ] results in colon cancer cell survival. In these studies, we used TNF-? to stimulate apoptosis. TNF-? is a pleiotropic cytokine that regulates many physiological actions, including inflammation, proliferation and cell death, and exerts these effects by activating multiple downstream effectors including NF-?B. Because some NF-?B target genes inhibit apoptosis, TNF-? may not induce cell death unless NF-?B activation is blocked [ 68 ]. For example, in mouse liver, genetic disruption of RelA (p65 NF-?B) is a prerequisite for TNF-?-induced cell death [ 52 ]. In contrast, we found that blocking NF-?B activation was not necessary for TNF-? to serve as a very efficacious stimulant of colon cancer cell apoptosis ( Fig. 1 ). This may be explained in part by the time-course shown in Fig. 3 ; in both colon cancer cell lines TNF-?-induced apoptosis is only detected after the initial TNF-?-induced increase in NF-?B activation has subsided. In TNF-?-treated colon cancer cells, rescue from apoptosis induced by addition of the bile acid correlates temporally with persistent NF-?B activation ( Fig. 3 ). This novel observation supports the key role of NF-?B activation in protecting colon cancer cells from stress-induced programmed cell death. In contrast to the parent unconjugated deoxycholic acid our findings in both HT-29 and H508 human colon cancer cells indicate that DCT, a conjugated secondary bile acid, has robust anti-apoptotic actions. In other organs, additional bile acids have demonstrated anti-apoptotic actions depending on the cell type examined and the stimulant of apoptosis. Examples include cholyltaurine which decreases TNF-?-induced apoptosis and stimulates cholangiocyte proliferation by a PI3K-dependent pathway [ 69 ] and ursodeoxycholyltaurine which reduces myocardial apoptosis [ 70 ]. Likewise, exposure of normal intestinal epithelial IEC-6 cells to chenodeoxycholyltaurine increases NF-?B activation and resistance to TNF-?/cycloheximide-induced apoptosis [ 71 ]. Hence, although we focused our investigation on DCT, a prominent bile acid in the gastrointestinal lumen, other bile acids may also mediate cell survival. Our findings are consistent with anti-apoptotic actions of conjugated bile acids in these other organs. Hence, it is likely that the novel mechanism of EGFR-dependent signaling elucidated herein is relevant to other parts of the gastrointestinal tract exposed to similar concentrations of secondary bile acids. Additional novel findings described herein are that basal activation of NF-?B (constitutive) in colon cancer cells is regulated by Akt ( Fig. 7 ) and that treatment with physiologically-relevant concentrations of a bile acid stimulates an additional increase in NF-?B nuclear translocation, sequence-specific DNA binding activity, and transcriptional activity (inducible). We base these conclusions on dose–response experiments that revealed that adding 1 to 10 ?M DCT, concentrations of DCT achieved in fecal contents of the normal human cecum [ 49 ], induces robust activation of NF-?B ( Fig. 2 ). Hence, particularly for tumors in the proximal colon, it is likely that by activating mechanisms described here, bile acids are important growth factors for neoplastic epithelial cells. In addition to stimulating colon cancer proliferation [ 8 , 9 ], conjugated secondary bile acids promote cell survival by attenuating stress-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 9 ). NF-?B-inducible gene products interfere with key steps in both the extrinsic (death receptor-mediated) and intrinsic (mitochondria-mediated) pathways of apoptosis. The role of NF-?B in regulating apoptosis depends on cell type, stimulants of apoptosis, duration of NF-?B activation, and the activity of other signaling pathways. Our experiments using UV radiation to induce apoptosis address the role of bile acid-induced activation of NF-?B in the intrinsic pathway. In other tissues, NF-?B inactivation increases susceptibility to UV-induced apoptosis [ 60 , 61 ]. Our findings that pre-incubation of colon cancer cells with DCT reduces UV-induced apoptosis by 50% and that apoptosis detected either by Annexin staining or by PARP degradation is restored by Akt (API-2) and NF-?B (Bay11-7082) inhibitors are consistent with Akt- and NF-?B-dependent pro-survival actions of the bile acid ( Fig. 8 ). Cell type-dependent effects are exemplified by similar responses of H508 and HT-29 colon cancer cells to treatment with TNF-?, but different responses to UV radiation. Whereas H508 cells developed consistent UV-induced apoptosis and rescue by DCT, HT-29 cells were relatively resistant to UV and the responses to bile acid treatment were variable. In summary, as illustrated in Fig. 9 , in colon cancer cells a conjugated secondary bile acid, DCT, promotes both cell proliferation and survival by distinct post-EGFR signaling pathways. Downstream of EGFR, activation of ERK signaling promotes cell proliferation [ 8 , 9 ] whereas activation of PI3K signaling and downstream activation of both Akt and NF-?B play critical roles in protecting colon cancer cells from stress (TNF-? and UV radiation)-induced apoptosis. Our work provides novel insights into pro-survival actions of bile acids in colon cancer. Inactivation of NF-?B by AdI?BSR prevented DCT-induced attenuation of TNF-?-stimulated apoptosis ( Fig. 4B ) and restored the intensity of the PARP cleavage product to that obtained with exposure to TNF-? alone ( Fig. 4D ). In the presence of chemical inhibitors of Akt and NF-?B activation, similar effects were observed with both TNF-?- and UV-induced apoptosis ( Table 1 , Figs. 7 and 8 ). These results indicate clearly that DCT-dependent activation of Akt and NF-?B is required for survival of both TNF-?- and UV-treated colon cancer cells. In general, cancer cells are resistant to environmental stimuli that modulate apoptosis. Based on the similarity of DCT effects in two different human colon cancer cell lines, the finding that effective concentrations of the bile acid are in the physiological range [ 49 ] and overlap with those that stimulate colon cancer cell proliferation [ 8 , 9 ], we believe that our observations are applicable to in vivo regulation of colon cancer cell proliferation and survival. DCT-induced rescue of colon cancer cells from stress-induced apoptosis most likely augments resistance to chemotherapy and radiation. Hence, in colon cancer, down-regulating NF-?B activation may diminish the resistance of tumors to commonly used therapies. A major concern in developing such cell signaling-based therapy is that targeting key regulators of normal cell function, like Akt and NF-?B, will result in both anticipated and unforeseen toxicity. Continued elucidation of pathways that mediate responses to distinct stimuli, like bile acids, will facilitate design of more specific and safer cell signaling-based therapy.  Figures and Table Fig. 1 Effects of bile acid on tumor necrosis factor-? (TNF-?; 100 ng/ml)-induced apoptosis in HT-29 and H508 human colon cancer cells. A. Images of TNF-?-induced apoptosis in HT-29 cells. a, Control cells (left) and cells treated for 24 h with TNF-? alone (middle) or TNF-? plus deoxycholyltaurine (DCT; 100 ?M) (right). b. Annexin-V staining. Original magnification, ×200. B. Actions of increasing concentrations of 1 to 300 ?M DCT on TNF-?-induced apoptosis. Percentage of apoptotic cells in HT-29 cells was calculated using Annexin-V staining. Values are mean±SE from 3 experiments. ** p <0.01 compared with cells treated with TNF-? alone. C. Changes in PARP degradation in HT-29 cells treated with TNF-? (100 ng/ml) alone or with DCT (100 ?M) at the times indicated. Levels of p85 PARP in cell extracts were measured by immunoblotting using a monoclonal antibody that does not recognize 116-kDa PARP. Protein loading was verified by immunoblotting with anti-?-actin antibody. Three experiments were performed that showed similar results. D. Percentage of apoptotic H508 cells determined as described for HT-29 cells in A. Cells were treated with DCT (100 ?M) and TNF-? (100 ng/ml), alone or in combination. Values are mean±SE from 3 experiments. *** p <0.001 compared with cells treated with TNF-? alone. E. Changes in PARP degradation in H508 cells treated with TNF-? (100 ng/ml) alone or with DCT (100 ?M) at the times indicated. Levels of p85 PARP in cell extracts were measured by immunoblotting. Three experiments were performed that showed similar results. Fig. 2 Effects of deoxycholyltaurine (DCT) on nuclear translocation and activation of NF-?B in human colon cancer cells. A. DCT stimulates nuclear translocation of p65 NF-?B. a: Representative immunoblots for dose – response for actions of DCT on p65 NF-?B protein in nuclear extracts. HT-29 and H508 cells were incubated for 30 min with indicated concentrations of DCT and nuclear extracts were immunoblotted for p65 NF-?B subunit and the loading control histone H2A. b: Representative immunoblots for time-courses for actions of DCT on p65 NF-?B protein in nuclear extracts. HT-29 and H508 cells were incubated with 100 ?M DCT for indicated times and nuclear extracts were immunoblotted for p65 NF-?B subunit and the loading control histone H2A. B. Cellular distribution of NF-?B in H508 (top row) and HT-29 (bottom row) cells. a, Control; b, Cells treated with EGF (10 ng/ml) for 30 min; c, cells treated with DCT (100 ?M) for 30 min. Cells were permeabilized and incubated with anti-p65 NF-?B antibody and then with anti-IgG conjugated with TRITC. Nuclei were stained with Hoechst. NF-?B is shown as red, whereas nuclei are shown as blue. Original magnification, ×200. Three experiments were performed that showed similar results. C. Changes in NF-?B-motif binding activity in H508 and HT-29 cells treated with DCT (100 ?M, 30 min). Nuclear extracts were isolated from cells with different treatments and the level of p65 NF-?B transcriptional activation was measured using a TransAM NF-?B kit. Values are means±SE from three experiments. * p <0.05 compared with cells incubated without DCT. D. Changes in NF-?B promoter activity as measured by luciferase reporter gene assays. a, Structure of luciferase (Luc) reporter: control p-TAL-Luc and NF-?B-Luc construct with four NF-?B binding sites. b, Level of NF-?B-dependent promoter activity. Cells were transfected with either pNF-?B-Luc or pTAL-Luc using Lipofectamine. Data for NF-?B-dependent promoter activity were normalized using Renilla luciferase activity. Values are means±SE from 3 experiments. *** p <0.05 and 0.01, respectively, compared with cells incubated without DCT. Fig. 3 Effects of deoxycholyltaurine (DCT) on tumor necrosis factor-? (TNF-?)-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation in HT-29 and H508 human colon cancer cells. Representative immunoblots (A) and line graphs of immunoblot densitometry (B) show time-course for effects of TNF-? (100 ng/ml) and DCT (100 ?M), alone or in combination, on increases in nuclear p65 NF-?B. Cells were incubated with test agents for the indicated times and nuclear extracts were immunoblotted for p65 NF-?B and a loading control, histone H2A. Results are representative of three separate experiments. Fig. 4 Effects of inactivation of NF-?B by ectopic expression of I?B? super-repressor (AdI?B?SR) on colon cancer cells. HT-29 and H508 cells transfected with either recombinant adenoviral vector encoding human I?B?SR cDNA (AdI?BSR) or adenoviral vector lacking I?B?SR cDNA (Adnull) at a multiplicity of infection of 25 plaque-forming units per cell for 48 h followed by incubation with DCT. A. Changes in NF-?B transcriptional activity in HT-29 (a) and H508 (b) cells. Cells were transfected with either pNF-?B-Luc or pTAL-Luc and incubated with DCT (100 ?M, 2 h). Transcriptional activity was examined by NF-?B-dependent promoter luciferase activity. Values are means±SE from 3 experiments. **,*** p <0.01 and 0.001, respectively, compared with DCT-treated cells infected with Adnull. B. Changes in TNF-?-induced apoptosis in HT-29 cells infected with AdI?BSR or Adnull. Cells were pretreated with Adnull and AdI?BSR, followed by DCT treatment (100 ?M, 2 h), and apoptosis was visualized 24 h after exposure to TNF-? (upper panel); images of Annexin-V staining (lower panel). C. Percentage of apoptotic cells in HT-29 (a) and H508 (b) cells. Percentage of apoptotic cells in control and TNF-? treated cells with various treatments described in B (microscopic images of apoptosis in H508 cells are not shown). Values are means±SE from 3 experiments. * p <0.05 compared with cells exposed to TNF-? and infected with Adnull. D. Effect of exposure to DCT (100 ?M, 2 h) on TNF-? (100 ng/ml)-stimulated PARP degradation in HT-29 and H508 cells transfected with AdI?BSR. Levels of p85 PARP in cell extracts were measured by immunoblotting using a monoclonal antibody that does not recognize 116-kDa PARP. Protein loading was verified by immunoblotting with anti-?-actin antibody. Three experiments were performed that showed similar results. Fig. 5 Effects of inhibiting post epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling on EGF- and deoxycholyltaurine (DCT)-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation in H508 human colon cancer cells. Representative immunoblots show the effects on NF-?B nuclear translocation of incubating H508 cells with 100 ?M DCT and 10 ng/ml EGF, alone and in the presence of the following agents: A. Inhibitors of EGFR activation (PD168393, 2 ?M and AG1478, 0.1 ?M); B. PI3K inhibitors (LY294002, 50 ?M and wortmannin,100 nM); C. Src (pp2, 10 ?M) and MEK inhibitors (PD98059, 25 ?M); and D. and E. NF-?B inhibitors (SN50, 20 ?g/ml; Bay11-7082, 10 ?M; PDTC, 10 ?M; and MG-132, 50 ?M). Results shown are representative of three separate experiments. Fig. 6 Effects of inhibiting epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activation on NF-?B nuclear translocation and TNF-?-induced apoptosis in HT-29 human colon cancer cells. A. Representative immunoblots showing NF-?B nuclear translocation. Effect of anti-EGFR ligand-binding domain antibody (LA1, 0.1 ?g/ml) and EGFR activation inhibitor (AG1478, 0.1 ?M) on DCT-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation. HT-29 cells were pre-incubated for 30 min, alone or with EGFR activation inhibitors, prior to treatment with 100 ?M DCT. Nuclear extracts were immunoblotted for the p65 NF-?B subunit. Protein loading was verified by immunoblotting using anti-histone H2A antibody. Three experiments were performed that showed similar results. B. Changes in TNF-?-induced apoptosis in HT-29 cells treated with DCT (100 ?M), alone or plus EGFR activation inhibitor, LA1 (0.1 ?g/ml). Apoptosis was visualized 24 h after exposure to TNF-? (upper panel); images of Annexin-V staining (lower panel). Original magnification, ×200. C. Percentage of apoptotic cells in HT-29 cells pre-treated for 30 min with LA1 (0.1 ?g/ml) and AG1478 (0.1 ?M). Percentage of apoptotic cells in control and EGFR activation inhibitor-treated cells, and in TNF-?-treated cells alone, with DCT (100 ?M) and DCT plus indicated concentrations of EGFR activation inhibitors. Values are means±SE from 3 experiments. *** p <0.05 and 0.01, respectively, compared with cells incubated without EGFR activation inhibitors. D. Effect of inhibiting EGFR activation on TNF-?-stimulated PARP degradation. HT-29 cells were pre-incubated with LA1 (0.1 ?g/ml) and AG1478 (0.1 ?M) 30 min before exposure to DCT (100 ?M) and TNF-? (100 ng/ml). Levels of p85 PARP in cell extracts were measured by immunoblotting using a monoclonal antibody that does not recognize 116-kDa PARP. Protein loading was verified by immunoblotting with anti-?-actin antibody. Three experiments were performed that showed similar results. Fig. 7 Effects of inhibiting Akt activation in HT-29 cells on NF-?B activation and TNF-?-induced apoptosis. A. Representative immunoblots show NF-?B nuclear translocation. a. Effect of transfection of colon cancer cells with kinase-dead Akt on DCT-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation. Control HT-29 cells and HT-29 cells transfected with plasmids containing wild type (WT) and mutant akt (DN) were incubated with 100 ?M DCT for 30 min. b. HT-29 cells were pre-incubated with Akt inhibitor, API-2 (5 ?M), for 30 min and then incubated with or without DCT (100 ?M). Nuclear extracts were immunoblotted for the p65 NF-?B subunit. Protein loading was verified by immunoblotting using anti-histone H2A antibody. Three experiments were performed that showed similar results. B. Effect of inhibiting Akt activity on NF-?B transcriptional activity as measured by NF-?B promoter activity in HT-29 cells. Control HT-29 cells and cells transfected with plasmids containing wild type (WT) and mutant akt (DNM) were incubated with 100 ?M DCT. Transcriptional activity was examined by NF-?B-dependent promoter luciferase activity. Values are means±SE from 3 experiments. *** p <0.05 and 0.01, respectively, compared with cells incubated without DCT. C. Changes in TNF-?-induced apoptosis in HT-29 cells treated with DCT (100 ?M), alone or plus an Akt inhibitor, API-2 (5 ?M). Apoptosis was visualized 24 h after exposure to TNF-? (upper panel); images of Annexin-V staining (lower panel). Original magnification, ×200. D. Percentage of apoptotic HT-29 cells following treatments described in C. Percentage of apoptotic cells in control and API-2-treated cells, and in TNF-?-treated cells alone, with DCT (100 ?M) and DCT plus indicated concentrations of API-2. Values are means±SE from 3 experiments. *,**,**** p <0.05, 0.01, and 0.001, respectively, compared with control cells incubated without API-2. E. Effect of inhibiting Akt activity on TNF-?-stimulated PARP degradation. HT-29 cells were pre-incubated with API-2 (5 ?M, 30 min) before exposure to DCT (100 ?M) and TNF-? (100 ng/ml). Levels of p85 PARP in cell extracts were measured by immunoblotting using a monoclonal antibody that does not recognize 116-kDa PARP. Protein loading was verified by immunoblotting with anti-?-actin antibody. Three experiments were performed that showed similar results. Fig. 8 Effects of treatment with DCT on colon cancer cell apoptosis induced by ultraviolet (UV) radiation. A. Increasing UV doses (10 – 200 J/m2) caused a progressive increase in H508 colon cancer cell apoptosis. B. Microscopic images of UV-induced apoptosis in H508 cells. a, Control cells (left) and cells treated with UV alone (10 J/m2) (middle) or with UV plus 100 ?M DCT (right). (b) Annexin-V staining. Original magnification, ×200. C. Percentage of apoptotic cells in H508 cells treated as shown in B. Values are mean±SE from 3 experiments. ** p <0.01 compared to cells treated with UV alone. D. Changes in UV (10 J/m2)-induced apoptosis in H508 cells treated with DCT (100 ?M), alone or plus an NF-?B inhibitor, Bay11-7082 (10 ?M), and an Akt inhibitor, API-2 (5 ?M). Values are mean±SE from 3 experiments. *,*** p <0.05 and 0.001, respectively, compared to cells treated with UV plus DCT alone. E. Effect of inhibiting Akt and NF-?B activity on UV-induced PARP degradation. H508 cells were pre-incubated with Bay11-7082 (10 ?M) and API-2 (5 ?M) for 30 min before exposure to DCT (100 ?M) and UV (10 and 50 J/m2). Levels of p85 PARP in cell extracts were measured by immunoblotting using a monoclonal antibody that does not recognize 116-kDa PARP. Protein loading was verified by immunoblotting with anti-?-actin antibody. Three experiments were performed that showed similar results. Fig. 9 Model of deoxycholyltaurine-induced post-EGFR signaling in human colon cancer cells. Signaling via the MEK/ERK pathway stimulates cell proliferation. Signaling via the PI3K/Akt pathway stimulates nuclear translocation and transcriptional activity of NF-?B, thereby protecting cells from stress-induced apoptosis. Dashed arrow between deoxycholyltaurine and EGFR indicates a mechanism involving release of the EGFR ligand HB-EGF [ 8 , 9 ]. Circled P indicates key phosphorylations. Table 1 Actions of NF-?B inhibitors on deoxycholyltaurine (DCT)-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation and transcriptional activation in H508 colon cancer cells Inhibition, % reduction observed with inhibitor plus DCT (100 ?M) Inhibitor Nuclear translocation p Transcriptional activation p SN50 (20 ?g/ml) 92.4±10.2 0.01 75.8±6.8 0.02 MG-132 (50 ?M) 85.4±8.7 0.01 82.7±7.3 0.02 BAY11-7082 (10 ?M) 70.9±6.4 0.02 60.4±6.1 0.03 H508 cells were incubated for 30 min with 100 ?M DCT, alone or with the indicated concentration of NF-?B inhibitor, and nuclear extracts were immunoblotted for the p65 NF-?B subunit. NF-?B transcriptional activation was measured by using a TransAM NF-?B kit. Values are means±SE from three experiments. p indicates comparison of values observed with cells incubated with DCT (100 ?M) plus the indicated concentration of NF-?B inhibitor compared to cells incubated with DCT alone.  Figures and Table Fig. 1 Effects of bile acid on tumor necrosis factor-? (TNF-?; 100 ng/ml)-induced apoptosis in HT-29 and H508 human colon cancer cells. A. Images of TNF-?-induced apoptosis in HT-29 cells. a, Control cells (left) and cells treated for 24 h with TNF-? alone (middle) or TNF-? plus deoxycholyltaurine (DCT; 100 ?M) (right). b. Annexin-V staining. Original magnification, ×200. B. Actions of increasing concentrations of 1 to 300 ?M DCT on TNF-?-induced apoptosis. Percentage of apoptotic cells in HT-29 cells was calculated using Annexin-V staining. Values are mean±SE from 3 experiments. ** p <0.01 compared with cells treated with TNF-? alone. C. Changes in PARP degradation in HT-29 cells treated with TNF-? (100 ng/ml) alone or with DCT (100 ?M) at the times indicated. Levels of p85 PARP in cell extracts were measured by immunoblotting using a monoclonal antibody that does not recognize 116-kDa PARP. Protein loading was verified by immunoblotting with anti-?-actin antibody. Three experiments were performed that showed similar results. D. Percentage of apoptotic H508 cells determined as described for HT-29 cells in A. Cells were treated with DCT (100 ?M) and TNF-? (100 ng/ml), alone or in combination. Values are mean±SE from 3 experiments. *** p <0.001 compared with cells treated with TNF-? alone. E. Changes in PARP degradation in H508 cells treated with TNF-? (100 ng/ml) alone or with DCT (100 ?M) at the times indicated. Levels of p85 PARP in cell extracts were measured by immunoblotting. Three experiments were performed that showed similar results. Fig. 2 Effects of deoxycholyltaurine (DCT) on nuclear translocation and activation of NF-?B in human colon cancer cells. A. DCT stimulates nuclear translocation of p65 NF-?B. a: Representative immunoblots for dose – response for actions of DCT on p65 NF-?B protein in nuclear extracts. HT-29 and H508 cells were incubated for 30 min with indicated concentrations of DCT and nuclear extracts were immunoblotted for p65 NF-?B subunit and the loading control histone H2A. b: Representative immunoblots for time-courses for actions of DCT on p65 NF-?B protein in nuclear extracts. HT-29 and H508 cells were incubated with 100 ?M DCT for indicated times and nuclear extracts were immunoblotted for p65 NF-?B subunit and the loading control histone H2A. B. Cellular distribution of NF-?B in H508 (top row) and HT-29 (bottom row) cells. a, Control; b, Cells treated with EGF (10 ng/ml) for 30 min; c, cells treated with DCT (100 ?M) for 30 min. Cells were permeabilized and incubated with anti-p65 NF-?B antibody and then with anti-IgG conjugated with TRITC. Nuclei were stained with Hoechst. NF-?B is shown as red, whereas nuclei are shown as blue. Original magnification, ×200. Three experiments were performed that showed similar results. C. Changes in NF-?B-motif binding activity in H508 and HT-29 cells treated with DCT (100 ?M, 30 min). Nuclear extracts were isolated from cells with different treatments and the level of p65 NF-?B transcriptional activation was measured using a TransAM NF-?B kit. Values are means±SE from three experiments. * p <0.05 compared with cells incubated without DCT. D. Changes in NF-?B promoter activity as measured by luciferase reporter gene assays. a, Structure of luciferase (Luc) reporter: control p-TAL-Luc and NF-?B-Luc construct with four NF-?B binding sites. b, Level of NF-?B-dependent promoter activity. Cells were transfected with either pNF-?B-Luc or pTAL-Luc using Lipofectamine. Data for NF-?B-dependent promoter activity were normalized using Renilla luciferase activity. Values are means±SE from 3 experiments. *** p <0.05 and 0.01, respectively, compared with cells incubated without DCT. Fig. 3 Effects of deoxycholyltaurine (DCT) on tumor necrosis factor-? (TNF-?)-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation in HT-29 and H508 human colon cancer cells. Representative immunoblots (A) and line graphs of immunoblot densitometry (B) show time-course for effects of TNF-? (100 ng/ml) and DCT (100 ?M), alone or in combination, on increases in nuclear p65 NF-?B. Cells were incubated with test agents for the indicated times and nuclear extracts were immunoblotted for p65 NF-?B and a loading control, histone H2A. Results are representative of three separate experiments. Fig. 4 Effects of inactivation of NF-?B by ectopic expression of I?B? super-repressor (AdI?B?SR) on colon cancer cells. HT-29 and H508 cells transfected with either recombinant adenoviral vector encoding human I?B?SR cDNA (AdI?BSR) or adenoviral vector lacking I?B?SR cDNA (Adnull) at a multiplicity of infection of 25 plaque-forming units per cell for 48 h followed by incubation with DCT. A. Changes in NF-?B transcriptional activity in HT-29 (a) and H508 (b) cells. Cells were transfected with either pNF-?B-Luc or pTAL-Luc and incubated with DCT (100 ?M, 2 h). Transcriptional activity was examined by NF-?B-dependent promoter luciferase activity. Values are means±SE from 3 experiments. **,*** p <0.01 and 0.001, respectively, compared with DCT-treated cells infected with Adnull. B. Changes in TNF-?-induced apoptosis in HT-29 cells infected with AdI?BSR or Adnull. Cells were pretreated with Adnull and AdI?BSR, followed by DCT treatment (100 ?M, 2 h), and apoptosis was visualized 24 h after exposure to TNF-? (upper panel); images of Annexin-V staining (lower panel). C. Percentage of apoptotic cells in HT-29 (a) and H508 (b) cells. Percentage of apoptotic cells in control and TNF-? treated cells with various treatments described in B (microscopic images of apoptosis in H508 cells are not shown). Values are means±SE from 3 experiments. * p <0.05 compared with cells exposed to TNF-? and infected with Adnull. D. Effect of exposure to DCT (100 ?M, 2 h) on TNF-? (100 ng/ml)-stimulated PARP degradation in HT-29 and H508 cells transfected with AdI?BSR. Levels of p85 PARP in cell extracts were measured by immunoblotting using a monoclonal antibody that does not recognize 116-kDa PARP. Protein loading was verified by immunoblotting with anti-?-actin antibody. Three experiments were performed that showed similar results. Fig. 5 Effects of inhibiting post epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling on EGF- and deoxycholyltaurine (DCT)-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation in H508 human colon cancer cells. Representative immunoblots show the effects on NF-?B nuclear translocation of incubating H508 cells with 100 ?M DCT and 10 ng/ml EGF, alone and in the presence of the following agents: A. Inhibitors of EGFR activation (PD168393, 2 ?M and AG1478, 0.1 ?M); B. PI3K inhibitors (LY294002, 50 ?M and wortmannin,100 nM); C. Src (pp2, 10 ?M) and MEK inhibitors (PD98059, 25 ?M); and D. and E. NF-?B inhibitors (SN50, 20 ?g/ml; Bay11-7082, 10 ?M; PDTC, 10 ?M; and MG-132, 50 ?M). Results shown are representative of three separate experiments. Fig. 6 Effects of inhibiting epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activation on NF-?B nuclear translocation and TNF-?-induced apoptosis in HT-29 human colon cancer cells. A. Representative immunoblots showing NF-?B nuclear translocation. Effect of anti-EGFR ligand-binding domain antibody (LA1, 0.1 ?g/ml) and EGFR activation inhibitor (AG1478, 0.1 ?M) on DCT-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation. HT-29 cells were pre-incubated for 30 min, alone or with EGFR activation inhibitors, prior to treatment with 100 ?M DCT. Nuclear extracts were immunoblotted for the p65 NF-?B subunit. Protein loading was verified by immunoblotting using anti-histone H2A antibody. Three experiments were performed that showed similar results. B. Changes in TNF-?-induced apoptosis in HT-29 cells treated with DCT (100 ?M), alone or plus EGFR activation inhibitor, LA1 (0.1 ?g/ml). Apoptosis was visualized 24 h after exposure to TNF-? (upper panel); images of Annexin-V staining (lower panel). Original magnification, ×200. C. Percentage of apoptotic cells in HT-29 cells pre-treated for 30 min with LA1 (0.1 ?g/ml) and AG1478 (0.1 ?M). Percentage of apoptotic cells in control and EGFR activation inhibitor-treated cells, and in TNF-?-treated cells alone, with DCT (100 ?M) and DCT plus indicated concentrations of EGFR activation inhibitors. Values are means±SE from 3 experiments. *** p <0.05 and 0.01, respectively, compared with cells incubated without EGFR activation inhibitors. D. Effect of inhibiting EGFR activation on TNF-?-stimulated PARP degradation. HT-29 cells were pre-incubated with LA1 (0.1 ?g/ml) and AG1478 (0.1 ?M) 30 min before exposure to DCT (100 ?M) and TNF-? (100 ng/ml). Levels of p85 PARP in cell extracts were measured by immunoblotting using a monoclonal antibody that does not recognize 116-kDa PARP. Protein loading was verified by immunoblotting with anti-?-actin antibody. Three experiments were performed that showed similar results. Fig. 7 Effects of inhibiting Akt activation in HT-29 cells on NF-?B activation and TNF-?-induced apoptosis. A. Representative immunoblots show NF-?B nuclear translocation. a. Effect of transfection of colon cancer cells with kinase-dead Akt on DCT-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation. Control HT-29 cells and HT-29 cells transfected with plasmids containing wild type (WT) and mutant akt (DN) were incubated with 100 ?M DCT for 30 min. b. HT-29 cells were pre-incubated with Akt inhibitor, API-2 (5 ?M), for 30 min and then incubated with or without DCT (100 ?M). Nuclear extracts were immunoblotted for the p65 NF-?B subunit. Protein loading was verified by immunoblotting using anti-histone H2A antibody. Three experiments were performed that showed similar results. B. Effect of inhibiting Akt activity on NF-?B transcriptional activity as measured by NF-?B promoter activity in HT-29 cells. Control HT-29 cells and cells transfected with plasmids containing wild type (WT) and mutant akt (DNM) were incubated with 100 ?M DCT. Transcriptional activity was examined by NF-?B-dependent promoter luciferase activity. Values are means±SE from 3 experiments. *** p <0.05 and 0.01, respectively, compared with cells incubated without DCT. C. Changes in TNF-?-induced apoptosis in HT-29 cells treated with DCT (100 ?M), alone or plus an Akt inhibitor, API-2 (5 ?M). Apoptosis was visualized 24 h after exposure to TNF-? (upper panel); images of Annexin-V staining (lower panel). Original magnification, ×200. D. Percentage of apoptotic HT-29 cells following treatments described in C. Percentage of apoptotic cells in control and API-2-treated cells, and in TNF-?-treated cells alone, with DCT (100 ?M) and DCT plus indicated concentrations of API-2. Values are means±SE from 3 experiments. *,**,**** p <0.05, 0.01, and 0.001, respectively, compared with control cells incubated without API-2. E. Effect of inhibiting Akt activity on TNF-?-stimulated PARP degradation. HT-29 cells were pre-incubated with API-2 (5 ?M, 30 min) before exposure to DCT (100 ?M) and TNF-? (100 ng/ml). Levels of p85 PARP in cell extracts were measured by immunoblotting using a monoclonal antibody that does not recognize 116-kDa PARP. Protein loading was verified by immunoblotting with anti-?-actin antibody. Three experiments were performed that showed similar results. Fig. 8 Effects of treatment with DCT on colon cancer cell apoptosis induced by ultraviolet (UV) radiation. A. Increasing UV doses (10 – 200 J/m2) caused a progressive increase in H508 colon cancer cell apoptosis. B. Microscopic images of UV-induced apoptosis in H508 cells. a, Control cells (left) and cells treated with UV alone (10 J/m2) (middle) or with UV plus 100 ?M DCT (right). (b) Annexin-V staining. Original magnification, ×200. C. Percentage of apoptotic cells in H508 cells treated as shown in B. Values are mean±SE from 3 experiments. ** p <0.01 compared to cells treated with UV alone. D. Changes in UV (10 J/m2)-induced apoptosis in H508 cells treated with DCT (100 ?M), alone or plus an NF-?B inhibitor, Bay11-7082 (10 ?M), and an Akt inhibitor, API-2 (5 ?M). Values are mean±SE from 3 experiments. *,*** p <0.05 and 0.001, respectively, compared to cells treated with UV plus DCT alone. E. Effect of inhibiting Akt and NF-?B activity on UV-induced PARP degradation. H508 cells were pre-incubated with Bay11-7082 (10 ?M) and API-2 (5 ?M) for 30 min before exposure to DCT (100 ?M) and UV (10 and 50 J/m2). Levels of p85 PARP in cell extracts were measured by immunoblotting using a monoclonal antibody that does not recognize 116-kDa PARP. Protein loading was verified by immunoblotting with anti-?-actin antibody. Three experiments were performed that showed similar results. Fig. 9 Model of deoxycholyltaurine-induced post-EGFR signaling in human colon cancer cells. Signaling via the MEK/ERK pathway stimulates cell proliferation. Signaling via the PI3K/Akt pathway stimulates nuclear translocation and transcriptional activity of NF-?B, thereby protecting cells from stress-induced apoptosis. Dashed arrow between deoxycholyltaurine and EGFR indicates a mechanism involving release of the EGFR ligand HB-EGF [ 8 , 9 ]. Circled P indicates key phosphorylations. Table 1 Actions of NF-?B inhibitors on deoxycholyltaurine (DCT)-induced NF-?B nuclear translocation and transcriptional activation in H508 colon cancer cells Inhibition, % reduction observed with inhibitor plus DCT (100 ?M) Inhibitor Nuclear translocation p Transcriptional activation p SN50 (20 ?g/ml) 92.4±10.2 0.01 75.8±6.8 0.02 MG-132 (50 ?M) 85.4±8.7 0.01 82.7±7.3 0.02 BAY11-7082 (10 ?M) 70.9±6.4 0.02 60.4±6.1 0.03 H508 cells were incubated for 30 min with 100 ?M DCT, alone or with the indicated concentration of NF-?B inhibitor, and nuclear extracts were immunoblotted for the p65 NF-?B subunit. NF-?B transcriptional activation was measured by using a TransAM NF-?B kit. Values are means±SE from three experiments. p indicates comparison of values observed with cells incubated with DCT (100 ?M) plus the indicated concentration of NF-?B inhibitor compared to cells incubated with DCT alone. 