Regulation of Cadherin Trafficking Cadherins are a large family of cell-cell adhesion molecules that tether cytoskeletal networks of actin and intermediate filaments to the plasma membrane. This function of cadherins promotes tissue organization and integrity, as demonstrated by numerous disease states that are characterized by the loss of cadherin-based adhesion. However, plasticity in cell adhesion is often required in cellular processes such as tissue patterning during development and epithelial migration during wound healing. Recent work has revealed a pivotal role for various membrane trafficking pathways in regulating cellular transitions between quiescent adhesive states and more dynamic phenotypes. The regulation of cadherins by membrane trafficking is emerging as a key player in this balancing act and studies are beginning to reveal how this process goes awry in the context of disease. This review summarizes the current understanding of how cadherins are routed and how the interface between cadherins and membrane trafficking pathways regulates cell surface adhesive potential. Particular emphasis is placed on the regulation of cadherin trafficking by catenins and the interplay between growth factor signaling pathways and cadherin endocytosis.  Conclusion Membrane trafficking pathways provide critical regulatory oversight of cadherin function. Understanding how cadherin adhesion and dynamics are integrated will provide significant insights into a range of developmental processes and disease pathologies associated with alterations in cadherin dynamics. A number of opportunities and challenges are evident in the cadherin and membrane trafficking fields. For example, the general relationship between cadherin trafficking and adhesion requires further clarification. In a series of papers, Troyanovsky and colleagues have manipulated cadherin dimerization and clathrin-mediated endocytosis to demonstrate that blocking endocytosis can stabilize cadherin dimer formation and adhesion ( 7 , 8 ). An important implication of this work is that changes in the rates of global endocytic activity or recycling may have profound impact on the overall adhesive status of the plasma membrane. Consistent with this possibility, two recent manuscripts identify a key role for cdc42 and the Par6/aPKC polarity pathway in regulating cadherin endocytosis ( 73 , 74 ). This pathway regulates cadherin internalization by locally modifying actin cytoskeletal dynamics and dynamin activity. When the pathway is inactivated, endocytosis is reduced and adherens junctions become disorganized. Taken together, these studies indicate that cadherin cell surface levels and junction organization are tightly controlled by the activity of endocytic machinery. Either too much or too little endocytosis of cadherin has deleterious effects on the assembly and function of adhesive intercellular junctions. Another challenge will be to determine not only how global changes in membrane trafficking impact adhesion, but to also reveal the molecular mechanisms that selectively identify cadherins as cargo and alter cadherin dynamics. These types of studies will be needed in order to determine whether alterations in cadherin trafficking play a causal role in a particular biological response, or if these changes are merely a consequence of the process. Addressing this issue directly will require a detailed analysis of cadherin domains and amino-acid determinants that regulate cadherin endocytosis or other trafficking decisions. Such studies will allow for mutations to be introduced that specifically alter cadherin trafficking rather than introducing global changes in membrane dynamics. Some advances have been made, including the identification of residues in VE-cadherin that mediate?-arrestin binding and endothelial monolayer permeability. Similarly, sequences in E-cadherin required for binding to the AP-1 adaptor complex play a key role in gastric epithelial tumorigenesis. It is also likely that key advances will be realized with the identification of molecules that regulate cadherins in a specific fashion. Two such examples include Hakai and p120-catenin, both of which selectively recognize cadherins and modify cadherin endocytic processing. Additional studies of using these approaches should reveal situations where regulation of cadherin trafficking has a primary role in a developmental or disease process.  Figure and Table Figure 1 Different Endocytic Pathways Utilized by E-cadherin (A) Numerous studies have illustrated that classical cadherins, such as E-cadherin, can undergo various types of endocytic processing. Furthermore, the route taken by E-cadherin seems to be dependent on the presence of its cytoplasmic binding partner, ?-catenin or p120. In the case of clathrin-mediated endocytosis, binding of ?-catenin and p120 maintains E-cadherin’s association with the actin cytoskeleton network and prevents E-cadherin endocytosis. However, signaling events may cause disassociation between the cadherin and the catenins, thereby allowing adaptors, such as AP-2 and ?-arrestin, to interact with the cytoplasmic tail and recruit clathrin and other accessory proteins that promote internalization. Once internalized, E-cadherin enters sorting/early endosomes in which other molecules proteins regulate the fate of the cadherin. GTPases, such as Rabs 5 and 7, as well as post-translational modification of the cadherin cytoplasmic tail (i.e. ubiquitination), promote E-cadherin entry into a lysosomal pathway for degradation. However, Rab 11 and the sorting nexin, SNX1, are essential for routing E-cadherin to recycling endosomes and ultimately back to the plasma membrane. (B) When E-cadherin undergoes clathrin-independent endocytosis, signaling events, such as Rac1 activation, are thought to rearrange the actin cytoskeleton network, allowing for internalization of the complex into early endosomes. This complex is internalized into a caveolin-enriched endosome and does not colocalize with markers for late endosomes or lysosomes, suggesting that the cadherin-catenin complex is then recycled back to the plasma membrane, with the assistance of the sorting nexin, SNX1. Table I Different Routes and Regulators of Cadherin Internalization Internalization Route Cadherin Adaptors and Regulators Clathrin-Mediated VE-cadherin p120( 11 , 75 ), ?-arrestin( 14 ), VEGF( 14 ), Ang1( 49 ), AP-2 ** E-cadherin p120( 33 , 34 ), Dab2( 15 ), ?-catenin( 43 ), PIPKI?( 16 ), Rac-1/IQGAP1( 12 ), FGF( 53 ), HGF( 51 ) N-cadherin NMDAR( 44 ), ?-catenin( 44 ) Caveolae-mediated E-cadherin Caveolin-1( 19 ), Rac-1( 19 ) Lipid raft-mediated Desmoglien 3 Tyr phosphorylation( 20 ) E-cadherin Arf6( 21 , 24 , 52 ) Macropinocytosis E-cadherin EGF( 22 ), Rac-1( 22 ) N-cadherin ?-catenin( 47 ), RAC-1/IQGAP1( 47 ) ** indicates submitted work by C. Chaisson and A. Kowalczyk 