Other Autonomic Neuropathies Associated with Ganglionic Antibody The acetylcholine receptor ganglionic (G-AchR) antibody is a very specific serologic test for autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy. The spectrum of autoimmune (or presumed to be autoimmune) autonomic disorders, however, is quite broad and positivity to this antibody has been reported in a variety of other conditions, albeit infrequent and with low titer. This review describes the autonomic neuropathies most frequently encountered in clinical practice in which an autoimmune etiology is suspected. They include a chronic form (pure autonomic failure) and limited autonomic neuropathies with predominant involvement of one neurotransmitter type (i.e., cholinergic vs. adrenergic) or one system (such as the gastrointestinal system) or a distal small fiber dysfunction. In each of these conditions, occasional positivity to the G-AchR antibody has been found, but the pathogenetic significance of such finding is still uncertain. Other antigens and antibodies yet to be identified are more likely to be responsible in these disorders.  Illustrative Pseudo Obstruction Case A 37 yo woman presented for evaluation of complex constellation of GI symptoms suggesting of generalized dysmotility that had began 4 yrs prior following a viral illness. Her symptoms suggested gastroparesis and colonic inertia. She also reported fatigue and mild orthostatic intolerance. Her upper GI symptoms had improved since the onset, but her constipation persisted. Her studies showed presence of mild, limited autonomic neuropathy, with features of POTS and DSFN and prolonged transit time. Her G-AchR antibody titer was 0.18 nmol/L when measured 8 yrs later. At that point, she continued to have symptoms but her studies had improved, suggesting more a functional syndrome. Comments The spectrum of AAG is likely to continue to expand as we gather more data. We can conclude at present we have no definite evidence G-AchR antibody has a pathogenetic role in POTS, CIA, or DSFN. The low titer detected in a few cases, without specific clinical characteristics differentiating them from the seronegative ones, is more likely indicative of an underlying autoimmune response (even one directly responsible for the clinical syndromes) and may suggest another auto-antibody may be involved, however one yet to be identified. As for CIP and gastrointestinal dysmotility in general, recent data suggest G-AchR may indeed be pathogenetic, alone or in association with other autoantibodies. Some individual seronegative patients respond to immunotherapy as well (P.A.L., unpublished observations). This observation suggests that the clinical phenotype of AAG, persistent severe autonomic failure, unassociated with G-AChR antibodies could be caused by antibodies other than G-AChR antibody and could respond to immunotherapy. However the numbers are still very small and the decision to treat with expensive and not risk-free therapies should not be taken lightly. The take home messages from this brief overview of conditions other than AAG in which G-AchR positivity may be found are: the spectrum of autoimmune autonomic disorders is broad and still expanding clinical suspicion of an autoimmune pathogenesis is higher whenever an antecedent event, subacute onset, evidence of multiple (albeit sometimes subtle) organ/system involvement or of other autoimmune disorder is present the decision to treat with costly therapies requiring careful monitoring (such as long-term immunosuppressive agents) should probably be entertained whenever the index of suspicion of an autoimmune pathogenesis is high, regardless of the low titer seropositivity or seronegativity, whenever a patient fails to respond adequately to symptomatic therapies. Such decision should be taken in a case by case approach as there is no large study at present to justify otherwise seronegativity does not exclude autoimmune pathogenesis: it may simply mean the responsible autoantibody has not been yet identified similar phenotypes may have very different pathogenetic mechanisms and “idiopathic” should not equate “autoimmune”  Comments The spectrum of AAG is likely to continue to expand as we gather more data. We can conclude at present we have no definite evidence G-AchR antibody has a pathogenetic role in POTS, CIA, or DSFN. The low titer detected in a few cases, without specific clinical characteristics differentiating them from the seronegative ones, is more likely indicative of an underlying autoimmune response (even one directly responsible for the clinical syndromes) and may suggest another auto-antibody may be involved, however one yet to be identified. As for CIP and gastrointestinal dysmotility in general, recent data suggest G-AchR may indeed be pathogenetic, alone or in association with other autoantibodies. Some individual seronegative patients respond to immunotherapy as well (P.A.L., unpublished observations). This observation suggests that the clinical phenotype of AAG, persistent severe autonomic failure, unassociated with G-AChR antibodies could be caused by antibodies other than G-AChR antibody and could respond to immunotherapy. However the numbers are still very small and the decision to treat with expensive and not risk-free therapies should not be taken lightly. The take home messages from this brief overview of conditions other than AAG in which G-AchR positivity may be found are: the spectrum of autoimmune autonomic disorders is broad and still expanding clinical suspicion of an autoimmune pathogenesis is higher whenever an antecedent event, subacute onset, evidence of multiple (albeit sometimes subtle) organ/system involvement or of other autoimmune disorder is present the decision to treat with costly therapies requiring careful monitoring (such as long-term immunosuppressive agents) should probably be entertained whenever the index of suspicion of an autoimmune pathogenesis is high, regardless of the low titer seropositivity or seronegativity, whenever a patient fails to respond adequately to symptomatic therapies. Such decision should be taken in a case by case approach as there is no large study at present to justify otherwise seronegativity does not exclude autoimmune pathogenesis: it may simply mean the responsible autoantibody has not been yet identified similar phenotypes may have very different pathogenetic mechanisms and “idiopathic” should not equate “autoimmune”  Figure and Table Figure 1 Skin biopsies showing perieccrine inflammatory cells infiltration around sweat glands in anhidrotic skin (A) and normal sweat gland coils from sweating skin (B) in the same patient with classic CIA. Courtesy of Dr. Robert D. Fealey. Table 1 Possible clinical phenotypes of G-AchR antibody autoimmunity Disorder Key clinical manifestations Antibody + frequency Antibody titers AAG Acute/subacute onset of pandysautonomia with prominent cholinergic abnormalities; often monophasic; may respond well to immunotherapy 50% Usually high PAF Gradual, progressive generalized autonomic failure ? low POTS Often subacute onset of orthostatic intolerance and inappropriate postural tachycardia; patients often polysyntomatic for various autonomic domains; fatigue can be a refractory symptom 15-25% low CIA Variable onset of heat intolerance due to inadequate sweat production. Loss can be complete. May respond to immunotherapy ? low GI dysmotility Variable onset, often subacute, of upper and/or lower GI tract motility disorder: can manifest as gastroparesis, pseudoobstruction or both ? low DSFN Variable onset of burning discomfort in the distal limbs; neurological exam and EMG often normal, but abnormal sweat found in >90% of cases ? low 