Atazanavir: its role in HIV treatment Azatanavir is a protease inhibitor (PI) approved for the treatment of HIV-1 infection. Atazanavir is a substrate and inhibitor of cytochrome P450 isozyme 3A and an inhibitor and inducer of P-glycoprotein. It has similar virologic efficacy as efavirenz and ritonavir-boosted lopinavir in antiretroviral-naive individuals. Its impact on lipids is less than other PIs and it is suitable for those in whom hyperlipidemia is undesirable. Ritonavir boosting of atazanavir enhances the bioavailability of atazanavir but may result in some elevation of lipids and is recommended for treatment-experienced patients and those receiving efavirenz or tenofovir. Ritonavir-boosted atazanavir has similar antiviral activity as ritonavir-boosted lopinavir in both antiretroviral therapy-naive and -experienced patients. Atazanavir causes unconjugated bilirubinemia in over 40% of patients but results in less than 2% discontinuations. Atazanavir is licensed for once-daily use and atazanavir/ritonavir competes with lopinavir/ritonavir as the most commonly prescribed PI.  Conclusion Unboosted atazanavir has extremely variable drug exposures but remains a preferred PI for those with increased cardiovascular risks and in those whom elevation of lipids would be disadvantageous. Atazanavir/RTV efficacy is comparable to lopinavir/RTV and side effects are tolerable and generally manageable. Raised unconjugated bilirubin levels are inconvenient but not generally a drug-limiting toxicity. Once-daily dosing is convenient when combined with once-daily NRTIs, such as tenofovir, making it a preferred option for initial therapy in industrialized settings and preferred second-line therapy in LMICs.  Expert commentary Atazanavir has similar virologic efficacy to efavirenz for drugnaive patients, shares the benefit of a once-daily regimen and has the advantage of a neutral impact on lipids. Disadvantages include less clinical experience of its use, the common side effect of hyperbilirubinemia and the lack of a coformulation with once-daily NRTIs. In ART-experienced patients, RTV-boosted atazanavir has similar virological activity to RTV-boosted lopinavir, which is its main market competitor. The benefits of a relatively neutral lipid profile are somewhat diminished by the addition of RTV to atazanavir, and the current lack of a coformulation with RTV and frequent hyperbilirubinemia are both disadvantageous. Use of atazanavir in LMICs is further hampered by the lack of a regimen for use together with standard rifampicin-based anti-TB therapy [ 106 ]. PI use in the global roll-out program in LMICs will continue to be determined predominantly by cost. With economies of scale and market competition, a coformulation of atazanavir with heat-stable RTV could achieve a significant price advantage [ 77 ], with subsequent increasing market share.  Five-year view The DHHS 2008 treatment guidelines [ 102 ] and the WHO expert panel on second-line ART [ 9 ] have recently upgraded atazanavir/RTV from an alternative PI regimen to preferred PI status. Future updates of other major guidelines will most probably follow these recommendations, thereby increasing market penetration in industrialized countries and LMICs. The lipidneutral characteristics of atazanavir will increase in importance with increased survival of HIV-infected patients at risk of cardiovascular events. In LMICs, the global numbers of patients requiring PI-based regimens will continue to grow at a rate of approximately 3% per annum. Atazanavir/RTV has efficacy and tolerability similar to its main competitors; however, it is likely that costing will determine market penetration in LMIC settings. With economies of scale, atazanavir/RTV combinations are anticipated to be 40% or cheaper than competitor PIs, based on requirements for less active pharmaceutical ingredients per dose [ 9 , 93 ]. Atazanavir is heat stable and the WHO has declared wider availability of coformulation atazanavir, together with heat-stable RTV, to be an urgent priority [ 8 , 9 ]. National programs will consider adopting atazanavir/RTV as a preferred PI option in their national second-line protocols as prices decrease and heat-stable formulations of RTV become more widely available. 