Allelic Variation of Calsyntenin 2 ( CLSTN2 ) Modulates the Impact of Developmental Tobacco Smoke Exposure on Mnemonic Processing in Adolescents Background Exposure to nicotine in tobacco smoke during development has been linked to subsequent deficits in attention and memory. The present study tested for evidence that genetic variation may contribute to individual differences in vulnerability to the effects of developmental exposure to tobacco smoke on memory and medial temporal lobe function in adolescents. Methods Verbal and visuospatial memory were assessed and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data were acquired in 101 adolescents systematically characterized for prenatal and adolescent exposure to tobacco smoke, while they performed an encoding and recognition memory task. The impact of allelic variation at loci within CLSTN2 (encoding synaptic protein calsyntenin 2) and KIBRA , shown previously to modulate early and delayed recall of words, on the dependent measures was examined. Results KIBRA genotype did not exert significant main or interacting effects with prenatal or adolescent exposure to tobacco smoke on verbal or visuospatial memory. Previous observations of a beneficial effect of the CLSTN2 C allele on verbal recall were replicated. Adolescent exposure to tobacco smoke reversed this beneficial effect and was associated with increased activation of parahippocampal gyrus during early and delayed recognition in CLTSN2 C allele carriers. While the CLSTN2 C allele conferred enhanced functional connectivity between brain regions subserving accurate verbal recognition, adolescent exposure to tobacco smoke reversed this effect. Conclusions These findings extend previous work demonstrating that calsyntenins play an essential role in learning and indicate that this role is modulated both by CLSTN2 genotype and, during adolescent development, by exposure to tobacco smoke.  Results Demographic, clinical and cognitive characteristics of both groups are presented in Table 1 . The groups did not differ in age, years of education, birth weight, general intelligence, reading achievement, or symptoms of inattention. Parents of nonsmokers with prenatal exposure to maternal smoking completed fewer years of education than did parents of smokers and parents of nonsmokers with no prenatal exposure (? = 4.0, t = 2.5, p < .02). Smokers reported significantly more symptoms of depression at screening (Beck Depression Inventory scores: ? = 5.3, t = 3.0, p < .004) and a greater history of cannabis consumption (? = 296.4, t = 2.8, p < .007). These effects of adolescent smoking and prenatal exposure were not significantly modified by genotype. There was a significant prenatal exposure by CLSTN2 rs6439886 genotype interaction effect on race (? = 1.2, t = 2.8, p < .007). All Hispanic subjects were CLSTN2 T homozygotes and were equally distributed across prenatal exposure groups. CLSTN2 C allele carriers with prenatal exposure to maternal smoking included 11 European American (EA) and 2 African American (AA) subjects, while CLSTN2 C allele carriers with no prenatal exposure included 5 EA, 6 AA, and 1 Asian American subject. There was a significant CLSTN2 genotype by adolescent smoking by prenatal exposure interaction effect on gender (? = 1.4, t = 2.2, p < .04); all exposure groups included more female subjects than male subjects except for C allele smokers with no prenatal exposure and nonsmokers with prenatal exposure, both of whom included more male subjects than female subjects. The CLSTN2 genotype by adolescent smoking by prenatal exposure effect on history of alcohol consumption was also significant (? = 9.3, t = 2.1, p < .05); rate of alcohol consumption was greatest among smokers with no prenatal exposure who were carriers of the CLSTN2 C allele, intermediate among the remaining smokers, and lowest among nonsmokers across prenatal exposure and genotype groups. Among smokers, effects of prenatal exposure to maternal smoking and CLSTN2 or KIBRA genotype on age at onset of smoking, years of daily smoking, number of cigarettes smoked per day, and symptoms of nicotine dependence (measured using the Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence [FTND] [41]) were not significant. Adolescents with prenatal exposure to active maternal smoking also had more prenatal exposure to alcohol (? = .3, t = 2.2, p < .05). This effect was not significantly modified by smoking status or genotype. Rates of prenatal exposure to cannabis or cocaine did not significantly differ across the groups. Among smokers, effects of genotype and prenatal exposure on estimated plasma concentrations of nicotine and cotinine at the time of assessment were not significant. Potential confounding effects of group differences in race, gender, alcohol use, parental education, baseline symptoms of depression, prenatal exposure to maternal alcohol consumption, and cannabis use were controlled for by including these variables in the regression models used to analyze the behavioral and brain imaging data. As our prior work in a larger sample has shown that adolescent smoking is associated with lower estimated general intelligence 6 ,), IQ was also included in the regression models. Effects of Genotype on the Impact of Developmental Exposure to Tobacco Smoke on Accuracy of Memory Performance KIBRA genotype did not exert significant main or interacting effects with prenatal or adolescent exposure to tobacco smoke on accuracy of verbal or visuospatial immediate or delayed recall. Similarly, CLSTN2 genotype did not exert significant main or interacting effects on accuracy of visuospatial immediate or delayed recall or verbal immediate recall. However, delayed verbal recall and percent retention was significantly more accurate in CLSTN2 C allele carriers (main effect of genotype on delayed verbal recall: ? = 2.2, t = 3.1, p = .003; on verbal percent retention: ? = 12.7, t = 2.3, p = .02). This benefit of the CLSTN2 C allele on verbal delayed recall was occluded by adolescent smoking (genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effect on delayed verbal recall: ? = ?4.9, t = ?2.3, p = .03; Figure 2 ). Effects of CLSTN2 genotype on verbal memory were not significantly modified by prenatal exposure to maternal tobacco smoking. Impact of <italic>CLSTN2</italic> Genotype and Adolescent Smoking on Medial Temporal Lobe Function During Verbal Encoding and Recognition Given the observed significant interaction between CLSTN2 genotype and adolescent smoking on accuracy of verbal recall, the lack of effects of KIBRA genotype on verbal or visuospatial memory, and the known importance of the medial temporal lobe to mnemonic function ( 12 ), fMRI data were examined for evidence of interacting effects of CLSTN2 genotype and adolescent smoking on medial temporal lobe function during verbal mnemonic processing. Effects of genotype and adolescent smoking on accuracy of task performance during scanning were not significant ( p values > .2). CLSTN2 genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effects on medial temporal lobe activation during encoding and rehearsal were not significant. Significant CLSTN2 genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effects were observed on activation of bilateral parahippocampal gyrus during early recognition of verbal stimuli presented during encoding (Talairach coordinates: right parahippocampal gyrus: x = 26, y = ?32, z = ?12, volume = 528 mm3, Brodmann area [BA] 35/36; left parahippocampal gyrus: x = ?30, y = ?32, z = ?12, volume = 80 mm3, BA 35/36). Percent signal change data extracted from these regions indicated that activation of bilateral parahippocampal gyrus during early recognition was greater in C allele carriers who were smokers than in T homozygotes or nonsmokers carrying the C allele ( Figure 3 ). Genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effects observed on activation of right fusiform gyrus (Talairach coordinates: x = 35, y = ?65, z = ?10, BA 19) and right medial frontal gyrus (Talairach coordinates: x = 0, y = 30, z = ?15, BA 11) during early recognition testing were not significant after controlling for potential confounding variables. A similar significant CLSTN2 genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effect was observed on activation of right parahippocampal gyrus during delayed recognition of verbal stimuli presented during encoding (Talairach coordinates: x = 28, y = ? 32, z = ?12, volume = 1096 mm3, BA 35/36). Percent signal change data extracted from this region indicated that activation of right parahippocampal gyrus during delayed recognition was greater in C allele carriers who were smokers than in T homozygotes or nonsmokers carrying the C allele ( Figure 4 ). The genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effect on activation of left superior frontal gyrus (Talairach coordinates: x = ?26, y = 52, z = ?15, BA 11) during verbal delayed recognition testing stemmed from increased activation of this region in nonsmokers carrying the CLSTN2 C allele, decreased activation in smokers carrying the CLSTN2 C allele, and minimal activation of this region in CLSTN2 T homozygotes. Impact of <italic>CLSTN2</italic> Genotype and Adolescent Smoking on Functional Connectivity Given the significant interaction between CLSTN2 genotype and adolescent smoking on accuracy of delayed verbal recall during HVLT-R testing, we examined functional connectivity using data acquired during delayed verbal recognition testing. The right parahippocampal gyrus region (Talairach coordinates: x = 28, y = ?32, z = ?12, volume = 1096 mm3) showing a significant CLSTN2 genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effect on activation during delayed verbal recognition testing was used as a seed region. This analysis produced two components that accounted for the majority of the variance in the imaging data. The first component, accounting for 69.5% of the variance, reflected a modest main effect of CLSTN2 genotype, whereby activation of the right parahippocampal gyrus seed region was more strongly positively correlated with activation of adjacent tissue in C allele carriers than in T homozygotes regardless of smoking status (factor loadings: smokers: T homozygotes = .34, C allele carriers = .59; nonsmokers: T homozygotes = .35, C allele carriers = .64; Supplement 2). The second component, accounting for 18.1% of the variance, strongly differentiated adolescent smokers and nonsmokers by CLSTN2 genotype (factor loadings: smokers: T homozygotes = .16, C allele carriers = ?.80; nonsmokers: T homozygotes = .13, C allele carriers = .57; Figure 5 , left panel). Connectivity maps for this component are shown on the right side of Figure 5 , where red/yellow indicates regions demonstrating positive functional connectivity with the seed region (encircled in green) that is consistent with the factor loadings. Positive loadings were observed at the medial frontal gyrus (x = 4, y = 53, z = ?15), bilateral caudate nucleus (x = 8, y = 19, z = ?2 and x = ?5, y = 19, z = ?2), anterior cingulate gyrus (x = 0, y = 35, z = 6; BA 24), right inferior/middle frontal gyrus (x = 38, y = 41, z = 6; BA 10/46), bilateral inferior/middle frontal gyrus (x = 50, y = 28, z = 23; BA 46 and x = ?48, y = 22, z = 22; BA 46), and left posterior precuneus (x = ?7, y = ?59, z = 25; BA 31). During delayed verbal recognition, activation of right parahippocampal gyrus seed voxels was strongly positively correlated with activation of medial frontal gyrus, bilateral caudate nucleus, anterior cingulate gyrus, right inferior/middle frontal gyrus, bilateral inferior/middle frontal gyrus, and left posterior precuneus in nonsmokers who carried the CLSTN2 C allele. Connectivity between these regions and right parahippocampal gyrus was less strongly positive in T homozygote smokers and nonsmokers. Strikingly, in smokers who carried the C allele, inverse connectivity was observed between the right parahippocampal gyrus seed region and frontal cortical regions, caudate nuclei, and precuneus, indicating that as activation of right parahippocampal gyrus increased during delayed recognition in these subjects, activation of frontal cortical regions, caudate nuclei, and precuneus decreased.  Results Demographic, clinical and cognitive characteristics of both groups are presented in Table 1 . The groups did not differ in age, years of education, birth weight, general intelligence, reading achievement, or symptoms of inattention. Parents of nonsmokers with prenatal exposure to maternal smoking completed fewer years of education than did parents of smokers and parents of nonsmokers with no prenatal exposure (? = 4.0, t = 2.5, p < .02). Smokers reported significantly more symptoms of depression at screening (Beck Depression Inventory scores: ? = 5.3, t = 3.0, p < .004) and a greater history of cannabis consumption (? = 296.4, t = 2.8, p < .007). These effects of adolescent smoking and prenatal exposure were not significantly modified by genotype. There was a significant prenatal exposure by CLSTN2 rs6439886 genotype interaction effect on race (? = 1.2, t = 2.8, p < .007). All Hispanic subjects were CLSTN2 T homozygotes and were equally distributed across prenatal exposure groups. CLSTN2 C allele carriers with prenatal exposure to maternal smoking included 11 European American (EA) and 2 African American (AA) subjects, while CLSTN2 C allele carriers with no prenatal exposure included 5 EA, 6 AA, and 1 Asian American subject. There was a significant CLSTN2 genotype by adolescent smoking by prenatal exposure interaction effect on gender (? = 1.4, t = 2.2, p < .04); all exposure groups included more female subjects than male subjects except for C allele smokers with no prenatal exposure and nonsmokers with prenatal exposure, both of whom included more male subjects than female subjects. The CLSTN2 genotype by adolescent smoking by prenatal exposure effect on history of alcohol consumption was also significant (? = 9.3, t = 2.1, p < .05); rate of alcohol consumption was greatest among smokers with no prenatal exposure who were carriers of the CLSTN2 C allele, intermediate among the remaining smokers, and lowest among nonsmokers across prenatal exposure and genotype groups. Among smokers, effects of prenatal exposure to maternal smoking and CLSTN2 or KIBRA genotype on age at onset of smoking, years of daily smoking, number of cigarettes smoked per day, and symptoms of nicotine dependence (measured using the Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence [FTND] [41]) were not significant. Adolescents with prenatal exposure to active maternal smoking also had more prenatal exposure to alcohol (? = .3, t = 2.2, p < .05). This effect was not significantly modified by smoking status or genotype. Rates of prenatal exposure to cannabis or cocaine did not significantly differ across the groups. Among smokers, effects of genotype and prenatal exposure on estimated plasma concentrations of nicotine and cotinine at the time of assessment were not significant. Potential confounding effects of group differences in race, gender, alcohol use, parental education, baseline symptoms of depression, prenatal exposure to maternal alcohol consumption, and cannabis use were controlled for by including these variables in the regression models used to analyze the behavioral and brain imaging data. As our prior work in a larger sample has shown that adolescent smoking is associated with lower estimated general intelligence 6 ,), IQ was also included in the regression models. Effects of Genotype on the Impact of Developmental Exposure to Tobacco Smoke on Accuracy of Memory Performance KIBRA genotype did not exert significant main or interacting effects with prenatal or adolescent exposure to tobacco smoke on accuracy of verbal or visuospatial immediate or delayed recall. Similarly, CLSTN2 genotype did not exert significant main or interacting effects on accuracy of visuospatial immediate or delayed recall or verbal immediate recall. However, delayed verbal recall and percent retention was significantly more accurate in CLSTN2 C allele carriers (main effect of genotype on delayed verbal recall: ? = 2.2, t = 3.1, p = .003; on verbal percent retention: ? = 12.7, t = 2.3, p = .02). This benefit of the CLSTN2 C allele on verbal delayed recall was occluded by adolescent smoking (genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effect on delayed verbal recall: ? = ?4.9, t = ?2.3, p = .03; Figure 2 ). Effects of CLSTN2 genotype on verbal memory were not significantly modified by prenatal exposure to maternal tobacco smoking. Impact of <italic>CLSTN2</italic> Genotype and Adolescent Smoking on Medial Temporal Lobe Function During Verbal Encoding and Recognition Given the observed significant interaction between CLSTN2 genotype and adolescent smoking on accuracy of verbal recall, the lack of effects of KIBRA genotype on verbal or visuospatial memory, and the known importance of the medial temporal lobe to mnemonic function ( 12 ), fMRI data were examined for evidence of interacting effects of CLSTN2 genotype and adolescent smoking on medial temporal lobe function during verbal mnemonic processing. Effects of genotype and adolescent smoking on accuracy of task performance during scanning were not significant ( p values > .2). CLSTN2 genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effects on medial temporal lobe activation during encoding and rehearsal were not significant. Significant CLSTN2 genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effects were observed on activation of bilateral parahippocampal gyrus during early recognition of verbal stimuli presented during encoding (Talairach coordinates: right parahippocampal gyrus: x = 26, y = ?32, z = ?12, volume = 528 mm3, Brodmann area [BA] 35/36; left parahippocampal gyrus: x = ?30, y = ?32, z = ?12, volume = 80 mm3, BA 35/36). Percent signal change data extracted from these regions indicated that activation of bilateral parahippocampal gyrus during early recognition was greater in C allele carriers who were smokers than in T homozygotes or nonsmokers carrying the C allele ( Figure 3 ). Genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effects observed on activation of right fusiform gyrus (Talairach coordinates: x = 35, y = ?65, z = ?10, BA 19) and right medial frontal gyrus (Talairach coordinates: x = 0, y = 30, z = ?15, BA 11) during early recognition testing were not significant after controlling for potential confounding variables. A similar significant CLSTN2 genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effect was observed on activation of right parahippocampal gyrus during delayed recognition of verbal stimuli presented during encoding (Talairach coordinates: x = 28, y = ? 32, z = ?12, volume = 1096 mm3, BA 35/36). Percent signal change data extracted from this region indicated that activation of right parahippocampal gyrus during delayed recognition was greater in C allele carriers who were smokers than in T homozygotes or nonsmokers carrying the C allele ( Figure 4 ). The genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effect on activation of left superior frontal gyrus (Talairach coordinates: x = ?26, y = 52, z = ?15, BA 11) during verbal delayed recognition testing stemmed from increased activation of this region in nonsmokers carrying the CLSTN2 C allele, decreased activation in smokers carrying the CLSTN2 C allele, and minimal activation of this region in CLSTN2 T homozygotes. Impact of <italic>CLSTN2</italic> Genotype and Adolescent Smoking on Functional Connectivity Given the significant interaction between CLSTN2 genotype and adolescent smoking on accuracy of delayed verbal recall during HVLT-R testing, we examined functional connectivity using data acquired during delayed verbal recognition testing. The right parahippocampal gyrus region (Talairach coordinates: x = 28, y = ?32, z = ?12, volume = 1096 mm3) showing a significant CLSTN2 genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effect on activation during delayed verbal recognition testing was used as a seed region. This analysis produced two components that accounted for the majority of the variance in the imaging data. The first component, accounting for 69.5% of the variance, reflected a modest main effect of CLSTN2 genotype, whereby activation of the right parahippocampal gyrus seed region was more strongly positively correlated with activation of adjacent tissue in C allele carriers than in T homozygotes regardless of smoking status (factor loadings: smokers: T homozygotes = .34, C allele carriers = .59; nonsmokers: T homozygotes = .35, C allele carriers = .64; Supplement 2). The second component, accounting for 18.1% of the variance, strongly differentiated adolescent smokers and nonsmokers by CLSTN2 genotype (factor loadings: smokers: T homozygotes = .16, C allele carriers = ?.80; nonsmokers: T homozygotes = .13, C allele carriers = .57; Figure 5 , left panel). Connectivity maps for this component are shown on the right side of Figure 5 , where red/yellow indicates regions demonstrating positive functional connectivity with the seed region (encircled in green) that is consistent with the factor loadings. Positive loadings were observed at the medial frontal gyrus (x = 4, y = 53, z = ?15), bilateral caudate nucleus (x = 8, y = 19, z = ?2 and x = ?5, y = 19, z = ?2), anterior cingulate gyrus (x = 0, y = 35, z = 6; BA 24), right inferior/middle frontal gyrus (x = 38, y = 41, z = 6; BA 10/46), bilateral inferior/middle frontal gyrus (x = 50, y = 28, z = 23; BA 46 and x = ?48, y = 22, z = 22; BA 46), and left posterior precuneus (x = ?7, y = ?59, z = 25; BA 31). During delayed verbal recognition, activation of right parahippocampal gyrus seed voxels was strongly positively correlated with activation of medial frontal gyrus, bilateral caudate nucleus, anterior cingulate gyrus, right inferior/middle frontal gyrus, bilateral inferior/middle frontal gyrus, and left posterior precuneus in nonsmokers who carried the CLSTN2 C allele. Connectivity between these regions and right parahippocampal gyrus was less strongly positive in T homozygote smokers and nonsmokers. Strikingly, in smokers who carried the C allele, inverse connectivity was observed between the right parahippocampal gyrus seed region and frontal cortical regions, caudate nuclei, and precuneus, indicating that as activation of right parahippocampal gyrus increased during delayed recognition in these subjects, activation of frontal cortical regions, caudate nuclei, and precuneus decreased.  Effects of Genotype on the Impact of Developmental Exposure to Tobacco Smoke on Accuracy of Memory Performance KIBRA genotype did not exert significant main or interacting effects with prenatal or adolescent exposure to tobacco smoke on accuracy of verbal or visuospatial immediate or delayed recall. Similarly, CLSTN2 genotype did not exert significant main or interacting effects on accuracy of visuospatial immediate or delayed recall or verbal immediate recall. However, delayed verbal recall and percent retention was significantly more accurate in CLSTN2 C allele carriers (main effect of genotype on delayed verbal recall: ? = 2.2, t = 3.1, p = .003; on verbal percent retention: ? = 12.7, t = 2.3, p = .02). This benefit of the CLSTN2 C allele on verbal delayed recall was occluded by adolescent smoking (genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effect on delayed verbal recall: ? = ?4.9, t = ?2.3, p = .03; Figure 2 ). Effects of CLSTN2 genotype on verbal memory were not significantly modified by prenatal exposure to maternal tobacco smoking.  Effects of Genotype on the Impact of Developmental Exposure to Tobacco Smoke on Accuracy of Memory Performance KIBRA genotype did not exert significant main or interacting effects with prenatal or adolescent exposure to tobacco smoke on accuracy of verbal or visuospatial immediate or delayed recall. Similarly, CLSTN2 genotype did not exert significant main or interacting effects on accuracy of visuospatial immediate or delayed recall or verbal immediate recall. However, delayed verbal recall and percent retention was significantly more accurate in CLSTN2 C allele carriers (main effect of genotype on delayed verbal recall: ? = 2.2, t = 3.1, p = .003; on verbal percent retention: ? = 12.7, t = 2.3, p = .02). This benefit of the CLSTN2 C allele on verbal delayed recall was occluded by adolescent smoking (genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effect on delayed verbal recall: ? = ?4.9, t = ?2.3, p = .03; Figure 2 ). Effects of CLSTN2 genotype on verbal memory were not significantly modified by prenatal exposure to maternal tobacco smoking.  Impact of <italic>CLSTN2</italic> Genotype and Adolescent Smoking on Medial Temporal Lobe Function During Verbal Encoding and Recognition Given the observed significant interaction between CLSTN2 genotype and adolescent smoking on accuracy of verbal recall, the lack of effects of KIBRA genotype on verbal or visuospatial memory, and the known importance of the medial temporal lobe to mnemonic function ( 12 ), fMRI data were examined for evidence of interacting effects of CLSTN2 genotype and adolescent smoking on medial temporal lobe function during verbal mnemonic processing. Effects of genotype and adolescent smoking on accuracy of task performance during scanning were not significant ( p values > .2). CLSTN2 genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effects on medial temporal lobe activation during encoding and rehearsal were not significant. Significant CLSTN2 genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effects were observed on activation of bilateral parahippocampal gyrus during early recognition of verbal stimuli presented during encoding (Talairach coordinates: right parahippocampal gyrus: x = 26, y = ?32, z = ?12, volume = 528 mm3, Brodmann area [BA] 35/36; left parahippocampal gyrus: x = ?30, y = ?32, z = ?12, volume = 80 mm3, BA 35/36). Percent signal change data extracted from these regions indicated that activation of bilateral parahippocampal gyrus during early recognition was greater in C allele carriers who were smokers than in T homozygotes or nonsmokers carrying the C allele ( Figure 3 ). Genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effects observed on activation of right fusiform gyrus (Talairach coordinates: x = 35, y = ?65, z = ?10, BA 19) and right medial frontal gyrus (Talairach coordinates: x = 0, y = 30, z = ?15, BA 11) during early recognition testing were not significant after controlling for potential confounding variables. A similar significant CLSTN2 genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effect was observed on activation of right parahippocampal gyrus during delayed recognition of verbal stimuli presented during encoding (Talairach coordinates: x = 28, y = ? 32, z = ?12, volume = 1096 mm3, BA 35/36). Percent signal change data extracted from this region indicated that activation of right parahippocampal gyrus during delayed recognition was greater in C allele carriers who were smokers than in T homozygotes or nonsmokers carrying the C allele ( Figure 4 ). The genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effect on activation of left superior frontal gyrus (Talairach coordinates: x = ?26, y = 52, z = ?15, BA 11) during verbal delayed recognition testing stemmed from increased activation of this region in nonsmokers carrying the CLSTN2 C allele, decreased activation in smokers carrying the CLSTN2 C allele, and minimal activation of this region in CLSTN2 T homozygotes.  Impact of <italic>CLSTN2</italic> Genotype and Adolescent Smoking on Medial Temporal Lobe Function During Verbal Encoding and Recognition Given the observed significant interaction between CLSTN2 genotype and adolescent smoking on accuracy of verbal recall, the lack of effects of KIBRA genotype on verbal or visuospatial memory, and the known importance of the medial temporal lobe to mnemonic function ( 12 ), fMRI data were examined for evidence of interacting effects of CLSTN2 genotype and adolescent smoking on medial temporal lobe function during verbal mnemonic processing. Effects of genotype and adolescent smoking on accuracy of task performance during scanning were not significant ( p values > .2). CLSTN2 genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effects on medial temporal lobe activation during encoding and rehearsal were not significant. Significant CLSTN2 genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effects were observed on activation of bilateral parahippocampal gyrus during early recognition of verbal stimuli presented during encoding (Talairach coordinates: right parahippocampal gyrus: x = 26, y = ?32, z = ?12, volume = 528 mm3, Brodmann area [BA] 35/36; left parahippocampal gyrus: x = ?30, y = ?32, z = ?12, volume = 80 mm3, BA 35/36). Percent signal change data extracted from these regions indicated that activation of bilateral parahippocampal gyrus during early recognition was greater in C allele carriers who were smokers than in T homozygotes or nonsmokers carrying the C allele ( Figure 3 ). Genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effects observed on activation of right fusiform gyrus (Talairach coordinates: x = 35, y = ?65, z = ?10, BA 19) and right medial frontal gyrus (Talairach coordinates: x = 0, y = 30, z = ?15, BA 11) during early recognition testing were not significant after controlling for potential confounding variables. A similar significant CLSTN2 genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effect was observed on activation of right parahippocampal gyrus during delayed recognition of verbal stimuli presented during encoding (Talairach coordinates: x = 28, y = ? 32, z = ?12, volume = 1096 mm3, BA 35/36). Percent signal change data extracted from this region indicated that activation of right parahippocampal gyrus during delayed recognition was greater in C allele carriers who were smokers than in T homozygotes or nonsmokers carrying the C allele ( Figure 4 ). The genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effect on activation of left superior frontal gyrus (Talairach coordinates: x = ?26, y = 52, z = ?15, BA 11) during verbal delayed recognition testing stemmed from increased activation of this region in nonsmokers carrying the CLSTN2 C allele, decreased activation in smokers carrying the CLSTN2 C allele, and minimal activation of this region in CLSTN2 T homozygotes.  Impact of <italic>CLSTN2</italic> Genotype and Adolescent Smoking on Functional Connectivity Given the significant interaction between CLSTN2 genotype and adolescent smoking on accuracy of delayed verbal recall during HVLT-R testing, we examined functional connectivity using data acquired during delayed verbal recognition testing. The right parahippocampal gyrus region (Talairach coordinates: x = 28, y = ?32, z = ?12, volume = 1096 mm3) showing a significant CLSTN2 genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effect on activation during delayed verbal recognition testing was used as a seed region. This analysis produced two components that accounted for the majority of the variance in the imaging data. The first component, accounting for 69.5% of the variance, reflected a modest main effect of CLSTN2 genotype, whereby activation of the right parahippocampal gyrus seed region was more strongly positively correlated with activation of adjacent tissue in C allele carriers than in T homozygotes regardless of smoking status (factor loadings: smokers: T homozygotes = .34, C allele carriers = .59; nonsmokers: T homozygotes = .35, C allele carriers = .64; Supplement 2). The second component, accounting for 18.1% of the variance, strongly differentiated adolescent smokers and nonsmokers by CLSTN2 genotype (factor loadings: smokers: T homozygotes = .16, C allele carriers = ?.80; nonsmokers: T homozygotes = .13, C allele carriers = .57; Figure 5 , left panel). Connectivity maps for this component are shown on the right side of Figure 5 , where red/yellow indicates regions demonstrating positive functional connectivity with the seed region (encircled in green) that is consistent with the factor loadings. Positive loadings were observed at the medial frontal gyrus (x = 4, y = 53, z = ?15), bilateral caudate nucleus (x = 8, y = 19, z = ?2 and x = ?5, y = 19, z = ?2), anterior cingulate gyrus (x = 0, y = 35, z = 6; BA 24), right inferior/middle frontal gyrus (x = 38, y = 41, z = 6; BA 10/46), bilateral inferior/middle frontal gyrus (x = 50, y = 28, z = 23; BA 46 and x = ?48, y = 22, z = 22; BA 46), and left posterior precuneus (x = ?7, y = ?59, z = 25; BA 31). During delayed verbal recognition, activation of right parahippocampal gyrus seed voxels was strongly positively correlated with activation of medial frontal gyrus, bilateral caudate nucleus, anterior cingulate gyrus, right inferior/middle frontal gyrus, bilateral inferior/middle frontal gyrus, and left posterior precuneus in nonsmokers who carried the CLSTN2 C allele. Connectivity between these regions and right parahippocampal gyrus was less strongly positive in T homozygote smokers and nonsmokers. Strikingly, in smokers who carried the C allele, inverse connectivity was observed between the right parahippocampal gyrus seed region and frontal cortical regions, caudate nuclei, and precuneus, indicating that as activation of right parahippocampal gyrus increased during delayed recognition in these subjects, activation of frontal cortical regions, caudate nuclei, and precuneus decreased.  Impact of <italic>CLSTN2</italic> Genotype and Adolescent Smoking on Functional Connectivity Given the significant interaction between CLSTN2 genotype and adolescent smoking on accuracy of delayed verbal recall during HVLT-R testing, we examined functional connectivity using data acquired during delayed verbal recognition testing. The right parahippocampal gyrus region (Talairach coordinates: x = 28, y = ?32, z = ?12, volume = 1096 mm3) showing a significant CLSTN2 genotype by adolescent smoking interaction effect on activation during delayed verbal recognition testing was used as a seed region. This analysis produced two components that accounted for the majority of the variance in the imaging data. The first component, accounting for 69.5% of the variance, reflected a modest main effect of CLSTN2 genotype, whereby activation of the right parahippocampal gyrus seed region was more strongly positively correlated with activation of adjacent tissue in C allele carriers than in T homozygotes regardless of smoking status (factor loadings: smokers: T homozygotes = .34, C allele carriers = .59; nonsmokers: T homozygotes = .35, C allele carriers = .64; Supplement 2). The second component, accounting for 18.1% of the variance, strongly differentiated adolescent smokers and nonsmokers by CLSTN2 genotype (factor loadings: smokers: T homozygotes = .16, C allele carriers = ?.80; nonsmokers: T homozygotes = .13, C allele carriers = .57; Figure 5 , left panel). Connectivity maps for this component are shown on the right side of Figure 5 , where red/yellow indicates regions demonstrating positive functional connectivity with the seed region (encircled in green) that is consistent with the factor loadings. Positive loadings were observed at the medial frontal gyrus (x = 4, y = 53, z = ?15), bilateral caudate nucleus (x = 8, y = 19, z = ?2 and x = ?5, y = 19, z = ?2), anterior cingulate gyrus (x = 0, y = 35, z = 6; BA 24), right inferior/middle frontal gyrus (x = 38, y = 41, z = 6; BA 10/46), bilateral inferior/middle frontal gyrus (x = 50, y = 28, z = 23; BA 46 and x = ?48, y = 22, z = 22; BA 46), and left posterior precuneus (x = ?7, y = ?59, z = 25; BA 31). During delayed verbal recognition, activation of right parahippocampal gyrus seed voxels was strongly positively correlated with activation of medial frontal gyrus, bilateral caudate nucleus, anterior cingulate gyrus, right inferior/middle frontal gyrus, bilateral inferior/middle frontal gyrus, and left posterior precuneus in nonsmokers who carried the CLSTN2 C allele. Connectivity between these regions and right parahippocampal gyrus was less strongly positive in T homozygote smokers and nonsmokers. Strikingly, in smokers who carried the C allele, inverse connectivity was observed between the right parahippocampal gyrus seed region and frontal cortical regions, caudate nuclei, and precuneus, indicating that as activation of right parahippocampal gyrus increased during delayed recognition in these subjects, activation of frontal cortical regions, caudate nuclei, and precuneus decreased.  Discussion In the present study, the previous observation of a beneficial effect of the CLSTN2 C allele on delayed recall of words was replicated ( 14 ). We further observed that exposure to tobacco smoke during adolescent development reverses this beneficial effect of the CLSTN2 C allele on verbal memory. CLSTN2 encodes calsyntenin 2 ( 22 ). Calsyntenins are transmembrane proteins, the extracellular domain of which is essential for multiple types of learning in Caenorhabditis elegans ( 23 ). Calsyntenins form a tripartite complex with the scaffolding protein X11L and APP that suppresses intracellular metabolism of both APP and calsyntenin ( 24 ). When dissociated from this tripartite complex, calsyntenin and APP undergo proteolytic cleavage by presenilin dependent ?-secretase, leading to the extracellular secretion of ?-alc and amyloid ? peptide (A?)( 42 ). Accumulation of A? is a hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease, the cardinal symptom of which is loss of memory ( 43 , 44 ). These cleavage events also generate the intracellular domain fragments AlcICD and AICD from calsyntenin and APP, respectively ( 42 ). Recent evidence suggests that AICD interacts with the proteins FE65 and TAG1 to regulate gene transactivation and suppress neurogenesis ( 45 ). AlcICD also associates with FE65 and can inhibit the FE65-dependent gene transactivation activity of AICD ( 42 ). Given that CLSTN2 is expressed in the medial temporal lobe and cortex ( 22 ), these observations suggest that the CLSTN2 C allele may constitutively improve memory by enhancing the stability of the calsyntenin-X11L-APP complex, thereby reducing the generation of A? and AICD and enhancing neurogenesis in brain structures critical to the adequate development of neurocircuitry that supports memory. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor agonists have been shown to modify the secretion of A? in mature neurons, which may contribute to the therapeutic action of these agents in cognitive decline ( 27 , 46 – 49 ). The mechanism by which nAChR ligands modify A? secretion is not known. However, if activation of nAChRs modifies A? secretion by altering the stability of the calsyntenin-X11L-APP complex, the present observations could reflect an effect of nAChR activation by nicotine in developing neurons that eliminates the beneficial effect of the CLSTN2 C allele by altering the stabilizing effect of the allele on the calsyntenin-X11L-APP complex. This would lead to increased generation of A? and AICD and consequent reductions in neurogenesis in regions subserving memory, relative to CLSTN2 C allele carriers with no developmental exposure to nicotine. Our failure to observe significant interacting effects between KIBRA genotype and developmental exposure to tobacco smoke is consistent with the lack of evidence that nAChRs modulate the function of this gene. Among CLSTN2 C allele carriers, adolescent exposure to tobacco smoke was associated with increased activation of bilateral parahippocampal gyrus during early verbal recognition and right parahippocampal gyrus during delayed verbal recognition, relative to T homozygotes and C allele carriers with no tobacco exposure during adolescence. Converging evidence indicates that the parahippocampal gyrus and perirhinal cortex play a key role in recognition memory ( 50 – 53 ). Firing rates of neurons in these regions decrease in response to previously encountered stimuli, while activation of parahippocampal and perirhinal regions during recognition is inversely related to memory strength ( 50 – 53 ). Thus, loss of the beneficial effect of the CLSTN2 C allele on memory in adolescent smokers may stem from maldevelopment of the parahippocampal gyrus that consequently reduces the ability of neurons in this region to modulate activity to convey information about prior stimulus occurrence. Connectivity analysis revealed that the benefit of the CLSTN2 C allele on delayed recognition of words in adolescent nonsmokers is associated with enhanced positive functional connectivity between right parahippocampal gyrus, bilateral caudate nuclei, and frontal cortical regions, including anterior cingulate gyrus and bilateral inferior/middle frontal gyrus. Loss of the beneficial effect of the CLSTN2 C allele in adolescent smokers was associated with inverse functional connectivity between these regions, while connectivity between these regions was weaker but still positive in noncarriers of the CLSTN2 C allele. Frontal cortical regions, including inferior/middle frontal gyrus (BA 9/10/46), are recruited during successful verbal recognition, with stronger medial temporal lobe-frontal cortical functional connectivity being associated with better verbal memory performance ( 17 , 54 – 56 ). Suppression of competing verbal memories, an essential component of accurate recognition memory performance, is associated with the recruitment of anterior cingulate cortex that closely correlates with the recruitment of right inferior middle frontal cortex ( 57 ). Together, these observations suggest that, in the absence of exposure to nicotine during adolescent development, the CLSTN2 C allele confers strengthened connectivity between brain regions critical to accurate retrieval during recognition memory. This strengthened connectivity likely supports more efficient neural processing during retrieval and thus may contribute to more accurate task performance. Inverse functional connectivity between right parahippocampal gyrus and bilateral caudate and frontal cortical regions conferred by adolescent exposure to nicotine in CLSTN2 C allele carriers, together with the observation of increased activation of right parahippocampal gyrus during delayed verbal recognition testing, is consistent with maldevelopment of neurocircuitry supporting mnemonic processing in these subjects, possibly stemming from reversal of a stabilizing effect of the CLSTN2 C allele on the calsyntenin-X11L-APP complex by activation of nAChRs. The possibility that the group differences in verbal memory, brain function, and functional connectivity observed in the present study stem from factors unrelated to genotype or developmental exposure to tobacco smoke cannot be excluded. However, the fact that the observed interaction effects between developmental exposure to tobacco smoke and CLSTN2 genotype remained significant after group matching and statistical controls for potential confounding variables argues against this possibility. While we have focused on developmental exposure to nicotine in the discussion of mechanisms that may underlie the observed findings, the possibility that developmental exposure to other components of tobacco smoke may have contributed to the observed effects cannot be excluded by these data. In the present study, immediate and delayed recall were assessed before scanning, while early and delayed recognition memory were assessed during scanning. While there are important distinctions between recall and recognition memory, both are forms of memory that rely on medial temporal lobe structures when there is a delay between the encoding and retrieval events ( 12 , 58 – 60 ), such as that employed during assessment of delayed recall using the HVLT-R and the MCG Complex Figure Test and d uring early and delayed recognition testing during scanning. Other limitations include the measurement of prenatal exposure by retrospective self-report. Work comparing prospectively and retrospectively collected data about pregnancy has supported the accuracy of pregnancy data collected by retrospective self-report ( 61 ). However, given the social stigma associated with tobacco smoking during pregnancy, underreporting of prenatal exposure may have weakened observed effects of prenatal exposure on the dependent measures. Further work is needed to address this limitation in samples prospectively characterized for prenatal exposure to maternal smoking.  Discussion In the present study, the previous observation of a beneficial effect of the CLSTN2 C allele on delayed recall of words was replicated ( 14 ). We further observed that exposure to tobacco smoke during adolescent development reverses this beneficial effect of the CLSTN2 C allele on verbal memory. CLSTN2 encodes calsyntenin 2 ( 22 ). Calsyntenins are transmembrane proteins, the extracellular domain of which is essential for multiple types of learning in Caenorhabditis elegans ( 23 ). Calsyntenins form a tripartite complex with the scaffolding protein X11L and APP that suppresses intracellular metabolism of both APP and calsyntenin ( 24 ). When dissociated from this tripartite complex, calsyntenin and APP undergo proteolytic cleavage by presenilin dependent ?-secretase, leading to the extracellular secretion of ?-alc and amyloid ? peptide (A?)( 42 ). Accumulation of A? is a hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease, the cardinal symptom of which is loss of memory ( 43 , 44 ). These cleavage events also generate the intracellular domain fragments AlcICD and AICD from calsyntenin and APP, respectively ( 42 ). Recent evidence suggests that AICD interacts with the proteins FE65 and TAG1 to regulate gene transactivation and suppress neurogenesis ( 45 ). AlcICD also associates with FE65 and can inhibit the FE65-dependent gene transactivation activity of AICD ( 42 ). Given that CLSTN2 is expressed in the medial temporal lobe and cortex ( 22 ), these observations suggest that the CLSTN2 C allele may constitutively improve memory by enhancing the stability of the calsyntenin-X11L-APP complex, thereby reducing the generation of A? and AICD and enhancing neurogenesis in brain structures critical to the adequate development of neurocircuitry that supports memory. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor agonists have been shown to modify the secretion of A? in mature neurons, which may contribute to the therapeutic action of these agents in cognitive decline ( 27 , 46 – 49 ). The mechanism by which nAChR ligands modify A? secretion is not known. However, if activation of nAChRs modifies A? secretion by altering the stability of the calsyntenin-X11L-APP complex, the present observations could reflect an effect of nAChR activation by nicotine in developing neurons that eliminates the beneficial effect of the CLSTN2 C allele by altering the stabilizing effect of the allele on the calsyntenin-X11L-APP complex. This would lead to increased generation of A? and AICD and consequent reductions in neurogenesis in regions subserving memory, relative to CLSTN2 C allele carriers with no developmental exposure to nicotine. Our failure to observe significant interacting effects between KIBRA genotype and developmental exposure to tobacco smoke is consistent with the lack of evidence that nAChRs modulate the function of this gene. Among CLSTN2 C allele carriers, adolescent exposure to tobacco smoke was associated with increased activation of bilateral parahippocampal gyrus during early verbal recognition and right parahippocampal gyrus during delayed verbal recognition, relative to T homozygotes and C allele carriers with no tobacco exposure during adolescence. Converging evidence indicates that the parahippocampal gyrus and perirhinal cortex play a key role in recognition memory ( 50 – 53 ). Firing rates of neurons in these regions decrease in response to previously encountered stimuli, while activation of parahippocampal and perirhinal regions during recognition is inversely related to memory strength ( 50 – 53 ). Thus, loss of the beneficial effect of the CLSTN2 C allele on memory in adolescent smokers may stem from maldevelopment of the parahippocampal gyrus that consequently reduces the ability of neurons in this region to modulate activity to convey information about prior stimulus occurrence. Connectivity analysis revealed that the benefit of the CLSTN2 C allele on delayed recognition of words in adolescent nonsmokers is associated with enhanced positive functional connectivity between right parahippocampal gyrus, bilateral caudate nuclei, and frontal cortical regions, including anterior cingulate gyrus and bilateral inferior/middle frontal gyrus. Loss of the beneficial effect of the CLSTN2 C allele in adolescent smokers was associated with inverse functional connectivity between these regions, while connectivity between these regions was weaker but still positive in noncarriers of the CLSTN2 C allele. Frontal cortical regions, including inferior/middle frontal gyrus (BA 9/10/46), are recruited during successful verbal recognition, with stronger medial temporal lobe-frontal cortical functional connectivity being associated with better verbal memory performance ( 17 , 54 – 56 ). Suppression of competing verbal memories, an essential component of accurate recognition memory performance, is associated with the recruitment of anterior cingulate cortex that closely correlates with the recruitment of right inferior middle frontal cortex ( 57 ). Together, these observations suggest that, in the absence of exposure to nicotine during adolescent development, the CLSTN2 C allele confers strengthened connectivity between brain regions critical to accurate retrieval during recognition memory. This strengthened connectivity likely supports more efficient neural processing during retrieval and thus may contribute to more accurate task performance. Inverse functional connectivity between right parahippocampal gyrus and bilateral caudate and frontal cortical regions conferred by adolescent exposure to nicotine in CLSTN2 C allele carriers, together with the observation of increased activation of right parahippocampal gyrus during delayed verbal recognition testing, is consistent with maldevelopment of neurocircuitry supporting mnemonic processing in these subjects, possibly stemming from reversal of a stabilizing effect of the CLSTN2 C allele on the calsyntenin-X11L-APP complex by activation of nAChRs. The possibility that the group differences in verbal memory, brain function, and functional connectivity observed in the present study stem from factors unrelated to genotype or developmental exposure to tobacco smoke cannot be excluded. However, the fact that the observed interaction effects between developmental exposure to tobacco smoke and CLSTN2 genotype remained significant after group matching and statistical controls for potential confounding variables argues against this possibility. While we have focused on developmental exposure to nicotine in the discussion of mechanisms that may underlie the observed findings, the possibility that developmental exposure to other components of tobacco smoke may have contributed to the observed effects cannot be excluded by these data. In the present study, immediate and delayed recall were assessed before scanning, while early and delayed recognition memory were assessed during scanning. While there are important distinctions between recall and recognition memory, both are forms of memory that rely on medial temporal lobe structures when there is a delay between the encoding and retrieval events ( 12 , 58 – 60 ), such as that employed during assessment of delayed recall using the HVLT-R and the MCG Complex Figure Test and d uring early and delayed recognition testing during scanning. Other limitations include the measurement of prenatal exposure by retrospective self-report. Work comparing prospectively and retrospectively collected data about pregnancy has supported the accuracy of pregnancy data collected by retrospective self-report ( 61 ). However, given the social stigma associated with tobacco smoking during pregnancy, underreporting of prenatal exposure may have weakened observed effects of prenatal exposure on the dependent measures. Further work is needed to address this limitation in samples prospectively characterized for prenatal exposure to maternal smoking.  Supplementary Material Figure  Supplementary Material Figure 