Iron homeostasis and eye disease Summary Iron is necessary for life, but excess iron can be toxic to tissues. Iron is thought to damage tissues primarily by generating oxygen free radicals through the Fenton reaction. We present an overview of the evidence supporting iron's potential contribution to a broad range of eye disease using an anatomical approach. Firstly, iron can be visualized in the cornea as iron lines in the normal aging cornea as well as in diseases like keratoconus and pterygium. In the lens, we present the evidence for the role of oxidative damage in cataractogenesis. Also, we review the evidence that iron may play a role in the pathogenesis of the retinal disease age-related macular degeneration. Although currently there is no direct link between excess iron and development of optic neuropathies, ferrous iron's ability to form highly reactive oxygen species may play a role in optic nerve pathology. Lastly, we discuss recent advances in prevention and therapeutics for eye disease with antioxidants and iron chelators,.  6. Disease of the Optic Nerve 6.1 Introduction Diseases of the optic nerve (optic neuropathies) affect millions of people and are a significant cause of morbidity and vision loss. Optic neuropathies include a range of pathologies including optic neuritis, ischemic optic neuropathy, traumatic optic neuropathy and glaucoma. The common mechanistic pathway uniting these diverse diseases is the eventual retinal ganglion cell death[ 113 ]. It seems that damage to retinal ganglion cell axons initiates cell death through apoptosis, an orderly cell suicide cascade[ 114 ]. The process by which axonal damage results in retinal ganglion cell death is still unknown. However, recently, it has been suggested by Lieven et al and Nguyen et al and others that reactive oxygen species (ROS) are crucial players in the signaling pathway in apoptosis following axonal injury[ 115 , 116 ]. Although currently there is no direct link between excess iron and development of optic neuropathies, ferrous iron's ability to form highly reactive oxygen species may play a role in optic neuropathy pathogenesis. In this section, the evidence for oxidative stress in the development of optic neuropathies is reviewed as well as, in the case of traumatic optic neuropathy, the role of the ferroxidase ceruloplasmin. 6.2 Optic Neuritis Optic neuritis is inflammation of the optic nerve seen in many autoimmune diseases, but is most commonly associated with multiple sclerosis (MS)[ 117 ]. MS is a progressive demyelinating disease of the central nervous system. The pathogenesis of the neurodegeneration of multiple sclerosis and optic neuritis is not well understood. Previously demyelination was viewed as the predominant contributor to disease activity from MS; however there is increasing interest in the role of axonal and neuronal cell death in disability from MS and optic neuritis. Currently, there is evidence that release of reactive oxygen species (ROS) may play a role in optic nerve injury[ 118 , 119 ]. The generator of the majority of ROS appears to be cellular mitochondria[ 120 ]. Following retinal ganglion cell injury, there is a release of intracellular superoxide anions from the mitochondria. Recently, Qi et al demonstrated that the neurodegeneration seen in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) --the mouse model for MS—can be suppressed by increasing the expression of a mitochondrial antioxidant gene, superoxide dismutase-2 (SOD2)[ 25 ]. Although further research is necessary, advances in understanding the role of oxidative damage in optic neuritis may lead to novel uses for antioxidant therapy and potentially for discovering a link between iron-related production of ROS and optic neuritis. 6.3 Ischemic optic neuropathy Ischemia and reperfusion is known to increase oxidative stress [ 121 ]. It is possible that ischemic ocular diseases may also involve this mechanism. These diseases include anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (AION), diabetic retinopathy, retinal vein occlusions, and retinopathy of prematurity. For example, Szabo et al demonstrated a decrease in oxidative stress induced by ischemia and reperfusion of a diabetic rat retina by administration of an oral antioxidant[ 122 ]. The exact role of oxidative stress in ischemic optic neuropathy is being investigated and raises the possibility of iron's participation in the generation of oxidative stress. 6.4 Traumatic optic neuropathy There is increasing evidence that oxidative stress is involved in the destruction of retinal ganglion cells following traumatic optic neuropathy. Traumatic optic neuropathy refers to posttraumatic loss of vision with associated relative afferent papillary defect. The pathophysiology of traumatic optic neuropathy is not well understood, but may involve either avulsion or direct damage to the optic nerve as well as damage that indirectly occurs following closed head trauma. A well-studied model of traumatic optic neuropathy involves crushing the axons of rodent optic nerves with forceps[ 27 , 28 , 123 ]. Retinal ganglion cell axotomy causes apoptosis[ 124 ]—a likely common pathway in the damage due to many optic neuropathies. Hence, studies of rodents following optic nerve crush may reveal new insights into the biology of optic neuropathy. Swanson et al demonstrated that decreasing oxidative stress by adding a sulfhydryl reductant is protective against retinal ganglion cell death after optic nerve axotomy[ 28 ]. Additionally, Levin and Geszvain demonstrated an increase in expression of ceruloplasmin in the retina after crush injury. They posit that this upregulation may help protect the retina from iron-induced oxidative stress[ 27 ]. The link between oxidative stress and the development of retinal ganglion cell death may extend to hereditary optic neuropathy. Patients with mitochondrial mutations in different subunits in the oxidative phosphorylation pathway develop Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON). LHON causes degeneration of retinal ganglion cells and their axons which eventually leads to central vision loss. Although the mechanisms are not entirely evident, like in the crush model, retinal ganglion cell death appears to be caused by oxidative stress leading to apoptosis[ 124 ]. Due to the LHON mutations, electrons in the oxidative phosphorylation pathway may react with oxygen and generate oxidative stress. Qi et al demonstrated that increasing the expression of mitochondrial antioxidant defenses like SOD2 could protect cells from oxidative damage[ 123 ]. Although currently there is no direct link between excess iron and development of optic neuropathies, iron may play a role in optic neuropathy pathogenesis through generation of oxidative stress. It is our hope that increased understanding into the role of oxidative damage in the development of optic neuropathies will lead to new potential treatments including antioxidants or iron chelators. 6.5 Glaucoma Glaucoma is a potentially blinding disease caused by progressive death of retinal ganglion cells and classically associated with increased intraocular pressure (IOP). Because the eye is an enclosed space, maintaining fluid homeostasis is crucial in the regulation of eye pressure. Aqueous humor flows from the ciliary body, fills the posterior chamber, and enters the anterior chamber through the pupil to exit the eye at the angle between the iris and the arch of the cornea through the trabecular meshwork. Although increased IOP is strongly associated with development of glaucoma, mechanisms of the ensuing ganglion cell death are incompletely understood. Oxidative stress [ 125 , 126 ] and glutamate neurotoxicity [ 127 , 128 ] may be important. It is hypothesized that oxidative damage contributes to the apoptotic process of retinal ganglion cells. Moreno et al demonstrated in an experimental rat model of glaucoma that there is a decrease in the antioxidant defenses of the retina--including superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase and glutathione--as compared to control retinas[ 129 ]. This evidence supports a theory in which increased intraocular pressure disturbs the protective antioxidant machinery and contributes to retinal damage from oxygen free radicals. Liu et al demonstrated evidence of products of oxidative damage throughout the retina after acute pressure elevation in the eye similar to that seen in glaucoma[ 130 ]. Although increased products of oxidative damage in the retina suggest a role for oxidative damage in glaucoma pathogenesis, the authors raise the question why the neuronal glaucoma is restricted to retinal ganglion cells if there is oxidative damage in all layers. Liu et al postulate that either the RGCs may be more vulnerable to damage because of longer axons with more lipids or perhaps there are additional unique stresses to the RGCs. Although iron's relationship to glaucoma is still not well understood, there is some evidence that iron-related proteins may be linked to glaucoma. Increased levels of transferrin have been reported in the aqueous humor in human glaucoma[ 131 ]. However, it is unclear whether this represents simply a more permeable blood-aqueous barrier or increased endogenous production. Farkas et al found increased levels of the iron related proteins--transferrin, ceruloplasmin and ferritin--in experimental monkey glaucoma as well as glaucomatous human eyes[ 29 ]. They also documented increased retinal mRNA levels of transferrin, ceruloplasmin and ferritin in glaucomatous monkey eyes. These changes in iron-related gene expression suggest that iron may be involved in glaucoma pathogenesis. Further, glaucoma pathogenesis may be linked to glutamate excitotoxicty, and recent evidence provides a potential link between glutamate toxicity and increased iron uptake by neurons[ 127 , 128 ]. Ultimately more research is needed to understand iron's role in the development of glaucoma, but these data support the potential for an oxidative damage mechanism as well as offer some hope that antioxidant therapy might be helpful in the future.  6.1 Introduction Diseases of the optic nerve (optic neuropathies) affect millions of people and are a significant cause of morbidity and vision loss. Optic neuropathies include a range of pathologies including optic neuritis, ischemic optic neuropathy, traumatic optic neuropathy and glaucoma. The common mechanistic pathway uniting these diverse diseases is the eventual retinal ganglion cell death[ 113 ]. It seems that damage to retinal ganglion cell axons initiates cell death through apoptosis, an orderly cell suicide cascade[ 114 ]. The process by which axonal damage results in retinal ganglion cell death is still unknown. However, recently, it has been suggested by Lieven et al and Nguyen et al and others that reactive oxygen species (ROS) are crucial players in the signaling pathway in apoptosis following axonal injury[ 115 , 116 ]. Although currently there is no direct link between excess iron and development of optic neuropathies, ferrous iron's ability to form highly reactive oxygen species may play a role in optic neuropathy pathogenesis. In this section, the evidence for oxidative stress in the development of optic neuropathies is reviewed as well as, in the case of traumatic optic neuropathy, the role of the ferroxidase ceruloplasmin.  6.2 Optic Neuritis Optic neuritis is inflammation of the optic nerve seen in many autoimmune diseases, but is most commonly associated with multiple sclerosis (MS)[ 117 ]. MS is a progressive demyelinating disease of the central nervous system. The pathogenesis of the neurodegeneration of multiple sclerosis and optic neuritis is not well understood. Previously demyelination was viewed as the predominant contributor to disease activity from MS; however there is increasing interest in the role of axonal and neuronal cell death in disability from MS and optic neuritis. Currently, there is evidence that release of reactive oxygen species (ROS) may play a role in optic nerve injury[ 118 , 119 ]. The generator of the majority of ROS appears to be cellular mitochondria[ 120 ]. Following retinal ganglion cell injury, there is a release of intracellular superoxide anions from the mitochondria. Recently, Qi et al demonstrated that the neurodegeneration seen in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) --the mouse model for MS—can be suppressed by increasing the expression of a mitochondrial antioxidant gene, superoxide dismutase-2 (SOD2)[ 25 ]. Although further research is necessary, advances in understanding the role of oxidative damage in optic neuritis may lead to novel uses for antioxidant therapy and potentially for discovering a link between iron-related production of ROS and optic neuritis.  6.3 Ischemic optic neuropathy Ischemia and reperfusion is known to increase oxidative stress [ 121 ]. It is possible that ischemic ocular diseases may also involve this mechanism. These diseases include anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (AION), diabetic retinopathy, retinal vein occlusions, and retinopathy of prematurity. For example, Szabo et al demonstrated a decrease in oxidative stress induced by ischemia and reperfusion of a diabetic rat retina by administration of an oral antioxidant[ 122 ]. The exact role of oxidative stress in ischemic optic neuropathy is being investigated and raises the possibility of iron's participation in the generation of oxidative stress.  6.4 Traumatic optic neuropathy There is increasing evidence that oxidative stress is involved in the destruction of retinal ganglion cells following traumatic optic neuropathy. Traumatic optic neuropathy refers to posttraumatic loss of vision with associated relative afferent papillary defect. The pathophysiology of traumatic optic neuropathy is not well understood, but may involve either avulsion or direct damage to the optic nerve as well as damage that indirectly occurs following closed head trauma. A well-studied model of traumatic optic neuropathy involves crushing the axons of rodent optic nerves with forceps[ 27 , 28 , 123 ]. Retinal ganglion cell axotomy causes apoptosis[ 124 ]—a likely common pathway in the damage due to many optic neuropathies. Hence, studies of rodents following optic nerve crush may reveal new insights into the biology of optic neuropathy. Swanson et al demonstrated that decreasing oxidative stress by adding a sulfhydryl reductant is protective against retinal ganglion cell death after optic nerve axotomy[ 28 ]. Additionally, Levin and Geszvain demonstrated an increase in expression of ceruloplasmin in the retina after crush injury. They posit that this upregulation may help protect the retina from iron-induced oxidative stress[ 27 ]. The link between oxidative stress and the development of retinal ganglion cell death may extend to hereditary optic neuropathy. Patients with mitochondrial mutations in different subunits in the oxidative phosphorylation pathway develop Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON). LHON causes degeneration of retinal ganglion cells and their axons which eventually leads to central vision loss. Although the mechanisms are not entirely evident, like in the crush model, retinal ganglion cell death appears to be caused by oxidative stress leading to apoptosis[ 124 ]. Due to the LHON mutations, electrons in the oxidative phosphorylation pathway may react with oxygen and generate oxidative stress. Qi et al demonstrated that increasing the expression of mitochondrial antioxidant defenses like SOD2 could protect cells from oxidative damage[ 123 ]. Although currently there is no direct link between excess iron and development of optic neuropathies, iron may play a role in optic neuropathy pathogenesis through generation of oxidative stress. It is our hope that increased understanding into the role of oxidative damage in the development of optic neuropathies will lead to new potential treatments including antioxidants or iron chelators.  6.5 Glaucoma Glaucoma is a potentially blinding disease caused by progressive death of retinal ganglion cells and classically associated with increased intraocular pressure (IOP). Because the eye is an enclosed space, maintaining fluid homeostasis is crucial in the regulation of eye pressure. Aqueous humor flows from the ciliary body, fills the posterior chamber, and enters the anterior chamber through the pupil to exit the eye at the angle between the iris and the arch of the cornea through the trabecular meshwork. Although increased IOP is strongly associated with development of glaucoma, mechanisms of the ensuing ganglion cell death are incompletely understood. Oxidative stress [ 125 , 126 ] and glutamate neurotoxicity [ 127 , 128 ] may be important. It is hypothesized that oxidative damage contributes to the apoptotic process of retinal ganglion cells. Moreno et al demonstrated in an experimental rat model of glaucoma that there is a decrease in the antioxidant defenses of the retina--including superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase and glutathione--as compared to control retinas[ 129 ]. This evidence supports a theory in which increased intraocular pressure disturbs the protective antioxidant machinery and contributes to retinal damage from oxygen free radicals. Liu et al demonstrated evidence of products of oxidative damage throughout the retina after acute pressure elevation in the eye similar to that seen in glaucoma[ 130 ]. Although increased products of oxidative damage in the retina suggest a role for oxidative damage in glaucoma pathogenesis, the authors raise the question why the neuronal glaucoma is restricted to retinal ganglion cells if there is oxidative damage in all layers. Liu et al postulate that either the RGCs may be more vulnerable to damage because of longer axons with more lipids or perhaps there are additional unique stresses to the RGCs. Although iron's relationship to glaucoma is still not well understood, there is some evidence that iron-related proteins may be linked to glaucoma. Increased levels of transferrin have been reported in the aqueous humor in human glaucoma[ 131 ]. However, it is unclear whether this represents simply a more permeable blood-aqueous barrier or increased endogenous production. Farkas et al found increased levels of the iron related proteins--transferrin, ceruloplasmin and ferritin--in experimental monkey glaucoma as well as glaucomatous human eyes[ 29 ]. They also documented increased retinal mRNA levels of transferrin, ceruloplasmin and ferritin in glaucomatous monkey eyes. These changes in iron-related gene expression suggest that iron may be involved in glaucoma pathogenesis. Further, glaucoma pathogenesis may be linked to glutamate excitotoxicty, and recent evidence provides a potential link between glutamate toxicity and increased iron uptake by neurons[ 127 , 128 ]. Ultimately more research is needed to understand iron's role in the development of glaucoma, but these data support the potential for an oxidative damage mechanism as well as offer some hope that antioxidant therapy might be helpful in the future.  7. Potential Therapies 7.1 Antioxidants Given the growing evidence that oxidative damage contributes to many diseases within the eye, there is hope that medical therapies targeting oxygen free radicals will prove beneficial. The Age-Related Eye Disease Study demonstrated a protective effect of an antioxidant cocktail of zinc, vitamin C, vitamin E, and beta-carotene in macular degeneration progression[ 98 ]. Additionally, in a 2007 AREDS case-control study, populations with higher dietary intake of macular carotenoids (lutein and zeaxanthin) were independently associated with decreased likelihood of having neovascular AMD, geographic atrophy, and large drusen[ 132 ]. Macular carotenoids may impact AMD development through their ability to filter blue light as well as reduce the impact of oxygen free radicals[ 133 ]. Additionally, melatonin, a highly lipophilic molecule with local activity in the retina, is thought to have potential benefit through its action as an antioxidant[ 129 , 134 ]. It has been demonstrated in guinea pig retina that melatonin attenuated oxidative damage in reperfusion injury[ 135 ]. The potential of antioxidant therapy in preventing cataractogenesis remains unclear. In 2001, an AREDS study also demonstrated no effect of antioxidants on the progression of age-related cataracts despite the oxidative damage component of cataractogenesis [ 98 ] . However, more recently it was shown that long-term use of dietary antioxidants like vitamin E may reduce the advancement of lens opacification [ 136 ]. Antioxidants remain an exciting horizon for potential improvement in the treatment of eye disease. 7.2 Chelators Iron chelators are currently being investigated for their benefit in limiting iron-induced oxidative damage. Iron chelation is the mainstay of treatment for blood-transfusion related iron overload, but is also being investigated for the treatment of some neurological degenerative diseases including Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease[ 137 ]. In order for a systemic iron chelator to be effective for neurodegenerative disease, it needs to selectively bind iron[ 138 ] as well as be lipid soluble enough to cross the blood-brain or blood-retina barrier[ 139 ]. The best known iron chelator in clinical use for transfusion-related iron-overload is desferrioxamine (DFO, Desferal). DFO is an effective hexadentate iron chelator and has been in clinical use since the 1970s[ 140 ]. However, administration requires continuous intravenous infusion or daily intramuscular injections due to its rapid renal excretion and poor absorption in the gut[ 141 ]. As a result, DFO is limited by expense and difficulty of use. A new form of DFO, a starch-conjugated form, allowing once-weekly administration is currently in clinical trials[ 142 ]. Additionally, there have been reports of retinal toxicity with high dose DFO use in iron overload diseases[ 143 ]. While the mechanism is likely to be RPE iron deficiency, this is uncertain and further research is needed to develop a chelator without retinal toxicity with potential to mediate iron-induced oxidative damage in ophthalmic diseases. One recent advance in this regard is the development of iron prochelators; chelators that bind iron only when activated by oxidative stress[ 144 ] . Two other systemic iron chelators that have recently gained approval for clinical use are deferiprone (Ferriprox) and deferasirox (Exjade). The benefits of deferiprone and deferasirox include effective oral administration and longer half life than DFO. Additionally, deferiprone and deferasirox offer hope for increased efficacy in specific tissues. Glickstein et al demonstrated more rapid chelation with deferiprone and deferasirox than DFO in several cultured cell types[ 145 ]. To our knowledge, the ocular toxicity associated with DFO has not been reported with deferiprone and deferasirox. While more studies are necessary to determine the long term safety and efficacy of the oral iron chelators, they remain promising novel therapeutics for potentially treating ocular diseases. Lastly, another chelator, salicylaldehyde isonicotinoyl hydrazone (SIH), is being studied as a potential therapy for iron-induced oxidative damage. SIH is a highly lipophilic chelator and as a result has increased cell permeability. A number of studies have demonstrated that SIH may have a role in mitigating oxidative-stress induced damage to cardiomyocytes[ 146 - 148 ]. In our studies, SIH protects cultured RPE cells against hydrogen peroxide toxicity [ 149 ]. Additionally, we are testing the efficacy of SIH in the cp/heph retinal iron overload mouse model. 7.3 Dietary iron limitation Given iron's ability to generate oxygen free radicals through the Fenton reaction and the documented increase in iron stores within tissues like the retina over time, it seems plausible that limiting dietary iron may decrease oxidative damage. Tuomainen et al demonstrated that men with increased iron stores are at an increased risk for an acute myocardial infarction[ 150 ]. Additionally, a decrease in risk of MI in blood donors compared to those who did not donate blood has been reported[ 151 ]. Our lab is currently investigating the role of a low-iron diet in the development of retinal degeneration in mice. Although a minimum of iron is necessary for life, decreasing lifetime iron stores through dietary iron limitation remains an intriguing therapeutic possibility.  7.1 Antioxidants Given the growing evidence that oxidative damage contributes to many diseases within the eye, there is hope that medical therapies targeting oxygen free radicals will prove beneficial. The Age-Related Eye Disease Study demonstrated a protective effect of an antioxidant cocktail of zinc, vitamin C, vitamin E, and beta-carotene in macular degeneration progression[ 98 ]. Additionally, in a 2007 AREDS case-control study, populations with higher dietary intake of macular carotenoids (lutein and zeaxanthin) were independently associated with decreased likelihood of having neovascular AMD, geographic atrophy, and large drusen[ 132 ]. Macular carotenoids may impact AMD development through their ability to filter blue light as well as reduce the impact of oxygen free radicals[ 133 ]. Additionally, melatonin, a highly lipophilic molecule with local activity in the retina, is thought to have potential benefit through its action as an antioxidant[ 129 , 134 ]. It has been demonstrated in guinea pig retina that melatonin attenuated oxidative damage in reperfusion injury[ 135 ]. The potential of antioxidant therapy in preventing cataractogenesis remains unclear. In 2001, an AREDS study also demonstrated no effect of antioxidants on the progression of age-related cataracts despite the oxidative damage component of cataractogenesis [ 98 ] . However, more recently it was shown that long-term use of dietary antioxidants like vitamin E may reduce the advancement of lens opacification [ 136 ]. Antioxidants remain an exciting horizon for potential improvement in the treatment of eye disease.  7.2 Chelators Iron chelators are currently being investigated for their benefit in limiting iron-induced oxidative damage. Iron chelation is the mainstay of treatment for blood-transfusion related iron overload, but is also being investigated for the treatment of some neurological degenerative diseases including Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease[ 137 ]. In order for a systemic iron chelator to be effective for neurodegenerative disease, it needs to selectively bind iron[ 138 ] as well as be lipid soluble enough to cross the blood-brain or blood-retina barrier[ 139 ]. The best known iron chelator in clinical use for transfusion-related iron-overload is desferrioxamine (DFO, Desferal). DFO is an effective hexadentate iron chelator and has been in clinical use since the 1970s[ 140 ]. However, administration requires continuous intravenous infusion or daily intramuscular injections due to its rapid renal excretion and poor absorption in the gut[ 141 ]. As a result, DFO is limited by expense and difficulty of use. A new form of DFO, a starch-conjugated form, allowing once-weekly administration is currently in clinical trials[ 142 ]. Additionally, there have been reports of retinal toxicity with high dose DFO use in iron overload diseases[ 143 ]. While the mechanism is likely to be RPE iron deficiency, this is uncertain and further research is needed to develop a chelator without retinal toxicity with potential to mediate iron-induced oxidative damage in ophthalmic diseases. One recent advance in this regard is the development of iron prochelators; chelators that bind iron only when activated by oxidative stress[ 144 ] . Two other systemic iron chelators that have recently gained approval for clinical use are deferiprone (Ferriprox) and deferasirox (Exjade). The benefits of deferiprone and deferasirox include effective oral administration and longer half life than DFO. Additionally, deferiprone and deferasirox offer hope for increased efficacy in specific tissues. Glickstein et al demonstrated more rapid chelation with deferiprone and deferasirox than DFO in several cultured cell types[ 145 ]. To our knowledge, the ocular toxicity associated with DFO has not been reported with deferiprone and deferasirox. While more studies are necessary to determine the long term safety and efficacy of the oral iron chelators, they remain promising novel therapeutics for potentially treating ocular diseases. Lastly, another chelator, salicylaldehyde isonicotinoyl hydrazone (SIH), is being studied as a potential therapy for iron-induced oxidative damage. SIH is a highly lipophilic chelator and as a result has increased cell permeability. A number of studies have demonstrated that SIH may have a role in mitigating oxidative-stress induced damage to cardiomyocytes[ 146 - 148 ]. In our studies, SIH protects cultured RPE cells against hydrogen peroxide toxicity [ 149 ]. Additionally, we are testing the efficacy of SIH in the cp/heph retinal iron overload mouse model.  7.3 Dietary iron limitation Given iron's ability to generate oxygen free radicals through the Fenton reaction and the documented increase in iron stores within tissues like the retina over time, it seems plausible that limiting dietary iron may decrease oxidative damage. Tuomainen et al demonstrated that men with increased iron stores are at an increased risk for an acute myocardial infarction[ 150 ]. Additionally, a decrease in risk of MI in blood donors compared to those who did not donate blood has been reported[ 151 ]. Our lab is currently investigating the role of a low-iron diet in the development of retinal degeneration in mice. Although a minimum of iron is necessary for life, decreasing lifetime iron stores through dietary iron limitation remains an intriguing therapeutic possibility.  Figures Figure 1 A schematic drawing of the cross-section of the eye. Reprinted with permission from Purves' Neuroscience published by Sinauer Associates in 1997. See legend for figure captions[ 15 ]). Figure 2 A schematic drawing of the cell layers within the retina. (A) Section of the retina showing the cell layers of the retina. (B) A diagram of the arrangement of the retinal cells. Reprinted with permission from Purves' Neuroscience published by Sinauer Associates in 1997 [ 15 ]) Figure 3 UV photographs of bilateral corneas with Hudson-Stahli lines in a healthy elderly man. Reprinted with permission from Every et al. “Ultraviolet Photography of the In Vivo Human Cornea Unmasks the Hudson-Stähli Line and Physiologic Vortex Patterns” published in IOVS in 2005 [ 54 ]) Figure 4 Slit lamp photograph of a normal and keratoconus eye in profile. Reprinted with permission from Lawless et al “ Keratoconus: diagnosis and management ” in Australian and New Zealand Journal of Ophthalmology by Blackwell Synergy in 1989[ 63 ]). Figure 5 Blue filter photography of the cornea of trauma patient with secondary keratoconus and a Fleischer's ring. Round Fleischer's ring-like pigment is observed (arrow). Reprinted with permission from Hiratsuka et al. “Secondary Keratoconus with Corneal Epithelial Iron Ring Similar to Fleischer's Ring” in Japanese Journal of Ophthalmology by SpringerLink in 2000 [ 43 ]. Figure 6 Photograph of a pterygium in the right eye. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Lts in Memarzadeh et al “Comparison of de-epithelialized amniotic membrane transplantation and conjunctival autograft after primary pterygium excision” in Eye 2006 [ 67 ]). Figure 7 A photograph of a patient with Salzmann's nodular degeneration. The left eye of a patient with Salzmann's nodular degeneration shows three blueish-white nodules located within the cornea. Reprinted with permission from Germundsson et al. “Phototherapeutic keratectomy in Salzmann's nodular degeneration” in Acta Ophthalmology Scandinavia by Blackwell Synergy in 2004 [ 80 ]. Figure 8 A slit lamp photograph showing iron deposits beneath the anterior lens capsule and the anterior lens opacity in ocular siderosis. Reprinted with permission from Hope-Ross et al. “Ocular Siderosis” in Eye by Nature Publishing Group[ 88 ]. Figure 9 Light microscopy of hyperferritinaemia cataract syndrome lenses. (A) Light microscopic appearance of crystalline inclusions within the lens stroma showing dense staining with monoclonal anti-L-ferritin (×400). (B) The deposits were not stained with anti-H-ferritin (×400). (C) Appearance of inclusions at ×50 000 magnification showing square-shaped crystal morphology. The crystals were not associated with any cellular elements, but appeared to lie free within the stroma. Reprinted with permission from Mumford et al. “The lens in hereditary hyperferritiniaemia cataract syndrome contains crystallin deposits of L-ferritin” in Br. J. Ophthal. by BMJ Publishing Group Ltd. [ 92 ] Figure 10 Photomicrographs of increased Perls'-positive iron in age-related macular degeneration (AMD)–affected retinas. (A) Healthy macula has no Perls-3,3?-diaminobenzidine (DAB) stain after bleaching (inset) (B) Geographic atrophic macula with severe photoreceptor loss, RPE atrophy, and sub-RPE deposits. Bruch's membrane and sub-RPE deposits (sub) are positive for iron (inset). (C) Exudative AMD retina demonstrating significant photoreceptor loss with RPE atrophy and thickened BR. The RPE contains iron detectable by the Perls Prussian blue stain without DAB enhancement (inset). Scale bars indicate 50 ?m. Reprinted figure and legend with permission from Hahn et al. “Maculas Affected by Age-Related Macular Degeneration Contain Increased Chelatable Iron in the Retinal Pigment Epithelium and Bruch's Membrane” in Arch Ophthalmol © 2003, American Medical Association. All rights reserved. [ 104 ]). 