Is Motion Perception Deficit in Schizophrenia a Consequence of Eye-Tracking Abnormality? Background Studies have shown that schizophrenia patients have motion perception deficit, which was thought to cause eye-tracking abnormality in schizophrenia. However, eye movement closely interacts with motion perception. The known eye-tracking difficulties in schizophrenia patients may interact with their motion perception. Methods Two speed discrimination experiments were conducted in a within-subject design. In experiment 1, the stimulus duration was 150 msec to minimize the chance of eye-tracking occurrence. In experiment 2, the duration was increased to 300 msec, increasing the possibility of eye movement intrusion. Regular eye-tracking performance was evaluated in a third experiment. Results At 150 msec, speed discrimination thresholds did not differ between schizophrenia patients ( n = 38) and control subjects ( n = 33). At 300 msec, patients had significantly higher thresholds than control subjects ( p =.03). Furthermore, frequencies of eye tracking during the 300 msec stimulus were significantly correlated with speed discrimination in control subjects ( p = .01) but not in patients, suggesting that eye-tracking initiation may benefit control subjects but not patients. The frequency of eye tracking during speed discrimination was not significantly related to regular eye-tracking performance. Conclusions Speed discrimination, per se, is not impaired in schizophrenia patients. The observed abnormality appears to be a consequence of impairment in generating or integrating the feedback information from eye movements. This study introduces a novel approach to motion perception studies and highlights the importance of concurrently measuring eye movements to understand interactions between these two systems; the results argue for a conceptual revision regarding motion perception abnormality in schizophrenia.  Eye Movement Characteristics During Speed Discrimination There was a nominally significant difference in average acceleration at 18.7°/sec ( p = .02, not significant after correction for 12 comparisons using Bonferroni correction p < .004). Otherwise, we did not find significant group differences in the range of eye movement parameters during test grating ( Table 2 ).  Correlations with Clinical and Demographic Information The total BPRS scores were 30.7 ± 11.2 in the patients. There were no significant correlations between BPRS total scores and frequency of eye movement in any speed/duration conditions (all r ? .20 in absolute values, all p ? .28). There was a nominally significant correlation between BPRS score and Weber threshold at 3.8°/sec at 150 msec stimulus ( n = 37, r = .36, p = .05, uncorrected). For BPRS subscales, the only nominally significant correlations were between Weber threshold at 3.8°/sec at 300 msec stimulus and thought disorder ( r = .41, p = .02) and psychosis ( r = .37, p = .03). None were significant after correction for multiple comparisons. In 24 schizophrenia patients whom we measured IQ (94.8 ± 15.5), we found a significant correlation between IQ and Weber threshold at 10.0°/sec at 150 msec stimulus ( r = ?.65, p = .001) but not at 300 msec condition ( r = ?.04, p = .84 at 10.0°/sec; r = ?.31, p = .14 at 18.7°/sec). Age was significantly correlated to Weber threshold in all three velocities at 150 msec ( r = .24–.27, p = .02–.04) but not 300 msec stimulus (all r ? .19, all p ? .11).  Methods and Materials Subjects Written informed consent was obtained from each subject. Subjects were 18 to 55 years of age, with no neurological or ophthalmologic conditions, substance dependence within the past 6 months, or current substance abuse. We tested 38 schizophrenia patients and 33 normal control subjects. All patients were clinically stable, with a diagnosis of schizophrenia based on the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID-IV). Three patients were on first-generation antipsychotic medications and the rest of the patients were on second-generation antipsychotic medications. Clinical symptoms were assessed using the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS). Control subjects were recruited by local media advertisements. Control subjects had no DSM-IV Axis I psychotic disorders, no cluster A personality diagnoses, and no family history of psychotic illness. Experimental Procedures Setting and Stimulus Stimuli were displayed on a 22-in flat screen monitor set to 60 Hz at 1280 × 1024 pixels, placed at a viewing distance of 60 cm in a room with illuminance of 2 lux. The target was a vertical sinusoidal grating with a spatial frequency of .5 cycles per degree. Slower spatial frequency (e.g., .5–1.0 cycles per degree) is related to the magnocellular function and schizophrenia patients are thought to be impaired in this function ( 33 ), but this interpretation is not without dispute ( 34 ). The grating was presented in a circular disk 19 visual degrees in diameter. The luminance of the monitor was calibrated using the LaCie blue eye vision calibrator (LaCie, Hillsboro, Oregon). The average luminance of the display was 24 candelas (cd)/m2. The contrast of the grating was .15. The grating setting replicated that used by Chen et al . ( 3 ), with the exception of a blurred edge to reduce edge effects. Psychophysical Procedures A two-alternative forced choice (2AFC) parameter estimation by sequential testing (PEST) adaptive procedure was used to determine the speed discrimination thresholds ( 35 , 36 ). A trial consisted of a grating moving at a test speed followed by a grating moving in the same direction 500 msec later but at a reference speed ( Figure 1 ). A fixation crosshair was always present. The subjects were instructed to maintain fixation. Subjects indicated whether the first grating (test speed) was moving faster or slower than the second grating (reference speed) by pressing response buttons. The next trial started randomly anywhere from 1 sec to 2 sec after a response. The gratings moved in either direction, randomly determined trial to trial, to make the onset of the test gratings unpredictable. The duration of the stimuli was either 150 msec (experiment 1) or 300 msec (experiment 2). Each experiment was tested using three reference speeds: 3.8°/sec, 10°/sec, and 18.7°/sec. Each block of tasks had 26 trials with stimuli of the same reference speed and duration. Two PEST procedures were run per block, with 13 trials from each PEST procedure randomly interlaced. The procedures had an initial test speed 40% faster or slower than the reference speed. Based on the subject’s response, the adaptive procedure ( 35 ) determined the next test speed to be presented. Subjects performed a total of six blocks (3 speeds × 2 durations). The orders of blocks were randomized across subjects by means of a Latin Square table. Speed discrimination threshold was expressed as Weber fraction ?V/V (|final test speed ? reference speed|/reference speed). Each subject was given one block of practice trials. Eye Movement Monitoring During Speed Discrimination Eye data were collected using an EyeLink II eye tracker (SR Research Ltd., Toronto, Canada) sampling at 500 Hz. The subject’s head was stabilized using a chin rest. A calibration sequence (?5°, 0°, +5°) routine was inserted every five trials for offline calibration. Eye data were low-pass filtered at 20 Hz and differentiated into velocity and acceleration records. Analysis of the oculomotor data was automated using in-house algorithms developed in Matlab (MathWorks, Inc. Natick, Massachusetts). The algorithm identified saccades based on velocity (>35°/sec) and acceleration (>600°/sec2) criteria. After saccade removal, eye movement occurrence was determined as follows: if the average speed within the 150 msec to 400 msec after the test stimulus onset exceeded a threshold of 1°/sec in the direction of the stimulus, the trial was considered as having an eye movement occurrence. Eye movements during the reference stimulus were also scored but not considered as a primary measure because eye movements here are in part anticipatory rather than based only on retinal motion. This is because the presentation of reference gratings was not the source of variation in stimulus speed (always the same speed in a block) and was entirely predictable (always the same direction as the first grating and the same interval). We also measured a number of eye movement characteristics (test grating only) in trials with eye movements, including pursuit initiation latency, initiation mean and peak velocity and acceleration within the first 100 msec of pursuit, and the peak velocity within the first 500 msec after initiation. Smooth Pursuit Initiation A third experiment was performed to obtain smooth pursuit measures. Briefly, pursuit initiation was triggered using a step-ramp procedure, which is known to minimize saccadic responses during the initiation ( 37 ), followed by a 2- to 4-cycle of horizontal eye movement at a constant speed (10.0 °/sec or 18.7°/sec targets). Each speed was tested for 12 trials. Subjects were instructed to follow the target with their eyes as closely as possible. We obtained the pursuit initiation latency and mean initiation acceleration within the first 100 msec of pursuit (for detailed methods, see 11). Closed-loop pursuit gain during constant target movement was also obtained. Data were scored blind to the subject and group identity. Statistical Analysis The overall hypothesis was that abnormal speed discrimination thresholds (Weber fraction) occur only in the 300 msec condition and not in 150 msec condition in schizophrenia patients. It was tested using repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) where Weber fraction was the dependent measure, stimulus duration (150 msec and 300 msec) and speed (3.8°/sec, 10.0°/sec, and 18.7°/sec) were within-subjects factors, and diagnosis was the between-subject factor. Significant interactions were examined by separate repeated measures ANOVA for each stimulus duration and post hoc simple effect analysis on each stimulus speed. Frequency of eye movements (number of trials with eye movement divided by 26 trials in a block) was similarly evaluated where duration, speed, and stimulus (test and reference grating) were the repeated measures. Relationships between eye movement frequency and Weber fraction and between dependent measures and clinical characteristics were examined using Pearson’s correlations.  Subjects Written informed consent was obtained from each subject. Subjects were 18 to 55 years of age, with no neurological or ophthalmologic conditions, substance dependence within the past 6 months, or current substance abuse. We tested 38 schizophrenia patients and 33 normal control subjects. All patients were clinically stable, with a diagnosis of schizophrenia based on the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID-IV). Three patients were on first-generation antipsychotic medications and the rest of the patients were on second-generation antipsychotic medications. Clinical symptoms were assessed using the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS). Control subjects were recruited by local media advertisements. Control subjects had no DSM-IV Axis I psychotic disorders, no cluster A personality diagnoses, and no family history of psychotic illness.  Experimental Procedures Setting and Stimulus Stimuli were displayed on a 22-in flat screen monitor set to 60 Hz at 1280 × 1024 pixels, placed at a viewing distance of 60 cm in a room with illuminance of 2 lux. The target was a vertical sinusoidal grating with a spatial frequency of .5 cycles per degree. Slower spatial frequency (e.g., .5–1.0 cycles per degree) is related to the magnocellular function and schizophrenia patients are thought to be impaired in this function ( 33 ), but this interpretation is not without dispute ( 34 ). The grating was presented in a circular disk 19 visual degrees in diameter. The luminance of the monitor was calibrated using the LaCie blue eye vision calibrator (LaCie, Hillsboro, Oregon). The average luminance of the display was 24 candelas (cd)/m2. The contrast of the grating was .15. The grating setting replicated that used by Chen et al . ( 3 ), with the exception of a blurred edge to reduce edge effects. Psychophysical Procedures A two-alternative forced choice (2AFC) parameter estimation by sequential testing (PEST) adaptive procedure was used to determine the speed discrimination thresholds ( 35 , 36 ). A trial consisted of a grating moving at a test speed followed by a grating moving in the same direction 500 msec later but at a reference speed ( Figure 1 ). A fixation crosshair was always present. The subjects were instructed to maintain fixation. Subjects indicated whether the first grating (test speed) was moving faster or slower than the second grating (reference speed) by pressing response buttons. The next trial started randomly anywhere from 1 sec to 2 sec after a response. The gratings moved in either direction, randomly determined trial to trial, to make the onset of the test gratings unpredictable. The duration of the stimuli was either 150 msec (experiment 1) or 300 msec (experiment 2). Each experiment was tested using three reference speeds: 3.8°/sec, 10°/sec, and 18.7°/sec. Each block of tasks had 26 trials with stimuli of the same reference speed and duration. Two PEST procedures were run per block, with 13 trials from each PEST procedure randomly interlaced. The procedures had an initial test speed 40% faster or slower than the reference speed. Based on the subject’s response, the adaptive procedure ( 35 ) determined the next test speed to be presented. Subjects performed a total of six blocks (3 speeds × 2 durations). The orders of blocks were randomized across subjects by means of a Latin Square table. Speed discrimination threshold was expressed as Weber fraction ?V/V (|final test speed ? reference speed|/reference speed). Each subject was given one block of practice trials. Eye Movement Monitoring During Speed Discrimination Eye data were collected using an EyeLink II eye tracker (SR Research Ltd., Toronto, Canada) sampling at 500 Hz. The subject’s head was stabilized using a chin rest. A calibration sequence (?5°, 0°, +5°) routine was inserted every five trials for offline calibration. Eye data were low-pass filtered at 20 Hz and differentiated into velocity and acceleration records. Analysis of the oculomotor data was automated using in-house algorithms developed in Matlab (MathWorks, Inc. Natick, Massachusetts). The algorithm identified saccades based on velocity (>35°/sec) and acceleration (>600°/sec2) criteria. After saccade removal, eye movement occurrence was determined as follows: if the average speed within the 150 msec to 400 msec after the test stimulus onset exceeded a threshold of 1°/sec in the direction of the stimulus, the trial was considered as having an eye movement occurrence. Eye movements during the reference stimulus were also scored but not considered as a primary measure because eye movements here are in part anticipatory rather than based only on retinal motion. This is because the presentation of reference gratings was not the source of variation in stimulus speed (always the same speed in a block) and was entirely predictable (always the same direction as the first grating and the same interval). We also measured a number of eye movement characteristics (test grating only) in trials with eye movements, including pursuit initiation latency, initiation mean and peak velocity and acceleration within the first 100 msec of pursuit, and the peak velocity within the first 500 msec after initiation. Smooth Pursuit Initiation A third experiment was performed to obtain smooth pursuit measures. Briefly, pursuit initiation was triggered using a step-ramp procedure, which is known to minimize saccadic responses during the initiation ( 37 ), followed by a 2- to 4-cycle of horizontal eye movement at a constant speed (10.0 °/sec or 18.7°/sec targets). Each speed was tested for 12 trials. Subjects were instructed to follow the target with their eyes as closely as possible. We obtained the pursuit initiation latency and mean initiation acceleration within the first 100 msec of pursuit (for detailed methods, see 11). Closed-loop pursuit gain during constant target movement was also obtained. Data were scored blind to the subject and group identity.  Setting and Stimulus Stimuli were displayed on a 22-in flat screen monitor set to 60 Hz at 1280 × 1024 pixels, placed at a viewing distance of 60 cm in a room with illuminance of 2 lux. The target was a vertical sinusoidal grating with a spatial frequency of .5 cycles per degree. Slower spatial frequency (e.g., .5–1.0 cycles per degree) is related to the magnocellular function and schizophrenia patients are thought to be impaired in this function ( 33 ), but this interpretation is not without dispute ( 34 ). The grating was presented in a circular disk 19 visual degrees in diameter. The luminance of the monitor was calibrated using the LaCie blue eye vision calibrator (LaCie, Hillsboro, Oregon). The average luminance of the display was 24 candelas (cd)/m2. The contrast of the grating was .15. The grating setting replicated that used by Chen et al . ( 3 ), with the exception of a blurred edge to reduce edge effects.  Psychophysical Procedures A two-alternative forced choice (2AFC) parameter estimation by sequential testing (PEST) adaptive procedure was used to determine the speed discrimination thresholds ( 35 , 36 ). A trial consisted of a grating moving at a test speed followed by a grating moving in the same direction 500 msec later but at a reference speed ( Figure 1 ). A fixation crosshair was always present. The subjects were instructed to maintain fixation. Subjects indicated whether the first grating (test speed) was moving faster or slower than the second grating (reference speed) by pressing response buttons. The next trial started randomly anywhere from 1 sec to 2 sec after a response. The gratings moved in either direction, randomly determined trial to trial, to make the onset of the test gratings unpredictable. The duration of the stimuli was either 150 msec (experiment 1) or 300 msec (experiment 2). Each experiment was tested using three reference speeds: 3.8°/sec, 10°/sec, and 18.7°/sec. Each block of tasks had 26 trials with stimuli of the same reference speed and duration. Two PEST procedures were run per block, with 13 trials from each PEST procedure randomly interlaced. The procedures had an initial test speed 40% faster or slower than the reference speed. Based on the subject’s response, the adaptive procedure ( 35 ) determined the next test speed to be presented. Subjects performed a total of six blocks (3 speeds × 2 durations). The orders of blocks were randomized across subjects by means of a Latin Square table. Speed discrimination threshold was expressed as Weber fraction ?V/V (|final test speed ? reference speed|/reference speed). Each subject was given one block of practice trials.  Eye Movement Monitoring During Speed Discrimination Eye data were collected using an EyeLink II eye tracker (SR Research Ltd., Toronto, Canada) sampling at 500 Hz. The subject’s head was stabilized using a chin rest. A calibration sequence (?5°, 0°, +5°) routine was inserted every five trials for offline calibration. Eye data were low-pass filtered at 20 Hz and differentiated into velocity and acceleration records. Analysis of the oculomotor data was automated using in-house algorithms developed in Matlab (MathWorks, Inc. Natick, Massachusetts). The algorithm identified saccades based on velocity (>35°/sec) and acceleration (>600°/sec2) criteria. After saccade removal, eye movement occurrence was determined as follows: if the average speed within the 150 msec to 400 msec after the test stimulus onset exceeded a threshold of 1°/sec in the direction of the stimulus, the trial was considered as having an eye movement occurrence. Eye movements during the reference stimulus were also scored but not considered as a primary measure because eye movements here are in part anticipatory rather than based only on retinal motion. This is because the presentation of reference gratings was not the source of variation in stimulus speed (always the same speed in a block) and was entirely predictable (always the same direction as the first grating and the same interval). We also measured a number of eye movement characteristics (test grating only) in trials with eye movements, including pursuit initiation latency, initiation mean and peak velocity and acceleration within the first 100 msec of pursuit, and the peak velocity within the first 500 msec after initiation.  Smooth Pursuit Initiation A third experiment was performed to obtain smooth pursuit measures. Briefly, pursuit initiation was triggered using a step-ramp procedure, which is known to minimize saccadic responses during the initiation ( 37 ), followed by a 2- to 4-cycle of horizontal eye movement at a constant speed (10.0 °/sec or 18.7°/sec targets). Each speed was tested for 12 trials. Subjects were instructed to follow the target with their eyes as closely as possible. We obtained the pursuit initiation latency and mean initiation acceleration within the first 100 msec of pursuit (for detailed methods, see 11). Closed-loop pursuit gain during constant target movement was also obtained. Data were scored blind to the subject and group identity.  Statistical Analysis The overall hypothesis was that abnormal speed discrimination thresholds (Weber fraction) occur only in the 300 msec condition and not in 150 msec condition in schizophrenia patients. It was tested using repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) where Weber fraction was the dependent measure, stimulus duration (150 msec and 300 msec) and speed (3.8°/sec, 10.0°/sec, and 18.7°/sec) were within-subjects factors, and diagnosis was the between-subject factor. Significant interactions were examined by separate repeated measures ANOVA for each stimulus duration and post hoc simple effect analysis on each stimulus speed. Frequency of eye movements (number of trials with eye movement divided by 26 trials in a block) was similarly evaluated where duration, speed, and stimulus (test and reference grating) were the repeated measures. Relationships between eye movement frequency and Weber fraction and between dependent measures and clinical characteristics were examined using Pearson’s correlations.  Results Speed Discrimination Schizophrenia patients and control subjects were not significantly different in age [mean ± SD: 40.3 ± 10.3 vs. 40.1 ± 11.2; F (1,70) = .01, p = .93], race (Caucasian:African American:Asian American: 18:19:1 vs. 19:11:3; ? 2 = 2.82, p = .24), or gender (female:male: 11:27 vs. 11:22; ? 2 = .16, p = .80). Repeated measure ANOVA showed no significant main effect of diagnosis [ F (1,69) = 2.63, p = .11] and a significant three-way stimulus duration × speed × diagnosis interaction [ F (2,69) = 2.95, p = .05]. At 150 msec, there was no significant effect of diagnosis [ F (1,69) = .55, p = .46] or speed by diagnosis interaction [ F (1,69) = .13, p = .29] ( Figure 2A ). At 300 msec, there was a significant effect of diagnosis [ F (1,69) = 5.15, p = .03] and a trend of speed by diagnosis interaction [ F (1,69) = 3.30, p = .07]. Schizophrenia patients had higher speed discrimination thresholds at target speeds of 18.7°/sec [ F (1,69) = 6.54, p = .01] and 10.0°/sec [ F (1,69) = 5.07, p = .03] but not at 3.8°/sec [ F (1,69) = .11, p = .74] compared with control subjects ( Figure 2B ). Eye movements occurred in both presentation durations despite explicit instruction to fixate ( Figure 3 ) but much less common with the 150 msec presentation. There were significant four-way diagnosis × speed × duration × stimulus ( p = .03) and two-way diagnosis × duration ( p = .008) interactions and no other significant diagnosis related main effect or interaction. Post hoc analyses of the significant interactions showed that control subjects and patients were not significantly different in frequency of eye movements at the 150 msec conditions in test [ F (1,69) = 1.23, p = .27] or reference ( p = .39) stimulus ( Figure 3A and 3C ). At 300 msec, control subjects had significantly more eye movement in test ( p = .02) and reference ( p = .04) stimulus compared with patients ( Figure 3B and 3D ). There were significant effects of duration ( p < .001) and stimulus ( p < .001), owing to significantly more eye movement occurrences in the 300 msec compared with 150 msec duration, and more eye movements during reference compared with test stimulus ( Figure 3 ). We also replicated previous findings of impaired motion perception in schizophrenia patients using the 300 msec target, but there were substantial eye movements during this condition. Eye Movements During Impaired Speed Discrimination Exploratory analyses were performed to assess why schizophrenia patients have worse speed discrimination during 300 msec 10.0°/sec and 18.7°/sec presentations, where there were more frequent occurrences of pursuit initiation. Did pursuit initiation differentially affect (benefit) motion discrimination in control subjects compared with patients? To address this question, we examined the correlations between the frequencies of eye movements and Weber fraction. There were no significant correlations in schizophrenia patients, but there were negative correlations in the control subjects, significant at the 10.0°/sec test speed ( p = .01; Figure 4 ), suggesting that more eye movements were associated with better speed discrimination thresholds in the control subjects but not in the patients. No significant correlations were found in reference stimuli ( Figure 4 ). Less Eye Movement Does Not Mean Impaired Ability to Follow Moving Targets It is possible that those subjects who made none to minimal pursuit eye movements had problems with SPEM initiation or motion perception, in which case we would see a correlation between eye movement frequencies during speed discrimination testing and regular pursuit initiation latency and/or initiation acceleration. Schizophrenia patients did not show significant impairment in pursuit initiation in the SPEM experiment compared with control subjects ( Table 1 ). In patients, there was no significant correlation between eye movement frequency during test grating and either latency or acceleration (all r ? |.24|, all p ? .15). In control subjects, there was a nominally significant correlation between eye movement frequency and latency at 18.7°/sec ( r = ?.35, p = .05). However, this would not be significant if corrected for multiple comparisons. Otherwise, there was no significant correlation between eye movement frequency and latency or acceleration in control subjects (all r ? |.35|, all p ? .05). These findings do not support that frequency of initiating eye movements during motion perception testing is related to subjects’ performance during instructed eye-tracking initiation. There was a significant correlation between initiation acceleration (during typical SPEM task) and Weber fraction at 18.7°/sec in schizophrenia patients ( n = 37, r = ?.50, p = .001) but not in healthy control subjects ( n = 33, p = ?.17, r = .34), replicating previous findings ( 1 - 4 ). For closed loop gain, patients showed reduced gain compared with control subjects, significant at 18.7°/sec ( Table 1 ). There was no significant correlation between closed loop gain and Weber fraction in the 150 msec duration in either 10.0°/sec ( r = ?.22, p = .10) or 18.7°/sec ( r = ?.17, p = .16) target speeds. In the 300 msec duration, the correlation was not significant at 10.0°/sec ( r = ?.10, p = .40) but significant at 18.7°/sec ( r = ?.34, p = .004). These correlations were from the combined group ( n = 70). We did not find any significant correlation when patients and control subjects were analyzed separately. Eye Movement Characteristics During Speed Discrimination There was a nominally significant difference in average acceleration at 18.7°/sec ( p = .02, not significant after correction for 12 comparisons using Bonferroni correction p < .004). Otherwise, we did not find significant group differences in the range of eye movement parameters during test grating ( Table 2 ). Correlations with Clinical and Demographic Information The total BPRS scores were 30.7 ± 11.2 in the patients. There were no significant correlations between BPRS total scores and frequency of eye movement in any speed/duration conditions (all r ? .20 in absolute values, all p ? .28). There was a nominally significant correlation between BPRS score and Weber threshold at 3.8°/sec at 150 msec stimulus ( n = 37, r = .36, p = .05, uncorrected). For BPRS subscales, the only nominally significant correlations were between Weber threshold at 3.8°/sec at 300 msec stimulus and thought disorder ( r = .41, p = .02) and psychosis ( r = .37, p = .03). None were significant after correction for multiple comparisons. In 24 schizophrenia patients whom we measured IQ (94.8 ± 15.5), we found a significant correlation between IQ and Weber threshold at 10.0°/sec at 150 msec stimulus ( r = ?.65, p = .001) but not at 300 msec condition ( r = ?.04, p = .84 at 10.0°/sec; r = ?.31, p = .14 at 18.7°/sec). Age was significantly correlated to Weber threshold in all three velocities at 150 msec ( r = .24–.27, p = .02–.04) but not 300 msec stimulus (all r ? .19, all p ? .11).  Results Speed Discrimination Schizophrenia patients and control subjects were not significantly different in age [mean ± SD: 40.3 ± 10.3 vs. 40.1 ± 11.2; F (1,70) = .01, p = .93], race (Caucasian:African American:Asian American: 18:19:1 vs. 19:11:3; ? 2 = 2.82, p = .24), or gender (female:male: 11:27 vs. 11:22; ? 2 = .16, p = .80). Repeated measure ANOVA showed no significant main effect of diagnosis [ F (1,69) = 2.63, p = .11] and a significant three-way stimulus duration × speed × diagnosis interaction [ F (2,69) = 2.95, p = .05]. At 150 msec, there was no significant effect of diagnosis [ F (1,69) = .55, p = .46] or speed by diagnosis interaction [ F (1,69) = .13, p = .29] ( Figure 2A ). At 300 msec, there was a significant effect of diagnosis [ F (1,69) = 5.15, p = .03] and a trend of speed by diagnosis interaction [ F (1,69) = 3.30, p = .07]. Schizophrenia patients had higher speed discrimination thresholds at target speeds of 18.7°/sec [ F (1,69) = 6.54, p = .01] and 10.0°/sec [ F (1,69) = 5.07, p = .03] but not at 3.8°/sec [ F (1,69) = .11, p = .74] compared with control subjects ( Figure 2B ). Eye movements occurred in both presentation durations despite explicit instruction to fixate ( Figure 3 ) but much less common with the 150 msec presentation. There were significant four-way diagnosis × speed × duration × stimulus ( p = .03) and two-way diagnosis × duration ( p = .008) interactions and no other significant diagnosis related main effect or interaction. Post hoc analyses of the significant interactions showed that control subjects and patients were not significantly different in frequency of eye movements at the 150 msec conditions in test [ F (1,69) = 1.23, p = .27] or reference ( p = .39) stimulus ( Figure 3A and 3C ). At 300 msec, control subjects had significantly more eye movement in test ( p = .02) and reference ( p = .04) stimulus compared with patients ( Figure 3B and 3D ). There were significant effects of duration ( p < .001) and stimulus ( p < .001), owing to significantly more eye movement occurrences in the 300 msec compared with 150 msec duration, and more eye movements during reference compared with test stimulus ( Figure 3 ). We also replicated previous findings of impaired motion perception in schizophrenia patients using the 300 msec target, but there were substantial eye movements during this condition. Eye Movements During Impaired Speed Discrimination Exploratory analyses were performed to assess why schizophrenia patients have worse speed discrimination during 300 msec 10.0°/sec and 18.7°/sec presentations, where there were more frequent occurrences of pursuit initiation. Did pursuit initiation differentially affect (benefit) motion discrimination in control subjects compared with patients? To address this question, we examined the correlations between the frequencies of eye movements and Weber fraction. There were no significant correlations in schizophrenia patients, but there were negative correlations in the control subjects, significant at the 10.0°/sec test speed ( p = .01; Figure 4 ), suggesting that more eye movements were associated with better speed discrimination thresholds in the control subjects but not in the patients. No significant correlations were found in reference stimuli ( Figure 4 ). Less Eye Movement Does Not Mean Impaired Ability to Follow Moving Targets It is possible that those subjects who made none to minimal pursuit eye movements had problems with SPEM initiation or motion perception, in which case we would see a correlation between eye movement frequencies during speed discrimination testing and regular pursuit initiation latency and/or initiation acceleration. Schizophrenia patients did not show significant impairment in pursuit initiation in the SPEM experiment compared with control subjects ( Table 1 ). In patients, there was no significant correlation between eye movement frequency during test grating and either latency or acceleration (all r ? |.24|, all p ? .15). In control subjects, there was a nominally significant correlation between eye movement frequency and latency at 18.7°/sec ( r = ?.35, p = .05). However, this would not be significant if corrected for multiple comparisons. Otherwise, there was no significant correlation between eye movement frequency and latency or acceleration in control subjects (all r ? |.35|, all p ? .05). These findings do not support that frequency of initiating eye movements during motion perception testing is related to subjects’ performance during instructed eye-tracking initiation. There was a significant correlation between initiation acceleration (during typical SPEM task) and Weber fraction at 18.7°/sec in schizophrenia patients ( n = 37, r = ?.50, p = .001) but not in healthy control subjects ( n = 33, p = ?.17, r = .34), replicating previous findings ( 1 - 4 ). For closed loop gain, patients showed reduced gain compared with control subjects, significant at 18.7°/sec ( Table 1 ). There was no significant correlation between closed loop gain and Weber fraction in the 150 msec duration in either 10.0°/sec ( r = ?.22, p = .10) or 18.7°/sec ( r = ?.17, p = .16) target speeds. In the 300 msec duration, the correlation was not significant at 10.0°/sec ( r = ?.10, p = .40) but significant at 18.7°/sec ( r = ?.34, p = .004). These correlations were from the combined group ( n = 70). We did not find any significant correlation when patients and control subjects were analyzed separately. Eye Movement Characteristics During Speed Discrimination There was a nominally significant difference in average acceleration at 18.7°/sec ( p = .02, not significant after correction for 12 comparisons using Bonferroni correction p < .004). Otherwise, we did not find significant group differences in the range of eye movement parameters during test grating ( Table 2 ). Correlations with Clinical and Demographic Information The total BPRS scores were 30.7 ± 11.2 in the patients. There were no significant correlations between BPRS total scores and frequency of eye movement in any speed/duration conditions (all r ? .20 in absolute values, all p ? .28). There was a nominally significant correlation between BPRS score and Weber threshold at 3.8°/sec at 150 msec stimulus ( n = 37, r = .36, p = .05, uncorrected). For BPRS subscales, the only nominally significant correlations were between Weber threshold at 3.8°/sec at 300 msec stimulus and thought disorder ( r = .41, p = .02) and psychosis ( r = .37, p = .03). None were significant after correction for multiple comparisons. In 24 schizophrenia patients whom we measured IQ (94.8 ± 15.5), we found a significant correlation between IQ and Weber threshold at 10.0°/sec at 150 msec stimulus ( r = ?.65, p = .001) but not at 300 msec condition ( r = ?.04, p = .84 at 10.0°/sec; r = ?.31, p = .14 at 18.7°/sec). Age was significantly correlated to Weber threshold in all three velocities at 150 msec ( r = .24–.27, p = .02–.04) but not 300 msec stimulus (all r ? .19, all p ? .11).  Speed Discrimination Schizophrenia patients and control subjects were not significantly different in age [mean ± SD: 40.3 ± 10.3 vs. 40.1 ± 11.2; F (1,70) = .01, p = .93], race (Caucasian:African American:Asian American: 18:19:1 vs. 19:11:3; ? 2 = 2.82, p = .24), or gender (female:male: 11:27 vs. 11:22; ? 2 = .16, p = .80). Repeated measure ANOVA showed no significant main effect of diagnosis [ F (1,69) = 2.63, p = .11] and a significant three-way stimulus duration × speed × diagnosis interaction [ F (2,69) = 2.95, p = .05]. At 150 msec, there was no significant effect of diagnosis [ F (1,69) = .55, p = .46] or speed by diagnosis interaction [ F (1,69) = .13, p = .29] ( Figure 2A ). At 300 msec, there was a significant effect of diagnosis [ F (1,69) = 5.15, p = .03] and a trend of speed by diagnosis interaction [ F (1,69) = 3.30, p = .07]. Schizophrenia patients had higher speed discrimination thresholds at target speeds of 18.7°/sec [ F (1,69) = 6.54, p = .01] and 10.0°/sec [ F (1,69) = 5.07, p = .03] but not at 3.8°/sec [ F (1,69) = .11, p = .74] compared with control subjects ( Figure 2B ). Eye movements occurred in both presentation durations despite explicit instruction to fixate ( Figure 3 ) but much less common with the 150 msec presentation. There were significant four-way diagnosis × speed × duration × stimulus ( p = .03) and two-way diagnosis × duration ( p = .008) interactions and no other significant diagnosis related main effect or interaction. Post hoc analyses of the significant interactions showed that control subjects and patients were not significantly different in frequency of eye movements at the 150 msec conditions in test [ F (1,69) = 1.23, p = .27] or reference ( p = .39) stimulus ( Figure 3A and 3C ). At 300 msec, control subjects had significantly more eye movement in test ( p = .02) and reference ( p = .04) stimulus compared with patients ( Figure 3B and 3D ). There were significant effects of duration ( p < .001) and stimulus ( p < .001), owing to significantly more eye movement occurrences in the 300 msec compared with 150 msec duration, and more eye movements during reference compared with test stimulus ( Figure 3 ). We also replicated previous findings of impaired motion perception in schizophrenia patients using the 300 msec target, but there were substantial eye movements during this condition.  Speed Discrimination Schizophrenia patients and control subjects were not significantly different in age [mean ± SD: 40.3 ± 10.3 vs. 40.1 ± 11.2; F (1,70) = .01, p = .93], race (Caucasian:African American:Asian American: 18:19:1 vs. 19:11:3; ? 2 = 2.82, p = .24), or gender (female:male: 11:27 vs. 11:22; ? 2 = .16, p = .80). Repeated measure ANOVA showed no significant main effect of diagnosis [ F (1,69) = 2.63, p = .11] and a significant three-way stimulus duration × speed × diagnosis interaction [ F (2,69) = 2.95, p = .05]. At 150 msec, there was no significant effect of diagnosis [ F (1,69) = .55, p = .46] or speed by diagnosis interaction [ F (1,69) = .13, p = .29] ( Figure 2A ). At 300 msec, there was a significant effect of diagnosis [ F (1,69) = 5.15, p = .03] and a trend of speed by diagnosis interaction [ F (1,69) = 3.30, p = .07]. Schizophrenia patients had higher speed discrimination thresholds at target speeds of 18.7°/sec [ F (1,69) = 6.54, p = .01] and 10.0°/sec [ F (1,69) = 5.07, p = .03] but not at 3.8°/sec [ F (1,69) = .11, p = .74] compared with control subjects ( Figure 2B ). Eye movements occurred in both presentation durations despite explicit instruction to fixate ( Figure 3 ) but much less common with the 150 msec presentation. There were significant four-way diagnosis × speed × duration × stimulus ( p = .03) and two-way diagnosis × duration ( p = .008) interactions and no other significant diagnosis related main effect or interaction. Post hoc analyses of the significant interactions showed that control subjects and patients were not significantly different in frequency of eye movements at the 150 msec conditions in test [ F (1,69) = 1.23, p = .27] or reference ( p = .39) stimulus ( Figure 3A and 3C ). At 300 msec, control subjects had significantly more eye movement in test ( p = .02) and reference ( p = .04) stimulus compared with patients ( Figure 3B and 3D ). There were significant effects of duration ( p < .001) and stimulus ( p < .001), owing to significantly more eye movement occurrences in the 300 msec compared with 150 msec duration, and more eye movements during reference compared with test stimulus ( Figure 3 ). We also replicated previous findings of impaired motion perception in schizophrenia patients using the 300 msec target, but there were substantial eye movements during this condition.  Eye Movements During Impaired Speed Discrimination Exploratory analyses were performed to assess why schizophrenia patients have worse speed discrimination during 300 msec 10.0°/sec and 18.7°/sec presentations, where there were more frequent occurrences of pursuit initiation. Did pursuit initiation differentially affect (benefit) motion discrimination in control subjects compared with patients? To address this question, we examined the correlations between the frequencies of eye movements and Weber fraction. There were no significant correlations in schizophrenia patients, but there were negative correlations in the control subjects, significant at the 10.0°/sec test speed ( p = .01; Figure 4 ), suggesting that more eye movements were associated with better speed discrimination thresholds in the control subjects but not in the patients. No significant correlations were found in reference stimuli ( Figure 4 ).  Eye Movements During Impaired Speed Discrimination Exploratory analyses were performed to assess why schizophrenia patients have worse speed discrimination during 300 msec 10.0°/sec and 18.7°/sec presentations, where there were more frequent occurrences of pursuit initiation. Did pursuit initiation differentially affect (benefit) motion discrimination in control subjects compared with patients? To address this question, we examined the correlations between the frequencies of eye movements and Weber fraction. There were no significant correlations in schizophrenia patients, but there were negative correlations in the control subjects, significant at the 10.0°/sec test speed ( p = .01; Figure 4 ), suggesting that more eye movements were associated with better speed discrimination thresholds in the control subjects but not in the patients. No significant correlations were found in reference stimuli ( Figure 4 ).  Less Eye Movement Does Not Mean Impaired Ability to Follow Moving Targets It is possible that those subjects who made none to minimal pursuit eye movements had problems with SPEM initiation or motion perception, in which case we would see a correlation between eye movement frequencies during speed discrimination testing and regular pursuit initiation latency and/or initiation acceleration. Schizophrenia patients did not show significant impairment in pursuit initiation in the SPEM experiment compared with control subjects ( Table 1 ). In patients, there was no significant correlation between eye movement frequency during test grating and either latency or acceleration (all r ? |.24|, all p ? .15). In control subjects, there was a nominally significant correlation between eye movement frequency and latency at 18.7°/sec ( r = ?.35, p = .05). However, this would not be significant if corrected for multiple comparisons. Otherwise, there was no significant correlation between eye movement frequency and latency or acceleration in control subjects (all r ? |.35|, all p ? .05). These findings do not support that frequency of initiating eye movements during motion perception testing is related to subjects’ performance during instructed eye-tracking initiation. There was a significant correlation between initiation acceleration (during typical SPEM task) and Weber fraction at 18.7°/sec in schizophrenia patients ( n = 37, r = ?.50, p = .001) but not in healthy control subjects ( n = 33, p = ?.17, r = .34), replicating previous findings ( 1 - 4 ). For closed loop gain, patients showed reduced gain compared with control subjects, significant at 18.7°/sec ( Table 1 ). There was no significant correlation between closed loop gain and Weber fraction in the 150 msec duration in either 10.0°/sec ( r = ?.22, p = .10) or 18.7°/sec ( r = ?.17, p = .16) target speeds. In the 300 msec duration, the correlation was not significant at 10.0°/sec ( r = ?.10, p = .40) but significant at 18.7°/sec ( r = ?.34, p = .004). These correlations were from the combined group ( n = 70). We did not find any significant correlation when patients and control subjects were analyzed separately.  Less Eye Movement Does Not Mean Impaired Ability to Follow Moving Targets It is possible that those subjects who made none to minimal pursuit eye movements had problems with SPEM initiation or motion perception, in which case we would see a correlation between eye movement frequencies during speed discrimination testing and regular pursuit initiation latency and/or initiation acceleration. Schizophrenia patients did not show significant impairment in pursuit initiation in the SPEM experiment compared with control subjects ( Table 1 ). In patients, there was no significant correlation between eye movement frequency during test grating and either latency or acceleration (all r ? |.24|, all p ? .15). In control subjects, there was a nominally significant correlation between eye movement frequency and latency at 18.7°/sec ( r = ?.35, p = .05). However, this would not be significant if corrected for multiple comparisons. Otherwise, there was no significant correlation between eye movement frequency and latency or acceleration in control subjects (all r ? |.35|, all p ? .05). These findings do not support that frequency of initiating eye movements during motion perception testing is related to subjects’ performance during instructed eye-tracking initiation. There was a significant correlation between initiation acceleration (during typical SPEM task) and Weber fraction at 18.7°/sec in schizophrenia patients ( n = 37, r = ?.50, p = .001) but not in healthy control subjects ( n = 33, p = ?.17, r = .34), replicating previous findings ( 1 - 4 ). For closed loop gain, patients showed reduced gain compared with control subjects, significant at 18.7°/sec ( Table 1 ). There was no significant correlation between closed loop gain and Weber fraction in the 150 msec duration in either 10.0°/sec ( r = ?.22, p = .10) or 18.7°/sec ( r = ?.17, p = .16) target speeds. In the 300 msec duration, the correlation was not significant at 10.0°/sec ( r = ?.10, p = .40) but significant at 18.7°/sec ( r = ?.34, p = .004). These correlations were from the combined group ( n = 70). We did not find any significant correlation when patients and control subjects were analyzed separately.  Discussion This study examined speed discrimination thresholds in schizophrenia patients after accounting for eye movements. The first experiment presented the motion stimulus for a duration that was shorter than the response latency of the smooth pursuit system, thus preventing the integration of oculomotor commands into motion processing to derive a motion percept. Data from this experiment showed that when there is insufficient time for oculomotor feedback to influence perception, schizophrenia patients perform similarly to healthy control subjects in speed discrimination. The simultaneous recording of eye movements during motion perception testing is a novel approach to understanding the interaction of these two functions in schizophrenia, a disorder with known impairments in both functions. Using this approach, the patients did show evidence of abnormal speed discrimination during the presentation of target motion in the second experiment, during 300 msec 10.0°/sec and 18.7°/sec presentations. However, there were frequent eye movements in both control subjects and patients in this experiment. Exploratory correlation analyses suggested that control subjects who made more frequent pursuit eye movements during the test stimulus tended to have better speed discrimination (significant at 10.0°/sec). This effect was not present during the reference stimulus. In comparison, schizophrenia patients showed no such correlation in either test or reference stimulus, suggesting that patients may have failed to benefit from pursuit initiation during motion perception. The stronger beneficial effect of eye movements from the test stimulus in control subjects was expected because the first stimulus had unexpected onset; eye movements that occurred during the first stimulus were likely based on retinal motion. Eye movements occurring at the second stimulus were likely influenced by anticipation in addition to motion perception because the target onset and direction were predictable; therefore, these eye movements might be less beneficial to speed discrimination. For humans, particularly subjects not trained to maintain fixation, it is difficult not to initiate eye movements in the presence of a dominant moving object in the visual field. Thus, one may argue that subjects who were able to follow the instructions and keep eyes fixated during the motion perception task were able to do so because of poor motion processing ability. We ruled out this possibility because there was no significant correlation between eye movement frequency during speed discrimination testing and initiation latency or acceleration during normal smooth pursuit. How do eye movements affect motion perception? One possibility is through an efference copy. Eye movements generate a copy of the oculomotor command, sometimes called the efference copy, which contributes to the extraretinal motion signal used for the subsequent pursuit ( 20 , 21 ). The oculomotor command is relayed to the motion sensors via corollary discharge during the late motion processing in the medio-superior temporal cortex ( 23 ). The MST integrates the corollary discharge to generate an accurate motion percept ( 29 , 38 , 39 ). Although the source of the efference copy of the pursuit command is unknown, recent data suggest that the pathway projecting from the superior colliculus to the frontal eye fields mediate efference copy of saccadic eye movements ( 40 ). Smooth pursuit eye movement during speed discrimination testing generates an efference copy of the eye movement command, which is used in computing the perceived target speed ( 29 , 38 , 39 ). Impaired smooth pursuit can lead to impaired analysis of moving objects ( 41 ). Conversely, SPEMs improve perception of coherent motions in normal control subjects ( 42 ). Pursuit-induced extraretinal signal is hypothesized to be the source of this enhancement ( 42 ). Studies have shown that schizophrenia patients and their relatives have a dysfunction in extraretinal motion processing ( 26 , 28 ). The data reported here suggest that a potential mechanism of motion perception deficit in schizophrenia may be secondary to impairments in generating, connecting, and/or integrating SPEM-induced extraretinal motion signals to render accurate motion perception. However, since patients made less eye movements in the 300 msec conditions, another hypothesis is that they might be in part “penalized” for more strictly following the instruction to fixate. This may apply to the current and previous motion perception studies in schizophrenia. The pattern of speed discrimination impairments, i.e., deficits at 10.0°/sec and 18.7°/sec but not at 3.8°/sec, replicated findings by Chen et al .( 2 ), who showed similar impairment at 10.0°/sec and 16.0°/sec but not at 3.8°/sec stimulus in schizophrenia patients. However, the results of the study challenge the previous conclusion on the speed discrimination deficit leading to SPEM problems in schizophrenia. The presentations of the motion stimuli were 200 msec to 250 msec ( 43 ) to 300 msec to 4000 msec ( 1 , 2 , 4 ) in previous studies, durations that are long enough to allow SPEM. Most of the previous studies also found a correlation between direction or speed discrimination thresholds and pursuit gain only in schizophrenia patients ( 1 - 4 ). Our experiment replicated the correlation between initiation acceleration and speed discrimination only in schizophrenia patients. In previous studies, the significant correlations were deemed as supportive evidence for the conclusion that the motion perception deficit leads to a SPEM deficit in schizophrenia. However, there are some problems with this interpretation. Impaired motion perception does not necessarily lead to abnormal smooth pursuit ( 31 ). Data presented here suggest that eye movements may also affect motion perception: when eye movements were limited, there were no between-group differences in speed discrimination. Several studies have shown a lack of significant impairment in schizophrenia patients in the pursuit initiation response ( 10 , 14 - 18 , 44 ). Both motion perception and SPEM impairments were observed at a later time course in the respective tasks, when performance could be affected by eye-tracking induced motor commands. We also observed that patients showed reduced closed loop gain compared with control subjects, significant at 18.7°/sec, and a correlation between speed discrimination and closed loop pursuit gain at 300 msec (18.7°/sec) but not at 150 msec presentation. This correlation by itself does not imply a causal relationship: it can imply motion perception effects on pursuit or the opposite. However, the combined observations of unimpaired motion perception in 150 msec and impaired closed loop eye tracking in schizophrenia patients, the lack of significant correlation between motion perception and pursuit gain when eye movements are minimized (at 150 msec), and a significant correlation emerging when eye movements are often (at 300 msec) do not support that impaired motion perception causes eye-tracking abnormality but provides additional support to the findings of the primary analysis that occurrence of eye movements may determine patient-control subject difference in motion perception. Self-generated actions can potentially distort the perception of the outside world, if the reafferent stimuli are left unchecked. Normally, this extraretinal motion information due to self-generated action modulates sensory processing to maintain high fidelity of the perceptual experience. Schizophrenia patients showed significantly impaired extraretinal motion processing ( 26 - 28 ). In the presence of impaired processing of this extraretinal information, one would expect distorted perception. Data reported here suggest that abnormal motion perception observed in schizophrenia may not primarily be a retinal motion processing problem, nor a problem of the eye movement itself, but a result of impaired processing or integration of oculomotor feedback signals into a motion percept.  Discussion This study examined speed discrimination thresholds in schizophrenia patients after accounting for eye movements. The first experiment presented the motion stimulus for a duration that was shorter than the response latency of the smooth pursuit system, thus preventing the integration of oculomotor commands into motion processing to derive a motion percept. Data from this experiment showed that when there is insufficient time for oculomotor feedback to influence perception, schizophrenia patients perform similarly to healthy control subjects in speed discrimination. The simultaneous recording of eye movements during motion perception testing is a novel approach to understanding the interaction of these two functions in schizophrenia, a disorder with known impairments in both functions. Using this approach, the patients did show evidence of abnormal speed discrimination during the presentation of target motion in the second experiment, during 300 msec 10.0°/sec and 18.7°/sec presentations. However, there were frequent eye movements in both control subjects and patients in this experiment. Exploratory correlation analyses suggested that control subjects who made more frequent pursuit eye movements during the test stimulus tended to have better speed discrimination (significant at 10.0°/sec). This effect was not present during the reference stimulus. In comparison, schizophrenia patients showed no such correlation in either test or reference stimulus, suggesting that patients may have failed to benefit from pursuit initiation during motion perception. The stronger beneficial effect of eye movements from the test stimulus in control subjects was expected because the first stimulus had unexpected onset; eye movements that occurred during the first stimulus were likely based on retinal motion. Eye movements occurring at the second stimulus were likely influenced by anticipation in addition to motion perception because the target onset and direction were predictable; therefore, these eye movements might be less beneficial to speed discrimination. For humans, particularly subjects not trained to maintain fixation, it is difficult not to initiate eye movements in the presence of a dominant moving object in the visual field. Thus, one may argue that subjects who were able to follow the instructions and keep eyes fixated during the motion perception task were able to do so because of poor motion processing ability. We ruled out this possibility because there was no significant correlation between eye movement frequency during speed discrimination testing and initiation latency or acceleration during normal smooth pursuit. How do eye movements affect motion perception? One possibility is through an efference copy. Eye movements generate a copy of the oculomotor command, sometimes called the efference copy, which contributes to the extraretinal motion signal used for the subsequent pursuit ( 20 , 21 ). The oculomotor command is relayed to the motion sensors via corollary discharge during the late motion processing in the medio-superior temporal cortex ( 23 ). The MST integrates the corollary discharge to generate an accurate motion percept ( 29 , 38 , 39 ). Although the source of the efference copy of the pursuit command is unknown, recent data suggest that the pathway projecting from the superior colliculus to the frontal eye fields mediate efference copy of saccadic eye movements ( 40 ). Smooth pursuit eye movement during speed discrimination testing generates an efference copy of the eye movement command, which is used in computing the perceived target speed ( 29 , 38 , 39 ). Impaired smooth pursuit can lead to impaired analysis of moving objects ( 41 ). Conversely, SPEMs improve perception of coherent motions in normal control subjects ( 42 ). Pursuit-induced extraretinal signal is hypothesized to be the source of this enhancement ( 42 ). Studies have shown that schizophrenia patients and their relatives have a dysfunction in extraretinal motion processing ( 26 , 28 ). The data reported here suggest that a potential mechanism of motion perception deficit in schizophrenia may be secondary to impairments in generating, connecting, and/or integrating SPEM-induced extraretinal motion signals to render accurate motion perception. However, since patients made less eye movements in the 300 msec conditions, another hypothesis is that they might be in part “penalized” for more strictly following the instruction to fixate. This may apply to the current and previous motion perception studies in schizophrenia. The pattern of speed discrimination impairments, i.e., deficits at 10.0°/sec and 18.7°/sec but not at 3.8°/sec, replicated findings by Chen et al .( 2 ), who showed similar impairment at 10.0°/sec and 16.0°/sec but not at 3.8°/sec stimulus in schizophrenia patients. However, the results of the study challenge the previous conclusion on the speed discrimination deficit leading to SPEM problems in schizophrenia. The presentations of the motion stimuli were 200 msec to 250 msec ( 43 ) to 300 msec to 4000 msec ( 1 , 2 , 4 ) in previous studies, durations that are long enough to allow SPEM. Most of the previous studies also found a correlation between direction or speed discrimination thresholds and pursuit gain only in schizophrenia patients ( 1 - 4 ). Our experiment replicated the correlation between initiation acceleration and speed discrimination only in schizophrenia patients. In previous studies, the significant correlations were deemed as supportive evidence for the conclusion that the motion perception deficit leads to a SPEM deficit in schizophrenia. However, there are some problems with this interpretation. Impaired motion perception does not necessarily lead to abnormal smooth pursuit ( 31 ). Data presented here suggest that eye movements may also affect motion perception: when eye movements were limited, there were no between-group differences in speed discrimination. Several studies have shown a lack of significant impairment in schizophrenia patients in the pursuit initiation response ( 10 , 14 - 18 , 44 ). Both motion perception and SPEM impairments were observed at a later time course in the respective tasks, when performance could be affected by eye-tracking induced motor commands. We also observed that patients showed reduced closed loop gain compared with control subjects, significant at 18.7°/sec, and a correlation between speed discrimination and closed loop pursuit gain at 300 msec (18.7°/sec) but not at 150 msec presentation. This correlation by itself does not imply a causal relationship: it can imply motion perception effects on pursuit or the opposite. However, the combined observations of unimpaired motion perception in 150 msec and impaired closed loop eye tracking in schizophrenia patients, the lack of significant correlation between motion perception and pursuit gain when eye movements are minimized (at 150 msec), and a significant correlation emerging when eye movements are often (at 300 msec) do not support that impaired motion perception causes eye-tracking abnormality but provides additional support to the findings of the primary analysis that occurrence of eye movements may determine patient-control subject difference in motion perception. Self-generated actions can potentially distort the perception of the outside world, if the reafferent stimuli are left unchecked. Normally, this extraretinal motion information due to self-generated action modulates sensory processing to maintain high fidelity of the perceptual experience. Schizophrenia patients showed significantly impaired extraretinal motion processing ( 26 - 28 ). In the presence of impaired processing of this extraretinal information, one would expect distorted perception. Data reported here suggest that abnormal motion perception observed in schizophrenia may not primarily be a retinal motion processing problem, nor a problem of the eye movement itself, but a result of impaired processing or integration of oculomotor feedback signals into a motion percept. 