Brain arteriovenous malformation biology relevant to hemorrhage and implication for therapeutic development Brain arteriovenous malformations (AVM) cause intracranial hemorrhage (ICH). Molecular characterization of lesional tissue implicates angiogenic (VEGF, ANG-2, MMP-9) and inflammatory (cytokines and chemokines) pathways, but the pathogenesis remain obscure and medical therapy is lacking. Macrophage and neutrophil invasion has also been observed in the absence of prior ICH. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in interleukin-1? ( IL-1? ) and activin receptor-like kinase-1 ( ALK-1 ) are associated with AVM susceptibility, and SNPs in IL-1?, IL-6, TNF-? and APOE are associated with AVM rupture. These observations suggest that even without a complete understanding of the determinants of AVM development, the recent discoveries of downstream derangements in vascular function and integrity may offer potential targets for therapy development. Further, biomarkers can be established for assessing ICH risk. Finally, these data will aid in development of model systems for mechanistic testing, by development of surrogate phenotypes (microvascular dysplasia) and/or models recapitulating the clinical syndrome of recurrent spontaneous ICH.  Conclusions The prevailing hypothesis is that AVM pathophysiology is governed to a large extent by chronic hemodynamic derangements imposed on a congenital lesion. Recent findings suggest an alternative hypothesis where angiogenic and inflammatory pathways synergize with underlying defects or hemodynamic injury to result in the clinical phenotype, perhaps in conjunction with as yet undetermined genetic or environmental influences ( Figure 1 ). Elucidating these mechanisms offers promise for developing innovative treatments and better risk stratification, and may provide insights into mechanisms of vascular biology.  Figure Figure 1 AVM pathogenesis: speculative synthesis of observations After an inciting event, inflammatory or angiogenic activity (MMP, VEGF) initiates microvascular growth and remodeling, which are stabilized through interplay of pathways including TIE-2/ANG and TGF-? or BMP-9 signaling through the ALK-1/ENG pathway. Lack of Integrin ?8 and Hox A5, an anti-angiogenic transcription factor, may also play a role. Normal vessels stabilize, but an incipient AVM undergoes a dysplastic response. Arteriovenous (A-V) shunting and high flow rates synergize with the dysplastic response and with inflammatory signals, causing a vicious cycle in a localized area destined to become the nidus. Eventually, the human disease phenotype emerges. Genetic variation can influence any step of the cycle. 