Dicyclomine, an M1 Muscarinic Antagonist, Reduces Biomarker Levels, But Not Neuronal Degeneration, in Fluid Percussion Brain Injury Recent studies indicate that ? II-spectrin breakdown products (SBDPs) have utility as biological markers of traumatic brain injury (TBI). However, the utility of SBDP biomarkers for detecting effects of therapeutic interventions has not been explored. Acetylcholine plays a role in pathological neuronal excitation and TBI-induced muscarinic cholinergic receptor activation may contribute to excitotoxic processes. In experiment I, regional and temporal changes in calpain-mediated ? -spectrin degradation were evaluated at 3, 12, 24, and 48 h using immunostaining for 145-kDa SBDP. Immunostaining of SBDP-145 was only evident in the hemisphere ipsilateral to TBI and was generally limited to the cortex except at 24 h when immunostaining was also prominent in the dentate gyrus and striatum. In Experiment II, cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) samples were analyzed for various SBDPs 24 h after moderate lateral fluid percussion TBI. Rats were administered either dicyclomine (5 mg/kg i.p.) or saline vehicle ( n = 8 per group) 5 min prior to injury. Injury produced significant increases ( p < 0.001) of 300%, 230%, and >1000% in SBDP-150, -145, and -120, respectively in vehicle-treated rats compared to sham. Dicyclomine treatment produced decreases of 38% ( p = 0.077), 37% ( p = 0.028), and 63% ( p = 0.051) in SBDP-150, -145, and -120, respectively, compared to vehicle-treated injury. Following CSF extraction, coronal brain sections were processed for detecting degenerating neurons using Fluoro-Jade histofluorescence. Stereological techniques were used to quantify neuronal degeneration in the dorsal hippocampus CA2/3 region and in the parietal cortex. No significant differences were detected in numbers of degenerating neurons in the dorsal CA2/3 hippocampus or the parietal cortex between saline and dicyclomine treatment groups. The percent weight loss following TBI was significantly reduced by dicyclomine treatment. These data provide additional evidence that, as TBI biomarkers, SBDPs are able to detect a therapeutic intervention even in the absence of changes in neuronal cell degeneration measured by Fluoro-jade.  Introduction Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is the leading cause of death and disability in persons under 45 years of age in industrialized countries ( Thurman et al., 1999 ). Of the 1.5 million head traumas estimated to occur each year in the United States, 500,000 are likely to require hospitalization, and 80,000 result in some form of chronic disability ( Langlois et al., 2006 ). The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimate that at least 5.3 million Americans, or about 2% of the population, currently have a long-term requirement for assistance with daily living activities as a result of TBI ( Langlois et al., 2006 ). Furthermore, total health costs for TBI amount to roughly $35 billion annually ( Max et al., 1991 ). Despite the prevalence and severity of this form of injury, no effective treatment has yet been developed. Biomarkers of central nervous system (CNS) injury could provide physicians and laboratory studies with quantifiable neurochemical markers to help determine not only the severity and cellular pathology of injury, but also provide a surrogate marker of therapeutic interventions. While a number of potential biochemical markers for TBI have been proposed ( Pineda et al., 2007 ), several studies have focused on breakdown products of ? II-spectrin proteolysis as biomarkers of CNS injury in rodents ( Pike et al., 2004 ; Ringger et al., 2004 ) and humans ( Pineda et al., 2007 ). Alpha-II-spectrin is primarily enriched in brain and is localized in neurons rather than glia (personal communication K. Wang). Furthermore, ? II-spectrin appears to be localized in axons ( Czogalla and Sikorski, 2005 ; Riederer et al., 1986 ). Alpha-II spectrin is cleaved by two cystein proteases: calpain and caspase. Calpain, which exists in a quiescent state in the resting cell, is induced to a hyperactive state in response to significant elevations in intracellular calcium, as accompanies TBI ( Fineman et al., 1993 ). This enzyme cleaves ? II-spectrin into 150- and 145-kDa fragments. Calpain proteolysis is primarily associated with necrotic oncosis ( Kampfl et al., 1997 ; Liu et al., 2004 ; Wang, 2002 ). Caspase, the activation of which is associated with apoptotic cell death, cleaves spectrin into distinct 150- and 120-kDa fragments ( Pike et al., 2001 ; Wang, 2000 ). This differential cleavage permits not only an indication of CNS-specific hyperactivation of spectrin cleavage enzymes in response to injury, but also an assessment of the relative significance of necrosis and/or apoptosis as contributory factors in the injury pathology. Thus, these ? II-spectrin breakdown products (SBDPs) can be considered biomarkers for TBI ( Wang et al., 2005 ). To date, the majority of studies examining excitotoxic mechanisms of TBI pathology have focused on the neurotransmitter glutamate. However, considerable evidence indicates acetylcholine-related toxicity to be likewise of great importance in CNS pathologies. Increases in acetylcholine (ACh) levels associated with brain trauma were documented over 50 years ago in laboratory as well as clinical settings ( Bornstein, 1946 ; Sachs, 1957 ). Comparatively higher levels of the neurotransmitter were noted with increasing severity of the injury ( Tower and McEachern, 1949 ). More recent studies have confirmed elevation of elevated ACh in brain cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) following experimental TBI ( Gorman et al., 1989 ; Lyeth et al., 1993a ) and ischemia ( Kumagae and Matsui, 1991 ), as well as the injurious nature of high levels of muscarinic cholinergic receptor activation through application of cholinomimetics ( Olney et al., 1983 ; Turski et al., 1983 ). Furthermore, several studies have demonstrated that acute administration of muscarinic antagonists improves behavioral recovery following experimental TBI ( Lyeth et al., 1988a , b , 1993b ; Lyeth and Hayes, 1992 ; Robinson et al., 1990 ). This study investigated the effects of the M1-specific muscarinic cholinergic receptor antagonist dicyclomine, which has been previously demonstrated to provide behavioral neuroprotection following TBI ( Robinson et al., 1990 ), on two outcome measures in the acute phase following moderate experimental TBI: the levels of SBDPs, putative TBI biomarkers, in CSF samples, and the quantity of degenerating hippocampal neurons. This dual approach permitted an examination of the relative importance of neuronal cell death and spectrin cleavage-associated processes (as those in the calpain and caspase pathways) as a contributory factor in acute-phase TBI pathology related to cholinergic over excitation.  Methods Subjects Thirty-two male Sprague-Dawley rats (Harlan, Indianapolis, IN), 300—350 g, were used as subjects for this experiment. Rats were housed in plastic cages within a vivarium on a 12-h light-dark cycle, with free access to water and Purina Lab solid rat food. Treatment groups Eight TBI subjects without drug treatment were used in a time course study for SPDP immunohistochemistry ( n = 2/time point at 3, 12, 24, and 48 h post-TBI). Twenty-four subjects were assigned to one of three treatment groups ( n = 8 each): an injury group administered a saline vehicle (equal volume as drug injection); an injury group administered dicyclomine; and a third, sham-injury group to serve as an uninjured baseline from which to compare TBI-induced changes in SBDP levels. Sham-injured rats were subjected to the same surgical and anesthetic procedures as animals in the two injury groups, but were neither given an actual injury nor administered the drug treatments. All procedures were performed in compliance with a protocol approved by the University of California, Davis, Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Surgical procedure Rats were initially anesthetized with 4% isoflurane in a carrier gas of air, intubated, and mechanically normoventilated with a rodent volume ventilator (model 683; Harvard Apparatus, Hollister, MA) with 2% isoflurane in a 2:1 nitrous oxide/oxygen carrier gas. Depth of anesthesia was routinely monitored every 10 min by testing for suppression of hind-paw withdrawal in response to a toe-pinch. Rats were mounted in a stereotaxic device (model 900; KOPF Instruments, Tujunga, CA), a scalp incision made along the midline, and a 4.8-mm diameter craniectomy was performed on the right parietal bone (centered at -4.5 mm Bregma and right lateral 3.0 mm). A rigid plastic injury tube (modified Luer-loc needle hub, 2.6 mm inner diameter) was secured over the exposed, intact dura with cyanoacrylate adhesive. The assembly was secured to the skull with cranio-plastic cement (Plastics One, Roanoke, VA). Two skull screws (2.1 mm diameter, 6.0 mm length) were placed into burr holes, 1 mm rostral to Bregma and 1 mm caudal to Lambda. Rectal temperature was continuously monitored and maintained within normal ranges during surgical preparation by a feedback temperature controller pad (model TC-1000; CWE, Ardmore, PA). Temporalis muscle temperature was measured (model TH-5; Physitemp, Clifton, NJ) by insertion of a needle temperature probe (model MT-29/2; Physitemp) between the skull and temporalis muscle. TBI induction Experimental TBI was produced using a fluid percussion device (VCU Biomedical Engineering, Richmond, VA) ( Dixon et al., 1987 ) using the lateral orientation ( McIntosh et al., 1989 ). The device consists of a Plexiglas cylindrical reservoir filled with isotonic saline. One end of the reservoir has a Plexiglas piston mounted on O-rings and the opposite end has a transducer housing with a 2.6-mm-ID (inside diameter) male Luer-loc opening. Injury was induced by the descent of a pendulum striking the piston, which injects a small volume of saline epidurally into the closed cranial cavity, producing a brief displacement and deformation of neural tissue. The resulting pressure pulse was measured in atmospheres (ATM) by an extracranial transducer (model EPN-0300A*-100A; Entran Devices, Inc., Fairfield, NJ) and recorded on a digital storage oscilloscope (model TDS 1002; Tektronix Inc., Beaverton, OR). The rats were disconnected from the ventilator, the injury tube connected to the fluid percussion cylinder, and a moderate fluid percussion pulse (2.14 ± 0.04 ATM) was delivered within 10 sec. Immediately after TBI, rats were ventilated with air with no isoflurane. The plastic injury tube and skull screws were removed and the scalp incision was closed with 4.0 braided silk sutures. As soon as spontaneous breathing was observed the animal was extubated and assessment of the righting reflex begun by placing the rat in a supine position at regular intervals (~30 sec) to test the rat’s ability to spontaneously recover to a prone position. The duration of suppression of the righting reflex was used as an indicator of traumatic unconsciousness and injury severity. Experiment 1: Time course of immunohistochemistry localization of SBDP-145 In order to describe regional and temporal changes in calpain-mediated ? -spectrin degradation after TBI, rats were euthanized at 3, 12, 24, and 48 h after TBI, and ? II-spectrin breakdown product 145 (SBDP-145) was localized immunohistochemically in coronal brain sections. Free-floating tissue sections were washed three times (10 min each) in 0.1 M PBS with agitation. Next, the sections underwent temperature-controlled microwave antigen retrieval as previously described ( Farkas et al., 2006 ). Briefly, the sections were placed in a pH 6.0 solution of 0.1M citric acid and 0.1M sodium citrate, and microwaved for 5 min at a set temperature of 45°C. The plates were then cooled for 5 min and then microwaved again for 5 min. After cooling for 20 min, the sections were then washed in 0.1M PBS three times (10 min each). Sections were then incubated in a blocking solution of 3% goat serum (GS) 0.3% Triton X-100 (TX) 3% BSA in 0.05M PBS for 1 h at 37° with agitation. After a brief rinse in 0.1M PBS, the tissue was incubated with anti-SBDP-145 antibody (polyclonal, rabbit, 1:1,000; custom synthesized by K.K.W. Wang) in a 0.05M PBS solution of 1% GS 0.3% TX 2% BSA for 48 h at 4°C. After six rinses (10 min each) in 0.1M PBS, the sections were then incubated with anti-rabbit Alexa 488 antibody (monoclonal, goat, 1:1,000; Invitrogen, Molecular Probes) in the same solution as used for the primary antibody, for 24 h at 4°C with agitation. The sections were then rinsed in 0.1M PBS six times (10 min each) and mounted on treated slides (Superfrost Plus slides; Fisher) and cover-slipped with DAPI mounting media (Vectorshield hard set mounting media, H-1500; Vector Laboratories). The slides were then allowed to dry overnight before viewing and were stored at 4°C in the dark. Experiment 2: Dicyclomine treatment effects on CSF biomarker and neuronal degeneration Based upon immunohistochemistry results of Experiment 1, a 24-h survival time point was chosen to evaluate the effects of TBI on SBDPs and to evaluate the effects of muscarinic M1 receptor antagonism on production of SBDPs and neuronal degeneration. Drug administration Dicyclomine hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), a selective muscarinic cholinergic M1 receptor antagonist, was dissolved in isotonic saline and administered intraperitoneal (i.p.) in a 5 mg/kg dose (volume 1.0 mL/kg) five minutes prior to induction of the TBI. The vehicle-treatment group received an equal volume i.p. injection of isotonic saline. Both groups received injections at the same time points relative to the injury, with the identity of the drug or vehicle concealed to the investigators. Drug dosing was based upon a previous TBI study which demonstrated behavioral protection with 1 or 10 mg/kg dicyclomine ( Robinson et al., 1990 ). Sample extractions and perfusion CSF samples were taken at 24 h post-TBI (±1 h), followed immediately by transcardial perfusion. A 5-mL injection of Ringer’s solution was administered intraperitoneally 1 h prior to the CSF sampling, to ensure sufficient hydration. The rat was anesthetized, shaved in the dorsal neck region, weighed once again, and supplied with a ventilator flow of 2% isoflurane in a carrier gas mixture of N2O and O2 (2:1 ratio). CSF samples were obtained from the cisterna magna, lying just beneath the atlanto-occipital membrane extending from the foramen magnum to the atlas (the first cervical vertebra). The membrane was isolated by blunt dissection of the dorsal region of the neck, with the assistance of a dissecting microscope. A butterfly catheter with a 25-gauge needle was then carefully inserted into the cisterna to obtain a CSF sample of approximately 100 ? L. The needle was bent approximately 30° near the tip, to better facilitate insertion. The sample was centrifuged for 10 min at 3000 rpm to separate out any interspersed blood cells, and the resulting supernatant was frozen on powdered dry ice and stored at ?80°C until ready for alpha-II SBDP quantification. Immediately following the extractions, the rat was perfused transcardially with 0.1 M phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; pH 7.4) until the blood cleared, followed by 200 mL of 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.4 M phosphate buffer (pH 7.4). The brain was left in the body for 60 min, then extracted and placed in 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.4 M phosphate buffer (PB; pH 7.4) to allow for additional fixation. SBDP immunoblotting Protein concentrations in CSF were determined using bicinchoninic acid microprotein assays (Pierce Inc., Rockford, IL) with albumin standards. Protein-balanced samples were prepared for sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) in twofold loading buffer containing 0.25 M Tris (pH 6.8), 0.2 M DTT, 8% SDS, 0.02% bromophenol blue, and 20% glycerol in distilled H2O. Samples were heated for 10 minutes at 100°C and centrifuged for 1 min at 8160× g in a microcentrifuge at ambient temperature. Twenty micrograms of protein per lane were routinely resolved by SDS-PAGE on 6.5% Tris/glycine gels for 1 h at 200 V. After electrophoresis, separated proteins were laterally transferred to polyvinylidine fluoride (PVDF) membranes in a transfer buffer containing 0.192 M glycine and 0.025 M Tris (pH 8.3) with 10% methanol at a constant voltage of 20 V for 2 h. Blots were blocked for 1 h at ambient temperature in 5% nonfat milk in TBS and 0.05% Tween-20. Panceau Red (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) was used to stain membranes to confirm successful transfer of protein and to insure that an equal amount of protein was loaded in each lane. CSF SBDP immunolabeling and quantification Immunoblots containing CSF protein were probed with mouse anti- ? II-spectrin (fodrin) monoclonal primary antibody (FG 6090 Ab, clone AA6, cat. no. FG 6090; Affiniti Research Products Limited, UK; 1:200 dilution) that detects intact non-erythroid ? II-spectrin (280 kDa) and 150-, 145-, and 120-kDa cleavage fragments to ? II-spectrin. After an overnight incubation at 4°C with the primary antibody, blots were incubated for 1 h at ambient temperature in 3% nonfat milk that contained a horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (1:10,000 dilution). Enhanced chemoluminescence (ECL, Amersham) reagents were used to visualize immunolabeling on Kodak (Rochester, NY) Biomax ML chemiluminescent film. CSF SBDP quantification Semi quantitative evaluation of SBDPs levels detected by immunolabeling was performed by computer-assisted densitometric (Epson XL3500 high-resolution flatbed scanner) and image analysis with Image J software version 1.6 (NIH). To minimize between-film variability in exposure time, each immunoblot was run with at least two sham-injured control animals, two injured animals, and two injured and drug-treated animals. Histology At 24 h (±1 h) following the perfusion, the brains were rinsed in 0.1M PB (5 min × 2), cryoprotected in 10% and 30% solutions of sucrose in 0.1M PB for 1 and 48 h, respectively, and stored in the 30% sucrose/PB solution at ?80°C. The brains were blocked and sectioned caudorostrally in 45- ? m increments from Bregma ?1.9 mm to Bregma ?4.15 mm using a sliding microtome (model 860; American Optical Corp.). The tissue sections were then mounted onto slides using distilled water and allowed to dry. For the Fluoro-Jade staining procedure ( Schmued et al., 1997 ), the sections were rehydrated using successive 5-min rinses in 100%, 75%, 50%, and 25% ethanol followed by 3 min in dH2O, placed in 0.06% KMNO4 for 15 min followed by 2 min in dH2O, and then stained in 0.0006% Fluoro-Jade B solution in 0.1% acetic acid for 30 min. The slides were then air-dried overnight, immersed in xylene, and coverslipped with DPX. The total number of Fluoro-Jade-stained cells within the CA2/CA3 region of the dorsal hippocampus for each subject was estimated using the optical fractionator technique ( West et al., 1991 ) with a computer-based system (Stereologer version 1.3; Systems Planning and Analysis, Inc., Alexandria, VA). The border of the dorsal CA2/3 pyramidal cell layer within each section was outlined using a 2× objective, and the cells were then manually counted at the 40× magnification. For the cortical cell counts, a site of highly localized Fluoro-Jade positivity observed in the cortex adjacent to the site of impact served as the region of interest (ROI): the region was outlined at the 2× magnification, and cells were quantified at 40× as with the hippocampal region. A numerical estimate of the total number of cells in each region of interest for each subject was calculated by the software using the equation: N obj = ( N ) ( 1 / SSF ) ( 1 / ASF ) ( 1 / TSF ) where N represents the sum of all objects counted for the subject, SSF the section sampling fraction, ASF the area sampling fraction, and TSF the thickness sampling fraction. Statistical analysis Values for controlled variables (body weight, TBI magnitude, and temperatures) are reported as group means ± standard deviation (SD). Values for dependent variables (SPDP densitometric units and cell counts) are reported as group means ± standard error of the means (SEM). Statistical significance of TBI magnitude, percent body weight loss, and stereological estimates for Fluoro-Jade positive neurons between dicyclomine- and vehicle-treated groups was analyzed using independent t -tests. Differences between initial body weight and all temperature measurements between the two injury groups and the sham group were analyzed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). The signal intensity level of each immunoblot was optimized to provide the best separation between the 150- and 145-kDa bands. Data for SBDP levels were normalized across immunoblots and expressed as arbitrary densitometric units. These data were evaluated using ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s Test post-hoc to compare vehicle- and dicyclomine-treated groups with the sham group.  Subjects Thirty-two male Sprague-Dawley rats (Harlan, Indianapolis, IN), 300—350 g, were used as subjects for this experiment. Rats were housed in plastic cages within a vivarium on a 12-h light-dark cycle, with free access to water and Purina Lab solid rat food.  Treatment groups Eight TBI subjects without drug treatment were used in a time course study for SPDP immunohistochemistry ( n = 2/time point at 3, 12, 24, and 48 h post-TBI). Twenty-four subjects were assigned to one of three treatment groups ( n = 8 each): an injury group administered a saline vehicle (equal volume as drug injection); an injury group administered dicyclomine; and a third, sham-injury group to serve as an uninjured baseline from which to compare TBI-induced changes in SBDP levels. Sham-injured rats were subjected to the same surgical and anesthetic procedures as animals in the two injury groups, but were neither given an actual injury nor administered the drug treatments. All procedures were performed in compliance with a protocol approved by the University of California, Davis, Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.  Surgical procedure Rats were initially anesthetized with 4% isoflurane in a carrier gas of air, intubated, and mechanically normoventilated with a rodent volume ventilator (model 683; Harvard Apparatus, Hollister, MA) with 2% isoflurane in a 2:1 nitrous oxide/oxygen carrier gas. Depth of anesthesia was routinely monitored every 10 min by testing for suppression of hind-paw withdrawal in response to a toe-pinch. Rats were mounted in a stereotaxic device (model 900; KOPF Instruments, Tujunga, CA), a scalp incision made along the midline, and a 4.8-mm diameter craniectomy was performed on the right parietal bone (centered at -4.5 mm Bregma and right lateral 3.0 mm). A rigid plastic injury tube (modified Luer-loc needle hub, 2.6 mm inner diameter) was secured over the exposed, intact dura with cyanoacrylate adhesive. The assembly was secured to the skull with cranio-plastic cement (Plastics One, Roanoke, VA). Two skull screws (2.1 mm diameter, 6.0 mm length) were placed into burr holes, 1 mm rostral to Bregma and 1 mm caudal to Lambda. Rectal temperature was continuously monitored and maintained within normal ranges during surgical preparation by a feedback temperature controller pad (model TC-1000; CWE, Ardmore, PA). Temporalis muscle temperature was measured (model TH-5; Physitemp, Clifton, NJ) by insertion of a needle temperature probe (model MT-29/2; Physitemp) between the skull and temporalis muscle.  TBI induction Experimental TBI was produced using a fluid percussion device (VCU Biomedical Engineering, Richmond, VA) ( Dixon et al., 1987 ) using the lateral orientation ( McIntosh et al., 1989 ). The device consists of a Plexiglas cylindrical reservoir filled with isotonic saline. One end of the reservoir has a Plexiglas piston mounted on O-rings and the opposite end has a transducer housing with a 2.6-mm-ID (inside diameter) male Luer-loc opening. Injury was induced by the descent of a pendulum striking the piston, which injects a small volume of saline epidurally into the closed cranial cavity, producing a brief displacement and deformation of neural tissue. The resulting pressure pulse was measured in atmospheres (ATM) by an extracranial transducer (model EPN-0300A*-100A; Entran Devices, Inc., Fairfield, NJ) and recorded on a digital storage oscilloscope (model TDS 1002; Tektronix Inc., Beaverton, OR). The rats were disconnected from the ventilator, the injury tube connected to the fluid percussion cylinder, and a moderate fluid percussion pulse (2.14 ± 0.04 ATM) was delivered within 10 sec. Immediately after TBI, rats were ventilated with air with no isoflurane. The plastic injury tube and skull screws were removed and the scalp incision was closed with 4.0 braided silk sutures. As soon as spontaneous breathing was observed the animal was extubated and assessment of the righting reflex begun by placing the rat in a supine position at regular intervals (~30 sec) to test the rat’s ability to spontaneously recover to a prone position. The duration of suppression of the righting reflex was used as an indicator of traumatic unconsciousness and injury severity.  Experiment 1: Time course of immunohistochemistry localization of SBDP-145 In order to describe regional and temporal changes in calpain-mediated ? -spectrin degradation after TBI, rats were euthanized at 3, 12, 24, and 48 h after TBI, and ? II-spectrin breakdown product 145 (SBDP-145) was localized immunohistochemically in coronal brain sections. Free-floating tissue sections were washed three times (10 min each) in 0.1 M PBS with agitation. Next, the sections underwent temperature-controlled microwave antigen retrieval as previously described ( Farkas et al., 2006 ). Briefly, the sections were placed in a pH 6.0 solution of 0.1M citric acid and 0.1M sodium citrate, and microwaved for 5 min at a set temperature of 45°C. The plates were then cooled for 5 min and then microwaved again for 5 min. After cooling for 20 min, the sections were then washed in 0.1M PBS three times (10 min each). Sections were then incubated in a blocking solution of 3% goat serum (GS) 0.3% Triton X-100 (TX) 3% BSA in 0.05M PBS for 1 h at 37° with agitation. After a brief rinse in 0.1M PBS, the tissue was incubated with anti-SBDP-145 antibody (polyclonal, rabbit, 1:1,000; custom synthesized by K.K.W. Wang) in a 0.05M PBS solution of 1% GS 0.3% TX 2% BSA for 48 h at 4°C. After six rinses (10 min each) in 0.1M PBS, the sections were then incubated with anti-rabbit Alexa 488 antibody (monoclonal, goat, 1:1,000; Invitrogen, Molecular Probes) in the same solution as used for the primary antibody, for 24 h at 4°C with agitation. The sections were then rinsed in 0.1M PBS six times (10 min each) and mounted on treated slides (Superfrost Plus slides; Fisher) and cover-slipped with DAPI mounting media (Vectorshield hard set mounting media, H-1500; Vector Laboratories). The slides were then allowed to dry overnight before viewing and were stored at 4°C in the dark.  Experiment 2: Dicyclomine treatment effects on CSF biomarker and neuronal degeneration Based upon immunohistochemistry results of Experiment 1, a 24-h survival time point was chosen to evaluate the effects of TBI on SBDPs and to evaluate the effects of muscarinic M1 receptor antagonism on production of SBDPs and neuronal degeneration.  Drug administration Dicyclomine hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), a selective muscarinic cholinergic M1 receptor antagonist, was dissolved in isotonic saline and administered intraperitoneal (i.p.) in a 5 mg/kg dose (volume 1.0 mL/kg) five minutes prior to induction of the TBI. The vehicle-treatment group received an equal volume i.p. injection of isotonic saline. Both groups received injections at the same time points relative to the injury, with the identity of the drug or vehicle concealed to the investigators. Drug dosing was based upon a previous TBI study which demonstrated behavioral protection with 1 or 10 mg/kg dicyclomine ( Robinson et al., 1990 ).  Sample extractions and perfusion CSF samples were taken at 24 h post-TBI (±1 h), followed immediately by transcardial perfusion. A 5-mL injection of Ringer’s solution was administered intraperitoneally 1 h prior to the CSF sampling, to ensure sufficient hydration. The rat was anesthetized, shaved in the dorsal neck region, weighed once again, and supplied with a ventilator flow of 2% isoflurane in a carrier gas mixture of N2O and O2 (2:1 ratio). CSF samples were obtained from the cisterna magna, lying just beneath the atlanto-occipital membrane extending from the foramen magnum to the atlas (the first cervical vertebra). The membrane was isolated by blunt dissection of the dorsal region of the neck, with the assistance of a dissecting microscope. A butterfly catheter with a 25-gauge needle was then carefully inserted into the cisterna to obtain a CSF sample of approximately 100 ? L. The needle was bent approximately 30° near the tip, to better facilitate insertion. The sample was centrifuged for 10 min at 3000 rpm to separate out any interspersed blood cells, and the resulting supernatant was frozen on powdered dry ice and stored at ?80°C until ready for alpha-II SBDP quantification. Immediately following the extractions, the rat was perfused transcardially with 0.1 M phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; pH 7.4) until the blood cleared, followed by 200 mL of 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.4 M phosphate buffer (pH 7.4). The brain was left in the body for 60 min, then extracted and placed in 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.4 M phosphate buffer (PB; pH 7.4) to allow for additional fixation.  SBDP immunoblotting Protein concentrations in CSF were determined using bicinchoninic acid microprotein assays (Pierce Inc., Rockford, IL) with albumin standards. Protein-balanced samples were prepared for sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) in twofold loading buffer containing 0.25 M Tris (pH 6.8), 0.2 M DTT, 8% SDS, 0.02% bromophenol blue, and 20% glycerol in distilled H2O. Samples were heated for 10 minutes at 100°C and centrifuged for 1 min at 8160× g in a microcentrifuge at ambient temperature. Twenty micrograms of protein per lane were routinely resolved by SDS-PAGE on 6.5% Tris/glycine gels for 1 h at 200 V. After electrophoresis, separated proteins were laterally transferred to polyvinylidine fluoride (PVDF) membranes in a transfer buffer containing 0.192 M glycine and 0.025 M Tris (pH 8.3) with 10% methanol at a constant voltage of 20 V for 2 h. Blots were blocked for 1 h at ambient temperature in 5% nonfat milk in TBS and 0.05% Tween-20. Panceau Red (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) was used to stain membranes to confirm successful transfer of protein and to insure that an equal amount of protein was loaded in each lane.  CSF SBDP immunolabeling and quantification Immunoblots containing CSF protein were probed with mouse anti- ? II-spectrin (fodrin) monoclonal primary antibody (FG 6090 Ab, clone AA6, cat. no. FG 6090; Affiniti Research Products Limited, UK; 1:200 dilution) that detects intact non-erythroid ? II-spectrin (280 kDa) and 150-, 145-, and 120-kDa cleavage fragments to ? II-spectrin. After an overnight incubation at 4°C with the primary antibody, blots were incubated for 1 h at ambient temperature in 3% nonfat milk that contained a horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (1:10,000 dilution). Enhanced chemoluminescence (ECL, Amersham) reagents were used to visualize immunolabeling on Kodak (Rochester, NY) Biomax ML chemiluminescent film.  CSF SBDP quantification Semi quantitative evaluation of SBDPs levels detected by immunolabeling was performed by computer-assisted densitometric (Epson XL3500 high-resolution flatbed scanner) and image analysis with Image J software version 1.6 (NIH). To minimize between-film variability in exposure time, each immunoblot was run with at least two sham-injured control animals, two injured animals, and two injured and drug-treated animals.  Histology At 24 h (±1 h) following the perfusion, the brains were rinsed in 0.1M PB (5 min × 2), cryoprotected in 10% and 30% solutions of sucrose in 0.1M PB for 1 and 48 h, respectively, and stored in the 30% sucrose/PB solution at ?80°C. The brains were blocked and sectioned caudorostrally in 45- ? m increments from Bregma ?1.9 mm to Bregma ?4.15 mm using a sliding microtome (model 860; American Optical Corp.). The tissue sections were then mounted onto slides using distilled water and allowed to dry. For the Fluoro-Jade staining procedure ( Schmued et al., 1997 ), the sections were rehydrated using successive 5-min rinses in 100%, 75%, 50%, and 25% ethanol followed by 3 min in dH2O, placed in 0.06% KMNO4 for 15 min followed by 2 min in dH2O, and then stained in 0.0006% Fluoro-Jade B solution in 0.1% acetic acid for 30 min. The slides were then air-dried overnight, immersed in xylene, and coverslipped with DPX. The total number of Fluoro-Jade-stained cells within the CA2/CA3 region of the dorsal hippocampus for each subject was estimated using the optical fractionator technique ( West et al., 1991 ) with a computer-based system (Stereologer version 1.3; Systems Planning and Analysis, Inc., Alexandria, VA). The border of the dorsal CA2/3 pyramidal cell layer within each section was outlined using a 2× objective, and the cells were then manually counted at the 40× magnification. For the cortical cell counts, a site of highly localized Fluoro-Jade positivity observed in the cortex adjacent to the site of impact served as the region of interest (ROI): the region was outlined at the 2× magnification, and cells were quantified at 40× as with the hippocampal region. A numerical estimate of the total number of cells in each region of interest for each subject was calculated by the software using the equation: N obj = ( N ) ( 1 / SSF ) ( 1 / ASF ) ( 1 / TSF ) where N represents the sum of all objects counted for the subject, SSF the section sampling fraction, ASF the area sampling fraction, and TSF the thickness sampling fraction.  Statistical analysis Values for controlled variables (body weight, TBI magnitude, and temperatures) are reported as group means ± standard deviation (SD). Values for dependent variables (SPDP densitometric units and cell counts) are reported as group means ± standard error of the means (SEM). Statistical significance of TBI magnitude, percent body weight loss, and stereological estimates for Fluoro-Jade positive neurons between dicyclomine- and vehicle-treated groups was analyzed using independent t -tests. Differences between initial body weight and all temperature measurements between the two injury groups and the sham group were analyzed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). The signal intensity level of each immunoblot was optimized to provide the best separation between the 150- and 145-kDa bands. Data for SBDP levels were normalized across immunoblots and expressed as arbitrary densitometric units. These data were evaluated using ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s Test post-hoc to compare vehicle- and dicyclomine-treated groups with the sham group.  Results There were no significant differences between groups for TBI magnitude, initial body weight (at the time of surgery), or temperatures during surgery ( Table 1 ). Percent body weight loss was significantly reduced ( p < 0.01) in the dicyclomine-treated group compared to the saline-treated group ( Table 1 ). At 3 hr post injury the ipsilateral hemisphere was characterized by scattered punctate immunostaining in cortex with prominent immunostaining of several neuronal processes extending perpendicular to the cortical surface through several cortical layers ( Fig. 1A ). Immunostaining elsewhere in the ipsilateral hemisphere and throughout the contralateral hemisphere was negligible. At 12 h post-injury, immunostaining of cell somas in the cortex became evident ( Fig. 1B , inset). At 24 h, diffuse immunostaining was evident in the cortex with increased punctuate intensity ( Fig. 1C ); prominent immunostaining was observed in the outer molecular layers of the dorsal and ventral blades of the ipsilateral dentate gyrus ( Fig. 1F ); an intense band of immunostaining coursed through the ipsilateral striatum ( Fig. 1E ). At 48 h post-injury, immunostaining was limited to the ipsilateral cortex but with reduced intensity compared to 24 h ( Fig. 1D ). The most intense and widespread immunostaining was observed at 24 h post-injury in the ipsilateral hemisphere. Immunostaining was negligible in the contralateral hemisphere at all at time points. Mean alpha-II SBDP levels measured in CSF ( Fig. 2 ) were significantly elevated in both of the injury groups at 24 h post-TBI compared with sham animals ( p < 0.001). The levels of 145-kDa SBDPs were significantly ( p = 0.028) reduced in the dicyclomine treatment group compared to the vehicle treatment group. There were trends for reduced SBDPs ( p = 0.051 and 0.077 for 150- and 120-kDa fragments, respectively) compared to the vehicle-treated group. The mean numbers of Fluoro-Jade-positive neurons observed in the hippocampal ROIs at 24 h post-TBI were 2982 and 2640 for the vehicle- and dicyclomine-treated groups, respectively ( Fig. 3a ). Mean numbers for the cortical ROIs were 84392 and 84452 for vehicle and dicyclomine-treated groups, respectively ( Fig. 3b ). The t -test revealed no significant difference between the treatment groups in either region.  Results There were no significant differences between groups for TBI magnitude, initial body weight (at the time of surgery), or temperatures during surgery ( Table 1 ). Percent body weight loss was significantly reduced ( p < 0.01) in the dicyclomine-treated group compared to the saline-treated group ( Table 1 ). At 3 hr post injury the ipsilateral hemisphere was characterized by scattered punctate immunostaining in cortex with prominent immunostaining of several neuronal processes extending perpendicular to the cortical surface through several cortical layers ( Fig. 1A ). Immunostaining elsewhere in the ipsilateral hemisphere and throughout the contralateral hemisphere was negligible. At 12 h post-injury, immunostaining of cell somas in the cortex became evident ( Fig. 1B , inset). At 24 h, diffuse immunostaining was evident in the cortex with increased punctuate intensity ( Fig. 1C ); prominent immunostaining was observed in the outer molecular layers of the dorsal and ventral blades of the ipsilateral dentate gyrus ( Fig. 1F ); an intense band of immunostaining coursed through the ipsilateral striatum ( Fig. 1E ). At 48 h post-injury, immunostaining was limited to the ipsilateral cortex but with reduced intensity compared to 24 h ( Fig. 1D ). The most intense and widespread immunostaining was observed at 24 h post-injury in the ipsilateral hemisphere. Immunostaining was negligible in the contralateral hemisphere at all at time points. Mean alpha-II SBDP levels measured in CSF ( Fig. 2 ) were significantly elevated in both of the injury groups at 24 h post-TBI compared with sham animals ( p < 0.001). The levels of 145-kDa SBDPs were significantly ( p = 0.028) reduced in the dicyclomine treatment group compared to the vehicle treatment group. There were trends for reduced SBDPs ( p = 0.051 and 0.077 for 150- and 120-kDa fragments, respectively) compared to the vehicle-treated group. The mean numbers of Fluoro-Jade-positive neurons observed in the hippocampal ROIs at 24 h post-TBI were 2982 and 2640 for the vehicle- and dicyclomine-treated groups, respectively ( Fig. 3a ). Mean numbers for the cortical ROIs were 84392 and 84452 for vehicle and dicyclomine-treated groups, respectively ( Fig. 3b ). The t -test revealed no significant difference between the treatment groups in either region.  Discussion Experimental overview This study examined the regional distribution and time course of SBDP-145 immunoreactivity in the injured rat brain prior to examining the effects of dicyclomine, an M1 muscarinic antagonist, on CSF SBDP levels and acute neuronal degeneration in the hippocampus. Immunostaining of SBDP-145 was only evident in the hemisphere ipsilateral to TBI and was generally limited to the cortex. However, at 24 h post-injury, immunostaining was more intense and encompassed several other regions. TBI significantly elevated all three of the calpain- and caspase-cleaved spectrin breakdown products measured 24 h after TBI compared with sham. The dicyclomine-treated group exhibited significant reductions in the levels of the 145-kDa breakdown products and trends of reduction in levels of the 150- and 120-kDa breakdown products. The dicyclomine-treated group lost significantly less body weight after injury. No significant differences were observed in the number of degenerating neurons in the hippocampus and cortex at 24 h post-TBI between dicyclomine-and vehicle-treated animals subjected to the brain trauma. SPDP-145 immunohistochemistry The immunohistochemistry results using an antibody selective for calpain-cleaved SBDP-145 demonstrated consistent results of immuolocalization in the hemisphere ipsilateral to the fluid percussion pulse with minimal immunostaining in the contralateral hemisphere. This hemispherical localization is consistent with the pathological responses to lateral fluid percussion TBI in the rat which predominantly affects the ipsilateral hemisphere ( Thompson et al., 2005 ). The time course experiments revealed an interesting early diffuse punctate immunostaining and accumulation in cell bodies and processes within hours after injury and are similar to that reported by Farkas and colleagues ( Farkas et al., 2006 ). The immunolocalization of SBDP-145 in soma is unexpected since alpha II spectrin is usually considered to be localized primarily to axons of the brain ( Czogalla and Sikorski, 2005 ; Riederer et al., 1986 ). Since the immunohistochemistry was selective for a SPDP-145, this cleavage product may have been transported to the soma via retrograde axonal transport. The distinct localization of punctate immunostaining in the outer molecular layer of the dentate gyrus suggests structural axonal damage in this region. Two candidates would be the GABAergic fusiform neurons just under the granule cell layer that give rise to axonal fibers that course along the outer molecular layer or from entorhinal afferents ( Amaral and Witter, 1995 ). The diffuse punctate patterns of immunostaining at 24 and 48 h suggest a diffusion of SBDPs out of damaged tissue into the extracellular fluid. Such diffusion would be consistent with CSF detection of the SBDPs. TBI-induced alterations in ?II-spectrin breakdown products Each of the SBDPs examined in this study were significantly elevated in response to TBI compared with the sham group. These results are consistent with data from previous laboratory and clinical studies identifying detectable elevations in the spectrin breakdown products following TBI ( Pike et al., 2001 ; Pineda et al., 2007 ), ischemia ( Pike et al., 2004 ), and SAH ( Lewis et al., 2007 ), and further substantiate the role of SBDPs as effectual biomarkers for TBI. Also of note were the substantially greater levels of calpain (145 kDa) relative to caspase (120 kDa) breakdown product formation following injury. However, it must be noted based on a previous study that calpain and caspase cleavage of ? II-spectrin follow a markedly different time course, with calpain cleavage reaching a peak within the first 24 h post-injury, while caspase cleavage exhibits a sustained elevation for at least 5 days following TBI ( Pineda et al., 2007 ). Therefore, it is possible that caspase cleavage was underrepresented at the 24-h time point. Dicyclomine treatment generated significant ( p = 0.028) reductions in the 145-kDa breakdown products, and trends for reduction for the 150- and 120-kDa SBDPs ( p = 0.077 and 0.051, respectively). Although axonal injury was not histologically measured in this study, axonal damage is a feature of fluid percussion injury ( Graham et al., 2000 ; Reeves et al., 2002; Singleton et al., 2004) and could be a target for M1 receptor antagonist-mediated neuroprotection, albeit indirectly since M1 receptors are located postsynapically. Reductions in SBDPs seen in CSF after dicyclomine treatment are consistent with possible attenuation of axonal damage, since alpha-II spectrin appears to be localized in axons ( Czogalla and Sikorski, 2005 ; Reider et al., 1986 ). SBDP-145 is indicative of cleavage by calpain and an indicator of necrotic cell death ( Pike et al., 2001 ). Hyperactivation of calpain is associated with pathologies in which calcium homeostasis alteration is a prominent feature ( Kampfl et al., 1997 ). Calpain is involved in a broad range of functions relating to the CNS ( Kampfl et al., 1997 ; Saido et al., 1994 ), and it is reasonable to assume that excessive cleavage by this protease might be implicated in various aspects of secondary cellular damage. For example, the protease has been linked to the hydrolysis of Tau ( Johnson et al., 1989 ), which contributes via microtubule destabilization and neurofibrillary tangle deposition to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease ( Mandelkow and Mandelkow, 1998 ), a condition for which brain trauma has been documented as a predisposing factor ( Fleminger et al., 2003 ; Lye and Shores, 2000 ). Moreover, the significant reductions in calpain-cleaved spectrin products in response to anti-M1 treatment strongly suggest that these processes are downstream of muscarinic activation. The 120-kDa breakdown products are indicative of cleavage by caspase ( Pike et al., 2001 ), and thus serve as an indicator of apoptosis. SBDP-120 cleavage exhibited a strong reductive trend ( p = 0.051) with the dicyclomine treatment, suggesting that a certain level of apoptotic activity may be induced or exacerbated by M1 receptor activation. However, low levels of SBDP-120 in comparison with the calpain-cleaved products indicates that apoptotic processes within the first 24 h after TBI are limited. Antimuscarinic treatment and neurologic integrity Early studies found elevations in acetylcholine levels as a consequence of brain injury ( Bornstein, 1946 ; Sachs, 1957 ; Tower and McEachern, 1949 ), as well as the potential of these elevations to generate abnormal neurological functioning ( Haber and Grossman, 1980 ; Sachs, 1957 ; Tower and McEachern, 1949 ) were reported in a number of early laboratory and clinical studies. Later, the phenomenon of acetylcholine-induced toxicity was confirmed in experimental studies in which direct injection of cholinomimetics or cholinesterase inhibitors generated seizure-related brain damage in rats ( Olney et al., 1983 ; Turski et al., 1983 ). In more recent studies using models of brain injury, acetylcholine in brain CSF was highly elevated (10-fold) during transient forebrain ischemia ( Kumagae and Matsui, 1991 ) and moderately elevated (twofold) within minutes after fluid percussion TBI ( Lyeth et al., 1993a ). Together, these studies provide evidence of a potentially toxic role for trauma-induced acetylcholine release, and suggest that neuroprotection might be conferred though reductions in cholinergic excitation, through application of acetylcholine receptor antagonists. Excessive M1 muscarinic receptor activation could lead to neuronal dysfunction and damage through several mechanisms related to second messenger cascades. Upon agonist binding at the M1 muscarininc receptor the ? q/11 subunit of the G protein dissociates from the ?? subunit complex. The ? subunit activates phospholipase C (PLC) causing the hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) into inositol 1,4,5 trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DG). IP3 stimulates the release of intracellular Ca2+ stores. DAG activates PKC that phosphorylates a number of proteins including ion channels and the NMDA receptor complex. The ?? G-protein subunit inhibits both muscarinic (IK(M)) and calcium-regulated (IK(Ca)) potassium currents which increases cell excitability by augmenting depolarization (Lyeth, 2001). Several studies provide compelling evidence that PIP2 signal transduction pathways are activated after TBI. Wei and colleagues ( Wei et al., 1982 ) first reported PLC activation immediately following fluid percussion TBI in cats. Later studies in the rat lateral fluid percussion model found elevated levels of IP3 at 5 min post-injury in the ipsilateral hippocampus and for up to 20 min after injury in the ipsilateral cortex ( Prasad et al., 1994 ). Subsequent studies measured the phosphodiestric breakdown of membrane PIP2 following fluid percussion TBI in rats and found that concentrations of tissue PIP2 were significantly decreased at times when DG was elevated ( Dhillon et al., 1995 ). Later studies examining the link between muscarinic receptors and TBI-induced activation of the PLC signal transduction pathway found that pharmacological blockade of muscarinic receptors with scopolamine at the time of injury significantly blunts the acute decrease in PIP2 derived fatty acids ( Lyeth et al., 1996 ). Thus, the activation of M1 receptors is associated with enhanced excitatory modulation though elevations in intracellular Ca2+, amplification of NMDA receptor sensitivity, and increased neuronal excitability. Early reports demonstrated the efficacy of certain anticholinergic treatments in reducing the neurological deficits associated with TBI ( Heppner and Diemath, 1958 ; Jenkner and Lechner, 1954 , 1955 ; Sachs, 1957 ; Ward Jr., 1950 ). In more recent experimental TBI investigations muscarinic, but not nicotinic, cholinergic antagonists reduced the duration of post-traumatic unconsciousness ( Lyeth et al., 1988a ) and attenuated long-term behavioral deficits ( Lyeth et al., 1988b ) in rats. Dicyclomine is a muscarinic antagonist whose neuroprotective effects in TBI have been compared with those of the more widely used scopolamine. Robinson and colleagues demonstrated the efficacy of dicyclomine in ameliorating behavioral deficits following fluid percussion brain injury in rats ( Robinson et al., 1990 ). In a later study, Jiang et al. (2000) found that dicyclomine reduced infarct volume in a subdural hematoma model. Dicyclomine bears a unique advantage over other muscarinic antagonists for treatment of TBI because of its high selective affinity for M1 over M2 muscarinic receptors ( Doods et al., 1987 ), thereby eliminating the problem of inducing tachycardia via M2 receptor antagonism ( Gallo et al., 1993 ; Sharma et al., 1996 ). Sublethal mechanisms of neuronal cell pathophysiology Fluoro Jade is an anionic fluoroscein derivative that binds signals specific to neuronal degeneration ( Schmued et al., 1997 ). As such, the fluorescent stain is able to selectively label neurons undergoing the process of cell death at the time of tissue fixation. This effect is not influenced by administration of membrane-permeabilizing treatments ( Schmued and Hopkins, 2000 ). Despite the presumably protective neurologic effects of anti-M1 treatment implied by the effects of dicyclomine on the breakdown of spectrin following injury, coupled with the observation that dicyclomine treatment significantly reduced weight loss 24 h following TBI, treatment with the drug in this study produced no significant differences in the number of degenerating neurons in the hippocampus or cortex at 24 h post-TBI. This is in apparent contrast to the observation of dicyclomine significantly reducing SBDP levels following TBI. While the time point studied coincides with the previously documented peak in TBI-induced cellular degradation detected with Fluor-Jade ( Hallam et al., 2004 ), it is possible that limiting the histological examination to a single time point (24 h) relative to the injury may have obscured detection of differential profiles of progressive neuronal degeneration beyond 24 h. Moreover, neuronal cell survival specifically has not been examined in previous antimuscarinic TBI studies measuring behavioral performance following trauma. A number of studies and lines of evidence have indicated that functional deficits following TBI can occur in the absence of cell death and therapeutic interventions can reduce functional deficits in the absence of evidence for histological protection. For example, central fluid percussion TBI can produce memory impairment in the absence of hippocampal cell death ( Lyeth et al., 1990 ) and enduring cognitive deficits can persist following a controlled cortical impact injury without significant neuronal loss or even gross tissue damage as evidenced by light microscopy ( Hamm et al., 1992 ). Hypothermia can reduce behavioral deficits associated with cortical contusion TBI without affecting volumes of cortical necrotic tissue cavitation ( Dixon et al., 1998 ). These findings underscore the tenuous relationship between cell death and pathophysiological states sufficient to generate behavioral deficits. It is clear that the existence of sublethal modes of cellular damage can be a critical factor in the translation of an injurious event into sustained neurologic dysfunction. Exactly how excessive muscarinic receptor activation can produce sublethal cellular dysfunction is unclear. However, several possibilities exist including alterations in muscarinic receptor expression, changes in signal transduction pathways, and production of LTP-like changes. TBI produces changes in muscarinic receptor binding acutely ( DeAngelis et al., 1994 ; Lyeth et al., 1994 ) and chronically ( Jiang et al., 1994 ). TBI also produces alterations in muscarinic-linked second messenger systems ( Delahunty, 1992 ; Delahunty et al., 1995a , b ; Jiang et al., 1994 ; Lyeth et al., 1996 ) that could alter the coupling of receptors and second messengers. Muscarinic activation facilitates the induction of long-term potentiation (LTP) ( Auerbach and Segal, 1996 ; Burgard and Sarvey, 1990 ), and several studies have demonstrated that LTP is altered following experimental TBI ( Auerbach and Segal, 1996 ; Burgard and Sarvey, 1990 ; Miyazaki et al., 1992 ; Reeves et al., 1995 ). Together, these lines of evidence clearly illustrate the potential importance of sublethal mechanisms of cellular damage in TBI pathophysiology, which based on the collective results of this study and others could be suggested to be the primary targets of anti-M1 therapeutic activity.  Discussion Experimental overview This study examined the regional distribution and time course of SBDP-145 immunoreactivity in the injured rat brain prior to examining the effects of dicyclomine, an M1 muscarinic antagonist, on CSF SBDP levels and acute neuronal degeneration in the hippocampus. Immunostaining of SBDP-145 was only evident in the hemisphere ipsilateral to TBI and was generally limited to the cortex. However, at 24 h post-injury, immunostaining was more intense and encompassed several other regions. TBI significantly elevated all three of the calpain- and caspase-cleaved spectrin breakdown products measured 24 h after TBI compared with sham. The dicyclomine-treated group exhibited significant reductions in the levels of the 145-kDa breakdown products and trends of reduction in levels of the 150- and 120-kDa breakdown products. The dicyclomine-treated group lost significantly less body weight after injury. No significant differences were observed in the number of degenerating neurons in the hippocampus and cortex at 24 h post-TBI between dicyclomine-and vehicle-treated animals subjected to the brain trauma. SPDP-145 immunohistochemistry The immunohistochemistry results using an antibody selective for calpain-cleaved SBDP-145 demonstrated consistent results of immuolocalization in the hemisphere ipsilateral to the fluid percussion pulse with minimal immunostaining in the contralateral hemisphere. This hemispherical localization is consistent with the pathological responses to lateral fluid percussion TBI in the rat which predominantly affects the ipsilateral hemisphere ( Thompson et al., 2005 ). The time course experiments revealed an interesting early diffuse punctate immunostaining and accumulation in cell bodies and processes within hours after injury and are similar to that reported by Farkas and colleagues ( Farkas et al., 2006 ). The immunolocalization of SBDP-145 in soma is unexpected since alpha II spectrin is usually considered to be localized primarily to axons of the brain ( Czogalla and Sikorski, 2005 ; Riederer et al., 1986 ). Since the immunohistochemistry was selective for a SPDP-145, this cleavage product may have been transported to the soma via retrograde axonal transport. The distinct localization of punctate immunostaining in the outer molecular layer of the dentate gyrus suggests structural axonal damage in this region. Two candidates would be the GABAergic fusiform neurons just under the granule cell layer that give rise to axonal fibers that course along the outer molecular layer or from entorhinal afferents ( Amaral and Witter, 1995 ). The diffuse punctate patterns of immunostaining at 24 and 48 h suggest a diffusion of SBDPs out of damaged tissue into the extracellular fluid. Such diffusion would be consistent with CSF detection of the SBDPs. TBI-induced alterations in ?II-spectrin breakdown products Each of the SBDPs examined in this study were significantly elevated in response to TBI compared with the sham group. These results are consistent with data from previous laboratory and clinical studies identifying detectable elevations in the spectrin breakdown products following TBI ( Pike et al., 2001 ; Pineda et al., 2007 ), ischemia ( Pike et al., 2004 ), and SAH ( Lewis et al., 2007 ), and further substantiate the role of SBDPs as effectual biomarkers for TBI. Also of note were the substantially greater levels of calpain (145 kDa) relative to caspase (120 kDa) breakdown product formation following injury. However, it must be noted based on a previous study that calpain and caspase cleavage of ? II-spectrin follow a markedly different time course, with calpain cleavage reaching a peak within the first 24 h post-injury, while caspase cleavage exhibits a sustained elevation for at least 5 days following TBI ( Pineda et al., 2007 ). Therefore, it is possible that caspase cleavage was underrepresented at the 24-h time point. Dicyclomine treatment generated significant ( p = 0.028) reductions in the 145-kDa breakdown products, and trends for reduction for the 150- and 120-kDa SBDPs ( p = 0.077 and 0.051, respectively). Although axonal injury was not histologically measured in this study, axonal damage is a feature of fluid percussion injury ( Graham et al., 2000 ; Reeves et al., 2002; Singleton et al., 2004) and could be a target for M1 receptor antagonist-mediated neuroprotection, albeit indirectly since M1 receptors are located postsynapically. Reductions in SBDPs seen in CSF after dicyclomine treatment are consistent with possible attenuation of axonal damage, since alpha-II spectrin appears to be localized in axons ( Czogalla and Sikorski, 2005 ; Reider et al., 1986 ). SBDP-145 is indicative of cleavage by calpain and an indicator of necrotic cell death ( Pike et al., 2001 ). Hyperactivation of calpain is associated with pathologies in which calcium homeostasis alteration is a prominent feature ( Kampfl et al., 1997 ). Calpain is involved in a broad range of functions relating to the CNS ( Kampfl et al., 1997 ; Saido et al., 1994 ), and it is reasonable to assume that excessive cleavage by this protease might be implicated in various aspects of secondary cellular damage. For example, the protease has been linked to the hydrolysis of Tau ( Johnson et al., 1989 ), which contributes via microtubule destabilization and neurofibrillary tangle deposition to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease ( Mandelkow and Mandelkow, 1998 ), a condition for which brain trauma has been documented as a predisposing factor ( Fleminger et al., 2003 ; Lye and Shores, 2000 ). Moreover, the significant reductions in calpain-cleaved spectrin products in response to anti-M1 treatment strongly suggest that these processes are downstream of muscarinic activation. The 120-kDa breakdown products are indicative of cleavage by caspase ( Pike et al., 2001 ), and thus serve as an indicator of apoptosis. SBDP-120 cleavage exhibited a strong reductive trend ( p = 0.051) with the dicyclomine treatment, suggesting that a certain level of apoptotic activity may be induced or exacerbated by M1 receptor activation. However, low levels of SBDP-120 in comparison with the calpain-cleaved products indicates that apoptotic processes within the first 24 h after TBI are limited. Antimuscarinic treatment and neurologic integrity Early studies found elevations in acetylcholine levels as a consequence of brain injury ( Bornstein, 1946 ; Sachs, 1957 ; Tower and McEachern, 1949 ), as well as the potential of these elevations to generate abnormal neurological functioning ( Haber and Grossman, 1980 ; Sachs, 1957 ; Tower and McEachern, 1949 ) were reported in a number of early laboratory and clinical studies. Later, the phenomenon of acetylcholine-induced toxicity was confirmed in experimental studies in which direct injection of cholinomimetics or cholinesterase inhibitors generated seizure-related brain damage in rats ( Olney et al., 1983 ; Turski et al., 1983 ). In more recent studies using models of brain injury, acetylcholine in brain CSF was highly elevated (10-fold) during transient forebrain ischemia ( Kumagae and Matsui, 1991 ) and moderately elevated (twofold) within minutes after fluid percussion TBI ( Lyeth et al., 1993a ). Together, these studies provide evidence of a potentially toxic role for trauma-induced acetylcholine release, and suggest that neuroprotection might be conferred though reductions in cholinergic excitation, through application of acetylcholine receptor antagonists. Excessive M1 muscarinic receptor activation could lead to neuronal dysfunction and damage through several mechanisms related to second messenger cascades. Upon agonist binding at the M1 muscarininc receptor the ? q/11 subunit of the G protein dissociates from the ?? subunit complex. The ? subunit activates phospholipase C (PLC) causing the hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) into inositol 1,4,5 trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DG). IP3 stimulates the release of intracellular Ca2+ stores. DAG activates PKC that phosphorylates a number of proteins including ion channels and the NMDA receptor complex. The ?? G-protein subunit inhibits both muscarinic (IK(M)) and calcium-regulated (IK(Ca)) potassium currents which increases cell excitability by augmenting depolarization (Lyeth, 2001). Several studies provide compelling evidence that PIP2 signal transduction pathways are activated after TBI. Wei and colleagues ( Wei et al., 1982 ) first reported PLC activation immediately following fluid percussion TBI in cats. Later studies in the rat lateral fluid percussion model found elevated levels of IP3 at 5 min post-injury in the ipsilateral hippocampus and for up to 20 min after injury in the ipsilateral cortex ( Prasad et al., 1994 ). Subsequent studies measured the phosphodiestric breakdown of membrane PIP2 following fluid percussion TBI in rats and found that concentrations of tissue PIP2 were significantly decreased at times when DG was elevated ( Dhillon et al., 1995 ). Later studies examining the link between muscarinic receptors and TBI-induced activation of the PLC signal transduction pathway found that pharmacological blockade of muscarinic receptors with scopolamine at the time of injury significantly blunts the acute decrease in PIP2 derived fatty acids ( Lyeth et al., 1996 ). Thus, the activation of M1 receptors is associated with enhanced excitatory modulation though elevations in intracellular Ca2+, amplification of NMDA receptor sensitivity, and increased neuronal excitability. Early reports demonstrated the efficacy of certain anticholinergic treatments in reducing the neurological deficits associated with TBI ( Heppner and Diemath, 1958 ; Jenkner and Lechner, 1954 , 1955 ; Sachs, 1957 ; Ward Jr., 1950 ). In more recent experimental TBI investigations muscarinic, but not nicotinic, cholinergic antagonists reduced the duration of post-traumatic unconsciousness ( Lyeth et al., 1988a ) and attenuated long-term behavioral deficits ( Lyeth et al., 1988b ) in rats. Dicyclomine is a muscarinic antagonist whose neuroprotective effects in TBI have been compared with those of the more widely used scopolamine. Robinson and colleagues demonstrated the efficacy of dicyclomine in ameliorating behavioral deficits following fluid percussion brain injury in rats ( Robinson et al., 1990 ). In a later study, Jiang et al. (2000) found that dicyclomine reduced infarct volume in a subdural hematoma model. Dicyclomine bears a unique advantage over other muscarinic antagonists for treatment of TBI because of its high selective affinity for M1 over M2 muscarinic receptors ( Doods et al., 1987 ), thereby eliminating the problem of inducing tachycardia via M2 receptor antagonism ( Gallo et al., 1993 ; Sharma et al., 1996 ). Sublethal mechanisms of neuronal cell pathophysiology Fluoro Jade is an anionic fluoroscein derivative that binds signals specific to neuronal degeneration ( Schmued et al., 1997 ). As such, the fluorescent stain is able to selectively label neurons undergoing the process of cell death at the time of tissue fixation. This effect is not influenced by administration of membrane-permeabilizing treatments ( Schmued and Hopkins, 2000 ). Despite the presumably protective neurologic effects of anti-M1 treatment implied by the effects of dicyclomine on the breakdown of spectrin following injury, coupled with the observation that dicyclomine treatment significantly reduced weight loss 24 h following TBI, treatment with the drug in this study produced no significant differences in the number of degenerating neurons in the hippocampus or cortex at 24 h post-TBI. This is in apparent contrast to the observation of dicyclomine significantly reducing SBDP levels following TBI. While the time point studied coincides with the previously documented peak in TBI-induced cellular degradation detected with Fluor-Jade ( Hallam et al., 2004 ), it is possible that limiting the histological examination to a single time point (24 h) relative to the injury may have obscured detection of differential profiles of progressive neuronal degeneration beyond 24 h. Moreover, neuronal cell survival specifically has not been examined in previous antimuscarinic TBI studies measuring behavioral performance following trauma. A number of studies and lines of evidence have indicated that functional deficits following TBI can occur in the absence of cell death and therapeutic interventions can reduce functional deficits in the absence of evidence for histological protection. For example, central fluid percussion TBI can produce memory impairment in the absence of hippocampal cell death ( Lyeth et al., 1990 ) and enduring cognitive deficits can persist following a controlled cortical impact injury without significant neuronal loss or even gross tissue damage as evidenced by light microscopy ( Hamm et al., 1992 ). Hypothermia can reduce behavioral deficits associated with cortical contusion TBI without affecting volumes of cortical necrotic tissue cavitation ( Dixon et al., 1998 ). These findings underscore the tenuous relationship between cell death and pathophysiological states sufficient to generate behavioral deficits. It is clear that the existence of sublethal modes of cellular damage can be a critical factor in the translation of an injurious event into sustained neurologic dysfunction. Exactly how excessive muscarinic receptor activation can produce sublethal cellular dysfunction is unclear. However, several possibilities exist including alterations in muscarinic receptor expression, changes in signal transduction pathways, and production of LTP-like changes. TBI produces changes in muscarinic receptor binding acutely ( DeAngelis et al., 1994 ; Lyeth et al., 1994 ) and chronically ( Jiang et al., 1994 ). TBI also produces alterations in muscarinic-linked second messenger systems ( Delahunty, 1992 ; Delahunty et al., 1995a , b ; Jiang et al., 1994 ; Lyeth et al., 1996 ) that could alter the coupling of receptors and second messengers. Muscarinic activation facilitates the induction of long-term potentiation (LTP) ( Auerbach and Segal, 1996 ; Burgard and Sarvey, 1990 ), and several studies have demonstrated that LTP is altered following experimental TBI ( Auerbach and Segal, 1996 ; Burgard and Sarvey, 1990 ; Miyazaki et al., 1992 ; Reeves et al., 1995 ). Together, these lines of evidence clearly illustrate the potential importance of sublethal mechanisms of cellular damage in TBI pathophysiology, which based on the collective results of this study and others could be suggested to be the primary targets of anti-M1 therapeutic activity.  Experimental overview This study examined the regional distribution and time course of SBDP-145 immunoreactivity in the injured rat brain prior to examining the effects of dicyclomine, an M1 muscarinic antagonist, on CSF SBDP levels and acute neuronal degeneration in the hippocampus. Immunostaining of SBDP-145 was only evident in the hemisphere ipsilateral to TBI and was generally limited to the cortex. However, at 24 h post-injury, immunostaining was more intense and encompassed several other regions. TBI significantly elevated all three of the calpain- and caspase-cleaved spectrin breakdown products measured 24 h after TBI compared with sham. The dicyclomine-treated group exhibited significant reductions in the levels of the 145-kDa breakdown products and trends of reduction in levels of the 150- and 120-kDa breakdown products. The dicyclomine-treated group lost significantly less body weight after injury. No significant differences were observed in the number of degenerating neurons in the hippocampus and cortex at 24 h post-TBI between dicyclomine-and vehicle-treated animals subjected to the brain trauma.  Experimental overview This study examined the regional distribution and time course of SBDP-145 immunoreactivity in the injured rat brain prior to examining the effects of dicyclomine, an M1 muscarinic antagonist, on CSF SBDP levels and acute neuronal degeneration in the hippocampus. Immunostaining of SBDP-145 was only evident in the hemisphere ipsilateral to TBI and was generally limited to the cortex. However, at 24 h post-injury, immunostaining was more intense and encompassed several other regions. TBI significantly elevated all three of the calpain- and caspase-cleaved spectrin breakdown products measured 24 h after TBI compared with sham. The dicyclomine-treated group exhibited significant reductions in the levels of the 145-kDa breakdown products and trends of reduction in levels of the 150- and 120-kDa breakdown products. The dicyclomine-treated group lost significantly less body weight after injury. No significant differences were observed in the number of degenerating neurons in the hippocampus and cortex at 24 h post-TBI between dicyclomine-and vehicle-treated animals subjected to the brain trauma.  SPDP-145 immunohistochemistry The immunohistochemistry results using an antibody selective for calpain-cleaved SBDP-145 demonstrated consistent results of immuolocalization in the hemisphere ipsilateral to the fluid percussion pulse with minimal immunostaining in the contralateral hemisphere. This hemispherical localization is consistent with the pathological responses to lateral fluid percussion TBI in the rat which predominantly affects the ipsilateral hemisphere ( Thompson et al., 2005 ). The time course experiments revealed an interesting early diffuse punctate immunostaining and accumulation in cell bodies and processes within hours after injury and are similar to that reported by Farkas and colleagues ( Farkas et al., 2006 ). The immunolocalization of SBDP-145 in soma is unexpected since alpha II spectrin is usually considered to be localized primarily to axons of the brain ( Czogalla and Sikorski, 2005 ; Riederer et al., 1986 ). Since the immunohistochemistry was selective for a SPDP-145, this cleavage product may have been transported to the soma via retrograde axonal transport. The distinct localization of punctate immunostaining in the outer molecular layer of the dentate gyrus suggests structural axonal damage in this region. Two candidates would be the GABAergic fusiform neurons just under the granule cell layer that give rise to axonal fibers that course along the outer molecular layer or from entorhinal afferents ( Amaral and Witter, 1995 ). The diffuse punctate patterns of immunostaining at 24 and 48 h suggest a diffusion of SBDPs out of damaged tissue into the extracellular fluid. Such diffusion would be consistent with CSF detection of the SBDPs.  SPDP-145 immunohistochemistry The immunohistochemistry results using an antibody selective for calpain-cleaved SBDP-145 demonstrated consistent results of immuolocalization in the hemisphere ipsilateral to the fluid percussion pulse with minimal immunostaining in the contralateral hemisphere. This hemispherical localization is consistent with the pathological responses to lateral fluid percussion TBI in the rat which predominantly affects the ipsilateral hemisphere ( Thompson et al., 2005 ). The time course experiments revealed an interesting early diffuse punctate immunostaining and accumulation in cell bodies and processes within hours after injury and are similar to that reported by Farkas and colleagues ( Farkas et al., 2006 ). The immunolocalization of SBDP-145 in soma is unexpected since alpha II spectrin is usually considered to be localized primarily to axons of the brain ( Czogalla and Sikorski, 2005 ; Riederer et al., 1986 ). Since the immunohistochemistry was selective for a SPDP-145, this cleavage product may have been transported to the soma via retrograde axonal transport. The distinct localization of punctate immunostaining in the outer molecular layer of the dentate gyrus suggests structural axonal damage in this region. Two candidates would be the GABAergic fusiform neurons just under the granule cell layer that give rise to axonal fibers that course along the outer molecular layer or from entorhinal afferents ( Amaral and Witter, 1995 ). The diffuse punctate patterns of immunostaining at 24 and 48 h suggest a diffusion of SBDPs out of damaged tissue into the extracellular fluid. Such diffusion would be consistent with CSF detection of the SBDPs.  TBI-induced alterations in ?II-spectrin breakdown products Each of the SBDPs examined in this study were significantly elevated in response to TBI compared with the sham group. These results are consistent with data from previous laboratory and clinical studies identifying detectable elevations in the spectrin breakdown products following TBI ( Pike et al., 2001 ; Pineda et al., 2007 ), ischemia ( Pike et al., 2004 ), and SAH ( Lewis et al., 2007 ), and further substantiate the role of SBDPs as effectual biomarkers for TBI. Also of note were the substantially greater levels of calpain (145 kDa) relative to caspase (120 kDa) breakdown product formation following injury. However, it must be noted based on a previous study that calpain and caspase cleavage of ? II-spectrin follow a markedly different time course, with calpain cleavage reaching a peak within the first 24 h post-injury, while caspase cleavage exhibits a sustained elevation for at least 5 days following TBI ( Pineda et al., 2007 ). Therefore, it is possible that caspase cleavage was underrepresented at the 24-h time point. Dicyclomine treatment generated significant ( p = 0.028) reductions in the 145-kDa breakdown products, and trends for reduction for the 150- and 120-kDa SBDPs ( p = 0.077 and 0.051, respectively). Although axonal injury was not histologically measured in this study, axonal damage is a feature of fluid percussion injury ( Graham et al., 2000 ; Reeves et al., 2002; Singleton et al., 2004) and could be a target for M1 receptor antagonist-mediated neuroprotection, albeit indirectly since M1 receptors are located postsynapically. Reductions in SBDPs seen in CSF after dicyclomine treatment are consistent with possible attenuation of axonal damage, since alpha-II spectrin appears to be localized in axons ( Czogalla and Sikorski, 2005 ; Reider et al., 1986 ). SBDP-145 is indicative of cleavage by calpain and an indicator of necrotic cell death ( Pike et al., 2001 ). Hyperactivation of calpain is associated with pathologies in which calcium homeostasis alteration is a prominent feature ( Kampfl et al., 1997 ). Calpain is involved in a broad range of functions relating to the CNS ( Kampfl et al., 1997 ; Saido et al., 1994 ), and it is reasonable to assume that excessive cleavage by this protease might be implicated in various aspects of secondary cellular damage. For example, the protease has been linked to the hydrolysis of Tau ( Johnson et al., 1989 ), which contributes via microtubule destabilization and neurofibrillary tangle deposition to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease ( Mandelkow and Mandelkow, 1998 ), a condition for which brain trauma has been documented as a predisposing factor ( Fleminger et al., 2003 ; Lye and Shores, 2000 ). Moreover, the significant reductions in calpain-cleaved spectrin products in response to anti-M1 treatment strongly suggest that these processes are downstream of muscarinic activation. The 120-kDa breakdown products are indicative of cleavage by caspase ( Pike et al., 2001 ), and thus serve as an indicator of apoptosis. SBDP-120 cleavage exhibited a strong reductive trend ( p = 0.051) with the dicyclomine treatment, suggesting that a certain level of apoptotic activity may be induced or exacerbated by M1 receptor activation. However, low levels of SBDP-120 in comparison with the calpain-cleaved products indicates that apoptotic processes within the first 24 h after TBI are limited.  TBI-induced alterations in ?II-spectrin breakdown products Each of the SBDPs examined in this study were significantly elevated in response to TBI compared with the sham group. These results are consistent with data from previous laboratory and clinical studies identifying detectable elevations in the spectrin breakdown products following TBI ( Pike et al., 2001 ; Pineda et al., 2007 ), ischemia ( Pike et al., 2004 ), and SAH ( Lewis et al., 2007 ), and further substantiate the role of SBDPs as effectual biomarkers for TBI. Also of note were the substantially greater levels of calpain (145 kDa) relative to caspase (120 kDa) breakdown product formation following injury. However, it must be noted based on a previous study that calpain and caspase cleavage of ? II-spectrin follow a markedly different time course, with calpain cleavage reaching a peak within the first 24 h post-injury, while caspase cleavage exhibits a sustained elevation for at least 5 days following TBI ( Pineda et al., 2007 ). Therefore, it is possible that caspase cleavage was underrepresented at the 24-h time point. Dicyclomine treatment generated significant ( p = 0.028) reductions in the 145-kDa breakdown products, and trends for reduction for the 150- and 120-kDa SBDPs ( p = 0.077 and 0.051, respectively). Although axonal injury was not histologically measured in this study, axonal damage is a feature of fluid percussion injury ( Graham et al., 2000 ; Reeves et al., 2002; Singleton et al., 2004) and could be a target for M1 receptor antagonist-mediated neuroprotection, albeit indirectly since M1 receptors are located postsynapically. Reductions in SBDPs seen in CSF after dicyclomine treatment are consistent with possible attenuation of axonal damage, since alpha-II spectrin appears to be localized in axons ( Czogalla and Sikorski, 2005 ; Reider et al., 1986 ). SBDP-145 is indicative of cleavage by calpain and an indicator of necrotic cell death ( Pike et al., 2001 ). Hyperactivation of calpain is associated with pathologies in which calcium homeostasis alteration is a prominent feature ( Kampfl et al., 1997 ). Calpain is involved in a broad range of functions relating to the CNS ( Kampfl et al., 1997 ; Saido et al., 1994 ), and it is reasonable to assume that excessive cleavage by this protease might be implicated in various aspects of secondary cellular damage. For example, the protease has been linked to the hydrolysis of Tau ( Johnson et al., 1989 ), which contributes via microtubule destabilization and neurofibrillary tangle deposition to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease ( Mandelkow and Mandelkow, 1998 ), a condition for which brain trauma has been documented as a predisposing factor ( Fleminger et al., 2003 ; Lye and Shores, 2000 ). Moreover, the significant reductions in calpain-cleaved spectrin products in response to anti-M1 treatment strongly suggest that these processes are downstream of muscarinic activation. The 120-kDa breakdown products are indicative of cleavage by caspase ( Pike et al., 2001 ), and thus serve as an indicator of apoptosis. SBDP-120 cleavage exhibited a strong reductive trend ( p = 0.051) with the dicyclomine treatment, suggesting that a certain level of apoptotic activity may be induced or exacerbated by M1 receptor activation. However, low levels of SBDP-120 in comparison with the calpain-cleaved products indicates that apoptotic processes within the first 24 h after TBI are limited.  Antimuscarinic treatment and neurologic integrity Early studies found elevations in acetylcholine levels as a consequence of brain injury ( Bornstein, 1946 ; Sachs, 1957 ; Tower and McEachern, 1949 ), as well as the potential of these elevations to generate abnormal neurological functioning ( Haber and Grossman, 1980 ; Sachs, 1957 ; Tower and McEachern, 1949 ) were reported in a number of early laboratory and clinical studies. Later, the phenomenon of acetylcholine-induced toxicity was confirmed in experimental studies in which direct injection of cholinomimetics or cholinesterase inhibitors generated seizure-related brain damage in rats ( Olney et al., 1983 ; Turski et al., 1983 ). In more recent studies using models of brain injury, acetylcholine in brain CSF was highly elevated (10-fold) during transient forebrain ischemia ( Kumagae and Matsui, 1991 ) and moderately elevated (twofold) within minutes after fluid percussion TBI ( Lyeth et al., 1993a ). Together, these studies provide evidence of a potentially toxic role for trauma-induced acetylcholine release, and suggest that neuroprotection might be conferred though reductions in cholinergic excitation, through application of acetylcholine receptor antagonists. Excessive M1 muscarinic receptor activation could lead to neuronal dysfunction and damage through several mechanisms related to second messenger cascades. Upon agonist binding at the M1 muscarininc receptor the ? q/11 subunit of the G protein dissociates from the ?? subunit complex. The ? subunit activates phospholipase C (PLC) causing the hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) into inositol 1,4,5 trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DG). IP3 stimulates the release of intracellular Ca2+ stores. DAG activates PKC that phosphorylates a number of proteins including ion channels and the NMDA receptor complex. The ?? G-protein subunit inhibits both muscarinic (IK(M)) and calcium-regulated (IK(Ca)) potassium currents which increases cell excitability by augmenting depolarization (Lyeth, 2001). Several studies provide compelling evidence that PIP2 signal transduction pathways are activated after TBI. Wei and colleagues ( Wei et al., 1982 ) first reported PLC activation immediately following fluid percussion TBI in cats. Later studies in the rat lateral fluid percussion model found elevated levels of IP3 at 5 min post-injury in the ipsilateral hippocampus and for up to 20 min after injury in the ipsilateral cortex ( Prasad et al., 1994 ). Subsequent studies measured the phosphodiestric breakdown of membrane PIP2 following fluid percussion TBI in rats and found that concentrations of tissue PIP2 were significantly decreased at times when DG was elevated ( Dhillon et al., 1995 ). Later studies examining the link between muscarinic receptors and TBI-induced activation of the PLC signal transduction pathway found that pharmacological blockade of muscarinic receptors with scopolamine at the time of injury significantly blunts the acute decrease in PIP2 derived fatty acids ( Lyeth et al., 1996 ). Thus, the activation of M1 receptors is associated with enhanced excitatory modulation though elevations in intracellular Ca2+, amplification of NMDA receptor sensitivity, and increased neuronal excitability. Early reports demonstrated the efficacy of certain anticholinergic treatments in reducing the neurological deficits associated with TBI ( Heppner and Diemath, 1958 ; Jenkner and Lechner, 1954 , 1955 ; Sachs, 1957 ; Ward Jr., 1950 ). In more recent experimental TBI investigations muscarinic, but not nicotinic, cholinergic antagonists reduced the duration of post-traumatic unconsciousness ( Lyeth et al., 1988a ) and attenuated long-term behavioral deficits ( Lyeth et al., 1988b ) in rats. Dicyclomine is a muscarinic antagonist whose neuroprotective effects in TBI have been compared with those of the more widely used scopolamine. Robinson and colleagues demonstrated the efficacy of dicyclomine in ameliorating behavioral deficits following fluid percussion brain injury in rats ( Robinson et al., 1990 ). In a later study, Jiang et al. (2000) found that dicyclomine reduced infarct volume in a subdural hematoma model. Dicyclomine bears a unique advantage over other muscarinic antagonists for treatment of TBI because of its high selective affinity for M1 over M2 muscarinic receptors ( Doods et al., 1987 ), thereby eliminating the problem of inducing tachycardia via M2 receptor antagonism ( Gallo et al., 1993 ; Sharma et al., 1996 ).  Antimuscarinic treatment and neurologic integrity Early studies found elevations in acetylcholine levels as a consequence of brain injury ( Bornstein, 1946 ; Sachs, 1957 ; Tower and McEachern, 1949 ), as well as the potential of these elevations to generate abnormal neurological functioning ( Haber and Grossman, 1980 ; Sachs, 1957 ; Tower and McEachern, 1949 ) were reported in a number of early laboratory and clinical studies. Later, the phenomenon of acetylcholine-induced toxicity was confirmed in experimental studies in which direct injection of cholinomimetics or cholinesterase inhibitors generated seizure-related brain damage in rats ( Olney et al., 1983 ; Turski et al., 1983 ). In more recent studies using models of brain injury, acetylcholine in brain CSF was highly elevated (10-fold) during transient forebrain ischemia ( Kumagae and Matsui, 1991 ) and moderately elevated (twofold) within minutes after fluid percussion TBI ( Lyeth et al., 1993a ). Together, these studies provide evidence of a potentially toxic role for trauma-induced acetylcholine release, and suggest that neuroprotection might be conferred though reductions in cholinergic excitation, through application of acetylcholine receptor antagonists. Excessive M1 muscarinic receptor activation could lead to neuronal dysfunction and damage through several mechanisms related to second messenger cascades. Upon agonist binding at the M1 muscarininc receptor the ? q/11 subunit of the G protein dissociates from the ?? subunit complex. The ? subunit activates phospholipase C (PLC) causing the hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) into inositol 1,4,5 trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DG). IP3 stimulates the release of intracellular Ca2+ stores. DAG activates PKC that phosphorylates a number of proteins including ion channels and the NMDA receptor complex. The ?? G-protein subunit inhibits both muscarinic (IK(M)) and calcium-regulated (IK(Ca)) potassium currents which increases cell excitability by augmenting depolarization (Lyeth, 2001). Several studies provide compelling evidence that PIP2 signal transduction pathways are activated after TBI. Wei and colleagues ( Wei et al., 1982 ) first reported PLC activation immediately following fluid percussion TBI in cats. Later studies in the rat lateral fluid percussion model found elevated levels of IP3 at 5 min post-injury in the ipsilateral hippocampus and for up to 20 min after injury in the ipsilateral cortex ( Prasad et al., 1994 ). Subsequent studies measured the phosphodiestric breakdown of membrane PIP2 following fluid percussion TBI in rats and found that concentrations of tissue PIP2 were significantly decreased at times when DG was elevated ( Dhillon et al., 1995 ). Later studies examining the link between muscarinic receptors and TBI-induced activation of the PLC signal transduction pathway found that pharmacological blockade of muscarinic receptors with scopolamine at the time of injury significantly blunts the acute decrease in PIP2 derived fatty acids ( Lyeth et al., 1996 ). Thus, the activation of M1 receptors is associated with enhanced excitatory modulation though elevations in intracellular Ca2+, amplification of NMDA receptor sensitivity, and increased neuronal excitability. Early reports demonstrated the efficacy of certain anticholinergic treatments in reducing the neurological deficits associated with TBI ( Heppner and Diemath, 1958 ; Jenkner and Lechner, 1954 , 1955 ; Sachs, 1957 ; Ward Jr., 1950 ). In more recent experimental TBI investigations muscarinic, but not nicotinic, cholinergic antagonists reduced the duration of post-traumatic unconsciousness ( Lyeth et al., 1988a ) and attenuated long-term behavioral deficits ( Lyeth et al., 1988b ) in rats. Dicyclomine is a muscarinic antagonist whose neuroprotective effects in TBI have been compared with those of the more widely used scopolamine. Robinson and colleagues demonstrated the efficacy of dicyclomine in ameliorating behavioral deficits following fluid percussion brain injury in rats ( Robinson et al., 1990 ). In a later study, Jiang et al. (2000) found that dicyclomine reduced infarct volume in a subdural hematoma model. Dicyclomine bears a unique advantage over other muscarinic antagonists for treatment of TBI because of its high selective affinity for M1 over M2 muscarinic receptors ( Doods et al., 1987 ), thereby eliminating the problem of inducing tachycardia via M2 receptor antagonism ( Gallo et al., 1993 ; Sharma et al., 1996 ).  Sublethal mechanisms of neuronal cell pathophysiology Fluoro Jade is an anionic fluoroscein derivative that binds signals specific to neuronal degeneration ( Schmued et al., 1997 ). As such, the fluorescent stain is able to selectively label neurons undergoing the process of cell death at the time of tissue fixation. This effect is not influenced by administration of membrane-permeabilizing treatments ( Schmued and Hopkins, 2000 ). Despite the presumably protective neurologic effects of anti-M1 treatment implied by the effects of dicyclomine on the breakdown of spectrin following injury, coupled with the observation that dicyclomine treatment significantly reduced weight loss 24 h following TBI, treatment with the drug in this study produced no significant differences in the number of degenerating neurons in the hippocampus or cortex at 24 h post-TBI. This is in apparent contrast to the observation of dicyclomine significantly reducing SBDP levels following TBI. While the time point studied coincides with the previously documented peak in TBI-induced cellular degradation detected with Fluor-Jade ( Hallam et al., 2004 ), it is possible that limiting the histological examination to a single time point (24 h) relative to the injury may have obscured detection of differential profiles of progressive neuronal degeneration beyond 24 h. Moreover, neuronal cell survival specifically has not been examined in previous antimuscarinic TBI studies measuring behavioral performance following trauma. A number of studies and lines of evidence have indicated that functional deficits following TBI can occur in the absence of cell death and therapeutic interventions can reduce functional deficits in the absence of evidence for histological protection. For example, central fluid percussion TBI can produce memory impairment in the absence of hippocampal cell death ( Lyeth et al., 1990 ) and enduring cognitive deficits can persist following a controlled cortical impact injury without significant neuronal loss or even gross tissue damage as evidenced by light microscopy ( Hamm et al., 1992 ). Hypothermia can reduce behavioral deficits associated with cortical contusion TBI without affecting volumes of cortical necrotic tissue cavitation ( Dixon et al., 1998 ). These findings underscore the tenuous relationship between cell death and pathophysiological states sufficient to generate behavioral deficits. It is clear that the existence of sublethal modes of cellular damage can be a critical factor in the translation of an injurious event into sustained neurologic dysfunction. Exactly how excessive muscarinic receptor activation can produce sublethal cellular dysfunction is unclear. However, several possibilities exist including alterations in muscarinic receptor expression, changes in signal transduction pathways, and production of LTP-like changes. TBI produces changes in muscarinic receptor binding acutely ( DeAngelis et al., 1994 ; Lyeth et al., 1994 ) and chronically ( Jiang et al., 1994 ). TBI also produces alterations in muscarinic-linked second messenger systems ( Delahunty, 1992 ; Delahunty et al., 1995a , b ; Jiang et al., 1994 ; Lyeth et al., 1996 ) that could alter the coupling of receptors and second messengers. Muscarinic activation facilitates the induction of long-term potentiation (LTP) ( Auerbach and Segal, 1996 ; Burgard and Sarvey, 1990 ), and several studies have demonstrated that LTP is altered following experimental TBI ( Auerbach and Segal, 1996 ; Burgard and Sarvey, 1990 ; Miyazaki et al., 1992 ; Reeves et al., 1995 ). Together, these lines of evidence clearly illustrate the potential importance of sublethal mechanisms of cellular damage in TBI pathophysiology, which based on the collective results of this study and others could be suggested to be the primary targets of anti-M1 therapeutic activity.  Sublethal mechanisms of neuronal cell pathophysiology Fluoro Jade is an anionic fluoroscein derivative that binds signals specific to neuronal degeneration ( Schmued et al., 1997 ). As such, the fluorescent stain is able to selectively label neurons undergoing the process of cell death at the time of tissue fixation. This effect is not influenced by administration of membrane-permeabilizing treatments ( Schmued and Hopkins, 2000 ). Despite the presumably protective neurologic effects of anti-M1 treatment implied by the effects of dicyclomine on the breakdown of spectrin following injury, coupled with the observation that dicyclomine treatment significantly reduced weight loss 24 h following TBI, treatment with the drug in this study produced no significant differences in the number of degenerating neurons in the hippocampus or cortex at 24 h post-TBI. This is in apparent contrast to the observation of dicyclomine significantly reducing SBDP levels following TBI. While the time point studied coincides with the previously documented peak in TBI-induced cellular degradation detected with Fluor-Jade ( Hallam et al., 2004 ), it is possible that limiting the histological examination to a single time point (24 h) relative to the injury may have obscured detection of differential profiles of progressive neuronal degeneration beyond 24 h. Moreover, neuronal cell survival specifically has not been examined in previous antimuscarinic TBI studies measuring behavioral performance following trauma. A number of studies and lines of evidence have indicated that functional deficits following TBI can occur in the absence of cell death and therapeutic interventions can reduce functional deficits in the absence of evidence for histological protection. For example, central fluid percussion TBI can produce memory impairment in the absence of hippocampal cell death ( Lyeth et al., 1990 ) and enduring cognitive deficits can persist following a controlled cortical impact injury without significant neuronal loss or even gross tissue damage as evidenced by light microscopy ( Hamm et al., 1992 ). Hypothermia can reduce behavioral deficits associated with cortical contusion TBI without affecting volumes of cortical necrotic tissue cavitation ( Dixon et al., 1998 ). These findings underscore the tenuous relationship between cell death and pathophysiological states sufficient to generate behavioral deficits. It is clear that the existence of sublethal modes of cellular damage can be a critical factor in the translation of an injurious event into sustained neurologic dysfunction. Exactly how excessive muscarinic receptor activation can produce sublethal cellular dysfunction is unclear. However, several possibilities exist including alterations in muscarinic receptor expression, changes in signal transduction pathways, and production of LTP-like changes. TBI produces changes in muscarinic receptor binding acutely ( DeAngelis et al., 1994 ; Lyeth et al., 1994 ) and chronically ( Jiang et al., 1994 ). TBI also produces alterations in muscarinic-linked second messenger systems ( Delahunty, 1992 ; Delahunty et al., 1995a , b ; Jiang et al., 1994 ; Lyeth et al., 1996 ) that could alter the coupling of receptors and second messengers. Muscarinic activation facilitates the induction of long-term potentiation (LTP) ( Auerbach and Segal, 1996 ; Burgard and Sarvey, 1990 ), and several studies have demonstrated that LTP is altered following experimental TBI ( Auerbach and Segal, 1996 ; Burgard and Sarvey, 1990 ; Miyazaki et al., 1992 ; Reeves et al., 1995 ). Together, these lines of evidence clearly illustrate the potential importance of sublethal mechanisms of cellular damage in TBI pathophysiology, which based on the collective results of this study and others could be suggested to be the primary targets of anti-M1 therapeutic activity.  Conclusion This study has further substantiated the efficacy of SBDPs as biomarkers of acute-phase TBI. Data also imply a mechanistic link between M1 muscarinic receptor activation and caplain-mediated degradation of ? II-spectrin. The efficacy of anti-M1 therapeutic intervention in ameliorating elevations in these breakdown products in the absence of neuronal cell death underscores the importance of nonlethal mechanisms of neuronal cell damage in the pathophysiology of traumatic brain injury. These results also provide insights into which mechanisms specifically may be involved. Reduction of calpain-cleaved products, for example, suggests a role for calpain hyperactivation in M1-mediated pathological pathways which can apparently act independently of neuronal cell death.  Figures and Table FIG. 1 Immunohistochemistry using an antibody for SBDP-145. ( A ) Ipsilateral cortex 3 hr post TBI: Prominent immunostaining of neuronal processes extended perpendicular to the cortical surface through several cortical layers amid scattered punctate immunostaining. ( B ) Ipsilateral cortex 12 hr post TBI: Several cell somas were observed amid scattered punctate immunostaining. Inset: high magnification of immunostained neuron with prominent staining in the cell body, but not the nucleus, with immunostaining of neuronal process (arrow). ( C ) Ipsilateral cortex 24 hrs post TBI: Diffuse immunostaining increased punctuate intensity was observed in deeper layers of the cortex. Note the lack of cell soma immunostaining compared to the 12 hrs time point. ( D ) Ipsilateral cortex 48 h post TBI: Patterns of immunostaining were similar to the 24 h time point but with reduced intensity. ( E ) Ipsilateral striatum 24 h post TBI: Bands of intense immunostaining were prominent. ( F ) Ipsilateral dentate gyrus 24 h post TBI: Prominent immunostaining was evident in the outer molecular layers (OML) of the dorsal and ventral blades. Immunostaining in the granule cell layer (GL) was negligible. Scale bars = 100 ? m (A–D); inset on B = 20 ? m; E, F = 50 ? m. FIG. 2 SBDP levels in CSF for sham, vehicle-treated injury (TBI) and dicyclomine-treated injury (TBI + Dicyclomine) groups. Quantities in densitometric units. Values are means ± standard error of the mean bars (SEM). TBI significantly ( p = 0.001) elevated SBDPs in the vehicle injury group compared with sham. Dicyclomine treatment significantly ( p = 0.028) reduced SBDP-145 compared with the vehicle injury, with trends of near significance SBDP-150 ( p = 0.051) and SBDP-120 ( p = 0.077). * p < 0.001 compared to sham; # p < 0.05 compared to TBI. FIG. 3 ( A ) Degenerating neuronal cells in the CA2/CA3 hippocampal region, as indicated by positive staining with Fluoro-Jade, for the vehicle and dicyclomine groups. Values are means + (SEM). Dicyclomine treatment did not significantly affect numbers of Fluoro-Jade-positive cells between groups. ( B ) Degenerating neuronal cells in the cortex, as indicated by positive staining with Fluoro-Jade, for the vehicle and dicyclomine groups. Means with error bars (SEM) are shown. Dicyclomine treatment did not significantly affect numbers of Fluoro-Jade-positive cells between groups. Table 1 Body Weight, Percent Weight Loss, TBI Magnitude, and Temperature Measurements for Sham, Vehicle-Treated Injury, and Dicyclomine-Treated Groups Pre-TBI Post-TBI Initial body weight (g) Percentage body weight loss TBI magnitude (ATM) Body temperature (°C) Brain temperature (°C) Body temperature (°C) Brain temperature (°C) Sham 344 ± 0.007 3.8 ± 2.09 — 37.0 ± 0.220 36.1 ± 0.104 37.0 ± 0.349 36.1 ± 0.100 Vehicle 329 ± 0.014 11.1 ± 1.10 2.15 ± 0.009 36.9 ± 0.336 35.9 ± 0.203 36.9 ± 0.319 SD 36.0 ± 0.238 Dicyclomine 315 ± 0.016 7.8 ± 2.08 * 2.15 ± 0.013 37.2 ± 0.330 36.0 ± 0.128 37.0 ± 0.283 SD 36.0 ± 0.200 Values are means ± standard deviation (SD). * p < 0.01 compared to vehicle-treated group. 