Remodeling the Brain with Behavioral Experience after Stroke Background and Purpose Behavioral experience can drive brain plasticity, but we lack sufficient knowledge to optimize its therapeutic use after stroke. Methods We outline recent findings from rodent models of cortical stroke of how experiences interact with post-injury events to influence synaptic connectivity and functional outcome, with a focus on upper extremity function. Results After unilateral cortical infarcts, behavioral experiences shape neuronal structure and activity in both hemispheres. Experiences that matter include interventions, such as skill training and constraint-like therapy, as well as unguided behaviors, such as learned nonuse and behavioral compensation. Lateralized behaviors have bihemispheric influences. Ischemic injury can alter the sensitivity of remaining neocortical neurons to behavioral change and this can have positive and negative functional effects. Conclusions Because experience is ongoing in stroke survivors, a better understanding of its interaction with brain reorganization is needed so that it can be manipulated to improve function and prevent its worsening.  Methods We outline recent findings from rodent models of cortical stroke of how experiences interact with post-injury events to influence synaptic connectivity and functional outcome, with a focus on upper extremity function.  Results After unilateral cortical infarcts, behavioral experiences shape neuronal structure and activity in both hemispheres. Experiences that matter include interventions, such as skill training and constraint-like therapy, as well as unguided behaviors, such as learned nonuse and behavioral compensation. Lateralized behaviors have bihemispheric influences. Ischemic injury can alter the sensitivity of remaining neocortical neurons to behavioral change and this can have positive and negative functional effects.  Conclusions Because experience is ongoing in stroke survivors, a better understanding of its interaction with brain reorganization is needed so that it can be manipulated to improve function and prevent its worsening.  Shaping Post-Injury Experience Brain damage can impair and enhance experience-dependent plasticity, depending on the region and time window after the injury. 1 , 2 We have found that, in rats with unilateral ischemic sensorimotor cortical lesions, the contralesional motor cortex, in concert with transcallosal degenerative changes, becomes more sensitive to behavioral experiences of the ipsilesional "unaffected" forelimb ( Fig. 1 ). 3 After these lesions, rats spontaneously begin to rely more on the unaffected forelimb and this drives the growth of synapses and dendrites in the contralesional cortex. More synapses also have ultrastructural characteristics of enhanced efficacy. These effects occur more robustly than those resulting from similar asymmetrical forelimb experience in intact animals. Thus, this is an example of an injury-induced enhancement of experience-dependent plasticity. The facilitation of plasticity in the contralesional cortex may enhance an animal's ability to learn compensatory ways of using the unaffected forelimb. Consistent with this, even in the presence of significant impairments in the "unaffected" limb, some types of skill acquisition with this limb are enhanced, an effect that is lesion size and time sensitive. 3 , 4 However, there is a cost. When rats were trained to use the unaffected limb for skilled reaching in the weeks after injury, it reduced neuronal activation (as assayed by FosB/?FosB expression) in remaining peri-infarct motor cortex, a region that is important for recovery of the impaired limb. 5 This was linked with slowed recovery of skilled motor function in the impaired limb and an exacerbation of its disuse. 3 , 5 Thus, experience with the unaffected limb has bihemispheric neuronal effects that can simultaneously enhance function in the unaffected limb and worsen function in the impaired limb. Humans with cerebral stroke have altered interhemispheric excitability and abnormal influences of the intact hemisphere over the stroke-affected hemisphere. 6 Our animal research suggests that experience-dependent plasticity could contribute to unbalanced interhemispheric activity. Attempts to improve impaired limb function, for example using constraint-induced movement therapy, may have to overcome some neuronal changes driven by experience with the unaffected limb. As with humans, anesthetization of the unaffected limb in rats transiently improves function in the impaired limb. 7 Unfortunately, it can sometimes be detrimental to restrict use of the unaffected limb too intensely and/or too early after a stroke. 2 , 8 Thus, we need to learn how to safely shape early behavioral experience to prevent it from driving brain plasticity in a suboptimal direction for bilateral function.  Enhancing Neurorehabilitation Behavioral improvements, neuronal structural plasticity and brain functional changes can be driven by targeted post-stroke behavioral rehabilitative therapies in humans and animal models, as reviewed previously. 2 , 9 , 10 For example, targeted training of the impaired upper extremity in motor skills enhances motor maps near cortical infarcts and improves motor function. 10 A limitation of motor rehabilitative training is that it can take much time and effort to greatly improve function and even then, it may be far from sufficient to normalize it. It might be enhanced by its combination with therapies that facilitate its neuroplastic effects. An approach that we and others have investigated is combining motor training with motor cortical stimulation (CS). 6 , 11 , 12 In rats and monkeys with motor cortical ischemic lesions, daily training in skilled reaching results in greater functional improvements when administered concurrently with CS. 12 The CS was delivered epidurally or subdurally in peri-infarct cortex at levels subthreshold to that needed to evoke movements. CS might help to activate remaining motor cortical neurons so that they can participate in the synaptic plasticity underlying motor re-learning. Consistent with this possibility, CS with motor training increases dendrites and synapses ( Fig. 1D ) 11 , enlarges motor maps 12 and potentiates motor cortical evoked potentials 13 . Currently, it is unclear whether the benefits of epidural CS can be reproduced in human stroke survivors. However, a broader implication of these animal studies is that facilitation of training-induced plasticity may greatly improve functional outcome after cortical ischemia.  Conclusion Experience is a potent factor in brain restoration and reorganization that can both improve and impair function. A more detailed knowledge of experience-injury interactions is needed to tailor manipulations of experience for time, injuries and individual characteristics in a manner that optimizes restorative brain plasticity and functional outcome.  Figure Figure 1 Behavioral interventions change the course of neural reorganization after sensorimotor cortical infarcts Rats use their forepaws in dexterous ways for food handling (A) and reaching behaviors (B), making them suitable for modeling aspects of upper extremity impairments. 14 , 15 After unilateral cortical infarcts, rats have enduring contralesional impairments in sensitive measures of these behaviors, and they develop a reliance on the "unaffected" ipsilesional forepaw. Skill acquisition with the unaffected forelimb interacts with injury-induced cellular changes to drive a robust plasticity of dendrites and synapses (*) in the contralesional motor cortex (layer V, C). 3 , 4 However, it also reduces neuronal activation in peri-infarct cortex and worsens the efficacy of later motor rehabilitative training focused on the impaired forelimb. 3 , 5 Cortical stimulation (CS) combined with motor training of the impaired limb improves its efficacy and increases the density of dendrites and synapses in peri-infarct motor cortex (D). 10 , 11 , MI, primary motor, SI, primary somatosensory cortex. 