Intermittent hypoxia and respiratory plasticity in humans and other animals: does exposure to intermittent hypoxia promote or mitigate sleep apnoea? This review focuses on two phenomena that are initiated during and after exposure to intermittent hypoxia. The two phenomena are referred to as long-term facilitation and progressive augmentation of respiratory motor output. Both phenomena are forms of respiratory plasticity. Long-term facilitation is characterized by a sustained elevation in respiratory activity after exposure to intermittent hypoxia. Progressive augmentation is characterized by a gradual increase in respiratory activity from the initial to the final hypoxic exposure. There is much speculation that long-term facilitation may have a significant role in individuals with sleep apnoea because this disorder is characterized by periods of upper airway collapse accompanied by intermittent hypoxia, one stimulus known to induce long-term facilitation. It has been suggested that activation of long-term facilitation may serve to mitigate apnoea by facilitating ventilation and, more importantly, upper airway muscle activity. We examine the less discussed but equally plausible situation that exposure to intermittent hypoxia might ultimately lead to the promotion of apnoea. There are at least two scenarios in which apnoea might be promoted following exposure to intermittent hypoxia. In both scenarios, long-term facilitation of upper airway muscle activity is initiated but ultimately rendered ineffective because of other physiological conditions. Thus, one of the primary goals of this review is to discuss, with support from basic and clinical studies, whether various forms of respiratory motor neuronal plasticity have a beneficial and/or a detrimental impact on breathing stability in individuals with sleep apnoea.  Summary and conclusion We have reviewed published work on two forms of respiratory plasticity, LTF and PA, which are initiated during and following exposure to IH. Moreover, we have reviewed a variety of factors, such as age, sex, arousal state and gas environment, that influence the manifestation of LTF and PA, making them complex phenomena to study. Although plenty of studies examining LTF in animals exist, fewer animal studies have focused on PA. Moreover, further studies are needed to examine these two phenomena in humans and the factors that influence these phenomena. Lastly, studies that begin to examine how various forms of plasticity interact and ultimately impact on breathing stability will bring us one step closer to understanding the impact that exposure to IH has on breathing in individuals with sleep apnoea.  Figures Figure 1 A recording of breath-by-breath minute ventilation values recorded from a human participant before, during and following exposure to 12 episodes of hypoxia Each hypoxic episode and subsequent recovery period was 4 min in duration with the exception of the last recovery period, which was 30 min in duration. Note that during exposure to intermittent hypoxia the ventilatory response to hypoxia gradually increased from the initial hypoxic episode to the final hypoxic episode. This phenomenon is referred to as progressive augmentation. Also note that during exposure to intermittent hypoxia minute ventilation gradually increased during the normoxic recovery periods so that it was substantially higher during the final recovery period compared with baseline. This phenomenon is referred to as long-term facilitation. Figure 2 The measurement of the hypoxic ventilatory response is dependent on the level of carbon dioxide that is sustained throughout the intermittent hypoxia protocol At a chosen isocapnic partial pressure of carbon dioxide (set to 2 mmHg above resting in this example) the ventilation increase (thick black arrow) from the hyperoxic carbon dioxide response line (assumed to reflect the central chemoreflex response) to the hypoxic carbon dioxide response line (assumed to reflect the sum of central and peripheral chemoreflex responses) is the value measured for the hypoxic ventilatory response. Progressive increases in the hypoxic ventilatory response (progressive augmentation) during exposure to intermittent hypoxia may be the result of changes in either chemoreflex threshold or sensitivity. Note in the figure that increases in the hypoxic ventilatory response may be accomplished by changes in threshold or sensitivity (indicated by changes in slope of the line) but that at a given isocapnic partial pressure of carbon dioxide the mechanisms (change in slope or threshold) responsible for the hypoxic response are indistinguishable from one another. Definitions: P CO2, partial pressure of carbon dioxide; P O2, partial pressure of oxygen; and S O2, arterial haemoglobin saturation with oxygen. Reproduced with permission from Duffin (2007) . Figure 3 Three scenarios that address the potential influence of intermittent hypoxia on apnea severity A , the ideal scenario is presented in which exposure to intermittent hypoxia promotes breathing stability. In this scenario, exposure to intermittent hypoxia leads to long-term facilitation of upper airway muscle activity, promoting the maintenance of upper airway patency. Likewise, carbon dioxide reserve is unaltered or increased while ventilatory sensitivity is unaltered or reduced. These chemoreflex characteristics promote the maintenance of carbon dioxide levels, ensuring that hypocapnia does not develop, which could restrain the manifestation of LTF of upper airway muscle activity. Ultimately, this integrated response promotes breathing and potentially mitigates the severity of apnoea. B , a scenario in which long-term facilitation is induced in upper airway muscles following exposure to intermittent hypoxia but ultimately is ineffective in mitigating apnoea because decreases in carbon dioxide reserve and increases in chemoreflex sensitivity increase the propensity for developing hypocapnia. The induced hypocapnia restrains LTF of upper airway muscle activity and respiratory muscle activity, ultimately resulting in the promotion of apnoea. C , a scenario in which exposure to intermittent hypoxia leads to fatigue of the upper airway muscles and results in a decrease in the carbon dioxide reserve and increase in chemoreflex sensitivity, ultimately resulting in a worse case scenario that results in the promotion of apnoea. Figure 4 A schematic diagram showing how changes in the ventilatory threshold and sensitivity to hypoxia could lead to disproportionate increases in ventilation and promote the development of hypocapnia Note that the change in the ventilatory threshold from the black arrow to the continuous grey arrow significantly reduces the carbon dioxide reserve (i.e. the difference in the carbon dioxide value that demarcates the threshold and the resting equilibrium point (?). If the carbon dioxide reserve is significantly reduced, small reductions in carbon dioxide will result in a carbon dioxide level that is below resting values, leading to reductions in breathing or apnoea. Likewise, a disproportionately high ventilatory sensitivity (dashed grey line) to hypoxia/hypercapnia (in this example, the partial pressure of oxygen is 50 mmHg and the partial pressure of carbon dioxide is 43 mmHg, indicated by ?) following an apnoea may ultimately result in reductions in carbon dioxide below resting values. Conversely, reductions in ventilatory sensitivity (continuous black line) and the ventilatory threshold (continuous black arrow) relative to the resting equilibrium point will tend to promote maintenance of carbon dioxide levels. Figure 5 A schematic diagram showing how hypocapnia leads to the promotion of apnoea Reductions in carbon dioxide lead to disfacilitation of central and peripheral chemoreceptors and ultimately respiratory neurons, resulting in an apnoea of central origin that may be followed by an obstructive event. Apnoea is accompanied by intermittent hypoxia and hypercapnia. In response to hypoxia and hypercapnia, the peripheral and central chemoreceptors are facilitated, resulting in an increase in ventilation. If the ventilatory response to the changes in chemical stimuli is disproportionately high, as would be the case if chemoreflex sensitivity is increased, a significant reduction in carbon dioxide would ensue. The reduction could result in below resting values, particularly if the carbon dioxide reserve is reduced, ultimately resulting in hypocapnia and the development of a subsequent apnoea. 