Allergenicity resulting from functional mimicry of a Toll-like receptor complex protein Aeroallergy results from maladaptive immune responses to ubiquitous, otherwise innocuous environmental proteins 1 . While the proteins so targeted represent a tiny fraction of the airborne proteins humans are exposed to, allergenicity is a quite public phenomenon—the same proteins typically behave as aeroallergens across the human population. Why particular proteins tend to act as allergens in susceptible hosts is a fundamental mechanistic question that remains largely unanswered. The major house dust mite allergen, Der p 2, has structural homology with MD-2, the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-binding component of the Toll-like receptor (TLR)4 signalling complex 2 – 4 . Here we show that Der p 2 has functional homology as well, facilitating signalling through direct interactions with the TLR4 complex, and reconstituting LPS-driven TLR4 signalling in the absence of MD-2. Mirroring this, airway sensitization and challenge with Der p 2 led to experimental allergic asthma in wild type and MD-2-deficient, but not TLR4-deficient, mice. Our results suggest that Der p 2 tends to be targeted by adaptive immune responses because of its auto-adjuvant properties. The fact that other members of the MD-2-like lipid binding family are allergens, and that a majority of defined major allergens are thought to be lipid-binding proteins 5 , suggests that intrinsic adjuvant activity by such proteins and their accompanying lipid cargo may have some generality as a mechanism underlying the phenomenon of allergenicity.  METHODS Reagents, expression constructs and cell lines IL-1? was from Peprotech. Re-purified E. coli K235 LPS was from S. Vogel. Pam3Cys was from EMC Microcollections. cDNA encoding Der p 2 was from Heska Corp. Immunoaffinity-purified Der p 2 was from Indoor Biotechnologies. Recombinant His-tagged Der p 2 (rDer p 2) was generated in baculovirus systems using the pAcGP67A transfer vector (BD Pharmingen) and Sf21 cells, and purification with Ni-NTA agarose beads (Qiagen). rDer p2 was generated under FCS-free conditions (Baculogold Max-XP media, BD Pharmingen), in the presence of E. coli LPS (100 ng/ml) and LPS-free human serum albumin (HSA) [0.25%] as a carrier and for stability 29 . Der p 2 (Y91A) was generated by PCR-mediated mutagenesis. HEK293 cell lines stably expressing CD14–TLR4, and HEK293FT cells, have been described 16 . All cell lines were Mycoplasma -free. All reagents contacting cultured cells were LPS-free to the limits of detection of the Limulus amebocyte lysate assay (Lonza) at the concentrations employed, unless otherwise stated. Human RP105, MD-1, TLR4 and MD-2 expression constructs were as described 16 . Der p 2 was cloned into the pCEFL-HA mammalian expression vector (INSERM U482, France). Epitope-tagged constructs were generated by PCR. Transient transfections were performed using PolyFect (Qiagen). Immunoprecipitation and Western blotting were performed as described. 16 <italic>In vitro</italic> cell stimulation One day after transient transfection of HEK293 cells, media was replaced. 72 h later, cells were stimulated (or mock stimulated) for an additional 24 h. Cell-free supernatants were collected and IL-8 production was quantified by ELISA (BD Pharmingen). Bone marrow-derived DCs and thioglycollate-elicited peritoneal macrophages were generated as described 16 from wild type, MD-2- (K. Miyake), TLR2- and TLR4-deficient mice (S. Akira)—all on a C57BL/6 background (>10 generations). 24 h after stimulation (or mock stimulation), cell-free supernatants were harvested and TNF-?, IL-12p40/23 and IL-6 production were quantified by ELISA (BD Pharmingen). Experimental allergic asthma model Wild type, MD-2?/? and TLR4?/? mice were sensitized and challenged according to the protocol of Bottomly 26 , with minor modifications. 10–12 wk-old female mice were used in all experiments. Briefly, mice anaesthetized with ketamine-xylazine were sensitized intranasally on d 0, 1 and 2 with: (a) rDer p 2 (0.1 µg) in PBS (co-purified with E. coli LPS [0.026 pg] and HSA [0.3 ng]) or (b) PBS (with E. coli LPS [0.026 pg] and HSA [0.3 ng]). Mice were subsequently challenged intranasally with 1/4 of the sensitization dose on d 14, 15, 18 and 19. For experiments with MD-2?/? mice, sensitization and challenge doses of Der p 2/LPS were 10-fold higher. On d 21, mice were sacrificed, and airway inflammation, total serum IgE concentrations, and airway mucus metaplasia were assessed as previously described 30 . Animal care was provided in accordance with NIH guidelines; studies were approved by the CCHMC IACUC.  Reagents, expression constructs and cell lines IL-1? was from Peprotech. Re-purified E. coli K235 LPS was from S. Vogel. Pam3Cys was from EMC Microcollections. cDNA encoding Der p 2 was from Heska Corp. Immunoaffinity-purified Der p 2 was from Indoor Biotechnologies. Recombinant His-tagged Der p 2 (rDer p 2) was generated in baculovirus systems using the pAcGP67A transfer vector (BD Pharmingen) and Sf21 cells, and purification with Ni-NTA agarose beads (Qiagen). rDer p2 was generated under FCS-free conditions (Baculogold Max-XP media, BD Pharmingen), in the presence of E. coli LPS (100 ng/ml) and LPS-free human serum albumin (HSA) [0.25%] as a carrier and for stability 29 . Der p 2 (Y91A) was generated by PCR-mediated mutagenesis. HEK293 cell lines stably expressing CD14–TLR4, and HEK293FT cells, have been described 16 . All cell lines were Mycoplasma -free. All reagents contacting cultured cells were LPS-free to the limits of detection of the Limulus amebocyte lysate assay (Lonza) at the concentrations employed, unless otherwise stated. Human RP105, MD-1, TLR4 and MD-2 expression constructs were as described 16 . Der p 2 was cloned into the pCEFL-HA mammalian expression vector (INSERM U482, France). Epitope-tagged constructs were generated by PCR. Transient transfections were performed using PolyFect (Qiagen).  Immunoprecipitation and Western blotting were performed as described. 16  <italic>In vitro</italic> cell stimulation One day after transient transfection of HEK293 cells, media was replaced. 72 h later, cells were stimulated (or mock stimulated) for an additional 24 h. Cell-free supernatants were collected and IL-8 production was quantified by ELISA (BD Pharmingen). Bone marrow-derived DCs and thioglycollate-elicited peritoneal macrophages were generated as described 16 from wild type, MD-2- (K. Miyake), TLR2- and TLR4-deficient mice (S. Akira)—all on a C57BL/6 background (>10 generations). 24 h after stimulation (or mock stimulation), cell-free supernatants were harvested and TNF-?, IL-12p40/23 and IL-6 production were quantified by ELISA (BD Pharmingen).  Experimental allergic asthma model Wild type, MD-2?/? and TLR4?/? mice were sensitized and challenged according to the protocol of Bottomly 26 , with minor modifications. 10–12 wk-old female mice were used in all experiments. Briefly, mice anaesthetized with ketamine-xylazine were sensitized intranasally on d 0, 1 and 2 with: (a) rDer p 2 (0.1 µg) in PBS (co-purified with E. coli LPS [0.026 pg] and HSA [0.3 ng]) or (b) PBS (with E. coli LPS [0.026 pg] and HSA [0.3 ng]). Mice were subsequently challenged intranasally with 1/4 of the sensitization dose on d 14, 15, 18 and 19. For experiments with MD-2?/? mice, sensitization and challenge doses of Der p 2/LPS were 10-fold higher. On d 21, mice were sacrificed, and airway inflammation, total serum IgE concentrations, and airway mucus metaplasia were assessed as previously described 30 . Animal care was provided in accordance with NIH guidelines; studies were approved by the CCHMC IACUC.  Supplementary Material 1 