Engineering of hetero-functional gold nanorods for the in-vivo molecular targeting of breast cancer cells A novel technique is described to functionalize gold nanorods (GNRs) allowing for in-vivo targeting of breast cancer tumors grown in athymic nude mice. GNRs were functionalized by covalent attachment of Herceptin (HER), a monoclonal antibody that enables molecular recognition of breast cancer cells expressing highly specific tumor associated antigens, and poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) which obscures particles against the reticuloendothelial system in the body. The stability and functionality of fabricated particles (Her-PEG GNRs) were demonstrated in-vitro in the presence of blood and then in-vivo in nude mice model for breast cancer. The results demonstrate successful tumor accumulation of functionalized gold nanorods within HER2/neu over-expressing breast tumors in tumor-bearing nude mice and support the notions that GNRs can be used for molecular imaging of tumor.  Discussion The stability of injected gold nanorods within blood microenvironment is a key issue for successful targeting of GNRs to tumor cells in-vivo . Although non-covalent approaches has been widely used to conjugate gold nanoparticles to monoclonal antibodies for in-vitro applications ( 12 ), a non-covalent approach to bind monoclonal antibodies to gold nanoparticles should be avoided for in-vivo applications because blood contains a relatively high concentration of proteins that can compete with antibodies to bind to gold nanoparticles. This may accelerate the dissociation of antibodies from gold nanoparticles once nanoparticles are injected intravenously ( 39 ) and may result in non-specific binding. To avoid inactivation and instability of nanoparticles in-vivo , a covalent conjugation between nanoparticle and functional molecules is required ( 39 , 40 ). Another important parameter is the circulation time of injected nanoparticles within body. Based on the size and surface characteristics of nanoparticles, the reticuloendothelial system of the body filters injected nanoparticles from blood circulation ( 25 ). Rapid clearance of nanoparticles from blood limits tumor targeting capabilities. To avoid this problem, nanoparticles can be coated with PEG to hide them from the reticuloendothelial system of the body. The beneficiary effects of PEGylation on the circulating time of injected nanoparticles have been demonstrated ( 41 ). Covalent conjugation of gold nanorods to monoclonal antibodies without PEGylation has been reported in the literature ( 30 ). In the current work, hetero-functional gold nanorods were engineered by covalent conjugation of both monoclonal antibodies and PEG to gold nanorods. In-vitro toxicity study of engineered GNRs revealed that engineered nanoparticles were not toxic to cells. In addition, the stability and functionality of engineered particles in blood was investigated by incubating conjugated gold nanorods with mouse blood and then exposing them to cancer cells. Finally, engineered particles were injected intravenously into nude mice carrying breast cancer tumors demonstrating successful uptake of Her-PEG GNRs into tumors. In a previous report, it was demonstrated that laser optoacoustic imaging system (LOIS) as an imaging modality can detect gold nanorods at a low concentration in-vivo ( 17 ). The current work supports the notion that functionalized gold nanoparticles covalently linked to Herceptin results in targeted accumulation of Herceptin allowing for in-vivo targeting and molecular imaging of tumor.  Discussion The stability of injected gold nanorods within blood microenvironment is a key issue for successful targeting of GNRs to tumor cells in-vivo . Although non-covalent approaches has been widely used to conjugate gold nanoparticles to monoclonal antibodies for in-vitro applications ( 12 ), a non-covalent approach to bind monoclonal antibodies to gold nanoparticles should be avoided for in-vivo applications because blood contains a relatively high concentration of proteins that can compete with antibodies to bind to gold nanoparticles. This may accelerate the dissociation of antibodies from gold nanoparticles once nanoparticles are injected intravenously ( 39 ) and may result in non-specific binding. To avoid inactivation and instability of nanoparticles in-vivo , a covalent conjugation between nanoparticle and functional molecules is required ( 39 , 40 ). Another important parameter is the circulation time of injected nanoparticles within body. Based on the size and surface characteristics of nanoparticles, the reticuloendothelial system of the body filters injected nanoparticles from blood circulation ( 25 ). Rapid clearance of nanoparticles from blood limits tumor targeting capabilities. To avoid this problem, nanoparticles can be coated with PEG to hide them from the reticuloendothelial system of the body. The beneficiary effects of PEGylation on the circulating time of injected nanoparticles have been demonstrated ( 41 ). Covalent conjugation of gold nanorods to monoclonal antibodies without PEGylation has been reported in the literature ( 30 ). In the current work, hetero-functional gold nanorods were engineered by covalent conjugation of both monoclonal antibodies and PEG to gold nanorods. In-vitro toxicity study of engineered GNRs revealed that engineered nanoparticles were not toxic to cells. In addition, the stability and functionality of engineered particles in blood was investigated by incubating conjugated gold nanorods with mouse blood and then exposing them to cancer cells. Finally, engineered particles were injected intravenously into nude mice carrying breast cancer tumors demonstrating successful uptake of Her-PEG GNRs into tumors. In a previous report, it was demonstrated that laser optoacoustic imaging system (LOIS) as an imaging modality can detect gold nanorods at a low concentration in-vivo ( 17 ). The current work supports the notion that functionalized gold nanoparticles covalently linked to Herceptin results in targeted accumulation of Herceptin allowing for in-vivo targeting and molecular imaging of tumor.  CONCLUSION The current results indicate that Her-PEG GNRs are tolerated by cells, do not aggregate when exposed to blood microenvironment in-vitro , and preserve their selective binding properties in blood. In-vivo targeting of breast tumors that over express HER2/neu receptor in animal models was also achieved using Her-PEG GNRs. Considering the unique properties of GNRs to function as molecular imaging agent, applications of GNRs may lead to the development of highly promising imaging technique for early detection of cancer. 