Nomenclature and Definitions for Emergency Department Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) Testing: Report from the 2007 Conference of the National Emergency Department HIV Testing Consortium Early diagnosis of persons infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) through diagnostic testing and screening is a critical priority for individual and public health. Emergency departments (EDs) have an important role in this effort. As EDs gain experience in HIV testing, it is increasingly apparent that implementing testing is conceptually and operationally complex. A wide variety of HIV testing practice and research models have emerged, each reflecting adaptations to site-specific factors and the needs of local populations. The diversity and complexity inherent in nascent ED HIV testing practice and research are associated with the risk that findings will not be described according to a common lexicon. This article presents a comprehensive set of terms and definitions that can be used to describe ED-based HIV testing programs, developed by consensus opinion from the inaugural meeting of the National ED HIV Testing Consortium. These definitions are designed to facilitate discussion, increase comparability of future reports, and potentially accelerate wider implementation of ED HIV testing.  CONCLUSIONS By examining the diversity of factors relevant to the operation of ED-based HIV testing programs, the complexity and variability inherent in the process become apparent. The definitions provided in this article reflect consensus opinions provided by a convened group of ED clinicians and researchers, public health officials, HIV medicine clinicians, HIV advocates, and other groups. The purpose of the conceptual framework outlined here is to enhance translation of HIV testing to clinical practice by providing a common lexicon to aid interpretation of these programs and research efforts. A standardized nomenclature with which to describe implementation and research in ED HIV testing should facilitate and accelerate knowledge translation as institutions experiment and report on novel approaches to ED HIV testing. 