Abnormal Nuclear Pore Formation Triggers Apoptosis in the Intestinal Epithelium of elys -Deficient Zebrafish Background & Aims Zebrafish mutants generated by ethylnitrosourea (ENU)-mutagenesis provide a powerful tool for dissecting the genetic regulation of developmental processes, including organogenesis. One zebrafish mutant, “ flotte lotte ” ( flo ), displays striking defects in intestinal, liver, pancreas and eye formation at 78hpf. In this study we sought to identify the underlying mutated gene in flo and link the genetic lesion to its phenotype. Methods Positional cloning was employed to map the flo mutation. Sub-cellular characterization of flo embryos was achieved using histology, immunocytochemistry, bromodeoxyuridine incorporation analysis, confocal and electron microscopy. Results The molecular lesion in flo is a nonsense mutation in the elys ( e mbryonic l arge molecule derived from y olk s ac ) gene which encodes a severely truncated protein lacking the Elys C-terminal AT-hook DNA binding domain. Recently, ELYS has been shown to play a critical, and hitherto unsuspected, role in nuclear pore assembly. Though elys mRNA is expressed broadly during early zebrafish development, widespread early defects in flo are circumvented by the persistence of maternally-expressed elys mRNA until 24hpf. From 72hpf, elys mRNA expression is restricted to proliferating tissues, including the intestinal epithelium, pancreas, liver and eye. Cells in these tissues display disrupted nuclear pore formation; ultimately intestinal epithelial cells undergo apoptosis. Conclusion Our results demonstrate that Elys regulates digestive organ formation.  Introduction Zebrafish provide a powerful genetic model for the identification of molecular mechanisms that establish and maintain the intestinal epithelium. The zebrafish intestine has been shown to share many characteristics with its mammalian counterpart 1 – 4 and a number of ethylnitrosourea (ENU)-mutagenized zebrafish lines exhibiting abnormalities in intestinal development have been reported 2 , 5 – 9 . Some of the underlying mutated genes have recently been identified using positional cloning 6 – 9 . flotte lotte ti262c ( flo ), was identified on the basis of its abnormal intestinal morphology at 96 hours post-fertilization (hpf) 5 . An independent focused genetic screen 10 , carried out on the transgenic Tg(gutGFP) s854 background, in which all endoderm-derived organs express GFP 11 , yielded several additional intestinal mutants, including s871 , which exhibits an identical phenotype to flo ti262c . In this study, we provide a comprehensive characterization of the flo phenotype, revealing abnormalities in intestinal, liver and pancreatic cell organization, growth and survival and use positional cloning to identify elys ( e mbryonic l arge molecule derived from y olk s ac) as the mutated gene in flo. Elys (also known as Mel-28 12 , 13 ) encodes an AT-hook DNA binding protein, first discovered in mouse 14 , which was recently shown to play an indispensable role in nuclear pore assembly 12 , 13 , 15 – 18 . Nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) are large, dynamic protein assemblies that form 9 nm diameter pores in the nuclear envelope through which ions and small molecules diffuse, and larger molecules, such as proteins, RNAs, and ribonucleoprotein (RNP) particles, are actively transported. NPCs comprise multiple copies of approximately 30 individual components, called nucleoporins (Nups), which are disassembled during every round of cell division 19 . The behavior of ELYS and components of the Nup107–160 complex is particularly interesting. At the onset of mitosis, these proteins disassociate from the nuclear envelope and localize to the mitotic spindle and attach to the kinetochores of sister chromatids 12 , 13 , 15 – 17 . At the end of mitosis, they participate in a tightly-regulated process to rebuild the nuclear envelope by providing a scaffold for the recruitment and assembly of other proteins and endoplasmic reticulum-derived membrane lipid components 19 , 20 . The association of ELYS with chromatin appears to provide a seeding point for the assembly of Nups at the end of mitosis, thereby compartmentalizing the chromosomes within the cell 12 , 13 , 15 – 18 . Here we show that nuclear pore formation in the intestinal epithelium, liver and photoreceptor cell layer of the eye of flo embryos is severely disrupted, while nuclear pores in most other tissues appear normal. In flo intestinal epithelial cells, the consequence of aberrant nuclear pore formation is apoptosis, consistent with an essential role for Elys during vertebrate organogenesis.  Materials and Methods Zebrafish strains, embryo collection, confocal and electron microscopy Zebrafish embryos were obtained from natural spawnings of either wild-type, flo ti262c (kind gift of the Max-Planck-Institute of Developmental Biology, Tübingen, Germany), flo s871 , flo ti262c;Tg(gutGFP) s854 , and flo ti262c;Tg(nkx2.2a:mEGFP) 1 fish and staged by morphological criteria 21 . All procedures were approved by the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Animal Ethics Committee. Imaging of live embryos was carried out after anaesthetizing embryos with 200mg/L benzocaine (Sigma-Aldrich) in embryo medium (for further details of microscopy and imaging, see Supplemental Material online at www.gastrojournal.org ). All images are of the flo ti262c allele unless otherwise stated and were imported into CorelDRAW11. Image manipulation was limited to levels, hue, and saturation adjustments. Histology, immunocytochemistry and wholemount in situ hybridization Histology and immunocytochemistry were performed as described 1 , 22 . Mucins and other carbohydrates secreted by intestinal goblet cells were stained using alcian blue-periodic acid Schiff reagent 1 . Primary antibodies were mouse anti-BrdU (BD Biosciences Pharmingen), anti-Hu mAb 16A11 (Molecular Probes) and MAb414 (Covance), which recognizes multiple Nups containing hydrophobic phenylalanine-glycine (FG) repeats, including components of the Nup107–160 complex. Secondary antibodies were ZyMax HRP-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (Zymed Laboratories) or Alexa Fluor 488/568 anti-mouse IgGs (Molecular Probes). For wholemount in situ hybridization (WISH), embryos were processed as described 22 , 23 (see Supplemental Material online at www.gastrojournal.org ). Genetic mapping and positional cloning of flo For genetic mapping, flo ti262c heterozygotes on the Tübingen (Tü)/TL background were crossed onto the polymorphic WIK strain 24 . Mutant embryos were identified by eye and intestinal defects that were visible with the stereomicroscope from 78hpf. Full details of the steps taken to clone the mutated gene in flo are provided in Supplemental Material online at www.gastrojournal.org . Detection of wildtype and mutant elys RNA molecules using allele-specific (AS) RT-PCR To distinguish between the expression of wildtype and mutant elys mRNA molecules during the development of flo embryos, total RNA was extracted from pools of either wildtype or flo embryos at multiple time-points up to 96hpf. Since wildtype and flo embryos are only distinguishable by morphology from 78hpf, genotyping of individual embryos prior to this stage was required prior to pooling. Embryos were individually arrayed in a 96-well microtiter plate and homogenized in 125µl Trizol (Invitrogen). After addition of chloroform (25µl), two phases were separated according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Genotyping was carried out on DNA extracted from the lower phase. The corresponding upper phases of embryos identified as either homozygous wildtype (+/+) or homozygous flo were pooled for RNA extraction. The presence or absence of wildtype and mutant elys mRNA molecules in wildtype and flo embryos was determined by allele-specific (AS) RT-PCR using a temperature switch, four primer system 25 (see Supplemental Material online at www.gastrojournal.org ). Detection of cells in the S-phase of the cell cycle To identify cells in the S-phase of the cell cycle, bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation by live embryos was analyzed as described 1 .  Zebrafish strains, embryo collection, confocal and electron microscopy Zebrafish embryos were obtained from natural spawnings of either wild-type, flo ti262c (kind gift of the Max-Planck-Institute of Developmental Biology, Tübingen, Germany), flo s871 , flo ti262c;Tg(gutGFP) s854 , and flo ti262c;Tg(nkx2.2a:mEGFP) 1 fish and staged by morphological criteria 21 . All procedures were approved by the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Animal Ethics Committee. Imaging of live embryos was carried out after anaesthetizing embryos with 200mg/L benzocaine (Sigma-Aldrich) in embryo medium (for further details of microscopy and imaging, see Supplemental Material online at www.gastrojournal.org ). All images are of the flo ti262c allele unless otherwise stated and were imported into CorelDRAW11. Image manipulation was limited to levels, hue, and saturation adjustments.  Histology, immunocytochemistry and wholemount in situ hybridization Histology and immunocytochemistry were performed as described 1 , 22 . Mucins and other carbohydrates secreted by intestinal goblet cells were stained using alcian blue-periodic acid Schiff reagent 1 . Primary antibodies were mouse anti-BrdU (BD Biosciences Pharmingen), anti-Hu mAb 16A11 (Molecular Probes) and MAb414 (Covance), which recognizes multiple Nups containing hydrophobic phenylalanine-glycine (FG) repeats, including components of the Nup107–160 complex. Secondary antibodies were ZyMax HRP-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (Zymed Laboratories) or Alexa Fluor 488/568 anti-mouse IgGs (Molecular Probes). For wholemount in situ hybridization (WISH), embryos were processed as described 22 , 23 (see Supplemental Material online at www.gastrojournal.org ).  Genetic mapping and positional cloning of flo For genetic mapping, flo ti262c heterozygotes on the Tübingen (Tü)/TL background were crossed onto the polymorphic WIK strain 24 . Mutant embryos were identified by eye and intestinal defects that were visible with the stereomicroscope from 78hpf. Full details of the steps taken to clone the mutated gene in flo are provided in Supplemental Material online at www.gastrojournal.org .  Detection of wildtype and mutant elys RNA molecules using allele-specific (AS) RT-PCR To distinguish between the expression of wildtype and mutant elys mRNA molecules during the development of flo embryos, total RNA was extracted from pools of either wildtype or flo embryos at multiple time-points up to 96hpf. Since wildtype and flo embryos are only distinguishable by morphology from 78hpf, genotyping of individual embryos prior to this stage was required prior to pooling. Embryos were individually arrayed in a 96-well microtiter plate and homogenized in 125µl Trizol (Invitrogen). After addition of chloroform (25µl), two phases were separated according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Genotyping was carried out on DNA extracted from the lower phase. The corresponding upper phases of embryos identified as either homozygous wildtype (+/+) or homozygous flo were pooled for RNA extraction. The presence or absence of wildtype and mutant elys mRNA molecules in wildtype and flo embryos was determined by allele-specific (AS) RT-PCR using a temperature switch, four primer system 25 (see Supplemental Material online at www.gastrojournal.org ).  Detection of cells in the S-phase of the cell cycle To identify cells in the S-phase of the cell cycle, bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation by live embryos was analyzed as described 1 .  Results flo embryos exhibit gross defects in intestinal, liver, pancreas and eye development Using DIC microscopy, several gross defects in the development of flo embryos are evident ( Figure 1 A and 1 B ). The elaborate folding of the wildtype intestinal epithelium seen at 6 and 7 days post-fertilization (dpf) is impaired in flo and the mutant embryos also exhibit smaller eyes (microphthalmia), a smaller, misshapen head, kyphosis, a rarely inflated swim bladder and impaired yolk resorption. The flo phenotype is completely penetrant and the animals die from 7–8dpf. Heterozygous flo carriers are phenotypically indistinguishable from their +/+ siblings. Using histology we observed that wildtype intestinal epithelial cells exhibit a regular, columnar morphology at 96hpf ( Figure 1 C and 1 E ), whereas these cells in flo are disorganized, less polarized, are frequently detached from the monolayer ( Figure 1 D and 1 F ) and express the active form of Caspase 3 1 , indicating that they are in the execution phase of apoptosis. Histology also reveals disruption to the six cell layers of the flo retina at 84hpf: the retinal pigmented epithelial layer is expanded and the photoreceptor cell layer and the outerplexiform layer are largely absent ( Figure 1 C , right and Figure 1 D , right). At the ultrastructural level, wildtype intestinal epithelial cells at 96hpf exhibit tight junctions and a highly elaborated apical brush border while these cells in flo have poorly developed apicobasal polarity, sparse apical membrane microvilli and the intestinal lumen is largely occluded with cellular debris (see Supplemental Figure 1 A –1 E online at www.gastrojournal.org ). To determine the size and morphology of the other endoderm-derived digestive organs, the flo allele was introduced onto the Tg(gutGFP) s854 background 11 . Whereas the liver and pancreas anlagen in flo and wildtype embryos are morphologically similar at 72hpf, these organs are severely diminished in size in flo by 98hpf (see Supplemental Figure 2 A – D online at www.gastrojournal.org ). Additional defects of flo include impaired development of ceratobranchial cartilages 3–5 at 72hpf, revealed using alcian blue staining, and the absence of rag1 -positive thymic lymphocytes at 96hpf (data not shown). Loss of all three cell lineages in the intestinal epithelium of flo embryos The flo mutation reduced the abundance of all three cell lineages in the zebrafish intestinal epithelium. In wildtype embryos, the most abundant cells are the absorptive enterocytes followed by the mucin-secreting goblet cells and the relatively sparse hormone-secreting enteroendocrine cells. Goblet cells, which populate the pharynx, esophagus and mid-intestine of wildtype embryos at 96hpf are virtually absent from the pharynx and mid-intestine in flo ( Figure 1 E and 1 F ). Next, the distribution of enteroendocrine cells in flo was evaluated by introducing the flo allele onto the Tg(nkx2.2a:mEGFP) background 1 . While EGFP-positive enteroendocrine cells are scattered throughout wildtype intestinal epithelium at 96hpf ( Figure 2 A and 2 B ), they are found rarely in flo ( Figure 2 A and 2 C ). Instead, EGFP-fluorescence is largely associated with apoptotic cells and cellular debris in the intestinal lumen ( Figure 2 A ). To estimate the impact of the flo mutation on the absorptive enterocyte cells, we counted the number of Hoescht33342-positive nuclei in EGFP-negative cells in comparable sections of wildtype and flo embryos through the intestinal bulb region ( Figure 2 A ). Interestingly, nuclei in the absorptive enterocytes of flo embryos are aberrantly shaped and positioned ( Figure 2 A ). There are approximately 35% fewer absorptive enterocytes in flo embryos at 78hpf compared to wildtype and by 96hpf, the reduction is more severe (65%). Role of flo in enteric neuron differentiation and spreading The broad impact of flo on intestinal development prompted us to examine the behavior of neural crest-derived enteric neurons (ENS). ENS migration from the vagal region to the intestine was followed using the pan crest-specific marker, crestin (36hpf) and the ENS precursor-specific marker, phox2b (55hpf). No differences in the initial migration of ENS precursors are observed in flo at 36hpf (data not shown) or along the length of the intestine at 55hpf ( Figure 2 D ). From 96–120hpf, wildtype Hu-positive, differentiated ENS are spread along the entire length and circumference of the intestine ( Figure 2 E ) but in flo these cells are fewer, particularly in the posterior intestine, and are restricted to the lateral margins of the mid-intestine where they initially migrated in columns ( Figure 2 E ) 3 . However, ENS cells are not lost by apoptosis, as shown by the absence of TUNEL staining at several time-points (data not shown). ENS migration has recently been shown to depend on Hedgehog signaling from intestinal endoderm 22 ; this process may be impaired in flo due to the abnormal development of this tissue. flo encodes Elys, a protein with an AT-hook DNA binding motif Positional cloning was used to identify the mutant gene responsible for abnormal digestive organ development in flo . We mapped the flo locus to a 50kb interval on chromosome 17 essentially encompassing a single gene, elys ( Figure 3 A ; see also Supplementary Material online at www.gastrojournal.org ). Zebrafish elys spans 28,464bp and comprises 36 exons, including a 5’ non-coding exon. flo carries a codon 1319 (C?T) base change in exon 29 of elys that encodes a premature stop codon ( Fig 3 B ). Individual embryo genotyping demonstrated invariable linkage of the nonsense mutation to the flo phenotype. That mutant elys is responsible for the flo phenotype was confirmed by non-complementation with an independent flo allele ( flo s871 ) (see Supplemental Figure 3 A – D online at www.gastrojournal.org ) that was identified in a focused genetic screen for mutants with defects in endoderm organ formation 10 . flo s871 also harbors a nonsense mutation in elys ; a (T?A) base change in codon 461 ( Figure 3 C ). Zebrafish elys encodes a protein of 2527 amino acids ( Figure 3 D and Supplemental Figure 4 online at www.gastrojournal.org ). Three nuclear export signals and two WD-40 domains originally described in mouse Elys 14 are conserved. Two bipartite nuclear localization signals 26 reside in the C-terminal region and an AT-hook chromatin/DNA binding sequence 27 occurs at position 1994. Both nonsense mutations are predicted to delete the DNA binding domain and nuclear localization signals. elys is conserved from worms to mammals (See Supplemental Figure 5 online at www.gastrojournal.org ). Analysis of elys mRNA expression during zebrafish development The relatively late onset of the flo phenotype (>72hpf) is surprising given the indispensable role of ELYS in nuclear pore formation. To assess whether the early development of flo embryos is supported by maternal expression of wildtype elys mRNA molecules deposited into the egg by the heterozygous mother during oogenesis, we conducted allele-specific (AS) RT-PCR. This approach ( Figure 4 A ) allowed us to distinguish between wildtype elys mRNA expressed maternally and mutant elys mRNA expressed zygotically in genotyped +/+ and flo embryos at multiple time-points over the first 96hpf. +/+ embryos express only wildtype mRNA molecules ( Figure 4 B and 4 C ) at all time-points investigated. Comparable levels of wildtype elys mRNA are also expressed in flo embryos up to 8hpf ( Figure 4 B ). From 12hpf, maternal expression of wildtype elys mRNA in flo embryos progressively wanes until at 48hpf no wildtype elys mRNA remains ( Figure 4 B ). At the same time, the expression of zygotic mutant elys mRNA molecules in flo is induced and persists thereafter ( Figure 4 C ). To identify the specific tissues expressing elys mRNA, we performed WISH analysis. At 24hpf, elys is widely expressed in the anterior portion of the embryo including the retina, pharyngeal region, midbrain and hindbrain ( Figure 4 D ). At 48–52hpf elys expression is present in a small area of the forebrain, the midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB), the pharyngeal region, developing liver, anterior intestine and fin buds ( Figure 4 D ). By 72hpf, elys expression is restricted to the pharyngeal region, anterior intestine, liver, fin buds, MHB and retina ( Figure 4 E ). At 96hpf, transverse sections of wholemount preparations reveal strong expression of elys mRNA in liver, pancreas and intestinal epithelial cells ( Figure 4 E ). In contrast, the presence of elys mRNA is barely discernible in flo embryos at 96hpf ( Figure 4 E ), possibly due to nonsense-mediated RNA decay. The discrepancy here with the data in Figure 4 B , where mutant elys mRNA is detectable at 96hpf, may reflect the greater sensitivity of the RT-PCR method compared to WISH. The formation of nuclear pores is disrupted in the intestinal epithelium of flo embryos Recent studies have established that Elys plays an indispensable role in nuclear pore formation and mitosis 15 – 17 . We therefore analyzed the distribution of NPCs in various tissues of flo and wildtype embryos using monoclonal antibody, MAb414. We found that the localization of NPCs in intestinal epithelial cells of flo embryos is severely disrupted at 78hpf. Whereas immunofluorescent staining of NPCs produces a punctate rim of fluorescence around the circumference of the nucleus in wildtype intestinal epithelial cells ( Figure 5 A and 5 A’ ), the NPCs in intestinal epithelial cells of flo appear as large aggregates in the cytoplasm ( Figure 5 B and 5 B’ ). Similar aggregates have been observed in human cell lines depleted of ELYS using RNAi 5 . When analyzed using TEM, the aggregates correspond to annulate lamellae comprising stacks of cytoplasmic pores 15 . In flo , detached epithelial cells present in the intestinal lumen contain profuse cytoplasmic aggregates ( Figure 5 B’ ). In rare cells, where NPCs remain associated with the nuclear rim, the punctate staining is sparser than in wildtype ( Figure 5 B’ ). At 78hpf, the localization of NPCs is also disrupted in the flo liver where cytoplasmic aggregates are abundant (compare Figure 5 C and 5 C’ with Figure 5 D and 5 D’ ). The ultrastructural appearance of nuclear pores in intestinal epithelial cells of wildtype and flo embryos at 82hpf was examined using TEM. Whereas nuclear pores are readily identifiable in wildtype intestinal epithelial cells ( Figure 5 E ; approximately 5.1 per nuclear profile), they are absent in flo intestinal epithelial cells ( Figure 5 E ). In contrast, other cells in flo embryos, such as the peridermal cell shown in Figure 5 E display abundant, apparently normal, nuclear pores (approximately 3.9 per nuclear profile, compared to 4.4 in wildtype cells). Outside the digestive system, the localization of NPCs is relatively unperturbed. However, cytoplasmic aggregates are found in the most dorsally positioned cells in the midbrain (compare Figure 6 A and 6 A’ with Figure 6 B , 6 B’ and 6 B’’ ) and in the photoreceptor cell layer of the retinal epithelium (compare Figure 6 C and C’ with Figure 6 D and 6 D’’ ). Aberrant development of flo embryos is restricted to proliferating tissues at 72hpf Our observation that the flo phenotype is restricted to specific organs appears to mirror the tissue-specific elys gene expression pattern from 72hpf. This pattern is also reflected in the cell cycle activity of cells in these organs at 72hpf. In wildtype and flo embryos, we observed a high frequency of BrdU-positive cells in the intestinal epithelium ( Figure 7 A –7 C ), pharyngeal arches ( Figure 7 A and 7 B ), liver ( Figure 7 A ), dorsal midbrain, cerebellum, dorsal hindbrain ( Figure 7 B and 7 C ), retinal epithelium ( Figure 7 B and 7 C ) and pancreas ( Figure 7 B ). Strikingly, the tissues demonstrating the highest rates of BrdU uptake are the ones most severely disrupted in flo . In contrast, unaffected tissues in flo , such as the somites, heart and some areas of the brain are quiescent.  Results flo embryos exhibit gross defects in intestinal, liver, pancreas and eye development Using DIC microscopy, several gross defects in the development of flo embryos are evident ( Figure 1 A and 1 B ). The elaborate folding of the wildtype intestinal epithelium seen at 6 and 7 days post-fertilization (dpf) is impaired in flo and the mutant embryos also exhibit smaller eyes (microphthalmia), a smaller, misshapen head, kyphosis, a rarely inflated swim bladder and impaired yolk resorption. The flo phenotype is completely penetrant and the animals die from 7–8dpf. Heterozygous flo carriers are phenotypically indistinguishable from their +/+ siblings. Using histology we observed that wildtype intestinal epithelial cells exhibit a regular, columnar morphology at 96hpf ( Figure 1 C and 1 E ), whereas these cells in flo are disorganized, less polarized, are frequently detached from the monolayer ( Figure 1 D and 1 F ) and express the active form of Caspase 3 1 , indicating that they are in the execution phase of apoptosis. Histology also reveals disruption to the six cell layers of the flo retina at 84hpf: the retinal pigmented epithelial layer is expanded and the photoreceptor cell layer and the outerplexiform layer are largely absent ( Figure 1 C , right and Figure 1 D , right). At the ultrastructural level, wildtype intestinal epithelial cells at 96hpf exhibit tight junctions and a highly elaborated apical brush border while these cells in flo have poorly developed apicobasal polarity, sparse apical membrane microvilli and the intestinal lumen is largely occluded with cellular debris (see Supplemental Figure 1 A –1 E online at www.gastrojournal.org ). To determine the size and morphology of the other endoderm-derived digestive organs, the flo allele was introduced onto the Tg(gutGFP) s854 background 11 . Whereas the liver and pancreas anlagen in flo and wildtype embryos are morphologically similar at 72hpf, these organs are severely diminished in size in flo by 98hpf (see Supplemental Figure 2 A – D online at www.gastrojournal.org ). Additional defects of flo include impaired development of ceratobranchial cartilages 3–5 at 72hpf, revealed using alcian blue staining, and the absence of rag1 -positive thymic lymphocytes at 96hpf (data not shown). Loss of all three cell lineages in the intestinal epithelium of flo embryos The flo mutation reduced the abundance of all three cell lineages in the zebrafish intestinal epithelium. In wildtype embryos, the most abundant cells are the absorptive enterocytes followed by the mucin-secreting goblet cells and the relatively sparse hormone-secreting enteroendocrine cells. Goblet cells, which populate the pharynx, esophagus and mid-intestine of wildtype embryos at 96hpf are virtually absent from the pharynx and mid-intestine in flo ( Figure 1 E and 1 F ). Next, the distribution of enteroendocrine cells in flo was evaluated by introducing the flo allele onto the Tg(nkx2.2a:mEGFP) background 1 . While EGFP-positive enteroendocrine cells are scattered throughout wildtype intestinal epithelium at 96hpf ( Figure 2 A and 2 B ), they are found rarely in flo ( Figure 2 A and 2 C ). Instead, EGFP-fluorescence is largely associated with apoptotic cells and cellular debris in the intestinal lumen ( Figure 2 A ). To estimate the impact of the flo mutation on the absorptive enterocyte cells, we counted the number of Hoescht33342-positive nuclei in EGFP-negative cells in comparable sections of wildtype and flo embryos through the intestinal bulb region ( Figure 2 A ). Interestingly, nuclei in the absorptive enterocytes of flo embryos are aberrantly shaped and positioned ( Figure 2 A ). There are approximately 35% fewer absorptive enterocytes in flo embryos at 78hpf compared to wildtype and by 96hpf, the reduction is more severe (65%). Role of flo in enteric neuron differentiation and spreading The broad impact of flo on intestinal development prompted us to examine the behavior of neural crest-derived enteric neurons (ENS). ENS migration from the vagal region to the intestine was followed using the pan crest-specific marker, crestin (36hpf) and the ENS precursor-specific marker, phox2b (55hpf). No differences in the initial migration of ENS precursors are observed in flo at 36hpf (data not shown) or along the length of the intestine at 55hpf ( Figure 2 D ). From 96–120hpf, wildtype Hu-positive, differentiated ENS are spread along the entire length and circumference of the intestine ( Figure 2 E ) but in flo these cells are fewer, particularly in the posterior intestine, and are restricted to the lateral margins of the mid-intestine where they initially migrated in columns ( Figure 2 E ) 3 . However, ENS cells are not lost by apoptosis, as shown by the absence of TUNEL staining at several time-points (data not shown). ENS migration has recently been shown to depend on Hedgehog signaling from intestinal endoderm 22 ; this process may be impaired in flo due to the abnormal development of this tissue. flo encodes Elys, a protein with an AT-hook DNA binding motif Positional cloning was used to identify the mutant gene responsible for abnormal digestive organ development in flo . We mapped the flo locus to a 50kb interval on chromosome 17 essentially encompassing a single gene, elys ( Figure 3 A ; see also Supplementary Material online at www.gastrojournal.org ). Zebrafish elys spans 28,464bp and comprises 36 exons, including a 5’ non-coding exon. flo carries a codon 1319 (C?T) base change in exon 29 of elys that encodes a premature stop codon ( Fig 3 B ). Individual embryo genotyping demonstrated invariable linkage of the nonsense mutation to the flo phenotype. That mutant elys is responsible for the flo phenotype was confirmed by non-complementation with an independent flo allele ( flo s871 ) (see Supplemental Figure 3 A – D online at www.gastrojournal.org ) that was identified in a focused genetic screen for mutants with defects in endoderm organ formation 10 . flo s871 also harbors a nonsense mutation in elys ; a (T?A) base change in codon 461 ( Figure 3 C ). Zebrafish elys encodes a protein of 2527 amino acids ( Figure 3 D and Supplemental Figure 4 online at www.gastrojournal.org ). Three nuclear export signals and two WD-40 domains originally described in mouse Elys 14 are conserved. Two bipartite nuclear localization signals 26 reside in the C-terminal region and an AT-hook chromatin/DNA binding sequence 27 occurs at position 1994. Both nonsense mutations are predicted to delete the DNA binding domain and nuclear localization signals. elys is conserved from worms to mammals (See Supplemental Figure 5 online at www.gastrojournal.org ). Analysis of elys mRNA expression during zebrafish development The relatively late onset of the flo phenotype (>72hpf) is surprising given the indispensable role of ELYS in nuclear pore formation. To assess whether the early development of flo embryos is supported by maternal expression of wildtype elys mRNA molecules deposited into the egg by the heterozygous mother during oogenesis, we conducted allele-specific (AS) RT-PCR. This approach ( Figure 4 A ) allowed us to distinguish between wildtype elys mRNA expressed maternally and mutant elys mRNA expressed zygotically in genotyped +/+ and flo embryos at multiple time-points over the first 96hpf. +/+ embryos express only wildtype mRNA molecules ( Figure 4 B and 4 C ) at all time-points investigated. Comparable levels of wildtype elys mRNA are also expressed in flo embryos up to 8hpf ( Figure 4 B ). From 12hpf, maternal expression of wildtype elys mRNA in flo embryos progressively wanes until at 48hpf no wildtype elys mRNA remains ( Figure 4 B ). At the same time, the expression of zygotic mutant elys mRNA molecules in flo is induced and persists thereafter ( Figure 4 C ). To identify the specific tissues expressing elys mRNA, we performed WISH analysis. At 24hpf, elys is widely expressed in the anterior portion of the embryo including the retina, pharyngeal region, midbrain and hindbrain ( Figure 4 D ). At 48–52hpf elys expression is present in a small area of the forebrain, the midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB), the pharyngeal region, developing liver, anterior intestine and fin buds ( Figure 4 D ). By 72hpf, elys expression is restricted to the pharyngeal region, anterior intestine, liver, fin buds, MHB and retina ( Figure 4 E ). At 96hpf, transverse sections of wholemount preparations reveal strong expression of elys mRNA in liver, pancreas and intestinal epithelial cells ( Figure 4 E ). In contrast, the presence of elys mRNA is barely discernible in flo embryos at 96hpf ( Figure 4 E ), possibly due to nonsense-mediated RNA decay. The discrepancy here with the data in Figure 4 B , where mutant elys mRNA is detectable at 96hpf, may reflect the greater sensitivity of the RT-PCR method compared to WISH. The formation of nuclear pores is disrupted in the intestinal epithelium of flo embryos Recent studies have established that Elys plays an indispensable role in nuclear pore formation and mitosis 15 – 17 . We therefore analyzed the distribution of NPCs in various tissues of flo and wildtype embryos using monoclonal antibody, MAb414. We found that the localization of NPCs in intestinal epithelial cells of flo embryos is severely disrupted at 78hpf. Whereas immunofluorescent staining of NPCs produces a punctate rim of fluorescence around the circumference of the nucleus in wildtype intestinal epithelial cells ( Figure 5 A and 5 A’ ), the NPCs in intestinal epithelial cells of flo appear as large aggregates in the cytoplasm ( Figure 5 B and 5 B’ ). Similar aggregates have been observed in human cell lines depleted of ELYS using RNAi 5 . When analyzed using TEM, the aggregates correspond to annulate lamellae comprising stacks of cytoplasmic pores 15 . In flo , detached epithelial cells present in the intestinal lumen contain profuse cytoplasmic aggregates ( Figure 5 B’ ). In rare cells, where NPCs remain associated with the nuclear rim, the punctate staining is sparser than in wildtype ( Figure 5 B’ ). At 78hpf, the localization of NPCs is also disrupted in the flo liver where cytoplasmic aggregates are abundant (compare Figure 5 C and 5 C’ with Figure 5 D and 5 D’ ). The ultrastructural appearance of nuclear pores in intestinal epithelial cells of wildtype and flo embryos at 82hpf was examined using TEM. Whereas nuclear pores are readily identifiable in wildtype intestinal epithelial cells ( Figure 5 E ; approximately 5.1 per nuclear profile), they are absent in flo intestinal epithelial cells ( Figure 5 E ). In contrast, other cells in flo embryos, such as the peridermal cell shown in Figure 5 E display abundant, apparently normal, nuclear pores (approximately 3.9 per nuclear profile, compared to 4.4 in wildtype cells). Outside the digestive system, the localization of NPCs is relatively unperturbed. However, cytoplasmic aggregates are found in the most dorsally positioned cells in the midbrain (compare Figure 6 A and 6 A’ with Figure 6 B , 6 B’ and 6 B’’ ) and in the photoreceptor cell layer of the retinal epithelium (compare Figure 6 C and C’ with Figure 6 D and 6 D’’ ). Aberrant development of flo embryos is restricted to proliferating tissues at 72hpf Our observation that the flo phenotype is restricted to specific organs appears to mirror the tissue-specific elys gene expression pattern from 72hpf. This pattern is also reflected in the cell cycle activity of cells in these organs at 72hpf. In wildtype and flo embryos, we observed a high frequency of BrdU-positive cells in the intestinal epithelium ( Figure 7 A –7 C ), pharyngeal arches ( Figure 7 A and 7 B ), liver ( Figure 7 A ), dorsal midbrain, cerebellum, dorsal hindbrain ( Figure 7 B and 7 C ), retinal epithelium ( Figure 7 B and 7 C ) and pancreas ( Figure 7 B ). Strikingly, the tissues demonstrating the highest rates of BrdU uptake are the ones most severely disrupted in flo . In contrast, unaffected tissues in flo , such as the somites, heart and some areas of the brain are quiescent.  flo embryos exhibit gross defects in intestinal, liver, pancreas and eye development Using DIC microscopy, several gross defects in the development of flo embryos are evident ( Figure 1 A and 1 B ). The elaborate folding of the wildtype intestinal epithelium seen at 6 and 7 days post-fertilization (dpf) is impaired in flo and the mutant embryos also exhibit smaller eyes (microphthalmia), a smaller, misshapen head, kyphosis, a rarely inflated swim bladder and impaired yolk resorption. The flo phenotype is completely penetrant and the animals die from 7–8dpf. Heterozygous flo carriers are phenotypically indistinguishable from their +/+ siblings. Using histology we observed that wildtype intestinal epithelial cells exhibit a regular, columnar morphology at 96hpf ( Figure 1 C and 1 E ), whereas these cells in flo are disorganized, less polarized, are frequently detached from the monolayer ( Figure 1 D and 1 F ) and express the active form of Caspase 3 1 , indicating that they are in the execution phase of apoptosis. Histology also reveals disruption to the six cell layers of the flo retina at 84hpf: the retinal pigmented epithelial layer is expanded and the photoreceptor cell layer and the outerplexiform layer are largely absent ( Figure 1 C , right and Figure 1 D , right). At the ultrastructural level, wildtype intestinal epithelial cells at 96hpf exhibit tight junctions and a highly elaborated apical brush border while these cells in flo have poorly developed apicobasal polarity, sparse apical membrane microvilli and the intestinal lumen is largely occluded with cellular debris (see Supplemental Figure 1 A –1 E online at www.gastrojournal.org ). To determine the size and morphology of the other endoderm-derived digestive organs, the flo allele was introduced onto the Tg(gutGFP) s854 background 11 . Whereas the liver and pancreas anlagen in flo and wildtype embryos are morphologically similar at 72hpf, these organs are severely diminished in size in flo by 98hpf (see Supplemental Figure 2 A – D online at www.gastrojournal.org ). Additional defects of flo include impaired development of ceratobranchial cartilages 3–5 at 72hpf, revealed using alcian blue staining, and the absence of rag1 -positive thymic lymphocytes at 96hpf (data not shown).  flo embryos exhibit gross defects in intestinal, liver, pancreas and eye development Using DIC microscopy, several gross defects in the development of flo embryos are evident ( Figure 1 A and 1 B ). The elaborate folding of the wildtype intestinal epithelium seen at 6 and 7 days post-fertilization (dpf) is impaired in flo and the mutant embryos also exhibit smaller eyes (microphthalmia), a smaller, misshapen head, kyphosis, a rarely inflated swim bladder and impaired yolk resorption. The flo phenotype is completely penetrant and the animals die from 7–8dpf. Heterozygous flo carriers are phenotypically indistinguishable from their +/+ siblings. Using histology we observed that wildtype intestinal epithelial cells exhibit a regular, columnar morphology at 96hpf ( Figure 1 C and 1 E ), whereas these cells in flo are disorganized, less polarized, are frequently detached from the monolayer ( Figure 1 D and 1 F ) and express the active form of Caspase 3 1 , indicating that they are in the execution phase of apoptosis. Histology also reveals disruption to the six cell layers of the flo retina at 84hpf: the retinal pigmented epithelial layer is expanded and the photoreceptor cell layer and the outerplexiform layer are largely absent ( Figure 1 C , right and Figure 1 D , right). At the ultrastructural level, wildtype intestinal epithelial cells at 96hpf exhibit tight junctions and a highly elaborated apical brush border while these cells in flo have poorly developed apicobasal polarity, sparse apical membrane microvilli and the intestinal lumen is largely occluded with cellular debris (see Supplemental Figure 1 A –1 E online at www.gastrojournal.org ). To determine the size and morphology of the other endoderm-derived digestive organs, the flo allele was introduced onto the Tg(gutGFP) s854 background 11 . Whereas the liver and pancreas anlagen in flo and wildtype embryos are morphologically similar at 72hpf, these organs are severely diminished in size in flo by 98hpf (see Supplemental Figure 2 A – D online at www.gastrojournal.org ). Additional defects of flo include impaired development of ceratobranchial cartilages 3–5 at 72hpf, revealed using alcian blue staining, and the absence of rag1 -positive thymic lymphocytes at 96hpf (data not shown).  Loss of all three cell lineages in the intestinal epithelium of flo embryos The flo mutation reduced the abundance of all three cell lineages in the zebrafish intestinal epithelium. In wildtype embryos, the most abundant cells are the absorptive enterocytes followed by the mucin-secreting goblet cells and the relatively sparse hormone-secreting enteroendocrine cells. Goblet cells, which populate the pharynx, esophagus and mid-intestine of wildtype embryos at 96hpf are virtually absent from the pharynx and mid-intestine in flo ( Figure 1 E and 1 F ). Next, the distribution of enteroendocrine cells in flo was evaluated by introducing the flo allele onto the Tg(nkx2.2a:mEGFP) background 1 . While EGFP-positive enteroendocrine cells are scattered throughout wildtype intestinal epithelium at 96hpf ( Figure 2 A and 2 B ), they are found rarely in flo ( Figure 2 A and 2 C ). Instead, EGFP-fluorescence is largely associated with apoptotic cells and cellular debris in the intestinal lumen ( Figure 2 A ). To estimate the impact of the flo mutation on the absorptive enterocyte cells, we counted the number of Hoescht33342-positive nuclei in EGFP-negative cells in comparable sections of wildtype and flo embryos through the intestinal bulb region ( Figure 2 A ). Interestingly, nuclei in the absorptive enterocytes of flo embryos are aberrantly shaped and positioned ( Figure 2 A ). There are approximately 35% fewer absorptive enterocytes in flo embryos at 78hpf compared to wildtype and by 96hpf, the reduction is more severe (65%).  Loss of all three cell lineages in the intestinal epithelium of flo embryos The flo mutation reduced the abundance of all three cell lineages in the zebrafish intestinal epithelium. In wildtype embryos, the most abundant cells are the absorptive enterocytes followed by the mucin-secreting goblet cells and the relatively sparse hormone-secreting enteroendocrine cells. Goblet cells, which populate the pharynx, esophagus and mid-intestine of wildtype embryos at 96hpf are virtually absent from the pharynx and mid-intestine in flo ( Figure 1 E and 1 F ). Next, the distribution of enteroendocrine cells in flo was evaluated by introducing the flo allele onto the Tg(nkx2.2a:mEGFP) background 1 . While EGFP-positive enteroendocrine cells are scattered throughout wildtype intestinal epithelium at 96hpf ( Figure 2 A and 2 B ), they are found rarely in flo ( Figure 2 A and 2 C ). Instead, EGFP-fluorescence is largely associated with apoptotic cells and cellular debris in the intestinal lumen ( Figure 2 A ). To estimate the impact of the flo mutation on the absorptive enterocyte cells, we counted the number of Hoescht33342-positive nuclei in EGFP-negative cells in comparable sections of wildtype and flo embryos through the intestinal bulb region ( Figure 2 A ). Interestingly, nuclei in the absorptive enterocytes of flo embryos are aberrantly shaped and positioned ( Figure 2 A ). There are approximately 35% fewer absorptive enterocytes in flo embryos at 78hpf compared to wildtype and by 96hpf, the reduction is more severe (65%).  Role of flo in enteric neuron differentiation and spreading The broad impact of flo on intestinal development prompted us to examine the behavior of neural crest-derived enteric neurons (ENS). ENS migration from the vagal region to the intestine was followed using the pan crest-specific marker, crestin (36hpf) and the ENS precursor-specific marker, phox2b (55hpf). No differences in the initial migration of ENS precursors are observed in flo at 36hpf (data not shown) or along the length of the intestine at 55hpf ( Figure 2 D ). From 96–120hpf, wildtype Hu-positive, differentiated ENS are spread along the entire length and circumference of the intestine ( Figure 2 E ) but in flo these cells are fewer, particularly in the posterior intestine, and are restricted to the lateral margins of the mid-intestine where they initially migrated in columns ( Figure 2 E ) 3 . However, ENS cells are not lost by apoptosis, as shown by the absence of TUNEL staining at several time-points (data not shown). ENS migration has recently been shown to depend on Hedgehog signaling from intestinal endoderm 22 ; this process may be impaired in flo due to the abnormal development of this tissue.  Role of flo in enteric neuron differentiation and spreading The broad impact of flo on intestinal development prompted us to examine the behavior of neural crest-derived enteric neurons (ENS). ENS migration from the vagal region to the intestine was followed using the pan crest-specific marker, crestin (36hpf) and the ENS precursor-specific marker, phox2b (55hpf). No differences in the initial migration of ENS precursors are observed in flo at 36hpf (data not shown) or along the length of the intestine at 55hpf ( Figure 2 D ). From 96–120hpf, wildtype Hu-positive, differentiated ENS are spread along the entire length and circumference of the intestine ( Figure 2 E ) but in flo these cells are fewer, particularly in the posterior intestine, and are restricted to the lateral margins of the mid-intestine where they initially migrated in columns ( Figure 2 E ) 3 . However, ENS cells are not lost by apoptosis, as shown by the absence of TUNEL staining at several time-points (data not shown). ENS migration has recently been shown to depend on Hedgehog signaling from intestinal endoderm 22 ; this process may be impaired in flo due to the abnormal development of this tissue.  flo encodes Elys, a protein with an AT-hook DNA binding motif Positional cloning was used to identify the mutant gene responsible for abnormal digestive organ development in flo . We mapped the flo locus to a 50kb interval on chromosome 17 essentially encompassing a single gene, elys ( Figure 3 A ; see also Supplementary Material online at www.gastrojournal.org ). Zebrafish elys spans 28,464bp and comprises 36 exons, including a 5’ non-coding exon. flo carries a codon 1319 (C?T) base change in exon 29 of elys that encodes a premature stop codon ( Fig 3 B ). Individual embryo genotyping demonstrated invariable linkage of the nonsense mutation to the flo phenotype. That mutant elys is responsible for the flo phenotype was confirmed by non-complementation with an independent flo allele ( flo s871 ) (see Supplemental Figure 3 A – D online at www.gastrojournal.org ) that was identified in a focused genetic screen for mutants with defects in endoderm organ formation 10 . flo s871 also harbors a nonsense mutation in elys ; a (T?A) base change in codon 461 ( Figure 3 C ). Zebrafish elys encodes a protein of 2527 amino acids ( Figure 3 D and Supplemental Figure 4 online at www.gastrojournal.org ). Three nuclear export signals and two WD-40 domains originally described in mouse Elys 14 are conserved. Two bipartite nuclear localization signals 26 reside in the C-terminal region and an AT-hook chromatin/DNA binding sequence 27 occurs at position 1994. Both nonsense mutations are predicted to delete the DNA binding domain and nuclear localization signals. elys is conserved from worms to mammals (See Supplemental Figure 5 online at www.gastrojournal.org ).  flo encodes Elys, a protein with an AT-hook DNA binding motif Positional cloning was used to identify the mutant gene responsible for abnormal digestive organ development in flo . We mapped the flo locus to a 50kb interval on chromosome 17 essentially encompassing a single gene, elys ( Figure 3 A ; see also Supplementary Material online at www.gastrojournal.org ). Zebrafish elys spans 28,464bp and comprises 36 exons, including a 5’ non-coding exon. flo carries a codon 1319 (C?T) base change in exon 29 of elys that encodes a premature stop codon ( Fig 3 B ). Individual embryo genotyping demonstrated invariable linkage of the nonsense mutation to the flo phenotype. That mutant elys is responsible for the flo phenotype was confirmed by non-complementation with an independent flo allele ( flo s871 ) (see Supplemental Figure 3 A – D online at www.gastrojournal.org ) that was identified in a focused genetic screen for mutants with defects in endoderm organ formation 10 . flo s871 also harbors a nonsense mutation in elys ; a (T?A) base change in codon 461 ( Figure 3 C ). Zebrafish elys encodes a protein of 2527 amino acids ( Figure 3 D and Supplemental Figure 4 online at www.gastrojournal.org ). Three nuclear export signals and two WD-40 domains originally described in mouse Elys 14 are conserved. Two bipartite nuclear localization signals 26 reside in the C-terminal region and an AT-hook chromatin/DNA binding sequence 27 occurs at position 1994. Both nonsense mutations are predicted to delete the DNA binding domain and nuclear localization signals. elys is conserved from worms to mammals (See Supplemental Figure 5 online at www.gastrojournal.org ).  Analysis of elys mRNA expression during zebrafish development The relatively late onset of the flo phenotype (>72hpf) is surprising given the indispensable role of ELYS in nuclear pore formation. To assess whether the early development of flo embryos is supported by maternal expression of wildtype elys mRNA molecules deposited into the egg by the heterozygous mother during oogenesis, we conducted allele-specific (AS) RT-PCR. This approach ( Figure 4 A ) allowed us to distinguish between wildtype elys mRNA expressed maternally and mutant elys mRNA expressed zygotically in genotyped +/+ and flo embryos at multiple time-points over the first 96hpf. +/+ embryos express only wildtype mRNA molecules ( Figure 4 B and 4 C ) at all time-points investigated. Comparable levels of wildtype elys mRNA are also expressed in flo embryos up to 8hpf ( Figure 4 B ). From 12hpf, maternal expression of wildtype elys mRNA in flo embryos progressively wanes until at 48hpf no wildtype elys mRNA remains ( Figure 4 B ). At the same time, the expression of zygotic mutant elys mRNA molecules in flo is induced and persists thereafter ( Figure 4 C ). To identify the specific tissues expressing elys mRNA, we performed WISH analysis. At 24hpf, elys is widely expressed in the anterior portion of the embryo including the retina, pharyngeal region, midbrain and hindbrain ( Figure 4 D ). At 48–52hpf elys expression is present in a small area of the forebrain, the midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB), the pharyngeal region, developing liver, anterior intestine and fin buds ( Figure 4 D ). By 72hpf, elys expression is restricted to the pharyngeal region, anterior intestine, liver, fin buds, MHB and retina ( Figure 4 E ). At 96hpf, transverse sections of wholemount preparations reveal strong expression of elys mRNA in liver, pancreas and intestinal epithelial cells ( Figure 4 E ). In contrast, the presence of elys mRNA is barely discernible in flo embryos at 96hpf ( Figure 4 E ), possibly due to nonsense-mediated RNA decay. The discrepancy here with the data in Figure 4 B , where mutant elys mRNA is detectable at 96hpf, may reflect the greater sensitivity of the RT-PCR method compared to WISH.  Analysis of elys mRNA expression during zebrafish development The relatively late onset of the flo phenotype (>72hpf) is surprising given the indispensable role of ELYS in nuclear pore formation. To assess whether the early development of flo embryos is supported by maternal expression of wildtype elys mRNA molecules deposited into the egg by the heterozygous mother during oogenesis, we conducted allele-specific (AS) RT-PCR. This approach ( Figure 4 A ) allowed us to distinguish between wildtype elys mRNA expressed maternally and mutant elys mRNA expressed zygotically in genotyped +/+ and flo embryos at multiple time-points over the first 96hpf. +/+ embryos express only wildtype mRNA molecules ( Figure 4 B and 4 C ) at all time-points investigated. Comparable levels of wildtype elys mRNA are also expressed in flo embryos up to 8hpf ( Figure 4 B ). From 12hpf, maternal expression of wildtype elys mRNA in flo embryos progressively wanes until at 48hpf no wildtype elys mRNA remains ( Figure 4 B ). At the same time, the expression of zygotic mutant elys mRNA molecules in flo is induced and persists thereafter ( Figure 4 C ). To identify the specific tissues expressing elys mRNA, we performed WISH analysis. At 24hpf, elys is widely expressed in the anterior portion of the embryo including the retina, pharyngeal region, midbrain and hindbrain ( Figure 4 D ). At 48–52hpf elys expression is present in a small area of the forebrain, the midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB), the pharyngeal region, developing liver, anterior intestine and fin buds ( Figure 4 D ). By 72hpf, elys expression is restricted to the pharyngeal region, anterior intestine, liver, fin buds, MHB and retina ( Figure 4 E ). At 96hpf, transverse sections of wholemount preparations reveal strong expression of elys mRNA in liver, pancreas and intestinal epithelial cells ( Figure 4 E ). In contrast, the presence of elys mRNA is barely discernible in flo embryos at 96hpf ( Figure 4 E ), possibly due to nonsense-mediated RNA decay. The discrepancy here with the data in Figure 4 B , where mutant elys mRNA is detectable at 96hpf, may reflect the greater sensitivity of the RT-PCR method compared to WISH.  The formation of nuclear pores is disrupted in the intestinal epithelium of flo embryos Recent studies have established that Elys plays an indispensable role in nuclear pore formation and mitosis 15 – 17 . We therefore analyzed the distribution of NPCs in various tissues of flo and wildtype embryos using monoclonal antibody, MAb414. We found that the localization of NPCs in intestinal epithelial cells of flo embryos is severely disrupted at 78hpf. Whereas immunofluorescent staining of NPCs produces a punctate rim of fluorescence around the circumference of the nucleus in wildtype intestinal epithelial cells ( Figure 5 A and 5 A’ ), the NPCs in intestinal epithelial cells of flo appear as large aggregates in the cytoplasm ( Figure 5 B and 5 B’ ). Similar aggregates have been observed in human cell lines depleted of ELYS using RNAi 5 . When analyzed using TEM, the aggregates correspond to annulate lamellae comprising stacks of cytoplasmic pores 15 . In flo , detached epithelial cells present in the intestinal lumen contain profuse cytoplasmic aggregates ( Figure 5 B’ ). In rare cells, where NPCs remain associated with the nuclear rim, the punctate staining is sparser than in wildtype ( Figure 5 B’ ). At 78hpf, the localization of NPCs is also disrupted in the flo liver where cytoplasmic aggregates are abundant (compare Figure 5 C and 5 C’ with Figure 5 D and 5 D’ ). The ultrastructural appearance of nuclear pores in intestinal epithelial cells of wildtype and flo embryos at 82hpf was examined using TEM. Whereas nuclear pores are readily identifiable in wildtype intestinal epithelial cells ( Figure 5 E ; approximately 5.1 per nuclear profile), they are absent in flo intestinal epithelial cells ( Figure 5 E ). In contrast, other cells in flo embryos, such as the peridermal cell shown in Figure 5 E display abundant, apparently normal, nuclear pores (approximately 3.9 per nuclear profile, compared to 4.4 in wildtype cells). Outside the digestive system, the localization of NPCs is relatively unperturbed. However, cytoplasmic aggregates are found in the most dorsally positioned cells in the midbrain (compare Figure 6 A and 6 A’ with Figure 6 B , 6 B’ and 6 B’’ ) and in the photoreceptor cell layer of the retinal epithelium (compare Figure 6 C and C’ with Figure 6 D and 6 D’’ ).  The formation of nuclear pores is disrupted in the intestinal epithelium of flo embryos Recent studies have established that Elys plays an indispensable role in nuclear pore formation and mitosis 15 – 17 . We therefore analyzed the distribution of NPCs in various tissues of flo and wildtype embryos using monoclonal antibody, MAb414. We found that the localization of NPCs in intestinal epithelial cells of flo embryos is severely disrupted at 78hpf. Whereas immunofluorescent staining of NPCs produces a punctate rim of fluorescence around the circumference of the nucleus in wildtype intestinal epithelial cells ( Figure 5 A and 5 A’ ), the NPCs in intestinal epithelial cells of flo appear as large aggregates in the cytoplasm ( Figure 5 B and 5 B’ ). Similar aggregates have been observed in human cell lines depleted of ELYS using RNAi 5 . When analyzed using TEM, the aggregates correspond to annulate lamellae comprising stacks of cytoplasmic pores 15 . In flo , detached epithelial cells present in the intestinal lumen contain profuse cytoplasmic aggregates ( Figure 5 B’ ). In rare cells, where NPCs remain associated with the nuclear rim, the punctate staining is sparser than in wildtype ( Figure 5 B’ ). At 78hpf, the localization of NPCs is also disrupted in the flo liver where cytoplasmic aggregates are abundant (compare Figure 5 C and 5 C’ with Figure 5 D and 5 D’ ). The ultrastructural appearance of nuclear pores in intestinal epithelial cells of wildtype and flo embryos at 82hpf was examined using TEM. Whereas nuclear pores are readily identifiable in wildtype intestinal epithelial cells ( Figure 5 E ; approximately 5.1 per nuclear profile), they are absent in flo intestinal epithelial cells ( Figure 5 E ). In contrast, other cells in flo embryos, such as the peridermal cell shown in Figure 5 E display abundant, apparently normal, nuclear pores (approximately 3.9 per nuclear profile, compared to 4.4 in wildtype cells). Outside the digestive system, the localization of NPCs is relatively unperturbed. However, cytoplasmic aggregates are found in the most dorsally positioned cells in the midbrain (compare Figure 6 A and 6 A’ with Figure 6 B , 6 B’ and 6 B’’ ) and in the photoreceptor cell layer of the retinal epithelium (compare Figure 6 C and C’ with Figure 6 D and 6 D’’ ).  Aberrant development of flo embryos is restricted to proliferating tissues at 72hpf Our observation that the flo phenotype is restricted to specific organs appears to mirror the tissue-specific elys gene expression pattern from 72hpf. This pattern is also reflected in the cell cycle activity of cells in these organs at 72hpf. In wildtype and flo embryos, we observed a high frequency of BrdU-positive cells in the intestinal epithelium ( Figure 7 A –7 C ), pharyngeal arches ( Figure 7 A and 7 B ), liver ( Figure 7 A ), dorsal midbrain, cerebellum, dorsal hindbrain ( Figure 7 B and 7 C ), retinal epithelium ( Figure 7 B and 7 C ) and pancreas ( Figure 7 B ). Strikingly, the tissues demonstrating the highest rates of BrdU uptake are the ones most severely disrupted in flo . In contrast, unaffected tissues in flo , such as the somites, heart and some areas of the brain are quiescent.  Aberrant development of flo embryos is restricted to proliferating tissues at 72hpf Our observation that the flo phenotype is restricted to specific organs appears to mirror the tissue-specific elys gene expression pattern from 72hpf. This pattern is also reflected in the cell cycle activity of cells in these organs at 72hpf. In wildtype and flo embryos, we observed a high frequency of BrdU-positive cells in the intestinal epithelium ( Figure 7 A –7 C ), pharyngeal arches ( Figure 7 A and 7 B ), liver ( Figure 7 A ), dorsal midbrain, cerebellum, dorsal hindbrain ( Figure 7 B and 7 C ), retinal epithelium ( Figure 7 B and 7 C ) and pancreas ( Figure 7 B ). Strikingly, the tissues demonstrating the highest rates of BrdU uptake are the ones most severely disrupted in flo . In contrast, unaffected tissues in flo , such as the somites, heart and some areas of the brain are quiescent.  Discussion Here we have shown, in the context of a vertebrate organism, that elys plays an indispensable role during development and specifically during the growth and differentiation of the zebrafish digestive organs. That Elys plays a role in nuclear pore formation was first suggested when antibodies to components of the Nup107–160 complex were found to co-immunoprecipitate Xenopus and human ELYS proteins 15 . Further studies demonstrated that the association of ELYS with chromatin acts as a seeding point for Nups, one of the earliest events in nuclear pore assembly 12 , 13 , 15 – 18 . In ELYS-depleted HeLa cells, NPCs fail to reassemble at the end of mitosis, causing cell cycle arrest and death 15 , 17 . This, together with the fact that Elys-deficient mouse embryos die around the time of implantation 28 , indicates that Elys is an essential cellular protein. However, widespread developmental abnormalities are not observed in flo embryos during early development. This is most likely due to maternally–deposited wildtype elys mRNA molecules, which persist in flo embryos up to 24hpf ( Figure 4B ). Maternally encoded wildtype Elys protein is likely to sustain flo embryos for an additional period thereafter. Eventually maternal elys expression diminishes to a level that can no longer support normal development of flo embryos. At this point, the affected organs are those that express the highest levels of elys mRNA in wildtype embryos at 72hpf, including the digestive organs. Interestingly, BrdU incorporation analysis demonstrates that at 72hpf many of the cells in these same organs are in S-phase of the cell cycle ( Figure 7 ). Thus the tissue-specific requirement for elys expression in these organs may be related to the need to reassemble nuclear pores at the end of every round of mitosis. An additional possibility is that Elys plays an active role in determining tissue-specific gene expression during cell differentiation. This suggestion is supported by strong evidence emerging from studies in yeast, flies and mammals that NPC composition and localization varies among differentiated cell types and during different stages of the cell cycle and development. For example, mouse embryonic stem cells deficient for Nup133, a component of the 107–160 Nup complex that interacts directly with Elys 15 , are able to assemble nuclear pores but lack the capacity to differentiate along a neural pathway 29 . Similarly, targeted disruption of Nup50 causes complex neural tube and CNS abnormalities and growth retardation 30 , while Nup96 +/? mice have impaired innate and adaptive immunity due to a compromised ability to properly express interferon–regulated proteins 31 . While studies so far of Elys function have pointed to a global role in initiating NPC assembly at the end of mitosis, our study is the first to demonstrate a tissue-specific requirement for elys during vertebrate development. This raises the question of whether Elys-containing nuclear pores play a specific role in coordinating the genetic events that govern the growth and differentiation of the intestinal epithelium and other digestive organs. Comparison of the tissue-specific expression profiles of flo embryos and their wildtype siblings may be a fruitful avenue to address this concept.  Discussion Here we have shown, in the context of a vertebrate organism, that elys plays an indispensable role during development and specifically during the growth and differentiation of the zebrafish digestive organs. That Elys plays a role in nuclear pore formation was first suggested when antibodies to components of the Nup107–160 complex were found to co-immunoprecipitate Xenopus and human ELYS proteins 15 . Further studies demonstrated that the association of ELYS with chromatin acts as a seeding point for Nups, one of the earliest events in nuclear pore assembly 12 , 13 , 15 – 18 . In ELYS-depleted HeLa cells, NPCs fail to reassemble at the end of mitosis, causing cell cycle arrest and death 15 , 17 . This, together with the fact that Elys-deficient mouse embryos die around the time of implantation 28 , indicates that Elys is an essential cellular protein. However, widespread developmental abnormalities are not observed in flo embryos during early development. This is most likely due to maternally–deposited wildtype elys mRNA molecules, which persist in flo embryos up to 24hpf ( Figure 4B ). Maternally encoded wildtype Elys protein is likely to sustain flo embryos for an additional period thereafter. Eventually maternal elys expression diminishes to a level that can no longer support normal development of flo embryos. At this point, the affected organs are those that express the highest levels of elys mRNA in wildtype embryos at 72hpf, including the digestive organs. Interestingly, BrdU incorporation analysis demonstrates that at 72hpf many of the cells in these same organs are in S-phase of the cell cycle ( Figure 7 ). Thus the tissue-specific requirement for elys expression in these organs may be related to the need to reassemble nuclear pores at the end of every round of mitosis. An additional possibility is that Elys plays an active role in determining tissue-specific gene expression during cell differentiation. This suggestion is supported by strong evidence emerging from studies in yeast, flies and mammals that NPC composition and localization varies among differentiated cell types and during different stages of the cell cycle and development. For example, mouse embryonic stem cells deficient for Nup133, a component of the 107–160 Nup complex that interacts directly with Elys 15 , are able to assemble nuclear pores but lack the capacity to differentiate along a neural pathway 29 . Similarly, targeted disruption of Nup50 causes complex neural tube and CNS abnormalities and growth retardation 30 , while Nup96 +/? mice have impaired innate and adaptive immunity due to a compromised ability to properly express interferon–regulated proteins 31 . While studies so far of Elys function have pointed to a global role in initiating NPC assembly at the end of mitosis, our study is the first to demonstrate a tissue-specific requirement for elys during vertebrate development. This raises the question of whether Elys-containing nuclear pores play a specific role in coordinating the genetic events that govern the growth and differentiation of the intestinal epithelium and other digestive organs. Comparison of the tissue-specific expression profiles of flo embryos and their wildtype siblings may be a fruitful avenue to address this concept.  Supplementary Material 01 02 03 04 05 06  Supplementary Material 01 02 03 04 05 06 