Dynamic Assessment and Response to Intervention Two Sides of One Coin This article compares and contrasts the main features of dynamic testing and assessment (DT/A) and response to intervention (RTI). The comparison is carried out along the following lines: (a) historical and empirical roots of both concepts, (b) premises underlying DT/A and RTI, (c) terms used in these concepts, (d) use of these concepts, (e) evidence in support of DT/A and RTI, and (f) expectations associated with each of the concepts. The main outcome of this comparison is a conclusion that both approaches belong to one family of methodologies in psychology and education whose key feature is in blending assessment and intervention in one holistic activity. Because DT/A has been around much longer than RTI, it makes sense for the proponents of RTI to consider both the accomplishments and frustrations that have accumulated in the field of DT/A.  Conclusion In reviews of DT/A, it has been stated that the methodology has promise but needs time and effort to grow ( Grigorenko & Sternberg, 1998 ). Comments on RTI have noted that it “has the most potential,” “but currently falls short” ( Dean, Burns, Grialou, & Varro, 2006 , p. 157). In short, both approaches are still developing and crystallizing; there is an ongoing attempt to bring both approaches into the category of “evidence based,” but how much evidence is enough and what should the evidence be, specifically? In closing, I would like to make two observations. First, DT/A and RTI appear to be two sides of the same coin. Both concepts have so many overlapping facets and are so often substituted for each other that one wonders whether the field needs two concepts to signify the same construct. Yet these two concepts originated differently and within different traditions, and cancellation or substitution of one of them might result in resistance. So if traditions are unbreakable, the field should at least acknowledge its duplication of effort. Second, both DT/A and RTI (or a single construct that underlies both concepts) put the accent on services rather than diagnostics ( Staskowski & Rivera, 2005 ). In fact, the concept of RTI is only loosely related to any theories and is fundamentally embedded in practice. DT/A originated as embedded in particular theoretical perspectives but has outgrown these limitations and in its current realization, generally speaking, is theory fair (or theory free). These features of RTI and DT/A meet a particular mode of modern knowledge production that is distinguished by its occurrence within the applied context and its embrace of social accountability and reflexivity ( Gibbons et al., 1994 ; Nowotny, Scott, & Gibbons, 2001 ). Both DT/A and RTI arose in response to applied tasks and are associated with important changes that need to be made in educational systems around the world. This mode of knowledge acquisition is developing in response to changes in modern society ( Gibbons et al., 1994 ). And it seems that not knowingly, this is the mode of knowledge acquisition referenced in yet another famous statement credited to Kurt Lewin: “The best way to understand something is to try to change it” (as cited in Greenwood & Levin, 1998 , p. 19). Both DT/A and RTI are about change; “change” conceptually (a change within a child) and applicationally (a change of established practices of dealing with children with special needs). But can we accept them as evidence-based scientific concepts? Science, scientific research, and scientific concepts are characterized by both epistemic (e.g., objectivity, empirical observations, careful experimental manipulation, logical consistencies of theories, and use of particular specialized linguistic and cognitive rituals) and nonepistemic (e.g., usability, worthiness, and applicability) values ( Brown, 2001 ; Crosby, Clayton, Downing, & Iyer, 2004 ). Although there is general agreement that any theory should be influenced by epistemic values, there is much debate with regard to the importance of nonepistemic values and whether science should be freed ( Kendler, 2004 ) from them or not ( Fortun & Bernstein, 1998 ). Given the content, intent, and history of DT/A and RTI, it can be stated that their nonepistemic values are transparent and well understood. Yet both DT/A and RTI need much supportive evidence to enhance the epistemic value of their underlying construct. And maybe such an enhancement would happen more quickly if the somewhat artificial border between the two concepts were eliminated, or at least lifted. After all, they are two sides of the same coin. 