The EphA2 Receptor and EphrinA1 Ligand in Solid Tumors: Function and Therapeutic Targeting The Eph receptor tyrosine kinases and ephrin ligands have been studied extensively for their roles in developmental processes. In recent years, Eph receptors and ephrins have been found to be integral players in cancer formation and progression. Among these are EphA2 and ephrinA1, which are involved in the development and maintenance of many different types of solid tumors. The function of EphA2 and ephrinA1 in tumorigenesis and tumor progression is complex and seems to be dependent on cell type and microenvironment. These variables affect the expression of the EphA2 and ephrinA1 proteins, the pathways through which they induce signaling, and the functional consequences of that signaling on the behavior of tumor cells and tumor-associated cells. This review will specifically focus on the roles that EphA2 and ephrinA1 play in the different cell types that contribute to the malignancy of solid tumors, with emphasis on the opportunities for therapeutic targeting.  Conclusion Overall, although EphA2 and ephrinA1 are no doubt of major importance in both development and cancer, the exact contribution of these proteins to the specific processes involved to tumor formation, maintenance, and progression is extremely complex and dependent on many factors. Future studies focusing on in vivo systems and using natural ephrin ligands rather than artificial recombinant proteins may shed more light on the specific roles that EphA2 and ephrinA1 coordinately and temporally play in tumorigenesis and angiogenesis. Moreover, further elucidation is needed with regard to the function of EphA2 and ephrinA1 in the context of other growth factor receptors and their ligands. Hopefully, all of this will lead to new knowledge about how this system affects the pathobiology of neoplasia, which can be used for the generation of improved, rationally designed therapeutics to target the EphA2/ephrinA1 system in solid tumors. 