DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF HEREDITARY PARAGANGLIOMA SYNDROME DUE TO THE F933>X67 SDHD MUTATION Background The hereditary paraganglioma syndromes (PGLs) are autosomal dominant conditions with an increased risk for tumors of the sympathetic and parasympathetic neuroendocrine systems. The recognition of patients with hereditary PGL and identification of the responsible gene are important for the management of index patients and family members. Methods We present the clinical, radiological, biochemical, and family history findings of a 15-year-old boy patient with a glomus vagale versus glomus jugulare tumor. Results Evaluation of the family history and the patient's history led to the identification of a familial succinate dehydrogenase subunit D (SDHD) gene mutation (F933>X67), consistent with a diagnosis of hereditary PGL1. Although this family had all head and neck tumors, this SDHD mutation has previously been described in a family with primarily functional pheochromocytomas. Conclusions This case report highlights the variable expressivity of a single mutation in SDHD, (F933>X67). Careful and comprehensive screening is warranted for individuals at risk.  DISCUSSION Hereditary PGL1 results from germline mutations of the SDHD gene. Review of the index patient's medical history and family history made SDHD the gene most likely responsible for the tumors in this family. Specifically, there were multiple individuals with head and neck paragangliomas, with most affected individuals seen with multiple tumors. Furthermore, the pedigree was consistent with a parent of origin effect such that all affected individuals appeared to have inherited the putative mutation from a father. Genetic testing for SDHD was offered to confirm our strong clinical suspicion of PGL1 and also to allow for the eventual identification of other gene mutation carriers in the family who could benefit from screening for paragangliomas. The SDHD mutation identified in the index patient (F933>X67) is predicted to produce a truncated protein of 66 amino acids, which lacks the transmembrane, signal, and haem-binding domains. 20 As expected, the patient's paternal half sister who had multiple head and neck paraganglioma was also found to carry this mutation. The identification of the causative gene mutation in the family allowed for genetic counseling and genetic testing of at-risk relatives including the index patient's full brother who was found to carry the mutation. Although the phenotype in our family was consistent with what has been described in the literature for SDHD gene mutations in general, it is quite discordant from a case report of another family with the same F933>X67 mutation of the SDHD gene. The previously reported family with this mutation was characterized primarily by early-onset pheochromocytomas, rather than head and neck paraganglioma. 20 This family contained 5 affected individuals, including 1 with a unilateral adrenal pheochromocytoma at age 19, 1 with a paraaortic pheochromocytoma at age 18, 1 with bilateral adrenal pheochromocytomas at age 23, 1 with a unilateral pheochromocytoma at age 13, and 1 with 2 carotid body tumors in her 60s. Given the variability in phenotype associated with this mutation, it is likely that other factors, possibly genetic or environmental, contribute to the penetrance and variable expressivity of this condition. In fact, a recent study described an Italian founder mutation (Q109X) in 6 families with wide variability in the age of onset; clinical presentation; and number, site, and secreting properties of the tumors. 21 In addition, recent reports have shown that SDHD mutations can be associated with malignant paragangliomas, 22 , 23 albeit less frequently than SDHB mutations. The variability in age of onset, site, hormonal activity, malignant potential, and number of primary tumors that can occur in SDHD mutation carriers poses challenges for screening and management. One proposed “minimal” monitoring program includes yearly history, physical examination, blood pressure measurement, and biochemical screening and biennial (every other year) imaging by CTor MRI beginning at age 10. 24 Our preference is for MRI screening to reduce excessive radiation exposure. Furthermore, we recommend yearly physical examination, history, and blood pressure measurement beginning in early childhood ( Table 2 ).  DISCUSSION Hereditary PGL1 results from germline mutations of the SDHD gene. Review of the index patient's medical history and family history made SDHD the gene most likely responsible for the tumors in this family. Specifically, there were multiple individuals with head and neck paragangliomas, with most affected individuals seen with multiple tumors. Furthermore, the pedigree was consistent with a parent of origin effect such that all affected individuals appeared to have inherited the putative mutation from a father. Genetic testing for SDHD was offered to confirm our strong clinical suspicion of PGL1 and also to allow for the eventual identification of other gene mutation carriers in the family who could benefit from screening for paragangliomas. The SDHD mutation identified in the index patient (F933>X67) is predicted to produce a truncated protein of 66 amino acids, which lacks the transmembrane, signal, and haem-binding domains. 20 As expected, the patient's paternal half sister who had multiple head and neck paraganglioma was also found to carry this mutation. The identification of the causative gene mutation in the family allowed for genetic counseling and genetic testing of at-risk relatives including the index patient's full brother who was found to carry the mutation. Although the phenotype in our family was consistent with what has been described in the literature for SDHD gene mutations in general, it is quite discordant from a case report of another family with the same F933>X67 mutation of the SDHD gene. The previously reported family with this mutation was characterized primarily by early-onset pheochromocytomas, rather than head and neck paraganglioma. 20 This family contained 5 affected individuals, including 1 with a unilateral adrenal pheochromocytoma at age 19, 1 with a paraaortic pheochromocytoma at age 18, 1 with bilateral adrenal pheochromocytomas at age 23, 1 with a unilateral pheochromocytoma at age 13, and 1 with 2 carotid body tumors in her 60s. Given the variability in phenotype associated with this mutation, it is likely that other factors, possibly genetic or environmental, contribute to the penetrance and variable expressivity of this condition. In fact, a recent study described an Italian founder mutation (Q109X) in 6 families with wide variability in the age of onset; clinical presentation; and number, site, and secreting properties of the tumors. 21 In addition, recent reports have shown that SDHD mutations can be associated with malignant paragangliomas, 22 , 23 albeit less frequently than SDHB mutations. The variability in age of onset, site, hormonal activity, malignant potential, and number of primary tumors that can occur in SDHD mutation carriers poses challenges for screening and management. One proposed “minimal” monitoring program includes yearly history, physical examination, blood pressure measurement, and biochemical screening and biennial (every other year) imaging by CTor MRI beginning at age 10. 24 Our preference is for MRI screening to reduce excessive radiation exposure. Furthermore, we recommend yearly physical examination, history, and blood pressure measurement beginning in early childhood ( Table 2 ).  CONCLUSIONS This case report highlights the variable expressivity of a single mutation in SDHD (F933>X67) in families with hereditary paraganglioma (PGL1). Clues to the diagnosis in the family included multiple affected individuals, early onset, multiple primary tumors, and a recognizable pattern of inheritance demonstrating a parent of origin effect. Careful and comprehensive screening is warranted for individuals at risk, which can accurately be predicted using genetic testing and counseling based on the parent of origin. Just as importantly, complicated and expensive screening can be avoided in those who are not at risk. However, as is evident within this family, uptake of genetic counseling and genetic testing is not uniform. 