CHBPR: Increased activation of STIM-1/Orai-1 in aorta from hypertensive rats: a novel insight into vascular dysfunction Disturbances in the regulation of cytosolic calcium (Ca2+) concentration play a key role in the vascular dysfunction associated with arterial hypertension. Stromal interaction molecules (STIMs) and Orai proteins represent a novel mechanism to control store-operated Ca2+ entry. Whereas STIMs act as Ca2+ sensors for the intracellular Ca2+ stores, Orai is the putative pore-forming component of CRAC (Ca2+ release-activated Ca2+) channels at the plasma membrane. We hypothesize that augmented activation of CRAC/Orai-1, through enhanced activity of STIM-1, plays a role in increased basal tonus and vascular reactivity in hypertensive animals. Endothelium-denuded aortic rings from Wistar Kyoto (WKY) and stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRSP) were used to evaluate contractions due to Ca2+ influx. Depletion of intracellular Ca2+ stores, which induces CRAC activation, was performed by placing arteries in Ca2+ free-EGTA buffer. The addition of Ca2+ regular buffer produced greater contractions in aortas from SHRSP vs. WKY. Thapsigargin (10µM), an inhibitor of the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ ATPase, further increased these contractions, especially in SHRSP aorta. Addition of the CRAC channel inhibitors, 2-aminoethoxydiphenyl borate (2-APB, 100µM) or gadolinium (Gd3+, 100µM), as well as neutralizing antibodies to STIM-1 or Orai-1 abolished thapsigargin-increased contraction and the differences in spontaneous tone between the groups. Expression of Orai-1 and STIM-1 proteins was increased in aorta from SHRSP, when compared with WKY. These results support the hypothesis that both Orai-1 and STIM-1 contribute to abnormal vascular function in hypertension. Augmented activation of STIM-1/Orai-1 may represent the mechanism that leads to impaired control of intracellular Ca2+levels in hypertension.  Introduction Upon stimulation, most excitable cells display a biphasic increase in cytosolic calcium (Ca2+) concentrations. The initial transient increase is due to inositol trisphosphate (IP3)-mediated release of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) Ca2+.( 1 , 2 ) The subsequent prolonged increase requires extracellular Ca2+ influx through various pathways. In smooth muscle cells (SMC), Ca2+ entry mechanisms responsible for sustained cellular activation are normally mediated by either voltage-operated or receptor-operated Ca2+ channels. ( 3 – 5 ) Depletion of ER Ca2+ stores is able to gate the entry of extracellular Ca2+ ( 6 , 7 ). This mechanism, by which the ER acts as a capacitor, lead to the term store-operated Ca2+ entry (SOCE) ( 6 , 7 ). Recently, the discoveries of the stromal interacting molecule (STIMs) ( 8 , 9 ) and Orai proteins ( 10 , 11 ) have provided important information into the possible mechanisms by which this process is regulated. STIMs are a family of single transmembrane domain proteins found both in the plasma membrane and the ER and their involvement with Ca2+ entry regulation has been recently described. It has been proposed that one of its isoforms, STIM-1, functions as a sensor for the ER Ca2+. The suppression of STIM-1 expression prevents SOC entry and eliminates the store-dependent activation of Ca2+ release-activated Ca2+ (CRAC) channels. Furthermore, Ca2+ depletion from ER results in a profound intracellular redistribution of STIM-1, from a uniform ER pattern to spatially discrete areas close to the plasma membrane ( 12 , 13 ). Another protein family, Orai, which presently has three members, seems to be an essential component of CRAC channels and Orai-1 has been suggested to be the pore-forming component of CRAC channels ( 10 ). Further, STIM-1 and Orai-1 are sufficient for generation of functional CRAC channels ( 12 , 14 ). Ca2+ is elevated in various cells from patients with hypertension and from spontaneous hypertensive rats. Because Ca2+ is a central component in the control of vascular contraction, abnormal handling of this cation by vascular myocytes has been suggested to account for the increased responses of vascular SMC (VSMC) to constrictor stimuli and augmented myogenic tone ( 15 – 19 ), key markers of arterial hypertension. The magnitude of contraction is associated with the concentration of free Ca+2. So, we used the contractile responses to reflect vascular Ca+2 influx or mobilization. This technique has been validated by Karaki ( 20 ) and previous work from our laboratory ( 21 , 22 ). In addition, the development of active tone in SHRSP aortas is brought by changes in Ca+2 influx and changes in tone and intracellular Ca2+ levels are positively correlated ( 23 ). Therefore, considering that hypertension is associated with an imbalance in Ca2+ homeostasis and STIM and Orai proteins seem to be fundamental to intracellular Ca2+ regulation, we hypothesized that increased activation of CRAC/Orai-1, through the Ca2+ sensor STIM-1, plays a role in augmented reactivity in aorta from hypertensive animals.  Methods Animals Five to six month-old male stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRSP) were obtained from the breeding colony at the Medical College of Georgia. Age-matched male Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rats were purchased from Harlan (Indianapolis IN). Rats were maintained on a 12-hour light dark cycle, housed two per cage and allowed access to normal chow and water ad libitum . Systolic blood pressure (SBP) was measured in non-anesthetized animals by tail cuff using a RTBP1001 blood pressure system (Kent Scientific Corporation, Connecticut, MA, USA). All procedures were performed in accordance with the Guiding Principles in the Care and Use of Animals, approved by the Medical College of Georgia Committee on the Use of Animals in Research and Education. Vascular functional studies After euthanasia, thoracic aortas were rapidly excised and placed in ice-chilled (?4°C) physiological salt solution (PSS). Segments of thoracic aorta were carefully dissected and the endothelium was removed by gently rubbing the lumen side of the vessels with a metallic pin. Aortic rings (4 mm in length) were mounted on two stainless steel wires in standard organ chambers (model 610M; Danish MyoTech, Aarhus, Denmark) for isometric tension recording, as previously described ( 21 , 22 ). After stabilization, arterial integrity was assessed first by stimulation of vessels with 120 mM potassium chloride (KCl) and, after washing and a new stabilization period, by contracting the segments with phenylephrine (PE; 1µM). Endothelium denudation was assessed by the absence of a relaxation response to acetylcholine (ACh; 1µM) during PE-induced contraction. Experimental protocols Force development in response to a specific experimental protocol was evaluated in aortas from both rat groups, as described in Figure 1 . Briefly, aortic rings were contracted with PE (1µM). When the contraction reached a plateau, aortas were washed in Ca2+ free-EGTA buffer, in order to deplete intracellular Ca2+ stores (depletion period), for 20 minutes. During the depletion period, aortas were incubated with vehicle or thapsigargin (1µM, a putative selective Ca2+-ATPase inhibitor) and some rings were treated with non-selective CRAC channel blockers, 2-aminoethoxydiphenyl borate (2-APB, 100µM) or gadolinium (Gd3+; 100µM). After Ca2+ depletion, intracellular Ca2+ stores were loaded (loading period) by placing the aortas in 1.6mM Ca2+ buffer, for 15 minutes. Contraction responses during the loading period were determined. The bathing medium was then replaced with Ca2+ -free buffer and after 2 minutes the aortic segments where stimulated with caffeine (20mM), in order to deplete intracellular Ca2+ stores, which resulted in a transient contraction( 20 , 21 ) Antibody delivery by the chariot technique Antibodies against STIM-1 and Orai-1 (ProSci, Poway – CA, USA); were intracellularly delivered, by the Chariot technique (Chariot™ Protein Delivery Reagent, Active Motif, Carlsbad, CA). This transfection reagent is able to deliver antibodies into cells whilst preserving their ability to localize to the proper cellular compartment and to recognize antigens within the cell( 24 , 25 , 26 ) and in our experiments was used to directly inhibit STIM-1 and Orai-1 proteins. Chariot/antibody complexes were prepared and used according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, aortic rings were incubated in Eagle’s minimum essential medium (EMEM) containing L-glutamine (1%), fetal bovine serum (10%), penicillin and streptomycin (0,5%), for 30 minutes at 37°C. For each transfection, 12µl Chariot in 100 µl 40% dimethyl sulphoxide was mixed with 6µg antibody in 100µl phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and incubated at room temperature for 30 min to allow the complex to form. The aorta were transferred to a sterile 24-well cell culture plate, overlaid with 200µl Chariot/antibody complex and mixed gently. EMEM medium (400µl) was added and the tissues were incubated for 1 hr at 37°C. Then, EMEM medium (750µl) was added and tissues were further incubated for 2 hr at 37°C. After this period, rings were mounted in the myograph and functional studies were performed. Western blotting Aortas from hypertensive and control rats were isolated, cleaned from fat, dissected and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Extracted proteins (40 µg) were separated by electrophoresis on a 10% polyacrylamide gel and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. Nonspecific binding sites were blocked with 5% skim milk in Tris-buffered saline solution with Tween (0.1%) for 1 hour at 24°C. Membranes were then incubated with antibodies overnight at 4°C. Antibodies were as follows: anti-STIM-1 and anti-Orai-1; (1:1000, ProSci, Poway – CA, USA); and ?-actin (1:1000, Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA). Human ovary and mouse thymus tissue lysate (ProSci, Poway – CA, USA) were used as positive controls for STIM-1 and Orai-1, respectively. After incubation with secondary antibodies, signals were revealed with chemiluminescence, visualized by autoradiography, and quantified densitometrically. Results were normalized by ?-actin expression and expressed as units of change from the control. RNA extraction, cDNA synthesis, and quantitative real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction Total RNA was extracted from aorta using the RNeasy Kit (Qiagen Sciences, Maryland, USA). The quantity, purity and integrity of all RNA samples were determined by NanoDrop spectrophotometry (NanoDrop Technologies,Wilmington, DE). One microgram of total RNA was reverse transcribed in a final volume of 50 µL using the High-Capacity cDNA Archive Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA), and single-strand cDNA was stored at –20°C. Primers for STIM-1 (cat# Rn00968446_m1) and Orai-1 (cat# Rn02397170_m1) mRNA were obtained from Applied Biosystems. Real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) reactions were performed using the 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems) in a total volume of 20 µL reaction mixture following the manufacturer’s protocol, using TaqMan® Fast Universal PCR Master Mix (2X) (Applied Biosystems), and 0.1 µM of each primer. Negative controls contained water instead of first-strand cDNA. Each sample was normalized on the basis of its 18S ribosomal RNA content. The 18S quantification was performed using a TaqMan Ribosomal RNA Reagent Kit (Applied Biosystems) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Relative gene expression for STIM-1 and Orai-1 mRNA was normalized to a calibrator that was chosen to be the basal condition (untreated sample) for each time point. Results were calculated with the ??Ct method and expressed as n -fold differences in preproET-1 gene expression relative to 18S rRNA and to the calibrator and were determined as follows: n -fold = 2 –(?Ct sample – ?Ct calibrator) , where the parameter Ct (threshold cycle) is defined as the fractional cycle number at which the PCR reaction reporter signal passes a fixed threshold. ?Ct values of the sample and the calibrator were determined by subtracting the average Ct value of the transcript under investigation from the average Ct value of the 18S rRNA gene for each sample. Immunofluorescence microscopy analysis STIM-1 and Orai-1 expression in endothelium-denuded aortas from SHRSP and WKY were determined by immunofluorescence staining technique. Aortas were frozen in OCT and sections were obtained. Briefly, aorta sections were washed with phosphate buffer saline (PBS) with 0.2% Triton X- (PBS-T) for 15 min at room temperature, fixed in acetone for 5 min at –20°C and nonspecific binding sites were blocked with PBS-T plus 1% bovine serum albumin (PBS-T/BSA) for 10 min at room temperature and with 10% goat serum in PBS-T/BSA, for 30 min at room temperature. Subsequently, STIM-1 and Orai-1 expression was determined by incubating the vascular sections with anti-STIM-1 (1:100; rabbit polyclonal, ProSCi) and anti-Orai-1 (1:100; mouse polyclonal, Abcon), respectively, overnight at 4°C. Aortic sections were then placed at room temperature, rinsed with PBS-T for 15 minutes, probed with goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 588, (1:1000, green fluorescence; Invitrogen) and with goat anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 568 (1:1000, red fluorescence; Invitrogen), which was followed by another rinse with TBS-T. Images were acquired with the use of the confocal microscope (LSM 510 Meta 3.2, Zeiss). Magnification power was set at 10x. Drugs and solutions Physiological salt solution of the following composition was used: 130 mM NaCl, 14.9 mM NaHCO3, 4.7 mM KCl, 1.18 mM KH2PO4, 1.17 mM MgSO4·7H2O, 5.5 mM glucose, 1.56 mM CaCl2·2H2O and 0.026mM EDTA. Phenylephrine hydrochloride (PE) and acetylcholine (ACh) were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO). All reagents were of analytical grade. Stock solutions were prepared in deionized water. Control solutions containing vehicle (DMSO) were also used through the experimental protocols. Data Analysis Results are presented as mean±SEM (standard error of the mean). Contractions were recorded as changes in the displacement (mN) from baseline and are represented as mN for n (number of) experiments. Statistically significant differences were calculated by ANOVA (Newman Kewls - post hoc test) or by Student’s t test where appropriate. P<0.05 was considered significant.  Animals Five to six month-old male stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRSP) were obtained from the breeding colony at the Medical College of Georgia. Age-matched male Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rats were purchased from Harlan (Indianapolis IN). Rats were maintained on a 12-hour light dark cycle, housed two per cage and allowed access to normal chow and water ad libitum . Systolic blood pressure (SBP) was measured in non-anesthetized animals by tail cuff using a RTBP1001 blood pressure system (Kent Scientific Corporation, Connecticut, MA, USA). All procedures were performed in accordance with the Guiding Principles in the Care and Use of Animals, approved by the Medical College of Georgia Committee on the Use of Animals in Research and Education.  Vascular functional studies After euthanasia, thoracic aortas were rapidly excised and placed in ice-chilled (?4°C) physiological salt solution (PSS). Segments of thoracic aorta were carefully dissected and the endothelium was removed by gently rubbing the lumen side of the vessels with a metallic pin. Aortic rings (4 mm in length) were mounted on two stainless steel wires in standard organ chambers (model 610M; Danish MyoTech, Aarhus, Denmark) for isometric tension recording, as previously described ( 21 , 22 ). After stabilization, arterial integrity was assessed first by stimulation of vessels with 120 mM potassium chloride (KCl) and, after washing and a new stabilization period, by contracting the segments with phenylephrine (PE; 1µM). Endothelium denudation was assessed by the absence of a relaxation response to acetylcholine (ACh; 1µM) during PE-induced contraction.  Experimental protocols Force development in response to a specific experimental protocol was evaluated in aortas from both rat groups, as described in Figure 1 . Briefly, aortic rings were contracted with PE (1µM). When the contraction reached a plateau, aortas were washed in Ca2+ free-EGTA buffer, in order to deplete intracellular Ca2+ stores (depletion period), for 20 minutes. During the depletion period, aortas were incubated with vehicle or thapsigargin (1µM, a putative selective Ca2+-ATPase inhibitor) and some rings were treated with non-selective CRAC channel blockers, 2-aminoethoxydiphenyl borate (2-APB, 100µM) or gadolinium (Gd3+; 100µM). After Ca2+ depletion, intracellular Ca2+ stores were loaded (loading period) by placing the aortas in 1.6mM Ca2+ buffer, for 15 minutes. Contraction responses during the loading period were determined. The bathing medium was then replaced with Ca2+ -free buffer and after 2 minutes the aortic segments where stimulated with caffeine (20mM), in order to deplete intracellular Ca2+ stores, which resulted in a transient contraction( 20 , 21 )  Antibody delivery by the chariot technique Antibodies against STIM-1 and Orai-1 (ProSci, Poway – CA, USA); were intracellularly delivered, by the Chariot technique (Chariot™ Protein Delivery Reagent, Active Motif, Carlsbad, CA). This transfection reagent is able to deliver antibodies into cells whilst preserving their ability to localize to the proper cellular compartment and to recognize antigens within the cell( 24 , 25 , 26 ) and in our experiments was used to directly inhibit STIM-1 and Orai-1 proteins. Chariot/antibody complexes were prepared and used according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, aortic rings were incubated in Eagle’s minimum essential medium (EMEM) containing L-glutamine (1%), fetal bovine serum (10%), penicillin and streptomycin (0,5%), for 30 minutes at 37°C. For each transfection, 12µl Chariot in 100 µl 40% dimethyl sulphoxide was mixed with 6µg antibody in 100µl phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and incubated at room temperature for 30 min to allow the complex to form. The aorta were transferred to a sterile 24-well cell culture plate, overlaid with 200µl Chariot/antibody complex and mixed gently. EMEM medium (400µl) was added and the tissues were incubated for 1 hr at 37°C. Then, EMEM medium (750µl) was added and tissues were further incubated for 2 hr at 37°C. After this period, rings were mounted in the myograph and functional studies were performed.  Western blotting Aortas from hypertensive and control rats were isolated, cleaned from fat, dissected and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Extracted proteins (40 µg) were separated by electrophoresis on a 10% polyacrylamide gel and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. Nonspecific binding sites were blocked with 5% skim milk in Tris-buffered saline solution with Tween (0.1%) for 1 hour at 24°C. Membranes were then incubated with antibodies overnight at 4°C. Antibodies were as follows: anti-STIM-1 and anti-Orai-1; (1:1000, ProSci, Poway – CA, USA); and ?-actin (1:1000, Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA). Human ovary and mouse thymus tissue lysate (ProSci, Poway – CA, USA) were used as positive controls for STIM-1 and Orai-1, respectively. After incubation with secondary antibodies, signals were revealed with chemiluminescence, visualized by autoradiography, and quantified densitometrically. Results were normalized by ?-actin expression and expressed as units of change from the control. RNA extraction, cDNA synthesis, and quantitative real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction Total RNA was extracted from aorta using the RNeasy Kit (Qiagen Sciences, Maryland, USA). The quantity, purity and integrity of all RNA samples were determined by NanoDrop spectrophotometry (NanoDrop Technologies,Wilmington, DE). One microgram of total RNA was reverse transcribed in a final volume of 50 µL using the High-Capacity cDNA Archive Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA), and single-strand cDNA was stored at –20°C. Primers for STIM-1 (cat# Rn00968446_m1) and Orai-1 (cat# Rn02397170_m1) mRNA were obtained from Applied Biosystems. Real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) reactions were performed using the 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems) in a total volume of 20 µL reaction mixture following the manufacturer’s protocol, using TaqMan® Fast Universal PCR Master Mix (2X) (Applied Biosystems), and 0.1 µM of each primer. Negative controls contained water instead of first-strand cDNA. Each sample was normalized on the basis of its 18S ribosomal RNA content. The 18S quantification was performed using a TaqMan Ribosomal RNA Reagent Kit (Applied Biosystems) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Relative gene expression for STIM-1 and Orai-1 mRNA was normalized to a calibrator that was chosen to be the basal condition (untreated sample) for each time point. Results were calculated with the ??Ct method and expressed as n -fold differences in preproET-1 gene expression relative to 18S rRNA and to the calibrator and were determined as follows: n -fold = 2 –(?Ct sample – ?Ct calibrator) , where the parameter Ct (threshold cycle) is defined as the fractional cycle number at which the PCR reaction reporter signal passes a fixed threshold. ?Ct values of the sample and the calibrator were determined by subtracting the average Ct value of the transcript under investigation from the average Ct value of the 18S rRNA gene for each sample.  RNA extraction, cDNA synthesis, and quantitative real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction Total RNA was extracted from aorta using the RNeasy Kit (Qiagen Sciences, Maryland, USA). The quantity, purity and integrity of all RNA samples were determined by NanoDrop spectrophotometry (NanoDrop Technologies,Wilmington, DE). One microgram of total RNA was reverse transcribed in a final volume of 50 µL using the High-Capacity cDNA Archive Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA), and single-strand cDNA was stored at –20°C. Primers for STIM-1 (cat# Rn00968446_m1) and Orai-1 (cat# Rn02397170_m1) mRNA were obtained from Applied Biosystems. Real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) reactions were performed using the 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems) in a total volume of 20 µL reaction mixture following the manufacturer’s protocol, using TaqMan® Fast Universal PCR Master Mix (2X) (Applied Biosystems), and 0.1 µM of each primer. Negative controls contained water instead of first-strand cDNA. Each sample was normalized on the basis of its 18S ribosomal RNA content. The 18S quantification was performed using a TaqMan Ribosomal RNA Reagent Kit (Applied Biosystems) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Relative gene expression for STIM-1 and Orai-1 mRNA was normalized to a calibrator that was chosen to be the basal condition (untreated sample) for each time point. Results were calculated with the ??Ct method and expressed as n -fold differences in preproET-1 gene expression relative to 18S rRNA and to the calibrator and were determined as follows: n -fold = 2 –(?Ct sample – ?Ct calibrator) , where the parameter Ct (threshold cycle) is defined as the fractional cycle number at which the PCR reaction reporter signal passes a fixed threshold. ?Ct values of the sample and the calibrator were determined by subtracting the average Ct value of the transcript under investigation from the average Ct value of the 18S rRNA gene for each sample.  Immunofluorescence microscopy analysis STIM-1 and Orai-1 expression in endothelium-denuded aortas from SHRSP and WKY were determined by immunofluorescence staining technique. Aortas were frozen in OCT and sections were obtained. Briefly, aorta sections were washed with phosphate buffer saline (PBS) with 0.2% Triton X- (PBS-T) for 15 min at room temperature, fixed in acetone for 5 min at –20°C and nonspecific binding sites were blocked with PBS-T plus 1% bovine serum albumin (PBS-T/BSA) for 10 min at room temperature and with 10% goat serum in PBS-T/BSA, for 30 min at room temperature. Subsequently, STIM-1 and Orai-1 expression was determined by incubating the vascular sections with anti-STIM-1 (1:100; rabbit polyclonal, ProSCi) and anti-Orai-1 (1:100; mouse polyclonal, Abcon), respectively, overnight at 4°C. Aortic sections were then placed at room temperature, rinsed with PBS-T for 15 minutes, probed with goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 588, (1:1000, green fluorescence; Invitrogen) and with goat anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 568 (1:1000, red fluorescence; Invitrogen), which was followed by another rinse with TBS-T. Images were acquired with the use of the confocal microscope (LSM 510 Meta 3.2, Zeiss). Magnification power was set at 10x. Drugs and solutions Physiological salt solution of the following composition was used: 130 mM NaCl, 14.9 mM NaHCO3, 4.7 mM KCl, 1.18 mM KH2PO4, 1.17 mM MgSO4·7H2O, 5.5 mM glucose, 1.56 mM CaCl2·2H2O and 0.026mM EDTA. Phenylephrine hydrochloride (PE) and acetylcholine (ACh) were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO). All reagents were of analytical grade. Stock solutions were prepared in deionized water. Control solutions containing vehicle (DMSO) were also used through the experimental protocols.  Drugs and solutions Physiological salt solution of the following composition was used: 130 mM NaCl, 14.9 mM NaHCO3, 4.7 mM KCl, 1.18 mM KH2PO4, 1.17 mM MgSO4·7H2O, 5.5 mM glucose, 1.56 mM CaCl2·2H2O and 0.026mM EDTA. Phenylephrine hydrochloride (PE) and acetylcholine (ACh) were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO). All reagents were of analytical grade. Stock solutions were prepared in deionized water. Control solutions containing vehicle (DMSO) were also used through the experimental protocols.  Data Analysis Results are presented as mean±SEM (standard error of the mean). Contractions were recorded as changes in the displacement (mN) from baseline and are represented as mN for n (number of) experiments. Statistically significant differences were calculated by ANOVA (Newman Kewls - post hoc test) or by Student’s t test where appropriate. P<0.05 was considered significant.  Results Systolic blood pressure and body weight of the rats At 24 weeks, SHRSP displayed higher systolic blood pressure (mmHg), in comparison with WKY rats (211±7.6, n=15 vs. 119±1.8, n=15; respectively). Body weight of SHRSP was significantly lower (296 ±6.1g; n=15) when compared with WKY rats (345±5.2g; n=15). Force development during the Ca<sup>2+</sup> loading period Figure 1 illustrates the protocol used to evaluate force development in response to Ca2+ influx after depletion of intracellular Ca2+ stores (loading period) and after caffeine stimulation in order to measure the functional capacity of the SR to release Ca2+. After an initial response to 120 mM KCl (SHRSP, 14.1±3.2mN vs. WKY, 22.7±5.3mN, n=10) and a new stabilization period, aortas were stimulated with PE (1µM) and the contraction was allowed to reach a plateau. PE-induced contractions were similar in aortas from SHRSP (20.8±1.7mN, n=12) compared to WKY (15.6±2.7mN, n=12). After PE contraction, aortas were washed in Ca2+ free-EGTA buffer either in absence ( Fig. 1A–B , vehicle) or presence ( Fig. 1C–D ) of thapsigargin (1µM). Figure 2A shows that during the Ca2+ loading period, force development was augmented in aortas from SHRSP (10.0±0.9mN, n=6), compared to WKY (4.8±1.0mN, n=6). CRAC channel blockade with 2-APB and Gd3+ significantly inhibited contraction in SHRSP aortas during the Ca2+ loading period (3.9±0.6 and 6.3±0.4mN, respectively), but had no significant effects in WKY aortas. Thapsigargin was used to inhibit the SR Ca2+-ATPase and promote depletion of intracellular Ca2+ stores. Accordingly, this would result in continuous stimulation of the SR Ca2+ sensor, STIM-1, and consequently, activation of SOC entry through CRAC channels. As shown in figure 2B , thapsigargin incubation augmented contractions during the Ca2+ loading period in aortic rings from both groups. However, contractions were greater in SHRSP aortas (16.5±0.9mN vs. WKY, 10.7±1.0, n=6). During thapsigargin incubation, simultaneous inhibition of CRAC channels by 2-APB and Gd3+ significantly decreased Ca2+ loading-induced contractions both in WKY (2.4±0.2 and 4.3±0.9mN, respectively) and SHRSP (3.9±0.1 and 5.9±0.4mN, respectively), abolishing differences between the groups. Collectively, these results suggest that CRAC channel activation is increased in aortas from the hypertensive animals, contributing to augmented extracellular Ca2+ influx. As an alternative approach to the pharmacological inhibition with 2-APB and Gd+3, neutralizing antibodies against STIM-1 and Orai-1 were intracellularly delivered, by the chariot technique. Figure 3A shows that transfection with Orai-1 or STIM-1 antibodies resulted in decreased contraction during the Ca2+ loading period in both groups, indicating that activation of STIM-1 and Orai-1 are required for SOC entry, even in physiological conditions. After transfection, contractile responses in SHRSP aortas were similar to those in the control group, reinforcing the notion that these proteins play a role in augmented tone development in vessels from SHRSP. Upon thapsigargin inhibition, anti-Orai-1 and anti-STIM-1 antibody transfection decreased contractile responses during the Ca2+ loading period in SHRSP aortas, whereas only a small reduction was observed in vessels from WKY ( Fig. 3B ). Empty chariot, or incubation of vessels with all reagents used in the chariot protocol except antibodies, as well as addition of a non specific antibody (anti-mouse IgG) to the empty chariot were used as additional controls and did not produce any significant effects. We speculate that increased CRAC channel activation in aortas from hypertensive rats, through mechanisms dependent on STIM-1 and Orai-1 activation, results in exacerbated extracellular Ca2+ influx and augmented spontaneous tone upon depletion of intracellular Ca2+ stores. Intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> stores depletion The functional capacity of the SR to release Ca2+ was evaluated by placing the aortas in Ca2+-free buffer for 2 minutes and by stimulation with caffeine (20mM). As observed in figure 4A , SHRSP aortas displayed increased caffeine-induced contractions, compared to WKY. CRAC channel blockade with 2-APB and Gd3+ during the Ca2+ loading period reduced contractions induced by caffeine, both in WKY and SHRSP. Upon thapsigargin incubation, caffeine-induced contractions were already reduced compared to those in vehicle-treated vessels, but still greater in SHRSP aortas, confirming that inhibition of the SR Ca2+-ATPase activity decreases intracellular Ca2+ storage. Caffeine-induced contractions were further reduced in aortas from both groups upon CRAC channel blockade. Treatment with 2-APB and Gd3+ practically abolished contractions in both groups ( Fig. 4B ). These results confirm that CRAC channel activation contribute to SR Ca2+ loading. Figure 5A shows that transfection of Orai-1 or STIM-1 antibodies decreased the SR Ca2+ loading capacity, resulting in smaller transient contractions to caffeine in both groups. Furthermore, differences in caffeine-induced contractions between aortas from WKY and SHRSP were abolished after transfection of Orai-1 or STIM-1 antibodies. Upon thapsigargin incubation, caffeine-induced contractions were decreased in vessels from SHRSP and WKY and no differences were found among the groups ( Fig. 5B ). In this condition, transfection of Orai-1 or STIM-1 antibodies had no further effects. These data reinforce the suggestion that STIM-1 and Orai-1 activation is important during the SR Ca2+ reloading period and indicate that aortas from hypertensive rats display increased activation of STIM-1 and Orai-1-related pathways. STIM-1 and Orai-1 expression Aortas from SHRSP exhibited increased protein levels of STIM-1 (1.61± 0.14) and Orai-1 (1.23± 0.06), compared to WKY ( Fig. 6A–B ). In addition, STIM-1 and Orai-1 mRNA levels were augmented in aortas from SHRSP (1.25 ±0.1 and 1.69±0.3, respectively) compared to WKY ( Fig. 6C–D ). Immunohistochemistry analysis confirmed increased expression of STIM-1, but not Orai-1, in aortas from SHRSP in comparison to WKY ( Fig. 6E ).  Results Systolic blood pressure and body weight of the rats At 24 weeks, SHRSP displayed higher systolic blood pressure (mmHg), in comparison with WKY rats (211±7.6, n=15 vs. 119±1.8, n=15; respectively). Body weight of SHRSP was significantly lower (296 ±6.1g; n=15) when compared with WKY rats (345±5.2g; n=15). Force development during the Ca<sup>2+</sup> loading period Figure 1 illustrates the protocol used to evaluate force development in response to Ca2+ influx after depletion of intracellular Ca2+ stores (loading period) and after caffeine stimulation in order to measure the functional capacity of the SR to release Ca2+. After an initial response to 120 mM KCl (SHRSP, 14.1±3.2mN vs. WKY, 22.7±5.3mN, n=10) and a new stabilization period, aortas were stimulated with PE (1µM) and the contraction was allowed to reach a plateau. PE-induced contractions were similar in aortas from SHRSP (20.8±1.7mN, n=12) compared to WKY (15.6±2.7mN, n=12). After PE contraction, aortas were washed in Ca2+ free-EGTA buffer either in absence ( Fig. 1A–B , vehicle) or presence ( Fig. 1C–D ) of thapsigargin (1µM). Figure 2A shows that during the Ca2+ loading period, force development was augmented in aortas from SHRSP (10.0±0.9mN, n=6), compared to WKY (4.8±1.0mN, n=6). CRAC channel blockade with 2-APB and Gd3+ significantly inhibited contraction in SHRSP aortas during the Ca2+ loading period (3.9±0.6 and 6.3±0.4mN, respectively), but had no significant effects in WKY aortas. Thapsigargin was used to inhibit the SR Ca2+-ATPase and promote depletion of intracellular Ca2+ stores. Accordingly, this would result in continuous stimulation of the SR Ca2+ sensor, STIM-1, and consequently, activation of SOC entry through CRAC channels. As shown in figure 2B , thapsigargin incubation augmented contractions during the Ca2+ loading period in aortic rings from both groups. However, contractions were greater in SHRSP aortas (16.5±0.9mN vs. WKY, 10.7±1.0, n=6). During thapsigargin incubation, simultaneous inhibition of CRAC channels by 2-APB and Gd3+ significantly decreased Ca2+ loading-induced contractions both in WKY (2.4±0.2 and 4.3±0.9mN, respectively) and SHRSP (3.9±0.1 and 5.9±0.4mN, respectively), abolishing differences between the groups. Collectively, these results suggest that CRAC channel activation is increased in aortas from the hypertensive animals, contributing to augmented extracellular Ca2+ influx. As an alternative approach to the pharmacological inhibition with 2-APB and Gd+3, neutralizing antibodies against STIM-1 and Orai-1 were intracellularly delivered, by the chariot technique. Figure 3A shows that transfection with Orai-1 or STIM-1 antibodies resulted in decreased contraction during the Ca2+ loading period in both groups, indicating that activation of STIM-1 and Orai-1 are required for SOC entry, even in physiological conditions. After transfection, contractile responses in SHRSP aortas were similar to those in the control group, reinforcing the notion that these proteins play a role in augmented tone development in vessels from SHRSP. Upon thapsigargin inhibition, anti-Orai-1 and anti-STIM-1 antibody transfection decreased contractile responses during the Ca2+ loading period in SHRSP aortas, whereas only a small reduction was observed in vessels from WKY ( Fig. 3B ). Empty chariot, or incubation of vessels with all reagents used in the chariot protocol except antibodies, as well as addition of a non specific antibody (anti-mouse IgG) to the empty chariot were used as additional controls and did not produce any significant effects. We speculate that increased CRAC channel activation in aortas from hypertensive rats, through mechanisms dependent on STIM-1 and Orai-1 activation, results in exacerbated extracellular Ca2+ influx and augmented spontaneous tone upon depletion of intracellular Ca2+ stores. Intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> stores depletion The functional capacity of the SR to release Ca2+ was evaluated by placing the aortas in Ca2+-free buffer for 2 minutes and by stimulation with caffeine (20mM). As observed in figure 4A , SHRSP aortas displayed increased caffeine-induced contractions, compared to WKY. CRAC channel blockade with 2-APB and Gd3+ during the Ca2+ loading period reduced contractions induced by caffeine, both in WKY and SHRSP. Upon thapsigargin incubation, caffeine-induced contractions were already reduced compared to those in vehicle-treated vessels, but still greater in SHRSP aortas, confirming that inhibition of the SR Ca2+-ATPase activity decreases intracellular Ca2+ storage. Caffeine-induced contractions were further reduced in aortas from both groups upon CRAC channel blockade. Treatment with 2-APB and Gd3+ practically abolished contractions in both groups ( Fig. 4B ). These results confirm that CRAC channel activation contribute to SR Ca2+ loading. Figure 5A shows that transfection of Orai-1 or STIM-1 antibodies decreased the SR Ca2+ loading capacity, resulting in smaller transient contractions to caffeine in both groups. Furthermore, differences in caffeine-induced contractions between aortas from WKY and SHRSP were abolished after transfection of Orai-1 or STIM-1 antibodies. Upon thapsigargin incubation, caffeine-induced contractions were decreased in vessels from SHRSP and WKY and no differences were found among the groups ( Fig. 5B ). In this condition, transfection of Orai-1 or STIM-1 antibodies had no further effects. These data reinforce the suggestion that STIM-1 and Orai-1 activation is important during the SR Ca2+ reloading period and indicate that aortas from hypertensive rats display increased activation of STIM-1 and Orai-1-related pathways. STIM-1 and Orai-1 expression Aortas from SHRSP exhibited increased protein levels of STIM-1 (1.61± 0.14) and Orai-1 (1.23± 0.06), compared to WKY ( Fig. 6A–B ). In addition, STIM-1 and Orai-1 mRNA levels were augmented in aortas from SHRSP (1.25 ±0.1 and 1.69±0.3, respectively) compared to WKY ( Fig. 6C–D ). Immunohistochemistry analysis confirmed increased expression of STIM-1, but not Orai-1, in aortas from SHRSP in comparison to WKY ( Fig. 6E ).  Systolic blood pressure and body weight of the rats At 24 weeks, SHRSP displayed higher systolic blood pressure (mmHg), in comparison with WKY rats (211±7.6, n=15 vs. 119±1.8, n=15; respectively). Body weight of SHRSP was significantly lower (296 ±6.1g; n=15) when compared with WKY rats (345±5.2g; n=15).  Systolic blood pressure and body weight of the rats At 24 weeks, SHRSP displayed higher systolic blood pressure (mmHg), in comparison with WKY rats (211±7.6, n=15 vs. 119±1.8, n=15; respectively). Body weight of SHRSP was significantly lower (296 ±6.1g; n=15) when compared with WKY rats (345±5.2g; n=15).  Force development during the Ca<sup>2+</sup> loading period Figure 1 illustrates the protocol used to evaluate force development in response to Ca2+ influx after depletion of intracellular Ca2+ stores (loading period) and after caffeine stimulation in order to measure the functional capacity of the SR to release Ca2+. After an initial response to 120 mM KCl (SHRSP, 14.1±3.2mN vs. WKY, 22.7±5.3mN, n=10) and a new stabilization period, aortas were stimulated with PE (1µM) and the contraction was allowed to reach a plateau. PE-induced contractions were similar in aortas from SHRSP (20.8±1.7mN, n=12) compared to WKY (15.6±2.7mN, n=12). After PE contraction, aortas were washed in Ca2+ free-EGTA buffer either in absence ( Fig. 1A–B , vehicle) or presence ( Fig. 1C–D ) of thapsigargin (1µM). Figure 2A shows that during the Ca2+ loading period, force development was augmented in aortas from SHRSP (10.0±0.9mN, n=6), compared to WKY (4.8±1.0mN, n=6). CRAC channel blockade with 2-APB and Gd3+ significantly inhibited contraction in SHRSP aortas during the Ca2+ loading period (3.9±0.6 and 6.3±0.4mN, respectively), but had no significant effects in WKY aortas. Thapsigargin was used to inhibit the SR Ca2+-ATPase and promote depletion of intracellular Ca2+ stores. Accordingly, this would result in continuous stimulation of the SR Ca2+ sensor, STIM-1, and consequently, activation of SOC entry through CRAC channels. As shown in figure 2B , thapsigargin incubation augmented contractions during the Ca2+ loading period in aortic rings from both groups. However, contractions were greater in SHRSP aortas (16.5±0.9mN vs. WKY, 10.7±1.0, n=6). During thapsigargin incubation, simultaneous inhibition of CRAC channels by 2-APB and Gd3+ significantly decreased Ca2+ loading-induced contractions both in WKY (2.4±0.2 and 4.3±0.9mN, respectively) and SHRSP (3.9±0.1 and 5.9±0.4mN, respectively), abolishing differences between the groups. Collectively, these results suggest that CRAC channel activation is increased in aortas from the hypertensive animals, contributing to augmented extracellular Ca2+ influx. As an alternative approach to the pharmacological inhibition with 2-APB and Gd+3, neutralizing antibodies against STIM-1 and Orai-1 were intracellularly delivered, by the chariot technique. Figure 3A shows that transfection with Orai-1 or STIM-1 antibodies resulted in decreased contraction during the Ca2+ loading period in both groups, indicating that activation of STIM-1 and Orai-1 are required for SOC entry, even in physiological conditions. After transfection, contractile responses in SHRSP aortas were similar to those in the control group, reinforcing the notion that these proteins play a role in augmented tone development in vessels from SHRSP. Upon thapsigargin inhibition, anti-Orai-1 and anti-STIM-1 antibody transfection decreased contractile responses during the Ca2+ loading period in SHRSP aortas, whereas only a small reduction was observed in vessels from WKY ( Fig. 3B ). Empty chariot, or incubation of vessels with all reagents used in the chariot protocol except antibodies, as well as addition of a non specific antibody (anti-mouse IgG) to the empty chariot were used as additional controls and did not produce any significant effects. We speculate that increased CRAC channel activation in aortas from hypertensive rats, through mechanisms dependent on STIM-1 and Orai-1 activation, results in exacerbated extracellular Ca2+ influx and augmented spontaneous tone upon depletion of intracellular Ca2+ stores.  Force development during the Ca<sup>2+</sup> loading period Figure 1 illustrates the protocol used to evaluate force development in response to Ca2+ influx after depletion of intracellular Ca2+ stores (loading period) and after caffeine stimulation in order to measure the functional capacity of the SR to release Ca2+. After an initial response to 120 mM KCl (SHRSP, 14.1±3.2mN vs. WKY, 22.7±5.3mN, n=10) and a new stabilization period, aortas were stimulated with PE (1µM) and the contraction was allowed to reach a plateau. PE-induced contractions were similar in aortas from SHRSP (20.8±1.7mN, n=12) compared to WKY (15.6±2.7mN, n=12). After PE contraction, aortas were washed in Ca2+ free-EGTA buffer either in absence ( Fig. 1A–B , vehicle) or presence ( Fig. 1C–D ) of thapsigargin (1µM). Figure 2A shows that during the Ca2+ loading period, force development was augmented in aortas from SHRSP (10.0±0.9mN, n=6), compared to WKY (4.8±1.0mN, n=6). CRAC channel blockade with 2-APB and Gd3+ significantly inhibited contraction in SHRSP aortas during the Ca2+ loading period (3.9±0.6 and 6.3±0.4mN, respectively), but had no significant effects in WKY aortas. Thapsigargin was used to inhibit the SR Ca2+-ATPase and promote depletion of intracellular Ca2+ stores. Accordingly, this would result in continuous stimulation of the SR Ca2+ sensor, STIM-1, and consequently, activation of SOC entry through CRAC channels. As shown in figure 2B , thapsigargin incubation augmented contractions during the Ca2+ loading period in aortic rings from both groups. However, contractions were greater in SHRSP aortas (16.5±0.9mN vs. WKY, 10.7±1.0, n=6). During thapsigargin incubation, simultaneous inhibition of CRAC channels by 2-APB and Gd3+ significantly decreased Ca2+ loading-induced contractions both in WKY (2.4±0.2 and 4.3±0.9mN, respectively) and SHRSP (3.9±0.1 and 5.9±0.4mN, respectively), abolishing differences between the groups. Collectively, these results suggest that CRAC channel activation is increased in aortas from the hypertensive animals, contributing to augmented extracellular Ca2+ influx. As an alternative approach to the pharmacological inhibition with 2-APB and Gd+3, neutralizing antibodies against STIM-1 and Orai-1 were intracellularly delivered, by the chariot technique. Figure 3A shows that transfection with Orai-1 or STIM-1 antibodies resulted in decreased contraction during the Ca2+ loading period in both groups, indicating that activation of STIM-1 and Orai-1 are required for SOC entry, even in physiological conditions. After transfection, contractile responses in SHRSP aortas were similar to those in the control group, reinforcing the notion that these proteins play a role in augmented tone development in vessels from SHRSP. Upon thapsigargin inhibition, anti-Orai-1 and anti-STIM-1 antibody transfection decreased contractile responses during the Ca2+ loading period in SHRSP aortas, whereas only a small reduction was observed in vessels from WKY ( Fig. 3B ). Empty chariot, or incubation of vessels with all reagents used in the chariot protocol except antibodies, as well as addition of a non specific antibody (anti-mouse IgG) to the empty chariot were used as additional controls and did not produce any significant effects. We speculate that increased CRAC channel activation in aortas from hypertensive rats, through mechanisms dependent on STIM-1 and Orai-1 activation, results in exacerbated extracellular Ca2+ influx and augmented spontaneous tone upon depletion of intracellular Ca2+ stores.  Intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> stores depletion The functional capacity of the SR to release Ca2+ was evaluated by placing the aortas in Ca2+-free buffer for 2 minutes and by stimulation with caffeine (20mM). As observed in figure 4A , SHRSP aortas displayed increased caffeine-induced contractions, compared to WKY. CRAC channel blockade with 2-APB and Gd3+ during the Ca2+ loading period reduced contractions induced by caffeine, both in WKY and SHRSP. Upon thapsigargin incubation, caffeine-induced contractions were already reduced compared to those in vehicle-treated vessels, but still greater in SHRSP aortas, confirming that inhibition of the SR Ca2+-ATPase activity decreases intracellular Ca2+ storage. Caffeine-induced contractions were further reduced in aortas from both groups upon CRAC channel blockade. Treatment with 2-APB and Gd3+ practically abolished contractions in both groups ( Fig. 4B ). These results confirm that CRAC channel activation contribute to SR Ca2+ loading. Figure 5A shows that transfection of Orai-1 or STIM-1 antibodies decreased the SR Ca2+ loading capacity, resulting in smaller transient contractions to caffeine in both groups. Furthermore, differences in caffeine-induced contractions between aortas from WKY and SHRSP were abolished after transfection of Orai-1 or STIM-1 antibodies. Upon thapsigargin incubation, caffeine-induced contractions were decreased in vessels from SHRSP and WKY and no differences were found among the groups ( Fig. 5B ). In this condition, transfection of Orai-1 or STIM-1 antibodies had no further effects. These data reinforce the suggestion that STIM-1 and Orai-1 activation is important during the SR Ca2+ reloading period and indicate that aortas from hypertensive rats display increased activation of STIM-1 and Orai-1-related pathways.  Intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> stores depletion The functional capacity of the SR to release Ca2+ was evaluated by placing the aortas in Ca2+-free buffer for 2 minutes and by stimulation with caffeine (20mM). As observed in figure 4A , SHRSP aortas displayed increased caffeine-induced contractions, compared to WKY. CRAC channel blockade with 2-APB and Gd3+ during the Ca2+ loading period reduced contractions induced by caffeine, both in WKY and SHRSP. Upon thapsigargin incubation, caffeine-induced contractions were already reduced compared to those in vehicle-treated vessels, but still greater in SHRSP aortas, confirming that inhibition of the SR Ca2+-ATPase activity decreases intracellular Ca2+ storage. Caffeine-induced contractions were further reduced in aortas from both groups upon CRAC channel blockade. Treatment with 2-APB and Gd3+ practically abolished contractions in both groups ( Fig. 4B ). These results confirm that CRAC channel activation contribute to SR Ca2+ loading. Figure 5A shows that transfection of Orai-1 or STIM-1 antibodies decreased the SR Ca2+ loading capacity, resulting in smaller transient contractions to caffeine in both groups. Furthermore, differences in caffeine-induced contractions between aortas from WKY and SHRSP were abolished after transfection of Orai-1 or STIM-1 antibodies. Upon thapsigargin incubation, caffeine-induced contractions were decreased in vessels from SHRSP and WKY and no differences were found among the groups ( Fig. 5B ). In this condition, transfection of Orai-1 or STIM-1 antibodies had no further effects. These data reinforce the suggestion that STIM-1 and Orai-1 activation is important during the SR Ca2+ reloading period and indicate that aortas from hypertensive rats display increased activation of STIM-1 and Orai-1-related pathways.  STIM-1 and Orai-1 expression Aortas from SHRSP exhibited increased protein levels of STIM-1 (1.61± 0.14) and Orai-1 (1.23± 0.06), compared to WKY ( Fig. 6A–B ). In addition, STIM-1 and Orai-1 mRNA levels were augmented in aortas from SHRSP (1.25 ±0.1 and 1.69±0.3, respectively) compared to WKY ( Fig. 6C–D ). Immunohistochemistry analysis confirmed increased expression of STIM-1, but not Orai-1, in aortas from SHRSP in comparison to WKY ( Fig. 6E ).  STIM-1 and Orai-1 expression Aortas from SHRSP exhibited increased protein levels of STIM-1 (1.61± 0.14) and Orai-1 (1.23± 0.06), compared to WKY ( Fig. 6A–B ). In addition, STIM-1 and Orai-1 mRNA levels were augmented in aortas from SHRSP (1.25 ±0.1 and 1.69±0.3, respectively) compared to WKY ( Fig. 6C–D ). Immunohistochemistry analysis confirmed increased expression of STIM-1, but not Orai-1, in aortas from SHRSP in comparison to WKY ( Fig. 6E ).  Discussion In smooth muscle, the activation of SOC entry is key to mediate long-term cytosolic Ca2+ signals and replenishing of intracellular Ca2+ stores ( 6 , 7 , 28 ). In many cell types, SOC entry carries a highly Ca2+–selective, non-voltage-gated, inwardly rectifying current termed the CRAC current, or I CRAC ( 7 , 27 , 28 ). A defect in the regulation of Ca2+ plays a role in the increased vascular reactivity in hypertension. The cellular mechanisms involved in abnormal Ca2+ handling in VSMCs are numerous and include increased Ca2+ entry, increased Ca2+ storage in the SR or decreased Ca2+ extrusion. In this manuscript, we focused on the possibility that increased Ca2+ influx mediated by a defective signal from intracellular Ca2+ stores contributes to abnormal vascular reactivity in hypertension. Increased activation of CRAC/Orai-1, through the Ca2+ sensor STIM-1, plays a role in augmented reactivity in aorta from hypertensive animals. Augmented Ca2+ levels in smooth muscle cells from spontaneously hypertensive rats ( 29 ) can be attributed to an increase in the amount of Ca2+ in the SR, which may contribute to enhanced vascular tone through Ca2+-release mechanisms. Differences in SR Ca2+ levels in arteries from hypertensive and normotensive rats include various possibilities. First, it is possible that augmented Ca 2+ uptake through the SR Ca 2+-ATPase-dependent mechanisms contributes to an increased Ca2+ store. Accordingly, Levistsky et al (1993) showed higher expression of the SR Ca2+-ATPase 2a and 2b isoforms in VSMC from SHR, which may account for the increased responses to thapsigargin and enhanced Ca2+ stores in vascular myocytes from these animals ( 30 ). Furthermore, Côrtes et al (1997) have shown that in Ca2+-free medium, Ca2+-release induced by thapsigargin, which represents Ca2+ release from SR/ER was two-times higher in rat aortic SMC from SHR than in those from WKY ( 19 , 29 ). These data show that the thapsigargin-sensitive pool is greater in SHR than in WKY. Second, alterations in Ca 2+ storage proteins , such as calsequestrin and calreticulin, may also contribute to increased SR Ca2+ levels. Ca2+ storage proteins, characterized by high Ca2+-binding capacity, keep high concentrations of Ca2+ inside the SR/ER. Upon IP3 stimulus e.g., Ca2+ is unbound from Ca2+ storage proteins and released to the cytoplasm ( 31 ). Furthermore, calreticulin is elevated in peripheral maternal blood during pre-eclampsia in humans ( 32 ) and cardiac hypertrophy causes alterations in the SR Ca2+-storing proteins, a mechanism that may contribute to the contractile dysfunction of hypertrophied cardiac myocytes ( 33 ). A correlation between increased levels of calreticulin/calsequestrin and increased risk of adult heart disease has also been established ( 34 ). A third mechanism is represented by alterations in the Ca 2+ ER sensor, STIM-1, which modulates/activates Ca 2+ entry . SOC entry in smooth muscle cells involves functional STIM-1 proteins, which upon activation, translocates to plasma membrane domains and activates Ca2+ entry, similarly to what has been described in other tissues ( 35 – 37 ). Recent literature has identified STIM and Orai proteins as key signaling players in the activation of SOC, in a number of inflammatory cell types. Orai-1 protein fulfills all the criteria of being the SOC moiety itself ( 11 , 13 , 14 , 38 – 41 ). Additionally, combined expression of STIM-1 and Orai-1 resulted in a huge gain of SOC function and indicates that the two proteins are likely sufficient to mediate the operation of SOCs ( 13 , 14 , 38 , 39 ). Peel et al (2008) showed that Orai-1 siRNA transfection on whole airway SMC blocks inward currents initiated by Ca2+ store depletion. They found a similar result by using inhibitors of SOC Ca2+ influx, including 2-APB, Gd3+ and La3+ ( 42 ). In addition, mutations in Orai-1 also result in significant changes to the electrophysiology properties of ICRAC, rendering the current less Ca2+ selective with outward rectification ( 11 ). Such studies have provided evidence for the theory that Orai-1 forms the pore forming subunits of the CRAC channel. Orai-1 and STIM-1 may also contribute to function of other SOC channels ( 43 ). In this sense, Orai-1 has been reported to interact with TRPC1 channel and forms a ternary complex along with STIM-1 in the plasma membrane ( 44 , 45 ). Nailing down the identity of both the sensor and the channel itself has created new possibilities in the Ca2+ signaling field. Considering that 1) defects in Ca2+ handling in VSMC are among the candidate cellular mechanisms for the pathogenesis of hypertension, 2) STIM-1/Orai-1 represent important components to the intracellular Ca2+ regulation, and 3) STIM-1/Orai activation in VSMC from hypertensive animals has not been addressed, we hypothesized that increased activation of CRAC/Orai-1, through the Ca2+ sensor STIM-1, plays a role in augmented reactivity in aorta from hypertensive animals. As evidenced by our results, CRAC channel activation is increased in aortas from SHRSP, by mechanisms dependent on STIM-1 and Orai-1 activation, resulting in augmented extracellular Ca2+ influx, inferred from spontaneous enhancement in contractile function. We previously described that aortas from SHRSP displayed increased force-development during the Ca2+ loading period, upon depletion of intracellular Ca2+ stores( 22 ). The SR Ca2+ store is larger in aortas from SHRSP due to an enhanced influx of Ca2+ across the sarcolemma rather than an impaired recycling of the cation by the SR Ca2+-ATPase ( 42 ). This study shows that prevention of STIM-1 activation by neutralizing antibodies prevents contractions induced by Ca2+ influx during the Ca2+ loading period. Neutralization of Orai-1 also decreased Ca2+ influx, as indicated by our functional experiments. Furthermore, thapsigargin-mediated vascular Ca2+ influx was greatly reduced by transfection of STIM-1 and Orai-1 antibodies, compared to that in negative transfected aortas. 2-APB, a non-selective and Gd3+, a selective and irreversible blocker of CRAC channels, were used to inhibit SOC entry ( 46 ). 2-APB and Gd3+ inhibited Ca2+ entry, evidenced by inhibition of contractile responses, in aortas from WKY and SHRSP. The differences in spontaneous tone development during the Ca2+ loading period between the groups were abolished after CRAC channel blockade. These results demonstrate that CRAC channels represent an important pathway for Ca2+ entry and that CRAC activation is enhanced in aorta from SHRSP, compared to that in WKY. Possible mechanisms associated with an abnormal function of the Ca2+ sensor STIM-1 and CRAC channels include increased expression or activity of these proteins, defective activation of the sensor by Ca2+, or augmented activation/decreased inactivation of CRAC channels. In this study, we have observed that aortas from SHRSP display increased expression of both STIM-1 and Orai-1. Whereas it is possible that increased protein levels may account for the increased functional contractile responses observed after intracellular Ca2+ depletion, other mechanisms may need to be taken into consideration. Perspectives Most of the work related to the characterization of STIM-1 and Orai-1 were performed in lymphocytes and T cells. A mutation in Orai-1 was observed in patients with severe combined immune deficiency, resulting in abrogated CRAC channel function ( 10 ). The effect of the mutation in the Orai-1 was not reverted by overexpression of Orai-2 or Orai-3. This important paper showed that alterations in Orai-1 are related to pathophysiological conditions and called the attention of pharmaceutical companies that have begun to investigate CRAC channel blockers as an option to reduce the toxicity of immunosuppressant drugs such as cyclosporine A ( 40 , 47 ). Here we show for the first time that STIM-1 and Orai-1 proteins are up-regulated in vessels from hypertensive animals. Functional up-regulation of SOC in vessels from SHRSP was confirmed both by pharmacological and molecular approaches. CRAC channel inhibitors may represent a new therapeutic approach to treat vascular dysfunction or prevent end-organ damage associated with arterial hypertension.  Discussion In smooth muscle, the activation of SOC entry is key to mediate long-term cytosolic Ca2+ signals and replenishing of intracellular Ca2+ stores ( 6 , 7 , 28 ). In many cell types, SOC entry carries a highly Ca2+–selective, non-voltage-gated, inwardly rectifying current termed the CRAC current, or I CRAC ( 7 , 27 , 28 ). A defect in the regulation of Ca2+ plays a role in the increased vascular reactivity in hypertension. The cellular mechanisms involved in abnormal Ca2+ handling in VSMCs are numerous and include increased Ca2+ entry, increased Ca2+ storage in the SR or decreased Ca2+ extrusion. In this manuscript, we focused on the possibility that increased Ca2+ influx mediated by a defective signal from intracellular Ca2+ stores contributes to abnormal vascular reactivity in hypertension. Increased activation of CRAC/Orai-1, through the Ca2+ sensor STIM-1, plays a role in augmented reactivity in aorta from hypertensive animals. Augmented Ca2+ levels in smooth muscle cells from spontaneously hypertensive rats ( 29 ) can be attributed to an increase in the amount of Ca2+ in the SR, which may contribute to enhanced vascular tone through Ca2+-release mechanisms. Differences in SR Ca2+ levels in arteries from hypertensive and normotensive rats include various possibilities. First, it is possible that augmented Ca 2+ uptake through the SR Ca 2+-ATPase-dependent mechanisms contributes to an increased Ca2+ store. Accordingly, Levistsky et al (1993) showed higher expression of the SR Ca2+-ATPase 2a and 2b isoforms in VSMC from SHR, which may account for the increased responses to thapsigargin and enhanced Ca2+ stores in vascular myocytes from these animals ( 30 ). Furthermore, Côrtes et al (1997) have shown that in Ca2+-free medium, Ca2+-release induced by thapsigargin, which represents Ca2+ release from SR/ER was two-times higher in rat aortic SMC from SHR than in those from WKY ( 19 , 29 ). These data show that the thapsigargin-sensitive pool is greater in SHR than in WKY. Second, alterations in Ca 2+ storage proteins , such as calsequestrin and calreticulin, may also contribute to increased SR Ca2+ levels. Ca2+ storage proteins, characterized by high Ca2+-binding capacity, keep high concentrations of Ca2+ inside the SR/ER. Upon IP3 stimulus e.g., Ca2+ is unbound from Ca2+ storage proteins and released to the cytoplasm ( 31 ). Furthermore, calreticulin is elevated in peripheral maternal blood during pre-eclampsia in humans ( 32 ) and cardiac hypertrophy causes alterations in the SR Ca2+-storing proteins, a mechanism that may contribute to the contractile dysfunction of hypertrophied cardiac myocytes ( 33 ). A correlation between increased levels of calreticulin/calsequestrin and increased risk of adult heart disease has also been established ( 34 ). A third mechanism is represented by alterations in the Ca 2+ ER sensor, STIM-1, which modulates/activates Ca 2+ entry . SOC entry in smooth muscle cells involves functional STIM-1 proteins, which upon activation, translocates to plasma membrane domains and activates Ca2+ entry, similarly to what has been described in other tissues ( 35 – 37 ). Recent literature has identified STIM and Orai proteins as key signaling players in the activation of SOC, in a number of inflammatory cell types. Orai-1 protein fulfills all the criteria of being the SOC moiety itself ( 11 , 13 , 14 , 38 – 41 ). Additionally, combined expression of STIM-1 and Orai-1 resulted in a huge gain of SOC function and indicates that the two proteins are likely sufficient to mediate the operation of SOCs ( 13 , 14 , 38 , 39 ). Peel et al (2008) showed that Orai-1 siRNA transfection on whole airway SMC blocks inward currents initiated by Ca2+ store depletion. They found a similar result by using inhibitors of SOC Ca2+ influx, including 2-APB, Gd3+ and La3+ ( 42 ). In addition, mutations in Orai-1 also result in significant changes to the electrophysiology properties of ICRAC, rendering the current less Ca2+ selective with outward rectification ( 11 ). Such studies have provided evidence for the theory that Orai-1 forms the pore forming subunits of the CRAC channel. Orai-1 and STIM-1 may also contribute to function of other SOC channels ( 43 ). In this sense, Orai-1 has been reported to interact with TRPC1 channel and forms a ternary complex along with STIM-1 in the plasma membrane ( 44 , 45 ). Nailing down the identity of both the sensor and the channel itself has created new possibilities in the Ca2+ signaling field. Considering that 1) defects in Ca2+ handling in VSMC are among the candidate cellular mechanisms for the pathogenesis of hypertension, 2) STIM-1/Orai-1 represent important components to the intracellular Ca2+ regulation, and 3) STIM-1/Orai activation in VSMC from hypertensive animals has not been addressed, we hypothesized that increased activation of CRAC/Orai-1, through the Ca2+ sensor STIM-1, plays a role in augmented reactivity in aorta from hypertensive animals. As evidenced by our results, CRAC channel activation is increased in aortas from SHRSP, by mechanisms dependent on STIM-1 and Orai-1 activation, resulting in augmented extracellular Ca2+ influx, inferred from spontaneous enhancement in contractile function. We previously described that aortas from SHRSP displayed increased force-development during the Ca2+ loading period, upon depletion of intracellular Ca2+ stores( 22 ). The SR Ca2+ store is larger in aortas from SHRSP due to an enhanced influx of Ca2+ across the sarcolemma rather than an impaired recycling of the cation by the SR Ca2+-ATPase ( 42 ). This study shows that prevention of STIM-1 activation by neutralizing antibodies prevents contractions induced by Ca2+ influx during the Ca2+ loading period. Neutralization of Orai-1 also decreased Ca2+ influx, as indicated by our functional experiments. Furthermore, thapsigargin-mediated vascular Ca2+ influx was greatly reduced by transfection of STIM-1 and Orai-1 antibodies, compared to that in negative transfected aortas. 2-APB, a non-selective and Gd3+, a selective and irreversible blocker of CRAC channels, were used to inhibit SOC entry ( 46 ). 2-APB and Gd3+ inhibited Ca2+ entry, evidenced by inhibition of contractile responses, in aortas from WKY and SHRSP. The differences in spontaneous tone development during the Ca2+ loading period between the groups were abolished after CRAC channel blockade. These results demonstrate that CRAC channels represent an important pathway for Ca2+ entry and that CRAC activation is enhanced in aorta from SHRSP, compared to that in WKY. Possible mechanisms associated with an abnormal function of the Ca2+ sensor STIM-1 and CRAC channels include increased expression or activity of these proteins, defective activation of the sensor by Ca2+, or augmented activation/decreased inactivation of CRAC channels. In this study, we have observed that aortas from SHRSP display increased expression of both STIM-1 and Orai-1. Whereas it is possible that increased protein levels may account for the increased functional contractile responses observed after intracellular Ca2+ depletion, other mechanisms may need to be taken into consideration. Perspectives Most of the work related to the characterization of STIM-1 and Orai-1 were performed in lymphocytes and T cells. A mutation in Orai-1 was observed in patients with severe combined immune deficiency, resulting in abrogated CRAC channel function ( 10 ). The effect of the mutation in the Orai-1 was not reverted by overexpression of Orai-2 or Orai-3. This important paper showed that alterations in Orai-1 are related to pathophysiological conditions and called the attention of pharmaceutical companies that have begun to investigate CRAC channel blockers as an option to reduce the toxicity of immunosuppressant drugs such as cyclosporine A ( 40 , 47 ). Here we show for the first time that STIM-1 and Orai-1 proteins are up-regulated in vessels from hypertensive animals. Functional up-regulation of SOC in vessels from SHRSP was confirmed both by pharmacological and molecular approaches. CRAC channel inhibitors may represent a new therapeutic approach to treat vascular dysfunction or prevent end-organ damage associated with arterial hypertension.  Perspectives Most of the work related to the characterization of STIM-1 and Orai-1 were performed in lymphocytes and T cells. A mutation in Orai-1 was observed in patients with severe combined immune deficiency, resulting in abrogated CRAC channel function ( 10 ). The effect of the mutation in the Orai-1 was not reverted by overexpression of Orai-2 or Orai-3. This important paper showed that alterations in Orai-1 are related to pathophysiological conditions and called the attention of pharmaceutical companies that have begun to investigate CRAC channel blockers as an option to reduce the toxicity of immunosuppressant drugs such as cyclosporine A ( 40 , 47 ). Here we show for the first time that STIM-1 and Orai-1 proteins are up-regulated in vessels from hypertensive animals. Functional up-regulation of SOC in vessels from SHRSP was confirmed both by pharmacological and molecular approaches. CRAC channel inhibitors may represent a new therapeutic approach to treat vascular dysfunction or prevent end-organ damage associated with arterial hypertension.  Perspectives Most of the work related to the characterization of STIM-1 and Orai-1 were performed in lymphocytes and T cells. A mutation in Orai-1 was observed in patients with severe combined immune deficiency, resulting in abrogated CRAC channel function ( 10 ). The effect of the mutation in the Orai-1 was not reverted by overexpression of Orai-2 or Orai-3. This important paper showed that alterations in Orai-1 are related to pathophysiological conditions and called the attention of pharmaceutical companies that have begun to investigate CRAC channel blockers as an option to reduce the toxicity of immunosuppressant drugs such as cyclosporine A ( 40 , 47 ). Here we show for the first time that STIM-1 and Orai-1 proteins are up-regulated in vessels from hypertensive animals. Functional up-regulation of SOC in vessels from SHRSP was confirmed both by pharmacological and molecular approaches. CRAC channel inhibitors may represent a new therapeutic approach to treat vascular dysfunction or prevent end-organ damage associated with arterial hypertension.  Figures Figure 1 Aortas from SHRSP display augmented spontaneous tone after depletion of intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> stores The tracings illustrate the protocol used to evaluate force in response to Ca2+ influx after depletion of intracellular Ca2+ stores (loading period). Briefly, aortic rings from WKY (A,C) and SHRSP (B,D) were stimulated with PE (1µM) for 15 minutes. Aortas were washed in Ca2+ free-EGTA buffer, in order to deplete intracellular Ca2+ stores (depletion period), for 20 minutes. During the depletion period, arteries were incubated with vehicle (A,B) or 1µM thapsigargin ( C,D ). After Ca2+ depletion, intracellular Ca2+ stores were loaded (loading period) by placing the aortas in 1.6mM Ca2+ buffer for 15 minutes. Contractile responses during the loading period, taken as a functional measure of Ca2+ influx, were determined. The bathing medium was then replaced with Ca2+-free buffer and after 2 minutes aortas were stimulated with caffeine (20mM), in order to deplete intracellular Ca2+ stores, which resulted in a transient contraction. The magnitude of this last response was taken as a measure of the functional capacity of the SR to release Ca2+. Figure 2 CRAC channel blockade partially prevents contraction during Ca<sup>2+</sup> loading and abolishes differences in spontaneous tone between arteries from WKY and SHRSP (A) Contraction during Ca2+ loading period, which is greater in SHRSP (black bars, n=6) compared to WKY (white bars, n=6), was significantly inhibited after CRAC channel blockade with 2-APB and Gd3+. (B) After thapsigargin treatment, aortic rings from WKY (white bars) and SHRSP (black bars) displayed greater contractions during the Ca2+ loading period. CRAC channel blockade with 2-APB and Gd3+ decreased contractions and abolished differences between the groups. Values are expressed as means ±SEM, n=6. * P< 0.05 versus WKY. † P< 0.05 versus DMSO. Figure 3 Neutralizing antibodies against STIM-1 and Orai-1, delivered with the chariot technique, partially prevents contraction during the Ca<sup>2+</sup> loading period Aortic rings from WKY (white bars, n=5) and SHRSP (black bars, n=5), transfected with antibodies anti-STIM-1 or anti-Orai-1, displayed reduced contraction during the Ca2+ loading period either in the presence of vehicle (A) or after thapsigargin treatment (B) . Values are expressed as means ± SEM. * P< 0.05 versus WKY. † P< 0.05 versus DMSO. Figure 4 CRAC channels contributes to the SR Ca<sup>2+</sup> loading. Caffeine-induced contractions after loading of intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> stores are prevented by CRAC channel blockade, both in aortas from WKY and SHRSP Aortic rings from WKY (white bars, n=6) and SHRSP (black bars, n=6) were made to contract in response to caffeine in absence (A) or presence (B) of thapsigargin (10µM), after a depletion and reloading cycle, as described in figure 1 . Values are expressed as means ± SEM. * P< 0.05 versus WKY. † P< 0.05 versus DMSO. Figure 5 STIM-1 and Orai-1 contribute to the SR Ca<sup>2+</sup> loading. Neutralizing antibodies against STIM-1 and Orai-1, delivered with the chariot technique, partially prevents contraction in response to caffeine after loading of intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> stores In the presence of vehicle (A) or after thapsigargin treatment (B) , aortic rings from WKY (white bars, n=5) and SHRSP (black bars, n=5) submitted to anti-STIM-1 or anti-Orai-1 transfection, displayed reduced contractions to caffeine after a depletion and reloading cycle, as described in figure 1 . Differences between SHRSP and WKY were abolished after antibodies transfection. Values are expressed as means ± SEM. * P< 0.05 versus WKY. † P< 0.05 versus DMSO. Figure 6 SHRSP displays increased vascular Orai-1 and STIM-1 protein and mRNA levels Top, representative western blot images and bottom, corresponding bar graphs demonstrating that (A) STIM-1 and (B) Orai-1 protein and (C) STIM-1 and (D) Orai-1 mRNA levels are augmented in SHRSP aorta (black bars, n=6), compared to WKY (white bars, n=6). Densitometric analyses were performed and values were normalized to ?-actin protein expression. * P<0.05 versus WKY. (E) , immunohistochemistry analysis using confocal microscopy confirmed increased expression of STIM-1 (red) and Orai-1 (green), in aortas from SHRSP (n=3), compared to WKY (n=3).  Figures Figure 1 Aortas from SHRSP display augmented spontaneous tone after depletion of intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> stores The tracings illustrate the protocol used to evaluate force in response to Ca2+ influx after depletion of intracellular Ca2+ stores (loading period). Briefly, aortic rings from WKY (A,C) and SHRSP (B,D) were stimulated with PE (1µM) for 15 minutes. Aortas were washed in Ca2+ free-EGTA buffer, in order to deplete intracellular Ca2+ stores (depletion period), for 20 minutes. During the depletion period, arteries were incubated with vehicle (A,B) or 1µM thapsigargin ( C,D ). After Ca2+ depletion, intracellular Ca2+ stores were loaded (loading period) by placing the aortas in 1.6mM Ca2+ buffer for 15 minutes. Contractile responses during the loading period, taken as a functional measure of Ca2+ influx, were determined. The bathing medium was then replaced with Ca2+-free buffer and after 2 minutes aortas were stimulated with caffeine (20mM), in order to deplete intracellular Ca2+ stores, which resulted in a transient contraction. The magnitude of this last response was taken as a measure of the functional capacity of the SR to release Ca2+. Figure 2 CRAC channel blockade partially prevents contraction during Ca<sup>2+</sup> loading and abolishes differences in spontaneous tone between arteries from WKY and SHRSP (A) Contraction during Ca2+ loading period, which is greater in SHRSP (black bars, n=6) compared to WKY (white bars, n=6), was significantly inhibited after CRAC channel blockade with 2-APB and Gd3+. (B) After thapsigargin treatment, aortic rings from WKY (white bars) and SHRSP (black bars) displayed greater contractions during the Ca2+ loading period. CRAC channel blockade with 2-APB and Gd3+ decreased contractions and abolished differences between the groups. Values are expressed as means ±SEM, n=6. * P< 0.05 versus WKY. † P< 0.05 versus DMSO. Figure 3 Neutralizing antibodies against STIM-1 and Orai-1, delivered with the chariot technique, partially prevents contraction during the Ca<sup>2+</sup> loading period Aortic rings from WKY (white bars, n=5) and SHRSP (black bars, n=5), transfected with antibodies anti-STIM-1 or anti-Orai-1, displayed reduced contraction during the Ca2+ loading period either in the presence of vehicle (A) or after thapsigargin treatment (B) . Values are expressed as means ± SEM. * P< 0.05 versus WKY. † P< 0.05 versus DMSO. Figure 4 CRAC channels contributes to the SR Ca<sup>2+</sup> loading. Caffeine-induced contractions after loading of intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> stores are prevented by CRAC channel blockade, both in aortas from WKY and SHRSP Aortic rings from WKY (white bars, n=6) and SHRSP (black bars, n=6) were made to contract in response to caffeine in absence (A) or presence (B) of thapsigargin (10µM), after a depletion and reloading cycle, as described in figure 1 . Values are expressed as means ± SEM. * P< 0.05 versus WKY. † P< 0.05 versus DMSO. Figure 5 STIM-1 and Orai-1 contribute to the SR Ca<sup>2+</sup> loading. Neutralizing antibodies against STIM-1 and Orai-1, delivered with the chariot technique, partially prevents contraction in response to caffeine after loading of intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> stores In the presence of vehicle (A) or after thapsigargin treatment (B) , aortic rings from WKY (white bars, n=5) and SHRSP (black bars, n=5) submitted to anti-STIM-1 or anti-Orai-1 transfection, displayed reduced contractions to caffeine after a depletion and reloading cycle, as described in figure 1 . Differences between SHRSP and WKY were abolished after antibodies transfection. Values are expressed as means ± SEM. * P< 0.05 versus WKY. † P< 0.05 versus DMSO. Figure 6 SHRSP displays increased vascular Orai-1 and STIM-1 protein and mRNA levels Top, representative western blot images and bottom, corresponding bar graphs demonstrating that (A) STIM-1 and (B) Orai-1 protein and (C) STIM-1 and (D) Orai-1 mRNA levels are augmented in SHRSP aorta (black bars, n=6), compared to WKY (white bars, n=6). Densitometric analyses were performed and values were normalized to ?-actin protein expression. * P<0.05 versus WKY. (E) , immunohistochemistry analysis using confocal microscopy confirmed increased expression of STIM-1 (red) and Orai-1 (green), in aortas from SHRSP (n=3), compared to WKY (n=3). 