Endometrial Cancer and Lynch Syndrome: Clinical and Pathologic Considerations Background Approximately 2% to 5% of endometrial cancers may be due to an inherited susceptibility. Lynch syndrome, also known as hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) syndrome, an autosomal-dominant inherited cancer susceptibility syndrome caused by a germline mutation in one of the DNA mismatch repair genes, accounts for the majority of inherited cases. Lynch syndrome is associated with early onset of cancer and the development of multiple cancer types, particularly colon and endometrial cancer. Methods The current status of knowledge regarding Lynch syndrome-associated endometrial cancer and methods for diagnosis, screening and prevention of cancers are reviewed. Results The lifetime cumulative risk of endometrial cancer for women with Lynch syndrome is 40% to 60%, which equals or exceeds their risk of colorectal cancer. No current evidence suggests either a survival advantage or disadvantage to endometrial cancer that is associated with Lynch syndrome when these cases are compared with sporadic cases. A combination of family and personal medical history and tumor testing provides an efficient combination for diagnosing Lynch syndrome in women with endometrial cancer. Current gynecologic cancer screening guidelines for women with Lynch syndrome include annual endometrial sampling and transvaginal ultrasonography beginning at age 30 to 35 years. Conclusions Diagnosing endometrial cancer patients with Lynch syndrome has important clinical implications for the individual and family members. Screening and prevention practices can decrease the likelihood of developing additional cancers.  Conclusions Women with Lynch syndrome have a high lifetime risk of endometrial cancer and second primary tumors. As such, it is paramount that physicians caring for women with endometrial cancer maintain a high index of suspicion when obtaining personal and family history information when evaluating their patients so that an appropriate and timely diagnosis can be made. Tumor studies provide clinicians with an intermediate step prior to performing germline mutational analysis in evaluating individuals with Lynch syndrome related malignancies. They can rule out Lynch syndrome in these patients and can simplify genetic testing by targeting particular genes in individuals with positive results. A diagnosis of Lynch syndrome provides an opportunity to utilize screening and prevention strategies that may decrease the incidence and mortality of colorectal cancer. Further research is needed to determine the efficacy of screening methods compared with prophylactic surgery for the reduction of endometrial cancer morbidity and mortality in women with Lynch syndrome. Additional research is needed to identify possible chemoprevention strategies and to assess the effect of prophylactic surgery on survival and gynecologic cancer-related deaths. In the meantime, we recommend that individuals diagnosed with Lynch syndrome be counseled by their health care providers to follow the current screening recommendations 34 , 41 and be offered the choice of prophylactic surgery. 