Single Chain Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Antibody Conjugated Nanoparticles for in vivo Tumor Targeting and Imaging Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) targeted nanoparticle are developed by conjugating a single-chain anti-EGFR antibody (ScFvEGFR) to surface functionalized quantum dots (QDs) or magnetic iron oxide (IO) nanoparticles. The results show that ScFvEGFR can be successfully conjugated to the nanoparticles, resulting in compact ScFvEGFR nanoparticles that specifically bind to and are internalized by EGFR-expressing cancer cells, thereby producing a fluorescent signal or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast. In vivo tumor targeting and uptake of the nanoparticles in human cancer cells is demonstrated after systemic delivery of ScFvEGFR-QDs or ScFvEGFR-IO nanoparticles into an orthotopic pancreatic cancer model. Therefore, ScFvEGFR nanoparticles have potential to be used as a molecular-targeted in vivo tumor imaging agent. Efficient internalization of ScFvEGFR nanoparticles into tumor cells after systemic delivery suggests that the EGFR-targeted nanoparticles can also be used for the targeted delivery of therapeutic agents.  4. Experimental Section Cancer Cell Lines Human breast cancer MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7, human pancreatic cancer MIA PaCa-2, and human embryonic kidney epithelial HEK 293 cell lines were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Rockville, MD). Mouse mammary carcinoma cell line 4T1 was kindly provided by Dr. Fred R. Miller in the Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, MI. Isolation of EGFR-Specific scFv B10 Clone from YUAN-FCCC Phage Display Library The human EGFR-specific scFv B10 was isolated from the YUAN-FCCC human naive phage display library using established solid phase biopanning methods. HEK 293 cells were stably transfected with a recombinant extracellular domain (ECD) of human EGFR.[ 6 , 35 ] Positive clones were sequenced and expressed from TG1 E. coli competent cells (Biochain Institute, Inc, Hayward, CA) for surface plasmon resonance (SPR) (Biacore 2000, GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ) and FACScan characterizations (BD Bioscience, San Jose, CA).[ 6 , 36 ] The scFv B10 clone was one of the strongest clones isolated. Affinity of scFv B10 for human EGFR was determined by SPR to be 3.36 × 10?9 m , with a Ka at 1.04 × 105 (Ms?1) and a Kd at 3.51 × 10?4 (s?1). Recombinant ScFvEGFR proteins with a molecular weight of 25 kDa were obtained from the bacterial lysates of scFv B10 transformed TG1 competent cells after Ni-NTA-agarose column separation under native conditions (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). Production of ScFvEGFR-QDs or ScFvEGFR-IO Nanoparticles QDs with an emission of 580 nm were synthesized using the protocol reported previously and then coated with the amphiphilic copolymers as described.[ 14 , 37 , 38 ] Ni-NTA was conjugated to QDs using a covalent link of the amine group of Ni-NTA with the carboxyl group (?COOH) of the amphiphilic polymer on the surface of QDs. ScFvEGFR proteins tagged with a sequence of six histidine residues were mixed with Ni-NTA-QDs at a molar ratio of 1 to 20 in PBS and incubated at 4 °C for overnight. Interaction of the His-tag with the nickel molecule leads to the stable conjugation of the ScFvEGFR single chain antibody to the surface of QDs. ScFvEGFR was conjugated to the magnetic IO nanoparticle via a covalent link of the amine group of the protein with the carboxyl group (?COOH) of the amphiphilic polymer. The final ScFvEGFR nanoparticle conjugates were purified using a Nanosep 100k OMEGA filter column (Pall Corp, Ann Arbor, MI). The core size and hydrodynamic size of the magnetic IO nanoparticles were determined using TEM and Zetasizer Nano (Malvern Instruments Inc., Southborough, MA). His-tagged recombinant GFP was produced from a pGFP-His-tag plasmid that was constructed in our laboratory using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-directed insertion of oligonucleotides encoding six histidine residues into a bacterial-expressing pGFP plasmid vector (Clonetech, Mountain View, CA). Recombinant GFP was produced and purified using the same procedure as used for the ScFvEGFR protein. Determination of Specificity of ScFvEGFR Using QDs ScFvEGFR-QDs or non-targeted QDs were incubated with cells cultured in chamber slides at 4 °C for 1 h. The slides were examined under an inverted Olympus fluorescence microscope. To further determine the ScFvEGFR-mediated specific binding and internalization of QDs, ScFvEGFR-QDs or non-targeted QDs were incubated with breast cancer cell lines expressing a high level (MDA-MB-231) or low level (MCF-7) of EGFR at 37 °C for 2 h. After washing, cells were fixed with ice-cold acetone and slides were then examined under Zeiss LSM 510 META confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss Micro-Imaging, Inc, Thornwood, NY). In vitro Assays for Specificity of ScFvEGFR-IO Nanoparticles Cells in a 24-well tissue culture plate were incubated with IO nanoparticles for 3 h at 37 °C, and then washed and fixed with formaldehyde (2%). Prussian blue staining was performed to determine the presence of the IO nanoparticles inside the cells using a staining solution containing a 1:1 mixture of potassium ferrocyanide (5%) and HCl (5%) at 37 °C for 60 min.[ 39 ] Orthotopic Human Pancreatic Cancer Xenograft Model A pancreatic tumor model was established using an EGFR-expressing human pancreatic cancer cell line, MIA PaCa-2. Compared to other tumor cell lines, such as the breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 that has a level of EGFR expression at 4.8 × 105 receptor cell?1, the MIA PaCa-2 cell line has a moderate level of expression of 1.7 × 105 receptor cell?1.[ 6 , 40 ] This should allow us to determine whether in vivo targeting and tumor imaging can be achieved in a tumor without the need to have a very high level of EGFR on the tumor cells. 1 × 107 of MIA PaCa-2 cells were injected directly into the pancreas of 6 to 8 week old female nude mice (Taconic, Hudson, NY). In 3 to 4 weeks, orthotopically xenografted pancreatic tumors typically reached 5 mm in diameter and were ready for experiments. Target Specificity and Tissue Distribution Detected by ScFvEGFR-QDs 200 pmol of either ScFvEGFR-QDs or control non-targeted QDs was administrated to the tumor-bearing mice via a tail vein injection. The mice were sacrificed 5 h after the injection. Xenografted pancreatic tumor and normal tissues were removed and frozen in the liquid nitrogen. Frozen tissue sections were counterstained with Hoechst 33342 and examined directly under fluorescence microscopy or confocal microscopy. MRI Scan in vitro and in vivo 1 × 107 of tumor cells were harvested from the cell culture after incubating with 10 nM of various IO nanoparticles at 37 °C for 3 h. Cells were washed with phosphate buffer saline (PBS) and then embedded in 1% agarose in multi-well plates. These cell plates were scanned using a 3T MRI scanner (Philips Medical Systems, Bothell, WA) and a multi-echo T2 weighted fast spin echo imaging sequence to collect a series of echo time (TE) dependent data points simultaneously (32 different TE values ranging from 6 ms to 200 ms). ScFvEGFR-IO induced MRI signal changes in tumor cells were measured in the selected region of interest (ROI). T2 values of each sample or well were calculated from the captured MRI by fitting the decay curve on a pixel-by-pixel basis using the non-linear mono-exponential algorithm of Mi = M0 × exp(?TEi/T2). Tumor-bearing mice were scanned using a 3T MRI scanner with a customised rodent coil to collect pre- and post-contrast enhanced MRI data. After the mice were injected with ScFvEGFR-IO or non-targeted IO nanoparticles (8 or 16 nmol kg?1 of body weight) in PBS (100 ? l) though the tail vein, they were imaged at different time points to follow the MRI contrast changes. Images from pre- and post-contrast administration were compared to evaluate the contrast enhancement by the target-specific contrast agent. The imaging sequences include: T1 and T2 weighted spin echo or gradient echo imaging. A multi-echo T2 weighted fast spin echo sequence (8 different TE values ranging from 10–120 ms) was used to obtain T2 relaxometry of the whole mouse. The ROI method was used to evaluate and quantify the contrast agent induced signal or T2 value changes in the tumor and other organs. The signal of the leg muscle was used to normalize the signals in ROIs. Histological Analysis The mice were sacrificed at 48 h after the injection of contrast agents or after MRI. Tumor and normal tissues were collected and frozen tissue sections were examined by Prussian blue staining to confirm the presence of IO nanoparticles in the tissue sections. After counterstaining with nuclear fast red (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA), the slides were examined under bright field microscopy.  Cancer Cell Lines Human breast cancer MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7, human pancreatic cancer MIA PaCa-2, and human embryonic kidney epithelial HEK 293 cell lines were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Rockville, MD). Mouse mammary carcinoma cell line 4T1 was kindly provided by Dr. Fred R. Miller in the Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, MI.  Isolation of EGFR-Specific scFv B10 Clone from YUAN-FCCC Phage Display Library The human EGFR-specific scFv B10 was isolated from the YUAN-FCCC human naive phage display library using established solid phase biopanning methods. HEK 293 cells were stably transfected with a recombinant extracellular domain (ECD) of human EGFR.[ 6 , 35 ] Positive clones were sequenced and expressed from TG1 E. coli competent cells (Biochain Institute, Inc, Hayward, CA) for surface plasmon resonance (SPR) (Biacore 2000, GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ) and FACScan characterizations (BD Bioscience, San Jose, CA).[ 6 , 36 ] The scFv B10 clone was one of the strongest clones isolated. Affinity of scFv B10 for human EGFR was determined by SPR to be 3.36 × 10?9 m , with a Ka at 1.04 × 105 (Ms?1) and a Kd at 3.51 × 10?4 (s?1). Recombinant ScFvEGFR proteins with a molecular weight of 25 kDa were obtained from the bacterial lysates of scFv B10 transformed TG1 competent cells after Ni-NTA-agarose column separation under native conditions (Qiagen, Valencia, CA).  Production of ScFvEGFR-QDs or ScFvEGFR-IO Nanoparticles QDs with an emission of 580 nm were synthesized using the protocol reported previously and then coated with the amphiphilic copolymers as described.[ 14 , 37 , 38 ] Ni-NTA was conjugated to QDs using a covalent link of the amine group of Ni-NTA with the carboxyl group (?COOH) of the amphiphilic polymer on the surface of QDs. ScFvEGFR proteins tagged with a sequence of six histidine residues were mixed with Ni-NTA-QDs at a molar ratio of 1 to 20 in PBS and incubated at 4 °C for overnight. Interaction of the His-tag with the nickel molecule leads to the stable conjugation of the ScFvEGFR single chain antibody to the surface of QDs. ScFvEGFR was conjugated to the magnetic IO nanoparticle via a covalent link of the amine group of the protein with the carboxyl group (?COOH) of the amphiphilic polymer. The final ScFvEGFR nanoparticle conjugates were purified using a Nanosep 100k OMEGA filter column (Pall Corp, Ann Arbor, MI). The core size and hydrodynamic size of the magnetic IO nanoparticles were determined using TEM and Zetasizer Nano (Malvern Instruments Inc., Southborough, MA). His-tagged recombinant GFP was produced from a pGFP-His-tag plasmid that was constructed in our laboratory using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-directed insertion of oligonucleotides encoding six histidine residues into a bacterial-expressing pGFP plasmid vector (Clonetech, Mountain View, CA). Recombinant GFP was produced and purified using the same procedure as used for the ScFvEGFR protein.  Determination of Specificity of ScFvEGFR Using QDs ScFvEGFR-QDs or non-targeted QDs were incubated with cells cultured in chamber slides at 4 °C for 1 h. The slides were examined under an inverted Olympus fluorescence microscope. To further determine the ScFvEGFR-mediated specific binding and internalization of QDs, ScFvEGFR-QDs or non-targeted QDs were incubated with breast cancer cell lines expressing a high level (MDA-MB-231) or low level (MCF-7) of EGFR at 37 °C for 2 h. After washing, cells were fixed with ice-cold acetone and slides were then examined under Zeiss LSM 510 META confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss Micro-Imaging, Inc, Thornwood, NY).  In vitro Assays for Specificity of ScFvEGFR-IO Nanoparticles Cells in a 24-well tissue culture plate were incubated with IO nanoparticles for 3 h at 37 °C, and then washed and fixed with formaldehyde (2%). Prussian blue staining was performed to determine the presence of the IO nanoparticles inside the cells using a staining solution containing a 1:1 mixture of potassium ferrocyanide (5%) and HCl (5%) at 37 °C for 60 min.[ 39 ]  Orthotopic Human Pancreatic Cancer Xenograft Model A pancreatic tumor model was established using an EGFR-expressing human pancreatic cancer cell line, MIA PaCa-2. Compared to other tumor cell lines, such as the breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 that has a level of EGFR expression at 4.8 × 105 receptor cell?1, the MIA PaCa-2 cell line has a moderate level of expression of 1.7 × 105 receptor cell?1.[ 6 , 40 ] This should allow us to determine whether in vivo targeting and tumor imaging can be achieved in a tumor without the need to have a very high level of EGFR on the tumor cells. 1 × 107 of MIA PaCa-2 cells were injected directly into the pancreas of 6 to 8 week old female nude mice (Taconic, Hudson, NY). In 3 to 4 weeks, orthotopically xenografted pancreatic tumors typically reached 5 mm in diameter and were ready for experiments.  Target Specificity and Tissue Distribution Detected by ScFvEGFR-QDs 200 pmol of either ScFvEGFR-QDs or control non-targeted QDs was administrated to the tumor-bearing mice via a tail vein injection. The mice were sacrificed 5 h after the injection. Xenografted pancreatic tumor and normal tissues were removed and frozen in the liquid nitrogen. Frozen tissue sections were counterstained with Hoechst 33342 and examined directly under fluorescence microscopy or confocal microscopy.  MRI Scan in vitro and in vivo 1 × 107 of tumor cells were harvested from the cell culture after incubating with 10 nM of various IO nanoparticles at 37 °C for 3 h. Cells were washed with phosphate buffer saline (PBS) and then embedded in 1% agarose in multi-well plates. These cell plates were scanned using a 3T MRI scanner (Philips Medical Systems, Bothell, WA) and a multi-echo T2 weighted fast spin echo imaging sequence to collect a series of echo time (TE) dependent data points simultaneously (32 different TE values ranging from 6 ms to 200 ms). ScFvEGFR-IO induced MRI signal changes in tumor cells were measured in the selected region of interest (ROI). T2 values of each sample or well were calculated from the captured MRI by fitting the decay curve on a pixel-by-pixel basis using the non-linear mono-exponential algorithm of Mi = M0 × exp(?TEi/T2). Tumor-bearing mice were scanned using a 3T MRI scanner with a customised rodent coil to collect pre- and post-contrast enhanced MRI data. After the mice were injected with ScFvEGFR-IO or non-targeted IO nanoparticles (8 or 16 nmol kg?1 of body weight) in PBS (100 ? l) though the tail vein, they were imaged at different time points to follow the MRI contrast changes. Images from pre- and post-contrast administration were compared to evaluate the contrast enhancement by the target-specific contrast agent. The imaging sequences include: T1 and T2 weighted spin echo or gradient echo imaging. A multi-echo T2 weighted fast spin echo sequence (8 different TE values ranging from 10–120 ms) was used to obtain T2 relaxometry of the whole mouse. The ROI method was used to evaluate and quantify the contrast agent induced signal or T2 value changes in the tumor and other organs. The signal of the leg muscle was used to normalize the signals in ROIs.  Histological Analysis The mice were sacrificed at 48 h after the injection of contrast agents or after MRI. Tumor and normal tissues were collected and frozen tissue sections were examined by Prussian blue staining to confirm the presence of IO nanoparticles in the tissue sections. After counterstaining with nuclear fast red (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA), the slides were examined under bright field microscopy. 