Toll-like Receptors, Wound healing and Carcinogenesis Following acute injury, the concerted action of resident and non-resident cell populations evokes wound healing responses that entail a temporary increase in inflammation, extracellular matrix production, and proliferation to ultimately restore normal organ architecture. However, chronic injury evokes a perpetuating wound healing response promoting the development of fibrosis, organ failure, and cancer. Recent evidence points towards toll-like receptors (TLRs) as important regulators of inflammatory signals in wound healing. Here we will review the activation of TLRs by different endogenous and bacterial TLR ligands during wound healing, and the contribution of TLR-induced signals to injury, fibrogenesis, regeneration and carcinogenesis. We will discuss the hypothesis that TLRs act as sensors of danger signals in injured tissue to switch the wound healing response towards fibrogenesis and regeneration as a protective response to imminent danger at the cost of an increased long-term risk of developing scars and cancer.  V. Conclusions and outlook Eleven years after the cloning of the first human TLR, TLRs have emerged as key regulators of inflammation with a broader role in acute and chronic inflammatory processes than initially perceived. In addition to their important role in innate immunity, TLRs are involved in the regulation of tissue injury and wound healing process even under sterile conditions. The ability of TLRs to recognize endogenous mediators appears to be key to their ability to regulate sterile inflammation after acute injury in many organs. Despite rapid progess in understanding the broad role of TLRs in the pathophysiology of disease, a number of questions remains to be answered: (i) There is no satisfying explanation why TLRs exert opposing effects on injury and wound healing in different organ systems. The most likely scenario is that there is already a sufficient activation of cytoprotective pathways in some organs, e.g. in the liver after ischemia-reperfusion, and that activation of cytoprotective pathways by TLRs does not provide additional benefit in these organs, whereas TLRs act as key mediators of cytoprotective signals in other organs and their absence thus leads to increased injury, even if the recruitment of inflammatory cells is reduced. (ii) The contribution of endogenous TLR ligands to sterile inflammation, injury and fibrogenesis needs to be further established. Current evidence for the role of these ligands is at best circumstantial. Genetic approaches such as conditional knock-out and knock-in are absolutely required to identify key actors and to define their cellular targets. It is likely that the effects of some endogenous TLR ligands have been overestimated, or that they are due to bacterial contaminants. (iii) The role of TLRs in carcinogenesis deserves further investigation and needs to be expanded to a larger number of organs. TLRs are likely to promote carcinogenesis in organs in which wound healing is mediated by TLRs, e.g. the liver. One could envision that targeting TLRs may help to redirect wound healing responses from healing by scarring towards healing by regeneration, and thus prevent the development of organ fibrosis and cancer. Better understanding of the TLR signaling pathways in wound healing responses will undoubtedly help to shape new concepts utilizing TLRs and their downstream signaling mediators as pharmacological targets for the treatment of chronic injury, fibrosis and cancer.  Figures Figure 1 TLR signaling Viral PAMPS activate TLR3, TLR7, and TLR9, whereas bacterial PAMPs activate TLR2/1, TLR2/6, TLR4, and TLR9. Several endogenous mediators including hyaluronan and HMGB1 have been suggested to activate TLR2 and TLR4. TLRs mediate their signaling through to adapater molecules, MyD88 and TRIF to induce up-regulation proinflammatory and antiviral genes. MyD88-induced signals (marked in orange) predominantly activate NF-?B, IRF-7 and JNK, Trif-dependent signals (marked in blue) predominantly activate NF-?B and IRF-3. Figure 2 TLR-mediated epithelial regeneration after DSS-mediated colonic injury In the colonic crypt, stem cells generate multipotent precursor cells which then differentiate into different types of terminally differentiated epithelial cell including enteroabsorptive, paneth and goblet cells to chronically replace the epithelial layer of crypts. Following DSS-induced injury, terminally differentiated epithelial cells as well as multipotent precursor cells undergo cell death. TLR4- and MyD88-dependent signals are required to induce Cox2-mediated generation of prostaglandin2 (ptg2) and to stimulate epithelial cell proliferation. The MyD88-Cox2 signal that promotes regeneration is largely provided by macrophages which migrate towards the site of injury to stimulate proliferation in Cox2-dependent manner. (Figure adapted from Rakoff-Nahoum et al. [ 82 ]. Figure 3 Mechanisms by which TLR4 promotes hepatic stellate cell activation and liver fibrosis Changes in the intestinal motility, mucosa and microbiota promote release of LPS from the intestinal microbiota. These relatively low amounts of LPS do not induce any appreciable liver injury but target hepatic stellate cells to downregulate TGF? pseudoreceptor Bambi and upregulate chemokines. These two signals work hand in hand to promote hepatic stellate cell activation: 1. Downregulation of Bambi through a TLR4-MyD88-NF-?B signaling cascade sensitizes hepatic stellate cells towards the effect of TGF?. 2. Chemokines induce Kupffer cells, a main source of TGF? in the injured liver, to migrate towards hepatic stellate cells. Thus, the LPS-TLR4-MyD88 signaling cascade mediates the cross-talk between HSCs and Kupffer cells resulting in unrestricted TGF?-mediated activation of hepatic stellate cells, increased deposition of extracellular matrix and promotion of liver fibrosis. 