Update on therapeutic options in Waldenström macroglobulinemia Waldenström macroglobulinemia (WM) is a B-cell disorder characterized primarily by bone marrow infiltration with lymphoplasmacytic cells (LPCs), along with demonstration of an IgM monoclonal gammopathy in the blood. WM remains incurable, with 5–6 yr median overall survival for patients with symptomatic WM. The main therapeutic options include alkylating agents, nucleoside analogues, and rituximab, either in monotherapy or in combination. Studies involving combination chemotherapy are ongoing, and preliminary results are encouraging. However, there are several limitations to these approaches. The complete response rate is low and the treatment free survival are short in many patients, no specific agent or regimen has been shown to be superior to another, and no treatment has been specifically approved for WM. As such, novel therapeutic agents are needed for the treatment of WM. In ongoing efforts, we and others have sought to exploit advances made in the understanding of the biology of WM so as to develop new targeted therapeutics for this malignancy. These efforts have led to the development of proteasome inhibitors, of them bortezomib, several Akt/mTor inhibitors, such as perifosine and Rad001, and immunomodulatory agents such as thalidomide and lenalidomide. Many agents and monoclonal antibodies are currently being tested in clinical trials and seem promising. This report provides an update of the current preclinical studies and clinical efforts for the development of novel agents in the treatment of WM.  Conclusion There have been significant advances in the understanding of the pathogenesis and molecular alterations that occur in WM. Based on these progresses, many targeted therapeutic agents and monoclonal antibodies have been tested in the preclinical setting and in early phase II studies. Clinical trials further establishing the optimal use of these agents, as monotherapy or in combined therapy as well as evaluation of several novel agents currently in preclinical studies are warranted. The current challenge is to identify combinations of agents that act synergistically against WM cells in order to carry out clinical trials that achieve high remission rates and prolonged survival in patients with WM. 