Fhit tumor suppressor: guardian of the preneoplastic genome Environmental agents induce intragenic alterations in the FRA3B/FHIT chromosome fragile site, resulting in fragile FHIT allele loss early in cancer development. Fhit knockout mice are predisposed to tumor development and Fhit gene therapy reduces tumor burden. Repair-deficient cancers are likely to be Fhit-deficient and Fhit-deficient cells show enhanced resistance to ultraviolet C, mitomycin C, camptothecin and oxidative stress-induced cell killing. Loss of Fhit leads to alterations in the DNA damage response checkpoint and contributes to DNA instability. Hsp60/Hsp10 are Fhit interactors, suggesting a direct role for Fhit in stress responses. Fhit also interacts with and stabilizes ferrodoxin reductase (Fdxr), a mitochondrial flavoprotein that transfers electrons from NADPH to cytochrome P450, suggesting a role for Fhit in the modulation of reactive oxygen species production and of genomic damage.  Conclusion The FHIT gene was discovered in 1996, and its protein product, Fhit, was shown in numerous studies by laboratories worldwide, to be a tumor suppressor that was reduced in expression or lost in the majority of cancers. Progress in understanding the Fhit signal pathways was less rapid. Very recently, several pathways affected by Fhit loss, as summarized in this review, have been identified: a stress response pathway; a DNA damage response checkpoint pathway; and a role in the production of reactive oxygen species on exposure to oxidative stress. Participation of Fhit in these pathways suggests reasons why Fhit-deficient cells show increased resistance to certain cytotoxic therapeutic drugs, and suggest that in normal cells Fhit is involved in the protection of cells from preneoplastic changes.  Future perspective Delineation of direct downstream effectors of the Fhit-suppressor pathway will lead to: ? Intensification of mechanistic studies of Fhit function that may influence future preventive and therapeutic strategies to activate the Fhit pathway or to specifically target Fhit-deficient cancers; ? Clarification of mechanisms by which this gene product protects cells from carcinogens and modulates sensitivity to external insults. The finding that ROS generation precedes Fhitmediated apoptosis in lung cancer cells is in satisfying accord with previous reports showing: ? That exposure to carcinogens in cigarette smoke was associated with FHIT gene loss; ? The importance of Fhit loss as a negative prognostic factor in various clinical settings (for example, assessment of Fhit status in preneoplastic or neoplastic conditions may be predictive of responses to antioxidant treatments). Finally, the fact that Fhit interacts with Hsp chaperones and this interaction appears to be important for its stability and correct localization in mitochondria, where it can initiate apoptosis through affecting stability of mitochondria respiratory chain proteins, suggests that drugs targeted to such chaperones might have efficacy in preneoplastic, neoplastic or other conditions associated with Fhit loss.  <italic>FHIT</italic> alterations occur in most cancers ? The FHIT gene is a tumor-suppressor gene altered by chromosome translocations and deletions. ? FHIT alterations are an early event in carcinogenesis. ? FHIT alterations are common in environmental carcinogen-related cancers, such as those of the lung and esophagus. ? Loss of FHIT function is observed more frequently in cancers with alterations to genes involved in DNA repair.  The Fhit-deficient mouse: a model to study the role of Fhit in carcinogen-induced tumors ? The mouse Fhit ortholog also encompasses a common fragile site, Fra14A2 on murine chromosome 14. ? Fhit ?/? mice, although healthy and fertile, showed increased susceptibility to spontaneous and carcinogen-induced tumors. ? The N -nitrosomethyl-benzylamine (NMBA)-induced tumor spectrum in Fhit +/? mice was similar to a human syndrome known as Muir–Torre syndrome. ? Rodents exposed to environmental cigarette smoke showed a loss of Fhit protein in bronchial/bronchiolar epithelium. ? Fhit plays a role in the pathogenesis of alopecia areata. ? 4-methylnitrosamino-1–3-pyridyl-1-butanone induced lung tumors in 100% of Fhit?/?Vhl+/? mice and adenomas in 40% of Fhit?/? mice. ? In different experiments conducted in different laboratories, the anti-inflammatory agent N -acetylcysteine (NAC) could inhibit Fhit loss or prevent its negative effect.  Fhit function in the stress response ? The knowledge of specific Fhit signaling pathways and mechanisms involved in its suppressor activity is limited. ? Overexpression of Fhit results in apoptosis in Fhit-deficient cancer cells. ? Fhit-deficient cells are less sensitive to genotoxic damage induced by ultraviolet C light, mitomycin C, camptothecin and ionizing radiation. ? Lung cancer cells expressing Fhit are more sensitive to H2O2 treatment. ? After oxidative stress, Fhit-positive cells also produced higher reactive oxygen species (ROS) and 8-hydroxyguanosine levels. ? Expression of exogenous Fhit in cells in vitro leads to modulation of expression of checkpoint proteins Hus1 and Chk1 at the mid-S checkpoint.  Fhit structure ? FHIT mRNA is only 1.1 kb long and codes for an 146 amino acid chain that forms a protein of 16.8 kD. ? Fhit is a member of the histidine triad (HIT) nucleotide-binding protein superfamily, encoding a diadenosine polyphosphate (Ap n A) hydrolase. ? The Fhit mutant H96N has shown that the H96 residue is essential for Ap3A hydrolase activity, but suppresses the tumorigenicity just as well as wild-type FHIT. ? The Fhit mutant Y114F, unable to be phosphorylated on tyrosine 114 by Src, does not induce apoptosis in cancer cells and prevents Fhit degradation.  Identification of Fhit effectors to define Fhit function ? Using adenovirus transduced Fhit-His6, Fhit-linked proteins, Hsp60, Hsp10, ferredoxin reductase (Fdxr), malate dehydrogenase (Mdh), electron-transfer flavoprotein (Etfb) and mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (Adh 2) were identified. ? Fhit localizes to mitochondria, as well as cytosol. ? Fhit is important for Fdxr stability and Fhit–Fdxr interaction. ? Fhit interacts with the chaperone machinery Hsp60/10, suggesting that the Hsp complex may be important for Fhit stability. ? The finding that Fhit interacts with Fdxr may be part of specific molecular machinery to protect important proteins from degradation, and also affects the cellular response to the damaging effects of ROS. 