Self-Delivered Home-Based Mirror Therapy for Lower Limb Phantom Pain Home-based patient-delivered mirror therapy is a promising approach in the treatment of phantom limb pain. Previous studies and case reports of mirror therapy have used a therapist-guided, structured protocol of exercises. No case report has described treatment for either upper or lower limb phantom pain by using home-based patient-delivered mirror therapy. The success of this case demonstrates that home-based patient-delivered mirror therapy may be an efficacious, low-cost treatment option that would eliminate many traditional barriers to care.  DISCUSSION Jonathan’s case elucidates several important points. Although he was receiving multidisciplinary care for his phantom limb pain (pain medicine, physical therapy, and psychology), his results with standard care were unsatisfactory. The resolution of his phantom limb pain occurred after the initiation of self-delivered home-based mirror therapy. His strong and enduring favorable response to the self-delivered mirror therapy above and beyond all previous treatment modalities is noteworthy. The mechanism of his response to mirror therapy is unknown but may include a combination of neural restructuring, conditioning processes, and improved self-efficacy for pain and anxiety. Although continued practice was required for sustained results, perhaps a treatment threshold can be reached in the long term, and mirror therapy can be discontinued. This case report adds to the growing body of literature describing successful treatment of lower limb phantom pain with mirror therapy. Furthermore, this case report is unique because Jonathan’s mirror therapy was self-delivered at home without the guidance of a structured exercise protocol. It is possible that other patients may benefit from simple educational brochures that describe how to self-deliver mirror therapy at home. MacLachlan et al. 8 offer several exercises that may be useful to patients who require increased structure. However, the present case suggests that frequency and duration of practice may be variables of greater importance than following a structured protocol of exercises. Among amputees, phantom limb pain is prevalent and efficacious treatments have been lacking. The success of this case offers preliminary evidence that fully self-delivered mirror therapy in an athome setting can improve lower limb phantom pain. Mirror therapy may prove to be a low-cost treatment that ameliorates pain, increases patients’ self-efficacy and sense of control regarding their condition, and decreases reliance on opioid medication. Self-delivered mirror therapy is likely to gain importance as increasing numbers of veterans return from conflict with an amputation. Previous data suggest persons who rate their phantom limb pain as “extremely bothersome” are at a 2.92-fold increased risk for experiencing a significant level of depressive symptoms ( P < 0.001), compared with those with no phantom limb pain. 3 Thus, accessible and efficacious treatment for phantom pain stands to provide patients with a significant improvement in overall quality of life.  DISCUSSION Jonathan’s case elucidates several important points. Although he was receiving multidisciplinary care for his phantom limb pain (pain medicine, physical therapy, and psychology), his results with standard care were unsatisfactory. The resolution of his phantom limb pain occurred after the initiation of self-delivered home-based mirror therapy. His strong and enduring favorable response to the self-delivered mirror therapy above and beyond all previous treatment modalities is noteworthy. The mechanism of his response to mirror therapy is unknown but may include a combination of neural restructuring, conditioning processes, and improved self-efficacy for pain and anxiety. Although continued practice was required for sustained results, perhaps a treatment threshold can be reached in the long term, and mirror therapy can be discontinued. This case report adds to the growing body of literature describing successful treatment of lower limb phantom pain with mirror therapy. Furthermore, this case report is unique because Jonathan’s mirror therapy was self-delivered at home without the guidance of a structured exercise protocol. It is possible that other patients may benefit from simple educational brochures that describe how to self-deliver mirror therapy at home. MacLachlan et al. 8 offer several exercises that may be useful to patients who require increased structure. However, the present case suggests that frequency and duration of practice may be variables of greater importance than following a structured protocol of exercises. Among amputees, phantom limb pain is prevalent and efficacious treatments have been lacking. The success of this case offers preliminary evidence that fully self-delivered mirror therapy in an athome setting can improve lower limb phantom pain. Mirror therapy may prove to be a low-cost treatment that ameliorates pain, increases patients’ self-efficacy and sense of control regarding their condition, and decreases reliance on opioid medication. Self-delivered mirror therapy is likely to gain importance as increasing numbers of veterans return from conflict with an amputation. Previous data suggest persons who rate their phantom limb pain as “extremely bothersome” are at a 2.92-fold increased risk for experiencing a significant level of depressive symptoms ( P < 0.001), compared with those with no phantom limb pain. 3 Thus, accessible and efficacious treatment for phantom pain stands to provide patients with a significant improvement in overall quality of life. 