INFLUENCE OF NMDA AND NON-NMDA ANTAGONISTS ON ACUTE AND INFLAMMATORY PAIN IN THE TRIGEMINAL TERRITORY A placebo control study NMDA and non-NMDA receptors are involved in spinal transmission of nociceptive information in physiological and pathological conditions. Our objective was to study the influence of NMDA and non-NMDA receptor antagonists on pain control in the trigeminal system using a formalin-induced orofacial pain model. Motor performance was also evaluated. Male Rattus norvegicus were pre-treated with topiramate (T) (n=8), memantine (M) (n=8), divalproex (D) (n=8) or isotonic saline solution (ISS) (n=10) intraperitoneally 30 minutes before the formalin test. Formalin 2.5% was injected into the right upper lip (V2 branch) and induced two phases: phase I (early or neurogenic) (0–3 min) and phase II (late or inflammatory) (12–30 min). For motor behavior performance we used the open-field test and measured latency to movement onset, locomotion and rearing frequencies, and immobility time. Pre-treatment of animals with M and D only attenuated nociceptive formalin behavior for phase II. T increased locomotion and rearing frequencies and reduced immobility time. Treatment with M increased immobility time and with D reduced locomotion frequency. Our results showed that the NMDA antagonist (M) is more potent than the non-NMDA antagonists (D and T) in the control of pain in the inflammatory phase. The non-NMDA topiramate improved motor performance more than did D and M, probably because T has more anxiolytic properties.  METHOD Subjects Male rats ( Rattus norvegicus ) (240–340g) were housed in standard plastic cages (4 per cage) with sawdust bedding in a temperature-controlled room (23±1°C) and kept in a 12h light-dark cycle. Animals were allowed free access to food pellets and water. The trial was carried out in the Health Sciences Experimental Laboratory, Jardim Botânico, Hospital de Clínicas, Federal University of Paraná, Curitiba, Brazil. Animals were randomized in a double-blind way and administered either 0.9% saline solution (control group n=10) (1 mL/kg) or active drugs (topiramate 10 mg/kg, memantine 10 mg/kg or divalproex sodium 60 mg/kg) intraperitoneally (i.p). 30 minutes before the open-field and formalin tests. Treatment The animals were divided into two groups: the first group was the open-field test group and the second group, the formalin test group. Both groups were divided into subgroups: the topiramate subgroup (Topamax®, Jansen-Cilag, Brazil), (topiramate reconstituted in 0.9% saline solution; 10 mg/mL) (n=8); the memantine subgroup (Ebix®, Lundbeck, Brazil) (memantine reconstituted in 0.9% saline solution; 10 mg/mL) (n=8); the divalproex sodium subgroup (Depakote®, Abott, Brazil) (divalproex reconstituted in 0.9% saline solution; 60 mg/mL) (n=8); and the 0.9% saline-solution subgroup (control subgroup) (n=10). All subgroups received the drug 30 minutes before the open-field and formalin tests. A 1 mL syringe with a 25–gauge needle was used to inject the drugs intraperitoneally. Motor performance and exploratory activity Open-field test Motor ability and spontaneous behavior in the open field test was studied in all subgroups. The open field employed was constructed according to Broadhurst (1960). The testing area was round, with a diameter of 97 cm. The circular wall was 32.5 cm high and was constructed of aluminum sheeting. The arena was situated on a wooden floor. The floor and the wall were painted white. The arena floor was divided into three concentric circles. The small inner circle had a diameter of 23 cm; the second circle had a diameter of 61 cm; and the arena wall defined the outside circle. Each circle was divided into essentially equal size areas. The number of areas in the inner, middle and outer circles was 1, 6 and 12, respectively. A 100-w ceiling light was placed 48 cm above the arena floor. Cheesecloth was draped from the ceiling and dropped outside the arena wall. The cloth served to diffuse the light and functioned as a one-way screen. Thirty minutes after the drugs were administered, the rats were observed individually for 5 minutes and the different groups were intermixed. Hand-operated counters were used to score latency to movement onset (latency to get out of the inner circle), locomotion frequency (number of floor units entered), rearing frequency (number of times the animals stood on their hind paws) and immobility time (number of seconds without any movement during testing). The apparatus was washed with a water-alcohol (5%) solution before behavioral testing to eliminate possible bias due to odors left by previous rats. Formalin test Formalin was diluted in 0.9% saline at a concentration of 2.5%. Formalin test sessions took place during the light phase between 11:00 AM and 07:00 PM in a quiet room maintained at 23–24°C. The animals were put inside the 30×30×30 cm test box with three mirrored sides. The rats did not have access to food or water during the test. Animals from each subgroup were weighed and placed inside a Plexiglas observation chamber for an acclimation period of 10–20 min. Then a 40 ?l bolus of 2.5% formalin was injected into the animals’ right upper lips using a 0.5 mL syringe with a 29-gauge needle. The recording time was divided into 10 blocks of three minutes and the pain score determined for each block by measuring the number of seconds (amplitude of the response) that the animal spent rubbing and flicking (R/F) over the injected area with the ipsilateral forepaw or hind paw. The data collected between 0 and 3 minutes post formalin injection represented phase I (early, neurogenic or phasic phase), and data collected between 12 and 30 minutes post formalin injection represented phase II (late, inflammatory or tonic phase). Rats were euthanized at the end of the experiment by cervical dislocation. Ethical aspects All experiments in this study conformed to international guidelines on the ethical use of animals, and every effort was made to minimize the suffering and number of animals used. All experiments adhered to the guidelines of the IASP Committee for research and Ethical Issues (1983). Statistical analysis We used the Student t-test for the formalin test, and the ANOVA and Tukey test for motor behavioral performance. Statistical significance was determined at p<0.05. Data are presented as mean ±SEM.  Subjects Male rats ( Rattus norvegicus ) (240–340g) were housed in standard plastic cages (4 per cage) with sawdust bedding in a temperature-controlled room (23±1°C) and kept in a 12h light-dark cycle. Animals were allowed free access to food pellets and water. The trial was carried out in the Health Sciences Experimental Laboratory, Jardim Botânico, Hospital de Clínicas, Federal University of Paraná, Curitiba, Brazil. Animals were randomized in a double-blind way and administered either 0.9% saline solution (control group n=10) (1 mL/kg) or active drugs (topiramate 10 mg/kg, memantine 10 mg/kg or divalproex sodium 60 mg/kg) intraperitoneally (i.p). 30 minutes before the open-field and formalin tests.  Treatment The animals were divided into two groups: the first group was the open-field test group and the second group, the formalin test group. Both groups were divided into subgroups: the topiramate subgroup (Topamax®, Jansen-Cilag, Brazil), (topiramate reconstituted in 0.9% saline solution; 10 mg/mL) (n=8); the memantine subgroup (Ebix®, Lundbeck, Brazil) (memantine reconstituted in 0.9% saline solution; 10 mg/mL) (n=8); the divalproex sodium subgroup (Depakote®, Abott, Brazil) (divalproex reconstituted in 0.9% saline solution; 60 mg/mL) (n=8); and the 0.9% saline-solution subgroup (control subgroup) (n=10). All subgroups received the drug 30 minutes before the open-field and formalin tests. A 1 mL syringe with a 25–gauge needle was used to inject the drugs intraperitoneally.  Motor performance and exploratory activity Open-field test Motor ability and spontaneous behavior in the open field test was studied in all subgroups. The open field employed was constructed according to Broadhurst (1960). The testing area was round, with a diameter of 97 cm. The circular wall was 32.5 cm high and was constructed of aluminum sheeting. The arena was situated on a wooden floor. The floor and the wall were painted white. The arena floor was divided into three concentric circles. The small inner circle had a diameter of 23 cm; the second circle had a diameter of 61 cm; and the arena wall defined the outside circle. Each circle was divided into essentially equal size areas. The number of areas in the inner, middle and outer circles was 1, 6 and 12, respectively. A 100-w ceiling light was placed 48 cm above the arena floor. Cheesecloth was draped from the ceiling and dropped outside the arena wall. The cloth served to diffuse the light and functioned as a one-way screen. Thirty minutes after the drugs were administered, the rats were observed individually for 5 minutes and the different groups were intermixed. Hand-operated counters were used to score latency to movement onset (latency to get out of the inner circle), locomotion frequency (number of floor units entered), rearing frequency (number of times the animals stood on their hind paws) and immobility time (number of seconds without any movement during testing). The apparatus was washed with a water-alcohol (5%) solution before behavioral testing to eliminate possible bias due to odors left by previous rats. Formalin test Formalin was diluted in 0.9% saline at a concentration of 2.5%. Formalin test sessions took place during the light phase between 11:00 AM and 07:00 PM in a quiet room maintained at 23–24°C. The animals were put inside the 30×30×30 cm test box with three mirrored sides. The rats did not have access to food or water during the test. Animals from each subgroup were weighed and placed inside a Plexiglas observation chamber for an acclimation period of 10–20 min. Then a 40 ?l bolus of 2.5% formalin was injected into the animals’ right upper lips using a 0.5 mL syringe with a 29-gauge needle. The recording time was divided into 10 blocks of three minutes and the pain score determined for each block by measuring the number of seconds (amplitude of the response) that the animal spent rubbing and flicking (R/F) over the injected area with the ipsilateral forepaw or hind paw. The data collected between 0 and 3 minutes post formalin injection represented phase I (early, neurogenic or phasic phase), and data collected between 12 and 30 minutes post formalin injection represented phase II (late, inflammatory or tonic phase). Rats were euthanized at the end of the experiment by cervical dislocation.  Open-field test Motor ability and spontaneous behavior in the open field test was studied in all subgroups. The open field employed was constructed according to Broadhurst (1960). The testing area was round, with a diameter of 97 cm. The circular wall was 32.5 cm high and was constructed of aluminum sheeting. The arena was situated on a wooden floor. The floor and the wall were painted white. The arena floor was divided into three concentric circles. The small inner circle had a diameter of 23 cm; the second circle had a diameter of 61 cm; and the arena wall defined the outside circle. Each circle was divided into essentially equal size areas. The number of areas in the inner, middle and outer circles was 1, 6 and 12, respectively. A 100-w ceiling light was placed 48 cm above the arena floor. Cheesecloth was draped from the ceiling and dropped outside the arena wall. The cloth served to diffuse the light and functioned as a one-way screen. Thirty minutes after the drugs were administered, the rats were observed individually for 5 minutes and the different groups were intermixed. Hand-operated counters were used to score latency to movement onset (latency to get out of the inner circle), locomotion frequency (number of floor units entered), rearing frequency (number of times the animals stood on their hind paws) and immobility time (number of seconds without any movement during testing). The apparatus was washed with a water-alcohol (5%) solution before behavioral testing to eliminate possible bias due to odors left by previous rats.  Formalin test Formalin was diluted in 0.9% saline at a concentration of 2.5%. Formalin test sessions took place during the light phase between 11:00 AM and 07:00 PM in a quiet room maintained at 23–24°C. The animals were put inside the 30×30×30 cm test box with three mirrored sides. The rats did not have access to food or water during the test. Animals from each subgroup were weighed and placed inside a Plexiglas observation chamber for an acclimation period of 10–20 min. Then a 40 ?l bolus of 2.5% formalin was injected into the animals’ right upper lips using a 0.5 mL syringe with a 29-gauge needle. The recording time was divided into 10 blocks of three minutes and the pain score determined for each block by measuring the number of seconds (amplitude of the response) that the animal spent rubbing and flicking (R/F) over the injected area with the ipsilateral forepaw or hind paw. The data collected between 0 and 3 minutes post formalin injection represented phase I (early, neurogenic or phasic phase), and data collected between 12 and 30 minutes post formalin injection represented phase II (late, inflammatory or tonic phase). Rats were euthanized at the end of the experiment by cervical dislocation.  Ethical aspects All experiments in this study conformed to international guidelines on the ethical use of animals, and every effort was made to minimize the suffering and number of animals used. All experiments adhered to the guidelines of the IASP Committee for research and Ethical Issues (1983).  Statistical analysis We used the Student t-test for the formalin test, and the ANOVA and Tukey test for motor behavioral performance. Statistical significance was determined at p<0.05. Data are presented as mean ±SEM.  RESULTS The animals’ response to the injection of 2.5% formalin into the right upper lip produced a biphasic pattern; two major intervals of intensive rubbing/flicking (R/F) activities were observed, the first between 0 and 3 min (early phase) and the second between 12 and 30 min (late phase), with almost no nociceptive response between 3 and 12 min. The control group (saline solution) was used to determine standard values for early and late phases. The memantine group attenuated the nociceptive formalin behavior only in the inflammatory phase (p<0.0001). The results for the neurogenic phase were the same as those for the control group (p=0.911) ( Table 1 , Fig 1 ). The antinociceptive effect of topiramate was not observed in either the inflammatory or neurogenic phase (p=0.296 and p=0.200) ( Table 2 , Fig 2 ). The antinociceptive effect of divalproex sodium was only observed for the inflammatory phase (p=0.003); its effect in the neurogenic phase was not statistically significant (p=0.638) ( Table 1 , Fig 1 ). Comparison of the NMDA (memantine) and non-NMDA groups only revealed a statistical significance for memantine and topiramate during the inflammatory phase, with memantine having the greater antinociceptive power (p=0.05) ( Table 1 , Fig 1 ). The open-field test results are shown in Table 2 and Fig 2 . Latency to movement onset was the same for all groups. Frequency of locomotion for the topiramate group was higher than for all other groups, and rearing frequency was higher for the topiramate group than for the saline and sodium-valproate groups. Immobility time was lower in the topiramate group than in all other groups.  RESULTS The animals’ response to the injection of 2.5% formalin into the right upper lip produced a biphasic pattern; two major intervals of intensive rubbing/flicking (R/F) activities were observed, the first between 0 and 3 min (early phase) and the second between 12 and 30 min (late phase), with almost no nociceptive response between 3 and 12 min. The control group (saline solution) was used to determine standard values for early and late phases. The memantine group attenuated the nociceptive formalin behavior only in the inflammatory phase (p<0.0001). The results for the neurogenic phase were the same as those for the control group (p=0.911) ( Table 1 , Fig 1 ). The antinociceptive effect of topiramate was not observed in either the inflammatory or neurogenic phase (p=0.296 and p=0.200) ( Table 2 , Fig 2 ). The antinociceptive effect of divalproex sodium was only observed for the inflammatory phase (p=0.003); its effect in the neurogenic phase was not statistically significant (p=0.638) ( Table 1 , Fig 1 ). Comparison of the NMDA (memantine) and non-NMDA groups only revealed a statistical significance for memantine and topiramate during the inflammatory phase, with memantine having the greater antinociceptive power (p=0.05) ( Table 1 , Fig 1 ). The open-field test results are shown in Table 2 and Fig 2 . Latency to movement onset was the same for all groups. Frequency of locomotion for the topiramate group was higher than for all other groups, and rearing frequency was higher for the topiramate group than for the saline and sodium-valproate groups. Immobility time was lower in the topiramate group than in all other groups.  DISCUSSION The present study evaluated the effects of (NMDA and non-NMDA) glutamate receptor antagonists on trigeminal pain and motor behavior. Using a panel of commercial (NMDA and non-NMDA) glutamate receptor antagonists, we found that NMDA (memantine) is a more potent inhibitor of the inflammatory phase than are non-NMDA antagonist receptors. During the early phase of the formalin test, chemoreceptors are activated on the peripheral terminals of primary afferents to evoke the release of proinflammatory peptides, producing neurogenic pain 16 . The late phase is either the result of sensitization of dorsal horn neurons (central sensitization), inflammation-induced hyperactivity of primary afferent nociceptors, or a combination of both 18 . During this phase glutamate is released 19 and glutamate receptor expression increases 20 . These changes produce pain behavior. The majority of sensorial primary afferent fibers contain glutamate, which is released both centrally and peripherally following formalin injection over the plantar area or over the trigeminal branches 21 . The expression of glutamate receptors on peripheral sensory axons is up-regulated during inflammation. Inflammation increases the release of excitatory amino acids (EAA) from inflammatory cells, which may further activate EAA autoreceptors by positive feedback, resulting in sustained enhancement of nociceptor activation. Previous studies have shown that application of an NMDA or non-NMDA receptor antagonist to the spinal cord preferentially inhibited spinal nociceptive responses triggered by input from superficial and deep tissue 22 . Using a formalin test, several researchers showed that memantine inhibited the late phase 23 , while in other studies it appeared to affect both phases 11 . Memantine inhibited the late phase at dose levels substantially lower than those required for suppression of the early phase 16 . Expression of the early phase is not dependent on NMDA receptor stimulation and, therefore, the effects of memantine on this phase may reflect primarily non-specific or non-NMDA receptor-mediated activity. In our study, memantine only inhibited the later phase. Topiramate is a non-NMDA antagonist that acts on AMPA and kainic acid (KA) and was initially indicated for use in anticonvulsant treatment, although it has recently been used for headaches such as migraine 24 . Sodium valproate is another non-NMDA receptor antagonist that has been used for migraine prophylaxis 25 . Our results show that NMDA antagonists are more effective than non-NMDA antagonists in inhibiting inflammatory behavior. As non-NMDA inhibitors are the therapy of first choice in the preventive treatment of migraine, NMDA inhibitors such as memantine could also be expected to be candidates for the prophylactic treatment of migraine attacks. In the last 15 years, memantine has shown good tolerability, and the number of patients treated with this drug exceeds 200000. It is used for Alzheimer disease, but further possible therapeutic uses include: AIDS; glaucoma; hepatic encephalopathy; multiple sclerosis; tinnitus; Parkinson’s disease; tardive dyskinesia; drug tolerance, sensitization and addiction; epilepsy; spasticity; and chronic pain 26 . Memantine selectively blocked formalin-induced tonic nociceptive responses in rats 16 and also provided a very good separation between the acute and prolonged phases in a rat formalin model following intrathecal administration 27 . It was found to have both therapeutic and prophylactic antinociceptive effects (10 and 15 mg/kg) against carrageenan-induced hyperalgesia 28 . It also blocked and reversed thermal hyperalgesia and mechanical allodynia in rat models of painful mononeuropathy without obvious effects on motor reflexes following systemic (10–20 mg/Kg) 29 . Very large doses of memantine 25–75 mg/Kg given acutely i.m. or orally to macaques (1.5–2.5 Kg) were reported to selectively reduce mechanical allodynia induced by ligation of the seventh spinal nerve 30 . Intraplantar pre-treatment with memantine significantly attenuated formalin-induced lifting and licking behaviors, but flicking behavior was not affected. Control experiments indicated that the effects of memantine were not via systemic redistribution and suggest that peripheral NMDA receptors on unmyelinated sensory axons in the skin contribute to nociceptor activation and can be manipulated to reduce pain of peripheral origin 31 . In our study, we assessed the effects of NMDA and non-NMDA antagonists on motor reflex behavior using the open-field test. This test is used to study not only spontaneous locomotion but also response to novelty, anxiety/fear levels and non-associative memory. The effects of non-NMDA antagonists such as topiramate on motor performance in the open-field test were similar to those of saline solution. Behavior in the open field was not impaired by topiramate; indeed, as in other studies 32 , an apparent anxiolytic effect was observed. Habituation (a decrease in locomotor activity during the 5-minute observation period), which is a form of simple non-associative learning, was also not compromised by TPM 32 . The effects of acute or chronic treatment with sodium valproate on rat behavior observed in the open-field test by other researchers were reduced grooming frequency and time spent in grooming. Locomotion, rearing or defecation after acute treatment, however, were not affected 33 . The effects of NMDA antagonists such as memantine on motor performance in the open-field test included enhanced horizontal activity (immobility time) and vertical activity (rearing frequency) 34 , while other studies showed that acute or sub-chronic treatment with memantine produced no effects on locomotor activity. However, assessment of exploratory activity in the open-field showed that memantine reduced rearing, ambulation and grooming behavior according to the dose 35 . Our results showing that non-NMDA (divalproex) and NMDA antagonists inhibited the late phase of pain in the trigeminal territory suggest that both kinds of drugs could be considered candidates for treatment of trigeminal pain syndromes utilizing this model of pain induced. The literature regarding experiments with non-NMDA antagonists (topiramate and sodium divalproate) suggests that they are a suitable choice for the prophylactic treatment of migraine. Our findings in pre-clinical research suggest that NMDA (memantine) is more potent than non-NMDA (topiramate) in the prophylaxis of pain in the trigeminal territory. The positive results observed for the NMDA group could be secondary to motor inhibition caused by this drug. However, our results for the memantine group showed that: a) latency to movement onset was the same as that for the saline and non-NMDA groups; b) locomotion frequency was the same as that for the saline and divalproex groups; c) rearing frequency was the same as that for the saline and divalproex groups; d) immobility time was the same as that for the divalproex group. Although immobility time was greater in the memantine group, other motor results suggest that the reduction of pain behavior in the inflammatory phase was not influenced by motor inability. The better results for motor behavior in the non-NMDA group (topiramate) suggest that this drug has anxiolytic proprieties. Our results suggest that memantine is a much more potent inhibitor of peripheral and central sensitization induced by formalin than are non-NMDA antagonists. As non-NMDA receptor antagonists (topiramate and divalproex) are used commercially as prophylactic options in migraine, we hypothesize that memantine could be a further option in the prophylactic treatment of this condition. Future clinical studies using memantine in the prophylactic treatment of migraine patients will allow this hypothesis to be evaluated.  DISCUSSION The present study evaluated the effects of (NMDA and non-NMDA) glutamate receptor antagonists on trigeminal pain and motor behavior. Using a panel of commercial (NMDA and non-NMDA) glutamate receptor antagonists, we found that NMDA (memantine) is a more potent inhibitor of the inflammatory phase than are non-NMDA antagonist receptors. During the early phase of the formalin test, chemoreceptors are activated on the peripheral terminals of primary afferents to evoke the release of proinflammatory peptides, producing neurogenic pain 16 . The late phase is either the result of sensitization of dorsal horn neurons (central sensitization), inflammation-induced hyperactivity of primary afferent nociceptors, or a combination of both 18 . During this phase glutamate is released 19 and glutamate receptor expression increases 20 . These changes produce pain behavior. The majority of sensorial primary afferent fibers contain glutamate, which is released both centrally and peripherally following formalin injection over the plantar area or over the trigeminal branches 21 . The expression of glutamate receptors on peripheral sensory axons is up-regulated during inflammation. Inflammation increases the release of excitatory amino acids (EAA) from inflammatory cells, which may further activate EAA autoreceptors by positive feedback, resulting in sustained enhancement of nociceptor activation. Previous studies have shown that application of an NMDA or non-NMDA receptor antagonist to the spinal cord preferentially inhibited spinal nociceptive responses triggered by input from superficial and deep tissue 22 . Using a formalin test, several researchers showed that memantine inhibited the late phase 23 , while in other studies it appeared to affect both phases 11 . Memantine inhibited the late phase at dose levels substantially lower than those required for suppression of the early phase 16 . Expression of the early phase is not dependent on NMDA receptor stimulation and, therefore, the effects of memantine on this phase may reflect primarily non-specific or non-NMDA receptor-mediated activity. In our study, memantine only inhibited the later phase. Topiramate is a non-NMDA antagonist that acts on AMPA and kainic acid (KA) and was initially indicated for use in anticonvulsant treatment, although it has recently been used for headaches such as migraine 24 . Sodium valproate is another non-NMDA receptor antagonist that has been used for migraine prophylaxis 25 . Our results show that NMDA antagonists are more effective than non-NMDA antagonists in inhibiting inflammatory behavior. As non-NMDA inhibitors are the therapy of first choice in the preventive treatment of migraine, NMDA inhibitors such as memantine could also be expected to be candidates for the prophylactic treatment of migraine attacks. In the last 15 years, memantine has shown good tolerability, and the number of patients treated with this drug exceeds 200000. It is used for Alzheimer disease, but further possible therapeutic uses include: AIDS; glaucoma; hepatic encephalopathy; multiple sclerosis; tinnitus; Parkinson’s disease; tardive dyskinesia; drug tolerance, sensitization and addiction; epilepsy; spasticity; and chronic pain 26 . Memantine selectively blocked formalin-induced tonic nociceptive responses in rats 16 and also provided a very good separation between the acute and prolonged phases in a rat formalin model following intrathecal administration 27 . It was found to have both therapeutic and prophylactic antinociceptive effects (10 and 15 mg/kg) against carrageenan-induced hyperalgesia 28 . It also blocked and reversed thermal hyperalgesia and mechanical allodynia in rat models of painful mononeuropathy without obvious effects on motor reflexes following systemic (10–20 mg/Kg) 29 . Very large doses of memantine 25–75 mg/Kg given acutely i.m. or orally to macaques (1.5–2.5 Kg) were reported to selectively reduce mechanical allodynia induced by ligation of the seventh spinal nerve 30 . Intraplantar pre-treatment with memantine significantly attenuated formalin-induced lifting and licking behaviors, but flicking behavior was not affected. Control experiments indicated that the effects of memantine were not via systemic redistribution and suggest that peripheral NMDA receptors on unmyelinated sensory axons in the skin contribute to nociceptor activation and can be manipulated to reduce pain of peripheral origin 31 . In our study, we assessed the effects of NMDA and non-NMDA antagonists on motor reflex behavior using the open-field test. This test is used to study not only spontaneous locomotion but also response to novelty, anxiety/fear levels and non-associative memory. The effects of non-NMDA antagonists such as topiramate on motor performance in the open-field test were similar to those of saline solution. Behavior in the open field was not impaired by topiramate; indeed, as in other studies 32 , an apparent anxiolytic effect was observed. Habituation (a decrease in locomotor activity during the 5-minute observation period), which is a form of simple non-associative learning, was also not compromised by TPM 32 . The effects of acute or chronic treatment with sodium valproate on rat behavior observed in the open-field test by other researchers were reduced grooming frequency and time spent in grooming. Locomotion, rearing or defecation after acute treatment, however, were not affected 33 . The effects of NMDA antagonists such as memantine on motor performance in the open-field test included enhanced horizontal activity (immobility time) and vertical activity (rearing frequency) 34 , while other studies showed that acute or sub-chronic treatment with memantine produced no effects on locomotor activity. However, assessment of exploratory activity in the open-field showed that memantine reduced rearing, ambulation and grooming behavior according to the dose 35 . Our results showing that non-NMDA (divalproex) and NMDA antagonists inhibited the late phase of pain in the trigeminal territory suggest that both kinds of drugs could be considered candidates for treatment of trigeminal pain syndromes utilizing this model of pain induced. The literature regarding experiments with non-NMDA antagonists (topiramate and sodium divalproate) suggests that they are a suitable choice for the prophylactic treatment of migraine. Our findings in pre-clinical research suggest that NMDA (memantine) is more potent than non-NMDA (topiramate) in the prophylaxis of pain in the trigeminal territory. The positive results observed for the NMDA group could be secondary to motor inhibition caused by this drug. However, our results for the memantine group showed that: a) latency to movement onset was the same as that for the saline and non-NMDA groups; b) locomotion frequency was the same as that for the saline and divalproex groups; c) rearing frequency was the same as that for the saline and divalproex groups; d) immobility time was the same as that for the divalproex group. Although immobility time was greater in the memantine group, other motor results suggest that the reduction of pain behavior in the inflammatory phase was not influenced by motor inability. The better results for motor behavior in the non-NMDA group (topiramate) suggest that this drug has anxiolytic proprieties. Our results suggest that memantine is a much more potent inhibitor of peripheral and central sensitization induced by formalin than are non-NMDA antagonists. As non-NMDA receptor antagonists (topiramate and divalproex) are used commercially as prophylactic options in migraine, we hypothesize that memantine could be a further option in the prophylactic treatment of this condition. Future clinical studies using memantine in the prophylactic treatment of migraine patients will allow this hypothesis to be evaluated. 