Cumulative Anticholinergic Exposure Is Associated with Poor Memory and Executive Function in Older Men OBJECTIVES To examine the longitudinal relationship between cumulative exposure to anticholinergic medications and memory and executive function in older men. DESIGN Prospective cohort study. SETTING A Department of Veterans Affairs primary care clinic. PARTICIPANTS Five hundred forty-four community-dwelling men aged 65 and older with diagnosed hypertension. MEASUREMENTS The outcomes were measured using the Hopkins Verbal Recall Test (HVRT) for short-term memory and the instrumental activity of daily living (IADL) scale for executive function at baseline and during follow-up. Anticholinergic medication use was ascertained using participants' primary care visit records and quantified as total anticholinergic burden using a clinician-rated anti-cholinergic score. RESULTS Cumulative exposure to anticholinergic medications over the preceding 12 months was associated with poorer performance on the HVRT and IADLs. On average, a 1-unit increase in the total anticholinergic burden per 3 months was associated with a 0.32-point (95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.05–0.58) and 0.10-point (95% CI = 0.04–0.17) decrease in the HVRT and IADLs, respectively, independent of other potential risk factors for cognitive impairment, including age, education, cognitive and physical function, comorbidities, and severity of hypertension. The association was attenuated but remained statistically significant with memory (0.29, 95% CI = 0.01–0.56) and executive function (0.08, 95% CI = 0.02–0.15) after further adjustment for concomitant non-anticholinergic medications. CONCLUSION Cumulative anticholinergic exposure across multiple medications over 1 year may negatively affect verbal memory and executive function in older men. Prescription of drugs with anticholinergic effects in older persons deserves continued attention to avoid deleterious adverse effects.  METHODS Participants The study used data from the Connecticut Veterans Longitudinal Cohort , consisting of 767 veterans aged 65 and older recruited at a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) primary care clinic between July 2000 and August 2001. The Yale University School of Medicine and VA Connecticut institutional review boards approved the study; the protocol and recruitment process have been described previously. 20 Data collected included demographic information, neuropsychological tests, activities of daily living (ADLs), physical performance tests, and clinical conditions, including vital signs, comorbidities, medication regimens, and health habits. In 2005, a second wave of data collection was added in a subset of the cohort with a diagnosis of hypertension at study entry. For each 3-month quarter over the 2-year follow-up period, a research assistant with medical training reviewed the primary care visits of these participants with hypertension. The entire medication regimen (prescribed and nonprescribed) was abstracted. For this study, the study population was restricted to the 544 men with diagnosed hypertension, a common clinical condition that requires chronic pharmacological treatment and typically involves treatment with multiple medications. 21  Participants The study used data from the Connecticut Veterans Longitudinal Cohort , consisting of 767 veterans aged 65 and older recruited at a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) primary care clinic between July 2000 and August 2001. The Yale University School of Medicine and VA Connecticut institutional review boards approved the study; the protocol and recruitment process have been described previously. 20 Data collected included demographic information, neuropsychological tests, activities of daily living (ADLs), physical performance tests, and clinical conditions, including vital signs, comorbidities, medication regimens, and health habits. In 2005, a second wave of data collection was added in a subset of the cohort with a diagnosis of hypertension at study entry. For each 3-month quarter over the 2-year follow-up period, a research assistant with medical training reviewed the primary care visits of these participants with hypertension. The entire medication regimen (prescribed and nonprescribed) was abstracted. For this study, the study population was restricted to the 544 men with diagnosed hypertension, a common clinical condition that requires chronic pharmacological treatment and typically involves treatment with multiple medications. 21  OUTCOME MEASURES The outcome measures for this study focused on two major domains: short-term memory and executive ability. The short-term memory was measured using the Hopkins Verbal Recall Test (HVRT), 22 , 23 which consists of three trials of immediate free recall of 12 words, with scores ranging from 0 (worst) to 36 (best). Executive function was measured using the instrumental activity of daily living (IADL) scale of the Older American Resources and Services (OARS) instrument, 24 which assesses ability to perform such tasks as handling money, using the telephone, and preparing meals, with scores ranging from 0 (complete dependence) to 7 (complete independence). Trained research personnel administered the two tests following a standardized protocol, first at baseline and then at 1- and 2-year follow-up. Although short-term memory represents a core area of cognitive function known to be specific to dementia pathology and anticholinergic toxicity, 8 , 9 executive performance requires competence in cognitive and physical function and hence is vulnerable to the adverse drug effects on cholinergic and potentially noncholinergic neurotransmitting pathways. 1 , 4 – 6 , 11 Measure of Anticholinergic and Other Medications A clinician-rated anticholinergic score was used to quantify potential anticholinergic effects of each study medication. 25 The clinician-rated anticholinergic score was an ordinal scale originally developed to assess potential effects of anticholinergic medication use on severity of delirium symptoms in older medical patients, with scores ranging from 0 (no effect) to 3 (strong effect). The rating procedure and resultant anticholinergic drug list have been previously reported. 25 Previous clinical epidemiological and pharmacological studies demonstrated that this clinical consensus-based rating scale has good concurrent criterion validity against other lists of anticholinergic medications and serum anticholinergic activities (SAAs) 25 – 30 and predictive validity against measures of cognitive impairment. 25 , 28 To apply the clinician-rated anticholinergic scale, two authors (JA and LH) reviewed a complete list of the generic medications used in the current study cohort. Medications were assigned an existing anticholinergic score if one was available from the original anticholinergic drug list (n = 164). For medications without an available score, their therapeutic classifications were reviewed based on the American Hospital Formulary Service system. 31 Classes judged to have no anticholinergic effect as a whole, such as antibiotics, antineoplastic agents, hematological drugs, diagnostic agents, expectorants, ophthalmic and nasal preparations, dietary supplements, and vitamins, were assigned a 0 score (n = 204). For the remaining unrated medications (n = 80), three geriatricians (JA, LW, and CF) conducted an independent rating. The median value of the three ratings was adopted as the final anticholinergic score for each medication, following the original protocol. 25 The exposure time window was defined as the 12 months preceding each follow-up assessment at 1 and 2 years. Because of lack of data on duration of medication use, an overall sum of anticholinergic scores across medications over the four quarters was calculated, under an assumption that a recorded medication was used for all the days during that quarter. To facilitate clinical interpretation of regression parameters for anticholinergic exposure, the overall sum was divided by 4 as an index for cumulative anticholinergic exposure intensity, or total anticholinergic burden, on a 3-month time unit. In addition, when number of medications per patient, rather than cumulative intensity over time, is of interest, an average of the 4 quarters provides the most compatible estimates to compare with previous investigations that typically collected data at a single time point. Following the same approach, cumulative number of antihypertensive, psychotropic and total non-anticholinergic medications was calculated on a 3-month time unit for each year as an index for concomitant medication exposure. Antihypertensive drugs, including angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, beta-blockers, calcium-channel blockers, diuretics, and centrally acting agents, were chosen because they were prescribed to the majority of the cohort members. In addition, previous studies have reported potential cognitive effects of antihypertensive drugs, although the results remain inconsistent or conflicting, suggesting a potentially detrimental (e.g., beta-blockers), neutral, or protective (e.g., diuretics) effect. 1 , 32 , 33 Psychotropic medications, including antidepressants, benzodiazepines, and other hypnotic-sedatives, anxiolytics, antipsychotics, antiparkinsonian agents, and anticonvulsants, have been associated with a variety of drug-induced cognitive or functional impairments. 1 , 2 , 16 , 17 , 34 Apart from other centrally active pharmacological mechanisms, many psychotropic drugs and several antihypertensive agents also have documented anti-cholinergic properties in vivo or in vitro. 1 , 6 , 7 , 26 , 30 In previous studies, such dual-action medications were typically analyzed as if they were exclusively anticholinergic. 5 , 16 – 18 To reflect clinical reality and to avoid potential overestimation of anticholinergic effect in multivariable modeling (see Statistical Analyses section for details), an antihypertensive or psychotropic drug that was rated as having anticholinergic properties was retained in each group rather than counted solely as anticholinergic. Finally, total non-anticholinergic medication burden was computed by including all the drugs with a clinician-rated anticholinergic score of 0, to represent maximal possible confounding effects of concomitant medications. A list of study medications that are considered to have anticholinergic effects, along with their assigned anticholinergic scores, is provided in Appendix A .  Measure of Anticholinergic and Other Medications A clinician-rated anticholinergic score was used to quantify potential anticholinergic effects of each study medication. 25 The clinician-rated anticholinergic score was an ordinal scale originally developed to assess potential effects of anticholinergic medication use on severity of delirium symptoms in older medical patients, with scores ranging from 0 (no effect) to 3 (strong effect). The rating procedure and resultant anticholinergic drug list have been previously reported. 25 Previous clinical epidemiological and pharmacological studies demonstrated that this clinical consensus-based rating scale has good concurrent criterion validity against other lists of anticholinergic medications and serum anticholinergic activities (SAAs) 25 – 30 and predictive validity against measures of cognitive impairment. 25 , 28 To apply the clinician-rated anticholinergic scale, two authors (JA and LH) reviewed a complete list of the generic medications used in the current study cohort. Medications were assigned an existing anticholinergic score if one was available from the original anticholinergic drug list (n = 164). For medications without an available score, their therapeutic classifications were reviewed based on the American Hospital Formulary Service system. 31 Classes judged to have no anticholinergic effect as a whole, such as antibiotics, antineoplastic agents, hematological drugs, diagnostic agents, expectorants, ophthalmic and nasal preparations, dietary supplements, and vitamins, were assigned a 0 score (n = 204). For the remaining unrated medications (n = 80), three geriatricians (JA, LW, and CF) conducted an independent rating. The median value of the three ratings was adopted as the final anticholinergic score for each medication, following the original protocol. 25 The exposure time window was defined as the 12 months preceding each follow-up assessment at 1 and 2 years. Because of lack of data on duration of medication use, an overall sum of anticholinergic scores across medications over the four quarters was calculated, under an assumption that a recorded medication was used for all the days during that quarter. To facilitate clinical interpretation of regression parameters for anticholinergic exposure, the overall sum was divided by 4 as an index for cumulative anticholinergic exposure intensity, or total anticholinergic burden, on a 3-month time unit. In addition, when number of medications per patient, rather than cumulative intensity over time, is of interest, an average of the 4 quarters provides the most compatible estimates to compare with previous investigations that typically collected data at a single time point. Following the same approach, cumulative number of antihypertensive, psychotropic and total non-anticholinergic medications was calculated on a 3-month time unit for each year as an index for concomitant medication exposure. Antihypertensive drugs, including angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, beta-blockers, calcium-channel blockers, diuretics, and centrally acting agents, were chosen because they were prescribed to the majority of the cohort members. In addition, previous studies have reported potential cognitive effects of antihypertensive drugs, although the results remain inconsistent or conflicting, suggesting a potentially detrimental (e.g., beta-blockers), neutral, or protective (e.g., diuretics) effect. 1 , 32 , 33 Psychotropic medications, including antidepressants, benzodiazepines, and other hypnotic-sedatives, anxiolytics, antipsychotics, antiparkinsonian agents, and anticonvulsants, have been associated with a variety of drug-induced cognitive or functional impairments. 1 , 2 , 16 , 17 , 34 Apart from other centrally active pharmacological mechanisms, many psychotropic drugs and several antihypertensive agents also have documented anti-cholinergic properties in vivo or in vitro. 1 , 6 , 7 , 26 , 30 In previous studies, such dual-action medications were typically analyzed as if they were exclusively anticholinergic. 5 , 16 – 18 To reflect clinical reality and to avoid potential overestimation of anticholinergic effect in multivariable modeling (see Statistical Analyses section for details), an antihypertensive or psychotropic drug that was rated as having anticholinergic properties was retained in each group rather than counted solely as anticholinergic. Finally, total non-anticholinergic medication burden was computed by including all the drugs with a clinician-rated anticholinergic score of 0, to represent maximal possible confounding effects of concomitant medications. A list of study medications that are considered to have anticholinergic effects, along with their assigned anticholinergic scores, is provided in Appendix A .  MEASURES OF COVARIATES Data on potential confounders of the putative association between anticholinergic exposure and cognitive impairment were collected through interview with patients at baseline or review of medical records. Demographic factors included age, education (years), race (white vs other), and living arrangement (alone vs with others) before enrollment. Health—behavioral factors included history of alcohol use and smoking and depressive symptoms, as measured using the 11-item, self-reported Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D). 35 ADL function was assessed on the seven basic items from the OARS. 24 Medical conditions were obtained from participants' medical records and were used to define the Charlson Comorbidity Index, a global measure of the severity and multiplicity of comorbid diseases. 36 The severity of hypertension was rated on a 5-level ordinal scale ranging from 0 to 4, with 0 indicating normal blood pressure (i.e., systolic blood pressure <120 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure <80 mmHg) and 4 indicating severe hypertension (i.e., systolic blood pressure ?160 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure ?100 mmHg), corresponding generally to blood pressure stages as classified by national guidelines. 21 Use of a global and a specific measure of clinical comorbidities addressed the need to control for confounding by drug indications. 37  STATISTICAL ANALYSES Baseline characteristics of the study population and longitudinal distribution of the outcome measures and medication use during follow-up were described using means and standard deviations or frequencies and proportions, as appropriate. The bivariate association between cumulative medication exposure and each outcome was assessed using Spearman correlation coefficients ( r s ). A mixed-effects linear regression model was used to examine the hypothesized association between cumulative anticholinergic exposure and performance on the HVRT and IADLs. Because there were only two repeated outcome measures per subject, and there was no prior knowledge regarding the trends of their variance and covariance over time, an “unstructured” covariance structure was adopted to account for potential interdependence of the repeated measures over time on the same participants. 38 The effect of cumulative anticholinergic exposure was sequentially adjusted for the a priori selected covariates. The baseline model included only the time-dependent cumulative anticholinergic exposure as the sole predictor (Model 1). Then demographic variables (age, race, education, and living arrangement) were introduced into the model (Model 2). To account for heterogeneity of participants' cognition at study entry, the baseline value of the HVRTand IADL measures were included. Next, the models were adjusted for health behavioral factors: tobacco and alcohol use, depression symptoms, and ADL function (Model 3). Finally, Charlson Comorbidity Index and severity of hypertension were added as potential indications for prescribing multiple medications in general and for prescribing antihypertensive medications in particular (Model 4). Potential departures of the estimated anticholinergic effect from linearity and homogeneity over time were tested by adding a quadratic term and interaction with follow-up year, respectively. Sensitivity analyses were performed to assess the robustness of the primary mixed-effect models. Because a few highly anticholinergic medications (e.g., tricyclic antidepressants) were primarily indicated for treating mental conditions, to ensure that the specific group of anticholinergic medications or their indication diseases did not determine the observed association, the final models were refit by excluding participants with a diagnosis of depression, posttraumatic stress disorder, anxiety, or alcohol abuse or dependence based on medical records. In addition, because 4.3% to 19.5% of surviving participants were missing an outcome measure at the first or second annual follow-up, multiple imputation analyses were conducted to assess potential bias of the final models due to missing data using the SAS MI and MIANALYZE procedure (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC). Previous epidemiological studies have largely ignored potential confounding by co-medications when evaluating effects of anticholinergic drugs. To address this important methodological concern and to examine the specificity of anticholinergic medications, exploratory analyses were conducted by adjusting the final models for different measures of concomitant medication use as an additional time-dependent covariate ( Table 4 ), namely antihypertensive (Model 4.1), psychotropic (Model 4.2), and total non-anticholinergic medication burden (Model 4.3) The t statistic derived from significance tests of individual parameter estimates was employed as an effect size index for comparing the strength of the anticholinergic exposure in predicting a specific outcome with that of different measures of concomitant medications. 39 The former two models may result in an overadjustment due to potential collinearity between anticholinergic burden and concomitant antihypertensive or psychotropic medication use, but they reduce the risk of type I error. In contrast, the third model eliminated potential collinearity and confounding from all non-anticholinergic medications but may be subject to potential misclassification by clinician rating. To provide insight into the biological mechanism of observed cumulative anticholinergic effects, number of (3-month) quarters in which a participant used anti-cholinergic medications (range 0–4) was counted as a surrogate for duration of anticholinergic use, and its linear and curvilinear relationship with the outcomes was tested. In addition, because prior evidence for anticholinergic drug—induced cognitive impairment was primarily established over an “acute” exposure time window, typically in hours or days after the drug intake, 7 , 10 , 11 the final model was refit by confining anticholinergic exposure to the most recent quarters. Statistical analyses were conducted using SAS software version 9.1 (SAS Institute Inc.). Model fit was assessed using the likelihood ratio test that evaluates the difference of the nested models against a chi-square distribution with a degree of freedom equaling the number of added covariates. 38 The hypotheses were tested at a two-sided significance level of .05.  RESULTS The baseline characteristics of the study population are summarized in Table 1 . The cohort comprised relatively healthy older men, with the majority being functionally independent. Their hypertension severity was mild to moderate. Three hundred forty-two (62.9%) participants were using anti-cholinergic medications, with a mean anticholinergic score of 1.3 ± 1.5 (median 1.0). On average, the cohort members were taking 2.3 ± 1.2 antihypertensive medications (median 2.0), 1.5 ± 1.3 psychotropic medications (median 1.0), and 6.4 ± 3.1 non-anticholinergic medications (median 6.0). The most frequently used medications with moderate to strong anticholinergic effects (a clinician-rated anticholinergic score of 2 or 3) were ranitidine (9.6%), amitriptyline (2.8%), fexofenadine (2.2%), nortriptyline (1.8%), and paroxetine (1.1%). During the follow-up period, 364 (66.9%) and 378 (69.5%) participants used at least one anticholinergic medications during the first or second year of follow-up, respectively. Of them, the majority (57.1% and 56.6%) used these medications for 3 or 4 quarters, and another 23.1% and 27.8% used them for 2 quarters each year. Fewer than 20% used these drugs in only 1 quarter. Thirteen (2.4%) and 19 (3.6%) participants died during the first or second year of follow-up, respectively. The memory and executive function of the study cohort at baseline and during the follow-up in survivors are shown in Table 2 . At each assessment occasion, participants who were users of anticholinergic drugs appeared to perform worse than nonusers, although the cross-sectional difference between the two groups was statistically significant only on the IADL ( t -test, P =.02 to .001) and not the HVRT ( t -test, P =.17 to .45). Table 3 summarizes the results of the series of mixed-effects regression models on the two outcomes, adjusting for other potential risk factors. There was an independent association between cumulative anticholinergic exposure and poorer performance on the HVRT and IADLs after adjusting for demographic factors (Model 2), health behavioral factors (Model 3), and potential indications for prescribing (Model 4). There were no statistically significant nonlinear effects or interactions with follow-up time (all P >.10, data not shown). Exclusion of participants with a psychiatric diagnosis (n=120) from the final models resulted in no substantive changes in the estimated decremental effect for cumulative anticholinergic exposure on HVRT (0.39, 95% CI=0.06– 0.71, P =.02) or IADLs (0.14, 95% CI 5 0.06–0.21, P <.001). Multiple imputations analyses derived consistent conclusion (data available upon request). Table 4 summarizes exploratory analyses of the final models (Model 4 of Table 3 ) after taking into account concomitant medication use. The effect of cumulative anti-cholinergic exposure was attenuated but remained statistically significant after adjusting for cumulative number of antihypertensive (Model 4.1) and non-anticholinergic medications (Model 4.3) but not psychotropic medications (Model 4.2). Based on the ratio of their t statistics, the anticholinergic medications had a consistently stronger effect than antihypertensive, psychotropic, and total non-anticholinergic medications in predicting HVRT. Anticholinergic medication effects were stronger than antihypertensive and total non-anticholinergic medications, but not psychotropic medications, in predicting IADL scores. Refitting the final models by using number of exposed quarters (instead of cumulative anticholinergic exposure over four quarters) as a predictor and by confining anti-cholinergic exposure to the last quarter yielded consistent results. One additional quarter of anticholinergic use was associated with a 0.21-point (95% CI 5 0.01–0.42, P =.04) and 0.05-point (95% CI 5 0.00–0.10 P =.05) decrease in the HVRT and IADL scores, whereas the corresponding estimates for a 1-unit increase in the “acute” anticholinergic exposure were 0.12 (95% CI= ?0.07–0.32 P =.23) on HVRTand 0.10 (95% CI= 0.06–0.15, P <.001) on IADLs.  RESULTS The baseline characteristics of the study population are summarized in Table 1 . The cohort comprised relatively healthy older men, with the majority being functionally independent. Their hypertension severity was mild to moderate. Three hundred forty-two (62.9%) participants were using anti-cholinergic medications, with a mean anticholinergic score of 1.3 ± 1.5 (median 1.0). On average, the cohort members were taking 2.3 ± 1.2 antihypertensive medications (median 2.0), 1.5 ± 1.3 psychotropic medications (median 1.0), and 6.4 ± 3.1 non-anticholinergic medications (median 6.0). The most frequently used medications with moderate to strong anticholinergic effects (a clinician-rated anticholinergic score of 2 or 3) were ranitidine (9.6%), amitriptyline (2.8%), fexofenadine (2.2%), nortriptyline (1.8%), and paroxetine (1.1%). During the follow-up period, 364 (66.9%) and 378 (69.5%) participants used at least one anticholinergic medications during the first or second year of follow-up, respectively. Of them, the majority (57.1% and 56.6%) used these medications for 3 or 4 quarters, and another 23.1% and 27.8% used them for 2 quarters each year. Fewer than 20% used these drugs in only 1 quarter. Thirteen (2.4%) and 19 (3.6%) participants died during the first or second year of follow-up, respectively. The memory and executive function of the study cohort at baseline and during the follow-up in survivors are shown in Table 2 . At each assessment occasion, participants who were users of anticholinergic drugs appeared to perform worse than nonusers, although the cross-sectional difference between the two groups was statistically significant only on the IADL ( t -test, P =.02 to .001) and not the HVRT ( t -test, P =.17 to .45). Table 3 summarizes the results of the series of mixed-effects regression models on the two outcomes, adjusting for other potential risk factors. There was an independent association between cumulative anticholinergic exposure and poorer performance on the HVRT and IADLs after adjusting for demographic factors (Model 2), health behavioral factors (Model 3), and potential indications for prescribing (Model 4). There were no statistically significant nonlinear effects or interactions with follow-up time (all P >.10, data not shown). Exclusion of participants with a psychiatric diagnosis (n=120) from the final models resulted in no substantive changes in the estimated decremental effect for cumulative anticholinergic exposure on HVRT (0.39, 95% CI=0.06– 0.71, P =.02) or IADLs (0.14, 95% CI 5 0.06–0.21, P <.001). Multiple imputations analyses derived consistent conclusion (data available upon request). Table 4 summarizes exploratory analyses of the final models (Model 4 of Table 3 ) after taking into account concomitant medication use. The effect of cumulative anti-cholinergic exposure was attenuated but remained statistically significant after adjusting for cumulative number of antihypertensive (Model 4.1) and non-anticholinergic medications (Model 4.3) but not psychotropic medications (Model 4.2). Based on the ratio of their t statistics, the anticholinergic medications had a consistently stronger effect than antihypertensive, psychotropic, and total non-anticholinergic medications in predicting HVRT. Anticholinergic medication effects were stronger than antihypertensive and total non-anticholinergic medications, but not psychotropic medications, in predicting IADL scores. Refitting the final models by using number of exposed quarters (instead of cumulative anticholinergic exposure over four quarters) as a predictor and by confining anti-cholinergic exposure to the last quarter yielded consistent results. One additional quarter of anticholinergic use was associated with a 0.21-point (95% CI 5 0.01–0.42, P =.04) and 0.05-point (95% CI 5 0.00–0.10 P =.05) decrease in the HVRT and IADL scores, whereas the corresponding estimates for a 1-unit increase in the “acute” anticholinergic exposure were 0.12 (95% CI= ?0.07–0.32 P =.23) on HVRTand 0.10 (95% CI= 0.06–0.15, P <.001) on IADLs.  DISCUSSION In this cohort of community-living older men with diagnosed hypertension, total anticholinergic burden across medications used over 1 year was significantly associated with poor performance on memory and executive tasks during the 2-year follow-up period. This association remained statistically significant after control for other potential risk factors for cognitive and functional impairment, including age, education, ADL function, comorbidities, severity of hypertension, and concomitant use of non-anti-cholinergic medications, including antihypertensives and psychotropics. To put these findings in a clinical context, an older community-dwelling man with hypertension, whose total anticholinergic burden is one unit (population mean) per 3 months (or equivalently, four units per 12 months) is expected to have 0.30- and 0.10-point deficits on the memory and executive tasks, respectively, based on the clinician-rated anticholinergic score. The adverse anticholinergic effect on the two tasks would be approximately 3 and 1 times as great as the combined effects of non-anticholinergic drugs. These results suggest that chronic use of medications with even low to moderate anticholinergic effects may represent an independent risk factor for memory and executive dysfunction in older persons. 18 , 19 The current study largely supports findings from several large-scale population-based studies. One study reported that continuous use of anticholinergic medications over 1 year was independently associated with poorer performance on attention, short-term memory, and visuo-spatial construction, 18 although the association with immediate verbal recall (and implicit memory) lost statistical significance after adjusting for age. In contrast, the current study demonstrated a strong and consistent linear relationship between poorer verbal recall and greater cumulative anticholinergic exposure, independent of an array of identified risk factors for cognitive impairment and disease indications for prescribing. Other population studies have also found similar relationships between anticholinergics and functional impairment in older adults but over a much shorter exposure time window or using a cross-sectional design. For instance, a previous study found that use of anticholinergic drugs in the previous 2 weeks was associated with poorer visual memory, verbal fluency, and global cognitive function. 16 Similarly, it has been observed that users of anticholinergic medication in the previous 2 weeks performed significantly worse than nonusers on ADL and IADL scales and muscle strength measures. 5 In comparison with the previous studies, the methodological advantages of the current study included the ascertainment of medication use during the course of follow-up, defining anticholinergic use as a cumulative exposure, and controlling for confounding by indications. In addition, the relationship was assessed using a longitudinal, repeated-measures regression model, which allows simultaneous adjustment for baseline (e.g., age and education) and time-varying (e.g., concomitant medication use) confounders and has greater statistical power due to the use of more than one observation from each subject. The anti-cholinergic effect remains statistically significant after adjusting for total concomitant non-anticholinergic or antihypertensive burden and has a stronger association than both. Its association with memory dysfunction also appears to be stronger than that of concomitant psychotropic medications, despite the potential collinearity between the anti-cholinergic and psychotropic medications. These findings provide preliminary evidence for the specificity of the cumulative anticholinergic effect on cognitive function, which has not been examined longitudinally in previous studies. Nevertheless, the weaker (and nonsignificant) anti-cholinergic effect than that of psychotropic medications on executive dysfunction may suggest that drug-induced executive impairment, unlike memory dysfunction, may involve other neurotransmitting mechanisms than anti-cholinergicity alone 4 , 6 , 17 , 30 and hence may be more strongly correlated with an overall measure of centrally active drug burden than specific anticholinergic exposure. In light of the well-established acute anticholinergic toxicity syndrome, 7 – 10 the associations noted here may arise from long-term cumulative anticholinergic insult over time. Most medications that the older adults in the current study were taking have only mild to moderate anti-cholinergic effects, and the dosages taken may not be considered to be extremely high. Nevertheless, previous studies have shown that, even at low level of SAA, such medications (e.g., atenolol and ranitidine) could cause cognitive and functional deficits in elderly people. 7 , 15 , 26 Therefore, their long-term use may repeatedly cause subthreshold, and probably reversible, damage to the central nervous system and thereby gradually reduce the accuracy, efficiency, and speed of some cognitive abilities. Older persons may be more vulnerable to such cumulative anticholinergic insults, not only because they are subject to age-related oversensitivity to and reduced metabolism of anticholinergic medications, 6 , 11 but also because they often chronically use more than one medication with anticholinergic effects. 1 , 15 , 26 If such a “cumulative insult” mechanism exists, then a single theorem that, at lower or subthreshold levels, anticholinergic exposure requires a longer time to “cause” cognitive impairment could explain the statistically insignificant “acute” anticholinergic effect and significant “dose” effect of the exposure duration on memory function. This study had several limitations. First, the measures of medication use were based on data abstracted from VA primary care medical records and did not take into account prescriptions from non-VA sources or dosage and actual duration of medication use. Second, the clinician-rated anticholinergic score is based on physicians' clinical judgment rather than explicit external criteria and hence may not accurately reflect the pharmacological profile or SAA level of the medications. 17 , 29 For instance, ranitidine may not have “moderate” anticholinergic properties, as it was rated here. Similarly, homatropine-containing eye drops have been associated with anticholinergic delirium, and ophthalmic preparations should be ascertained as part of regular medication reviews. Third, study outcomes were measured in their original, quantitative units, which avoided arbitrary dichotomization and improved statistical power but also added uncertainty about the clinical significance of the detected functional deficits. Fourth, unmeasured and imprecisely measured risk factors, such as physical inactivity and specific medical and psychiatric conditions, may have introduced residual confounding or could offer an alternative explanation for the observed associations. Finally, the study population was restricted to relatively healthy men who had regular medical access and a shared comorbidity (hypertension). Whether these findings can be generalized to the aging population at large requires further investigation. In summary, in this cohort of community-dwelling older men with hypertension, cumulative anticholinergic exposure across medications used over 1 year was associated with poorer performance on short-term verbal memory and executive function. Age, education, cognitive and physical function at baseline, comorbid diseases, severity of hypertension, and concomitant medications did not explain this association. In addition, the effect of cumulative anticholinergic exposure on memory dysfunction appeared to be stronger than antihypertensive, psychotropic, and total non-anticholinergic medications. Future epidemiological studies should take into account the dose and duration of actual use of the medications and replicate these findings in women and other older adult populations without restriction to specific comorbidity. Clinicians prescribing drugs with anticholinergic effects should pay close attention to potential adverse effects that may arise with long-term use of these drugs in older persons.  DISCUSSION In this cohort of community-living older men with diagnosed hypertension, total anticholinergic burden across medications used over 1 year was significantly associated with poor performance on memory and executive tasks during the 2-year follow-up period. This association remained statistically significant after control for other potential risk factors for cognitive and functional impairment, including age, education, ADL function, comorbidities, severity of hypertension, and concomitant use of non-anti-cholinergic medications, including antihypertensives and psychotropics. To put these findings in a clinical context, an older community-dwelling man with hypertension, whose total anticholinergic burden is one unit (population mean) per 3 months (or equivalently, four units per 12 months) is expected to have 0.30- and 0.10-point deficits on the memory and executive tasks, respectively, based on the clinician-rated anticholinergic score. The adverse anticholinergic effect on the two tasks would be approximately 3 and 1 times as great as the combined effects of non-anticholinergic drugs. These results suggest that chronic use of medications with even low to moderate anticholinergic effects may represent an independent risk factor for memory and executive dysfunction in older persons. 18 , 19 The current study largely supports findings from several large-scale population-based studies. One study reported that continuous use of anticholinergic medications over 1 year was independently associated with poorer performance on attention, short-term memory, and visuo-spatial construction, 18 although the association with immediate verbal recall (and implicit memory) lost statistical significance after adjusting for age. In contrast, the current study demonstrated a strong and consistent linear relationship between poorer verbal recall and greater cumulative anticholinergic exposure, independent of an array of identified risk factors for cognitive impairment and disease indications for prescribing. Other population studies have also found similar relationships between anticholinergics and functional impairment in older adults but over a much shorter exposure time window or using a cross-sectional design. For instance, a previous study found that use of anticholinergic drugs in the previous 2 weeks was associated with poorer visual memory, verbal fluency, and global cognitive function. 16 Similarly, it has been observed that users of anticholinergic medication in the previous 2 weeks performed significantly worse than nonusers on ADL and IADL scales and muscle strength measures. 5 In comparison with the previous studies, the methodological advantages of the current study included the ascertainment of medication use during the course of follow-up, defining anticholinergic use as a cumulative exposure, and controlling for confounding by indications. In addition, the relationship was assessed using a longitudinal, repeated-measures regression model, which allows simultaneous adjustment for baseline (e.g., age and education) and time-varying (e.g., concomitant medication use) confounders and has greater statistical power due to the use of more than one observation from each subject. The anti-cholinergic effect remains statistically significant after adjusting for total concomitant non-anticholinergic or antihypertensive burden and has a stronger association than both. Its association with memory dysfunction also appears to be stronger than that of concomitant psychotropic medications, despite the potential collinearity between the anti-cholinergic and psychotropic medications. These findings provide preliminary evidence for the specificity of the cumulative anticholinergic effect on cognitive function, which has not been examined longitudinally in previous studies. Nevertheless, the weaker (and nonsignificant) anti-cholinergic effect than that of psychotropic medications on executive dysfunction may suggest that drug-induced executive impairment, unlike memory dysfunction, may involve other neurotransmitting mechanisms than anti-cholinergicity alone 4 , 6 , 17 , 30 and hence may be more strongly correlated with an overall measure of centrally active drug burden than specific anticholinergic exposure. In light of the well-established acute anticholinergic toxicity syndrome, 7 – 10 the associations noted here may arise from long-term cumulative anticholinergic insult over time. Most medications that the older adults in the current study were taking have only mild to moderate anti-cholinergic effects, and the dosages taken may not be considered to be extremely high. Nevertheless, previous studies have shown that, even at low level of SAA, such medications (e.g., atenolol and ranitidine) could cause cognitive and functional deficits in elderly people. 7 , 15 , 26 Therefore, their long-term use may repeatedly cause subthreshold, and probably reversible, damage to the central nervous system and thereby gradually reduce the accuracy, efficiency, and speed of some cognitive abilities. Older persons may be more vulnerable to such cumulative anticholinergic insults, not only because they are subject to age-related oversensitivity to and reduced metabolism of anticholinergic medications, 6 , 11 but also because they often chronically use more than one medication with anticholinergic effects. 1 , 15 , 26 If such a “cumulative insult” mechanism exists, then a single theorem that, at lower or subthreshold levels, anticholinergic exposure requires a longer time to “cause” cognitive impairment could explain the statistically insignificant “acute” anticholinergic effect and significant “dose” effect of the exposure duration on memory function. This study had several limitations. First, the measures of medication use were based on data abstracted from VA primary care medical records and did not take into account prescriptions from non-VA sources or dosage and actual duration of medication use. Second, the clinician-rated anticholinergic score is based on physicians' clinical judgment rather than explicit external criteria and hence may not accurately reflect the pharmacological profile or SAA level of the medications. 17 , 29 For instance, ranitidine may not have “moderate” anticholinergic properties, as it was rated here. Similarly, homatropine-containing eye drops have been associated with anticholinergic delirium, and ophthalmic preparations should be ascertained as part of regular medication reviews. Third, study outcomes were measured in their original, quantitative units, which avoided arbitrary dichotomization and improved statistical power but also added uncertainty about the clinical significance of the detected functional deficits. Fourth, unmeasured and imprecisely measured risk factors, such as physical inactivity and specific medical and psychiatric conditions, may have introduced residual confounding or could offer an alternative explanation for the observed associations. Finally, the study population was restricted to relatively healthy men who had regular medical access and a shared comorbidity (hypertension). Whether these findings can be generalized to the aging population at large requires further investigation. In summary, in this cohort of community-dwelling older men with hypertension, cumulative anticholinergic exposure across medications used over 1 year was associated with poorer performance on short-term verbal memory and executive function. Age, education, cognitive and physical function at baseline, comorbid diseases, severity of hypertension, and concomitant medications did not explain this association. In addition, the effect of cumulative anticholinergic exposure on memory dysfunction appeared to be stronger than antihypertensive, psychotropic, and total non-anticholinergic medications. Future epidemiological studies should take into account the dose and duration of actual use of the medications and replicate these findings in women and other older adult populations without restriction to specific comorbidity. Clinicians prescribing drugs with anticholinergic effects should pay close attention to potential adverse effects that may arise with long-term use of these drugs in older persons. 