Bead-based kinase phosphorylation profiling identifies SRC as a therapeutic target in glioblastoma  METHODS Luminex immunosandwich assay Individual bead-type of Luminex xMAP microspheres (Luminex Corporation, Austin, TX) were coupled separately to capture antibodies against total tyrosine kinases using the following procedure. 100?l Microspheres were washed with 100 ?l ddH2O and resuspended in 80 ?l 100mM NaH2PO4 pH 6.2. 10 ?l 25mg/ml Sulfo-NHS (Pierce) and 10 ?l 25mg/ml EDC (Pierce) were added and incubated at 25°C for 20min while shaking to activate the microspheres. The activated beads were washed with 250 ?l 1x PBS pH7.4 twice and resuspended in 200 ?l 1x PBS. 20 ?g capture antibodies in 50 ?l 1x PBS were added. The mixtures were incubated at 25°C for two hours while shaking in dark. The antibody-coupled beads were blocked with 500 ?l PBS-TBN (0.02% Tween-20, 0.1% BSA and 0.05% NaN3 in 1x PBS pH7.4) at 25°C for 30 minutes while shaking. Finally, the microspheres were washed with 500 ?l PBS-TBN twice and stored in 500 ?l PBS-TBN at 4°C until use. 0.25 ?l coupled microspheres per bead type were used for each sample. Microsphere mixture were transferred into a 96-well 1.2um filter plate (Millipore) and washed with 100 ?l 1x PBS-1% BSA pH7.4 (Sigma) twice. 100 ?l 1mg/ml protein lysates were added to each well and incubated at 4°C overnight while shaking. The microspheres were washed with 100?l 1x PBS-1% BSA pH7.4 twice. 50?l 4?g/ml biotin-4G10 (UpState) were added and incubated at 25°C for 30 minutes while shaking. The microspheres were then washed with 100?l 1x PBS-1% BSA pH7.4 twice and then incubated with 50?l 4?g/ml R-phycoerythrin streptavidin conjugates (Molecular Probes) at 25°C for 10 minutes. Finally, the samples were washed with 100?l 1x PBS-1% BSA pH7.4 twice and resuspended in 50?l 1x PBS-1% BSA pH7.4 for analysis. The data were acquired with a Luminex 100 instrument (Luminex Corporation) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The background readings for each capture antibody were obtained using microspheres incubated with 1x cell lysis buffer (Cell Signaling Technology). Values were considered positive if they were 3-fold over the background and represented by log2-transformation of the folds over background. Negative values were threshold to -10. The preprocessed data were converted into .gct files and analyzed with GenePattern 3.0 (The Broad Institute). Technical and Biological Variation All analyses were based on median-based statistics. Variation was measured using the quartile coefficient of variation 25 , defined as: (Q3-Q1)/(Q3+Q1), where Q1 is the lower quartile and Q3 is the upper quartile. To determine whether a TK was active or inactive in any given cell line, we evaluated its measured intensity against a reference as follows: 1) Measure the TK in a reference where it is inactive. Repeat the measurement n times and note the observed intensity; 2) Let max be the maximum of these n measurements in the reference; 3) For any new measurement of TK in any cell line, the TK is active if the new measurement exceeds max ; the TK is otherwise inactive. With this procedure, the probability that a measurement greater than max could arise from an inactive TK depends on the value of n , and can be calculated using the binomial distribution 26 . IP-LC/MS/MS The basics of the procedure is developed and described by Rush and colleagues 27 . Briefly, 2x108 cells were lysed in 8M urea / 20 mM Hepes containing phosphatase inhibitors. Upon reduction of the disulfide bonds, the lysate was split into 2 aliquots and diluted with 20 mM Hepes to 2M or 0.5 M urea before digestion with trypsin or chymotrypsin, respectively. The total peptide mixtures were then desalted by Sep-Pak cartridge and resuspended in IP buffer, 50 mM MOPS/NaOH pH 7.2, 10 mM Na2PO4, 50 mM NaCl, along with 4 exogenous pTyr-containing peptides added as controls. IP was performed with a cocktail of 3 protein G agarose bead-bound phospho-tyrosine antibodies pY100 (Cell Signaling), 4G10 (UpState), and PY99 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) to enrich for phosphotyrosine-containing peptides. Peptides captured by phospho-tyrosine antibodies were eluted under basic followed by acidic conditions. The IP eluates were analyzed by data-dependent LC/MS/MS using a Thermo LTQ-FT instrument. Each peptide’s site(s) of phosphorylation were uniquely mapped using the sequence information present in its ion trap MS/MS spectrum, unless it had several tyrosine residues and fragmented poorly. All MS and MS/MS data was processed using the Spectrum Mill software package (Agilent Technologies). Dasatinib treatment, viability, proliferation, migration and apoptosis assays Human glioblastoma T98G cells cultured in 96-well plates (1000 cells /well) were treated with different concentrations of dasatinib and a vehicle control (DMSO). Dasatinib 16 was synthesized by the Chemical Biology Program at the Broad Institute. Treatments lengths varied from 24h for migration and proliferation assays to 48h for apoptosis and 96h for viability. Cell viability was determined by quantification of ATP present in culture using CellTiter-Glo (Promega). Cell proliferation was determined by incorporation of bromodeoxyuridine to actively proliferating cells and subsequent quantification of BrdU by immunohistochemistry (Calbiochem). The kit’s substrate solution was replaced with Glo Substrate (R&D) for higher sensitivity. CytoSelect™ Cell Migration Assay Kit (Cell Biolabs, INC.) was used to assess cell migration. Migratory cells were detected using CellTiter-Glo (Promega) instead of the dye provided with the kit. Apoptosis was determined using a luminescence assay that quantifies caspases 3 and 7 activities (Caspase Glo 3/7 Assay, Promega). Orthotropic glioblastoma model Orthotopic glioma xenografts were established as previously described 28 . Briefly, 50,000 U87-LucNeo cells were stereotactically implanted into the right brain of 6 week old male NCr nude mice using a 1:1 mix of propylene glycol and water as the vehicle. Bioluminescence imaging was performed 7 and 12 days after tumor implantation to identify mice with logarithmically growing tumors. Mice were divided into treatment groups with statistically equivalent mean bioluminescence. Treatments consisted of either imatinib at 75 mg/kg twice a day by oral gavage, dasatinib at 10 mg/kg twice a day by oral gavage, or vehicle. Tumor burden was assessed by bioluminescence imaging as previously described, and for each individual animal values were expressed relative to the bioluminescence at the start of treatment. All animal studies were performed under an IACUC approved protocol. Overexpression vectors (cloning), transformations, transfections and infection Cloning Vectors containing tyrosine kinase ORFs were obtained from Harvard Institute of Proteomics or Dr. Mark Vidal at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute. The ORFs were amplified with primers listed in Supplementary Table 10 and inserted into pENTR/D-TOPO (Invitrogen). Site-directed mutagenesis was performed with the primers listed in Supplementary Table 10 according to manufacturer’s recommendations (Stratagene). Both wild-type and mutant constructs were sequence verified. LR recombination reaction into pLenti6/UbC/V5-DEST vector was done according to Invitrogen’s guideline. The inserts were verified again with sequencing. Transfections 293-FT producer cells (Invitrogen) were transfected using ViraPower™ Lentiviral Expression Systems (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Virus was harvested at 48h and 72h. Infections. Cells were plated in 96-well plates (1000 cells/well) and infected with 10 uL of wild type and mutant TK lentivirus. Infections were done in triplicates. On day 2 cells were treated with various concentrations of dasatinib. Viability was assessed at 96h after dasatinib treatment.  Luminex immunosandwich assay Individual bead-type of Luminex xMAP microspheres (Luminex Corporation, Austin, TX) were coupled separately to capture antibodies against total tyrosine kinases using the following procedure. 100?l Microspheres were washed with 100 ?l ddH2O and resuspended in 80 ?l 100mM NaH2PO4 pH 6.2. 10 ?l 25mg/ml Sulfo-NHS (Pierce) and 10 ?l 25mg/ml EDC (Pierce) were added and incubated at 25°C for 20min while shaking to activate the microspheres. The activated beads were washed with 250 ?l 1x PBS pH7.4 twice and resuspended in 200 ?l 1x PBS. 20 ?g capture antibodies in 50 ?l 1x PBS were added. The mixtures were incubated at 25°C for two hours while shaking in dark. The antibody-coupled beads were blocked with 500 ?l PBS-TBN (0.02% Tween-20, 0.1% BSA and 0.05% NaN3 in 1x PBS pH7.4) at 25°C for 30 minutes while shaking. Finally, the microspheres were washed with 500 ?l PBS-TBN twice and stored in 500 ?l PBS-TBN at 4°C until use. 0.25 ?l coupled microspheres per bead type were used for each sample. Microsphere mixture were transferred into a 96-well 1.2um filter plate (Millipore) and washed with 100 ?l 1x PBS-1% BSA pH7.4 (Sigma) twice. 100 ?l 1mg/ml protein lysates were added to each well and incubated at 4°C overnight while shaking. The microspheres were washed with 100?l 1x PBS-1% BSA pH7.4 twice. 50?l 4?g/ml biotin-4G10 (UpState) were added and incubated at 25°C for 30 minutes while shaking. The microspheres were then washed with 100?l 1x PBS-1% BSA pH7.4 twice and then incubated with 50?l 4?g/ml R-phycoerythrin streptavidin conjugates (Molecular Probes) at 25°C for 10 minutes. Finally, the samples were washed with 100?l 1x PBS-1% BSA pH7.4 twice and resuspended in 50?l 1x PBS-1% BSA pH7.4 for analysis. The data were acquired with a Luminex 100 instrument (Luminex Corporation) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The background readings for each capture antibody were obtained using microspheres incubated with 1x cell lysis buffer (Cell Signaling Technology). Values were considered positive if they were 3-fold over the background and represented by log2-transformation of the folds over background. Negative values were threshold to -10. The preprocessed data were converted into .gct files and analyzed with GenePattern 3.0 (The Broad Institute).  Technical and Biological Variation All analyses were based on median-based statistics. Variation was measured using the quartile coefficient of variation 25 , defined as: (Q3-Q1)/(Q3+Q1), where Q1 is the lower quartile and Q3 is the upper quartile. To determine whether a TK was active or inactive in any given cell line, we evaluated its measured intensity against a reference as follows: 1) Measure the TK in a reference where it is inactive. Repeat the measurement n times and note the observed intensity; 2) Let max be the maximum of these n measurements in the reference; 3) For any new measurement of TK in any cell line, the TK is active if the new measurement exceeds max ; the TK is otherwise inactive. With this procedure, the probability that a measurement greater than max could arise from an inactive TK depends on the value of n , and can be calculated using the binomial distribution 26 .  IP-LC/MS/MS The basics of the procedure is developed and described by Rush and colleagues 27 . Briefly, 2x108 cells were lysed in 8M urea / 20 mM Hepes containing phosphatase inhibitors. Upon reduction of the disulfide bonds, the lysate was split into 2 aliquots and diluted with 20 mM Hepes to 2M or 0.5 M urea before digestion with trypsin or chymotrypsin, respectively. The total peptide mixtures were then desalted by Sep-Pak cartridge and resuspended in IP buffer, 50 mM MOPS/NaOH pH 7.2, 10 mM Na2PO4, 50 mM NaCl, along with 4 exogenous pTyr-containing peptides added as controls. IP was performed with a cocktail of 3 protein G agarose bead-bound phospho-tyrosine antibodies pY100 (Cell Signaling), 4G10 (UpState), and PY99 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) to enrich for phosphotyrosine-containing peptides. Peptides captured by phospho-tyrosine antibodies were eluted under basic followed by acidic conditions. The IP eluates were analyzed by data-dependent LC/MS/MS using a Thermo LTQ-FT instrument. Each peptide’s site(s) of phosphorylation were uniquely mapped using the sequence information present in its ion trap MS/MS spectrum, unless it had several tyrosine residues and fragmented poorly. All MS and MS/MS data was processed using the Spectrum Mill software package (Agilent Technologies).  Dasatinib treatment, viability, proliferation, migration and apoptosis assays Human glioblastoma T98G cells cultured in 96-well plates (1000 cells /well) were treated with different concentrations of dasatinib and a vehicle control (DMSO). Dasatinib 16 was synthesized by the Chemical Biology Program at the Broad Institute. Treatments lengths varied from 24h for migration and proliferation assays to 48h for apoptosis and 96h for viability. Cell viability was determined by quantification of ATP present in culture using CellTiter-Glo (Promega). Cell proliferation was determined by incorporation of bromodeoxyuridine to actively proliferating cells and subsequent quantification of BrdU by immunohistochemistry (Calbiochem). The kit’s substrate solution was replaced with Glo Substrate (R&D) for higher sensitivity. CytoSelect™ Cell Migration Assay Kit (Cell Biolabs, INC.) was used to assess cell migration. Migratory cells were detected using CellTiter-Glo (Promega) instead of the dye provided with the kit. Apoptosis was determined using a luminescence assay that quantifies caspases 3 and 7 activities (Caspase Glo 3/7 Assay, Promega).  Orthotropic glioblastoma model Orthotopic glioma xenografts were established as previously described 28 . Briefly, 50,000 U87-LucNeo cells were stereotactically implanted into the right brain of 6 week old male NCr nude mice using a 1:1 mix of propylene glycol and water as the vehicle. Bioluminescence imaging was performed 7 and 12 days after tumor implantation to identify mice with logarithmically growing tumors. Mice were divided into treatment groups with statistically equivalent mean bioluminescence. Treatments consisted of either imatinib at 75 mg/kg twice a day by oral gavage, dasatinib at 10 mg/kg twice a day by oral gavage, or vehicle. Tumor burden was assessed by bioluminescence imaging as previously described, and for each individual animal values were expressed relative to the bioluminescence at the start of treatment. All animal studies were performed under an IACUC approved protocol.  Overexpression vectors (cloning), transformations, transfections and infection Cloning Vectors containing tyrosine kinase ORFs were obtained from Harvard Institute of Proteomics or Dr. Mark Vidal at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute. The ORFs were amplified with primers listed in Supplementary Table 10 and inserted into pENTR/D-TOPO (Invitrogen). Site-directed mutagenesis was performed with the primers listed in Supplementary Table 10 according to manufacturer’s recommendations (Stratagene). Both wild-type and mutant constructs were sequence verified. LR recombination reaction into pLenti6/UbC/V5-DEST vector was done according to Invitrogen’s guideline. The inserts were verified again with sequencing. Transfections 293-FT producer cells (Invitrogen) were transfected using ViraPower™ Lentiviral Expression Systems (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Virus was harvested at 48h and 72h. Infections. Cells were plated in 96-well plates (1000 cells/well) and infected with 10 uL of wild type and mutant TK lentivirus. Infections were done in triplicates. On day 2 cells were treated with various concentrations of dasatinib. Viability was assessed at 96h after dasatinib treatment.  Cloning Vectors containing tyrosine kinase ORFs were obtained from Harvard Institute of Proteomics or Dr. Mark Vidal at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute. The ORFs were amplified with primers listed in Supplementary Table 10 and inserted into pENTR/D-TOPO (Invitrogen). Site-directed mutagenesis was performed with the primers listed in Supplementary Table 10 according to manufacturer’s recommendations (Stratagene). Both wild-type and mutant constructs were sequence verified. LR recombination reaction into pLenti6/UbC/V5-DEST vector was done according to Invitrogen’s guideline. The inserts were verified again with sequencing.  Transfections 293-FT producer cells (Invitrogen) were transfected using ViraPower™ Lentiviral Expression Systems (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Virus was harvested at 48h and 72h. Infections. Cells were plated in 96-well plates (1000 cells/well) and infected with 10 uL of wild type and mutant TK lentivirus. Infections were done in triplicates. On day 2 cells were treated with various concentrations of dasatinib. Viability was assessed at 96h after dasatinib treatment.  Supplementary Material Supplementary Data Supplementary Table 1 Supplementary Table 10 Supplementary Table 2 Supplementary Table 3 Supplementary Table 4 Supplementary Table 5 Supplementary Table 6 Supplementary Table 7 Supplementary Table 8 Supplementary Table 9  Figures Figure 1 Luminex immunosandwich assay and IP-MS approach (a) The left panel shows the Luminex immunosandwich assay. Antibody-coupled beads were incubated with cellular protein lysates to capture tyrosine kinases. A biotinylated phospho-tyrosine antibody and streptavidin R-phycoerythrin conjugate (SAPE) were added sequentially to bind to the phospho-tyrosine residues. The mixture was analyzed with a Luminex 100 instrument, whereby each microsphere is analyzed with two lasers -- one to detect the bead color and thereby the identity of the tyrosine kinase, and the other to detect the R-phycoerythrin signal reflecting the tyrosine phosphorylation levels on the bead. The right panel presents the IP-MS approach. Total protein lysates were subjected to enzymatic digestion. Subsequently, the digested lysates were immunoprecipitated with a cocktail of phospho-tyrosine antibodies to enrich for phospho-tyrosine containing peptides. Upon elution, the peptide mixture was analyzed with mass spectrometry to determine their sequences and phosphorylation sites. (b) Comparison between IP-MS and Luminex data on five cell lines. The tyrosine phosphorylations on tyrosine kinases were assayed on biological replicates with either Luminex immunosandwich assay or IP-MS approach as described. Van diagrams of pY-TKs are shown. Numbers of pY-TKs identified with each method alone or both methods are indicated in parentheses. (c) Luminex fluorescence intensities on selected positive control samples. Lysates were prepared from 293FT cells infected with either a control lentivirus (Ctrl) or virus expressing the tyrosine kinases specified in the figure. The samples were assayed on at least three independent days and the representative raw values are shown. Western analysis on the same samples used in the left panels with either a phospho-specific antibody against pY419SRC or pY530SRC. Due to the high sequence homology, pY419SRC antibody also recognizes the corresponding phosphorylation site in other family members. (d) Technical and biological variations of the Luminex assay. For technical variations (blue bars), protein lysates from 6 cell lines (one sample per line) were analyzed at least 8 times with Luminex assay. For biological variations (red bars), protein lysates from each cell line were harvested 12 times sequentially and analyzed with Luminex assay. Variations of active (dark blue or red) and inactive beads (light blue or red) were determined as described in Materials and Methods. Figure 2 Luminex screen identifies activated tyrosine kinases in human cancer cell lines and primary glioblastomas (a) Luminex screen on human cancer cell lines. Total protein lysates were prepared from human cancer cell lines and assayed as described in the Experimental Procedures. The raw data were processed and positive signals were normalized to fold-over-backgrounds. The normalized readings were log-transformed and converted into a gct file and the heat map was generated using the GenePattern 3.0 software. (b) Luminex screen on human primary glioblastomas. Total protein lysates were prepared from freshly frozen patient samples as described in the Experimental Procedures. The data was acquired and processed same as in a). (c) Representative positive and negative pY419SRC IHC staining in primary GBM samples. Primary GBM tissue microarrays were staining as described in the Experimental Procedures. Normal brain samples on the same TMA consistently stained negative for pY419SRC (data not shown). Figure 3 Dasatinib effectively blocked tumor progression <italic>in vitro</italic> and <italic>in vivo</italic>, and resistant mutants of SRC and FYN rescued dasatinib effects in glioma cells (a) Dasatinib diminished T98G glioma cell viability and migration in vitro . T98G cells were plated onto 96-well plates and treatment with either DMSO or dasatinib at concentrations specified in the figure. The cell viability was assayed with CellTiterGlo. Proliferation rates were assessed with BrdU incorporation at 24h. Apoptosis levels were analyzed with a Caspase3/7 activity assay at 48h. Cell migration through 0.45um membrane was measured at 24h post-treatment. Triplicate samples were assayed for each condition. The averages and standard deviations are presented. (b) Dasatinib effectively inhibited tumor growth in vivo . Mice with established intracranial U87 tumors were treated with imatinib at 75 mg/kg twice a day by oral gavage (n=6) or vehicle (n=5). Tumor burden was assessed by bioluminescence imaging and expressed relative to the start of treatment (Treatment Day 1). Data expressed as mean ± SD. A significant suppression of tumor growth was observed in mice treated with dasatinib at 10 mg/kg twice a day by oral gavage (n=5) by comparison to vehicle treated controls (n=5). Day 14 of treatment was the last imaging point with all vehicle treated animals. Student’s t-test p<0.05. Representative images of dasatinib and vehicle treated animals. Bioluminescence intensity is represented by the indicated false-color scale. (c) T98G cells were plated onto 96-well plates and infected with lentiviruses expressing the tyrosine kinases specified in the figure. 24 hours after infection, cells were treated with dasatinib ranging from 50nM to 5uM. Cell viability was assessed at 96h post-treatment. Triplicate samples were analyzed for each condition. The averages and standard deviations are shown. (d) Total protein lysates were prepared from T98G cells treated with dasatinib at concentrations specified in the figure. The lysates were immunoprecipitated with a total SRC antibody and blotted with either the pY419SRC antibody or a total SRC antibody. (e) Dasatinib-resistant mutant SRC but not other alleles confer resistance in glioma cells, indicating increased SRC activity alone does not confer dasatinib resistance. T98G cells were plated, infected and treated same as in figure 3. Besides the wild-type and drug resistant T341I mutant, cells were also infected with viruses expressing an activating allele (Y530F), a kinase dead allele (K598R) and a double mutant of K598R/T341I. Uninfected cells and lacZ virus infected cells were used as controls. Each condition was assayed in triplicates and the means and standard deviations are presented. 