Relationship Between Smoking Status and Body Weight in a Military Population of Young Adults The purpose of the present study was to determine the association between smoking and body weight in a cohort of young U.S. Air Force recruits (mean age = 20 years) enrolled in basic military training ( N = 35 986). Twenty-two percent of recruits smoked daily prior to basic military training ( n = 8 087) and were compared to never smokers, former smokers, and experimental or nondaily smokers. A three-way interaction among smoking status, gender and ethnicity suggested a small effect for daily smoking among White male recruits only and no significant differences for female recruits or members of any other ethnic group. Although there was a statistically significant relationship between smoking and body weight in White males, the effect size was ~1 kg. These results suggest that the energy balance differences in body weight between young smokers and nonsmokers are minimal and that it would take decades to accrue the differences typically seen in adult smokers.  2. Method 2.1 Procedures A baseline survey administered to 36 013 Air Force recruits enrolled in basic military training (BMT) between 1999 and 2000 included questions that covered demographics and tobacco use. Recruits self-reported height, body weight, gender, ethnicity, age, education and annual income. Tobacco use is prohibited in BMT, so smoking status was determined retrospectively according to self-reported history immediately prior to BMT and categorized as never smoker, experimental or nondaily smoker (smoked occasionally but not every day), former smoker (smoked regularly but quit prior to BMT), and daily smoker. 2.2 Statistical Analysis Analysis of covariance was performed with the GLM univariate procedure in SPSS (15.0.1) to compare body weight (kg) in relation to smoking status, gender and ethnicity with height and age as covariates. Education and income were tested as covariates and did not affect the pattern of results. Main effects, two-way interactions, and a three-way interaction among smoking status, gender, and ethnicity were examined. Simple main effects tests with Bonferroni adjustments for multiple comparisons were used to examine significant interactions.  2.1 Procedures A baseline survey administered to 36 013 Air Force recruits enrolled in basic military training (BMT) between 1999 and 2000 included questions that covered demographics and tobacco use. Recruits self-reported height, body weight, gender, ethnicity, age, education and annual income. Tobacco use is prohibited in BMT, so smoking status was determined retrospectively according to self-reported history immediately prior to BMT and categorized as never smoker, experimental or nondaily smoker (smoked occasionally but not every day), former smoker (smoked regularly but quit prior to BMT), and daily smoker.  2.2 Statistical Analysis Analysis of covariance was performed with the GLM univariate procedure in SPSS (15.0.1) to compare body weight (kg) in relation to smoking status, gender and ethnicity with height and age as covariates. Education and income were tested as covariates and did not affect the pattern of results. Main effects, two-way interactions, and a three-way interaction among smoking status, gender, and ethnicity were examined. Simple main effects tests with Bonferroni adjustments for multiple comparisons were used to examine significant interactions.  3. Results Mean age was 20.1 years ( SD = 2.3) and ranged from 17 – 35 years. Most recruits were single (88%; n = 31 745) and male (74%; n = 26 739). Ethnic minorities made up 36% of the sample. Self-reported body weight averaged 69.7 kg ( SD = 11.9) and ranged from 36 to 133 kg. Eighty percent of daily smokers reported they had begun smoking regularly before they reached 18 years of age ( M = 15.6, SD = 2.3). As expected, males weighed more than females, F (1, 35 952) = 817.72, p < .01. The three-way interaction (smoking status, gender, ethnicity) was significant, F (24, 35 952) = 2.06, p < .01. As shown in Figure 1 (a and b) , daily smokers weighed significantly less than nonsmokers among White male recruits only ( MD = 1.0 kg, p < .01). No significant differences were found for female recruits, regardless of ethnicity. Analyses were also conducted with BMI and the pattern of results was not affected.  3. Results Mean age was 20.1 years ( SD = 2.3) and ranged from 17 – 35 years. Most recruits were single (88%; n = 31 745) and male (74%; n = 26 739). Ethnic minorities made up 36% of the sample. Self-reported body weight averaged 69.7 kg ( SD = 11.9) and ranged from 36 to 133 kg. Eighty percent of daily smokers reported they had begun smoking regularly before they reached 18 years of age ( M = 15.6, SD = 2.3). As expected, males weighed more than females, F (1, 35 952) = 817.72, p < .01. The three-way interaction (smoking status, gender, ethnicity) was significant, F (24, 35 952) = 2.06, p < .01. As shown in Figure 1 (a and b) , daily smokers weighed significantly less than nonsmokers among White male recruits only ( MD = 1.0 kg, p < .01). No significant differences were found for female recruits, regardless of ethnicity. Analyses were also conducted with BMI and the pattern of results was not affected.  4. Discussion This investigation examined the association between body weight and smoking in a large, ethnically diverse population of young Air Force recruits. Results corroborate previous findings that show minimal-to-no association between smoking and reduced body weight in young people ( Klesges, Elliott, & Robinson, 1997 ; Klesges, Zbikowski et al., 1998 ). Although a difference was found between White male smokers and nonsmokers, the effect was quite small (~1 kg). Of critical importance is that female daily smokers, who most often cite weight control as a reason for smoking ( Camp, Klesges, & Relyea, 1993 ; Klesges & Klesges, 1988 ), showed no weight benefit. Despite the strengths of this study (e.g., large diverse sample), several limitations should be noted. One potential drawback is self-reported height and weight although such self-reports are generally viewed as acceptable in large-scale studies ( Spencer, Appleby, Davey, & Key, 2007 ; Tienboon, Wahlqvist, & Rutishauser, 1992 ). A second limitation is self-reported smoking status although past research suggests that self-reported smoking is highly accurate in healthy populations with limited incentive or social pressure to misreport ( Velicer, Prochaska, Rossi, & Snow, 1992 ). A third consideration is generalizability beyond military personnel. Young adults who join the armed forces differ inherently from civilians (e.g., younger, more likely to be minority and low-income) and are a fairly select group in that eligibility for service requires they be in good physical health and not obese. However, similar results have been reported for adolescent and young adult civilians ( Klesges et al., 1997 ; Klesges, Ward et al., 1998 ). Consistent with a growing literature, these findings indicate little, if any, benefit of smoking to manage body weight among young adults. As noted by the Surgeon General ( USDHHS, 1990 ), several studies have shown that any relationship between smoking and reduced body weight appears to be moderated by age, and later studies have shown little or no weight attenuation in young smokers ( Klesges et al., 1997 ; Klesges, Zbikowski et al., 1998 ). Any effect on body weight most likely would emerge in middle age and probably would be a suppression of weight gain rather than weight loss. Given the common belief that smoking can promote thinness, prevention strategies among young people should focus on correcting this misperception. Future research should determine whether there is a particular age at which differences in body weight begin to emerge between smokers and nonsmokers, whether the actual duration of smoking is more important, or whether an interaction between age and duration of smoking is most informative.  4. Discussion This investigation examined the association between body weight and smoking in a large, ethnically diverse population of young Air Force recruits. Results corroborate previous findings that show minimal-to-no association between smoking and reduced body weight in young people ( Klesges, Elliott, & Robinson, 1997 ; Klesges, Zbikowski et al., 1998 ). Although a difference was found between White male smokers and nonsmokers, the effect was quite small (~1 kg). Of critical importance is that female daily smokers, who most often cite weight control as a reason for smoking ( Camp, Klesges, & Relyea, 1993 ; Klesges & Klesges, 1988 ), showed no weight benefit. Despite the strengths of this study (e.g., large diverse sample), several limitations should be noted. One potential drawback is self-reported height and weight although such self-reports are generally viewed as acceptable in large-scale studies ( Spencer, Appleby, Davey, & Key, 2007 ; Tienboon, Wahlqvist, & Rutishauser, 1992 ). A second limitation is self-reported smoking status although past research suggests that self-reported smoking is highly accurate in healthy populations with limited incentive or social pressure to misreport ( Velicer, Prochaska, Rossi, & Snow, 1992 ). A third consideration is generalizability beyond military personnel. Young adults who join the armed forces differ inherently from civilians (e.g., younger, more likely to be minority and low-income) and are a fairly select group in that eligibility for service requires they be in good physical health and not obese. However, similar results have been reported for adolescent and young adult civilians ( Klesges et al., 1997 ; Klesges, Ward et al., 1998 ). Consistent with a growing literature, these findings indicate little, if any, benefit of smoking to manage body weight among young adults. As noted by the Surgeon General ( USDHHS, 1990 ), several studies have shown that any relationship between smoking and reduced body weight appears to be moderated by age, and later studies have shown little or no weight attenuation in young smokers ( Klesges et al., 1997 ; Klesges, Zbikowski et al., 1998 ). Any effect on body weight most likely would emerge in middle age and probably would be a suppression of weight gain rather than weight loss. Given the common belief that smoking can promote thinness, prevention strategies among young people should focus on correcting this misperception. Future research should determine whether there is a particular age at which differences in body weight begin to emerge between smokers and nonsmokers, whether the actual duration of smoking is more important, or whether an interaction between age and duration of smoking is most informative.  Figure Figure 1 (a) Estimated marginal means of weight (kg) in male recruits (b) Estimated marginal means of weight (kg) in female recruits  Figure Figure 1 (a) Estimated marginal means of weight (kg) in male recruits (b) Estimated marginal means of weight (kg) in female recruits 