Pharmacology of Stone Disease Kidney stone disease remains a major health and economic burden on the nation. It has been increasingly recognized that nephrolithiasis can be both a chronic or systemic illness. There have been major limitations in the development of new drugs for the prevention and management of this disease, largely due to our lack of understanding of the complex pathophysiologic mechanisms involving the interaction of three major target organs: the kidney, bone, and intestine. We also do not yet understand the molecular genetic basis of this polygenic disorder. These limitations are coupled with the incorrect perception that kidney stone disease is solely an acute illness, and the lack of reliable tests to assess outcome measures. All of these factors combined have diminished the willingness of the pharmaceutical industry to engage in the development of novel drugs.  Conclusion Our knowledge of the pathogenic cascades and molecular genetic basis leading to nephrolithiasis has changed significantly over the past decade. In the future, we should use this knowledge to formulate a novel method for the diagnosis and management of nephrolithiasis. There are many questions to be answered and barriers to overcome before such an approach will become reality. The gap in current trials on the management of kidney stone disease is wide. This is largely because of the availability of only a few longitudinal trials in a small number of patients with a short duration of treatment that was conducted over 2 to 3 decades ago. It is anticipated that this gap will gradually fill with the advances in our understanding of the pathophysiology and the genetic basis of kidney stone disease. This knowledge will be helpful in the design of long-term outcome trials of conventional treatments and, hopefully, new novel drugs that target the rectification of specific physiologic abnormalities.  Figures and Table Figure 1 Pharmacologic treatment, facilitating ureteral stone passage: ?-blockers versus calcium-channel blockers (±steroids). (Adapted with permission from Hollingsworth et al. 11 ) Figure 2 Randomized treatment trials for the prevention of recurrent calcium oxalate nephrolithiasis. (Adapted with permission from Coe et al. 31 ) Table 1 Future Directions Regulating Intestinal Oxalate Transport Intestinal Luminal Oxalate Degradation and Secretion Oxalobacter formigenes Recombinant enzyme Engineered bacteria Upregulation of Intestinal Luminal Secretion Increase anion transporter activity (Slc26a6) Luminal active non-asorbed agents Intestinal Luminal Oxalate Complexation Polymeric cations Calcium supplementation 