Contrast Agent Dose Effects in Cerebral Dynamic Susceptibility Contrast Magnetic Resonance Perfusion Imaging Purpose To study the contrast agent dose sensitivity of hemodynamic parameters derived from brain dynamic susceptibility contrast MRI (DSC-MRI). Materials and Methods Sequential DSC-MRI (1.5T gradient-echo echo-planar imaging using an echo time of 61–64 msec) was performed using contrast agent doses of 0.1 and 0.2 mmol/kg delivered at a fixed rate of 5.0 mL/second in 12 normal subjects and 12 stroke patients. Results 1) Arterial signal showed the expected doubling in relaxation response (?R2*) to dose doubling. 2) The brain signal showed a less than doubled ?R2* response to dose doubling. 3) The 0.2 mmol/kg dose studies subtly under-estimated cerebral blood volume (CBV) and cerebral blood flow (CBF) relative to the 0.1 mmol/kg studies. 4) In the range of low CBV and CBF, the 0.2 mmol/kg studies over-estimated the CBV and CBF compared with the 0.1 mmol/kg studies. 5) The 0.1 mmol/kg studies reported larger ischemic volumes in stroke. Conclusion Subtle but statistically significant dose sensitivities were found. Therefore, it is advisable to carefully control the contrast agent dose when DSC-MRI is used in clinical trials. The study also suggests that a 0.1 mmol/kg dose is adequate for hemodynamic measurements.  Materials and Methods Sequential DSC-MRI (1.5T gradient-echo echo-planar imaging using an echo time of 61–64 msec) was performed using contrast agent doses of 0.1 and 0.2 mmol/kg delivered at a fixed rate of 5.0 mL/second in 12 normal subjects and 12 stroke patients.  Results 1) Arterial signal showed the expected doubling in relaxation response (?R2*) to dose doubling. 2) The brain signal showed a less than doubled ?R2* response to dose doubling. 3) The 0.2 mmol/kg dose studies subtly under-estimated cerebral blood volume (CBV) and cerebral blood flow (CBF) relative to the 0.1 mmol/kg studies. 4) In the range of low CBV and CBF, the 0.2 mmol/kg studies over-estimated the CBV and CBF compared with the 0.1 mmol/kg studies. 5) The 0.1 mmol/kg studies reported larger ischemic volumes in stroke.  Conclusion Subtle but statistically significant dose sensitivities were found. Therefore, it is advisable to carefully control the contrast agent dose when DSC-MRI is used in clinical trials. The study also suggests that a 0.1 mmol/kg dose is adequate for hemodynamic measurements.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Subjects Twelve normal adult subjects and 12 patients suffering from recent acute ischemic cerebrovascular events were studied after giving written informed consent using a protocol approved by the institutional human subjects research review board. Stroke patients were studied to obtain measures of contrast passage at two different doses in brain areas having abnormal blood flow. Examinations were performed in ischemic stroke patients between 48 and 96 hours after initial symptoms, and in patients having persistent ongoing ischemic symptoms. Studies of acute stroke patients were not attempted because the time required to perform two sequential DSC-MRI studies could have complicated clinical management. Subacute ischemic stroke is characterized by persistent CBF abnormalities and therefore provides the opportunity to study dose effects in brain areas having abnormal blood flow without impacting clinical management. Normal subjects were studied to evaluate differences between the two doses in brain areas having normal hemodynamics. Image Acquisition The image acquisition procedure was designed to mimic procedures that are typically used in stroke clinical trials. Dynamic gradient-echo EPI (GE-EPI) was used to acquire a time series of multislice susceptibility-weighted images. Two dynamic contrast passage imaging studies were performed in each subject. One of these used a “single dose” (SD) of contrast agent (0.1 mmol/kg) and the other used a “double dose” (DD) of contrast agent (0.2 mmol/kg). The two studies were performed as closely in time as possible. Usually less than five minutes elapsed between the end of one DSC-MRI study and the beginning of the next. Subjects remained in the scanner and were not repositioned between the two acquisitions. The order of the SD and DD studies was randomized. Contrast agent, was administered at the packaged concentration (0.5 mmol/mL) at an infusion rate of 5.0 mL/second, requiring that the DD infusion have twice the duration of the SD infusion. The subject’s body mass was used to calculate the volume of contrast agent, to be infused to reach doses of 0.1 mmol/kg and 0.2 mmol/kg. A MedRad Spectris power injector was used for bolus infusion into an antecubital vein. The SD and DD infusions had durations of approximately four and eight seconds, respectively. A 10–15-mL saline infusion followed each contrast agent bolus using the same infusion rate. Four of the normal subject studies used gadopentetate dimeglumine (Magnevist®; Berlex Laboratories, Wayne, NJ, USA) as a contrast agent. The remainder of the studies used gadodiamide (Omniscan; Nycomed, Inc., Princeton, NJ, USA). The use of two different, contrast agent preparations was the result of a change in the contrast agent vendor that occurred at our institution during the course of the study. The two contrast agent preparations (gadopentetate dimeglumine and gadodiamide) contain the same number of gadolinium equivalents per unit volume. DSC-MRI studies were performed using two Siemens Medical Solutions (Erlangen, Germany) 1.5T MRI scanners. Initial studies ( N = 9) were acquired on a Siemens Vision and later studies ( N = 15) used a Siemens Sonata. This transition resulted from the fact that the Vision scanner was the only one available at the time of study initiation. The Sonata scanner became available during the study and was subsequently used because of improvements in image quality, gradient performance, and slice coverage. The Vision parameters were: GE-EPI, TR = 2000 msec, TE = 64 msec, slice thickness = 7 mm, number of slices = 12, number of volume images = 40. Gadodiamide was used as a contrast agent for five of the studies performed with the Siemens Vision. Gadopentetate dimeglumine was used for the remainder ( N = 4) of the studies performed with the Siemens Vision. The Sonata parameters were: GE-EPI, TR = 2060 msec, TE = 61 msec, slice thickness = 7 mm, number of slices = 18, number of volume images = 60. The chosen TE was the minimum value compatible with acquisition of 128 × 128 in-plane resolution using the available GE-EPI pulse sequences. Contrast agent infusion was initiated during the acquisition of the fifth volume in the time series, approximately 10 seconds after the start of image acquisition, Gadodiamide was used as a contrast agent for all ( N = 15) studies performed with the Siemens Sonata. In summary, the following scanner-contrast agent combinations were included in the study: Vision-Gadopentetate dimeglumine ( N = 4), Vision-gadodiamide ( N = 5), and Sonata-gadodiamide ( N = 15). Image Processing Image processing was based on techniques that have been previously summarized ( 1 ). The “instantaneous” local concentration of contrast agent, was inferred from the measured change in susceptibility driven spin dephasing: [1] ? R 2 ? ( t ) = ? 1 TE ln ( S ( t ) S b ) = KC ( t ) , where S(t) is the measured signal during contrast passage, and Sb is the “baseline” signal measured prior to contrast agent arrival. Instantaneous contrast agent concentration, C(t), was assumed to be linearly related to the relaxation change through an arbitrary and generally unknown scale factor, K. CBV was determined as the ratio of the time integrals of the tissue passage and the arterial passage [2] CBV = ( 100 · ml 100 · g · brain ) ( 1 ? ) ( K T K A ) ( ( 1 ? H A ) ( 1 ? H T ) ) × ( ? dt ? R 2 ? T ( t ) ? dt ? R 2 ? A ( t ) ) , where ? is the apparent brain density (1.04 g/mL), HA (= 0.45) is the assumed hematocrit in large arterial vessels, and HT (= 0.25) is the assumed hematocrit in the smaller capillaries in the tissue. A value of 0.1369 was used for the tissue to artery concentration scale factor ratio ( K T K A ) because in an earlier study of a small group of stroke patients, this correction brought absolute DSC-MRI hemodynamic measures into agreement with those obtained by xenon computed tomography (CT) ( 34 ). Nonparametric singular value decomposition (SVD) was used deconvolve the arterial and tissue passages to determine the “residue” function (R(t)) in each image voxel ( 35 ). Singular values were truncated at 0.15 to suppress artifacts in the deconvolution. CBF was then determined as the maximum value attained by the residue function. Software for image processing was written using Interactive Data Language (IDL; ITT Visual Information Solutions, Boulder, CO, USA). The software performed the following operations: 1) image reading, 2) time-series motion correction, 3) concentration vs. time calculation for each voxel in the three-dimensional (3D) image space ( Eq. [1] ), 4) manual selection of arterial input function (AIF), 5) CBV calculation for each voxel ( Eq. [2] ), 6) SVD deconvolution and CBF determination for each voxel, and 7) storage of the key ?R2* parameters (maximum, time integral, and concluding steady-state values) in each voxel. The time integrals of arterial passages, tissue passages, and residue functions used for CBV and CBF calculation were computed using the five-point Newton-Cotes integration formula implemented by the INT_TABULATED function of IDL. This function integrates a tabulated set of data over a closed time interval representing the entire data array. AIFs were chosen in the middle cerebral artery (MCA), The right MCA was consistently used across studies except in patients who had evidence of flow deficit in right frontal arterial territories, in which cases the left MCA was used. An automated routine that selects voxels having sharp contrast passages with a large time integral was used to identify candidate AIF voxels in the vicinity of the MCA. The concentration passage in each candidate voxel was then manually examined. Voxels showing large time integrals, but broad passages were eliminated. For each study at least 20 suitable voxels were identified. The signals in these arterial voxels were averaged to lessen the sensitivity to noise. The arterial sampling technique is similar to that, proposed by Carroll et al ( 36 ), but was developed independently. IDL software for quantitatively comparing derived parametric 3D volume images was also written. This software performed a linear regression analysis of the SD vs. DD results for various parameters over the set of all voxels in the 3D image space. Additional measurements were generated over selected gray matter (GM) and white matter (WM) subregions. The subregions were defined in the first slice superior to the ventricles in all subjects. WM was sampled in a single, roughly elliptical region between the mid-line and the cortex on the SD CBV image. Multiple GM regions of irregular shape and approximately equal volume to the identified WM region were identified on the SD CBV image with specific attention to avoiding the vasculature. The GM/WM regions were chosen in the opposite hemisphere to the infarct for all stroke patients. The mean values of SD CBV, DD CBV, SD CBF, and DD CBF in the defined ROIs were then measured. Regression analysis comparing the SD and DD results from these homogeneous tissue regions was performed. Ischemic and hyperemic volumes were identified in the 3D CBV and CBF images of the stroke patients. Two different definitions of the ischemic territory were used: 1) voxels having CBV less than 1 mL/100 g, and 2) voxels having CBF below 10 mL/100 g/minute. Voxels having CBV between 7 and 15 mL/100 g were labeled as hyperemic in an effort to identify tissues at the infarct periphery that sometimes show vasodilation and high CBV. The total volumes of ischemic and hyperemic tissue were determined for each subject and dose by counting the identified voxels and multiplying by the voxel volume. Statistical analyses were performed using StatView software (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA). Numerical results reported in the text and the tables are expressed as mean ± standard deviation. Paired t -tests were used to test for significant differences between numerical measures for SD and DD studies, with P < 0.05 as the criterion for significance. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Fisher’s protected least significant difference (PLSD) test was used to assess the effect of the three agent-scanner combinations (Vision-Gadopentetate dimeglumine, Vision-gadodiamide, and Sonata-gadodiamide) on various numerical measures. A pairwise significance level of P < 0.05 was used to assert significant differences. A Bland-Altman analysis ( 37 ) provides an alternative approach to the above described regression analysis for identifying the effects of contrast agent dose on CBV and CBF measurements. In Bland-Altman analysis, the difference between a measured parameter (i.e., CBV or CBF) assessed using DD and SD protocols is plotted against the mean of the same parameter measured using these protocols (e.g., [DD CBF ? SD CBF] vs. [DD CBF + SD CBF]/2.0). Agreement, between SD and DD measurements is indicated on the Bland-Altman plots as regression lines having slope and intercept of zero. Disagreement is indicated by a statistically significant deviation from this ideal behavior. IDL software was written to construct Bland-Altman plots for CBV and CBF using the measurements from all voxels in the 3D image space followed by a linear regression analysis to determine the regression intercept and slope. This Bland-Altman analysis was performed for each of the 24 studies. The ROI measures of CBV and CBF for GM and WM were also subjected to a Bland-Altman analysis. StatView software was used to construct the plots and perform the linear regression analyses for these data.  Subjects Twelve normal adult subjects and 12 patients suffering from recent acute ischemic cerebrovascular events were studied after giving written informed consent using a protocol approved by the institutional human subjects research review board. Stroke patients were studied to obtain measures of contrast passage at two different doses in brain areas having abnormal blood flow. Examinations were performed in ischemic stroke patients between 48 and 96 hours after initial symptoms, and in patients having persistent ongoing ischemic symptoms. Studies of acute stroke patients were not attempted because the time required to perform two sequential DSC-MRI studies could have complicated clinical management. Subacute ischemic stroke is characterized by persistent CBF abnormalities and therefore provides the opportunity to study dose effects in brain areas having abnormal blood flow without impacting clinical management. Normal subjects were studied to evaluate differences between the two doses in brain areas having normal hemodynamics.  Image Acquisition The image acquisition procedure was designed to mimic procedures that are typically used in stroke clinical trials. Dynamic gradient-echo EPI (GE-EPI) was used to acquire a time series of multislice susceptibility-weighted images. Two dynamic contrast passage imaging studies were performed in each subject. One of these used a “single dose” (SD) of contrast agent (0.1 mmol/kg) and the other used a “double dose” (DD) of contrast agent (0.2 mmol/kg). The two studies were performed as closely in time as possible. Usually less than five minutes elapsed between the end of one DSC-MRI study and the beginning of the next. Subjects remained in the scanner and were not repositioned between the two acquisitions. The order of the SD and DD studies was randomized. Contrast agent, was administered at the packaged concentration (0.5 mmol/mL) at an infusion rate of 5.0 mL/second, requiring that the DD infusion have twice the duration of the SD infusion. The subject’s body mass was used to calculate the volume of contrast agent, to be infused to reach doses of 0.1 mmol/kg and 0.2 mmol/kg. A MedRad Spectris power injector was used for bolus infusion into an antecubital vein. The SD and DD infusions had durations of approximately four and eight seconds, respectively. A 10–15-mL saline infusion followed each contrast agent bolus using the same infusion rate. Four of the normal subject studies used gadopentetate dimeglumine (Magnevist®; Berlex Laboratories, Wayne, NJ, USA) as a contrast agent. The remainder of the studies used gadodiamide (Omniscan; Nycomed, Inc., Princeton, NJ, USA). The use of two different, contrast agent preparations was the result of a change in the contrast agent vendor that occurred at our institution during the course of the study. The two contrast agent preparations (gadopentetate dimeglumine and gadodiamide) contain the same number of gadolinium equivalents per unit volume. DSC-MRI studies were performed using two Siemens Medical Solutions (Erlangen, Germany) 1.5T MRI scanners. Initial studies ( N = 9) were acquired on a Siemens Vision and later studies ( N = 15) used a Siemens Sonata. This transition resulted from the fact that the Vision scanner was the only one available at the time of study initiation. The Sonata scanner became available during the study and was subsequently used because of improvements in image quality, gradient performance, and slice coverage. The Vision parameters were: GE-EPI, TR = 2000 msec, TE = 64 msec, slice thickness = 7 mm, number of slices = 12, number of volume images = 40. Gadodiamide was used as a contrast agent for five of the studies performed with the Siemens Vision. Gadopentetate dimeglumine was used for the remainder ( N = 4) of the studies performed with the Siemens Vision. The Sonata parameters were: GE-EPI, TR = 2060 msec, TE = 61 msec, slice thickness = 7 mm, number of slices = 18, number of volume images = 60. The chosen TE was the minimum value compatible with acquisition of 128 × 128 in-plane resolution using the available GE-EPI pulse sequences. Contrast agent infusion was initiated during the acquisition of the fifth volume in the time series, approximately 10 seconds after the start of image acquisition, Gadodiamide was used as a contrast agent for all ( N = 15) studies performed with the Siemens Sonata. In summary, the following scanner-contrast agent combinations were included in the study: Vision-Gadopentetate dimeglumine ( N = 4), Vision-gadodiamide ( N = 5), and Sonata-gadodiamide ( N = 15).  Image Processing Image processing was based on techniques that have been previously summarized ( 1 ). The “instantaneous” local concentration of contrast agent, was inferred from the measured change in susceptibility driven spin dephasing: [1] ? R 2 ? ( t ) = ? 1 TE ln ( S ( t ) S b ) = KC ( t ) , where S(t) is the measured signal during contrast passage, and Sb is the “baseline” signal measured prior to contrast agent arrival. Instantaneous contrast agent concentration, C(t), was assumed to be linearly related to the relaxation change through an arbitrary and generally unknown scale factor, K. CBV was determined as the ratio of the time integrals of the tissue passage and the arterial passage [2] CBV = ( 100 · ml 100 · g · brain ) ( 1 ? ) ( K T K A ) ( ( 1 ? H A ) ( 1 ? H T ) ) × ( ? dt ? R 2 ? T ( t ) ? dt ? R 2 ? A ( t ) ) , where ? is the apparent brain density (1.04 g/mL), HA (= 0.45) is the assumed hematocrit in large arterial vessels, and HT (= 0.25) is the assumed hematocrit in the smaller capillaries in the tissue. A value of 0.1369 was used for the tissue to artery concentration scale factor ratio ( K T K A ) because in an earlier study of a small group of stroke patients, this correction brought absolute DSC-MRI hemodynamic measures into agreement with those obtained by xenon computed tomography (CT) ( 34 ). Nonparametric singular value decomposition (SVD) was used deconvolve the arterial and tissue passages to determine the “residue” function (R(t)) in each image voxel ( 35 ). Singular values were truncated at 0.15 to suppress artifacts in the deconvolution. CBF was then determined as the maximum value attained by the residue function. Software for image processing was written using Interactive Data Language (IDL; ITT Visual Information Solutions, Boulder, CO, USA). The software performed the following operations: 1) image reading, 2) time-series motion correction, 3) concentration vs. time calculation for each voxel in the three-dimensional (3D) image space ( Eq. [1] ), 4) manual selection of arterial input function (AIF), 5) CBV calculation for each voxel ( Eq. [2] ), 6) SVD deconvolution and CBF determination for each voxel, and 7) storage of the key ?R2* parameters (maximum, time integral, and concluding steady-state values) in each voxel. The time integrals of arterial passages, tissue passages, and residue functions used for CBV and CBF calculation were computed using the five-point Newton-Cotes integration formula implemented by the INT_TABULATED function of IDL. This function integrates a tabulated set of data over a closed time interval representing the entire data array. AIFs were chosen in the middle cerebral artery (MCA), The right MCA was consistently used across studies except in patients who had evidence of flow deficit in right frontal arterial territories, in which cases the left MCA was used. An automated routine that selects voxels having sharp contrast passages with a large time integral was used to identify candidate AIF voxels in the vicinity of the MCA. The concentration passage in each candidate voxel was then manually examined. Voxels showing large time integrals, but broad passages were eliminated. For each study at least 20 suitable voxels were identified. The signals in these arterial voxels were averaged to lessen the sensitivity to noise. The arterial sampling technique is similar to that, proposed by Carroll et al ( 36 ), but was developed independently. IDL software for quantitatively comparing derived parametric 3D volume images was also written. This software performed a linear regression analysis of the SD vs. DD results for various parameters over the set of all voxels in the 3D image space. Additional measurements were generated over selected gray matter (GM) and white matter (WM) subregions. The subregions were defined in the first slice superior to the ventricles in all subjects. WM was sampled in a single, roughly elliptical region between the mid-line and the cortex on the SD CBV image. Multiple GM regions of irregular shape and approximately equal volume to the identified WM region were identified on the SD CBV image with specific attention to avoiding the vasculature. The GM/WM regions were chosen in the opposite hemisphere to the infarct for all stroke patients. The mean values of SD CBV, DD CBV, SD CBF, and DD CBF in the defined ROIs were then measured. Regression analysis comparing the SD and DD results from these homogeneous tissue regions was performed. Ischemic and hyperemic volumes were identified in the 3D CBV and CBF images of the stroke patients. Two different definitions of the ischemic territory were used: 1) voxels having CBV less than 1 mL/100 g, and 2) voxels having CBF below 10 mL/100 g/minute. Voxels having CBV between 7 and 15 mL/100 g were labeled as hyperemic in an effort to identify tissues at the infarct periphery that sometimes show vasodilation and high CBV. The total volumes of ischemic and hyperemic tissue were determined for each subject and dose by counting the identified voxels and multiplying by the voxel volume. Statistical analyses were performed using StatView software (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA). Numerical results reported in the text and the tables are expressed as mean ± standard deviation. Paired t -tests were used to test for significant differences between numerical measures for SD and DD studies, with P < 0.05 as the criterion for significance. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Fisher’s protected least significant difference (PLSD) test was used to assess the effect of the three agent-scanner combinations (Vision-Gadopentetate dimeglumine, Vision-gadodiamide, and Sonata-gadodiamide) on various numerical measures. A pairwise significance level of P < 0.05 was used to assert significant differences. A Bland-Altman analysis ( 37 ) provides an alternative approach to the above described regression analysis for identifying the effects of contrast agent dose on CBV and CBF measurements. In Bland-Altman analysis, the difference between a measured parameter (i.e., CBV or CBF) assessed using DD and SD protocols is plotted against the mean of the same parameter measured using these protocols (e.g., [DD CBF ? SD CBF] vs. [DD CBF + SD CBF]/2.0). Agreement, between SD and DD measurements is indicated on the Bland-Altman plots as regression lines having slope and intercept of zero. Disagreement is indicated by a statistically significant deviation from this ideal behavior. IDL software was written to construct Bland-Altman plots for CBV and CBF using the measurements from all voxels in the 3D image space followed by a linear regression analysis to determine the regression intercept and slope. This Bland-Altman analysis was performed for each of the 24 studies. The ROI measures of CBV and CBF for GM and WM were also subjected to a Bland-Altman analysis. StatView software was used to construct the plots and perform the linear regression analyses for these data.  RESULTS SD vs. DD Arterial Passage Figure 1 shows typical SD and DD arterial passages measured in the MCA in studies of a normal subject and a stroke patient. These examples illustrate that the DD study produced an arterial bolus with a larger peak ?R2*, a larger concluding steady-state ?R2*, and a larger ?R2* time integral but only a slightly wider bolus in comparison with the SD study. Key arterial passage measures for SD and DD studies are as follows: The DD arterial maximum ?R2* (40.5 ± 9.4 seconds?1) was significantly larger than the SD arterial maximum AR2* (28.7 ± 7.1 seconds?1). The time integral of AR2* for the DD arterial passage (1011.4 ± 316.3 seconds?1 second) was significantly larger than that measured in the SD studies (580.1 ± 226.5 seconds?1 second). The concluding steady-state ?R2* for the DD arterial passages (7.5 ± 2.6 seconds?1) was significantly larger in comparison with that measured in the SD arterial passages (4.0 ± 2.7 seconds?1). The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the SD arterial passage (9.0 ± 2.6 seconds) was significantly smaller in comparison with the FWHM of the DD arterial passage (10.5 ± 2.9 seconds). The DD study involves the administration of twice as much contrast agent compared with the SD study. Hence, if the ?R2* concentration relationship is indeed linear, one would expect the ratio of the DD to SD ?R2* time integrals to be 2.0. Similarly, at the conclusion of the passage, the vascular system contains twice as much contrast agent in the DD study compared with the SD study, and it is therefore expected that, the ratio of the DD to SD ?R2* steady-state values in artery should be equal to 2.0. Neither the DD to SD ?R2* time integral ratio nor the DD to SD ?R2* steady-state ratio were significantly different from 2.0. These findings, summarized in Table 1 , empirically support the assertion of a linear relationship between ?R2* and concentration for artery. What the DD to SD arterial maximum ?R2* ratio should hypothetically be is less clear. A ratio of 1.0 would be expected based on the venous bolus infusion protocols that were used. (The peak venous concentrations were the same for both SD and DD). The observed ratio, however, was significantly greater than 1.0 (one group t -test, P < 0.05). The DD to SD arterial maximum ?R2* ratio was also significantly different from 2.0. The DD passage results in an arterial ?R2* maximum that is approximately 45% larger than that produced by the SD passage. It is tempting to assert that the DD study showed some “saturation” of the signal response at the peak compared with the SD study. However, this assertion would be inappropriate because it is not known what the true peak concentrations should be for the particular infusion protocol that was used. If saturation were occurring in this experiment, we would expect the DD and SD ?R2* time integral ratio in Table 1 to be significantly less than 2.0, which is not the case (see above). The most likely explanation for this somewhat nonintuitive finding is the complex, cumulative dispersion effects of the cardiovascular system from the injection site to the MCA. SD vs. DD Brain Tissue Passage Figure 2 presents examples of Images of the time integral of ?R2* from a normal subject, and a stroke patient. As discussed above, the DD study Involves the administration of twice as much contrast agent compared with the SD study. Therefore, if the ?R2* vs. concentration relationship is linear for brain tissue passage, it is expected that the ratio of the DD to SD ?R2* time integrals for the brain tissue should be equal to 2.0. The graphs shown in Fig. 2 are correlation plots. In these graphs, the ?R2* time integral produced by the SD study is plotted on the horizontal axis against the ?R2* time integral produced by the DD study on the vertical axis for each voxel in the respective subjects’ brains. The solid lines in these graphs are the best linear fits to the data. A slope of 2.0 as expected in the case of perfectly linear dose response is shown as a dotted line. These correlation plots illustrate that for these two cases the measured slopes are less than 2.0. Over all the subjects, the mean DD to SD correlation plot slope for the ?R2* time integral is approximately 1.56 and is significantly less than the expected value of 2.0 (one group t -test, P < 0.05). Table 1 presents further analyses for brain tissue ?R2* passages. The table reports linear correlation slopes (SD vs. DD) for the time integral, maximum and steady-state values of the ?R2*. At the conclusion of the passage, the vascular system contains twice as much contrast in the DD study compared with the SD study, and it is therefore expected that the ratio of the DD to SD final steady-state ?R2* values for brain tissue should be equal to 2.0. The DD to SD correlation plot slope for steady-state ?R2* Is approximately 1.3 and is significantly less than the expected value of 2.0. As was the case for the arterial passages, the DD to SD ratio of maximum ?R2* reached in the brain passages was significantly different than 2.0 and also significantly different, from 1.0 (one group t -tests, P <0.05). SD vs. DD CBF (Whole Brain) Figure 3 shows representative CBF images calculated from SD and DD studies of selected subjects. The CBF images that result, from the SD and DD studies are qualitatively similar. They show approximately the same absolute CBF values and have similar contrast between GM and WM. The whole-brain average CBFs determined from the DD studies were not significantly different from those determined from the SD studies. However, there are subtle differences between the DD and SD CBF images that become apparent, when more detailed quantitative analyses are performed. The mean slope of the CBF correlation plots shown to the right of the images in Fig. 3 is 0.79 ± 0.24 (mean ± standard deviation) and is significantly less than 1.0 (one group t -test, P < 0.05). This finding, included in the summary of statistical measurements in Table 2 , indicates that, on average, the DD passage underestimates the CBF by about. 21% compared with the SD passage. Interestingly, the correlation plots uniformly show positive intercepts, indicating that the DD study produced a slightly higher CBF measure compared with the SD study at low CBF values, while the opposite was true at higher CBF values. The agreement between the SD and DD studies is closest in the intermediate CBF range of 50–100 mL/100 g/minute. SD vs. DD CBV (Whole Brain) Table 2 also presents a summary of statistical measurements of derived CBV values equivalent, to those discussed in the previous paragraph related to CBF. The DD and SD passages produced mean whole-brain CBV averages that did not significantly differ. However, the DD study appears to underestimate the CBV over the entire measured range of CBV by about 20% compared with the SD study. The DD to SD CBV correlation plots showed positive intercepts, indicating that the DD studies tended to give higher CBV measures in the low CBV range compared with the SD studies, with the opposite being true in the high CBV range. The correlation plots showed that. SD and DD CBV measurements were consistent in the 3–7 mL/100 g range. SD vs. DD CBV and CBF in Homogeneous GM and WM Regions Additional regression analyses were performed using the CBV and CBF values extracted from homogeneous GM and WM regions for each subject. Figure 4 provides a representative illustration of GM and WM ROI identification. This analysis was performed in order to avoid the possible confounding influence of vasculature and CSF in the whole-brain results discussed in the previous sections. The homogeneous tissue region results are presented in Table 2 . The GM/WM results are not separated into normal and stroke subpopulations as the regions were chosen in the opposite hemisphere to the infarct for all stroke patients. The general trends observed for whole brain persist for the GM/WM regions, with no significant difference between SD and DD CBV and CBF measurements, mean correlation slopes less than 1.0, and positive intercept values. The most significant difference in the results is that the mean regression slope and intercept values for the GM and WM regions are closer to 1.0 and 0.0, respectively. This indicates that the dose dependence observed in the whole-brain analysis is more pronounced in highly vascular regions, possibly due to saturation effects. Constrast Agent Preparations and Scanners One-way ANOVA followed by Fisher’s PLSD test was used to assess the effect of the three agent-scanner combinations (Vision-Gadopentetate dimeglumine, Vision-gadodiamide, and Sonata-gadodiamide) on each of the 26 numerical measurements reported in the “All” columns of Tables 1 and 2 . Only one of these 26 analyses showed a significant agent-scanner effect at the P < 0.05 level, and even this result was only marginally significant. A formal correction for multiple comparisons would eliminate even this one finding of significance. These findings indicate that the variance in the measured values reported in Tables 1 and 2 is largely the result of study-to-study variation as opposed to systematic differences attributable to agent-scanner combinations. This result justifies pooling all results into a single analysis. This does not mean that differences attributable to scanner or contrast agent preparation are nonexistent. It only means there is not sufficient power in these data to detect differences. Any agent/scanner-attributable differences are overwhelmed by study-to-study variation resulting from some other unknown cause. SD vs. DD for the Delineation of Ischemic Tissue The differences between the hemodynamic images obtained with SD and DD passages have implications for the identification and quantification of ischemic tissue. Table 3 illustrates that the SD and DD studies reported significantly different volumes of ischemic tissue in the stroke patients. The DD studies reported about 50% smaller ischemic volumes (identified as regions having CBF less than 10 mL/100 g/minute) compared with the SD studies, and the difference was statistically significant. However, the volume of hyperemic tissue measured by the SD and DD studies did not differ ( Table 3 ). A second evaluation, which identified CBF values less than 15 mL/100 g/minute as ischemic, also demonstrated that the DD studies result in significantly smaller estimated volumes of ischemic tissue. Bland-Altman Analyses Figure 5 provides Bland-Altman plots derived from the ROI measurements of CBV and CBF of GM and WM. The slope and intercept of the CBV regression are not significantly different from zero, indicating there is agreement between DD and SD measures of CBV. The CBF plot shows a slight downward slope, indicating a tendency of DD protocols to underestimate CBF relative to SD protocols at higher CBF values, but this is not statistically significant at the P < 0.05 level. The plots also identify specific agent-scanner combinations to further illustrate that variance in measured GM and WM CBF and CBV is not attributable to scanner or agent choice. Separate Bland-Altman regression analyses were performed for each agent-scanner combination. No statistically significant nonzero slopes or intercepts were identified for any of the agent-scanner combinations. Plots showing the distribution of the Bland-Altman slopes and intercepts derived from analysis all voxels in the 3D image space for each study are provided in Fig. 6 . These plots show positive and generally significant nonzero Bland-Altman intercepts for CBV and CBF. They also show negative Bland-Altman slopes for CBV and CBF that are not (or only marginally) statistically significant. Nevertheless, these data are consistent with a subtle tendency of DD procedures to underestimate CBF relative to SD procedures in the high CBF range. The plots also illustrate the absence of significant differences due to agent-scanner combinations in the various Bland-Altman slopes and intercepts. In Fig. 7 are plotted the ROI CBF and CBV distributions for SD and DD protocol as a function of the order of the SD and DD injections (i.e., SD 1 or SD 2) used for each study. ANOVA evaluations showed only two of the eight pairwise comparisons (i.e., SD 1 vs. SD 2) in which there was a statistically significant effect of injection order on the measured values. Measured SD CBV was significantly reduced when a DD study had been completed a few minutes earlier, and measured SD CBF was significantly reduced when a DD study had been completed a few minutes earlier. These results indicate that the presence of contrast agent administered as a DD as few minutes prior to an SD will lead to a slight, underestimation of CBV and CBF in WM. Otherwise, the plots and the ANOVA analyses illustrate that the effects of previous SD or DD contrast agent administration on CBF and CBV assessment are much smaller than the study-to-study variation in these measures. Results summary The summary of the principal results is as follows: 1) The arterial passages show the expected doubled response in ?R2* to doubling the contrast agent dose. 2) The brain passages show a less than doubled ?R2* response to doubling the contrast agent dose. 3) The DD arterial passages have a larger peak ?R2* in comparison with the SD arterial passages. 4) The FWHM of the primary DD arterial passage through the MCA was only 16% larger than the SD arterial passage. 5) The DD studies underestimate the brain tissue CBV and CBF relative to the SD studies. 6) In the range of low CBV and CBF, the DD studies overestimate the CBV and CBF compared with the SD studies, and this causes the SD studies to report significantly greater ischemic volumes compared with the DD studies. 7) Neither the use of different contrast agent preparations and scanners nor the dose order had a substantially significant influence on the various measured values.  RESULTS SD vs. DD Arterial Passage Figure 1 shows typical SD and DD arterial passages measured in the MCA in studies of a normal subject and a stroke patient. These examples illustrate that the DD study produced an arterial bolus with a larger peak ?R2*, a larger concluding steady-state ?R2*, and a larger ?R2* time integral but only a slightly wider bolus in comparison with the SD study. Key arterial passage measures for SD and DD studies are as follows: The DD arterial maximum ?R2* (40.5 ± 9.4 seconds?1) was significantly larger than the SD arterial maximum AR2* (28.7 ± 7.1 seconds?1). The time integral of AR2* for the DD arterial passage (1011.4 ± 316.3 seconds?1 second) was significantly larger than that measured in the SD studies (580.1 ± 226.5 seconds?1 second). The concluding steady-state ?R2* for the DD arterial passages (7.5 ± 2.6 seconds?1) was significantly larger in comparison with that measured in the SD arterial passages (4.0 ± 2.7 seconds?1). The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the SD arterial passage (9.0 ± 2.6 seconds) was significantly smaller in comparison with the FWHM of the DD arterial passage (10.5 ± 2.9 seconds). The DD study involves the administration of twice as much contrast agent compared with the SD study. Hence, if the ?R2* concentration relationship is indeed linear, one would expect the ratio of the DD to SD ?R2* time integrals to be 2.0. Similarly, at the conclusion of the passage, the vascular system contains twice as much contrast agent in the DD study compared with the SD study, and it is therefore expected that, the ratio of the DD to SD ?R2* steady-state values in artery should be equal to 2.0. Neither the DD to SD ?R2* time integral ratio nor the DD to SD ?R2* steady-state ratio were significantly different from 2.0. These findings, summarized in Table 1 , empirically support the assertion of a linear relationship between ?R2* and concentration for artery. What the DD to SD arterial maximum ?R2* ratio should hypothetically be is less clear. A ratio of 1.0 would be expected based on the venous bolus infusion protocols that were used. (The peak venous concentrations were the same for both SD and DD). The observed ratio, however, was significantly greater than 1.0 (one group t -test, P < 0.05). The DD to SD arterial maximum ?R2* ratio was also significantly different from 2.0. The DD passage results in an arterial ?R2* maximum that is approximately 45% larger than that produced by the SD passage. It is tempting to assert that the DD study showed some “saturation” of the signal response at the peak compared with the SD study. However, this assertion would be inappropriate because it is not known what the true peak concentrations should be for the particular infusion protocol that was used. If saturation were occurring in this experiment, we would expect the DD and SD ?R2* time integral ratio in Table 1 to be significantly less than 2.0, which is not the case (see above). The most likely explanation for this somewhat nonintuitive finding is the complex, cumulative dispersion effects of the cardiovascular system from the injection site to the MCA. SD vs. DD Brain Tissue Passage Figure 2 presents examples of Images of the time integral of ?R2* from a normal subject, and a stroke patient. As discussed above, the DD study Involves the administration of twice as much contrast agent compared with the SD study. Therefore, if the ?R2* vs. concentration relationship is linear for brain tissue passage, it is expected that the ratio of the DD to SD ?R2* time integrals for the brain tissue should be equal to 2.0. The graphs shown in Fig. 2 are correlation plots. In these graphs, the ?R2* time integral produced by the SD study is plotted on the horizontal axis against the ?R2* time integral produced by the DD study on the vertical axis for each voxel in the respective subjects’ brains. The solid lines in these graphs are the best linear fits to the data. A slope of 2.0 as expected in the case of perfectly linear dose response is shown as a dotted line. These correlation plots illustrate that for these two cases the measured slopes are less than 2.0. Over all the subjects, the mean DD to SD correlation plot slope for the ?R2* time integral is approximately 1.56 and is significantly less than the expected value of 2.0 (one group t -test, P < 0.05). Table 1 presents further analyses for brain tissue ?R2* passages. The table reports linear correlation slopes (SD vs. DD) for the time integral, maximum and steady-state values of the ?R2*. At the conclusion of the passage, the vascular system contains twice as much contrast in the DD study compared with the SD study, and it is therefore expected that the ratio of the DD to SD final steady-state ?R2* values for brain tissue should be equal to 2.0. The DD to SD correlation plot slope for steady-state ?R2* Is approximately 1.3 and is significantly less than the expected value of 2.0. As was the case for the arterial passages, the DD to SD ratio of maximum ?R2* reached in the brain passages was significantly different than 2.0 and also significantly different, from 1.0 (one group t -tests, P <0.05). SD vs. DD CBF (Whole Brain) Figure 3 shows representative CBF images calculated from SD and DD studies of selected subjects. The CBF images that result, from the SD and DD studies are qualitatively similar. They show approximately the same absolute CBF values and have similar contrast between GM and WM. The whole-brain average CBFs determined from the DD studies were not significantly different from those determined from the SD studies. However, there are subtle differences between the DD and SD CBF images that become apparent, when more detailed quantitative analyses are performed. The mean slope of the CBF correlation plots shown to the right of the images in Fig. 3 is 0.79 ± 0.24 (mean ± standard deviation) and is significantly less than 1.0 (one group t -test, P < 0.05). This finding, included in the summary of statistical measurements in Table 2 , indicates that, on average, the DD passage underestimates the CBF by about. 21% compared with the SD passage. Interestingly, the correlation plots uniformly show positive intercepts, indicating that the DD study produced a slightly higher CBF measure compared with the SD study at low CBF values, while the opposite was true at higher CBF values. The agreement between the SD and DD studies is closest in the intermediate CBF range of 50–100 mL/100 g/minute. SD vs. DD CBV (Whole Brain) Table 2 also presents a summary of statistical measurements of derived CBV values equivalent, to those discussed in the previous paragraph related to CBF. The DD and SD passages produced mean whole-brain CBV averages that did not significantly differ. However, the DD study appears to underestimate the CBV over the entire measured range of CBV by about 20% compared with the SD study. The DD to SD CBV correlation plots showed positive intercepts, indicating that the DD studies tended to give higher CBV measures in the low CBV range compared with the SD studies, with the opposite being true in the high CBV range. The correlation plots showed that. SD and DD CBV measurements were consistent in the 3–7 mL/100 g range. SD vs. DD CBV and CBF in Homogeneous GM and WM Regions Additional regression analyses were performed using the CBV and CBF values extracted from homogeneous GM and WM regions for each subject. Figure 4 provides a representative illustration of GM and WM ROI identification. This analysis was performed in order to avoid the possible confounding influence of vasculature and CSF in the whole-brain results discussed in the previous sections. The homogeneous tissue region results are presented in Table 2 . The GM/WM results are not separated into normal and stroke subpopulations as the regions were chosen in the opposite hemisphere to the infarct for all stroke patients. The general trends observed for whole brain persist for the GM/WM regions, with no significant difference between SD and DD CBV and CBF measurements, mean correlation slopes less than 1.0, and positive intercept values. The most significant difference in the results is that the mean regression slope and intercept values for the GM and WM regions are closer to 1.0 and 0.0, respectively. This indicates that the dose dependence observed in the whole-brain analysis is more pronounced in highly vascular regions, possibly due to saturation effects. Constrast Agent Preparations and Scanners One-way ANOVA followed by Fisher’s PLSD test was used to assess the effect of the three agent-scanner combinations (Vision-Gadopentetate dimeglumine, Vision-gadodiamide, and Sonata-gadodiamide) on each of the 26 numerical measurements reported in the “All” columns of Tables 1 and 2 . Only one of these 26 analyses showed a significant agent-scanner effect at the P < 0.05 level, and even this result was only marginally significant. A formal correction for multiple comparisons would eliminate even this one finding of significance. These findings indicate that the variance in the measured values reported in Tables 1 and 2 is largely the result of study-to-study variation as opposed to systematic differences attributable to agent-scanner combinations. This result justifies pooling all results into a single analysis. This does not mean that differences attributable to scanner or contrast agent preparation are nonexistent. It only means there is not sufficient power in these data to detect differences. Any agent/scanner-attributable differences are overwhelmed by study-to-study variation resulting from some other unknown cause. SD vs. DD for the Delineation of Ischemic Tissue The differences between the hemodynamic images obtained with SD and DD passages have implications for the identification and quantification of ischemic tissue. Table 3 illustrates that the SD and DD studies reported significantly different volumes of ischemic tissue in the stroke patients. The DD studies reported about 50% smaller ischemic volumes (identified as regions having CBF less than 10 mL/100 g/minute) compared with the SD studies, and the difference was statistically significant. However, the volume of hyperemic tissue measured by the SD and DD studies did not differ ( Table 3 ). A second evaluation, which identified CBF values less than 15 mL/100 g/minute as ischemic, also demonstrated that the DD studies result in significantly smaller estimated volumes of ischemic tissue. Bland-Altman Analyses Figure 5 provides Bland-Altman plots derived from the ROI measurements of CBV and CBF of GM and WM. The slope and intercept of the CBV regression are not significantly different from zero, indicating there is agreement between DD and SD measures of CBV. The CBF plot shows a slight downward slope, indicating a tendency of DD protocols to underestimate CBF relative to SD protocols at higher CBF values, but this is not statistically significant at the P < 0.05 level. The plots also identify specific agent-scanner combinations to further illustrate that variance in measured GM and WM CBF and CBV is not attributable to scanner or agent choice. Separate Bland-Altman regression analyses were performed for each agent-scanner combination. No statistically significant nonzero slopes or intercepts were identified for any of the agent-scanner combinations. Plots showing the distribution of the Bland-Altman slopes and intercepts derived from analysis all voxels in the 3D image space for each study are provided in Fig. 6 . These plots show positive and generally significant nonzero Bland-Altman intercepts for CBV and CBF. They also show negative Bland-Altman slopes for CBV and CBF that are not (or only marginally) statistically significant. Nevertheless, these data are consistent with a subtle tendency of DD procedures to underestimate CBF relative to SD procedures in the high CBF range. The plots also illustrate the absence of significant differences due to agent-scanner combinations in the various Bland-Altman slopes and intercepts. In Fig. 7 are plotted the ROI CBF and CBV distributions for SD and DD protocol as a function of the order of the SD and DD injections (i.e., SD 1 or SD 2) used for each study. ANOVA evaluations showed only two of the eight pairwise comparisons (i.e., SD 1 vs. SD 2) in which there was a statistically significant effect of injection order on the measured values. Measured SD CBV was significantly reduced when a DD study had been completed a few minutes earlier, and measured SD CBF was significantly reduced when a DD study had been completed a few minutes earlier. These results indicate that the presence of contrast agent administered as a DD as few minutes prior to an SD will lead to a slight, underestimation of CBV and CBF in WM. Otherwise, the plots and the ANOVA analyses illustrate that the effects of previous SD or DD contrast agent administration on CBF and CBV assessment are much smaller than the study-to-study variation in these measures. Results summary The summary of the principal results is as follows: 1) The arterial passages show the expected doubled response in ?R2* to doubling the contrast agent dose. 2) The brain passages show a less than doubled ?R2* response to doubling the contrast agent dose. 3) The DD arterial passages have a larger peak ?R2* in comparison with the SD arterial passages. 4) The FWHM of the primary DD arterial passage through the MCA was only 16% larger than the SD arterial passage. 5) The DD studies underestimate the brain tissue CBV and CBF relative to the SD studies. 6) In the range of low CBV and CBF, the DD studies overestimate the CBV and CBF compared with the SD studies, and this causes the SD studies to report significantly greater ischemic volumes compared with the DD studies. 7) Neither the use of different contrast agent preparations and scanners nor the dose order had a substantially significant influence on the various measured values.  SD vs. DD Arterial Passage Figure 1 shows typical SD and DD arterial passages measured in the MCA in studies of a normal subject and a stroke patient. These examples illustrate that the DD study produced an arterial bolus with a larger peak ?R2*, a larger concluding steady-state ?R2*, and a larger ?R2* time integral but only a slightly wider bolus in comparison with the SD study. Key arterial passage measures for SD and DD studies are as follows: The DD arterial maximum ?R2* (40.5 ± 9.4 seconds?1) was significantly larger than the SD arterial maximum AR2* (28.7 ± 7.1 seconds?1). The time integral of AR2* for the DD arterial passage (1011.4 ± 316.3 seconds?1 second) was significantly larger than that measured in the SD studies (580.1 ± 226.5 seconds?1 second). The concluding steady-state ?R2* for the DD arterial passages (7.5 ± 2.6 seconds?1) was significantly larger in comparison with that measured in the SD arterial passages (4.0 ± 2.7 seconds?1). The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the SD arterial passage (9.0 ± 2.6 seconds) was significantly smaller in comparison with the FWHM of the DD arterial passage (10.5 ± 2.9 seconds). The DD study involves the administration of twice as much contrast agent compared with the SD study. Hence, if the ?R2* concentration relationship is indeed linear, one would expect the ratio of the DD to SD ?R2* time integrals to be 2.0. Similarly, at the conclusion of the passage, the vascular system contains twice as much contrast agent in the DD study compared with the SD study, and it is therefore expected that, the ratio of the DD to SD ?R2* steady-state values in artery should be equal to 2.0. Neither the DD to SD ?R2* time integral ratio nor the DD to SD ?R2* steady-state ratio were significantly different from 2.0. These findings, summarized in Table 1 , empirically support the assertion of a linear relationship between ?R2* and concentration for artery. What the DD to SD arterial maximum ?R2* ratio should hypothetically be is less clear. A ratio of 1.0 would be expected based on the venous bolus infusion protocols that were used. (The peak venous concentrations were the same for both SD and DD). The observed ratio, however, was significantly greater than 1.0 (one group t -test, P < 0.05). The DD to SD arterial maximum ?R2* ratio was also significantly different from 2.0. The DD passage results in an arterial ?R2* maximum that is approximately 45% larger than that produced by the SD passage. It is tempting to assert that the DD study showed some “saturation” of the signal response at the peak compared with the SD study. However, this assertion would be inappropriate because it is not known what the true peak concentrations should be for the particular infusion protocol that was used. If saturation were occurring in this experiment, we would expect the DD and SD ?R2* time integral ratio in Table 1 to be significantly less than 2.0, which is not the case (see above). The most likely explanation for this somewhat nonintuitive finding is the complex, cumulative dispersion effects of the cardiovascular system from the injection site to the MCA.  SD vs. DD Arterial Passage Figure 1 shows typical SD and DD arterial passages measured in the MCA in studies of a normal subject and a stroke patient. These examples illustrate that the DD study produced an arterial bolus with a larger peak ?R2*, a larger concluding steady-state ?R2*, and a larger ?R2* time integral but only a slightly wider bolus in comparison with the SD study. Key arterial passage measures for SD and DD studies are as follows: The DD arterial maximum ?R2* (40.5 ± 9.4 seconds?1) was significantly larger than the SD arterial maximum AR2* (28.7 ± 7.1 seconds?1). The time integral of AR2* for the DD arterial passage (1011.4 ± 316.3 seconds?1 second) was significantly larger than that measured in the SD studies (580.1 ± 226.5 seconds?1 second). The concluding steady-state ?R2* for the DD arterial passages (7.5 ± 2.6 seconds?1) was significantly larger in comparison with that measured in the SD arterial passages (4.0 ± 2.7 seconds?1). The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the SD arterial passage (9.0 ± 2.6 seconds) was significantly smaller in comparison with the FWHM of the DD arterial passage (10.5 ± 2.9 seconds). The DD study involves the administration of twice as much contrast agent compared with the SD study. Hence, if the ?R2* concentration relationship is indeed linear, one would expect the ratio of the DD to SD ?R2* time integrals to be 2.0. Similarly, at the conclusion of the passage, the vascular system contains twice as much contrast agent in the DD study compared with the SD study, and it is therefore expected that, the ratio of the DD to SD ?R2* steady-state values in artery should be equal to 2.0. Neither the DD to SD ?R2* time integral ratio nor the DD to SD ?R2* steady-state ratio were significantly different from 2.0. These findings, summarized in Table 1 , empirically support the assertion of a linear relationship between ?R2* and concentration for artery. What the DD to SD arterial maximum ?R2* ratio should hypothetically be is less clear. A ratio of 1.0 would be expected based on the venous bolus infusion protocols that were used. (The peak venous concentrations were the same for both SD and DD). The observed ratio, however, was significantly greater than 1.0 (one group t -test, P < 0.05). The DD to SD arterial maximum ?R2* ratio was also significantly different from 2.0. The DD passage results in an arterial ?R2* maximum that is approximately 45% larger than that produced by the SD passage. It is tempting to assert that the DD study showed some “saturation” of the signal response at the peak compared with the SD study. However, this assertion would be inappropriate because it is not known what the true peak concentrations should be for the particular infusion protocol that was used. If saturation were occurring in this experiment, we would expect the DD and SD ?R2* time integral ratio in Table 1 to be significantly less than 2.0, which is not the case (see above). The most likely explanation for this somewhat nonintuitive finding is the complex, cumulative dispersion effects of the cardiovascular system from the injection site to the MCA.  SD vs. DD Brain Tissue Passage Figure 2 presents examples of Images of the time integral of ?R2* from a normal subject, and a stroke patient. As discussed above, the DD study Involves the administration of twice as much contrast agent compared with the SD study. Therefore, if the ?R2* vs. concentration relationship is linear for brain tissue passage, it is expected that the ratio of the DD to SD ?R2* time integrals for the brain tissue should be equal to 2.0. The graphs shown in Fig. 2 are correlation plots. In these graphs, the ?R2* time integral produced by the SD study is plotted on the horizontal axis against the ?R2* time integral produced by the DD study on the vertical axis for each voxel in the respective subjects’ brains. The solid lines in these graphs are the best linear fits to the data. A slope of 2.0 as expected in the case of perfectly linear dose response is shown as a dotted line. These correlation plots illustrate that for these two cases the measured slopes are less than 2.0. Over all the subjects, the mean DD to SD correlation plot slope for the ?R2* time integral is approximately 1.56 and is significantly less than the expected value of 2.0 (one group t -test, P < 0.05). Table 1 presents further analyses for brain tissue ?R2* passages. The table reports linear correlation slopes (SD vs. DD) for the time integral, maximum and steady-state values of the ?R2*. At the conclusion of the passage, the vascular system contains twice as much contrast in the DD study compared with the SD study, and it is therefore expected that the ratio of the DD to SD final steady-state ?R2* values for brain tissue should be equal to 2.0. The DD to SD correlation plot slope for steady-state ?R2* Is approximately 1.3 and is significantly less than the expected value of 2.0. As was the case for the arterial passages, the DD to SD ratio of maximum ?R2* reached in the brain passages was significantly different than 2.0 and also significantly different, from 1.0 (one group t -tests, P <0.05).  SD vs. DD Brain Tissue Passage Figure 2 presents examples of Images of the time integral of ?R2* from a normal subject, and a stroke patient. As discussed above, the DD study Involves the administration of twice as much contrast agent compared with the SD study. Therefore, if the ?R2* vs. concentration relationship is linear for brain tissue passage, it is expected that the ratio of the DD to SD ?R2* time integrals for the brain tissue should be equal to 2.0. The graphs shown in Fig. 2 are correlation plots. In these graphs, the ?R2* time integral produced by the SD study is plotted on the horizontal axis against the ?R2* time integral produced by the DD study on the vertical axis for each voxel in the respective subjects’ brains. The solid lines in these graphs are the best linear fits to the data. A slope of 2.0 as expected in the case of perfectly linear dose response is shown as a dotted line. These correlation plots illustrate that for these two cases the measured slopes are less than 2.0. Over all the subjects, the mean DD to SD correlation plot slope for the ?R2* time integral is approximately 1.56 and is significantly less than the expected value of 2.0 (one group t -test, P < 0.05). Table 1 presents further analyses for brain tissue ?R2* passages. The table reports linear correlation slopes (SD vs. DD) for the time integral, maximum and steady-state values of the ?R2*. At the conclusion of the passage, the vascular system contains twice as much contrast in the DD study compared with the SD study, and it is therefore expected that the ratio of the DD to SD final steady-state ?R2* values for brain tissue should be equal to 2.0. The DD to SD correlation plot slope for steady-state ?R2* Is approximately 1.3 and is significantly less than the expected value of 2.0. As was the case for the arterial passages, the DD to SD ratio of maximum ?R2* reached in the brain passages was significantly different than 2.0 and also significantly different, from 1.0 (one group t -tests, P <0.05).  SD vs. DD CBF (Whole Brain) Figure 3 shows representative CBF images calculated from SD and DD studies of selected subjects. The CBF images that result, from the SD and DD studies are qualitatively similar. They show approximately the same absolute CBF values and have similar contrast between GM and WM. The whole-brain average CBFs determined from the DD studies were not significantly different from those determined from the SD studies. However, there are subtle differences between the DD and SD CBF images that become apparent, when more detailed quantitative analyses are performed. The mean slope of the CBF correlation plots shown to the right of the images in Fig. 3 is 0.79 ± 0.24 (mean ± standard deviation) and is significantly less than 1.0 (one group t -test, P < 0.05). This finding, included in the summary of statistical measurements in Table 2 , indicates that, on average, the DD passage underestimates the CBF by about. 21% compared with the SD passage. Interestingly, the correlation plots uniformly show positive intercepts, indicating that the DD study produced a slightly higher CBF measure compared with the SD study at low CBF values, while the opposite was true at higher CBF values. The agreement between the SD and DD studies is closest in the intermediate CBF range of 50–100 mL/100 g/minute.  SD vs. DD CBF (Whole Brain) Figure 3 shows representative CBF images calculated from SD and DD studies of selected subjects. The CBF images that result, from the SD and DD studies are qualitatively similar. They show approximately the same absolute CBF values and have similar contrast between GM and WM. The whole-brain average CBFs determined from the DD studies were not significantly different from those determined from the SD studies. However, there are subtle differences between the DD and SD CBF images that become apparent, when more detailed quantitative analyses are performed. The mean slope of the CBF correlation plots shown to the right of the images in Fig. 3 is 0.79 ± 0.24 (mean ± standard deviation) and is significantly less than 1.0 (one group t -test, P < 0.05). This finding, included in the summary of statistical measurements in Table 2 , indicates that, on average, the DD passage underestimates the CBF by about. 21% compared with the SD passage. Interestingly, the correlation plots uniformly show positive intercepts, indicating that the DD study produced a slightly higher CBF measure compared with the SD study at low CBF values, while the opposite was true at higher CBF values. The agreement between the SD and DD studies is closest in the intermediate CBF range of 50–100 mL/100 g/minute.  SD vs. DD CBV (Whole Brain) Table 2 also presents a summary of statistical measurements of derived CBV values equivalent, to those discussed in the previous paragraph related to CBF. The DD and SD passages produced mean whole-brain CBV averages that did not significantly differ. However, the DD study appears to underestimate the CBV over the entire measured range of CBV by about 20% compared with the SD study. The DD to SD CBV correlation plots showed positive intercepts, indicating that the DD studies tended to give higher CBV measures in the low CBV range compared with the SD studies, with the opposite being true in the high CBV range. The correlation plots showed that. SD and DD CBV measurements were consistent in the 3–7 mL/100 g range.  SD vs. DD CBV (Whole Brain) Table 2 also presents a summary of statistical measurements of derived CBV values equivalent, to those discussed in the previous paragraph related to CBF. The DD and SD passages produced mean whole-brain CBV averages that did not significantly differ. However, the DD study appears to underestimate the CBV over the entire measured range of CBV by about 20% compared with the SD study. The DD to SD CBV correlation plots showed positive intercepts, indicating that the DD studies tended to give higher CBV measures in the low CBV range compared with the SD studies, with the opposite being true in the high CBV range. The correlation plots showed that. SD and DD CBV measurements were consistent in the 3–7 mL/100 g range.  SD vs. DD CBV and CBF in Homogeneous GM and WM Regions Additional regression analyses were performed using the CBV and CBF values extracted from homogeneous GM and WM regions for each subject. Figure 4 provides a representative illustration of GM and WM ROI identification. This analysis was performed in order to avoid the possible confounding influence of vasculature and CSF in the whole-brain results discussed in the previous sections. The homogeneous tissue region results are presented in Table 2 . The GM/WM results are not separated into normal and stroke subpopulations as the regions were chosen in the opposite hemisphere to the infarct for all stroke patients. The general trends observed for whole brain persist for the GM/WM regions, with no significant difference between SD and DD CBV and CBF measurements, mean correlation slopes less than 1.0, and positive intercept values. The most significant difference in the results is that the mean regression slope and intercept values for the GM and WM regions are closer to 1.0 and 0.0, respectively. This indicates that the dose dependence observed in the whole-brain analysis is more pronounced in highly vascular regions, possibly due to saturation effects.  SD vs. DD CBV and CBF in Homogeneous GM and WM Regions Additional regression analyses were performed using the CBV and CBF values extracted from homogeneous GM and WM regions for each subject. Figure 4 provides a representative illustration of GM and WM ROI identification. This analysis was performed in order to avoid the possible confounding influence of vasculature and CSF in the whole-brain results discussed in the previous sections. The homogeneous tissue region results are presented in Table 2 . The GM/WM results are not separated into normal and stroke subpopulations as the regions were chosen in the opposite hemisphere to the infarct for all stroke patients. The general trends observed for whole brain persist for the GM/WM regions, with no significant difference between SD and DD CBV and CBF measurements, mean correlation slopes less than 1.0, and positive intercept values. The most significant difference in the results is that the mean regression slope and intercept values for the GM and WM regions are closer to 1.0 and 0.0, respectively. This indicates that the dose dependence observed in the whole-brain analysis is more pronounced in highly vascular regions, possibly due to saturation effects.  Constrast Agent Preparations and Scanners One-way ANOVA followed by Fisher’s PLSD test was used to assess the effect of the three agent-scanner combinations (Vision-Gadopentetate dimeglumine, Vision-gadodiamide, and Sonata-gadodiamide) on each of the 26 numerical measurements reported in the “All” columns of Tables 1 and 2 . Only one of these 26 analyses showed a significant agent-scanner effect at the P < 0.05 level, and even this result was only marginally significant. A formal correction for multiple comparisons would eliminate even this one finding of significance. These findings indicate that the variance in the measured values reported in Tables 1 and 2 is largely the result of study-to-study variation as opposed to systematic differences attributable to agent-scanner combinations. This result justifies pooling all results into a single analysis. This does not mean that differences attributable to scanner or contrast agent preparation are nonexistent. It only means there is not sufficient power in these data to detect differences. Any agent/scanner-attributable differences are overwhelmed by study-to-study variation resulting from some other unknown cause.  Constrast Agent Preparations and Scanners One-way ANOVA followed by Fisher’s PLSD test was used to assess the effect of the three agent-scanner combinations (Vision-Gadopentetate dimeglumine, Vision-gadodiamide, and Sonata-gadodiamide) on each of the 26 numerical measurements reported in the “All” columns of Tables 1 and 2 . Only one of these 26 analyses showed a significant agent-scanner effect at the P < 0.05 level, and even this result was only marginally significant. A formal correction for multiple comparisons would eliminate even this one finding of significance. These findings indicate that the variance in the measured values reported in Tables 1 and 2 is largely the result of study-to-study variation as opposed to systematic differences attributable to agent-scanner combinations. This result justifies pooling all results into a single analysis. This does not mean that differences attributable to scanner or contrast agent preparation are nonexistent. It only means there is not sufficient power in these data to detect differences. Any agent/scanner-attributable differences are overwhelmed by study-to-study variation resulting from some other unknown cause.  SD vs. DD for the Delineation of Ischemic Tissue The differences between the hemodynamic images obtained with SD and DD passages have implications for the identification and quantification of ischemic tissue. Table 3 illustrates that the SD and DD studies reported significantly different volumes of ischemic tissue in the stroke patients. The DD studies reported about 50% smaller ischemic volumes (identified as regions having CBF less than 10 mL/100 g/minute) compared with the SD studies, and the difference was statistically significant. However, the volume of hyperemic tissue measured by the SD and DD studies did not differ ( Table 3 ). A second evaluation, which identified CBF values less than 15 mL/100 g/minute as ischemic, also demonstrated that the DD studies result in significantly smaller estimated volumes of ischemic tissue.  SD vs. DD for the Delineation of Ischemic Tissue The differences between the hemodynamic images obtained with SD and DD passages have implications for the identification and quantification of ischemic tissue. Table 3 illustrates that the SD and DD studies reported significantly different volumes of ischemic tissue in the stroke patients. The DD studies reported about 50% smaller ischemic volumes (identified as regions having CBF less than 10 mL/100 g/minute) compared with the SD studies, and the difference was statistically significant. However, the volume of hyperemic tissue measured by the SD and DD studies did not differ ( Table 3 ). A second evaluation, which identified CBF values less than 15 mL/100 g/minute as ischemic, also demonstrated that the DD studies result in significantly smaller estimated volumes of ischemic tissue.  Bland-Altman Analyses Figure 5 provides Bland-Altman plots derived from the ROI measurements of CBV and CBF of GM and WM. The slope and intercept of the CBV regression are not significantly different from zero, indicating there is agreement between DD and SD measures of CBV. The CBF plot shows a slight downward slope, indicating a tendency of DD protocols to underestimate CBF relative to SD protocols at higher CBF values, but this is not statistically significant at the P < 0.05 level. The plots also identify specific agent-scanner combinations to further illustrate that variance in measured GM and WM CBF and CBV is not attributable to scanner or agent choice. Separate Bland-Altman regression analyses were performed for each agent-scanner combination. No statistically significant nonzero slopes or intercepts were identified for any of the agent-scanner combinations. Plots showing the distribution of the Bland-Altman slopes and intercepts derived from analysis all voxels in the 3D image space for each study are provided in Fig. 6 . These plots show positive and generally significant nonzero Bland-Altman intercepts for CBV and CBF. They also show negative Bland-Altman slopes for CBV and CBF that are not (or only marginally) statistically significant. Nevertheless, these data are consistent with a subtle tendency of DD procedures to underestimate CBF relative to SD procedures in the high CBF range. The plots also illustrate the absence of significant differences due to agent-scanner combinations in the various Bland-Altman slopes and intercepts. In Fig. 7 are plotted the ROI CBF and CBV distributions for SD and DD protocol as a function of the order of the SD and DD injections (i.e., SD 1 or SD 2) used for each study. ANOVA evaluations showed only two of the eight pairwise comparisons (i.e., SD 1 vs. SD 2) in which there was a statistically significant effect of injection order on the measured values. Measured SD CBV was significantly reduced when a DD study had been completed a few minutes earlier, and measured SD CBF was significantly reduced when a DD study had been completed a few minutes earlier. These results indicate that the presence of contrast agent administered as a DD as few minutes prior to an SD will lead to a slight, underestimation of CBV and CBF in WM. Otherwise, the plots and the ANOVA analyses illustrate that the effects of previous SD or DD contrast agent administration on CBF and CBV assessment are much smaller than the study-to-study variation in these measures.  Bland-Altman Analyses Figure 5 provides Bland-Altman plots derived from the ROI measurements of CBV and CBF of GM and WM. The slope and intercept of the CBV regression are not significantly different from zero, indicating there is agreement between DD and SD measures of CBV. The CBF plot shows a slight downward slope, indicating a tendency of DD protocols to underestimate CBF relative to SD protocols at higher CBF values, but this is not statistically significant at the P < 0.05 level. The plots also identify specific agent-scanner combinations to further illustrate that variance in measured GM and WM CBF and CBV is not attributable to scanner or agent choice. Separate Bland-Altman regression analyses were performed for each agent-scanner combination. No statistically significant nonzero slopes or intercepts were identified for any of the agent-scanner combinations. Plots showing the distribution of the Bland-Altman slopes and intercepts derived from analysis all voxels in the 3D image space for each study are provided in Fig. 6 . These plots show positive and generally significant nonzero Bland-Altman intercepts for CBV and CBF. They also show negative Bland-Altman slopes for CBV and CBF that are not (or only marginally) statistically significant. Nevertheless, these data are consistent with a subtle tendency of DD procedures to underestimate CBF relative to SD procedures in the high CBF range. The plots also illustrate the absence of significant differences due to agent-scanner combinations in the various Bland-Altman slopes and intercepts. In Fig. 7 are plotted the ROI CBF and CBV distributions for SD and DD protocol as a function of the order of the SD and DD injections (i.e., SD 1 or SD 2) used for each study. ANOVA evaluations showed only two of the eight pairwise comparisons (i.e., SD 1 vs. SD 2) in which there was a statistically significant effect of injection order on the measured values. Measured SD CBV was significantly reduced when a DD study had been completed a few minutes earlier, and measured SD CBF was significantly reduced when a DD study had been completed a few minutes earlier. These results indicate that the presence of contrast agent administered as a DD as few minutes prior to an SD will lead to a slight, underestimation of CBV and CBF in WM. Otherwise, the plots and the ANOVA analyses illustrate that the effects of previous SD or DD contrast agent administration on CBF and CBV assessment are much smaller than the study-to-study variation in these measures.  Results summary The summary of the principal results is as follows: 1) The arterial passages show the expected doubled response in ?R2* to doubling the contrast agent dose. 2) The brain passages show a less than doubled ?R2* response to doubling the contrast agent dose. 3) The DD arterial passages have a larger peak ?R2* in comparison with the SD arterial passages. 4) The FWHM of the primary DD arterial passage through the MCA was only 16% larger than the SD arterial passage. 5) The DD studies underestimate the brain tissue CBV and CBF relative to the SD studies. 6) In the range of low CBV and CBF, the DD studies overestimate the CBV and CBF compared with the SD studies, and this causes the SD studies to report significantly greater ischemic volumes compared with the DD studies. 7) Neither the use of different contrast agent preparations and scanners nor the dose order had a substantially significant influence on the various measured values.  Results summary The summary of the principal results is as follows: 1) The arterial passages show the expected doubled response in ?R2* to doubling the contrast agent dose. 2) The brain passages show a less than doubled ?R2* response to doubling the contrast agent dose. 3) The DD arterial passages have a larger peak ?R2* in comparison with the SD arterial passages. 4) The FWHM of the primary DD arterial passage through the MCA was only 16% larger than the SD arterial passage. 5) The DD studies underestimate the brain tissue CBV and CBF relative to the SD studies. 6) In the range of low CBV and CBF, the DD studies overestimate the CBV and CBF compared with the SD studies, and this causes the SD studies to report significantly greater ischemic volumes compared with the DD studies. 7) Neither the use of different contrast agent preparations and scanners nor the dose order had a substantially significant influence on the various measured values.  DISCUSSION In recent, years DSC-MRI has been used extensively for the assessment of stroke. The majority of users tend to rely on images such as TTP, Tmax, or MTT that depict the temporal aspects related either to contrast agent arrival or passage. A motivating factor for the present study was the desire to make better use of the CBV and CBF images that can also be obtained from DSC-MRI. The primary goal was to study the influence of contrast agent dose when contrast agent is delivered in the customary manner (i.e., at the maximum tolerable rate for all doses). Prior to this study it was not known whether a substantial error in CBV or CBF might result from a particular choice of the contrast agent dose. In theory, CBV images should not show dose dependence. This is because the analysis methodology “scales” the tissue measures of contrast agent concentration against those measured in artery and then integrates over time. Time integration should eliminate any influence a longer arterial bolus characteristic of higher dose may have on derived CBV. This approach is applicable only if the ?R2* response is linear in concentration for both artery and brain tissue. In addition, scale factors for artery and brain must be identical or known with accuracy. If there are deviations from these ideal conditions, the CBV images that are derived from DSC-MRI may acquire contrast agent dose dependence. Sensitivity issues may also come into play for tissues that have relatively small blood volumes (i.e., WM) and experience relatively small contrast agent delivery. For such tissues, higher doses may result in improved sensitivity and accuracy. At the other end of the spectrum, tissues with high blood volumes may experience so much contrast agent delivery that the ?R2* response saturates to the point at which the measurement becomes insensitive. CBF is derived by deconvolution of arterial and tissue passages, and one would expect the deconvolution process to eliminate any influence a longer arterial bolus characteristic of a high dose might have on CBF determination. However, this is true only for noise-free measurements. When noise is present, bolus length may have an influence on CBF determination. Furthermore, all the potential influences that were discussed above with reference to dose effects on CBV may also influence CBF determination. Because the interaction between all these possibilities was too complex to model, an empirical approach to establishing whether dose influences CBV and CBF determination was chosen. This research systematically studied CBV and CBF images derived from two DSC-MRI studies performed with different administered contrast agent doses. Doses of 0.1 mmol/kg (SD) and 0.2 mmol/kg (DD) were used because most existing studies use one of these two doses and because both doses are clinically practical. The research was performed using what are now the most commonly employed DSC-MRI techniques (1.5 T multislice GE-EPI with fixed maximal rate injections). There have been previous studies of DSC-MRI dose dependence, but these did not use techniques or contrast agents that are in current clinical use. While Manka et al ( 38 ) studied dose sensitivity using three contrast agent doses, they used a susceptibility-weighted imaging procedure that differs from the EPI technique that is now used in the majority of centers, and furthermore their studies were performed at 3 Tesla (T) rather than the more commonly used 1.5 T. Moreover, Manka et al ( 38 ) did not specifically evaluate CBF or CBV images. Similarly, earlier studies of DSC-MRI contrast agent dose sensitivity ( 26 , 27 ) were performed at 1.0 T or used a different pulse sequence or contrast agent than are typically now used for stroke assessment. The arterial ?R2* measures in the present work ( Fig. 1 ) agree with the modeling studies of Heiland et al ( 39 ), which predict that increasing the length of the injection at a fixed rate and concentration leads to a higher peak concentration in the brain, as was found in the present work. Moreover, there is rough quantitative agreement between the bolus widths measured in the present study and those predicted by Heiland et al. For instance, Fig. 2 of Heiland et al’s ( 39 ) paper predicts that a DD whole-brain passage resulting from a 5 mL/second injection will have an FWHM of about 14 seconds. The mean FWHM for DD arterial passage measured in the present study was 10.5 ± 2.9 seconds (mean ± standard deviation). The present observations together with Heiland et al’s ( 39 ) results confirm that bolus dispersion during transit between the arm vein and the brain artery is a dominating factor that adds significantly to the width of the injected bolus. The present study shows that neither the CBV nor the CBF images derived from a DD study are fully consistent with those obtained from an SD study, although the discrepancy is relatively subtle. On average, over the entire range of CBF and CBV, regression analysis shows that DD studies underestimate CBV and CBF by only about 20% relative to SD studies for both stroke patients and normal subjects. At very low CBV and CBF, the DD studies slightly overestimate CBV and CBF compared with SD studies. This latter effect causes DD studies to report smaller volumes of ischemic tissues in stroke patients in comparison with SD studies. Bland-Altman analysis confirms the regression analysis findings but is not as statistically powerful. Although the contrast agent bolus delivery to the antecubital vein was 200% longer for the DD studies in comparison with the SD studies, the bolus widths measured in the MCA were only 16% larger for the DD studies relative to the SD studies. This small difference in the measured arterial bolus width between the SD and DD studies may be responsible for the subtle dose dependencies of derived CBF found in this study. It is not possible to determine whether this is the case without being able to control the arterial bolus widths more precisely. Faster injection of the DD could be considered, but is probably unsafe. Alternatively, diluting the contrast agent used for the SD study and lengthening the duration of the SD injection could be considered, but this may be viewed as a suboptimal way of performing the SD measurement. It seems unlikely that the 16% wider arterial bolus characteristic of the DD studies is responsible for the observed dose dependence of CBV because the CBV determination is generally insensitive to the length of the arterial bolus. The dose dependencies of the derived CBV and CBF measures found in this study are subtle, but they are statistically significant and may well have an influence on the results of clinical trials that use DSC-MRI. Therefore, it is advisable for clinical trials to prospectively prescribe a dose of contrast agent relative to body mass. It must be emphasized that the CBV and CBF dose dependencies reported here apply specifically to imaging techniques and parameters used in this study. The results are not necessarily generalizable to other dosing regimens, different TE values, or different field strengths. It is furthermore important to emphasize that the CBV and CBF images obtained at either dose are incorrect in an absolute sense. The application of an empirical artery/tissue scale factor that was derived from comparisons between DSC-MRI perfusion studies and xenon CT in a few subjects was necessary to bring CBV and CBF measures obtained at either dose into the range of expected values. Without this empirical scale factor, the CBV and CBF images obtained at either dose are more than sevenfold too high to be consistent with known physiology. In this regard, the DD passages tend to give CBF and CBV values that are modestly more consistent with the true values than do the SD passages because DD studies tend to give CBF and CBV values that are about 20% lower than SD studies. There are three possible explanations for the failure of the DD to SD ?R2* correlation slopes for brain tissue ( Fig. 2 and Table 1 ) to reach the expected values of 2.0. The first explanation is that the relationship between ?R2* and contrast agent concentration in the capillaries of brain tissue is not linear. It is not possible to fit a linear function ( Eq. [1] ) to these observations, suggesting that an alternative nonlinear formalism should be considered. The report by Kjolby et al ( 30 ) suggests that this explanation is unlikely. These authors developed a comprehensive theoretical model that demonstrates that the ?R2* response of brain tissue is most probably a simple linear function of contrast agent concentration when GE-EPI is used to detect signal change. The second explanation is that the raw signal becomes so heavily saturated during the DD passage (but not the SD passage) that, it is overwhelmed by noise and the true ?R2* can not be measured with sufficient precision. Examination of the present, data suggests that, this is likely the case. The maximum ?R2* reached in the GM during the DD passage can be about 40 seconds?1. This corresponds to a signal attenuation of approximately 10-fold relative to baseline, and these attenuated signal levels are comparable to the representative noise levels. A third, somewhat more subtle explanation is related to the fact that a signal phase shift is expected to occur during the contrast agent, passage. This phase shift will result in a subtle time-dependent spatial misregistration of the signal as the contrast agent passes. Because the signal moves in the image space as the contrast agent passes, the total measured response may be less than is expected and the true ?R2* may be underreported in the DD passage relative to the SD passage. Defining which of the three explanations is most likely will require further study. The present data are in partial agreement with the ?R2* modeling findings of Kjolby et al ( 30 ). The present finding of possible ?R2* saturation in brain but not in artery during the DD passage is consistent with Kjolby et al’s assertion that the ?R2* response is stronger in brain tissue than in arterial blood. On the other hand, Kjolby et al’s ( 30 ) study and a related study ( 28 ) assert that the arterial ?R2* response is a quadratic function of contrast agent dose. The present results are not consistent with this latter assertion because a twofold increase in contrast passage through artery most definitely did not produce a fourfold ?R2* response. This discrepancy probably has to do with the how the arterial signal is measured. The theory and experiment that underlie the assertion of a quadratic relationship between ?R2* response and concentration are relevant to bulk blood in the carotid arteries and do not necessarily reflect the environment in the vicinity of the smaller MCAs that were used for arterial sampling in the present study. The influence of dose on time variables (e.g., MTT and Tmax) was not formally studied in this work in an effort to maintain focus and control the length of the presentation. However, the present results support hypotheses for future studies. MTT is usually calculated as the CBV/CBF ratio. The subtle underestimation of DD CBF (relative to SD CBF) found in the present study together with the weaker CBV dose dependence suggests the CBV/CBF ratio (which is usually inferred to be MTT) will be subtly lower for DD procedures. Tmax is primarily a measure of delay in the bolus peak in the brain tissue relative to that in the MCA. The difference between the arterial bolus FWHM for the SD and DD studies was much less than the Tmax that is typically seen in acute stroke, and therefore differences in Tmax between SD and DD studies are expected to be very subtle. The overall picture that emerges from the present study is that when DDs are used at a maximum tolerable injection rate, there is some attenuation of the ?R2* response in brain tissue (particularly GM) but not in artery, and this is likely responsible for the subtle dose sensitivities of the CBV and CBF images that have been discussed. In conclusion, some subtle but statistically significant DSC-MRI dose sensitivities were found that may have an influence on clinical trial results. While normal GM and WM measures of CBV and CBF were largely consistent, between SD and DD studies, evaluation of ischemic lesions and whole-brain correlation measurements suggested there are inconsistencies between SD and DD studies in these contexts. Therefore, it is advisable to carefully control the dose of contrast agent when DSC-MRI is used in clinical trials. With regard to the specific choice of contrast agent dosage, this work suggests that GM regions may show small to moderate signal saturation at the peak of a DD passage when GE-EPI 1.5 T acquisitions with TEs in the 61–64 msec range are used. The possibility of loss of accuracy due to signal saturation at high dose, together with the higher cost and safety concerns associated with DD studies, argues for the use of SD protocols in clinical trials. Moreover, the relatively minor differences between SD and DD CBV and CBF measures indicate that a dose of 0.1 mmol/kg is as adequate as a dose of 0.2 mmol/kg for perfusion measurements.  DISCUSSION In recent, years DSC-MRI has been used extensively for the assessment of stroke. The majority of users tend to rely on images such as TTP, Tmax, or MTT that depict the temporal aspects related either to contrast agent arrival or passage. A motivating factor for the present study was the desire to make better use of the CBV and CBF images that can also be obtained from DSC-MRI. The primary goal was to study the influence of contrast agent dose when contrast agent is delivered in the customary manner (i.e., at the maximum tolerable rate for all doses). Prior to this study it was not known whether a substantial error in CBV or CBF might result from a particular choice of the contrast agent dose. In theory, CBV images should not show dose dependence. This is because the analysis methodology “scales” the tissue measures of contrast agent concentration against those measured in artery and then integrates over time. Time integration should eliminate any influence a longer arterial bolus characteristic of higher dose may have on derived CBV. This approach is applicable only if the ?R2* response is linear in concentration for both artery and brain tissue. In addition, scale factors for artery and brain must be identical or known with accuracy. If there are deviations from these ideal conditions, the CBV images that are derived from DSC-MRI may acquire contrast agent dose dependence. Sensitivity issues may also come into play for tissues that have relatively small blood volumes (i.e., WM) and experience relatively small contrast agent delivery. For such tissues, higher doses may result in improved sensitivity and accuracy. At the other end of the spectrum, tissues with high blood volumes may experience so much contrast agent delivery that the ?R2* response saturates to the point at which the measurement becomes insensitive. CBF is derived by deconvolution of arterial and tissue passages, and one would expect the deconvolution process to eliminate any influence a longer arterial bolus characteristic of a high dose might have on CBF determination. However, this is true only for noise-free measurements. When noise is present, bolus length may have an influence on CBF determination. Furthermore, all the potential influences that were discussed above with reference to dose effects on CBV may also influence CBF determination. Because the interaction between all these possibilities was too complex to model, an empirical approach to establishing whether dose influences CBV and CBF determination was chosen. This research systematically studied CBV and CBF images derived from two DSC-MRI studies performed with different administered contrast agent doses. Doses of 0.1 mmol/kg (SD) and 0.2 mmol/kg (DD) were used because most existing studies use one of these two doses and because both doses are clinically practical. The research was performed using what are now the most commonly employed DSC-MRI techniques (1.5 T multislice GE-EPI with fixed maximal rate injections). There have been previous studies of DSC-MRI dose dependence, but these did not use techniques or contrast agents that are in current clinical use. While Manka et al ( 38 ) studied dose sensitivity using three contrast agent doses, they used a susceptibility-weighted imaging procedure that differs from the EPI technique that is now used in the majority of centers, and furthermore their studies were performed at 3 Tesla (T) rather than the more commonly used 1.5 T. Moreover, Manka et al ( 38 ) did not specifically evaluate CBF or CBV images. Similarly, earlier studies of DSC-MRI contrast agent dose sensitivity ( 26 , 27 ) were performed at 1.0 T or used a different pulse sequence or contrast agent than are typically now used for stroke assessment. The arterial ?R2* measures in the present work ( Fig. 1 ) agree with the modeling studies of Heiland et al ( 39 ), which predict that increasing the length of the injection at a fixed rate and concentration leads to a higher peak concentration in the brain, as was found in the present work. Moreover, there is rough quantitative agreement between the bolus widths measured in the present study and those predicted by Heiland et al. For instance, Fig. 2 of Heiland et al’s ( 39 ) paper predicts that a DD whole-brain passage resulting from a 5 mL/second injection will have an FWHM of about 14 seconds. The mean FWHM for DD arterial passage measured in the present study was 10.5 ± 2.9 seconds (mean ± standard deviation). The present observations together with Heiland et al’s ( 39 ) results confirm that bolus dispersion during transit between the arm vein and the brain artery is a dominating factor that adds significantly to the width of the injected bolus. The present study shows that neither the CBV nor the CBF images derived from a DD study are fully consistent with those obtained from an SD study, although the discrepancy is relatively subtle. On average, over the entire range of CBF and CBV, regression analysis shows that DD studies underestimate CBV and CBF by only about 20% relative to SD studies for both stroke patients and normal subjects. At very low CBV and CBF, the DD studies slightly overestimate CBV and CBF compared with SD studies. This latter effect causes DD studies to report smaller volumes of ischemic tissues in stroke patients in comparison with SD studies. Bland-Altman analysis confirms the regression analysis findings but is not as statistically powerful. Although the contrast agent bolus delivery to the antecubital vein was 200% longer for the DD studies in comparison with the SD studies, the bolus widths measured in the MCA were only 16% larger for the DD studies relative to the SD studies. This small difference in the measured arterial bolus width between the SD and DD studies may be responsible for the subtle dose dependencies of derived CBF found in this study. It is not possible to determine whether this is the case without being able to control the arterial bolus widths more precisely. Faster injection of the DD could be considered, but is probably unsafe. Alternatively, diluting the contrast agent used for the SD study and lengthening the duration of the SD injection could be considered, but this may be viewed as a suboptimal way of performing the SD measurement. It seems unlikely that the 16% wider arterial bolus characteristic of the DD studies is responsible for the observed dose dependence of CBV because the CBV determination is generally insensitive to the length of the arterial bolus. The dose dependencies of the derived CBV and CBF measures found in this study are subtle, but they are statistically significant and may well have an influence on the results of clinical trials that use DSC-MRI. Therefore, it is advisable for clinical trials to prospectively prescribe a dose of contrast agent relative to body mass. It must be emphasized that the CBV and CBF dose dependencies reported here apply specifically to imaging techniques and parameters used in this study. The results are not necessarily generalizable to other dosing regimens, different TE values, or different field strengths. It is furthermore important to emphasize that the CBV and CBF images obtained at either dose are incorrect in an absolute sense. The application of an empirical artery/tissue scale factor that was derived from comparisons between DSC-MRI perfusion studies and xenon CT in a few subjects was necessary to bring CBV and CBF measures obtained at either dose into the range of expected values. Without this empirical scale factor, the CBV and CBF images obtained at either dose are more than sevenfold too high to be consistent with known physiology. In this regard, the DD passages tend to give CBF and CBV values that are modestly more consistent with the true values than do the SD passages because DD studies tend to give CBF and CBV values that are about 20% lower than SD studies. There are three possible explanations for the failure of the DD to SD ?R2* correlation slopes for brain tissue ( Fig. 2 and Table 1 ) to reach the expected values of 2.0. The first explanation is that the relationship between ?R2* and contrast agent concentration in the capillaries of brain tissue is not linear. It is not possible to fit a linear function ( Eq. [1] ) to these observations, suggesting that an alternative nonlinear formalism should be considered. The report by Kjolby et al ( 30 ) suggests that this explanation is unlikely. These authors developed a comprehensive theoretical model that demonstrates that the ?R2* response of brain tissue is most probably a simple linear function of contrast agent concentration when GE-EPI is used to detect signal change. The second explanation is that the raw signal becomes so heavily saturated during the DD passage (but not the SD passage) that, it is overwhelmed by noise and the true ?R2* can not be measured with sufficient precision. Examination of the present, data suggests that, this is likely the case. The maximum ?R2* reached in the GM during the DD passage can be about 40 seconds?1. This corresponds to a signal attenuation of approximately 10-fold relative to baseline, and these attenuated signal levels are comparable to the representative noise levels. A third, somewhat more subtle explanation is related to the fact that a signal phase shift is expected to occur during the contrast agent, passage. This phase shift will result in a subtle time-dependent spatial misregistration of the signal as the contrast agent passes. Because the signal moves in the image space as the contrast agent passes, the total measured response may be less than is expected and the true ?R2* may be underreported in the DD passage relative to the SD passage. Defining which of the three explanations is most likely will require further study. The present data are in partial agreement with the ?R2* modeling findings of Kjolby et al ( 30 ). The present finding of possible ?R2* saturation in brain but not in artery during the DD passage is consistent with Kjolby et al’s assertion that the ?R2* response is stronger in brain tissue than in arterial blood. On the other hand, Kjolby et al’s ( 30 ) study and a related study ( 28 ) assert that the arterial ?R2* response is a quadratic function of contrast agent dose. The present results are not consistent with this latter assertion because a twofold increase in contrast passage through artery most definitely did not produce a fourfold ?R2* response. This discrepancy probably has to do with the how the arterial signal is measured. The theory and experiment that underlie the assertion of a quadratic relationship between ?R2* response and concentration are relevant to bulk blood in the carotid arteries and do not necessarily reflect the environment in the vicinity of the smaller MCAs that were used for arterial sampling in the present study. The influence of dose on time variables (e.g., MTT and Tmax) was not formally studied in this work in an effort to maintain focus and control the length of the presentation. However, the present results support hypotheses for future studies. MTT is usually calculated as the CBV/CBF ratio. The subtle underestimation of DD CBF (relative to SD CBF) found in the present study together with the weaker CBV dose dependence suggests the CBV/CBF ratio (which is usually inferred to be MTT) will be subtly lower for DD procedures. Tmax is primarily a measure of delay in the bolus peak in the brain tissue relative to that in the MCA. The difference between the arterial bolus FWHM for the SD and DD studies was much less than the Tmax that is typically seen in acute stroke, and therefore differences in Tmax between SD and DD studies are expected to be very subtle. The overall picture that emerges from the present study is that when DDs are used at a maximum tolerable injection rate, there is some attenuation of the ?R2* response in brain tissue (particularly GM) but not in artery, and this is likely responsible for the subtle dose sensitivities of the CBV and CBF images that have been discussed. In conclusion, some subtle but statistically significant DSC-MRI dose sensitivities were found that may have an influence on clinical trial results. While normal GM and WM measures of CBV and CBF were largely consistent, between SD and DD studies, evaluation of ischemic lesions and whole-brain correlation measurements suggested there are inconsistencies between SD and DD studies in these contexts. Therefore, it is advisable to carefully control the dose of contrast agent when DSC-MRI is used in clinical trials. With regard to the specific choice of contrast agent dosage, this work suggests that GM regions may show small to moderate signal saturation at the peak of a DD passage when GE-EPI 1.5 T acquisitions with TEs in the 61–64 msec range are used. The possibility of loss of accuracy due to signal saturation at high dose, together with the higher cost and safety concerns associated with DD studies, argues for the use of SD protocols in clinical trials. Moreover, the relatively minor differences between SD and DD CBV and CBF measures indicate that a dose of 0.1 mmol/kg is as adequate as a dose of 0.2 mmol/kg for perfusion measurements.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Representative arterial sampling (top row). The highlighted voxels (arrows) overlaid on the grayscale image obtained at the time of maximal signal attenuation show the typical artery sampling that was used in this study. The bottom row shows representative arterial ?R2* time-course data for SD and DD passages in a normal subject and a stroke patient. These ?R2* time-course data illustrate that the SD and DD passages produced boluses in the MCA with nearly identical widths. Figure 2 Comparison of ?R2* time integral images from a representative normal subject and a stroke patient derived from SD and DD contrast passages. Only one slice of 18 acquired slices is displayed in each case. To the right of each image comparison is a correlation plot, showing the relationship between the ?R2* time integral images derived from SD and DD contrast passages for each voxel within the brain in all 18 slices. The solid lines in the graphs are the best-fit linear regressions to all the data. The dotted lines show the hypothetical regression lines (slope = 2, intercept = 0) for the ideal situation in which twice the contrast passage is detected in the DD passage compared with the SD passage. Figure 3 Comparison of CBF images from a representative normal subject and a representative stroke patient derived from SD and DD contrast passages. Only one slice of 18 acquired slices is displayed in each case. To the right of each image comparison is a correlation plot showing the relationship between the CBF values derived from SD and DD contrast passages for each voxel within the brain in the 18 slices, The solid lines in the graphs are the best-fit linear regressions to all the data. The dotted lines show the hypothetical regression lines (slope = 1, intercept = 0) for the ideal situation in which CBV values derived from the SD and DD contrast passages are identical. Figure 4 Representative illustration of WM and GM ROI identification. The regions were identified using the SD CBV image shown in grayscale. Figure 5 Bland-Altman regression plots for the ROI CBV (upper panel) and CBF (lower panel) measurements. Two points (one GM measurement and one WM measurement) are plotted for each study. WM readings are clustered on the left of each plot. GM readings are clustered to the right. The contrast agent, preparation and the scanner used for each study are identified by the symbols shown in the legend. Regression lines determined from all the points are plotted as solid lines. The 95% confidence intervals for the regression lines are shown by dotted curves. Figure 6 Box plots showing the distribution of the Bland-Altman regression intercepts and slopes for CBV and CBF derived from Bland-Altman regression analysis of all voxels in the 3D image data. Ideal agreement between SD and DD measures is indicated by zero intercept and slope (dotted) line on the plots. The distributions for the various contrast agent-scanner combinations are plotted separately. Figure 7 Box plots ROI CBV and CBF measures in GM and WM segregated according to whether the SD study was performed first (SD 1) or second (SD 2). Comparison of each pair (e.g., SD GM CBF: SD 1 vs. SD GM CBF: SD 2) provides a means of determining whether dose order had an effect on the SD and DD CBF and CBV measurements; * indicates a statistically significant ( P < 0.05) pairwise mean difference. Table 1 ?R2* Measurements † Normal ( N = 12) Stroke ( N = 12) All ( N = 24) Arterial DD/SD ?R2* time integral ratio 1.94 ± 0.68 1.86 ± 0.65 1.90 ± 0.65 Arterial DD/SD ?R2* steady state ratio 2.48 ± 1.36 2.38 ± 1.48 2.43 ± 1.39 Arterial DD/SD ?R2* maximum ratio 1.54 ± 0.41 a , b , c 1.35 ± 0.20 a , b , c 1.45 ± 0.33 a , b , c Whole brain DD vs. SD ?R2* time integral correlation slope 1.54 ± 0.20 a , 1.59 ± 0.25 a , 1.56 ± 0.22 a , Whole brain DD vs. SD ?R2* steady state correlation slope 1.38 ± 0.29 a , d 1.18 ± 0.42 a , d 1.28 ± 0.37 a , d Whole brain DD vs. SD ?R2* maximum correlation slope 1.34 ± 0.13 b , e 1.34 ± 0.22 b , e 1.34 ± 0.18 b , e † Values are means ± standard deviation. a Significantly different from 2.0 (one-group t -test, P < 0.05). b Significantly different from 1.0 (one-group t -test, P < 0.05). c Significantly different from steady state (paired t -test, P < 0.05). d Significantly different from time integral. e Not significantly different from steady state. Table 2 Dose Dependence of Derived CBV and CBF * Normal Stroke All SD whole brain mean CBV (mL/100 g) 3.0 ± 0.8 3.3 ± 0.9 3.1 ± 0.8 DD whole brain mean CBV (mL/100 g) 3.1 ± 0.5 3.6 ± 0.7 3.4 ± 0.7 SD gray matter CBV (mL/100 g) 3.9 ± 0.6 DD gray matter CBV (mL/100 g) 4.0 ± 0.9 SD white matter CBV (mL/100 g) 1.1 ± 0.3 DD white matter CBV (mL/100 g) 1.2 ± 0.3 SD whole brain mean CBF (mL/100 g minute) 44.1 ± 15.0 44.7 ± 17.2 44.4 ± 15.7 DD whole brain mean CBF (mL/100 g minute) 45.0 ± 6.9 46.4 ± 12.2 45.7 ± 12.3 SD gray matter CBF (mL/100 g minute) 61.2 ± 16.1 DD gray matter CBF (mL/100 g minute) 59.3 ± 12.9 SD white matter CBF (mL/100 g minute) 13.7 ± 5.5 DD white matter CBF (mL/100 g minute) 15.8 ± 3.7 a Whole brain DD vs. SD CBV correlation slope 0.80 ± 0.28 b 0.84 ± 0.27 b 0.82 ± 0.27 b Whole brain DD vs. SD CBV correlation intercept (mL/100 g) 0.85 ± 0.29 c 1.07 ± 0.41 c 0.96 ± 0.36 c Gray and white matter DD vs. SD CBV correlation slope 0.96 ± 0.23 Gray and white matter DD vs. SD CBV correlation intercept (mL/100 g) 0.22 ± 0.25 c Whole brain DD vs. SD CBF correlation slope 0.79 ± 0.23 b 0.78 ± 0.25 b 0.79 ± 0.24 b Whole brain DD vs. SD CBF correlation intercept (mL/100 g/minute) 12.5 ± 4.2 c 13.4 ± 4.4 c 13.0 ± 4.2 c Gray and white matter DD vs. SD CBF correlation slope 0.90 ± 0.25 Gray and white matter DD vs. SD CBF correlation intercept (mL/100 g) 5.27 ± 3.38 c * Values are means ± standard deviation. a Significantly different from single dose (paired t -test, P < 0.05). b Significantly different from 1.0 ( P < 0.05). c Significantly different from 0.0 ( P < 0.05). Table 3 Volume Measurements from CBV and CBF Images of Stroke Patients ( N = 12) * SD DD P (paired t -test) Brain volume (cm3) with CBV < 1.0 mL/100 g 104.8 ± 63.5 53.1 ± 37.0 0.01 Brain volume (cm3) with CBV between 7.0 and 15 mL/100 g 79.9 ± 55.9 89.9 ± 64.8 ns Brain volume (cm3) with CBF < 10 mL/100 g/minute 64.1 ± 51.9 32.2 ± 22.6 0.01 Brain volume (cm3) with CBF < 15 mL/100 g/minute 145.5 ± 104.0 77.9 ± 48.2 <0.01 * Values are means ± standard deviation. ns = not significant.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Representative arterial sampling (top row). The highlighted voxels (arrows) overlaid on the grayscale image obtained at the time of maximal signal attenuation show the typical artery sampling that was used in this study. The bottom row shows representative arterial ?R2* time-course data for SD and DD passages in a normal subject and a stroke patient. These ?R2* time-course data illustrate that the SD and DD passages produced boluses in the MCA with nearly identical widths. Figure 2 Comparison of ?R2* time integral images from a representative normal subject and a stroke patient derived from SD and DD contrast passages. Only one slice of 18 acquired slices is displayed in each case. To the right of each image comparison is a correlation plot, showing the relationship between the ?R2* time integral images derived from SD and DD contrast passages for each voxel within the brain in all 18 slices. The solid lines in the graphs are the best-fit linear regressions to all the data. The dotted lines show the hypothetical regression lines (slope = 2, intercept = 0) for the ideal situation in which twice the contrast passage is detected in the DD passage compared with the SD passage. Figure 3 Comparison of CBF images from a representative normal subject and a representative stroke patient derived from SD and DD contrast passages. Only one slice of 18 acquired slices is displayed in each case. To the right of each image comparison is a correlation plot showing the relationship between the CBF values derived from SD and DD contrast passages for each voxel within the brain in the 18 slices, The solid lines in the graphs are the best-fit linear regressions to all the data. The dotted lines show the hypothetical regression lines (slope = 1, intercept = 0) for the ideal situation in which CBV values derived from the SD and DD contrast passages are identical. Figure 4 Representative illustration of WM and GM ROI identification. The regions were identified using the SD CBV image shown in grayscale. Figure 5 Bland-Altman regression plots for the ROI CBV (upper panel) and CBF (lower panel) measurements. Two points (one GM measurement and one WM measurement) are plotted for each study. WM readings are clustered on the left of each plot. GM readings are clustered to the right. The contrast agent, preparation and the scanner used for each study are identified by the symbols shown in the legend. Regression lines determined from all the points are plotted as solid lines. The 95% confidence intervals for the regression lines are shown by dotted curves. Figure 6 Box plots showing the distribution of the Bland-Altman regression intercepts and slopes for CBV and CBF derived from Bland-Altman regression analysis of all voxels in the 3D image data. Ideal agreement between SD and DD measures is indicated by zero intercept and slope (dotted) line on the plots. The distributions for the various contrast agent-scanner combinations are plotted separately. Figure 7 Box plots ROI CBV and CBF measures in GM and WM segregated according to whether the SD study was performed first (SD 1) or second (SD 2). Comparison of each pair (e.g., SD GM CBF: SD 1 vs. SD GM CBF: SD 2) provides a means of determining whether dose order had an effect on the SD and DD CBF and CBV measurements; * indicates a statistically significant ( P < 0.05) pairwise mean difference. Table 1 ?R2* Measurements † Normal ( N = 12) Stroke ( N = 12) All ( N = 24) Arterial DD/SD ?R2* time integral ratio 1.94 ± 0.68 1.86 ± 0.65 1.90 ± 0.65 Arterial DD/SD ?R2* steady state ratio 2.48 ± 1.36 2.38 ± 1.48 2.43 ± 1.39 Arterial DD/SD ?R2* maximum ratio 1.54 ± 0.41 a , b , c 1.35 ± 0.20 a , b , c 1.45 ± 0.33 a , b , c Whole brain DD vs. SD ?R2* time integral correlation slope 1.54 ± 0.20 a , 1.59 ± 0.25 a , 1.56 ± 0.22 a , Whole brain DD vs. SD ?R2* steady state correlation slope 1.38 ± 0.29 a , d 1.18 ± 0.42 a , d 1.28 ± 0.37 a , d Whole brain DD vs. SD ?R2* maximum correlation slope 1.34 ± 0.13 b , e 1.34 ± 0.22 b , e 1.34 ± 0.18 b , e † Values are means ± standard deviation. a Significantly different from 2.0 (one-group t -test, P < 0.05). b Significantly different from 1.0 (one-group t -test, P < 0.05). c Significantly different from steady state (paired t -test, P < 0.05). d Significantly different from time integral. e Not significantly different from steady state. Table 2 Dose Dependence of Derived CBV and CBF * Normal Stroke All SD whole brain mean CBV (mL/100 g) 3.0 ± 0.8 3.3 ± 0.9 3.1 ± 0.8 DD whole brain mean CBV (mL/100 g) 3.1 ± 0.5 3.6 ± 0.7 3.4 ± 0.7 SD gray matter CBV (mL/100 g) 3.9 ± 0.6 DD gray matter CBV (mL/100 g) 4.0 ± 0.9 SD white matter CBV (mL/100 g) 1.1 ± 0.3 DD white matter CBV (mL/100 g) 1.2 ± 0.3 SD whole brain mean CBF (mL/100 g minute) 44.1 ± 15.0 44.7 ± 17.2 44.4 ± 15.7 DD whole brain mean CBF (mL/100 g minute) 45.0 ± 6.9 46.4 ± 12.2 45.7 ± 12.3 SD gray matter CBF (mL/100 g minute) 61.2 ± 16.1 DD gray matter CBF (mL/100 g minute) 59.3 ± 12.9 SD white matter CBF (mL/100 g minute) 13.7 ± 5.5 DD white matter CBF (mL/100 g minute) 15.8 ± 3.7 a Whole brain DD vs. SD CBV correlation slope 0.80 ± 0.28 b 0.84 ± 0.27 b 0.82 ± 0.27 b Whole brain DD vs. SD CBV correlation intercept (mL/100 g) 0.85 ± 0.29 c 1.07 ± 0.41 c 0.96 ± 0.36 c Gray and white matter DD vs. SD CBV correlation slope 0.96 ± 0.23 Gray and white matter DD vs. SD CBV correlation intercept (mL/100 g) 0.22 ± 0.25 c Whole brain DD vs. SD CBF correlation slope 0.79 ± 0.23 b 0.78 ± 0.25 b 0.79 ± 0.24 b Whole brain DD vs. SD CBF correlation intercept (mL/100 g/minute) 12.5 ± 4.2 c 13.4 ± 4.4 c 13.0 ± 4.2 c Gray and white matter DD vs. SD CBF correlation slope 0.90 ± 0.25 Gray and white matter DD vs. SD CBF correlation intercept (mL/100 g) 5.27 ± 3.38 c * Values are means ± standard deviation. a Significantly different from single dose (paired t -test, P < 0.05). b Significantly different from 1.0 ( P < 0.05). c Significantly different from 0.0 ( P < 0.05). Table 3 Volume Measurements from CBV and CBF Images of Stroke Patients ( N = 12) * SD DD P (paired t -test) Brain volume (cm3) with CBV < 1.0 mL/100 g 104.8 ± 63.5 53.1 ± 37.0 0.01 Brain volume (cm3) with CBV between 7.0 and 15 mL/100 g 79.9 ± 55.9 89.9 ± 64.8 ns Brain volume (cm3) with CBF < 10 mL/100 g/minute 64.1 ± 51.9 32.2 ± 22.6 0.01 Brain volume (cm3) with CBF < 15 mL/100 g/minute 145.5 ± 104.0 77.9 ± 48.2 <0.01 * Values are means ± standard deviation. ns = not significant. 