A 3.1 Mb Microdeletion of 3p21.31 Associated with Cortical Blindness, Cleft Lip, CNS Abnormalities, and Developmental Delay We report a 3.1 Mb de novo deletion of 3p21.31 in a 3 ½ year old female with cortical blindness, cleft lip, CNS abnormalities, and gross developmental delays. Examination of the region showed ~80 genes to be involved in the deletion. Functional analysis of the deleted genes suggests that several of them may be important in normal neuronal maturation and function. Thus, haploinsufficiency of one or more of these genes could potentially contribute to the observed phenotype. Our patient does not have clinical features that overlap completely with either proximal or distal 3p deletions, suggesting that the deletion seen in our patient leads to a distinct clinical phenotype not described previously.  5. Discussion In this report, we present a patient with multiple congenital anomalies including a cleft lip, dysmorphic features, and motor and language delays. She had many previously normal genetic studies including a high-resolution karyotype, subtelomere in situ hybridization, and BAC-based aCGH. She was found to have a 3.1 Mb deletion of 3p21.31 by higher-density oligonucleotide microarray analysis. Review of the literature and the DECIPHER database ( https://decipher.sanger.ac.uk/ ) did not identify any patients with this specific deletion. There was one patient in DECIPHER (patient 00004666) with joint laxity, mental retardation, speech delay, and a long/thin face, who had a partially overlapping deletion from 49,290,812–54,276,939 Mbp. However, most patients described in the literature with interstitial 3p deletions are more proximal and involve band 3p12 [ 7 , 11 , 15 ], which is not included in our patient’s deletion. These patients have variable phenotypic findings, but are thought to commonly share psychomotor delay, cardiovascular anomalies, early growth retardation, and dysmorphic facial features such as dysplastic and low-set ears. A cleft lip or cleft palate has been seen in two patients [ 7 , 11 ]. Another patient was described with an interstitial deletion distal to our patient (3p26.2-p25.3), with clinical findings consisting of ptosis, microcephaly, growth retardation, and developmental delay [ 3 ]. Patients with terminal 3p deletion syndrome typically have breakpoints in 3p25 resulting in haploinsufficiency of the CALL gene, and the clinical characteristics include growth retardation, developmental delays, microcephaly, hypertelorism, ptosis, abnormal nose, low-set ears, and a long philtrum [ 2 , 10 ]. Our patient does have some clinical features that overlap with known proximal and distal 3p deletion syndromes, but the variability of the observed phenotype suggests this particular deletion is a distinct clinical entity. The 3.1 Mb region deleted in our patient contains over 80 genes. The genes with known functions that may be relevant to this patient’s phenotype are listed in Table I . Although it is premature to pinpoint which one of these genes is involved in the patient’s phenotype, the genes that are expressed in the brain are presumed to explain many of the observed neurological features, such as the developmental delays, cortical blindness, and hypotonia. A review of the deleted genes identified several possible candidates associated with the clinical findings. The PLXNB1 gene encodes for the semaphorin 4D receptor and is important in axon guidance in the developing nervous system, and can either induce extension or retraction of axons [ 8 ]. Mice deficient for this gene show abnormal axon collapsing; however they do not have specific developmental defects [ 6 ]. CELSR3 is a protocadherin gene involved in axonal development and neuronal cell polarity, as evidenced by Celsr3 deficient mice showing anomalies of several axonal fascicles [ 14 ]. Studies of rat neuron cultures showed Celsr3 suppresses neurite growth whereas Celsr2 enhances growth, and the balance of these two genes is important for normal neurite growth regulation [ 12 ]. The protein product of another deleted gene, bassoon ( BSN ), has been shown to be involved in presynaptic transmission of excitatory neurons, the loss of which decreases the transmission of the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamine in the brain and retina [ 1 , 5 ]. GNAT1 is involved in autosomal dominant congenital stationary night blindness, but this typically is due to a dominant negative effect of a constitutively active mutant protein and not to haploinsufficiency [ 13 ]. DOCK3 , also expressed in the brain, was found to be interrupted in a patient with a 3p inversion and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder-like behaviors, suggesting this gene may be associated with normal brain development and function [ 4 ]. In summary, we present here a patient exhibiting dysmorphic features and developmental delays. Analysis using high-density oligonucleotide microarrays demonstrated a de novo 3.1 Mb deletion of 3p21.31 involving approximately 80 genes. Several of the deleted genes are expressed in the brain and may be required for normal brain development. This chromosomal region and deleted genes should be considered for analysis in patients with a similar clinical phenotype. Since the parental studies were normal, the parents were able to have 2 more unaffected children, knowing that the likelihood of germ line mosaicism was very low. This case highlights the utility of genome-wide, high-density microarrays in detecting deletions or duplications in patients with congenital anomalies and mental retardation.  5. Discussion In this report, we present a patient with multiple congenital anomalies including a cleft lip, dysmorphic features, and motor and language delays. She had many previously normal genetic studies including a high-resolution karyotype, subtelomere in situ hybridization, and BAC-based aCGH. She was found to have a 3.1 Mb deletion of 3p21.31 by higher-density oligonucleotide microarray analysis. Review of the literature and the DECIPHER database ( https://decipher.sanger.ac.uk/ ) did not identify any patients with this specific deletion. There was one patient in DECIPHER (patient 00004666) with joint laxity, mental retardation, speech delay, and a long/thin face, who had a partially overlapping deletion from 49,290,812–54,276,939 Mbp. However, most patients described in the literature with interstitial 3p deletions are more proximal and involve band 3p12 [ 7 , 11 , 15 ], which is not included in our patient’s deletion. These patients have variable phenotypic findings, but are thought to commonly share psychomotor delay, cardiovascular anomalies, early growth retardation, and dysmorphic facial features such as dysplastic and low-set ears. A cleft lip or cleft palate has been seen in two patients [ 7 , 11 ]. Another patient was described with an interstitial deletion distal to our patient (3p26.2-p25.3), with clinical findings consisting of ptosis, microcephaly, growth retardation, and developmental delay [ 3 ]. Patients with terminal 3p deletion syndrome typically have breakpoints in 3p25 resulting in haploinsufficiency of the CALL gene, and the clinical characteristics include growth retardation, developmental delays, microcephaly, hypertelorism, ptosis, abnormal nose, low-set ears, and a long philtrum [ 2 , 10 ]. Our patient does have some clinical features that overlap with known proximal and distal 3p deletion syndromes, but the variability of the observed phenotype suggests this particular deletion is a distinct clinical entity. The 3.1 Mb region deleted in our patient contains over 80 genes. The genes with known functions that may be relevant to this patient’s phenotype are listed in Table I . Although it is premature to pinpoint which one of these genes is involved in the patient’s phenotype, the genes that are expressed in the brain are presumed to explain many of the observed neurological features, such as the developmental delays, cortical blindness, and hypotonia. A review of the deleted genes identified several possible candidates associated with the clinical findings. The PLXNB1 gene encodes for the semaphorin 4D receptor and is important in axon guidance in the developing nervous system, and can either induce extension or retraction of axons [ 8 ]. Mice deficient for this gene show abnormal axon collapsing; however they do not have specific developmental defects [ 6 ]. CELSR3 is a protocadherin gene involved in axonal development and neuronal cell polarity, as evidenced by Celsr3 deficient mice showing anomalies of several axonal fascicles [ 14 ]. Studies of rat neuron cultures showed Celsr3 suppresses neurite growth whereas Celsr2 enhances growth, and the balance of these two genes is important for normal neurite growth regulation [ 12 ]. The protein product of another deleted gene, bassoon ( BSN ), has been shown to be involved in presynaptic transmission of excitatory neurons, the loss of which decreases the transmission of the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamine in the brain and retina [ 1 , 5 ]. GNAT1 is involved in autosomal dominant congenital stationary night blindness, but this typically is due to a dominant negative effect of a constitutively active mutant protein and not to haploinsufficiency [ 13 ]. DOCK3 , also expressed in the brain, was found to be interrupted in a patient with a 3p inversion and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder-like behaviors, suggesting this gene may be associated with normal brain development and function [ 4 ]. In summary, we present here a patient exhibiting dysmorphic features and developmental delays. Analysis using high-density oligonucleotide microarrays demonstrated a de novo 3.1 Mb deletion of 3p21.31 involving approximately 80 genes. Several of the deleted genes are expressed in the brain and may be required for normal brain development. This chromosomal region and deleted genes should be considered for analysis in patients with a similar clinical phenotype. Since the parental studies were normal, the parents were able to have 2 more unaffected children, knowing that the likelihood of germ line mosaicism was very low. This case highlights the utility of genome-wide, high-density microarrays in detecting deletions or duplications in patients with congenital anomalies and mental retardation. 