Vitamin E Succinate Reduces Ischemia/Reperfusion Injury in Steatotic Livers Steatotic livers represent a growing proportion of marginal organs available for transplantation. These livers are highly prone to primary nonfunction following transplant, and are therefore routinely turned down for surgery. Given the elevated levels and sensitivity for reactive oxygen species (ROS) in these livers, we evaluated whether pretreatment with a targeted ROS scavenger, vitamin E succinate, could increase survival and decrease injury after ischemia/reperfusion (I/R). For this study, ob/ob mice received 50 I.U. of vitamin E succinate per day in supplemented vs. control chow for seven days and were subjected to 15 minutes of total hepatic ischemia, and 24 hours of reperfusion. Treatment resulted in a 5-fold decrease in ALT levels after reperfusion, mirrored by significant decreases in hepatocellular necrosis. These results suggest that targeted antioxidants such as vitamin E succinate may prove to be highly applicable for the pretreatment of steatotic donor livers, increasing their tolerance for I/R and the transplantation process.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Animals For these survival studies, 6–7 week old male ob/ob (leptin?/?) and control C57Bl6 mice (Jackson Labs) were used. Seven days prior to experimentation, mice were placed on either Purina #5001 chow or chow supplemented with 1g/kg of d-alpha-tocopherol succinate (VE) prepared by Dyets (Bethlehem, PA). Total daily consumption was approximately 50 I.U. per animal each day. Mice were either sacrificed or subjected to ischemia at the end of the 7-day treatment. All animals subjected to I/R were placed on control diet following ischemia. For all groups, n=5, and I/R was conducted as previously described. 16 This experimental series complied with the protocols approved by the MUSC IACUC. Analysis of Injury Following 24 hours of reperfusion, blood was collected by sterile cardiac puncture, under isoflurane inhalation anesthesia, and serum was separated. Serum ALT concentrations were measured by a Synchron LX20 system (Beckman Coulter) and expressed as IU/L (Clinical Laboratory Services, MUSC). Hemotoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining was performed by MUSC university pathological services. Slides were blinded, then graded for centrilobular necrosis in H&E stained slides on a 0 to 3 scale as described by Neil et al. 17 Ten central veins, each under high-powered magnification, were graded and the average was used as the individual grade for each animal. Representative photomicrographs were captured digitally and image brightness and size were adjusted using Adobe Photoshop® CS Version 8. All values are expressed as mean ± standard deviation (s.d.). An alpha value of 0.05 was established prior to experimentation as the limit for statistical significance. For each single pairwise comparison, a two-tailed t -test was used.  Animals For these survival studies, 6–7 week old male ob/ob (leptin?/?) and control C57Bl6 mice (Jackson Labs) were used. Seven days prior to experimentation, mice were placed on either Purina #5001 chow or chow supplemented with 1g/kg of d-alpha-tocopherol succinate (VE) prepared by Dyets (Bethlehem, PA). Total daily consumption was approximately 50 I.U. per animal each day. Mice were either sacrificed or subjected to ischemia at the end of the 7-day treatment. All animals subjected to I/R were placed on control diet following ischemia. For all groups, n=5, and I/R was conducted as previously described. 16 This experimental series complied with the protocols approved by the MUSC IACUC.  Analysis of Injury Following 24 hours of reperfusion, blood was collected by sterile cardiac puncture, under isoflurane inhalation anesthesia, and serum was separated. Serum ALT concentrations were measured by a Synchron LX20 system (Beckman Coulter) and expressed as IU/L (Clinical Laboratory Services, MUSC). Hemotoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining was performed by MUSC university pathological services. Slides were blinded, then graded for centrilobular necrosis in H&E stained slides on a 0 to 3 scale as described by Neil et al. 17 Ten central veins, each under high-powered magnification, were graded and the average was used as the individual grade for each animal. Representative photomicrographs were captured digitally and image brightness and size were adjusted using Adobe Photoshop® CS Version 8. All values are expressed as mean ± standard deviation (s.d.). An alpha value of 0.05 was established prior to experimentation as the limit for statistical significance. For each single pairwise comparison, a two-tailed t -test was used.  RESULTS To investigate whether VE protects against I/R injury in 6–7 week old ob/ob mice, we treated with VE supplemented food for 7 days, after which time, the mice were subjected to 15 minutes of warm, total hepatic ischemia, followed by 24 hours of reperfusion. VE is specifically designed for intracellular hydrolysis and the esterified tag targets it for specific and increased uptake in the liver compared to other forms of vitamin E. 15 , 18 All ob/ob mice receiving VE survived I/R, while only 67% of the control ob/ob animals survived, although this difference was not significant (p=0.17)( Fig. 1a ). Liver injury was assessed through the measurement of serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) concentrations. At 24 hours following reperfusion, ALT levels in the VE treated mice were 5-fold lower than the surviving ob/ob controls (p<0.05)( Fig. 1b ). As an additional indicator of hepatic injury, hepatocellular necrosis was measured histologically. Graded necrosis was significantly reduced in the VE treated mice on the 0 to 3 scale (Figure 6.2c, p<0.05). Large necrotic foci were observed in the control livers ( Fig. 2a ), extending well beyond the centrilobular space (zone 3), while necrosis in the VE treated livers was generally mild ( Fig. 2b ), and confined on average to a few cells adjacent to the central veins ( Fig. 2c ).  RESULTS To investigate whether VE protects against I/R injury in 6–7 week old ob/ob mice, we treated with VE supplemented food for 7 days, after which time, the mice were subjected to 15 minutes of warm, total hepatic ischemia, followed by 24 hours of reperfusion. VE is specifically designed for intracellular hydrolysis and the esterified tag targets it for specific and increased uptake in the liver compared to other forms of vitamin E. 15 , 18 All ob/ob mice receiving VE survived I/R, while only 67% of the control ob/ob animals survived, although this difference was not significant (p=0.17)( Fig. 1a ). Liver injury was assessed through the measurement of serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) concentrations. At 24 hours following reperfusion, ALT levels in the VE treated mice were 5-fold lower than the surviving ob/ob controls (p<0.05)( Fig. 1b ). As an additional indicator of hepatic injury, hepatocellular necrosis was measured histologically. Graded necrosis was significantly reduced in the VE treated mice on the 0 to 3 scale (Figure 6.2c, p<0.05). Large necrotic foci were observed in the control livers ( Fig. 2a ), extending well beyond the centrilobular space (zone 3), while necrosis in the VE treated livers was generally mild ( Fig. 2b ), and confined on average to a few cells adjacent to the central veins ( Fig. 2c ).  DISCUSSION Although able to carry out their functions at rest, the hepatocytes of steatotic livers are acutely susceptible to injury. This observation is especially evident when the steatotic organ is exposed to the ischemia and reperfusion associated with transplantation. 19 , 20 Steatotic livers are more prone to necrosis, and more specifically oncotic cell death following I/R instead of apoptosis. 11 In this study, we demonstrate that the pretreatment of animals with steatotic livers with VE reduced the level of injury following I/R. VE may provide an ideal candidate for the pretreatment of steatotic livers in the clinical setting. For example, in vitro studies show that VE can enter into cells as the intact ester and then be hydrolyzed intracellularly back to alpha-tocopherol. Importantly, bypassing the gut results in delaying VE hydrolysis until cellular uptake, thus improving rate of delivery and even mitochondrial localization, especially in hepatocytes. 21 – 23 Therefore, VE may in fact perform better when administered by a more clinically applicable route such as i.v. Additional studies are necessary to determine the effectiveness of VE treatment by these alternative routes and for a more clinically appropriate window of time.  DISCUSSION Although able to carry out their functions at rest, the hepatocytes of steatotic livers are acutely susceptible to injury. This observation is especially evident when the steatotic organ is exposed to the ischemia and reperfusion associated with transplantation. 19 , 20 Steatotic livers are more prone to necrosis, and more specifically oncotic cell death following I/R instead of apoptosis. 11 In this study, we demonstrate that the pretreatment of animals with steatotic livers with VE reduced the level of injury following I/R. VE may provide an ideal candidate for the pretreatment of steatotic livers in the clinical setting. For example, in vitro studies show that VE can enter into cells as the intact ester and then be hydrolyzed intracellularly back to alpha-tocopherol. Importantly, bypassing the gut results in delaying VE hydrolysis until cellular uptake, thus improving rate of delivery and even mitochondrial localization, especially in hepatocytes. 21 – 23 Therefore, VE may in fact perform better when administered by a more clinically applicable route such as i.v. Additional studies are necessary to determine the effectiveness of VE treatment by these alternative routes and for a more clinically appropriate window of time. 