Dissecting the Human Plasma Proteome and Inflammatory Response Biomarkers A central focus of clinical proteomics is to search for biomarkers in plasma for diagnostic and therapeutic use. We studied a set of plasma proteins accessed from the HIP2 database, a larger set of curated human proteins, and a subset of inflammatory proteins, for overlap with sets of known protein biomarkers, drug targets, and secreted proteins. Most inflammatory proteins were found to occur in plasma, and over three times the level of biomarkers were found in inflammatory plasma proteins and their interacting protein neighbors compared to the sets of plasma and curated human proteins. Percentage overlaps with Gene Ontology terms were similar between the curated human set and plasma protein set, yet the set of inflammatory plasma proteins had a distinct ontology-based profile. Most of the major hub proteins within protein-protein interaction networks of tissue specific sets of inflammatory proteins were found to occur in disease pathways. The present study presents a systematic approach for profiling a plasma subproteome’s relationship to both its potential range of clinical application and its overlap with complex disease.  3 Results and discussion For practical application, an issue for our investigation was to evaluate the plasma proteins and inflammatory proteins inferred by mass spectrometry for diagnostic and therapeutic use. We analyzed the presence of cancer biomarkers, drug targets and secreted proteins across different data sets: i) curated human proteome, ii) human plasma proteome, iii) inflammatory proteins and inflammatory plasma proteins, and iv) inflammatory plasma expanded proteins. Extensive GO cross-comparison analyses were performed across these sets. To check the specificity of inflammatory proteins present in the plasma, tissue specific PPIs were studied in five major tissues: brain, heart, lung, kidney and liver. The hub proteins in the network analysis coming from the inflammatory protein seed list were then searched in four pathway databases: NCI-curated, Reactome, BioCarta, and ProteinLounge. 3.1 Prevalence of Biomarkers, Drug Targets, and Secreted Proteins Protein biomarkers and drug targets are studied here in the context of curated human proteome and human plasma proteome, because we believe they indicate a range of clinical application opportunities. In particular, protein biomarkers in the plasma may have especially significant utility for clinical diagnosis. Ideally, however, a tissue-specific drug target protein should not be present in the plasma in high concentration, because the drug would then bind to the proteins in the plasma and not reach the specific tissue(s) [ 31 ]. Tissue-specific proteins that are secreted outside of the cell membrane may eventually reach the plasma, so we made an attempt to study the relationship of plasma proteins to secreted proteins. As a means for studying potential association with chronic disease, we surveyed both plasma and non-plasma inflammatory proteins of the curated human proteome for biomarkers, drug targets and secreted proteins. 3.1.1 Curated human proteome, human plasma proteome and filtered human plasma proteome comparison We compared the curated human proteome and human plasma proteome by examining its percentage of overlap in each set for biomarkers, drug targets and secreted proteins. As shown in Table 1 , the human plasma proteome and filtered human plasma proteome have slightly higher percentages of biomarkers, drug targets and secreted proteins relative to the curated human proteome. Percentage differences of overlap with biomarkers and drug targets were <0.5% between the filtered human plasma proteome and the human plasma proteome. The set of secreted proteins had the smallest percentage-wise distinction of overlap between the curated human proteome and the human plasma proteome, and was the only category to decrease in overlap between the unfiltered and filtered human plasma proteomes. All percentage overlaps were less than 10%, and these results highlight the need for using additional classifications of protein subsets within these proteomes to uncover higher amounts of overlap with biomarkers and drug targets. When adjusting the filter from peptide count ?2, to thresholds of 3 and 5, changes to the overall percentage overlaps were within ±2%. With a threshold peptide count ?10, the changes to percentage overlaps were also similarly minor for candidate biomarkers and drug targets, but the percentage overlap more than doubled for secreted proteins. We also conducted the percentage overlap comparison with a high-confidence set of plasma proteins from States et al . [ 20 ], and found these overlaps to be distinctly different from what was found for each of the specific peptide count thresholds. Since our study relates primarily to usage of actual output and performance of existing clinical proteomics technologies, we opted to use the peptide count threshold ?2 as reported in [ 10 , 13 ]. 3.1.2 Inflammatory proteins We next examined inflammatory proteins and their interacting protein neighbors for overlap with biomarkers, drug targets and secreted proteins. The examined datasets were the set of 291 inflammatory proteins, the subset of 204 inflammatory plasma proteins, and datasets based on expansions with interacting protein neighbors. As shown in Table 2 , restricting the initial set of 291 inflammatory proteins to the 204 proteins in the plasma proteome produced only marginal changes (?1%) in percentage overlap with biomarkers, drug targets and secreted proteins. Overlap with biomarkers increased by 4% with a first neighbor-based protein interaction expansion on the set of inflammatory plasma proteins, yet an overall percentage-wise decrease was found for the second neighbor-based protein interaction expansion. We calculated p-value based on Fisher’s exact test to test whether inflammatory proteins present in plasma ( n =204), first neighbor expansion proteins ( n =710) and second neighbor expansion proteins ( n =2866) are biomarkers or non biomarkers. We got p-value of 0.1977 between inflammatory proteins present in plasma and first neighbor expansion proteins; p-value of 0.0006 between first neighbor expansion proteins and second neighbor expansion proteins; p-value of 0.0141 between inflammatory proteins present in plasma and second neighbor expansion proteins (See Table S1–S3 ). Protein interaction expansions to the set of inflammatory plasma proteins produced consecutive reductions in overlap with drug targets and secreted proteins, most significantly for secreted proteins and the contingency tables of Fisher’s exact test are shown in Table S4–S9 . Based on protein interactions, both first neighbor and second neighbor expansions were found to be successful in overlapping with higher numbers of biomarkers, drug targets and secreted proteins than observed for the curated human proteome or human plasma proteome. For an additional survey of biomarkers, drug targets and secreted proteins, we next distinguished for plasma versus non-plasma proteins in the set of inflammatory proteins and its related set of expanded proteins. The subsets of non-plasma proteins in the inflammatory and expanded sets of inflammatory proteins had elevated percentages of overlap for biomarkers and secreted proteins as shown in Table 3 . We found the greatest increases between plasma and non-plasma protein sets to occur for percentage overlaps with inflammatory protein biomarkers. We found this trend to be consistent with the presence of inflammatory protein biomarkers outside of plasma. The inflammatory response proteins and their interacting protein partners thus implicate possibilities for clinical application related to cancer detection and therapy. Investigating the relationship of these prospective sets of proteins with functional annotations, disease biology and pathways may therefore yield insight on the range and activity of these proteins in cellular and organism physiology. 3.2 Comparative gene functional category analysis We use gene ontology as a primary tool to annotate and compare protein functions between the annotated subsets of the curated human proteome ( H ) and the filtered human plasma proteome ( P ) to make comparisons. We conducted two sets of comparisons involving: i) the annotated subsets of the curated human proteome and filtered human plasma proteome ( H vs P ); and ii) the filtered human plasma proteome and inflammatory plasma proteins ( P vs I p ). To account for the relative difference in sizes between protein sets and their frequency ranges of GO annotations, we determined significance based on an adjusted p-value as calculated from 1000 null-hypothesis simulations of hypergeometric comparisons based on random selection ( p adj ?0.001). Following our initial selection of statistically significant, level 4 GO terms, we made further refinements to the set of GO terms to be used for analysis. The set of biological process GO terms was pruned for general redundancies with inflammatory response resulting in the removal of 35 GO terms from our analytical comparisons. Calculation of percentages was based on the sets of proteins annotated to each of three selected sets of GO terms: 11 cellular component terms, 18 molecular function terms and 14 biological process terms. 3.2.1 Curated human proteome and filtered human plasma proteome We studied the annotations of 43 GO terms as they are applied to the curated human proteome and filtered human plasma proteome. Differences between the GO annotation percentages of the H and P sets were <2%, and the overall distributions were identical as shown in Figure 1 . Across the three GO vocabularies, for the 13 GO terms in H and P with <2% annotation frequencies, the P set uniformly had higher percentages except for the indexed P8 category (response to bacterium, GO:0009617). For the 8 cellular component and 10 molecular function GO terms in H and P with >2% annotation frequencies, the H set had only a slightly higher number of GO terms with greater percentages than the P set. For biological process, the P set had a higher percentage than the H set for 8 of the 12 GO terms with >2% annotation frequencies. While the differences of percentages between GO annotations in the H and P sets were low (<2%), 34 of the 43 GO terms were statistically significant for the overall comparison as presented in Tables 4 – 6 . Interestingly, our findings show the percentage ontology classifications of the H and P sets to be much more similar than has been previously reported in studies where the proteome coverage was low or the data came from a single instrument type [ 10 , 12 , 13 ]. Possible differences likely arose from our use of a more expansive and up-to-date reference set for the plasma proteome, our choice of a reference set of human proteins, and our use of more recent ontology and annotation files. Another source of variation between our results and the other proteomic analyses may have been our inclusion of all evidence codes including the inferred from electronic annotation code (IEA). There was some notable, almost identical, similarity however between some of the percentages in our study, and percentages from a study based on a different plasma proteome database [ 12 ]. Similarities were found for cell communication (P7: 24% versus 23.7% respectively), immune response (P14: 4.5% versus 4.3% respectively) and hydrolase activity (F14: 8.8% versus 9% respectively). The similarities are surprisingly close considering that our percentages are calculated based on a different overall set of GO terms and, unlike Muthusamy et al . [ 12 ], we did not include a category for proteins without annotation. Significant differences (two-fold) were observed however for transport (P12) and signal transducer activity (F18). We found consistency of sorted rankings for percentages of different GO terms, although percentages and proteomic comparisons between Ping et al . [ 10 ], Liu et al . [ 13 ], and our study varied. Nucleus (C9) and protein binding (F11) were the top-ranked GO categories of cellular component and molecular function for both our study (see Figure 1 ) and Ping et al . [ 10 ]. Nucleus was the second highest ranking category for Liu et al . [ 13 ]. For biological process terms across both human and plasma protein sets, transport was in the top three GO terms in our study and the most prevalent GO term in Ping et al . [ 10 ]. When comparing the human and plasma protein sets, Liu et al. [ 13 ] found a noticeable increase in extracellular component (+5%) and a decrease in nuclear proteins (-12%). We found similar directions of change, but of a reduced magnitude; for extracellular matrix and space (C10 and C11), there was a 1% increase, and for nucleus (C9), there was a 2% decrease. The biological processes of cell proliferation, immune response and cell motility in our analysis matched the percentage frequency rank order of Ping et al. , as did the molecular functions of protein binding, ion binding and nucleotide binding. We did not find a similarly high magnitude of percentage differences between plasma and human protein sets. In general, our study did not find the many two-fold or more changes in percentages common to most of Ping et al . (for instance, from a human protein set to plasma protein set comparison, they found changes of 2% to 4%, and 2% to 6% for extracellular matrix and space respectively). We did however find, consistent with findings reported in Ping et al ., plasma proteins to be increasingly over-represented for low frequency GO annotations relative to human proteins. Our findings may also help further resolve proposed interpretations concerning the percentage differences between the plasma and the entire human proteome. Intriguingly, with plasma, Liu et al. and Ping et al. report similar percentages for their respective nuclear and nucleus component categories (18%). Liu et al . find a rise of the percentage (to 30%) observed in a human protein set, yet Ping et al. find an unexpected reduction (to <14%) which they suggested may be the result of the secretion of cellular breakdown products into circulation. We found 40% of the human plasma proteome to consist of nucleus proteins, with a minor rise in value to 42% for the curated human proteome. Liu et al. suggest that mimicry of percentages in the human proteome by the plasma map would indicate that it is composed of random assignments, and they find evidence against random assignment based on significant differences in percentage. We did not find significant differences in GO term percentages but our tests for statistical significance would reject a scenario of completely random assignment. 3.2.2 Filtered human plasma proteome and inflammatory plasma proteins We compared GO annotations between the human plasma proteome and inflammatory plasma proteins. Across the set of comparisons between 43 GO terms shown in Tables 4 – 6 and Figure 1, I p did not have any representative proteins for 3 of the cellular component terms: lysosomal membrane, myosin complex and collagen (C3, C5 and C6), 6 of the molecular function terms: structural constituent of cytoskeleton, chromatin binding, helicase activity, extracellular matrix structural constituent, RNS polymerase II transcription factor activity and GTPase regulator activity (F1, F2, F3, F4, F8 and F9) and a single biological process term: extracellular structure organization and biogenesis (P1). The distribution of GO term percentages on the I p set was broadly distinguishable from the P set. Differences between the GO term percentages of the P and I p sets were generally >2%. Differences were >10% for 3 of the 8 GO terms within the P versus I p cellular component comparison, and 2 of the GO terms within each of the 12 molecular function and 13 biological process comparisons. For larger differences among cellular component GO terms (>10%), the I p set had higher percentages for plasma membrane part (C7) and extracellular space (C11), and a smaller percentage for nucleus (C9). For larger differences among molecular function GO terms (>10%), the I p set had higher percentages for protein binding (F11) and signal transducer activity (F18). For larger differences among biological process GO terms (>10%), the I p set had a higher percentage for response to stress (P4) and a smaller percentage for transport (P12). For a percentage difference threshold of >8%, the I p set also had a higher percentage for immune response (P14) and a smaller percentage for cell communication (P7). Statistically significant comparisons between the P and I p sets were observed for 1 cellular component GO term : extracellular space (C11), 1 molecular function GO term: signal transducer activity (F18) and 7 biological process GO terms: response to stress, death, cell motility, cell communication, response to bacterium, immune system development and immune response (P4, P5, P6, P7, P8, P13 and P14). Extracellular space and signal transducer activity were exclusively significant for the P vs I p comparison. The statistically significant distinctions of biological process with the inflammatory protein set characterize a system of cellular communication, motility, immune response and system development, death, and response to stress. For biological process, the response to bacterium, immune response and immune system development terms were exclusively significant for the P vs I p comparison. The I p set is based on the biological process GO term of inflammatory response, and the interdependency among concepts within the biological process GO vocabulary suggested that over-representation may occur for other biological process GO terms, as was indeed found. Overall, we found inflammatory proteins to be annotated with functions, processes and cellular components in ways that would distinctly separate this class of proteins from the human plasma proteome in general. Beyond this observed distinction in functional annotation for inflammatory proteins, objectives for direct clinical application may be further advanced by investigating the specificity of inflammatory proteins to multiple aspects of different complex diseases. In particular, we next sought to complement the findings of our ontology analysis by investigations of tissue specificity, interactions between proteins, and biological pathways. 3.3 Tissue specific PPIs Inflammation processes are tissue specific [ 32 ], thus we investigated overlap of inflammatory plasma proteins in tissue. We observed in which tissues those inflammatory proteins were expressed, and found these proteins to be expressed in heart, brain, lung, kidney, pancreas, skin, colon, testis and ovary, liver and spleen. For our study, we evaluated five main organs such as heart, brain, lung, kidney and liver for which the inflammatory proteins were also present in amounts ? 20. The UniProt IDs of the proteins expressed in these tissues has been shown in Table 7 . For the visualization of PPIs, we used plugin software APID2NET in the Cytoscape with settings described in Section 2.2 of this paper. All the GO terms mentioned in the tissue PPIs analysis are related to cancer prognosis [ 33 – 35 ]. 3.3.1 Brain We observed 25 inflammatory proteins expressed in brain tissue, and the interaction network was expanded to 129 nodes and 278 edges. We found six major hub proteins – NMI(17), CXCR4 (26), HDAC (17), AACT (18) and BMP2 (14), STAT3 (103) as shown in Fig. S1 . In the expanded list of 129 proteins, we studied the GO terms of biological process, and observed that eight proteins are from the JAK-STAT cascade (GO:7259)- STAT4, SOCS3, CCR2, STAT4, STAT3, STA5A, STA5B, NMI; four proteins are from the anti-apoptosis (GO:6916)- TF65, SOCS3, NFKB1, HDAC3; two proteins are from the I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB cascade (GO:7249)- STAT1 TLR8; two proteins are from activation of NF-kappaB-inducing kinase (GO:7250)- TLR4 M3K7. Interestingly, we observed other proteins to be associated with GO development processes such as a protein in eye development (GO:1654) - BMR1B; two proteins in nervous system development (GO:7399) - STAT3, HDAC4; and two proteins in muscle contraction (GO:6936)- LT4R1, DAG1. 3.3.2 Heart We observed 29 inflammatory proteins expressed in heart tissue, and the interaction network was expanded to 116 nodes and 234 edges. We found five major hub proteins, HDAC9 (17), NOD1 (13), GCR (98), BMP2 (14), CXCR4 (26) as shown in Fig. S2 . In the expanded list of 116 proteins, we studied the GO terms of biological process, and observed that five proteins are from the JAK-STAT cascade (GO:7259) - STA5A, CCR2, STAT3, STA5A, STA5B; five proteins are associated with anti-apoptosis (GO:6916)- HDAC3, BAG1, NFKB1, TF65, SOCS3; one protein is associated with activation of NF-kappaB transcription factor (GO:51092)- TF65; and one protein is from the I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB cascade(GO:7249)- TLR8. 3.3.3 Lung We observed 34 inflammatory proteins expressed in lung tissue, and the interaction network was expanded to 153 nodes and 353 edges. We found eight major hub proteins – IRAK2 (12), IL1AP (13), CXCR4 (26), NOD1 (13), TLR2 (18), CEBPB (60), BMP2 (14), STAT3 (103) as shown in Fig. S3 . Six proteins are from the JAK-STAT cascade pathway (GO:7259)- INAR1, SOCS3, STA5A, CCR2, NMI, STAT3; five proteins are associated with anti-apoptosis (GO:6916)- FOXO1, NFKB1, SOCS3, TF65, ENPL; three proteins are from the I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB cascade pathway (GO:7249)- IRAK2, STAT1, TLR8; three proteins are from the activation of NF-kappaB-inducing kinase pathway (GO:7250)- TLR4, M3K7, TRAF6. All the GO terms mentioned were found to relate to cancer prognosis [ 33 – 35 ]. 3.3.4 Kidney We observed 21 inflammatory proteins expressed in kidney tissue, and the interaction network was expanded to 106 nodes and 281 edges. We found six major hub proteins – IRAK2 (12), CXCR4 (26), NOD1 (13), CEBPB (60), BMP2 (14), STAT3 (103) as shown in Fig. S4 . We observed that five proteins are from the JAK-STAT cascade pathway (GO:7259)- INAR1, SOCS3, STA5A, NMI, STAT3; four proteins are associated with anti-apoptosis (GO:6916)- SOCS3, NFKB1, TF65, FOXO1; two proteins are from the I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB cascade (GO:7249)- STAT1, IRAK2; and three proteins are associated with activation of NF-kappaB-inducing kinase (GO:7250)- TLR4, M3K7, TRAF6. 3.3.5 Liver We observed 43 inflammatory proteins expressed in liver tissue, and the interaction network was expanded to 165 nodes and 318 edges. We found fourteen major hub proteins – IRAK2 (12), NMI (25), IL1AP (13), CXCR4 (26), NOD1 (13), TLR2 (18), AACT (18), BMP2 (14), THRB (48), FETUA (10), TRFE (20), CFAH (11), A2AP (15), STAT3 (103) as shown in Fig S5 . We observed that eight proteins are from the with JAK-STAT cascade (GO:7259)- STAT4, STA5B, INAR1, SOCS3, STA5A, CCR2, NMI, STAT3; four proteins are associated with anti-apoptosis (GO:6916)- NFKB1, SOCS3, TF65, ENPL; three proteins are from the I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB cascade (GO:7249)- IRAK2, TLR8, STAT1; three proteins are associated with in activation of NF-kappaB-inducing kinase (GO:7250) - TLR4, M3K7, TRAF6. 3.4 Pathway database searching for network hub proteins Seventeen hub proteins expressed in five tissues were analyzed with known pathways as shown in Table 8 . It was observed that many inflammatory proteins were expressed in many tissues. For example, BMP2_HUMAN protein is expressed in all the five organs studied (heart, brain, lung, kidney, and liver) and it is secreted protein [ 24 ]. NOD1_HUMAN, AACT_HUMAN, FETUA_HUMAN, TRFE_HUMAN, CFAH_HUMAN, A2AP_HUMAN were the six hub proteins not found in our set of pathway databases. All of those pathways containing our proteins related to complex disease. For instance, HDAC9_HUMAN is expressed in heart, brain, and liver and is associated with pathways of cardiac hypertrophy, notch signaling, and the p53 signaling pathway. GCR_HUMAN is expressed only in the heart and is found in chromatin remodelling[ 36 ]; defects in the GCR gene cause a hypertensive, hyperandrogenic disorder characterized by increased serum cortisol concentrations [ 37 ]. AACT_HUMAN is expressed only in brain and liver tissue, and defects in the AACT gene are a proposed cause of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [ 38 ]. TLR2_HUMAN is expressed in liver and is observed in Toll-like receptors pathway and TLR-TRIF pathway. THRB_HUMAN is a part of thrombin signalling, thrombopoietin pathway. Six hub proteins, BMP2_HUMAN, AACT_HUMAN, CXCR4_HUMAN, FETUA_HUMAN, TRFE_HUMAN and THRB_HUMAN were found in the cancer biomarker list as reported in [ 22 ]. Four hub proteins, GCR_HUMAN, TLR2_HUMAN, TRFE_HUMAN and THRB_HUMAN were found in the drug target list [ 23 ].  3.1 Prevalence of Biomarkers, Drug Targets, and Secreted Proteins Protein biomarkers and drug targets are studied here in the context of curated human proteome and human plasma proteome, because we believe they indicate a range of clinical application opportunities. In particular, protein biomarkers in the plasma may have especially significant utility for clinical diagnosis. Ideally, however, a tissue-specific drug target protein should not be present in the plasma in high concentration, because the drug would then bind to the proteins in the plasma and not reach the specific tissue(s) [ 31 ]. Tissue-specific proteins that are secreted outside of the cell membrane may eventually reach the plasma, so we made an attempt to study the relationship of plasma proteins to secreted proteins. As a means for studying potential association with chronic disease, we surveyed both plasma and non-plasma inflammatory proteins of the curated human proteome for biomarkers, drug targets and secreted proteins. 3.1.1 Curated human proteome, human plasma proteome and filtered human plasma proteome comparison We compared the curated human proteome and human plasma proteome by examining its percentage of overlap in each set for biomarkers, drug targets and secreted proteins. As shown in Table 1 , the human plasma proteome and filtered human plasma proteome have slightly higher percentages of biomarkers, drug targets and secreted proteins relative to the curated human proteome. Percentage differences of overlap with biomarkers and drug targets were <0.5% between the filtered human plasma proteome and the human plasma proteome. The set of secreted proteins had the smallest percentage-wise distinction of overlap between the curated human proteome and the human plasma proteome, and was the only category to decrease in overlap between the unfiltered and filtered human plasma proteomes. All percentage overlaps were less than 10%, and these results highlight the need for using additional classifications of protein subsets within these proteomes to uncover higher amounts of overlap with biomarkers and drug targets. When adjusting the filter from peptide count ?2, to thresholds of 3 and 5, changes to the overall percentage overlaps were within ±2%. With a threshold peptide count ?10, the changes to percentage overlaps were also similarly minor for candidate biomarkers and drug targets, but the percentage overlap more than doubled for secreted proteins. We also conducted the percentage overlap comparison with a high-confidence set of plasma proteins from States et al . [ 20 ], and found these overlaps to be distinctly different from what was found for each of the specific peptide count thresholds. Since our study relates primarily to usage of actual output and performance of existing clinical proteomics technologies, we opted to use the peptide count threshold ?2 as reported in [ 10 , 13 ]. 3.1.2 Inflammatory proteins We next examined inflammatory proteins and their interacting protein neighbors for overlap with biomarkers, drug targets and secreted proteins. The examined datasets were the set of 291 inflammatory proteins, the subset of 204 inflammatory plasma proteins, and datasets based on expansions with interacting protein neighbors. As shown in Table 2 , restricting the initial set of 291 inflammatory proteins to the 204 proteins in the plasma proteome produced only marginal changes (?1%) in percentage overlap with biomarkers, drug targets and secreted proteins. Overlap with biomarkers increased by 4% with a first neighbor-based protein interaction expansion on the set of inflammatory plasma proteins, yet an overall percentage-wise decrease was found for the second neighbor-based protein interaction expansion. We calculated p-value based on Fisher’s exact test to test whether inflammatory proteins present in plasma ( n =204), first neighbor expansion proteins ( n =710) and second neighbor expansion proteins ( n =2866) are biomarkers or non biomarkers. We got p-value of 0.1977 between inflammatory proteins present in plasma and first neighbor expansion proteins; p-value of 0.0006 between first neighbor expansion proteins and second neighbor expansion proteins; p-value of 0.0141 between inflammatory proteins present in plasma and second neighbor expansion proteins (See Table S1–S3 ). Protein interaction expansions to the set of inflammatory plasma proteins produced consecutive reductions in overlap with drug targets and secreted proteins, most significantly for secreted proteins and the contingency tables of Fisher’s exact test are shown in Table S4–S9 . Based on protein interactions, both first neighbor and second neighbor expansions were found to be successful in overlapping with higher numbers of biomarkers, drug targets and secreted proteins than observed for the curated human proteome or human plasma proteome. For an additional survey of biomarkers, drug targets and secreted proteins, we next distinguished for plasma versus non-plasma proteins in the set of inflammatory proteins and its related set of expanded proteins. The subsets of non-plasma proteins in the inflammatory and expanded sets of inflammatory proteins had elevated percentages of overlap for biomarkers and secreted proteins as shown in Table 3 . We found the greatest increases between plasma and non-plasma protein sets to occur for percentage overlaps with inflammatory protein biomarkers. We found this trend to be consistent with the presence of inflammatory protein biomarkers outside of plasma. The inflammatory response proteins and their interacting protein partners thus implicate possibilities for clinical application related to cancer detection and therapy. Investigating the relationship of these prospective sets of proteins with functional annotations, disease biology and pathways may therefore yield insight on the range and activity of these proteins in cellular and organism physiology.  3.1.1 Curated human proteome, human plasma proteome and filtered human plasma proteome comparison We compared the curated human proteome and human plasma proteome by examining its percentage of overlap in each set for biomarkers, drug targets and secreted proteins. As shown in Table 1 , the human plasma proteome and filtered human plasma proteome have slightly higher percentages of biomarkers, drug targets and secreted proteins relative to the curated human proteome. Percentage differences of overlap with biomarkers and drug targets were <0.5% between the filtered human plasma proteome and the human plasma proteome. The set of secreted proteins had the smallest percentage-wise distinction of overlap between the curated human proteome and the human plasma proteome, and was the only category to decrease in overlap between the unfiltered and filtered human plasma proteomes. All percentage overlaps were less than 10%, and these results highlight the need for using additional classifications of protein subsets within these proteomes to uncover higher amounts of overlap with biomarkers and drug targets. When adjusting the filter from peptide count ?2, to thresholds of 3 and 5, changes to the overall percentage overlaps were within ±2%. With a threshold peptide count ?10, the changes to percentage overlaps were also similarly minor for candidate biomarkers and drug targets, but the percentage overlap more than doubled for secreted proteins. We also conducted the percentage overlap comparison with a high-confidence set of plasma proteins from States et al . [ 20 ], and found these overlaps to be distinctly different from what was found for each of the specific peptide count thresholds. Since our study relates primarily to usage of actual output and performance of existing clinical proteomics technologies, we opted to use the peptide count threshold ?2 as reported in [ 10 , 13 ].  3.1.2 Inflammatory proteins We next examined inflammatory proteins and their interacting protein neighbors for overlap with biomarkers, drug targets and secreted proteins. The examined datasets were the set of 291 inflammatory proteins, the subset of 204 inflammatory plasma proteins, and datasets based on expansions with interacting protein neighbors. As shown in Table 2 , restricting the initial set of 291 inflammatory proteins to the 204 proteins in the plasma proteome produced only marginal changes (?1%) in percentage overlap with biomarkers, drug targets and secreted proteins. Overlap with biomarkers increased by 4% with a first neighbor-based protein interaction expansion on the set of inflammatory plasma proteins, yet an overall percentage-wise decrease was found for the second neighbor-based protein interaction expansion. We calculated p-value based on Fisher’s exact test to test whether inflammatory proteins present in plasma ( n =204), first neighbor expansion proteins ( n =710) and second neighbor expansion proteins ( n =2866) are biomarkers or non biomarkers. We got p-value of 0.1977 between inflammatory proteins present in plasma and first neighbor expansion proteins; p-value of 0.0006 between first neighbor expansion proteins and second neighbor expansion proteins; p-value of 0.0141 between inflammatory proteins present in plasma and second neighbor expansion proteins (See Table S1–S3 ). Protein interaction expansions to the set of inflammatory plasma proteins produced consecutive reductions in overlap with drug targets and secreted proteins, most significantly for secreted proteins and the contingency tables of Fisher’s exact test are shown in Table S4–S9 . Based on protein interactions, both first neighbor and second neighbor expansions were found to be successful in overlapping with higher numbers of biomarkers, drug targets and secreted proteins than observed for the curated human proteome or human plasma proteome. For an additional survey of biomarkers, drug targets and secreted proteins, we next distinguished for plasma versus non-plasma proteins in the set of inflammatory proteins and its related set of expanded proteins. The subsets of non-plasma proteins in the inflammatory and expanded sets of inflammatory proteins had elevated percentages of overlap for biomarkers and secreted proteins as shown in Table 3 . We found the greatest increases between plasma and non-plasma protein sets to occur for percentage overlaps with inflammatory protein biomarkers. We found this trend to be consistent with the presence of inflammatory protein biomarkers outside of plasma. The inflammatory response proteins and their interacting protein partners thus implicate possibilities for clinical application related to cancer detection and therapy. Investigating the relationship of these prospective sets of proteins with functional annotations, disease biology and pathways may therefore yield insight on the range and activity of these proteins in cellular and organism physiology.  3.2 Comparative gene functional category analysis We use gene ontology as a primary tool to annotate and compare protein functions between the annotated subsets of the curated human proteome ( H ) and the filtered human plasma proteome ( P ) to make comparisons. We conducted two sets of comparisons involving: i) the annotated subsets of the curated human proteome and filtered human plasma proteome ( H vs P ); and ii) the filtered human plasma proteome and inflammatory plasma proteins ( P vs I p ). To account for the relative difference in sizes between protein sets and their frequency ranges of GO annotations, we determined significance based on an adjusted p-value as calculated from 1000 null-hypothesis simulations of hypergeometric comparisons based on random selection ( p adj ?0.001). Following our initial selection of statistically significant, level 4 GO terms, we made further refinements to the set of GO terms to be used for analysis. The set of biological process GO terms was pruned for general redundancies with inflammatory response resulting in the removal of 35 GO terms from our analytical comparisons. Calculation of percentages was based on the sets of proteins annotated to each of three selected sets of GO terms: 11 cellular component terms, 18 molecular function terms and 14 biological process terms. 3.2.1 Curated human proteome and filtered human plasma proteome We studied the annotations of 43 GO terms as they are applied to the curated human proteome and filtered human plasma proteome. Differences between the GO annotation percentages of the H and P sets were <2%, and the overall distributions were identical as shown in Figure 1 . Across the three GO vocabularies, for the 13 GO terms in H and P with <2% annotation frequencies, the P set uniformly had higher percentages except for the indexed P8 category (response to bacterium, GO:0009617). For the 8 cellular component and 10 molecular function GO terms in H and P with >2% annotation frequencies, the H set had only a slightly higher number of GO terms with greater percentages than the P set. For biological process, the P set had a higher percentage than the H set for 8 of the 12 GO terms with >2% annotation frequencies. While the differences of percentages between GO annotations in the H and P sets were low (<2%), 34 of the 43 GO terms were statistically significant for the overall comparison as presented in Tables 4 – 6 . Interestingly, our findings show the percentage ontology classifications of the H and P sets to be much more similar than has been previously reported in studies where the proteome coverage was low or the data came from a single instrument type [ 10 , 12 , 13 ]. Possible differences likely arose from our use of a more expansive and up-to-date reference set for the plasma proteome, our choice of a reference set of human proteins, and our use of more recent ontology and annotation files. Another source of variation between our results and the other proteomic analyses may have been our inclusion of all evidence codes including the inferred from electronic annotation code (IEA). There was some notable, almost identical, similarity however between some of the percentages in our study, and percentages from a study based on a different plasma proteome database [ 12 ]. Similarities were found for cell communication (P7: 24% versus 23.7% respectively), immune response (P14: 4.5% versus 4.3% respectively) and hydrolase activity (F14: 8.8% versus 9% respectively). The similarities are surprisingly close considering that our percentages are calculated based on a different overall set of GO terms and, unlike Muthusamy et al . [ 12 ], we did not include a category for proteins without annotation. Significant differences (two-fold) were observed however for transport (P12) and signal transducer activity (F18). We found consistency of sorted rankings for percentages of different GO terms, although percentages and proteomic comparisons between Ping et al . [ 10 ], Liu et al . [ 13 ], and our study varied. Nucleus (C9) and protein binding (F11) were the top-ranked GO categories of cellular component and molecular function for both our study (see Figure 1 ) and Ping et al . [ 10 ]. Nucleus was the second highest ranking category for Liu et al . [ 13 ]. For biological process terms across both human and plasma protein sets, transport was in the top three GO terms in our study and the most prevalent GO term in Ping et al . [ 10 ]. When comparing the human and plasma protein sets, Liu et al. [ 13 ] found a noticeable increase in extracellular component (+5%) and a decrease in nuclear proteins (-12%). We found similar directions of change, but of a reduced magnitude; for extracellular matrix and space (C10 and C11), there was a 1% increase, and for nucleus (C9), there was a 2% decrease. The biological processes of cell proliferation, immune response and cell motility in our analysis matched the percentage frequency rank order of Ping et al. , as did the molecular functions of protein binding, ion binding and nucleotide binding. We did not find a similarly high magnitude of percentage differences between plasma and human protein sets. In general, our study did not find the many two-fold or more changes in percentages common to most of Ping et al . (for instance, from a human protein set to plasma protein set comparison, they found changes of 2% to 4%, and 2% to 6% for extracellular matrix and space respectively). We did however find, consistent with findings reported in Ping et al ., plasma proteins to be increasingly over-represented for low frequency GO annotations relative to human proteins. Our findings may also help further resolve proposed interpretations concerning the percentage differences between the plasma and the entire human proteome. Intriguingly, with plasma, Liu et al. and Ping et al. report similar percentages for their respective nuclear and nucleus component categories (18%). Liu et al . find a rise of the percentage (to 30%) observed in a human protein set, yet Ping et al. find an unexpected reduction (to <14%) which they suggested may be the result of the secretion of cellular breakdown products into circulation. We found 40% of the human plasma proteome to consist of nucleus proteins, with a minor rise in value to 42% for the curated human proteome. Liu et al. suggest that mimicry of percentages in the human proteome by the plasma map would indicate that it is composed of random assignments, and they find evidence against random assignment based on significant differences in percentage. We did not find significant differences in GO term percentages but our tests for statistical significance would reject a scenario of completely random assignment. 3.2.2 Filtered human plasma proteome and inflammatory plasma proteins We compared GO annotations between the human plasma proteome and inflammatory plasma proteins. Across the set of comparisons between 43 GO terms shown in Tables 4 – 6 and Figure 1, I p did not have any representative proteins for 3 of the cellular component terms: lysosomal membrane, myosin complex and collagen (C3, C5 and C6), 6 of the molecular function terms: structural constituent of cytoskeleton, chromatin binding, helicase activity, extracellular matrix structural constituent, RNS polymerase II transcription factor activity and GTPase regulator activity (F1, F2, F3, F4, F8 and F9) and a single biological process term: extracellular structure organization and biogenesis (P1). The distribution of GO term percentages on the I p set was broadly distinguishable from the P set. Differences between the GO term percentages of the P and I p sets were generally >2%. Differences were >10% for 3 of the 8 GO terms within the P versus I p cellular component comparison, and 2 of the GO terms within each of the 12 molecular function and 13 biological process comparisons. For larger differences among cellular component GO terms (>10%), the I p set had higher percentages for plasma membrane part (C7) and extracellular space (C11), and a smaller percentage for nucleus (C9). For larger differences among molecular function GO terms (>10%), the I p set had higher percentages for protein binding (F11) and signal transducer activity (F18). For larger differences among biological process GO terms (>10%), the I p set had a higher percentage for response to stress (P4) and a smaller percentage for transport (P12). For a percentage difference threshold of >8%, the I p set also had a higher percentage for immune response (P14) and a smaller percentage for cell communication (P7). Statistically significant comparisons between the P and I p sets were observed for 1 cellular component GO term : extracellular space (C11), 1 molecular function GO term: signal transducer activity (F18) and 7 biological process GO terms: response to stress, death, cell motility, cell communication, response to bacterium, immune system development and immune response (P4, P5, P6, P7, P8, P13 and P14). Extracellular space and signal transducer activity were exclusively significant for the P vs I p comparison. The statistically significant distinctions of biological process with the inflammatory protein set characterize a system of cellular communication, motility, immune response and system development, death, and response to stress. For biological process, the response to bacterium, immune response and immune system development terms were exclusively significant for the P vs I p comparison. The I p set is based on the biological process GO term of inflammatory response, and the interdependency among concepts within the biological process GO vocabulary suggested that over-representation may occur for other biological process GO terms, as was indeed found. Overall, we found inflammatory proteins to be annotated with functions, processes and cellular components in ways that would distinctly separate this class of proteins from the human plasma proteome in general. Beyond this observed distinction in functional annotation for inflammatory proteins, objectives for direct clinical application may be further advanced by investigating the specificity of inflammatory proteins to multiple aspects of different complex diseases. In particular, we next sought to complement the findings of our ontology analysis by investigations of tissue specificity, interactions between proteins, and biological pathways.  3.2.1 Curated human proteome and filtered human plasma proteome We studied the annotations of 43 GO terms as they are applied to the curated human proteome and filtered human plasma proteome. Differences between the GO annotation percentages of the H and P sets were <2%, and the overall distributions were identical as shown in Figure 1 . Across the three GO vocabularies, for the 13 GO terms in H and P with <2% annotation frequencies, the P set uniformly had higher percentages except for the indexed P8 category (response to bacterium, GO:0009617). For the 8 cellular component and 10 molecular function GO terms in H and P with >2% annotation frequencies, the H set had only a slightly higher number of GO terms with greater percentages than the P set. For biological process, the P set had a higher percentage than the H set for 8 of the 12 GO terms with >2% annotation frequencies. While the differences of percentages between GO annotations in the H and P sets were low (<2%), 34 of the 43 GO terms were statistically significant for the overall comparison as presented in Tables 4 – 6 . Interestingly, our findings show the percentage ontology classifications of the H and P sets to be much more similar than has been previously reported in studies where the proteome coverage was low or the data came from a single instrument type [ 10 , 12 , 13 ]. Possible differences likely arose from our use of a more expansive and up-to-date reference set for the plasma proteome, our choice of a reference set of human proteins, and our use of more recent ontology and annotation files. Another source of variation between our results and the other proteomic analyses may have been our inclusion of all evidence codes including the inferred from electronic annotation code (IEA). There was some notable, almost identical, similarity however between some of the percentages in our study, and percentages from a study based on a different plasma proteome database [ 12 ]. Similarities were found for cell communication (P7: 24% versus 23.7% respectively), immune response (P14: 4.5% versus 4.3% respectively) and hydrolase activity (F14: 8.8% versus 9% respectively). The similarities are surprisingly close considering that our percentages are calculated based on a different overall set of GO terms and, unlike Muthusamy et al . [ 12 ], we did not include a category for proteins without annotation. Significant differences (two-fold) were observed however for transport (P12) and signal transducer activity (F18). We found consistency of sorted rankings for percentages of different GO terms, although percentages and proteomic comparisons between Ping et al . [ 10 ], Liu et al . [ 13 ], and our study varied. Nucleus (C9) and protein binding (F11) were the top-ranked GO categories of cellular component and molecular function for both our study (see Figure 1 ) and Ping et al . [ 10 ]. Nucleus was the second highest ranking category for Liu et al . [ 13 ]. For biological process terms across both human and plasma protein sets, transport was in the top three GO terms in our study and the most prevalent GO term in Ping et al . [ 10 ]. When comparing the human and plasma protein sets, Liu et al. [ 13 ] found a noticeable increase in extracellular component (+5%) and a decrease in nuclear proteins (-12%). We found similar directions of change, but of a reduced magnitude; for extracellular matrix and space (C10 and C11), there was a 1% increase, and for nucleus (C9), there was a 2% decrease. The biological processes of cell proliferation, immune response and cell motility in our analysis matched the percentage frequency rank order of Ping et al. , as did the molecular functions of protein binding, ion binding and nucleotide binding. We did not find a similarly high magnitude of percentage differences between plasma and human protein sets. In general, our study did not find the many two-fold or more changes in percentages common to most of Ping et al . (for instance, from a human protein set to plasma protein set comparison, they found changes of 2% to 4%, and 2% to 6% for extracellular matrix and space respectively). We did however find, consistent with findings reported in Ping et al ., plasma proteins to be increasingly over-represented for low frequency GO annotations relative to human proteins. Our findings may also help further resolve proposed interpretations concerning the percentage differences between the plasma and the entire human proteome. Intriguingly, with plasma, Liu et al. and Ping et al. report similar percentages for their respective nuclear and nucleus component categories (18%). Liu et al . find a rise of the percentage (to 30%) observed in a human protein set, yet Ping et al. find an unexpected reduction (to <14%) which they suggested may be the result of the secretion of cellular breakdown products into circulation. We found 40% of the human plasma proteome to consist of nucleus proteins, with a minor rise in value to 42% for the curated human proteome. Liu et al. suggest that mimicry of percentages in the human proteome by the plasma map would indicate that it is composed of random assignments, and they find evidence against random assignment based on significant differences in percentage. We did not find significant differences in GO term percentages but our tests for statistical significance would reject a scenario of completely random assignment.  3.2.2 Filtered human plasma proteome and inflammatory plasma proteins We compared GO annotations between the human plasma proteome and inflammatory plasma proteins. Across the set of comparisons between 43 GO terms shown in Tables 4 – 6 and Figure 1, I p did not have any representative proteins for 3 of the cellular component terms: lysosomal membrane, myosin complex and collagen (C3, C5 and C6), 6 of the molecular function terms: structural constituent of cytoskeleton, chromatin binding, helicase activity, extracellular matrix structural constituent, RNS polymerase II transcription factor activity and GTPase regulator activity (F1, F2, F3, F4, F8 and F9) and a single biological process term: extracellular structure organization and biogenesis (P1). The distribution of GO term percentages on the I p set was broadly distinguishable from the P set. Differences between the GO term percentages of the P and I p sets were generally >2%. Differences were >10% for 3 of the 8 GO terms within the P versus I p cellular component comparison, and 2 of the GO terms within each of the 12 molecular function and 13 biological process comparisons. For larger differences among cellular component GO terms (>10%), the I p set had higher percentages for plasma membrane part (C7) and extracellular space (C11), and a smaller percentage for nucleus (C9). For larger differences among molecular function GO terms (>10%), the I p set had higher percentages for protein binding (F11) and signal transducer activity (F18). For larger differences among biological process GO terms (>10%), the I p set had a higher percentage for response to stress (P4) and a smaller percentage for transport (P12). For a percentage difference threshold of >8%, the I p set also had a higher percentage for immune response (P14) and a smaller percentage for cell communication (P7). Statistically significant comparisons between the P and I p sets were observed for 1 cellular component GO term : extracellular space (C11), 1 molecular function GO term: signal transducer activity (F18) and 7 biological process GO terms: response to stress, death, cell motility, cell communication, response to bacterium, immune system development and immune response (P4, P5, P6, P7, P8, P13 and P14). Extracellular space and signal transducer activity were exclusively significant for the P vs I p comparison. The statistically significant distinctions of biological process with the inflammatory protein set characterize a system of cellular communication, motility, immune response and system development, death, and response to stress. For biological process, the response to bacterium, immune response and immune system development terms were exclusively significant for the P vs I p comparison. The I p set is based on the biological process GO term of inflammatory response, and the interdependency among concepts within the biological process GO vocabulary suggested that over-representation may occur for other biological process GO terms, as was indeed found. Overall, we found inflammatory proteins to be annotated with functions, processes and cellular components in ways that would distinctly separate this class of proteins from the human plasma proteome in general. Beyond this observed distinction in functional annotation for inflammatory proteins, objectives for direct clinical application may be further advanced by investigating the specificity of inflammatory proteins to multiple aspects of different complex diseases. In particular, we next sought to complement the findings of our ontology analysis by investigations of tissue specificity, interactions between proteins, and biological pathways.  3.3 Tissue specific PPIs Inflammation processes are tissue specific [ 32 ], thus we investigated overlap of inflammatory plasma proteins in tissue. We observed in which tissues those inflammatory proteins were expressed, and found these proteins to be expressed in heart, brain, lung, kidney, pancreas, skin, colon, testis and ovary, liver and spleen. For our study, we evaluated five main organs such as heart, brain, lung, kidney and liver for which the inflammatory proteins were also present in amounts ? 20. The UniProt IDs of the proteins expressed in these tissues has been shown in Table 7 . For the visualization of PPIs, we used plugin software APID2NET in the Cytoscape with settings described in Section 2.2 of this paper. All the GO terms mentioned in the tissue PPIs analysis are related to cancer prognosis [ 33 – 35 ]. 3.3.1 Brain We observed 25 inflammatory proteins expressed in brain tissue, and the interaction network was expanded to 129 nodes and 278 edges. We found six major hub proteins – NMI(17), CXCR4 (26), HDAC (17), AACT (18) and BMP2 (14), STAT3 (103) as shown in Fig. S1 . In the expanded list of 129 proteins, we studied the GO terms of biological process, and observed that eight proteins are from the JAK-STAT cascade (GO:7259)- STAT4, SOCS3, CCR2, STAT4, STAT3, STA5A, STA5B, NMI; four proteins are from the anti-apoptosis (GO:6916)- TF65, SOCS3, NFKB1, HDAC3; two proteins are from the I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB cascade (GO:7249)- STAT1 TLR8; two proteins are from activation of NF-kappaB-inducing kinase (GO:7250)- TLR4 M3K7. Interestingly, we observed other proteins to be associated with GO development processes such as a protein in eye development (GO:1654) - BMR1B; two proteins in nervous system development (GO:7399) - STAT3, HDAC4; and two proteins in muscle contraction (GO:6936)- LT4R1, DAG1. 3.3.2 Heart We observed 29 inflammatory proteins expressed in heart tissue, and the interaction network was expanded to 116 nodes and 234 edges. We found five major hub proteins, HDAC9 (17), NOD1 (13), GCR (98), BMP2 (14), CXCR4 (26) as shown in Fig. S2 . In the expanded list of 116 proteins, we studied the GO terms of biological process, and observed that five proteins are from the JAK-STAT cascade (GO:7259) - STA5A, CCR2, STAT3, STA5A, STA5B; five proteins are associated with anti-apoptosis (GO:6916)- HDAC3, BAG1, NFKB1, TF65, SOCS3; one protein is associated with activation of NF-kappaB transcription factor (GO:51092)- TF65; and one protein is from the I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB cascade(GO:7249)- TLR8. 3.3.3 Lung We observed 34 inflammatory proteins expressed in lung tissue, and the interaction network was expanded to 153 nodes and 353 edges. We found eight major hub proteins – IRAK2 (12), IL1AP (13), CXCR4 (26), NOD1 (13), TLR2 (18), CEBPB (60), BMP2 (14), STAT3 (103) as shown in Fig. S3 . Six proteins are from the JAK-STAT cascade pathway (GO:7259)- INAR1, SOCS3, STA5A, CCR2, NMI, STAT3; five proteins are associated with anti-apoptosis (GO:6916)- FOXO1, NFKB1, SOCS3, TF65, ENPL; three proteins are from the I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB cascade pathway (GO:7249)- IRAK2, STAT1, TLR8; three proteins are from the activation of NF-kappaB-inducing kinase pathway (GO:7250)- TLR4, M3K7, TRAF6. All the GO terms mentioned were found to relate to cancer prognosis [ 33 – 35 ]. 3.3.4 Kidney We observed 21 inflammatory proteins expressed in kidney tissue, and the interaction network was expanded to 106 nodes and 281 edges. We found six major hub proteins – IRAK2 (12), CXCR4 (26), NOD1 (13), CEBPB (60), BMP2 (14), STAT3 (103) as shown in Fig. S4 . We observed that five proteins are from the JAK-STAT cascade pathway (GO:7259)- INAR1, SOCS3, STA5A, NMI, STAT3; four proteins are associated with anti-apoptosis (GO:6916)- SOCS3, NFKB1, TF65, FOXO1; two proteins are from the I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB cascade (GO:7249)- STAT1, IRAK2; and three proteins are associated with activation of NF-kappaB-inducing kinase (GO:7250)- TLR4, M3K7, TRAF6. 3.3.5 Liver We observed 43 inflammatory proteins expressed in liver tissue, and the interaction network was expanded to 165 nodes and 318 edges. We found fourteen major hub proteins – IRAK2 (12), NMI (25), IL1AP (13), CXCR4 (26), NOD1 (13), TLR2 (18), AACT (18), BMP2 (14), THRB (48), FETUA (10), TRFE (20), CFAH (11), A2AP (15), STAT3 (103) as shown in Fig S5 . We observed that eight proteins are from the with JAK-STAT cascade (GO:7259)- STAT4, STA5B, INAR1, SOCS3, STA5A, CCR2, NMI, STAT3; four proteins are associated with anti-apoptosis (GO:6916)- NFKB1, SOCS3, TF65, ENPL; three proteins are from the I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB cascade (GO:7249)- IRAK2, TLR8, STAT1; three proteins are associated with in activation of NF-kappaB-inducing kinase (GO:7250) - TLR4, M3K7, TRAF6.  3.3.1 Brain We observed 25 inflammatory proteins expressed in brain tissue, and the interaction network was expanded to 129 nodes and 278 edges. We found six major hub proteins – NMI(17), CXCR4 (26), HDAC (17), AACT (18) and BMP2 (14), STAT3 (103) as shown in Fig. S1 . In the expanded list of 129 proteins, we studied the GO terms of biological process, and observed that eight proteins are from the JAK-STAT cascade (GO:7259)- STAT4, SOCS3, CCR2, STAT4, STAT3, STA5A, STA5B, NMI; four proteins are from the anti-apoptosis (GO:6916)- TF65, SOCS3, NFKB1, HDAC3; two proteins are from the I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB cascade (GO:7249)- STAT1 TLR8; two proteins are from activation of NF-kappaB-inducing kinase (GO:7250)- TLR4 M3K7. Interestingly, we observed other proteins to be associated with GO development processes such as a protein in eye development (GO:1654) - BMR1B; two proteins in nervous system development (GO:7399) - STAT3, HDAC4; and two proteins in muscle contraction (GO:6936)- LT4R1, DAG1.  3.3.2 Heart We observed 29 inflammatory proteins expressed in heart tissue, and the interaction network was expanded to 116 nodes and 234 edges. We found five major hub proteins, HDAC9 (17), NOD1 (13), GCR (98), BMP2 (14), CXCR4 (26) as shown in Fig. S2 . In the expanded list of 116 proteins, we studied the GO terms of biological process, and observed that five proteins are from the JAK-STAT cascade (GO:7259) - STA5A, CCR2, STAT3, STA5A, STA5B; five proteins are associated with anti-apoptosis (GO:6916)- HDAC3, BAG1, NFKB1, TF65, SOCS3; one protein is associated with activation of NF-kappaB transcription factor (GO:51092)- TF65; and one protein is from the I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB cascade(GO:7249)- TLR8.  3.3.3 Lung We observed 34 inflammatory proteins expressed in lung tissue, and the interaction network was expanded to 153 nodes and 353 edges. We found eight major hub proteins – IRAK2 (12), IL1AP (13), CXCR4 (26), NOD1 (13), TLR2 (18), CEBPB (60), BMP2 (14), STAT3 (103) as shown in Fig. S3 . Six proteins are from the JAK-STAT cascade pathway (GO:7259)- INAR1, SOCS3, STA5A, CCR2, NMI, STAT3; five proteins are associated with anti-apoptosis (GO:6916)- FOXO1, NFKB1, SOCS3, TF65, ENPL; three proteins are from the I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB cascade pathway (GO:7249)- IRAK2, STAT1, TLR8; three proteins are from the activation of NF-kappaB-inducing kinase pathway (GO:7250)- TLR4, M3K7, TRAF6. All the GO terms mentioned were found to relate to cancer prognosis [ 33 – 35 ].  3.3.4 Kidney We observed 21 inflammatory proteins expressed in kidney tissue, and the interaction network was expanded to 106 nodes and 281 edges. We found six major hub proteins – IRAK2 (12), CXCR4 (26), NOD1 (13), CEBPB (60), BMP2 (14), STAT3 (103) as shown in Fig. S4 . We observed that five proteins are from the JAK-STAT cascade pathway (GO:7259)- INAR1, SOCS3, STA5A, NMI, STAT3; four proteins are associated with anti-apoptosis (GO:6916)- SOCS3, NFKB1, TF65, FOXO1; two proteins are from the I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB cascade (GO:7249)- STAT1, IRAK2; and three proteins are associated with activation of NF-kappaB-inducing kinase (GO:7250)- TLR4, M3K7, TRAF6.  3.3.5 Liver We observed 43 inflammatory proteins expressed in liver tissue, and the interaction network was expanded to 165 nodes and 318 edges. We found fourteen major hub proteins – IRAK2 (12), NMI (25), IL1AP (13), CXCR4 (26), NOD1 (13), TLR2 (18), AACT (18), BMP2 (14), THRB (48), FETUA (10), TRFE (20), CFAH (11), A2AP (15), STAT3 (103) as shown in Fig S5 . We observed that eight proteins are from the with JAK-STAT cascade (GO:7259)- STAT4, STA5B, INAR1, SOCS3, STA5A, CCR2, NMI, STAT3; four proteins are associated with anti-apoptosis (GO:6916)- NFKB1, SOCS3, TF65, ENPL; three proteins are from the I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB cascade (GO:7249)- IRAK2, TLR8, STAT1; three proteins are associated with in activation of NF-kappaB-inducing kinase (GO:7250) - TLR4, M3K7, TRAF6.  3.4 Pathway database searching for network hub proteins Seventeen hub proteins expressed in five tissues were analyzed with known pathways as shown in Table 8 . It was observed that many inflammatory proteins were expressed in many tissues. For example, BMP2_HUMAN protein is expressed in all the five organs studied (heart, brain, lung, kidney, and liver) and it is secreted protein [ 24 ]. NOD1_HUMAN, AACT_HUMAN, FETUA_HUMAN, TRFE_HUMAN, CFAH_HUMAN, A2AP_HUMAN were the six hub proteins not found in our set of pathway databases. All of those pathways containing our proteins related to complex disease. For instance, HDAC9_HUMAN is expressed in heart, brain, and liver and is associated with pathways of cardiac hypertrophy, notch signaling, and the p53 signaling pathway. GCR_HUMAN is expressed only in the heart and is found in chromatin remodelling[ 36 ]; defects in the GCR gene cause a hypertensive, hyperandrogenic disorder characterized by increased serum cortisol concentrations [ 37 ]. AACT_HUMAN is expressed only in brain and liver tissue, and defects in the AACT gene are a proposed cause of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [ 38 ]. TLR2_HUMAN is expressed in liver and is observed in Toll-like receptors pathway and TLR-TRIF pathway. THRB_HUMAN is a part of thrombin signalling, thrombopoietin pathway. Six hub proteins, BMP2_HUMAN, AACT_HUMAN, CXCR4_HUMAN, FETUA_HUMAN, TRFE_HUMAN and THRB_HUMAN were found in the cancer biomarker list as reported in [ 22 ]. Four hub proteins, GCR_HUMAN, TLR2_HUMAN, TRFE_HUMAN and THRB_HUMAN were found in the drug target list [ 23 ].  4 Conclusions Characterizing the components of plasma proteome systematically is closely related to future clinical applications of MS proteomics emerging from a wave of promising new technologies such as SELDI [ 39 ], shotgun proteomics [ 40 ], multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) [ 41 ] and glycoprotein-mass spectrometry coupled proteomics [ 42 ]. In order to measure the consequence of these advancements which may add significant quality to the biomarker discovery process, there is a need for inspecting how current proteomic surveys generally relate to systems of complex disease. In this work, we examined proteomic and inflammatory protein sets for clinically important overlaps with biomarkers and drug targets in the healthy human plasma proteome recently integrated in the HIP2 database [ 14 ]. We analyzed the functional annotations of these protein sets with gene ontology, and investigated patterns of protein interaction, tissue specificity and overlap with pathways. The human plasma proteome and filtered human plasma proteome were found to have higher percentages of biomarkers and drug targets than was found in the curated human proteome. Plasma is readily accessible and, based on the presence of biomarkers in plasma, this suggests that it is useful for objectives of clinical diagnosis and prognosis. As we found, especially for GO level 4, tests for statistical significance identified differences between the curated human proteome and the filtered human plasma proteome across all three GO vocabularies. Distinct differences of percentages for GO term overlaps were not observed however between the curated human proteome and the human plasma proteome, although we did find higher percentage representations of P compared to H for GO term annotation percentages <2%. The higher percentage representations for low frequency GO term annotations in plasma can be generally interpreted to represent how the plasma proteome specifically deviates from the overall human proteome. Although the inflammatory process is tissue specific, 70% of inflammatory proteins are also found in plasma, and inflammation has been found to have some overlap with complex disease. We found inflammatory plasma proteins to have a higher chance to be biomarkers than the plasma proteome. Additionally, we found inflammatory plasma protein interacting partners to have a higher chance to be biomarkers than the plasma proteome. Compared to the plasma proteome, the inflammatory plasma protein set also presented a distinctive profile of statistically significant GO terms and percentages of overlap. Our visualizations of PPI network topologies showed differences between tissues, most distinctively for the higher centrality observed in brain and heart PPI networks. Six hub proteins in the PPIs expanded inflammatory network were found to be potential cancer biomarkers: BMP2_HUMAN, AACT_HUMAN, CXCR4_HUMAN, FETUA_HUMAN, TRFE_HUMAN and THRB_HUMAN. We identified a specificity issue in terms of how many inflammatory proteins are expressed in many tissues, and may thus be difficult to use as biomarkers of tissue specific cancer. Despite decades of effort, single biomarkers have not been found that can reach the levels of specificity and sensitivity that are required for routine clinical use for the detection or monitoring of the most common cancers. Alternative approaches that measure sensitivity and specificity based on multiple protein and peptide markers may therefore be necessary to achieve a higher level of diagnostic specificity. Overall, we found that a systematic evaluation of plasma, inflammatory proteins and interacting protein partners facilitates the study of complex disease and opportunities for clinical application.  Supplementary Material Supplementary Data 