Substance P, obesity and gut inflammation Purpose of review The purpose of this review is to present recent data on the effects of substance P (SP) on the development two common pathological conditions, namely obesity and gut inflammation, and elucidate the neuropeptide as a potential regulator between increased adiposity and exacerbated inflammatory responses during IBD. Recent findings We present data that demonstrate a role for SP in both obesity and IBD and investigate potential effects on fat tissue that may influence the progression of intestinal inflammation. More specifically, we present new evidence of direct effects of SP on fat tissue that determine fat depot size and overall weight in mice and analyze some of the potential mechanisms. Furthermore, we present data that describe changes in the intestinal sensory innervation, in particular SP-positive inneravation, during gut inflammation and new direct evidence of the effects of pre-established obesity in the outcome of experimental inflammation of the colon in mice. In the end we propose a link between the role of SP in the promotion of obesity and the potential consequences on IBD. Summary We propose that SP may promote fat tissue expansion either centrally or peripherally, and thus create a pro-inflammatory environment (as is the case with obesity) which may in turn affect the progression (exacerbate) of gut inflammation. Further studies are required on the effects of “creeping fat” in IBD in order to decipher the role this type of fat depot expansion in the development of the disease.  Conclusion Based on the studies described in this review, there is persuasive evidence associating the neuropeptide SP with two very common and rapidly growing pathologies of the last two decades, namely obesity and IBD. The mechanisms underlying these potential effects are still unclear, but accumulating evidence demonstrate the ability of SP to stimulate pro-inflammatory responses in different cell types involved in these conditions. In addition, new potential pathways are suggested by its ability to influence angiogenesis and fat tissue growth. The later can be accomplished in multiple ways through the effects of SP on preadipocytes replication and apoptosis. Since increased preadipocyte numbers are essential for fat depot enlargement, the direct effect of SP on these cells strongly favors such a development. Another way SP could affect fat growth is through its ability increase angiogenesis, although these studies have not yet been performed in the context of fat tissue. Furthermore, it is also becoming clear that the pro-inflammatory environment that exists with increased adiposity is favorable for the development of conditions where inflammation represents a central component, such as IBD. Thus, SP seems to be able to influence the development of intestinal inflammation both directly, through the activation of pro-inflammatory pathways, and indirectly through its actions on fat tissue that may disrupt fat tissue homeostasis, including the promotion of obesity. As more of these pathologies continue to be investigated under the scope of pre-existing obesity, changes in responses of fat tissue components to endocrine signals will be of central importance in the efforts to comprehend the mechanisms underlying these diseases and in future attempts for potential treatments. The increasing incidence of IBD and the continuously decreasing age at which symptoms for this disease first appear, point to environmental and habitual factors as potential reason(s) for this phenomenon. Increased energy intake and the subsequent development of obesity (with its pathological consequences) is becoming a major epidemic and factors, such as SP and possibly other neuropeptides, that are common among the two conditions may prove helpful in uncovering etiologies as well as developing future therapeutic approaches. 