Update on therapeutic vascularization strategies The ability to exploit angiogenesis and vascularization as a therapeutic strategy will be of enormous benefit to a wide range of medical and tissue-engineering applications. Angiogenic growth factor and cell-based therapies have thus far failed to produce a robust healing response in clinical trials for a variety of ischemic diseases, while engineered tissue substitutes are still size-limited by a lack of vascularization. The purpose of this review is to investigate current research advances in therapeutic vascularization strategies applied to ischemic disease states, tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. Recent advances are discussed that focus on better regulation of growth factor delivery and attempts to better mimic natural processes by delivering combinations of multiple growth factors, cells and bioactive materials in the right spatial and temporal setting. Some unconventional approaches and novel therapeutic targets that hold significant potential are also discussed.  Conclusion The therapeutic vascularization field experienced initial setbacks in the failure of several clinical trials with GF therapy going quickly from benchtop to bedside before precise delivery methods and controls were elucidated. A growing body of evidence is beginning to suggest that single GF therapy may be insufficient for restoring a large volume of blood flow to an ischemic tissue, especially in a diseased state where vessels may be less responsive. A great deal of effort has gone into identifying upstream activators that induce expression of multiple angiogenic factors as well as alternative pathways to the traditional angiogenic signaling paradigm. Cell-based therapy looks very promising, but continues to suffer from optimal sourcing and delivery strategies. A new generation of therapies is needed to better address the problems with current angiogenesis strategies.  Future perspective Future approaches to therapeutic vascularization will have a better chance of success if a more targeted and careful approach than that of earlier trials is utilized. A clinically successful vascularization therapy is likely to be a combination therapy. Examples of combination therapies such as engineered cell therapy, multiple GF release, or growth factor–cell–matrix combinations [ 124 ] are beginning to emerge. We must also consider the importance of inducing arteriogenesis, angiogenesis, neovascularization or some combination. Future therapies need to consider the end-goal in terms of reperfusion and what type of therapy or combination strategy is best-suited to obtain both the necessary increase in blood-flow volume and ability to deliver oxygen. Ongoing research is helping us to understand the complex signaling and pathfinding mechanisms that lead to branching morphogenesis. Knowledge divulged from studies on development of vascular architecture and pathfinding, such as GF gradients, vascular memory and morphogenesis signaling, needs to be applied to create more physiologically accurate and better functioning induced vasculature. More work is needed to sort out the extremely complex angiogenic molecular program. Metabolic control over angiogenesis is an interesting new approach and further research in this area may provide alternative therapies to patients who do not respond to traditional GF therapy or that have metabolic disease-related ischemic disorders. Additionally, advances in engineered bioartificial and bioactive matrices are illustrating higher levels of control in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine, paving the way towards large-scale engineered tissue substitutes. As work progresses in all of these areas, we can expect more functional therapies to become available to patients. Based on the impressive progress thus far, we can expect the future of therapeutic vascularization to be quite bright. Executive summary Biological mechanisms ? Sprouting angiogenesis is the best understood mechanism of new blood vessel growth in adults and involves the formation of new capillaries in response to ischemia or other stimuli. ? Arteriogenesis involves widening of existing arteries and formation of collateral vessels triggered by mechanical stresses often linked to atherosclerosis. Arteriogenesis is capable of restoring a large volume of blood flow to a distal ischemic tissue, although will not necessarily increase oxygen delivery without simultaneous capillary expansion in the ischemic tissue itself. ? Vasculogenesis refers to de novo generation of vessels from migrating or transplanted endothelial progenitor cells. Growth factor delivery ? Early trials with VEGF, FGF and HGF were promising but failed to demonstrate significant benefit in exercise stress tests. ? Better understanding of growth factor (GF) dosage and spatial and temporal control of delivery are needed to produce better clinical results. ? New strategies stagger exposure of inductive followed by stabilizing factors to generate more functional vasculature. ? Delivery of upstream activators that engage more components of the angiogenic machinery such as hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1? and PlGF may provide novel therapies. ? Gene therapy remains an option to combat problems with protein delivery such as production expense and short half-life in vivo . Cell therapy ? Transplantation of endothelial progenitors or mesenchymal stem cells has benefits for ischemic heart disease. ? Administration of attractive cytokines is a possible alternative to or augmentation for cell transplantation but has not yet been very effective in clinical studies. ? Engineered cell therapy is an attractive alternative to direct gene therapy. ? Endothelial progenitors in combination with well-designed matrices are proving successful for tissue engineering. Matrix interaction ? A new generation of bio-active materials is being designed that closely mimics the natural extracellular matrix but provides a high level of control over the signaling environment. ? Patterning techniques could be employed to control architecture of induced vasculature. Metabolic controls ? Administration of nitrite has been studied to selectively deliver proangiogenic nitric oxide to ischemic tissues while leaving healthy tissue unaffected. ? Expression of peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor-? coactivator-1?, a metabolic sensor, activates a non-HIF-1? angiogenic pathway. ? Reducing prolyl-hydroxylase-1 expression results in a hypoxia-tolerant state, reducing ischemic damage to tissue. ? Pharmaceutical methods for simulating ischemic preconditioning might be possible. Future perspective ? Effective future approaches are likely to be combination therapies with components containing multiple GFs, upstream activators, cell-transplantations or novel matrices.  Biological mechanisms ? Sprouting angiogenesis is the best understood mechanism of new blood vessel growth in adults and involves the formation of new capillaries in response to ischemia or other stimuli. ? Arteriogenesis involves widening of existing arteries and formation of collateral vessels triggered by mechanical stresses often linked to atherosclerosis. Arteriogenesis is capable of restoring a large volume of blood flow to a distal ischemic tissue, although will not necessarily increase oxygen delivery without simultaneous capillary expansion in the ischemic tissue itself. ? Vasculogenesis refers to de novo generation of vessels from migrating or transplanted endothelial progenitor cells.  Growth factor delivery ? Early trials with VEGF, FGF and HGF were promising but failed to demonstrate significant benefit in exercise stress tests. ? Better understanding of growth factor (GF) dosage and spatial and temporal control of delivery are needed to produce better clinical results. ? New strategies stagger exposure of inductive followed by stabilizing factors to generate more functional vasculature. ? Delivery of upstream activators that engage more components of the angiogenic machinery such as hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1? and PlGF may provide novel therapies. ? Gene therapy remains an option to combat problems with protein delivery such as production expense and short half-life in vivo .  Cell therapy ? Transplantation of endothelial progenitors or mesenchymal stem cells has benefits for ischemic heart disease. ? Administration of attractive cytokines is a possible alternative to or augmentation for cell transplantation but has not yet been very effective in clinical studies. ? Engineered cell therapy is an attractive alternative to direct gene therapy. ? Endothelial progenitors in combination with well-designed matrices are proving successful for tissue engineering.  Matrix interaction ? A new generation of bio-active materials is being designed that closely mimics the natural extracellular matrix but provides a high level of control over the signaling environment. ? Patterning techniques could be employed to control architecture of induced vasculature.  Metabolic controls ? Administration of nitrite has been studied to selectively deliver proangiogenic nitric oxide to ischemic tissues while leaving healthy tissue unaffected. ? Expression of peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor-? coactivator-1?, a metabolic sensor, activates a non-HIF-1? angiogenic pathway. ? Reducing prolyl-hydroxylase-1 expression results in a hypoxia-tolerant state, reducing ischemic damage to tissue. ? Pharmaceutical methods for simulating ischemic preconditioning might be possible.  Future perspective ? Effective future approaches are likely to be combination therapies with components containing multiple GFs, upstream activators, cell-transplantations or novel matrices.  Figures and Table Figure 1 Sprouting angiogenesis (A) Endothelial cell is activated in response to a growth factor gradient; tip cell is selected. (B) Tip cell degrades basement membrane and migrates down gradient, following positive and negative guidance cues in the matrix; stalk cells form behind leading tip cell. (C) Guidance cues control pathfinding and morphogenesis, large vacuoles form in stalk cells and merge to make tubules. (D) Recruitment of pericytes and deposition of basement memebrane stabilizes newly formed endothelial tubules. Figure 2 Bioartificial matrix A bioartificial matrix contains a number of bioactive components that enables an artificially synthesized material such as PEG hydrogel to exhibit properties of natural extracellular matrix in a controlled manner. The bioactive components may include MMP-degradable crosslinkers, adhesive ligands such as RGD, and growth factors. A-PEG groups allow for photopolymerization of modular components to form a matrix. A-PEG: Acrylate-PEG; MMP: Matrix mettaloproteinase. Table 1 Selection of ongoing and recently completed clinical trials for treatment of ischemic conditions. Therapy Title Conditions Interventions Phase Enrollment NCT ID Ref. Cell Stem cell study for patients with heart disease Coronary artery disease Genetic: Cell therapy – autologous CD34+ cells I 24 NCT00081913 [ 125 ] Cell EPC by intracoronary injection in patients with chronic stable angina Coronary artery disease Device: Vescell™ – autologous EPCs/angiogenic cell precursors II 24 NCT00384514 Cell Bone marrow transfer to enhance ST-elevation infarct regeneration Myocardial infarction Procedure: Intracoronary bone marrow cell transfer I 60 NCT00224536 [ 126 ] Cell Intramyocardial injection of autologous aldehyde dehydrogenase-bright stem cells for therapeutic angiogenesis Coronary artery disease Procedure: Stem cell injection under electromechanical guidance I 60 NCT00314366 Cell Autologous stem cells for cardiac angiogenesis Ischemic heart disease Device: Intramyocardial injection of stem cells via noga mapping I 30 NCT00203203 Cell Combination stem cell therapy for the treatment of severe leg ischemia Limb ischemia Biological: Mesendo I 10 NCT00518401 Cell Stem cell study for patients with leg ulcer/gangrene Limb ischemia Genetic: Autologous peripheral blood CD34+ cell therapy I, II 15 NCT00221143 [ 127 ] Cell Autologous bone marrow for lower extremity ischemia treating Limb ischemia Procedure: Bone marrow aspiration injection of isolated CD133+ cells II 42 NCT00753025 Cell ACPs in severe PAD/CLI by direct intramuscular injection Limb ischemia Procedure: ACPs or Vescell I 6 NCT00523731 Cell Autologous bone marrow transplanted via transendocardial catheter to chronic myocardial infarct border zone Limb ischemia Procedure: Transendocaridal transplantation of autologous bone marrow I 20 NCT00507468 Cell Autologous stem cell transplantation in acute myocardial infarction Myocardial infarction Gene transfer: Intracoronary autologous stem cell transplantation II 100 NCT00199823 [ 128 ] Cell CD133+ autologous cells after myocardial infarction Myocardial infarction Procedure: CD133+ cell intracoronary administration I, II 15 NCT00400959 Cell Autologous bone marrow transplanted via transendocardial catheter to chronic myocardial infarct border zone Limb ischemia Procedure: Transendocaridal transplantation of autologous bone marrow I 20 NCT00507468 Cell Autologous stem cell transplantation in acute myocardial infarction Myocardial infarction Gene transfer: Intracoronary autologous stem cell transplantation II 100 NCT00199823 [ 128 ] Cell CD133+ autologous cells after myocardial infarction Myocardial infarction Procedure: CD133+ cell intracoronary administration I, II 15 NCT00400959 Cell Autologous bone marrow transplanted via transendocardial catheter to chronic myocardial infarct border zone Limb ischemia Procedure: Transendocaridal transplantation of autologous bone marrow I 20 NCT00507468 Cell Autologous stem cell transplantation in acute myocardial infarction Myocardial infarction Gene transfer: Intracoronary autologous stem cell transplantation II 100 NCT00199823 [ 128 ] Cell CD133+ autologous cells after myocardial infarction Myocardial infarction Procedure: CD133+ cell intracoronary administration I, II 15 NCT00400959 Cell Bone marrow cells in myocardial infarction Myocardial infarction Procedure: Intracoronary injection of bone marrow cells II, III 100 NCT00363324 Cell Stem cell therapy to improve myocardial function in patients undergoing CABG Myocardial infarction Procedure: Bone marrow stem cell therapy combined CABG I, II 50 NCT00395811 Cell Efficacy study of intramuscular or intracoronary injection of autologous bone marrow cells to treat scarred myocardium Myocardial infarction Control procedure: intramuscular administration of bone marrow cells procedure: intracoronary administration of bone marrow cells II 63 NCT00560742 Cell REPAIR-AMI: intracoronary progenitor cells in AMI Myocardial infarction Drug: Intracoronary infusion of enriched bone marrow-derived progenitor cells III 200 NCT00279175 [ 129 ] Cell Safety study of bone marrow derived cells to treat damaged heart muscle Myocardial infarction Drug: NX-CP105 I 18 NCT00361855 Cell Safety study of adult MSCs to treat acute myocardial infarction Myocardial infarction Drug: Provacel™ I 48 NCT00114452 [ 130 ] Cell Bone marrow-derived stem cell transfer in acute myocardial infarctions Myocardial infarction Procedure: Bone marrow-derived stem cell transfer II 68 NCT00264316 [ 131 ] Cell Myocardial stem cell administration after acute myocardial infarction (MYSTAR) study Myocardial infarction Procedure: Bone marrow-derived stem cells implantation II 116 NCT00384982 Cell Intracoronary stem cells in large myocardial infarction Myocardial infarction Procedure: Intracoronary infusion of autologous bone-marrow derived stem cells II NCT00389545 Cell Long-term follow-up of autologous bone marrow mononuclear cells therapy in STEMI Myocardial infarction Procedure: Saline infusion. Procedure: Autologous bone marrow mononuclear cells infusion I, II 37 NCT00626145 Cell ACT34-CMI adult autologous CD34+ stem cells Myocardial infarction Device: Stem cell injection II 150 NCT00300053 Cell Stem cell therapy in chronic ischemic heart failure Myocardial infarction Procedure: Bone marrow transplantation II 35 NCT00235417 Cytokine Stem cell mobilization to treat chest pain and shortness of breath in patients with coronary artery disease Coronary artery disease Procedure: Stem cell mobilization II 35 NCT00043628 Cytokine A Phase I–II safety study of filgrastim (Neupogen®) to improve left ventricular function after severe acute myocardial infarction Myocardial infarction Drug: Filgrastim I, II NCT00215124 [ 132 ] Cytokine Stem cells in myocardial infarction Myocardial infarction Drug: G-CSF (Neupogen) II 78 NCT00135928 Cytokine Myocardial regeneration and angiogenesis in myocardial infarction with G-CSF and intracoronary stem cell infusion-3-DES Myocardial infarction Drug: G-CSF Procedure: Collection of mobilized peripheral blood stem cells Procedure: Intracoronary infusion of mobilized cells II 96 NCT00291629 [ 133 ] Cytokine Bone marrow stem cell mobilisation therapy for AMI (REVIVAL-2) Myocardial infarction Drug: G-CSF Other: Placebo IV 114 NCT00126100 [ 134 ] Cytokine Effects of recombinant human erythropoietin on platelet function in patients with acute myocardial infarction Myocardial infarction Drug: recombinant human erythropoietin-? II 48 NCT00367991 Gene The effect of mobilized stem cell by G-CSF and VEGF gene therapy in patients with stable severe angina pectoris Ischemic heart disease Gene transfer: VEGF-A165 plasmid I, II 48 NCT00135850 Gene VEGF gene transfer for critical limb ischemia Limb ischemia Genetic: pVGI.1 (VEGF-2) I NCT00304837 ACP: Angiogenic cell precursor; AMI: Acute myocardial infarction; CABG: Coronary artery bypass grafting; CLI: Critical limb ischemia; DES: Drug-eluting stent; EPC: Endothelial progenitor cell; G-CSF: Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor; MSC: Mesenchymal stem cell; PAD: Peripheral artery disease; REPAIR-AMI: Reinfusion of Enriched Progenitor And Infarct Remodeling in Acute Myocardial Infarction. Data from [ 201 ]. 