Roles of Infection, Inflammation, and the Immune System in Cholesterol Gallstone Formation Cholesterol gallstone formation is a complex process mediated by genetic and environmental factors. Until recently, the role of the immune system in the pathogenesis of cholesterol gallstones was not considered a valid topic of research interest. This review collates and interprets an extensive body of basic literature, some of which is not customarily considered to be related to cholelithogenesis, describing the multiple facets of the immune system that appear to be involved in cholesterol cholelithogenesis. A thorough understanding of the immune interactions with biliary lipids and cholecystocytes should modify current views of the pathogenesis of cholesterol gallstones, promote further research on the pathways involved, and lead to novel diagnostic tools, treatments, and preventive measures.  Conclusions The gallbladder, despite its simple structure and function, is a complex organ. Like most organs, when it becomes inflamed and damaged, it loses its ability to perform concentrative, pH modification, absorptive, and contractive functions. Unlike most other organs in the body, the gallbladder can be exposed to large concentrations of free (unesterified) cholesterol and potentially cytotoxic detergent-like bile salts. These molecules, as well as other proinflammatory molecules, can induce potent inflammatory responses under certain circumstances. 23 , 106 – 108 Such inflammatory damage, through a variety of undetermined mediators, then induces gallbladder hypomotility and promotes the production of pronucleating agents. 23 , 84 , 87 These effects appear to be due, at least in part, to T cells and a proinflammatory Th1 immune response. 18 Furthermore, inflammation, at least in short-term studies, modifies hepatic lipid metabolism and secretion, which could promote cholelithogenesis by altering biliary cholesterol secretion and bile concentration. 173 , 175 , 178 These findings raise the possibility that inflammatory mediators or their subsets are serologic biomarkers of cholesterol gallstone formation. If identified, these biomarkers could prove valuable for diagnosis and interventional therapy. Specifically, abatement of prolonged immune stimulation might prove useful in the prevention or treatment of cholesterol gallstones, either alone or in conjunction with other lipid-altering therapies. It is important to note that many of the studies described in this review relied principally on observation using genetically homozygous mice (>99% identify among genomes). In contrast, even the most consanguineous of human populations are relatively heterogeneous. The role of inflammation in human cholesterol gallstone disease is therefore likely to be subtle and involve a wide variety of overlapping factors. Both environmental (exposure to pathogens and proinflammatory conditions) and genetic immune factors (polymorphisms in genes that promote the response to immune stimuli) are likely to contribute to pathogenesis. Clearly, much remains to be learned in this regard, and further in vitro, animal model, and human studies are likely to clarify many of these exciting possibilities.  Figures Figure 1 The physical-chemical processes involved in formation of cholesterol gallstones. The classic physical-chemical symbols for cholesterol ( pink ), phospholipid ( green ), and bile salt ( purple ) molecules are shown, along with the macromolecular structures they form. Cholesterol, phospholipids, and bile salts combine by hydrophobic interactions to form mixed micelles (micelles) and cholesterol and phospholipids form unilamellar vesicles. Normally the unilamellar vesicles would be ?5–10 times larger than micelles (?40 Å in radius), but for illustration purposes they are depicted here nonproportionately. As cholesterol concentration in gallbladder bile increases principally from hepatic hypersecretion of cholesterol, the true supersaturated state forms transiently. Supersaturated bile usually implies that phase separation of excess cholesterol from micelles has occurred, forming unilamellar vesicles with biliary phospholipids (mostly >95% phosphatidylcholine). In the most common nucleation sequence, unilamellar vesicles fuse to form multilamellar vesicles, or liquid crystals, which are visible by low-power polarizing microscopy. From these, plate-like cholesterol monohydrate crystals (solid cholesterol crystals) nucleate heterogeneously, usually in a mucin gel. The dotted arrow indicates how cholesterol can occasionally phase separate directly from supersaturated micelles. The solid resulting cholesterol monohydrate crystals are a polymorph of the classic cholesterol monohydrate plates into which they transform with passage of time. Once the nucleation sequence has occurred and solid cholesterol crystals have formed, the phase sequence is not repeated if bile remains continuously supersaturated. Gallbladder dysmotility and mucin gel formation also contribute to the aggregation of the plate-like cholesterol monohydrate crystals and contribute to their agglomeration and growth into macroscopic cholesterol gallstones. Figure 2 Receptors and ligands expressed by biliary epithelial cells. The receptors (displayed on the basolateral surface of the cell) and ligands (displayed extracellularly) expressed by biliary epithelial cells are shown in the unstimulated ( right panel ) and stimulated ( left panel ) state. The receptors, ligands, and cells that interact with these biliary expressed proteins are also shown. CCL, chemokine CC motif ligand; CCR, chemokine CC motif receptor; CXCL, chemokine CXC ligand; CXCR, chemokine CXC receptor; LFA, lymphocyte function-associated antigen; MHC, major histocompatibility complex. Figure 3 Immune system–stimulated production of MUC2. Various pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), through their interaction with TLR molecules, increase the production of mucin 2 (MUC2). A portion of this increase seems to be due to increased production of caudal type homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX2), which feeds back to stimulate MUC2 production. Further, LPS and TNF- ? stimulate the production of MUC2. In the case of LPS, this stimulation seems to be mediated through the TNF- ? pathway because inhibition of TNF- ? blocks the effects of LPS treatment on MUC2 production. Figure 4 The points at which the immune system stimulates production of MUC5AC. As described for mucin 2, LPS stimulation leads to production of mucin 5AC (MUC5AC) in a TNF- ? dependent manner (not shown). TNF- ? acts via protein kinase C (PKC)-dependent and EGF-mediated pathways to up-regulate MUC5AC production. In the case of the EGF pathway, this up-regulation results from the production of apical EGF receptors and subsequent binding to apical EGF. Figure 5 Stimulation of mucin 3 (MUC3) production by LPS via CD14 and likely TLR molecules. Stimulation of MUC3 by LPS is independent of TNF- ? , in contrast to MUC2 and MUC5AC. It is currently unclear what downstream pathways are important in LPS stimulation of MUC3 production. 