Gamma-radiation (GR) triggers a unique gene expression profile associated with cell death compared to proton radiation (PR) in mice in vivo Proton radiation (PR) therapy offers a number of potential advantages over conventional (photon) ?-radiation (GR) therapy for cancer, due to a more localized delivery of the radiation dose. However, the pathophysiological effects following PR-exposure are less well characterized than those of GR-exposure and the molecular changes associated with the acute apoptotic effects in mice in vivo following PR have not been elucidated. Previous studies have estimated the RBE of protons for various in vivo and in vitro endpoints at between 1.1 and 1.3. We assumed an RBE of 1.1 for the endpoints to be evaluated in these studies. Based on this assumption, ICR mice were treated with whole-body doses of GR (1.1 and 7.0 Gy) and PR (1.0 and 6.4 Gy) that were expected to represent RBE-weighted doses. The bone marrow, thymus, spleen and GI-tract were isolated and processed for histology and immunohistochemistry. The apoptotic responses varied greatly between GR and PR in a tissue- and dose-dependent manner. Surprisingly, cell death in the splenic white pulp was consistently lower in PR-treated animals compared to animals treated with GR. This was in spite of an increased presence of damaged DNA following PR as determined by staining for ?H2AX and phospho-ATM. Interestingly, both PR and GR triggered nuclear accumulation of p53 and no significant differences were found in the majority of the known pro-apoptotic p53-target genes in the spleens of treated mice. However, GR uniquely triggered a pro-apoptotic expression profile including expression of the pro-apoptotic, p53- and interferon stimulated target gene Bcl-G. In contrast to PR, GR may, in a cell type specific manner, trigger a more diverse non-random stress-response that mediates apoptosis partially independent of the extent of DNA damage.  Introduction Proton radiation (PR) may hold promise for the treatment of malignancies as the physical properties allow a more localized delivery of radiation therapy compared to ?-radiation (GR). In theory, more efficient targeting of the tumor volume could allow for higher treatment doses to be used without increasing toxicity to normal tissues (reviewed in ref. 1 ). PR also has qualitatively different properties from GR. PR may show characteristics of both high- and low linear energy transfer (LET) radiation and at higher energies (>250 MeV) over 30% of the kinetic energy is transferred in the production of secondary particles. 2 PR produces a non-uniform pattern of energy deposition with clusters of ionization, which could be linked to the observed higher biological effectiveness (RBE) values for PR in relation to GR. 3 - 6 However, estimates of RBE in relation to GR have been shown to vary depending on the choice of end-point and cell type. The largely uncharacterized risks associated with exposure to PR may be of concern for astronauts following long-term space missions. 7 , 8 The acute pro-apoptotic response that triggers a lethal hematopoietic condition through bone marrow suppression following GR has been linked to the tumor suppressor p53 and downstream components of the p53 pathway. 9 , 10 Indeed, mice lacking either p53 or the pro-apoptotic transcriptional p53-target PUMA are protected from lethal doses of GR and show lack of apoptosis in several GR-sensitive tissues e.g., spleen, thymus and the GI-tract following irradiation. 11 - 15 Some studies employing experimental animals have addressed early and late change following GR and PR. The immune suppression following whole-body radiation and lethality following localized delivery to the thorax suggests that an RBE with respect to these end-points is close to one for PR. 16 - 19 However, in vivo studies to date have provided little mechanistic insight into tissue-specific regulation of cell death by GR and PR in vivo. The few studies addressing the apoptotic response following PR in vitro suggest the pro-apoptotic response to PR is qualitatively similar to that of GR. 20 - 22 Indeed, upregulation of several pro-apoptotic p53-target genes at the mRNA level was demonstrated following PR. 20 Exposure to PR led to a more potent triggering of cell death in vitro and did so without a lag in the induction of apoptosis, as was observed following GR. Also, exposure to PR was associated with increased DNA damage and DNA damage-repair in comparison to exposure to GR. 20 - 22 Thus a correlation between the extent of DNA damage and apoptosis following both PR and GR was demonstrated. We irradiated ICR mice at Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL) with PR and GR to compare the acute effects of the radiation-treatments in radiation-sensitive tissues (e.g. spleen, thymus, bone marrow, testis and the GI tract). The cell-death response in some of the tissues suggested increased apoptosis following PR compared to GR supporting previous in vitro studies. 20 - 22 Interestingly, the spleen and Peyer’s patches, showed increased apoptosis following GR compared to PR. This occurred despite the increased presence of DNA strand breaks (as measured by immunohistochemistry for ?H2AX) and phosphorylated-ATM in PR-exposed spleens. Total RNA was isolated from the spleens and used for Affymetrix expression profiling. Differences in the acute pro-apoptotic response to PR and GR correlated with increased expression of the p53-dependent pro-apoptotic gene Bcl-G and granzyme B. 23 Our data suggest that cell fate following PR or GR may be context-dependent and possibly the triggering of apoptosis in lymphoid cells in vivo following radiation may not solely depend on the amount of DNA damage inflicted upon the cell.  Results GR and PR triggers cell death in vivo in an organ-specific manner Mice were sacrificed (n = 3 for each treatment group) four hours following irradiation with RBE-weighted doses of GR (1.1 Gy and 7.0 Gy) or PR (1.0 Gy and 6.4 Gy) and tissues isolated. Isolated tissues included bone marrow, spleen, thymus, Peyer’s patches, small intestine and colon i.e., tissues that exhibit a well-documented apoptotic response following GR. 24 , 25 Detailed histological analysis of H/E stained sections, image analysis of H/E stained sections and immunohistochemical staining for apoptosis markers (TUNEL, cleaved caspase-9 and cleaved PARP) were used to assess the cell death response following the different radiation-types and radiation doses. Dying cells were detected in all tissues following radiation irrespective of radiation-type and dose. However, the extent of cell death varied in a tissue-, dose- and radiation-type specific manner. In agreement with previously published in vitro data documenting a more efficient triggering of apoptosis following PR, 1.0 Gy of PR triggered more apoptosis than 1.1 Gy GR in the bone marrow and the thymic cortex ( Fig. 1A ). 20 Conversely both the high and low dose of GR triggered a more extensive cell death response in the splenic white pulp compared to that of mice treated with PR ( Fig. 1 ). PR triggers DNA-damage more efficiently than GR in vivo In order to address the extent of DNA damage in the spleen, immunohistochemical staining for the DNA double-strand break marker ?H2AX was performed. We found that PR triggered an increased presence of cells in the splenic white pulp with ?H2AX-foci and an increased number of ?H2AX-foci/cell compared to GR ( Fig. 2A and Table 1 ). Additionally, immunohistochemistry for phosphorylated ATM (serine-1986 of mouse ATM corresponding to serine-1981 on human ATM) a marker associated with the presence of DNA-damage suggested that spleens irradiated with 6.4 Gy of PR expressed an increased number of cells in the white pulp with phosphorylated-ATM (p-ATM+) compared to spleens treated with 7.0 Gy of GR ( Fig. 2B ). Immunohistochemistry for ?H2AX occasionally resulted in the labeling of cells in the white pulp containing fragmented nuclei and other morphological changes indicative of late phase apoptosis ( Fig. 2A , yellow arrowheads). Such cells were not included in the analysis as they may result in the overestimation of the extent of DNA-damage. Although DNA double-strand breaks can be deleterious for the cell following GR they commonly represent a minority of all DNA-lesions following GR. Therefore, we also performed immunohistochemistry for 8-hydroxyguanosine (8-OH-G) a common DNA-adduct following ionizing radiation. Although irradiated spleens stained more extensively following exposure to both PR and GR we were unable to establish any significant differences between PR and GR with regard to the levels of to 8-OH-G adducts (data not shown). Taken together our data on DNA damage are in agreement with previously reported data suggesting PR is more potent than GR in the triggering of DNA damage. 20 , 21 Expression profiling reveals unique gene expression patterns associated with exposure to PR and GR in the spleen Total RNA was isolated from spleens treated with PR and GR (four hour post-radiation) and used for expression profiling in order to characterize the differences in the global stress-response in the spleen. Two-dimensional principal component analysis (PCA) of global gene expression changes (22,690 genes) in the different treatment groups suggest that two components can be extracted from the data, clustering spleens in the high dose group (i.e., 7.0 Gy of GR and 6.4 Gy of PR) in the same quadrant as related in contrast to untreated spleens or spleens in the low dose group (i.e., 1.1 Gy of GR and 1.0 Gy of PR) ( Fig. 3A ). Thus an overall trend in the global gene expression data exist that distinguish the RNA from spleens in the high dose group relative to the RNA from untreated spleens (control). Relative to the control, a total of 440 and 641 genes were up- or downregulated more than two-fold (p < 0.05, One-way ANOVA test) following 1.0 Gy and 6.4 Gy PR respectively (see supplemental Excel file “Gene List” ). The corresponding values for GR were 265 and 1,271 genes (up- or downregulated more than two-fold) for 1.1 Gy and 7.0 Gy of GR respectively. Interestingly, our analysis indicated that the 7.0 Gy GR-group showed a substantial non-random enrichment (p < 0.05) of gene expression changes in several different Gene Ontology (GO) classes as opposed to 6.4 Gy of PR where non-random enrichment was only observed in the “cell death”-gene list ( Fig. 3B ). This indicates that 7.0 Gy of GR may specifically trigger several different signal transduction-responses in the spleen compared to 6.4 Gy of PR. Treatment related changes were filtered through the GO-gene list “apoptosis regulator activity” (GO: 00176) in order to isolate potential candidate genes that may differentially regulate the apoptotic response following GR and PR. In agreement with previous literature, the responses involved upregulation of IL-6 and several pro-apoptotic genes that have been shown to be responsive to the tumor suppressor and transcription factor p53 in the spleen following GR 24 , 26 - 28 ( Fig. 4A and B ). Indeed, upregulation of p53-protein was also detected in the splenic white pulp and the GI-tract at both low and high doses of GR and PR ( Fig. 4C–E ). Despite this we were not able to detect increased expression of p53-dependent genes by microarray in the low dose group of GR and PR (i.e., 1.1 Gy and 1.0 Gy respectively), suggesting that our microarray analysis did not provide us with sufficient sensitivity to detect smaller changes in gene expression. Literature data suggest that p53-dependent changes in gene expression can be detected following doses of 0.1 Gy of GR using more sensitive methods (e.g., RT-PCR). 29 Given the importance of the p53-pathway in mediating cell death in the spleen, we therefore decided to focus on the high dose of GR and PR. By performing expression-based clustering of genes in the “apoptosis facilitator” gene list that were differentially expressed between the 7.0 Gy GR-group and the 6.4 Gy PR group and applying the criteria for an “upregulated pro-apoptotic gene” or a “downregulated anti-apoptotic gene” (based on literature data) established a number of candidate genes ( Fig. 5A and B ). In addition, isolating genes that showed differential regulation relative to control, using the volcano plot-function in GeneSpring identified hsp1a (hsp70) to be down regulated after 7.0 Gy. This gene has been shown to block apoptosis following GR (data not shown and Fig. 5A ). 30 Bcl-G has previously been shown to be a pro-apoptotic gene containing a BH3-domain and to be upregulated in a p53-dependent manner. 23 , 31 However, the involvement of Bcl-G in the DNA-damage response has until now remained unproven. Granzyme B has been shown to trigger apoptosis through cleavage of e.g., caspase-3, PARP-1 and DNA-PK with a substrate specificity resembling that of caspase-6, -8 and -9. 32 , 33 Birc1a/naip, a member of the IAP-protein family, may interact with and block the activity of caspase-3, -7 and -9. 34 , 35 Indeed, Bcl-G protein was overexpressed in the splenic white pulp of mice subjected to 7.0 Gy of GR but not following 6.4 Gy of PR, suggesting that the observed differences in Bcl-G mRNA expression translated into altered protein expression ( Fig. 5B ). Bcl-G expression was mostly confined to cells with fragmented DNA in atrophic zones of the splenic white pulp in the 7.0 Gy GR-group. Differential expression of cell cycle-regulating genes following GR and PR Filtering-out gene expression changes in the 6.4 Gy PR and 7.0 Gy GR-group that could influence cell cycle progression (cell cycle; GO: 0007049) revealed increased expression of the proto-oncogene K-Ras in PR-treated spleens and the tumor suppressor CDKN2A (INK4A and ARF) in GR-treated spleens ( Table 2 ). Indeed, spleens subjected to 7.0 Gy of GR expressed more p16-INK4A compared to spleens subjected to 6.4 Gy of PR as determined by immunohistochemistry ( Fig. 6 ). Immunohistochemical staining was absent in atrophic areas whereas the marginal zone of the white pulp and the red pulp stained strongly in the 7.0 Gy GR-group. In spleens treated with 6.4 Gy PR, weak staining was detected in the center of the white pulp, whereas staining was completely lacking in the marginal zone and red pulp. Activated Ras has been associated with increased radio-resistance whereas overex-pression of p16-INK4A in T cells, lung cancer cells and erythroid cells may enhance sensitivity to DNA damage through the triggering of apoptosis. 36 - 40 Thus other signal transduction pathways and molecules not directly related to the apoptotic machinery may contribute to the differential triggering of apoptosis in the spleen following GR and PR. Bcl-G is expressed in a p53-dependent manner in the spleen following GR Previous data suggest that Bcl-G is expressed as a long (Bcl-GL) or short (Bcl-GS) protein isoform. 31 Although both Bcl-G isoforms trigger apoptosis, Bcl-GS does so more efficiently compared to Bcl-GL. Bcl-GS was expressed in a p53-dependent manner in confluent HCT116 cells and etoposide-treatment triggered expression of Bcl-GS (but not Bcl-GL) in L929 cells in vitro with concomitant expression of p53 ( Fig. 7A and B ). Mice lacking the p53-gene (Trp53) show an almost complete absence of apoptosis following treatment with GR in the white pulp of the spleen compared to wildtype littermates. 24 Indeed, wildtype but not Trp53?/? C57Bl/6 mice showed increased expression of Bcl-GS in their spleens when subjected to GR (4 Gy) ( Fig. 7C ). Also a granzyme B isoform around 40 kDa did show p53-dependent expression following GR whereas we were unable to substantiate downregulation of Birc1a/naip on the protein level as observed at the mRNA level. Enforced myc-expression and IFN? triggers Bcl-G expression Both GR and PR triggered similar levels of p53 protein expression and similar levels of expression of mRNA from established p53 down-stream target genes ( Fig. 4 ). Given the importance of p53 in regulating expression of Bcl-GS ( Fig. 7D ), we hypothesized that expression of Bcl-G may be regulated by other co-factors in concert with p53 and that these factors may be uniquely expressed following GR. Thus, the diverse set of non-random gene expression changes following 7.0 Gy of GR in contrast to 6.4 Gy of PR, led us to investigate other avenues that could influence the triggering of cell death ( Fig. 3B and Supplemental Excel file “Gene List” ). Overall, upregulation of genes e.g., IL-1, stat5a suggested that 7.0 Gy GR triggered an interleukin/interferon/STAT-response whereas PR did not. Previous literature data suggest that Bcl-G expression in addition to being controlled by p53 also may be controlled by interferon and STAT-signaling. 41 Lymph nodes and spleens isolated from wild-type and E?-myc mice, overexpressing the proto-oncogene and STAT transcriptional target c-Myc in pre-B and B cells, were subjected to Western blot ( Fig. 8A ). Increased expression of Bcl-GS (but not Bcl-GL, data not shown) was detected in both lymph nodes and spleens of E?-myc mice. Increased p53 expression was also detected suggesting that activated p53 may contribute to increased expression of Bcl-G. However, immortalized p53dmc/ras colonocytes (Trp53?/?) overexpressing c-Myc also showed concomitantly increased expression of Bcl-GS ( Fig. 8B ). 42 This suggests that Bcl-GS may be expressed in a myc-dependent but p53-independent manner. We also examined the role of IFN? in the triggering of Bcl-GS ( Fig. 8C ). Following 3–9 hrs treatment of L929 cells with IFN?, an increase in Bcl-GS expression was detected with concomitant increase in phosphorylated (Tyr701) Stat1. Thus, the expression of Bcl-GS may be triggered by additional factors to that of p53 and potentially following GR.  Results GR and PR triggers cell death in vivo in an organ-specific manner Mice were sacrificed (n = 3 for each treatment group) four hours following irradiation with RBE-weighted doses of GR (1.1 Gy and 7.0 Gy) or PR (1.0 Gy and 6.4 Gy) and tissues isolated. Isolated tissues included bone marrow, spleen, thymus, Peyer’s patches, small intestine and colon i.e., tissues that exhibit a well-documented apoptotic response following GR. 24 , 25 Detailed histological analysis of H/E stained sections, image analysis of H/E stained sections and immunohistochemical staining for apoptosis markers (TUNEL, cleaved caspase-9 and cleaved PARP) were used to assess the cell death response following the different radiation-types and radiation doses. Dying cells were detected in all tissues following radiation irrespective of radiation-type and dose. However, the extent of cell death varied in a tissue-, dose- and radiation-type specific manner. In agreement with previously published in vitro data documenting a more efficient triggering of apoptosis following PR, 1.0 Gy of PR triggered more apoptosis than 1.1 Gy GR in the bone marrow and the thymic cortex ( Fig. 1A ). 20 Conversely both the high and low dose of GR triggered a more extensive cell death response in the splenic white pulp compared to that of mice treated with PR ( Fig. 1 ). PR triggers DNA-damage more efficiently than GR in vivo In order to address the extent of DNA damage in the spleen, immunohistochemical staining for the DNA double-strand break marker ?H2AX was performed. We found that PR triggered an increased presence of cells in the splenic white pulp with ?H2AX-foci and an increased number of ?H2AX-foci/cell compared to GR ( Fig. 2A and Table 1 ). Additionally, immunohistochemistry for phosphorylated ATM (serine-1986 of mouse ATM corresponding to serine-1981 on human ATM) a marker associated with the presence of DNA-damage suggested that spleens irradiated with 6.4 Gy of PR expressed an increased number of cells in the white pulp with phosphorylated-ATM (p-ATM+) compared to spleens treated with 7.0 Gy of GR ( Fig. 2B ). Immunohistochemistry for ?H2AX occasionally resulted in the labeling of cells in the white pulp containing fragmented nuclei and other morphological changes indicative of late phase apoptosis ( Fig. 2A , yellow arrowheads). Such cells were not included in the analysis as they may result in the overestimation of the extent of DNA-damage. Although DNA double-strand breaks can be deleterious for the cell following GR they commonly represent a minority of all DNA-lesions following GR. Therefore, we also performed immunohistochemistry for 8-hydroxyguanosine (8-OH-G) a common DNA-adduct following ionizing radiation. Although irradiated spleens stained more extensively following exposure to both PR and GR we were unable to establish any significant differences between PR and GR with regard to the levels of to 8-OH-G adducts (data not shown). Taken together our data on DNA damage are in agreement with previously reported data suggesting PR is more potent than GR in the triggering of DNA damage. 20 , 21 Expression profiling reveals unique gene expression patterns associated with exposure to PR and GR in the spleen Total RNA was isolated from spleens treated with PR and GR (four hour post-radiation) and used for expression profiling in order to characterize the differences in the global stress-response in the spleen. Two-dimensional principal component analysis (PCA) of global gene expression changes (22,690 genes) in the different treatment groups suggest that two components can be extracted from the data, clustering spleens in the high dose group (i.e., 7.0 Gy of GR and 6.4 Gy of PR) in the same quadrant as related in contrast to untreated spleens or spleens in the low dose group (i.e., 1.1 Gy of GR and 1.0 Gy of PR) ( Fig. 3A ). Thus an overall trend in the global gene expression data exist that distinguish the RNA from spleens in the high dose group relative to the RNA from untreated spleens (control). Relative to the control, a total of 440 and 641 genes were up- or downregulated more than two-fold (p < 0.05, One-way ANOVA test) following 1.0 Gy and 6.4 Gy PR respectively (see supplemental Excel file “Gene List” ). The corresponding values for GR were 265 and 1,271 genes (up- or downregulated more than two-fold) for 1.1 Gy and 7.0 Gy of GR respectively. Interestingly, our analysis indicated that the 7.0 Gy GR-group showed a substantial non-random enrichment (p < 0.05) of gene expression changes in several different Gene Ontology (GO) classes as opposed to 6.4 Gy of PR where non-random enrichment was only observed in the “cell death”-gene list ( Fig. 3B ). This indicates that 7.0 Gy of GR may specifically trigger several different signal transduction-responses in the spleen compared to 6.4 Gy of PR. Treatment related changes were filtered through the GO-gene list “apoptosis regulator activity” (GO: 00176) in order to isolate potential candidate genes that may differentially regulate the apoptotic response following GR and PR. In agreement with previous literature, the responses involved upregulation of IL-6 and several pro-apoptotic genes that have been shown to be responsive to the tumor suppressor and transcription factor p53 in the spleen following GR 24 , 26 - 28 ( Fig. 4A and B ). Indeed, upregulation of p53-protein was also detected in the splenic white pulp and the GI-tract at both low and high doses of GR and PR ( Fig. 4C–E ). Despite this we were not able to detect increased expression of p53-dependent genes by microarray in the low dose group of GR and PR (i.e., 1.1 Gy and 1.0 Gy respectively), suggesting that our microarray analysis did not provide us with sufficient sensitivity to detect smaller changes in gene expression. Literature data suggest that p53-dependent changes in gene expression can be detected following doses of 0.1 Gy of GR using more sensitive methods (e.g., RT-PCR). 29 Given the importance of the p53-pathway in mediating cell death in the spleen, we therefore decided to focus on the high dose of GR and PR. By performing expression-based clustering of genes in the “apoptosis facilitator” gene list that were differentially expressed between the 7.0 Gy GR-group and the 6.4 Gy PR group and applying the criteria for an “upregulated pro-apoptotic gene” or a “downregulated anti-apoptotic gene” (based on literature data) established a number of candidate genes ( Fig. 5A and B ). In addition, isolating genes that showed differential regulation relative to control, using the volcano plot-function in GeneSpring identified hsp1a (hsp70) to be down regulated after 7.0 Gy. This gene has been shown to block apoptosis following GR (data not shown and Fig. 5A ). 30 Bcl-G has previously been shown to be a pro-apoptotic gene containing a BH3-domain and to be upregulated in a p53-dependent manner. 23 , 31 However, the involvement of Bcl-G in the DNA-damage response has until now remained unproven. Granzyme B has been shown to trigger apoptosis through cleavage of e.g., caspase-3, PARP-1 and DNA-PK with a substrate specificity resembling that of caspase-6, -8 and -9. 32 , 33 Birc1a/naip, a member of the IAP-protein family, may interact with and block the activity of caspase-3, -7 and -9. 34 , 35 Indeed, Bcl-G protein was overexpressed in the splenic white pulp of mice subjected to 7.0 Gy of GR but not following 6.4 Gy of PR, suggesting that the observed differences in Bcl-G mRNA expression translated into altered protein expression ( Fig. 5B ). Bcl-G expression was mostly confined to cells with fragmented DNA in atrophic zones of the splenic white pulp in the 7.0 Gy GR-group. Differential expression of cell cycle-regulating genes following GR and PR Filtering-out gene expression changes in the 6.4 Gy PR and 7.0 Gy GR-group that could influence cell cycle progression (cell cycle; GO: 0007049) revealed increased expression of the proto-oncogene K-Ras in PR-treated spleens and the tumor suppressor CDKN2A (INK4A and ARF) in GR-treated spleens ( Table 2 ). Indeed, spleens subjected to 7.0 Gy of GR expressed more p16-INK4A compared to spleens subjected to 6.4 Gy of PR as determined by immunohistochemistry ( Fig. 6 ). Immunohistochemical staining was absent in atrophic areas whereas the marginal zone of the white pulp and the red pulp stained strongly in the 7.0 Gy GR-group. In spleens treated with 6.4 Gy PR, weak staining was detected in the center of the white pulp, whereas staining was completely lacking in the marginal zone and red pulp. Activated Ras has been associated with increased radio-resistance whereas overex-pression of p16-INK4A in T cells, lung cancer cells and erythroid cells may enhance sensitivity to DNA damage through the triggering of apoptosis. 36 - 40 Thus other signal transduction pathways and molecules not directly related to the apoptotic machinery may contribute to the differential triggering of apoptosis in the spleen following GR and PR. Bcl-G is expressed in a p53-dependent manner in the spleen following GR Previous data suggest that Bcl-G is expressed as a long (Bcl-GL) or short (Bcl-GS) protein isoform. 31 Although both Bcl-G isoforms trigger apoptosis, Bcl-GS does so more efficiently compared to Bcl-GL. Bcl-GS was expressed in a p53-dependent manner in confluent HCT116 cells and etoposide-treatment triggered expression of Bcl-GS (but not Bcl-GL) in L929 cells in vitro with concomitant expression of p53 ( Fig. 7A and B ). Mice lacking the p53-gene (Trp53) show an almost complete absence of apoptosis following treatment with GR in the white pulp of the spleen compared to wildtype littermates. 24 Indeed, wildtype but not Trp53?/? C57Bl/6 mice showed increased expression of Bcl-GS in their spleens when subjected to GR (4 Gy) ( Fig. 7C ). Also a granzyme B isoform around 40 kDa did show p53-dependent expression following GR whereas we were unable to substantiate downregulation of Birc1a/naip on the protein level as observed at the mRNA level. Enforced myc-expression and IFN? triggers Bcl-G expression Both GR and PR triggered similar levels of p53 protein expression and similar levels of expression of mRNA from established p53 down-stream target genes ( Fig. 4 ). Given the importance of p53 in regulating expression of Bcl-GS ( Fig. 7D ), we hypothesized that expression of Bcl-G may be regulated by other co-factors in concert with p53 and that these factors may be uniquely expressed following GR. Thus, the diverse set of non-random gene expression changes following 7.0 Gy of GR in contrast to 6.4 Gy of PR, led us to investigate other avenues that could influence the triggering of cell death ( Fig. 3B and Supplemental Excel file “Gene List” ). Overall, upregulation of genes e.g., IL-1, stat5a suggested that 7.0 Gy GR triggered an interleukin/interferon/STAT-response whereas PR did not. Previous literature data suggest that Bcl-G expression in addition to being controlled by p53 also may be controlled by interferon and STAT-signaling. 41 Lymph nodes and spleens isolated from wild-type and E?-myc mice, overexpressing the proto-oncogene and STAT transcriptional target c-Myc in pre-B and B cells, were subjected to Western blot ( Fig. 8A ). Increased expression of Bcl-GS (but not Bcl-GL, data not shown) was detected in both lymph nodes and spleens of E?-myc mice. Increased p53 expression was also detected suggesting that activated p53 may contribute to increased expression of Bcl-G. However, immortalized p53dmc/ras colonocytes (Trp53?/?) overexpressing c-Myc also showed concomitantly increased expression of Bcl-GS ( Fig. 8B ). 42 This suggests that Bcl-GS may be expressed in a myc-dependent but p53-independent manner. We also examined the role of IFN? in the triggering of Bcl-GS ( Fig. 8C ). Following 3–9 hrs treatment of L929 cells with IFN?, an increase in Bcl-GS expression was detected with concomitant increase in phosphorylated (Tyr701) Stat1. Thus, the expression of Bcl-GS may be triggered by additional factors to that of p53 and potentially following GR.  GR and PR triggers cell death in vivo in an organ-specific manner Mice were sacrificed (n = 3 for each treatment group) four hours following irradiation with RBE-weighted doses of GR (1.1 Gy and 7.0 Gy) or PR (1.0 Gy and 6.4 Gy) and tissues isolated. Isolated tissues included bone marrow, spleen, thymus, Peyer’s patches, small intestine and colon i.e., tissues that exhibit a well-documented apoptotic response following GR. 24 , 25 Detailed histological analysis of H/E stained sections, image analysis of H/E stained sections and immunohistochemical staining for apoptosis markers (TUNEL, cleaved caspase-9 and cleaved PARP) were used to assess the cell death response following the different radiation-types and radiation doses. Dying cells were detected in all tissues following radiation irrespective of radiation-type and dose. However, the extent of cell death varied in a tissue-, dose- and radiation-type specific manner. In agreement with previously published in vitro data documenting a more efficient triggering of apoptosis following PR, 1.0 Gy of PR triggered more apoptosis than 1.1 Gy GR in the bone marrow and the thymic cortex ( Fig. 1A ). 20 Conversely both the high and low dose of GR triggered a more extensive cell death response in the splenic white pulp compared to that of mice treated with PR ( Fig. 1 ).  GR and PR triggers cell death in vivo in an organ-specific manner Mice were sacrificed (n = 3 for each treatment group) four hours following irradiation with RBE-weighted doses of GR (1.1 Gy and 7.0 Gy) or PR (1.0 Gy and 6.4 Gy) and tissues isolated. Isolated tissues included bone marrow, spleen, thymus, Peyer’s patches, small intestine and colon i.e., tissues that exhibit a well-documented apoptotic response following GR. 24 , 25 Detailed histological analysis of H/E stained sections, image analysis of H/E stained sections and immunohistochemical staining for apoptosis markers (TUNEL, cleaved caspase-9 and cleaved PARP) were used to assess the cell death response following the different radiation-types and radiation doses. Dying cells were detected in all tissues following radiation irrespective of radiation-type and dose. However, the extent of cell death varied in a tissue-, dose- and radiation-type specific manner. In agreement with previously published in vitro data documenting a more efficient triggering of apoptosis following PR, 1.0 Gy of PR triggered more apoptosis than 1.1 Gy GR in the bone marrow and the thymic cortex ( Fig. 1A ). 20 Conversely both the high and low dose of GR triggered a more extensive cell death response in the splenic white pulp compared to that of mice treated with PR ( Fig. 1 ).  PR triggers DNA-damage more efficiently than GR in vivo In order to address the extent of DNA damage in the spleen, immunohistochemical staining for the DNA double-strand break marker ?H2AX was performed. We found that PR triggered an increased presence of cells in the splenic white pulp with ?H2AX-foci and an increased number of ?H2AX-foci/cell compared to GR ( Fig. 2A and Table 1 ). Additionally, immunohistochemistry for phosphorylated ATM (serine-1986 of mouse ATM corresponding to serine-1981 on human ATM) a marker associated with the presence of DNA-damage suggested that spleens irradiated with 6.4 Gy of PR expressed an increased number of cells in the white pulp with phosphorylated-ATM (p-ATM+) compared to spleens treated with 7.0 Gy of GR ( Fig. 2B ). Immunohistochemistry for ?H2AX occasionally resulted in the labeling of cells in the white pulp containing fragmented nuclei and other morphological changes indicative of late phase apoptosis ( Fig. 2A , yellow arrowheads). Such cells were not included in the analysis as they may result in the overestimation of the extent of DNA-damage. Although DNA double-strand breaks can be deleterious for the cell following GR they commonly represent a minority of all DNA-lesions following GR. Therefore, we also performed immunohistochemistry for 8-hydroxyguanosine (8-OH-G) a common DNA-adduct following ionizing radiation. Although irradiated spleens stained more extensively following exposure to both PR and GR we were unable to establish any significant differences between PR and GR with regard to the levels of to 8-OH-G adducts (data not shown). Taken together our data on DNA damage are in agreement with previously reported data suggesting PR is more potent than GR in the triggering of DNA damage. 20 , 21  PR triggers DNA-damage more efficiently than GR in vivo In order to address the extent of DNA damage in the spleen, immunohistochemical staining for the DNA double-strand break marker ?H2AX was performed. We found that PR triggered an increased presence of cells in the splenic white pulp with ?H2AX-foci and an increased number of ?H2AX-foci/cell compared to GR ( Fig. 2A and Table 1 ). Additionally, immunohistochemistry for phosphorylated ATM (serine-1986 of mouse ATM corresponding to serine-1981 on human ATM) a marker associated with the presence of DNA-damage suggested that spleens irradiated with 6.4 Gy of PR expressed an increased number of cells in the white pulp with phosphorylated-ATM (p-ATM+) compared to spleens treated with 7.0 Gy of GR ( Fig. 2B ). Immunohistochemistry for ?H2AX occasionally resulted in the labeling of cells in the white pulp containing fragmented nuclei and other morphological changes indicative of late phase apoptosis ( Fig. 2A , yellow arrowheads). Such cells were not included in the analysis as they may result in the overestimation of the extent of DNA-damage. Although DNA double-strand breaks can be deleterious for the cell following GR they commonly represent a minority of all DNA-lesions following GR. Therefore, we also performed immunohistochemistry for 8-hydroxyguanosine (8-OH-G) a common DNA-adduct following ionizing radiation. Although irradiated spleens stained more extensively following exposure to both PR and GR we were unable to establish any significant differences between PR and GR with regard to the levels of to 8-OH-G adducts (data not shown). Taken together our data on DNA damage are in agreement with previously reported data suggesting PR is more potent than GR in the triggering of DNA damage. 20 , 21  Expression profiling reveals unique gene expression patterns associated with exposure to PR and GR in the spleen Total RNA was isolated from spleens treated with PR and GR (four hour post-radiation) and used for expression profiling in order to characterize the differences in the global stress-response in the spleen. Two-dimensional principal component analysis (PCA) of global gene expression changes (22,690 genes) in the different treatment groups suggest that two components can be extracted from the data, clustering spleens in the high dose group (i.e., 7.0 Gy of GR and 6.4 Gy of PR) in the same quadrant as related in contrast to untreated spleens or spleens in the low dose group (i.e., 1.1 Gy of GR and 1.0 Gy of PR) ( Fig. 3A ). Thus an overall trend in the global gene expression data exist that distinguish the RNA from spleens in the high dose group relative to the RNA from untreated spleens (control). Relative to the control, a total of 440 and 641 genes were up- or downregulated more than two-fold (p < 0.05, One-way ANOVA test) following 1.0 Gy and 6.4 Gy PR respectively (see supplemental Excel file “Gene List” ). The corresponding values for GR were 265 and 1,271 genes (up- or downregulated more than two-fold) for 1.1 Gy and 7.0 Gy of GR respectively. Interestingly, our analysis indicated that the 7.0 Gy GR-group showed a substantial non-random enrichment (p < 0.05) of gene expression changes in several different Gene Ontology (GO) classes as opposed to 6.4 Gy of PR where non-random enrichment was only observed in the “cell death”-gene list ( Fig. 3B ). This indicates that 7.0 Gy of GR may specifically trigger several different signal transduction-responses in the spleen compared to 6.4 Gy of PR. Treatment related changes were filtered through the GO-gene list “apoptosis regulator activity” (GO: 00176) in order to isolate potential candidate genes that may differentially regulate the apoptotic response following GR and PR. In agreement with previous literature, the responses involved upregulation of IL-6 and several pro-apoptotic genes that have been shown to be responsive to the tumor suppressor and transcription factor p53 in the spleen following GR 24 , 26 - 28 ( Fig. 4A and B ). Indeed, upregulation of p53-protein was also detected in the splenic white pulp and the GI-tract at both low and high doses of GR and PR ( Fig. 4C–E ). Despite this we were not able to detect increased expression of p53-dependent genes by microarray in the low dose group of GR and PR (i.e., 1.1 Gy and 1.0 Gy respectively), suggesting that our microarray analysis did not provide us with sufficient sensitivity to detect smaller changes in gene expression. Literature data suggest that p53-dependent changes in gene expression can be detected following doses of 0.1 Gy of GR using more sensitive methods (e.g., RT-PCR). 29 Given the importance of the p53-pathway in mediating cell death in the spleen, we therefore decided to focus on the high dose of GR and PR. By performing expression-based clustering of genes in the “apoptosis facilitator” gene list that were differentially expressed between the 7.0 Gy GR-group and the 6.4 Gy PR group and applying the criteria for an “upregulated pro-apoptotic gene” or a “downregulated anti-apoptotic gene” (based on literature data) established a number of candidate genes ( Fig. 5A and B ). In addition, isolating genes that showed differential regulation relative to control, using the volcano plot-function in GeneSpring identified hsp1a (hsp70) to be down regulated after 7.0 Gy. This gene has been shown to block apoptosis following GR (data not shown and Fig. 5A ). 30 Bcl-G has previously been shown to be a pro-apoptotic gene containing a BH3-domain and to be upregulated in a p53-dependent manner. 23 , 31 However, the involvement of Bcl-G in the DNA-damage response has until now remained unproven. Granzyme B has been shown to trigger apoptosis through cleavage of e.g., caspase-3, PARP-1 and DNA-PK with a substrate specificity resembling that of caspase-6, -8 and -9. 32 , 33 Birc1a/naip, a member of the IAP-protein family, may interact with and block the activity of caspase-3, -7 and -9. 34 , 35 Indeed, Bcl-G protein was overexpressed in the splenic white pulp of mice subjected to 7.0 Gy of GR but not following 6.4 Gy of PR, suggesting that the observed differences in Bcl-G mRNA expression translated into altered protein expression ( Fig. 5B ). Bcl-G expression was mostly confined to cells with fragmented DNA in atrophic zones of the splenic white pulp in the 7.0 Gy GR-group.  Expression profiling reveals unique gene expression patterns associated with exposure to PR and GR in the spleen Total RNA was isolated from spleens treated with PR and GR (four hour post-radiation) and used for expression profiling in order to characterize the differences in the global stress-response in the spleen. Two-dimensional principal component analysis (PCA) of global gene expression changes (22,690 genes) in the different treatment groups suggest that two components can be extracted from the data, clustering spleens in the high dose group (i.e., 7.0 Gy of GR and 6.4 Gy of PR) in the same quadrant as related in contrast to untreated spleens or spleens in the low dose group (i.e., 1.1 Gy of GR and 1.0 Gy of PR) ( Fig. 3A ). Thus an overall trend in the global gene expression data exist that distinguish the RNA from spleens in the high dose group relative to the RNA from untreated spleens (control). Relative to the control, a total of 440 and 641 genes were up- or downregulated more than two-fold (p < 0.05, One-way ANOVA test) following 1.0 Gy and 6.4 Gy PR respectively (see supplemental Excel file “Gene List” ). The corresponding values for GR were 265 and 1,271 genes (up- or downregulated more than two-fold) for 1.1 Gy and 7.0 Gy of GR respectively. Interestingly, our analysis indicated that the 7.0 Gy GR-group showed a substantial non-random enrichment (p < 0.05) of gene expression changes in several different Gene Ontology (GO) classes as opposed to 6.4 Gy of PR where non-random enrichment was only observed in the “cell death”-gene list ( Fig. 3B ). This indicates that 7.0 Gy of GR may specifically trigger several different signal transduction-responses in the spleen compared to 6.4 Gy of PR. Treatment related changes were filtered through the GO-gene list “apoptosis regulator activity” (GO: 00176) in order to isolate potential candidate genes that may differentially regulate the apoptotic response following GR and PR. In agreement with previous literature, the responses involved upregulation of IL-6 and several pro-apoptotic genes that have been shown to be responsive to the tumor suppressor and transcription factor p53 in the spleen following GR 24 , 26 - 28 ( Fig. 4A and B ). Indeed, upregulation of p53-protein was also detected in the splenic white pulp and the GI-tract at both low and high doses of GR and PR ( Fig. 4C–E ). Despite this we were not able to detect increased expression of p53-dependent genes by microarray in the low dose group of GR and PR (i.e., 1.1 Gy and 1.0 Gy respectively), suggesting that our microarray analysis did not provide us with sufficient sensitivity to detect smaller changes in gene expression. Literature data suggest that p53-dependent changes in gene expression can be detected following doses of 0.1 Gy of GR using more sensitive methods (e.g., RT-PCR). 29 Given the importance of the p53-pathway in mediating cell death in the spleen, we therefore decided to focus on the high dose of GR and PR. By performing expression-based clustering of genes in the “apoptosis facilitator” gene list that were differentially expressed between the 7.0 Gy GR-group and the 6.4 Gy PR group and applying the criteria for an “upregulated pro-apoptotic gene” or a “downregulated anti-apoptotic gene” (based on literature data) established a number of candidate genes ( Fig. 5A and B ). In addition, isolating genes that showed differential regulation relative to control, using the volcano plot-function in GeneSpring identified hsp1a (hsp70) to be down regulated after 7.0 Gy. This gene has been shown to block apoptosis following GR (data not shown and Fig. 5A ). 30 Bcl-G has previously been shown to be a pro-apoptotic gene containing a BH3-domain and to be upregulated in a p53-dependent manner. 23 , 31 However, the involvement of Bcl-G in the DNA-damage response has until now remained unproven. Granzyme B has been shown to trigger apoptosis through cleavage of e.g., caspase-3, PARP-1 and DNA-PK with a substrate specificity resembling that of caspase-6, -8 and -9. 32 , 33 Birc1a/naip, a member of the IAP-protein family, may interact with and block the activity of caspase-3, -7 and -9. 34 , 35 Indeed, Bcl-G protein was overexpressed in the splenic white pulp of mice subjected to 7.0 Gy of GR but not following 6.4 Gy of PR, suggesting that the observed differences in Bcl-G mRNA expression translated into altered protein expression ( Fig. 5B ). Bcl-G expression was mostly confined to cells with fragmented DNA in atrophic zones of the splenic white pulp in the 7.0 Gy GR-group.  Differential expression of cell cycle-regulating genes following GR and PR Filtering-out gene expression changes in the 6.4 Gy PR and 7.0 Gy GR-group that could influence cell cycle progression (cell cycle; GO: 0007049) revealed increased expression of the proto-oncogene K-Ras in PR-treated spleens and the tumor suppressor CDKN2A (INK4A and ARF) in GR-treated spleens ( Table 2 ). Indeed, spleens subjected to 7.0 Gy of GR expressed more p16-INK4A compared to spleens subjected to 6.4 Gy of PR as determined by immunohistochemistry ( Fig. 6 ). Immunohistochemical staining was absent in atrophic areas whereas the marginal zone of the white pulp and the red pulp stained strongly in the 7.0 Gy GR-group. In spleens treated with 6.4 Gy PR, weak staining was detected in the center of the white pulp, whereas staining was completely lacking in the marginal zone and red pulp. Activated Ras has been associated with increased radio-resistance whereas overex-pression of p16-INK4A in T cells, lung cancer cells and erythroid cells may enhance sensitivity to DNA damage through the triggering of apoptosis. 36 - 40 Thus other signal transduction pathways and molecules not directly related to the apoptotic machinery may contribute to the differential triggering of apoptosis in the spleen following GR and PR.  Differential expression of cell cycle-regulating genes following GR and PR Filtering-out gene expression changes in the 6.4 Gy PR and 7.0 Gy GR-group that could influence cell cycle progression (cell cycle; GO: 0007049) revealed increased expression of the proto-oncogene K-Ras in PR-treated spleens and the tumor suppressor CDKN2A (INK4A and ARF) in GR-treated spleens ( Table 2 ). Indeed, spleens subjected to 7.0 Gy of GR expressed more p16-INK4A compared to spleens subjected to 6.4 Gy of PR as determined by immunohistochemistry ( Fig. 6 ). Immunohistochemical staining was absent in atrophic areas whereas the marginal zone of the white pulp and the red pulp stained strongly in the 7.0 Gy GR-group. In spleens treated with 6.4 Gy PR, weak staining was detected in the center of the white pulp, whereas staining was completely lacking in the marginal zone and red pulp. Activated Ras has been associated with increased radio-resistance whereas overex-pression of p16-INK4A in T cells, lung cancer cells and erythroid cells may enhance sensitivity to DNA damage through the triggering of apoptosis. 36 - 40 Thus other signal transduction pathways and molecules not directly related to the apoptotic machinery may contribute to the differential triggering of apoptosis in the spleen following GR and PR.  Bcl-G is expressed in a p53-dependent manner in the spleen following GR Previous data suggest that Bcl-G is expressed as a long (Bcl-GL) or short (Bcl-GS) protein isoform. 31 Although both Bcl-G isoforms trigger apoptosis, Bcl-GS does so more efficiently compared to Bcl-GL. Bcl-GS was expressed in a p53-dependent manner in confluent HCT116 cells and etoposide-treatment triggered expression of Bcl-GS (but not Bcl-GL) in L929 cells in vitro with concomitant expression of p53 ( Fig. 7A and B ). Mice lacking the p53-gene (Trp53) show an almost complete absence of apoptosis following treatment with GR in the white pulp of the spleen compared to wildtype littermates. 24 Indeed, wildtype but not Trp53?/? C57Bl/6 mice showed increased expression of Bcl-GS in their spleens when subjected to GR (4 Gy) ( Fig. 7C ). Also a granzyme B isoform around 40 kDa did show p53-dependent expression following GR whereas we were unable to substantiate downregulation of Birc1a/naip on the protein level as observed at the mRNA level.  Bcl-G is expressed in a p53-dependent manner in the spleen following GR Previous data suggest that Bcl-G is expressed as a long (Bcl-GL) or short (Bcl-GS) protein isoform. 31 Although both Bcl-G isoforms trigger apoptosis, Bcl-GS does so more efficiently compared to Bcl-GL. Bcl-GS was expressed in a p53-dependent manner in confluent HCT116 cells and etoposide-treatment triggered expression of Bcl-GS (but not Bcl-GL) in L929 cells in vitro with concomitant expression of p53 ( Fig. 7A and B ). Mice lacking the p53-gene (Trp53) show an almost complete absence of apoptosis following treatment with GR in the white pulp of the spleen compared to wildtype littermates. 24 Indeed, wildtype but not Trp53?/? C57Bl/6 mice showed increased expression of Bcl-GS in their spleens when subjected to GR (4 Gy) ( Fig. 7C ). Also a granzyme B isoform around 40 kDa did show p53-dependent expression following GR whereas we were unable to substantiate downregulation of Birc1a/naip on the protein level as observed at the mRNA level.  Enforced myc-expression and IFN? triggers Bcl-G expression Both GR and PR triggered similar levels of p53 protein expression and similar levels of expression of mRNA from established p53 down-stream target genes ( Fig. 4 ). Given the importance of p53 in regulating expression of Bcl-GS ( Fig. 7D ), we hypothesized that expression of Bcl-G may be regulated by other co-factors in concert with p53 and that these factors may be uniquely expressed following GR. Thus, the diverse set of non-random gene expression changes following 7.0 Gy of GR in contrast to 6.4 Gy of PR, led us to investigate other avenues that could influence the triggering of cell death ( Fig. 3B and Supplemental Excel file “Gene List” ). Overall, upregulation of genes e.g., IL-1, stat5a suggested that 7.0 Gy GR triggered an interleukin/interferon/STAT-response whereas PR did not. Previous literature data suggest that Bcl-G expression in addition to being controlled by p53 also may be controlled by interferon and STAT-signaling. 41 Lymph nodes and spleens isolated from wild-type and E?-myc mice, overexpressing the proto-oncogene and STAT transcriptional target c-Myc in pre-B and B cells, were subjected to Western blot ( Fig. 8A ). Increased expression of Bcl-GS (but not Bcl-GL, data not shown) was detected in both lymph nodes and spleens of E?-myc mice. Increased p53 expression was also detected suggesting that activated p53 may contribute to increased expression of Bcl-G. However, immortalized p53dmc/ras colonocytes (Trp53?/?) overexpressing c-Myc also showed concomitantly increased expression of Bcl-GS ( Fig. 8B ). 42 This suggests that Bcl-GS may be expressed in a myc-dependent but p53-independent manner. We also examined the role of IFN? in the triggering of Bcl-GS ( Fig. 8C ). Following 3–9 hrs treatment of L929 cells with IFN?, an increase in Bcl-GS expression was detected with concomitant increase in phosphorylated (Tyr701) Stat1. Thus, the expression of Bcl-GS may be triggered by additional factors to that of p53 and potentially following GR.  Enforced myc-expression and IFN? triggers Bcl-G expression Both GR and PR triggered similar levels of p53 protein expression and similar levels of expression of mRNA from established p53 down-stream target genes ( Fig. 4 ). Given the importance of p53 in regulating expression of Bcl-GS ( Fig. 7D ), we hypothesized that expression of Bcl-G may be regulated by other co-factors in concert with p53 and that these factors may be uniquely expressed following GR. Thus, the diverse set of non-random gene expression changes following 7.0 Gy of GR in contrast to 6.4 Gy of PR, led us to investigate other avenues that could influence the triggering of cell death ( Fig. 3B and Supplemental Excel file “Gene List” ). Overall, upregulation of genes e.g., IL-1, stat5a suggested that 7.0 Gy GR triggered an interleukin/interferon/STAT-response whereas PR did not. Previous literature data suggest that Bcl-G expression in addition to being controlled by p53 also may be controlled by interferon and STAT-signaling. 41 Lymph nodes and spleens isolated from wild-type and E?-myc mice, overexpressing the proto-oncogene and STAT transcriptional target c-Myc in pre-B and B cells, were subjected to Western blot ( Fig. 8A ). Increased expression of Bcl-GS (but not Bcl-GL, data not shown) was detected in both lymph nodes and spleens of E?-myc mice. Increased p53 expression was also detected suggesting that activated p53 may contribute to increased expression of Bcl-G. However, immortalized p53dmc/ras colonocytes (Trp53?/?) overexpressing c-Myc also showed concomitantly increased expression of Bcl-GS ( Fig. 8B ). 42 This suggests that Bcl-GS may be expressed in a myc-dependent but p53-independent manner. We also examined the role of IFN? in the triggering of Bcl-GS ( Fig. 8C ). Following 3–9 hrs treatment of L929 cells with IFN?, an increase in Bcl-GS expression was detected with concomitant increase in phosphorylated (Tyr701) Stat1. Thus, the expression of Bcl-GS may be triggered by additional factors to that of p53 and potentially following GR.  Discussion PR holds significant promise in the treatment of human cancers as its physical properties allow a more localized delivery of the dose to the tumor area with less anticipated toxicity to normal tissues. Although, the few reports available estimate an RBE of 1.1–1.3 for some in vivo endpoints, this similarity in the magnitude of response may not reflect a similarity in mechanism. On a micro-scale, these two radiation sources cause a different ionization pattern that appears to translate into distinct biological damage to cells in vivo. Thus, altered biological damage may yield an altered cellular response due to mechanistic differences at the molecular level and this may involve differences in the processing of damage signals between PR and GR. We show here that the acute apoptotic response following GR and PR varies in a dose- and tissue-dependent manner ( Fig. 1A and B and Table 1 ). Surprisingly, compared to GR, PR consistently triggered less apoptosis and concomitant atrophy in the white pulp of the spleen and small intestinal mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues ( Fig. 1A and B ). This was in spite of increased DNA damage to cells in the white pulp following PR ( Fig. 2 ). Thus in the white pulp of the spleen, the extent of DNA damage does not appear to directly predict the extent of apoptosis following GR and PR. Previous studies addressing the acute effect of whole-body PR relative to GR on the immune system suggest that 3.0 Gy of PR and GR essentially trigger similar deficiencies in immunity with regard to cell count in the spleen and blood. 18 However, that particular study did show that T cells were less sensitive to PR delivered as a spread-out Bragg peak (SOBP) in comparison to GR at twelve hours following irradiation. Furthermore, by day 10 post-irradiation fewer T and Th cells were found in the GR-group in comparison to the PR (SOBP) group. Thus, our findings may at least in part recapitulate the findings of this previous study albeit with a different end-point. It should be noted that the extent of apoptosis merely reflects one aspect in the control of cell number and tissue homeostasis. Other mechanisms such as cell cycle block, senescence, necrosis and autophagy may contribute as well. Our analysis addressed atrophy in the white pulp and thus both necrosis and apoptosis contributing to such differences would have been accounted for. In order to address changes in gene expression that could contribute to our observed phenotypic differences following GR and PR in the spleen, we performed expression profiling using isolated total RNA from this tissue. To our surprise we observed major differences in the gene expression response relative control between 6.4 Gy of PR and 7.0 Gy of GR. GR non-randomly accumulated gene expression changes in a number of different GO-annotation classes whereas PR only did so in the “cell death” class ( Fig. 3B ). Potentially, this altered expression suggests a different stress-response to GR in comparison to PR. Despite the observed difference between the gene expression-responses, the extent of induction of the tumor suppressor p53 and several pro-apoptotic p53-target genes did not significantly differ between PR and GR ( Fig. 4B and C ). This was surprising since loss of either p53 or (some) of its pro-apoptotic target genes has been shown to significantly block apoptosis in the white pulp of the spleen (refs. 11 , 15 , 24 , 28 , Finnberg N and El-Deiry WS; unpublished observations). However, further filtering differentially expressed genes annotated as “apoptosis regulators” identified a number of candidate genes that were differentially expressed between PR and GR-treated spleens ( Fig. 5A and B ). Bcl-G has been shown to be responsive to p53 and encodes at least two isoforms of which the shorter one Bcl-GS is a BH3-only protein that localizes to the mitochondria and triggers apoptosis. 23 , 31 We were able to confirm differential expression in the white pulp of the spleen of Bcl-G as well as p53-dependent expression in the spleen following GR ( Figs. 5C and 7C ). A plausible explanation for the lack of induction of Bcl-G following PR, despite efficient triggering of a p53-downstream response may stem from the requirement of additional factors to that of p53 for the efficient triggering of apoptosis. Bcl-G has been shown to be responsive to e.g., IFN? and IFN? ( Fig. 8C ). 41 Indeed binding sites for STAT1 and IRF-1 were also found in the Bcl-G promoter suggesting that Bcl-G is responsive to interferons through STAT-signaling. We were also able to show that increased p53-independent expression of Bcl-G could be triggered through overexpression of the STAT3-target- and proto-oncogene Myc ( Fig. 8A and B ). Given that GR triggered a more extensive interleukin response compared to PR and the expression of Stat5a, suggests that this may be a possible mechanism by which GR amplifies the apoptotic response independent of DNA-damage ( Supplemental Excel File “Gene List” ). Previous data also suggest that p53 and STAT1 may interact and modulate each other’s transcriptional activity. 43 Thus, p53 may be required for the execution of interferon-dependent pro-apoptotic signaling through Bcl-G. We are currently undertaking experiments to address this issue (to be published elsewhere). We also investigated the possibility that a number of pro-survival genes may be overexpressed in the spleen of PR-treated spleens in relation to GR-treated spleens and thereby modulate the apoptotic response. Indeed, spleens treated with 6.4 Gy of PR expressed 5.6-fold more K-RAS than spleens treated with 7.0 Gy GR ( Table 2 ). RAS has been shown to confer radioresistance and is a target for radiosensitzing agents e.g. Prenyltransferase inhibitors (reviewed in ref. 44 ). However, the mechanism by which PR triggers K-RAS remains to be elucidated. We also show here that 7.0 Gy of GR is more efficient in promoting expression of CDKN2A than 6.4 Gy PR ( Table 2 ). Immunhistochemical analysis of irradiated spleens suggests that p16-INK4A indeed is expressed at higher levels in a unique pattern in the marginal zone of the white pulp treated with GR ( Fig. 6 ). P16-INK4A has been shown to have tumor suppressor functions, presumably in part through blocking cell cycle progression. 45 However, early studies also suggested that P16-INK4A may trigger apoptosis (independent of p19-ARF). 39 , 40 Further experiments are required to address the differences in the response to GR and PR and the significance there-of. However, our data suggest that the stress-response may be intrinsically different between these two radiation-types and this may be reflected as resistance to PR in some cell types as compared to GR. Our data may have implications when combination treatments are considered to specifically target tumor cell apoptosis in conjunction with PR. The less diverse involvement of signal transduction pathways following PR may suggest that triggering of additional signal transduction pathways through the combination of PR with e.g., cytokine-treatment may be particularly advantageous in evoking apoptosis.  Discussion PR holds significant promise in the treatment of human cancers as its physical properties allow a more localized delivery of the dose to the tumor area with less anticipated toxicity to normal tissues. Although, the few reports available estimate an RBE of 1.1–1.3 for some in vivo endpoints, this similarity in the magnitude of response may not reflect a similarity in mechanism. On a micro-scale, these two radiation sources cause a different ionization pattern that appears to translate into distinct biological damage to cells in vivo. Thus, altered biological damage may yield an altered cellular response due to mechanistic differences at the molecular level and this may involve differences in the processing of damage signals between PR and GR. We show here that the acute apoptotic response following GR and PR varies in a dose- and tissue-dependent manner ( Fig. 1A and B and Table 1 ). Surprisingly, compared to GR, PR consistently triggered less apoptosis and concomitant atrophy in the white pulp of the spleen and small intestinal mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues ( Fig. 1A and B ). This was in spite of increased DNA damage to cells in the white pulp following PR ( Fig. 2 ). Thus in the white pulp of the spleen, the extent of DNA damage does not appear to directly predict the extent of apoptosis following GR and PR. Previous studies addressing the acute effect of whole-body PR relative to GR on the immune system suggest that 3.0 Gy of PR and GR essentially trigger similar deficiencies in immunity with regard to cell count in the spleen and blood. 18 However, that particular study did show that T cells were less sensitive to PR delivered as a spread-out Bragg peak (SOBP) in comparison to GR at twelve hours following irradiation. Furthermore, by day 10 post-irradiation fewer T and Th cells were found in the GR-group in comparison to the PR (SOBP) group. Thus, our findings may at least in part recapitulate the findings of this previous study albeit with a different end-point. It should be noted that the extent of apoptosis merely reflects one aspect in the control of cell number and tissue homeostasis. Other mechanisms such as cell cycle block, senescence, necrosis and autophagy may contribute as well. Our analysis addressed atrophy in the white pulp and thus both necrosis and apoptosis contributing to such differences would have been accounted for. In order to address changes in gene expression that could contribute to our observed phenotypic differences following GR and PR in the spleen, we performed expression profiling using isolated total RNA from this tissue. To our surprise we observed major differences in the gene expression response relative control between 6.4 Gy of PR and 7.0 Gy of GR. GR non-randomly accumulated gene expression changes in a number of different GO-annotation classes whereas PR only did so in the “cell death” class ( Fig. 3B ). Potentially, this altered expression suggests a different stress-response to GR in comparison to PR. Despite the observed difference between the gene expression-responses, the extent of induction of the tumor suppressor p53 and several pro-apoptotic p53-target genes did not significantly differ between PR and GR ( Fig. 4B and C ). This was surprising since loss of either p53 or (some) of its pro-apoptotic target genes has been shown to significantly block apoptosis in the white pulp of the spleen (refs. 11 , 15 , 24 , 28 , Finnberg N and El-Deiry WS; unpublished observations). However, further filtering differentially expressed genes annotated as “apoptosis regulators” identified a number of candidate genes that were differentially expressed between PR and GR-treated spleens ( Fig. 5A and B ). Bcl-G has been shown to be responsive to p53 and encodes at least two isoforms of which the shorter one Bcl-GS is a BH3-only protein that localizes to the mitochondria and triggers apoptosis. 23 , 31 We were able to confirm differential expression in the white pulp of the spleen of Bcl-G as well as p53-dependent expression in the spleen following GR ( Figs. 5C and 7C ). A plausible explanation for the lack of induction of Bcl-G following PR, despite efficient triggering of a p53-downstream response may stem from the requirement of additional factors to that of p53 for the efficient triggering of apoptosis. Bcl-G has been shown to be responsive to e.g., IFN? and IFN? ( Fig. 8C ). 41 Indeed binding sites for STAT1 and IRF-1 were also found in the Bcl-G promoter suggesting that Bcl-G is responsive to interferons through STAT-signaling. We were also able to show that increased p53-independent expression of Bcl-G could be triggered through overexpression of the STAT3-target- and proto-oncogene Myc ( Fig. 8A and B ). Given that GR triggered a more extensive interleukin response compared to PR and the expression of Stat5a, suggests that this may be a possible mechanism by which GR amplifies the apoptotic response independent of DNA-damage ( Supplemental Excel File “Gene List” ). Previous data also suggest that p53 and STAT1 may interact and modulate each other’s transcriptional activity. 43 Thus, p53 may be required for the execution of interferon-dependent pro-apoptotic signaling through Bcl-G. We are currently undertaking experiments to address this issue (to be published elsewhere). We also investigated the possibility that a number of pro-survival genes may be overexpressed in the spleen of PR-treated spleens in relation to GR-treated spleens and thereby modulate the apoptotic response. Indeed, spleens treated with 6.4 Gy of PR expressed 5.6-fold more K-RAS than spleens treated with 7.0 Gy GR ( Table 2 ). RAS has been shown to confer radioresistance and is a target for radiosensitzing agents e.g. Prenyltransferase inhibitors (reviewed in ref. 44 ). However, the mechanism by which PR triggers K-RAS remains to be elucidated. We also show here that 7.0 Gy of GR is more efficient in promoting expression of CDKN2A than 6.4 Gy PR ( Table 2 ). Immunhistochemical analysis of irradiated spleens suggests that p16-INK4A indeed is expressed at higher levels in a unique pattern in the marginal zone of the white pulp treated with GR ( Fig. 6 ). P16-INK4A has been shown to have tumor suppressor functions, presumably in part through blocking cell cycle progression. 45 However, early studies also suggested that P16-INK4A may trigger apoptosis (independent of p19-ARF). 39 , 40 Further experiments are required to address the differences in the response to GR and PR and the significance there-of. However, our data suggest that the stress-response may be intrinsically different between these two radiation-types and this may be reflected as resistance to PR in some cell types as compared to GR. Our data may have implications when combination treatments are considered to specifically target tumor cell apoptosis in conjunction with PR. The less diverse involvement of signal transduction pathways following PR may suggest that triggering of additional signal transduction pathways through the combination of PR with e.g., cytokine-treatment may be particularly advantageous in evoking apoptosis.  Material and Methods Mice Four to five-week old male ICR-mice (Taconic farms, Germantown, NY) were housed in the animal facility at Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL). Four to six weeks old B6.Cg-Tg (IghMyc)22Bri/J (“E?-myc” mice), wild-type and Trp53?/? C57Bl/6 mice (Jackson Laboratory, ME) were housed in the animal facility of the clinical research building, University of Pennsylvania. All mice were housed in a controlled environment with regard to light, temperature and humidity. Mice were euthanized through carbon dioxide induced asphyxiation. The animal care and treatment procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees of the University of Pennsylvania and Brookhaven National Laboratory. Treatment with GR and PR Previous studies have estimated the RBE of protons for in vivo and in vitro endpoints at between 1.1 and 1.3. Based on Engels, et al. 7 we assumed an RBE of 1.1 for the endpoint we studied. Based on this assumption, mice were treated with RBE-weighted doses of whole body radiation. GR (1.1 and 7.0 Gy) was delivered at the Controlled Environment Radiation Facility (CERF), BNL. PR (1.0 and 6.4 Gy) was delivered at the NASA Space Radiation Laboratory, BNL. Total-body GR of animals was performed at a dose rate of 5 and 35 cGy/min for 1.1 and 7.0 Gy of GR respectively. Total-body PR of animals was performed at 20 and 70 cGy/minute (1 GeV/nucleon, approximate linear energy transfer (LET) - 0.24 keV/?m) for 1.0 and 6.4 Gy. PR was carried out within the non-stopping region (Bragg plateau) of the curve for energy deposition as a function of depth. Also, for PR, mice were placed into restraining devices for insertion into the beam lines approximately 3 minutes before irradiation. All animals were sacrificed at four hours following irradiation. In a separate experiment, wildtype and Trp53?/? mice were irradiated with 4.0 Gy of GR from a 137Cs gamma source (University of Pennsylvania) at a dose rate of 1.4 Gy/min. Histology and Immunohistochemistry Following necropsy, the bone marrow, colon, small intestine, spleen, testis and thymus were collected and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight at 4°C, embedded in paraffin and cut into 4-?m sections for evaluation by histology and immunohistochemistry. Cut sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and analyzed by microscopy. Cut sections were also stained for Ki-67 (Novocastra), p53 (Santa Cruz), S1986-ATM (Rockland Immunochemical), Bcl-G (Anaspec), p16 (Santa Cruz) and phospho-H2AX (eBiosciences). Immunohistochemistry was performed by rehydrating slides and subjecting them to antigen-retrieval through boiling in 1 mM citric acid buffer (pH 6.0). Endogenous peroxidases were blocked by submerging slides in 3% H2O2. Briefly, primary antibodies were left on sections overnight at 4°C. Sections were washed and primary antibodies were conjugated with either peroxidase conjugates using the ABC-system (Vecta Elite) or Cy2-conjugated donkey antibodies. In the case of Cy2-conjugated antibodies, counterstaining was performed using DAPI. In addition, apoptosis was detected by TUNEL-staining using the ApoptTag Plus peroxidase kit (Chemicon International). Representative depiction of histology and immunhistochemistry was made using IP lab software (BD Biosciences). Cell culturing Murine fibrosarcoma cell L929 (ATCC), p53dmc/ras and p53dmc/ras/myc colonocytes (kindly provided by Dr. Andrei Thomas-Tikhonenko) were maintained in MEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin and streptomycin. HCT116 p53+/+ and p53?/? cells were kindly provided by Dr. Bert Vogelstein and maintained in McCoy’s 5A-medium (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin and streptomycin. Sub-confluent L929 cells were treated with 10 ?M of etoposide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 24 hours and collected for Western blot analysis (as described above). Microarray analysis Total RNA was extracted and amplified from frozen spleens of three ICR mice per treatment (i.e., ‘control-0 Gy’, ‘1.1 Gy GR’, ‘7.0 Gy GR’, ‘1.1 Gy PR’ and ‘6.4 Gy PR’, all at 4 hours post-radiation) using the RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen) and the WT pico FFPE-kit (Nugen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Complementary DNA was synthesized from total RNA using a dT-primer tagged with a T7 promoter. Complementary RNA was synthesized by transcription in vitro and labeled with biotinylated nucleotides (Enzo Biochem). All hybridizations were performed using the MOE430A 2.0 GeneChip (Affymetrix). Two dimensional principal component analysis (PCA) was made on the global naive gene expression profiles (approximately 22,690 genes) of all the treatment groups using the two most relevant principal components (based on eigenvalues) identified using the Gene Spring 7.3.1 software (Agilent). Gene lists were filtered by a minimum of 2-fold change and p < 0.05 (one-way ANOVA test) relative control using the Volcano plot function in the GeneSpring GX 7.3.1 software. p-values for enrichment in gene ontology (GO) classes were obtained for each gene list, converted to -logP values and plotted in relation to respective GO-class in Excel (Microsoft). Also, gene expression changes were filtered by annotation for “apoptosis regulator activity” (GO: 00176), “signal transduction” (GO: 0007165), “cell cycle” (GO: 0007049), obtained from the Gene Ontology Consortium. Quantitation of histological and immunohistochemical findings All slide sections were coded, analyzed and quantified blindly by counting ten randomly selected 60× or 100× image fields of three non-serial sections of the same specimen. The area percentage of the total area occupied by dead cells (atrophy) in the white pulp of the spleen, the cortex of thymus and Peyer’s patches where estimated using ImageJ (NIH Image 1.62 software). Also, the number of cells positive for cleaved caspase-3, cleaved caspase-9 and cleaved PARP was calculated on digital images of specimens with the use of ImageJ (NIH Image 1.62 software). Appropriate statistics were applied to the generated data (see “Statistical analysis”). Western blotting Cells were homogenized and sonicated in RIPA-buffer (1 × PBS, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1 mM PMSF, Complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)). Protein concentrations were determined by the Bradford method (Bio-Rad) and proteins separated on sodium dodecylsulfate 12.5% polyacrylamide gels and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes. Ran, c-Myc, Granzyme B, NAIP, phosphorylated Stat-1, Bcl-G and p53 were detected by immunoblotting with mouse anti-Actin (C-2, Santa Cruz), mouse anti-Ran (BD Transduction Laboratories), rabbit anti- myc (N-262, Santa Cruz), rabbit anti-Tyr701 phosphorylated Stat1 (Cell Signaling), rabbit anti-Bcl-G (Anaspec), rabbit anti-Granzyme B (Cell Signaling), mouse anti-?H2AX (Rockland Immunochemicals), rabbit anti-NAIP (Chemicon) and rabbit anti-p53 (Santa Cruz) respectively. Membranes were incubated with horseradish peroxidase conjugated secondary antibodies (1:4,000) and detected by the ECL procedure (Amersham). Statistical analysis Differences in the percentages of atrophy in the splenic white pulp and Peyer’s patches were analyzed using Student’s t test. Differences in the count of apoptotic cells per field, the number of ?H2AX positive cells/field, the number of ?H2AX-positive foci/cell and the number of p-ATM positive cells/field were analyzed using the Mann-Whitney test. All statistical analyses were performed using the MedCalc software version 8.2.1.0 (MedCalc Software, Belgium). p < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant.  Material and Methods Mice Four to five-week old male ICR-mice (Taconic farms, Germantown, NY) were housed in the animal facility at Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL). Four to six weeks old B6.Cg-Tg (IghMyc)22Bri/J (“E?-myc” mice), wild-type and Trp53?/? C57Bl/6 mice (Jackson Laboratory, ME) were housed in the animal facility of the clinical research building, University of Pennsylvania. All mice were housed in a controlled environment with regard to light, temperature and humidity. Mice were euthanized through carbon dioxide induced asphyxiation. The animal care and treatment procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees of the University of Pennsylvania and Brookhaven National Laboratory. Treatment with GR and PR Previous studies have estimated the RBE of protons for in vivo and in vitro endpoints at between 1.1 and 1.3. Based on Engels, et al. 7 we assumed an RBE of 1.1 for the endpoint we studied. Based on this assumption, mice were treated with RBE-weighted doses of whole body radiation. GR (1.1 and 7.0 Gy) was delivered at the Controlled Environment Radiation Facility (CERF), BNL. PR (1.0 and 6.4 Gy) was delivered at the NASA Space Radiation Laboratory, BNL. Total-body GR of animals was performed at a dose rate of 5 and 35 cGy/min for 1.1 and 7.0 Gy of GR respectively. Total-body PR of animals was performed at 20 and 70 cGy/minute (1 GeV/nucleon, approximate linear energy transfer (LET) - 0.24 keV/?m) for 1.0 and 6.4 Gy. PR was carried out within the non-stopping region (Bragg plateau) of the curve for energy deposition as a function of depth. Also, for PR, mice were placed into restraining devices for insertion into the beam lines approximately 3 minutes before irradiation. All animals were sacrificed at four hours following irradiation. In a separate experiment, wildtype and Trp53?/? mice were irradiated with 4.0 Gy of GR from a 137Cs gamma source (University of Pennsylvania) at a dose rate of 1.4 Gy/min. Histology and Immunohistochemistry Following necropsy, the bone marrow, colon, small intestine, spleen, testis and thymus were collected and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight at 4°C, embedded in paraffin and cut into 4-?m sections for evaluation by histology and immunohistochemistry. Cut sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and analyzed by microscopy. Cut sections were also stained for Ki-67 (Novocastra), p53 (Santa Cruz), S1986-ATM (Rockland Immunochemical), Bcl-G (Anaspec), p16 (Santa Cruz) and phospho-H2AX (eBiosciences). Immunohistochemistry was performed by rehydrating slides and subjecting them to antigen-retrieval through boiling in 1 mM citric acid buffer (pH 6.0). Endogenous peroxidases were blocked by submerging slides in 3% H2O2. Briefly, primary antibodies were left on sections overnight at 4°C. Sections were washed and primary antibodies were conjugated with either peroxidase conjugates using the ABC-system (Vecta Elite) or Cy2-conjugated donkey antibodies. In the case of Cy2-conjugated antibodies, counterstaining was performed using DAPI. In addition, apoptosis was detected by TUNEL-staining using the ApoptTag Plus peroxidase kit (Chemicon International). Representative depiction of histology and immunhistochemistry was made using IP lab software (BD Biosciences). Cell culturing Murine fibrosarcoma cell L929 (ATCC), p53dmc/ras and p53dmc/ras/myc colonocytes (kindly provided by Dr. Andrei Thomas-Tikhonenko) were maintained in MEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin and streptomycin. HCT116 p53+/+ and p53?/? cells were kindly provided by Dr. Bert Vogelstein and maintained in McCoy’s 5A-medium (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin and streptomycin. Sub-confluent L929 cells were treated with 10 ?M of etoposide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 24 hours and collected for Western blot analysis (as described above). Microarray analysis Total RNA was extracted and amplified from frozen spleens of three ICR mice per treatment (i.e., ‘control-0 Gy’, ‘1.1 Gy GR’, ‘7.0 Gy GR’, ‘1.1 Gy PR’ and ‘6.4 Gy PR’, all at 4 hours post-radiation) using the RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen) and the WT pico FFPE-kit (Nugen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Complementary DNA was synthesized from total RNA using a dT-primer tagged with a T7 promoter. Complementary RNA was synthesized by transcription in vitro and labeled with biotinylated nucleotides (Enzo Biochem). All hybridizations were performed using the MOE430A 2.0 GeneChip (Affymetrix). Two dimensional principal component analysis (PCA) was made on the global naive gene expression profiles (approximately 22,690 genes) of all the treatment groups using the two most relevant principal components (based on eigenvalues) identified using the Gene Spring 7.3.1 software (Agilent). Gene lists were filtered by a minimum of 2-fold change and p < 0.05 (one-way ANOVA test) relative control using the Volcano plot function in the GeneSpring GX 7.3.1 software. p-values for enrichment in gene ontology (GO) classes were obtained for each gene list, converted to -logP values and plotted in relation to respective GO-class in Excel (Microsoft). Also, gene expression changes were filtered by annotation for “apoptosis regulator activity” (GO: 00176), “signal transduction” (GO: 0007165), “cell cycle” (GO: 0007049), obtained from the Gene Ontology Consortium. Quantitation of histological and immunohistochemical findings All slide sections were coded, analyzed and quantified blindly by counting ten randomly selected 60× or 100× image fields of three non-serial sections of the same specimen. The area percentage of the total area occupied by dead cells (atrophy) in the white pulp of the spleen, the cortex of thymus and Peyer’s patches where estimated using ImageJ (NIH Image 1.62 software). Also, the number of cells positive for cleaved caspase-3, cleaved caspase-9 and cleaved PARP was calculated on digital images of specimens with the use of ImageJ (NIH Image 1.62 software). Appropriate statistics were applied to the generated data (see “Statistical analysis”). Western blotting Cells were homogenized and sonicated in RIPA-buffer (1 × PBS, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1 mM PMSF, Complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)). Protein concentrations were determined by the Bradford method (Bio-Rad) and proteins separated on sodium dodecylsulfate 12.5% polyacrylamide gels and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes. Ran, c-Myc, Granzyme B, NAIP, phosphorylated Stat-1, Bcl-G and p53 were detected by immunoblotting with mouse anti-Actin (C-2, Santa Cruz), mouse anti-Ran (BD Transduction Laboratories), rabbit anti- myc (N-262, Santa Cruz), rabbit anti-Tyr701 phosphorylated Stat1 (Cell Signaling), rabbit anti-Bcl-G (Anaspec), rabbit anti-Granzyme B (Cell Signaling), mouse anti-?H2AX (Rockland Immunochemicals), rabbit anti-NAIP (Chemicon) and rabbit anti-p53 (Santa Cruz) respectively. Membranes were incubated with horseradish peroxidase conjugated secondary antibodies (1:4,000) and detected by the ECL procedure (Amersham). Statistical analysis Differences in the percentages of atrophy in the splenic white pulp and Peyer’s patches were analyzed using Student’s t test. Differences in the count of apoptotic cells per field, the number of ?H2AX positive cells/field, the number of ?H2AX-positive foci/cell and the number of p-ATM positive cells/field were analyzed using the Mann-Whitney test. All statistical analyses were performed using the MedCalc software version 8.2.1.0 (MedCalc Software, Belgium). p < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant.  Mice Four to five-week old male ICR-mice (Taconic farms, Germantown, NY) were housed in the animal facility at Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL). Four to six weeks old B6.Cg-Tg (IghMyc)22Bri/J (“E?-myc” mice), wild-type and Trp53?/? C57Bl/6 mice (Jackson Laboratory, ME) were housed in the animal facility of the clinical research building, University of Pennsylvania. All mice were housed in a controlled environment with regard to light, temperature and humidity. Mice were euthanized through carbon dioxide induced asphyxiation. The animal care and treatment procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees of the University of Pennsylvania and Brookhaven National Laboratory.  Mice Four to five-week old male ICR-mice (Taconic farms, Germantown, NY) were housed in the animal facility at Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL). Four to six weeks old B6.Cg-Tg (IghMyc)22Bri/J (“E?-myc” mice), wild-type and Trp53?/? C57Bl/6 mice (Jackson Laboratory, ME) were housed in the animal facility of the clinical research building, University of Pennsylvania. All mice were housed in a controlled environment with regard to light, temperature and humidity. Mice were euthanized through carbon dioxide induced asphyxiation. The animal care and treatment procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees of the University of Pennsylvania and Brookhaven National Laboratory.  Treatment with GR and PR Previous studies have estimated the RBE of protons for in vivo and in vitro endpoints at between 1.1 and 1.3. Based on Engels, et al. 7 we assumed an RBE of 1.1 for the endpoint we studied. Based on this assumption, mice were treated with RBE-weighted doses of whole body radiation. GR (1.1 and 7.0 Gy) was delivered at the Controlled Environment Radiation Facility (CERF), BNL. PR (1.0 and 6.4 Gy) was delivered at the NASA Space Radiation Laboratory, BNL. Total-body GR of animals was performed at a dose rate of 5 and 35 cGy/min for 1.1 and 7.0 Gy of GR respectively. Total-body PR of animals was performed at 20 and 70 cGy/minute (1 GeV/nucleon, approximate linear energy transfer (LET) - 0.24 keV/?m) for 1.0 and 6.4 Gy. PR was carried out within the non-stopping region (Bragg plateau) of the curve for energy deposition as a function of depth. Also, for PR, mice were placed into restraining devices for insertion into the beam lines approximately 3 minutes before irradiation. All animals were sacrificed at four hours following irradiation. In a separate experiment, wildtype and Trp53?/? mice were irradiated with 4.0 Gy of GR from a 137Cs gamma source (University of Pennsylvania) at a dose rate of 1.4 Gy/min.  Treatment with GR and PR Previous studies have estimated the RBE of protons for in vivo and in vitro endpoints at between 1.1 and 1.3. Based on Engels, et al. 7 we assumed an RBE of 1.1 for the endpoint we studied. Based on this assumption, mice were treated with RBE-weighted doses of whole body radiation. GR (1.1 and 7.0 Gy) was delivered at the Controlled Environment Radiation Facility (CERF), BNL. PR (1.0 and 6.4 Gy) was delivered at the NASA Space Radiation Laboratory, BNL. Total-body GR of animals was performed at a dose rate of 5 and 35 cGy/min for 1.1 and 7.0 Gy of GR respectively. Total-body PR of animals was performed at 20 and 70 cGy/minute (1 GeV/nucleon, approximate linear energy transfer (LET) - 0.24 keV/?m) for 1.0 and 6.4 Gy. PR was carried out within the non-stopping region (Bragg plateau) of the curve for energy deposition as a function of depth. Also, for PR, mice were placed into restraining devices for insertion into the beam lines approximately 3 minutes before irradiation. All animals were sacrificed at four hours following irradiation. In a separate experiment, wildtype and Trp53?/? mice were irradiated with 4.0 Gy of GR from a 137Cs gamma source (University of Pennsylvania) at a dose rate of 1.4 Gy/min.  Histology and Immunohistochemistry Following necropsy, the bone marrow, colon, small intestine, spleen, testis and thymus were collected and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight at 4°C, embedded in paraffin and cut into 4-?m sections for evaluation by histology and immunohistochemistry. Cut sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and analyzed by microscopy. Cut sections were also stained for Ki-67 (Novocastra), p53 (Santa Cruz), S1986-ATM (Rockland Immunochemical), Bcl-G (Anaspec), p16 (Santa Cruz) and phospho-H2AX (eBiosciences). Immunohistochemistry was performed by rehydrating slides and subjecting them to antigen-retrieval through boiling in 1 mM citric acid buffer (pH 6.0). Endogenous peroxidases were blocked by submerging slides in 3% H2O2. Briefly, primary antibodies were left on sections overnight at 4°C. Sections were washed and primary antibodies were conjugated with either peroxidase conjugates using the ABC-system (Vecta Elite) or Cy2-conjugated donkey antibodies. In the case of Cy2-conjugated antibodies, counterstaining was performed using DAPI. In addition, apoptosis was detected by TUNEL-staining using the ApoptTag Plus peroxidase kit (Chemicon International). Representative depiction of histology and immunhistochemistry was made using IP lab software (BD Biosciences).  Histology and Immunohistochemistry Following necropsy, the bone marrow, colon, small intestine, spleen, testis and thymus were collected and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight at 4°C, embedded in paraffin and cut into 4-?m sections for evaluation by histology and immunohistochemistry. Cut sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and analyzed by microscopy. Cut sections were also stained for Ki-67 (Novocastra), p53 (Santa Cruz), S1986-ATM (Rockland Immunochemical), Bcl-G (Anaspec), p16 (Santa Cruz) and phospho-H2AX (eBiosciences). Immunohistochemistry was performed by rehydrating slides and subjecting them to antigen-retrieval through boiling in 1 mM citric acid buffer (pH 6.0). Endogenous peroxidases were blocked by submerging slides in 3% H2O2. Briefly, primary antibodies were left on sections overnight at 4°C. Sections were washed and primary antibodies were conjugated with either peroxidase conjugates using the ABC-system (Vecta Elite) or Cy2-conjugated donkey antibodies. In the case of Cy2-conjugated antibodies, counterstaining was performed using DAPI. In addition, apoptosis was detected by TUNEL-staining using the ApoptTag Plus peroxidase kit (Chemicon International). Representative depiction of histology and immunhistochemistry was made using IP lab software (BD Biosciences).  Cell culturing Murine fibrosarcoma cell L929 (ATCC), p53dmc/ras and p53dmc/ras/myc colonocytes (kindly provided by Dr. Andrei Thomas-Tikhonenko) were maintained in MEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin and streptomycin. HCT116 p53+/+ and p53?/? cells were kindly provided by Dr. Bert Vogelstein and maintained in McCoy’s 5A-medium (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin and streptomycin. Sub-confluent L929 cells were treated with 10 ?M of etoposide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 24 hours and collected for Western blot analysis (as described above).  Cell culturing Murine fibrosarcoma cell L929 (ATCC), p53dmc/ras and p53dmc/ras/myc colonocytes (kindly provided by Dr. Andrei Thomas-Tikhonenko) were maintained in MEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin and streptomycin. HCT116 p53+/+ and p53?/? cells were kindly provided by Dr. Bert Vogelstein and maintained in McCoy’s 5A-medium (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin and streptomycin. Sub-confluent L929 cells were treated with 10 ?M of etoposide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 24 hours and collected for Western blot analysis (as described above).  Microarray analysis Total RNA was extracted and amplified from frozen spleens of three ICR mice per treatment (i.e., ‘control-0 Gy’, ‘1.1 Gy GR’, ‘7.0 Gy GR’, ‘1.1 Gy PR’ and ‘6.4 Gy PR’, all at 4 hours post-radiation) using the RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen) and the WT pico FFPE-kit (Nugen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Complementary DNA was synthesized from total RNA using a dT-primer tagged with a T7 promoter. Complementary RNA was synthesized by transcription in vitro and labeled with biotinylated nucleotides (Enzo Biochem). All hybridizations were performed using the MOE430A 2.0 GeneChip (Affymetrix). Two dimensional principal component analysis (PCA) was made on the global naive gene expression profiles (approximately 22,690 genes) of all the treatment groups using the two most relevant principal components (based on eigenvalues) identified using the Gene Spring 7.3.1 software (Agilent). Gene lists were filtered by a minimum of 2-fold change and p < 0.05 (one-way ANOVA test) relative control using the Volcano plot function in the GeneSpring GX 7.3.1 software. p-values for enrichment in gene ontology (GO) classes were obtained for each gene list, converted to -logP values and plotted in relation to respective GO-class in Excel (Microsoft). Also, gene expression changes were filtered by annotation for “apoptosis regulator activity” (GO: 00176), “signal transduction” (GO: 0007165), “cell cycle” (GO: 0007049), obtained from the Gene Ontology Consortium.  Microarray analysis Total RNA was extracted and amplified from frozen spleens of three ICR mice per treatment (i.e., ‘control-0 Gy’, ‘1.1 Gy GR’, ‘7.0 Gy GR’, ‘1.1 Gy PR’ and ‘6.4 Gy PR’, all at 4 hours post-radiation) using the RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen) and the WT pico FFPE-kit (Nugen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Complementary DNA was synthesized from total RNA using a dT-primer tagged with a T7 promoter. Complementary RNA was synthesized by transcription in vitro and labeled with biotinylated nucleotides (Enzo Biochem). All hybridizations were performed using the MOE430A 2.0 GeneChip (Affymetrix). Two dimensional principal component analysis (PCA) was made on the global naive gene expression profiles (approximately 22,690 genes) of all the treatment groups using the two most relevant principal components (based on eigenvalues) identified using the Gene Spring 7.3.1 software (Agilent). Gene lists were filtered by a minimum of 2-fold change and p < 0.05 (one-way ANOVA test) relative control using the Volcano plot function in the GeneSpring GX 7.3.1 software. p-values for enrichment in gene ontology (GO) classes were obtained for each gene list, converted to -logP values and plotted in relation to respective GO-class in Excel (Microsoft). Also, gene expression changes were filtered by annotation for “apoptosis regulator activity” (GO: 00176), “signal transduction” (GO: 0007165), “cell cycle” (GO: 0007049), obtained from the Gene Ontology Consortium.  Quantitation of histological and immunohistochemical findings All slide sections were coded, analyzed and quantified blindly by counting ten randomly selected 60× or 100× image fields of three non-serial sections of the same specimen. The area percentage of the total area occupied by dead cells (atrophy) in the white pulp of the spleen, the cortex of thymus and Peyer’s patches where estimated using ImageJ (NIH Image 1.62 software). Also, the number of cells positive for cleaved caspase-3, cleaved caspase-9 and cleaved PARP was calculated on digital images of specimens with the use of ImageJ (NIH Image 1.62 software). Appropriate statistics were applied to the generated data (see “Statistical analysis”).  Quantitation of histological and immunohistochemical findings All slide sections were coded, analyzed and quantified blindly by counting ten randomly selected 60× or 100× image fields of three non-serial sections of the same specimen. The area percentage of the total area occupied by dead cells (atrophy) in the white pulp of the spleen, the cortex of thymus and Peyer’s patches where estimated using ImageJ (NIH Image 1.62 software). Also, the number of cells positive for cleaved caspase-3, cleaved caspase-9 and cleaved PARP was calculated on digital images of specimens with the use of ImageJ (NIH Image 1.62 software). Appropriate statistics were applied to the generated data (see “Statistical analysis”).  Western blotting Cells were homogenized and sonicated in RIPA-buffer (1 × PBS, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1 mM PMSF, Complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)). Protein concentrations were determined by the Bradford method (Bio-Rad) and proteins separated on sodium dodecylsulfate 12.5% polyacrylamide gels and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes. Ran, c-Myc, Granzyme B, NAIP, phosphorylated Stat-1, Bcl-G and p53 were detected by immunoblotting with mouse anti-Actin (C-2, Santa Cruz), mouse anti-Ran (BD Transduction Laboratories), rabbit anti- myc (N-262, Santa Cruz), rabbit anti-Tyr701 phosphorylated Stat1 (Cell Signaling), rabbit anti-Bcl-G (Anaspec), rabbit anti-Granzyme B (Cell Signaling), mouse anti-?H2AX (Rockland Immunochemicals), rabbit anti-NAIP (Chemicon) and rabbit anti-p53 (Santa Cruz) respectively. Membranes were incubated with horseradish peroxidase conjugated secondary antibodies (1:4,000) and detected by the ECL procedure (Amersham).  Western blotting Cells were homogenized and sonicated in RIPA-buffer (1 × PBS, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1 mM PMSF, Complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)). Protein concentrations were determined by the Bradford method (Bio-Rad) and proteins separated on sodium dodecylsulfate 12.5% polyacrylamide gels and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes. Ran, c-Myc, Granzyme B, NAIP, phosphorylated Stat-1, Bcl-G and p53 were detected by immunoblotting with mouse anti-Actin (C-2, Santa Cruz), mouse anti-Ran (BD Transduction Laboratories), rabbit anti- myc (N-262, Santa Cruz), rabbit anti-Tyr701 phosphorylated Stat1 (Cell Signaling), rabbit anti-Bcl-G (Anaspec), rabbit anti-Granzyme B (Cell Signaling), mouse anti-?H2AX (Rockland Immunochemicals), rabbit anti-NAIP (Chemicon) and rabbit anti-p53 (Santa Cruz) respectively. Membranes were incubated with horseradish peroxidase conjugated secondary antibodies (1:4,000) and detected by the ECL procedure (Amersham).  Statistical analysis Differences in the percentages of atrophy in the splenic white pulp and Peyer’s patches were analyzed using Student’s t test. Differences in the count of apoptotic cells per field, the number of ?H2AX positive cells/field, the number of ?H2AX-positive foci/cell and the number of p-ATM positive cells/field were analyzed using the Mann-Whitney test. All statistical analyses were performed using the MedCalc software version 8.2.1.0 (MedCalc Software, Belgium). p < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant.  Statistical analysis Differences in the percentages of atrophy in the splenic white pulp and Peyer’s patches were analyzed using Student’s t test. Differences in the count of apoptotic cells per field, the number of ?H2AX positive cells/field, the number of ?H2AX-positive foci/cell and the number of p-ATM positive cells/field were analyzed using the Mann-Whitney test. All statistical analyses were performed using the MedCalc software version 8.2.1.0 (MedCalc Software, Belgium). p < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant.  Supplementary Material supplementary material  Supplementary Material supplementary material 