New Concepts in Atrial Fibrillation: Neural Mechanisms and Calcium Dynamics Synopsis Atrial fibrillation (AF) is a complex arrhythmia with multiple possible mechanisms. It requires a trigger for initiation and a favorable substrate for maintenance. Pulmonary vein myocardial sleeves have the potential to generate spontaneous activity, and such arrhythmogenic activity is surfaced by modulation of intracellular calcium dynamics. Direct autonomic nerve recordings in canine models demonstrate that simultaneous sympathovagal discharges are the most common triggers of paroxysmal atrial tachycardia and paroxysmal AF. Autonomic modulation as a potential therapeutic strategy has been targeted clinically and experimentally, but its effectiveness as an adjunctive therapeutic modality to catheter ablation of AF has been inconsistent. Further studies are warranted before application can be widely implied for therapies of clinical AF.  Implications of neural anatomy of the pulmonary vein If both sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves are co-stimulated/ablated, why is bradycardia the dominant response elicited during ganglionic stimulation/ablation rather than tachycardia? Several explanations are proposed. Firstly, complex extracardiac neural pathways 27 43 involved in the generation of bradycardic reflexes during stimulation/ablation around the PVs project to vagal nuclei centrally but do not involve sympathetic tracts. 43 Second, a paracrine mechanism might be in operation, as ganglion cells predominantly are cholinergic 24 and release mostly acetylcholine when stimulated/ablated. Third, adrenergic nerves are distributed more widely than cholinergic nerves. 24 44 Hence, radiofrequency ablation is more likely to eliminate adrenergic nerves than the cholinergic nerves, resulting in a relatively heightened vagal tone and bradycardia. Clinical reports 42 30 show that autonomic reflexes are elicited most commonly within approximately 1cm of PV-LA junction. The anatomic colocalization of adrenergic and cholinergic innervations implies that it virtually would be impossible to eliminate only sympathetic or parasympathetic nerves selectively during catheter ablation of AF. The coexistence of adrenergic and cholinergic phenotypes within ganglionic cell neuroplasm also suggests that when ganglion cells are stimulated, adrenergic and cholinergic mediators may be released simultaneously, affecting cellular electrophysiology in ways that may predispose to triggered activity 38 .  Implications of neural anatomy of the pulmonary vein If both sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves are co-stimulated/ablated, why is bradycardia the dominant response elicited during ganglionic stimulation/ablation rather than tachycardia? Several explanations are proposed. Firstly, complex extracardiac neural pathways 27 43 involved in the generation of bradycardic reflexes during stimulation/ablation around the PVs project to vagal nuclei centrally but do not involve sympathetic tracts. 43 Second, a paracrine mechanism might be in operation, as ganglion cells predominantly are cholinergic 24 and release mostly acetylcholine when stimulated/ablated. Third, adrenergic nerves are distributed more widely than cholinergic nerves. 24 44 Hence, radiofrequency ablation is more likely to eliminate adrenergic nerves than the cholinergic nerves, resulting in a relatively heightened vagal tone and bradycardia. Clinical reports 42 30 show that autonomic reflexes are elicited most commonly within approximately 1cm of PV-LA junction. The anatomic colocalization of adrenergic and cholinergic innervations implies that it virtually would be impossible to eliminate only sympathetic or parasympathetic nerves selectively during catheter ablation of AF. The coexistence of adrenergic and cholinergic phenotypes within ganglionic cell neuroplasm also suggests that when ganglion cells are stimulated, adrenergic and cholinergic mediators may be released simultaneously, affecting cellular electrophysiology in ways that may predispose to triggered activity 38 .  Autonomic nervous system and AF in human patients Several observations suggest the ANS plays an important role in the initiation and maintenance of AF in humans. Most patients who have idiopathic paroxysmal AF seem vagally dependent, with a heightened susceptibility to vasovagal cardiovascular response. In contrast, in most patients who have organic heart diseases, the paroxysmal AF episodes seem more sympathetically dependent. 45 A shift toward an increase in sympathetic tone or toward a loss of vagal tone has been observed before postoperative paroxysmal AF 46 , before the onset of atrial flutter 47 and before paroxysmal AF occurring during sleep 48 ; whereas a shift toward vagal predominance was observed in young patients with lone AF and nocturnal episodes of paroxysmal AF 49 . More recently, a primary increase in adrenergic drive followed by marked modulation toward vagal predominance immediately before the onset of paroxysmal AF was observed. 5 , 50 , 51 The ANS activity in all these studies was indirectly evaluated indirectly, however, by the analysis of heart rate variability parameters on continuous ECG recordings. Heart rate variability measures changes in the relative degree of ANS, not the absolute level of sympathetic or parasympathetic discharges. It is necessary, therefore, to perform direct recording of sympathetic and vagal nerve activity to prove or disprove these observations in ambulatory animals.  Autonomic nervous system and AF in human patients Several observations suggest the ANS plays an important role in the initiation and maintenance of AF in humans. Most patients who have idiopathic paroxysmal AF seem vagally dependent, with a heightened susceptibility to vasovagal cardiovascular response. In contrast, in most patients who have organic heart diseases, the paroxysmal AF episodes seem more sympathetically dependent. 45 A shift toward an increase in sympathetic tone or toward a loss of vagal tone has been observed before postoperative paroxysmal AF 46 , before the onset of atrial flutter 47 and before paroxysmal AF occurring during sleep 48 ; whereas a shift toward vagal predominance was observed in young patients with lone AF and nocturnal episodes of paroxysmal AF 49 . More recently, a primary increase in adrenergic drive followed by marked modulation toward vagal predominance immediately before the onset of paroxysmal AF was observed. 5 , 50 , 51 The ANS activity in all these studies was indirectly evaluated indirectly, however, by the analysis of heart rate variability parameters on continuous ECG recordings. Heart rate variability measures changes in the relative degree of ANS, not the absolute level of sympathetic or parasympathetic discharges. It is necessary, therefore, to perform direct recording of sympathetic and vagal nerve activity to prove or disprove these observations in ambulatory animals.  Sympathetic nerve recordings in animal models of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation Barrett and colleagues 52 first reported successful recording of renal sympathetic nerve activity in conscious rabbits continuously for more than 7 days. The renal sympathetic nerve activity may not predict the cardiac sympathetic nerve activity, however. To record cardiac sympathetic nerve activity, Jung et al 53 used Data Sciences International transmitters to record stellate ganglion nerve activity, 24 hr a day, 7 days a week, for an average of 41.5±16.6 days in normal ambulatory dogs. The results showed a circadian variation of sympathetic outflow. Normal dogs rarely develop paroxysmal AF, however. To test the hypothesis that spontaneous ANS discharges can serve as triggers of paroxysmal AF, it is necessary to develop an animal model of paroxysmal AF. Wijffels and colleagues 54 previously demonstrated that intermittent rapid pacing could induce progressively increased electrophysiological remodeling, leading to persistent AF. Rapid atrial pacing also causes significant neural remodeling characterized by heterogeneous increase of sympathetic innervation 55 and extensive nerve sprouting 56 . Tan and colleagues 57 implanted Data Sciences International transmitters to directly record left stellate ganglion nerve activity, left vagal nerve activity and LA local bipolar electrograms or surface ECG simultaneously in ambulatory dogs over several weeks. Intermittent rapid atrial pacing was performed and ANS activity was monitored when the pacemaker was turned off. Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia and paroxysmal AF were documented and that simultaneous sympathovagal discharges were the most common triggers of paroxysmal atrial tachycardia and paroxysmal AF. Cryoablation of the stellate ganglia and the superior cardiac branches of vagal nerve eliminated all episodes of paroxysmal AF and atrial tachycardias. These results further support the hypothesis that ANS activity is important in the generation of paroxysmal AF. Histological examinations of cryoablated dogs showed cardiac nerve sprouting and sympathetic hyperinnervation in the atria. These findings suggest decentralization rather than denervation of the sympathovagal nerves underlies the antiarrhythmic mechanism of stellate ganglion and vagal nerve ablation.  Sympathetic nerve recordings in animal models of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation Barrett and colleagues 52 first reported successful recording of renal sympathetic nerve activity in conscious rabbits continuously for more than 7 days. The renal sympathetic nerve activity may not predict the cardiac sympathetic nerve activity, however. To record cardiac sympathetic nerve activity, Jung et al 53 used Data Sciences International transmitters to record stellate ganglion nerve activity, 24 hr a day, 7 days a week, for an average of 41.5±16.6 days in normal ambulatory dogs. The results showed a circadian variation of sympathetic outflow. Normal dogs rarely develop paroxysmal AF, however. To test the hypothesis that spontaneous ANS discharges can serve as triggers of paroxysmal AF, it is necessary to develop an animal model of paroxysmal AF. Wijffels and colleagues 54 previously demonstrated that intermittent rapid pacing could induce progressively increased electrophysiological remodeling, leading to persistent AF. Rapid atrial pacing also causes significant neural remodeling characterized by heterogeneous increase of sympathetic innervation 55 and extensive nerve sprouting 56 . Tan and colleagues 57 implanted Data Sciences International transmitters to directly record left stellate ganglion nerve activity, left vagal nerve activity and LA local bipolar electrograms or surface ECG simultaneously in ambulatory dogs over several weeks. Intermittent rapid atrial pacing was performed and ANS activity was monitored when the pacemaker was turned off. Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia and paroxysmal AF were documented and that simultaneous sympathovagal discharges were the most common triggers of paroxysmal atrial tachycardia and paroxysmal AF. Cryoablation of the stellate ganglia and the superior cardiac branches of vagal nerve eliminated all episodes of paroxysmal AF and atrial tachycardias. These results further support the hypothesis that ANS activity is important in the generation of paroxysmal AF. Histological examinations of cryoablated dogs showed cardiac nerve sprouting and sympathetic hyperinnervation in the atria. These findings suggest decentralization rather than denervation of the sympathovagal nerves underlies the antiarrhythmic mechanism of stellate ganglion and vagal nerve ablation.  Ca<sub>i</sub> dynamics and vagal atrial fibrillation in heart failure The Framingham Heart Study 58 concluded that in heart failure subjects, late development of AF was associated with increased mortality. Heart failure-related atrial arrhythmias appear to arise from macroreentrant sources, primarily by increasing atrial size and promoting interstitial fibrosis 59 . In addition to macroreentry, Stambler and colleagues 60 reported that DADs-induced triggered activity may also be a mechanism of focal atrial tachycardias in pacing-induced heart failure dogs. Okuyama and colleagues 61 demonstrated that some AF episodes were characterized by focal activations in the PVs and vein of Marshall, and by complex, fractionated wavefronts within the PVs in a canine heart failure model, suggesting the occurrence of significant proarrhythmic remodeling in the PVs during heart failure. A major arrhythmogenic mechanism in heart failure results from altered ryanodine receptor function 62 . A combination of abnormal ryanodine receptor and increased sympathetic tone during exercise can cause triggered activity 63 . Alternatively, direct autonomic nerve recordings in a canine heart failure model showed that not only sympathetic but also vagal nerves discharges were increased in heart failure dogs, and simultaneous sympathovagal discharges were common triggers of atrial arrhythmias 64 . A computer simulation study 65 has suggested that vagal AF may arise from acetylcholine-induced stabilization of the primary spiral-wave generator and disorganization of propagation by repolarization gradient that causes fibrillatory dynamics. As IKACh activation shortens APD and hyperpolarizes the cell membrane, Atienza and colleagues 66 reported that adenosine activates IKACh and accelerates AF by promoting reentry rather than triggered activity in human. However, Chou and colleagues 67 reported that acetylcholine facilitates both PV focal discharges and PV-LA microreentry during vagal AF in a canine heart failure model. By using isolated, Langendorff-perfused canine PV-LA preparations and two cameras to map membrane potential and Cai simultaneously, it was demonstrated that pause-related large Cai elevation is associated with focal discharges in the PVs. A long preceding pause increases the Cai accumulation, leading to a greater SR Ca2+ release at the first beat after the pause. 37 Because the APD was reduced by acetylcholine, this large rise of Cai resulted in persistent Cai elevation into late phase 3 to induce late phase 3 EADs and PV focal discharges 37 , 38 , 68 . These triggered beats followed by sustained PV-LA microreentry can induce atrial tachycardia and AF, suggesting that both triggered and reentrant activities are important during vagal AF. Failing hearts have increased INCX current, 69 which renders them more susceptible to the late phase 3 EADs. Acetylcholine may increase Na+ conductance and intracellular Na+ activity, leading to altered INCX, reduced Cai efflux 70 , 71 and further enhanced Cai accumulation. The hypothesis is also supported by the suppression of late phase 3 EADs by ryanodine and thapsigargin infusion. Parasympathetic activation and acetylcholine release could be important mechanisms in the pathophysiology and atrial arrhythmogenesis in the heart failure status. Livanis et al 72 reported that neurally mediated mechanisms may be implicated in the pathophysiology of syncope in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy. In that study, both sympathetic and parasympathetic heart rate parameters were markedly stimulated.  Ca<sub>i</sub> dynamics and vagal atrial fibrillation in heart failure The Framingham Heart Study 58 concluded that in heart failure subjects, late development of AF was associated with increased mortality. Heart failure-related atrial arrhythmias appear to arise from macroreentrant sources, primarily by increasing atrial size and promoting interstitial fibrosis 59 . In addition to macroreentry, Stambler and colleagues 60 reported that DADs-induced triggered activity may also be a mechanism of focal atrial tachycardias in pacing-induced heart failure dogs. Okuyama and colleagues 61 demonstrated that some AF episodes were characterized by focal activations in the PVs and vein of Marshall, and by complex, fractionated wavefronts within the PVs in a canine heart failure model, suggesting the occurrence of significant proarrhythmic remodeling in the PVs during heart failure. A major arrhythmogenic mechanism in heart failure results from altered ryanodine receptor function 62 . A combination of abnormal ryanodine receptor and increased sympathetic tone during exercise can cause triggered activity 63 . Alternatively, direct autonomic nerve recordings in a canine heart failure model showed that not only sympathetic but also vagal nerves discharges were increased in heart failure dogs, and simultaneous sympathovagal discharges were common triggers of atrial arrhythmias 64 . A computer simulation study 65 has suggested that vagal AF may arise from acetylcholine-induced stabilization of the primary spiral-wave generator and disorganization of propagation by repolarization gradient that causes fibrillatory dynamics. As IKACh activation shortens APD and hyperpolarizes the cell membrane, Atienza and colleagues 66 reported that adenosine activates IKACh and accelerates AF by promoting reentry rather than triggered activity in human. However, Chou and colleagues 67 reported that acetylcholine facilitates both PV focal discharges and PV-LA microreentry during vagal AF in a canine heart failure model. By using isolated, Langendorff-perfused canine PV-LA preparations and two cameras to map membrane potential and Cai simultaneously, it was demonstrated that pause-related large Cai elevation is associated with focal discharges in the PVs. A long preceding pause increases the Cai accumulation, leading to a greater SR Ca2+ release at the first beat after the pause. 37 Because the APD was reduced by acetylcholine, this large rise of Cai resulted in persistent Cai elevation into late phase 3 to induce late phase 3 EADs and PV focal discharges 37 , 38 , 68 . These triggered beats followed by sustained PV-LA microreentry can induce atrial tachycardia and AF, suggesting that both triggered and reentrant activities are important during vagal AF. Failing hearts have increased INCX current, 69 which renders them more susceptible to the late phase 3 EADs. Acetylcholine may increase Na+ conductance and intracellular Na+ activity, leading to altered INCX, reduced Cai efflux 70 , 71 and further enhanced Cai accumulation. The hypothesis is also supported by the suppression of late phase 3 EADs by ryanodine and thapsigargin infusion. Parasympathetic activation and acetylcholine release could be important mechanisms in the pathophysiology and atrial arrhythmogenesis in the heart failure status. Livanis et al 72 reported that neurally mediated mechanisms may be implicated in the pathophysiology of syncope in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy. In that study, both sympathetic and parasympathetic heart rate parameters were markedly stimulated.  Neural Modulation as a Potential Therapeutic Strategy The effectiveness of autonomic modulation as an adjunctive therapeutic strategy to catheter ablation of AF has been inconsistent. Although favorable results have been obtained by Nakagawa and colleagues and Pappone and colleagues 30 , 42 , others found no beneficial 73 or deleterious 74 outcomes in patients who had denervation compared to those who did not, a finding also underlined by animal studies by Hirose and colleagues 35 , where partial vagal denervation of the high right atrium was found to increase inducibility of AF. These conflicting studies suggest that the interactions between the ANS and AF are more complex than currently understood. Perhaps a degree of individual variability accounts for these discrepancies, with some patients having more pronounced autonomic triggers than others. As an illustration, Scanavacca and colleagues 75 recently found that in a small number of patients who had “autonomic” paroxysmal AF, denervation alone without substrate modification in the atria was effective in preventing AF recurrence in 2 of 11 patients, these two patients having the most pronounced and persistent changes in heart rate variability. In summary, the evidence to date suggests that autonomic modulation does have an adjunctive role to play in catheter AF ablation, especially when applied selectively. Further mechanistic and clinical studies are warranted before a wider application can be recommended.  Neural Modulation as a Potential Therapeutic Strategy The effectiveness of autonomic modulation as an adjunctive therapeutic strategy to catheter ablation of AF has been inconsistent. Although favorable results have been obtained by Nakagawa and colleagues and Pappone and colleagues 30 , 42 , others found no beneficial 73 or deleterious 74 outcomes in patients who had denervation compared to those who did not, a finding also underlined by animal studies by Hirose and colleagues 35 , where partial vagal denervation of the high right atrium was found to increase inducibility of AF. These conflicting studies suggest that the interactions between the ANS and AF are more complex than currently understood. Perhaps a degree of individual variability accounts for these discrepancies, with some patients having more pronounced autonomic triggers than others. As an illustration, Scanavacca and colleagues 75 recently found that in a small number of patients who had “autonomic” paroxysmal AF, denervation alone without substrate modification in the atria was effective in preventing AF recurrence in 2 of 11 patients, these two patients having the most pronounced and persistent changes in heart rate variability. In summary, the evidence to date suggests that autonomic modulation does have an adjunctive role to play in catheter AF ablation, especially when applied selectively. Further mechanistic and clinical studies are warranted before a wider application can be recommended.  Figure Figure 1 Patterns of activation during sustained AF induced by chronic rapid atrial pacing. (A) Snapshots of focal discharge and reentrant activation patterns within right super PV at baseline AF. Asterisk in the left upper corner indicates the anatomical location of focal discharge at the proximal right superior PV. Black horizontal dotted line indicates the PV-LA junction. The number below each snapshot represents the time in milliseconds, with the beginning of data acquisition as time zero. In snapshots, red color represents the wavefront; black arrows, the direction of wave propagation; black dotted line, line of block; arrowhead, site of focal discharge. The color bar on the right shows the time scale (0 to 50 ms). (B) Snapshots of focal discharge and reentrant activation patterns within right superior PV after ibutilide infusion (0.02 mg/kg). A rectangle towards the end of the ECG tracings shows the time period corresponding to the snapshots in (A) and (B). (From Chou CC, Zhou S, Tan AY, et al. High-density mapping of pulmonary veins and left atrium during ibutilide administration in a canine model of sustained atrial fibrillation. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2005;289: H2704; used with permission)  Figure Figure 1 Patterns of activation during sustained AF induced by chronic rapid atrial pacing. (A) Snapshots of focal discharge and reentrant activation patterns within right super PV at baseline AF. Asterisk in the left upper corner indicates the anatomical location of focal discharge at the proximal right superior PV. Black horizontal dotted line indicates the PV-LA junction. The number below each snapshot represents the time in milliseconds, with the beginning of data acquisition as time zero. In snapshots, red color represents the wavefront; black arrows, the direction of wave propagation; black dotted line, line of block; arrowhead, site of focal discharge. The color bar on the right shows the time scale (0 to 50 ms). (B) Snapshots of focal discharge and reentrant activation patterns within right superior PV after ibutilide infusion (0.02 mg/kg). A rectangle towards the end of the ECG tracings shows the time period corresponding to the snapshots in (A) and (B). (From Chou CC, Zhou S, Tan AY, et al. High-density mapping of pulmonary veins and left atrium during ibutilide administration in a canine model of sustained atrial fibrillation. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2005;289: H2704; used with permission) 