Cardiovascular, Inflammatory and Metabolic Consequences of Sleep Deprivation That insufficient sleep is associated with poor attention and performance deficits is becoming widely recognized. Fewer people are aware that chronic sleep complaints in epidemiological studies have also been associated with an increase in overall mortality and morbidity. This article summarizes findings of known effects of insufficient sleep on cardiovascular risk factors including blood pressure, glucose metabolism, hormonal regulation and inflammation with particular emphasis on experimental sleep loss, using models of total and partial sleep deprivation, in healthy individuals who normally sleep in the range of 7-8 hours and have no sleep disorders. These studies show that insufficient sleep alters established cardiovascular risk factors in a direction that is known to increase the risk of cardiac morbidity.  Summary and future directions Autonomic functioning, inflammatory and coagulatory mediators and hormonal profiles are all altered during controlled sleep deprivation studies. The mechanism of this increase is not known, and certainly is related to the strain of maintaining wakefulness under conditions of an accumulating sleep deficit, and at times when the biological clocks are primed for sleep. It is not known if these changes are short-lived and these systems are able to adapt over time. The available experimental data, as reviewed here, suggest that with short term sleep deprivation blood pressure, inflammation, autonomic tone and hormones all are altered in a direction that is recognized to contribute to the development of cardiovascular disease, most importantly, atherosclerosis. The changes seen with experimental models of total and partial sleep deprivation are mild, usually subclinical, and resolve quickly with recovery sleep. Nevertheless the magnitude of change is similar to that seen in profiles predicting future CVD risk, and therefore are worthy of investigation. It is reasonable to hypothesize that chronic under-sleeping may contribute to the establishment of basal elevations in inflammatory mediators and coagulatory factors, thereby priming otherwise healthy individuals for development of disease. This is an important question for public health and health risk management in aging and warrants further attention. Future studies are needed to investigate the relationship between short term acute and more prolonged partial sleep deprivation under controlled settings, and sex and age differences in physiological responses to sleep loss challenge. In addition, the relationships between autonomic, inflammatory, coagulatory and metabolic and hormonal changes in individuals chronically under-sleeping in their daily lives, and interventions to investigate the reversibility of these changes through sleep extension, for example, are needed. At the physiological level as well as in field and epidemiological studies, the relationship between vulnerability to sleep loss and individual differences needs to be investigated with a multidisciplinary approach so that the consequences of sleep loss can be better understood at a systems level, so that individualized approaches to preventative strategies can be tested to reduce future cardiovascular and metabolic syndrome related disease risk. 