Metabotropic Glutamate Receptors as Targets for Multipotential Treatment of Neurological Disorders Summary Glutamate is a major excitatory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system (CNS) that is involved in numerous cellular functions, including cell death and survival. Metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR) are G-protein coupled receptors that have been divided into three groups on the basis of signal transduction pathways and pharmacological profiles. Group I, II and III mGluRs are found on cell types within and peripheral to the CNS, including neurons, microglia, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, T and B lymphocytes, osteoblasts, hepatocytes and endothelial cells, among others. These receptors have a number of effects on cells that can affect outcome after trauma, including reducing neuronal and olidogendroglial cell death, inflammation, and endothelial permeability. Therefore, mGluRs are a promising multipotential therapeutic approach. As the pathology of CNS trauma and neurodegeneration is multi-factorial, including oxidative stress, mitochondrial breakdown, inflammation and so on, therapies that serve to modulate multiple pathophysiological pathways may prove more effective than those directed at a single target. This review examines the multipotential therapeutic utility of mGluR modulation in acute and chronic injury and neurodegeneration.  Introduction Glutamate is a major excitatory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system (CNS) that regulates cellular and synaptic activity, plasticity, cell death and survival, learning and memory, pain perception, and motor activity. 1 Glutamate receptors are present in two forms: ionotropic and metabotropic. Ionotropic receptors, such as the NMDA and AMPA receptors, are ligand-gated ionic channels, whereas metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR) are G-protein coupled receptors. The latter have seven transmembrane domains and have been divided into three groups on the basis of signal transduction pathways and pharmacological profiles (see Table 1 ). Group I mGluR include mGluR1 and mGluR5. They are localized in the postsynaptic density (PSD) area at excitatory synaptic sites and function through G?q -proteins ( Fig. 1 ). Group I agonists cause activation of phospholipase C (PLC), leading to release of calcium and activation of protein kinase C (PKC). 2 Downstream signaling pathways include mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases, ERK1 and ERK2, which can be inhibited by mGluR5 and mGluR1 antagonists such as MPEP and CPCCOEt. 2 , 3 Although less well studied, mGluR1 and 5 have been identified on other cell types including microglia, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. Group II and III mGluRs are primarily localized presynaptically and are negatively coupled to adenylate cyclase ( Fig. 1 ). Activation of these receptors results in feedback inhibition of glutamate release, through the inhibition of voltage-gated calcium entry into the cell. Similar to mGluR1 and 5, group II and III mGluRs have also been identified on astrocytes and microglia. Following CNS trauma, the extracellular concentration of excitatory amino acids, including glutamate, is increased. 4 , 5 The expression of mGluRs are also altered by CNS trauma; Group II mGluRs are reduced after SCI and traumatic brain injury (TBI), 6 – 8 whereas mGluR1 is increased rostral and caudal to the injury site following SCI, and mGluR5 remains unchanged. 7 Multipotential treatments have become more attractive therapeutic strategies. Several recent review articles have emphasized the potential of multifunctional drug approaches. 9 – 11 As the pathology of CNS trauma and neurodegeneration is multi-factorial, therapies that serve to modulate multiple pathophysiological pathways may prove more effective than those directed at a single target. Neurons, astrocytes, microglia, oligodendrocytes, endothelial cells and circulating immune cells all play roles in response to acute and sub-acute injury, as well as chronic neurodegeneration. Therefore, treatments that target multiple cell types and associated pathways may prove most beneficial. This review examines the multipotential therapeutic utility of mGluR modulation in acute and chronic injury and neurodegeneration. Targeting mGluRs represents a multifunctional drug approach, as their expression is widely distributed throughout the CNS and are expressed in a number of different cell types. 12  Effects Mediated by mGluR in Neurons Neurons express all three groups of mGluRs ( Tables 2 – 4 ), depending on location within the CNS. For example, neurons within the cortex and caudate/putamen express mGluR3 and mGluR5, but only mGluR3 is expressed in the septum. 13 mGluR1 is predominantly expressed in the CA3 region of the hippocampus. 14 Following injury, the expression of mGluRs is altered. After kainate-induced seizures, for example, expression of mGluR3 and mGluR5 in NeuN+ neurons increases, 13 and the expression of mGluR1 and 2/3 are also chronically increased in neurons after SCI. 6 Stimulation of group I mGluRs increases neuronal excitability 15 and has been linked to epileptic events. 14 Antagonists for mGluR1 and 5 and agonists for mGluR group II and III have anti-convulsant activities. In normal tissue, activation of mGluR1a in the hippocampus potentiates signaling, facilitating LTP induction. 14 Within neurons, group I mGluR receptors potentiate glutamatergic signaling. Addition of group I agonists, such as DHPG, to neurons enhances the potency of NMDA-induced neuronal cell death. 16 – 18 In addition, DHPG enhances the release of arachidonic acid in response to NMDA administration to neuronal cultures, increasing neuronal cell death 18 via the production of superoxide and subsequent lipid peroxidation and DNA damage. 19 Not surprisingly, antagonists of group I mGluRs are neuroprotective. For example, the mGluR1 antagonists AIDA, CPCCOEt and LY367385 reduce neuronal cell death after mechanical trauma in vitro. 20 Furthermore, MCPG, AIDA and 4CPG are neuroprotective when neurons are subjected to oxygen/glucose deprivation in vitro. 17 mGluR1 antagonists also limit cell death in response to the administration of NMDA 21 or staurosporine. 17 The mGluR5 antagonist MPEP also significantly reduced neuronal cell death in response to NMDA administration; 22 however, these effects were found when MPEP was applied in a concentration that was effective in blocking NMDA channel openings. Therefore, neuroprotective effects may not be a result of direct mGluR5 activity, but rather from non-competitive NMDA antagonistic properties. Further work has demonstrated that neuroprotective properties of mGluR5 antagonists are mediated by direct actions on NMDA receptors, and similar protective effects are observed in mGluR5 knockout mice. 23 Administration of ?-amyloid (A?) to cortical neuronal cultures causes neuronal apoptosis, which is exacerbated by application of the mGluR1 antagonist AIDA. 24 In contrast, agonists of mGluR5 demonstrate neuroprotective properties. For example, the non-selective mGluR group I agonist DHPG or the selective mGluR5 agonist CHPG are neuroprotective when neurons are challenged with nitric oxide (NO), 25 A?, 26 or platelet activating factor (PAF). 27 More specifically, mGluR5 agonists block apoptotic neuronal cell death 17 and these effects are reversed by the mGluR5 antagonist MPEP. 26 Group II and III mGluRs are pre-synaptic receptors on neurons that act to reduce glutamatergic signaling. As such, excitotoxicity may be reduced following trauma. A number of studies have demonstrated neuroprotective activities of group II and group III mGluR agonists. For example, activation of these receptors with APDC, L-CCG-I, LY379268 or LAP4 increases neuronal survival in response to several different challenges, including activation of endonucleases with NO donors, 25 , 28 , 29 PAF, 27 or NMDA challenge. 30 Electrophysiological function is also improved with group III agonist treatment following oxygen-glucose deprivation. 31 In neuronal and astrocytes mixed cultures, administration of DCG-IV, APDC or L-CCG-I, group II mGluR agonists, or the group III mGluR agonists L-SOP or L-AP4 reduced A?-induced neuronal apoptosis. 32 The group II mGluR agonists LY379268, DCG-IV, APDC and LY354740 reduced neuronal LDH release following mechanical trauma in vitro. 33 , 34 These effects may have been mGluR2 specific since administration of the mGluR2/3 antagonist EGLU reduced the observed neuroprotection, while the mGluR3 antagonist ?NAAG did not. 33 Furthermore, the mGluR3 specific agonist ?NAAG did not have the neuroprotective effects observed by LY379268, the non-specific group II agonist. The specific agonists of group III mGluRs, L-SOP and L-AP4, also significantly reduced neuronal cell death following mechanical injury in vitro. 35 These neuroprotective effects were mediated by a reduction in cAMP, and antagonists of group III mGluRs exacerbated neuronal death.  mGluR Mediated Effects in Microglia mGluRs are expressed in glial cells, where their activation exerts numerous effects that are crucial for glial cell function and glial–neuronal interaction under physiologic and pathologic conditions. mGluR5 mRNA has been detected in cultured microglia, 36 but has not been found in resident microglia of intact brain by in situ hybridization. 13 Although mGluR1 mRNA has not been detected in cultured microglia, 36 in humans mGluR1? immunreactivity is co-localized with a subset of cells of the microglial/macrophage lineage in multiple sclerosis lesions. 37 However, we recently found (using immunocytochemistry and Western blotting) that mGluR5 protein is expressed in microglia cultured from rat brain, 38 whereas mGluR1? is negligibly expressed ( Fig. 2 ). Double-labeling with the microglial markers OX42 and ED1 demonstrated that microglial cells do express mGluR5 ( Fig. 3C ). Preliminary experiments in which the group I mGluR agonist DHPG is applied to microglia stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) demonstrate that DHPG has an inhibitory effect on microglial activation. Measures of microglial activation including NO production ( Fig. 3A ) and proliferation ( Fig. 3B ) were significantly reduced by the pre-treatment of purified cortical microglia (96% pure) with DHPG and the mGluR1 antagonist CPCCOEt prior to LPS stimulation. Further, the mGluR5 specific agonist CHPG showed similar actions- suppressing NO, reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, proliferation and neurotoxicity. 38 These effects were not observed in microglial cultures from mGluR5 knockout mice. 38 Suppression of microglial activation by mGluR5 agonists is mediated by the G?q signal transduction pathway, and requires activation of PLC, PKC and calcium release. 38 Cultured microglia express mRNA and protein for group II mGluRs mGluR2 and mGluR3. 39 Activation of mGluR2 and mGluR3 by selective agonists DCGIV and L-CCG-I promotes a neurotoxic microglial phenotype. In addition, chromogranin A (CGA)- and A? (A?25–35)-induced microglial activation is modulated by group II mGluRs since inhibition by the antagonist MCCG reduced toxin-induced microglial reactivity and related neurotoxicity. 39 More recently, it was demonstrated that activation of microglial mGluR2 exacerbated cell death whilst activation of mGluR3 was protective in a model of myelin-induced microglial neurotoxicity. 40 Although mGluR3 mRNA has not been found in microglia from intact rat brain, 13 mGluR2/3 immunoreactivity has been observed in microglia/macrophage-like cells in autopsied brain samples from patients with multiple sclerosis (MS). 37 Microglia also express mRNA and protein for the group III mGluRs mGluR4, mGluR6, and mGluR8 - but not mGluR7. 41 Activation of these receptors with the specific group III agonists L-AP4 or RS-PPG inhibited forskolin-induced cAMP production, linking them to the negative inhibition of adenylate cyclase. Agonists of group III mGluRs reduced microglial activation when stimulated with LPS, CGA or A?25–35, and agonist treatment reduced their neurotoxicity after microglial stimulation with LPS or CGA; thus, activation of group III mGluRs can protect neurons against microglial-mediated neurotoxicity. 41 The protective effects of group III mGluR activation has been confirmed in a model of myelin-induced microglial neurotoxicity, 40 findings that may have important implications for the treatment of MS. Interestingly, analysis of human tissue samples revealed that mGluR8, but not mGluR4, was expressed in MS lesions, in particular in cells of the microglia/macrophage lineage with an amoeboid morphology. 42 With respect to lesion stage, it was found that the mGluR8 expression was strongly co-localized to actively demyelinating lesions.  mGluR Mediated Effects in Astrocytes mGluR5 receptor mRNA has been detected in astrocytes isolated from young 43 and adult rats. 44 The expression profile of mGluR5 in astrocytes appears to decrease during development, 44 but in the intact brain, immunohistochemistry reveals mGluR5 protein expression. 45 However, the other group I mGluR, mGluR1, shows limited astrocytic expression. mGluR1a receptor mRNA or protein has not been detected in cultured cortical astrocytes grown in conventional medium or astrocyte-defined media. 46 – 48 In a small proportion (10%) of cultured astrocytes prepared from the spinal cord, however, mGluR1a receptors have been detected by immunohistochemistry. 49 These data are consistent with observations of human spinal cord from patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). 50 The expression of mGluR5 receptors is modulated by extracellular signals. Cultured astrocytes grown in conventional serum-containing medium show low expression, whereas expression is up-regulated when cells are cultured in medium containing growth factors such as basic fibroblast growth factor, epidermal growth factor, or transforming growth factor-?. 46 , 48 It has been suggested that the expression profile induced by the growth medium mimics the activation of astrocytes during reactive gliosis. Accordingly, immunohistochemical analysis revealed mGluR5 expression in reactive astrocytes surrounding a lesion site or induced by epileptic seizures to be higher than in non-activated astrocytes. 6 , 51 – 53 In humans, mGluR5 receptors have been found to be diffusely up-regulated in reactive astrocytes under pathological conditions, such as MS 37 and in ALS. 50 Activation of mGluR5 in astrocytes stimulates polyphosphoinositide (PI) hydrolysis 48 and generates oscillatory increases in intracellular calcium. 36 , 54 This results in the release of transmitters such as glutamate, which in turn modulates neuronal excitability and promotes synchronized activation of groups of neurons. 55 Activation of group I receptors by DHPG stimulates MAP kinase pathways 56 and selective activation of mGluR5 stimulates phopholipase D signaling in cultured cortical and hippocampal astrocytes. 57 Among group II mGluRs, astrocytes express mGluR3 receptors in vitro and in vivo, whereas mGluR2 receptors are not expressed. 13 , 58 , 59 mGluR3 mRNA is expressed in cultured astrocytes, 36 but detection of mGluR3 protein has been unsuccessful with the current battery of mGluR3-specific antibodies. 60 , 61 Similar to mGluR5 expression, mGluR3 expression is up-regulated in media containing growth factors in cultured astrocytes. 60 mGluR2 and mGluR3 receptors are negatively coupled to adenylate cyclase and activation of group II mGluRs by the selective agonist LY379268 reduces forskolin-stimulated cAMP formation in the absence of extracellular calcium, but enhances cAMP formation in the presence of calcium. 62 This dual regulation of cAMP formation is unique to cultured astrocytes. In addition, activation of group II mGluRs amplifies the stimulation of cAMP formation mediated by ?2-adrenergic receptors, leading to adenosine release in cultured astrocytes. 63 Activation of mGluR2/3 receptors also stimulates the MAP/ERK kinase and PI-3-kinase signaling pathways. 60 , 64 Stimulation of MAP kinase and PI-3-kinase pathways increases formation of transforming growth factor-? (TGF-?), which is neuroprotective, 65 and also protects against astrocytic damage caused by oxygen/glucose deprivation in culture. 66 The expression of mGluR4 in astrocytes is controversial; some studies have detected the receptor in primary cultures of rat and mouse cortical astrocytes by RT-PCR and Western immunoblotting, 67 whereas others have not. 36 , 61 Neither mGluR6 nor mGluR7 expression has been detected in cultured astrocytes to date; 61 although mGluR8 mRNA is not expressed in cortical astrocytes grown in conventional medium, it is up-regulated in astrocytes grown in astrocyte-defined media. In humans, mGluR4 receptors are not found in resting astrocytes, but are detectable in reactive astrocytes of MS lesions. 42  mGluR Mediated Effects in Other Cell Types Studies have shown that mGluRs are expressed on a number of other CNS and peripheral cell types, including oligodendrocytes, lymphocytes, meningeal cells, pinealocytes, hepatocytes, osteoblasts, bone marrow cells and pancreatic islet cells (for review, see 12 , 68 ). Cultured oligodendrocytes prepared from neonatal rats express mGluR1?, mGluR2/3, mGluR4, and mGluR5 receptors. Expression of these receptor subtypes is developmentally regulated and is high in early and late oligodendrocyte precursors, and low or absent in immature and mature oligodendrocytes. 69 Rat O4- and O1-positive and A2B5-positive early precursors from adult human brain express both mGlu3 and mGlu5 receptor proteins. 70 , 71 In oligodendrocytes, group I mGluR agonists reduce oxidative stress and excitotoxic cell death in a PKC? mediated manner. 69 This effect is reversed by the mGluR5 antagonist MPEP, suggesting mGluR5 mediates the protective effect. T and B lymphocytes express group I, II and III mGluRs. 72 , 73 In T cells, mGluR5 activation results in cAMP up-regulation and an inhibition of T cell activity. 72 Activation of mGluR1 in T cells resulted in increases in ERK1/2 phosphorylation and cell proliferation. 72 Activation of group III mGluRs with L-AP4 has been shown to increase reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels in lymphocytes and contribute to neuronal toxicity, which is contrary to its effects in vivo. 73  Therapeutic Effects: mGluR1 Antagonists As discussed above, mGluR1 receptors are expressed on a number of cells within the CNS, including neurons, meningeal cells, microglia, astrocytes, T and B cells ( Table 2 ). Through interactions with the Homer proteins, group I mGluRs may also have effects on NMDA signaling 74 and they potentiate NMDA-mediated neurotoxicity and increase arachidonic acid release. 18 Further, mGluR1 agonists increase T cell proliferation and activation of the MAP kinase signal transduction cascade, increasing inflammation. 72 Therefore, antagonists of mGluR1 may have multi-model therapeutic effects following CNS trauma. Inhibition of mGluR1 receptors has beneficial effects following CNS damage. After spinal cord contusion injury, injections of the mGluR group I antagonist AIDA into the lesion site improved early locomotor recovery, as measured by the standardized Basso-Beattie-Bresnahan (BBB) scores. 75 However, differences between animals receiving AIDA or vehicle disappeared by 28 days post-injury, possibly due to the fact that only single dose administration was delivered. Beneficial effects were mediated by the mGluR1? receptor, as the effects were also found with the mGluR1? specific antagonist LY367385, but not the mGluR5 specific antagonist MPEP. Treatment with the mGluR1? antagonist also produced white and gray matter sparing; however, the cellular target of this effect was not investigated. mGluR1 antagonists have also proved protective in traumatic brain injury models ( Fig. 4 ). AIDA administration following lateral fluid percussion in rats significantly improved neuroscores and MRI-based lesion volume, 20 as well as reduced overall neuronal cell death. 76 Furthermore, the mGluR1 antagonist YM-202074 is neuroprotective following cerebral ischemia: 77 following middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats, YM-202074 administration within 2 h of the onset of ischemia significantly reduced infarct volumes in the brain and improved neurological scores.  Therapeutic Effects: mGluR5 Agonists mGluR5 can operate through either release of calcium from intracellular stores, similar to mGluR1, or it can activate the Src family of tyrosine kinases, producing intracellular signaling through the ERK/MAPK cascade. 78 As discussed above, expression of mGluR5 is found in a number of CNS and peripheral cells ( Table 2 ), 12 and its actions in different cells have suggested strong possibilities for therapeutic potential. For example, mGluR5 agonists have shown anti-apoptotic properties in neuronal cultures, 17 , 25 – 27 and have strong anti-inflammatory effects in microglial cultures. 38 In addition, group I mGluRs can activate PKC ( Fig. 1 ), which can cause up-regulation of inward rectifier potassium channels and reduce microglial activation. 79 mGluR5 activation also reduces excitotoxic death in oligodendrocyte cultures. 69 Co-cultures of neurons and astrocytes suggested the requirement of astrocytes for a CHPG mediated excitotoxicity. 80 In this co-culture system, administration of the mGluR5 agonist CHPG significantly reduced NMDA-mediated currents after a stretch-injury; without astrocytes, CHPG did not modulate the NMDA responses. However, this study did not directly address the effects of CHPG on astrocytic cultures. Although a number of publications indicate that treatment with the specific mGluR5 agonist CHPG is neuroprotective in vitro and in vivo , treatment with the mGluR5 antagonist MPEP may also provide neuroprotection. The fact that the group I receptors mGluR1 and mGluR5 have similar signaling pathways and intracellular effects led to the theory that inhibition of mGluR5, similar to mGluR1, would be neuroprotective. Indeed, administration of MPEP significantly reduced neuronal death following glutamate or NMDA exposure. 22 However, the confusing actions of mGluR5 agonism/antagonism is underscored in a 2001 study by Bao et al., 81 in which CHPG or MPEP were administered following middle cerebral artery occlusion-induced focal ischemia. Both the agonist CHPG and antagonist MPEP reduced infarct volume when applied at 250nmol concentrations. Application of MPEP following injection of 6-OHDA into the substantia nigra also attenuated neuronal loss. 82 Preliminary studies in our laboratory have shown promising beneficial effects of mGluR5 agonists in a rat spinal cord contusion model and in a mouse TBI model. Intrathecal administration of CHPG for 7 days following a moderately severe spinal cord contusion at T9 resulted in a significant improvement in function, as measured by the BBB score at 28 days post-injury ( Fig. 5 ). This apparent confusion regarding mGluR5 agonists and antagonists was resolved by Lea et al., 23 which definitively showed that neuroprotective actions of the mGluR5 antagonists MPEP or MTEP did not reflect actions at the mGluR5 receptor. Instead, MPEP acted to directly inhibit NMDA receptor signaling, and application of the antagonists in cultures lacking the mGluR5 receptors (mGluR5 knockouts) demonstrated the same neuroprotective effects as in cultures from wild-type animals.  Therapeutic Effects: Group II and III mGluR agonists Group II and III mGluRs are pre-synaptic receptors on neurons, 30 but are also expressed on microglia, astrocytes, and a number of other cell types ( Tables 3 and 4 ). Activation of these receptors reduces glutamate release and GABAergic transmission in neurons, 83 thus potentially reducing excitotoxic cell death. Furthermore, group III mGluR activation induces neuroprotective phenotypes in microglia, 40 , 41 although non-specific activation of the group II mGluR2/3 has shown neurotoxic effects 39 while the group II agonist DCG-IV induces BDNF expression in microglia. 84 , 85 In astrocytes, activation of mGluR2/3 induces the release of neuroprotective TGF?. 65 These findings suggest that group II and III mGluR agonists may also have multipotential therapeutic actions. In vivo, the group II agonist LY379268 reduced neuronal loss in the hippocampus following global ischemia in a gerbil model and application of LY379268 up to 2 h after occlusion was neuroprotective in a rat model of focal ischemia. 30 These effects may reflect not only reduced neuronal death directly, but also the impact of stimulating astrocytes to produce neuroprotective factors 65 and reducing glutamate release. 30 In other models of CNS damage, such as SCI, TBI or excitotoxic injections, group II and III mGluRs provide neuroprotection. For example, following SCI, group II and III mGluR agonists improve some measures of recovery, such as reduced allodynia. 86 Additionally, administration of the mGluR4 agonist RSPPG reduces NMDA-induced neuronal death. 87 To confirm that these results were due to actions at the mGluR4 receptor, control experiments in mGluR4 knockout mice demonstrated no neuroprotection with the addition of RSPPG following NMDA administration. Administration of LY379268 30 minutes after controlled cortical impact injury in mice resulted in significant improvements in both motor and cognitive function ( Fig. 6 ). 33 Similarly, treatment with LY354740 significantly improved neurological scores at 2 wks post-injury after lateral fluid percussion injury in rats. 34 Further, blocking the breakdown of the endogenous mGluR2/3 neurotransmitter Nacetylaspartylglutamate (NAAG) with ZJ-43 resulted in significant reductions in neuronal death and excitotoxicity. 88  Future Work To date, neurons have been the assumed target of mGluR agonists and antagonists in vivo . However, as this review demonstrates, a number of other cells express functional mGluRs, which may play pathophysiological or protective roles after CNS injury. Therefore, more research remains to be done on the function of mGluRs in the various cell types and their specific roles in vivo . Conditional knockout models may help to discriminate specific cell contributions to neuroprotection and recovery. In addition, because acute and chronic CNS disorders share similar mechanisms of neuronal death, including inflammation and neuronal apoptosis, mGluRs may also provide therapeutic targets for chronic neurodegenerative disorders. For example, mGluR1 is strongly expressed in the substantia nigra 12 and group I mGluRs facilitate inhibitory signaling in the striatal pathways. 74 Antagonists against mGluR1, such as LY367385, attenuate the loss of dopamine and tyrosine hyrdoxylase (TH) positive neurons following injection of 6-OHDA into the substantia nigra. 82 mGluR1 is also expressed in the hippocampus, 12 and inhibition of mGluR1 signaling may be beneficial for Alzheimer’s disease. 89 Group II and III agonists also reduce GABAergic and glutamatergic transmission in the basal ganglia, and improve motor activity in experimental models of Parkinson’s disease (PD; for review see 68 , 74 , 90 ). Thus, the group II agonist LY354740 reduces muscle rigidity and catalepsy in an animal model of PD. 91  Conclusion Although less frequently investigated than neuronal expression, it is clear that mGluRs are expressed on a number of different cell types. Group I, II and III mGluRs are found on cell types within, and peripheral to, the CNS, including neurons, microglia, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, T and B lymphocytes, osteoblasts, hepatocytes and endothelial cells, among others ( Tables 2 – 4 ). These receptors have a number of effects on cells that can affect outcome after trauma. It is now well known that activation of neuronal mGluR1 exacerbates necrosis; mGluR1 activation has also been shown to increase permeability of endothelial cells after injury, which may exacerbate inflammation and injury. mGluR5 activation in neurons deters neuronal apoptosis, and provides protection in oligodendrocytes exposed to oxidative stress. Stimulation of the group II and III mGluRs is neuroprotective, reducing neuronal death after a variety of mechanical or chemical injuries. In microglia, activation of mGluR5, mGluR3 and group III mGluRs has an anti-inflammatory effect, reducing neurotoxicity and production of inflammatory mediators. mGluR5 also exerts anti-inflammatory effects when activated in T lymphocytes. mGluR2 stimulation, on the other hand, promotes a neurotoxic microglial phenotype. Stimulation of mGluR3 and group III mGluRs in astrocytes may also have neuroprotective effects, stimulating growth factor expression and glutamate clearance. Modulation of mGluRs represents an attractive multipotential therapeutic strategy for both acute and chronic neurodegenerative disorders. In vivo , the activation of mGluR5 and group II and III mGluRs has been met with improved recovery after both TBI and SCI, while antagonism of mGluR1 has similar effects, reflecting the multiple actions of these receptors in vitro . Potential therapeutic effects of mGluR modulation includes reduction of inflammation, decreased excitotoxicity, and inhibition of both necrotic and apoptotic cell death. It is important to keep in mind, however, that the treatment regimen must be optimized for each injury or neurodegenerative model, with a focus on time of application and dose to most appropriately respond to each situation. The response of individual cell types to injury or disease was briefly reviewed above, and should be considered when applying mGluR agonists or antagonists as multi-potential treatment strategies. For example, the increase in proliferation of microglia occurs quickly after SCI, and is maintained for months, 92 suggesting a long therapeutic window for mGluR5 modification of microglial-mediated inflammation after SCI. Further, mGluR2/3 is chronically increased in neurons after SCI, 6 suggesting the possibility of delayed treatments. Much research remains to be done to fully characterize the potential targets and therapeutic approaches to optimize mGluRs as a multipotential intervention. Recent reviews extensively outline critical considerations for the development of mutli-target-directed ligands for treatment of neurodegenerative disorders. 10 , 93  Figures and Tables Fig. 1 Simple schematic of mGluR neuronal signaling. Fig. 2 Microglia express the group I mGluR receptors: mGluR5 and mGluR1?, as demonstrated by Western blot (A) and immunocytochemistry (B, C) Rat cortical neuron (RCN) samples were run alongside microglia (MG) as positive controls for the antibodies. To confirm microglial expression of mGluR5, cells were double-labeled with common markers for microglia, including OX42 and ED1 (C). Cell nuclei are indicated with DAPI (blue). Used with permission from Byrnes KR et al. mGluR5 activation inhibits microglial associated inflammation and neurotoxicity. Glia 2008; in press. Fig. 3 Stimulation of mGluR5 with DHPG (mGluR1 is inhibited by the addition of CPCCOEt) reduces LPS-induced activation of microglia Microglial activation was measured by NO production (a) and proliferation (b) at 24 h after stimulation. Both measurements were significantly inhibited by pre-treatment with DHPG + CPCCOEt. Bars represent mean +/? SEM; **p<0.01 vs. control; #p<0.05 vs. LPS. Fig. 4 AIDA- and MCPG-treated animals developed significantly smaller lesions after TBI than vehicle-treated control animals (A) Representative MRI T2-weighted images of control and mGluR1 antagonist treated rat brains at day 21 after TBI. (B) Summary of the effects of AIDA and MCPG treatments on lesion volume after TBI. The histograms represent average lesion volume (?l) at day 21 after injury +/? SEM, as measured using T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging; n = 9 to 11 animals per treatment; * P < 0.05 versus vehicle-treated controls using one-tailed t test. Used with permission from Faden AI et al. Selective blockade of the mGluR1 receptor reduces traumatic neuronal injury in vitro and improves outcome after brain trauma. Exp Neurol 2001; 167: 435–44. Fig. 5 Hindlimb locomotor function was assessed at day 28 after SCI in rats CHPG treatment resulted in a significant improvement in BBB score. Bars represent mean +/? SEM; **p<0.01. Fig. 6 Treatment with LY379268 improved motor recovery after brain injury in mice A beam walking task was used to discriminate fine motor coordination differences between treated and control animals, which were subjected to controlled cortical impact (CCI) injury. LY379268 or vehicle was administered i.v. at 30 min after trauma. A repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) yielded significant differences between these two groups ( p < 0.05) at days 14 and 21. Used with permission from Movsesyan VA, Faden AI. Neuroprotective effects of selective group II mGluR activation in brain trauma and traumatic neuronal injury. J Neurotrauma 2006;23:117–127. Table 1 mGluR Group Subtype Location Transduction Mechanism Agonists Antagonists Glutamate Receptor Affinity (EC50) 94 Group I mGluR1 mGluR5 Preferentially post-synaptic ?PLC ?PKC ?PLA2 ?Calcium release ? Adenylate cyclase tADA CHPG DHPG 3HPG S-Sulpho-L-cysteine LY367385 MCPG AIDA 4CPG CPCCOEt MPEP SIB-1893 9 10 Group II mGluR2 mGluR3 Preferentially pre-synaptic ? Adenylate cyclase DCG-IV LY354740 L-CCG-I APDC LY341495 MCCG EGLU 4 3 Group III mGluR4 mGluR6 mGluR7 mGluR8 Preferentially pre-synaptic ? Adenylate cyclase ? cGMP- PDE L-AP4 L-SOP BzAPDC Homo- AMPA CPPG MAP4 MSOP 5 16 1000 2.5 95 Table 2 Cells Expressing Group I mGluR Cell Type Receptor Subtype Function Neuron mGluR1 mGluR5 Post-synaptic; operates through PLC activation and potentiation of L-type calcium channels to increase neuronal excitation 73 Astrocyte mGluR1 36 mGluR5 6 , 36 Elevates intracellular calcium 96 May contribute to neuronal death by increasing glutamate release T Lymphocyte mGluR1 mGluR5 72 mGluR5 reduces activation in a cAMP dependent fashion 72 B Lymphocyte mGluR1 mGluR5 97 Unknown Microglia mGluR5 12 , 36 Attenuates activation (proliferation, production of inflammatory mediators) 38 Hepatocytes mGluR5 98 May contribute to oxidative induced cell death Pinealocytes mGluR5 99 Unknown Melanocytes mGluR1 100 mGluR5 101 Induces Proliferation Oligodendrocytes mGluR5 96 Reduces oxidative stress 69 May limit cell death 102 Endothelial Cells mGluR1 mGluR5 103 Increase permeability 103 Table 3 Cells Expressing group II mGluR Cell Type Receptor Subtype Function Neuron mGluR2 mGluR3 104 Reduces adenylate cyclase activity, reducing cAMP and neuronal excitability. mGluR2 may be less neuroprotective than mGluR3 104 Astrocyte mGluR3 12 Increases growth factor production 105 Microglia mGluR2 mGluR3 41 mGluR2 stimulates a neurotoxic phenotype, while mGluR3 is neuroprotective 40 Pinealocytes mGluR3 99 Negatively regulate melatonin secretion Oligodendrocytes mGluR3 59 , 96 , 102 May play a role in cell survival 102 Table 4 Cells Expressing group III mGluR Cell Type Receptor Subtype Function Neuron mGluR4 mGluR6 mGluR7 mGluR8 Reduces Adenylate cyclase activity, reducing cAMP and neuronal excitability Astrocyte mGluR4 42 mGluR6 mGluR7 mGluR8 36 Increases glutamate uptake, potentially providing neuroprotection 106 Microglia mGluR4 mGluR6 mGluR8 12 , 41 Stimulates a neuroprotective phenotype 40 , 41 Osteoblasts mGluR4 mGluR8 107 May play a role in proliferation 107 Bone Marrow Stromal Cells mGluR4 mGluR8 108 Reduces nitric oxide synthase activity 108 Endothelial Cells mGluR4 103 Increase permeability 103 