Regulation of Estrogen-Dependent Transcription by the LIM Cofactors CLIM and RLIM in Breast Cancer Mammary oncogenesis is profoundly influenced by signaling pathways controlled by Estrogen Receptor-alpha (ER?). Although it is known that ER? exerts its oncogenic effect by stimulating the proliferation of many human breast cancers through the activation of target genes, our knowledge of the underlying transcriptional mechanisms remains limited. Our published work has shown that the in vivo activity of LIM homeodomain transcription factors (LIM-HDs) is critically regulated by C ofactors of LIM -HD proteins (CLIM) and the ubiquitin ligase R ING finger LIM domain interacting protein (RLIM). Here, we identify CLIM and RLIM as novel ER? cofactors that co-localize and interact with ER? in primary human breast tumors. We show that both cofactors associate with estrogen responsive promoters and regulate the expression of endogenous ER? target genes in breast cancer cells. Surprisingly, our results indicate opposing functions of LIM cofactors for ER? and LIM-HDs: whereas CLIM enhances transcriptional activity of LIM-HDs, it inhibits transcriptional activation mediated by ER? on most target genes in vivo . In turn, the ubiquitin ligase RLIM inhibits transcriptional activity of LIM-HDs, but enhances transcriptional activation of endogenous ER? target genes. Results from a human breast cancer tissue microarray (TMA) of 1,335 patients revealed a highly significant correlation of elevated CLIM levels to ER/PR positivity and poor differentiation of tumors. Combined, these results indicate that LIM cofactors CLIM and RLIM regulate the biological activity of ER? during the development of human breast cancer.  Introduction Estrogens play an important role in a number of physiological processes including normal reproductive cycles, bone development and osteoporosis, breast and ovarian cancers, Alzheimer’s disease, and cardiovascular disease. Importantly, expression of the estrogen receptor (ER), and its downstream target gene progesterone receptor (PR), are important prognostic indicators for increased survival and responsiveness of breast tumors to endocrine therapy ( 1 ). In general, ER expression correlates with a more differentiated, less aggressive tumor phenotype ( 2 , 3 ). Consistent with these data, a specific “signature” of gene expression associated with ER? expression has been identified and shown to correlate with a luminal phenotype ( 4 ). More recently, the estrogen receptor-? (ESR1) gene was shown to be amplified in approximately 20% of breast cancers and this amplification correlated with increased survival and responsiveness to anti-estrogen (tamoxifen) treatment ( 5 ). The ER elicits its biological effects in large part through its function as a ligand activated transcription factor. The binding of estrogen to the ligand binding domain (LBD) induces a conformational change in ER? which allows for dimerization and the binding of co-regulatory proteins ( 6 ). Despite the advances made in the understanding of ER biology and its molecular mechanisms of action, the changes involved during tumor progression which allow tumor cells to utilize ER-regulated transcription for their growth and survival remain poorly understood. Importantly, transcriptional cofactors which modulate the ability of ER to regulate differentiation may be of particular relevance for defining new clinical diagnostic markers for determining the appropriate course of treatment for patients with ER-positive tumors. The CLIM/LDB/NLI and RLIM/RNF12 cofactors (hereafter referred to as CLIM and RLIM, respectively) are transcriptional co-regulatory proteins identified by virtue of their ability to bind to the LIM domains of nuclear LIM proteins including LIM-homeodomain (LIM-HD) transcription factors ( 7 – 12 ). In humans, the CLIM cofactors are encoded by two genes CLIM1 and CLIM2 which produce protein products that bear 78% identity and 89% similarity to one another. mRNA encoding CLIM2 (also called LDB1 or NLI) is ubiquitously expressed whereas expression of CLIM1 mRNA (also called LDB2) is more regionalized ( 8 ). As our polyclonal antibodies do not distinguish between CLIM1 and CLIM2 ( 13 ), the protein products recognized by our antiserum will be referred to as CLIM. The association of CLIM is required for LIM-HDs to exert at least part of their biological and transcriptional activity ( 14 – 16 ). Recent studies show that the stabilization of LIM-HDs by CLIM contributes to this positive function ( 17 , 18 ). Although CLIM has been investigated largely in the context of its interaction with the LIM-HD factors, the multiple phenotypes observed in both Drosophila and mouse gene deletion mutants indicates that its function is much broader ( 11 , 19 ). Consistent with this, the Drosophila homolog of CLIM, Chip, is localized in multiple locations on polytene chromosomes ( 11 ). Furthermore, CLIM interacts with several other functionally diverse transcription factors ( 8 , 20 ). The RING finger ubiquitin ligase RLIM acts as a negative regulator of LIM-HD activity ( 9 ). Importantly, RLIM interacts with and targets CLIM for degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway ( 13 ), establishing a direct connection between both cofactors. Although functions for CLIM2 in the differentiation of mammary epithelial cells have been suspected ( 21 , 22 ), the role of the CLIM/RLIM protein network in breast cancer remains unknown. In the current study we demonstrate that the LIM cofactors CLIM and RLIM are associated with ER? in primary human breast tumors and regulate its transcriptional activity in vivo in an opposing fashion. As elevated CLIM expression correlates with ER-positivity in human breast cancers in a significant manner, these data provide strong evidence that both CLIM and RLIM are involved in the regulation of ER?, functionally connecting the ER? and LIM-HD protein networks during breast cancer.  Materials and Methods Cell transfection and reporter assays MCF7 cells were kindly provided by T.C. Spelsberg at the Mayo Clinic. MCF7, H1299 and U-2 OS-Tet-ER? cells were maintained in DMEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1X penicillin/streptomycin. Blasticidin S (5 mg/l) and Zeocin (500 mg/l) were additionally added to the medium of the U-2 OS-Tet-ER? cells in order to maintain selection of the transgenes. For luciferase assays cells were grown in 24-well plates and transfected with various combinations of the indicated plasmids or siRNAs using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Following transfection cells were maintained overnight in phenol red-free DMEM containing 5% charcoal-stripped FBS and then medium was changed to serum free/phenol red-free DMEM alone or medium containing 10?8 M ethinyl estradiol. After 24 h treatment luciferase extracts were harvested with Passive Lysis Buffer (Promega) and analyzed using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter System (Promega) on a Turner TD 20/20 luminometer. Human TrueClone™ CLIM1, CLIM2 and RLIM expression plasmids were purchased from OriGene Technologies (Rockville, MD). Mammalian and bacterial mouse RLIM and RLIM?RING plasmids and specific RLIM siRNA were described previously ( 13 ). phRG-TK was purchased from Promega (Madison, WI). CLIM2 specific, RLIM and All-Stars Negative Control™ siRNAs were purchased from Qiagen (Heidelberg, Germany) and shRNA vectors were purchased from Open Biosystems (Huntsville, AL). Protein-protein interaction studies, western blot and ubiquitination analysis GST or GST-fusion proteins for in vitro interaction and ubiquitination assays were expressed and purified using glutathione-agarose beads as previously described ( 23 ). 35S-labeled proteins were produced using the TNT in vitro transcription and translation system (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. GST-fusion proteins were incubated with the appropriate 35S-labeled proteins and analyzed in ubiquitination assays or GST-pulldown interaction analyses as previously described ( 13 ). Co-immunoprecipitation experiments of endogenous proteins were performed as previously described ( 23 ) using protein extracts from primary tumor samples or from MCF7 cells grown in phenol red-free DMEM and treated for 15 minutes with 10?8 M estrogen. For in vivo ubiquitination analysis H1299 cells were co-transfected with mammalian expression plasmids for HA-tagged ER? (1 µg), His-tagged ubiquitin (2 µg), and/or RLIM (2 µg) or the respective control plasmid(s) using Lipofectamine 2000 according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were harvested in lysis buffer containing 6 M guanidine-HCI, 0.1 M Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4 and 10 mM imidazole, pH 8.0. Ubiquitinated proteins were captured using Ni-NTA-agarose beads and analyzed by western blot analysis using an anti-HA (HA.11) monoclonal antibody (Covance). Quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis Chromatin immunoprecipitation was performed essentially as described ( 24 ). Antibodies utilized for ChIP were non-specific rabbit IgG (Ab46540, Abcam), anti-ER? (HC-20, Santa Cruz), RLIM or CLIM ( 13 ). ChIP and input DNA were analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR to determine the amount of immunoprecipitated DNA. Following quantitation by real-time PCR, ChIP samples were normalized to the respective input samples and then expressed as fold enrichment by dividing the individual values by the average of the non-specific IgG ChIP samples. RT-PCR and quantitative real-time PCR RNA was prepared from MCF7 cells which were transfected and treated as indicated using Trizol (Invitrogen). Reverse transcription was performed using the Quantitect Reverse Transcription Kit (Qiagen). Quantitative real-time PCR was performed using a 2X real- time PCR master mix (Applied Biosystems) on an Applied Biosystems 7500 Real-Time PCR machine. For reverse transcriptions, PS2-hnRNA, CathepsinD, WISP2, CLIM2 and RLIM gene expression was normalized to a control gene (36B4) and expressed relative to the untreated, control transfected samples. Immunofluorescence Staining ER-positive human invasive ductal mamma carcinoma specimens were obtained from the Tissue Bank of the University of Massachusetts Memorial Cancer Center. Immunofluorescence co-staining using antibodies directed against ER?, CLIM and RLIM were performed essentially as described previously ( 5 ). Tissue Microarray To analyze the prognostic relevance of CLIM expression, a breast cancer tissue microarray (TMA) containing a total of >2000 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded primary breast tumor specimens with available clinical follow-up and histopathological data was used ( 5 ). This study was approved by the University of Basel Ethics Committee. IRB approval was obtained before samples were collected. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded TMA sections were deparaffinized and subsequently subjected to an autoclave pre-treatment in TEC (Tris/EDTA/Citrate) buffer (20 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.8, 10 mM sodium citrate, 13 mM EDTA) for 5 min at 120°C. Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked by H2O2 (1%, v/v in methanol). Application of the primary antibody (anti-CLIM rabbit polyclonal antibody, concentration 1:2000) for 2 hours at 30°C was followed by the incubation with peroxidase-labeled EnVision™ polymer coupled goat anti-rabbit immunoglobulins (DakoCytomation, Glostrup, Denmark) for 20 min at 30°C. DAB (3,3’-diaminobenzidine) was utilized as chromogen. Sections were counterstained with Mayer’s hemalaun solution (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) and permanently mounted. For negative control the primary antibody was omitted. Staining results were judged by a board certified pathologist (L.R.). For each tissue sample, the fraction of immunostained tumor cells was recorded, and the staining intensity was estimated on a four-step scale (0, 1, 2, 3). Tumors were then initially categorized according to arbitrarily predefined criteria into four groups, including completely negative, strongly positive, and two intermediate groups similarly as described previously ( 5 ). The exact criteria for these groups were as follows: negative (no staining at all); weak (1+ staining in ? 50% of cells or 2+ staining in ? 20% of cells); moderate (1+ staining in > 50 % of cells or 2+ staining in >20% but ? 70% of cells or 3+ staining in ? 30% of cells); strong (2+ staining >70% of cells or 3+ staining in > 30% of cells). Statistical analyses of TMA data were done with the help the SPSS software for PC (Version 11 for windows). P values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.  Cell transfection and reporter assays MCF7 cells were kindly provided by T.C. Spelsberg at the Mayo Clinic. MCF7, H1299 and U-2 OS-Tet-ER? cells were maintained in DMEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1X penicillin/streptomycin. Blasticidin S (5 mg/l) and Zeocin (500 mg/l) were additionally added to the medium of the U-2 OS-Tet-ER? cells in order to maintain selection of the transgenes. For luciferase assays cells were grown in 24-well plates and transfected with various combinations of the indicated plasmids or siRNAs using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Following transfection cells were maintained overnight in phenol red-free DMEM containing 5% charcoal-stripped FBS and then medium was changed to serum free/phenol red-free DMEM alone or medium containing 10?8 M ethinyl estradiol. After 24 h treatment luciferase extracts were harvested with Passive Lysis Buffer (Promega) and analyzed using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter System (Promega) on a Turner TD 20/20 luminometer. Human TrueClone™ CLIM1, CLIM2 and RLIM expression plasmids were purchased from OriGene Technologies (Rockville, MD). Mammalian and bacterial mouse RLIM and RLIM?RING plasmids and specific RLIM siRNA were described previously ( 13 ). phRG-TK was purchased from Promega (Madison, WI). CLIM2 specific, RLIM and All-Stars Negative Control™ siRNAs were purchased from Qiagen (Heidelberg, Germany) and shRNA vectors were purchased from Open Biosystems (Huntsville, AL).  Protein-protein interaction studies, western blot and ubiquitination analysis GST or GST-fusion proteins for in vitro interaction and ubiquitination assays were expressed and purified using glutathione-agarose beads as previously described ( 23 ). 35S-labeled proteins were produced using the TNT in vitro transcription and translation system (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. GST-fusion proteins were incubated with the appropriate 35S-labeled proteins and analyzed in ubiquitination assays or GST-pulldown interaction analyses as previously described ( 13 ). Co-immunoprecipitation experiments of endogenous proteins were performed as previously described ( 23 ) using protein extracts from primary tumor samples or from MCF7 cells grown in phenol red-free DMEM and treated for 15 minutes with 10?8 M estrogen. For in vivo ubiquitination analysis H1299 cells were co-transfected with mammalian expression plasmids for HA-tagged ER? (1 µg), His-tagged ubiquitin (2 µg), and/or RLIM (2 µg) or the respective control plasmid(s) using Lipofectamine 2000 according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were harvested in lysis buffer containing 6 M guanidine-HCI, 0.1 M Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4 and 10 mM imidazole, pH 8.0. Ubiquitinated proteins were captured using Ni-NTA-agarose beads and analyzed by western blot analysis using an anti-HA (HA.11) monoclonal antibody (Covance).  Quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis Chromatin immunoprecipitation was performed essentially as described ( 24 ). Antibodies utilized for ChIP were non-specific rabbit IgG (Ab46540, Abcam), anti-ER? (HC-20, Santa Cruz), RLIM or CLIM ( 13 ). ChIP and input DNA were analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR to determine the amount of immunoprecipitated DNA. Following quantitation by real-time PCR, ChIP samples were normalized to the respective input samples and then expressed as fold enrichment by dividing the individual values by the average of the non-specific IgG ChIP samples.  RT-PCR and quantitative real-time PCR RNA was prepared from MCF7 cells which were transfected and treated as indicated using Trizol (Invitrogen). Reverse transcription was performed using the Quantitect Reverse Transcription Kit (Qiagen). Quantitative real-time PCR was performed using a 2X real- time PCR master mix (Applied Biosystems) on an Applied Biosystems 7500 Real-Time PCR machine. For reverse transcriptions, PS2-hnRNA, CathepsinD, WISP2, CLIM2 and RLIM gene expression was normalized to a control gene (36B4) and expressed relative to the untreated, control transfected samples.  Immunofluorescence Staining ER-positive human invasive ductal mamma carcinoma specimens were obtained from the Tissue Bank of the University of Massachusetts Memorial Cancer Center. Immunofluorescence co-staining using antibodies directed against ER?, CLIM and RLIM were performed essentially as described previously ( 5 ).  Tissue Microarray To analyze the prognostic relevance of CLIM expression, a breast cancer tissue microarray (TMA) containing a total of >2000 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded primary breast tumor specimens with available clinical follow-up and histopathological data was used ( 5 ). This study was approved by the University of Basel Ethics Committee. IRB approval was obtained before samples were collected. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded TMA sections were deparaffinized and subsequently subjected to an autoclave pre-treatment in TEC (Tris/EDTA/Citrate) buffer (20 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.8, 10 mM sodium citrate, 13 mM EDTA) for 5 min at 120°C. Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked by H2O2 (1%, v/v in methanol). Application of the primary antibody (anti-CLIM rabbit polyclonal antibody, concentration 1:2000) for 2 hours at 30°C was followed by the incubation with peroxidase-labeled EnVision™ polymer coupled goat anti-rabbit immunoglobulins (DakoCytomation, Glostrup, Denmark) for 20 min at 30°C. DAB (3,3’-diaminobenzidine) was utilized as chromogen. Sections were counterstained with Mayer’s hemalaun solution (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) and permanently mounted. For negative control the primary antibody was omitted. Staining results were judged by a board certified pathologist (L.R.). For each tissue sample, the fraction of immunostained tumor cells was recorded, and the staining intensity was estimated on a four-step scale (0, 1, 2, 3). Tumors were then initially categorized according to arbitrarily predefined criteria into four groups, including completely negative, strongly positive, and two intermediate groups similarly as described previously ( 5 ). The exact criteria for these groups were as follows: negative (no staining at all); weak (1+ staining in ? 50% of cells or 2+ staining in ? 20% of cells); moderate (1+ staining in > 50 % of cells or 2+ staining in >20% but ? 70% of cells or 3+ staining in ? 30% of cells); strong (2+ staining >70% of cells or 3+ staining in > 30% of cells). Statistical analyses of TMA data were done with the help the SPSS software for PC (Version 11 for windows). P values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.  Results CLIM and RLIM co-localize with ER? in the nucleus Because CLIM2 has been suspected to contribute to the development of breast cancer ( 21 , 22 ) and CLIM2 and RLIM display a remarkably similar developmental expression profile ( 9 , 25 ), we examined the expression of both cofactors in primary human breast cancers. Immunofluorescence experiments using specific antisera directed against CLIM and RLIM revealed that both cofactors are highly expressed in all ten human primary breast tumors examined ( Fig. 1A and B ; data not shown). As these tumors were characterized as ER-positive we tested whether LIM cofactors CLIM and RLIM co-localized with ER?. Indeed, we detected co-localization in the nuclei of all primary human breast tumors ( Fig. 1A and B ) opening the possibility that LIM cofactors CLIM and/or RLIM bind to ER? during breast cancer. In order to establish an in vitro system for analyzing a potential role for CLIM and RLIM in the regulation of ER? activity, we tested whether these proteins also co-localize with ER? in the MCF7 breast cancer cell line. As observed in the primary tumors, CLIM and RLIM co-localized with ER? in the nucleus of MCF7 cells ( Fig. 1C ). CLIM and RLIM interact with ER? <italic>in vivo</italic> We next tested whether CLIM and RLIM are physically associated with ER? by performing co-immunoprecipitation analysis of protein extracts from primary tumor samples ( Suppl. Fig. 1 ) and MCF7 cells ( Fig. 1D ). As previously reported for other cell lines ( 13 ), we detected an interaction between CLIM and RLIM in MCF7 cells as well as in primary tumor protein extracts. Interestingly, immunoprecipitation of CLIM or RLIM co-precipitated ER? as well. Importantly, immunoprecipitation of ER? also co-precipitated CLIM and RLIM, confirming that CLIM and RLIM indeed interact with ER?. It is, however, unclear whether ER?, RLIM and CLIM form a ternary complex or whether the interactions of ER? with CLIM and RLIM are mutually exclusive. Co-regulators of nuclear hormone receptor (NR) transcriptional activity are known to frequently bind to a hydrophobic cleft of the LBD through receptor interaction domains (RID) which often contain LxxLL ( 26 , 27 ), FxxLL ( 28 ), or LxxIL ( 29 ) motifs. Since we identified a highly conserved sequence that corresponds to a consensus RID motif within the L db/ C hip c onserved d omain (LCCD) of human CLIM proteins (amino acids 236–240 of hCLIM2 and 206–210 of hCLIM1; Fig. 2A upper panel), we tested whether this motif mediates a direct interaction with ER?. Indeed, using GST-pulldown analysis CLIM2 directly interacted with full-length ER? ( Fig. 2A , middle panel) as well as the isolated LBD ( Fig. 2A , lower panel). Furthermore, this interaction required the putative RID since mutation of the leucine and isoleucine residues of the core RID to alanine (AxxAA) abolished the interaction ( Fig. 2A ). As RLIM does not contain a consensus RID sequence we utilized deletion mutants to determine if this cofactor also directly interacts with ER?. As shown in Figure 2B , GST-pulldown analysis revealed that RLIM directly interacted with ER? through a portion of its C-terminal domain. This was confirmed using a deletion mutant (RLIM?RING) which lacks the C-terminal RING finger domain ( Fig. 2B , lower panel). Furthermore, like CLIM, RLIM also bound to the LBD of ER? ( Fig. 2B , middle panel). Many coactivators, such as the p160 family of s teroid r eceptor c oactivator (SRC) proteins, interact with many different NRs through RID domains. Therefore, we also tested whether the interactions of CLIM and RLIM with ER? are specific or if they are more general NR-interacting proteins. Surprisingly, CLIM and RLIM specifically interacted with ER?, but not with ER? ( Fig. 2C ), the androgen (AR) or glucocorticoid (GR) receptors ( Fig. 2D ). Combined, these data demonstrate that the LIM cofactors CLIM and RLIM are in a complex with ER? and suggest that they may be involved in the regulation of ER? during the development of breast cancer. ER? is a substrate for ubiquitination by RLIM We have previously demonstrated that RLIM negatively regulates transcription by the LIM-HD factors, at least in part, by targeting CLIM for ubiquitination and subsequent degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome system ( 13 ). Therefore we tested whether ER? is also a target of ubiquitination by RLIM. Indeed, using an in vitro ubiquitination assay, RLIM was able to induce the formation of higher molecular forms of ER? ( Fig. 3A ). We next tested whether RLIM alters the amount of high molecular weight forms of ER? in vivo by co-expressing ER? along with ubiquitin and RLIM. Consistent with other reports in which polyubiquitination decreases the detergent solubility of proteins, RLIM overexpression resulted in an increase in a detergent-insoluble higher molecular weight form of ER? ( Fig. 3B , lower panel). However, no decrease in the total amount of soluble or insoluble forms of ER? was observed ( Fig. 3B , middle and lower panels), suggesting that RLIM overexpression does not alter steady state levels of ER? protein by targeting it for degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. In addition, using various established assays ( 23 ) we did not find any evidence for an RLIM-mediated proteasomal degradation of ER? (data not shown). In order to verify that the higher molecular weight forms of ER? observed upon RLIM overexpression are due to an increase in ubiquitination, we performed a His-pulldown assay using extracts from cells transfected with ER? together with constructs for His-tagged ubiquitin and RLIM. Consistent with the in vitro results, RLIM overexpression caused a significant shift in ER towards a higher molecular weight ( Fig. 3C ). Thus, ER? is both an in vitro and in vivo target for ubiquitination by RLIM demonstrating that their interaction is functional in cells. CLIM and RLIM regulate ERE-driven transcriptional activation Based on the co-localization and interactions that we observed in vivo and in vitro , we hypothesized that CLIM and RLIM may function as transcriptional co-regulators of ER?. We initially tested a potential role for these proteins in the estrogen-dependent regulation of gene expression by co-transfecting an ERE-luciferase reporter construct with CLIM2, CLIM1 or RLIM expression plasmids in MCF7 cells. As shown in Figure 4A , overexpression of CLIM2 dramatically decreased reporter gene activity by more than 60% in a dose-dependent manner. CLIM1 also exerted a negative effect on ER? activity and decreased ERE-dependent transcription by greater than 40% ( Suppl. Fig. 2A ). Mutation of the RID (AxxAA mutant) within CLIM2 completely blocked its ability to inhibit ERE-dependent transcription ( Fig. 4A ). In contrast, overexpression of RLIM increased ER?-dependent gene induction in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 4B ). We found that the ability of RLIM to induce transcriptional activity of ER? was dependent on its C-terminal domain since the RING finger-deleted RLIM mutant RLIM?RING was no longer able to co-activate transcription ( Fig. 4B ). To determine if endogenous CLIM and RLIM also influence ERE-dependent transcription, we co-transfected specific siRNAs against CLIM or RLIM along with an ERE-luciferase reporter construct. Using RT-PCR analysis we were only able to detect CLIM2, but not CLIM1 mRNA expression in MCF7 cells (data not shown), consistent with previous results that show ubiquitous CLIM2 expression but restriction of CLIM1 expression mainly to neuronal tissues ( 8 ). Based on this, we limited our CLIM siRNA studies to CLIM2. Consistent with our overexpression studies, we observed a reciprocal effect of CLIM2 and RLIM siRNAs on ERE-driven transcription. Whereas the CLIM2 siRNA increased ERE-dependent transcription nearly 3-fold, RLIM siRNA decreased ERE-dependent transcription nearly 50% ( Fig. 4C ). These results were confirmed independently using two different shRNA constructs for each protein ( Suppl. Fig. 2C ). In order to determine if the effects of CLIM and RLIM are specific for ER? we also tested whether their overexpression or knock-down also affected the transactivation capabilities of the glucocorticoid receptor. Consistent with our in vitro interaction data, no effect of CLIM and RLIM was observed on a glucocorticoid response reporter ( Suppl. Fig. 2D,E ). Combined, our results show that CLIM and RLIM act as specific negative and positive cofactors for ERE-dependent transcription, respectively. These data further show that the activities of both cofactors combined are able to modulate transcription from the ERE over a wide range (up to 10-fold). CLIM and RLIM regulate transcription of endogenous estrogen-regulated genes Extensive microarray analyses have identified many estrogen-regulated genes including PS2 (TFF1), Cathepsin D and WISP2 which are directly bound by ER? at specific sites close to or within the gene and whose expression is rapidly induced following estrogen treatment ( 30 ). In order to determine whether CLIM2 and RLIM influence the rapid induction (2h after estrogen treatment) of endogenous estrogen regulated genes, we performed quantitative real-time reverse-transcription PCR analysis of PS2 heterogeneous nuclear RNA (hnRNA), Cathepsin D and WISP2 mRNAs from control or estrogen treated cells following siRNA mediated knock-down of CLIM2 or RLIM gene expression ( Fig. 5A, B ). PS2 hnRNA was utilized because it very precisely reflects the rate of active transcription through the analysis of newly synthesized, short-lived, unspliced mRNA ( 31 ). Consistent with our luciferase data, knock-down of CLIM2 expression increased the rapid induction of both PS2 hnRNA and Cathepsin D mRNA ( Fig. 5A ). Surprisingly, WISP2 induction was decreased following CLIM2 knock-down, possibly reflecting a target gene and context specific role for CLIM2 in the regulation of ER? activity. In contrast, knock-down of RLIM expression dramatically decreased estrogen-dependent induction of PS2 hnRNA, Cathepsin D and WISP2 gene transcription ( Fig. 5B ). Notably, Cathepsin D and WISP2 induction after 2 h of estrogen treatment was almost completely lost following RLIM knock-down. These results demonstrate that the LIM cofactors CLIM and RLIM regulate the expression of the endogenous ER target genes PS2, Cathepsin D and WISP2. Based on our observations that CLIM and RLIM directly interact with ER? and also influence gene regulation by ER?, we examined if LIM cofactors are present on endogenous estrogen regulated genes. In addition to being highly dependent upon ER for its expression, the PS2 gene has the additional advantage that the ERE within its promoter has been identified and the composition of ER?-containing transcriptional activation complexes has been thoroughly characterized ( 32 ). Furthermore, the precise ER? binding sites in the Cathepsin D and WISP2 genes are also known from genome-wide ChIP-on-chip analysis ( 30 ). We therefore performed chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis of ER?, CLIM and RLIM on the identified ER? binding sites of the PS2, Cathepsin D and WISP2 genes. Importantly, both CLIM and RLIM were present on the ER? binding sites of all three genes ( Fig. 5C ) at levels significantly above background. The recruitment of CLIM to each of these sites increased concurrent with ER? ( Fig. 5C , Suppl. Fig. 3 ) following estrogen treatment but not to a downstream sequence (+6KB of the PS2 gene, data not shown). RLIM recruitment to the PS2 and WISP2 genes was undetectable in the absence of estrogen treatment but significantly increased following induction. Surprisingly, RLIM was present at significant levels on the Cathepsin D gene both before and after estrogen treatment. CLIM expression correlates with ER/PR-positivity and a less differentiated phenotype In order to determine whether the expression of CLIM correlates with clinicopathologic variables in breast cancer we performed immunohistochemical analysis using a high-density tissue microarray analysis yielding 1,335 interpretable tumor sample stainings. Samples were scored as negative, weak ( Suppl. Fig. 4A ), moderate ( Suppl. Fig. 4B ) or strong ( Suppl. Fig. 4C ) for CLIM expression. Most tumor samples (97.5%) displayed positive CLIM staining with slightly more than half (50.8%) displaying high CLIM staining, more than a third (38.8%) showing moderate staining, and only 7.8% and 2.5% displaying weak or no staining, respectively ( Table 1 ). While no significant correlation between CLIM expression and lymph node status was found, CLIM expression significantly correlated to the grade of differentiation, tumor type, tumor size, mitotic index, or patient age ( Table 1 , Suppl. Table 1 ). Elevated CLIM expression was observed in ductal compared to lobular and other tumors, in higher tumor stages, less differentiated tumors and tumors of patients at lower age ( Table 1 , Suppl. Table 1 ). A significant correlation (p=0.0001) between strong CLIM staining and positive staining for both ER and PR was observed ( Table 1 ). Furthermore, the correlation was even stronger when the co-expression of ER and PR was correlated with positive CLIM staining (p<0.0001; Table 1 ). Unfortunately, while the RLIM antibody provided specific immunohistochemical staining of cryosections and in cultured cells (see Fig. 1A–C ) it was not functional in paraffin-embedded sections. Thus we were unable to perform a parallel analysis of RLIM expression in this study. Combined, our data indicate that LIM cofactors CLIM and RLIM serve as transcriptional cofactors regulating the activity of ER? in human breast tumors.  Results CLIM and RLIM co-localize with ER? in the nucleus Because CLIM2 has been suspected to contribute to the development of breast cancer ( 21 , 22 ) and CLIM2 and RLIM display a remarkably similar developmental expression profile ( 9 , 25 ), we examined the expression of both cofactors in primary human breast cancers. Immunofluorescence experiments using specific antisera directed against CLIM and RLIM revealed that both cofactors are highly expressed in all ten human primary breast tumors examined ( Fig. 1A and B ; data not shown). As these tumors were characterized as ER-positive we tested whether LIM cofactors CLIM and RLIM co-localized with ER?. Indeed, we detected co-localization in the nuclei of all primary human breast tumors ( Fig. 1A and B ) opening the possibility that LIM cofactors CLIM and/or RLIM bind to ER? during breast cancer. In order to establish an in vitro system for analyzing a potential role for CLIM and RLIM in the regulation of ER? activity, we tested whether these proteins also co-localize with ER? in the MCF7 breast cancer cell line. As observed in the primary tumors, CLIM and RLIM co-localized with ER? in the nucleus of MCF7 cells ( Fig. 1C ). CLIM and RLIM interact with ER? <italic>in vivo</italic> We next tested whether CLIM and RLIM are physically associated with ER? by performing co-immunoprecipitation analysis of protein extracts from primary tumor samples ( Suppl. Fig. 1 ) and MCF7 cells ( Fig. 1D ). As previously reported for other cell lines ( 13 ), we detected an interaction between CLIM and RLIM in MCF7 cells as well as in primary tumor protein extracts. Interestingly, immunoprecipitation of CLIM or RLIM co-precipitated ER? as well. Importantly, immunoprecipitation of ER? also co-precipitated CLIM and RLIM, confirming that CLIM and RLIM indeed interact with ER?. It is, however, unclear whether ER?, RLIM and CLIM form a ternary complex or whether the interactions of ER? with CLIM and RLIM are mutually exclusive. Co-regulators of nuclear hormone receptor (NR) transcriptional activity are known to frequently bind to a hydrophobic cleft of the LBD through receptor interaction domains (RID) which often contain LxxLL ( 26 , 27 ), FxxLL ( 28 ), or LxxIL ( 29 ) motifs. Since we identified a highly conserved sequence that corresponds to a consensus RID motif within the L db/ C hip c onserved d omain (LCCD) of human CLIM proteins (amino acids 236–240 of hCLIM2 and 206–210 of hCLIM1; Fig. 2A upper panel), we tested whether this motif mediates a direct interaction with ER?. Indeed, using GST-pulldown analysis CLIM2 directly interacted with full-length ER? ( Fig. 2A , middle panel) as well as the isolated LBD ( Fig. 2A , lower panel). Furthermore, this interaction required the putative RID since mutation of the leucine and isoleucine residues of the core RID to alanine (AxxAA) abolished the interaction ( Fig. 2A ). As RLIM does not contain a consensus RID sequence we utilized deletion mutants to determine if this cofactor also directly interacts with ER?. As shown in Figure 2B , GST-pulldown analysis revealed that RLIM directly interacted with ER? through a portion of its C-terminal domain. This was confirmed using a deletion mutant (RLIM?RING) which lacks the C-terminal RING finger domain ( Fig. 2B , lower panel). Furthermore, like CLIM, RLIM also bound to the LBD of ER? ( Fig. 2B , middle panel). Many coactivators, such as the p160 family of s teroid r eceptor c oactivator (SRC) proteins, interact with many different NRs through RID domains. Therefore, we also tested whether the interactions of CLIM and RLIM with ER? are specific or if they are more general NR-interacting proteins. Surprisingly, CLIM and RLIM specifically interacted with ER?, but not with ER? ( Fig. 2C ), the androgen (AR) or glucocorticoid (GR) receptors ( Fig. 2D ). Combined, these data demonstrate that the LIM cofactors CLIM and RLIM are in a complex with ER? and suggest that they may be involved in the regulation of ER? during the development of breast cancer. ER? is a substrate for ubiquitination by RLIM We have previously demonstrated that RLIM negatively regulates transcription by the LIM-HD factors, at least in part, by targeting CLIM for ubiquitination and subsequent degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome system ( 13 ). Therefore we tested whether ER? is also a target of ubiquitination by RLIM. Indeed, using an in vitro ubiquitination assay, RLIM was able to induce the formation of higher molecular forms of ER? ( Fig. 3A ). We next tested whether RLIM alters the amount of high molecular weight forms of ER? in vivo by co-expressing ER? along with ubiquitin and RLIM. Consistent with other reports in which polyubiquitination decreases the detergent solubility of proteins, RLIM overexpression resulted in an increase in a detergent-insoluble higher molecular weight form of ER? ( Fig. 3B , lower panel). However, no decrease in the total amount of soluble or insoluble forms of ER? was observed ( Fig. 3B , middle and lower panels), suggesting that RLIM overexpression does not alter steady state levels of ER? protein by targeting it for degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. In addition, using various established assays ( 23 ) we did not find any evidence for an RLIM-mediated proteasomal degradation of ER? (data not shown). In order to verify that the higher molecular weight forms of ER? observed upon RLIM overexpression are due to an increase in ubiquitination, we performed a His-pulldown assay using extracts from cells transfected with ER? together with constructs for His-tagged ubiquitin and RLIM. Consistent with the in vitro results, RLIM overexpression caused a significant shift in ER towards a higher molecular weight ( Fig. 3C ). Thus, ER? is both an in vitro and in vivo target for ubiquitination by RLIM demonstrating that their interaction is functional in cells. CLIM and RLIM regulate ERE-driven transcriptional activation Based on the co-localization and interactions that we observed in vivo and in vitro , we hypothesized that CLIM and RLIM may function as transcriptional co-regulators of ER?. We initially tested a potential role for these proteins in the estrogen-dependent regulation of gene expression by co-transfecting an ERE-luciferase reporter construct with CLIM2, CLIM1 or RLIM expression plasmids in MCF7 cells. As shown in Figure 4A , overexpression of CLIM2 dramatically decreased reporter gene activity by more than 60% in a dose-dependent manner. CLIM1 also exerted a negative effect on ER? activity and decreased ERE-dependent transcription by greater than 40% ( Suppl. Fig. 2A ). Mutation of the RID (AxxAA mutant) within CLIM2 completely blocked its ability to inhibit ERE-dependent transcription ( Fig. 4A ). In contrast, overexpression of RLIM increased ER?-dependent gene induction in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 4B ). We found that the ability of RLIM to induce transcriptional activity of ER? was dependent on its C-terminal domain since the RING finger-deleted RLIM mutant RLIM?RING was no longer able to co-activate transcription ( Fig. 4B ). To determine if endogenous CLIM and RLIM also influence ERE-dependent transcription, we co-transfected specific siRNAs against CLIM or RLIM along with an ERE-luciferase reporter construct. Using RT-PCR analysis we were only able to detect CLIM2, but not CLIM1 mRNA expression in MCF7 cells (data not shown), consistent with previous results that show ubiquitous CLIM2 expression but restriction of CLIM1 expression mainly to neuronal tissues ( 8 ). Based on this, we limited our CLIM siRNA studies to CLIM2. Consistent with our overexpression studies, we observed a reciprocal effect of CLIM2 and RLIM siRNAs on ERE-driven transcription. Whereas the CLIM2 siRNA increased ERE-dependent transcription nearly 3-fold, RLIM siRNA decreased ERE-dependent transcription nearly 50% ( Fig. 4C ). These results were confirmed independently using two different shRNA constructs for each protein ( Suppl. Fig. 2C ). In order to determine if the effects of CLIM and RLIM are specific for ER? we also tested whether their overexpression or knock-down also affected the transactivation capabilities of the glucocorticoid receptor. Consistent with our in vitro interaction data, no effect of CLIM and RLIM was observed on a glucocorticoid response reporter ( Suppl. Fig. 2D,E ). Combined, our results show that CLIM and RLIM act as specific negative and positive cofactors for ERE-dependent transcription, respectively. These data further show that the activities of both cofactors combined are able to modulate transcription from the ERE over a wide range (up to 10-fold). CLIM and RLIM regulate transcription of endogenous estrogen-regulated genes Extensive microarray analyses have identified many estrogen-regulated genes including PS2 (TFF1), Cathepsin D and WISP2 which are directly bound by ER? at specific sites close to or within the gene and whose expression is rapidly induced following estrogen treatment ( 30 ). In order to determine whether CLIM2 and RLIM influence the rapid induction (2h after estrogen treatment) of endogenous estrogen regulated genes, we performed quantitative real-time reverse-transcription PCR analysis of PS2 heterogeneous nuclear RNA (hnRNA), Cathepsin D and WISP2 mRNAs from control or estrogen treated cells following siRNA mediated knock-down of CLIM2 or RLIM gene expression ( Fig. 5A, B ). PS2 hnRNA was utilized because it very precisely reflects the rate of active transcription through the analysis of newly synthesized, short-lived, unspliced mRNA ( 31 ). Consistent with our luciferase data, knock-down of CLIM2 expression increased the rapid induction of both PS2 hnRNA and Cathepsin D mRNA ( Fig. 5A ). Surprisingly, WISP2 induction was decreased following CLIM2 knock-down, possibly reflecting a target gene and context specific role for CLIM2 in the regulation of ER? activity. In contrast, knock-down of RLIM expression dramatically decreased estrogen-dependent induction of PS2 hnRNA, Cathepsin D and WISP2 gene transcription ( Fig. 5B ). Notably, Cathepsin D and WISP2 induction after 2 h of estrogen treatment was almost completely lost following RLIM knock-down. These results demonstrate that the LIM cofactors CLIM and RLIM regulate the expression of the endogenous ER target genes PS2, Cathepsin D and WISP2. Based on our observations that CLIM and RLIM directly interact with ER? and also influence gene regulation by ER?, we examined if LIM cofactors are present on endogenous estrogen regulated genes. In addition to being highly dependent upon ER for its expression, the PS2 gene has the additional advantage that the ERE within its promoter has been identified and the composition of ER?-containing transcriptional activation complexes has been thoroughly characterized ( 32 ). Furthermore, the precise ER? binding sites in the Cathepsin D and WISP2 genes are also known from genome-wide ChIP-on-chip analysis ( 30 ). We therefore performed chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis of ER?, CLIM and RLIM on the identified ER? binding sites of the PS2, Cathepsin D and WISP2 genes. Importantly, both CLIM and RLIM were present on the ER? binding sites of all three genes ( Fig. 5C ) at levels significantly above background. The recruitment of CLIM to each of these sites increased concurrent with ER? ( Fig. 5C , Suppl. Fig. 3 ) following estrogen treatment but not to a downstream sequence (+6KB of the PS2 gene, data not shown). RLIM recruitment to the PS2 and WISP2 genes was undetectable in the absence of estrogen treatment but significantly increased following induction. Surprisingly, RLIM was present at significant levels on the Cathepsin D gene both before and after estrogen treatment. CLIM expression correlates with ER/PR-positivity and a less differentiated phenotype In order to determine whether the expression of CLIM correlates with clinicopathologic variables in breast cancer we performed immunohistochemical analysis using a high-density tissue microarray analysis yielding 1,335 interpretable tumor sample stainings. Samples were scored as negative, weak ( Suppl. Fig. 4A ), moderate ( Suppl. Fig. 4B ) or strong ( Suppl. Fig. 4C ) for CLIM expression. Most tumor samples (97.5%) displayed positive CLIM staining with slightly more than half (50.8%) displaying high CLIM staining, more than a third (38.8%) showing moderate staining, and only 7.8% and 2.5% displaying weak or no staining, respectively ( Table 1 ). While no significant correlation between CLIM expression and lymph node status was found, CLIM expression significantly correlated to the grade of differentiation, tumor type, tumor size, mitotic index, or patient age ( Table 1 , Suppl. Table 1 ). Elevated CLIM expression was observed in ductal compared to lobular and other tumors, in higher tumor stages, less differentiated tumors and tumors of patients at lower age ( Table 1 , Suppl. Table 1 ). A significant correlation (p=0.0001) between strong CLIM staining and positive staining for both ER and PR was observed ( Table 1 ). Furthermore, the correlation was even stronger when the co-expression of ER and PR was correlated with positive CLIM staining (p<0.0001; Table 1 ). Unfortunately, while the RLIM antibody provided specific immunohistochemical staining of cryosections and in cultured cells (see Fig. 1A–C ) it was not functional in paraffin-embedded sections. Thus we were unable to perform a parallel analysis of RLIM expression in this study. Combined, our data indicate that LIM cofactors CLIM and RLIM serve as transcriptional cofactors regulating the activity of ER? in human breast tumors.  CLIM and RLIM co-localize with ER? in the nucleus Because CLIM2 has been suspected to contribute to the development of breast cancer ( 21 , 22 ) and CLIM2 and RLIM display a remarkably similar developmental expression profile ( 9 , 25 ), we examined the expression of both cofactors in primary human breast cancers. Immunofluorescence experiments using specific antisera directed against CLIM and RLIM revealed that both cofactors are highly expressed in all ten human primary breast tumors examined ( Fig. 1A and B ; data not shown). As these tumors were characterized as ER-positive we tested whether LIM cofactors CLIM and RLIM co-localized with ER?. Indeed, we detected co-localization in the nuclei of all primary human breast tumors ( Fig. 1A and B ) opening the possibility that LIM cofactors CLIM and/or RLIM bind to ER? during breast cancer. In order to establish an in vitro system for analyzing a potential role for CLIM and RLIM in the regulation of ER? activity, we tested whether these proteins also co-localize with ER? in the MCF7 breast cancer cell line. As observed in the primary tumors, CLIM and RLIM co-localized with ER? in the nucleus of MCF7 cells ( Fig. 1C ).  CLIM and RLIM co-localize with ER? in the nucleus Because CLIM2 has been suspected to contribute to the development of breast cancer ( 21 , 22 ) and CLIM2 and RLIM display a remarkably similar developmental expression profile ( 9 , 25 ), we examined the expression of both cofactors in primary human breast cancers. Immunofluorescence experiments using specific antisera directed against CLIM and RLIM revealed that both cofactors are highly expressed in all ten human primary breast tumors examined ( Fig. 1A and B ; data not shown). As these tumors were characterized as ER-positive we tested whether LIM cofactors CLIM and RLIM co-localized with ER?. Indeed, we detected co-localization in the nuclei of all primary human breast tumors ( Fig. 1A and B ) opening the possibility that LIM cofactors CLIM and/or RLIM bind to ER? during breast cancer. In order to establish an in vitro system for analyzing a potential role for CLIM and RLIM in the regulation of ER? activity, we tested whether these proteins also co-localize with ER? in the MCF7 breast cancer cell line. As observed in the primary tumors, CLIM and RLIM co-localized with ER? in the nucleus of MCF7 cells ( Fig. 1C ).  CLIM and RLIM interact with ER? <italic>in vivo</italic> We next tested whether CLIM and RLIM are physically associated with ER? by performing co-immunoprecipitation analysis of protein extracts from primary tumor samples ( Suppl. Fig. 1 ) and MCF7 cells ( Fig. 1D ). As previously reported for other cell lines ( 13 ), we detected an interaction between CLIM and RLIM in MCF7 cells as well as in primary tumor protein extracts. Interestingly, immunoprecipitation of CLIM or RLIM co-precipitated ER? as well. Importantly, immunoprecipitation of ER? also co-precipitated CLIM and RLIM, confirming that CLIM and RLIM indeed interact with ER?. It is, however, unclear whether ER?, RLIM and CLIM form a ternary complex or whether the interactions of ER? with CLIM and RLIM are mutually exclusive. Co-regulators of nuclear hormone receptor (NR) transcriptional activity are known to frequently bind to a hydrophobic cleft of the LBD through receptor interaction domains (RID) which often contain LxxLL ( 26 , 27 ), FxxLL ( 28 ), or LxxIL ( 29 ) motifs. Since we identified a highly conserved sequence that corresponds to a consensus RID motif within the L db/ C hip c onserved d omain (LCCD) of human CLIM proteins (amino acids 236–240 of hCLIM2 and 206–210 of hCLIM1; Fig. 2A upper panel), we tested whether this motif mediates a direct interaction with ER?. Indeed, using GST-pulldown analysis CLIM2 directly interacted with full-length ER? ( Fig. 2A , middle panel) as well as the isolated LBD ( Fig. 2A , lower panel). Furthermore, this interaction required the putative RID since mutation of the leucine and isoleucine residues of the core RID to alanine (AxxAA) abolished the interaction ( Fig. 2A ). As RLIM does not contain a consensus RID sequence we utilized deletion mutants to determine if this cofactor also directly interacts with ER?. As shown in Figure 2B , GST-pulldown analysis revealed that RLIM directly interacted with ER? through a portion of its C-terminal domain. This was confirmed using a deletion mutant (RLIM?RING) which lacks the C-terminal RING finger domain ( Fig. 2B , lower panel). Furthermore, like CLIM, RLIM also bound to the LBD of ER? ( Fig. 2B , middle panel). Many coactivators, such as the p160 family of s teroid r eceptor c oactivator (SRC) proteins, interact with many different NRs through RID domains. Therefore, we also tested whether the interactions of CLIM and RLIM with ER? are specific or if they are more general NR-interacting proteins. Surprisingly, CLIM and RLIM specifically interacted with ER?, but not with ER? ( Fig. 2C ), the androgen (AR) or glucocorticoid (GR) receptors ( Fig. 2D ). Combined, these data demonstrate that the LIM cofactors CLIM and RLIM are in a complex with ER? and suggest that they may be involved in the regulation of ER? during the development of breast cancer.  CLIM and RLIM interact with ER? <italic>in vivo</italic> We next tested whether CLIM and RLIM are physically associated with ER? by performing co-immunoprecipitation analysis of protein extracts from primary tumor samples ( Suppl. Fig. 1 ) and MCF7 cells ( Fig. 1D ). As previously reported for other cell lines ( 13 ), we detected an interaction between CLIM and RLIM in MCF7 cells as well as in primary tumor protein extracts. Interestingly, immunoprecipitation of CLIM or RLIM co-precipitated ER? as well. Importantly, immunoprecipitation of ER? also co-precipitated CLIM and RLIM, confirming that CLIM and RLIM indeed interact with ER?. It is, however, unclear whether ER?, RLIM and CLIM form a ternary complex or whether the interactions of ER? with CLIM and RLIM are mutually exclusive. Co-regulators of nuclear hormone receptor (NR) transcriptional activity are known to frequently bind to a hydrophobic cleft of the LBD through receptor interaction domains (RID) which often contain LxxLL ( 26 , 27 ), FxxLL ( 28 ), or LxxIL ( 29 ) motifs. Since we identified a highly conserved sequence that corresponds to a consensus RID motif within the L db/ C hip c onserved d omain (LCCD) of human CLIM proteins (amino acids 236–240 of hCLIM2 and 206–210 of hCLIM1; Fig. 2A upper panel), we tested whether this motif mediates a direct interaction with ER?. Indeed, using GST-pulldown analysis CLIM2 directly interacted with full-length ER? ( Fig. 2A , middle panel) as well as the isolated LBD ( Fig. 2A , lower panel). Furthermore, this interaction required the putative RID since mutation of the leucine and isoleucine residues of the core RID to alanine (AxxAA) abolished the interaction ( Fig. 2A ). As RLIM does not contain a consensus RID sequence we utilized deletion mutants to determine if this cofactor also directly interacts with ER?. As shown in Figure 2B , GST-pulldown analysis revealed that RLIM directly interacted with ER? through a portion of its C-terminal domain. This was confirmed using a deletion mutant (RLIM?RING) which lacks the C-terminal RING finger domain ( Fig. 2B , lower panel). Furthermore, like CLIM, RLIM also bound to the LBD of ER? ( Fig. 2B , middle panel). Many coactivators, such as the p160 family of s teroid r eceptor c oactivator (SRC) proteins, interact with many different NRs through RID domains. Therefore, we also tested whether the interactions of CLIM and RLIM with ER? are specific or if they are more general NR-interacting proteins. Surprisingly, CLIM and RLIM specifically interacted with ER?, but not with ER? ( Fig. 2C ), the androgen (AR) or glucocorticoid (GR) receptors ( Fig. 2D ). Combined, these data demonstrate that the LIM cofactors CLIM and RLIM are in a complex with ER? and suggest that they may be involved in the regulation of ER? during the development of breast cancer.  ER? is a substrate for ubiquitination by RLIM We have previously demonstrated that RLIM negatively regulates transcription by the LIM-HD factors, at least in part, by targeting CLIM for ubiquitination and subsequent degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome system ( 13 ). Therefore we tested whether ER? is also a target of ubiquitination by RLIM. Indeed, using an in vitro ubiquitination assay, RLIM was able to induce the formation of higher molecular forms of ER? ( Fig. 3A ). We next tested whether RLIM alters the amount of high molecular weight forms of ER? in vivo by co-expressing ER? along with ubiquitin and RLIM. Consistent with other reports in which polyubiquitination decreases the detergent solubility of proteins, RLIM overexpression resulted in an increase in a detergent-insoluble higher molecular weight form of ER? ( Fig. 3B , lower panel). However, no decrease in the total amount of soluble or insoluble forms of ER? was observed ( Fig. 3B , middle and lower panels), suggesting that RLIM overexpression does not alter steady state levels of ER? protein by targeting it for degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. In addition, using various established assays ( 23 ) we did not find any evidence for an RLIM-mediated proteasomal degradation of ER? (data not shown). In order to verify that the higher molecular weight forms of ER? observed upon RLIM overexpression are due to an increase in ubiquitination, we performed a His-pulldown assay using extracts from cells transfected with ER? together with constructs for His-tagged ubiquitin and RLIM. Consistent with the in vitro results, RLIM overexpression caused a significant shift in ER towards a higher molecular weight ( Fig. 3C ). Thus, ER? is both an in vitro and in vivo target for ubiquitination by RLIM demonstrating that their interaction is functional in cells.  ER? is a substrate for ubiquitination by RLIM We have previously demonstrated that RLIM negatively regulates transcription by the LIM-HD factors, at least in part, by targeting CLIM for ubiquitination and subsequent degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome system ( 13 ). Therefore we tested whether ER? is also a target of ubiquitination by RLIM. Indeed, using an in vitro ubiquitination assay, RLIM was able to induce the formation of higher molecular forms of ER? ( Fig. 3A ). We next tested whether RLIM alters the amount of high molecular weight forms of ER? in vivo by co-expressing ER? along with ubiquitin and RLIM. Consistent with other reports in which polyubiquitination decreases the detergent solubility of proteins, RLIM overexpression resulted in an increase in a detergent-insoluble higher molecular weight form of ER? ( Fig. 3B , lower panel). However, no decrease in the total amount of soluble or insoluble forms of ER? was observed ( Fig. 3B , middle and lower panels), suggesting that RLIM overexpression does not alter steady state levels of ER? protein by targeting it for degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. In addition, using various established assays ( 23 ) we did not find any evidence for an RLIM-mediated proteasomal degradation of ER? (data not shown). In order to verify that the higher molecular weight forms of ER? observed upon RLIM overexpression are due to an increase in ubiquitination, we performed a His-pulldown assay using extracts from cells transfected with ER? together with constructs for His-tagged ubiquitin and RLIM. Consistent with the in vitro results, RLIM overexpression caused a significant shift in ER towards a higher molecular weight ( Fig. 3C ). Thus, ER? is both an in vitro and in vivo target for ubiquitination by RLIM demonstrating that their interaction is functional in cells.  CLIM and RLIM regulate ERE-driven transcriptional activation Based on the co-localization and interactions that we observed in vivo and in vitro , we hypothesized that CLIM and RLIM may function as transcriptional co-regulators of ER?. We initially tested a potential role for these proteins in the estrogen-dependent regulation of gene expression by co-transfecting an ERE-luciferase reporter construct with CLIM2, CLIM1 or RLIM expression plasmids in MCF7 cells. As shown in Figure 4A , overexpression of CLIM2 dramatically decreased reporter gene activity by more than 60% in a dose-dependent manner. CLIM1 also exerted a negative effect on ER? activity and decreased ERE-dependent transcription by greater than 40% ( Suppl. Fig. 2A ). Mutation of the RID (AxxAA mutant) within CLIM2 completely blocked its ability to inhibit ERE-dependent transcription ( Fig. 4A ). In contrast, overexpression of RLIM increased ER?-dependent gene induction in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 4B ). We found that the ability of RLIM to induce transcriptional activity of ER? was dependent on its C-terminal domain since the RING finger-deleted RLIM mutant RLIM?RING was no longer able to co-activate transcription ( Fig. 4B ). To determine if endogenous CLIM and RLIM also influence ERE-dependent transcription, we co-transfected specific siRNAs against CLIM or RLIM along with an ERE-luciferase reporter construct. Using RT-PCR analysis we were only able to detect CLIM2, but not CLIM1 mRNA expression in MCF7 cells (data not shown), consistent with previous results that show ubiquitous CLIM2 expression but restriction of CLIM1 expression mainly to neuronal tissues ( 8 ). Based on this, we limited our CLIM siRNA studies to CLIM2. Consistent with our overexpression studies, we observed a reciprocal effect of CLIM2 and RLIM siRNAs on ERE-driven transcription. Whereas the CLIM2 siRNA increased ERE-dependent transcription nearly 3-fold, RLIM siRNA decreased ERE-dependent transcription nearly 50% ( Fig. 4C ). These results were confirmed independently using two different shRNA constructs for each protein ( Suppl. Fig. 2C ). In order to determine if the effects of CLIM and RLIM are specific for ER? we also tested whether their overexpression or knock-down also affected the transactivation capabilities of the glucocorticoid receptor. Consistent with our in vitro interaction data, no effect of CLIM and RLIM was observed on a glucocorticoid response reporter ( Suppl. Fig. 2D,E ). Combined, our results show that CLIM and RLIM act as specific negative and positive cofactors for ERE-dependent transcription, respectively. These data further show that the activities of both cofactors combined are able to modulate transcription from the ERE over a wide range (up to 10-fold).  CLIM and RLIM regulate ERE-driven transcriptional activation Based on the co-localization and interactions that we observed in vivo and in vitro , we hypothesized that CLIM and RLIM may function as transcriptional co-regulators of ER?. We initially tested a potential role for these proteins in the estrogen-dependent regulation of gene expression by co-transfecting an ERE-luciferase reporter construct with CLIM2, CLIM1 or RLIM expression plasmids in MCF7 cells. As shown in Figure 4A , overexpression of CLIM2 dramatically decreased reporter gene activity by more than 60% in a dose-dependent manner. CLIM1 also exerted a negative effect on ER? activity and decreased ERE-dependent transcription by greater than 40% ( Suppl. Fig. 2A ). Mutation of the RID (AxxAA mutant) within CLIM2 completely blocked its ability to inhibit ERE-dependent transcription ( Fig. 4A ). In contrast, overexpression of RLIM increased ER?-dependent gene induction in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 4B ). We found that the ability of RLIM to induce transcriptional activity of ER? was dependent on its C-terminal domain since the RING finger-deleted RLIM mutant RLIM?RING was no longer able to co-activate transcription ( Fig. 4B ). To determine if endogenous CLIM and RLIM also influence ERE-dependent transcription, we co-transfected specific siRNAs against CLIM or RLIM along with an ERE-luciferase reporter construct. Using RT-PCR analysis we were only able to detect CLIM2, but not CLIM1 mRNA expression in MCF7 cells (data not shown), consistent with previous results that show ubiquitous CLIM2 expression but restriction of CLIM1 expression mainly to neuronal tissues ( 8 ). Based on this, we limited our CLIM siRNA studies to CLIM2. Consistent with our overexpression studies, we observed a reciprocal effect of CLIM2 and RLIM siRNAs on ERE-driven transcription. Whereas the CLIM2 siRNA increased ERE-dependent transcription nearly 3-fold, RLIM siRNA decreased ERE-dependent transcription nearly 50% ( Fig. 4C ). These results were confirmed independently using two different shRNA constructs for each protein ( Suppl. Fig. 2C ). In order to determine if the effects of CLIM and RLIM are specific for ER? we also tested whether their overexpression or knock-down also affected the transactivation capabilities of the glucocorticoid receptor. Consistent with our in vitro interaction data, no effect of CLIM and RLIM was observed on a glucocorticoid response reporter ( Suppl. Fig. 2D,E ). Combined, our results show that CLIM and RLIM act as specific negative and positive cofactors for ERE-dependent transcription, respectively. These data further show that the activities of both cofactors combined are able to modulate transcription from the ERE over a wide range (up to 10-fold).  CLIM and RLIM regulate transcription of endogenous estrogen-regulated genes Extensive microarray analyses have identified many estrogen-regulated genes including PS2 (TFF1), Cathepsin D and WISP2 which are directly bound by ER? at specific sites close to or within the gene and whose expression is rapidly induced following estrogen treatment ( 30 ). In order to determine whether CLIM2 and RLIM influence the rapid induction (2h after estrogen treatment) of endogenous estrogen regulated genes, we performed quantitative real-time reverse-transcription PCR analysis of PS2 heterogeneous nuclear RNA (hnRNA), Cathepsin D and WISP2 mRNAs from control or estrogen treated cells following siRNA mediated knock-down of CLIM2 or RLIM gene expression ( Fig. 5A, B ). PS2 hnRNA was utilized because it very precisely reflects the rate of active transcription through the analysis of newly synthesized, short-lived, unspliced mRNA ( 31 ). Consistent with our luciferase data, knock-down of CLIM2 expression increased the rapid induction of both PS2 hnRNA and Cathepsin D mRNA ( Fig. 5A ). Surprisingly, WISP2 induction was decreased following CLIM2 knock-down, possibly reflecting a target gene and context specific role for CLIM2 in the regulation of ER? activity. In contrast, knock-down of RLIM expression dramatically decreased estrogen-dependent induction of PS2 hnRNA, Cathepsin D and WISP2 gene transcription ( Fig. 5B ). Notably, Cathepsin D and WISP2 induction after 2 h of estrogen treatment was almost completely lost following RLIM knock-down. These results demonstrate that the LIM cofactors CLIM and RLIM regulate the expression of the endogenous ER target genes PS2, Cathepsin D and WISP2. Based on our observations that CLIM and RLIM directly interact with ER? and also influence gene regulation by ER?, we examined if LIM cofactors are present on endogenous estrogen regulated genes. In addition to being highly dependent upon ER for its expression, the PS2 gene has the additional advantage that the ERE within its promoter has been identified and the composition of ER?-containing transcriptional activation complexes has been thoroughly characterized ( 32 ). Furthermore, the precise ER? binding sites in the Cathepsin D and WISP2 genes are also known from genome-wide ChIP-on-chip analysis ( 30 ). We therefore performed chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis of ER?, CLIM and RLIM on the identified ER? binding sites of the PS2, Cathepsin D and WISP2 genes. Importantly, both CLIM and RLIM were present on the ER? binding sites of all three genes ( Fig. 5C ) at levels significantly above background. The recruitment of CLIM to each of these sites increased concurrent with ER? ( Fig. 5C , Suppl. Fig. 3 ) following estrogen treatment but not to a downstream sequence (+6KB of the PS2 gene, data not shown). RLIM recruitment to the PS2 and WISP2 genes was undetectable in the absence of estrogen treatment but significantly increased following induction. Surprisingly, RLIM was present at significant levels on the Cathepsin D gene both before and after estrogen treatment.  CLIM and RLIM regulate transcription of endogenous estrogen-regulated genes Extensive microarray analyses have identified many estrogen-regulated genes including PS2 (TFF1), Cathepsin D and WISP2 which are directly bound by ER? at specific sites close to or within the gene and whose expression is rapidly induced following estrogen treatment ( 30 ). In order to determine whether CLIM2 and RLIM influence the rapid induction (2h after estrogen treatment) of endogenous estrogen regulated genes, we performed quantitative real-time reverse-transcription PCR analysis of PS2 heterogeneous nuclear RNA (hnRNA), Cathepsin D and WISP2 mRNAs from control or estrogen treated cells following siRNA mediated knock-down of CLIM2 or RLIM gene expression ( Fig. 5A, B ). PS2 hnRNA was utilized because it very precisely reflects the rate of active transcription through the analysis of newly synthesized, short-lived, unspliced mRNA ( 31 ). Consistent with our luciferase data, knock-down of CLIM2 expression increased the rapid induction of both PS2 hnRNA and Cathepsin D mRNA ( Fig. 5A ). Surprisingly, WISP2 induction was decreased following CLIM2 knock-down, possibly reflecting a target gene and context specific role for CLIM2 in the regulation of ER? activity. In contrast, knock-down of RLIM expression dramatically decreased estrogen-dependent induction of PS2 hnRNA, Cathepsin D and WISP2 gene transcription ( Fig. 5B ). Notably, Cathepsin D and WISP2 induction after 2 h of estrogen treatment was almost completely lost following RLIM knock-down. These results demonstrate that the LIM cofactors CLIM and RLIM regulate the expression of the endogenous ER target genes PS2, Cathepsin D and WISP2. Based on our observations that CLIM and RLIM directly interact with ER? and also influence gene regulation by ER?, we examined if LIM cofactors are present on endogenous estrogen regulated genes. In addition to being highly dependent upon ER for its expression, the PS2 gene has the additional advantage that the ERE within its promoter has been identified and the composition of ER?-containing transcriptional activation complexes has been thoroughly characterized ( 32 ). Furthermore, the precise ER? binding sites in the Cathepsin D and WISP2 genes are also known from genome-wide ChIP-on-chip analysis ( 30 ). We therefore performed chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis of ER?, CLIM and RLIM on the identified ER? binding sites of the PS2, Cathepsin D and WISP2 genes. Importantly, both CLIM and RLIM were present on the ER? binding sites of all three genes ( Fig. 5C ) at levels significantly above background. The recruitment of CLIM to each of these sites increased concurrent with ER? ( Fig. 5C , Suppl. Fig. 3 ) following estrogen treatment but not to a downstream sequence (+6KB of the PS2 gene, data not shown). RLIM recruitment to the PS2 and WISP2 genes was undetectable in the absence of estrogen treatment but significantly increased following induction. Surprisingly, RLIM was present at significant levels on the Cathepsin D gene both before and after estrogen treatment.  CLIM expression correlates with ER/PR-positivity and a less differentiated phenotype In order to determine whether the expression of CLIM correlates with clinicopathologic variables in breast cancer we performed immunohistochemical analysis using a high-density tissue microarray analysis yielding 1,335 interpretable tumor sample stainings. Samples were scored as negative, weak ( Suppl. Fig. 4A ), moderate ( Suppl. Fig. 4B ) or strong ( Suppl. Fig. 4C ) for CLIM expression. Most tumor samples (97.5%) displayed positive CLIM staining with slightly more than half (50.8%) displaying high CLIM staining, more than a third (38.8%) showing moderate staining, and only 7.8% and 2.5% displaying weak or no staining, respectively ( Table 1 ). While no significant correlation between CLIM expression and lymph node status was found, CLIM expression significantly correlated to the grade of differentiation, tumor type, tumor size, mitotic index, or patient age ( Table 1 , Suppl. Table 1 ). Elevated CLIM expression was observed in ductal compared to lobular and other tumors, in higher tumor stages, less differentiated tumors and tumors of patients at lower age ( Table 1 , Suppl. Table 1 ). A significant correlation (p=0.0001) between strong CLIM staining and positive staining for both ER and PR was observed ( Table 1 ). Furthermore, the correlation was even stronger when the co-expression of ER and PR was correlated with positive CLIM staining (p<0.0001; Table 1 ). Unfortunately, while the RLIM antibody provided specific immunohistochemical staining of cryosections and in cultured cells (see Fig. 1A–C ) it was not functional in paraffin-embedded sections. Thus we were unable to perform a parallel analysis of RLIM expression in this study. Combined, our data indicate that LIM cofactors CLIM and RLIM serve as transcriptional cofactors regulating the activity of ER? in human breast tumors.  CLIM expression correlates with ER/PR-positivity and a less differentiated phenotype In order to determine whether the expression of CLIM correlates with clinicopathologic variables in breast cancer we performed immunohistochemical analysis using a high-density tissue microarray analysis yielding 1,335 interpretable tumor sample stainings. Samples were scored as negative, weak ( Suppl. Fig. 4A ), moderate ( Suppl. Fig. 4B ) or strong ( Suppl. Fig. 4C ) for CLIM expression. Most tumor samples (97.5%) displayed positive CLIM staining with slightly more than half (50.8%) displaying high CLIM staining, more than a third (38.8%) showing moderate staining, and only 7.8% and 2.5% displaying weak or no staining, respectively ( Table 1 ). While no significant correlation between CLIM expression and lymph node status was found, CLIM expression significantly correlated to the grade of differentiation, tumor type, tumor size, mitotic index, or patient age ( Table 1 , Suppl. Table 1 ). Elevated CLIM expression was observed in ductal compared to lobular and other tumors, in higher tumor stages, less differentiated tumors and tumors of patients at lower age ( Table 1 , Suppl. Table 1 ). A significant correlation (p=0.0001) between strong CLIM staining and positive staining for both ER and PR was observed ( Table 1 ). Furthermore, the correlation was even stronger when the co-expression of ER and PR was correlated with positive CLIM staining (p<0.0001; Table 1 ). Unfortunately, while the RLIM antibody provided specific immunohistochemical staining of cryosections and in cultured cells (see Fig. 1A–C ) it was not functional in paraffin-embedded sections. Thus we were unable to perform a parallel analysis of RLIM expression in this study. Combined, our data indicate that LIM cofactors CLIM and RLIM serve as transcriptional cofactors regulating the activity of ER? in human breast tumors.  Discussion We have demonstrated that CLIM and RLIM physically and functionally interact with ER? in human breast cancers. Indeed, CLIM protein expression significantly correlates with the expression of ER? and PR in a large cohort of clinical breast cancer samples. This is significant since, although ER? and PR expression normally correlates with a more differentiated (and thus less aggressive) phenotype, the co-expression of CLIM in ER? and/or PR-positive tumors correlates with a less differentiated (and thus more aggressive) phenotype. This observation is consistent with a previous report in which CLIM2 overexpression was shown to block the in vitro differentiation of various cell types including mammary epithelial cells ( 12 , 21 ). One possible scenario explaining such a correlation would be if CLIM were an estrogen-up-regulated gene and/or if RLIM were an estrogen down-regulated gene. However, we did not find any indication that CLIM or RLIM mRNA or protein levels were affected by ER? ( Suppl. Fig. 5 ), strongly suggesting that CLIM and RLIM are not ER? target genes. The identification of CLIM cofactors as negative regulators for ER? was initially surprising as they are thought to act as positive transcriptional co-regulators for LIM-HD transcription factors ( 15 , 33 ). In this context, a recent report suggests that CLIM2, together with the LIM-only protein LMO4, may play a complex role as a negative regulator of BMP7 gene transcription in MCF7 cells and the authors hypothesized that this interaction may play a role in the development of breast cancer ( 34 ). Intriguingly, BMP7 has also been reported to be repressed by estrogen ( 35 ). However, while the regulation of BMP7 was dependent upon the interaction between LMO4 and CLIM2, no effect of LMO4 on ER? dependent transcription was observed in our experiments (data not shown). Furthermore, BMP7 expression was increased by both CLIM2 knock-down and overexpression, thus indicating that the stoichiometry between CLIM2 and LMO4 is critical for the biological effect of these proteins ( 34 ). Similar results have also been obtained in developmental models of CLIM activity where stoichiometry appears to play a central role in determining the biological outcome of the LMO and CLIM proteins ( 36 , 37 ). In contrast, ERE activity was stimulated by CLIM2 knock-down and inhibited by its overexpression thus indicating that the mechanism by which CLIM2 regulates ER?-dependent transcription is different than that used in the LIM-HD network and is probably not dependent upon the stoichiometry between CLIM2 and other LIM-domain proteins such as LMO4. In a related manuscript, we have demonstrated that the RLIM protein shuttles between the cytoplasm and nucleus in mammary epithelial cells in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. Furthermore, we have shown that RLIM protein subcellular localization is dramatically reorganized upon epithelial differentiation and is exclusively found in the nucleus of differentiated cells where it regulates the expression of specific epithelial differentiation genes (Güngör et al., submitted). The finding that RLIM regulates ER?-dependent transcription in breast cancer further extends RLIM’s functions during the development and pathogenesis of the mammary gland. Indeed, we found that RLIM and CLIM2 play opposing roles in regulating ER?-dependent transcription, consistent with their reciprocal roles in regulating LIM-HD transcription factors. While RLIM acts as a potent coactivator for the induction of estrogen-stimulated transcription, CLIM2 is a strong corepressor of ER?. Additional studies will be necessary to determine whether CLIM and RLIM can simultaneously interact with ER? or if these interactions are mutually exclusive. Given the fact that each factor interacts directly with the ER? LBD, it is likely that these are, in fact, mutually exclusive interactions. In addition, as one of the negative activities that RLIM exerts on LIM-HDs is the targeting of CLIM for proteasomal degradation, it is likely that the same activity may also be part of its positive regulation of ER?. Evidence from several studies have shown that the ubiquitin-proteasome system plays an important role in the activation of transcription by a number of different transcription factors ( 38 ). However, the function of the proteasome in transcriptional regulation is multifaceted and may include the regulation of transcription factor availability, localization and complex formation, histone modification and chromatin remodeling, elongation, and silencing of transcription through the regulation of transcription factor half-life, depending upon the timing and context ( 39 ). In addition to classical transcriptional regulatory proteins, the estrogen receptor also recruits specific ubiquitin-proteasome components to the target gene promoter during each cycle of binding ( 40 ). The estrogen receptor itself is a target of ubiquitination ( 41 , 42 ) and the inhibition of ubiquitin proteasome activity blocks estrogen receptor cycling and the activation of target gene expression ( 40 , 41 ). Nevertheless, the precise mechanisms by which the ubiquitin-proteasome system functions in estrogen-regulated transcription remain unknown. Similar to the ubiquitin ligases MDM2 and E6-AP which also coactivate ER?-dependent transcription ( 43 , 44 ), RLIM also possesses ubiquitin ligase activity and is a potent ER? coactivator. Interestingly, while we have been able to demonstrate potent and specific ubiquitination of ER? by RLIM in vitro and in vivo , we observed no effect of RLIM on ER? protein levels. Therefore, we hypothesize that either ( 1 ) RLIM-mediated ubiquitination of ER? plays a role other than targeting it for proteasome-mediated degradation and/or that ( 2 ) the targeting of other proteins is critical for RLIM function in ER?-dependent transcription. Of particular note is that CyclinT1, a component of the P-TEFb complex, has been shown to directly interact with both ubiquitin ( 45 ) and ER? ( 46 ). Therefore, it is conceivable that RLIM coactivates ER?-dependent transcription by ubiquitinating ER? in a way which stimulates CyclinT1 binding without targeting ER? for degradation. RLIM may further increase the recruitment of the pTEFb (CyclinT1/CDK9) complex through its direct interactions with both CDK9 and ER? (C.G., S.A.J. and I.B., unpublished results). The fact that the down-regulation of CLIM and RLIM significantly increased and decreased levels of endogenous ER activity, respectively, indicates that LIM cofactors represent an important part of ER? regulation, despite the existence of many other cofactors that participate in ER? regulation ( 32 ). Indeed, in recent years it became clear that many cofactors not only interact with a specific class of transcription factors, but often play significant roles in the regulation of numerous classes of transcription factors in a context-dependent manner ( 47 ). The identification of CLIM and RLIM as ER? cofactors connects the fields of estrogen signaling with nuclear LIM proteins and strongly suggests combinatorial usage of both cofactors by both systems. In this context it is interesting to note that the LCCD in CLIM mediates interaction both with SSDP1 ( 48 ) and RLIM ( 13 ) and we have shown that the association of SSDP1 with CLIM inhibits RLIM binding thereby leading to a stabilization of CLIM protein ( 17 ). Intriguingly, the RID which mediates interactions with ER? is also located in the LCCD directly adjacent to the SSDP1 binding site, thus opening the possibility for further combinatorial regulation. In addition, the identification of proteins that serve as targets for RLIM-mediated ubiquitination/degradation such as HDAC2 ( 49 ) offers additional combinatorial possibilities of transcriptional cross-regulation between these systems. In conclusion, we have identified the LIM cofactors CLIM and RLIM as new ER? co-regulatory proteins which may play a role in the onset and/or progression of breast cancer. As such, specific therapies which target the expression or activity of these proteins may provide potential new therapies for ER?-positive breast tumors.  Discussion We have demonstrated that CLIM and RLIM physically and functionally interact with ER? in human breast cancers. Indeed, CLIM protein expression significantly correlates with the expression of ER? and PR in a large cohort of clinical breast cancer samples. This is significant since, although ER? and PR expression normally correlates with a more differentiated (and thus less aggressive) phenotype, the co-expression of CLIM in ER? and/or PR-positive tumors correlates with a less differentiated (and thus more aggressive) phenotype. This observation is consistent with a previous report in which CLIM2 overexpression was shown to block the in vitro differentiation of various cell types including mammary epithelial cells ( 12 , 21 ). One possible scenario explaining such a correlation would be if CLIM were an estrogen-up-regulated gene and/or if RLIM were an estrogen down-regulated gene. However, we did not find any indication that CLIM or RLIM mRNA or protein levels were affected by ER? ( Suppl. Fig. 5 ), strongly suggesting that CLIM and RLIM are not ER? target genes. The identification of CLIM cofactors as negative regulators for ER? was initially surprising as they are thought to act as positive transcriptional co-regulators for LIM-HD transcription factors ( 15 , 33 ). In this context, a recent report suggests that CLIM2, together with the LIM-only protein LMO4, may play a complex role as a negative regulator of BMP7 gene transcription in MCF7 cells and the authors hypothesized that this interaction may play a role in the development of breast cancer ( 34 ). Intriguingly, BMP7 has also been reported to be repressed by estrogen ( 35 ). However, while the regulation of BMP7 was dependent upon the interaction between LMO4 and CLIM2, no effect of LMO4 on ER? dependent transcription was observed in our experiments (data not shown). Furthermore, BMP7 expression was increased by both CLIM2 knock-down and overexpression, thus indicating that the stoichiometry between CLIM2 and LMO4 is critical for the biological effect of these proteins ( 34 ). Similar results have also been obtained in developmental models of CLIM activity where stoichiometry appears to play a central role in determining the biological outcome of the LMO and CLIM proteins ( 36 , 37 ). In contrast, ERE activity was stimulated by CLIM2 knock-down and inhibited by its overexpression thus indicating that the mechanism by which CLIM2 regulates ER?-dependent transcription is different than that used in the LIM-HD network and is probably not dependent upon the stoichiometry between CLIM2 and other LIM-domain proteins such as LMO4. In a related manuscript, we have demonstrated that the RLIM protein shuttles between the cytoplasm and nucleus in mammary epithelial cells in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. Furthermore, we have shown that RLIM protein subcellular localization is dramatically reorganized upon epithelial differentiation and is exclusively found in the nucleus of differentiated cells where it regulates the expression of specific epithelial differentiation genes (Güngör et al., submitted). The finding that RLIM regulates ER?-dependent transcription in breast cancer further extends RLIM’s functions during the development and pathogenesis of the mammary gland. Indeed, we found that RLIM and CLIM2 play opposing roles in regulating ER?-dependent transcription, consistent with their reciprocal roles in regulating LIM-HD transcription factors. While RLIM acts as a potent coactivator for the induction of estrogen-stimulated transcription, CLIM2 is a strong corepressor of ER?. Additional studies will be necessary to determine whether CLIM and RLIM can simultaneously interact with ER? or if these interactions are mutually exclusive. Given the fact that each factor interacts directly with the ER? LBD, it is likely that these are, in fact, mutually exclusive interactions. In addition, as one of the negative activities that RLIM exerts on LIM-HDs is the targeting of CLIM for proteasomal degradation, it is likely that the same activity may also be part of its positive regulation of ER?. Evidence from several studies have shown that the ubiquitin-proteasome system plays an important role in the activation of transcription by a number of different transcription factors ( 38 ). However, the function of the proteasome in transcriptional regulation is multifaceted and may include the regulation of transcription factor availability, localization and complex formation, histone modification and chromatin remodeling, elongation, and silencing of transcription through the regulation of transcription factor half-life, depending upon the timing and context ( 39 ). In addition to classical transcriptional regulatory proteins, the estrogen receptor also recruits specific ubiquitin-proteasome components to the target gene promoter during each cycle of binding ( 40 ). The estrogen receptor itself is a target of ubiquitination ( 41 , 42 ) and the inhibition of ubiquitin proteasome activity blocks estrogen receptor cycling and the activation of target gene expression ( 40 , 41 ). Nevertheless, the precise mechanisms by which the ubiquitin-proteasome system functions in estrogen-regulated transcription remain unknown. Similar to the ubiquitin ligases MDM2 and E6-AP which also coactivate ER?-dependent transcription ( 43 , 44 ), RLIM also possesses ubiquitin ligase activity and is a potent ER? coactivator. Interestingly, while we have been able to demonstrate potent and specific ubiquitination of ER? by RLIM in vitro and in vivo , we observed no effect of RLIM on ER? protein levels. Therefore, we hypothesize that either ( 1 ) RLIM-mediated ubiquitination of ER? plays a role other than targeting it for proteasome-mediated degradation and/or that ( 2 ) the targeting of other proteins is critical for RLIM function in ER?-dependent transcription. Of particular note is that CyclinT1, a component of the P-TEFb complex, has been shown to directly interact with both ubiquitin ( 45 ) and ER? ( 46 ). Therefore, it is conceivable that RLIM coactivates ER?-dependent transcription by ubiquitinating ER? in a way which stimulates CyclinT1 binding without targeting ER? for degradation. RLIM may further increase the recruitment of the pTEFb (CyclinT1/CDK9) complex through its direct interactions with both CDK9 and ER? (C.G., S.A.J. and I.B., unpublished results). The fact that the down-regulation of CLIM and RLIM significantly increased and decreased levels of endogenous ER activity, respectively, indicates that LIM cofactors represent an important part of ER? regulation, despite the existence of many other cofactors that participate in ER? regulation ( 32 ). Indeed, in recent years it became clear that many cofactors not only interact with a specific class of transcription factors, but often play significant roles in the regulation of numerous classes of transcription factors in a context-dependent manner ( 47 ). The identification of CLIM and RLIM as ER? cofactors connects the fields of estrogen signaling with nuclear LIM proteins and strongly suggests combinatorial usage of both cofactors by both systems. In this context it is interesting to note that the LCCD in CLIM mediates interaction both with SSDP1 ( 48 ) and RLIM ( 13 ) and we have shown that the association of SSDP1 with CLIM inhibits RLIM binding thereby leading to a stabilization of CLIM protein ( 17 ). Intriguingly, the RID which mediates interactions with ER? is also located in the LCCD directly adjacent to the SSDP1 binding site, thus opening the possibility for further combinatorial regulation. In addition, the identification of proteins that serve as targets for RLIM-mediated ubiquitination/degradation such as HDAC2 ( 49 ) offers additional combinatorial possibilities of transcriptional cross-regulation between these systems. In conclusion, we have identified the LIM cofactors CLIM and RLIM as new ER? co-regulatory proteins which may play a role in the onset and/or progression of breast cancer. As such, specific therapies which target the expression or activity of these proteins may provide potential new therapies for ER?-positive breast tumors.  Supplementary Material Suppl. Fig. 1 Suppl. Fig. 2 Suppl. Fig. 3 Suppl. Fig. 4 Suppl. Fig. 5 Suppl. Fig. 6 Suppl. Fig. Legends  Supplementary Material Suppl. Fig. 1 Suppl. Fig. 2 Suppl. Fig. 3 Suppl. Fig. 4 Suppl. Fig. 5 Suppl. Fig. 6 Suppl. Fig. Legends  Figures and Tables Figure 1 CLIM and RLIM are co-localized with ER? in the nucleus of breast cancer cells. Immunohistochemical staining of breast tumor samples was performed on cryosections using an anti-ER? monoclonal antibody together with anti-CLIM (A) or anti-RLIM (B) polyclonal antibodies. CLIM and RLIM expression is observed almost exclusively in the nucleus and is co-localized with ER? expression. CLIM, RLIM and ER? are also co-localized in the nucleus of MCF7 breast cancer cells (C). (D) Interaction of endogenous RLIM, CLIM and ER? in MCF7 cells. Total cell extracts of MCF7 cells were immunoprecipitated with specific anti-RLIM, -CLIM, -ER? or non-specific IgG polyclonal antibodies. Western blot analysis was performed with each antibody. Twenty percent input is shown. Figure 2 CLIM and RLIM are specific ER?-interacting proteins. 35S-labeled in vitro transcribed and translated full-length human ER? (A–D), isolated human ER?-LBD (A,B), full-length human ER? ER? (C), full-length human AR (D) and full-length human ER? GR (D) were tested for their ability to interact with full-length GST-CLIM2 or GST-RLIM (A–D) or various mutants of CLIM2 (A) or RLIM (B). Equal amounts of GST and GST-fusion proteins were used and input samples of in vitro translated proteins were loaded separately. (A) CLIM contains a RID (upper panel) within the LCCD domain which is necessary for interaction with full-length (middle panel) ER? and with the isolated ER?-LBD (lower panel). DD, dimerization domain; LCCD, LDB/Chip conserved domain; NLS, nuclear localization signal; LID, LIM-interacting domain. (B) RLIM interacts with the LBD of ER? through the C-terminal RING finger-containing domain. NLS, nuclear localization signal; BD, basic domain; RING, RING-H2 zinc finger. CLIM2 and RLIM specifically interact with ER?, but not with ER? (C), AR (D) or GR (D) in the presence of the respective ligands. Figure 3 RLIM targets ER? for ubiquitination. (A) ER? is an in vitro substrate for ubiquitination by RLIM. In vitro 35S-labelled full-length ER? protein was incubated alone or together with various combinations of the ubiquitin activating enzyme (E1), the ubiquitin conjugating enzyme (E2) UbcH5 or bacterially expressed and purified full-length GST-RLIM. The brackets indicate higher molecular weight ubiquitinated ER?. Ub-ER?, ubiquitinated ER?. (B) Overexpression of RLIM increases the formation of high molecular weight, detergent insoluble forms of ER?. H1299 cells were transfected with ER? and ubiquitin expression vectors as indicated. Whole extracts were prepared and detergent soluble and insoluble fractions were separately analyzed by western blot analysis with specific anti-RLIM polyclonal or anti-ER? monoclonal antibodies. Note that there is a noticeable increase in a high molecular weight form of ER? upon overexpression of RLIM in the detergent insoluble fraction which is not apparent in the detergent soluble fraction. Ubiq, ubiquitin. (C) Overexpression of RLIM results in increased ER? ubiquitination in cells. H1299 cells were transfected with a His-tagged ubiquitin (His-Ub) expression vector with or without RLIM overexpression as in (B) and the ubiquitinated proteins were isolated using a Ni-NTA affinity matrix and analyzed by western blot using a specific anti-ER? monoclonal antibody. The brackets indicate the increase in high molecular weight ubiquitinated ER? upon RLIM overexpression. Figure 4 CLIM and RLIM regulate the transcriptional activity of ER?. (A) CLIM overexpression dose-dependently decreases ERE transcriptional activity. MCF7 cells were transfected with an ERE-containing luciferase reporter construct (ERE-TK-Luc) and an internal control plasmid for transfection efficiency (phRG-TK) which constitutively expresses Renilla luciferase together with the indicated amounts of a plasmid expressing CLIM2 or a CLIM2 RID mutant (AxxAA). The total amount of DNA was kept constant by adding an appropriate amount of control plasmid (pCS2). Estrogen (10?8 M ethinyl estradiol) was added 24h after transfection and cells were harvested after another 24h. All transfections were normalized and expressed relative to the average of the estrogen-treated, control transfected cells as relative activity. (B) RLIM overexpression dose-dependently increases ERE transcriptional activity. MCF7 cells were transfected with ERE-TK-Luc and phRG-TK together with the indicated amounts of a RLIM or RLIM?RING expression vector and treated with estrogen as in (A). The total amount of plasmid DNA was kept constant by adding the control plasmid (pCS2). (C) CLIM2 and RLIM siRNA increase and decrease ERE activity, respectively. ERE-TK-Luc and phRG-TK were transfected as in (A) and (B) together with control, CLIM2 or RLIM siRNA. Cells were grown for 48h to allow for a knock-down of endogenous CLIM2 or RLIM prior to estrogen treatment for another 24h. Luciferase activity was expressed as relative activity as in (A) and (B). Figure 5 CLIM2 and RLIM regulate endogenous estrogen receptor activity. (A) Endogenous CLIM2 regulates ER? activity in cells. MCF7 breast cancer cells were transfected with control siRNA (A and B), CLIM2 siRNA (A) or RLIM siRNA (B). Cells were grown for 48 hours and treated for 2h with estrogen (10?8 M ethinyl estradiol) or untreated. Gene expression was measured by quantitative RT-PCR using primers specific for PS2-hnRNA, Cathepsin D, WISP2 or CLIM2 mRNA. mRNA levels were normalized to an unregulated gene (36B4) and expressed relative to the uninduced control siRNA transfected cells. CLIM2 mRNA levels are shown to verify efficient knock-down. (B) RLIM is necessary for optimal induction of gene expression by the endogenous estrogen receptor. MCF7 cells were transfected with RLIM siRNA and treated as in (A). In opposition to CLIM2 siRNA, RLIM siRNA significantly decreases the induction of estrogen-regulated gene expression compared to the control conditions. RLIM mRNA levels are decreased approximately 90% upon siRNA transfection. (C) CLIM and RLIM are recruited to endogenous EREs. CLIM or RLIM recruitment to the PS2, Cathepsin D and WISP2 genes was analyzed by chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis using chromatin from MCF7 cells untreated or treated with estrogen (10?8 M ethinyl estradiol) for 1h. Estrogen treatment increased the recruitment of both CLIM and RLIM to the PS2 and WISP2 genes while only CLIM recruitment was also increased on the Cathepsin D gene where RLIM was also present in an estrogen-independent manner. Non-specific IgG was used to distinguish between specific and background binding. ChIP samples were normalized to input samples and expressed as fold enrichment relative to the average of all IgG ChIP samples. Table 1 Expression of CLIM Variable negative + ++ +++ p-value Total (n=1335) 33 106 518 678 Histologic grade G1 (n=354) 11 (3.1%) 33 (9.3%) 148 (41.8%) 162 (45.8%) p=0.005 G2 (n=474) 11 (2.3%) 38 (8%) 172 (36.3%) 253 (53.4%) (Kruskal-Wallis test) G3 (n=347) 6 (1.7%) 28 (8.1%) 110 (31.7%) 203 (58.5%) Total (n=1175) 28 (2.4%) 99 (8.4%) 430 (36.6%) 618 (52.6%) ER Negative (n=280) 16 (5.7%) 36 (12.9%) 107 (38.2%) 121 (43.2%) p=0.0001 Positive (n=987) 14 (1.4%) 61 (6.2%) 384 (38.9%) 528 (53.3%) (Mann-Whitney, U-test) Total (n=1267) 30 (2.4%) 97 (7.7%) 491 (38.8%) 649 (51.2%) PR Negative (n=715) 17 (2.4%) 72 (10.1%) 288 (40.3%) 338 (47.3%) p=0.0001 Positive (n=447) 4 (0.9%) 15 (5.4%) 176 (39.4%) 252 (56.4%) (Mann-Whitney, U-test) Total (n=1162) 21 (1.8%) 87 (7.5%) 464 (39.9%) 590 (50.6%) ER/PR score 1 (n=280)(ER?) 16 (5.7%) 36 (12.9%) 107 (38.2%) 121 (43.2%) p<0.0001 2 (n=465) (ER+/PR?) 8 (1.7%) 40 (8.6%) 191 (41.1%) 226 (48.6%) (Kruskal-Wallis test) 3 (n=426) (ER+/PR+) 2 (0.47%) 12 (2.8%) 169 (39.7%) 243 (57%) Total (n=1171) 26 (2.2%) 88 (7.5%) 467 (39.9%) 590 (50.4%) Total (n=1117) 26 90 408 593 ER? Grading 15 32 91 109 G1 (n=925) 3 (13.6%) 3 (13.6%) 8 (36.4%) 8 (36.4%) G2 (n=189) 7 (11.5%) 10 (16.4%) 26 (42.6%) 18 (29.5%) p=0.004 G3 (n=211) 5 (3.0%) 19 (11.6%) 57(34.8%) 83 (50.6%) ER+ Grading 11 58 317 484 G1 7 (2.2%) 27 (8.7%) 131 (42.0%) 147 (47.1%) G2 3 (0.8%) 23 (5.9%) 138 (35.8%) 222 (57.5%) p<0.0001 G3 1 (0.6%) 8 (4.6%) 48 (27.9%) 115 (66.9%) Total (n=1023) 17 81 386 539 PR? Grading 14 66 243 314 G1 7 (4.3%) 17 (10.4%) 75 (46%) 64 (39.3%) G2 5 (2.1%) 24 (10.0%) 90 (37.7%) 120 (50.2%) P=0.01 G3 2 (0.9%) 25 (10.6%) 78 (33.3%) 130 (55.3%) PR+ Grading 3 15 143 225 G1 1 (0.7%) 10 (6.9%) 62 (42.8%) 72 (49.6%) G2 2 (1.2%) 5 (3.0%) 57 (34.1%) 103 (61.7%) P=0.0094 G3 0 (0%) 0 (0%) 24 (32.4%) 50 (67.6%)  Figures and Tables Figure 1 CLIM and RLIM are co-localized with ER? in the nucleus of breast cancer cells. Immunohistochemical staining of breast tumor samples was performed on cryosections using an anti-ER? monoclonal antibody together with anti-CLIM (A) or anti-RLIM (B) polyclonal antibodies. CLIM and RLIM expression is observed almost exclusively in the nucleus and is co-localized with ER? expression. CLIM, RLIM and ER? are also co-localized in the nucleus of MCF7 breast cancer cells (C). (D) Interaction of endogenous RLIM, CLIM and ER? in MCF7 cells. Total cell extracts of MCF7 cells were immunoprecipitated with specific anti-RLIM, -CLIM, -ER? or non-specific IgG polyclonal antibodies. Western blot analysis was performed with each antibody. Twenty percent input is shown. Figure 2 CLIM and RLIM are specific ER?-interacting proteins. 35S-labeled in vitro transcribed and translated full-length human ER? (A–D), isolated human ER?-LBD (A,B), full-length human ER? ER? (C), full-length human AR (D) and full-length human ER? GR (D) were tested for their ability to interact with full-length GST-CLIM2 or GST-RLIM (A–D) or various mutants of CLIM2 (A) or RLIM (B). Equal amounts of GST and GST-fusion proteins were used and input samples of in vitro translated proteins were loaded separately. (A) CLIM contains a RID (upper panel) within the LCCD domain which is necessary for interaction with full-length (middle panel) ER? and with the isolated ER?-LBD (lower panel). DD, dimerization domain; LCCD, LDB/Chip conserved domain; NLS, nuclear localization signal; LID, LIM-interacting domain. (B) RLIM interacts with the LBD of ER? through the C-terminal RING finger-containing domain. NLS, nuclear localization signal; BD, basic domain; RING, RING-H2 zinc finger. CLIM2 and RLIM specifically interact with ER?, but not with ER? (C), AR (D) or GR (D) in the presence of the respective ligands. Figure 3 RLIM targets ER? for ubiquitination. (A) ER? is an in vitro substrate for ubiquitination by RLIM. In vitro 35S-labelled full-length ER? protein was incubated alone or together with various combinations of the ubiquitin activating enzyme (E1), the ubiquitin conjugating enzyme (E2) UbcH5 or bacterially expressed and purified full-length GST-RLIM. The brackets indicate higher molecular weight ubiquitinated ER?. Ub-ER?, ubiquitinated ER?. (B) Overexpression of RLIM increases the formation of high molecular weight, detergent insoluble forms of ER?. H1299 cells were transfected with ER? and ubiquitin expression vectors as indicated. Whole extracts were prepared and detergent soluble and insoluble fractions were separately analyzed by western blot analysis with specific anti-RLIM polyclonal or anti-ER? monoclonal antibodies. Note that there is a noticeable increase in a high molecular weight form of ER? upon overexpression of RLIM in the detergent insoluble fraction which is not apparent in the detergent soluble fraction. Ubiq, ubiquitin. (C) Overexpression of RLIM results in increased ER? ubiquitination in cells. H1299 cells were transfected with a His-tagged ubiquitin (His-Ub) expression vector with or without RLIM overexpression as in (B) and the ubiquitinated proteins were isolated using a Ni-NTA affinity matrix and analyzed by western blot using a specific anti-ER? monoclonal antibody. The brackets indicate the increase in high molecular weight ubiquitinated ER? upon RLIM overexpression. Figure 4 CLIM and RLIM regulate the transcriptional activity of ER?. (A) CLIM overexpression dose-dependently decreases ERE transcriptional activity. MCF7 cells were transfected with an ERE-containing luciferase reporter construct (ERE-TK-Luc) and an internal control plasmid for transfection efficiency (phRG-TK) which constitutively expresses Renilla luciferase together with the indicated amounts of a plasmid expressing CLIM2 or a CLIM2 RID mutant (AxxAA). The total amount of DNA was kept constant by adding an appropriate amount of control plasmid (pCS2). Estrogen (10?8 M ethinyl estradiol) was added 24h after transfection and cells were harvested after another 24h. All transfections were normalized and expressed relative to the average of the estrogen-treated, control transfected cells as relative activity. (B) RLIM overexpression dose-dependently increases ERE transcriptional activity. MCF7 cells were transfected with ERE-TK-Luc and phRG-TK together with the indicated amounts of a RLIM or RLIM?RING expression vector and treated with estrogen as in (A). The total amount of plasmid DNA was kept constant by adding the control plasmid (pCS2). (C) CLIM2 and RLIM siRNA increase and decrease ERE activity, respectively. ERE-TK-Luc and phRG-TK were transfected as in (A) and (B) together with control, CLIM2 or RLIM siRNA. Cells were grown for 48h to allow for a knock-down of endogenous CLIM2 or RLIM prior to estrogen treatment for another 24h. Luciferase activity was expressed as relative activity as in (A) and (B). Figure 5 CLIM2 and RLIM regulate endogenous estrogen receptor activity. (A) Endogenous CLIM2 regulates ER? activity in cells. MCF7 breast cancer cells were transfected with control siRNA (A and B), CLIM2 siRNA (A) or RLIM siRNA (B). Cells were grown for 48 hours and treated for 2h with estrogen (10?8 M ethinyl estradiol) or untreated. Gene expression was measured by quantitative RT-PCR using primers specific for PS2-hnRNA, Cathepsin D, WISP2 or CLIM2 mRNA. mRNA levels were normalized to an unregulated gene (36B4) and expressed relative to the uninduced control siRNA transfected cells. CLIM2 mRNA levels are shown to verify efficient knock-down. (B) RLIM is necessary for optimal induction of gene expression by the endogenous estrogen receptor. MCF7 cells were transfected with RLIM siRNA and treated as in (A). In opposition to CLIM2 siRNA, RLIM siRNA significantly decreases the induction of estrogen-regulated gene expression compared to the control conditions. RLIM mRNA levels are decreased approximately 90% upon siRNA transfection. (C) CLIM and RLIM are recruited to endogenous EREs. CLIM or RLIM recruitment to the PS2, Cathepsin D and WISP2 genes was analyzed by chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis using chromatin from MCF7 cells untreated or treated with estrogen (10?8 M ethinyl estradiol) for 1h. Estrogen treatment increased the recruitment of both CLIM and RLIM to the PS2 and WISP2 genes while only CLIM recruitment was also increased on the Cathepsin D gene where RLIM was also present in an estrogen-independent manner. Non-specific IgG was used to distinguish between specific and background binding. ChIP samples were normalized to input samples and expressed as fold enrichment relative to the average of all IgG ChIP samples. Table 1 Expression of CLIM Variable negative + ++ +++ p-value Total (n=1335) 33 106 518 678 Histologic grade G1 (n=354) 11 (3.1%) 33 (9.3%) 148 (41.8%) 162 (45.8%) p=0.005 G2 (n=474) 11 (2.3%) 38 (8%) 172 (36.3%) 253 (53.4%) (Kruskal-Wallis test) G3 (n=347) 6 (1.7%) 28 (8.1%) 110 (31.7%) 203 (58.5%) Total (n=1175) 28 (2.4%) 99 (8.4%) 430 (36.6%) 618 (52.6%) ER Negative (n=280) 16 (5.7%) 36 (12.9%) 107 (38.2%) 121 (43.2%) p=0.0001 Positive (n=987) 14 (1.4%) 61 (6.2%) 384 (38.9%) 528 (53.3%) (Mann-Whitney, U-test) Total (n=1267) 30 (2.4%) 97 (7.7%) 491 (38.8%) 649 (51.2%) PR Negative (n=715) 17 (2.4%) 72 (10.1%) 288 (40.3%) 338 (47.3%) p=0.0001 Positive (n=447) 4 (0.9%) 15 (5.4%) 176 (39.4%) 252 (56.4%) (Mann-Whitney, U-test) Total (n=1162) 21 (1.8%) 87 (7.5%) 464 (39.9%) 590 (50.6%) ER/PR score 1 (n=280)(ER?) 16 (5.7%) 36 (12.9%) 107 (38.2%) 121 (43.2%) p<0.0001 2 (n=465) (ER+/PR?) 8 (1.7%) 40 (8.6%) 191 (41.1%) 226 (48.6%) (Kruskal-Wallis test) 3 (n=426) (ER+/PR+) 2 (0.47%) 12 (2.8%) 169 (39.7%) 243 (57%) Total (n=1171) 26 (2.2%) 88 (7.5%) 467 (39.9%) 590 (50.4%) Total (n=1117) 26 90 408 593 ER? Grading 15 32 91 109 G1 (n=925) 3 (13.6%) 3 (13.6%) 8 (36.4%) 8 (36.4%) G2 (n=189) 7 (11.5%) 10 (16.4%) 26 (42.6%) 18 (29.5%) p=0.004 G3 (n=211) 5 (3.0%) 19 (11.6%) 57(34.8%) 83 (50.6%) ER+ Grading 11 58 317 484 G1 7 (2.2%) 27 (8.7%) 131 (42.0%) 147 (47.1%) G2 3 (0.8%) 23 (5.9%) 138 (35.8%) 222 (57.5%) p<0.0001 G3 1 (0.6%) 8 (4.6%) 48 (27.9%) 115 (66.9%) Total (n=1023) 17 81 386 539 PR? Grading 14 66 243 314 G1 7 (4.3%) 17 (10.4%) 75 (46%) 64 (39.3%) G2 5 (2.1%) 24 (10.0%) 90 (37.7%) 120 (50.2%) P=0.01 G3 2 (0.9%) 25 (10.6%) 78 (33.3%) 130 (55.3%) PR+ Grading 3 15 143 225 G1 1 (0.7%) 10 (6.9%) 62 (42.8%) 72 (49.6%) G2 2 (1.2%) 5 (3.0%) 57 (34.1%) 103 (61.7%) P=0.0094 G3 0 (0%) 0 (0%) 24 (32.4%) 50 (67.6%) 