Plasticity of central autonomic neural circuits in diabetes Regulation of energy metabolism is controlled by the brain, in which key central neuronal circuits process a variety of information reflecting nutritional state. Special sensory and gastrointestinal afferent neural signals, along with blood-borne metabolic signals, impinge on parallel central autonomic circuits located in the brainstem and hypothalamus to signal changes in metabolic balance. Specifically, neural and humoral signals converge on the brainstem vagal system and similar signals concentrate in the hypothalamus, with significant overlap between both sensory and motor components of each system and extensive cross-talk between the systems. This ultimately results in production of coordinated regulatory autonomic and neuroendocrine cues to maintain energy homeostasis. Therapeutic metabolic adjustments can be accomplished by modulating viscerosensory input or autonomic motor output, including altering parasympathetic circuitry related to GI, pancreas, and liver regulation. These alterations can include pharmacological manipulation, but surgical modification of neural signaling should also be considered. In addition, central control of visceral function is often compromised by diabetes mellitus, indicating that circuit modification should be studied in the context of its effect on neurons in the diabetic state. Diabetes has traditionally been handled as a peripheral metabolic disease, but the central nervous system plays a crucial role in regulating glucose homeostasis. This review focuses on key autonomic brain areas associated with management of energy homeostasis and functional changes in these areas associated with the development of diabetes.  Conclusions Precise regulation of autonomic function and hepatic gluconeogenesis is necessary to maintain appropriate energy sources. Recent observations provide strong evidence in support of an important pathway for brain-liver interactions, which connects lipid and peptide sensing in the hypothalamus and brainstem to hepatic glucose homeostasis [ 17 , 18 , 23 ]. In addition, vagal signaling and direct glucose sensing in the vagal complex could mediate some of the brain’s responses to changes in plasma glucose concentration [ 40 , 43 ]. Current data support the hypothesis that insulin acts at least partly through central KATP channels to modulate central autonomic centers in the hypothalamus and brainstem to inhibit hepatic glucose production. Many effects of insulin, leptin, and glucose on hypothalamic or other central autonomic circuits require intact vagal outflow through the hepatic branch of the vagus. Neural activity is altered at the level of central synapses in diabetes models, and this is reflected in significantly modified vagal motor function in animal models of diabetes and in patients. Among the numerous modulators that may be targeted to regulate metabolic output, the endogenous cannabinoids represent an emerging system for affecting control over homeostatic functions. To improve health outcomes and quality of life requires early and intensive treatment of diabetes [ 93 ]. Modulation of central autonomic circuitry in the hypothalamus and/or brainstem represents a potential therapeutic target for managing glucose metabolism in diabetic patients.  Figures Figure 1 Schematic of hypothesized parallel brain-digestive system-brain circuits in hypothalamus and brainstem. Hypothalamic nuclei involved in autonomic regulation and feeding make reciprocal connections with neurons in the dorsal vagal complex that regulate visceral function. Within the vagal complex, the NTS receives visceral afferent neural input and projects heavily to vagal motor neurons of the DMV. The NTS is also reciprocally connected to hypothalamic nuclei involved in autonomic regulation, especially the PVN. Both PVN and NTS also project to central sympathetic nervous system regulatory centers. Likewise, both brainstem and hypothalamic areas receive information about peptide and glucose content in the blood. Abbreviations: DMV, dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus; IML, intermediolateral cell column; LH, lateral hypothalamus; NTS, nucleus tractus solitarius; PVN, paraventricular nucleus; VLM, ventrolateral medulla; VMH, ventromedial hypothalamus. Figure 2 A simplified diagram illustrating a basic-circuit connection between preautonomic neurons and parasympathetic, preganglionic motor neurons in the context of a model for how energy-regulating factors can influence central autonomic circuits. Somatodendritic KATP channel, with Kir6.2 and SUR subunits are shown in both types of cell. Also shown are leptin and insulin receptors and glucose sensors, all of which can utilize kinases to affect cellular activity. Glucokinase and PI3K are indicated, but AMPK can also mediate some effects. GABA critically regulates motor neuron function and its release is in the DMV is illustrated. General pertinent vagally-mediated visceral effects are listed. Altered glutamate or other neurotransmitter release is omitted for simplicity, but may also occur. Figure 3 Schematic model illustrating cannabinoid and vanilloid activity in central autonomic circuits. A synaptic terminal (glutamatergic or GABAergic) is shown, containing TRPV1 and CB1R. Anandamide (AEA) is illustrated as an example of an endogenously synthesized cannabinoid (eCB) agonist that can bind both receptors. Synthesis and retrograde release of eCB from postganglionic neurons is suggested. TRPV1 are non-selective cation channels that are also activated by capsaicin and flux Ca2+, resulting in increased synaptic release. CB1R are G protein-coupled receptors that can also be activated by the synthetic agonist, WIN 55,212-02. Binding CB1R on typically suppresses neurotransmitter release. 