Cell Cycle Re-entry Mediated Neurodegeneration and Its Treatment Role in the Pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s Disease As one of the earliest pathologic changes, the aberrant re-expression of many cell cycle -related proteins and inappropriate cell cycle control in specific vulnerable neuronal populations in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is emerging as an important component in the pathogenesis leading to AD and other neurodegenerative diseases. These events are clearly representative of a true cell cycle, rather than epiphenomena of other processes since, in AD and other neurodegenerative diseases, there is a true mitotic alteration that leads to DNA replication. While the exact role of cell cycle re-entry is unclear, recent studies using cell culture and animal models strongly support the notion that the dysregulation of cell cycle in neurons leads to the development of AD-related pathology such as hyperphosphorylation of tau and amyloid-? deposition and ultimately causes neuronal cell death. Importantly, cell cycle re-entry is also evident in mutant amyloid-? protein precursor and tau transgenic mice and, as in human disease, occurs prior to the development of the pathological hallmarks, neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid-? plaques. Therefore, the study of aberrant cell cycle regulation in model cellular and animal systems may provide extremely important insights into the pathogenesis of AD while serving as a means to test novel therapeutic approaches.  CONCLUSIONS The relevance of cell cycle and other oncogenic/mitotic markers to a bone fide mitotic process was initially thought to be confounded by the multiplicity of functions for such markers ( Bowser and Smith, 2002 ). For example, cyclins and other proteins are involved in cell growth, differentiation, DNA repair, and apoptotic signaling pathways ( Park et al., 1998 ; Giovanni et al., 1999 ).While such processes are involved in AD, and therefore could explain the presence of some mitotic markers, it is apparent that for many proteins described in AD that a role in mitotic regulation is their only known function (e.g., MRG15) ( Raina et al., 2001 ). Also, such neurons receive mitogenic signals furthering the notion of exit from quiescence ( McShea etal., 1999b ; Perry et al., 1999 ). More importantly, many of the neurons demarked as being mitotically active based on these markers actually show evidence of binucleation ( Zhu et al., 2008 ) involving chromosome replication ( Yang et al., 2001 ; Mosch et al., 2007 ) and/or premature chromosome separation ( Spremo-Potparevic et al., 2008 ). Nonetheless, to date, there has not been a systematic study of how cell cycle changes relate to other neurodegenerative changes or to each other. Such studies are required not only to examine the current AD animal models for elucidating the causal relationship between cell cycle re-entry and AD related pathologies but also to develop new animal models to provide a framework for integrating all of the disparate reports of cell cycle abnormalities. In conclusion, based on the evidence presented above, we hypothesize that terminally differentiated neurons in AD are “instructed” to enter the mitotic cycle and, thereafter, proceed (either sequentially or dysfunctionally) only through to a point(s) prior to the actual event of cellular division since they are inherently restricted in their mitotic competence. Such incomplete cell division not only leads to pathological hallmarks of disease (amyloid-? and tau phosphorylation) but also, ultimately, to cell death. As such, therapeutics targeting cell cycle entry and/or progression may be useful for the treatment of AD ( Woods et al., 2007 ). 