Quadriceps Strength and the Risk of Cartilage Loss and Symptom Progression in Knee Osteoarthritis Objective To determine the effect of quadriceps strength in individuals with knee osteoarthritis (OA) on loss of cartilage at the tibiofemoral and patellofemoral joints (assessed by magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]) and on knee pain and function. Methods We studied 265 subjects (154 men and 111 women, mean ± SD age 67 ± 9 years) who met the American College of Rheumatology criteria for symptomatic knee OA and who were participating in a prospective, 30-month natural history study of knee OA. Quadriceps strength was measured at baseline, isokinetically, during concentric knee extension. MRI of the knee at baseline and at 15 and 30 months was used to assess cartilage loss at the tibiofemoral and patellofemoral joints, with medial and lateral compartments assessed separately. At baseline and at followup visits, knee pain was assessed using a visual analog scale, and physical function was assessed using the Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index. Results There was no association between quadriceps strength and cartilage loss at the tibiofemoral joint. Results were similar in malaligned knees. However, greater quadriceps strength was protective against cartilage loss at the lateral compartment of the patellofemoral joint (for highest versus lowest tertile of strength, odds ratio 0.4 [95% confidence interval 0.2, 0.9]). Those with greater quadriceps strength had less knee pain and better physical function over followup ( P < 0.001). Conclusion Greater quadriceps strength had no influence on cartilage loss at the tibiofemoral joint, including in malaligned knees. We report for the first time that greater quadriceps strength protected against cartilage loss at the lateral compartment of the patellofemoral joint, a finding that requires confirmation. Subjects with greater quadriceps strength also had less knee pain and better physical function over followup.  RESULTS There were 317 participants who had no contraindications to baseline knee MRI, and 277 (87%) underwent followup knee MRI at 15 months, 30 months, or both. There were no differences between those who were and those who were not followed up with respect to age (mean ± SD 66 ± 9 years versus 66 ± 10 years, respectively), baseline BMI (mean ± SD 30.8 ± 5.7 kg/m2 versus 29.1 ± 5.6 kg/m2, respectively), Kellgren/ Lawrence (K/L) grade ( 28 ) (54% versus 55%, respectively, with K/L grade >2), or quadriceps strength (mean ± SD 0.78 ± 0.33 Nm/kg versus 0.79 ± 0.31 Nm/kg, respectively), but the group not followed up included a higher proportion of men (83% of those not followed up versus 59% of those followed up; P < 0.01). We excluded 12 subjects from analyses; 9 of these subjects had no measure of quadriceps strength (see Patients and Methods), and 3 of these subjects had MRIs that were unreadable for cartilage loss. Thus, the final study population included 265 participants. Of the 265 participants who were included in analyses (154 men and 111 women) ( Table 1 ), alignment data were available for 219 (83%). Characteristics of participants by sex-specific tertile of quadriceps strength are listed in Table 2 . (Because the K/L grade is scored based on PA radiograph views only, participants in our study with K/L grades of <2 represent those with OA involving the patellofemoral joint.) Overall, 30-month data were available for 222 subjects (84%), and 15-month data were available for the remainder, and the proportions with 30-month and 15-month followup were similar among the tertiles of quadriceps strength. Cartilage loss at the tibiofemoral joint There were 118 knees (45%) with loss of cartilage at ?1 of the 5 regions in the medial tibiofemoral compartment. Quadriceps strength did not influence the likelihood of cartilage loss over followup in the medial compartment, in either crude or adjusted analyses ( Table 3 ). Results were consistent between men and women (data not shown). Further adjustment for quartile of alignment did not change the results: for middle strength, odds ratio (OR) 0.7 (95% confidence interval [95% CI] 0.4, 1.3); for high strength, OR 0.9 (95% CI 0.5, 1.7). When we stratified results by ?5° varus alignment versus <5° alignment, we still observed no association ( Table 4 ). There were 58 knees (22%) with loss of cartilage at ?1 region in the lateral tibiofemoral compartment. There was no association between quadriceps strength and cartilage loss in this compartment ( Table 3 ). Adjustment for quartiles of alignment did not change the results (for middle strength, OR 1.3 [95% CI 0.6, 2.7]; for high strength, OR 1.1 [95% CI 0.5, 2.5]). There were very few participants with cartilage loss in this compartment among those with ?5° varus alignment or even valgus malalignment, which limited our ability to evaluate the possibility of differential effects of strength by alignment within this compartment. Cartilage loss at the patellofemoral joint There were 58 knees (22%) with loss of cartilage at either region (patella or anterior femur) in the medial compartment of the patellofemoral joint. We found no association between quadriceps strength and cartilage loss ( Table 3 ), and additional adjustment for quartile of alignment did not change the results (for middle strength, OR 0.9 [95% CI 0.5, 1.8]; for high strength, OR 0.8 [95% CI 0.4, 1.6]). Results were similar when stratified by alignment ( Table 4 ). There were 50 knees (19%) with loss of cartilage at either region in the lateral compartment of the patellofemoral joint. The proportion of regions within this compartment showing loss of cartilage over followup was less when quadriceps strength was high ( Table 3 ). Further adjustment for quartile of alignment did not change the results (for middle strength, OR 0.5 [95% CI 0.2, 1.1]; for high strength, OR 0.4 [95% CI 0.2, 0.9]). Findings appeared similar when stratified by alignment, although power was limited ( Table 4 ). Results for the medial and lateral compartments of the patellofemoral joint were also consistent for men and women (data not shown). Knee pain and physical function findings Although the change in either knee pain or physical function over followup did not differ significantly by quadriceps strength, participants in the highest tertile of quadriceps strength had significantly less knee pain and better physical function (even following adjustment for confounders) at baseline compared with participants in the lowest tertile of quadriceps strength ( Table 5 ), and these findings persisted at followup ( Table 5 ). Results were similar upon stratification for alignment, although greater quadriceps strength conferred a slightly more favorable effect on pain and physical function among those with <5° of alignment than among those with ?5° varus alignment (data not shown). All findings and conclusions regarding cartilage loss and knee symptoms were the same in separate yet identical analyses in which sex-specific tertiles of quadriceps strength (in Nm; not normalized to body weight) were used.  RESULTS There were 317 participants who had no contraindications to baseline knee MRI, and 277 (87%) underwent followup knee MRI at 15 months, 30 months, or both. There were no differences between those who were and those who were not followed up with respect to age (mean ± SD 66 ± 9 years versus 66 ± 10 years, respectively), baseline BMI (mean ± SD 30.8 ± 5.7 kg/m2 versus 29.1 ± 5.6 kg/m2, respectively), Kellgren/ Lawrence (K/L) grade ( 28 ) (54% versus 55%, respectively, with K/L grade >2), or quadriceps strength (mean ± SD 0.78 ± 0.33 Nm/kg versus 0.79 ± 0.31 Nm/kg, respectively), but the group not followed up included a higher proportion of men (83% of those not followed up versus 59% of those followed up; P < 0.01). We excluded 12 subjects from analyses; 9 of these subjects had no measure of quadriceps strength (see Patients and Methods), and 3 of these subjects had MRIs that were unreadable for cartilage loss. Thus, the final study population included 265 participants. Of the 265 participants who were included in analyses (154 men and 111 women) ( Table 1 ), alignment data were available for 219 (83%). Characteristics of participants by sex-specific tertile of quadriceps strength are listed in Table 2 . (Because the K/L grade is scored based on PA radiograph views only, participants in our study with K/L grades of <2 represent those with OA involving the patellofemoral joint.) Overall, 30-month data were available for 222 subjects (84%), and 15-month data were available for the remainder, and the proportions with 30-month and 15-month followup were similar among the tertiles of quadriceps strength. Cartilage loss at the tibiofemoral joint There were 118 knees (45%) with loss of cartilage at ?1 of the 5 regions in the medial tibiofemoral compartment. Quadriceps strength did not influence the likelihood of cartilage loss over followup in the medial compartment, in either crude or adjusted analyses ( Table 3 ). Results were consistent between men and women (data not shown). Further adjustment for quartile of alignment did not change the results: for middle strength, odds ratio (OR) 0.7 (95% confidence interval [95% CI] 0.4, 1.3); for high strength, OR 0.9 (95% CI 0.5, 1.7). When we stratified results by ?5° varus alignment versus <5° alignment, we still observed no association ( Table 4 ). There were 58 knees (22%) with loss of cartilage at ?1 region in the lateral tibiofemoral compartment. There was no association between quadriceps strength and cartilage loss in this compartment ( Table 3 ). Adjustment for quartiles of alignment did not change the results (for middle strength, OR 1.3 [95% CI 0.6, 2.7]; for high strength, OR 1.1 [95% CI 0.5, 2.5]). There were very few participants with cartilage loss in this compartment among those with ?5° varus alignment or even valgus malalignment, which limited our ability to evaluate the possibility of differential effects of strength by alignment within this compartment. Cartilage loss at the patellofemoral joint There were 58 knees (22%) with loss of cartilage at either region (patella or anterior femur) in the medial compartment of the patellofemoral joint. We found no association between quadriceps strength and cartilage loss ( Table 3 ), and additional adjustment for quartile of alignment did not change the results (for middle strength, OR 0.9 [95% CI 0.5, 1.8]; for high strength, OR 0.8 [95% CI 0.4, 1.6]). Results were similar when stratified by alignment ( Table 4 ). There were 50 knees (19%) with loss of cartilage at either region in the lateral compartment of the patellofemoral joint. The proportion of regions within this compartment showing loss of cartilage over followup was less when quadriceps strength was high ( Table 3 ). Further adjustment for quartile of alignment did not change the results (for middle strength, OR 0.5 [95% CI 0.2, 1.1]; for high strength, OR 0.4 [95% CI 0.2, 0.9]). Findings appeared similar when stratified by alignment, although power was limited ( Table 4 ). Results for the medial and lateral compartments of the patellofemoral joint were also consistent for men and women (data not shown). Knee pain and physical function findings Although the change in either knee pain or physical function over followup did not differ significantly by quadriceps strength, participants in the highest tertile of quadriceps strength had significantly less knee pain and better physical function (even following adjustment for confounders) at baseline compared with participants in the lowest tertile of quadriceps strength ( Table 5 ), and these findings persisted at followup ( Table 5 ). Results were similar upon stratification for alignment, although greater quadriceps strength conferred a slightly more favorable effect on pain and physical function among those with <5° of alignment than among those with ?5° varus alignment (data not shown). All findings and conclusions regarding cartilage loss and knee symptoms were the same in separate yet identical analyses in which sex-specific tertiles of quadriceps strength (in Nm; not normalized to body weight) were used.  Cartilage loss at the tibiofemoral joint There were 118 knees (45%) with loss of cartilage at ?1 of the 5 regions in the medial tibiofemoral compartment. Quadriceps strength did not influence the likelihood of cartilage loss over followup in the medial compartment, in either crude or adjusted analyses ( Table 3 ). Results were consistent between men and women (data not shown). Further adjustment for quartile of alignment did not change the results: for middle strength, odds ratio (OR) 0.7 (95% confidence interval [95% CI] 0.4, 1.3); for high strength, OR 0.9 (95% CI 0.5, 1.7). When we stratified results by ?5° varus alignment versus <5° alignment, we still observed no association ( Table 4 ). There were 58 knees (22%) with loss of cartilage at ?1 region in the lateral tibiofemoral compartment. There was no association between quadriceps strength and cartilage loss in this compartment ( Table 3 ). Adjustment for quartiles of alignment did not change the results (for middle strength, OR 1.3 [95% CI 0.6, 2.7]; for high strength, OR 1.1 [95% CI 0.5, 2.5]). There were very few participants with cartilage loss in this compartment among those with ?5° varus alignment or even valgus malalignment, which limited our ability to evaluate the possibility of differential effects of strength by alignment within this compartment.  Cartilage loss at the tibiofemoral joint There were 118 knees (45%) with loss of cartilage at ?1 of the 5 regions in the medial tibiofemoral compartment. Quadriceps strength did not influence the likelihood of cartilage loss over followup in the medial compartment, in either crude or adjusted analyses ( Table 3 ). Results were consistent between men and women (data not shown). Further adjustment for quartile of alignment did not change the results: for middle strength, odds ratio (OR) 0.7 (95% confidence interval [95% CI] 0.4, 1.3); for high strength, OR 0.9 (95% CI 0.5, 1.7). When we stratified results by ?5° varus alignment versus <5° alignment, we still observed no association ( Table 4 ). There were 58 knees (22%) with loss of cartilage at ?1 region in the lateral tibiofemoral compartment. There was no association between quadriceps strength and cartilage loss in this compartment ( Table 3 ). Adjustment for quartiles of alignment did not change the results (for middle strength, OR 1.3 [95% CI 0.6, 2.7]; for high strength, OR 1.1 [95% CI 0.5, 2.5]). There were very few participants with cartilage loss in this compartment among those with ?5° varus alignment or even valgus malalignment, which limited our ability to evaluate the possibility of differential effects of strength by alignment within this compartment.  Cartilage loss at the patellofemoral joint There were 58 knees (22%) with loss of cartilage at either region (patella or anterior femur) in the medial compartment of the patellofemoral joint. We found no association between quadriceps strength and cartilage loss ( Table 3 ), and additional adjustment for quartile of alignment did not change the results (for middle strength, OR 0.9 [95% CI 0.5, 1.8]; for high strength, OR 0.8 [95% CI 0.4, 1.6]). Results were similar when stratified by alignment ( Table 4 ). There were 50 knees (19%) with loss of cartilage at either region in the lateral compartment of the patellofemoral joint. The proportion of regions within this compartment showing loss of cartilage over followup was less when quadriceps strength was high ( Table 3 ). Further adjustment for quartile of alignment did not change the results (for middle strength, OR 0.5 [95% CI 0.2, 1.1]; for high strength, OR 0.4 [95% CI 0.2, 0.9]). Findings appeared similar when stratified by alignment, although power was limited ( Table 4 ). Results for the medial and lateral compartments of the patellofemoral joint were also consistent for men and women (data not shown).  Cartilage loss at the patellofemoral joint There were 58 knees (22%) with loss of cartilage at either region (patella or anterior femur) in the medial compartment of the patellofemoral joint. We found no association between quadriceps strength and cartilage loss ( Table 3 ), and additional adjustment for quartile of alignment did not change the results (for middle strength, OR 0.9 [95% CI 0.5, 1.8]; for high strength, OR 0.8 [95% CI 0.4, 1.6]). Results were similar when stratified by alignment ( Table 4 ). There were 50 knees (19%) with loss of cartilage at either region in the lateral compartment of the patellofemoral joint. The proportion of regions within this compartment showing loss of cartilage over followup was less when quadriceps strength was high ( Table 3 ). Further adjustment for quartile of alignment did not change the results (for middle strength, OR 0.5 [95% CI 0.2, 1.1]; for high strength, OR 0.4 [95% CI 0.2, 0.9]). Findings appeared similar when stratified by alignment, although power was limited ( Table 4 ). Results for the medial and lateral compartments of the patellofemoral joint were also consistent for men and women (data not shown).  Knee pain and physical function findings Although the change in either knee pain or physical function over followup did not differ significantly by quadriceps strength, participants in the highest tertile of quadriceps strength had significantly less knee pain and better physical function (even following adjustment for confounders) at baseline compared with participants in the lowest tertile of quadriceps strength ( Table 5 ), and these findings persisted at followup ( Table 5 ). Results were similar upon stratification for alignment, although greater quadriceps strength conferred a slightly more favorable effect on pain and physical function among those with <5° of alignment than among those with ?5° varus alignment (data not shown). All findings and conclusions regarding cartilage loss and knee symptoms were the same in separate yet identical analyses in which sex-specific tertiles of quadriceps strength (in Nm; not normalized to body weight) were used.  Knee pain and physical function findings Although the change in either knee pain or physical function over followup did not differ significantly by quadriceps strength, participants in the highest tertile of quadriceps strength had significantly less knee pain and better physical function (even following adjustment for confounders) at baseline compared with participants in the lowest tertile of quadriceps strength ( Table 5 ), and these findings persisted at followup ( Table 5 ). Results were similar upon stratification for alignment, although greater quadriceps strength conferred a slightly more favorable effect on pain and physical function among those with <5° of alignment than among those with ?5° varus alignment (data not shown). All findings and conclusions regarding cartilage loss and knee symptoms were the same in separate yet identical analyses in which sex-specific tertiles of quadriceps strength (in Nm; not normalized to body weight) were used.  DISCUSSION Among 265 men and women with symptomatic knee OA, we found that for most compartments of the knee, greater quadriceps strength had no effect on cartilage loss, including in knees with varus malalignment. Interestingly, we found that stronger quadriceps protected against cartilage loss at the lateral compartment of the patellofemoral joint, a finding that needs confirmation. We also found that those with the greatest quadriceps strength had persistently less knee pain and better physical function than those with the least strength, throughout followup. Skeletal muscles provide shock absorption and distribute load across joints ( 29 ). Impaired neuromuscular protective mechanisms from weak quadriceps muscles may lead to failure in dissipating potentially harmful loads during heel-strike ( 30 ), thereby initiating or worsening joint damage. Nevertheless, we found no protective effect of greater quadriceps strength on cartilage loss at the load-bearing tibiofemoral joint. Our findings are consistent with those of previous studies showing no overall effect of greater quadriceps strength at the tibiofemoral joint ( 11 , 12 ). While malalignment at the knee is an important risk factor for progression of knee OA ( 31 ), we were unable to confirm the finding of greater quadriceps strength increasing the risk of tibiofemoral cartilage loss in malaligned knees ( 12 ). Our study was MRI based, so we were able to assess cartilage loss directly. It is not clear whether the lack of weight-bearing imaging by MRI can account for differences. Similar to other studies ( 11 , 12 ), our study was observational; therefore, differences in level and type of physical activity or self-directed exercise programs among those with greater quadriceps strength could have contributed to differences in findings among studies. Similarly, our inability to identify a protective effect of greater quadriceps strength on cartilage at the tibiofemoral joint may be due to an avoidance of injurious activities by those with weaker quadriceps, who, as we have noted, also tend to be less physically active. We did find a protective effect of greater quadriceps strength on the lateral compartment of the patellofemoral joint, which is a novel observation. As part of 1 of the 4 quadriceps muscles, the vastus medialis obliquus pulls the patella medially in the femoral trochlea ( 13 , 14 ). Weakness of the vastus medialis obliquus predisposes to lateral subluxation or partial dislocation of the patella ( 13 , 14 ). A stronger quadriceps may represent, in part, a stronger vastus medialis obliquus, preventing excessive lateral excursion of the patella and thereby preventing excess cartilage loss in this compartment. It may also be a reason that less severe knee pain and better physical function were noted among our study participants in the highest tertile of quadriceps strength, but this requires further investigation. Our findings, which include an association of greater quadriceps strength with less knee pain and physical limitation over followup, suggest that greater quadriceps strength has an overall beneficial effect on symptomatic knee OA. Our study has limitations. While OA in the community is more common among women, we had more men than women in our study since participants were recruited largely from the Veterans Administration. Although this was a relatively large longitudinal MRI study of knee OA, we still had only a modest number of participants to permit analyses of all potential confounders. Residual confounding by age and BMI remains a possibility. We do not have a measure of knee laxity. We were unable to evaluate the possibility of an interaction between quadriceps strength and activity level. Alignment data were available for most, but not all, study participants. We had too few individuals with valgus malalignment to explore its relationship to quadriceps strength and cartilage loss at the lateral tibiofemoral compartment. While we have information on analgesic use, it was still too limited to adequately assess its influence on our findings regarding knee symptoms. We did observe, however, that the proportion of participants reporting analgesic use, regardless of the indication, was similar across quadriceps strength groups (data not shown). Finally, it is important to note that the focus of this study was quadriceps strength, and not strengthening or exercise. While our findings suggest that maintaining strong quadriceps is of benefit to those with knee OA, further work is needed to determine the type and frequency of exercise regimen that will be both safe and effective. Although there have been several short-term exercise trials that have shown improved quadriceps strength and beneficial effects on knee pain and function ( 18 , 32 – 35 ), consistent with our observations, most were of limited duration, which precluded an assessment of cartilage loss. One 18-month trial of low-intensity aerobic and resistive training in knee OA demonstrated that both types of exercise regimens resulted in an improvement in symptoms and physical function over followup compared with the control group; however, no differences were seen among groups in radiographic scores ( 36 ). Interestingly, knee flexion strength was better in both exercise groups relative to controls, but knee extension strength was similar at followup in all 3 groups. A more recent trial of quadriceps strengthening exercise failed to demonstrate a protective effect on progression of joint space narrowing ( 37 ); however, not only was it a radiographic study, but the exercise intervention also failed to produce an improvement in quadriceps strength. Ideally, clinical trials designed to study the influence of quadriceps strengthening exercises on progression of symptomatic knee OA would include MRI for longitudinal assessment of cartilage loss, both at the tibiofemoral and patellofemoral joints, as well as an assessment of the degree to which quadriceps strength is improved by the exercise intervention. In summary, in men and women with symptomatic knee OA, we found no association between quadriceps strength and cartilage loss at the tibiofemoral joint, including in malaligned knees. However, greater quadriceps strength, which may prevent lateral offset and tilt of the patella, protected against cartilage loss at the lateral compartment of the patellofemoral joint, a frequent site of symptom generation in knee OA. Subjects with greater quadriceps strength were also more likely to have less knee pain and better physical function. Our results suggest that strong quadriceps muscles have an overall beneficial effect on knee OA.  DISCUSSION Among 265 men and women with symptomatic knee OA, we found that for most compartments of the knee, greater quadriceps strength had no effect on cartilage loss, including in knees with varus malalignment. Interestingly, we found that stronger quadriceps protected against cartilage loss at the lateral compartment of the patellofemoral joint, a finding that needs confirmation. We also found that those with the greatest quadriceps strength had persistently less knee pain and better physical function than those with the least strength, throughout followup. Skeletal muscles provide shock absorption and distribute load across joints ( 29 ). Impaired neuromuscular protective mechanisms from weak quadriceps muscles may lead to failure in dissipating potentially harmful loads during heel-strike ( 30 ), thereby initiating or worsening joint damage. Nevertheless, we found no protective effect of greater quadriceps strength on cartilage loss at the load-bearing tibiofemoral joint. Our findings are consistent with those of previous studies showing no overall effect of greater quadriceps strength at the tibiofemoral joint ( 11 , 12 ). While malalignment at the knee is an important risk factor for progression of knee OA ( 31 ), we were unable to confirm the finding of greater quadriceps strength increasing the risk of tibiofemoral cartilage loss in malaligned knees ( 12 ). Our study was MRI based, so we were able to assess cartilage loss directly. It is not clear whether the lack of weight-bearing imaging by MRI can account for differences. Similar to other studies ( 11 , 12 ), our study was observational; therefore, differences in level and type of physical activity or self-directed exercise programs among those with greater quadriceps strength could have contributed to differences in findings among studies. Similarly, our inability to identify a protective effect of greater quadriceps strength on cartilage at the tibiofemoral joint may be due to an avoidance of injurious activities by those with weaker quadriceps, who, as we have noted, also tend to be less physically active. We did find a protective effect of greater quadriceps strength on the lateral compartment of the patellofemoral joint, which is a novel observation. As part of 1 of the 4 quadriceps muscles, the vastus medialis obliquus pulls the patella medially in the femoral trochlea ( 13 , 14 ). Weakness of the vastus medialis obliquus predisposes to lateral subluxation or partial dislocation of the patella ( 13 , 14 ). A stronger quadriceps may represent, in part, a stronger vastus medialis obliquus, preventing excessive lateral excursion of the patella and thereby preventing excess cartilage loss in this compartment. It may also be a reason that less severe knee pain and better physical function were noted among our study participants in the highest tertile of quadriceps strength, but this requires further investigation. Our findings, which include an association of greater quadriceps strength with less knee pain and physical limitation over followup, suggest that greater quadriceps strength has an overall beneficial effect on symptomatic knee OA. Our study has limitations. While OA in the community is more common among women, we had more men than women in our study since participants were recruited largely from the Veterans Administration. Although this was a relatively large longitudinal MRI study of knee OA, we still had only a modest number of participants to permit analyses of all potential confounders. Residual confounding by age and BMI remains a possibility. We do not have a measure of knee laxity. We were unable to evaluate the possibility of an interaction between quadriceps strength and activity level. Alignment data were available for most, but not all, study participants. We had too few individuals with valgus malalignment to explore its relationship to quadriceps strength and cartilage loss at the lateral tibiofemoral compartment. While we have information on analgesic use, it was still too limited to adequately assess its influence on our findings regarding knee symptoms. We did observe, however, that the proportion of participants reporting analgesic use, regardless of the indication, was similar across quadriceps strength groups (data not shown). Finally, it is important to note that the focus of this study was quadriceps strength, and not strengthening or exercise. While our findings suggest that maintaining strong quadriceps is of benefit to those with knee OA, further work is needed to determine the type and frequency of exercise regimen that will be both safe and effective. Although there have been several short-term exercise trials that have shown improved quadriceps strength and beneficial effects on knee pain and function ( 18 , 32 – 35 ), consistent with our observations, most were of limited duration, which precluded an assessment of cartilage loss. One 18-month trial of low-intensity aerobic and resistive training in knee OA demonstrated that both types of exercise regimens resulted in an improvement in symptoms and physical function over followup compared with the control group; however, no differences were seen among groups in radiographic scores ( 36 ). Interestingly, knee flexion strength was better in both exercise groups relative to controls, but knee extension strength was similar at followup in all 3 groups. A more recent trial of quadriceps strengthening exercise failed to demonstrate a protective effect on progression of joint space narrowing ( 37 ); however, not only was it a radiographic study, but the exercise intervention also failed to produce an improvement in quadriceps strength. Ideally, clinical trials designed to study the influence of quadriceps strengthening exercises on progression of symptomatic knee OA would include MRI for longitudinal assessment of cartilage loss, both at the tibiofemoral and patellofemoral joints, as well as an assessment of the degree to which quadriceps strength is improved by the exercise intervention. In summary, in men and women with symptomatic knee OA, we found no association between quadriceps strength and cartilage loss at the tibiofemoral joint, including in malaligned knees. However, greater quadriceps strength, which may prevent lateral offset and tilt of the patella, protected against cartilage loss at the lateral compartment of the patellofemoral joint, a frequent site of symptom generation in knee OA. Subjects with greater quadriceps strength were also more likely to have less knee pain and better physical function. Our results suggest that strong quadriceps muscles have an overall beneficial effect on knee OA. 