Improving clinical trial design for inquiries into the mechanisms of cyst growth in ADPKD  Utilizing renal volume as an outcome measure in randomized clinical trials in ADPKD - study design considerations Kistler et al ( 1 ) provide additional information regarding the frequency and cadence of medical complications related to ADPKD and renal volume. A significant association between clinical complications of ADPKD and renal volume was found. Increased renal volume was associated with greater frequency of hypertension, macrohematuria, urinary tract infections and recurrent flank pain. Importantly, 10% of participants demonstrated a significant reduction in renal volume over 6 months. These individuals demonstrated greater baseline renal volumes and more complications related to ADPKD than those who did not demonstrate a dramatic reduction in renal volume. Understanding the frequency of these events, as well as potential contributors (for example, a rapidly increasing rate of cyst or renal growth) provides critical information for establishing inclusion criteria for enrollment into randomized clinical trials in ADPKD as well as considerations for analytical approaches that account for these events during trial participation. Given the dramatic volumetric effect of spontaneous cyst involution or rupture, subjects at high risk for disease progression may be inadvertently excluded depending on the inclusion criteria used. Although Kistler and colleagues ( 1 ) demonstrate that MR measurements every six months are sufficient to demonstrate a detectable change in renal volume in ADPKD, caution is warranted in considering this duration of participation in a randomized clinical trial. If one anticipates that a therapeutic agent has a significant impact (for example 25% reduction in the rate of cyst or renal expansion), assessing change in renal and cyst volume over a six month duration will be insufficient to detect real therapeutic effects. This magnitude of change is potentially less than the level of detection with current MR-based imaging protocols. On the basis of volumetric measures in the study by Kistler et al ( 1 ) and the CRISP study, only half of the subjects could be included in a 6 month study where this magnitude of effect is anticipated, and many individuals with progressive renal disease would be excluded. Given the complex nature of cyst growth in ADPKD, such as alterations in epithelial proliferation, rates of apoptosis, extracellular matrix responses and the presence of cyst fluid secretion, multiple agents targeting different aspects of cyst growth and expansion will most likely be used in ADPKD. The duration of drug exposure to determine whether therapeutic impact is possible will vary on the basis of the aspect of cyst growth and formation targeted. Investigators will need to take into account the pace at which these alterations contribute to cyst growth in ADPKD. For example, inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system in ADPKD, may provide therapeutic benefit for renal and cyst growth in ADPKD over a relatively long period of time where tissue fibrosis and vascular remodeling are chronically affected. Alternatively, with agents that acutely alter cyst fluid secretion, such as secretin or somatostatin analogues, shorter and intermittent exposures may be sufficient to demonstrate a beneficial effect. For those interventions that affect epithelial proliferation or apoptosis (such as mTOR inhibitors) exposure time may need to be intermediate to determine efficacy.  Risk stratification for disease progression using renal volume estimates in ADPKD This study by Kistler et al ( 1 ), as well as the CRISP study, highlights the important fact that ADPKD individuals at high risk for progression can now be identified by MR based measures. Renal volume can provide a stratification to high or low risk for disease progression in ADPKD. In the study by Kistler et al ( 1 ), those with the greatest renal volume demonstrated the fastest rate of increase in renal size. In addition, the greatest renal volume was associated with the greatest frequency of complications in ADPKD, including the frequency of hypertension, the presence of albuminuria, frequency of episodes of gross hematuria and asymptomatic cyst rupture. The lessons of Kister et al ( 1 ) show that it is reasonable to justify renal volume as a marker of disease severity and progression in ADPKD. Young ADPKD patients with large renal volumes demonstrate the most rapid progression of disease and should be identified as high risk ADPKD patients. Importantly, the magnitude of renal volume change correlates with initial renal volume throughout the study population but most strongly in the younger than 30 year age group.  Mechanisms responsible for cyst and renal growth in ADPKD In both in this and the CRISP study, an extremely high level of agreement between left and right kidney volume was found. In addition, both studies demonstrated a strong association between change in left and change in right kidney volume over time. This level of agreement between kidneys within individuals where random somatic mutations or second hits are required for cyst development is difficult to reconcile. Only a small proportion of individuals demonstrated significantly discordant renal volumes and many of these were the individuals who developed asymptomatic cyst rupture. Heritability indices of renal volume in healthy controls have not been established with MR, but in ADPKD, heritability indices are extremely high, greater than 85% ( 6 ). The high correlation between left and right renal volumes in CRISP and the study by Kistler et al suggests that heritability of renal size in ADPKD is extremely high. Although somatic mutations or modifier influences play a significant role in disease progression in ADPKD, studies addressing the allelic contribution to disease severity (PKD1 or PKD2 mutations) deserve further attention. 