Microtubule Dynamics as a Target in Oncology Drugs that affect microtubule dynamics, including the taxanes and vinca alkaloids, have been a mainstay in the treatment of leukemias and solid tumors for decades. New, more effective microtubule-targeting agents continue to enter into clinical trials and some, including the epothilone ixapebilone, have been approved for use. In contrast, several other drugs of this class with promising preclinical data were later shown to be ineffective or intolerable in animal models or clinical trials. In this review we discuss the molecular mechanisms as well as preclinical and clinical results for a variety of microtubule-targeting agents in various stages of development. We also offer a frank discussion of which microtubule-targeting agents are amenable to further development based on their availability, efficacy and toxic profile.  Conclusions Microtubule targeting agents are actively used in the clinic against a wide variety of solid tumors and hematological malignancies. However, many obstacles to effective treatment with currently approved agents are present. These include inherited and acquired resistance, side effects of peripheral neuropathy and neutropenia, and poor solubility, necessitating the use of toxic solvents. The many microtubule stabilizers and depolymerizers in preclinical and clinical development will likely yield a subset of agents that will have advantages over the current standard of care in defined settings. The demonstrated synergistic effects of these novel agents with current therapies may also allow for their use at more tolerated doses.  Figures Figure 1 Microtubule structure. (A) Tubulin heterodimers are composed of ? and ? subunits that polymerize head-to-tail to form protofilaments (B). Thirteen protofilaments form lateral contacts to create the hollow cylindrical structure of the microtubule (C and D) with ?-tubulin exposed at the microtubule plus end (+) and ?-tubulin exposed at the microtubule minus end (?). Figure 2 The effect of microtubule-targeting agents on interphase microtubules. A10 cells were treated with vehicle (A), 250 nM vinblastine (B) or 2?M paclitaxel (C) for 18 hours. Microtubules were visualized by indirect immunofluorescence. Figure 3 Binding sites for microtubule-targeting agents. (A) Vinblastine (Vin) binds to?-tubulin near the GTP-binding site at the plus end of microtubules. (B) Colchicine (Col) binds unpolymerized tubulin at the ?/?-tubulin interface near the ?-tubulin GTP-binding site and is then incorporated into microtubules. The binding of either vinblastine or colchicine to microtubule plus-end decreases microtubule dynamicity. At higher concentrations, binding of these drugs along the length of microtubules disrupts lateral contacts between protofilaments, resulting in gross microtubule depolymerization. (C and D) Paclitaxel (pTax) and docetaxel (dTax) bind to the interior lumen of microtubules, resulting in decreased dynamicity at low concentrations and microtubule bundling at higher concentrations. Paclitaxel and docetaxel catalyze formation of microtubules containing 12 and 13 protofilaments respectively. 