Transient receptor potential channels: targeting pain at the source Pain results from the complex processing of neural signals at different levels of the central nervous system, with each signal potentially offering multiple opportunities for pharmacological intervention. A logical strategy for developing novel analgesics is to target the beginning of the pain pathway, and aim potential treatments directly at the nociceptors — the high-threshold primary sensory neurons that detect noxious stimuli. The largest group of receptors that function as noxious stimuli detectors in nociceptors is the transient receptor potential (TRP) channel family. This Review highlights evidence supporting particular TRP channels as targets for analgesics, indicates the likely efficacy profiles of TRP-channel-acting drugs, and discusses the development pathways needed to test candidates as analgesics in humans.  Conclusions The discovery that the capacity to detect many forms of noxious stimuli is mediated by high-threshold TRP channels expressed selectively in nociceptors has provided insights into the molecular basis of sensory labelled lines — neural input channels devoted to specific types of stimuli and in the peripheral nervous system. It has also provided an opportunity for the development of analgesics that are different from the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, opiates, anticonvulsants and antidepressants currently used. The field has moved relatively quickly, from the cloning of TRPV1 to clinical trials within 10 years. Studies on TRPV1 raise the intriguing possibility that these ion channels have functional roles greater than initially anticipated, which may provide problems and opportunities. For example, while TRPV1 is an acute noxious heat receptor, it also seems to be a major player in various pain states such as bone cancer pain and neuropathic pain, as well as in thermoregulation and hippocampal plasticity. TRPA1 also seems to be a major player is sensing damage, and has great clinical potential as an analgesic and perhaps even more so for several respiratory diseases. However, more studies are required to identify which TRP channels will be appropriate targets for which specific pain and other indications. Armed with genetic deletions for each of these ion channels, and specific small-molecule agonists and antagonists against many of them, the important questions should be addressed in the next few years. We are poised to discover whether drugs that act on sensory TRP channels provide greater efficacy and fewer adverse effects in the treatment of pain than the currently available analgesics. In addition to targeting TRP channels with agonists to activate, desensitize and ablate nociceptors, and with antagonists to reduce TRP activity in the periphery and CNS, we can also use TRP channels as a drug delivery system to target, with TRP agonists, small cationic compounds selectively into those specific cells that express these ion channels. It seems likely that somehow, from these multiple and diverse therapeutic opportunities, TRP channels will provide a new means of reducing pain.  Figures Figure 1 Classification of major pain syndromes Pain can be divided into three broad categories: nociceptive, inflammatory and neuropathic. This division is based on the initiating stimulus (presence of a noxious stimulus, inflammation or neural damage); the neural substrate involved (nociceptors or non-nociceptors and the relative contribution/involvement of the peripheral nervous system (PNS) or central nervous system (CNS)); and the relative involvement of transient receptor potential (TRP) channels; the typical clinical conditions; the biological role of pain; and the pain threshold. Nociceptive pain is generated by noxious stimuli that act on nociceptors in the PNS, and which, for thermal stimuli and chemical irritants, depend on TRP channels. This pain occurs clinically in the setting of acute trauma, is protective and serves to warn of damage. Inflammatory pain occurs in the presence of damaged or inflamed tissue. Inflammatory mediators can sensitize nociceptors, which involves alterations in TRP channel threshold. Central changes are also induced (central sensitization) such that pain can be recruited by activation of non-nociceptors. This clinical pain state is typically reversible and associated with hypersensitivity (noxious stimuli are no longer needed to evoke pain). Neuropathic pain results from damage and lesions to the nervous system. The pathophysiological changes responsible for the spontaneous pain and pain hypersensitivity experienced by patients occur both in the PNS and CNS and represent non-adaptive pathological changes. Some TRP channel antagonists reduce such pain but their involvement is not well understood. Figure 2 Representation of the roles of TRP channels in the peripheral and central terminals of nociceptor neurons Noxious and thermal stimuli act directly on the peripheral terminals of nociceptors to activate these sensory fibres. Many of the transduction channels that convert thermal, mechanical or chemical stimuli into electrical activity are transient receptor potential (TRP) channels. Activation of the peripheral terminal leads to action potential signalling towards the central nervous system (CNS) and a local release of vasoactive peptides that produce neurogenic inflammation. Although TRPV1 and TRPA1 are co-expressed in nociceptors TRPM8 is largely expressed in a unique set of sensory neurons without co-expression of TRV1 and TRPA1 (represented by bracket around TRPM8). Some TRP channels are expressed on keratinocytes and these cells may respond to noxious thermal stimuli by releasing a signal molecule, possibly ATP that then acts on the nociceptor. The nociceptor presynaptic terminal contains excitatory amino acid and peptide transmitters, the release of which is modulated by several TRP channels. The dashed arrows in the figure represent unknown signalling molecules, possibly endovanilloid lipids. CGRP, calcitonin gene-related peptide. Figure 3 Changes in TRP channels produced by inflammation Peripheral inflammation produces multiple inflammatory mediators (sensitizers) that act on their cognate receptors expressed by nociceptors to activate intracellular signal transduction pathways. These pathways can phosphorylate transient receptor potential (TRP) channels and thereby alter their trafficking to the membrane and their thresholds and kinetics. Several growth factors produced during inflammation, most notably nerve growth factor (NGF), are retrogradely transported to the cell body of the nociceptors in the dorsal root ganglion. At the dorsal root ganglion, these growth factors — through intracellular signalling pathways, such as p38 MAP kinase — increase the expression of TRP channels, which are then transported to the peripheral terminal. Changes in transcription and translation of TRP channels and other proteins can switch the chemical phenotype of the neurons from their state in naive conditions to an altered state during inflammation. The net effect of these changes is peripheral sensitization; that is, a reduction in the pain threshold at the site of inflamed tissue. B2, bradykinin receptor B2; ERK, extracellular signal-regulated kinase; ETAR, endothelin receptor type A; GDNF, glial-cell-derived neurotrophic factor; NK1, neurokinin receptor 1; PAR2, protease-activated receptor 2; PGE2, prostaglandin E2; PI3K, phosphoinositide 3-kinase; PK, protein kinase; PKR, prokineticin receptor; TNF?, tumour necrosis factor ?; TNFR1, TNF receptor 1; TRKA, tyrosine kinase receptor A. Figure 4 TRP channel antagonists and agonists as analgesics Transient receptor potential (TRP) channel antagonists as analgesics ( a ). Inhibition of TRP channels may produce analgesia by preventing transduction in the periphery, acting on channels expressed in keratinocytes or nociceptors, reducing ectopic activity generated by TRP channels along the axon and by reducing transmitter release as well as possibly acting on central neurons. The small hexagons represent TRPV1 channels at different anatomical locations, the vertical line share the different sites of actions of TRPV1 antagonists and the horizontal line shows the flow of nociceptive information from the periphery to the central nervous system. TRP channel agonists as analgesics ( b – d ). Activation of TRP channels may reduce pain by desensitizing the TRP channel to reduce pain transduction (this effect is transient and fully reversible; b ); by producing sufficient calcium influx to ablate the axon at the site of application (represented by dotted lines on the left; c ), producing long-lasting but potentially reversible morphological change, or ablating the whole neuron as a result of death of the cell body (represented by dotted circle), which is irreversible ( c ); and by driving inhibitory circuits, as for activation of cool-sensing TRPM8 expressing neurons, which represent the channels on the peripheral terminal ( d ). For approaches b and c the agonist will cause pain until desensitization is achieved or neuronal ablation occurs and may require a general anaesthetic. Evidence for efficacy for topical capsaicin in rheumatic conditions is lacking 161 , and that for resiniferatoxin for lower urinary tract symptoms is inconclusive 162 . However, there seems to be efficacy for topical low-dose capsaicin for post-herpetic neuralgia 163 and high-dose capsaicin for pain experienced in HIV 127 . Figure 5 TRP drugs currently under development as analgesics Current state of transient receptor potential (TRP) channel drug discovery, illustrated by phase of development. Chemical structures of lead molecules have been inserted where known (see REFS 133 , 134 ). Patent examples are drawn where the structure is not published (from REFS 135 , 136 ). 