Advanced noninvasive imaging of spinal vascular malformations Spinal vascular malformations (SVMs) are an uncommon, heterogeneous group of vascular anomalies that can render devastating neurological consequences if they are not diagnosed and treated in a timely fashion. Imaging SVMs has always presented a formidable challenge because their clinical and imaging presentations resemble those of neoplasms, demyelination diseases, and infection. Advancements in noninvasive imaging modalities (MR and CT angiography) have increased during the last decade and have improved the ability to accurately diagnose spinal vascular anomalies. In addition, intraoperative imaging techniques have been developed that aid in the intraoperative assessment before, during, and after resection of these lesions with minimal and/or optimal use of spinal digital subtraction angiography. In this report, the authors review recent advancements in the imaging of SVMs that will likely lead to more timely diagnoses and treatment while reducing procedural risk exposure to the patients who harbor these uncommon spinal lesions.  Conclusions Although the gold standard of SVM imaging currently remains 2D DS angiography because of its superior ability to acquire images with better spatial and temporal resolution, noninvasive techniques continue to improve. Rapid time-resolved MR angiography can establish the vertebral level of most SVMs noninvasively and assist in optimizing spinal DS angiography if endovascular treatment is chosen or the appropriate surgical levels need to be explored. Indocyanine green video angiography is also a very helpful perioperative imaging modality when used to assist in the determination of retained fistulous connections during the resection of an SVM. As technology continues to develop, noninvasive imaging methods will continue to improve but will complement, not supplant, spinal DS angiography in the diagnosis and treatment of SVMs.  Figures FIG. 1 A and B: Midline thoracic sagittal T2-weighted MR images demonstrating characteristic MR imaging findings of a T-8 intradural-intramedullary SVM, including the spinal AVM nidus (A, arrowhead ) with associated T2 signal changes (A, arrow ) and draining intradural veins (B, arrow ). C and D: Axial T2-weighted MR images demonstrating increased perinidal T2 signal changes (C, arrow ) and prominent subarachnoid vessels (D, arrow ). FIG. 2 A–E: Progressive rapid time-resolved MR angiography time sequence of images demonstrating the filling of the spinal AVM nidus (C, arrow ) and the draining vessels (E, arrow ). The time interval between the images is ~ 2 seconds. F: Spinal DS angiogram of same SVM showing filling of the SVM nidus (arrow) . FIG. 3 Intraoperative photographs (A, C, and E) and corresponding ICG video angiograms (B, D, and F) of a dorsal intradural SVM before, during, and after surgical treatment. A: Intraoperative photograph of the SVM before clip ligation. B: Corresponding ICG fluorescence image to panel A demonstrating the spinal AVM fistulous connections (arrows) . C: Intraoperative photograph of the SVM after clip ligation of a single fistulous connection (arrow) and demonstration of another fistulous connection (arrowhead) . D: Corresponding ICG fluorescence image to panel C demonstrating the residual spinal AVM (arrowhead) after initial clip ligation of one fistulous connection (arrow) . E: Intraoperative photograph of the SVM after complete surgical treatment including clip ligation (arrows) . F: Corresponding ICG fluorescence image to panel E demonstrating no apparent residual spinal AVM after surgical treatment including clip ligation (arrows) with maintenance of parent artery blood flow. 