Familial occurrence of schwannomas and malignant rhabdoid tumour associated with a duplication in SMARCB1 Background The role of germline and somatic SMARCB1 gene mutations in malignant rhabdoid tumour (MRT) predisposition is well known. Germline SMARCB1 mutations have also recently been identified in a subset of individuals with schwannomatosis. Surprisingly, MRT predisposition and schwannomatosis have never been reported to co-occur in a family. The correlation between genotype and phenotype for mutations in SMARCB1 has not been determined. Results We have identified a germline 2631 bp duplication that includes exon 6 of SMARCB1 in a unique family with a four generation history of MRT predisposition and schwannomatosis. This duplication segregates with disease in individuals affected with both conditions, linking MRT predisposition and schwannomatosis as components of the same syndrome in this family. Conclusion The unique combination of tumours that result from the duplication described in this report may provide important clues about the mechanisms that influence the phenotype associated with a given SMARCB1 mutation.  DISCUSSION There is some knowledge of the pathways through which Smarcb1 suppresses neoplasia. As a core component of the chromatin remodelling SWI/SNF complex, it is involved in regulating gene transcription. Smarcb1 suppression of MRT involves increasing the expression of p16INK4a and repressing the expression of cyclin D1. 21 – 24 The pathways involved in schwannomatosis remain to be defined, although somatic biallelic inactivation of the NF2 gene (mutated in NF2) at 22q12.2 is a frequent finding in schwannomas from SMARCB1 mutation carriers. 14 – 16 The mechanisms by which SMARCB1 germline mutations predispose to schwannomatosis versus MRT are unknown. In MRT, SMARCB1 acts as a classic tumour suppressor gene that is subject to biallelic inactivation in tumours. 8 11 Interestingly, SMARCB1 appears to function in a similar fashion in schwannomatosis. 13 – 16 It is, therefore, significant that MRT has not previously been reported in families with schwannomatosis, and unaffected SMARCB1 mutation carriers in the three previously reported families with MRT predisposition have not been diagnosed with schwannomatosis. 2 4 5 Accordingly, MRT predisposition and schwannomatosis could result from different types of mutations in SMARCB1 . Although no clear genotype–phenotype correlation has yet emerged, schwannomatosis cases may have an increased frequency of missense mutations and mutations in exon 1. 13 15 Additional factors must be involved, however, because a number of reported mutations associated with schwannomatosis, not all of which lie in exon 1, are predicted to result in complete loss of gene function. 14 – 16 It has been proposed that an early developmental window exists during which an SMARCB1 mutation carrier is predisposed to MRT, and survivors might subsequently develop schwannomatosis. 4 13 Thus, mutant SMARCB1 alleles that retain partial function might have low penetrance for MRT, yet still cause schwannomatosis. The fact that schwannomatosis was not detected in unaffected mutation carriers from previously reported MRT families could reflect the incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity that is a feature of hereditary schwannomatosis. 3 It is also possible that common co-inherited variants associated with nearby genes, such as NF2 , could play some role in the phenotype conferred by a mutation. In fact, the MRT from IV.1 was also deleted for NF2 as a result of monosomy 22. Finally, since some sporadic cases of apparent schwannomatosis are known to result from mosaicism for NF2 mutations, 17 mosaicism for SMARCB1 mutations may be responsible for other cases. In such a circumstance, the tissue distribution of a mutation will, no doubt, influence the associated tumour spectrum. How the germline duplication described in this report results in predisposition to both MRT and schwannomatosis in the family is still unknown. The duplicated SMARCB1 exon could be variably spliced into the mRNA transcript, allowing some residual or altered gene function. Alternatively, a unique co-inherited variant in a neighbouring gene could be influencing the phenotype. We are currently examining the splicing of mutant SMARCB1 mRNA in members of the family, and we plan to study NF2 and other nearby genes as possible modifiers of the phenotype. It is also intriguing that the schwannomas studied in this report differ from those in other reported schwannomatosis families in two aspects: first, they are of the epithelioid variant; second, they are fully negative, rather than mosaic, for Smarcb1 immunostaining in neoplastic cells. We will evaluate other tumours from this family, as they are resected, to determine if these individuals have a unique subtype of schwannomatosis or if the unusual characteristics are confined to a subset of tumours. Conclusion This is the first report of a family with inherited predisposition to both MRT and schwannomatosis. Analysis of the germline duplication in SMARCB1 that is responsible for this unique combination of conditions may allow for a greater understanding of the molecular bases of the disorders associated with this gene.  Conclusion This is the first report of a family with inherited predisposition to both MRT and schwannomatosis. Analysis of the germline duplication in SMARCB1 that is responsible for this unique combination of conditions may allow for a greater understanding of the molecular bases of the disorders associated with this gene.  Figures Figure 1 Pedigree of family K18853. Individuals with malignant rhabdoid tumour (MRT), confirmed schwannomatosis (schw) and clinically suspected schwannomatosis (skin lumps) are noted. Confirmed duplication carriers ( dup +) and non-carriers ( dup ?) are marked. Individual IV.3 is unaffected at age 7 years. Figure 2 (A) Haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained section of the AT/RT from IV.1. (B) Immunohistochemical Smarcb1 (BAF47/INI1) stain of the atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumour (AT/RT) from IV.1. Endothelial cell nuclei show positive staining. (C) H&E stained section of the epithelioid schwannoma from III.1. Note rounded epithelioid schwann cells arranged singly and in small aggregates. (D) Immunohistochemical Smarcb1 stain of the epithelioid schwannoma from III.1. Neoplastic cell nuclei are immunonegative. Original magnification ×500. Figure 3 (A) Array comparative genomic hybridisation (CGH) results in a 50 skb window encompassing SMARCB1 . The top plot shows all probes. Each point in the bottom plot represents the average of the probes in a 700 bp window; the raised horizontal bar marks the duplication. Nucleotides are numbered at top (from NCBI Build 36.1). (B) Sequences from the telomeric (Tel) and centromeric (Cen) ends of the duplication are aligned with the sequence of the duplication junction. The region of similarity is boxed. (C) Diagram of SMARCB1. Exons are represented by vertical bars, and exon 1 is at left. The arrow represents the duplicated region. (D) Locations of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primers, represented by small arrows (labelled A–E). Each large arrow represents one segment of the duplication. (E) Confirmation of the duplication through analysis of the peak height ratios of an intronic SMARCB1 SNP (rs2070457) in DNA sequences of three different PCR products amplified from III.4. The “C” allele is present on both segments of the duplication; the wild-type (WT) chromosome carries the “A” allele. All three copies (WT and mutant) of the duplicated region amplified in the product at top; the WT chromosome and the centromeric duplication segment amplified in the product at centre; the telomeric duplication segment amplified in the product at bottom. Figure 4 Agarose gel electrophoresis of a duplication specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) product (primers C + E) amplified from the DNA of affected individuals in K18853. DNA samples from random unaffected individuals (R) were included as negative controls. Samples prepared from blood (bl) and paraffin embedded tumour (tu) are noted. 