A Matter Of Race: Early- Versus Late-Stage Cancer Diagnosis African Americans receive their cancer diagnoses at more advanced stages of the disease than whites do We compared the stage at which cancer is diagnosed and survival rates between African Americans and whites, for thirty-four solid tumors, using the population-based Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) database. Whites were diagnosed at earlier stages than African Americans for thirty-one of the thirty-four tumor sites. Whites were significantly more likely than blacks to survive five years for twenty-six tumor sites; no cancer site had significantly superior survival among African Americans. These differences cannot be explained by screening behavior or risk factors; they point instead to the need for broad-based strategies to remedy racial inequality in cancer survival.  Study limitations This study used data from the SEER cancer registries. As such, we could not measure availability of insurance, use of diagnostic technologies, or time from symptom onset to diagnosis. Likewise, for cancers associated with screening tests, we could not determine whether screening was offered or performed. Nor could we measure the presence or absence of specific risk factors such as smoking or diet. Our measurement of demographic factors was limited to age, sex, race, and marital status. Cancer screening can pose some analytic challenges when researchers are assessing the benefits of early detection. In general, the cancers detected by screening will tend to be smaller and slower growing than those detected when they become clinically apparent. If the stage pattern were only seen in cancers with accepted screens (see Exhibit 1 ), then bias would be a possible explanation. The consistency across such a large number of tumors with variable clinical courses makes bias an unlikely explanation. This study did not take into account whether there were differences by race in the underlying rate of cancer incidence. Efforts to prevent cancer through modification of risk factors such as smoking and diet are important. The need for risk-factor reduction, however, does not negate the need to focus on diagnosis at earlier stages as a mechanism to reduce disparities in cancer survival. In spite of the growing array of treatments available for patients diagnosed with metastatic disease, the most effective way to improve cancer survivorship is through early detection. Although efforts to eliminate disparities in cancer treatment are important and necessary, they are not sufficient to eliminate disparities in overall cancer survival if the disparities in the stage at which diagnoses are made remain.  Discussion The overwhelming and consistent disparities in stage of cancer diagnosis and survival rates is a wake-up call. African Americans were diagnosed at significantly more-advanced stages than whites were for cancers for which screening is available and noncontroversial (female breast, colorectal, and cervix). African Americans were more likely to be diagnosed at advanced stages for the most common cancers and relatively rare cancers. The pattern was observed for cancers that are associated with tobacco exposure (for example, lung, bladder, and oral) and radiation exposure (for example, thyroid and sarcoma). Given the wide variety of malignancies evaluated, the consistency of the racial disparities does not seem to be explained by differences in risk factors, screening behavior, or tumor biology. Rather, the factors that are most likely responsible for these differences are related to the patients themselves or the institutional racism inherent in the health care system in which they receive care. Insurance and care-seeking behavior It is likely that patient factors that are differently found in the white population than in the African American population are responsible for part of the observed disparity. Well-recognized candidates include the availability of health insurance and care-seeking behavior. Although SEER does not include information on insurance status, we found that the observed patterns were unchanged when we limited our analysis to people of Medicare age, which suggests that the effects were not purely due to insurance. Others have examined the association between insurance coverage and cancer outcomes. [first name?] Halpern used the National Cancer Database to show an association between lack of insurance and higher stage at cancer diagnosis for twelve common cancers. 12 [first name?] Ward and others have shown that uninsured people and those on Medicaid are less likely to be screened for cancer than people with insurance. This finding would be consistent with the stage and survival patterns seen in Exhibit 1 . Interestingly, Ward reports a stronger association between stage at breast cancer diagnosis and insurance for white women than for African American women. 13 Medicaid enrollment Medicaid enrollment at the time of tumor diagnosis is consistently shown as a risk factor for later stage at diagnosis. 14 [first name?] Perkins examined whether people enrolled in Medicaid in the year prior to cancer diagnosis are diagnosed at later stages and found increased risk of late diagnosis but less than that of people enrolling in Medicaid at diagnosis. 15 Others have found no increased risk of late-stage diagnosis for long-term Medicaid enrollees relative to the insured. 16 Income and education Income and education are strongly and consistently associated with health care use and outcomes. Both within the United States and in countries with universal health insurance, studies have shown that populations with low income and low education are less likely to be screened for cancer and are more likely to be diagnosed at later stages than other populations. 17 Differences in health care providers Studies have shown that African Americans are treated by different health care providers than whites are. 18 These providers may be less knowledgeable about cancer signs, symptoms, and diagnosis; have a less-well-established referral network; or have longer wait times for appointments. Provider education would be a strategy for improving the general quality of care. Both Barrel Gaskin and Beth Virnig argue that a race-neutral approach that emphasizes reducing hospital, provider, or regional variability would be more effective than a strategy that focuses solely on race-based approaches. 19 Patients’ delay in seeking care Studies of delay in cancer diagnosis and treatment identify patient and provider components of delay. Patients may delay seeking care after symptom onset because of fear or denial, lack of a primary care provider, or lack of recognition of the importance of a symptom. 20 Patients might also experience delays in obtaining an initial appointment, obtaining necessary diagnostic testing, or seeing specialists. 21 Several studies point to greater delays experienced by African American cancer patients than their white counterparts. 22 Providers’ role in delayed diagnoses [first name?] Gross and colleagues reported that racial disparities in treatment of breast, colorectal, lung, and prostate cancers for elders did not narrow between 1992 and 2002. 23 Their analysis examined process-of-care measures for diagnosed cancer patients covered by Medicare and found poorer quality of care that was consistent over time. Pay-for-performance (P4P) incentives show some promise of improving specific quality-of-care problems. In general, the strategy seems to be most easily implemented for conditions with relatively clear-cut guidelines and established processes of care such as diabetes or nodal retrieval in association with specific cancer-directed surgeries. It is unclear whether P4P could equalize the quality of diagnostic care associated with the broad range of cancers studied here. Study limitations This study used data from the SEER cancer registries. As such, we could not measure availability of insurance, use of diagnostic technologies, or time from symptom onset to diagnosis. Likewise, for cancers associated with screening tests, we could not determine whether screening was offered or performed. Nor could we measure the presence or absence of specific risk factors such as smoking or diet. Our measurement of demographic factors was limited to age, sex, race, and marital status. Cancer screening can pose some analytic challenges when researchers are assessing the benefits of early detection. In general, the cancers detected by screening will tend to be smaller and slower growing than those detected when they become clinically apparent. If the stage pattern were only seen in cancers with accepted screens (see Exhibit 1 ), then bias would be a possible explanation. The consistency across such a large number of tumors with variable clinical courses makes bias an unlikely explanation. This study did not take into account whether there were differences by race in the underlying rate of cancer incidence. Efforts to prevent cancer through modification of risk factors such as smoking and diet are important. The need for risk-factor reduction, however, does not negate the need to focus on diagnosis at earlier stages as a mechanism to reduce disparities in cancer survival. In spite of the growing array of treatments available for patients diagnosed with metastatic disease, the most effective way to improve cancer survivorship is through early detection. Although efforts to eliminate disparities in cancer treatment are important and necessary, they are not sufficient to eliminate disparities in overall cancer survival if the disparities in the stage at which diagnoses are made remain.  Discussion The overwhelming and consistent disparities in stage of cancer diagnosis and survival rates is a wake-up call. African Americans were diagnosed at significantly more-advanced stages than whites were for cancers for which screening is available and noncontroversial (female breast, colorectal, and cervix). African Americans were more likely to be diagnosed at advanced stages for the most common cancers and relatively rare cancers. The pattern was observed for cancers that are associated with tobacco exposure (for example, lung, bladder, and oral) and radiation exposure (for example, thyroid and sarcoma). Given the wide variety of malignancies evaluated, the consistency of the racial disparities does not seem to be explained by differences in risk factors, screening behavior, or tumor biology. Rather, the factors that are most likely responsible for these differences are related to the patients themselves or the institutional racism inherent in the health care system in which they receive care. Insurance and care-seeking behavior It is likely that patient factors that are differently found in the white population than in the African American population are responsible for part of the observed disparity. Well-recognized candidates include the availability of health insurance and care-seeking behavior. Although SEER does not include information on insurance status, we found that the observed patterns were unchanged when we limited our analysis to people of Medicare age, which suggests that the effects were not purely due to insurance. Others have examined the association between insurance coverage and cancer outcomes. [first name?] Halpern used the National Cancer Database to show an association between lack of insurance and higher stage at cancer diagnosis for twelve common cancers. 12 [first name?] Ward and others have shown that uninsured people and those on Medicaid are less likely to be screened for cancer than people with insurance. This finding would be consistent with the stage and survival patterns seen in Exhibit 1 . Interestingly, Ward reports a stronger association between stage at breast cancer diagnosis and insurance for white women than for African American women. 13 Medicaid enrollment Medicaid enrollment at the time of tumor diagnosis is consistently shown as a risk factor for later stage at diagnosis. 14 [first name?] Perkins examined whether people enrolled in Medicaid in the year prior to cancer diagnosis are diagnosed at later stages and found increased risk of late diagnosis but less than that of people enrolling in Medicaid at diagnosis. 15 Others have found no increased risk of late-stage diagnosis for long-term Medicaid enrollees relative to the insured. 16 Income and education Income and education are strongly and consistently associated with health care use and outcomes. Both within the United States and in countries with universal health insurance, studies have shown that populations with low income and low education are less likely to be screened for cancer and are more likely to be diagnosed at later stages than other populations. 17 Differences in health care providers Studies have shown that African Americans are treated by different health care providers than whites are. 18 These providers may be less knowledgeable about cancer signs, symptoms, and diagnosis; have a less-well-established referral network; or have longer wait times for appointments. Provider education would be a strategy for improving the general quality of care. Both Barrel Gaskin and Beth Virnig argue that a race-neutral approach that emphasizes reducing hospital, provider, or regional variability would be more effective than a strategy that focuses solely on race-based approaches. 19 Patients’ delay in seeking care Studies of delay in cancer diagnosis and treatment identify patient and provider components of delay. Patients may delay seeking care after symptom onset because of fear or denial, lack of a primary care provider, or lack of recognition of the importance of a symptom. 20 Patients might also experience delays in obtaining an initial appointment, obtaining necessary diagnostic testing, or seeing specialists. 21 Several studies point to greater delays experienced by African American cancer patients than their white counterparts. 22 Providers’ role in delayed diagnoses [first name?] Gross and colleagues reported that racial disparities in treatment of breast, colorectal, lung, and prostate cancers for elders did not narrow between 1992 and 2002. 23 Their analysis examined process-of-care measures for diagnosed cancer patients covered by Medicare and found poorer quality of care that was consistent over time. Pay-for-performance (P4P) incentives show some promise of improving specific quality-of-care problems. In general, the strategy seems to be most easily implemented for conditions with relatively clear-cut guidelines and established processes of care such as diabetes or nodal retrieval in association with specific cancer-directed surgeries. It is unclear whether P4P could equalize the quality of diagnostic care associated with the broad range of cancers studied here. Study limitations This study used data from the SEER cancer registries. As such, we could not measure availability of insurance, use of diagnostic technologies, or time from symptom onset to diagnosis. Likewise, for cancers associated with screening tests, we could not determine whether screening was offered or performed. Nor could we measure the presence or absence of specific risk factors such as smoking or diet. Our measurement of demographic factors was limited to age, sex, race, and marital status. Cancer screening can pose some analytic challenges when researchers are assessing the benefits of early detection. In general, the cancers detected by screening will tend to be smaller and slower growing than those detected when they become clinically apparent. If the stage pattern were only seen in cancers with accepted screens (see Exhibit 1 ), then bias would be a possible explanation. The consistency across such a large number of tumors with variable clinical courses makes bias an unlikely explanation. This study did not take into account whether there were differences by race in the underlying rate of cancer incidence. Efforts to prevent cancer through modification of risk factors such as smoking and diet are important. The need for risk-factor reduction, however, does not negate the need to focus on diagnosis at earlier stages as a mechanism to reduce disparities in cancer survival. In spite of the growing array of treatments available for patients diagnosed with metastatic disease, the most effective way to improve cancer survivorship is through early detection. Although efforts to eliminate disparities in cancer treatment are important and necessary, they are not sufficient to eliminate disparities in overall cancer survival if the disparities in the stage at which diagnoses are made remain.  Insurance and care-seeking behavior It is likely that patient factors that are differently found in the white population than in the African American population are responsible for part of the observed disparity. Well-recognized candidates include the availability of health insurance and care-seeking behavior. Although SEER does not include information on insurance status, we found that the observed patterns were unchanged when we limited our analysis to people of Medicare age, which suggests that the effects were not purely due to insurance. Others have examined the association between insurance coverage and cancer outcomes. [first name?] Halpern used the National Cancer Database to show an association between lack of insurance and higher stage at cancer diagnosis for twelve common cancers. 12 [first name?] Ward and others have shown that uninsured people and those on Medicaid are less likely to be screened for cancer than people with insurance. This finding would be consistent with the stage and survival patterns seen in Exhibit 1 . Interestingly, Ward reports a stronger association between stage at breast cancer diagnosis and insurance for white women than for African American women. 13  Insurance and care-seeking behavior It is likely that patient factors that are differently found in the white population than in the African American population are responsible for part of the observed disparity. Well-recognized candidates include the availability of health insurance and care-seeking behavior. Although SEER does not include information on insurance status, we found that the observed patterns were unchanged when we limited our analysis to people of Medicare age, which suggests that the effects were not purely due to insurance. Others have examined the association between insurance coverage and cancer outcomes. [first name?] Halpern used the National Cancer Database to show an association between lack of insurance and higher stage at cancer diagnosis for twelve common cancers. 12 [first name?] Ward and others have shown that uninsured people and those on Medicaid are less likely to be screened for cancer than people with insurance. This finding would be consistent with the stage and survival patterns seen in Exhibit 1 . Interestingly, Ward reports a stronger association between stage at breast cancer diagnosis and insurance for white women than for African American women. 13  Medicaid enrollment Medicaid enrollment at the time of tumor diagnosis is consistently shown as a risk factor for later stage at diagnosis. 14 [first name?] Perkins examined whether people enrolled in Medicaid in the year prior to cancer diagnosis are diagnosed at later stages and found increased risk of late diagnosis but less than that of people enrolling in Medicaid at diagnosis. 15 Others have found no increased risk of late-stage diagnosis for long-term Medicaid enrollees relative to the insured. 16  Medicaid enrollment Medicaid enrollment at the time of tumor diagnosis is consistently shown as a risk factor for later stage at diagnosis. 14 [first name?] Perkins examined whether people enrolled in Medicaid in the year prior to cancer diagnosis are diagnosed at later stages and found increased risk of late diagnosis but less than that of people enrolling in Medicaid at diagnosis. 15 Others have found no increased risk of late-stage diagnosis for long-term Medicaid enrollees relative to the insured. 16  Income and education Income and education are strongly and consistently associated with health care use and outcomes. Both within the United States and in countries with universal health insurance, studies have shown that populations with low income and low education are less likely to be screened for cancer and are more likely to be diagnosed at later stages than other populations. 17  Income and education Income and education are strongly and consistently associated with health care use and outcomes. Both within the United States and in countries with universal health insurance, studies have shown that populations with low income and low education are less likely to be screened for cancer and are more likely to be diagnosed at later stages than other populations. 17  Differences in health care providers Studies have shown that African Americans are treated by different health care providers than whites are. 18 These providers may be less knowledgeable about cancer signs, symptoms, and diagnosis; have a less-well-established referral network; or have longer wait times for appointments. Provider education would be a strategy for improving the general quality of care. Both Barrel Gaskin and Beth Virnig argue that a race-neutral approach that emphasizes reducing hospital, provider, or regional variability would be more effective than a strategy that focuses solely on race-based approaches. 19  Differences in health care providers Studies have shown that African Americans are treated by different health care providers than whites are. 18 These providers may be less knowledgeable about cancer signs, symptoms, and diagnosis; have a less-well-established referral network; or have longer wait times for appointments. Provider education would be a strategy for improving the general quality of care. Both Barrel Gaskin and Beth Virnig argue that a race-neutral approach that emphasizes reducing hospital, provider, or regional variability would be more effective than a strategy that focuses solely on race-based approaches. 19  Patients’ delay in seeking care Studies of delay in cancer diagnosis and treatment identify patient and provider components of delay. Patients may delay seeking care after symptom onset because of fear or denial, lack of a primary care provider, or lack of recognition of the importance of a symptom. 20 Patients might also experience delays in obtaining an initial appointment, obtaining necessary diagnostic testing, or seeing specialists. 21 Several studies point to greater delays experienced by African American cancer patients than their white counterparts. 22  Patients’ delay in seeking care Studies of delay in cancer diagnosis and treatment identify patient and provider components of delay. Patients may delay seeking care after symptom onset because of fear or denial, lack of a primary care provider, or lack of recognition of the importance of a symptom. 20 Patients might also experience delays in obtaining an initial appointment, obtaining necessary diagnostic testing, or seeing specialists. 21 Several studies point to greater delays experienced by African American cancer patients than their white counterparts. 22  Providers’ role in delayed diagnoses [first name?] Gross and colleagues reported that racial disparities in treatment of breast, colorectal, lung, and prostate cancers for elders did not narrow between 1992 and 2002. 23 Their analysis examined process-of-care measures for diagnosed cancer patients covered by Medicare and found poorer quality of care that was consistent over time. Pay-for-performance (P4P) incentives show some promise of improving specific quality-of-care problems. In general, the strategy seems to be most easily implemented for conditions with relatively clear-cut guidelines and established processes of care such as diabetes or nodal retrieval in association with specific cancer-directed surgeries. It is unclear whether P4P could equalize the quality of diagnostic care associated with the broad range of cancers studied here.  Providers’ role in delayed diagnoses [first name?] Gross and colleagues reported that racial disparities in treatment of breast, colorectal, lung, and prostate cancers for elders did not narrow between 1992 and 2002. 23 Their analysis examined process-of-care measures for diagnosed cancer patients covered by Medicare and found poorer quality of care that was consistent over time. Pay-for-performance (P4P) incentives show some promise of improving specific quality-of-care problems. In general, the strategy seems to be most easily implemented for conditions with relatively clear-cut guidelines and established processes of care such as diabetes or nodal retrieval in association with specific cancer-directed surgeries. It is unclear whether P4P could equalize the quality of diagnostic care associated with the broad range of cancers studied here. 