Theories, Models, and Frameworks Related to Sleep-Wake Disturbances in the Context of Cancer The purpose of this article was to review theories, models, and frameworks of sleep disturbances referenced in the cancer literature. Sleep-wake disturbances in cancer are a significant problem that negatively affects quality of life. There is no previously published review of the theories, models, or frameworks used to study sleep-wake disturbances in the context of cancer. Describing existing theories or models and their application in cancer is important to advance knowledge in this area. Two theories and 9 models were identified for review. These have been used to further understand the problem of sleep-wake disturbances as a primary or secondary symptom within the cancer literature. Searches were conducted from January 1, 1970, to July 31, 2008, to find relevant articles using 4 electronic databases: MEDLINE, CINAHL, PubMed, and PsychINFO. On the basis of the search, 73 descriptive or intervention studies were identified and reviewed. Most research was atheoretical, with no identified theory, model, or framework. In studies that did use theory or models, few were applied in more than one study. Although several commonalities across models did emerge, a more comprehensive and widely used model could help guide nursing research to facilitate effective symptom management for this prominent problem in cancer.  Methods Data Sources Searches were conducted to find relevant articles. Using MEDLINE, CINAHL, PubMed, and PsychINFO search engines (n = 4), citations from January 1, 1970, to July 31, 2008, were reviewed. Search terms used alone and in combination included the following: sleep, wake, disturbance, impaired sleep, insomnia, theoretical, conceptual, model, frame-work, adult, cancer , and survivor . We identified articles that included cancer patients undergoing treatment and cancer survivors (had completed treatment). Because these search terms resulted in more than 500 possible publications, articles were excluded from the review if they (1) were drug interventions, (2) focused on pediatric cancer or caregivers of cancer patients, (3) were instrument or questionnaire validation studies, (4) focused on statistical modeling of sleep-wake disturbances, (5) were letters to the editor or single case reports, or (6) reported sleep and wake as an incidental finding. Procedures On the basis of the above, 73 studies were identified and reviewed. We quantified the number of studies with and without an explicitly stated a theory, model, or framework to clearly define these subsets of the studies and avoid assumptions of vague descriptions of theoretical underpinnings. We then summarized studies based on these criteria: (1) discipline of authors; (2) type of study; (3) sample information including ( a ) cancer diagnosis, ( b ) cancer stage, and ( c ) treatment status; (4) study variables; and (5) measures of sleep-wake. We then used ?2 tests to compare these criteria between studies with and without a theory, model, or framework. Next, we evaluated whether sleep was a primary or secondary variable within each theory, model, or framework. We developed a written summary of each theory, model, or framework and identified and compared their key attributes.  Data Sources Searches were conducted to find relevant articles. Using MEDLINE, CINAHL, PubMed, and PsychINFO search engines (n = 4), citations from January 1, 1970, to July 31, 2008, were reviewed. Search terms used alone and in combination included the following: sleep, wake, disturbance, impaired sleep, insomnia, theoretical, conceptual, model, frame-work, adult, cancer , and survivor . We identified articles that included cancer patients undergoing treatment and cancer survivors (had completed treatment). Because these search terms resulted in more than 500 possible publications, articles were excluded from the review if they (1) were drug interventions, (2) focused on pediatric cancer or caregivers of cancer patients, (3) were instrument or questionnaire validation studies, (4) focused on statistical modeling of sleep-wake disturbances, (5) were letters to the editor or single case reports, or (6) reported sleep and wake as an incidental finding.  Procedures On the basis of the above, 73 studies were identified and reviewed. We quantified the number of studies with and without an explicitly stated a theory, model, or framework to clearly define these subsets of the studies and avoid assumptions of vague descriptions of theoretical underpinnings. We then summarized studies based on these criteria: (1) discipline of authors; (2) type of study; (3) sample information including ( a ) cancer diagnosis, ( b ) cancer stage, and ( c ) treatment status; (4) study variables; and (5) measures of sleep-wake. We then used ?2 tests to compare these criteria between studies with and without a theory, model, or framework. Next, we evaluated whether sleep was a primary or secondary variable within each theory, model, or framework. We developed a written summary of each theory, model, or framework and identified and compared their key attributes.  Results Quantification, Summary, and Comparison of Studies With and Without Explicitly Described Theories, Models, or Frameworks Of the 73 studies, 51 (70%) did not contain a reported theory, model, or framework. 3 , 5 , 7 , 9 , 11 , 14 , 22 – 66 These studies were considered atheoretical because there was no explicit description of a theory, model, or framework that had guided the study. These 51 studies are listed alphabetically in Table 1 . The remaining 22 (30%) articles included a description of a theory, model, or framework that guided the study. 1 , 2 , 6 , 12 , 15 , 67 – 82 These 22 studies are listed alphabetically in Table 2 . Tables 1 and 2 provide a general summary of all studies based on our review criteria. Comparisons between the 51 atheoretical and 22 theoretically based studies are provided in Table 3 . ?2 Tests of differences indicated that studies that included a theory, model, or framework were significantly (1) more likely to include authors from the discipline of nursing and (2) less likely to have included wrist actigraphy as an outcome measure. Summary and Comparison of Theories, Models, and Frameworks Table 4 contains a summary and comparison of theories, models, and frameworks. There were 2 nursing theories 83 , 84 and 9 different conceptual models. 67 , 71 , 72 , 85 – 93 Three conceptual models focused on sleep-wake disturbances as a primary variable of interest. Two theories and 6 additional models included sleep-wake disturbances as one of several variables. These 8 latter theories/models tended to include sleep-wake disturbances as a secondary variable or as one variable within a cluster of several symptoms (eg, pain, fatigue, and sleep-wake disturbances). A description of each theory and model follows, starting with ones that included sleep wake disturbances as a primary variable and concluding with those that included it as a secondary variable. Models With Sleep-Wake Disturbances as a Primary Variable BIOBEHAVIORAL MODEL OF ALTERED DYSREGULATION IN CIRCADIAN SYSTEMS The Biobehavioral Model of Altered Dysregulation in Circadian Systems proposes mechanisms that contribute to sleep-wake disturbances manifested as circadian dysregulation. 71 The model postulates that psychological functioning (stress, depression, mood states) have direct-reciprocal relationships with the endocrine system, autonomic nervous system, and sleep system. Dysregulation can be attributed to one or more of these biological systems. Dysregulation can be measured by sleep duration and sleep quality, as well as by cortisol, melatonin, and autonomic nervous system activity. The ultimate outcome of this dysregulation is poor quality of life, impaired well-being, poor treatment adherence, fatigue, disease progression, and poorer survival. 71 This model was included in one article. 71 SPIELMAN’S THREE-FACTOR INSOMNIA MODEL Spielman’s Three-Factor Insomnia Model proposes interactions among predisposing, precipitating, and perpetuating factors of insomnia. 94 This cognitive-behavioral model is also known as the 3P model. The model includes both stress and behavioral factors to explain the evolution of insomnia and describe how individual differences cause initiation of acute disturbances in sleep that become chronic. The model proposes that people with insomnia have predisposing factors or traits that, when combined with life stress (precipitating factors), lead to chronic insomnia if there are maladaptive coping strategies (perpetuating factors). 86 When a person with predisposing factors of insomnia experiences one or more precipitating factors, the result can be acute episodes of insomnia. 94 Perpetuating factors are behaviors used to compensate for the loss of sleep. This model was included in 2 articles. 67 , 73 TWO-PROCESS MODEL OF SLEEP REGULATION The Two-Process Model of Sleep Regulation provides an understanding of the physiological mechanisms that drive sleep and wakefulness. 88 The model has changed over time, as researchers were able to pinpoint mechanisms or processes of sleep in relation to the 2 major sleep cycles of non–rapid eye movement and rapid eye movement sleep. Visually, the model is a wavelike structure that shows the relationship between 2 physiological processes of sleep regulation, process S and process C. The homeostatic process (process S) increases during the awake state (drives the need for sleep) and decreases during sleep (decreases the need for sleep). Process S is considered the basic mechanism of sleep regulation. If there is a deficit of sleep, process S elicits a compensatory increase in the duration and intensity of sleep. This produces a sleepy feeling during wakefulness, thus driving the need or desire to correct this deficit by falling asleep. The circadian process (process C) determines alterations of high and low sleep propensity that are independent of prior sleeping-waking (the timing to sleep and wakefulness), which determines the onset and end of sleep. 88 Process C is directed by a clocklike mechanism that is not related to prior levels of sleep or the wake-like process S. Process C is the mechanism that helps the body stay asleep. It is driven by a pacemaker found in the brain called the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nuclei, which works in conjunction with neurotransmitters that facilitate sleep and thermoregulatory processes. The interaction of process S and process C has been used to predict the timing and duration of sleep, structure of sleep, and changes in daytime wakefulness. 88 This model was adapted for use in one article. 1 Theories or Models With Sleep Disturbances as a Secondary or Clustered Variable MODEL OF QUALITY OF LIFE The Model of Quality of Life identifies 4 domains that define an individual’s quality of life. Developed within the discipline of nursing, the model has been used to describe the quality of life in cancer patients. The 4 domains include physical well-being (eg, sleep), psychological well-being (eg, depression), social well-being (eg, family distress), and spiritual well-being (hopefulness). 90 – 92 , 95 , 96 Each domain is stated to act singly or in combination with the other domains and ultimately impact quality of life. The specific symptoms or factors within each quality of life domain have been further studied in various cancers such as breast cancer (see the study of Ferrell et al 90 ). For this model, sleep is depicted as a physical domain that could be singly or combined with other domain factors that impact quality of life. 90 This model was included in one article. 12 MODEL OF SYMPTOM MANAGEMENT The Model of Symptom Management was a nursing model developed by nursing faculty from the University of California San Francisco’s Center for Symptom Management. 89 The conceptual model is based on the premise that a symptom is a subjective experience of a biophysical function, cognition, or sensation. Starting with the symptom experience, 3 inner relationships include the perception of the symptom, the evaluation of the symptom, and the response of the symptom, which is related back to the perception. The response then includes internal feelings, behaviors, or thoughts related to the perceived or actual presence of a health problem. Symptom management strategies are actions that overcome or stop the negative outcomes from the symptoms through medical or self-care interventions such as assessment and treatment. The outcome of the symptoms is a complex construct that includes 10 possible dimensions. 89 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances can be a symptom or an outcome. This model was included in 2 articles. 6 , 12 NEUROENDOCRINE-BASED REGULATORY FATIGUE MODEL The Neuroendocrine-Based Regulatory Model was developed to describe mechanisms of fatigue in chronic illness. 93 Although thought to be a multidimensional concept, the model proposes that fatigue is strongly influenced by endocrine-based bio-chemicals such as tryptophan and melatonin. Any stress on the endocrine system creates biological effects that serve as markers for fatigue. 93 Antecedents of fatigue are stated to be either physiological (altered circadian rhythm of sleep/wake) or psychological (depression). The model proposes interventions that act as a mediator to reduce the impact of the antecedents on the endocrine system and improve fatigue. This model was used in 2 articles. 69 , 80 OREM’S SELF-CARE DEFICIT THEORY OF NURSING Orem’s Self-care Deficit Theory of Nursing was developed in 1985 and focuses on the ability of an individual to perform self-care activities (termed self-care agency ) to maintain life, health, and well-being or the ability to care for others (termed dependent-care agency ). 20 , 84 The nursing role within the model is to assess the individual’s ability to perform self-care through a complete assessment of the current health state and symptoms being experienced by the individual. The model suggests that nurses provide 3 types of care: (1) total compensatory where the nurse provides total care when the individual cannot perform any self-care, (2) partial compensatory where the individual and nurse share self-care activities, and (3) supportive care or educational care where the nurse facilitates self-care through educating the individual with the tools to make decisions or learn skills needed for total self-care. 20 , 84 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances are symptoms that can result from cancer treatment that potentially impact self-care. This theory was used in 2 articles. 82 , 97 PIPER INTEGRATED FATIGUE MODEL The Piper Integrated Fatigue Model has been used to study fatigue in relation to sleep disturbances in cancer patients. 15 The mid-range nursing model by Piper et al proposes a variety of factors as influencing subjective and objective manifestations of fatigue (see Piper et al 85 for the figure). Fatigue manifestations are divided into physiological, biochemical, and behavioral components. These components include physiological muscle fatigue, changes in behavioral work activity, and/or symptoms of depression, and they can occur in combination as fatigue becomes a chronic problem. 85 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances are one of several factors influencing fatigue. This model was included in 6 articles. 15 , 68 , 70 , 76 , 78 , 79 PSYCHOBIOLOGICAL HOT FLASH MODEL This model depicts sleep disturbances as an outcome of meno-pausal hot flashes. It shows relationships among physiological hot flashes, perceived hot flashes, and the reporting of hot flash severity and bother, and it proposes that hot flashes contribute to a possible cluster of symptoms that include sleep-wake disturbances, mood disturbances, and changes in affect, which ultimately impact quality of life. This model was included in one article. 72 ROY ADAPTATION MODEL Roy Adaptation Model is a complex nursing model postulating that human beings have the ability to adapt to changes in the environment. 87 Adaptation or coping with environmental change occurs through maintaining 4 subsystems: (1) physiologic needs, (2) self-concept, (3) interdependence, and (4) role function. For nursing, the goal is to use this model to guide health promotion and adaptation to illness. The model postulates that focal, contextual, or residual stimuli can be manipulated to promote adaptation based on stage of personal development, family development, and culture. 87 Adaptation responses can be effective or ineffective depending on the mode of adaptation. Effective adaptation responses are thought to promote integrity of the human system. 87 In this model, sleep can be conceptualized as a physiological mode of adaptation alone or in combination with other outcomes. 75 This model was included in one article. 75 THEORY OF UNPLEASANT SYMPTOMS The Theory of Unpleasant Symptoms 83 is a mid-range nursing theory that has been used to describe sleep as it interacts with other symptoms. The theory has 3 interrelated components: (1) symptoms that the person experiences, (2) influencing factors that cause or affect the nature of the symptoms, and (3) consequences of the symptom experience. 83 Symptoms are the main component of the model and are measured in terms of intensity, quality, timing, and distress. The model posits that symptoms can occur alone or simultaneously with other symptoms and suggests that certain symptoms can catalyze other symptoms (see Figure 2 in the study of Lenz et al 83 ). Influencing factors are the physiological, psychological, and situational factors influenced by the symptoms. The third component is the consequence, defined as the impact of symptoms on an individual’s ability to perform functional or cognitive activities. Functional performance includes activities such as physical, daily living, social, interactive, and role performance (eg, work) activities. The interaction among the 3 major concepts of symptoms, influencing factors, and consequences is reciprocal and can change as the symptom experience changes. This suggests that symptoms can moderate or mediate the relationship between influencing factors and performance. 83 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances can be one of many symptoms or an influencing factor affecting other symptoms. This model was included in 2 articles. 2 , 74  Results Quantification, Summary, and Comparison of Studies With and Without Explicitly Described Theories, Models, or Frameworks Of the 73 studies, 51 (70%) did not contain a reported theory, model, or framework. 3 , 5 , 7 , 9 , 11 , 14 , 22 – 66 These studies were considered atheoretical because there was no explicit description of a theory, model, or framework that had guided the study. These 51 studies are listed alphabetically in Table 1 . The remaining 22 (30%) articles included a description of a theory, model, or framework that guided the study. 1 , 2 , 6 , 12 , 15 , 67 – 82 These 22 studies are listed alphabetically in Table 2 . Tables 1 and 2 provide a general summary of all studies based on our review criteria. Comparisons between the 51 atheoretical and 22 theoretically based studies are provided in Table 3 . ?2 Tests of differences indicated that studies that included a theory, model, or framework were significantly (1) more likely to include authors from the discipline of nursing and (2) less likely to have included wrist actigraphy as an outcome measure. Summary and Comparison of Theories, Models, and Frameworks Table 4 contains a summary and comparison of theories, models, and frameworks. There were 2 nursing theories 83 , 84 and 9 different conceptual models. 67 , 71 , 72 , 85 – 93 Three conceptual models focused on sleep-wake disturbances as a primary variable of interest. Two theories and 6 additional models included sleep-wake disturbances as one of several variables. These 8 latter theories/models tended to include sleep-wake disturbances as a secondary variable or as one variable within a cluster of several symptoms (eg, pain, fatigue, and sleep-wake disturbances). A description of each theory and model follows, starting with ones that included sleep wake disturbances as a primary variable and concluding with those that included it as a secondary variable. Models With Sleep-Wake Disturbances as a Primary Variable BIOBEHAVIORAL MODEL OF ALTERED DYSREGULATION IN CIRCADIAN SYSTEMS The Biobehavioral Model of Altered Dysregulation in Circadian Systems proposes mechanisms that contribute to sleep-wake disturbances manifested as circadian dysregulation. 71 The model postulates that psychological functioning (stress, depression, mood states) have direct-reciprocal relationships with the endocrine system, autonomic nervous system, and sleep system. Dysregulation can be attributed to one or more of these biological systems. Dysregulation can be measured by sleep duration and sleep quality, as well as by cortisol, melatonin, and autonomic nervous system activity. The ultimate outcome of this dysregulation is poor quality of life, impaired well-being, poor treatment adherence, fatigue, disease progression, and poorer survival. 71 This model was included in one article. 71 SPIELMAN’S THREE-FACTOR INSOMNIA MODEL Spielman’s Three-Factor Insomnia Model proposes interactions among predisposing, precipitating, and perpetuating factors of insomnia. 94 This cognitive-behavioral model is also known as the 3P model. The model includes both stress and behavioral factors to explain the evolution of insomnia and describe how individual differences cause initiation of acute disturbances in sleep that become chronic. The model proposes that people with insomnia have predisposing factors or traits that, when combined with life stress (precipitating factors), lead to chronic insomnia if there are maladaptive coping strategies (perpetuating factors). 86 When a person with predisposing factors of insomnia experiences one or more precipitating factors, the result can be acute episodes of insomnia. 94 Perpetuating factors are behaviors used to compensate for the loss of sleep. This model was included in 2 articles. 67 , 73 TWO-PROCESS MODEL OF SLEEP REGULATION The Two-Process Model of Sleep Regulation provides an understanding of the physiological mechanisms that drive sleep and wakefulness. 88 The model has changed over time, as researchers were able to pinpoint mechanisms or processes of sleep in relation to the 2 major sleep cycles of non–rapid eye movement and rapid eye movement sleep. Visually, the model is a wavelike structure that shows the relationship between 2 physiological processes of sleep regulation, process S and process C. The homeostatic process (process S) increases during the awake state (drives the need for sleep) and decreases during sleep (decreases the need for sleep). Process S is considered the basic mechanism of sleep regulation. If there is a deficit of sleep, process S elicits a compensatory increase in the duration and intensity of sleep. This produces a sleepy feeling during wakefulness, thus driving the need or desire to correct this deficit by falling asleep. The circadian process (process C) determines alterations of high and low sleep propensity that are independent of prior sleeping-waking (the timing to sleep and wakefulness), which determines the onset and end of sleep. 88 Process C is directed by a clocklike mechanism that is not related to prior levels of sleep or the wake-like process S. Process C is the mechanism that helps the body stay asleep. It is driven by a pacemaker found in the brain called the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nuclei, which works in conjunction with neurotransmitters that facilitate sleep and thermoregulatory processes. The interaction of process S and process C has been used to predict the timing and duration of sleep, structure of sleep, and changes in daytime wakefulness. 88 This model was adapted for use in one article. 1 Theories or Models With Sleep Disturbances as a Secondary or Clustered Variable MODEL OF QUALITY OF LIFE The Model of Quality of Life identifies 4 domains that define an individual’s quality of life. Developed within the discipline of nursing, the model has been used to describe the quality of life in cancer patients. The 4 domains include physical well-being (eg, sleep), psychological well-being (eg, depression), social well-being (eg, family distress), and spiritual well-being (hopefulness). 90 – 92 , 95 , 96 Each domain is stated to act singly or in combination with the other domains and ultimately impact quality of life. The specific symptoms or factors within each quality of life domain have been further studied in various cancers such as breast cancer (see the study of Ferrell et al 90 ). For this model, sleep is depicted as a physical domain that could be singly or combined with other domain factors that impact quality of life. 90 This model was included in one article. 12 MODEL OF SYMPTOM MANAGEMENT The Model of Symptom Management was a nursing model developed by nursing faculty from the University of California San Francisco’s Center for Symptom Management. 89 The conceptual model is based on the premise that a symptom is a subjective experience of a biophysical function, cognition, or sensation. Starting with the symptom experience, 3 inner relationships include the perception of the symptom, the evaluation of the symptom, and the response of the symptom, which is related back to the perception. The response then includes internal feelings, behaviors, or thoughts related to the perceived or actual presence of a health problem. Symptom management strategies are actions that overcome or stop the negative outcomes from the symptoms through medical or self-care interventions such as assessment and treatment. The outcome of the symptoms is a complex construct that includes 10 possible dimensions. 89 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances can be a symptom or an outcome. This model was included in 2 articles. 6 , 12 NEUROENDOCRINE-BASED REGULATORY FATIGUE MODEL The Neuroendocrine-Based Regulatory Model was developed to describe mechanisms of fatigue in chronic illness. 93 Although thought to be a multidimensional concept, the model proposes that fatigue is strongly influenced by endocrine-based bio-chemicals such as tryptophan and melatonin. Any stress on the endocrine system creates biological effects that serve as markers for fatigue. 93 Antecedents of fatigue are stated to be either physiological (altered circadian rhythm of sleep/wake) or psychological (depression). The model proposes interventions that act as a mediator to reduce the impact of the antecedents on the endocrine system and improve fatigue. This model was used in 2 articles. 69 , 80 OREM’S SELF-CARE DEFICIT THEORY OF NURSING Orem’s Self-care Deficit Theory of Nursing was developed in 1985 and focuses on the ability of an individual to perform self-care activities (termed self-care agency ) to maintain life, health, and well-being or the ability to care for others (termed dependent-care agency ). 20 , 84 The nursing role within the model is to assess the individual’s ability to perform self-care through a complete assessment of the current health state and symptoms being experienced by the individual. The model suggests that nurses provide 3 types of care: (1) total compensatory where the nurse provides total care when the individual cannot perform any self-care, (2) partial compensatory where the individual and nurse share self-care activities, and (3) supportive care or educational care where the nurse facilitates self-care through educating the individual with the tools to make decisions or learn skills needed for total self-care. 20 , 84 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances are symptoms that can result from cancer treatment that potentially impact self-care. This theory was used in 2 articles. 82 , 97 PIPER INTEGRATED FATIGUE MODEL The Piper Integrated Fatigue Model has been used to study fatigue in relation to sleep disturbances in cancer patients. 15 The mid-range nursing model by Piper et al proposes a variety of factors as influencing subjective and objective manifestations of fatigue (see Piper et al 85 for the figure). Fatigue manifestations are divided into physiological, biochemical, and behavioral components. These components include physiological muscle fatigue, changes in behavioral work activity, and/or symptoms of depression, and they can occur in combination as fatigue becomes a chronic problem. 85 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances are one of several factors influencing fatigue. This model was included in 6 articles. 15 , 68 , 70 , 76 , 78 , 79 PSYCHOBIOLOGICAL HOT FLASH MODEL This model depicts sleep disturbances as an outcome of meno-pausal hot flashes. It shows relationships among physiological hot flashes, perceived hot flashes, and the reporting of hot flash severity and bother, and it proposes that hot flashes contribute to a possible cluster of symptoms that include sleep-wake disturbances, mood disturbances, and changes in affect, which ultimately impact quality of life. This model was included in one article. 72 ROY ADAPTATION MODEL Roy Adaptation Model is a complex nursing model postulating that human beings have the ability to adapt to changes in the environment. 87 Adaptation or coping with environmental change occurs through maintaining 4 subsystems: (1) physiologic needs, (2) self-concept, (3) interdependence, and (4) role function. For nursing, the goal is to use this model to guide health promotion and adaptation to illness. The model postulates that focal, contextual, or residual stimuli can be manipulated to promote adaptation based on stage of personal development, family development, and culture. 87 Adaptation responses can be effective or ineffective depending on the mode of adaptation. Effective adaptation responses are thought to promote integrity of the human system. 87 In this model, sleep can be conceptualized as a physiological mode of adaptation alone or in combination with other outcomes. 75 This model was included in one article. 75 THEORY OF UNPLEASANT SYMPTOMS The Theory of Unpleasant Symptoms 83 is a mid-range nursing theory that has been used to describe sleep as it interacts with other symptoms. The theory has 3 interrelated components: (1) symptoms that the person experiences, (2) influencing factors that cause or affect the nature of the symptoms, and (3) consequences of the symptom experience. 83 Symptoms are the main component of the model and are measured in terms of intensity, quality, timing, and distress. The model posits that symptoms can occur alone or simultaneously with other symptoms and suggests that certain symptoms can catalyze other symptoms (see Figure 2 in the study of Lenz et al 83 ). Influencing factors are the physiological, psychological, and situational factors influenced by the symptoms. The third component is the consequence, defined as the impact of symptoms on an individual’s ability to perform functional or cognitive activities. Functional performance includes activities such as physical, daily living, social, interactive, and role performance (eg, work) activities. The interaction among the 3 major concepts of symptoms, influencing factors, and consequences is reciprocal and can change as the symptom experience changes. This suggests that symptoms can moderate or mediate the relationship between influencing factors and performance. 83 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances can be one of many symptoms or an influencing factor affecting other symptoms. This model was included in 2 articles. 2 , 74  Quantification, Summary, and Comparison of Studies With and Without Explicitly Described Theories, Models, or Frameworks Of the 73 studies, 51 (70%) did not contain a reported theory, model, or framework. 3 , 5 , 7 , 9 , 11 , 14 , 22 – 66 These studies were considered atheoretical because there was no explicit description of a theory, model, or framework that had guided the study. These 51 studies are listed alphabetically in Table 1 . The remaining 22 (30%) articles included a description of a theory, model, or framework that guided the study. 1 , 2 , 6 , 12 , 15 , 67 – 82 These 22 studies are listed alphabetically in Table 2 . Tables 1 and 2 provide a general summary of all studies based on our review criteria. Comparisons between the 51 atheoretical and 22 theoretically based studies are provided in Table 3 . ?2 Tests of differences indicated that studies that included a theory, model, or framework were significantly (1) more likely to include authors from the discipline of nursing and (2) less likely to have included wrist actigraphy as an outcome measure.  Quantification, Summary, and Comparison of Studies With and Without Explicitly Described Theories, Models, or Frameworks Of the 73 studies, 51 (70%) did not contain a reported theory, model, or framework. 3 , 5 , 7 , 9 , 11 , 14 , 22 – 66 These studies were considered atheoretical because there was no explicit description of a theory, model, or framework that had guided the study. These 51 studies are listed alphabetically in Table 1 . The remaining 22 (30%) articles included a description of a theory, model, or framework that guided the study. 1 , 2 , 6 , 12 , 15 , 67 – 82 These 22 studies are listed alphabetically in Table 2 . Tables 1 and 2 provide a general summary of all studies based on our review criteria. Comparisons between the 51 atheoretical and 22 theoretically based studies are provided in Table 3 . ?2 Tests of differences indicated that studies that included a theory, model, or framework were significantly (1) more likely to include authors from the discipline of nursing and (2) less likely to have included wrist actigraphy as an outcome measure.  Summary and Comparison of Theories, Models, and Frameworks Table 4 contains a summary and comparison of theories, models, and frameworks. There were 2 nursing theories 83 , 84 and 9 different conceptual models. 67 , 71 , 72 , 85 – 93 Three conceptual models focused on sleep-wake disturbances as a primary variable of interest. Two theories and 6 additional models included sleep-wake disturbances as one of several variables. These 8 latter theories/models tended to include sleep-wake disturbances as a secondary variable or as one variable within a cluster of several symptoms (eg, pain, fatigue, and sleep-wake disturbances). A description of each theory and model follows, starting with ones that included sleep wake disturbances as a primary variable and concluding with those that included it as a secondary variable.  Summary and Comparison of Theories, Models, and Frameworks Table 4 contains a summary and comparison of theories, models, and frameworks. There were 2 nursing theories 83 , 84 and 9 different conceptual models. 67 , 71 , 72 , 85 – 93 Three conceptual models focused on sleep-wake disturbances as a primary variable of interest. Two theories and 6 additional models included sleep-wake disturbances as one of several variables. These 8 latter theories/models tended to include sleep-wake disturbances as a secondary variable or as one variable within a cluster of several symptoms (eg, pain, fatigue, and sleep-wake disturbances). A description of each theory and model follows, starting with ones that included sleep wake disturbances as a primary variable and concluding with those that included it as a secondary variable.  Models With Sleep-Wake Disturbances as a Primary Variable BIOBEHAVIORAL MODEL OF ALTERED DYSREGULATION IN CIRCADIAN SYSTEMS The Biobehavioral Model of Altered Dysregulation in Circadian Systems proposes mechanisms that contribute to sleep-wake disturbances manifested as circadian dysregulation. 71 The model postulates that psychological functioning (stress, depression, mood states) have direct-reciprocal relationships with the endocrine system, autonomic nervous system, and sleep system. Dysregulation can be attributed to one or more of these biological systems. Dysregulation can be measured by sleep duration and sleep quality, as well as by cortisol, melatonin, and autonomic nervous system activity. The ultimate outcome of this dysregulation is poor quality of life, impaired well-being, poor treatment adherence, fatigue, disease progression, and poorer survival. 71 This model was included in one article. 71 SPIELMAN’S THREE-FACTOR INSOMNIA MODEL Spielman’s Three-Factor Insomnia Model proposes interactions among predisposing, precipitating, and perpetuating factors of insomnia. 94 This cognitive-behavioral model is also known as the 3P model. The model includes both stress and behavioral factors to explain the evolution of insomnia and describe how individual differences cause initiation of acute disturbances in sleep that become chronic. The model proposes that people with insomnia have predisposing factors or traits that, when combined with life stress (precipitating factors), lead to chronic insomnia if there are maladaptive coping strategies (perpetuating factors). 86 When a person with predisposing factors of insomnia experiences one or more precipitating factors, the result can be acute episodes of insomnia. 94 Perpetuating factors are behaviors used to compensate for the loss of sleep. This model was included in 2 articles. 67 , 73 TWO-PROCESS MODEL OF SLEEP REGULATION The Two-Process Model of Sleep Regulation provides an understanding of the physiological mechanisms that drive sleep and wakefulness. 88 The model has changed over time, as researchers were able to pinpoint mechanisms or processes of sleep in relation to the 2 major sleep cycles of non–rapid eye movement and rapid eye movement sleep. Visually, the model is a wavelike structure that shows the relationship between 2 physiological processes of sleep regulation, process S and process C. The homeostatic process (process S) increases during the awake state (drives the need for sleep) and decreases during sleep (decreases the need for sleep). Process S is considered the basic mechanism of sleep regulation. If there is a deficit of sleep, process S elicits a compensatory increase in the duration and intensity of sleep. This produces a sleepy feeling during wakefulness, thus driving the need or desire to correct this deficit by falling asleep. The circadian process (process C) determines alterations of high and low sleep propensity that are independent of prior sleeping-waking (the timing to sleep and wakefulness), which determines the onset and end of sleep. 88 Process C is directed by a clocklike mechanism that is not related to prior levels of sleep or the wake-like process S. Process C is the mechanism that helps the body stay asleep. It is driven by a pacemaker found in the brain called the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nuclei, which works in conjunction with neurotransmitters that facilitate sleep and thermoregulatory processes. The interaction of process S and process C has been used to predict the timing and duration of sleep, structure of sleep, and changes in daytime wakefulness. 88 This model was adapted for use in one article. 1  Models With Sleep-Wake Disturbances as a Primary Variable BIOBEHAVIORAL MODEL OF ALTERED DYSREGULATION IN CIRCADIAN SYSTEMS The Biobehavioral Model of Altered Dysregulation in Circadian Systems proposes mechanisms that contribute to sleep-wake disturbances manifested as circadian dysregulation. 71 The model postulates that psychological functioning (stress, depression, mood states) have direct-reciprocal relationships with the endocrine system, autonomic nervous system, and sleep system. Dysregulation can be attributed to one or more of these biological systems. Dysregulation can be measured by sleep duration and sleep quality, as well as by cortisol, melatonin, and autonomic nervous system activity. The ultimate outcome of this dysregulation is poor quality of life, impaired well-being, poor treatment adherence, fatigue, disease progression, and poorer survival. 71 This model was included in one article. 71 SPIELMAN’S THREE-FACTOR INSOMNIA MODEL Spielman’s Three-Factor Insomnia Model proposes interactions among predisposing, precipitating, and perpetuating factors of insomnia. 94 This cognitive-behavioral model is also known as the 3P model. The model includes both stress and behavioral factors to explain the evolution of insomnia and describe how individual differences cause initiation of acute disturbances in sleep that become chronic. The model proposes that people with insomnia have predisposing factors or traits that, when combined with life stress (precipitating factors), lead to chronic insomnia if there are maladaptive coping strategies (perpetuating factors). 86 When a person with predisposing factors of insomnia experiences one or more precipitating factors, the result can be acute episodes of insomnia. 94 Perpetuating factors are behaviors used to compensate for the loss of sleep. This model was included in 2 articles. 67 , 73 TWO-PROCESS MODEL OF SLEEP REGULATION The Two-Process Model of Sleep Regulation provides an understanding of the physiological mechanisms that drive sleep and wakefulness. 88 The model has changed over time, as researchers were able to pinpoint mechanisms or processes of sleep in relation to the 2 major sleep cycles of non–rapid eye movement and rapid eye movement sleep. Visually, the model is a wavelike structure that shows the relationship between 2 physiological processes of sleep regulation, process S and process C. The homeostatic process (process S) increases during the awake state (drives the need for sleep) and decreases during sleep (decreases the need for sleep). Process S is considered the basic mechanism of sleep regulation. If there is a deficit of sleep, process S elicits a compensatory increase in the duration and intensity of sleep. This produces a sleepy feeling during wakefulness, thus driving the need or desire to correct this deficit by falling asleep. The circadian process (process C) determines alterations of high and low sleep propensity that are independent of prior sleeping-waking (the timing to sleep and wakefulness), which determines the onset and end of sleep. 88 Process C is directed by a clocklike mechanism that is not related to prior levels of sleep or the wake-like process S. Process C is the mechanism that helps the body stay asleep. It is driven by a pacemaker found in the brain called the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nuclei, which works in conjunction with neurotransmitters that facilitate sleep and thermoregulatory processes. The interaction of process S and process C has been used to predict the timing and duration of sleep, structure of sleep, and changes in daytime wakefulness. 88 This model was adapted for use in one article. 1  BIOBEHAVIORAL MODEL OF ALTERED DYSREGULATION IN CIRCADIAN SYSTEMS The Biobehavioral Model of Altered Dysregulation in Circadian Systems proposes mechanisms that contribute to sleep-wake disturbances manifested as circadian dysregulation. 71 The model postulates that psychological functioning (stress, depression, mood states) have direct-reciprocal relationships with the endocrine system, autonomic nervous system, and sleep system. Dysregulation can be attributed to one or more of these biological systems. Dysregulation can be measured by sleep duration and sleep quality, as well as by cortisol, melatonin, and autonomic nervous system activity. The ultimate outcome of this dysregulation is poor quality of life, impaired well-being, poor treatment adherence, fatigue, disease progression, and poorer survival. 71 This model was included in one article. 71  BIOBEHAVIORAL MODEL OF ALTERED DYSREGULATION IN CIRCADIAN SYSTEMS The Biobehavioral Model of Altered Dysregulation in Circadian Systems proposes mechanisms that contribute to sleep-wake disturbances manifested as circadian dysregulation. 71 The model postulates that psychological functioning (stress, depression, mood states) have direct-reciprocal relationships with the endocrine system, autonomic nervous system, and sleep system. Dysregulation can be attributed to one or more of these biological systems. Dysregulation can be measured by sleep duration and sleep quality, as well as by cortisol, melatonin, and autonomic nervous system activity. The ultimate outcome of this dysregulation is poor quality of life, impaired well-being, poor treatment adherence, fatigue, disease progression, and poorer survival. 71 This model was included in one article. 71  SPIELMAN’S THREE-FACTOR INSOMNIA MODEL Spielman’s Three-Factor Insomnia Model proposes interactions among predisposing, precipitating, and perpetuating factors of insomnia. 94 This cognitive-behavioral model is also known as the 3P model. The model includes both stress and behavioral factors to explain the evolution of insomnia and describe how individual differences cause initiation of acute disturbances in sleep that become chronic. The model proposes that people with insomnia have predisposing factors or traits that, when combined with life stress (precipitating factors), lead to chronic insomnia if there are maladaptive coping strategies (perpetuating factors). 86 When a person with predisposing factors of insomnia experiences one or more precipitating factors, the result can be acute episodes of insomnia. 94 Perpetuating factors are behaviors used to compensate for the loss of sleep. This model was included in 2 articles. 67 , 73  SPIELMAN’S THREE-FACTOR INSOMNIA MODEL Spielman’s Three-Factor Insomnia Model proposes interactions among predisposing, precipitating, and perpetuating factors of insomnia. 94 This cognitive-behavioral model is also known as the 3P model. The model includes both stress and behavioral factors to explain the evolution of insomnia and describe how individual differences cause initiation of acute disturbances in sleep that become chronic. The model proposes that people with insomnia have predisposing factors or traits that, when combined with life stress (precipitating factors), lead to chronic insomnia if there are maladaptive coping strategies (perpetuating factors). 86 When a person with predisposing factors of insomnia experiences one or more precipitating factors, the result can be acute episodes of insomnia. 94 Perpetuating factors are behaviors used to compensate for the loss of sleep. This model was included in 2 articles. 67 , 73  TWO-PROCESS MODEL OF SLEEP REGULATION The Two-Process Model of Sleep Regulation provides an understanding of the physiological mechanisms that drive sleep and wakefulness. 88 The model has changed over time, as researchers were able to pinpoint mechanisms or processes of sleep in relation to the 2 major sleep cycles of non–rapid eye movement and rapid eye movement sleep. Visually, the model is a wavelike structure that shows the relationship between 2 physiological processes of sleep regulation, process S and process C. The homeostatic process (process S) increases during the awake state (drives the need for sleep) and decreases during sleep (decreases the need for sleep). Process S is considered the basic mechanism of sleep regulation. If there is a deficit of sleep, process S elicits a compensatory increase in the duration and intensity of sleep. This produces a sleepy feeling during wakefulness, thus driving the need or desire to correct this deficit by falling asleep. The circadian process (process C) determines alterations of high and low sleep propensity that are independent of prior sleeping-waking (the timing to sleep and wakefulness), which determines the onset and end of sleep. 88 Process C is directed by a clocklike mechanism that is not related to prior levels of sleep or the wake-like process S. Process C is the mechanism that helps the body stay asleep. It is driven by a pacemaker found in the brain called the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nuclei, which works in conjunction with neurotransmitters that facilitate sleep and thermoregulatory processes. The interaction of process S and process C has been used to predict the timing and duration of sleep, structure of sleep, and changes in daytime wakefulness. 88 This model was adapted for use in one article. 1  TWO-PROCESS MODEL OF SLEEP REGULATION The Two-Process Model of Sleep Regulation provides an understanding of the physiological mechanisms that drive sleep and wakefulness. 88 The model has changed over time, as researchers were able to pinpoint mechanisms or processes of sleep in relation to the 2 major sleep cycles of non–rapid eye movement and rapid eye movement sleep. Visually, the model is a wavelike structure that shows the relationship between 2 physiological processes of sleep regulation, process S and process C. The homeostatic process (process S) increases during the awake state (drives the need for sleep) and decreases during sleep (decreases the need for sleep). Process S is considered the basic mechanism of sleep regulation. If there is a deficit of sleep, process S elicits a compensatory increase in the duration and intensity of sleep. This produces a sleepy feeling during wakefulness, thus driving the need or desire to correct this deficit by falling asleep. The circadian process (process C) determines alterations of high and low sleep propensity that are independent of prior sleeping-waking (the timing to sleep and wakefulness), which determines the onset and end of sleep. 88 Process C is directed by a clocklike mechanism that is not related to prior levels of sleep or the wake-like process S. Process C is the mechanism that helps the body stay asleep. It is driven by a pacemaker found in the brain called the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nuclei, which works in conjunction with neurotransmitters that facilitate sleep and thermoregulatory processes. The interaction of process S and process C has been used to predict the timing and duration of sleep, structure of sleep, and changes in daytime wakefulness. 88 This model was adapted for use in one article. 1  Theories or Models With Sleep Disturbances as a Secondary or Clustered Variable MODEL OF QUALITY OF LIFE The Model of Quality of Life identifies 4 domains that define an individual’s quality of life. Developed within the discipline of nursing, the model has been used to describe the quality of life in cancer patients. The 4 domains include physical well-being (eg, sleep), psychological well-being (eg, depression), social well-being (eg, family distress), and spiritual well-being (hopefulness). 90 – 92 , 95 , 96 Each domain is stated to act singly or in combination with the other domains and ultimately impact quality of life. The specific symptoms or factors within each quality of life domain have been further studied in various cancers such as breast cancer (see the study of Ferrell et al 90 ). For this model, sleep is depicted as a physical domain that could be singly or combined with other domain factors that impact quality of life. 90 This model was included in one article. 12 MODEL OF SYMPTOM MANAGEMENT The Model of Symptom Management was a nursing model developed by nursing faculty from the University of California San Francisco’s Center for Symptom Management. 89 The conceptual model is based on the premise that a symptom is a subjective experience of a biophysical function, cognition, or sensation. Starting with the symptom experience, 3 inner relationships include the perception of the symptom, the evaluation of the symptom, and the response of the symptom, which is related back to the perception. The response then includes internal feelings, behaviors, or thoughts related to the perceived or actual presence of a health problem. Symptom management strategies are actions that overcome or stop the negative outcomes from the symptoms through medical or self-care interventions such as assessment and treatment. The outcome of the symptoms is a complex construct that includes 10 possible dimensions. 89 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances can be a symptom or an outcome. This model was included in 2 articles. 6 , 12 NEUROENDOCRINE-BASED REGULATORY FATIGUE MODEL The Neuroendocrine-Based Regulatory Model was developed to describe mechanisms of fatigue in chronic illness. 93 Although thought to be a multidimensional concept, the model proposes that fatigue is strongly influenced by endocrine-based bio-chemicals such as tryptophan and melatonin. Any stress on the endocrine system creates biological effects that serve as markers for fatigue. 93 Antecedents of fatigue are stated to be either physiological (altered circadian rhythm of sleep/wake) or psychological (depression). The model proposes interventions that act as a mediator to reduce the impact of the antecedents on the endocrine system and improve fatigue. This model was used in 2 articles. 69 , 80 OREM’S SELF-CARE DEFICIT THEORY OF NURSING Orem’s Self-care Deficit Theory of Nursing was developed in 1985 and focuses on the ability of an individual to perform self-care activities (termed self-care agency ) to maintain life, health, and well-being or the ability to care for others (termed dependent-care agency ). 20 , 84 The nursing role within the model is to assess the individual’s ability to perform self-care through a complete assessment of the current health state and symptoms being experienced by the individual. The model suggests that nurses provide 3 types of care: (1) total compensatory where the nurse provides total care when the individual cannot perform any self-care, (2) partial compensatory where the individual and nurse share self-care activities, and (3) supportive care or educational care where the nurse facilitates self-care through educating the individual with the tools to make decisions or learn skills needed for total self-care. 20 , 84 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances are symptoms that can result from cancer treatment that potentially impact self-care. This theory was used in 2 articles. 82 , 97 PIPER INTEGRATED FATIGUE MODEL The Piper Integrated Fatigue Model has been used to study fatigue in relation to sleep disturbances in cancer patients. 15 The mid-range nursing model by Piper et al proposes a variety of factors as influencing subjective and objective manifestations of fatigue (see Piper et al 85 for the figure). Fatigue manifestations are divided into physiological, biochemical, and behavioral components. These components include physiological muscle fatigue, changes in behavioral work activity, and/or symptoms of depression, and they can occur in combination as fatigue becomes a chronic problem. 85 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances are one of several factors influencing fatigue. This model was included in 6 articles. 15 , 68 , 70 , 76 , 78 , 79 PSYCHOBIOLOGICAL HOT FLASH MODEL This model depicts sleep disturbances as an outcome of meno-pausal hot flashes. It shows relationships among physiological hot flashes, perceived hot flashes, and the reporting of hot flash severity and bother, and it proposes that hot flashes contribute to a possible cluster of symptoms that include sleep-wake disturbances, mood disturbances, and changes in affect, which ultimately impact quality of life. This model was included in one article. 72 ROY ADAPTATION MODEL Roy Adaptation Model is a complex nursing model postulating that human beings have the ability to adapt to changes in the environment. 87 Adaptation or coping with environmental change occurs through maintaining 4 subsystems: (1) physiologic needs, (2) self-concept, (3) interdependence, and (4) role function. For nursing, the goal is to use this model to guide health promotion and adaptation to illness. The model postulates that focal, contextual, or residual stimuli can be manipulated to promote adaptation based on stage of personal development, family development, and culture. 87 Adaptation responses can be effective or ineffective depending on the mode of adaptation. Effective adaptation responses are thought to promote integrity of the human system. 87 In this model, sleep can be conceptualized as a physiological mode of adaptation alone or in combination with other outcomes. 75 This model was included in one article. 75 THEORY OF UNPLEASANT SYMPTOMS The Theory of Unpleasant Symptoms 83 is a mid-range nursing theory that has been used to describe sleep as it interacts with other symptoms. The theory has 3 interrelated components: (1) symptoms that the person experiences, (2) influencing factors that cause or affect the nature of the symptoms, and (3) consequences of the symptom experience. 83 Symptoms are the main component of the model and are measured in terms of intensity, quality, timing, and distress. The model posits that symptoms can occur alone or simultaneously with other symptoms and suggests that certain symptoms can catalyze other symptoms (see Figure 2 in the study of Lenz et al 83 ). Influencing factors are the physiological, psychological, and situational factors influenced by the symptoms. The third component is the consequence, defined as the impact of symptoms on an individual’s ability to perform functional or cognitive activities. Functional performance includes activities such as physical, daily living, social, interactive, and role performance (eg, work) activities. The interaction among the 3 major concepts of symptoms, influencing factors, and consequences is reciprocal and can change as the symptom experience changes. This suggests that symptoms can moderate or mediate the relationship between influencing factors and performance. 83 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances can be one of many symptoms or an influencing factor affecting other symptoms. This model was included in 2 articles. 2 , 74  Theories or Models With Sleep Disturbances as a Secondary or Clustered Variable MODEL OF QUALITY OF LIFE The Model of Quality of Life identifies 4 domains that define an individual’s quality of life. Developed within the discipline of nursing, the model has been used to describe the quality of life in cancer patients. The 4 domains include physical well-being (eg, sleep), psychological well-being (eg, depression), social well-being (eg, family distress), and spiritual well-being (hopefulness). 90 – 92 , 95 , 96 Each domain is stated to act singly or in combination with the other domains and ultimately impact quality of life. The specific symptoms or factors within each quality of life domain have been further studied in various cancers such as breast cancer (see the study of Ferrell et al 90 ). For this model, sleep is depicted as a physical domain that could be singly or combined with other domain factors that impact quality of life. 90 This model was included in one article. 12 MODEL OF SYMPTOM MANAGEMENT The Model of Symptom Management was a nursing model developed by nursing faculty from the University of California San Francisco’s Center for Symptom Management. 89 The conceptual model is based on the premise that a symptom is a subjective experience of a biophysical function, cognition, or sensation. Starting with the symptom experience, 3 inner relationships include the perception of the symptom, the evaluation of the symptom, and the response of the symptom, which is related back to the perception. The response then includes internal feelings, behaviors, or thoughts related to the perceived or actual presence of a health problem. Symptom management strategies are actions that overcome or stop the negative outcomes from the symptoms through medical or self-care interventions such as assessment and treatment. The outcome of the symptoms is a complex construct that includes 10 possible dimensions. 89 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances can be a symptom or an outcome. This model was included in 2 articles. 6 , 12 NEUROENDOCRINE-BASED REGULATORY FATIGUE MODEL The Neuroendocrine-Based Regulatory Model was developed to describe mechanisms of fatigue in chronic illness. 93 Although thought to be a multidimensional concept, the model proposes that fatigue is strongly influenced by endocrine-based bio-chemicals such as tryptophan and melatonin. Any stress on the endocrine system creates biological effects that serve as markers for fatigue. 93 Antecedents of fatigue are stated to be either physiological (altered circadian rhythm of sleep/wake) or psychological (depression). The model proposes interventions that act as a mediator to reduce the impact of the antecedents on the endocrine system and improve fatigue. This model was used in 2 articles. 69 , 80 OREM’S SELF-CARE DEFICIT THEORY OF NURSING Orem’s Self-care Deficit Theory of Nursing was developed in 1985 and focuses on the ability of an individual to perform self-care activities (termed self-care agency ) to maintain life, health, and well-being or the ability to care for others (termed dependent-care agency ). 20 , 84 The nursing role within the model is to assess the individual’s ability to perform self-care through a complete assessment of the current health state and symptoms being experienced by the individual. The model suggests that nurses provide 3 types of care: (1) total compensatory where the nurse provides total care when the individual cannot perform any self-care, (2) partial compensatory where the individual and nurse share self-care activities, and (3) supportive care or educational care where the nurse facilitates self-care through educating the individual with the tools to make decisions or learn skills needed for total self-care. 20 , 84 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances are symptoms that can result from cancer treatment that potentially impact self-care. This theory was used in 2 articles. 82 , 97 PIPER INTEGRATED FATIGUE MODEL The Piper Integrated Fatigue Model has been used to study fatigue in relation to sleep disturbances in cancer patients. 15 The mid-range nursing model by Piper et al proposes a variety of factors as influencing subjective and objective manifestations of fatigue (see Piper et al 85 for the figure). Fatigue manifestations are divided into physiological, biochemical, and behavioral components. These components include physiological muscle fatigue, changes in behavioral work activity, and/or symptoms of depression, and they can occur in combination as fatigue becomes a chronic problem. 85 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances are one of several factors influencing fatigue. This model was included in 6 articles. 15 , 68 , 70 , 76 , 78 , 79 PSYCHOBIOLOGICAL HOT FLASH MODEL This model depicts sleep disturbances as an outcome of meno-pausal hot flashes. It shows relationships among physiological hot flashes, perceived hot flashes, and the reporting of hot flash severity and bother, and it proposes that hot flashes contribute to a possible cluster of symptoms that include sleep-wake disturbances, mood disturbances, and changes in affect, which ultimately impact quality of life. This model was included in one article. 72 ROY ADAPTATION MODEL Roy Adaptation Model is a complex nursing model postulating that human beings have the ability to adapt to changes in the environment. 87 Adaptation or coping with environmental change occurs through maintaining 4 subsystems: (1) physiologic needs, (2) self-concept, (3) interdependence, and (4) role function. For nursing, the goal is to use this model to guide health promotion and adaptation to illness. The model postulates that focal, contextual, or residual stimuli can be manipulated to promote adaptation based on stage of personal development, family development, and culture. 87 Adaptation responses can be effective or ineffective depending on the mode of adaptation. Effective adaptation responses are thought to promote integrity of the human system. 87 In this model, sleep can be conceptualized as a physiological mode of adaptation alone or in combination with other outcomes. 75 This model was included in one article. 75 THEORY OF UNPLEASANT SYMPTOMS The Theory of Unpleasant Symptoms 83 is a mid-range nursing theory that has been used to describe sleep as it interacts with other symptoms. The theory has 3 interrelated components: (1) symptoms that the person experiences, (2) influencing factors that cause or affect the nature of the symptoms, and (3) consequences of the symptom experience. 83 Symptoms are the main component of the model and are measured in terms of intensity, quality, timing, and distress. The model posits that symptoms can occur alone or simultaneously with other symptoms and suggests that certain symptoms can catalyze other symptoms (see Figure 2 in the study of Lenz et al 83 ). Influencing factors are the physiological, psychological, and situational factors influenced by the symptoms. The third component is the consequence, defined as the impact of symptoms on an individual’s ability to perform functional or cognitive activities. Functional performance includes activities such as physical, daily living, social, interactive, and role performance (eg, work) activities. The interaction among the 3 major concepts of symptoms, influencing factors, and consequences is reciprocal and can change as the symptom experience changes. This suggests that symptoms can moderate or mediate the relationship between influencing factors and performance. 83 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances can be one of many symptoms or an influencing factor affecting other symptoms. This model was included in 2 articles. 2 , 74  MODEL OF QUALITY OF LIFE The Model of Quality of Life identifies 4 domains that define an individual’s quality of life. Developed within the discipline of nursing, the model has been used to describe the quality of life in cancer patients. The 4 domains include physical well-being (eg, sleep), psychological well-being (eg, depression), social well-being (eg, family distress), and spiritual well-being (hopefulness). 90 – 92 , 95 , 96 Each domain is stated to act singly or in combination with the other domains and ultimately impact quality of life. The specific symptoms or factors within each quality of life domain have been further studied in various cancers such as breast cancer (see the study of Ferrell et al 90 ). For this model, sleep is depicted as a physical domain that could be singly or combined with other domain factors that impact quality of life. 90 This model was included in one article. 12  MODEL OF QUALITY OF LIFE The Model of Quality of Life identifies 4 domains that define an individual’s quality of life. Developed within the discipline of nursing, the model has been used to describe the quality of life in cancer patients. The 4 domains include physical well-being (eg, sleep), psychological well-being (eg, depression), social well-being (eg, family distress), and spiritual well-being (hopefulness). 90 – 92 , 95 , 96 Each domain is stated to act singly or in combination with the other domains and ultimately impact quality of life. The specific symptoms or factors within each quality of life domain have been further studied in various cancers such as breast cancer (see the study of Ferrell et al 90 ). For this model, sleep is depicted as a physical domain that could be singly or combined with other domain factors that impact quality of life. 90 This model was included in one article. 12  MODEL OF SYMPTOM MANAGEMENT The Model of Symptom Management was a nursing model developed by nursing faculty from the University of California San Francisco’s Center for Symptom Management. 89 The conceptual model is based on the premise that a symptom is a subjective experience of a biophysical function, cognition, or sensation. Starting with the symptom experience, 3 inner relationships include the perception of the symptom, the evaluation of the symptom, and the response of the symptom, which is related back to the perception. The response then includes internal feelings, behaviors, or thoughts related to the perceived or actual presence of a health problem. Symptom management strategies are actions that overcome or stop the negative outcomes from the symptoms through medical or self-care interventions such as assessment and treatment. The outcome of the symptoms is a complex construct that includes 10 possible dimensions. 89 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances can be a symptom or an outcome. This model was included in 2 articles. 6 , 12  MODEL OF SYMPTOM MANAGEMENT The Model of Symptom Management was a nursing model developed by nursing faculty from the University of California San Francisco’s Center for Symptom Management. 89 The conceptual model is based on the premise that a symptom is a subjective experience of a biophysical function, cognition, or sensation. Starting with the symptom experience, 3 inner relationships include the perception of the symptom, the evaluation of the symptom, and the response of the symptom, which is related back to the perception. The response then includes internal feelings, behaviors, or thoughts related to the perceived or actual presence of a health problem. Symptom management strategies are actions that overcome or stop the negative outcomes from the symptoms through medical or self-care interventions such as assessment and treatment. The outcome of the symptoms is a complex construct that includes 10 possible dimensions. 89 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances can be a symptom or an outcome. This model was included in 2 articles. 6 , 12  NEUROENDOCRINE-BASED REGULATORY FATIGUE MODEL The Neuroendocrine-Based Regulatory Model was developed to describe mechanisms of fatigue in chronic illness. 93 Although thought to be a multidimensional concept, the model proposes that fatigue is strongly influenced by endocrine-based bio-chemicals such as tryptophan and melatonin. Any stress on the endocrine system creates biological effects that serve as markers for fatigue. 93 Antecedents of fatigue are stated to be either physiological (altered circadian rhythm of sleep/wake) or psychological (depression). The model proposes interventions that act as a mediator to reduce the impact of the antecedents on the endocrine system and improve fatigue. This model was used in 2 articles. 69 , 80  NEUROENDOCRINE-BASED REGULATORY FATIGUE MODEL The Neuroendocrine-Based Regulatory Model was developed to describe mechanisms of fatigue in chronic illness. 93 Although thought to be a multidimensional concept, the model proposes that fatigue is strongly influenced by endocrine-based bio-chemicals such as tryptophan and melatonin. Any stress on the endocrine system creates biological effects that serve as markers for fatigue. 93 Antecedents of fatigue are stated to be either physiological (altered circadian rhythm of sleep/wake) or psychological (depression). The model proposes interventions that act as a mediator to reduce the impact of the antecedents on the endocrine system and improve fatigue. This model was used in 2 articles. 69 , 80  OREM’S SELF-CARE DEFICIT THEORY OF NURSING Orem’s Self-care Deficit Theory of Nursing was developed in 1985 and focuses on the ability of an individual to perform self-care activities (termed self-care agency ) to maintain life, health, and well-being or the ability to care for others (termed dependent-care agency ). 20 , 84 The nursing role within the model is to assess the individual’s ability to perform self-care through a complete assessment of the current health state and symptoms being experienced by the individual. The model suggests that nurses provide 3 types of care: (1) total compensatory where the nurse provides total care when the individual cannot perform any self-care, (2) partial compensatory where the individual and nurse share self-care activities, and (3) supportive care or educational care where the nurse facilitates self-care through educating the individual with the tools to make decisions or learn skills needed for total self-care. 20 , 84 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances are symptoms that can result from cancer treatment that potentially impact self-care. This theory was used in 2 articles. 82 , 97  OREM’S SELF-CARE DEFICIT THEORY OF NURSING Orem’s Self-care Deficit Theory of Nursing was developed in 1985 and focuses on the ability of an individual to perform self-care activities (termed self-care agency ) to maintain life, health, and well-being or the ability to care for others (termed dependent-care agency ). 20 , 84 The nursing role within the model is to assess the individual’s ability to perform self-care through a complete assessment of the current health state and symptoms being experienced by the individual. The model suggests that nurses provide 3 types of care: (1) total compensatory where the nurse provides total care when the individual cannot perform any self-care, (2) partial compensatory where the individual and nurse share self-care activities, and (3) supportive care or educational care where the nurse facilitates self-care through educating the individual with the tools to make decisions or learn skills needed for total self-care. 20 , 84 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances are symptoms that can result from cancer treatment that potentially impact self-care. This theory was used in 2 articles. 82 , 97  PIPER INTEGRATED FATIGUE MODEL The Piper Integrated Fatigue Model has been used to study fatigue in relation to sleep disturbances in cancer patients. 15 The mid-range nursing model by Piper et al proposes a variety of factors as influencing subjective and objective manifestations of fatigue (see Piper et al 85 for the figure). Fatigue manifestations are divided into physiological, biochemical, and behavioral components. These components include physiological muscle fatigue, changes in behavioral work activity, and/or symptoms of depression, and they can occur in combination as fatigue becomes a chronic problem. 85 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances are one of several factors influencing fatigue. This model was included in 6 articles. 15 , 68 , 70 , 76 , 78 , 79  PIPER INTEGRATED FATIGUE MODEL The Piper Integrated Fatigue Model has been used to study fatigue in relation to sleep disturbances in cancer patients. 15 The mid-range nursing model by Piper et al proposes a variety of factors as influencing subjective and objective manifestations of fatigue (see Piper et al 85 for the figure). Fatigue manifestations are divided into physiological, biochemical, and behavioral components. These components include physiological muscle fatigue, changes in behavioral work activity, and/or symptoms of depression, and they can occur in combination as fatigue becomes a chronic problem. 85 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances are one of several factors influencing fatigue. This model was included in 6 articles. 15 , 68 , 70 , 76 , 78 , 79  PSYCHOBIOLOGICAL HOT FLASH MODEL This model depicts sleep disturbances as an outcome of meno-pausal hot flashes. It shows relationships among physiological hot flashes, perceived hot flashes, and the reporting of hot flash severity and bother, and it proposes that hot flashes contribute to a possible cluster of symptoms that include sleep-wake disturbances, mood disturbances, and changes in affect, which ultimately impact quality of life. This model was included in one article. 72  PSYCHOBIOLOGICAL HOT FLASH MODEL This model depicts sleep disturbances as an outcome of meno-pausal hot flashes. It shows relationships among physiological hot flashes, perceived hot flashes, and the reporting of hot flash severity and bother, and it proposes that hot flashes contribute to a possible cluster of symptoms that include sleep-wake disturbances, mood disturbances, and changes in affect, which ultimately impact quality of life. This model was included in one article. 72  ROY ADAPTATION MODEL Roy Adaptation Model is a complex nursing model postulating that human beings have the ability to adapt to changes in the environment. 87 Adaptation or coping with environmental change occurs through maintaining 4 subsystems: (1) physiologic needs, (2) self-concept, (3) interdependence, and (4) role function. For nursing, the goal is to use this model to guide health promotion and adaptation to illness. The model postulates that focal, contextual, or residual stimuli can be manipulated to promote adaptation based on stage of personal development, family development, and culture. 87 Adaptation responses can be effective or ineffective depending on the mode of adaptation. Effective adaptation responses are thought to promote integrity of the human system. 87 In this model, sleep can be conceptualized as a physiological mode of adaptation alone or in combination with other outcomes. 75 This model was included in one article. 75  ROY ADAPTATION MODEL Roy Adaptation Model is a complex nursing model postulating that human beings have the ability to adapt to changes in the environment. 87 Adaptation or coping with environmental change occurs through maintaining 4 subsystems: (1) physiologic needs, (2) self-concept, (3) interdependence, and (4) role function. For nursing, the goal is to use this model to guide health promotion and adaptation to illness. The model postulates that focal, contextual, or residual stimuli can be manipulated to promote adaptation based on stage of personal development, family development, and culture. 87 Adaptation responses can be effective or ineffective depending on the mode of adaptation. Effective adaptation responses are thought to promote integrity of the human system. 87 In this model, sleep can be conceptualized as a physiological mode of adaptation alone or in combination with other outcomes. 75 This model was included in one article. 75  THEORY OF UNPLEASANT SYMPTOMS The Theory of Unpleasant Symptoms 83 is a mid-range nursing theory that has been used to describe sleep as it interacts with other symptoms. The theory has 3 interrelated components: (1) symptoms that the person experiences, (2) influencing factors that cause or affect the nature of the symptoms, and (3) consequences of the symptom experience. 83 Symptoms are the main component of the model and are measured in terms of intensity, quality, timing, and distress. The model posits that symptoms can occur alone or simultaneously with other symptoms and suggests that certain symptoms can catalyze other symptoms (see Figure 2 in the study of Lenz et al 83 ). Influencing factors are the physiological, psychological, and situational factors influenced by the symptoms. The third component is the consequence, defined as the impact of symptoms on an individual’s ability to perform functional or cognitive activities. Functional performance includes activities such as physical, daily living, social, interactive, and role performance (eg, work) activities. The interaction among the 3 major concepts of symptoms, influencing factors, and consequences is reciprocal and can change as the symptom experience changes. This suggests that symptoms can moderate or mediate the relationship between influencing factors and performance. 83 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances can be one of many symptoms or an influencing factor affecting other symptoms. This model was included in 2 articles. 2 , 74  THEORY OF UNPLEASANT SYMPTOMS The Theory of Unpleasant Symptoms 83 is a mid-range nursing theory that has been used to describe sleep as it interacts with other symptoms. The theory has 3 interrelated components: (1) symptoms that the person experiences, (2) influencing factors that cause or affect the nature of the symptoms, and (3) consequences of the symptom experience. 83 Symptoms are the main component of the model and are measured in terms of intensity, quality, timing, and distress. The model posits that symptoms can occur alone or simultaneously with other symptoms and suggests that certain symptoms can catalyze other symptoms (see Figure 2 in the study of Lenz et al 83 ). Influencing factors are the physiological, psychological, and situational factors influenced by the symptoms. The third component is the consequence, defined as the impact of symptoms on an individual’s ability to perform functional or cognitive activities. Functional performance includes activities such as physical, daily living, social, interactive, and role performance (eg, work) activities. The interaction among the 3 major concepts of symptoms, influencing factors, and consequences is reciprocal and can change as the symptom experience changes. This suggests that symptoms can moderate or mediate the relationship between influencing factors and performance. 83 In this model, sleep-wake disturbances can be one of many symptoms or an influencing factor affecting other symptoms. This model was included in 2 articles. 2 , 74  Discussion Quantification, Summary, and Comparison of Studies With and Without Explicitly Described Theories, Models, or Frameworks The quantification of studies indicates that most research related to sleep-wake disturbances in cancer patients and survivors could be considered atheoretical. Most published studies that were reviewed here did not include an explicit description of a guiding theory, model, or framework. This is a significant limitation of existing research that may inhibit clarity of (1) the conceptual definition of sleep-wake disturbances, (2) the subsequent operationalization of sleep-wake disturbances, and (3) identification of contributing factors and consequences of sleep-wake disturbances. The summary and comparison of studies indicated first that whether an article included a theory, model, or frame-work varied by discipline. Articles authored by nurses were significantly more likely to include an explicit description of a theory, model, or framework. It is well-known that non-nursing disciplines often do not disclose theoretical or conceptual models unless the purpose of the study is to further define the underlying concepts of the model. In addition, nonnursing journals may not allow space for the description of a theory or model. Therefore, one limitation of this review is that it is not known whether the studies were truly atheoretical or just lacking a written description of the theory, model, or framework. The summary and comparison of studies also indicated that theoretically based articles were more likely to be based on subjective measurement rather than objective measures such as wrist actigraphy or polysomnography. Theories and models would seem to be equally relevant to subjective and objective measurement of sleep; however, exclusion of objective measures means that these theories and models are being tested only in the context of subjective sleep. In addition, the subjective measures that were used varied widely within both groups of studies (for details of sleep measures, see review 18 ). Although the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index was the most commonly used measure of subjective sleep, most studies used other types of questionnaires to measure sleep-wake disturbances. This is also reflected by the various terminology of sleep such as sleep-wake, insomnia, sleep disturbances, restless sleep , and tiredness . Because of these variations in terminology and measurement, it is difficult to ascertain if sleep-wake disturbances were conceptualized similarly across studies that did not include theories or models. The summary and comparison of studies did not show significant differences by group in terms of type of study (descriptive or intervention) and sample characteristics. These criteria varied widely within both groups of studies. Varying sample characteristics may make comparisons across studies somewhat difficult. Summary and Comparison of Theories, Models, and Frameworks This review revealed wide variation in the theories, models, and frameworks that are used to study sleep-wake disturbances in cancer. Several theories or models were only used in one study. The exceptions were Spielman’s Three-Factor Model, the Model of Symptom Management, Orem’s Self-care Deficit Theory, Piper’s Integrated Fatigue Model, the Neuroendocrine-Based Regulatory Fatigue Model, and the Theory of Unpleasant Symptoms. These were each used in more than one study. In addition, when an author produced multiple works, he/she tended to consistently use the same model. For example, Berger et al 15 , 68 – 70 , 78 , 79 used the Piper’s Integrated Fatigue Model and Payne 93 used the Neuroendocrine-Based Regulatory Fatigue Model in more than one study. On the other hand, Carpenter et al 2 , 6 , 72 used 3 different models for each of the studies reviewed. This illustrates that use of these theories may vary both within and between investigators and hypothesis driven. Despite variation in the theories and models used, there were some commonalities. First, the theories and models overall are consistent with the idea that sleep disturbances are a combination of physiological, psychological, and behavioral phenomena. 71 , 86 , 88 Nine theories/models include physiological components, 71 , 72 , 84 , 85 , 88 – 90 , 93 , 94 eight included psychological components, 71 , 84 , 85 , 88 – 90 , 93 , 94 and six included behavioral components. 83 – 85 , 88 , 89 , 94 , 98 In addition, the theories/models suggest that other symptoms may be a combination of components and/or consequences of sleep-wake disturbances. For example, when the Theory of Unpleasant Symptoms 83 was applied, it included psychological and/or physical symptoms as components of sleep-wake disturbances. When the Model of Symptom Management was applied, the co-occurrence of sleep-wake and other symptoms was emphasized. 6 The Piper model 85 included sleep-wake disturbances as a cofactor of fatigue, suggesting that fatigue might be a consequence of sleep disturbances. Other consequences of sleep-wake disturbances included performance status in the Lenz model and impact on wakefulness in other models. 88 , 94 Finally, the models suggest that factors that contribute to sleep-wake disturbances are nonlinear; can change over time; and include predisposing, precipitating, and perpetuating factors. 94 Factors that initiate sleep disturbances (ie, predisposing or precipitating factors) may be different from those that lead to chronic sleep disturbances (ie, perpetuating factors). Thus, these models suggest that contributing factors should be reassessed over time. Because of the high prevalence of sleep disturbances that contribute to poor quality of life in cancer patients, future research should focus on the development of a model or mid-range theory that is specific to the problem of sleep-wake disturbances in cancer. Such a model should include demographic, physiological, psychological, and behavioral factors of sleep disturbances and resulting health-related outcomes. In particular, cancer disease and treatment-related factors and other problems unique to this population should be included. For example, it is likely that women with breast cancer have unique health-related problems that might lead to sleep-wake disturbances (eg, premature menopause), 65 and these should be incorporated to increase model specificity. The model or theory should also account for symptoms as predisposing, co-occurring, or consequential phenomena. The theory/model also needs to clearly delineate the nonlinear nature of sleep disturbances. Finally, the model should consider the potentially broad impact of sleep and wake disturbances on physiological, psychological, behavioral, and social outcomes. Having a more specific conceptual model or theory for sleep-wake disturbances could help guide research by providing a mechanism that clearly defines and measures the concepts of sleep-wake disturbances in cancer. This would result in increased consistency among researchers by using similar types of measurement and similar variables increasing the ability to compare results across studies. Ultimately, a more specific model will provide researchers with a basis to facilitate symptom management through effective theory-based descriptive and interventions for this prominent problem in cancer.  Discussion Quantification, Summary, and Comparison of Studies With and Without Explicitly Described Theories, Models, or Frameworks The quantification of studies indicates that most research related to sleep-wake disturbances in cancer patients and survivors could be considered atheoretical. Most published studies that were reviewed here did not include an explicit description of a guiding theory, model, or framework. This is a significant limitation of existing research that may inhibit clarity of (1) the conceptual definition of sleep-wake disturbances, (2) the subsequent operationalization of sleep-wake disturbances, and (3) identification of contributing factors and consequences of sleep-wake disturbances. The summary and comparison of studies indicated first that whether an article included a theory, model, or frame-work varied by discipline. Articles authored by nurses were significantly more likely to include an explicit description of a theory, model, or framework. It is well-known that non-nursing disciplines often do not disclose theoretical or conceptual models unless the purpose of the study is to further define the underlying concepts of the model. In addition, nonnursing journals may not allow space for the description of a theory or model. Therefore, one limitation of this review is that it is not known whether the studies were truly atheoretical or just lacking a written description of the theory, model, or framework. The summary and comparison of studies also indicated that theoretically based articles were more likely to be based on subjective measurement rather than objective measures such as wrist actigraphy or polysomnography. Theories and models would seem to be equally relevant to subjective and objective measurement of sleep; however, exclusion of objective measures means that these theories and models are being tested only in the context of subjective sleep. In addition, the subjective measures that were used varied widely within both groups of studies (for details of sleep measures, see review 18 ). Although the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index was the most commonly used measure of subjective sleep, most studies used other types of questionnaires to measure sleep-wake disturbances. This is also reflected by the various terminology of sleep such as sleep-wake, insomnia, sleep disturbances, restless sleep , and tiredness . Because of these variations in terminology and measurement, it is difficult to ascertain if sleep-wake disturbances were conceptualized similarly across studies that did not include theories or models. The summary and comparison of studies did not show significant differences by group in terms of type of study (descriptive or intervention) and sample characteristics. These criteria varied widely within both groups of studies. Varying sample characteristics may make comparisons across studies somewhat difficult. Summary and Comparison of Theories, Models, and Frameworks This review revealed wide variation in the theories, models, and frameworks that are used to study sleep-wake disturbances in cancer. Several theories or models were only used in one study. The exceptions were Spielman’s Three-Factor Model, the Model of Symptom Management, Orem’s Self-care Deficit Theory, Piper’s Integrated Fatigue Model, the Neuroendocrine-Based Regulatory Fatigue Model, and the Theory of Unpleasant Symptoms. These were each used in more than one study. In addition, when an author produced multiple works, he/she tended to consistently use the same model. For example, Berger et al 15 , 68 – 70 , 78 , 79 used the Piper’s Integrated Fatigue Model and Payne 93 used the Neuroendocrine-Based Regulatory Fatigue Model in more than one study. On the other hand, Carpenter et al 2 , 6 , 72 used 3 different models for each of the studies reviewed. This illustrates that use of these theories may vary both within and between investigators and hypothesis driven. Despite variation in the theories and models used, there were some commonalities. First, the theories and models overall are consistent with the idea that sleep disturbances are a combination of physiological, psychological, and behavioral phenomena. 71 , 86 , 88 Nine theories/models include physiological components, 71 , 72 , 84 , 85 , 88 – 90 , 93 , 94 eight included psychological components, 71 , 84 , 85 , 88 – 90 , 93 , 94 and six included behavioral components. 83 – 85 , 88 , 89 , 94 , 98 In addition, the theories/models suggest that other symptoms may be a combination of components and/or consequences of sleep-wake disturbances. For example, when the Theory of Unpleasant Symptoms 83 was applied, it included psychological and/or physical symptoms as components of sleep-wake disturbances. When the Model of Symptom Management was applied, the co-occurrence of sleep-wake and other symptoms was emphasized. 6 The Piper model 85 included sleep-wake disturbances as a cofactor of fatigue, suggesting that fatigue might be a consequence of sleep disturbances. Other consequences of sleep-wake disturbances included performance status in the Lenz model and impact on wakefulness in other models. 88 , 94 Finally, the models suggest that factors that contribute to sleep-wake disturbances are nonlinear; can change over time; and include predisposing, precipitating, and perpetuating factors. 94 Factors that initiate sleep disturbances (ie, predisposing or precipitating factors) may be different from those that lead to chronic sleep disturbances (ie, perpetuating factors). Thus, these models suggest that contributing factors should be reassessed over time. Because of the high prevalence of sleep disturbances that contribute to poor quality of life in cancer patients, future research should focus on the development of a model or mid-range theory that is specific to the problem of sleep-wake disturbances in cancer. Such a model should include demographic, physiological, psychological, and behavioral factors of sleep disturbances and resulting health-related outcomes. In particular, cancer disease and treatment-related factors and other problems unique to this population should be included. For example, it is likely that women with breast cancer have unique health-related problems that might lead to sleep-wake disturbances (eg, premature menopause), 65 and these should be incorporated to increase model specificity. The model or theory should also account for symptoms as predisposing, co-occurring, or consequential phenomena. The theory/model also needs to clearly delineate the nonlinear nature of sleep disturbances. Finally, the model should consider the potentially broad impact of sleep and wake disturbances on physiological, psychological, behavioral, and social outcomes. Having a more specific conceptual model or theory for sleep-wake disturbances could help guide research by providing a mechanism that clearly defines and measures the concepts of sleep-wake disturbances in cancer. This would result in increased consistency among researchers by using similar types of measurement and similar variables increasing the ability to compare results across studies. Ultimately, a more specific model will provide researchers with a basis to facilitate symptom management through effective theory-based descriptive and interventions for this prominent problem in cancer.  Quantification, Summary, and Comparison of Studies With and Without Explicitly Described Theories, Models, or Frameworks The quantification of studies indicates that most research related to sleep-wake disturbances in cancer patients and survivors could be considered atheoretical. Most published studies that were reviewed here did not include an explicit description of a guiding theory, model, or framework. This is a significant limitation of existing research that may inhibit clarity of (1) the conceptual definition of sleep-wake disturbances, (2) the subsequent operationalization of sleep-wake disturbances, and (3) identification of contributing factors and consequences of sleep-wake disturbances. The summary and comparison of studies indicated first that whether an article included a theory, model, or frame-work varied by discipline. Articles authored by nurses were significantly more likely to include an explicit description of a theory, model, or framework. It is well-known that non-nursing disciplines often do not disclose theoretical or conceptual models unless the purpose of the study is to further define the underlying concepts of the model. In addition, nonnursing journals may not allow space for the description of a theory or model. Therefore, one limitation of this review is that it is not known whether the studies were truly atheoretical or just lacking a written description of the theory, model, or framework. The summary and comparison of studies also indicated that theoretically based articles were more likely to be based on subjective measurement rather than objective measures such as wrist actigraphy or polysomnography. Theories and models would seem to be equally relevant to subjective and objective measurement of sleep; however, exclusion of objective measures means that these theories and models are being tested only in the context of subjective sleep. In addition, the subjective measures that were used varied widely within both groups of studies (for details of sleep measures, see review 18 ). Although the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index was the most commonly used measure of subjective sleep, most studies used other types of questionnaires to measure sleep-wake disturbances. This is also reflected by the various terminology of sleep such as sleep-wake, insomnia, sleep disturbances, restless sleep , and tiredness . Because of these variations in terminology and measurement, it is difficult to ascertain if sleep-wake disturbances were conceptualized similarly across studies that did not include theories or models. The summary and comparison of studies did not show significant differences by group in terms of type of study (descriptive or intervention) and sample characteristics. These criteria varied widely within both groups of studies. Varying sample characteristics may make comparisons across studies somewhat difficult.  Quantification, Summary, and Comparison of Studies With and Without Explicitly Described Theories, Models, or Frameworks The quantification of studies indicates that most research related to sleep-wake disturbances in cancer patients and survivors could be considered atheoretical. Most published studies that were reviewed here did not include an explicit description of a guiding theory, model, or framework. This is a significant limitation of existing research that may inhibit clarity of (1) the conceptual definition of sleep-wake disturbances, (2) the subsequent operationalization of sleep-wake disturbances, and (3) identification of contributing factors and consequences of sleep-wake disturbances. The summary and comparison of studies indicated first that whether an article included a theory, model, or frame-work varied by discipline. Articles authored by nurses were significantly more likely to include an explicit description of a theory, model, or framework. It is well-known that non-nursing disciplines often do not disclose theoretical or conceptual models unless the purpose of the study is to further define the underlying concepts of the model. In addition, nonnursing journals may not allow space for the description of a theory or model. Therefore, one limitation of this review is that it is not known whether the studies were truly atheoretical or just lacking a written description of the theory, model, or framework. The summary and comparison of studies also indicated that theoretically based articles were more likely to be based on subjective measurement rather than objective measures such as wrist actigraphy or polysomnography. Theories and models would seem to be equally relevant to subjective and objective measurement of sleep; however, exclusion of objective measures means that these theories and models are being tested only in the context of subjective sleep. In addition, the subjective measures that were used varied widely within both groups of studies (for details of sleep measures, see review 18 ). Although the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index was the most commonly used measure of subjective sleep, most studies used other types of questionnaires to measure sleep-wake disturbances. This is also reflected by the various terminology of sleep such as sleep-wake, insomnia, sleep disturbances, restless sleep , and tiredness . Because of these variations in terminology and measurement, it is difficult to ascertain if sleep-wake disturbances were conceptualized similarly across studies that did not include theories or models. The summary and comparison of studies did not show significant differences by group in terms of type of study (descriptive or intervention) and sample characteristics. These criteria varied widely within both groups of studies. Varying sample characteristics may make comparisons across studies somewhat difficult.  Summary and Comparison of Theories, Models, and Frameworks This review revealed wide variation in the theories, models, and frameworks that are used to study sleep-wake disturbances in cancer. Several theories or models were only used in one study. The exceptions were Spielman’s Three-Factor Model, the Model of Symptom Management, Orem’s Self-care Deficit Theory, Piper’s Integrated Fatigue Model, the Neuroendocrine-Based Regulatory Fatigue Model, and the Theory of Unpleasant Symptoms. These were each used in more than one study. In addition, when an author produced multiple works, he/she tended to consistently use the same model. For example, Berger et al 15 , 68 – 70 , 78 , 79 used the Piper’s Integrated Fatigue Model and Payne 93 used the Neuroendocrine-Based Regulatory Fatigue Model in more than one study. On the other hand, Carpenter et al 2 , 6 , 72 used 3 different models for each of the studies reviewed. This illustrates that use of these theories may vary both within and between investigators and hypothesis driven. Despite variation in the theories and models used, there were some commonalities. First, the theories and models overall are consistent with the idea that sleep disturbances are a combination of physiological, psychological, and behavioral phenomena. 71 , 86 , 88 Nine theories/models include physiological components, 71 , 72 , 84 , 85 , 88 – 90 , 93 , 94 eight included psychological components, 71 , 84 , 85 , 88 – 90 , 93 , 94 and six included behavioral components. 83 – 85 , 88 , 89 , 94 , 98 In addition, the theories/models suggest that other symptoms may be a combination of components and/or consequences of sleep-wake disturbances. For example, when the Theory of Unpleasant Symptoms 83 was applied, it included psychological and/or physical symptoms as components of sleep-wake disturbances. When the Model of Symptom Management was applied, the co-occurrence of sleep-wake and other symptoms was emphasized. 6 The Piper model 85 included sleep-wake disturbances as a cofactor of fatigue, suggesting that fatigue might be a consequence of sleep disturbances. Other consequences of sleep-wake disturbances included performance status in the Lenz model and impact on wakefulness in other models. 88 , 94 Finally, the models suggest that factors that contribute to sleep-wake disturbances are nonlinear; can change over time; and include predisposing, precipitating, and perpetuating factors. 94 Factors that initiate sleep disturbances (ie, predisposing or precipitating factors) may be different from those that lead to chronic sleep disturbances (ie, perpetuating factors). Thus, these models suggest that contributing factors should be reassessed over time. Because of the high prevalence of sleep disturbances that contribute to poor quality of life in cancer patients, future research should focus on the development of a model or mid-range theory that is specific to the problem of sleep-wake disturbances in cancer. Such a model should include demographic, physiological, psychological, and behavioral factors of sleep disturbances and resulting health-related outcomes. In particular, cancer disease and treatment-related factors and other problems unique to this population should be included. For example, it is likely that women with breast cancer have unique health-related problems that might lead to sleep-wake disturbances (eg, premature menopause), 65 and these should be incorporated to increase model specificity. The model or theory should also account for symptoms as predisposing, co-occurring, or consequential phenomena. The theory/model also needs to clearly delineate the nonlinear nature of sleep disturbances. Finally, the model should consider the potentially broad impact of sleep and wake disturbances on physiological, psychological, behavioral, and social outcomes. Having a more specific conceptual model or theory for sleep-wake disturbances could help guide research by providing a mechanism that clearly defines and measures the concepts of sleep-wake disturbances in cancer. This would result in increased consistency among researchers by using similar types of measurement and similar variables increasing the ability to compare results across studies. Ultimately, a more specific model will provide researchers with a basis to facilitate symptom management through effective theory-based descriptive and interventions for this prominent problem in cancer.  Summary and Comparison of Theories, Models, and Frameworks This review revealed wide variation in the theories, models, and frameworks that are used to study sleep-wake disturbances in cancer. Several theories or models were only used in one study. The exceptions were Spielman’s Three-Factor Model, the Model of Symptom Management, Orem’s Self-care Deficit Theory, Piper’s Integrated Fatigue Model, the Neuroendocrine-Based Regulatory Fatigue Model, and the Theory of Unpleasant Symptoms. These were each used in more than one study. In addition, when an author produced multiple works, he/she tended to consistently use the same model. For example, Berger et al 15 , 68 – 70 , 78 , 79 used the Piper’s Integrated Fatigue Model and Payne 93 used the Neuroendocrine-Based Regulatory Fatigue Model in more than one study. On the other hand, Carpenter et al 2 , 6 , 72 used 3 different models for each of the studies reviewed. This illustrates that use of these theories may vary both within and between investigators and hypothesis driven. Despite variation in the theories and models used, there were some commonalities. First, the theories and models overall are consistent with the idea that sleep disturbances are a combination of physiological, psychological, and behavioral phenomena. 71 , 86 , 88 Nine theories/models include physiological components, 71 , 72 , 84 , 85 , 88 – 90 , 93 , 94 eight included psychological components, 71 , 84 , 85 , 88 – 90 , 93 , 94 and six included behavioral components. 83 – 85 , 88 , 89 , 94 , 98 In addition, the theories/models suggest that other symptoms may be a combination of components and/or consequences of sleep-wake disturbances. For example, when the Theory of Unpleasant Symptoms 83 was applied, it included psychological and/or physical symptoms as components of sleep-wake disturbances. When the Model of Symptom Management was applied, the co-occurrence of sleep-wake and other symptoms was emphasized. 6 The Piper model 85 included sleep-wake disturbances as a cofactor of fatigue, suggesting that fatigue might be a consequence of sleep disturbances. Other consequences of sleep-wake disturbances included performance status in the Lenz model and impact on wakefulness in other models. 88 , 94 Finally, the models suggest that factors that contribute to sleep-wake disturbances are nonlinear; can change over time; and include predisposing, precipitating, and perpetuating factors. 94 Factors that initiate sleep disturbances (ie, predisposing or precipitating factors) may be different from those that lead to chronic sleep disturbances (ie, perpetuating factors). Thus, these models suggest that contributing factors should be reassessed over time. Because of the high prevalence of sleep disturbances that contribute to poor quality of life in cancer patients, future research should focus on the development of a model or mid-range theory that is specific to the problem of sleep-wake disturbances in cancer. Such a model should include demographic, physiological, psychological, and behavioral factors of sleep disturbances and resulting health-related outcomes. In particular, cancer disease and treatment-related factors and other problems unique to this population should be included. For example, it is likely that women with breast cancer have unique health-related problems that might lead to sleep-wake disturbances (eg, premature menopause), 65 and these should be incorporated to increase model specificity. The model or theory should also account for symptoms as predisposing, co-occurring, or consequential phenomena. The theory/model also needs to clearly delineate the nonlinear nature of sleep disturbances. Finally, the model should consider the potentially broad impact of sleep and wake disturbances on physiological, psychological, behavioral, and social outcomes. Having a more specific conceptual model or theory for sleep-wake disturbances could help guide research by providing a mechanism that clearly defines and measures the concepts of sleep-wake disturbances in cancer. This would result in increased consistency among researchers by using similar types of measurement and similar variables increasing the ability to compare results across studies. Ultimately, a more specific model will provide researchers with a basis to facilitate symptom management through effective theory-based descriptive and interventions for this prominent problem in cancer.  Conclusion In summary, although most existing research on sleep-wake disturbances in cancer does not include a description of a theory, model, or framework, several theories and models have been applied to this problem in this population at least once. The reviewed theories or models represent options that are available to guide research on sleep-wake disturbances in cancer populations. However, no one theory, model, or framework seems to provide an accurate picture of sleep-wake disturbances. Additional model or theory development is needed to enhance research that can be translated into improved clinical care in this area. It is recommended that authors should be encouraged to explicitly state the theory, model, or framework within the manuscript if one was used to guide the research. This could be accomplished through adding this type of reporting to publication guidelines to ensure that the readers can identify the conceptual underpinnings of the research.  Tables Table 1 Summary of Studies Without a Theory, Model, or Framework Source Disciplines of Authors Type of Study Sample Stage of Cancer Cancer tx Status Variables of Interest Measure of Sleep-Wake Ancoli-Israel et al 22 Psychiatry, medicine Descriptive Breast cancer I–IIIa Pre-tx Fatigue, sleep quality, circadian rhythm functional status, depression Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, wrist actigraph Anderson et al 23 Psychology, psychiatry, medicine, public health Descriptive Mixed sample of cancer I–IV NR Fatigue, sleep disturbance, depression, mood Sleep Disturbance Scale Andrykowski et al 24 Psychology, nursing, medicine Descriptive Bone marrow transplant NR Post–bone marrow transplantation Fatigue, sleep quality, mood, depression Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index Bardwell et al 25 Psychiatry, psychology, medicine Descriptive Breast cancer I–IIIa Active or post-tx Insomnia, depression, mood, functional status, physical health, health behaviors Women’s Health Initiative Sleep Disturbance Scale Berger and Farr 54 Nursing Descriptive Breast cancer I–II Active tx Fatigue, daytime activity nighttime rest, circadian rhythms Wrist actigraph Bower et al 55 Psychiatry, behavioral medicine, medicine, psychology, and biostatistics Descriptive Breast cancer 0–II Post-tx Fatigue, contributing factors of fatigue, depression, pain, menopausal factors, sleep, quality of life Medical Outcomes Study-Sleep Scale Broeckel et al 26 Psychology and medicine Descriptive Breast cancer I–III Post-tx Fatigue, sleep, mood, menopausal symptoms, depression/adjustment disorder Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index Bruera et al 56 Medicine Descriptive Mixed sample of cancer Advanced disease NR Insomnia, hypnotic withdrawal, cognitive failure Visual analog scale of insomnia items Cannici et al 58 Psychology, psychiatry Intervention Mixed sample of cancer NR Active and post-tx Insomnia, muscle relaxation Daily sleep questionnaire (sleep behaviors) Chen et al 57 Nursing, medicine Descriptive Lung cancer III–IV Active tx Sleep disturbances, chemotherapy, quality of life, functional performance Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index Cohen et al 27 Psychology, public health, medicine, biostatistics, religion Intervention Lymphoma I–IV Active or post-tx Sleep quality, psychological adjustment, depression, anxiety, impact of life event, fatigue Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index Coleman et al 59 Nursing, biostatistics, public health, education Intervention Multiple myeloma NR Active tx Exercise, sleep, fatigue, mood, activity, muscle strength, aerobic capacity Wrist actigraph, sleep log, Epworth Sleepiness Scale Couzi et al 60 Medicine, psychiatry, public health Descriptive Breast cancer 0–III Post-tx Menopausal symptoms, willingness to take estrogen therapy 66-Item questionnaire with single-item sleep question Crandall et al 7 Medicine, public health Descriptive Breast cancer 0–IIIa Post-tx Severity, bother of menopausal symptoms—sleep, hot flashes, urogenital, sexual, cancer-related pain, cognitive functioning, depression, menopausal status Generic questionnaire with one question regarding restless sleep Davidson et al 28 Psychology, medicine Intervention Mixed sample of cancer NR Post-tx Sleep disturbances as insomnia, mood, functioning Sleep diary, wrist actigraph Davidson et al 5 Psychology, medicine Descriptive Mixed sample of cancer NR Active or post-tx Sleep disturbances, insomnia, fatigue, daytime sleepiness, sleep-related breathing problem, resdess legs, dreaming, napping, use of sleep medications Sleep Survey de Moor et al 14 Behavioral medicine, biostatistics, psychiatry, medicine Intervention Renal cell cancer Metastatic Active tx Expressive writing, psychological, behavioral adjustment Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index Dirksen and Epstein, 2008 Nursing Intervention Breast cancer I–III Post-tx Insomnia, cognitive behavioral intervention, quality of life Insomnia Severity Index Engstrom et al 29 Nursing, psychiatry Descriptive Mixed sample of cancer NR Active or post-tx Sleep disturbances, mood, performance, daytime functioning, physical activity, lifestyle behaviors Study specific 82-item sleep disturbance questionnaire, qualitative interview specific to sleep Espie et al 62 Psychology, medicine Intervention Mixed sample of cancer NR Post-tx Insomnia, fatigue, cognitive behavioral intervention, quality of life Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, Epworth Sleepiness Scale Fernandes et al 63 General science, medicine Descriptive Mixed sample of cancer Advanced disease Active or post-tx Fatigue, daytime activity, sleep disorders, circadian rhythm Wrist actigraph, sleep diary Former et al 11 Psychology, medicine Descriptive Breast cancer NR Pre-tx, active, or post-tx Sleep, quality of life, cancer treatment Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index Haghighat et al 64 Medicine, public health Descriptive Breast cancer I–IV Active or post-tx Fatigue, contributing factors of fatigue General physical symptom questionnaire Hunter et al 65 Psychology, medicine, psychiatry Descriptive Breast cancer No active cancer Hormonal tx Menopausal symptoms (eg, hot flashes, sleep), quality of life, management strategies Women’s Health Questionnaire Janz et al 66 Health behaviors/education, medicine, public health Descriptive Breast Cancer 0–II Post-tx Symptom experience post-tx, quality of life European Organization for Research of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire (EORTC QLQ-C30) Koopman et al 30 Psychology, medicine Descriptive Breast cancer Metastatic/locally advanced Active or post-tx Sleep disturbances, depression, social support, cortisol levels Sleep questionnaire (modified version of insomnia interview) Lamb 42 Nursing Descriptive Mixed sample of cancer Active-tx or supportive care NR Sleep, hospitalization, cancer diagnosis Study specific sleep questionnaire with items, open-ended questions Le Guen et al 45 Medicine Descriptive Lung cancer Small cell (limited to extensive), non–small cell (stages I–IV) Pre-tx Sleep disturbances, daytime functioning Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, Epworth Sleepiness Scale, wrist actigraph Lis et al 46 Public health Descriptive Mixed sample of cancer I–IV Pre-tx or active tx Insomnia, patient satisfaction, quality of life Insomnia subscale of EORTC QLQ Malone et al 47 Pharmacy, medicine Descriptive Mixed sample of cancer NR Active-tx Quality of life (work, recreation, home management, sleep), health status UK Sickness Impact Profile Mao et al 48 Medicine, biostatistics Descriptive Mixed sample of cancer NR Post-tx Pain, depression, anxiety, insomnia, cancer survivorship, impact of symptom burden, age, comorbidity Items from the National Health Interview survey Miaskowski and Lee 31 Nursing Descriptive Mixed sample of cancer Metastatic Active-tx Fatigue, pain, sleep disturbance, depression Sleep diary, wrist actigraph Monga et al 49 Medicine, psychology Descriptive Prostate cancer Tlc-T2c Active-tx Neuromuscular fatigue, sleep, depression, radiation tx Epworth Sleepiness Scale Okuyama et al 50 Psychiatry, medicine Descriptive Breast cancer 0–III Post-tx Fatigue, correlates of fatigue, depression, coping, physical symptoms such as sleep Physical symptom questionnaire Owen et al 32 Nursing Descriptive Mixed sample of cancer NR Active or post-tx Sleep quality Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index Parker et al 53 Nursing, medicine Descriptive Mixed sample of cancer III–IV NR Sleep-wake patterns, advanced cancer, medications Polysomnography Pud et al 58 Nursing, psychology Descriptive Mixed sample of cancer NR Active tx Fatigue, sleep disturbance, epression, pain, quality of life General sleep disturbance scale Quesnel et al 39 Psychology Intervention Breast cancer I–III Post-tx Insomnia, depression, state/trait anxiety, fatigue, quality of life Insomnia Severity Index, polysomnography Roscoe et al 34 Psychology, medicine Descriptive Breast cancer NR Active tx Fatigue, circadian rhythms, depression, mood, type of cancer treatment Wrist actigraph Savard et al 3 Psychology Descriptive Breast cancer I–III Post-tx Insomnia, contributing factors of insomnia Insomnia Screening Questionnaire, Insomnia Interview Schedule Savard et al 33 Psychology Descriptive Breast cancer I–III Post-tx Insomnia, nocturnal hot flashes, sleep disturbances Insomnia Interview Schedule Savard et al 38 Psychology Intervention Breast cancer I–III Post-tx Insomnia, anxiety, depression, fatigue, quality of life Insomnia Interview Schedule, Insomnia Severity Index, Sleep Diary, polysomnography Servaes et al 43 Psychology, medicine Descriptive Breast cancer NR Post-tx Fatigue, determinates of fatigue Groninger Sleep Quality Scale Schultz et al 9 Nursing, medicine Descriptive Breast cancer NR Post-tx Menopausal symptoms, physiological health effects related to cancer treatment, quality of life Menopausal symptom questionnaire Shapiro et al 42 Psychology, medicine/public health Intervention Breast cancer II Post-tx Sleep disturbance, mood, worry, depression, state/trait anxiety, type of cancer treatment, sense of coherence, control Sleep diary Silberfarb et al 51 Psychiatry, psychology Descriptive Lung cancer NR Active-tx Insomnia, sleep, cancer Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, sleep log Silberfarb et al 35 Psychiatry, psychology Descriptive Mixed sample of cancer I–IV Post-tx Sleep disturbance as insomnia, anxiety, mood, strength, depression, nausea, pain, fatigue Polysomnography Simeit et al 36 Psychology Intervention Mixed sample of cancer NR Post-tx Sleep management, cancer- related quality of life Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index Spelten et al 41 Medicine, psychology Descriptive Mixed sample of cancer NR Active and post-tx Fatigue, depression, sleep, physical problems, cognitive dysfunction, psychological distress, return to work Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index Tatrow et al 37 Behavioral medicine Descriptive Breast cancer NR Active tx Sleep, activity, distress, quality of life, fatigue, activity Three-item sleep-wake assessment Wang et al 40 Nursing, medicine, biostatistics Descriptive Mixed sample of cancer III–IV Active tx Pain, sleep disturbance Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index Abbreviations: NR, not reported; tx, treatment. Table 2 Summary of Studies With a Theory, Model, or Framework Source Theory, Model, or Framework Disciplines of Authors Type of Study Sample Stage of Cancer Cancer tx Status Variables of Interest Measure of Sleep-Wake Berger 78 Piper’s Integrated Fatigue Model Nursing Descriptive Breast cancer I–II Active tx Fatigue, activity/rest, cancer treatment Wrist actigraph Berger and Higginbotham 79 Piper’s Integrated Fatigue Model Nursing Descriptive Breast cancer I-II Active tx Fatigue, sleep, activity/rest, symptom distress, health status Morin Sleep Diary, wrist actigraph Berger et al 70 Piper’s Integrated Fatigue Model Nursing Intervention Breast cancer I–II Active tx Fatigue, sleep, activity, chemotherapy, sleep hygiene intervention Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, Brief Sleep History, Sleep Hygiene Awareness, Practice Scale, wrist actigraph, Morin Sleep Diary Berger et al 15 Piper’s Integrated Fatigue Model Nursing Intervention Breast cancer I–II Active or post-tx Fatigue, sleep disturbance, adherence, sleep hygiene Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, wrist actigraph, Morin Sleep Diary Berger et al 68 Piper’s Integrated Fatigue Model Nursing Descriptive Breast cancer I–IIIa Pre-tx Fatigue, sleep-wake, activity-rest, circadian rhythms Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, wrist actigraph, sleep diary Blesch et al 76 Piper’s Integrated Fatigue Model Nursing Descriptive Breast and lung cancer NR Active-tx Fatigue, correlates of fatigue Two-item sleep questionnaire regarding hours of sleep obtained at home, during hospitalization Carlson et al, 2007 Biobehavioral Model of Altered Dysregulation in Orcadian Systems Medicine and psychology Descriptive Breast cancer I–IV Post-tx Sleep quality, cortisol, melatonin, catecholamines, psychosocial stress/factors Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index Carpenter and Andrykowski 6 Model of Symptom Management Nursing and behavioral science Descriptive Breast cancer 0–III Post-tx Menopause, menopausal symptoms, quality of life Blatt Menopausal Index Carpenter et al 2 Theory of Unpleasant Symptoms— adapted Nursing Descriptive Breast cancer I–III Post-tx Hot flashes, sleep, fatigue, depression Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index Carpenter et al 72 Psychobiological model of hot flashes Nursing Intervention Breast cancer 0–III Post-tx Hot flashes, sleep, mood Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, wrist actigraph Dodd et al 77 Model of Symptom Management Nursing and psychology Descriptive Mixed sample of cancer Metastatic and nonmetastatic Active tx Symptom cluster, symptom outcomes, functional status, pain, fatigue, sleep insufficiency Quality of Life—Cancer Dow et al 12 Model of Quality of Life Nursing Descriptive Breast cancer 0–IV Active and post-tx Quality of life, physical, psychological, social, spiritual domains of quality of life Quality of Life—Cancer Epstein and Dirksen 73 Spielman’s Three- Factor Model Nursing Intervention Breast cancer I–III Post-tx Cognitive-behavioral intervention, insomnia Sleep Diary, wrist actigraph Hoffman et al 81 Theory of Unpleasant Symptoms Nursing and psychology Descriptive Lung cancer I–IV Active tx Symptom cluster: pain, fatigue, insomnia Cancer Symptom Experience Inventory McMillan et al 97 Orem’s Self-care Deficit Theory of Nursing Nursing Descriptive Mixed sample of cancer Any stage NR Pain, sleep disturbance, depression Memorial Symptom Assessment Scale Payne et al 69 Neuroendocrine- Based Regulatory Fatigue Model Nursing and medicine Descriptive Breast cancer II Active tx Fatigue, sleep, depressive symptoms, biomarkers Demographic questionnaire (sleep disturbance), Piper Fatigue Scale (sleep disturbance item), wrist actigraph Payne et al 80 Neuroendocrine- Based Regulatory Fatigue Model Nursing, medicine, and biostatistics Intervention Breast cancer NR Post-tx (hormonal tx) Fatigue, waking intervention, sleep disturbances, depressive symptoms, biomarkers, symptom management Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index Redeker et al 74 Theory of Unpleasant Symptoms Nursing Descriptive Mixed sample of cancer Majority metastatic Active tx Insomnia, fatigue, anxiety, depression, quality of life Symptom Distress Scale Rhodes et al 82 Orem’s Self-care Deficit Theory of Nursing Nursing Qualitative Mixed sample of cancer NR Post-tx Tiredness, weakness, self-care Self-care interview Rumble et al 67 Spielman’s Three-Factor Model Psychology, psychiatry, and medicine Descriptive Lung cancer I–IlIa, limited stage small cell lung cancer NR Insomnia, sleep hygiene, cancer symptoms, mood, quality of life Structured Interview for Sleep Disorders, Sleep Hygiene Practice Scale, Insomnia Symptom Questionnaire, sleep log, wrist actigraph Vena et al 1 Adapted Two-Process Model of Sleep Regulation Nursing, psychology, and medicine Descriptive Lung cancer Advanced disease Active tx Sleep-wake disturbances, quality of life Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, Epworth Sleepiness Scale Young-McCaughan et al 75 Roy Adaptation Model Nursing, biostatistics, psychology, medicine Intervention Mixed sample of cancer 0–IV Active or post-tx Exercise tolerance, activity, sleep patterns, quality of life Wrist actigraph Abbreviation: tx, treatment. Table 3 Comparisons Between Articles Without a Theory, Model, or Framework (n = 51) and Articles With a Theory, Model, or Framework (n = 22) Without Theory, Model, or Framework, n (%) With Theory, Model, or Framework, n (%) P a Author Disciplines Included Nursing No 38 (75) 2 (9) < .001 Yes 13 (25) 20 (91) Types of Study Descriptive 40 (78) 16 (73) .59 Intervention 11 (22) 6 (27) Sample: cancer diagnoses Mixed sample 20 (39) 6 (27) .53 Breast only 23 (45) 13 (59) Other single cancer 8 (16) 3 (14) Sample: stage of cancer Nonmetastatic 16 (31) 11 (50) .21 Metastatic 5 (10) 2 (9) Both 11 (22) 6 (27) Not reported 19 (37) 3 (14) Sample: treatment status Pretreatment 2 (4) 1 (5) .60 Active treatment 12 (24) 9 (41) Posttreatment b 21 (41) 7 (32) Mixed sample 12 (24) 3 (14) Not reported 4 (8) 2 (9) Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index included No 38 (75) 14 (64) .35 Yes 13 (25) 8 (36) Polysomnography used No 46 (90) 22 (100) .13 Yes 5 (10) 0 (0) Actigraphy used No 43 (84) 12 (55) .01 Yes 8 (16) 10 (45) Significant differences are in bold. a P value based on ?2 test of differences between groups. b Posttreatment included subjects taking hormonal therapy. Table 4 Summary and Comparison of Theories, Models, and Frameworks SWD Model Brief Synopsis Physiological Components Psychological Components Behavioral Components Primary Biobehavioral Model of Altered Dysregulation in Circadian Systems SWD manifested as circadian dysregulation X X Primary Spielman’s Three-Factor Model Predisposing, precipitating, and perpetuating factors interact in insomnia X X X Primary Adapted Two-Process Model of Sleep Regulation (adapted) Process S and process C drive sleep and wakefulness X X X Secondary Model of Quality of Life Sleep as part of physical well-being, 1 of 4 quality of life domains X X Secondary Model of Symptom Management Symptom experience, symptom management and symptom outcomes are related X X X Secondary Neuroendocrine-Based Regulatory Fatigue Model Describes mechanisms of wake disturbances (fatigue) X X Secondary Orem’s Self-care Deficit Theory of Nursing SWD potentially impact self-care abilities X X X Secondary Piper’s Integrated Fatigue Model Sleep as one of several factors influencing fatigue X X X Secondary Psychobiological model of hot flashes Sleep disturbances as outcome of menopausal hot flashes X Secondary Roy Adaptation Model Sleep as physiological mode of adaptation X X Secondary Theory of Unpleasant Symptoms—adapted Physiological, psychological, and situational factors influence sleep and other symptoms that negatively affect performance status X X X Abbreviation: SWD, sleep wake disturbances. 