Gleason grading of prostatic adenocarcinoma with glomeruloid features on needle biopsy Summary Glomerulations in prostatic adenocarcinoma are characterized by dilated glands containing intraluminal cribriform structures with a single point of attachment, resembling a renal glomerulus. On prostate biopsy, glomerulations are exclusively associated with carcinoma and not associated with benign mimickers. However, the Gleason grading of carcinoma with glomerulations on needle biopsy remains controversial. We prospectively collected 45 prostate needle biopsies containing carcinoma with glomeruloid features from our consult files for a 9-month period and examined the association between glomerulations and the presence of concurrent high-grade carcinoma. Glomerulations were overwhelmingly associated with high-grade cancer on the same core, composed of either Gleason pattern 4 (n = 36, 80% of cases) or Gleason pattern 5 (n = 2, 4% of cases). Only a minority of glomerulations were surrounded exclusively by pattern 3 cancer (n = 7, 16% of cases) on the same core. Most of the cases with surrounding pattern 4 cancer were scored as 3 + 4 = 7 (n = 24, 66%), whereas a smaller fraction were scored as 4 + 3 = 7 (n = 9, 26%), and only a minority were 4 + 4 = 8 (n = 3, 9%). In most cases, glomeruloid change was present on the same core as the highest Gleason score carcinoma of the case. None of the pattern 3 cases and only a minority of the pattern 4 cancers had higher Gleason score carcinoma on additional cores (n = 5, 14%). Glomeruloid structures are a rare but diagnostic feature of prostatic carcinoma on needle biopsy. Our data indicate that glomerulations are overwhelmingly associated with concurrent Gleason pattern 4 or higher-grade carcinoma. In several cases, transition could be seen among small glomerulations, large glomeruloid structures, and cribriform pattern 4 cancer. These data suggest that glomerulations represent an early stage of cribriform pattern 4 cancer and, until follow-up data are available, are best graded as Gleason pattern 4. 