Burnt-Out Diabetes: The Impact of CKD Progression on the Natural Course of Diabetes Mellitus Many individuals with diabetic nephropathy, the leading cause of chronic kidney disease (CKD) in the United States, progress to stage 5 of CKD and undergo maintenance dialysis treatment. Recent data indicate that in up to one-third of the diabetic dialysis patients with the presumptive diagnosis of diabetic nephropathy, glycemic control improves spontaneously with the progression of CKD, loss of residual renal function and the initiation of dialysis therapy, leading to normal to low hemoglobin A1c (<6%) and glucose levels, requiring cessation of insulin or other diabetic medications. Potential contributors to this so-called “burnt-out diabetes” include decreased renal and hepatic insulin clearance, decline in renal gluconeogenesis, deficient catecholamine release, diminished food intake due to anorexia and/or diabetic gastroparesis, protein-energy wasting with resultant weight and body fat loss, and hypoglycemic effect of dialysis treatment. Although the concept of “burnt-out diabetes” appears in sharp contradistinction to the natural history of diabetes mellitus, studying this condition and its potential causes and consequences including the role of genetic factors may lead to better understanding of the pathophysiology of metabolic syndrome and diabetes mellitus in the CKD population and in many other individuals with chronic disease states associated with wasting syndrome that can confound the natural history of diabetes.  Conclusions Recent data indicate that in up to one-third of diabetic patients with the presumptive diagnosis of diabetic nephropathy, glycemic control may improve spontaneously with the progression of CKD, loss of residual renal function and the initiation of dialysis therapy. Many of these long-standing diabetic patients have full-blown diabetic microangiopathies (proliferative retinoapthy, nephropathy and neuropathy) and macroangiopathies (coronary artery disease, peripheral vascular disease, and limb amputations); nevertheless, they may not need insulin or other diabetic medications any more, as their A1c levels shifts within normal range and their serum glucose goes into normal or even low ranges, especially if such medications continued to be administered with the same doses or frequencies as before. The concept of “burnt-out diabetes” that we have advanced herewith is not a novel condition in our opinion. However, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that this condition has been described systematically by referring to the national A1c data of the hemodialysis patients in the USA ( Figure 1 )[ 29 ] and by presenting the comprehensive list potential etiologies of the “burnt-out diabetes” ( Table 1 ). Although the concept of burnt-out diabetes may sound provocative and in sharp contradistinction to the natural history of DM, it appears to be a real entity, the study of which may lead to better understanding of the pathophysiology of metabolic syndrome and DM in not only the CKD population but in many other conditions with chronic disease states, such as chronic heart failure,[ 30 ] that are associated with wasting syndrome and that may confound the natural course of DM. If for instance these one-third CKD patients with burnt-out diabetes have distinguished genotype or phenotypes, such genetic or acquired distinction may help module the glycemic control and treat or prevent DM more effectively. Studying the causes and consequences of the burnt-out diabetes may be a mean to that end.  Figure and Table Figure 1 Distribution of hemoglobin A1c in 23618 diabetic hemodialysis patients in the United States (these data are derived from all DaVita dialysis clinics between July 2001 and June 2003)[ 29 ] Table 1 Potential contributors of the “burnt-out diabetes” in patients with CKD stage 5. 1. Decreased renal clearance of insulin 2. Decreased hepatic clearance of insulin 3. Impaired renal insulin degradation 4. Increased insulin half-life * 5. Decline in renal gluconeogenesis 6. Deficient catecholamine release 7. Other impacts of uremia on glucose homeostasis 8. Diminished food intake due to anorexia, diabetic gastroparesis, etc. 9. Protein-energy wasting (malnutrition-inflammation complex) 10. Loss of body weight and fat mass 11. Comorbiod conditions 12. Hypoglycemia during hemodialysis treatments 13. Effects of peritoneal dialysis on glucose metabolism 14. Prescribed medications 15. Imposed dietary restrictions 16. Apparently low A1c due to confounding by uremia or anemia * Due to conditions other than those under 1 through 3 