Psychosocial Correlates of Hepatitis C: Interaction and impact on quality of life Despite demonstrated prevalence of psychosocial problems among hepatitis C (HCV) patients, little is known about how these problems develop, why they are sustained, and how clinical providers can effectively intervene. This study uses a qualitative approach to investigate the nature of psychosocial issues in HCV. Focus groups were conducted with HCV patients during which participants discussed significant feelings of anger, depression, and stigma associated with diagnosis. Participants noted these feelings/experiences isolated them from potential sources of social support. Results have important implications for clinical providers and suggest pathways by which HCV-related psychosocial factors interact and impact of quality of life.  Discussion Guide: HCV Patient Experiences, Preferences, and Attitudes Introduction As participants enter, offer snacks. Read through the consent form with the group and ask each person to complete the consent form Collect all forms before beginning the focus group discussion. Purpose of Focus group Thank you for attending this Focus Group. My name is [_____] and I will be moderating this discussion today. The purpose of this focus group is to ask you to talk about your experiences about treatment for Hepatitis C. We are particularly interested in hearing about your experiences, your opinions about your choices for treatment and reasons why you may have refused treatment. You were invited to participate in this group because you have hepatitis C and were recently evaluated in the VA Hepatitis C Resource center. Some of you currently are being treated and some of you may not be receiving treatment. I would like to go over a few ground rules before we begin: First, we hope that you will feel comfortable discussing your personal experiences in this group discussion format. However, we realize that it is possible that some of you may feel uncomfortable or uneasy sharing some experiences given the composition of the group. For example, we realize that some of you may know one another. Therefore if you feel that participation in today’s discussion will be awkward we will fully respect your decision not to participate. It is important that this evening’s/afternoon’s/morning’s discussion remains confidential. Therefore, I ask you that our conversation does not leave this room. Please use only your first name and please refer to others by first name only. That will allow us to maintain as much anonymity on the tape recording as possible. I would also like to remind you that today’s discussion will be tape recorded. We record all conversations so that we have an accurate and complete report of what was said. You will not be identified on the tape other than by your first name. The tape will be transcribed into a written form (your first name will not be part of the written form). The tapes will not be used for any other purpose and will be destroyed at end of the project. It is important that only one person speaks at a time, and please speak up so we can capture all of your comments. If there is more than one person speaking at a time, it is very difficult to transcribe. We need to be able to hear what everyone says so that we can produce an accurate report of the discussion. Please avoid any side conversations (with your neighbor) during the discussion, since that can interfere with the audiotape transcription, as well. Interactions between all of the group members are encouraged. Please feel free to share your feelings and opinions, even if you disagree with what has already been said. We would like to hear everyone's viewpoints. Because this is a group discussion, I will try to make sure that everyone has a chance to speak but that no one dominates the discussion; so please don’t be offended if I gently cut you off. Are there any questions before we begin? We have a lot to discuss, so let's get started. Tell us whether you have been treated for hepatitis C. If yes, how long you have been treated for Hepatitis C, and what is your current or most treatment. If no, why you or your doctor decided not to begin treatment. START TAPE RECORDING. ASK AGAIN IF EVERYONE IS COMFORTABLE WITH AUDIOTAPING THE SESSION. Questions Current Treatment Status: 1. To begin, I want to you talk about whether or not you are currently being treatment for Hepatitis C. PROBE: Have you started, complete or are currently in treatment? Did anyone not complete a full course of treatment? If so, why? Did anyone one refuse treatment for Hep C. If so, why? Symptoms: 2. As you probably know, people can have many different reactions to treatment. Some may experience a lot of side effects; others not be affected as much. Thinking about the past year, or since you started treatment, what were your experiences with your treatment? PROBE: Did this treatment have any effect on you physically? If so, what? PROBE: Did this treatment have any effect on you emotionally? If so, what? PROBE: Did this treatment have any effect on your social life? If so, what? Expectations about Treatment: 3. Think back to when you first talked with a doctor about treatment for your hepatitis. When you first started your treatment for Hepatitis C, what did you think the treatment would do for you? 4. When you first started your treatment for Hepatitis C how did you expect to feel? Why did you expect to feel this way? 5. Were you expecting the experience(s) you describe? Why or why not? PROBE: Are you surprised by your experiences with your treatment? Why or why not. Decisions and Choices: 6. What were the concerns or questions you had about starting treatment? How did you make the choice to start treatment or not? FOR THOSE BEING TREATED: Did you think about not doing anything for your Hepatitis C? If so, why did you go ahead with this treatment? 7. Knowing what you do now about your treatment, would you make a different choice now? What? Why? 8. Is there anything about your treatment that you wish you knew about before you started? What? Why? 9. Now I am going to ask you to shift your focus and talk about specific issues that can be important for a doctor and patient to talk about when choosing a course of treatment. For some people, making a choice depends on how they will have to take the medicine or treatment. For example, some people don’t want to have to have injections. Others worry about keeping track of all of their pills. How important were these considerations for you? Why? Some kinds of treatment require a lot of follow-up visits to check for side effects. How important was this for you? Why? Some treatment choices may make people feel sick or cause or kinds of problems for them. How important are these considerations for you? Why? 10. If you were talking to a close friend or family member who needed to start treatment for Hepatitis C, what would you tell him or her to think about when choosing a treatment? What is important for anyone to know about before deciding to go ahead or refuse treatment?  Introduction As participants enter, offer snacks. Read through the consent form with the group and ask each person to complete the consent form Collect all forms before beginning the focus group discussion.  Purpose of Focus group Thank you for attending this Focus Group. My name is [_____] and I will be moderating this discussion today. The purpose of this focus group is to ask you to talk about your experiences about treatment for Hepatitis C. We are particularly interested in hearing about your experiences, your opinions about your choices for treatment and reasons why you may have refused treatment. You were invited to participate in this group because you have hepatitis C and were recently evaluated in the VA Hepatitis C Resource center. Some of you currently are being treated and some of you may not be receiving treatment. I would like to go over a few ground rules before we begin: First, we hope that you will feel comfortable discussing your personal experiences in this group discussion format. However, we realize that it is possible that some of you may feel uncomfortable or uneasy sharing some experiences given the composition of the group. For example, we realize that some of you may know one another. Therefore if you feel that participation in today’s discussion will be awkward we will fully respect your decision not to participate. It is important that this evening’s/afternoon’s/morning’s discussion remains confidential. Therefore, I ask you that our conversation does not leave this room. Please use only your first name and please refer to others by first name only. That will allow us to maintain as much anonymity on the tape recording as possible. I would also like to remind you that today’s discussion will be tape recorded. We record all conversations so that we have an accurate and complete report of what was said. You will not be identified on the tape other than by your first name. The tape will be transcribed into a written form (your first name will not be part of the written form). The tapes will not be used for any other purpose and will be destroyed at end of the project. It is important that only one person speaks at a time, and please speak up so we can capture all of your comments. If there is more than one person speaking at a time, it is very difficult to transcribe. We need to be able to hear what everyone says so that we can produce an accurate report of the discussion. Please avoid any side conversations (with your neighbor) during the discussion, since that can interfere with the audiotape transcription, as well. Interactions between all of the group members are encouraged. Please feel free to share your feelings and opinions, even if you disagree with what has already been said. We would like to hear everyone's viewpoints. Because this is a group discussion, I will try to make sure that everyone has a chance to speak but that no one dominates the discussion; so please don’t be offended if I gently cut you off. Are there any questions before we begin? We have a lot to discuss, so let's get started. Tell us whether you have been treated for hepatitis C. If yes, how long you have been treated for Hepatitis C, and what is your current or most treatment. If no, why you or your doctor decided not to begin treatment. START TAPE RECORDING. ASK AGAIN IF EVERYONE IS COMFORTABLE WITH AUDIOTAPING THE SESSION.  Questions Current Treatment Status: 1. To begin, I want to you talk about whether or not you are currently being treatment for Hepatitis C. PROBE: Have you started, complete or are currently in treatment? Did anyone not complete a full course of treatment? If so, why? Did anyone one refuse treatment for Hep C. If so, why? Symptoms: 2. As you probably know, people can have many different reactions to treatment. Some may experience a lot of side effects; others not be affected as much. Thinking about the past year, or since you started treatment, what were your experiences with your treatment? PROBE: Did this treatment have any effect on you physically? If so, what? PROBE: Did this treatment have any effect on you emotionally? If so, what? PROBE: Did this treatment have any effect on your social life? If so, what? Expectations about Treatment: 3. Think back to when you first talked with a doctor about treatment for your hepatitis. When you first started your treatment for Hepatitis C, what did you think the treatment would do for you? 4. When you first started your treatment for Hepatitis C how did you expect to feel? Why did you expect to feel this way? 5. Were you expecting the experience(s) you describe? Why or why not? PROBE: Are you surprised by your experiences with your treatment? Why or why not. Decisions and Choices: 6. What were the concerns or questions you had about starting treatment? How did you make the choice to start treatment or not? FOR THOSE BEING TREATED: Did you think about not doing anything for your Hepatitis C? If so, why did you go ahead with this treatment? 7. Knowing what you do now about your treatment, would you make a different choice now? What? Why? 8. Is there anything about your treatment that you wish you knew about before you started? What? Why? 9. Now I am going to ask you to shift your focus and talk about specific issues that can be important for a doctor and patient to talk about when choosing a course of treatment. For some people, making a choice depends on how they will have to take the medicine or treatment. For example, some people don’t want to have to have injections. Others worry about keeping track of all of their pills. How important were these considerations for you? Why? Some kinds of treatment require a lot of follow-up visits to check for side effects. How important was this for you? Why? Some treatment choices may make people feel sick or cause or kinds of problems for them. How important are these considerations for you? Why? 10. If you were talking to a close friend or family member who needed to start treatment for Hepatitis C, what would you tell him or her to think about when choosing a treatment? What is important for anyone to know about before deciding to go ahead or refuse treatment?  Methods Participants Data for this study were collected as part of an investigation on patient decision-making about treatment for HCV. Detailed information about the recruitment and research methods is found in Fraenkel and colleagues. 18 – 19 In brief, participants were recruited through outpatient liver clinics from Yale New Haven Hospital and the Veterans Administration (VA) Connecticut Healthcare System. Health care providers at the clinics referred patients to the study. Individuals were eligible if they had biopsy proven HCV, were currently undergoing treatment for HCV, had received treatment in the past six months, or had been offered treatment but refused. Data Collection and Measures Eight focus groups were completed between January 2004 and August 2004. The focus groups had an average of five participants and took 90 minutes to complete. The same, trained investigator (SMcG) moderated all sessions. The sessions were audio taped and the tapes transcribed to written form by a professional transcription service. All participants gave informed consent; and both the VA Connecticut Healthcare System and the Yale University Institutional Review Boards approved the study. A structured discussion guide (see Appendix A ) covered ten questions about current treatment status; reactions to treatment including physical, emotional and social effects; expectations about their treatment experiences prior to beginning treatment; and questions and concerns about treatment and the decision-making process. Demographic information was collected at the beginning of each focus group using a self-administered questionnaire. Data Analysis The constant comparative method 20 was used to analyze the data. Using this iterative approach, two analysts independently read the transcripts and developed an initial list of themes. Themes were revised and refined on a second reading. QSR*NUDIST (Sage Publications Software, Thousand Oaks, CA) was used to identify and sort text across transcripts for each code. 21  Participants Data for this study were collected as part of an investigation on patient decision-making about treatment for HCV. Detailed information about the recruitment and research methods is found in Fraenkel and colleagues. 18 – 19 In brief, participants were recruited through outpatient liver clinics from Yale New Haven Hospital and the Veterans Administration (VA) Connecticut Healthcare System. Health care providers at the clinics referred patients to the study. Individuals were eligible if they had biopsy proven HCV, were currently undergoing treatment for HCV, had received treatment in the past six months, or had been offered treatment but refused.  Data Collection and Measures Eight focus groups were completed between January 2004 and August 2004. The focus groups had an average of five participants and took 90 minutes to complete. The same, trained investigator (SMcG) moderated all sessions. The sessions were audio taped and the tapes transcribed to written form by a professional transcription service. All participants gave informed consent; and both the VA Connecticut Healthcare System and the Yale University Institutional Review Boards approved the study. A structured discussion guide (see Appendix A ) covered ten questions about current treatment status; reactions to treatment including physical, emotional and social effects; expectations about their treatment experiences prior to beginning treatment; and questions and concerns about treatment and the decision-making process. Demographic information was collected at the beginning of each focus group using a self-administered questionnaire.  Data Analysis The constant comparative method 20 was used to analyze the data. Using this iterative approach, two analysts independently read the transcripts and developed an initial list of themes. Themes were revised and refined on a second reading. QSR*NUDIST (Sage Publications Software, Thousand Oaks, CA) was used to identify and sort text across transcripts for each code. 21  Results Description of the Sample A total of 40 patients (80% male) participated in eight focus groups. The mean age (±SD) of the study sample was 51.5 ± 5.2 (range 40–60 years), 82% were Caucasian, 59% had greater than a high school education, 55% were employed, and 38% reported having a very good or excellent overall health status. At the time of the session, 32.5% were in treatment, 50% had completed treatment, and 17.5% had refused treatment. Focus Group Findings Several key themes emerged from focus group discussions. Nearly all members discussed the impact of symptoms and side-effects from chronic HCV and its associated treatment. As these discussions are consistent with previously published reports, they will not be detailed here. However, group discussions additionally focused on feelings of emotional volatility, stigma, and disease impact on social relationships. Participants discussed significant feelings of irritability, anger, and depression along with experiences of stigma related to being diagnosed with HCV. They also noted that these feelings and experiences led to a desire to isolate from potential sources of social support. The following sections describe these themes in greater detail. Anger and reduction in impulse control A number of participants discussed experiencing intense feelings of irritability, anger, and outright rage. Almost all of the participants who described these feelings found them to be disturbing, unexpected, and unfamiliar. Frequently, these feelings were directed towards the people around them. A number of participants expressed difficulty controlling these feelings of anger, with some describing a significant loss of impulse control. Like I blew up, and have rages and yell at people, and then I'd say, what in the world am I doing? When I'd get home I was so upset with myself. Group 2 I stayed stuck on mean and evil… I’ve got a three-year-old grandson who stays with me. Feels like I see him days that I don’t get that shot, I’m just as cool as ever. Once I get that shot, I try and avoid him, because I know how mean I’m going to get. I’m going to be hollering at him, which is why I don’t want to do that. But looks like everything he does aggravates me. And then when my lady sees me, she’s going out of her way because she knows that day is …. She goes the opposite way. And so I’ve got older kids and they mostly understand on that day don’t mess with pop. Pop go in the room, I come from there, I go home, I goes in my room, that’s where I’m at. Now you talk to me the next day. Don’t talk to me today, because you’re going to say something and I’m going to get angry with you. Group 4 My fuse definitely is shortened. You know? Like I get really anxious at traffic lights enough to get me punching the dashboard sometimes. Group 7 One participant expressed the notion that feelings of irritability and anger were fundamentally different from the physical effects of the treatment. You know, I could have like dealt with the physical effects easier I think. I wasn't real depressed or nothing, but just irritable, snappy, real short fuse. Group 8 Some described difficulty with controlling what they said to others. …you're pretty much out of control. Little things, you snap, yell, scream. And then you think about them later, I mean much later you'll say, "That really didn't mean that much. Why did I react that way?" Then you look at it in retrospect, but at the moment it's just this bubbling, boiling, bursting from within whelm of emotion that just rushes up inside of you and sort of controls you at that second. Group 2 Because the next thing I knew my ears were hearing the words like I'm saying that were supposed be only thoughts. Group 8 Others described difficulty controlling their actions when these feelings of anger arose. I had two incidents of road rage. One where I put my fist through a driver’s window, cut my hand and actually drove the glass into his shoulder. I’ve never done anything like that in my life. Group 4 If somebody did something, like I had a problem with the neighbor…I wanted to go out there and beat the {expletive} out of him…. If somebody wasn't there holding me back, I would have went out there and hit the guy. Group 6 One other time my wife started {expletive} at me. I pulled over to the side of the road. I opened the door and I pushed her right out of the car…. And I was so mad, if I would've been driving 60 miles an hour, she would've been out the door. And it was like an uncontrollable sense of anger. I couldn't get a handle on it. Group 4 Sadness and depression Many participants discussed feelings of depression, but some particularly associated this sadness with feelings of irritability and the “emotional roller coaster” that comes with having chronic HCV and its associated treatment. Some participants noted that changes in emotions were sudden and unpredictable. I was seriously depressed. I just felt. And I had never felt like this in my entire life before and she said, it was a nurse practitioner, she said you feel overwhelming sadness. I said that’s exactly how I feel. I just feel like crying all the time. And I never, ever felt like this in my life. And it was so dramatic. It took like five or six days. I was feeling perfect. I had had aches and pains, but I mentally was fine. And then all of a sudden. And it happened very quickly, which was very, very frightening, because I knew of the side effects, people get suicidal and homicidal, and I thought, oh my God, I’m going to be bananas. So, I saw her in the morning and actually got a little confused trying to find her office. And I thought, wow …. By that afternoon I couldn’t even think. I literally. I was crying all the time. Group 7 I think I was too miserable to feel depressed. But I have to tell you, if depression is being in a dark place, I was in a dark place…. And this is a dark place. It was a dark place for me. And if that’s depression, then I would say I was depressed. But didn’t feel like depression. I didn’t feel like, oh gee, my life sucks or anything else like that. I didn’t feel sorry for myself or bad. I just felt awful. Group 8 I felt like I was coming down with Tourette’s or something. You know, I’d be sitting there real quiet and all of a sudden I’d go …. You know? It must have been me. Group 8 The experience of such strong and labile emotions led some participants to express the notion that they felt they lost their sense of self. I can't help it. I just don't know who I am now. Group 8 You're set in your world and role for a long time. You know yourself, but all of a sudden this drug is doing things to you that make you a little flaky around the edges. Group 2 When I was on the ribavirin it was the mood swings were very severe and they were uncontrollable. I didn't know who I was…I was ready to slam somebody through a wall. Group 8 For some participants these feelings of anger and loss of control became so strong they linked to suicidal and even homicidal thoughts. And I'm thinking, I never had any suicidal tendencies, but I wanted to kill my neighbor next door, because. Hold me back. Hold me back. Group 6 You know I just lost it one day. …And I just screamed every four-letter word and every this and that and I wish I didn't wake up and I didn't even want to wake up anymore. You know I had no feelings of killing myself. I'm too much of a coward. Group 6 One participant expressed the sense that, after completing INF treatment, the feelings of anger he experienced during treatment turned into feelings of sadness. I thought it was over. Thank God it’s over. But it’s not always over. I’m still getting over some residual, and also my anger went to sadness, went to actual feelings of depression….I started having that after the treatment, after I stopped the injections. Now I wasn’t having a rage, but now I was really beginning to have the depression where I really felt bad. And like you, I couldn’t blame it on that. I couldn’t say, “Well it’ll just be over next Thursday. I’m not taking the medicine anymore.” And for me in some ways that was harder. And you get off it slowly. It doesn’t just go away when you stop taking the medication. Group 2 Stigma Many participants also talked about their awareness of the stigma and negative social perceptions associated with HCV. They perceived stigma not only from acquaintances but also from family members and even health care providers. For example, several participants expressed a belief that others—including health care providers—sometimes assumed their infection resulted from substance abuse or other stigmatized conditions. At first I thought I can’t tell anybody… Group 6 A lot of people don’t know anything about it and it scares them. Also associated to drug use and everything. It’s just misinformation. They have no idea what it is or anything. They’re afraid of the unknown. Group 3 The first thing they think about is that you've done something wrong to acquire this. Group 2 The first time I went for treatment a lot of it they thought was drug abuse, because they just were saying you shouldn’t be having this much joint pains and all this kind of business. Another participant replied to this: “Don't you hate when they say that?” Group 6 Several participants described how stigma associated with HCV led them to limit their openness about their illness. People are uneducated about it and right away you're like a dirty person or whatever. People are so judgmental that you're better off being confidential about it. Group 7 So it's almost like you're afraid to tell anybody or it's taboo. It's just like when I had cancer. People would say; you're walking around with a big C on your, instead of a big H on your head. Group 2 This stigma also resulted in tension and strained interactions in social relationships, even among family members. I remember sneezing while I was handling some silverware, which I would've rewashed anyway, but I remember my sister-in-law… just being freaked out, just really not knowing. And I'm like, "It's okay. It's blood borne. Unless we exchange body fluids here, you're okay." Group 5 And people don't understand it, so they're afraid that if I touch you and you have cancer, I'm going to die of cancer. You're got Hep-C; can I breathe in this room? Group 2 Social isolation Feelings of emotional volatility and concern about stigma led many participants to withdraw or isolate themselves from others. I get so aggravated I just shut down completely. I go home; I go in the basement…. Don't bother me. Group 4 And like when I was down, I mean that would sometimes last for days, just being, "Leave me alone. I don't want to be bothered. Go in the other room and leave me." Group 4 I developed from the first time, and still now, a fear of socializing outside with people. Group 6 And I felt that it really became out of my control, so I literally just completely withdrew. And I was perfectly happy living that way. I really didn't want to deal with people, I mean in any way, shape or form. Group 2 Some also isolated themselves because they did not feel well and had lost a desire to seek social contact. I just did not want to dress up and go anywhere because I just didn’t feel normal. Group 6 I couldn’t do it from the medication. So that part of it people did stop asking me towards the end…. Socially the isolation was there when I felt the worst, when I was in my bed for 48 hours. Group 6 Additionally, some participants noted that feeling confused and overwhelmed also led them to withdraw socially. I couldn't remember someone's name…. It's like if I'm around my neighbor too much, they're going to think I'm an idiot, because they're going to wonder why I keep forgetting everything. And so that was part of the withdrawing. It's not just the anger, but the confusion. It's like I just don't want people to see me like this and I don't want to have to deal with it. Group 2  Results Description of the Sample A total of 40 patients (80% male) participated in eight focus groups. The mean age (±SD) of the study sample was 51.5 ± 5.2 (range 40–60 years), 82% were Caucasian, 59% had greater than a high school education, 55% were employed, and 38% reported having a very good or excellent overall health status. At the time of the session, 32.5% were in treatment, 50% had completed treatment, and 17.5% had refused treatment. Focus Group Findings Several key themes emerged from focus group discussions. Nearly all members discussed the impact of symptoms and side-effects from chronic HCV and its associated treatment. As these discussions are consistent with previously published reports, they will not be detailed here. However, group discussions additionally focused on feelings of emotional volatility, stigma, and disease impact on social relationships. Participants discussed significant feelings of irritability, anger, and depression along with experiences of stigma related to being diagnosed with HCV. They also noted that these feelings and experiences led to a desire to isolate from potential sources of social support. The following sections describe these themes in greater detail. Anger and reduction in impulse control A number of participants discussed experiencing intense feelings of irritability, anger, and outright rage. Almost all of the participants who described these feelings found them to be disturbing, unexpected, and unfamiliar. Frequently, these feelings were directed towards the people around them. A number of participants expressed difficulty controlling these feelings of anger, with some describing a significant loss of impulse control. Like I blew up, and have rages and yell at people, and then I'd say, what in the world am I doing? When I'd get home I was so upset with myself. Group 2 I stayed stuck on mean and evil… I’ve got a three-year-old grandson who stays with me. Feels like I see him days that I don’t get that shot, I’m just as cool as ever. Once I get that shot, I try and avoid him, because I know how mean I’m going to get. I’m going to be hollering at him, which is why I don’t want to do that. But looks like everything he does aggravates me. And then when my lady sees me, she’s going out of her way because she knows that day is …. She goes the opposite way. And so I’ve got older kids and they mostly understand on that day don’t mess with pop. Pop go in the room, I come from there, I go home, I goes in my room, that’s where I’m at. Now you talk to me the next day. Don’t talk to me today, because you’re going to say something and I’m going to get angry with you. Group 4 My fuse definitely is shortened. You know? Like I get really anxious at traffic lights enough to get me punching the dashboard sometimes. Group 7 One participant expressed the notion that feelings of irritability and anger were fundamentally different from the physical effects of the treatment. You know, I could have like dealt with the physical effects easier I think. I wasn't real depressed or nothing, but just irritable, snappy, real short fuse. Group 8 Some described difficulty with controlling what they said to others. …you're pretty much out of control. Little things, you snap, yell, scream. And then you think about them later, I mean much later you'll say, "That really didn't mean that much. Why did I react that way?" Then you look at it in retrospect, but at the moment it's just this bubbling, boiling, bursting from within whelm of emotion that just rushes up inside of you and sort of controls you at that second. Group 2 Because the next thing I knew my ears were hearing the words like I'm saying that were supposed be only thoughts. Group 8 Others described difficulty controlling their actions when these feelings of anger arose. I had two incidents of road rage. One where I put my fist through a driver’s window, cut my hand and actually drove the glass into his shoulder. I’ve never done anything like that in my life. Group 4 If somebody did something, like I had a problem with the neighbor…I wanted to go out there and beat the {expletive} out of him…. If somebody wasn't there holding me back, I would have went out there and hit the guy. Group 6 One other time my wife started {expletive} at me. I pulled over to the side of the road. I opened the door and I pushed her right out of the car…. And I was so mad, if I would've been driving 60 miles an hour, she would've been out the door. And it was like an uncontrollable sense of anger. I couldn't get a handle on it. Group 4 Sadness and depression Many participants discussed feelings of depression, but some particularly associated this sadness with feelings of irritability and the “emotional roller coaster” that comes with having chronic HCV and its associated treatment. Some participants noted that changes in emotions were sudden and unpredictable. I was seriously depressed. I just felt. And I had never felt like this in my entire life before and she said, it was a nurse practitioner, she said you feel overwhelming sadness. I said that’s exactly how I feel. I just feel like crying all the time. And I never, ever felt like this in my life. And it was so dramatic. It took like five or six days. I was feeling perfect. I had had aches and pains, but I mentally was fine. And then all of a sudden. And it happened very quickly, which was very, very frightening, because I knew of the side effects, people get suicidal and homicidal, and I thought, oh my God, I’m going to be bananas. So, I saw her in the morning and actually got a little confused trying to find her office. And I thought, wow …. By that afternoon I couldn’t even think. I literally. I was crying all the time. Group 7 I think I was too miserable to feel depressed. But I have to tell you, if depression is being in a dark place, I was in a dark place…. And this is a dark place. It was a dark place for me. And if that’s depression, then I would say I was depressed. But didn’t feel like depression. I didn’t feel like, oh gee, my life sucks or anything else like that. I didn’t feel sorry for myself or bad. I just felt awful. Group 8 I felt like I was coming down with Tourette’s or something. You know, I’d be sitting there real quiet and all of a sudden I’d go …. You know? It must have been me. Group 8 The experience of such strong and labile emotions led some participants to express the notion that they felt they lost their sense of self. I can't help it. I just don't know who I am now. Group 8 You're set in your world and role for a long time. You know yourself, but all of a sudden this drug is doing things to you that make you a little flaky around the edges. Group 2 When I was on the ribavirin it was the mood swings were very severe and they were uncontrollable. I didn't know who I was…I was ready to slam somebody through a wall. Group 8 For some participants these feelings of anger and loss of control became so strong they linked to suicidal and even homicidal thoughts. And I'm thinking, I never had any suicidal tendencies, but I wanted to kill my neighbor next door, because. Hold me back. Hold me back. Group 6 You know I just lost it one day. …And I just screamed every four-letter word and every this and that and I wish I didn't wake up and I didn't even want to wake up anymore. You know I had no feelings of killing myself. I'm too much of a coward. Group 6 One participant expressed the sense that, after completing INF treatment, the feelings of anger he experienced during treatment turned into feelings of sadness. I thought it was over. Thank God it’s over. But it’s not always over. I’m still getting over some residual, and also my anger went to sadness, went to actual feelings of depression….I started having that after the treatment, after I stopped the injections. Now I wasn’t having a rage, but now I was really beginning to have the depression where I really felt bad. And like you, I couldn’t blame it on that. I couldn’t say, “Well it’ll just be over next Thursday. I’m not taking the medicine anymore.” And for me in some ways that was harder. And you get off it slowly. It doesn’t just go away when you stop taking the medication. Group 2 Stigma Many participants also talked about their awareness of the stigma and negative social perceptions associated with HCV. They perceived stigma not only from acquaintances but also from family members and even health care providers. For example, several participants expressed a belief that others—including health care providers—sometimes assumed their infection resulted from substance abuse or other stigmatized conditions. At first I thought I can’t tell anybody… Group 6 A lot of people don’t know anything about it and it scares them. Also associated to drug use and everything. It’s just misinformation. They have no idea what it is or anything. They’re afraid of the unknown. Group 3 The first thing they think about is that you've done something wrong to acquire this. Group 2 The first time I went for treatment a lot of it they thought was drug abuse, because they just were saying you shouldn’t be having this much joint pains and all this kind of business. Another participant replied to this: “Don't you hate when they say that?” Group 6 Several participants described how stigma associated with HCV led them to limit their openness about their illness. People are uneducated about it and right away you're like a dirty person or whatever. People are so judgmental that you're better off being confidential about it. Group 7 So it's almost like you're afraid to tell anybody or it's taboo. It's just like when I had cancer. People would say; you're walking around with a big C on your, instead of a big H on your head. Group 2 This stigma also resulted in tension and strained interactions in social relationships, even among family members. I remember sneezing while I was handling some silverware, which I would've rewashed anyway, but I remember my sister-in-law… just being freaked out, just really not knowing. And I'm like, "It's okay. It's blood borne. Unless we exchange body fluids here, you're okay." Group 5 And people don't understand it, so they're afraid that if I touch you and you have cancer, I'm going to die of cancer. You're got Hep-C; can I breathe in this room? Group 2 Social isolation Feelings of emotional volatility and concern about stigma led many participants to withdraw or isolate themselves from others. I get so aggravated I just shut down completely. I go home; I go in the basement…. Don't bother me. Group 4 And like when I was down, I mean that would sometimes last for days, just being, "Leave me alone. I don't want to be bothered. Go in the other room and leave me." Group 4 I developed from the first time, and still now, a fear of socializing outside with people. Group 6 And I felt that it really became out of my control, so I literally just completely withdrew. And I was perfectly happy living that way. I really didn't want to deal with people, I mean in any way, shape or form. Group 2 Some also isolated themselves because they did not feel well and had lost a desire to seek social contact. I just did not want to dress up and go anywhere because I just didn’t feel normal. Group 6 I couldn’t do it from the medication. So that part of it people did stop asking me towards the end…. Socially the isolation was there when I felt the worst, when I was in my bed for 48 hours. Group 6 Additionally, some participants noted that feeling confused and overwhelmed also led them to withdraw socially. I couldn't remember someone's name…. It's like if I'm around my neighbor too much, they're going to think I'm an idiot, because they're going to wonder why I keep forgetting everything. And so that was part of the withdrawing. It's not just the anger, but the confusion. It's like I just don't want people to see me like this and I don't want to have to deal with it. Group 2  Description of the Sample A total of 40 patients (80% male) participated in eight focus groups. The mean age (±SD) of the study sample was 51.5 ± 5.2 (range 40–60 years), 82% were Caucasian, 59% had greater than a high school education, 55% were employed, and 38% reported having a very good or excellent overall health status. At the time of the session, 32.5% were in treatment, 50% had completed treatment, and 17.5% had refused treatment.  Description of the Sample A total of 40 patients (80% male) participated in eight focus groups. The mean age (±SD) of the study sample was 51.5 ± 5.2 (range 40–60 years), 82% were Caucasian, 59% had greater than a high school education, 55% were employed, and 38% reported having a very good or excellent overall health status. At the time of the session, 32.5% were in treatment, 50% had completed treatment, and 17.5% had refused treatment.  Focus Group Findings Several key themes emerged from focus group discussions. Nearly all members discussed the impact of symptoms and side-effects from chronic HCV and its associated treatment. As these discussions are consistent with previously published reports, they will not be detailed here. However, group discussions additionally focused on feelings of emotional volatility, stigma, and disease impact on social relationships. Participants discussed significant feelings of irritability, anger, and depression along with experiences of stigma related to being diagnosed with HCV. They also noted that these feelings and experiences led to a desire to isolate from potential sources of social support. The following sections describe these themes in greater detail. Anger and reduction in impulse control A number of participants discussed experiencing intense feelings of irritability, anger, and outright rage. Almost all of the participants who described these feelings found them to be disturbing, unexpected, and unfamiliar. Frequently, these feelings were directed towards the people around them. A number of participants expressed difficulty controlling these feelings of anger, with some describing a significant loss of impulse control. Like I blew up, and have rages and yell at people, and then I'd say, what in the world am I doing? When I'd get home I was so upset with myself. Group 2 I stayed stuck on mean and evil… I’ve got a three-year-old grandson who stays with me. Feels like I see him days that I don’t get that shot, I’m just as cool as ever. Once I get that shot, I try and avoid him, because I know how mean I’m going to get. I’m going to be hollering at him, which is why I don’t want to do that. But looks like everything he does aggravates me. And then when my lady sees me, she’s going out of her way because she knows that day is …. She goes the opposite way. And so I’ve got older kids and they mostly understand on that day don’t mess with pop. Pop go in the room, I come from there, I go home, I goes in my room, that’s where I’m at. Now you talk to me the next day. Don’t talk to me today, because you’re going to say something and I’m going to get angry with you. Group 4 My fuse definitely is shortened. You know? Like I get really anxious at traffic lights enough to get me punching the dashboard sometimes. Group 7 One participant expressed the notion that feelings of irritability and anger were fundamentally different from the physical effects of the treatment. You know, I could have like dealt with the physical effects easier I think. I wasn't real depressed or nothing, but just irritable, snappy, real short fuse. Group 8 Some described difficulty with controlling what they said to others. …you're pretty much out of control. Little things, you snap, yell, scream. And then you think about them later, I mean much later you'll say, "That really didn't mean that much. Why did I react that way?" Then you look at it in retrospect, but at the moment it's just this bubbling, boiling, bursting from within whelm of emotion that just rushes up inside of you and sort of controls you at that second. Group 2 Because the next thing I knew my ears were hearing the words like I'm saying that were supposed be only thoughts. Group 8 Others described difficulty controlling their actions when these feelings of anger arose. I had two incidents of road rage. One where I put my fist through a driver’s window, cut my hand and actually drove the glass into his shoulder. I’ve never done anything like that in my life. Group 4 If somebody did something, like I had a problem with the neighbor…I wanted to go out there and beat the {expletive} out of him…. If somebody wasn't there holding me back, I would have went out there and hit the guy. Group 6 One other time my wife started {expletive} at me. I pulled over to the side of the road. I opened the door and I pushed her right out of the car…. And I was so mad, if I would've been driving 60 miles an hour, she would've been out the door. And it was like an uncontrollable sense of anger. I couldn't get a handle on it. Group 4 Sadness and depression Many participants discussed feelings of depression, but some particularly associated this sadness with feelings of irritability and the “emotional roller coaster” that comes with having chronic HCV and its associated treatment. Some participants noted that changes in emotions were sudden and unpredictable. I was seriously depressed. I just felt. And I had never felt like this in my entire life before and she said, it was a nurse practitioner, she said you feel overwhelming sadness. I said that’s exactly how I feel. I just feel like crying all the time. And I never, ever felt like this in my life. And it was so dramatic. It took like five or six days. I was feeling perfect. I had had aches and pains, but I mentally was fine. And then all of a sudden. And it happened very quickly, which was very, very frightening, because I knew of the side effects, people get suicidal and homicidal, and I thought, oh my God, I’m going to be bananas. So, I saw her in the morning and actually got a little confused trying to find her office. And I thought, wow …. By that afternoon I couldn’t even think. I literally. I was crying all the time. Group 7 I think I was too miserable to feel depressed. But I have to tell you, if depression is being in a dark place, I was in a dark place…. And this is a dark place. It was a dark place for me. And if that’s depression, then I would say I was depressed. But didn’t feel like depression. I didn’t feel like, oh gee, my life sucks or anything else like that. I didn’t feel sorry for myself or bad. I just felt awful. Group 8 I felt like I was coming down with Tourette’s or something. You know, I’d be sitting there real quiet and all of a sudden I’d go …. You know? It must have been me. Group 8 The experience of such strong and labile emotions led some participants to express the notion that they felt they lost their sense of self. I can't help it. I just don't know who I am now. Group 8 You're set in your world and role for a long time. You know yourself, but all of a sudden this drug is doing things to you that make you a little flaky around the edges. Group 2 When I was on the ribavirin it was the mood swings were very severe and they were uncontrollable. I didn't know who I was…I was ready to slam somebody through a wall. Group 8 For some participants these feelings of anger and loss of control became so strong they linked to suicidal and even homicidal thoughts. And I'm thinking, I never had any suicidal tendencies, but I wanted to kill my neighbor next door, because. Hold me back. Hold me back. Group 6 You know I just lost it one day. …And I just screamed every four-letter word and every this and that and I wish I didn't wake up and I didn't even want to wake up anymore. You know I had no feelings of killing myself. I'm too much of a coward. Group 6 One participant expressed the sense that, after completing INF treatment, the feelings of anger he experienced during treatment turned into feelings of sadness. I thought it was over. Thank God it’s over. But it’s not always over. I’m still getting over some residual, and also my anger went to sadness, went to actual feelings of depression….I started having that after the treatment, after I stopped the injections. Now I wasn’t having a rage, but now I was really beginning to have the depression where I really felt bad. And like you, I couldn’t blame it on that. I couldn’t say, “Well it’ll just be over next Thursday. I’m not taking the medicine anymore.” And for me in some ways that was harder. And you get off it slowly. It doesn’t just go away when you stop taking the medication. Group 2 Stigma Many participants also talked about their awareness of the stigma and negative social perceptions associated with HCV. They perceived stigma not only from acquaintances but also from family members and even health care providers. For example, several participants expressed a belief that others—including health care providers—sometimes assumed their infection resulted from substance abuse or other stigmatized conditions. At first I thought I can’t tell anybody… Group 6 A lot of people don’t know anything about it and it scares them. Also associated to drug use and everything. It’s just misinformation. They have no idea what it is or anything. They’re afraid of the unknown. Group 3 The first thing they think about is that you've done something wrong to acquire this. Group 2 The first time I went for treatment a lot of it they thought was drug abuse, because they just were saying you shouldn’t be having this much joint pains and all this kind of business. Another participant replied to this: “Don't you hate when they say that?” Group 6 Several participants described how stigma associated with HCV led them to limit their openness about their illness. People are uneducated about it and right away you're like a dirty person or whatever. People are so judgmental that you're better off being confidential about it. Group 7 So it's almost like you're afraid to tell anybody or it's taboo. It's just like when I had cancer. People would say; you're walking around with a big C on your, instead of a big H on your head. Group 2 This stigma also resulted in tension and strained interactions in social relationships, even among family members. I remember sneezing while I was handling some silverware, which I would've rewashed anyway, but I remember my sister-in-law… just being freaked out, just really not knowing. And I'm like, "It's okay. It's blood borne. Unless we exchange body fluids here, you're okay." Group 5 And people don't understand it, so they're afraid that if I touch you and you have cancer, I'm going to die of cancer. You're got Hep-C; can I breathe in this room? Group 2 Social isolation Feelings of emotional volatility and concern about stigma led many participants to withdraw or isolate themselves from others. I get so aggravated I just shut down completely. I go home; I go in the basement…. Don't bother me. Group 4 And like when I was down, I mean that would sometimes last for days, just being, "Leave me alone. I don't want to be bothered. Go in the other room and leave me." Group 4 I developed from the first time, and still now, a fear of socializing outside with people. Group 6 And I felt that it really became out of my control, so I literally just completely withdrew. And I was perfectly happy living that way. I really didn't want to deal with people, I mean in any way, shape or form. Group 2 Some also isolated themselves because they did not feel well and had lost a desire to seek social contact. I just did not want to dress up and go anywhere because I just didn’t feel normal. Group 6 I couldn’t do it from the medication. So that part of it people did stop asking me towards the end…. Socially the isolation was there when I felt the worst, when I was in my bed for 48 hours. Group 6 Additionally, some participants noted that feeling confused and overwhelmed also led them to withdraw socially. I couldn't remember someone's name…. It's like if I'm around my neighbor too much, they're going to think I'm an idiot, because they're going to wonder why I keep forgetting everything. And so that was part of the withdrawing. It's not just the anger, but the confusion. It's like I just don't want people to see me like this and I don't want to have to deal with it. Group 2  Focus Group Findings Several key themes emerged from focus group discussions. Nearly all members discussed the impact of symptoms and side-effects from chronic HCV and its associated treatment. As these discussions are consistent with previously published reports, they will not be detailed here. However, group discussions additionally focused on feelings of emotional volatility, stigma, and disease impact on social relationships. Participants discussed significant feelings of irritability, anger, and depression along with experiences of stigma related to being diagnosed with HCV. They also noted that these feelings and experiences led to a desire to isolate from potential sources of social support. The following sections describe these themes in greater detail. Anger and reduction in impulse control A number of participants discussed experiencing intense feelings of irritability, anger, and outright rage. Almost all of the participants who described these feelings found them to be disturbing, unexpected, and unfamiliar. Frequently, these feelings were directed towards the people around them. A number of participants expressed difficulty controlling these feelings of anger, with some describing a significant loss of impulse control. Like I blew up, and have rages and yell at people, and then I'd say, what in the world am I doing? When I'd get home I was so upset with myself. Group 2 I stayed stuck on mean and evil… I’ve got a three-year-old grandson who stays with me. Feels like I see him days that I don’t get that shot, I’m just as cool as ever. Once I get that shot, I try and avoid him, because I know how mean I’m going to get. I’m going to be hollering at him, which is why I don’t want to do that. But looks like everything he does aggravates me. And then when my lady sees me, she’s going out of her way because she knows that day is …. She goes the opposite way. And so I’ve got older kids and they mostly understand on that day don’t mess with pop. Pop go in the room, I come from there, I go home, I goes in my room, that’s where I’m at. Now you talk to me the next day. Don’t talk to me today, because you’re going to say something and I’m going to get angry with you. Group 4 My fuse definitely is shortened. You know? Like I get really anxious at traffic lights enough to get me punching the dashboard sometimes. Group 7 One participant expressed the notion that feelings of irritability and anger were fundamentally different from the physical effects of the treatment. You know, I could have like dealt with the physical effects easier I think. I wasn't real depressed or nothing, but just irritable, snappy, real short fuse. Group 8 Some described difficulty with controlling what they said to others. …you're pretty much out of control. Little things, you snap, yell, scream. And then you think about them later, I mean much later you'll say, "That really didn't mean that much. Why did I react that way?" Then you look at it in retrospect, but at the moment it's just this bubbling, boiling, bursting from within whelm of emotion that just rushes up inside of you and sort of controls you at that second. Group 2 Because the next thing I knew my ears were hearing the words like I'm saying that were supposed be only thoughts. Group 8 Others described difficulty controlling their actions when these feelings of anger arose. I had two incidents of road rage. One where I put my fist through a driver’s window, cut my hand and actually drove the glass into his shoulder. I’ve never done anything like that in my life. Group 4 If somebody did something, like I had a problem with the neighbor…I wanted to go out there and beat the {expletive} out of him…. If somebody wasn't there holding me back, I would have went out there and hit the guy. Group 6 One other time my wife started {expletive} at me. I pulled over to the side of the road. I opened the door and I pushed her right out of the car…. And I was so mad, if I would've been driving 60 miles an hour, she would've been out the door. And it was like an uncontrollable sense of anger. I couldn't get a handle on it. Group 4 Sadness and depression Many participants discussed feelings of depression, but some particularly associated this sadness with feelings of irritability and the “emotional roller coaster” that comes with having chronic HCV and its associated treatment. Some participants noted that changes in emotions were sudden and unpredictable. I was seriously depressed. I just felt. And I had never felt like this in my entire life before and she said, it was a nurse practitioner, she said you feel overwhelming sadness. I said that’s exactly how I feel. I just feel like crying all the time. And I never, ever felt like this in my life. And it was so dramatic. It took like five or six days. I was feeling perfect. I had had aches and pains, but I mentally was fine. And then all of a sudden. And it happened very quickly, which was very, very frightening, because I knew of the side effects, people get suicidal and homicidal, and I thought, oh my God, I’m going to be bananas. So, I saw her in the morning and actually got a little confused trying to find her office. And I thought, wow …. By that afternoon I couldn’t even think. I literally. I was crying all the time. Group 7 I think I was too miserable to feel depressed. But I have to tell you, if depression is being in a dark place, I was in a dark place…. And this is a dark place. It was a dark place for me. And if that’s depression, then I would say I was depressed. But didn’t feel like depression. I didn’t feel like, oh gee, my life sucks or anything else like that. I didn’t feel sorry for myself or bad. I just felt awful. Group 8 I felt like I was coming down with Tourette’s or something. You know, I’d be sitting there real quiet and all of a sudden I’d go …. You know? It must have been me. Group 8 The experience of such strong and labile emotions led some participants to express the notion that they felt they lost their sense of self. I can't help it. I just don't know who I am now. Group 8 You're set in your world and role for a long time. You know yourself, but all of a sudden this drug is doing things to you that make you a little flaky around the edges. Group 2 When I was on the ribavirin it was the mood swings were very severe and they were uncontrollable. I didn't know who I was…I was ready to slam somebody through a wall. Group 8 For some participants these feelings of anger and loss of control became so strong they linked to suicidal and even homicidal thoughts. And I'm thinking, I never had any suicidal tendencies, but I wanted to kill my neighbor next door, because. Hold me back. Hold me back. Group 6 You know I just lost it one day. …And I just screamed every four-letter word and every this and that and I wish I didn't wake up and I didn't even want to wake up anymore. You know I had no feelings of killing myself. I'm too much of a coward. Group 6 One participant expressed the sense that, after completing INF treatment, the feelings of anger he experienced during treatment turned into feelings of sadness. I thought it was over. Thank God it’s over. But it’s not always over. I’m still getting over some residual, and also my anger went to sadness, went to actual feelings of depression….I started having that after the treatment, after I stopped the injections. Now I wasn’t having a rage, but now I was really beginning to have the depression where I really felt bad. And like you, I couldn’t blame it on that. I couldn’t say, “Well it’ll just be over next Thursday. I’m not taking the medicine anymore.” And for me in some ways that was harder. And you get off it slowly. It doesn’t just go away when you stop taking the medication. Group 2 Stigma Many participants also talked about their awareness of the stigma and negative social perceptions associated with HCV. They perceived stigma not only from acquaintances but also from family members and even health care providers. For example, several participants expressed a belief that others—including health care providers—sometimes assumed their infection resulted from substance abuse or other stigmatized conditions. At first I thought I can’t tell anybody… Group 6 A lot of people don’t know anything about it and it scares them. Also associated to drug use and everything. It’s just misinformation. They have no idea what it is or anything. They’re afraid of the unknown. Group 3 The first thing they think about is that you've done something wrong to acquire this. Group 2 The first time I went for treatment a lot of it they thought was drug abuse, because they just were saying you shouldn’t be having this much joint pains and all this kind of business. Another participant replied to this: “Don't you hate when they say that?” Group 6 Several participants described how stigma associated with HCV led them to limit their openness about their illness. People are uneducated about it and right away you're like a dirty person or whatever. People are so judgmental that you're better off being confidential about it. Group 7 So it's almost like you're afraid to tell anybody or it's taboo. It's just like when I had cancer. People would say; you're walking around with a big C on your, instead of a big H on your head. Group 2 This stigma also resulted in tension and strained interactions in social relationships, even among family members. I remember sneezing while I was handling some silverware, which I would've rewashed anyway, but I remember my sister-in-law… just being freaked out, just really not knowing. And I'm like, "It's okay. It's blood borne. Unless we exchange body fluids here, you're okay." Group 5 And people don't understand it, so they're afraid that if I touch you and you have cancer, I'm going to die of cancer. You're got Hep-C; can I breathe in this room? Group 2 Social isolation Feelings of emotional volatility and concern about stigma led many participants to withdraw or isolate themselves from others. I get so aggravated I just shut down completely. I go home; I go in the basement…. Don't bother me. Group 4 And like when I was down, I mean that would sometimes last for days, just being, "Leave me alone. I don't want to be bothered. Go in the other room and leave me." Group 4 I developed from the first time, and still now, a fear of socializing outside with people. Group 6 And I felt that it really became out of my control, so I literally just completely withdrew. And I was perfectly happy living that way. I really didn't want to deal with people, I mean in any way, shape or form. Group 2 Some also isolated themselves because they did not feel well and had lost a desire to seek social contact. I just did not want to dress up and go anywhere because I just didn’t feel normal. Group 6 I couldn’t do it from the medication. So that part of it people did stop asking me towards the end…. Socially the isolation was there when I felt the worst, when I was in my bed for 48 hours. Group 6 Additionally, some participants noted that feeling confused and overwhelmed also led them to withdraw socially. I couldn't remember someone's name…. It's like if I'm around my neighbor too much, they're going to think I'm an idiot, because they're going to wonder why I keep forgetting everything. And so that was part of the withdrawing. It's not just the anger, but the confusion. It's like I just don't want people to see me like this and I don't want to have to deal with it. Group 2  Anger and reduction in impulse control A number of participants discussed experiencing intense feelings of irritability, anger, and outright rage. Almost all of the participants who described these feelings found them to be disturbing, unexpected, and unfamiliar. Frequently, these feelings were directed towards the people around them. A number of participants expressed difficulty controlling these feelings of anger, with some describing a significant loss of impulse control. Like I blew up, and have rages and yell at people, and then I'd say, what in the world am I doing? When I'd get home I was so upset with myself. Group 2 I stayed stuck on mean and evil… I’ve got a three-year-old grandson who stays with me. Feels like I see him days that I don’t get that shot, I’m just as cool as ever. Once I get that shot, I try and avoid him, because I know how mean I’m going to get. I’m going to be hollering at him, which is why I don’t want to do that. But looks like everything he does aggravates me. And then when my lady sees me, she’s going out of her way because she knows that day is …. She goes the opposite way. And so I’ve got older kids and they mostly understand on that day don’t mess with pop. Pop go in the room, I come from there, I go home, I goes in my room, that’s where I’m at. Now you talk to me the next day. Don’t talk to me today, because you’re going to say something and I’m going to get angry with you. Group 4 My fuse definitely is shortened. You know? Like I get really anxious at traffic lights enough to get me punching the dashboard sometimes. Group 7 One participant expressed the notion that feelings of irritability and anger were fundamentally different from the physical effects of the treatment. You know, I could have like dealt with the physical effects easier I think. I wasn't real depressed or nothing, but just irritable, snappy, real short fuse. Group 8 Some described difficulty with controlling what they said to others. …you're pretty much out of control. Little things, you snap, yell, scream. And then you think about them later, I mean much later you'll say, "That really didn't mean that much. Why did I react that way?" Then you look at it in retrospect, but at the moment it's just this bubbling, boiling, bursting from within whelm of emotion that just rushes up inside of you and sort of controls you at that second. Group 2 Because the next thing I knew my ears were hearing the words like I'm saying that were supposed be only thoughts. Group 8 Others described difficulty controlling their actions when these feelings of anger arose. I had two incidents of road rage. One where I put my fist through a driver’s window, cut my hand and actually drove the glass into his shoulder. I’ve never done anything like that in my life. Group 4 If somebody did something, like I had a problem with the neighbor…I wanted to go out there and beat the {expletive} out of him…. If somebody wasn't there holding me back, I would have went out there and hit the guy. Group 6 One other time my wife started {expletive} at me. I pulled over to the side of the road. I opened the door and I pushed her right out of the car…. And I was so mad, if I would've been driving 60 miles an hour, she would've been out the door. And it was like an uncontrollable sense of anger. I couldn't get a handle on it. Group 4  Anger and reduction in impulse control A number of participants discussed experiencing intense feelings of irritability, anger, and outright rage. Almost all of the participants who described these feelings found them to be disturbing, unexpected, and unfamiliar. Frequently, these feelings were directed towards the people around them. A number of participants expressed difficulty controlling these feelings of anger, with some describing a significant loss of impulse control. Like I blew up, and have rages and yell at people, and then I'd say, what in the world am I doing? When I'd get home I was so upset with myself. Group 2 I stayed stuck on mean and evil… I’ve got a three-year-old grandson who stays with me. Feels like I see him days that I don’t get that shot, I’m just as cool as ever. Once I get that shot, I try and avoid him, because I know how mean I’m going to get. I’m going to be hollering at him, which is why I don’t want to do that. But looks like everything he does aggravates me. And then when my lady sees me, she’s going out of her way because she knows that day is …. She goes the opposite way. And so I’ve got older kids and they mostly understand on that day don’t mess with pop. Pop go in the room, I come from there, I go home, I goes in my room, that’s where I’m at. Now you talk to me the next day. Don’t talk to me today, because you’re going to say something and I’m going to get angry with you. Group 4 My fuse definitely is shortened. You know? Like I get really anxious at traffic lights enough to get me punching the dashboard sometimes. Group 7 One participant expressed the notion that feelings of irritability and anger were fundamentally different from the physical effects of the treatment. You know, I could have like dealt with the physical effects easier I think. I wasn't real depressed or nothing, but just irritable, snappy, real short fuse. Group 8 Some described difficulty with controlling what they said to others. …you're pretty much out of control. Little things, you snap, yell, scream. And then you think about them later, I mean much later you'll say, "That really didn't mean that much. Why did I react that way?" Then you look at it in retrospect, but at the moment it's just this bubbling, boiling, bursting from within whelm of emotion that just rushes up inside of you and sort of controls you at that second. Group 2 Because the next thing I knew my ears were hearing the words like I'm saying that were supposed be only thoughts. Group 8 Others described difficulty controlling their actions when these feelings of anger arose. I had two incidents of road rage. One where I put my fist through a driver’s window, cut my hand and actually drove the glass into his shoulder. I’ve never done anything like that in my life. Group 4 If somebody did something, like I had a problem with the neighbor…I wanted to go out there and beat the {expletive} out of him…. If somebody wasn't there holding me back, I would have went out there and hit the guy. Group 6 One other time my wife started {expletive} at me. I pulled over to the side of the road. I opened the door and I pushed her right out of the car…. And I was so mad, if I would've been driving 60 miles an hour, she would've been out the door. And it was like an uncontrollable sense of anger. I couldn't get a handle on it. Group 4  Sadness and depression Many participants discussed feelings of depression, but some particularly associated this sadness with feelings of irritability and the “emotional roller coaster” that comes with having chronic HCV and its associated treatment. Some participants noted that changes in emotions were sudden and unpredictable. I was seriously depressed. I just felt. And I had never felt like this in my entire life before and she said, it was a nurse practitioner, she said you feel overwhelming sadness. I said that’s exactly how I feel. I just feel like crying all the time. And I never, ever felt like this in my life. And it was so dramatic. It took like five or six days. I was feeling perfect. I had had aches and pains, but I mentally was fine. And then all of a sudden. And it happened very quickly, which was very, very frightening, because I knew of the side effects, people get suicidal and homicidal, and I thought, oh my God, I’m going to be bananas. So, I saw her in the morning and actually got a little confused trying to find her office. And I thought, wow …. By that afternoon I couldn’t even think. I literally. I was crying all the time. Group 7 I think I was too miserable to feel depressed. But I have to tell you, if depression is being in a dark place, I was in a dark place…. And this is a dark place. It was a dark place for me. And if that’s depression, then I would say I was depressed. But didn’t feel like depression. I didn’t feel like, oh gee, my life sucks or anything else like that. I didn’t feel sorry for myself or bad. I just felt awful. Group 8 I felt like I was coming down with Tourette’s or something. You know, I’d be sitting there real quiet and all of a sudden I’d go …. You know? It must have been me. Group 8 The experience of such strong and labile emotions led some participants to express the notion that they felt they lost their sense of self. I can't help it. I just don't know who I am now. Group 8 You're set in your world and role for a long time. You know yourself, but all of a sudden this drug is doing things to you that make you a little flaky around the edges. Group 2 When I was on the ribavirin it was the mood swings were very severe and they were uncontrollable. I didn't know who I was…I was ready to slam somebody through a wall. Group 8 For some participants these feelings of anger and loss of control became so strong they linked to suicidal and even homicidal thoughts. And I'm thinking, I never had any suicidal tendencies, but I wanted to kill my neighbor next door, because. Hold me back. Hold me back. Group 6 You know I just lost it one day. …And I just screamed every four-letter word and every this and that and I wish I didn't wake up and I didn't even want to wake up anymore. You know I had no feelings of killing myself. I'm too much of a coward. Group 6 One participant expressed the sense that, after completing INF treatment, the feelings of anger he experienced during treatment turned into feelings of sadness. I thought it was over. Thank God it’s over. But it’s not always over. I’m still getting over some residual, and also my anger went to sadness, went to actual feelings of depression….I started having that after the treatment, after I stopped the injections. Now I wasn’t having a rage, but now I was really beginning to have the depression where I really felt bad. And like you, I couldn’t blame it on that. I couldn’t say, “Well it’ll just be over next Thursday. I’m not taking the medicine anymore.” And for me in some ways that was harder. And you get off it slowly. It doesn’t just go away when you stop taking the medication. Group 2  Sadness and depression Many participants discussed feelings of depression, but some particularly associated this sadness with feelings of irritability and the “emotional roller coaster” that comes with having chronic HCV and its associated treatment. Some participants noted that changes in emotions were sudden and unpredictable. I was seriously depressed. I just felt. And I had never felt like this in my entire life before and she said, it was a nurse practitioner, she said you feel overwhelming sadness. I said that’s exactly how I feel. I just feel like crying all the time. And I never, ever felt like this in my life. And it was so dramatic. It took like five or six days. I was feeling perfect. I had had aches and pains, but I mentally was fine. And then all of a sudden. And it happened very quickly, which was very, very frightening, because I knew of the side effects, people get suicidal and homicidal, and I thought, oh my God, I’m going to be bananas. So, I saw her in the morning and actually got a little confused trying to find her office. And I thought, wow …. By that afternoon I couldn’t even think. I literally. I was crying all the time. Group 7 I think I was too miserable to feel depressed. But I have to tell you, if depression is being in a dark place, I was in a dark place…. And this is a dark place. It was a dark place for me. And if that’s depression, then I would say I was depressed. But didn’t feel like depression. I didn’t feel like, oh gee, my life sucks or anything else like that. I didn’t feel sorry for myself or bad. I just felt awful. Group 8 I felt like I was coming down with Tourette’s or something. You know, I’d be sitting there real quiet and all of a sudden I’d go …. You know? It must have been me. Group 8 The experience of such strong and labile emotions led some participants to express the notion that they felt they lost their sense of self. I can't help it. I just don't know who I am now. Group 8 You're set in your world and role for a long time. You know yourself, but all of a sudden this drug is doing things to you that make you a little flaky around the edges. Group 2 When I was on the ribavirin it was the mood swings were very severe and they were uncontrollable. I didn't know who I was…I was ready to slam somebody through a wall. Group 8 For some participants these feelings of anger and loss of control became so strong they linked to suicidal and even homicidal thoughts. And I'm thinking, I never had any suicidal tendencies, but I wanted to kill my neighbor next door, because. Hold me back. Hold me back. Group 6 You know I just lost it one day. …And I just screamed every four-letter word and every this and that and I wish I didn't wake up and I didn't even want to wake up anymore. You know I had no feelings of killing myself. I'm too much of a coward. Group 6 One participant expressed the sense that, after completing INF treatment, the feelings of anger he experienced during treatment turned into feelings of sadness. I thought it was over. Thank God it’s over. But it’s not always over. I’m still getting over some residual, and also my anger went to sadness, went to actual feelings of depression….I started having that after the treatment, after I stopped the injections. Now I wasn’t having a rage, but now I was really beginning to have the depression where I really felt bad. And like you, I couldn’t blame it on that. I couldn’t say, “Well it’ll just be over next Thursday. I’m not taking the medicine anymore.” And for me in some ways that was harder. And you get off it slowly. It doesn’t just go away when you stop taking the medication. Group 2  Stigma Many participants also talked about their awareness of the stigma and negative social perceptions associated with HCV. They perceived stigma not only from acquaintances but also from family members and even health care providers. For example, several participants expressed a belief that others—including health care providers—sometimes assumed their infection resulted from substance abuse or other stigmatized conditions. At first I thought I can’t tell anybody… Group 6 A lot of people don’t know anything about it and it scares them. Also associated to drug use and everything. It’s just misinformation. They have no idea what it is or anything. They’re afraid of the unknown. Group 3 The first thing they think about is that you've done something wrong to acquire this. Group 2 The first time I went for treatment a lot of it they thought was drug abuse, because they just were saying you shouldn’t be having this much joint pains and all this kind of business. Another participant replied to this: “Don't you hate when they say that?” Group 6 Several participants described how stigma associated with HCV led them to limit their openness about their illness. People are uneducated about it and right away you're like a dirty person or whatever. People are so judgmental that you're better off being confidential about it. Group 7 So it's almost like you're afraid to tell anybody or it's taboo. It's just like when I had cancer. People would say; you're walking around with a big C on your, instead of a big H on your head. Group 2 This stigma also resulted in tension and strained interactions in social relationships, even among family members. I remember sneezing while I was handling some silverware, which I would've rewashed anyway, but I remember my sister-in-law… just being freaked out, just really not knowing. And I'm like, "It's okay. It's blood borne. Unless we exchange body fluids here, you're okay." Group 5 And people don't understand it, so they're afraid that if I touch you and you have cancer, I'm going to die of cancer. You're got Hep-C; can I breathe in this room? Group 2  Stigma Many participants also talked about their awareness of the stigma and negative social perceptions associated with HCV. They perceived stigma not only from acquaintances but also from family members and even health care providers. For example, several participants expressed a belief that others—including health care providers—sometimes assumed their infection resulted from substance abuse or other stigmatized conditions. At first I thought I can’t tell anybody… Group 6 A lot of people don’t know anything about it and it scares them. Also associated to drug use and everything. It’s just misinformation. They have no idea what it is or anything. They’re afraid of the unknown. Group 3 The first thing they think about is that you've done something wrong to acquire this. Group 2 The first time I went for treatment a lot of it they thought was drug abuse, because they just were saying you shouldn’t be having this much joint pains and all this kind of business. Another participant replied to this: “Don't you hate when they say that?” Group 6 Several participants described how stigma associated with HCV led them to limit their openness about their illness. People are uneducated about it and right away you're like a dirty person or whatever. People are so judgmental that you're better off being confidential about it. Group 7 So it's almost like you're afraid to tell anybody or it's taboo. It's just like when I had cancer. People would say; you're walking around with a big C on your, instead of a big H on your head. Group 2 This stigma also resulted in tension and strained interactions in social relationships, even among family members. I remember sneezing while I was handling some silverware, which I would've rewashed anyway, but I remember my sister-in-law… just being freaked out, just really not knowing. And I'm like, "It's okay. It's blood borne. Unless we exchange body fluids here, you're okay." Group 5 And people don't understand it, so they're afraid that if I touch you and you have cancer, I'm going to die of cancer. You're got Hep-C; can I breathe in this room? Group 2  Social isolation Feelings of emotional volatility and concern about stigma led many participants to withdraw or isolate themselves from others. I get so aggravated I just shut down completely. I go home; I go in the basement…. Don't bother me. Group 4 And like when I was down, I mean that would sometimes last for days, just being, "Leave me alone. I don't want to be bothered. Go in the other room and leave me." Group 4 I developed from the first time, and still now, a fear of socializing outside with people. Group 6 And I felt that it really became out of my control, so I literally just completely withdrew. And I was perfectly happy living that way. I really didn't want to deal with people, I mean in any way, shape or form. Group 2 Some also isolated themselves because they did not feel well and had lost a desire to seek social contact. I just did not want to dress up and go anywhere because I just didn’t feel normal. Group 6 I couldn’t do it from the medication. So that part of it people did stop asking me towards the end…. Socially the isolation was there when I felt the worst, when I was in my bed for 48 hours. Group 6 Additionally, some participants noted that feeling confused and overwhelmed also led them to withdraw socially. I couldn't remember someone's name…. It's like if I'm around my neighbor too much, they're going to think I'm an idiot, because they're going to wonder why I keep forgetting everything. And so that was part of the withdrawing. It's not just the anger, but the confusion. It's like I just don't want people to see me like this and I don't want to have to deal with it. Group 2  Social isolation Feelings of emotional volatility and concern about stigma led many participants to withdraw or isolate themselves from others. I get so aggravated I just shut down completely. I go home; I go in the basement…. Don't bother me. Group 4 And like when I was down, I mean that would sometimes last for days, just being, "Leave me alone. I don't want to be bothered. Go in the other room and leave me." Group 4 I developed from the first time, and still now, a fear of socializing outside with people. Group 6 And I felt that it really became out of my control, so I literally just completely withdrew. And I was perfectly happy living that way. I really didn't want to deal with people, I mean in any way, shape or form. Group 2 Some also isolated themselves because they did not feel well and had lost a desire to seek social contact. I just did not want to dress up and go anywhere because I just didn’t feel normal. Group 6 I couldn’t do it from the medication. So that part of it people did stop asking me towards the end…. Socially the isolation was there when I felt the worst, when I was in my bed for 48 hours. Group 6 Additionally, some participants noted that feeling confused and overwhelmed also led them to withdraw socially. I couldn't remember someone's name…. It's like if I'm around my neighbor too much, they're going to think I'm an idiot, because they're going to wonder why I keep forgetting everything. And so that was part of the withdrawing. It's not just the anger, but the confusion. It's like I just don't want people to see me like this and I don't want to have to deal with it. Group 2  Discussion This study highlights several key themes that may lead to better understanding of the multidimensional nature of chronic hepatitis C (HCV) and the need for improved, integrated care for HCV patients. In the present study, patients discussed a striking level of emotional volatility ranging from irritability to outright rage. This lability was associated with reduced impulse control, anger, and feelings of sadness and depression. Participants also discussed a keen awareness of stigmatization and communication difficulties related to their HCV diagnosis from both providers and social peers, and perceived that this stigmatization strained even close family relationships. Finally, participants discussed feeling significant isolation—in part resulting from their experience of stigma and emotional volatility. While the relationship between depression and chronic HCV 22 and depression and interferon (INF) therapy for HCV 7 is generally well established, symptoms of anger and hostility have been given relatively little attention in systematic investigations of psychological correlates of HCV. A few previous studies have found an increase in irritability, anger, and hostility in HCV patients undergoing INF therapy. 7 , 23 It is not clear from existing literature whether a similar relationship exists in treatment naïve HCV patients. However, the current findings suggest that feelings of emotional volatility are present in the HCV patients included in the present study, that these emotions run the gamut from irritability to intense—at times uncontrollable—hostility, and that these emotions have a profound impact on the patient’s sense of self and their interactions with others. Furthermore, the results of this study suggest a relationship between the patients’ experience of emotional volatility and difficulties interacting with others, including clinical providers, social peers and family. Patients in the current study related social isolation and changing intra- and interpersonal relationships to difficulties with emotional volatility and their experience of HCV-related stigma. Previous research examining stigma in HCV has found that stigmatization is a common emotional experience with a profound impact on social relationships and overall quality of life. 13 Importantly, communication difficulties and perceived stigmatization from clinical providers may negatively impact treatment adherence. Research suggests patients with higher levels of emotional and social problems are more likely to have self-reported conflicts with physicians 14 and patients with interpersonal problems are also more likely to be noncompliant with treatment. 24 The current study further supports the hypothesis that emotional conflicts, social problems, perceived stigmatization, and impaired communication are present in chronic HCV patients. Furthermore, these findings suggest that these problems are interrelated and in combination contribute to the negative health-related quality of life (HRQOL) often found in these patients. The current findings have important implications for clinical providers. First, it is critical for providers to assess for psychosocial difficulties in their HCV patients regardless of treatment status. This advisement is not new, previous research and clinical guidelines have made similar recommendations. 25 However, the current findings identify more specifically the kinds of symptoms providers should assess. Previous recommendations tend to focus primarily on assessment and treatment for symptoms of depression. While certainly this is a valuable recommendation given what is known about the relationship between depression and chronic HCV, the current findings suggest it is particularly important to consider the variety of ways in which psychosocial difficulties can present in HCV patients. In the current study, patients discussed irritability as a notably troubling symptom. There is evidence from other studies that HCV patients may exhibit symptoms of fatigue and anhedonia along with symptoms of irritability and agitation more typical of hypomania23—yet no disorder with such a symptom profile clearly exists in the current classification of mental illnesses. Thus, it is important for clinical providers to be aware of difficulties classifying HCV-related psychiatric disorders and that presenting symptoms may be related to a combination of disease, treatment, and personal factors. It is also essential for providers to consider the impact of these psychosocial factors on patients’ health status and overall quality of life. In the current study, patients reported that their emotional volatility made them feel alienated from themselves, alienated from others, and placed them in situations where they may be in danger of doing harm to themselves or others. Other research has found that higher scores on anger/hostility scales of symptom checklists are associated with poor adherence to treatment. 24 Given these findings it is imperative that clinical providers assess for and address complaints—such as the emotional volatility expressed by patients in the current study—that might not fit neatly into established diagnostic categories but may have a significant impact on the patients’ quality of life, adherence to treatment, and overall health. There are several steps providers can take to ensure comprehensive assessment of HCV patients’ psychosocial status. Providers should begin discussion of psychosocial issues with patients early in the treatment process to help foster effective communication and promote early identification of problems when they occur. Whenever possible, clinicians should seek to work with multidisciplinary teams and/or consult mental health care providers for guidance on assessment strategies to determine the nature and extent of psychosocial difficulties in HCV patients. A thorough clinical interview should address both physical and emotional aspects of the disease (and of treatment for those currently on INF therapy). Providers should specifically ask about all aspects of mood, including mood states such as irritability and emotional volatility, and their impact on patients’ daily functioning. Given the relationship found in some studies between anger/hostility and poor adherence to INF treatment, it is particularly important to screen for issues of emotional volatility prior to beginning INF therapy. For patients where medication treatment of INF-induced mood disorders appears warranted, determining the distinction between an irritable depression that might characterize a depressive mixed state versus irritable mania that might characterize a manic/hypomanic state is critical to deciding appropriate treatment course. When possible, treatment options should include both medical and psychological protocols, and once again multidisciplinary teams and/or mental health care providers should be consulted to develop treatment plans that fully address the complex physical and emotional needs of the HCV patient. Given the qualitative design of the current study, it is difficult to determine the proportion of patients who experienced these symptoms and the statistical associations among participant characteristics and their experienced psychosocial difficulty. The generalizability of these results is limited as information was only collected from patients seen at two sites in Connecticut. And, focus groups of this type can involve selection bias and ought not to be considered a representative population sample in the statistical sense. However, recruitment purposefully focused on patients who underwent therapy as well as those who refused treatment in order to ensure a broad representation of patients’ experiences. Despite these limitations, this study suggests that among HCV positive patients, emotional volatility and the perception of stigmatization are common and disturbing experiences that may be related to patients’ increasing social isolation. The current findings provide some initial insight as to how HCV patients may come to experience reduced HQOL and reinforce the notion that managing psychosocial distress should be a part of managing HCV disease. Future quantitative studies should further address the themes discussed in this paper, work towards modeling the process of reduced HQOL in HCV patients, and continue to provide guidance to providers caring for HCV positive patients.  Discussion This study highlights several key themes that may lead to better understanding of the multidimensional nature of chronic hepatitis C (HCV) and the need for improved, integrated care for HCV patients. In the present study, patients discussed a striking level of emotional volatility ranging from irritability to outright rage. This lability was associated with reduced impulse control, anger, and feelings of sadness and depression. Participants also discussed a keen awareness of stigmatization and communication difficulties related to their HCV diagnosis from both providers and social peers, and perceived that this stigmatization strained even close family relationships. Finally, participants discussed feeling significant isolation—in part resulting from their experience of stigma and emotional volatility. While the relationship between depression and chronic HCV 22 and depression and interferon (INF) therapy for HCV 7 is generally well established, symptoms of anger and hostility have been given relatively little attention in systematic investigations of psychological correlates of HCV. A few previous studies have found an increase in irritability, anger, and hostility in HCV patients undergoing INF therapy. 7 , 23 It is not clear from existing literature whether a similar relationship exists in treatment naïve HCV patients. However, the current findings suggest that feelings of emotional volatility are present in the HCV patients included in the present study, that these emotions run the gamut from irritability to intense—at times uncontrollable—hostility, and that these emotions have a profound impact on the patient’s sense of self and their interactions with others. Furthermore, the results of this study suggest a relationship between the patients’ experience of emotional volatility and difficulties interacting with others, including clinical providers, social peers and family. Patients in the current study related social isolation and changing intra- and interpersonal relationships to difficulties with emotional volatility and their experience of HCV-related stigma. Previous research examining stigma in HCV has found that stigmatization is a common emotional experience with a profound impact on social relationships and overall quality of life. 13 Importantly, communication difficulties and perceived stigmatization from clinical providers may negatively impact treatment adherence. Research suggests patients with higher levels of emotional and social problems are more likely to have self-reported conflicts with physicians 14 and patients with interpersonal problems are also more likely to be noncompliant with treatment. 24 The current study further supports the hypothesis that emotional conflicts, social problems, perceived stigmatization, and impaired communication are present in chronic HCV patients. Furthermore, these findings suggest that these problems are interrelated and in combination contribute to the negative health-related quality of life (HRQOL) often found in these patients. The current findings have important implications for clinical providers. First, it is critical for providers to assess for psychosocial difficulties in their HCV patients regardless of treatment status. This advisement is not new, previous research and clinical guidelines have made similar recommendations. 25 However, the current findings identify more specifically the kinds of symptoms providers should assess. Previous recommendations tend to focus primarily on assessment and treatment for symptoms of depression. While certainly this is a valuable recommendation given what is known about the relationship between depression and chronic HCV, the current findings suggest it is particularly important to consider the variety of ways in which psychosocial difficulties can present in HCV patients. In the current study, patients discussed irritability as a notably troubling symptom. There is evidence from other studies that HCV patients may exhibit symptoms of fatigue and anhedonia along with symptoms of irritability and agitation more typical of hypomania23—yet no disorder with such a symptom profile clearly exists in the current classification of mental illnesses. Thus, it is important for clinical providers to be aware of difficulties classifying HCV-related psychiatric disorders and that presenting symptoms may be related to a combination of disease, treatment, and personal factors. It is also essential for providers to consider the impact of these psychosocial factors on patients’ health status and overall quality of life. In the current study, patients reported that their emotional volatility made them feel alienated from themselves, alienated from others, and placed them in situations where they may be in danger of doing harm to themselves or others. Other research has found that higher scores on anger/hostility scales of symptom checklists are associated with poor adherence to treatment. 24 Given these findings it is imperative that clinical providers assess for and address complaints—such as the emotional volatility expressed by patients in the current study—that might not fit neatly into established diagnostic categories but may have a significant impact on the patients’ quality of life, adherence to treatment, and overall health. There are several steps providers can take to ensure comprehensive assessment of HCV patients’ psychosocial status. Providers should begin discussion of psychosocial issues with patients early in the treatment process to help foster effective communication and promote early identification of problems when they occur. Whenever possible, clinicians should seek to work with multidisciplinary teams and/or consult mental health care providers for guidance on assessment strategies to determine the nature and extent of psychosocial difficulties in HCV patients. A thorough clinical interview should address both physical and emotional aspects of the disease (and of treatment for those currently on INF therapy). Providers should specifically ask about all aspects of mood, including mood states such as irritability and emotional volatility, and their impact on patients’ daily functioning. Given the relationship found in some studies between anger/hostility and poor adherence to INF treatment, it is particularly important to screen for issues of emotional volatility prior to beginning INF therapy. For patients where medication treatment of INF-induced mood disorders appears warranted, determining the distinction between an irritable depression that might characterize a depressive mixed state versus irritable mania that might characterize a manic/hypomanic state is critical to deciding appropriate treatment course. When possible, treatment options should include both medical and psychological protocols, and once again multidisciplinary teams and/or mental health care providers should be consulted to develop treatment plans that fully address the complex physical and emotional needs of the HCV patient. Given the qualitative design of the current study, it is difficult to determine the proportion of patients who experienced these symptoms and the statistical associations among participant characteristics and their experienced psychosocial difficulty. The generalizability of these results is limited as information was only collected from patients seen at two sites in Connecticut. And, focus groups of this type can involve selection bias and ought not to be considered a representative population sample in the statistical sense. However, recruitment purposefully focused on patients who underwent therapy as well as those who refused treatment in order to ensure a broad representation of patients’ experiences. Despite these limitations, this study suggests that among HCV positive patients, emotional volatility and the perception of stigmatization are common and disturbing experiences that may be related to patients’ increasing social isolation. The current findings provide some initial insight as to how HCV patients may come to experience reduced HQOL and reinforce the notion that managing psychosocial distress should be a part of managing HCV disease. Future quantitative studies should further address the themes discussed in this paper, work towards modeling the process of reduced HQOL in HCV patients, and continue to provide guidance to providers caring for HCV positive patients. 