Hepatic Steatosis in Response to Acute Alcohol Exposure in Zebrafish requires Srebp Activation Steatosis is the most common consequence of acute alcohol abuse and may predispose to more severe hepatic disease. Increased lipogenesis driven by the sterol response element binding protein (SREBP) transcription factors is essential for steatosis associated with chronic alcohol ingestion, but the mechanisms underlying steatosis following acute alcohol exposure are unknown. Zebrafish larvae represent an attractive vertebrate model for studying alcoholic liver disease (ALD), because they possess the pathways to metabolize alcohol, the liver is mature by 4 days post-fertilization (dpf), and alcohol can be simply added to their water. Exposing 4 dpf zebrafish larvae to 2% ethanol (EtOH) for 32 hours achieves ?80 mM intracellular EtOH and upregulation of hepatic cyp2e1, sod and bip , indicating that EtOH is metabolized and provokes oxidant stress. EtOH-treated larvae develop hepatomegaly and steatosis accompanied by changes in the expression of genes required for hepatic lipid metabolism. Based on the importance of SREPBs in chronic ALD, we explored the role of Srebps in this model of acute ALD. Srebp activation was prevented in gonzo larvae, which harbor a mutation in the membrane bound transcription factor protease 1 ( mbtps1 ) gene, and in embryos injected with a morpholino to knock-down Srebp cleavage activating protein ( scap ). Both gonzo mutants and scap morphants were resistant to steatosis in response to 2% EtOH, and the expression of many Srebp target genes are down regulated in gonzo mutant livers. Conclusion Zebrafish larvae develop signs of acute ALD, including steatosis. Srebp activation is required for steatosis in this model. The tractability of zebrafish genetics provides a valuable tool for dissecting the molecular pathogenesis of acute ALD.  EXPERIMENTAL PROCEEDURES Animals Adult wild type (WT) zebrafish and heterozygous carriers of the hi1487 allele ( 30 , 37 )) of mbtps1 (herein referred to as goz hi1487 were maintained on a 14:10 hour light:dark cycle at 28°C. Fertilized embryos collected following natural spawning were cultured at 28° C in fish water (0.6g/L Crystal Sea Marinemix-Marine Enterprises International: Baltimore, Maryland) containing methylene blue (0.002g/L). The Mount Sinai School of Medicine Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approved all protocols. Ethanol Treatment At 4 dpf (between 96-98 hours post fertilization; hpf), 20-50 larvae were anesthetized with 2.5g/L tricane and transferred to 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, or 4% EtOH in fish water and cultured in sealed dishes for up to 32 hours. Each experiment was repeated on at least 3 clutches. Tissue Alcohol Concentration Assay Approximately 50 4 dpf larvae were treated with 0, 1 or 2% EtOH and collected at 8, 24, or 32 hours of EtOH exposure. Lavae were washed twice in phosphate buffered saline (PBS), homogenized on ice in 50 ?l of PBS and pelleted by centrifugation. The supernatant was adjusted with PBS to equal 1 ?l/larvae and EtOH concentration was quantified using the Ethanol Assay (Diagnostic Chemicals Limited: Oxford, CT). Briefly, the supernatant was incubated with alcohol dehydrogenase and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide at room temperature. The UV absorbance at 340 nm was measured and the reading from untreated larvae at each time point was set as 0 mM. The concentration was calculated according to measurements of a standard containing 20 mM EtOH. Each sample was measured in triplicate and repeated on three clutches per time point. Oil Red O Staining Whole larvae were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, washed with PBS, infiltrated with a graded series of propylene glycol and stained with 0.5% Oil Red O in 100% propylene glycol overnight. Stained larvae were washed with decreasing concentrations of propylene glycol followed by several rinses with PBS and transferred to 80% glycerol. Steatosis was scored as 3 or more lipid droplets per liver. Images were captured on a Nikon SMZ1500 with a Nikon Digital Sight color camera. Histologic Analysis Larvae were fixed, embedded in HistoGel (Richard-Allan Scientific: Kalamazoo, MI) and paraffin according to standard procedures. 4 ?m sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and imaged on an Olympus BX41 microscope and a Nikon Digital Sight-Ri1 camera. Reverse Transcription and Quantitative PCR Poly dT primed cDNA was prepared from RNA isolated with the RNeasy kit (Quiagen) using Superscript II (Invitrogen: Carlsbad, CA). Real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) was carried out on Light Cycler 480 (Roche: Basel, Switzerland) with one cycle of 95°C for 3 minutes, followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 15 seconds, and 60°C for 1 minute using 1?mol/L of gene specific primers (supplementary Table 1) and the iQ SYBR Green Supermix (Roche). rpp0 was used as a reference, and expression was calculated using the cycle threshold (Ct) method (2-Ct (target)/ 2-Ct (rppo)). Typically, 20 fish were pooled for each sample and 3-10 separate clutches were analyzed per experiment. Morpholino injections A splice blocking morpholino targeting scap (MO; 5?-cccgatactgcaagaagatt-3? as described ( 31 )) and a control morpholino (5? aggttcctttggttttgcacagcgc-3?; Gene Tools, Philomath, OR) were diluted with water to 0.5 mM and approximately 4 nl was injected into >50 1-2 cell stage embryos using a Narishege IM-300 microinjector. Abnormal embryos were removed at 6 hpf. Statistical Analysis All evaluations were performed with MS Excel software. p values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.  Animals Adult wild type (WT) zebrafish and heterozygous carriers of the hi1487 allele ( 30 , 37 )) of mbtps1 (herein referred to as goz hi1487 were maintained on a 14:10 hour light:dark cycle at 28°C. Fertilized embryos collected following natural spawning were cultured at 28° C in fish water (0.6g/L Crystal Sea Marinemix-Marine Enterprises International: Baltimore, Maryland) containing methylene blue (0.002g/L). The Mount Sinai School of Medicine Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approved all protocols.  Ethanol Treatment At 4 dpf (between 96-98 hours post fertilization; hpf), 20-50 larvae were anesthetized with 2.5g/L tricane and transferred to 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, or 4% EtOH in fish water and cultured in sealed dishes for up to 32 hours. Each experiment was repeated on at least 3 clutches.  Tissue Alcohol Concentration Assay Approximately 50 4 dpf larvae were treated with 0, 1 or 2% EtOH and collected at 8, 24, or 32 hours of EtOH exposure. Lavae were washed twice in phosphate buffered saline (PBS), homogenized on ice in 50 ?l of PBS and pelleted by centrifugation. The supernatant was adjusted with PBS to equal 1 ?l/larvae and EtOH concentration was quantified using the Ethanol Assay (Diagnostic Chemicals Limited: Oxford, CT). Briefly, the supernatant was incubated with alcohol dehydrogenase and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide at room temperature. The UV absorbance at 340 nm was measured and the reading from untreated larvae at each time point was set as 0 mM. The concentration was calculated according to measurements of a standard containing 20 mM EtOH. Each sample was measured in triplicate and repeated on three clutches per time point.  Oil Red O Staining Whole larvae were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, washed with PBS, infiltrated with a graded series of propylene glycol and stained with 0.5% Oil Red O in 100% propylene glycol overnight. Stained larvae were washed with decreasing concentrations of propylene glycol followed by several rinses with PBS and transferred to 80% glycerol. Steatosis was scored as 3 or more lipid droplets per liver. Images were captured on a Nikon SMZ1500 with a Nikon Digital Sight color camera.  Histologic Analysis Larvae were fixed, embedded in HistoGel (Richard-Allan Scientific: Kalamazoo, MI) and paraffin according to standard procedures. 4 ?m sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and imaged on an Olympus BX41 microscope and a Nikon Digital Sight-Ri1 camera.  Reverse Transcription and Quantitative PCR Poly dT primed cDNA was prepared from RNA isolated with the RNeasy kit (Quiagen) using Superscript II (Invitrogen: Carlsbad, CA). Real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) was carried out on Light Cycler 480 (Roche: Basel, Switzerland) with one cycle of 95°C for 3 minutes, followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 15 seconds, and 60°C for 1 minute using 1?mol/L of gene specific primers (supplementary Table 1) and the iQ SYBR Green Supermix (Roche). rpp0 was used as a reference, and expression was calculated using the cycle threshold (Ct) method (2-Ct (target)/ 2-Ct (rppo)). Typically, 20 fish were pooled for each sample and 3-10 separate clutches were analyzed per experiment.  Morpholino injections A splice blocking morpholino targeting scap (MO; 5?-cccgatactgcaagaagatt-3? as described ( 31 )) and a control morpholino (5? aggttcctttggttttgcacagcgc-3?; Gene Tools, Philomath, OR) were diluted with water to 0.5 mM and approximately 4 nl was injected into >50 1-2 cell stage embryos using a Narishege IM-300 microinjector. Abnormal embryos were removed at 6 hpf.  Statistical Analysis All evaluations were performed with MS Excel software. p values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.  RESULTS Ethanol Induces Abnormalities in Zebrafish Larvae Zebrafish hepatogenesis occurs between 1-3 dpf ( 38 ), and larval feeding begins on 4-5 dpf when the yolk has been completely utilized. Fasting induced steatosis occurs if larvae are not fed by 6 dpf (KCS and CG, unpublished). Thus, 4-5 dpf is the ideal time to assess the effects of alcohol without interference by the metabolic changes that accompany external nutrient metabolism or fasting. To optimize a protocol for exposing zebrafish larvae to EtOH, we first assessed EtOH toxicity. 4 dpf larvae were exposed to EtOH concentrations ranging from 0.5 to 4.0% for 32 hours (i.e. until 128 hpf; Fig. 1A ) and were visually scored for viability, morphology and behavioral changes. Exposure to 4% EtOH causes rapid mortality, while nearly all larvae exposed to 2% EtOH or less survived the entire exposure ( Fig. 1B ). Thus, 4 dpf larvae are affected by EtOH in a dose- and time-dependent manner, the LD50 is 2.6% at 32 hours of treatment and 2% EtOH is the maximal tolerable dose. The cellular EtOH concentration was determined by an alcohol dehydrogenase assay using homogenate prepared from larvae exposed to 0, 171 and 343 mM EtOH (i.e. 0, 1 and 2% EtOH) for 8, 24, or 32 hours as a substrate. By 8 hours of exposure, tissue EtOH levels reached 40 mM in larvae treated with 1% EtOH and 63 mM in those treated with 2% ( Fig. 1C ). The level of internal alcohol remained constant at all time points, but at 24 hours of exposure, the internal EtOH concentration was higher in larvae treated with 2% compared 1% EtOH ( Fig. 1C ). The values measured in our experiments are comparable to those measured in other zebrafish studies ( 22 , 39 ) and are within an order of magnitude of the legal limit in humans. If zebrafish metabolize EtOH, then the genes which metabolize EtOH, such as cyp2e1, cyp3a4 and aldh ( 3 ) should be induced, and the generation of free oxygen radicals should cause oxidative stress and induce superoxide dismutase ( sod ) expression ( 40 ). While neither extended time ( Fig. 1D ) or increased concentration ( Fig. 1E ) of EtOH exposure caused changes in the expression these genes in extracts prepared from whole embryos, cyp2e1 and sod expression increased significantly (p values <0.05), albeit modestly, in livers dissected from larvae treated with 2% EtOH for 32 hours. Strikingly, bip expression was induced more than 30 fold in the liver ( Fig. 1F ), indicating significant ER stress. Based on these data, we conclude that zebrafish can ingest and metabolize EtOH, and this causes hepatic oxidative stress, signifying the suitability of this model for studying acute ALD. Exposing early zebrafish embryos to EtOH disrupts patterning and causes morphologic abnormalities ( 25 , 28 ). To avoid these effects on early development, we began our treatment protocol at 4 dpf, yet we found EtOH concentrations of 2% or greater induced reproducible morphologic abnormalities ( Fig. 2A ). Fish with edema, hepatomegaly, body curvature were considered severely affected, whereas those which had only failed to inflate their swim bladder were scored as moderately affected ( Fig. 2B ). The number of affected fish increased as either time of exposure or EtOH concentration increased, with higher concentrations (3 and 4% EtOH) inducing more severe abnormalities ( Fig. 2B ). Alcohol induces profound behavioral effects in mammals as well as in adult ( 19 , 21 , 41 ) and larval ( 22 ) zebrafish. We also observed irregular and non-directional swimming, lethargy and immobility in zebrafish larvae treated with EtOH, and scored the number of animals exhibiting any of these behaviors as affected ( Fig. 2C ). These results demonstrate that EtOH ingestion by 4 dpf zebrafish larvae increases mortality and causes changes in morphology and behavior. Acute Ethanol Exposure Induces Steatosis Acute ethanol exposure in mammals causes steatosis ( 2 ). To determine whether this also occurs in zebrafish larvae, we treated 4 dpf larvae with 1% or 2% EtOH for 24 or 32 hours and visualized neutral lipids by whole mount oil red O staining ( Fig. 3A ). Untreated larvae and those treated with 1% EtOH (not shown) rarely developed steatosis by 5.5 dpf, whereas 2% EtOH treatment resulted in 53% and 64% steatosis at 24 and 32 hours of exposure, respectively ( Fig. 3B ). Histological analysis revealed macrovesicular lipid droplets in the hepatocytes of larvae treated for 32 hours with 2% EtOH ( Fig. 3C ). Despite this marked steatosis, there was no change in the expression of genes regulating several other hepatic functions (Fig. S2), suggesting that acute alcohol does not compromise liver function. Steatosis in chronic ALD is due to both decreased lipid utilization due to mitochondrial dysfunction ( 6 , 7 ) and to lipogenesis driven by SREBP1-c ( 8 ). The molecular basis of steatosis associated with acute EtOH exposure is not known. To assess the effects of EtOH on hepatic lipid metabolism in zebrafish, qPCR was used to detect the expression of genes involved in lipid and cholesterol synthesis, lipid oxidation and transport. The expression of these genes was compared between the livers of 5.5 dpf fish treated with 2% EtOH to untreated fish. In Figure 3D , the fold change in expression is plotted as a single point for each clutch, with the mean fold change from all experiments indicated by an ‘X’. We found significant changes in the expression of genes in each category, including the putative Srebp target genes fasn, hmgcs1 and the hmgcra and hmgcrb genes, which resulted from the genome duplication that occurred during teleost evolution ( 42 ). Ethanol Mediated Steatosis Requires mbtps1 and scap: A Role for Srebps To address whether acute alcohol-induced steatosis requires Srebps, we used mbtps1 mutants and scap morpholino knock-down to prevent Srebp activation (Fig. S1). Both genes are expressed in the 5 dpf liver ( Fig. 4A ) suggesting they function at the time in which larvae develop steatosis in response to EtOH. The hi1487 allele of goz mutants (i.e. goz hi1487) has a viral insertion in the intron preceding the initiator ATG of the mbtps1 gene, resulting in a loss of function and embryonic lethality ( 30 , 37 ). However, unlike the Mbtps1 knock-out mice which die in utero ( 43 ), precluding examination of hepatic function, goz hi1487 mutants survive until 7 dpf with fully mature livers. Additionally, injecting embryos with a morpholino to prevent scap splicing ( 31 ) should specifically prevent Srebp activation. We found no difference in the internal EtOH concentration of WT larvae and goz hi1487 mutants ( Fig. 4B ) or scap morphants (not shown) or the morphological changes induced by 32 hours of treatment with 2% EtOH ( Fig. 4C and not shown), indicating that these models do not alter the ability of zebrafish larvae to ingest and respond to alcohol. There was, however, a marked inhibition of steatosis in response to 32 hours exposure to 2% EtOH in goz hi1487 mutants ( Figs. 4D and E ) indicating a requirement for mbtps1 in steatosis resulting from acute EtOH exposure. The most straightforward interpretation of this data is that acute alcohol exposure causes hepatic Srebp activation, thereby inducing the expression of genes required for lipid and cholesterol synthesis ( Fig. 3D ), and that mutation of mbtps1 blocks this pathway. Alternatively, as ATF6 is critical to the unfolded protein response (UPR), and this pathway has been implicated in ALD ( 44 ) the role of mbtps1 in activating the ATF6 ( 12 ) may also be important (see Figure S1). However, with the exception of bip upregulation ( Fig. 1F ), we found that other Atf6 targets (Fig. S3A) and or xbp1 splicing (Fig. S3B), markers of the UPR, were not induced the livers of EtOH treated larvae. Serum amyloid ( saa2 ) is regulated by CREBH ( 13 ) and was substantially upregulated in response to EtOH (Fig. S3C), but the degree of upregulation varied from clutch to clutch. These findings raised the possibility that failure to activate Atf6 and/or Crebh may contribute for the striking inhibition of steatosis in goz hi1487 mutants. Transient knock down of scap expression in WT fish by injecting embryos with a morpholino that blocks splicing of scap message is predicted to specifically prevent Srebp activation without affecting Atf6 or Crebh. scap morpholino injection did not adversely affect embryonic development or mortality and the same internal EtOH concentration was measured measured in scap morphants, larvae injected with a control morpholino and uninjected controls treated with 2% EtOH for 24 hours (not shown). In both sets of control larvae, i.e uninjected and those injected with a non-targeting morpholino, over 60% of the larvae developed steatosis in response to 2% EtOH in contrast, to only 25.7% steatosis in scap morphants ( Fig. 4F ). If Srebp activation does not occur in goz hi1487 mutants in response to acute alcohol exposure, then Srebp target genes should not be upregulated in these fish. qPCR analysis of gene expression in the livers from 3 clutches of goz hi1487 larvae and their non-mutant siblings confirms this hypothesis. The expression of acc1, fasn, hmgcra and hmgcs1 is significantly lower in untreated goz hi1487 livers compared to WTs, signifying that expression of these genes is regulated by Srebps during normal liver homeostasis ( Fig. 5A ). The hepatic expression of each of these genes is increased following 2% EtOH exposure in WT livers ( Fig. 3D ) whereas acc1, fasn, hmgcra and hmgcs1 expression was markedly reduced in goz hi1487 ( Fig. 5B ). Interestingly, there is hmgcrb expression is the same in WT and goz hi1487 livers, regardless of EtOH exposure, suggesting that it is independent of Srebps. This is consistent with the finding that hmgcrb expression is not liver-specific and that it primarily functions in the zebrafish heart, not in the liver ( 45 ). Importantly, changes in echs1, cyp2e1 and mtp expression in response to EtOH are similar in WT and goz hi1487 livers, indicating the specificity of the effect on Srebp target genes. The Atf6 target gene, bip , is strongly induced in the liver following EtOH treatment, similar to what is observed in adult zebrafish brains following to chronic alcohol exposure ( 46 ). There is not a significant decrease in bip expression, however, in goz hi1487 livers ( Fig 5C ), suggesting that Atf6 may not be the primary regulator of bip in response to EtOH. We thus conclude that Srebp activation occurs in response to acute alcohol exposure, and is required for steatosis.  RESULTS Ethanol Induces Abnormalities in Zebrafish Larvae Zebrafish hepatogenesis occurs between 1-3 dpf ( 38 ), and larval feeding begins on 4-5 dpf when the yolk has been completely utilized. Fasting induced steatosis occurs if larvae are not fed by 6 dpf (KCS and CG, unpublished). Thus, 4-5 dpf is the ideal time to assess the effects of alcohol without interference by the metabolic changes that accompany external nutrient metabolism or fasting. To optimize a protocol for exposing zebrafish larvae to EtOH, we first assessed EtOH toxicity. 4 dpf larvae were exposed to EtOH concentrations ranging from 0.5 to 4.0% for 32 hours (i.e. until 128 hpf; Fig. 1A ) and were visually scored for viability, morphology and behavioral changes. Exposure to 4% EtOH causes rapid mortality, while nearly all larvae exposed to 2% EtOH or less survived the entire exposure ( Fig. 1B ). Thus, 4 dpf larvae are affected by EtOH in a dose- and time-dependent manner, the LD50 is 2.6% at 32 hours of treatment and 2% EtOH is the maximal tolerable dose. The cellular EtOH concentration was determined by an alcohol dehydrogenase assay using homogenate prepared from larvae exposed to 0, 171 and 343 mM EtOH (i.e. 0, 1 and 2% EtOH) for 8, 24, or 32 hours as a substrate. By 8 hours of exposure, tissue EtOH levels reached 40 mM in larvae treated with 1% EtOH and 63 mM in those treated with 2% ( Fig. 1C ). The level of internal alcohol remained constant at all time points, but at 24 hours of exposure, the internal EtOH concentration was higher in larvae treated with 2% compared 1% EtOH ( Fig. 1C ). The values measured in our experiments are comparable to those measured in other zebrafish studies ( 22 , 39 ) and are within an order of magnitude of the legal limit in humans. If zebrafish metabolize EtOH, then the genes which metabolize EtOH, such as cyp2e1, cyp3a4 and aldh ( 3 ) should be induced, and the generation of free oxygen radicals should cause oxidative stress and induce superoxide dismutase ( sod ) expression ( 40 ). While neither extended time ( Fig. 1D ) or increased concentration ( Fig. 1E ) of EtOH exposure caused changes in the expression these genes in extracts prepared from whole embryos, cyp2e1 and sod expression increased significantly (p values <0.05), albeit modestly, in livers dissected from larvae treated with 2% EtOH for 32 hours. Strikingly, bip expression was induced more than 30 fold in the liver ( Fig. 1F ), indicating significant ER stress. Based on these data, we conclude that zebrafish can ingest and metabolize EtOH, and this causes hepatic oxidative stress, signifying the suitability of this model for studying acute ALD. Exposing early zebrafish embryos to EtOH disrupts patterning and causes morphologic abnormalities ( 25 , 28 ). To avoid these effects on early development, we began our treatment protocol at 4 dpf, yet we found EtOH concentrations of 2% or greater induced reproducible morphologic abnormalities ( Fig. 2A ). Fish with edema, hepatomegaly, body curvature were considered severely affected, whereas those which had only failed to inflate their swim bladder were scored as moderately affected ( Fig. 2B ). The number of affected fish increased as either time of exposure or EtOH concentration increased, with higher concentrations (3 and 4% EtOH) inducing more severe abnormalities ( Fig. 2B ). Alcohol induces profound behavioral effects in mammals as well as in adult ( 19 , 21 , 41 ) and larval ( 22 ) zebrafish. We also observed irregular and non-directional swimming, lethargy and immobility in zebrafish larvae treated with EtOH, and scored the number of animals exhibiting any of these behaviors as affected ( Fig. 2C ). These results demonstrate that EtOH ingestion by 4 dpf zebrafish larvae increases mortality and causes changes in morphology and behavior. Acute Ethanol Exposure Induces Steatosis Acute ethanol exposure in mammals causes steatosis ( 2 ). To determine whether this also occurs in zebrafish larvae, we treated 4 dpf larvae with 1% or 2% EtOH for 24 or 32 hours and visualized neutral lipids by whole mount oil red O staining ( Fig. 3A ). Untreated larvae and those treated with 1% EtOH (not shown) rarely developed steatosis by 5.5 dpf, whereas 2% EtOH treatment resulted in 53% and 64% steatosis at 24 and 32 hours of exposure, respectively ( Fig. 3B ). Histological analysis revealed macrovesicular lipid droplets in the hepatocytes of larvae treated for 32 hours with 2% EtOH ( Fig. 3C ). Despite this marked steatosis, there was no change in the expression of genes regulating several other hepatic functions (Fig. S2), suggesting that acute alcohol does not compromise liver function. Steatosis in chronic ALD is due to both decreased lipid utilization due to mitochondrial dysfunction ( 6 , 7 ) and to lipogenesis driven by SREBP1-c ( 8 ). The molecular basis of steatosis associated with acute EtOH exposure is not known. To assess the effects of EtOH on hepatic lipid metabolism in zebrafish, qPCR was used to detect the expression of genes involved in lipid and cholesterol synthesis, lipid oxidation and transport. The expression of these genes was compared between the livers of 5.5 dpf fish treated with 2% EtOH to untreated fish. In Figure 3D , the fold change in expression is plotted as a single point for each clutch, with the mean fold change from all experiments indicated by an ‘X’. We found significant changes in the expression of genes in each category, including the putative Srebp target genes fasn, hmgcs1 and the hmgcra and hmgcrb genes, which resulted from the genome duplication that occurred during teleost evolution ( 42 ). Ethanol Mediated Steatosis Requires mbtps1 and scap: A Role for Srebps To address whether acute alcohol-induced steatosis requires Srebps, we used mbtps1 mutants and scap morpholino knock-down to prevent Srebp activation (Fig. S1). Both genes are expressed in the 5 dpf liver ( Fig. 4A ) suggesting they function at the time in which larvae develop steatosis in response to EtOH. The hi1487 allele of goz mutants (i.e. goz hi1487) has a viral insertion in the intron preceding the initiator ATG of the mbtps1 gene, resulting in a loss of function and embryonic lethality ( 30 , 37 ). However, unlike the Mbtps1 knock-out mice which die in utero ( 43 ), precluding examination of hepatic function, goz hi1487 mutants survive until 7 dpf with fully mature livers. Additionally, injecting embryos with a morpholino to prevent scap splicing ( 31 ) should specifically prevent Srebp activation. We found no difference in the internal EtOH concentration of WT larvae and goz hi1487 mutants ( Fig. 4B ) or scap morphants (not shown) or the morphological changes induced by 32 hours of treatment with 2% EtOH ( Fig. 4C and not shown), indicating that these models do not alter the ability of zebrafish larvae to ingest and respond to alcohol. There was, however, a marked inhibition of steatosis in response to 32 hours exposure to 2% EtOH in goz hi1487 mutants ( Figs. 4D and E ) indicating a requirement for mbtps1 in steatosis resulting from acute EtOH exposure. The most straightforward interpretation of this data is that acute alcohol exposure causes hepatic Srebp activation, thereby inducing the expression of genes required for lipid and cholesterol synthesis ( Fig. 3D ), and that mutation of mbtps1 blocks this pathway. Alternatively, as ATF6 is critical to the unfolded protein response (UPR), and this pathway has been implicated in ALD ( 44 ) the role of mbtps1 in activating the ATF6 ( 12 ) may also be important (see Figure S1). However, with the exception of bip upregulation ( Fig. 1F ), we found that other Atf6 targets (Fig. S3A) and or xbp1 splicing (Fig. S3B), markers of the UPR, were not induced the livers of EtOH treated larvae. Serum amyloid ( saa2 ) is regulated by CREBH ( 13 ) and was substantially upregulated in response to EtOH (Fig. S3C), but the degree of upregulation varied from clutch to clutch. These findings raised the possibility that failure to activate Atf6 and/or Crebh may contribute for the striking inhibition of steatosis in goz hi1487 mutants. Transient knock down of scap expression in WT fish by injecting embryos with a morpholino that blocks splicing of scap message is predicted to specifically prevent Srebp activation without affecting Atf6 or Crebh. scap morpholino injection did not adversely affect embryonic development or mortality and the same internal EtOH concentration was measured measured in scap morphants, larvae injected with a control morpholino and uninjected controls treated with 2% EtOH for 24 hours (not shown). In both sets of control larvae, i.e uninjected and those injected with a non-targeting morpholino, over 60% of the larvae developed steatosis in response to 2% EtOH in contrast, to only 25.7% steatosis in scap morphants ( Fig. 4F ). If Srebp activation does not occur in goz hi1487 mutants in response to acute alcohol exposure, then Srebp target genes should not be upregulated in these fish. qPCR analysis of gene expression in the livers from 3 clutches of goz hi1487 larvae and their non-mutant siblings confirms this hypothesis. The expression of acc1, fasn, hmgcra and hmgcs1 is significantly lower in untreated goz hi1487 livers compared to WTs, signifying that expression of these genes is regulated by Srebps during normal liver homeostasis ( Fig. 5A ). The hepatic expression of each of these genes is increased following 2% EtOH exposure in WT livers ( Fig. 3D ) whereas acc1, fasn, hmgcra and hmgcs1 expression was markedly reduced in goz hi1487 ( Fig. 5B ). Interestingly, there is hmgcrb expression is the same in WT and goz hi1487 livers, regardless of EtOH exposure, suggesting that it is independent of Srebps. This is consistent with the finding that hmgcrb expression is not liver-specific and that it primarily functions in the zebrafish heart, not in the liver ( 45 ). Importantly, changes in echs1, cyp2e1 and mtp expression in response to EtOH are similar in WT and goz hi1487 livers, indicating the specificity of the effect on Srebp target genes. The Atf6 target gene, bip , is strongly induced in the liver following EtOH treatment, similar to what is observed in adult zebrafish brains following to chronic alcohol exposure ( 46 ). There is not a significant decrease in bip expression, however, in goz hi1487 livers ( Fig 5C ), suggesting that Atf6 may not be the primary regulator of bip in response to EtOH. We thus conclude that Srebp activation occurs in response to acute alcohol exposure, and is required for steatosis.  Ethanol Induces Abnormalities in Zebrafish Larvae Zebrafish hepatogenesis occurs between 1-3 dpf ( 38 ), and larval feeding begins on 4-5 dpf when the yolk has been completely utilized. Fasting induced steatosis occurs if larvae are not fed by 6 dpf (KCS and CG, unpublished). Thus, 4-5 dpf is the ideal time to assess the effects of alcohol without interference by the metabolic changes that accompany external nutrient metabolism or fasting. To optimize a protocol for exposing zebrafish larvae to EtOH, we first assessed EtOH toxicity. 4 dpf larvae were exposed to EtOH concentrations ranging from 0.5 to 4.0% for 32 hours (i.e. until 128 hpf; Fig. 1A ) and were visually scored for viability, morphology and behavioral changes. Exposure to 4% EtOH causes rapid mortality, while nearly all larvae exposed to 2% EtOH or less survived the entire exposure ( Fig. 1B ). Thus, 4 dpf larvae are affected by EtOH in a dose- and time-dependent manner, the LD50 is 2.6% at 32 hours of treatment and 2% EtOH is the maximal tolerable dose. The cellular EtOH concentration was determined by an alcohol dehydrogenase assay using homogenate prepared from larvae exposed to 0, 171 and 343 mM EtOH (i.e. 0, 1 and 2% EtOH) for 8, 24, or 32 hours as a substrate. By 8 hours of exposure, tissue EtOH levels reached 40 mM in larvae treated with 1% EtOH and 63 mM in those treated with 2% ( Fig. 1C ). The level of internal alcohol remained constant at all time points, but at 24 hours of exposure, the internal EtOH concentration was higher in larvae treated with 2% compared 1% EtOH ( Fig. 1C ). The values measured in our experiments are comparable to those measured in other zebrafish studies ( 22 , 39 ) and are within an order of magnitude of the legal limit in humans. If zebrafish metabolize EtOH, then the genes which metabolize EtOH, such as cyp2e1, cyp3a4 and aldh ( 3 ) should be induced, and the generation of free oxygen radicals should cause oxidative stress and induce superoxide dismutase ( sod ) expression ( 40 ). While neither extended time ( Fig. 1D ) or increased concentration ( Fig. 1E ) of EtOH exposure caused changes in the expression these genes in extracts prepared from whole embryos, cyp2e1 and sod expression increased significantly (p values <0.05), albeit modestly, in livers dissected from larvae treated with 2% EtOH for 32 hours. Strikingly, bip expression was induced more than 30 fold in the liver ( Fig. 1F ), indicating significant ER stress. Based on these data, we conclude that zebrafish can ingest and metabolize EtOH, and this causes hepatic oxidative stress, signifying the suitability of this model for studying acute ALD. Exposing early zebrafish embryos to EtOH disrupts patterning and causes morphologic abnormalities ( 25 , 28 ). To avoid these effects on early development, we began our treatment protocol at 4 dpf, yet we found EtOH concentrations of 2% or greater induced reproducible morphologic abnormalities ( Fig. 2A ). Fish with edema, hepatomegaly, body curvature were considered severely affected, whereas those which had only failed to inflate their swim bladder were scored as moderately affected ( Fig. 2B ). The number of affected fish increased as either time of exposure or EtOH concentration increased, with higher concentrations (3 and 4% EtOH) inducing more severe abnormalities ( Fig. 2B ). Alcohol induces profound behavioral effects in mammals as well as in adult ( 19 , 21 , 41 ) and larval ( 22 ) zebrafish. We also observed irregular and non-directional swimming, lethargy and immobility in zebrafish larvae treated with EtOH, and scored the number of animals exhibiting any of these behaviors as affected ( Fig. 2C ). These results demonstrate that EtOH ingestion by 4 dpf zebrafish larvae increases mortality and causes changes in morphology and behavior.  Ethanol Induces Abnormalities in Zebrafish Larvae Zebrafish hepatogenesis occurs between 1-3 dpf ( 38 ), and larval feeding begins on 4-5 dpf when the yolk has been completely utilized. Fasting induced steatosis occurs if larvae are not fed by 6 dpf (KCS and CG, unpublished). Thus, 4-5 dpf is the ideal time to assess the effects of alcohol without interference by the metabolic changes that accompany external nutrient metabolism or fasting. To optimize a protocol for exposing zebrafish larvae to EtOH, we first assessed EtOH toxicity. 4 dpf larvae were exposed to EtOH concentrations ranging from 0.5 to 4.0% for 32 hours (i.e. until 128 hpf; Fig. 1A ) and were visually scored for viability, morphology and behavioral changes. Exposure to 4% EtOH causes rapid mortality, while nearly all larvae exposed to 2% EtOH or less survived the entire exposure ( Fig. 1B ). Thus, 4 dpf larvae are affected by EtOH in a dose- and time-dependent manner, the LD50 is 2.6% at 32 hours of treatment and 2% EtOH is the maximal tolerable dose. The cellular EtOH concentration was determined by an alcohol dehydrogenase assay using homogenate prepared from larvae exposed to 0, 171 and 343 mM EtOH (i.e. 0, 1 and 2% EtOH) for 8, 24, or 32 hours as a substrate. By 8 hours of exposure, tissue EtOH levels reached 40 mM in larvae treated with 1% EtOH and 63 mM in those treated with 2% ( Fig. 1C ). The level of internal alcohol remained constant at all time points, but at 24 hours of exposure, the internal EtOH concentration was higher in larvae treated with 2% compared 1% EtOH ( Fig. 1C ). The values measured in our experiments are comparable to those measured in other zebrafish studies ( 22 , 39 ) and are within an order of magnitude of the legal limit in humans. If zebrafish metabolize EtOH, then the genes which metabolize EtOH, such as cyp2e1, cyp3a4 and aldh ( 3 ) should be induced, and the generation of free oxygen radicals should cause oxidative stress and induce superoxide dismutase ( sod ) expression ( 40 ). While neither extended time ( Fig. 1D ) or increased concentration ( Fig. 1E ) of EtOH exposure caused changes in the expression these genes in extracts prepared from whole embryos, cyp2e1 and sod expression increased significantly (p values <0.05), albeit modestly, in livers dissected from larvae treated with 2% EtOH for 32 hours. Strikingly, bip expression was induced more than 30 fold in the liver ( Fig. 1F ), indicating significant ER stress. Based on these data, we conclude that zebrafish can ingest and metabolize EtOH, and this causes hepatic oxidative stress, signifying the suitability of this model for studying acute ALD. Exposing early zebrafish embryos to EtOH disrupts patterning and causes morphologic abnormalities ( 25 , 28 ). To avoid these effects on early development, we began our treatment protocol at 4 dpf, yet we found EtOH concentrations of 2% or greater induced reproducible morphologic abnormalities ( Fig. 2A ). Fish with edema, hepatomegaly, body curvature were considered severely affected, whereas those which had only failed to inflate their swim bladder were scored as moderately affected ( Fig. 2B ). The number of affected fish increased as either time of exposure or EtOH concentration increased, with higher concentrations (3 and 4% EtOH) inducing more severe abnormalities ( Fig. 2B ). Alcohol induces profound behavioral effects in mammals as well as in adult ( 19 , 21 , 41 ) and larval ( 22 ) zebrafish. We also observed irregular and non-directional swimming, lethargy and immobility in zebrafish larvae treated with EtOH, and scored the number of animals exhibiting any of these behaviors as affected ( Fig. 2C ). These results demonstrate that EtOH ingestion by 4 dpf zebrafish larvae increases mortality and causes changes in morphology and behavior.  Acute Ethanol Exposure Induces Steatosis Acute ethanol exposure in mammals causes steatosis ( 2 ). To determine whether this also occurs in zebrafish larvae, we treated 4 dpf larvae with 1% or 2% EtOH for 24 or 32 hours and visualized neutral lipids by whole mount oil red O staining ( Fig. 3A ). Untreated larvae and those treated with 1% EtOH (not shown) rarely developed steatosis by 5.5 dpf, whereas 2% EtOH treatment resulted in 53% and 64% steatosis at 24 and 32 hours of exposure, respectively ( Fig. 3B ). Histological analysis revealed macrovesicular lipid droplets in the hepatocytes of larvae treated for 32 hours with 2% EtOH ( Fig. 3C ). Despite this marked steatosis, there was no change in the expression of genes regulating several other hepatic functions (Fig. S2), suggesting that acute alcohol does not compromise liver function. Steatosis in chronic ALD is due to both decreased lipid utilization due to mitochondrial dysfunction ( 6 , 7 ) and to lipogenesis driven by SREBP1-c ( 8 ). The molecular basis of steatosis associated with acute EtOH exposure is not known. To assess the effects of EtOH on hepatic lipid metabolism in zebrafish, qPCR was used to detect the expression of genes involved in lipid and cholesterol synthesis, lipid oxidation and transport. The expression of these genes was compared between the livers of 5.5 dpf fish treated with 2% EtOH to untreated fish. In Figure 3D , the fold change in expression is plotted as a single point for each clutch, with the mean fold change from all experiments indicated by an ‘X’. We found significant changes in the expression of genes in each category, including the putative Srebp target genes fasn, hmgcs1 and the hmgcra and hmgcrb genes, which resulted from the genome duplication that occurred during teleost evolution ( 42 ).  Acute Ethanol Exposure Induces Steatosis Acute ethanol exposure in mammals causes steatosis ( 2 ). To determine whether this also occurs in zebrafish larvae, we treated 4 dpf larvae with 1% or 2% EtOH for 24 or 32 hours and visualized neutral lipids by whole mount oil red O staining ( Fig. 3A ). Untreated larvae and those treated with 1% EtOH (not shown) rarely developed steatosis by 5.5 dpf, whereas 2% EtOH treatment resulted in 53% and 64% steatosis at 24 and 32 hours of exposure, respectively ( Fig. 3B ). Histological analysis revealed macrovesicular lipid droplets in the hepatocytes of larvae treated for 32 hours with 2% EtOH ( Fig. 3C ). Despite this marked steatosis, there was no change in the expression of genes regulating several other hepatic functions (Fig. S2), suggesting that acute alcohol does not compromise liver function. Steatosis in chronic ALD is due to both decreased lipid utilization due to mitochondrial dysfunction ( 6 , 7 ) and to lipogenesis driven by SREBP1-c ( 8 ). The molecular basis of steatosis associated with acute EtOH exposure is not known. To assess the effects of EtOH on hepatic lipid metabolism in zebrafish, qPCR was used to detect the expression of genes involved in lipid and cholesterol synthesis, lipid oxidation and transport. The expression of these genes was compared between the livers of 5.5 dpf fish treated with 2% EtOH to untreated fish. In Figure 3D , the fold change in expression is plotted as a single point for each clutch, with the mean fold change from all experiments indicated by an ‘X’. We found significant changes in the expression of genes in each category, including the putative Srebp target genes fasn, hmgcs1 and the hmgcra and hmgcrb genes, which resulted from the genome duplication that occurred during teleost evolution ( 42 ).  Ethanol Mediated Steatosis Requires mbtps1 and scap: A Role for Srebps To address whether acute alcohol-induced steatosis requires Srebps, we used mbtps1 mutants and scap morpholino knock-down to prevent Srebp activation (Fig. S1). Both genes are expressed in the 5 dpf liver ( Fig. 4A ) suggesting they function at the time in which larvae develop steatosis in response to EtOH. The hi1487 allele of goz mutants (i.e. goz hi1487) has a viral insertion in the intron preceding the initiator ATG of the mbtps1 gene, resulting in a loss of function and embryonic lethality ( 30 , 37 ). However, unlike the Mbtps1 knock-out mice which die in utero ( 43 ), precluding examination of hepatic function, goz hi1487 mutants survive until 7 dpf with fully mature livers. Additionally, injecting embryos with a morpholino to prevent scap splicing ( 31 ) should specifically prevent Srebp activation. We found no difference in the internal EtOH concentration of WT larvae and goz hi1487 mutants ( Fig. 4B ) or scap morphants (not shown) or the morphological changes induced by 32 hours of treatment with 2% EtOH ( Fig. 4C and not shown), indicating that these models do not alter the ability of zebrafish larvae to ingest and respond to alcohol. There was, however, a marked inhibition of steatosis in response to 32 hours exposure to 2% EtOH in goz hi1487 mutants ( Figs. 4D and E ) indicating a requirement for mbtps1 in steatosis resulting from acute EtOH exposure. The most straightforward interpretation of this data is that acute alcohol exposure causes hepatic Srebp activation, thereby inducing the expression of genes required for lipid and cholesterol synthesis ( Fig. 3D ), and that mutation of mbtps1 blocks this pathway. Alternatively, as ATF6 is critical to the unfolded protein response (UPR), and this pathway has been implicated in ALD ( 44 ) the role of mbtps1 in activating the ATF6 ( 12 ) may also be important (see Figure S1). However, with the exception of bip upregulation ( Fig. 1F ), we found that other Atf6 targets (Fig. S3A) and or xbp1 splicing (Fig. S3B), markers of the UPR, were not induced the livers of EtOH treated larvae. Serum amyloid ( saa2 ) is regulated by CREBH ( 13 ) and was substantially upregulated in response to EtOH (Fig. S3C), but the degree of upregulation varied from clutch to clutch. These findings raised the possibility that failure to activate Atf6 and/or Crebh may contribute for the striking inhibition of steatosis in goz hi1487 mutants. Transient knock down of scap expression in WT fish by injecting embryos with a morpholino that blocks splicing of scap message is predicted to specifically prevent Srebp activation without affecting Atf6 or Crebh. scap morpholino injection did not adversely affect embryonic development or mortality and the same internal EtOH concentration was measured measured in scap morphants, larvae injected with a control morpholino and uninjected controls treated with 2% EtOH for 24 hours (not shown). In both sets of control larvae, i.e uninjected and those injected with a non-targeting morpholino, over 60% of the larvae developed steatosis in response to 2% EtOH in contrast, to only 25.7% steatosis in scap morphants ( Fig. 4F ). If Srebp activation does not occur in goz hi1487 mutants in response to acute alcohol exposure, then Srebp target genes should not be upregulated in these fish. qPCR analysis of gene expression in the livers from 3 clutches of goz hi1487 larvae and their non-mutant siblings confirms this hypothesis. The expression of acc1, fasn, hmgcra and hmgcs1 is significantly lower in untreated goz hi1487 livers compared to WTs, signifying that expression of these genes is regulated by Srebps during normal liver homeostasis ( Fig. 5A ). The hepatic expression of each of these genes is increased following 2% EtOH exposure in WT livers ( Fig. 3D ) whereas acc1, fasn, hmgcra and hmgcs1 expression was markedly reduced in goz hi1487 ( Fig. 5B ). Interestingly, there is hmgcrb expression is the same in WT and goz hi1487 livers, regardless of EtOH exposure, suggesting that it is independent of Srebps. This is consistent with the finding that hmgcrb expression is not liver-specific and that it primarily functions in the zebrafish heart, not in the liver ( 45 ). Importantly, changes in echs1, cyp2e1 and mtp expression in response to EtOH are similar in WT and goz hi1487 livers, indicating the specificity of the effect on Srebp target genes. The Atf6 target gene, bip , is strongly induced in the liver following EtOH treatment, similar to what is observed in adult zebrafish brains following to chronic alcohol exposure ( 46 ). There is not a significant decrease in bip expression, however, in goz hi1487 livers ( Fig 5C ), suggesting that Atf6 may not be the primary regulator of bip in response to EtOH. We thus conclude that Srebp activation occurs in response to acute alcohol exposure, and is required for steatosis.  Ethanol Mediated Steatosis Requires mbtps1 and scap: A Role for Srebps To address whether acute alcohol-induced steatosis requires Srebps, we used mbtps1 mutants and scap morpholino knock-down to prevent Srebp activation (Fig. S1). Both genes are expressed in the 5 dpf liver ( Fig. 4A ) suggesting they function at the time in which larvae develop steatosis in response to EtOH. The hi1487 allele of goz mutants (i.e. goz hi1487) has a viral insertion in the intron preceding the initiator ATG of the mbtps1 gene, resulting in a loss of function and embryonic lethality ( 30 , 37 ). However, unlike the Mbtps1 knock-out mice which die in utero ( 43 ), precluding examination of hepatic function, goz hi1487 mutants survive until 7 dpf with fully mature livers. Additionally, injecting embryos with a morpholino to prevent scap splicing ( 31 ) should specifically prevent Srebp activation. We found no difference in the internal EtOH concentration of WT larvae and goz hi1487 mutants ( Fig. 4B ) or scap morphants (not shown) or the morphological changes induced by 32 hours of treatment with 2% EtOH ( Fig. 4C and not shown), indicating that these models do not alter the ability of zebrafish larvae to ingest and respond to alcohol. There was, however, a marked inhibition of steatosis in response to 32 hours exposure to 2% EtOH in goz hi1487 mutants ( Figs. 4D and E ) indicating a requirement for mbtps1 in steatosis resulting from acute EtOH exposure. The most straightforward interpretation of this data is that acute alcohol exposure causes hepatic Srebp activation, thereby inducing the expression of genes required for lipid and cholesterol synthesis ( Fig. 3D ), and that mutation of mbtps1 blocks this pathway. Alternatively, as ATF6 is critical to the unfolded protein response (UPR), and this pathway has been implicated in ALD ( 44 ) the role of mbtps1 in activating the ATF6 ( 12 ) may also be important (see Figure S1). However, with the exception of bip upregulation ( Fig. 1F ), we found that other Atf6 targets (Fig. S3A) and or xbp1 splicing (Fig. S3B), markers of the UPR, were not induced the livers of EtOH treated larvae. Serum amyloid ( saa2 ) is regulated by CREBH ( 13 ) and was substantially upregulated in response to EtOH (Fig. S3C), but the degree of upregulation varied from clutch to clutch. These findings raised the possibility that failure to activate Atf6 and/or Crebh may contribute for the striking inhibition of steatosis in goz hi1487 mutants. Transient knock down of scap expression in WT fish by injecting embryos with a morpholino that blocks splicing of scap message is predicted to specifically prevent Srebp activation without affecting Atf6 or Crebh. scap morpholino injection did not adversely affect embryonic development or mortality and the same internal EtOH concentration was measured measured in scap morphants, larvae injected with a control morpholino and uninjected controls treated with 2% EtOH for 24 hours (not shown). In both sets of control larvae, i.e uninjected and those injected with a non-targeting morpholino, over 60% of the larvae developed steatosis in response to 2% EtOH in contrast, to only 25.7% steatosis in scap morphants ( Fig. 4F ). If Srebp activation does not occur in goz hi1487 mutants in response to acute alcohol exposure, then Srebp target genes should not be upregulated in these fish. qPCR analysis of gene expression in the livers from 3 clutches of goz hi1487 larvae and their non-mutant siblings confirms this hypothesis. The expression of acc1, fasn, hmgcra and hmgcs1 is significantly lower in untreated goz hi1487 livers compared to WTs, signifying that expression of these genes is regulated by Srebps during normal liver homeostasis ( Fig. 5A ). The hepatic expression of each of these genes is increased following 2% EtOH exposure in WT livers ( Fig. 3D ) whereas acc1, fasn, hmgcra and hmgcs1 expression was markedly reduced in goz hi1487 ( Fig. 5B ). Interestingly, there is hmgcrb expression is the same in WT and goz hi1487 livers, regardless of EtOH exposure, suggesting that it is independent of Srebps. This is consistent with the finding that hmgcrb expression is not liver-specific and that it primarily functions in the zebrafish heart, not in the liver ( 45 ). Importantly, changes in echs1, cyp2e1 and mtp expression in response to EtOH are similar in WT and goz hi1487 livers, indicating the specificity of the effect on Srebp target genes. The Atf6 target gene, bip , is strongly induced in the liver following EtOH treatment, similar to what is observed in adult zebrafish brains following to chronic alcohol exposure ( 46 ). There is not a significant decrease in bip expression, however, in goz hi1487 livers ( Fig 5C ), suggesting that Atf6 may not be the primary regulator of bip in response to EtOH. We thus conclude that Srebp activation occurs in response to acute alcohol exposure, and is required for steatosis.  DISCUSSION We demonstrate that 32 hours of continuous exposure to 2% EtOH causes zebrafish larvae to develop characteristic signs of acute ALD, including hepatomegaly, steatosis and changes in hepatic gene expression suggesting that alcohol is metabolized and causes oxidative stress ( 47 ). Symptomatic fish were generated rapidly and in large numbers via a relatively simple treatment protocol, providing distinct advantages over mammalian models. Genetic tractability is among the most useful attributes of zebrafish. We present two example, using goz hi1487 mutants and scap morphants, which demonstrate that zebrafish genetics can be used to quickly and efficiently identify genes required for alcohol-mediated steatosis. Several studies established early zebrafish embryos as a model for fetal alcohol syndrome ( 23 , 25 - 27 , 48 ) and adult zebrafish are used to study the effects of alcohol on behavior ( 19 - 21 , 41 , 46 ). While we also find that EtOH induces morphological and behavioral abnormalities in zebrafish larvae, the effects we report are less likely to be attributable to disrupting developmental processes, since we expose larvae to alcohol once major developmental milestones are complete. Alcohol exposure of both early and late stage embryos does, however, appear to affect of cholesterol metabolism. Early embryos exposed to EtOH display growth retardation and cyclopia attributed to decreased cholesterol modification of sonic hedgehog ( 27 ) while we find that alcohol increases the expression of genes required for cholesterol biogenesis. It is possible that alcohol influences cholesterol metabolism by different mechanisms depending on the developmental stage. The failure of goz hi1487 larvae to develop EtOH mediated steatosis demonstrates the role of mbtps1 in acute ALD and implicates one of the Mbtps1 substrates - i.e. Srebps, Atf6 or Crebh - in this process. scap morphants are also resistant to EtOH mediated steatosis, but are not otherwise phenotypically affected. Moreover, as both scap morphants and goz hi1487 mutants internalize EtOH and display phenotypic and gene expression changes, indicating that these larvae are capable of metabolizing and responding to EtOH, but that they do not develop steatosis. This indicates that EtOH treatment activates Srebps, leading to target gene activation and subsequent increase in hepatic lipogenesis. Indeed, the hepatic expression of several Srebp target genes is dependent on mbtps1 , even without alcohol, pointing to an essential and conserved function for Srebps hepatic lipid homeostasis. The Srebp1 and Srebp2 genes were recently identified in zebrafish through the ongoing zebrafish genome project, and it will be of interest to interrogate those transcripts to further define which Srebp is crucial for steatosis in this model. While the most likely explanation of our data is that de novo lipogenesis driven by Srebps is required for steatosis, Atf6 may also contribute to steatosis in this setting, as a role for the UPR in ALD has been demonstrated in mammals ( 44 ). It is possible that the combined action of Srebps and Atf6 could explain the more substantial suppression of steatosis in goz hi1487 mutants compared to scap morphants. Arguing against this is the finding that several Srebp target genes are suppressed in goz hi1487 mutants, whereas there is no significant difference the induction of the Atf6 target gene, bip, in response to EtOH. Thus, the more likely explaination is that the differences in the efficacy of morpholinos, which act transiently so that there is only partial scap knockdown by 4 dpf, compared to the stable depletion achieved by homozygous mutation. In summary, we conclude that acute alcohol exposure causes Srebp activation, which drives the transcription of genes that are required for lipid and cholesterol synthesis, leading to de novo hepatic lipogenesis and steatosis. The risk of ALD progression is dose- and pattern-dependent, but quantifying the level of alcohol consumption that provokes progression beyond past steatosis has not been possible. Moreover, variations in disease progression are thought to be influenced by as-yet-unidentified genetic factors. While exciting progress has been made using mammalian models of ALD, uncovering the genes that contribute to this disease are a major hurdle. Knock-out mice are an unsurpassed means of testing genes suspected to play a role in ALD, however, these are costly and time consuming. The rapidly expanding library of publicly available zebrafish mutants ( zirc.org ) and the use of morpholinos to knockdown gene expression are a significant advantage of zebrafish. While the zebrafish larval model of ALD is not amenable to exploring the consequences of chronic alcohol abuse, such as fibrosis, this system offers several features that will complement mammalian studies of acute ALD. Additionally, as multiple organ systems are affected by alcohol abuse, we envision future investigations to incorporate studies on ALD with studies on the effects of alcohol on fields outside of hepatology.  DISCUSSION We demonstrate that 32 hours of continuous exposure to 2% EtOH causes zebrafish larvae to develop characteristic signs of acute ALD, including hepatomegaly, steatosis and changes in hepatic gene expression suggesting that alcohol is metabolized and causes oxidative stress ( 47 ). Symptomatic fish were generated rapidly and in large numbers via a relatively simple treatment protocol, providing distinct advantages over mammalian models. Genetic tractability is among the most useful attributes of zebrafish. We present two example, using goz hi1487 mutants and scap morphants, which demonstrate that zebrafish genetics can be used to quickly and efficiently identify genes required for alcohol-mediated steatosis. Several studies established early zebrafish embryos as a model for fetal alcohol syndrome ( 23 , 25 - 27 , 48 ) and adult zebrafish are used to study the effects of alcohol on behavior ( 19 - 21 , 41 , 46 ). While we also find that EtOH induces morphological and behavioral abnormalities in zebrafish larvae, the effects we report are less likely to be attributable to disrupting developmental processes, since we expose larvae to alcohol once major developmental milestones are complete. Alcohol exposure of both early and late stage embryos does, however, appear to affect of cholesterol metabolism. Early embryos exposed to EtOH display growth retardation and cyclopia attributed to decreased cholesterol modification of sonic hedgehog ( 27 ) while we find that alcohol increases the expression of genes required for cholesterol biogenesis. It is possible that alcohol influences cholesterol metabolism by different mechanisms depending on the developmental stage. The failure of goz hi1487 larvae to develop EtOH mediated steatosis demonstrates the role of mbtps1 in acute ALD and implicates one of the Mbtps1 substrates - i.e. Srebps, Atf6 or Crebh - in this process. scap morphants are also resistant to EtOH mediated steatosis, but are not otherwise phenotypically affected. Moreover, as both scap morphants and goz hi1487 mutants internalize EtOH and display phenotypic and gene expression changes, indicating that these larvae are capable of metabolizing and responding to EtOH, but that they do not develop steatosis. This indicates that EtOH treatment activates Srebps, leading to target gene activation and subsequent increase in hepatic lipogenesis. Indeed, the hepatic expression of several Srebp target genes is dependent on mbtps1 , even without alcohol, pointing to an essential and conserved function for Srebps hepatic lipid homeostasis. The Srebp1 and Srebp2 genes were recently identified in zebrafish through the ongoing zebrafish genome project, and it will be of interest to interrogate those transcripts to further define which Srebp is crucial for steatosis in this model. While the most likely explanation of our data is that de novo lipogenesis driven by Srebps is required for steatosis, Atf6 may also contribute to steatosis in this setting, as a role for the UPR in ALD has been demonstrated in mammals ( 44 ). It is possible that the combined action of Srebps and Atf6 could explain the more substantial suppression of steatosis in goz hi1487 mutants compared to scap morphants. Arguing against this is the finding that several Srebp target genes are suppressed in goz hi1487 mutants, whereas there is no significant difference the induction of the Atf6 target gene, bip, in response to EtOH. Thus, the more likely explaination is that the differences in the efficacy of morpholinos, which act transiently so that there is only partial scap knockdown by 4 dpf, compared to the stable depletion achieved by homozygous mutation. In summary, we conclude that acute alcohol exposure causes Srebp activation, which drives the transcription of genes that are required for lipid and cholesterol synthesis, leading to de novo hepatic lipogenesis and steatosis. The risk of ALD progression is dose- and pattern-dependent, but quantifying the level of alcohol consumption that provokes progression beyond past steatosis has not been possible. Moreover, variations in disease progression are thought to be influenced by as-yet-unidentified genetic factors. While exciting progress has been made using mammalian models of ALD, uncovering the genes that contribute to this disease are a major hurdle. Knock-out mice are an unsurpassed means of testing genes suspected to play a role in ALD, however, these are costly and time consuming. The rapidly expanding library of publicly available zebrafish mutants ( zirc.org ) and the use of morpholinos to knockdown gene expression are a significant advantage of zebrafish. While the zebrafish larval model of ALD is not amenable to exploring the consequences of chronic alcohol abuse, such as fibrosis, this system offers several features that will complement mammalian studies of acute ALD. Additionally, as multiple organ systems are affected by alcohol abuse, we envision future investigations to incorporate studies on ALD with studies on the effects of alcohol on fields outside of hepatology.  Figures Figure 1 Acute EtOH exposure reduces viability of zebrafish larvae (A) Outline of the EtOH treatment protocol. EtOH exposure began at 96 hpf and continued for up to 32 hours (128 hpf). (B) Larvae treated with 0-4% EtOH were scored for mortality and the average of 3 clutches is plotted during 32 hours of exposure; error bars show standard deviation. (C) Tissue EtOH concentration was determined using homogenates of whole larvae treated with 0, 171 and 343 mM EtOH (i.e. 0, 1 and 2%) as a substrate for an alcohol dehydrogenase activity using, and the measurements from untreated larvae was subtracted as background from measurements obtained from treated animals. Values indicate the average mM of internal EtOH in at least 3 separate clutches. * indicates p=0.046. (D-F) qPCR analysis of gene expression in whole larvae treated for 24 or 32 hours with 2% EtOH (D) or for 32 hours with either 1% or 2% EtOH (E). Values indicate the average fold change in gene expression compared to untreated controls in 3 clutches. (F) Livers were dissected from 4-8 clutches of larvae that were treated with 0% or 2% EtOH for 32 hours and qPCR analysis demonstrates a significant increase in the expression of cyp2e1 and sod in response to EtOH (*indicates p value < 0.03). Figure 2 Zebrafish exposed to alcohol develop morphological and behavioral abnormalities (A) 5.5 dpf larvae treated with 0% or 2% EtOH for 32 hours develop morphologic abnormalities including upward curvature of the trunk and tail, hepatomegaly (liver is outlined by a dotted line), pericardial edema (arrow), and failure to inflate the swim bladder (sb). Scale bar represents 250 ?m. (B) Morphologic abnormalities induced by 0, 1, 2 and 3% EtOH become more severe with duration of exposure. Failure to inflate the sb was scored as a moderate abnormality and occurrence of one additional phenotype (i.e. edema, body curvature or hepatomegaly) was scored as severe. (C) Behavioral abnormalities induced by EtOH, including non-directional swimming and lethargy, was scored for animals treated with 0, 1, 2 and 3% EtOH. All experiments were repeated on 3 clutches and error bars indicate standard deviation. Figure 3 EtOH exposure results in steatosis and alteration of lipid metabolism (A) Whole mount oil red O staining of 5.5 dpf larvae after exposure to 0% or 2% EtOH for 32 hours reveals steatosis. Dotted line outlines the liver. (B) 4 dpf larvae were treated with 0% or 2% EtOH, collected at 24 or 32 hours of exposure and stained with oil red O. The percent of larvae with steatosis was scored in at least 4 clutches with an average n of 22 fish per group; *p=0.07; **p=0.0002. (C) H&E staining of sections through the liver of 5.5 dpf larvae treated with 0, 1 or 2% EtOH for 32 hours. Large, clear cytoplasmic lipid droplets (arrows) are seen in livers from larvae treated with 2% EtOH. (D) Livers were dissected from 5.5 dpf larvae treated with 0% or 2% for 32 hours and the expression of genes involved in lipid metabolism was analyzed by qPCR. Each gene was analyzed in up to 8 clutches and each point represents the fold change of each gene in livers treated with 2% EtOH relative to their untreated siblings. The X indicates the mean fold change, which is indicated numerically. * indicates p <0.02 and ** indicates a p =0.07. Figure 4 <italic>goz</italic><sup>hi1487</sup> mutants and <italic>scap</italic> morphants are resistant to EtOH induced steatosis (A) PCR analysis of mbtps1 and scap expression in 5 dpf liver and whole embryo extracts. rpp0 is used as a control. (B) Tissue EtOH concentration was determined by spectrophotometric analysis of alcohol dehydrogenase activity using homogenates of whole 5.5 dpf larvae treated for 24 hours with 2% EtOH as a substrate. Values on each bar indicate the average mM of internal EtOH in 4 separate clutches of non-mutant siblings (WT) and goz hi1487 larvae. Error bars indicate the SEM. (C) Live images of 5.5 dpf larvae treated with 0% or 2% EtOH for 32 hours indicate that EtOH induces the same morphological changes in WT and goz hi1487 larvae. Additionally, goz hi1487 mutants have defective craniofacial development ( 30 ) illustrated by the small jaw (arrow). Scale bar = 250 ?M. (D) goz hi1487 larvae and their non-mutant siblings were stained with oil red O on 5.5 dpf following 32 hours exposure to 2% EtOH. Neutral lipid accumulation is seen in the liver (dotted line) of WT fish (top) but not in goz hi1487 mutants (bottom). The percent of 5.5 dpf goz hi1487 mutants (E) or scap morphants (F) that develop steatosis with and without 32 hours of 2% EtOH exposure was scored in 4 goz hi148 clutches (n ? 14 fish per clutch; total n=230 larvae) and 5 clutches injected with scap or control morpholinos (MO; n? 8 fish per clutch, average clutch size of 21 and total n= 502 larvae) and averaged. Control larvae were non-mutant siblings in E and the sum of uninjected and control morpholino injected larvae in F. Error bars indicate SEM and p values are indicated. Figure 5 <italic>goz</italic><sup>hi1487</sup> mutants have decreased hepatic expression of Srebp target genes (A-B) Livers were dissected from non-mutant siblings (WT) and goz hi1487 larvae on 5.5. dpf following 32 hours of exposure to 0% (A) and 2% EtOH (B) and qPCR analysis was used to detect gene expression relative to rpp0 . The average fold change normalized to the expression in WT livers with no alcohol treatment is plotted. error bars indicate SEM. In (A) * indicates p<0.02. In (B), the p value corresponding to the different expression levels in WT and mutants is indicated. (C) qPCR was used to compare the expression of genes involved in EtOH metabolism (cyp2e1), lipid metabolism ( echs1 and mtp ) and the Atf6 target, bip in the livers of WT and goz hi1487 larvae on 5.5. dpf following 32 hours of exposure to 0% and 2% EtOH.  Figures Figure 1 Acute EtOH exposure reduces viability of zebrafish larvae (A) Outline of the EtOH treatment protocol. EtOH exposure began at 96 hpf and continued for up to 32 hours (128 hpf). (B) Larvae treated with 0-4% EtOH were scored for mortality and the average of 3 clutches is plotted during 32 hours of exposure; error bars show standard deviation. (C) Tissue EtOH concentration was determined using homogenates of whole larvae treated with 0, 171 and 343 mM EtOH (i.e. 0, 1 and 2%) as a substrate for an alcohol dehydrogenase activity using, and the measurements from untreated larvae was subtracted as background from measurements obtained from treated animals. Values indicate the average mM of internal EtOH in at least 3 separate clutches. * indicates p=0.046. (D-F) qPCR analysis of gene expression in whole larvae treated for 24 or 32 hours with 2% EtOH (D) or for 32 hours with either 1% or 2% EtOH (E). Values indicate the average fold change in gene expression compared to untreated controls in 3 clutches. (F) Livers were dissected from 4-8 clutches of larvae that were treated with 0% or 2% EtOH for 32 hours and qPCR analysis demonstrates a significant increase in the expression of cyp2e1 and sod in response to EtOH (*indicates p value < 0.03). Figure 2 Zebrafish exposed to alcohol develop morphological and behavioral abnormalities (A) 5.5 dpf larvae treated with 0% or 2% EtOH for 32 hours develop morphologic abnormalities including upward curvature of the trunk and tail, hepatomegaly (liver is outlined by a dotted line), pericardial edema (arrow), and failure to inflate the swim bladder (sb). Scale bar represents 250 ?m. (B) Morphologic abnormalities induced by 0, 1, 2 and 3% EtOH become more severe with duration of exposure. Failure to inflate the sb was scored as a moderate abnormality and occurrence of one additional phenotype (i.e. edema, body curvature or hepatomegaly) was scored as severe. (C) Behavioral abnormalities induced by EtOH, including non-directional swimming and lethargy, was scored for animals treated with 0, 1, 2 and 3% EtOH. All experiments were repeated on 3 clutches and error bars indicate standard deviation. Figure 3 EtOH exposure results in steatosis and alteration of lipid metabolism (A) Whole mount oil red O staining of 5.5 dpf larvae after exposure to 0% or 2% EtOH for 32 hours reveals steatosis. Dotted line outlines the liver. (B) 4 dpf larvae were treated with 0% or 2% EtOH, collected at 24 or 32 hours of exposure and stained with oil red O. The percent of larvae with steatosis was scored in at least 4 clutches with an average n of 22 fish per group; *p=0.07; **p=0.0002. (C) H&E staining of sections through the liver of 5.5 dpf larvae treated with 0, 1 or 2% EtOH for 32 hours. Large, clear cytoplasmic lipid droplets (arrows) are seen in livers from larvae treated with 2% EtOH. (D) Livers were dissected from 5.5 dpf larvae treated with 0% or 2% for 32 hours and the expression of genes involved in lipid metabolism was analyzed by qPCR. Each gene was analyzed in up to 8 clutches and each point represents the fold change of each gene in livers treated with 2% EtOH relative to their untreated siblings. The X indicates the mean fold change, which is indicated numerically. * indicates p <0.02 and ** indicates a p =0.07. Figure 4 <italic>goz</italic><sup>hi1487</sup> mutants and <italic>scap</italic> morphants are resistant to EtOH induced steatosis (A) PCR analysis of mbtps1 and scap expression in 5 dpf liver and whole embryo extracts. rpp0 is used as a control. (B) Tissue EtOH concentration was determined by spectrophotometric analysis of alcohol dehydrogenase activity using homogenates of whole 5.5 dpf larvae treated for 24 hours with 2% EtOH as a substrate. Values on each bar indicate the average mM of internal EtOH in 4 separate clutches of non-mutant siblings (WT) and goz hi1487 larvae. Error bars indicate the SEM. (C) Live images of 5.5 dpf larvae treated with 0% or 2% EtOH for 32 hours indicate that EtOH induces the same morphological changes in WT and goz hi1487 larvae. Additionally, goz hi1487 mutants have defective craniofacial development ( 30 ) illustrated by the small jaw (arrow). Scale bar = 250 ?M. (D) goz hi1487 larvae and their non-mutant siblings were stained with oil red O on 5.5 dpf following 32 hours exposure to 2% EtOH. Neutral lipid accumulation is seen in the liver (dotted line) of WT fish (top) but not in goz hi1487 mutants (bottom). The percent of 5.5 dpf goz hi1487 mutants (E) or scap morphants (F) that develop steatosis with and without 32 hours of 2% EtOH exposure was scored in 4 goz hi148 clutches (n ? 14 fish per clutch; total n=230 larvae) and 5 clutches injected with scap or control morpholinos (MO; n? 8 fish per clutch, average clutch size of 21 and total n= 502 larvae) and averaged. Control larvae were non-mutant siblings in E and the sum of uninjected and control morpholino injected larvae in F. Error bars indicate SEM and p values are indicated. Figure 5 <italic>goz</italic><sup>hi1487</sup> mutants have decreased hepatic expression of Srebp target genes (A-B) Livers were dissected from non-mutant siblings (WT) and goz hi1487 larvae on 5.5. dpf following 32 hours of exposure to 0% (A) and 2% EtOH (B) and qPCR analysis was used to detect gene expression relative to rpp0 . The average fold change normalized to the expression in WT livers with no alcohol treatment is plotted. error bars indicate SEM. In (A) * indicates p<0.02. In (B), the p value corresponding to the different expression levels in WT and mutants is indicated. (C) qPCR was used to compare the expression of genes involved in EtOH metabolism (cyp2e1), lipid metabolism ( echs1 and mtp ) and the Atf6 target, bip in the livers of WT and goz hi1487 larvae on 5.5. dpf following 32 hours of exposure to 0% and 2% EtOH. 