Overtreating Chronic Back Pain: Time to Back Off? Chronic back pain is among the most common patient complaints. Its prevalence and impact have spawned a rapidly expanding range of tests and treatments. Some of these have become widely used for indications that are not well-validated, leading to uncertainty about efficacy and safety, increasing complication rates, and marketing abuses. Recent studies document – over approximately a decade - a 629% increase in Medicare expenditures for epidural steroid injections; a 423% increase in expenditures for opioids for back pain; a 307% increase in the number of lumbar MRIs among Medicare beneficiaries; and a 220% increase in spinal fusion surgery rates. The limited studies available suggest that these increases have not been accompanied by population-level improvements in patient outcomes or disability rates. We suggest a need for a better understanding of the basic science of pain mechanisms; more rigorous and independent trials of many treatments; a stronger regulatory stance toward approval and post-marketing surveillance of new drugs and devices for chronic pain; and a chronic disease model for managing chronic back pain.  Implications and possible responses Prescribing yet more imaging, opioids, injections, and operations is not likely to improve outcomes for patients with chronic back pain. We must rethink chronic back pain at fundamental levels. Our understanding of chronic back pain mechanisms remains rudimentary, including our knowledge of spinal biology, central nervous system processing, genetic factors, and psychosocial and environmental influences. Greater investment is needed in this basic science research. Clinicians may often be applying an acute care model to a chronic condition. There are no “magic bullets” for chronic back pain, and expecting a cure from a drug, injection, or operation is generally wishful thinking. These approaches risk overlooking the psychosocial, occupational, and lifestyle dimensions of chronic pain. Although evidence remains incomplete, and the magnitude of benefits may be modest, data support the benefits of interventions that promote patient involvement and activity (e.g. graded exercise programs and group support). 73 - 77 These therapies also have the advantage of being low risk. A “chronic care model” would acknowledge that chronic back pain, like diabetes or asthma, is a condition we can treat but rarely cure. As with other chronic conditions, care of chronic back pain may benefit from sustained commitment from health care providers, involvement of patients as partners in their care, education in self-care strategies, coordination of care, and involvement of community resources to promote exercise, provide social support, and facilitate return to work. 78 , 79 Patients need realistic expectations, despite product marketing, media reports, and medical rhetoric that promise a pain-free life. Each treatment and test discussed here has a role in managing back pain, but the evidence base for judicious use remains inadequate. Greater federal involvement in research on therapies and devices may be necessary, to provide independent assessments. Initiatives in comparative effectiveness research would be particularly welcome in this regard. Research emphasis should shift from studying fine points of procedural technique to determining who benefits most. Instead of measuring only technical success (solid bony fusion or properly placed injection), research should clarify a treatment's safety and its effects on pain, function, and return to work. Serious complications and unclear benefits highlight the need for more rigorous approval and better post-marketing surveillance of both drugs and devices for treating pain. Without stronger evidence, insurers may reasonably question coverage of newer drugs, devices, and procedures. 80 In the meantime, we should fully inform patients about available treatment options, including the best available evidence for effectiveness, uncertainties, and risks, and encourage them to play an expanded role in therapeutic decision-making. 77  Implications and possible responses Prescribing yet more imaging, opioids, injections, and operations is not likely to improve outcomes for patients with chronic back pain. We must rethink chronic back pain at fundamental levels. Our understanding of chronic back pain mechanisms remains rudimentary, including our knowledge of spinal biology, central nervous system processing, genetic factors, and psychosocial and environmental influences. Greater investment is needed in this basic science research. Clinicians may often be applying an acute care model to a chronic condition. There are no “magic bullets” for chronic back pain, and expecting a cure from a drug, injection, or operation is generally wishful thinking. These approaches risk overlooking the psychosocial, occupational, and lifestyle dimensions of chronic pain. Although evidence remains incomplete, and the magnitude of benefits may be modest, data support the benefits of interventions that promote patient involvement and activity (e.g. graded exercise programs and group support). 73 - 77 These therapies also have the advantage of being low risk. A “chronic care model” would acknowledge that chronic back pain, like diabetes or asthma, is a condition we can treat but rarely cure. As with other chronic conditions, care of chronic back pain may benefit from sustained commitment from health care providers, involvement of patients as partners in their care, education in self-care strategies, coordination of care, and involvement of community resources to promote exercise, provide social support, and facilitate return to work. 78 , 79 Patients need realistic expectations, despite product marketing, media reports, and medical rhetoric that promise a pain-free life. Each treatment and test discussed here has a role in managing back pain, but the evidence base for judicious use remains inadequate. Greater federal involvement in research on therapies and devices may be necessary, to provide independent assessments. Initiatives in comparative effectiveness research would be particularly welcome in this regard. Research emphasis should shift from studying fine points of procedural technique to determining who benefits most. Instead of measuring only technical success (solid bony fusion or properly placed injection), research should clarify a treatment's safety and its effects on pain, function, and return to work. Serious complications and unclear benefits highlight the need for more rigorous approval and better post-marketing surveillance of both drugs and devices for treating pain. Without stronger evidence, insurers may reasonably question coverage of newer drugs, devices, and procedures. 80 In the meantime, we should fully inform patients about available treatment options, including the best available evidence for effectiveness, uncertainties, and risks, and encourage them to play an expanded role in therapeutic decision-making. 77  Figures Figure 1 Increases in Use of Various Services for Low Back Pain (1a.) Lumbar spine magnetic resonance imaging (CPT codes 72148, 72149, 72158), numbers of scans among Medicare beneficiaries, from Part B claims; (1b.) Numbers of opioid prescriptions for spine conditions, national data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, reference 11 (1c.) Rates of lumbosacral injections in the Medicare population, age- and sex-adjusted. Data are from reference 1, adapted with permission.(1d.) Lumbar spine fusion rates for degenerative conditions, age- and sex-adjusted, National Inpatient Sample, from reference 2, reproduced with permission. Figure 2 Percentage of individuals with permanent work disability (Social Security Disability Income beneficiaries) disabled by various medical conditions. Data are from reference 24.  Figures Figure 1 Increases in Use of Various Services for Low Back Pain (1a.) Lumbar spine magnetic resonance imaging (CPT codes 72148, 72149, 72158), numbers of scans among Medicare beneficiaries, from Part B claims; (1b.) Numbers of opioid prescriptions for spine conditions, national data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, reference 11 (1c.) Rates of lumbosacral injections in the Medicare population, age- and sex-adjusted. Data are from reference 1, adapted with permission.(1d.) Lumbar spine fusion rates for degenerative conditions, age- and sex-adjusted, National Inpatient Sample, from reference 2, reproduced with permission. Figure 2 Percentage of individuals with permanent work disability (Social Security Disability Income beneficiaries) disabled by various medical conditions. Data are from reference 24. 