AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS AND NEUROSARCOIDOSIS: A CASE REPORT Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) remains a clinical diagnosis without definable biomarkers. The pathomechanism of motor neuron degeneration in ALS has yet to be elucidated. Here we present a case of limb-onset ALS, with autopsy findings of Bunina bodies and skein-like inclusions, as well as sarcoid granulomas predominating among motor neurons. The targeting of the motor neurons by the sarcoid inflammation raises questions regarding the role of cellular immunity in the pathomechanisms for ALS.  DISCUSSION To date, ALS remains a clinical diagnosis of exclusion because it has no identifiable biomarkers. Our patient presented with weakness that appeared to spread from upper to lower extremities, and then involved her oropharyngeal muscles. The disease eventually affected the diaphragm, with evidence for both upper and lower motor neuron dysfunction. Her presentation and clinical course was rather characteristic of ALS, and the diagnosis was confirmed by the neuropathological findings with pyramidal tract degeneration and characteristic motor neuron involvement including Bunina bodies and skein-like inclusions. However, the autopsy finding of sarcoid granulomas in the lungs, lymph nodes, skeletal muscle, and the nervous system was not anticipated. Clinically, the patient did not have the typical features of systemic sarcoidosis, such as skin plaques, facial lupus pernio, anterior uveitis, or hilar lymphadenopathy. Although prior evaluation revealed a slight elevation of ACE levels, this is neither specific nor diagnostic of sarcoidosis. 5 , 6 Interestingly, neurosarcoidosis represents about 5%-15% of all sarcoidosis cases, and the diagnosis is made antemortem only 50% of the time. 10 Given the clinical and electrodiagnostic evidence for motor neuron dysfunction in our patient, we did not further investigate the possibility of neurosarcoidosis, as that is also a diagnosis of exclusion. There have been two case reports of clinical “bulbar ALS,” in whom subsequent studies suggested the patients had sarcoidosis. 2 , 9 One of the patients had improved bulbar and limb function in response to prednisone treatment after a lymph node biopsy indicated sarcoidosis. 9 The “bulbar ALS” patient was later diagnosed as “sarcoid brainstem encephalitis” after autopsy. 2 Pathologically, this case differs from ours, as the brain and spinal cord did not have histopathological evidence of ALS, such as motor neuron loss, intracytoplasmic Bunina bodies, or ubiquinated inclusions (pathologist Martin Lammens, personal communication) ( Table 1 ). Both cases highlight the significant overlap in the clinical presentation of neurosarcoidosis and bulbar ALS, and they remind clinicians of the need to maintain a high clinical suspicion for this form of brainstem encephalitis when evaluating patients for bulbar ALS. There have been two reported cases of ALS and sarcoidosis that coexist in the same patient. 7 , 11 One patient with autopsy-proven ALS exhibited sarcoid granulomas in the lungs and muscles with sparing of the meninges, brain, and spinal cord. The other patient had clinical resolution of hilar LAD in response to prednisone treatment, but the motor disorder progressed to a state of severe, diffuse weakness in the subsequent 10 months. No autopsy was performed to determine whether sarcoidosis involved the central nervous system ( Table 1 ). Our patient appears to be the first case of ALS that shows coexisting neurosarcoidosis. Moreover, sarcoid granulomas targeted chiefly the anterior horns, brainstem motor nuclei, and motor cortex. The etiology of sarcoidosis is not known, but the disorder is thought to result from an immunological response to poorly soluble or insoluble antigen. Epidemiological studies suggest that the disease is likely a consequence of a genetic susceptibility of patients in combination with exposure to an environmental agent. 5 Although the disorder shows a predilection for lymph nodes, lungs, skin, eyes, and skeletal muscle, it only rarely exhibits tissue specificity as exemplified in the nervous system in this ALS case. Rarely, sarcoid granulomatous lesions appear in skin tattoos or scars of systemic sarcoidosis, 1 , 4 , 12 and they sometimes demonstrate exquisite specificity of the inflammatory response to one pigment of a multicolor tattoo. This rare granulomatous manifestation of sarcoidosis in tattoos suggests possible shared pathomechanisms with this ALS patient. It is possible that the motor neuron degeneration in this case resembled tattoos or scars and triggered a local granulomatous inflammatory reaction to an insoluble material in the setting of sarcoidosis. In addition, cytokines or other factors arising in the inflammatory cells may have contributed to the degeneration of motor neurons. Clearly, the molecular basis of this interesting phenomenon requires a better understanding of the pathomechanisms of both ALS and sarcoidosis. Our experience suggests that ALS is a clinical syndrome and that autopsy study is still of paramount importance for confirmation of the diagnosis and furthering understanding of the disease pathology. The rate of autopsy has gradually declined in recent years. However, clinicians must confirm their diagnosis with autopsy even when we are quite confident about the clinical diagnosis.  DISCUSSION To date, ALS remains a clinical diagnosis of exclusion because it has no identifiable biomarkers. Our patient presented with weakness that appeared to spread from upper to lower extremities, and then involved her oropharyngeal muscles. The disease eventually affected the diaphragm, with evidence for both upper and lower motor neuron dysfunction. Her presentation and clinical course was rather characteristic of ALS, and the diagnosis was confirmed by the neuropathological findings with pyramidal tract degeneration and characteristic motor neuron involvement including Bunina bodies and skein-like inclusions. However, the autopsy finding of sarcoid granulomas in the lungs, lymph nodes, skeletal muscle, and the nervous system was not anticipated. Clinically, the patient did not have the typical features of systemic sarcoidosis, such as skin plaques, facial lupus pernio, anterior uveitis, or hilar lymphadenopathy. Although prior evaluation revealed a slight elevation of ACE levels, this is neither specific nor diagnostic of sarcoidosis. 5 , 6 Interestingly, neurosarcoidosis represents about 5%-15% of all sarcoidosis cases, and the diagnosis is made antemortem only 50% of the time. 10 Given the clinical and electrodiagnostic evidence for motor neuron dysfunction in our patient, we did not further investigate the possibility of neurosarcoidosis, as that is also a diagnosis of exclusion. There have been two case reports of clinical “bulbar ALS,” in whom subsequent studies suggested the patients had sarcoidosis. 2 , 9 One of the patients had improved bulbar and limb function in response to prednisone treatment after a lymph node biopsy indicated sarcoidosis. 9 The “bulbar ALS” patient was later diagnosed as “sarcoid brainstem encephalitis” after autopsy. 2 Pathologically, this case differs from ours, as the brain and spinal cord did not have histopathological evidence of ALS, such as motor neuron loss, intracytoplasmic Bunina bodies, or ubiquinated inclusions (pathologist Martin Lammens, personal communication) ( Table 1 ). Both cases highlight the significant overlap in the clinical presentation of neurosarcoidosis and bulbar ALS, and they remind clinicians of the need to maintain a high clinical suspicion for this form of brainstem encephalitis when evaluating patients for bulbar ALS. There have been two reported cases of ALS and sarcoidosis that coexist in the same patient. 7 , 11 One patient with autopsy-proven ALS exhibited sarcoid granulomas in the lungs and muscles with sparing of the meninges, brain, and spinal cord. The other patient had clinical resolution of hilar LAD in response to prednisone treatment, but the motor disorder progressed to a state of severe, diffuse weakness in the subsequent 10 months. No autopsy was performed to determine whether sarcoidosis involved the central nervous system ( Table 1 ). Our patient appears to be the first case of ALS that shows coexisting neurosarcoidosis. Moreover, sarcoid granulomas targeted chiefly the anterior horns, brainstem motor nuclei, and motor cortex. The etiology of sarcoidosis is not known, but the disorder is thought to result from an immunological response to poorly soluble or insoluble antigen. Epidemiological studies suggest that the disease is likely a consequence of a genetic susceptibility of patients in combination with exposure to an environmental agent. 5 Although the disorder shows a predilection for lymph nodes, lungs, skin, eyes, and skeletal muscle, it only rarely exhibits tissue specificity as exemplified in the nervous system in this ALS case. Rarely, sarcoid granulomatous lesions appear in skin tattoos or scars of systemic sarcoidosis, 1 , 4 , 12 and they sometimes demonstrate exquisite specificity of the inflammatory response to one pigment of a multicolor tattoo. This rare granulomatous manifestation of sarcoidosis in tattoos suggests possible shared pathomechanisms with this ALS patient. It is possible that the motor neuron degeneration in this case resembled tattoos or scars and triggered a local granulomatous inflammatory reaction to an insoluble material in the setting of sarcoidosis. In addition, cytokines or other factors arising in the inflammatory cells may have contributed to the degeneration of motor neurons. Clearly, the molecular basis of this interesting phenomenon requires a better understanding of the pathomechanisms of both ALS and sarcoidosis. Our experience suggests that ALS is a clinical syndrome and that autopsy study is still of paramount importance for confirmation of the diagnosis and furthering understanding of the disease pathology. The rate of autopsy has gradually declined in recent years. However, clinicians must confirm their diagnosis with autopsy even when we are quite confident about the clinical diagnosis.  Figure and Table FIGURE 1 Spinal cord and skeletal muscle in autopsy of a patient with ALS and sarcoidosis. (A) The cervical level of the spinal cord shows prominent infiltration of the region of the crossed and uncrossed pyramidal tracts (arrows) by microglia and macrophages. Immunoperoxidase stain of CD68; scale bar = 1.0 mm. (B) A ventral horn motor neuron contains ubiquinated fibrils that form skein-like inclusions within the cytoplasm (arrow). Immunoperoxidase stain of ubiquitin; scale bar = 50 ?. (C) A ventral horn displays two small granulomas (arrows) near surviving motor neurons. Hematoxylin and eosin; scale bar = 100 ?. (D) Two large granulomas (arrows) are found within skeletal muscle. Hematoxylin and eosin; scale bar = 200 ?. Table 1 Data from four patients with sarcoidosis and ALS or bulbar ALS-like syndrome Age, gender Clinical ALS features Atypical ALS features/ comments Response to steroids Diagnosis/autopsy findings Koide et al., 2005 9 50, F - weight loss - MRI with signal abnormalities in bilateral Meckle's cave Yes: Sarcoid brainstem encephalitis/no autopsy performed - dysphagia - bulbar function improved - dysphonia - absent gag reflex - motor strength improved after 6 months - hyperreflexia - Chest X-ray with hilar LAD - muscle atrophy - proximal limb weakness - anterior scalene muscle lymph nodes biopsy revealed sarcoidosis Bos et al., 2006 2 63, F - dysarthria - EMG with only neurogenic changes in the left first dorsal interosseous muscle N/A Sarcoid brainstem encephalitis/at 3 years of symptom onset, autopsy: - dysphagia - respiratory symptoms - nemaline rods in several muscles - tongue atrophy with fasciculations - Muscle biopsy showed nemaline rods - lymphocytes in two muscles - sarcoidosis of medulla, without involvement of cranial or spinal nerves/meninges/anterior horn cells - hyperreflexia - hyperreflexia - no pathological evidence of ALS Saiki et al. 2001 1 63, F after 11 months of previously diagnosed uveitis and hilar LAD: - uveitis and hilar LAD at 11 months prior to motor deficits No ALS & sarcoidosis; at 14 months of motor symptom onset, autopsy showed: - calf biopsy revealed sarcoidosis A. sarcoidosis in lungs only (no mononuclear cell infiltration or granulomatous lesion in SC or nerve roots) - left leg weakness with left calf mass - progressive leg weakness in spite of immunotherapy B. ALS features included 1. loss of anterior horn cells - contralateral leg and arm weakness 2. axonal spheroids 3. Bunina bodies 4. Myelin pallor & vacuolar degeneration in corticospinal tract - bulbar palsy - mildly brisk reflexes in arms, hyporeflexia in legs Karacostas et al., 2007 7 56, F -1 year of left foot drop - (concurrently) elevated serum ACE, normal CSF-ACE - Partial response to steroid with resolution of hilar LAD ALS/no autopsy performed - progressive gait difficulty - hilar LAD; biopsy revealed granulomas - distal to proximal gradient weakness - no improvement of motor function - fasciculations in all extremities and tongue - hyperreflexia ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; EMG, electromyogram; F, female; LAD, lymphadenopathy; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; N/A, not available.  Figure and Table FIGURE 1 Spinal cord and skeletal muscle in autopsy of a patient with ALS and sarcoidosis. (A) The cervical level of the spinal cord shows prominent infiltration of the region of the crossed and uncrossed pyramidal tracts (arrows) by microglia and macrophages. Immunoperoxidase stain of CD68; scale bar = 1.0 mm. (B) A ventral horn motor neuron contains ubiquinated fibrils that form skein-like inclusions within the cytoplasm (arrow). Immunoperoxidase stain of ubiquitin; scale bar = 50 ?. (C) A ventral horn displays two small granulomas (arrows) near surviving motor neurons. Hematoxylin and eosin; scale bar = 100 ?. (D) Two large granulomas (arrows) are found within skeletal muscle. Hematoxylin and eosin; scale bar = 200 ?. Table 1 Data from four patients with sarcoidosis and ALS or bulbar ALS-like syndrome Age, gender Clinical ALS features Atypical ALS features/ comments Response to steroids Diagnosis/autopsy findings Koide et al., 2005 9 50, F - weight loss - MRI with signal abnormalities in bilateral Meckle's cave Yes: Sarcoid brainstem encephalitis/no autopsy performed - dysphagia - bulbar function improved - dysphonia - absent gag reflex - motor strength improved after 6 months - hyperreflexia - Chest X-ray with hilar LAD - muscle atrophy - proximal limb weakness - anterior scalene muscle lymph nodes biopsy revealed sarcoidosis Bos et al., 2006 2 63, F - dysarthria - EMG with only neurogenic changes in the left first dorsal interosseous muscle N/A Sarcoid brainstem encephalitis/at 3 years of symptom onset, autopsy: - dysphagia - respiratory symptoms - nemaline rods in several muscles - tongue atrophy with fasciculations - Muscle biopsy showed nemaline rods - lymphocytes in two muscles - sarcoidosis of medulla, without involvement of cranial or spinal nerves/meninges/anterior horn cells - hyperreflexia - hyperreflexia - no pathological evidence of ALS Saiki et al. 2001 1 63, F after 11 months of previously diagnosed uveitis and hilar LAD: - uveitis and hilar LAD at 11 months prior to motor deficits No ALS & sarcoidosis; at 14 months of motor symptom onset, autopsy showed: - calf biopsy revealed sarcoidosis A. sarcoidosis in lungs only (no mononuclear cell infiltration or granulomatous lesion in SC or nerve roots) - left leg weakness with left calf mass - progressive leg weakness in spite of immunotherapy B. ALS features included 1. loss of anterior horn cells - contralateral leg and arm weakness 2. axonal spheroids 3. Bunina bodies 4. Myelin pallor & vacuolar degeneration in corticospinal tract - bulbar palsy - mildly brisk reflexes in arms, hyporeflexia in legs Karacostas et al., 2007 7 56, F -1 year of left foot drop - (concurrently) elevated serum ACE, normal CSF-ACE - Partial response to steroid with resolution of hilar LAD ALS/no autopsy performed - progressive gait difficulty - hilar LAD; biopsy revealed granulomas - distal to proximal gradient weakness - no improvement of motor function - fasciculations in all extremities and tongue - hyperreflexia ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; EMG, electromyogram; F, female; LAD, lymphadenopathy; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; N/A, not available. 