Transcriptome Sequencing to Detect Gene Fusions in Cancer Recurrent gene fusions, typically associated with hematological malignancies and rare bone and soft tissue tumors 1 , have been recently described in common solid tumors 2 – 9 . Here we employ an integrative analysis of high-throughput long and short read transcriptome sequencing of cancer cells to discover novel gene fusions. As a proof of concept we successfully utilized integrative transcriptome sequencing to “re-discover” the BCR-ABL1 10 gene fusion in a chronic myelogenous leukemia cell line and the TMPRSS2-ERG 2 , 3 gene fusion in a prostate cancer cell line and tissues. Additionally, we nominated, and experimentally validated, novel gene fusions resulting in chimeric transcripts in cancer cell lines and tumors. Taken together, this study establishes a robust pipeline for the discovery of novel gene chimeras using high throughput sequencing, opening up an important class of cancer-related mutations for comprehensive characterization.  METHODS SUMMARY Long read sequencing was conducted using 454 FLX Sequencing whereas short read sequencing was performed on the Illumina Genome Analyzer. Q-PCR for fusion candidates were performed using indicated oligonucleotide primers ( Supplementary Table 8 ). Interphase FISH were performed in cell lines and tissues using bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) probes ( Supplementary Fig. 4a , Supplementary Fig 5a, 5c, 5e , Supplementary Fig 8 , Supplementary Fig 7d , Supplementary Fig 12 , Supplementary Fig 13 , Supplementary Fig 14b, and 14d ). Oligonucleotide comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) was performed using Agilent arrays and copy number analysis was conducted in CGH Analytics. Affymetrix Genome-wide Human SNP Array 6.0 was processed using the Affymetrix Genotyping Console. Prostate tissues were obtained from the radical prostatectomy series at the University of Michigan and from the Rapid Autopsy Program, University of Michigan Specialized Program of Research Excellence (S.P.O.R.E.) in prostate cancer.  METHODS Samples and cell lines The benign immortalized prostate cell line RWPE and the prostate cancer cell line LNCaP was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection. Primary benign prostatic epithelial cells (PrEC) were obtained from Cambrex Bio Science. The prostate cancer cell line MDA-PCa 2B was provided by E. Keller. The prostate cancer cell line 22-RV1 was provided by J. Macoska. VCaP was derived from a vertebral metastasis from a patient with hormone-refractory metastatic prostate cancer 28 , and was provided by Ken Pienta. Androgen stimulation experiment was carried out with LNCaP and VCaP cells grown in charcoal-stripped serum containing media for 24 h, before treatment with 1% ethanol or 1 nM of methyltrienolone (R1881, NEN Life Science Products) dissolved in ethanol, for 24 and 48 h. Total RNA was isolated with RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Prostate tissues were obtained from the radical prostatectomy series at the University of Michigan and from the Rapid Autopsy Program 29 , University of Michigan Prostate Cancer Specialized Program of Research Excellence Tissue Core. All samples were collected with informed consent of the patients and prior approval of the institutional review board. 454 FLX Sequencing PolyA+ RNA was purified from 50µg total RNA using two rounds of selection on oligo-dT containing paramagnetic beads using Dynabeads mRNA Purification Kit (Dynal Biotech, Oslo, Norway), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 200 ng mRNA was fragmented at 82°C in Fragmentation Buffer (40 mM Tris-Acetate, 100 mM Potassium Acetate, 31.5 mM Magnesium Acetate, pH 8.1) for 2 minutes. First strand cDNA library was prepared using Superscript II (Invitrogen) according to standard protocols and directional adaptors were ligated to the cDNA ends for clonal amplification and sequencing on the Genome Sequencer FLX. The adaptor ligation reaction was carried out in Quick Ligase Buffer (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) containing 1.67 µM of the Adaptor A, 6.67 µM of the Adaptor B and 2000 units of T4 DNA Ligase (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) at 37°C for 2 hours. Adapted library was recovered with 0.05% Sera-Mag30 streptavidin beads (Seradyn Inc, Indianapolis, IN) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Finally, the sscDNA library was purified twice with RNAClean (Agencourt, Beverly, MA) as per the manufacturer’s directions except the amount of beads was reduced to 1.6X the volume of the sample. The purified sscDNA library was analyzed on an RNA 6000 Pico chip on a 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) to confirm a size distribution between 450 to 750 nucleotides, and quantified with Quant-iT Ribogreen RNA Assay Kit (Invitrogen Corporation, Carlsbad, CA) on a Synergy HT (Bio-Tek Instruments Inc, Winooski, VT) instrument following the manufacturer’s instructions. The library was PCR amplified with 2 µM each of Primer A (5'-GCC TCC CTC GCG CCA-3') and Primer B (5'-GCC TTG CCA GCC CGC-3'), 400 µM dNTPs, 1X Advantage 2 buffer and 1 µl of Advantage 2 polymerase mix (Clontech, Mountain View, CA). The amplification reaction was performed at: 96°C for 4 min; 94°C for 30 sec, 64°C for 30 sec, repeating steps 2 and 3 for a total of 20 cycles, followed by 68°C for 3 minutes. The samples were purified using AMPure beads and diluted to a final working concentration of 200,000 molecules per µl. Emulsion beads for sequencing were generated using Sequencing emPCR Kit II and Kit III and sequencing was carried out using 600,000 beads. Normalization by Subtraction mRNA from the prostate cancer cell line VCaP was hybridized with the subtractor cell line LNCaP 1st-strand cDNA immobilised on magnetic beads (Dynabeads, Invitrogen), according to the manufacturers instructions. Transcripts common to both the cells were captured and removed by magnetic separation of bead-bound subtractor cDNA and the subtracted VCaP mRNA left in the supernatant was recovered by precipitation and used for generating sequencing library as described. Efficiency of normalization was assessed by qRT-PCR assay of levels of select transcripts in the sample before and after the subtraction (data not shown). Illumina Genome Analyzer Sequencing 200ng mRNA was fragmented at 70°C for 5 min in a Fragmentation buffer (Ambion), and converted to first strand cDNA using Superscript III (Invitrogen), followed by second strand cDNA synthesis using E coli DNA pol I (Invitrogen). The double stranded cDNA library was further processed by Illumina Genomic DNA Sample Prep kit, and it involved end repair using T4 DNA polymerase, Klenow DNA polymerase, and T4 Polynucleotide kinase followed by a single <A> base addition using Klenow 3’ to 5’ exo? polymerase, and was ligated with Illumina’s adaptor oligo mix using T4 DNA ligase. Adaptor ligated library was size selected by separating on a 4% agarose gel and cutting out the library smear at 200bp (+/? 25bp). The library was PCR amplified by Phu polymerase (Stratagene), and purified by Qiaquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen). The library was quantified with Quant-iT Picogreen dsDNA Assay Kit (Invitrogen Corporation, Carlsbad, CA) on a Modulus™ Single Tube Luminometer (Turner Biosystems, Sunnyvale, CA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. 10nM library was used to prepare flowcells with approximately 30,000 clusters per lane. Sequence datasets Human genome build 18 (hg18) was used as a reference genome. All UCSC and Refseq transcripts were downloaded from the UCSC genome browser ( http://genome.ucsc.edu/ ) 30 . Sequences of previously identified TMPRSS2-ERGa fusion transcript (Genbank accession: DQ204772) and BCR-ABL1 fusion transcript (Genbank accession: M30829) were used for reference. Short read chimera discovery Short reads that do not completely align to the human genome, Refseq genes, mitochondrial, ribosomal, or contaminant sequences are categorized as non-mapping. For many chimeras we expect that there will be a larger portion mapping to a fusion partner (major alignment), and smaller portion aligning to the second partner (minor alignment). Our approach is therefore divided into two phases in which we focus on first identifying the major alignment and then performing a more exhaustive approach for identifying the minor alignment. In the first phase all non-mapping reads are aligned against all exons of Refseq genes using Vmatch, a pattern matching program 31 . Only reads that have an alignment of 12 or more nucleotides to an exon boundary are kept as potential chimeras. In the second phase, the non-mapping portion of the remaining reads are then mapped to all possible exon boundaries using a Perl script that utilizes regular expressions to detect alignments of as few as six nucleotides. Only those short reads that show partial alignment to exon boundaries of two separate genes are categorized as chimeras. It is possible to have a chimera that has 28 nucleotides aligning to gene x and 8 nucleotides that align to gene y and z because the 8-mer does not provide enough sequence resolution to distinguish between gene y and gene z. Therefore we would categorize this as two individual chimeras. If a sequence forms more than five chimeras it is discarded because it is ambiguous. To minimize false positives, we require that a predicted gene fusion event has at least two supporting chimeras. Long and short read integrated chimera discovery All 454 reads are aligned against the human Refseq collection using BLAT, a rapid mRNA/DNA alignment tool 32 . Using a Perl script, the BLAT output files were parsed to detect potential chimeric reads. A read is categorized as completely aligning if it shows greater than 90% alignment to a known Refseq transcript. These are then discarded as they almost completely align and therefore are not characteristic of a chimera. From the remaining reads, we want to query for reads having partial alignment, with minimal overlap, to two Refseq transcripts representing putative chimeras. To accomplish this, we iterate the all possible BLAT alignments for a putative chimera, extracting only those partial alignments that have no more than a six nucleotide, or two codon, overlap. This step reduces false positive chimeras introduced by repetitive regions, large gene families, and conserved domains. Additionally, while our approach tolerates overlap between the partial alignments, it filters those having more than ten or more nucleotides between the partial alignments. The short reads (36 nucleotides) generated from the Illumina platform are parsed by aligning them against the Refseq database and the human genome using Eland, an alignment tool for short reads. Reads that align completely or fail quality control are removed leaving only the “non-mapping” reads; a rich source for chimeras. These non-mapping short reads are subsequently aligned against all putative long read chimeras (obtained as described above) using Vmatch 31 , a pattern matching program. A Perl script is used to parse the Vmatch output to extract only those reads that span the fusion boundary by at least three nucleotides on each side. Following this integration, the remaining putative chimeras are categorized as inter- or intra-chromosomal chimeras based on whether the partial alignments are located on different or the same chromosomes, respectively. Those intra-chromosomal chimeras that have partial alignments to adjacent genes are believed to be the product of co-transcription of adjacent genes coupled with intergenic splicing (CoTIS) 18 , alternatively known as read-throughs. The remaining intra-chromosomal and all inter-chromosomal chimeras are considered candidate gene fusions. One additional source of false positive chimeras could be an unknown transcript that is not in Refseq. Due to its absence in the Refseq database, the corresponding long read would not be able to show a complete alignment, but instead show partial hits. Subsequently, short reads spanning this transcript would naturally validate the artificially produced fusion boundary. Therefore, to remove these candidates, we aligned all of the chimeras against the human genome using BLAT. If the long read had greater than 90% alignment to one genomic location, it is considered a novel transcript rather than a chimeric read. The remaining chimeras are given a score which is calculated by multiplying the long read coverage spanning the fusion boundary against the short read coverage spanning the fusion boundary. Coverage analysis Transcript coverage for every gene locus was calculated from the total number of passing filter reads that mapped, via ELAND, to exons. The total count of these reads was multiplied by the read length and divided by the longest transcript isoform of the gene as determined by the sum of all exon lengths as defined in the UCSC knownGene table (Mar. 2006 assembly). Nucleotide coverage was determined by enumerating the total reads, based on ELAND mappings, at every nucleotide position within a non-redundant set of exons from all possible UCSC transcript isoforms. Array CGH analysis Oligonucleotide comparative genomic hybridization is a high-resolution method to detect unbalanced copy number changes at whole genome level. Competitive hybridization of differentially labeled tumor and reference DNA to oligonucleotide printed in an array format (Agilent Technologies, USA) and analysis of fluorescent intensity for each probe will detect the copy number changes in the tumor sample relative to normal reference genome. We identified genomic breakpoints at regions with a change in copy number level of at least one copy (log ratio ± 0.5) for gains and losses involving more than one probe representing each genomic interval as detected by the aberration detection method (ADM) in CGH analytics algorithm. Real Time PCR validation Quantitative PCR (QPCR) was performed using Power SYBR Green Mastermix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) on an Applied Biosystems Step One Plus Real Time PCR System as described 3 . All oligonucleotide primers were synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA) and are listed in Table S8 . GAPDH 33 , primer was as described. All assays were performed in duplicate or triplicate and results were plotted as average fold change relative to GAPDH . Quantitative PCR for SLC45A3-ELK4 was carried out by Taqman assay method using fusion specific primers and Probe #7 of Universal Probe Library (UPL), Human (Roche) as the internal oligonucleotide, according to manufacturer’s instructions. PGK1 was used as housekeeping control gene for UPL based Taqman assay (Roche), as per manufacturer’s instructions. HMBS (Applied Biosystems, Taqman assay Hs00609297_m1) was used as housekeeping gene control for Taqman assays according to standard protocols (Applied Biosystems). Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) FISH hybridizations were performed on VCaP, LNCaP, and FFPE tumor and normal tissues. BAC clones were selected from UCSC genome browser. Following colony purification midi prep DNA was prepared using QiagenTips-100 (Qiagen, USA). DNA was labeled by nick translation labeling with biotin-16-dUTP and digoxigenin-11-dUTP (Roche, USA). Probe DNA was precipitated and dissolved in hybridization mixture containing 50% formamide, 2XSSC, 10% dextran sulphate, and 1% Denhardts solution. About 200ng of labeled probes was hybridized to normal human chromosomes to confirm the map position of each BAC clone. FISH signals were obtained using anti digoxigenin-fluorescein and alexa fluor594 conjugate for green and red colors respectively. Fluorescence images were captured using a high resolution CCD camera controlled by ISIS image processing software (Metasystems, Germany). Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0 1 µg each of genomic DNA samples was sent to Affymetrix service centers (Center for Molecular Medicine, Grand Rapid, MI and Vanderbilt Affymetrix Genotyping Core, Nashville, TN) for genomic level analysis of 15 samples on the Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0. Copy number analysis was conducted using the Affymetrix Genotyping Console software and visualizations were generated by the Genotyping Console (GTC) browser.  Samples and cell lines The benign immortalized prostate cell line RWPE and the prostate cancer cell line LNCaP was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection. Primary benign prostatic epithelial cells (PrEC) were obtained from Cambrex Bio Science. The prostate cancer cell line MDA-PCa 2B was provided by E. Keller. The prostate cancer cell line 22-RV1 was provided by J. Macoska. VCaP was derived from a vertebral metastasis from a patient with hormone-refractory metastatic prostate cancer 28 , and was provided by Ken Pienta. Androgen stimulation experiment was carried out with LNCaP and VCaP cells grown in charcoal-stripped serum containing media for 24 h, before treatment with 1% ethanol or 1 nM of methyltrienolone (R1881, NEN Life Science Products) dissolved in ethanol, for 24 and 48 h. Total RNA was isolated with RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Prostate tissues were obtained from the radical prostatectomy series at the University of Michigan and from the Rapid Autopsy Program 29 , University of Michigan Prostate Cancer Specialized Program of Research Excellence Tissue Core. All samples were collected with informed consent of the patients and prior approval of the institutional review board.  454 FLX Sequencing PolyA+ RNA was purified from 50µg total RNA using two rounds of selection on oligo-dT containing paramagnetic beads using Dynabeads mRNA Purification Kit (Dynal Biotech, Oslo, Norway), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 200 ng mRNA was fragmented at 82°C in Fragmentation Buffer (40 mM Tris-Acetate, 100 mM Potassium Acetate, 31.5 mM Magnesium Acetate, pH 8.1) for 2 minutes. First strand cDNA library was prepared using Superscript II (Invitrogen) according to standard protocols and directional adaptors were ligated to the cDNA ends for clonal amplification and sequencing on the Genome Sequencer FLX. The adaptor ligation reaction was carried out in Quick Ligase Buffer (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) containing 1.67 µM of the Adaptor A, 6.67 µM of the Adaptor B and 2000 units of T4 DNA Ligase (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) at 37°C for 2 hours. Adapted library was recovered with 0.05% Sera-Mag30 streptavidin beads (Seradyn Inc, Indianapolis, IN) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Finally, the sscDNA library was purified twice with RNAClean (Agencourt, Beverly, MA) as per the manufacturer’s directions except the amount of beads was reduced to 1.6X the volume of the sample. The purified sscDNA library was analyzed on an RNA 6000 Pico chip on a 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) to confirm a size distribution between 450 to 750 nucleotides, and quantified with Quant-iT Ribogreen RNA Assay Kit (Invitrogen Corporation, Carlsbad, CA) on a Synergy HT (Bio-Tek Instruments Inc, Winooski, VT) instrument following the manufacturer’s instructions. The library was PCR amplified with 2 µM each of Primer A (5'-GCC TCC CTC GCG CCA-3') and Primer B (5'-GCC TTG CCA GCC CGC-3'), 400 µM dNTPs, 1X Advantage 2 buffer and 1 µl of Advantage 2 polymerase mix (Clontech, Mountain View, CA). The amplification reaction was performed at: 96°C for 4 min; 94°C for 30 sec, 64°C for 30 sec, repeating steps 2 and 3 for a total of 20 cycles, followed by 68°C for 3 minutes. The samples were purified using AMPure beads and diluted to a final working concentration of 200,000 molecules per µl. Emulsion beads for sequencing were generated using Sequencing emPCR Kit II and Kit III and sequencing was carried out using 600,000 beads.  Normalization by Subtraction mRNA from the prostate cancer cell line VCaP was hybridized with the subtractor cell line LNCaP 1st-strand cDNA immobilised on magnetic beads (Dynabeads, Invitrogen), according to the manufacturers instructions. Transcripts common to both the cells were captured and removed by magnetic separation of bead-bound subtractor cDNA and the subtracted VCaP mRNA left in the supernatant was recovered by precipitation and used for generating sequencing library as described. Efficiency of normalization was assessed by qRT-PCR assay of levels of select transcripts in the sample before and after the subtraction (data not shown).  Illumina Genome Analyzer Sequencing 200ng mRNA was fragmented at 70°C for 5 min in a Fragmentation buffer (Ambion), and converted to first strand cDNA using Superscript III (Invitrogen), followed by second strand cDNA synthesis using E coli DNA pol I (Invitrogen). The double stranded cDNA library was further processed by Illumina Genomic DNA Sample Prep kit, and it involved end repair using T4 DNA polymerase, Klenow DNA polymerase, and T4 Polynucleotide kinase followed by a single <A> base addition using Klenow 3’ to 5’ exo? polymerase, and was ligated with Illumina’s adaptor oligo mix using T4 DNA ligase. Adaptor ligated library was size selected by separating on a 4% agarose gel and cutting out the library smear at 200bp (+/? 25bp). The library was PCR amplified by Phu polymerase (Stratagene), and purified by Qiaquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen). The library was quantified with Quant-iT Picogreen dsDNA Assay Kit (Invitrogen Corporation, Carlsbad, CA) on a Modulus™ Single Tube Luminometer (Turner Biosystems, Sunnyvale, CA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. 10nM library was used to prepare flowcells with approximately 30,000 clusters per lane.  Sequence datasets Human genome build 18 (hg18) was used as a reference genome. All UCSC and Refseq transcripts were downloaded from the UCSC genome browser ( http://genome.ucsc.edu/ ) 30 . Sequences of previously identified TMPRSS2-ERGa fusion transcript (Genbank accession: DQ204772) and BCR-ABL1 fusion transcript (Genbank accession: M30829) were used for reference.  Short read chimera discovery Short reads that do not completely align to the human genome, Refseq genes, mitochondrial, ribosomal, or contaminant sequences are categorized as non-mapping. For many chimeras we expect that there will be a larger portion mapping to a fusion partner (major alignment), and smaller portion aligning to the second partner (minor alignment). Our approach is therefore divided into two phases in which we focus on first identifying the major alignment and then performing a more exhaustive approach for identifying the minor alignment. In the first phase all non-mapping reads are aligned against all exons of Refseq genes using Vmatch, a pattern matching program 31 . Only reads that have an alignment of 12 or more nucleotides to an exon boundary are kept as potential chimeras. In the second phase, the non-mapping portion of the remaining reads are then mapped to all possible exon boundaries using a Perl script that utilizes regular expressions to detect alignments of as few as six nucleotides. Only those short reads that show partial alignment to exon boundaries of two separate genes are categorized as chimeras. It is possible to have a chimera that has 28 nucleotides aligning to gene x and 8 nucleotides that align to gene y and z because the 8-mer does not provide enough sequence resolution to distinguish between gene y and gene z. Therefore we would categorize this as two individual chimeras. If a sequence forms more than five chimeras it is discarded because it is ambiguous. To minimize false positives, we require that a predicted gene fusion event has at least two supporting chimeras.  Long and short read integrated chimera discovery All 454 reads are aligned against the human Refseq collection using BLAT, a rapid mRNA/DNA alignment tool 32 . Using a Perl script, the BLAT output files were parsed to detect potential chimeric reads. A read is categorized as completely aligning if it shows greater than 90% alignment to a known Refseq transcript. These are then discarded as they almost completely align and therefore are not characteristic of a chimera. From the remaining reads, we want to query for reads having partial alignment, with minimal overlap, to two Refseq transcripts representing putative chimeras. To accomplish this, we iterate the all possible BLAT alignments for a putative chimera, extracting only those partial alignments that have no more than a six nucleotide, or two codon, overlap. This step reduces false positive chimeras introduced by repetitive regions, large gene families, and conserved domains. Additionally, while our approach tolerates overlap between the partial alignments, it filters those having more than ten or more nucleotides between the partial alignments. The short reads (36 nucleotides) generated from the Illumina platform are parsed by aligning them against the Refseq database and the human genome using Eland, an alignment tool for short reads. Reads that align completely or fail quality control are removed leaving only the “non-mapping” reads; a rich source for chimeras. These non-mapping short reads are subsequently aligned against all putative long read chimeras (obtained as described above) using Vmatch 31 , a pattern matching program. A Perl script is used to parse the Vmatch output to extract only those reads that span the fusion boundary by at least three nucleotides on each side. Following this integration, the remaining putative chimeras are categorized as inter- or intra-chromosomal chimeras based on whether the partial alignments are located on different or the same chromosomes, respectively. Those intra-chromosomal chimeras that have partial alignments to adjacent genes are believed to be the product of co-transcription of adjacent genes coupled with intergenic splicing (CoTIS) 18 , alternatively known as read-throughs. The remaining intra-chromosomal and all inter-chromosomal chimeras are considered candidate gene fusions. One additional source of false positive chimeras could be an unknown transcript that is not in Refseq. Due to its absence in the Refseq database, the corresponding long read would not be able to show a complete alignment, but instead show partial hits. Subsequently, short reads spanning this transcript would naturally validate the artificially produced fusion boundary. Therefore, to remove these candidates, we aligned all of the chimeras against the human genome using BLAT. If the long read had greater than 90% alignment to one genomic location, it is considered a novel transcript rather than a chimeric read. The remaining chimeras are given a score which is calculated by multiplying the long read coverage spanning the fusion boundary against the short read coverage spanning the fusion boundary.  Coverage analysis Transcript coverage for every gene locus was calculated from the total number of passing filter reads that mapped, via ELAND, to exons. The total count of these reads was multiplied by the read length and divided by the longest transcript isoform of the gene as determined by the sum of all exon lengths as defined in the UCSC knownGene table (Mar. 2006 assembly). Nucleotide coverage was determined by enumerating the total reads, based on ELAND mappings, at every nucleotide position within a non-redundant set of exons from all possible UCSC transcript isoforms.  Array CGH analysis Oligonucleotide comparative genomic hybridization is a high-resolution method to detect unbalanced copy number changes at whole genome level. Competitive hybridization of differentially labeled tumor and reference DNA to oligonucleotide printed in an array format (Agilent Technologies, USA) and analysis of fluorescent intensity for each probe will detect the copy number changes in the tumor sample relative to normal reference genome. We identified genomic breakpoints at regions with a change in copy number level of at least one copy (log ratio ± 0.5) for gains and losses involving more than one probe representing each genomic interval as detected by the aberration detection method (ADM) in CGH analytics algorithm.  Real Time PCR validation Quantitative PCR (QPCR) was performed using Power SYBR Green Mastermix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) on an Applied Biosystems Step One Plus Real Time PCR System as described 3 . All oligonucleotide primers were synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA) and are listed in Table S8 . GAPDH 33 , primer was as described. All assays were performed in duplicate or triplicate and results were plotted as average fold change relative to GAPDH . Quantitative PCR for SLC45A3-ELK4 was carried out by Taqman assay method using fusion specific primers and Probe #7 of Universal Probe Library (UPL), Human (Roche) as the internal oligonucleotide, according to manufacturer’s instructions. PGK1 was used as housekeeping control gene for UPL based Taqman assay (Roche), as per manufacturer’s instructions. HMBS (Applied Biosystems, Taqman assay Hs00609297_m1) was used as housekeeping gene control for Taqman assays according to standard protocols (Applied Biosystems).  Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) FISH hybridizations were performed on VCaP, LNCaP, and FFPE tumor and normal tissues. BAC clones were selected from UCSC genome browser. Following colony purification midi prep DNA was prepared using QiagenTips-100 (Qiagen, USA). DNA was labeled by nick translation labeling with biotin-16-dUTP and digoxigenin-11-dUTP (Roche, USA). Probe DNA was precipitated and dissolved in hybridization mixture containing 50% formamide, 2XSSC, 10% dextran sulphate, and 1% Denhardts solution. About 200ng of labeled probes was hybridized to normal human chromosomes to confirm the map position of each BAC clone. FISH signals were obtained using anti digoxigenin-fluorescein and alexa fluor594 conjugate for green and red colors respectively. Fluorescence images were captured using a high resolution CCD camera controlled by ISIS image processing software (Metasystems, Germany).  Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0 1 µg each of genomic DNA samples was sent to Affymetrix service centers (Center for Molecular Medicine, Grand Rapid, MI and Vanderbilt Affymetrix Genotyping Core, Nashville, TN) for genomic level analysis of 15 samples on the Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0. Copy number analysis was conducted using the Affymetrix Genotyping Console software and visualizations were generated by the Genotyping Console (GTC) browser.  Supplementary Material 1 Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of this paper at www.nature.com/nature . 