Family-Based Treatment of a 17-Year-Old Twin Presenting with Emerging Anorexia Nervosa: A Case Study Using the “Maudsley Method” This paper describes the successful application of family-based treatment (FBT) for a 17-year-old identical twin presenting with a four-month history of clinically significant symptoms of anorexia nervosa (AN). FBT is a manualized treatment that has been studied in randomized controlled trials for adolescents with AN. This case study illustrates the administration of this evidence-based intervention in a clinical setting, highlighting how the best available research was used to make clinical decisions at each stage of treatment delivery.  Six-Month Follow-Up and Summary Bella was medically monitored by a physician at college, but chose not to continue in psychological treatment. Her symptom status was generally stable. A vacation home revealed a two-pound weight loss. Erring on the side of caution, Bella and her parents did not want to attribute this to normal weight fluctuations, and agreed that the weight should be actively regained. Bella was successful in this with her parents’ support, but not supervision. She reported enjoying college life. She and Kayla chose separate dormitories and different majors. Bella’s outcome is consistent with results achieved in published RCT data on FBT, and her weight and menstrual status at termination place her in the best of three categorical outcomes applied in Maudsley studies ( Eisler et al., 2000 ; Le Grange et al., 1992 ; Lock et al., 2005 ; Russell et al., 1987 ). Weight was chosen as the primary objective measure of treatment progress because early weight gain in the course of FBT predicts remission ( Lock, Couturier, Bryson, & Agras, 2006 ), and weight is the least vulnerable to patients’ denial or distortion among the complement of diagnostic criteria for AN. The psychological criteria for AN may be denied or minimized (e.g., Couturier & Lock, 2006 ) by virtue of motivated deception, lack of insight, or, in the case of children or adolescents, because of developmental limitations in cognitive capabilities necessary to endorse abstract concepts. Similarly, tracking changes in “denial of seriousness of low body weight” may not be valid for younger patients because it is normative, not pathological, for adolescents to exhibit deficits in risk appraisal relative to adults ( Boyer, 2006 ), particularly for distal outcomes. (For a review of challenges in child/adolescent identification and classification of eating disturbance, see WCEDCA, 2007 ). This case suggests that concurrent individual psychodynamic treatment is compatible with FBT provided that the individual therapist agrees that FBT should be implemented and the two therapists communicate frequently, although its specific effect on outcome is unknown. Moreover, the success of FBT does not require that the individual therapist relinquish a distinct case formulation or personally subscribe to the approach. Finally, this report highlights the importance of early intervention for a disorder as serious as AN. 