Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor-1: The Double Edged Sword in Apoptosis Plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 (PAI-1) is a multi-functional protein. It is a fast acting inhibitor of plasminogen activators; urokinase-plasminogen activator and tissue type plasminogen activator, and also plays an important role in regulating cell proliferation, adhesion, migration, and signal transduction pathways. These biological events are important processes during angiogenesis and restenosis. PAI-1 has been shown to regulate proliferation, migration, and apoptosis of vascular smooth muscle cells and endothelial cells. The ability of PAI-1 to regulate cellular proliferation and migration has been attributed to its ability to control plasmin production, modify signaling pathways, and its inherent multifactorial ability to bind to vitronectin and lipoprotein receptor-related protein. However, the mechanism by which PAI-1 regulates the apoptotic pathway is not well understood. Evidence from the literature suggests that PAI-1 or its deficiency alters key signaling pathways, such as the PI3-k/Akt and the Jak/STAT pathways, and is involved in maintaining endothelial cell integrity thereby regulating cell death. Other investigators have demonstrated that PAI-1 directly binds to caspases as a mechanism of PAI-1-mediated cellular apoptosis. Moreover, results from studies assessing the role of PAI-1 in apoptosis have suggested that PAI-1 can exert pathogenic or protective effects, which may be related to the disease model or type of injury employed.  Conclusion It is evident that PAI-1 is a functionally promiscuous protein, not only acting as a primary inhibitor of uPA and tPA, but also involved in modulating cell proliferation, migration, and apoptosis ( 58 , 60 , 62 , 93 , 99 ). PAI-1 expression is tightly regulated and under normal conditions PAI-1 is present as a trace protein in plasma. However, during a pathological condition, such as cancer, atherosclerosis, diabetes, and severe obesity PAI-1 levels are dramatically elevated( 100 ). The involvement of PAI-1 in angiogenesis is controversial and not fully understood. It regulates this process through binding of PAI-1 to vitronectin ( 60 ) or through inhibition of uPA and tPA where excess plasmin activity is abrogated leading to vessel stabilization ( 33 , 101 ). Components of the plasminogen activators-plasmin system are also known to regulate apoptosis, however PAI-1 can be pro-apoptotic ( 61 , 63 , 87 ), and anti-apoptotic ( 70 , 93 , 94 , 96 ). Increased levels of PAI-1 in tumor pathologies prove to be beneficial to the tumor as it down-regulates apoptosis promoting a more aggressive phenotype and supporting the paradox that elevated PAI-1 levels correlate with poor patient prognosis. Indeed, addition of exogenous PAI-1 to HL-60 and PC-3 cells could inhibit apoptosis that required the inhibitory activity of PAI-1, but was not necessarily via the uPA/uPAR-signaling axis ( 54 ). Another advantage for cancer cells producing high levels of endogenous PAI-1 may be that they are less sensitive to chemotherapy treatment. Church and colleagues ( 102 ) demonstrated that MDA-MB-435 breast cancer cells expressing WT PAI-1 had an increased recovery compared to MDA-MB-435 cells expressing inactive PAI-1 after treatment with paclitaxel. Hence, up-regulation of PAI-1 in cancer cells foster tumor growth and spread. Furthermore, by cDNA microarray analysis it was demonstrated that MDA-MB-435 cells expressing WT PAI-1 down-regulated genes, such as follistatin, which is an inhibitor of anti-proliferation ( 102 ). Similarly, fibrosarcoma fibroblasts established from PAI-1?/? mice were more sensitive to apoptotic stimuli and had a longer lag-phase before they could establish tumors when injected in mice ( 34 ). From the above investigations it appears that down-regulation of PAI-1 would be beneficial for killing tumorigenic growth. Absence of PAI-1 in VSMC, an important component of an atherosclerotic plaque, increases the apoptotic index, which may be beneficial in preventing atherosclerotic plaque formation or restenosis. Increased expression of PAI-1 or addition of exogenous PAI-1 controlled VSMC apoptosis by inhibiting caspase-3 ( 70 ). Addition of plasminogen to PAI-1?/? VSMC induced an increase in apoptosis compared to WT, tPA?/?, or uPA?/? VSMC, indicating that plasminogen-mediated apoptosis is dependent on plasmin generated by tPA or uPA and is dampened by PAI-1 ( 75 , 76 ). These data provide mechanistic insights in terms of the pathogenic or protective role of PAI-1 in vascular remodeling. Figure 1 schematically portrays the possible mechanisms by which PAI-1 could be regulating apoptosis. Alhough PAI-1 is a secreted protein, any intracellular events occurring after PAI-1 is internalized and is able to interact with caspases or other apoptotic proteins should not be discounted. Besides, interaction of PAI-1 with LRP may elicit recruitment of signaling intermediates that could regulate apoptosis via an unknown mechanism. There is a high probability that such a mechanism is possible when PAI-1 is added exogenously. We have demonstrated that r-PAI-1 could effectively diminish the hyperactivation of Akt in PAI-1?/? EC with downstream consequences of increasing levels of active caspase-3 thereby increasing spontaneous apoptosis ( 63 ). Excess PAI-1 synthesized in a diseased state is known to compete for binding with vitronectin causing detachment of EC. It is also possible that PAI-1 could be controlling apoptosis by two different mechanisms simultaneously. Another mechanism by which PAI-1 can control proliferation is by controlling key cell cycle progression proteins. It has been reported that mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from PAI-1?/? mice display an uncontrolled proliferative phenotype compared to PAI-1 expressing MEFs mediated by a senescence bypass mechanism. As observed in primary murine aortic PAI-1?/? EC ( 63 ), the PAI-1?/? MEFs also exhibited sustained activation of Akt(P-Ser473) accompanied by nuclear retention of cyclin D1 and increased inactivation of GSK3-? was sufficient to bypass senescence (103). Thus PAI-1 acts as an inhibitor of proliferation. In pathological conditions where PAI-1 over expression promotes accumulation of VSMC, as in the increased incidence of restenosis after percutaneous coronary interventions or renders tumor cells resistant to chemotherapeutic agents, decreasing PAI-1 levels would be beneficial. Therefore, in-depth mechanistic studies on the mode of action of PAI-1 in apoptosis would be therapeutically beneficial in enabling the design of drugs that diminish levels or selectively target specific functional domains of PAI-1. 