Obesity and the Built Environment: Changes in Environmental Cues Cause Energy Imbalances  Conclusion Eating behaviors as well as physical activity behaviors have previously been characterized as a matter of conscious choice that people make to satisfy their own desires and cravings or to achieve their own goals. This model assumes that people are rational players who make decisions in their best interests and are aware of everything they do. Yet in reality, many people do not want to eat more than they need to, because they do not want to be overweight or obese, but that are unable to control their intake in a sustained manner. Similarly, in the past, more people had to be active, (whether or not they wanted to), whereas now, labor-saving devices mean we do not have expend as many calories to complete daily routines and communications. Given that the majority of individuals are now overweight or obese, and that obesity exists across all subgroups, including among minority and majority populations, among low and high income, and among well educated and poorly educated groups, suggests that excess eating and reduced physical activity may not be a conscious choice, but is probably the result of automatic and largely uncontrollable responses to unappreciated environmental cues. It can be clearly shown that changes in food presentation, portion sizes, and other environmental factors precede and cause changes in food consumption. Similarly, changes in environmental cues, like signs that promote climbing the stairs ( 44 - 46 ) also result in increases in physical activity in a causal fashion. The existence of mechanisms that facilitate automatic and unconscious eating and responses to cues for physical activity are the critical link in the chain of causation between the environment and behavior. A more accurate conceptualization of the obesity epidemic is that people are responding to the forces in their environment, rather than lacking in willpower and self-control. A metaphor that more truly captures the phenomenon is the tsunami. The environmental tsunami of cues and stimuli artificially make people hungry and lead them to unintentionally overconsume and to remain excessively sedentary. The societal response to the tsunami has been to provide swimming lessons and cheerleaders. The response has clearly not been proportional to the threat. People cannot change their responses to cues they do not perceive. Unless we focus on a more appropriate response, the obesity epidemic will continue. The real solution would be to control and reduce those forces that are causing the tsunami, change the cues we are exposed to on a daily basis to prevent drowning, or make explicit the cues we cannot change. Only then will people be able to make good use of the swimming lessons they receive, and bring themselves into energy balance according to their individual preferences. 