A Phase II Trial of Autologous Stem Cell Transplant Followed by Mini-Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplant for the Treatment of Multiple Myeloma: An Analysis of Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group ECOG E4A98 and E1A97 Purpose Conventional allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) for multiple myeloma is associated with a high transplant-related mortality (TRM). Non-myeloablative allogeneic (NST) utilizes the known graft-versus-myeloma (GVM) effect to eradicate minimal residual disease. The ECOG conducted a Phase II trial of autologous HSCT followed by NST in order to provide maximal tumor cytoreduction to allow for a subsequent GVM effect. Methods Patients received melphalan 200 mg/m2 with autologous HSCT followed by fludarabine 30 mg/m2 in 5 daily doses and cyclophosphamide 1 g/m2 in 2 daily doses with matched sibling donor NST. GVHD prophylaxis included cyclosporine and corticosteroids. The primary endpoints were TRM, graft failure, acute GVHD, progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS). Results Thirty-two patients were enrolled into the study; 23 patients completed both transplants (72%). Best responses post-NST were 7 (30%) CR, 11 (48%) PR, 2 (9%) NR and 3 (13%) NE. Acute grade III/IV GVHD was observed in 4 (17%); chronic GVHD in 13 patients (57%; 7 limited; 6 extensive). Chronic GVHD resulted in the following responses: 3 (23%) CR, 1 CCR, and 6 (46%) PR. Two patients (8.7%) had early TRM. With a median follow up of 4.6 years, the median PFS was 3.6 years and the 2-year survival rate was 78%. Conclusions Autologous HSCT followed by NST is feasible with a low early TRM in a cooperative group setting. The overall response rate was 78% including 30% CR-similar to other reports for autologous HSCT-NST. Since a plateau in PFS or OS was not observed with this treatment approach, even in patients achieving CR, we suggest that future studies utilize post-transplant maintenance therapy.  INTRODUCTION Conventional allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) in multiple myeloma (MM) patients is associated with a transplant-related mortality (TRM) ranging from 20–60% 1 – 3 . More recently, with improved supportive care and patient selection, the TRM has been lowered to the 20% range 4 . Subsequently, efforts to further reduce the transplant-related morbidity and mortality have resulted in less toxic non-myeloablative allogeneic transplant (NST) regimens to. Furthermore, earlier studies demonstrated that donor lymphocyte infusions (DLI) affected a graft-versus-myeloma (GVM) effect in patients with persistent/relapsed disease following allogeneic transplant. This lead to the development of ECOG E1A97, utilizing DLI for relapsed/persistent myeloma post-allogeneic transplant. This approach attempted to eradicate residual disease by harnessing the previously proven GVM effect through alloreactive donor T lymphocytes infused in the donor graft. Preliminary studies of NST in relapsed and/or refractory MM demonstrated significant complete remissions and low 100 day post-NST TRM. However, although response rates were high, the vast majority of patients with extensive disease at the time of transplant relapsed within the first year 5 – 8 . Ultimately, overall TRM was not significantly reduced, just deferred to a later time point with TRM exceeding 30% at 2-years post transplant in some reports 5 . Furthermore, very few patients achieved long-term disease control. Subsequent approaches investigated tandem transplants earlier in the disease course: high dose therapy with autologous HSCT to provide maximal tumor cytoreduction followed by NST to eradicate minimal residual disease through the GVM effect 9 – 15 . We report the combined results of ECOG E4A98, a Phase II trial of autologous HSCT for maximal tumor cytoreduction followed by a matched sibling NST to allow for a GVM effect. In addition, the results of a parallel donor lymphocyte infusion trial (E1A97) are described.  Patient Characteristics Thirty-two patients from 10 institutions were enrolled into the study between May 2001 and January 2005. All 32 patients were eligible and were included in the analysis although only 23 received both transplants. The patient characteristics are summarized in Table 1 . The median age was 52. The median time from diagnosis to first autologous transplant was 7.7 months. Using the ECOG response criteria, seventy percent of patients had chemotherapy sensitive disease at the time of the autologous HSCT including 13% complete remission (CR; serum and urine IFE negative, bone marrow ? 3% plasma cells) and 57% partial remission (PR); 10% had progressive disease. The median beta-2 microglobulin was 2.6 mg/dl. Planned autologous HSCT Mobilization and collection of peripheral blood stem cells were according to institutional guidelines. All 32 patients enrolled on the study completed the autologous HSCT The median day to neutrophil engraftment was 13 days (the median day to platelet engraftment was 11days. There were no autologous transplant-related deaths; there were 13 grade 3 and 12 grade 4 non-hematologic toxicities reported. The best response to autologous transplant were: 1 nCR, 3 CCR, 17 PR, 6 NR and 5 NE ( Table 2 ). Allogeneic HSCT Twenty three patients continued onto the mini-allogeneic transplantation thereafter: the drop-out rate after autograft was 28%. The median number of days from autologous HSCT to NST was 124. At the time of the trial design, this delay (100–182 days) was considered necessary to allow sufficient time for patient recovery from the first transplant. The reasons for discontinuing protocol therapy included: patient withdrawal/refusal (n=2), toxicities (n=2) (multiple medical problems in 1 patient; intractable pain syndrome in the other)., and one each for symptomatic deterioration without progression, other complicating disease, and death (non-disease related). The median day to neutrophil engraftment was 11 days; the median day to platelet engraftment was 0 days There were 9 grade 3 and 11 grade 4 non-hematologic toxicities. One patient achieving a partial remission had graft failure after initial engraftment and subsequently died.  Planned autologous HSCT Mobilization and collection of peripheral blood stem cells were according to institutional guidelines. All 32 patients enrolled on the study completed the autologous HSCT The median day to neutrophil engraftment was 13 days (the median day to platelet engraftment was 11days. There were no autologous transplant-related deaths; there were 13 grade 3 and 12 grade 4 non-hematologic toxicities reported. The best response to autologous transplant were: 1 nCR, 3 CCR, 17 PR, 6 NR and 5 NE ( Table 2 ).  Allogeneic HSCT Twenty three patients continued onto the mini-allogeneic transplantation thereafter: the drop-out rate after autograft was 28%. The median number of days from autologous HSCT to NST was 124. At the time of the trial design, this delay (100–182 days) was considered necessary to allow sufficient time for patient recovery from the first transplant. The reasons for discontinuing protocol therapy included: patient withdrawal/refusal (n=2), toxicities (n=2) (multiple medical problems in 1 patient; intractable pain syndrome in the other)., and one each for symptomatic deterioration without progression, other complicating disease, and death (non-disease related). The median day to neutrophil engraftment was 11 days; the median day to platelet engraftment was 0 days There were 9 grade 3 and 11 grade 4 non-hematologic toxicities. One patient achieving a partial remission had graft failure after initial engraftment and subsequently died.  GVHD Acute grade III/IV GVHD was observed in 4 (17%) patients at a median of 23 days. Chronic GVHD developed in 13 patients (57%): 7 limited; 6 extensive at a median of 169 days after allografting. The cumulative incidence of GVHD after NST (A) Acute GVHD: 70% grade I–IV; 17% grade III/IV. (B) Chronic GVHD, 57% overall; 6 extensive, 7 limited. ( Figure 1a, 1b ). Chronic GVHD resulted in 3 CR (23%), 1 CCR, and 6 PR (46%) ( Table 3 ). With a median follow up of 4.3 years after NST, 4 (31%) of the 13 patients with chronic GVHD were in remission whereas 6 (46%)had progressed and 3 (23%) died. Donor Lymphocyte Infusions Seven patients were enrolled on the ancillary E1A97 Phase II trial before closure for poor accrual: only 5 were deemed eligible. Only 1 patient received a second DLI treatment. Of the 5 patients, 3 patients were discontinued due to toxicity including grade 4 or higher toxicity in two patients (cardiac; multi-system failure grade III GVHD); one for progressive disease, one finished treatment. No patient developed marrow hypoplasia/aplasia. DLI responses included: progressive disease (n =1) and stable disease (n=4) -all 4 subsequently progressed. Two patients had acute GVHD (one patient had grade 3 acute GVHD), 4 had chronic GVHD: 3 limited, 1 extensive. The median PFS was 5 months; median OS was 57 months. Combining the results of E4A98 and E1A97 demonstrated that 19 patients developed acute GVHD and 17 patients developed chronic GVHD with an overall response of 5 CR (including 1 CCR in E4A98 and 1 CR from an ineligible patient enrolled in E1A97), 6 PR, 5 NR and 1 PD. The median duration of response was 42.4 months. 7 of 17 with chronic GVHD progressed at the time of this analysis.  Donor Lymphocyte Infusions Seven patients were enrolled on the ancillary E1A97 Phase II trial before closure for poor accrual: only 5 were deemed eligible. Only 1 patient received a second DLI treatment. Of the 5 patients, 3 patients were discontinued due to toxicity including grade 4 or higher toxicity in two patients (cardiac; multi-system failure grade III GVHD); one for progressive disease, one finished treatment. No patient developed marrow hypoplasia/aplasia. DLI responses included: progressive disease (n =1) and stable disease (n=4) -all 4 subsequently progressed. Two patients had acute GVHD (one patient had grade 3 acute GVHD), 4 had chronic GVHD: 3 limited, 1 extensive. The median PFS was 5 months; median OS was 57 months. Combining the results of E4A98 and E1A97 demonstrated that 19 patients developed acute GVHD and 17 patients developed chronic GVHD with an overall response of 5 CR (including 1 CCR in E4A98 and 1 CR from an ineligible patient enrolled in E1A97), 6 PR, 5 NR and 1 PD. The median duration of response was 42.4 months. 7 of 17 with chronic GVHD progressed at the time of this analysis.  Disease Response Table 2 summarizes the response to autograft and to the autograft followed by the NST. For the 32 patients completing at least autograft, sixty-five percent achieved a PR/CR following the autologous transplant. For the 23 patients completing both transplants, the overall response rate was 78%. At a median follow up of 4.6 years from enrollment of autograft (range, 0.4 to 5.7 years), the overall response rate included: 7 (30%) CR (2 in CCR), 11 (48%) PR and 2 (9%) NR and 3 (13%) NE, as the best overall response. We have observed 1 relapse among the 7 patients achieving a CR, whereas 8 of 11 patients in PR have relapsed with a median time to relapse of 2.8 years.  NRM/Survival With a median follow up of 4.6 years from registration, the median PFS was 3.6 years and the 2-year survival rate was 78% (95% CI: 61% 95%) for the 23 pts who completed both transplants ( Figure 2a, 2b ) and 4.4 years and 78% (95% CI: 62% 90%), respectively for all 32 enrolled patients. There were no transplant-related deaths within the first 100 days in the first 19 patients; 2 (8.7%; 95% CI 1.6%, 24.9%) of the subsequent 13 patients experienced TRM: one from GVHD at day + 41 and the other from pneumonia/aspergillus at day + 74. As of February 2008, 9 patients have expired: 3 transplant-related (GVHD) and 6 non-transplant-related including progressive disease (n = 2), sepsis (n =2) and thrombotic vascular events (n = 2) ranging from 11 months to 4.5 years post-transplant. Chronic GVHD did not improve PFS and OS (P-value=0.16 and 0.30, respectively.  METHODS Eligibility Criteria Patients aged 18–70 years with previously treated symptomatic myeloma were eligible for enrollment on the study. Patients were eligible as consolidation following conventional induction chemotherapy or as part of salvage therapy. There was no restriction of prior lines of therapy except prior autologous or allogeneic transplant. Chemotherapy sensitivity was not required for entry. Patients must have had an adequate performance status (ECOG 0–2), acceptable physiologic organ function, and an HLA-A, B and DR genotypically identical sibling donor. Written informed consent obtained on enrolled and the study was approved by the institutional review boards of all participating institutions. High Dose Melphalan/Autologous HSCT Thirty two patients, with a previously collected minimum of 2 ×106 CD34+ cells/kg, were enrolled and received high dose melphalan 200 mg/m² as a single dose IV over 5 -15 minutes within 30 minutes of reconstitution on Day -1. Peripheral blood stem cells were collected according to institutional guidelines. Peripheral stem cell re-infusion was performed on Day 0. On Day + 1 post-infusion, GM-CSF (granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor) 250 mcg/m² was administered daily until the neutrophil count exceeded 1,000/mm³ for 3 consecutive days. Patients received prophylaxis against Herpes simplex virus, Varicella zoster, Pneumocystis carini and Candida according to institutional guidelines. Non-myeloablative Allogeneic Transplant Eligibility After re-confirming eligibility of the patient and donor, patients underwent NST between 100–182 days after autologous HSCT. Patients were eligible to proceed to allogeneic HSCT regardless of disease status after autologous HSCT. However, patients with progressive disease could not receive cytotoxic chemotherapy between transplants. Allogeneic Stem Cell Mobilization Allogeneic peripheral stem cells were collected using G-CSF priming typically at a dose of 10 mcg/kg/day beginning 2–5 days prior to collection according to institutional practice. The target cell dose was a minimum of 5×106 CD34+ cells/kg (recipient weight) via 1 or 2 phereses. It was recommended that fresh stem cells be utilized whenever possible, although the protocol did allow for cryopreservation if necessary. Conditioning Regimen/Stem Cell Infusion Conditioning included fludarabine at a dose of 30 mg/m² (150 mg/m2 total dose) IV per day for each of 5 consecutive days beginning day -6. Fludarabine was reduced to 20 mg/m2 if renal function was impaired (creatinine 1.6–2 mg/dL) or if the patient age was greater than 60 years. Cyclophosphamide 1 gm/m² (2 g/m2 total dose) IV per day for 2 consecutive days beginning day -3. Allogeneic stem cells were infused on day 0 and, if necessary, on day +1. On Day +1, patients received GM-CSF 250 mcg/m² daily until the neutrophil count was > 1,000/mm³ for 3 consecutive days. Post-transplant Immunosuppression Cyclosporine (CSA) was administered starting on Day –1 at a dose of 3.0 mg/kg/day intravenously in two divided doses (1.5 mg/kg each) every 12 hours. Patients could be converted to oral cyclosporine per institutional guidelines. Unless toxicities or GVHD were encountered, CSA was continued at the same dose until day +60. After Day +60, the dose was reduced by 10–20% every 1–2 weeks and the drug discontinued approximately 4 months after allografting. Beginning on day +3, methylprednisolone (or oral prednisone equivalent) was administered at a dose of 1 mg/kg/day for 2 weeks. Thereafter, in the absence of GVHD, the dose was reduced to approximately, 0.6 mg/kg, 0.3 mg/kg, and 0.15 mg/kg with reductions every 2 weeks, respectively. Final taper was per institutional guidelines. If the patient developed GVHD, treatment was initiated as per institutional guidelines. In addition, if the patient met the criteria for grades 2 - 4 GVHD, 5 doses of daclizumab (Zenapax®, Roche Pharmaceuticals, Nutley, NJ) were to be administered at a dose of 1 mg/kg every 3 days. Patients received prophylaxis against Herpes simplex virus, Varicella zoster, Pneumocystis carini and Candida, according to institutional guidelines, at least for the first 100 days post-transplant. Donor Lymphocyte Infusions (DLI) Patients with persistent disease or recurrent disease 6 months following any HLA identical sibling allogeneic HSCT were eligible to participate in an ECOG Phase II clinical trial (E1A97) utilizing DLI. The objective of this ancillary study was to assess response, safety and toxicity. Patients must have discontinued any immunosuppressive therapy, except prednisone (no more than 0.25 mg/kg/d) for prior GVHD for at least 4 weeks prior to DLI. Patients could receive salvage chemotherapy prior to DLI but must be at least 4 weeks from the most recent treatment. DLI were collected in the steady state from the original sibling donor. DLI were administered at an initial cell dose of 5 × 107 CD3+ cells/kg of ideal body weight. However, patients with rapidly progressive disease could receive a dose of 1.5 × 108 CD3+ cells/kg. Patients who did not achieve a complete response could be re-treated for up to two additional escalating doses of DLI: patients with evidence of progressive disease at 8 weeks or with stable disease or partial response at 12 weeks could be re-treated. The intended second dose level was 1.5 × 108 CD3+ cells/kg and the third dose level was 4.5 × 108 CD3+ cells/kg. Response/Engraftment Criteria Responses were evaluated monthly for the first year following autologous HSCT and then every two months thereafter. Responses utilized the EMBT/IMBTR criteria by Bladé 16 . The date of neutrophil engraftment was defined as the first day of three consecutive days on which the absolute neutrophil count was (ANC) > 500/mm³. The date of platelet engraftment was defined as the first of three consecutive measurements with a platelet count > 20,000/mm³ (without platelet transfusions). Study Design The primary goal for this Phase II study was to evaluate the early incidence rate of mortality at day 100 of the NST. By design, the study was suspended after the first 19 patients were treated. Since no patient died in the first 100 days after mini-allogeneic transplantation, the study was reopened. Additional objectives were early graft failure (within the first 100 days), incidence of grade 3–4 acute GVHD, toxicities, progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS). Due to slow patient accrual, the study was closed early in January 2005. Statistical Methods Cumulative incidence estimates were calculated for acute and chronic GVHD. OS and PFS were estimated using the method of Kaplan-Meier 17 on the 23 patients who had undergone both transplants. In the PFS analysis, patients were counted as events if they have progressed or died due to any cause, and the death without documented progression must be within 3 months of their last disease evaluation. The PFS time was calculated as the time from registration date of autologous HSCT to time of progression or time of death whichever came first. The effect of chronic GVHD on PFS and OS was investigated using Cox proportional hazards model, in which chronic GVHD status was included as a time dependent variable. Follow up was as of May 2008.  Eligibility Criteria Patients aged 18–70 years with previously treated symptomatic myeloma were eligible for enrollment on the study. Patients were eligible as consolidation following conventional induction chemotherapy or as part of salvage therapy. There was no restriction of prior lines of therapy except prior autologous or allogeneic transplant. Chemotherapy sensitivity was not required for entry. Patients must have had an adequate performance status (ECOG 0–2), acceptable physiologic organ function, and an HLA-A, B and DR genotypically identical sibling donor. Written informed consent obtained on enrolled and the study was approved by the institutional review boards of all participating institutions.  High Dose Melphalan/Autologous HSCT Thirty two patients, with a previously collected minimum of 2 ×106 CD34+ cells/kg, were enrolled and received high dose melphalan 200 mg/m² as a single dose IV over 5 -15 minutes within 30 minutes of reconstitution on Day -1. Peripheral blood stem cells were collected according to institutional guidelines. Peripheral stem cell re-infusion was performed on Day 0. On Day + 1 post-infusion, GM-CSF (granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor) 250 mcg/m² was administered daily until the neutrophil count exceeded 1,000/mm³ for 3 consecutive days. Patients received prophylaxis against Herpes simplex virus, Varicella zoster, Pneumocystis carini and Candida according to institutional guidelines.  Non-myeloablative Allogeneic Transplant Eligibility After re-confirming eligibility of the patient and donor, patients underwent NST between 100–182 days after autologous HSCT. Patients were eligible to proceed to allogeneic HSCT regardless of disease status after autologous HSCT. However, patients with progressive disease could not receive cytotoxic chemotherapy between transplants. Allogeneic Stem Cell Mobilization Allogeneic peripheral stem cells were collected using G-CSF priming typically at a dose of 10 mcg/kg/day beginning 2–5 days prior to collection according to institutional practice. The target cell dose was a minimum of 5×106 CD34+ cells/kg (recipient weight) via 1 or 2 phereses. It was recommended that fresh stem cells be utilized whenever possible, although the protocol did allow for cryopreservation if necessary. Conditioning Regimen/Stem Cell Infusion Conditioning included fludarabine at a dose of 30 mg/m² (150 mg/m2 total dose) IV per day for each of 5 consecutive days beginning day -6. Fludarabine was reduced to 20 mg/m2 if renal function was impaired (creatinine 1.6–2 mg/dL) or if the patient age was greater than 60 years. Cyclophosphamide 1 gm/m² (2 g/m2 total dose) IV per day for 2 consecutive days beginning day -3. Allogeneic stem cells were infused on day 0 and, if necessary, on day +1. On Day +1, patients received GM-CSF 250 mcg/m² daily until the neutrophil count was > 1,000/mm³ for 3 consecutive days. Post-transplant Immunosuppression Cyclosporine (CSA) was administered starting on Day –1 at a dose of 3.0 mg/kg/day intravenously in two divided doses (1.5 mg/kg each) every 12 hours. Patients could be converted to oral cyclosporine per institutional guidelines. Unless toxicities or GVHD were encountered, CSA was continued at the same dose until day +60. After Day +60, the dose was reduced by 10–20% every 1–2 weeks and the drug discontinued approximately 4 months after allografting. Beginning on day +3, methylprednisolone (or oral prednisone equivalent) was administered at a dose of 1 mg/kg/day for 2 weeks. Thereafter, in the absence of GVHD, the dose was reduced to approximately, 0.6 mg/kg, 0.3 mg/kg, and 0.15 mg/kg with reductions every 2 weeks, respectively. Final taper was per institutional guidelines. If the patient developed GVHD, treatment was initiated as per institutional guidelines. In addition, if the patient met the criteria for grades 2 - 4 GVHD, 5 doses of daclizumab (Zenapax®, Roche Pharmaceuticals, Nutley, NJ) were to be administered at a dose of 1 mg/kg every 3 days. Patients received prophylaxis against Herpes simplex virus, Varicella zoster, Pneumocystis carini and Candida, according to institutional guidelines, at least for the first 100 days post-transplant.  Eligibility After re-confirming eligibility of the patient and donor, patients underwent NST between 100–182 days after autologous HSCT. Patients were eligible to proceed to allogeneic HSCT regardless of disease status after autologous HSCT. However, patients with progressive disease could not receive cytotoxic chemotherapy between transplants.  Allogeneic Stem Cell Mobilization Allogeneic peripheral stem cells were collected using G-CSF priming typically at a dose of 10 mcg/kg/day beginning 2–5 days prior to collection according to institutional practice. The target cell dose was a minimum of 5×106 CD34+ cells/kg (recipient weight) via 1 or 2 phereses. It was recommended that fresh stem cells be utilized whenever possible, although the protocol did allow for cryopreservation if necessary.  Conditioning Regimen/Stem Cell Infusion Conditioning included fludarabine at a dose of 30 mg/m² (150 mg/m2 total dose) IV per day for each of 5 consecutive days beginning day -6. Fludarabine was reduced to 20 mg/m2 if renal function was impaired (creatinine 1.6–2 mg/dL) or if the patient age was greater than 60 years. Cyclophosphamide 1 gm/m² (2 g/m2 total dose) IV per day for 2 consecutive days beginning day -3. Allogeneic stem cells were infused on day 0 and, if necessary, on day +1. On Day +1, patients received GM-CSF 250 mcg/m² daily until the neutrophil count was > 1,000/mm³ for 3 consecutive days.  Post-transplant Immunosuppression Cyclosporine (CSA) was administered starting on Day –1 at a dose of 3.0 mg/kg/day intravenously in two divided doses (1.5 mg/kg each) every 12 hours. Patients could be converted to oral cyclosporine per institutional guidelines. Unless toxicities or GVHD were encountered, CSA was continued at the same dose until day +60. After Day +60, the dose was reduced by 10–20% every 1–2 weeks and the drug discontinued approximately 4 months after allografting. Beginning on day +3, methylprednisolone (or oral prednisone equivalent) was administered at a dose of 1 mg/kg/day for 2 weeks. Thereafter, in the absence of GVHD, the dose was reduced to approximately, 0.6 mg/kg, 0.3 mg/kg, and 0.15 mg/kg with reductions every 2 weeks, respectively. Final taper was per institutional guidelines. If the patient developed GVHD, treatment was initiated as per institutional guidelines. In addition, if the patient met the criteria for grades 2 - 4 GVHD, 5 doses of daclizumab (Zenapax®, Roche Pharmaceuticals, Nutley, NJ) were to be administered at a dose of 1 mg/kg every 3 days. Patients received prophylaxis against Herpes simplex virus, Varicella zoster, Pneumocystis carini and Candida, according to institutional guidelines, at least for the first 100 days post-transplant.  Donor Lymphocyte Infusions (DLI) Patients with persistent disease or recurrent disease 6 months following any HLA identical sibling allogeneic HSCT were eligible to participate in an ECOG Phase II clinical trial (E1A97) utilizing DLI. The objective of this ancillary study was to assess response, safety and toxicity. Patients must have discontinued any immunosuppressive therapy, except prednisone (no more than 0.25 mg/kg/d) for prior GVHD for at least 4 weeks prior to DLI. Patients could receive salvage chemotherapy prior to DLI but must be at least 4 weeks from the most recent treatment. DLI were collected in the steady state from the original sibling donor. DLI were administered at an initial cell dose of 5 × 107 CD3+ cells/kg of ideal body weight. However, patients with rapidly progressive disease could receive a dose of 1.5 × 108 CD3+ cells/kg. Patients who did not achieve a complete response could be re-treated for up to two additional escalating doses of DLI: patients with evidence of progressive disease at 8 weeks or with stable disease or partial response at 12 weeks could be re-treated. The intended second dose level was 1.5 × 108 CD3+ cells/kg and the third dose level was 4.5 × 108 CD3+ cells/kg.  Response/Engraftment Criteria Responses were evaluated monthly for the first year following autologous HSCT and then every two months thereafter. Responses utilized the EMBT/IMBTR criteria by Bladé 16 . The date of neutrophil engraftment was defined as the first day of three consecutive days on which the absolute neutrophil count was (ANC) > 500/mm³. The date of platelet engraftment was defined as the first of three consecutive measurements with a platelet count > 20,000/mm³ (without platelet transfusions).  Study Design The primary goal for this Phase II study was to evaluate the early incidence rate of mortality at day 100 of the NST. By design, the study was suspended after the first 19 patients were treated. Since no patient died in the first 100 days after mini-allogeneic transplantation, the study was reopened. Additional objectives were early graft failure (within the first 100 days), incidence of grade 3–4 acute GVHD, toxicities, progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS). Due to slow patient accrual, the study was closed early in January 2005.  Statistical Methods Cumulative incidence estimates were calculated for acute and chronic GVHD. OS and PFS were estimated using the method of Kaplan-Meier 17 on the 23 patients who had undergone both transplants. In the PFS analysis, patients were counted as events if they have progressed or died due to any cause, and the death without documented progression must be within 3 months of their last disease evaluation. The PFS time was calculated as the time from registration date of autologous HSCT to time of progression or time of death whichever came first. The effect of chronic GVHD on PFS and OS was investigated using Cox proportional hazards model, in which chronic GVHD status was included as a time dependent variable. Follow up was as of May 2008.  Univariate and Multi-variate Analysis Univariate analysis of prognostic variables included: age, gender, level of beta-2 microglobulin, LDH, creatinine, Durie-Salmon stage, GVHD status, and chemotherapy sensitivity. Median OS was significantly shorter in patients with higher LDH value (P=0.048, hazard ratio: 1.003 with 95% CI (1.000, 1.005). No other variable had prognostic significance in this small study. In the multivariate analysis using a Cox proportional hazards model 18 , with all the possible prognostic variables included, no variable was significantly associated with PFS and OS.  RESULTS Patient Characteristics Thirty-two patients from 10 institutions were enrolled into the study between May 2001 and January 2005. All 32 patients were eligible and were included in the analysis although only 23 received both transplants. The patient characteristics are summarized in Table 1 . The median age was 52. The median time from diagnosis to first autologous transplant was 7.7 months. Using the ECOG response criteria, seventy percent of patients had chemotherapy sensitive disease at the time of the autologous HSCT including 13% complete remission (CR; serum and urine IFE negative, bone marrow ? 3% plasma cells) and 57% partial remission (PR); 10% had progressive disease. The median beta-2 microglobulin was 2.6 mg/dl. Planned autologous HSCT Mobilization and collection of peripheral blood stem cells were according to institutional guidelines. All 32 patients enrolled on the study completed the autologous HSCT The median day to neutrophil engraftment was 13 days (the median day to platelet engraftment was 11days. There were no autologous transplant-related deaths; there were 13 grade 3 and 12 grade 4 non-hematologic toxicities reported. The best response to autologous transplant were: 1 nCR, 3 CCR, 17 PR, 6 NR and 5 NE ( Table 2 ). Allogeneic HSCT Twenty three patients continued onto the mini-allogeneic transplantation thereafter: the drop-out rate after autograft was 28%. The median number of days from autologous HSCT to NST was 124. At the time of the trial design, this delay (100–182 days) was considered necessary to allow sufficient time for patient recovery from the first transplant. The reasons for discontinuing protocol therapy included: patient withdrawal/refusal (n=2), toxicities (n=2) (multiple medical problems in 1 patient; intractable pain syndrome in the other)., and one each for symptomatic deterioration without progression, other complicating disease, and death (non-disease related). The median day to neutrophil engraftment was 11 days; the median day to platelet engraftment was 0 days There were 9 grade 3 and 11 grade 4 non-hematologic toxicities. One patient achieving a partial remission had graft failure after initial engraftment and subsequently died. GVHD Acute grade III/IV GVHD was observed in 4 (17%) patients at a median of 23 days. Chronic GVHD developed in 13 patients (57%): 7 limited; 6 extensive at a median of 169 days after allografting. The cumulative incidence of GVHD after NST (A) Acute GVHD: 70% grade I–IV; 17% grade III/IV. (B) Chronic GVHD, 57% overall; 6 extensive, 7 limited. ( Figure 1a, 1b ). Chronic GVHD resulted in 3 CR (23%), 1 CCR, and 6 PR (46%) ( Table 3 ). With a median follow up of 4.3 years after NST, 4 (31%) of the 13 patients with chronic GVHD were in remission whereas 6 (46%)had progressed and 3 (23%) died. Donor Lymphocyte Infusions Seven patients were enrolled on the ancillary E1A97 Phase II trial before closure for poor accrual: only 5 were deemed eligible. Only 1 patient received a second DLI treatment. Of the 5 patients, 3 patients were discontinued due to toxicity including grade 4 or higher toxicity in two patients (cardiac; multi-system failure grade III GVHD); one for progressive disease, one finished treatment. No patient developed marrow hypoplasia/aplasia. DLI responses included: progressive disease (n =1) and stable disease (n=4) -all 4 subsequently progressed. Two patients had acute GVHD (one patient had grade 3 acute GVHD), 4 had chronic GVHD: 3 limited, 1 extensive. The median PFS was 5 months; median OS was 57 months. Combining the results of E4A98 and E1A97 demonstrated that 19 patients developed acute GVHD and 17 patients developed chronic GVHD with an overall response of 5 CR (including 1 CCR in E4A98 and 1 CR from an ineligible patient enrolled in E1A97), 6 PR, 5 NR and 1 PD. The median duration of response was 42.4 months. 7 of 17 with chronic GVHD progressed at the time of this analysis. Disease Response Table 2 summarizes the response to autograft and to the autograft followed by the NST. For the 32 patients completing at least autograft, sixty-five percent achieved a PR/CR following the autologous transplant. For the 23 patients completing both transplants, the overall response rate was 78%. At a median follow up of 4.6 years from enrollment of autograft (range, 0.4 to 5.7 years), the overall response rate included: 7 (30%) CR (2 in CCR), 11 (48%) PR and 2 (9%) NR and 3 (13%) NE, as the best overall response. We have observed 1 relapse among the 7 patients achieving a CR, whereas 8 of 11 patients in PR have relapsed with a median time to relapse of 2.8 years. NRM/Survival With a median follow up of 4.6 years from registration, the median PFS was 3.6 years and the 2-year survival rate was 78% (95% CI: 61% 95%) for the 23 pts who completed both transplants ( Figure 2a, 2b ) and 4.4 years and 78% (95% CI: 62% 90%), respectively for all 32 enrolled patients. There were no transplant-related deaths within the first 100 days in the first 19 patients; 2 (8.7%; 95% CI 1.6%, 24.9%) of the subsequent 13 patients experienced TRM: one from GVHD at day + 41 and the other from pneumonia/aspergillus at day + 74. As of February 2008, 9 patients have expired: 3 transplant-related (GVHD) and 6 non-transplant-related including progressive disease (n = 2), sepsis (n =2) and thrombotic vascular events (n = 2) ranging from 11 months to 4.5 years post-transplant. Chronic GVHD did not improve PFS and OS (P-value=0.16 and 0.30, respectively. Univariate and Multi-variate Analysis Univariate analysis of prognostic variables included: age, gender, level of beta-2 microglobulin, LDH, creatinine, Durie-Salmon stage, GVHD status, and chemotherapy sensitivity. Median OS was significantly shorter in patients with higher LDH value (P=0.048, hazard ratio: 1.003 with 95% CI (1.000, 1.005). No other variable had prognostic significance in this small study. In the multivariate analysis using a Cox proportional hazards model 18 , with all the possible prognostic variables included, no variable was significantly associated with PFS and OS.  RESULTS Patient Characteristics Thirty-two patients from 10 institutions were enrolled into the study between May 2001 and January 2005. All 32 patients were eligible and were included in the analysis although only 23 received both transplants. The patient characteristics are summarized in Table 1 . The median age was 52. The median time from diagnosis to first autologous transplant was 7.7 months. Using the ECOG response criteria, seventy percent of patients had chemotherapy sensitive disease at the time of the autologous HSCT including 13% complete remission (CR; serum and urine IFE negative, bone marrow ? 3% plasma cells) and 57% partial remission (PR); 10% had progressive disease. The median beta-2 microglobulin was 2.6 mg/dl. Planned autologous HSCT Mobilization and collection of peripheral blood stem cells were according to institutional guidelines. All 32 patients enrolled on the study completed the autologous HSCT The median day to neutrophil engraftment was 13 days (the median day to platelet engraftment was 11days. There were no autologous transplant-related deaths; there were 13 grade 3 and 12 grade 4 non-hematologic toxicities reported. The best response to autologous transplant were: 1 nCR, 3 CCR, 17 PR, 6 NR and 5 NE ( Table 2 ). Allogeneic HSCT Twenty three patients continued onto the mini-allogeneic transplantation thereafter: the drop-out rate after autograft was 28%. The median number of days from autologous HSCT to NST was 124. At the time of the trial design, this delay (100–182 days) was considered necessary to allow sufficient time for patient recovery from the first transplant. The reasons for discontinuing protocol therapy included: patient withdrawal/refusal (n=2), toxicities (n=2) (multiple medical problems in 1 patient; intractable pain syndrome in the other)., and one each for symptomatic deterioration without progression, other complicating disease, and death (non-disease related). The median day to neutrophil engraftment was 11 days; the median day to platelet engraftment was 0 days There were 9 grade 3 and 11 grade 4 non-hematologic toxicities. One patient achieving a partial remission had graft failure after initial engraftment and subsequently died. GVHD Acute grade III/IV GVHD was observed in 4 (17%) patients at a median of 23 days. Chronic GVHD developed in 13 patients (57%): 7 limited; 6 extensive at a median of 169 days after allografting. The cumulative incidence of GVHD after NST (A) Acute GVHD: 70% grade I–IV; 17% grade III/IV. (B) Chronic GVHD, 57% overall; 6 extensive, 7 limited. ( Figure 1a, 1b ). Chronic GVHD resulted in 3 CR (23%), 1 CCR, and 6 PR (46%) ( Table 3 ). With a median follow up of 4.3 years after NST, 4 (31%) of the 13 patients with chronic GVHD were in remission whereas 6 (46%)had progressed and 3 (23%) died. Donor Lymphocyte Infusions Seven patients were enrolled on the ancillary E1A97 Phase II trial before closure for poor accrual: only 5 were deemed eligible. Only 1 patient received a second DLI treatment. Of the 5 patients, 3 patients were discontinued due to toxicity including grade 4 or higher toxicity in two patients (cardiac; multi-system failure grade III GVHD); one for progressive disease, one finished treatment. No patient developed marrow hypoplasia/aplasia. DLI responses included: progressive disease (n =1) and stable disease (n=4) -all 4 subsequently progressed. Two patients had acute GVHD (one patient had grade 3 acute GVHD), 4 had chronic GVHD: 3 limited, 1 extensive. The median PFS was 5 months; median OS was 57 months. Combining the results of E4A98 and E1A97 demonstrated that 19 patients developed acute GVHD and 17 patients developed chronic GVHD with an overall response of 5 CR (including 1 CCR in E4A98 and 1 CR from an ineligible patient enrolled in E1A97), 6 PR, 5 NR and 1 PD. The median duration of response was 42.4 months. 7 of 17 with chronic GVHD progressed at the time of this analysis. Disease Response Table 2 summarizes the response to autograft and to the autograft followed by the NST. For the 32 patients completing at least autograft, sixty-five percent achieved a PR/CR following the autologous transplant. For the 23 patients completing both transplants, the overall response rate was 78%. At a median follow up of 4.6 years from enrollment of autograft (range, 0.4 to 5.7 years), the overall response rate included: 7 (30%) CR (2 in CCR), 11 (48%) PR and 2 (9%) NR and 3 (13%) NE, as the best overall response. We have observed 1 relapse among the 7 patients achieving a CR, whereas 8 of 11 patients in PR have relapsed with a median time to relapse of 2.8 years. NRM/Survival With a median follow up of 4.6 years from registration, the median PFS was 3.6 years and the 2-year survival rate was 78% (95% CI: 61% 95%) for the 23 pts who completed both transplants ( Figure 2a, 2b ) and 4.4 years and 78% (95% CI: 62% 90%), respectively for all 32 enrolled patients. There were no transplant-related deaths within the first 100 days in the first 19 patients; 2 (8.7%; 95% CI 1.6%, 24.9%) of the subsequent 13 patients experienced TRM: one from GVHD at day + 41 and the other from pneumonia/aspergillus at day + 74. As of February 2008, 9 patients have expired: 3 transplant-related (GVHD) and 6 non-transplant-related including progressive disease (n = 2), sepsis (n =2) and thrombotic vascular events (n = 2) ranging from 11 months to 4.5 years post-transplant. Chronic GVHD did not improve PFS and OS (P-value=0.16 and 0.30, respectively. Univariate and Multi-variate Analysis Univariate analysis of prognostic variables included: age, gender, level of beta-2 microglobulin, LDH, creatinine, Durie-Salmon stage, GVHD status, and chemotherapy sensitivity. Median OS was significantly shorter in patients with higher LDH value (P=0.048, hazard ratio: 1.003 with 95% CI (1.000, 1.005). No other variable had prognostic significance in this small study. In the multivariate analysis using a Cox proportional hazards model 18 , with all the possible prognostic variables included, no variable was significantly associated with PFS and OS.  DISCUSSION We investigated the feasibility and outcome of an autologous-nonmyeloablative allogeneic tandem strategy within ECOG. At the time this study was initially designed in 1998, there were no reported single or multi-institutional clinical trials incorporating this novel approach of autologous stem cell transplant for maximum cytoreduction followed by a non-myeloablative allogeneic transplant to allow for a graft-versus-myeloma effect. One of the primary endpoints of the study was early mortality. This was the basis for the two-stage design with a planned stopping point after the first 19 patients who completed the autologous HSCT-allogeneic NST. These patients were followed for TRM until 100 days post-allogeneic NST. Since there were no treatment-related deaths in the first 100 days in these 19 patients, the primary endpoint was achieved and the study was re-opened to accrual. During the accrual period, the Seattle and German groups, with the same basic study design, reported their results demonstrating the feasibility, toxicity and efficacy of this concept 9 , 11 . Enrollment to this study slowed precipitously and the study was terminated early due to slow accrual probably since the uniqueness of this approach had been published by other investigators 9 rather than undo toxicity. However, this study did show the feasibility and safety of conducting a tandem autologous-nonmyeloablative allogeneic HSCT within a cooperative group. In our study, 32 patients from 10 institutions were initially entered on the study. We observed a 28% drop out rate which is consistent with other reported tandem HSCT studies ( Table 4 ). In this study, we utilized a cyclophosphamide and fludarabine-based preparative regimen whereas more recent NST trials have utilized a melphalan-based regimen (i.e. melphalan + fludarabine, etc) or low-dose TBI (200 cGy) ( Table 4 ). For the 23 patients who completed both transplants, the cumulative complete response rate increased from 9% CR after induction to 30% CR after NST. The low CR rate to autologous HSCT probably reflects the heterogeneity of the patients included in the trial which did not require chemotherapy sensitivity for eligibility. However, the overall response rate is comparable to other reported tandem HSCT trials especially when considering that 30% of our patients had chemotherapy resistant disease at the time of study enrollment-none of which achieved a CR. Furthermore, this study utilized a GVHD prophylaxis regimen consisting of corticosteroids and cyclosporine resulting in a 70% and 57%, incidence, respectively, of acute and chronic GVHD. More recent studies have incorporated either mycophenolate mofetil, tacrolimus or anti-thymocyte globulin without appreciably different rates of acute and chronic GVHD. Thus, there is no absolute ‘standard’ preparative regimen or GVHD prophylaxis at this time. Finally, non-hematologic toxicities were also comparable to other reported studies even though this study was designed at a time when non-myeloablative allogeneic HSCT were still considered highly investigational. The actuarial survival at 2 years was 78%. We observed only a single graft failure. Whereas the recent report from Bruno et al demonstrated an impressive 10% TRM in the HSCT-NST arm, our TRM is the lowest reported to date at 8.7% 12 . Furthermore, this is an exceptionally low incidence considering that this type of approach was quite novel at inception when first proposed in 1998 and was conducted within a cooperative group. These results are superior to other reports for NST for myeloma and remains superior to a number of more current trials ( Table 4 ). The TRM was lower independent of the incidence of acute and chronic GVHD observed in this trial compared to other reports ( Table 4 ). This supports the concept that allogeneic NST can be safely conducted in the cooperative group setting. With a median follow up of 4.6 years, we have observed one relapse among 7 patients in CR. Of the 11 patients in PR, 8 have relapsed, and the median time to relapse was 2.8 years. Admittedly, it is unknown whether the patients who have relapsed may have had adverse cytogenetic features since this data was not available. Seventy percent of patients developed acute GVHD and 57% chronic GVHD. Unfortunately, the development of GVHD did not correlate with a significant increase in CR: combining the incidence of chronic GVHD observed de novo or after DLI (ECOG E1A97), only 24% (4 of 17) of patients achieved a CR. One additional patient with CCR also developed chronic GVHD. The median PFS and OS of these 5 patients did not differ significantly from the other 12 patients who developed chronic GVHD or from the entire cohort of patients achieving CR. Although GVHD is associated with GVM as has been documented in the literature 19 – 21 , our observations that chronic GVHD, whether de novo or after DLI, is not associated with improved outcome. In contrast, other reports indicate chronic GVHD is associated with improved outcomes 22 , 23 . If the GVM is to be durable, it is only effective in the setting of minimal residual disease since a number of studies have shown that an NST administered late in the disease course can result in high response rates yet these responses are not durable even in the setting of chronic GVHD 5 – 7 .Furthermore, in our study, none of the 5 patients with chemotherapy resistant disease achieved CR. Thus, the strategy applied in this study-myeloablative autologous HSCT followed by a non-myeloablative allogeneic transplant may be the only potential approach to provide long-term disease control but should be administered early in the disease course at the time of minimal disease. Incorporating novel therapies, such as bortezomib and/or lenalidomide, utilized in more recent induction regimens results in response rates exceeding 80% including CR or near CR in the 20–30% range 24 – 26 . These are the ideal patients to proceed onto a tandem autologous-NST transplant regimen. With a median follow up of 4.6 years the median PFS was 3.6 years and the 2-year survival rate was 78% for the 23 patients who completed both HSCT. This is comparable to previous reports by the Seattle and German groups ( Table 4 ). Unfortunately, neither of these studies nor the current report demonstrates a plateau in progression-free survival. In addition, the recent tandem HSCT-NST trial by the Italian group also does not appear to have a plateau in survival curves. In contrast, the Spanish PETHEMA study may show a plateau in survival but at the ‘cost’ of a higher TRM (16%) and chronic GVHD (66%) 15 . On the positive, the transplant-related mortality in our study was 8.7% which is almost identical to the 10% and 11% rates reported by the Italian and French studies 10 , 12 , respectively, and lower than the16% to18% reported by the Spanish, Seattle and German groups 9 , 11 , 15 . In summary, we report a tandem transplant trial utilizing autologous HSCT followed by an allogeneic NST conducted by ECOG. We observed an overall response rate of 78% with PFS and OS comparable to other published reports. Similar to other studies, chronic GVHD was not associated with long-term disease control. Thus, our current regimens can affect high response rates but without durable responses. If cures are to be achieved, future trials should include patients early in their disease course treated to maximal response with novel therapies (e.g. bortezomib and/or lenalidomide) to optimize pre-transplant response. Thereafter, an autologous transplant for maximal tumor cytoreduction followed by an allogeneic NST to eradicate residual disease. Indeed, molecular remissions can be achieved in a minority of patients following allogeneic transplant. Patients with molecular remissions have improved PFS and OS 27 , 28 . To improve on eradication of minimal residual disease, with a goal to achieve a molecular remission, a post-transplant maintenance with novel agents should be incorporated into the treatment regimen. The use of these agents is based on the findings that both proteasome inhibitors and immunomodulatory agents have shown activity for treatment of relapse after NST 29 , 30 . With this type of approach, myeloma may either be truly cured or be “operationally” cured by returning to a state of a low proliferative ‘benign’ plasma cell dyscrasia akin to monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) 31 , 32 .  DISCUSSION We investigated the feasibility and outcome of an autologous-nonmyeloablative allogeneic tandem strategy within ECOG. At the time this study was initially designed in 1998, there were no reported single or multi-institutional clinical trials incorporating this novel approach of autologous stem cell transplant for maximum cytoreduction followed by a non-myeloablative allogeneic transplant to allow for a graft-versus-myeloma effect. One of the primary endpoints of the study was early mortality. This was the basis for the two-stage design with a planned stopping point after the first 19 patients who completed the autologous HSCT-allogeneic NST. These patients were followed for TRM until 100 days post-allogeneic NST. Since there were no treatment-related deaths in the first 100 days in these 19 patients, the primary endpoint was achieved and the study was re-opened to accrual. During the accrual period, the Seattle and German groups, with the same basic study design, reported their results demonstrating the feasibility, toxicity and efficacy of this concept 9 , 11 . Enrollment to this study slowed precipitously and the study was terminated early due to slow accrual probably since the uniqueness of this approach had been published by other investigators 9 rather than undo toxicity. However, this study did show the feasibility and safety of conducting a tandem autologous-nonmyeloablative allogeneic HSCT within a cooperative group. In our study, 32 patients from 10 institutions were initially entered on the study. We observed a 28% drop out rate which is consistent with other reported tandem HSCT studies ( Table 4 ). In this study, we utilized a cyclophosphamide and fludarabine-based preparative regimen whereas more recent NST trials have utilized a melphalan-based regimen (i.e. melphalan + fludarabine, etc) or low-dose TBI (200 cGy) ( Table 4 ). For the 23 patients who completed both transplants, the cumulative complete response rate increased from 9% CR after induction to 30% CR after NST. The low CR rate to autologous HSCT probably reflects the heterogeneity of the patients included in the trial which did not require chemotherapy sensitivity for eligibility. However, the overall response rate is comparable to other reported tandem HSCT trials especially when considering that 30% of our patients had chemotherapy resistant disease at the time of study enrollment-none of which achieved a CR. Furthermore, this study utilized a GVHD prophylaxis regimen consisting of corticosteroids and cyclosporine resulting in a 70% and 57%, incidence, respectively, of acute and chronic GVHD. More recent studies have incorporated either mycophenolate mofetil, tacrolimus or anti-thymocyte globulin without appreciably different rates of acute and chronic GVHD. Thus, there is no absolute ‘standard’ preparative regimen or GVHD prophylaxis at this time. Finally, non-hematologic toxicities were also comparable to other reported studies even though this study was designed at a time when non-myeloablative allogeneic HSCT were still considered highly investigational. The actuarial survival at 2 years was 78%. We observed only a single graft failure. Whereas the recent report from Bruno et al demonstrated an impressive 10% TRM in the HSCT-NST arm, our TRM is the lowest reported to date at 8.7% 12 . Furthermore, this is an exceptionally low incidence considering that this type of approach was quite novel at inception when first proposed in 1998 and was conducted within a cooperative group. These results are superior to other reports for NST for myeloma and remains superior to a number of more current trials ( Table 4 ). The TRM was lower independent of the incidence of acute and chronic GVHD observed in this trial compared to other reports ( Table 4 ). This supports the concept that allogeneic NST can be safely conducted in the cooperative group setting. With a median follow up of 4.6 years, we have observed one relapse among 7 patients in CR. Of the 11 patients in PR, 8 have relapsed, and the median time to relapse was 2.8 years. Admittedly, it is unknown whether the patients who have relapsed may have had adverse cytogenetic features since this data was not available. Seventy percent of patients developed acute GVHD and 57% chronic GVHD. Unfortunately, the development of GVHD did not correlate with a significant increase in CR: combining the incidence of chronic GVHD observed de novo or after DLI (ECOG E1A97), only 24% (4 of 17) of patients achieved a CR. One additional patient with CCR also developed chronic GVHD. The median PFS and OS of these 5 patients did not differ significantly from the other 12 patients who developed chronic GVHD or from the entire cohort of patients achieving CR. Although GVHD is associated with GVM as has been documented in the literature 19 – 21 , our observations that chronic GVHD, whether de novo or after DLI, is not associated with improved outcome. In contrast, other reports indicate chronic GVHD is associated with improved outcomes 22 , 23 . If the GVM is to be durable, it is only effective in the setting of minimal residual disease since a number of studies have shown that an NST administered late in the disease course can result in high response rates yet these responses are not durable even in the setting of chronic GVHD 5 – 7 .Furthermore, in our study, none of the 5 patients with chemotherapy resistant disease achieved CR. Thus, the strategy applied in this study-myeloablative autologous HSCT followed by a non-myeloablative allogeneic transplant may be the only potential approach to provide long-term disease control but should be administered early in the disease course at the time of minimal disease. Incorporating novel therapies, such as bortezomib and/or lenalidomide, utilized in more recent induction regimens results in response rates exceeding 80% including CR or near CR in the 20–30% range 24 – 26 . These are the ideal patients to proceed onto a tandem autologous-NST transplant regimen. With a median follow up of 4.6 years the median PFS was 3.6 years and the 2-year survival rate was 78% for the 23 patients who completed both HSCT. This is comparable to previous reports by the Seattle and German groups ( Table 4 ). Unfortunately, neither of these studies nor the current report demonstrates a plateau in progression-free survival. In addition, the recent tandem HSCT-NST trial by the Italian group also does not appear to have a plateau in survival curves. In contrast, the Spanish PETHEMA study may show a plateau in survival but at the ‘cost’ of a higher TRM (16%) and chronic GVHD (66%) 15 . On the positive, the transplant-related mortality in our study was 8.7% which is almost identical to the 10% and 11% rates reported by the Italian and French studies 10 , 12 , respectively, and lower than the16% to18% reported by the Spanish, Seattle and German groups 9 , 11 , 15 . In summary, we report a tandem transplant trial utilizing autologous HSCT followed by an allogeneic NST conducted by ECOG. We observed an overall response rate of 78% with PFS and OS comparable to other published reports. Similar to other studies, chronic GVHD was not associated with long-term disease control. Thus, our current regimens can affect high response rates but without durable responses. If cures are to be achieved, future trials should include patients early in their disease course treated to maximal response with novel therapies (e.g. bortezomib and/or lenalidomide) to optimize pre-transplant response. Thereafter, an autologous transplant for maximal tumor cytoreduction followed by an allogeneic NST to eradicate residual disease. Indeed, molecular remissions can be achieved in a minority of patients following allogeneic transplant. Patients with molecular remissions have improved PFS and OS 27 , 28 . To improve on eradication of minimal residual disease, with a goal to achieve a molecular remission, a post-transplant maintenance with novel agents should be incorporated into the treatment regimen. The use of these agents is based on the findings that both proteasome inhibitors and immunomodulatory agents have shown activity for treatment of relapse after NST 29 , 30 . With this type of approach, myeloma may either be truly cured or be “operationally” cured by returning to a state of a low proliferative ‘benign’ plasma cell dyscrasia akin to monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) 31 , 32 . 