Alzheimer Abnormalities of the Amygdala With Klüver-Bucy Syndrome Symptoms An Amygdaloid Variant of Alzheimer Disease Background Neurofibrillary tangles and ?-amyloid plaques have been observed in the amygdala in Alzheimer disease. A disproportionate abundance of this abnormality in the amygdala may cause behavioral symptoms similar to Klüver-Bucy syndrome. Objectives To describe an atypical behavioral presentation of Alzheimer disease and to review the literature on the subject. Design Case study. Setting Outpatient specialty clinic. Patient A 70-year-old man with progressive behavioral symptoms of hyperorality, hypersexuality, hypermetamorphosis, visual agnosia, hyperphagia, and apathy who died at age 77 of asphyxiation on a foreign object. Main Outcome Measures Clinical symptomatology, brain imaging, and neuropathology. Results The pathologic diagnosis was Alzheimer disease with abundant tangles and plaques in the lateral amygdala. Conclusions This case represents a variant of Alzheimer disease with prominent amygdala abnormalities and a Klüver-Bucy phenotype that was misdiagnosed as frontotemporal dementia. Clinical and imaging findings that may aid in accurate diagnosis are reviewed.  COMMENT Described by Klüver and Bucy in the late 1930s, this behavioral syndrome is associated with bilateral amygdala lesions and is characterized by the following cluster of symptoms: hypersexuality, hyperorality, hypermetamorphosis (excessive exploration of visual stimuli), visual agnosia, apathy, and withdrawal. 6 The amygdala processes sensory information for emotional valence; therefore, amygdala lesions cause abnormal emotional responses, resulting in aggressiveness, fearlessness, or apathy. 7 Lesion studies 8 in rats demonstrate that efferent projections from the posterodorsal amygdala to the hypothalamus lead to hyperphagia, obesity, and sexual dysregulation. Projections between the visual cortex and the amygdala have been mapped in nonhuman primates. 9 Injury to these projections likely underlies the visual agnosia and hypermetamorphosis observed in patients with amygdala lesions. Sourander and Sjogren 10 described KB syndrome symptoms in patients with AD. Morris et al 11 suggested that excessive eating in some patients with dementia may be a form of KB syndrome. Burns and colleagues 12 examined 178 patients with AD to quantify the number of KB syndrome symptoms: 29.3% had 1, 24.7% had 2, 17.2% had 3, 8.6% had 4, and 0.6% had all the KB syndrome symptoms. Neuronal loss in the medial, central, and cortical nuclei of the amygdala has been observed in AD. 13 , 14 Amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles are consistently present in the amygdala in AD. 3 – 5 The present patient had 150 tangles per 1.6 mm2 in the lateral amygdala. By comparison, 14 other AD brains with Braak and Braak stage VI were studied and were found to have 5 to 90 tangles per 1.6 mm2 in the amygdala. Kromer Vogt et al 2 investigated the amygdala abnormalities of 20 patients with AD and demonstrated a significant amount of tangles and neuritic plaques in the cortical nucleus and accessory basal nucleus of the amygdala, which have projections with the hippocampus; however, the lateral nuclei of the amygdala were relatively spared (1 patient had a 4+ tangle score and 1 had a 3+ plaque score). Compared with patients with typical AD described by Kromer Vogt et al, 2 the patient described herein had significant tangle and plaque density in the lateral amygdala. Hayman and colleagues 15 also described a patient with KB syndrome after lateral amygdala lesions. This is the first published study of this amygdaloid variant of AD with serial neuropsychological testing, magnetic resonance imaging, PET, and pathologic analysis. A frontal variant of AD with prominent behavioral symptoms has been described. 16 The frontal variant is characterized by an atypical distribution of AD abnormalities in the frontal lobes that may be more difficult to distinguish from FTD. In contrast, PET of this patient revealed the typical pattern of posterior hypometabolism. This tool might be a useful diagnostic aid. Behavioral variants of AD are primarily a diagnostic challenge because several of the symptoms overlap with FTD. 17 Cognitive-behavioral symptoms in AD often respond to acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, and misdiagnosis of FTD might preclude this intervention and other potential disease-modifying agents for AD that are currently being investigated. Also, FTD has more rapid progression, with mean survival of 4.2 years from initial evaluation compared with 6 years for AD. 18 This patient’s prominent behavioral symptoms led to the incorrect diagnosis of FTD. There were, however, a variety of noteworthy signs and imaging clues that pointed toward the correct diagnosis of AD. The patient noted memory dysfunction, and delayed memory scores were very poor relatively early in the illness. Age at presentation was late, and the course was relatively slow. Magnetic resonance imaging showed evidence of biparietal atrophy. The PET demonstrated biparietal hypometabolism consistent with AD. The specificity and sensitivity of PET, used to differentiate between AD and FTD, were recently shown to be superior to those of clinical assessment alone. 19 Furthermore, the positive finding of temporoparietal hypometabolism is strongly associated with AD abnormalities even in the presence of atypical features. 20  Figures and Table Figure 1 Brain magnetic resonance images of the patient at age 72 years showing slightly enlarged biparietal sulci and the absence of frontal or temporal lobar atrophy. Figure 2 Positron emission tomography with radiolabeled fluorodeoxyglucose in the patient at age 73 years showing hypometabolism in the bilateral parietal and anterotemporal regions. Figure 3 Bielschowsky silver impregnation staining showing an overview of large neuritic plaques (arrows) and smaller neurofibrillary tangles in the lateral amygdala adjacent to the inferior horn of the lateral ventricle. Bar=0.5 mm. Figure 4 Bielschowsky silver impregnation staining showing a higher-power view of neurofibrillary tangles (arrowheads) in the lateral amygdala (approximately 150 tangles per 1.6 mm2). Bar=0.1 mm. Figure 5 Bielschowsky silver impregnation staining showing a higher-power view of neuritic plaques, amyloid core, and surrounding tangles (approximately 10–20 neuritic plaques per 1.6 mm2). Bar=0.1 mm. Table Neuropsychological Test Results for the Patient at Ages 70 to 74 Years a Neuropsychological Test Patient Ages, y 70 71 72 73 74 MMSE score 30 29 28 27 18 Attention ?Digit Span score 13 (97) 14 (101) 13 (97) 9 (82) 9 (82) Language ?Boston Naming Test score 39 (55) 39 (55) 31 (<55) 23 (<55) 16 (<55) Memory score ?Logical Memory I 16 (89) 9 (76) 7 (71) 4 (65) 3 (63) ?Logical Memory II 11 (97) 7 (87) 0 0 NA Visuoperception ?Block design score 20 (105) 27 (115) 20 (105) 12 (90) 16 (100) Abbreviations: MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination; NA, not applicable. a Standard scores are given in parentheses (mean [SD], 100 [15]). 