Genetic architecture of murine skin inflammation and tumor susceptibility Germline polymorphisms in both model organisms and humans influence susceptibility to complex trait diseases such as inflammation and cancer 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 . Mice of the Mus spretus species are resistant to tumor development, and crosses between Mus spretus and susceptible Mus musculus strains have been used to map locations of genetic variants that contribute to skin cancer susceptibility 4 , 5 , 6 . We have integrated germline polymorphisms with gene expression in normal skin from a musculus x spretus backcross to generate a network view of the gene expression architecture of mouse skin. Here we demonstrate how this approach identifies expression motifs that contribute to tissue organization and biological functions related to inflammation, hematopoiesis, cell cycle control and tumor susceptibility. Motifs associated with inflammation, epidermal barrier function and proliferation are differentially regulated in backcross mice susceptible or resistant to tumor development. The intestinal stem cell marker Lgr5 is identified as a candidate master regulator of the hair follicle, and the Vitamin D receptor ( Vdr) is linked to coordinated control of epidermal barrier function, inflammation, and tumor susceptibility.  METHODS Male SPRET/Ei and female FVB/N mice from the Jackson Laboratory were crossed. Female F1 hybrids were mated to male FVB/N mice. Seventy-one backcross mice (8-12 weeks old) received a dose of DMBA (25 ?g per mouse in 200 ?l acetone applied to shaved dorsal back skin). One week after initiation tumors were promoted with TPA (200 ?l of 10?4 M solution in acetone) twice weekly for 20 weeks. Susceptibility groups were defined by papilloma count at 20 weeks (Low: zero at 20 weeks, n = 20, High: ? 8 at 20 weeks, n=17). Normal tail skin from FVBBX, SPRET/Ei, FVB/N and F1 mice (4 replicates per group) was snap frozen at sacrifice. mRNA expression profiles were generated with the Affymetrix M430 2.0 platform. Mice were genotyped using the ABI platform at 223 SNPs. Correlation analysis (Wilcoxon rank-sum) was performed with 24,357 transcripts expressed above background levels in FVBBX samples. Eighty-three additional FVBBX mice were generated and CBC was analyzed using a blood cell counter (HEMAVET; CDC Technologies, CT, USA). Linkage testing was performed by linear regression. An FDR method that accounts for signal dependence between loci on the same chromosome 26 identified 5% and 10% FDR p value cut-offs for linkage. CBC QTL were calculated and plotted using R/QTL 27 , using 1000 permutations to calculate the 5% genome-wide error rate p-value cut-off. Gene Ontology analysis was performed with BiNGO 28 . The relevance network used an r2 cut-off of 0.64 ( < 0.01% alpha level, 1000 permutations). Cliques with at least five members were identified using a modification of the Bron-Kerbosch algorithm. Network figures were generated using Cytoscape version 2.5.1 ( www.cytoscape.org ). Differentially expressed genes were identified using the Significance Analysis of Microarrays 29 with a maximum FDR of 10%.  Supplementary Material 1 