Phase II Evaluation of Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy and Debulking Followed by Intraperitoneal Chemotherapy in Women with Stage III and IV Epithelial Ovarian, Fallopian Tube or Primary Peritoneal Cancer: Southwest Oncology Group Study S0009 Purpose Intraperitoneal (IP) chemotherapy prolongs survival in optimally reduced ovarian cancer patients. For patients in whom optimal debulking cannot be achieved, one could incorporate IP therapy post-operatively if the cancer was optimally debulked following neoadjuvant chemotherapy. We sought to evaluate overall survival (OS), progression-free survival (PFS), percent of patients optimally debulked and toxicity in patients treated with this strategy. Methods Women with adenocarcinoma by biopsy or cytology with stage III/IV (pleural effusions only) epithelial ovarian, fallopian tube or primary peritoneal carcinoma that presented with bulky disease were treated with neoadjuvant intravenous (IV) paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 and carboplatin AUC 6 q 21 days x 3 cycles followed by surgery (if ? 50% decrease in CA125). If optimally debulked they received IV paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 and IP carboplatin AUC 5 (day 1) and IP paclitaxel 60 mg/m2 (day 8) q 28 days x 6 cycles. Results Sixty-two patients were registered. Four were ineligible. Fifty-six were evaluated for neoadjuvant chemotherapy toxicities. One patient died of pneumonia. Five patients had grade 4 toxicity, including neutropenia ( 3 ), anemia, leukopenia, anorexia, fatigue, muscle weakness, respiratory infection, and cardiac ischemia. Thirty-six patients had debulking surgery. Two had grade 4 hemorrhage. Twenty-six patients received post-cytoreduction chemotherapy. Four had grade 4 neutropenia. At a median follow-up of 21 months, median PFS is 21 months and median OS is 32 months for all 58 patients. PFS and OS for the 26 patients who received IV/IP chemotherapy is 29 and 34 months respectively. Conclusions These results compare favorably with other studies of sub-optimally debulked patients.  Patients and Methods Patients were eligible for this study if the clinical picture was consistent with stage III epithelial ovarian cancer, primary peritoneal or fallopian tube cancer with a large pelvic mass and/or bulky abdominal disease and/or malignant pleural effusion. Patients with stage IV disease with malignant pleural effusion only were allowed. Patients must have had adenocarcinoma by biopsy or cytology (nonmucinous histology) compatible with an epithelial ovarian, fallopian tube or peritoneal primary. Patients were deemed unlikely to be optimally cytoreduced by the evaluating gynecologic oncologist. Patients must not have had prior chemotherapy, immunotherapy, or pelvic radiation for this cancer. Patients who had undergone an exploratory laparotomy prior to enrollment were eligible only if an aggressive tumor debulking procedure was not performed (e.g., BSO/TAH with omentectomy). Only minimal tumor resection for the purposes of diagnosis and palliation was allowed (e.g., salpingo oophorectomy and/or partial omentectomy). Baseline CA-125 was required to be ? 70 units/ml. Patients were required to have a calculated creatinine clearance ? 50 ml/min, a serum bilirubin and SGOT ? 2 x the institutional upper limit of normal, a granulocyte count of ? 1,500/?l, platelets ? 100,000/?l and a performance status of 0 – 2. Patients with any ? grade 2 sensory neuropathy were not eligible. Patients were informed of the investigational nature of the study and signed and gave informed consent in accordance with institutional and federal guidelines. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy was given for three 21 day cycles and consisted of paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 over 3 hours followed by carboplatin, target AUC 6, IV over 30–60 minutes. Patients were required to receive prophylaxis for paclitaxel-associated hypersensitivity reactions as per their institutional regimen. Carboplatin dose was determined using the Calvert formula substituting calculated creatinine clearance for the GFR (glomerular filtration rate). ( 25 ) If following neoadjuvant chemotherapy, a patient had a ? 50% decrease in CA-125 from baseline, an exploratory laparotomy was performed with the goal of optimal debulking or complete resection of any residual tumor seen. These procedures were all performed by gynecologic oncologists familiar with the protocol and trained in debulking surgery techniques. At the completion of cytoreductive surgery patients must have had optimal disease defined as no residual lesions after resection, or residual disease such that no single lesion measured ? 1 cm. Patients whose disease was not optimally cytoreduced were removed from protocol. Malignant pleural effusions were required to have resolved completely. Post-operative chemotherapy consisted of paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 IV over 3 hours day 1 followed by carboplatin AUC=5 IP day 1 and paclitaxel 60 mg/m2 IP day 8 q 28 days x 6 courses. An IV Port-A-Cath™ was recommended for IP chemotherapy administration. Carboplatin was diluted in 1,000 mL of normal saline or D5W, warmed to 37°C and instilled into the peritoneal cavity as rapidly as possible immediately following the end of the IV paclitaxel infusion. On day 8, IP paclitaxel was administered in a similar fashion. Standard dose modifications were employed. The primary goal of the study was to evaluate PFS and OS in stages III and IV, bulky ovarian, peritoneal, and fallopian tube cancer patients treated with this strategy. OS was the primary endpoint. Based on prior GOG trials in suboptimally debulked patients ( 26 , 27 ), it was assumed that the study strategy would not be of further interest if the true two-year survival rate was less than 60%, while a two-year rate of 73% or higher would be of interest for further testing. This design had a power (probability of correctly declaring a regimen with a 73% true two-year survival rate to warrant further study) of 0.80. Fifty-five patients were deemed sufficient to estimate the optimal debulking rate or the probability of a particular neoadjuvant treatment toxicity to within ± 13%. Assuming a baseline 20% optimal debulking rate for this group of patients, the power to detect an improvement in this rate would be higher than 0.90 if the neoadjuvant treatment increased it to at least 40%. Any toxicity with a true incidence rate of 5% or higher would be likely (94% chance) to be seen at least once. All patients entering the study underwent pathology review for both the initial diagnostic procedure and for the interval cytoreduction procedure. A review of the surgical procedure was carried out prior to the second registration by gynecologic oncologists familiar with the techniques used, to confirm that optimal debulking was performed.  Results Sixty-two patients were registered between March 2001 and February 2006. Four patients were ineligible (1 had extensive surgery, 2 distant metastases, 1 CA125 < 70). The median age for the patients on study was 62.6 (31.5–79.8). Forty-three (74%) patients had ovarian cancer, 14 (24%) had primary peritoneal cancer and in one patient (2%) the primary site was not reported. Forty-three (74%) patients had stage III disease and 15 (26%) had stage IV. Of the 58 eligible patients undergoing neoadjuvant chemotherapy, 45 completed the planned treatment. Two patients were discontinued for adverse events, 3 discontinued for refusal unrelated to adverse events. Three patients were discontinued for disease progression and four died (3 from disease, 1 from toxicity). One patient was found to have a second primary cancer and was removed from study. There were no major protocol deviations. Fifty-six of the 58 eligible patients have been evaluated for neoadjuvant chemotherapy adverse events (2 institutions did not submit toxicity data). One patient died of pneumonia and sepsis probably due to treatment. Five other patients had grade 4 adverse events, including neutropenia ( 3 ), anemia, leukopenia, anorexia, fatigue/malaise/lethargy, muscle weakness, respiratory infection, and cardiac ischemia/infarction. Thirty-six (62%) eligible patients had interval debulking surgery. Two patients experienced grade 4 hemorrhage due to surgery. No other significant surgical complications were noted. Thirty one patients were registered for post-cytoreduction chemotherapy. Five were ineligible due to suboptimal cytoreduction. The median age for this group of patients was 62.3 (45.2–80.1). Of the 26 optimally debulked eligible patients (72% of the group undergoing surgery), 18 (69%) completed the planned treatment. Six patients were discontinued secondary to toxicity, 1 for progression and 1 was discontinued for personal reasons. The only grade 4 toxicity seen among the 26 eligible patients who received post-cytoreduction chemotherapy was neutropenia in 4 patients. Thirteen patients had grade 3 adverse events including neutropenia in 7 patients, 1 episode of febrile neutropenia, anemia in 3 patients, thrombocytopenia in 2 patients, abdominal pain in 3 patients, anorexia in 1 patient, IP catheter infection in 1 patient, fatigue in 1 patient and vomiting in 3 patients ( Table 1 ). At a median follow-up of 21 months for those still alive, median PFS is 21 months and median OS is 32 months for all 58 eligible patients. PFS and OS (from the time of starting post-operative chemotherapy) for the 26 patients who received IV/IP chemotherapy are 29 and 34 months respectively ( Figures 1 – IV ).  Results Sixty-two patients were registered between March 2001 and February 2006. Four patients were ineligible (1 had extensive surgery, 2 distant metastases, 1 CA125 < 70). The median age for the patients on study was 62.6 (31.5–79.8). Forty-three (74%) patients had ovarian cancer, 14 (24%) had primary peritoneal cancer and in one patient (2%) the primary site was not reported. Forty-three (74%) patients had stage III disease and 15 (26%) had stage IV. Of the 58 eligible patients undergoing neoadjuvant chemotherapy, 45 completed the planned treatment. Two patients were discontinued for adverse events, 3 discontinued for refusal unrelated to adverse events. Three patients were discontinued for disease progression and four died (3 from disease, 1 from toxicity). One patient was found to have a second primary cancer and was removed from study. There were no major protocol deviations. Fifty-six of the 58 eligible patients have been evaluated for neoadjuvant chemotherapy adverse events (2 institutions did not submit toxicity data). One patient died of pneumonia and sepsis probably due to treatment. Five other patients had grade 4 adverse events, including neutropenia ( 3 ), anemia, leukopenia, anorexia, fatigue/malaise/lethargy, muscle weakness, respiratory infection, and cardiac ischemia/infarction. Thirty-six (62%) eligible patients had interval debulking surgery. Two patients experienced grade 4 hemorrhage due to surgery. No other significant surgical complications were noted. Thirty one patients were registered for post-cytoreduction chemotherapy. Five were ineligible due to suboptimal cytoreduction. The median age for this group of patients was 62.3 (45.2–80.1). Of the 26 optimally debulked eligible patients (72% of the group undergoing surgery), 18 (69%) completed the planned treatment. Six patients were discontinued secondary to toxicity, 1 for progression and 1 was discontinued for personal reasons. The only grade 4 toxicity seen among the 26 eligible patients who received post-cytoreduction chemotherapy was neutropenia in 4 patients. Thirteen patients had grade 3 adverse events including neutropenia in 7 patients, 1 episode of febrile neutropenia, anemia in 3 patients, thrombocytopenia in 2 patients, abdominal pain in 3 patients, anorexia in 1 patient, IP catheter infection in 1 patient, fatigue in 1 patient and vomiting in 3 patients ( Table 1 ). At a median follow-up of 21 months for those still alive, median PFS is 21 months and median OS is 32 months for all 58 eligible patients. PFS and OS (from the time of starting post-operative chemotherapy) for the 26 patients who received IV/IP chemotherapy are 29 and 34 months respectively ( Figures 1 – IV ).  Discussion Previous small studies have suggested similar PFS and OS with the use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy as compared with initial surgery followed by chemotherapy with reduced surgical morbidity, better optimal debulking rates, less cost and better chemotherapy tolerability ( 12 – 17 ). The EORTC randomized neoadjuvant chemotherapy study recently closed to accrual should shed further light on the value of the neoadjuvant approach. Neoadjuvant therapy should be distinguished from interval debulking. Neoadjuvant therapy, as performed in this study, is defined as a chemical cytoreduction occurring prior to any significant attempt at surgical resection of the tumor. In contrast, interval debulking implies that an attempt at optimal debulking has already been made prior to the patients’ receiving any chemotherapy. This approach has not consistently been shown to improve survival ( 7 , 8 ). Studies of interval debulking therefore address a different patient population from the group described by this report. The impact of the neoadjuvant approach in a select group of patients who receive chemotherapy prior to any or little debulking effort is not known. In our study 21 patients had –pre-registration “surgery” of any kind, meaning that 37 patients had biopsy or cytology only. Among the 58 patients, reasons given for these patients to be “unlikely to be debulked” were that 27 were unresectable by CT scan criteria, 9 by physical examination findings, 11 by findings at surgery and 11 unknown. There are conflicting data regarding whether various criteria used correlate well with unresectability. ( 28 , 29 ) It is important to identify the patients who are truly unlikely to be optimally debulked so as not to potentially “deprive” a patient of the possibility of being optimally debulked. A recent meta-analysis ( 30 ) summarizes the need for better universal criteria for unresectability. We estimated an approximately 20% optimal debulking for this group of patients without neoadjuvant therapy and 45% of the entire cohort and 72% of the group who underwent surgery were optimally debulked. Although the survival results obtained using this treatment regimen compare favorably with other studies of sub-optimally debulked patients, our primary statistical endpoint was not met. In 2 GOG trials of suboptimally debulked stage III and IV ovarian cancer patients treated with cisplatin and paclitaxel combinations, the 2 year OS rates were approximately 60%. ( 26 , 27 ). We assumed that a 2 year survival rate of greater than 73% would be of considerable interest for further development and our 2 year survival rate was 52%. Perhaps in this poor prognosis group of patients, our survival goal was too optimistic. It is true that because only approximately half of the patients went on to receive the IP component of the study, it is difficult in a non-randomized trial to decipher whether these patients did relatively well because of selecting out the best prognosis patients by response to neoadjvuant therapy or because of the surgery or the IP route of chemotherapy. The numbers are certainly too small to compare the median survival for the entire cohort of 32 months versus the 34 month median survival for the patients who completed surgery with <1 cm disease and then received IP chemotherapy, but it should be noted that the PFS and OS estimates reported for the latter group is calculated from the time of starting the IV/IP therapy. Although randomized trials in ovarian cancer have established a survival advantage for IP chemotherapy for optimally debulked ovarian cancer, toxicity has been significant in the IP arms of these trials. Because IV carboplatin and cisplatinhave equivalent efficacy in ovarian cancer, andcarboplatin can be safely administered IP with a similar pharmacokineticadvantage as IP cisplatin ( 31 , 32 ), and IP carboplatin has been shown to have activity ( 33 – 35 ), we chose to use IP carboplatin in our post-cytoreductive chemotherapy regimen and this certainly may have accounted for the comparatively good tolerability for our IP regimen. The 28 day cycle as compared to 21 day cycle may have contributed to the favorable toxicity profile as well. In addition, the participants in this study appeared to tolerate surgery with less morbidity than might have been expected from women with very advanced disease. Certainly, randomized comparisons will be needed to make conclusions about the toxicity and efficacy of this IP regimen in this group of patients.  Discussion Previous small studies have suggested similar PFS and OS with the use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy as compared with initial surgery followed by chemotherapy with reduced surgical morbidity, better optimal debulking rates, less cost and better chemotherapy tolerability ( 12 – 17 ). The EORTC randomized neoadjuvant chemotherapy study recently closed to accrual should shed further light on the value of the neoadjuvant approach. Neoadjuvant therapy should be distinguished from interval debulking. Neoadjuvant therapy, as performed in this study, is defined as a chemical cytoreduction occurring prior to any significant attempt at surgical resection of the tumor. In contrast, interval debulking implies that an attempt at optimal debulking has already been made prior to the patients’ receiving any chemotherapy. This approach has not consistently been shown to improve survival ( 7 , 8 ). Studies of interval debulking therefore address a different patient population from the group described by this report. The impact of the neoadjuvant approach in a select group of patients who receive chemotherapy prior to any or little debulking effort is not known. In our study 21 patients had –pre-registration “surgery” of any kind, meaning that 37 patients had biopsy or cytology only. Among the 58 patients, reasons given for these patients to be “unlikely to be debulked” were that 27 were unresectable by CT scan criteria, 9 by physical examination findings, 11 by findings at surgery and 11 unknown. There are conflicting data regarding whether various criteria used correlate well with unresectability. ( 28 , 29 ) It is important to identify the patients who are truly unlikely to be optimally debulked so as not to potentially “deprive” a patient of the possibility of being optimally debulked. A recent meta-analysis ( 30 ) summarizes the need for better universal criteria for unresectability. We estimated an approximately 20% optimal debulking for this group of patients without neoadjuvant therapy and 45% of the entire cohort and 72% of the group who underwent surgery were optimally debulked. Although the survival results obtained using this treatment regimen compare favorably with other studies of sub-optimally debulked patients, our primary statistical endpoint was not met. In 2 GOG trials of suboptimally debulked stage III and IV ovarian cancer patients treated with cisplatin and paclitaxel combinations, the 2 year OS rates were approximately 60%. ( 26 , 27 ). We assumed that a 2 year survival rate of greater than 73% would be of considerable interest for further development and our 2 year survival rate was 52%. Perhaps in this poor prognosis group of patients, our survival goal was too optimistic. It is true that because only approximately half of the patients went on to receive the IP component of the study, it is difficult in a non-randomized trial to decipher whether these patients did relatively well because of selecting out the best prognosis patients by response to neoadjvuant therapy or because of the surgery or the IP route of chemotherapy. The numbers are certainly too small to compare the median survival for the entire cohort of 32 months versus the 34 month median survival for the patients who completed surgery with <1 cm disease and then received IP chemotherapy, but it should be noted that the PFS and OS estimates reported for the latter group is calculated from the time of starting the IV/IP therapy. Although randomized trials in ovarian cancer have established a survival advantage for IP chemotherapy for optimally debulked ovarian cancer, toxicity has been significant in the IP arms of these trials. Because IV carboplatin and cisplatinhave equivalent efficacy in ovarian cancer, andcarboplatin can be safely administered IP with a similar pharmacokineticadvantage as IP cisplatin ( 31 , 32 ), and IP carboplatin has been shown to have activity ( 33 – 35 ), we chose to use IP carboplatin in our post-cytoreductive chemotherapy regimen and this certainly may have accounted for the comparatively good tolerability for our IP regimen. The 28 day cycle as compared to 21 day cycle may have contributed to the favorable toxicity profile as well. In addition, the participants in this study appeared to tolerate surgery with less morbidity than might have been expected from women with very advanced disease. Certainly, randomized comparisons will be needed to make conclusions about the toxicity and efficacy of this IP regimen in this group of patients. 