Mitochondrial DNA mutations in the D-loop region may not be frequent in cervical cancer: a discussion on pitfalls in mitochondrial DNA studies  1. Materials In this study ( Chen and Zhan 2009 ), samples were obtained from patients with cervical cancer, and DNA was then extracted from both cancer tissue (CT) and nearby normal tissue (NT). However, apparently the tissue they used for DNA extraction was not the one they used for pathological diagnosis. From our own experiences, the percentages of cancer cells are different in different fractions of CT. We would suggest that DNA used for sequencing analysis should be extracted from the material on slides used for pathological diagnosis with microdissection technology ( Eltoum et al. 2002 ).  2. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) Both positive and negative controls should be included in PCR, especially in cases where nested PCR strategy is utilized to improve yields with low amount of materials. Some other standard precautions are listed in Kraytsberg's article on avoiding contamination in PCR ( Kraytsberg and Khrapko 2005 ). Additional efforts should be taken to avoid amplification of mitochondrial pseudogenes in nuclear genome by inclusion of a mtDNA-less rho zero cell as a control ( Yao et al. 2008 ).  3. Sequence electropherograms It is quite obvious to us that the point mutation G16535A was a reading error after careful examination of the sequence electropherogram. Apparently, a heteroplasmic mutation caused the shift of part of sequence electropherogram. Since error was detected in one of only two figures provided, we are very concerned about the quality of sequencing data which was the foundation of this paper.  4. Data analysis According to the authors, variants were compared with MITOMAP, and then mutations and novel polymorphisms were listed in Tables 1 and 2, respectively. We reanalyzed 13 new polymorphic sites reported in Table 2 of their paper. Contradicting to their claim that 13 new polymorphism changes had not been recorded in MITOMAP, as shown in Table 1 here, we found that 6 (as indicated with # in column 2) of 13 polymorphic sites were already listed in MITOMAP and had been reported before the year of 2008. Moreover, for the rest 7 sites, 5 of them (with the correct sequences indicated in the brackets in column 2) matched with wrong positions at the standard Cambridge reference sequence (CRS). As a result, no polymorphisms were found with sample 7 at 12 and 16,085 positions, and polymorphisms at position 298 and 16,233 were also reported previously ( Table 1 , column 2). We then did additional database search and found that among the rest 3 “new polymorphisms”, only G16110T passed the test ( Table 1 , column 3). As MITOMAP is a only limited database that targeted to medical genetics, for polymorphic sites survey, other mtDNA databases such as mtDB ( http://www.genpat.uu.se/mtDB ), mtDNA ( http://www.ianlogan.co.uk/mtdna.htm ), FBI mtDNA population database ( http://www.fbi.gov/hq/lab/fsc/backissu/april2002/miller1.htm ) or GenBank ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank/index.html ) should also be included. A straightforward Google or Yahoo search can help to define the “novelty” of mtDNA polymorphisms ( Bandelt et al. 2006 , 2008a , b ). The other useful advise is to identify potential pathogenic mutations with phylogenetic methods ( Bandelt et al. 2001 , 2006 ; Salas et al. 2005 ; Yao et al. 2007 ). We also briefly checked some “mutations” claimed in their Table 1 , and found several possible errors. For examples, position 171 bears a G in CRS, not a mutation as suggested by the authors; 16,303 in samples 1, 3 and 9 should be a base shift for 16,304, as 16,303 has G in CRS; 424 has T in CRS, again not a mutation suggested by the authors; 16,518 in samples 3 and 9 should be a base shift for 16,519. Obviously, the author could have avoided such mistakes by simply using CRS as the reference. Besides these major problems, some of statements in this paper were also misleading. For examples, “Mutation in D-loop zone is more serious, which will result in disorder of function of whole mitochondrial” is simply not correct; “mtDNA molecule is free in mitochondrial substrate (matrix?)” is also confusing and wrong. As we discussed, Chen and Zhan's study suffered multiple flaws in experimental design, examination and interpretation of the data. We noticed similar errors were also presented in other publications. On this aspect, we agreed with Salas et al. (2005) that the mtDNA data quality in many cancer studies is quite poor. While we do believe mitochondrial dysfunction and mtDNA mutations could play an important role in tumorigenesis, a call for more careful reassessment of the approach and the interpretation of the raw data seems necessary. 