Nitric Oxide Signaling Depends on Biotin in Jurkat Human Lymphoma Cells 1 , 2 Biotin affects gene expression through a diverse array of cell signaling pathways. Previous studies provided evidence that cGMP-dependent signaling also depends on biotin, but the mechanistic sequence of cGMP regulation by biotin is unknown. Here we tested the hypothesis that the effects of biotin in cGMP-dependent cell signaling are mediated by nitric oxide (NO). Human lymphoid (Jurkat) cells were cultured in media containing deficient (0.025 nmol/L), physiological (0.25 nmol/L), and pharmacological (10 nmol/L) concentrations of biotin for 5 wk. Both levels of intracellular biotin and NO exhibited a dose-dependent relationship in regard to biotin concentrations in culture media. Effects of biotin on NO levels were disrupted by the NO synthase (NOS) inhibitor N-monomethyl-arginine. Biotin-dependent production of NO was linked with biotin-dependent expression of endothelial and neuronal NOS, but not inducible NOS. Previous studies revealed that NO is an activator of guanylate cyclase. Consistent with these previous observations, biotin-dependent generation of NO increased the abundance of cGMP in Jurkat cells. Finally, the biotin-dependent generation of cGMP increased protein kinase G activity. Collectively this study is consistent with the hypothesis that biotin-dependent cGMP signaling in human lymphoid cells is mediated by NO.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell culture Jurkat cell clone E6-1 (ATCC; Manassas, VA) was cultured in humidified atmosphere in the following biotin-defined media for at least 5 wk prior to sample collection ( 25 ): 0.025 nmol/L of biotin (denoted "deficient"), 0.25 nmol/L of biotin ("physiological"), and 10 nmol/L of biotin ("pharmacological"). Biotin concentrations in media represent plasma concentrations in biotin-deficient individuals (> 2 standard deviations below the mean plasma concentration in normal subjects), normal subjects, and individuals taking a typical over-the-counter supplement providing 600 µg of biotin per day (i.e., 20 times the Adequate Intake) ( 27 – 29 ). Culture media were replaced with fresh media every 48 h. Media were prepared by using biotin-depleted fetal bovine serum ( 25 ); biotin concentrations in media were confirmed by avidin-binding assay ( 30 ) with modifications ( 25 ). The effect of biotin on cell growth was monitored by seeding 2 × 105 cells per mL of biotin-defined media and re-counting the cells after 24 h of incubation. Avidin blots of carboxylases The following mammalian carboxylases contain covalently bound biotin: acetyl-CoA carboxylases 1 and 2, pyruvate carboxylase, propionyl-CoA carboxylase (? chain), and 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (? chain) ( 2 ). The abundance of biotinylated carboxylases is a reliable marker for intracellular biotin concentrations ( 2 , 25 , 31 ). Biotinylated carboxylases in cell extracts were resolved by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and probed by using streptavidin peroxidase ( 25 ). Binding of streptavidin to biotin was quantified by using gel densitometry ( 21 ). Nitric oxide Intracellular NO was quantified fluorometrically using 4-amino-5-methylamino-2',7'-difluorofluorescein diacetate (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) as described ( 32 ). Control cultures were treated with 1 mmol/L N G-monomethyl- l -arginine (NMMA) for 1 h to inhibit NOS, or with 1 mmol/L of the synthetic NO donor 3-morpholinosydnonimine (SIN-1) for 1 h ( 33 ). Expression of genes coding for NOS The following three forms of NOS have been detected in human cells: endothelial NOS (eNOS) and neuronal NOS (nNOS), both of which belong to the class of constitutively expressed NOS (cNOS); and the inducible NOS (iNOS) ( 34 , 35 ). Here, the expression of genes encoding eNOS, nNOS, iNOS, and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (control) was quantified using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) with SYBR Green 1 labeling in a iCycler iQ™ multicolour real-time detection system (BioRad Laboratories, Palo Alto, CA) ( 12 , 19 ). The following primers were used (Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA): 5’-CGG CAT CAC CAG GAA GAA GA- 3’ and 5’-CAT GAG CGA GGC GGA GAT-3’ for eNOS (GenBank accession number NM_000603); 5’-GGT GGA GAT CAA TAT CGC GGT T-3’ and 5’-CCG GCA GCG GTA CTC ATT CT-3’ for nNOS (GenBank accession number NM_000620); 5’-CCA AGA GAA GAG AGA TTC CAT TGA A-3’ and 5’-TGA TTT TCC TGT CTC TGT CGC A-3’ for iNOS (GenBank accession number AF068236); and 5’-TCC ACT GGC GTC TTC ACC-3’ and 5’- GGC AGA GAT GAC CCT TT-3’ for glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GenBank accession number NM_002046). Samples were incubated at 95°C for 3 min, followed by cycles, each consisting of denaturation at 95°C for 10 s and annealing plus extension at 55°C for 45 s. Fluorescence data were collected at the annealing temperature. The cycle threshold values generated were used to calculate the mRNA abundance for each sample ( 36 ). cGMP NO is known to stimulate synthesis of cGMP ( 24 , 33 , 37 ). cGMP in cell lysates was quantified using the Cyclic GMP EIA kit (Cayman Chemical Inc., Ann Arbor, MI). 8-Bromo-guanosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate (8-Br-cGMP) is a non hydrolysable analog of cGMP; positive controls were cultured with 100 µmol/L 8-Br-cGMP for 20 min to validate the EIA kit (data not shown). PKG activity cGMP is known to activate PKG ( 37 ). PKG activity in cell lysate was detected by PKG-dependent [32P]phosphorylation (?-AT[32P], specific activity = 370 GBq/mmol); of the peptide substrate BPDEtide (Arg-Lys-Ile-Ser-Ala-Ser-Glu-Phe-Asp-Arg-Pro-Leu-Arg) ( 38 ) and quantified by using a beta counter. Cells treated with 100 µmol/L 8-Br-cGMP for 30 min served as positive controls; negative controls were produced by treating cell with 1 µmol/L of the PKG inhibitor KT5823 for 30 min. Statistics Homogeneity of variances among groups was confirmed using Bartlett’s test ( 39 ). Significance of differences among groups was tested by one-way ANOVA. Fisher's Protected Least Significant Difference procedure was used for posthoc testing ( 39 ). StatView 5.0.1 (SAS Institute; Cary, NC) was used to perform all calculations. Differences were considered significant if P < 0.05. Data are expressed as means ± SD.  Cell culture Jurkat cell clone E6-1 (ATCC; Manassas, VA) was cultured in humidified atmosphere in the following biotin-defined media for at least 5 wk prior to sample collection ( 25 ): 0.025 nmol/L of biotin (denoted "deficient"), 0.25 nmol/L of biotin ("physiological"), and 10 nmol/L of biotin ("pharmacological"). Biotin concentrations in media represent plasma concentrations in biotin-deficient individuals (> 2 standard deviations below the mean plasma concentration in normal subjects), normal subjects, and individuals taking a typical over-the-counter supplement providing 600 µg of biotin per day (i.e., 20 times the Adequate Intake) ( 27 – 29 ). Culture media were replaced with fresh media every 48 h. Media were prepared by using biotin-depleted fetal bovine serum ( 25 ); biotin concentrations in media were confirmed by avidin-binding assay ( 30 ) with modifications ( 25 ). The effect of biotin on cell growth was monitored by seeding 2 × 105 cells per mL of biotin-defined media and re-counting the cells after 24 h of incubation.  Avidin blots of carboxylases The following mammalian carboxylases contain covalently bound biotin: acetyl-CoA carboxylases 1 and 2, pyruvate carboxylase, propionyl-CoA carboxylase (? chain), and 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (? chain) ( 2 ). The abundance of biotinylated carboxylases is a reliable marker for intracellular biotin concentrations ( 2 , 25 , 31 ). Biotinylated carboxylases in cell extracts were resolved by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and probed by using streptavidin peroxidase ( 25 ). Binding of streptavidin to biotin was quantified by using gel densitometry ( 21 ).  Nitric oxide Intracellular NO was quantified fluorometrically using 4-amino-5-methylamino-2',7'-difluorofluorescein diacetate (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) as described ( 32 ). Control cultures were treated with 1 mmol/L N G-monomethyl- l -arginine (NMMA) for 1 h to inhibit NOS, or with 1 mmol/L of the synthetic NO donor 3-morpholinosydnonimine (SIN-1) for 1 h ( 33 ).  Expression of genes coding for NOS The following three forms of NOS have been detected in human cells: endothelial NOS (eNOS) and neuronal NOS (nNOS), both of which belong to the class of constitutively expressed NOS (cNOS); and the inducible NOS (iNOS) ( 34 , 35 ). Here, the expression of genes encoding eNOS, nNOS, iNOS, and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (control) was quantified using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) with SYBR Green 1 labeling in a iCycler iQ™ multicolour real-time detection system (BioRad Laboratories, Palo Alto, CA) ( 12 , 19 ). The following primers were used (Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA): 5’-CGG CAT CAC CAG GAA GAA GA- 3’ and 5’-CAT GAG CGA GGC GGA GAT-3’ for eNOS (GenBank accession number NM_000603); 5’-GGT GGA GAT CAA TAT CGC GGT T-3’ and 5’-CCG GCA GCG GTA CTC ATT CT-3’ for nNOS (GenBank accession number NM_000620); 5’-CCA AGA GAA GAG AGA TTC CAT TGA A-3’ and 5’-TGA TTT TCC TGT CTC TGT CGC A-3’ for iNOS (GenBank accession number AF068236); and 5’-TCC ACT GGC GTC TTC ACC-3’ and 5’- GGC AGA GAT GAC CCT TT-3’ for glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GenBank accession number NM_002046). Samples were incubated at 95°C for 3 min, followed by cycles, each consisting of denaturation at 95°C for 10 s and annealing plus extension at 55°C for 45 s. Fluorescence data were collected at the annealing temperature. The cycle threshold values generated were used to calculate the mRNA abundance for each sample ( 36 ).  cGMP NO is known to stimulate synthesis of cGMP ( 24 , 33 , 37 ). cGMP in cell lysates was quantified using the Cyclic GMP EIA kit (Cayman Chemical Inc., Ann Arbor, MI). 8-Bromo-guanosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate (8-Br-cGMP) is a non hydrolysable analog of cGMP; positive controls were cultured with 100 µmol/L 8-Br-cGMP for 20 min to validate the EIA kit (data not shown).  PKG activity cGMP is known to activate PKG ( 37 ). PKG activity in cell lysate was detected by PKG-dependent [32P]phosphorylation (?-AT[32P], specific activity = 370 GBq/mmol); of the peptide substrate BPDEtide (Arg-Lys-Ile-Ser-Ala-Ser-Glu-Phe-Asp-Arg-Pro-Leu-Arg) ( 38 ) and quantified by using a beta counter. Cells treated with 100 µmol/L 8-Br-cGMP for 30 min served as positive controls; negative controls were produced by treating cell with 1 µmol/L of the PKG inhibitor KT5823 for 30 min.  Statistics Homogeneity of variances among groups was confirmed using Bartlett’s test ( 39 ). Significance of differences among groups was tested by one-way ANOVA. Fisher's Protected Least Significant Difference procedure was used for posthoc testing ( 39 ). StatView 5.0.1 (SAS Institute; Cary, NC) was used to perform all calculations. Differences were considered significant if P < 0.05. Data are expressed as means ± SD.  RESULTS Biotin-dependent carboxylases Biotinylation of carboxylases was dose-dependent upon the levels of biotin in culture media in Jurkat cells, confirming that treatment was effective. The abundance of biotinylated pyruvate carboxylase increased by 80% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls ( Fig 1 ); no biotinylated pyruvate carboxylase was detectable in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin. Likewise, the abundance of biotinylated ?-chains of propionyl-CoA carboxylase and 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase depended on biotin in culture media. Note that the ?-chains of propionyl-CoA carboxylase (molecular mass = 80 kDa) and 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (molecular mass = 83 kDa) were poorly resolved on the polyacrylamide gels used here and, therefore, were pooled for analysis by gel densitometry. The abundance of biotinylated propionyl-CoA carboxylase plus 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase decreased by 94% in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls ( Fig. 1 ); the abundance of biotinylated propionyl-CoA carboxylase plus 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase increased by 40% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls. Acetyl-CoA carboxylases 1 and 2 were not detectable in Jurkat cell extracts, consistent with previous studies ( 25 ). Cell growth did not differ among treated cells, if 2 × 105 cells were seeded per mL of medium and re-counted after 24 h of incubation: 81 ± 14% increase in the number of cells cultured in biotin-deficient medium, 68 ± 20% increase in the number of cells from physiological medium, and 82 ± 28% increase in the number of cells from pharmacological medium ( P = 0.61, n = 4/group). Synthesis of NO The concentration of NO in Jurkat cell extracts was dose-dependent upon the levels of biotin in culture media. The concentration of NO decreased by 18% in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls ( Fig. 2 ); the concentration of NO increased by 27% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls. Differences among treatment groups were abolished if biotin-defined cells were treated with the NOS inhibitor NMMA ( Fig. 2 ) or the NO donor SNI-1 (data not shown). Effects of biotin on NO levels were mediated at least partially by biotin-dependent expression of eNOS and nNOS. The abundances of mRNA encoding eNOS and nNOS were dose-dependent upon the levels of biotin in culture media ( Fig. 3 ). The abundance of eNOS mRNA decreased by 95% in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls; the abundance of eNOS mRNA increased by 78% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls. Likewise, the abundance of nNOS mRNA decreased by 64% in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls; the abundance of nNOS mRNA increased by 41% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls. In contrast, the abundance of iNOS mRNA was not affected by biotin ( Fig. 3 ). Signaling by cGMP and PKG The activation of NO synthesis by biotin coincided with increased cGMP levels in Jurkat cells. Concentrations of cGMP differed among all treated cells and were 1.6 ± 0.05 nmol × L?1 × mg of protein?1 in those cultured in biotin-deficient medium, 1.9 ± 0.05 nmol × L?1 × mg of protein?1 in cells from physiological medium, and 2.3 ± 0.2 nmol × L?1 × mg of protein?1 in cells from pharmacological medium ( P < 0.01, n = 3/group). PKG activities paralleled the biotin-dependent synthesis of cGMP, as judged by phosphorylation of the synthetic PKG substrate BPDEtide in response to incubation with cell extracts. Phosphorylation of BPDEtide decreased by 16% in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls ( Fig. 4 ); phosphorylation of BPDEtide increased by 35% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls. PKG activity increased by 64% in 8-Br-cGMP-treated, biotin-matched (10 nmol/L) cells (positive controls); PKG activity decreased by 25% and 40% in cells treated with KT5823 and NMMA, respectively, compared with biotin-matched inhibitor-free cells (negative control) Patterns were similar for positive and negative controls at biotin concentrations of 0.025 nmol/L and 0.25 nmol/L (data not shown).  RESULTS Biotin-dependent carboxylases Biotinylation of carboxylases was dose-dependent upon the levels of biotin in culture media in Jurkat cells, confirming that treatment was effective. The abundance of biotinylated pyruvate carboxylase increased by 80% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls ( Fig 1 ); no biotinylated pyruvate carboxylase was detectable in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin. Likewise, the abundance of biotinylated ?-chains of propionyl-CoA carboxylase and 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase depended on biotin in culture media. Note that the ?-chains of propionyl-CoA carboxylase (molecular mass = 80 kDa) and 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (molecular mass = 83 kDa) were poorly resolved on the polyacrylamide gels used here and, therefore, were pooled for analysis by gel densitometry. The abundance of biotinylated propionyl-CoA carboxylase plus 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase decreased by 94% in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls ( Fig. 1 ); the abundance of biotinylated propionyl-CoA carboxylase plus 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase increased by 40% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls. Acetyl-CoA carboxylases 1 and 2 were not detectable in Jurkat cell extracts, consistent with previous studies ( 25 ). Cell growth did not differ among treated cells, if 2 × 105 cells were seeded per mL of medium and re-counted after 24 h of incubation: 81 ± 14% increase in the number of cells cultured in biotin-deficient medium, 68 ± 20% increase in the number of cells from physiological medium, and 82 ± 28% increase in the number of cells from pharmacological medium ( P = 0.61, n = 4/group). Synthesis of NO The concentration of NO in Jurkat cell extracts was dose-dependent upon the levels of biotin in culture media. The concentration of NO decreased by 18% in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls ( Fig. 2 ); the concentration of NO increased by 27% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls. Differences among treatment groups were abolished if biotin-defined cells were treated with the NOS inhibitor NMMA ( Fig. 2 ) or the NO donor SNI-1 (data not shown). Effects of biotin on NO levels were mediated at least partially by biotin-dependent expression of eNOS and nNOS. The abundances of mRNA encoding eNOS and nNOS were dose-dependent upon the levels of biotin in culture media ( Fig. 3 ). The abundance of eNOS mRNA decreased by 95% in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls; the abundance of eNOS mRNA increased by 78% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls. Likewise, the abundance of nNOS mRNA decreased by 64% in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls; the abundance of nNOS mRNA increased by 41% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls. In contrast, the abundance of iNOS mRNA was not affected by biotin ( Fig. 3 ). Signaling by cGMP and PKG The activation of NO synthesis by biotin coincided with increased cGMP levels in Jurkat cells. Concentrations of cGMP differed among all treated cells and were 1.6 ± 0.05 nmol × L?1 × mg of protein?1 in those cultured in biotin-deficient medium, 1.9 ± 0.05 nmol × L?1 × mg of protein?1 in cells from physiological medium, and 2.3 ± 0.2 nmol × L?1 × mg of protein?1 in cells from pharmacological medium ( P < 0.01, n = 3/group). PKG activities paralleled the biotin-dependent synthesis of cGMP, as judged by phosphorylation of the synthetic PKG substrate BPDEtide in response to incubation with cell extracts. Phosphorylation of BPDEtide decreased by 16% in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls ( Fig. 4 ); phosphorylation of BPDEtide increased by 35% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls. PKG activity increased by 64% in 8-Br-cGMP-treated, biotin-matched (10 nmol/L) cells (positive controls); PKG activity decreased by 25% and 40% in cells treated with KT5823 and NMMA, respectively, compared with biotin-matched inhibitor-free cells (negative control) Patterns were similar for positive and negative controls at biotin concentrations of 0.025 nmol/L and 0.25 nmol/L (data not shown).  Biotin-dependent carboxylases Biotinylation of carboxylases was dose-dependent upon the levels of biotin in culture media in Jurkat cells, confirming that treatment was effective. The abundance of biotinylated pyruvate carboxylase increased by 80% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls ( Fig 1 ); no biotinylated pyruvate carboxylase was detectable in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin. Likewise, the abundance of biotinylated ?-chains of propionyl-CoA carboxylase and 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase depended on biotin in culture media. Note that the ?-chains of propionyl-CoA carboxylase (molecular mass = 80 kDa) and 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (molecular mass = 83 kDa) were poorly resolved on the polyacrylamide gels used here and, therefore, were pooled for analysis by gel densitometry. The abundance of biotinylated propionyl-CoA carboxylase plus 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase decreased by 94% in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls ( Fig. 1 ); the abundance of biotinylated propionyl-CoA carboxylase plus 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase increased by 40% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls. Acetyl-CoA carboxylases 1 and 2 were not detectable in Jurkat cell extracts, consistent with previous studies ( 25 ). Cell growth did not differ among treated cells, if 2 × 105 cells were seeded per mL of medium and re-counted after 24 h of incubation: 81 ± 14% increase in the number of cells cultured in biotin-deficient medium, 68 ± 20% increase in the number of cells from physiological medium, and 82 ± 28% increase in the number of cells from pharmacological medium ( P = 0.61, n = 4/group).  Biotin-dependent carboxylases Biotinylation of carboxylases was dose-dependent upon the levels of biotin in culture media in Jurkat cells, confirming that treatment was effective. The abundance of biotinylated pyruvate carboxylase increased by 80% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls ( Fig 1 ); no biotinylated pyruvate carboxylase was detectable in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin. Likewise, the abundance of biotinylated ?-chains of propionyl-CoA carboxylase and 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase depended on biotin in culture media. Note that the ?-chains of propionyl-CoA carboxylase (molecular mass = 80 kDa) and 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (molecular mass = 83 kDa) were poorly resolved on the polyacrylamide gels used here and, therefore, were pooled for analysis by gel densitometry. The abundance of biotinylated propionyl-CoA carboxylase plus 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase decreased by 94% in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls ( Fig. 1 ); the abundance of biotinylated propionyl-CoA carboxylase plus 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase increased by 40% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls. Acetyl-CoA carboxylases 1 and 2 were not detectable in Jurkat cell extracts, consistent with previous studies ( 25 ). Cell growth did not differ among treated cells, if 2 × 105 cells were seeded per mL of medium and re-counted after 24 h of incubation: 81 ± 14% increase in the number of cells cultured in biotin-deficient medium, 68 ± 20% increase in the number of cells from physiological medium, and 82 ± 28% increase in the number of cells from pharmacological medium ( P = 0.61, n = 4/group).  Synthesis of NO The concentration of NO in Jurkat cell extracts was dose-dependent upon the levels of biotin in culture media. The concentration of NO decreased by 18% in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls ( Fig. 2 ); the concentration of NO increased by 27% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls. Differences among treatment groups were abolished if biotin-defined cells were treated with the NOS inhibitor NMMA ( Fig. 2 ) or the NO donor SNI-1 (data not shown). Effects of biotin on NO levels were mediated at least partially by biotin-dependent expression of eNOS and nNOS. The abundances of mRNA encoding eNOS and nNOS were dose-dependent upon the levels of biotin in culture media ( Fig. 3 ). The abundance of eNOS mRNA decreased by 95% in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls; the abundance of eNOS mRNA increased by 78% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls. Likewise, the abundance of nNOS mRNA decreased by 64% in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls; the abundance of nNOS mRNA increased by 41% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls. In contrast, the abundance of iNOS mRNA was not affected by biotin ( Fig. 3 ).  Synthesis of NO The concentration of NO in Jurkat cell extracts was dose-dependent upon the levels of biotin in culture media. The concentration of NO decreased by 18% in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls ( Fig. 2 ); the concentration of NO increased by 27% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls. Differences among treatment groups were abolished if biotin-defined cells were treated with the NOS inhibitor NMMA ( Fig. 2 ) or the NO donor SNI-1 (data not shown). Effects of biotin on NO levels were mediated at least partially by biotin-dependent expression of eNOS and nNOS. The abundances of mRNA encoding eNOS and nNOS were dose-dependent upon the levels of biotin in culture media ( Fig. 3 ). The abundance of eNOS mRNA decreased by 95% in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls; the abundance of eNOS mRNA increased by 78% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls. Likewise, the abundance of nNOS mRNA decreased by 64% in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls; the abundance of nNOS mRNA increased by 41% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls. In contrast, the abundance of iNOS mRNA was not affected by biotin ( Fig. 3 ).  Signaling by cGMP and PKG The activation of NO synthesis by biotin coincided with increased cGMP levels in Jurkat cells. Concentrations of cGMP differed among all treated cells and were 1.6 ± 0.05 nmol × L?1 × mg of protein?1 in those cultured in biotin-deficient medium, 1.9 ± 0.05 nmol × L?1 × mg of protein?1 in cells from physiological medium, and 2.3 ± 0.2 nmol × L?1 × mg of protein?1 in cells from pharmacological medium ( P < 0.01, n = 3/group). PKG activities paralleled the biotin-dependent synthesis of cGMP, as judged by phosphorylation of the synthetic PKG substrate BPDEtide in response to incubation with cell extracts. Phosphorylation of BPDEtide decreased by 16% in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls ( Fig. 4 ); phosphorylation of BPDEtide increased by 35% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls. PKG activity increased by 64% in 8-Br-cGMP-treated, biotin-matched (10 nmol/L) cells (positive controls); PKG activity decreased by 25% and 40% in cells treated with KT5823 and NMMA, respectively, compared with biotin-matched inhibitor-free cells (negative control) Patterns were similar for positive and negative controls at biotin concentrations of 0.025 nmol/L and 0.25 nmol/L (data not shown).  Signaling by cGMP and PKG The activation of NO synthesis by biotin coincided with increased cGMP levels in Jurkat cells. Concentrations of cGMP differed among all treated cells and were 1.6 ± 0.05 nmol × L?1 × mg of protein?1 in those cultured in biotin-deficient medium, 1.9 ± 0.05 nmol × L?1 × mg of protein?1 in cells from physiological medium, and 2.3 ± 0.2 nmol × L?1 × mg of protein?1 in cells from pharmacological medium ( P < 0.01, n = 3/group). PKG activities paralleled the biotin-dependent synthesis of cGMP, as judged by phosphorylation of the synthetic PKG substrate BPDEtide in response to incubation with cell extracts. Phosphorylation of BPDEtide decreased by 16% in cells cultured in medium containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls ( Fig. 4 ); phosphorylation of BPDEtide increased by 35% in cells cultured in medium containing 10 nmol/L biotin compared with physiological controls. PKG activity increased by 64% in 8-Br-cGMP-treated, biotin-matched (10 nmol/L) cells (positive controls); PKG activity decreased by 25% and 40% in cells treated with KT5823 and NMMA, respectively, compared with biotin-matched inhibitor-free cells (negative control) Patterns were similar for positive and negative controls at biotin concentrations of 0.025 nmol/L and 0.25 nmol/L (data not shown).  DISCUSSION Previous studies provide convincing evidence that biotin and its metabolite biotinyl-AMP activate soluble guanylate cyclase, increasing the synthesis of cGMP ( 22 , 40 , 41 ). Subsequently, cGMP activates PKG, thereby increasing the transcription of genes coding for biotin-dependent carboxylases and holocarboxylase synthetase ( 22 ). However, the initial biotin-dependent steps in the cGMP pathway were not elucidated. The study presented here fills some important gaps by offering novel insights in the biotin-dependent regulation of cGMP and PKG signaling. Importantly, evidence is provided that the generation of NO depends on biotin in human lymphoid cells, and that biotin-dependent generation of NO is mediated by increased expression of eNOS and nNOS. Effects of biotin are gene specific, given that iNOS mRNA levels were not altered by biotin. Biotin-dependent generation of NO increased the abundance of cGMP, consistent with previous studies revealing that NO is an activator of guanylate cyclase ( 23 , 24 ). Ultimately, the biotin-dependent generation of cGMP increased PKG activity. Collectively, this study is consistent with the hypothesis that biotin-dependent synthesis of NO contributes to cGMP signaling in human lymphoid cells. Effects of biotin on the synthesis of NO are physiologically important, based on the following lines of reasoning. First, NO is a key regulator of numerous biological processes, including vasodilatation, synaptic plasticity, and immune defense ( 34 ). Importantly, NO affects the cellular abundance of the ubiquitous second messengers cGMP and cAMP ( 33 , 37 ), triggering downstream effects on the activity of various transcription factors and the expression of numerous genes. This is consistent with the large number of biotin-dependent genes discovered in previous studies ( 3 – 5 ). Second, the studies described here were conducted using biotin at concentrations that are physiologically relevant ( 25 , 27 – 29 ). There are still some minor uncertainties associated with this regulatory pathway. First, Leon-Del-Rio and co-workers suggested that holocarboxylase synthetase plays a critical role in biotin-dependent signaling by cGMP and PKG ( 22 , 42 ). A possible involvement of holocarboxylase synthetase in the regulation of NO and NOS has not been investigated in this study. Previous studies in our laboratory and by others revealed that holocarboxylase synthetase mediates the binding of biotin to histones ( 7 , 43 , 44 ) and that biotinylation of histones plays an important role in gene regulation ( 7 , 8 , 12 , 19 ). We speculate that histone biotinylation by holocarboxylase synthetase might mediate some of the effects of biotin on NOS expression. Second, the mechanism by which biotin increases the expression of eNOS and nNOS is unknown. We speculate that one or more of the many biotin-dependent transcription factors participate in the regulation of the two genes ( 5 , 9 , 21 ). In addition, we propose that decreased expression of the sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum ATPase 3 (SERCA3) in biotin-supplemented cells decreases the transport of Ca2+ from the cytoplasm into the endoplasmic reticulum, leading to increased concentrations of Ca2+ in the cytoplasm ( 20 ). Cytoplasmic free Ca2+ is known to enhance the production of NO in Jurkat cells ( 45 ). In this study, effects of biotin on the abundance of mRNA coding for eNOS and nNOS were greater than the effects of biotin on NO levels. We cannot exclude the possibility that the unaltered abundance of iNOS mRNA in biotin-defined cells is responsible for this difference in effect. Taken together, this study is consistent with the hypothesis that some of the effects of biotin in cGMP and PKC signaling are mediated by NO and NOS. The proposed mechanisms tie in well with other biotin-dependent cell signals, e.g., transcription factor activity, calcium flux, and histone biotinylation. Given the central regulatory role of NO in metabolism, we anticipate that the observations presented here will lead to new discoveries with regard to roles of biotin in cell signaling.  DISCUSSION Previous studies provide convincing evidence that biotin and its metabolite biotinyl-AMP activate soluble guanylate cyclase, increasing the synthesis of cGMP ( 22 , 40 , 41 ). Subsequently, cGMP activates PKG, thereby increasing the transcription of genes coding for biotin-dependent carboxylases and holocarboxylase synthetase ( 22 ). However, the initial biotin-dependent steps in the cGMP pathway were not elucidated. The study presented here fills some important gaps by offering novel insights in the biotin-dependent regulation of cGMP and PKG signaling. Importantly, evidence is provided that the generation of NO depends on biotin in human lymphoid cells, and that biotin-dependent generation of NO is mediated by increased expression of eNOS and nNOS. Effects of biotin are gene specific, given that iNOS mRNA levels were not altered by biotin. Biotin-dependent generation of NO increased the abundance of cGMP, consistent with previous studies revealing that NO is an activator of guanylate cyclase ( 23 , 24 ). Ultimately, the biotin-dependent generation of cGMP increased PKG activity. Collectively, this study is consistent with the hypothesis that biotin-dependent synthesis of NO contributes to cGMP signaling in human lymphoid cells. Effects of biotin on the synthesis of NO are physiologically important, based on the following lines of reasoning. First, NO is a key regulator of numerous biological processes, including vasodilatation, synaptic plasticity, and immune defense ( 34 ). Importantly, NO affects the cellular abundance of the ubiquitous second messengers cGMP and cAMP ( 33 , 37 ), triggering downstream effects on the activity of various transcription factors and the expression of numerous genes. This is consistent with the large number of biotin-dependent genes discovered in previous studies ( 3 – 5 ). Second, the studies described here were conducted using biotin at concentrations that are physiologically relevant ( 25 , 27 – 29 ). There are still some minor uncertainties associated with this regulatory pathway. First, Leon-Del-Rio and co-workers suggested that holocarboxylase synthetase plays a critical role in biotin-dependent signaling by cGMP and PKG ( 22 , 42 ). A possible involvement of holocarboxylase synthetase in the regulation of NO and NOS has not been investigated in this study. Previous studies in our laboratory and by others revealed that holocarboxylase synthetase mediates the binding of biotin to histones ( 7 , 43 , 44 ) and that biotinylation of histones plays an important role in gene regulation ( 7 , 8 , 12 , 19 ). We speculate that histone biotinylation by holocarboxylase synthetase might mediate some of the effects of biotin on NOS expression. Second, the mechanism by which biotin increases the expression of eNOS and nNOS is unknown. We speculate that one or more of the many biotin-dependent transcription factors participate in the regulation of the two genes ( 5 , 9 , 21 ). In addition, we propose that decreased expression of the sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum ATPase 3 (SERCA3) in biotin-supplemented cells decreases the transport of Ca2+ from the cytoplasm into the endoplasmic reticulum, leading to increased concentrations of Ca2+ in the cytoplasm ( 20 ). Cytoplasmic free Ca2+ is known to enhance the production of NO in Jurkat cells ( 45 ). In this study, effects of biotin on the abundance of mRNA coding for eNOS and nNOS were greater than the effects of biotin on NO levels. We cannot exclude the possibility that the unaltered abundance of iNOS mRNA in biotin-defined cells is responsible for this difference in effect. Taken together, this study is consistent with the hypothesis that some of the effects of biotin in cGMP and PKC signaling are mediated by NO and NOS. The proposed mechanisms tie in well with other biotin-dependent cell signals, e.g., transcription factor activity, calcium flux, and histone biotinylation. Given the central regulatory role of NO in metabolism, we anticipate that the observations presented here will lead to new discoveries with regard to roles of biotin in cell signaling.  Figures FIGURE 1 The abundance of holocarboxylases in Jurkat cells depends on the concentration of biotin in culture media. Cells were cultured in biotin-defined media for 5 wk. Biotinylated carboxylases were quantified using streptavidin blots and gel densitometry; equal amounts of protein were loaded (20 µg/lane). Values are means ± SD, n=3. Means for each variable without a common letter differ, P < 0.01. Abbreviations: MCC, 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase; PC, pyruvate carboxylase; PCC, propionyl-CoA carboxylase. FIGURE 2 The concentration of nitric oxide (NO) in Jurkat cell extracts depends on the concentration of biotin in culture media. Cells were cultured in biotin-defined media for 5 wk. NO in whole cell extracts from 5 × 105 cells was quantified fluorometrically. Controls were treated with the NO synthase inhibitor N G-monomethyl- l -arginine (NMMA). Values are means ± SD, n=3. Means for each variable without a common letter differ, P < 0.01. Cells without NMMA were not compared to NMMA-treated cells. FIGURE 3 The abundance of transcripts coding for eNOS and nNOS in Jurkat cells depends on the concentration of biotin in culture media. Cells were cultured in biotin-defined media for 5 wk. mRNA coding for eNOS, nNOS, and iNOS was quantified by real-time PCR. Values are means ± SD, n=3. Means for each variable without a common letter differ for the same transcript, P < 0.01. FIGURE 4 Phosphorylation of BPDEtide by PKG depends on the concentration of biotin in Jurkat cells. Cells were cultured in biotin-defined media for 5 wk. PKG activity in cell lysates was measured by the ?-AT[32P]-mediated phosphorylation of the peptide BPDEtide. Values are means ± SD, n=3. Means for each variable without a common letter differ, P < 0.01.  Figures FIGURE 1 The abundance of holocarboxylases in Jurkat cells depends on the concentration of biotin in culture media. Cells were cultured in biotin-defined media for 5 wk. Biotinylated carboxylases were quantified using streptavidin blots and gel densitometry; equal amounts of protein were loaded (20 µg/lane). Values are means ± SD, n=3. Means for each variable without a common letter differ, P < 0.01. Abbreviations: MCC, 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase; PC, pyruvate carboxylase; PCC, propionyl-CoA carboxylase. FIGURE 2 The concentration of nitric oxide (NO) in Jurkat cell extracts depends on the concentration of biotin in culture media. Cells were cultured in biotin-defined media for 5 wk. NO in whole cell extracts from 5 × 105 cells was quantified fluorometrically. Controls were treated with the NO synthase inhibitor N G-monomethyl- l -arginine (NMMA). Values are means ± SD, n=3. Means for each variable without a common letter differ, P < 0.01. Cells without NMMA were not compared to NMMA-treated cells. FIGURE 3 The abundance of transcripts coding for eNOS and nNOS in Jurkat cells depends on the concentration of biotin in culture media. Cells were cultured in biotin-defined media for 5 wk. mRNA coding for eNOS, nNOS, and iNOS was quantified by real-time PCR. Values are means ± SD, n=3. Means for each variable without a common letter differ for the same transcript, P < 0.01. FIGURE 4 Phosphorylation of BPDEtide by PKG depends on the concentration of biotin in Jurkat cells. Cells were cultured in biotin-defined media for 5 wk. PKG activity in cell lysates was measured by the ?-AT[32P]-mediated phosphorylation of the peptide BPDEtide. Values are means ± SD, n=3. Means for each variable without a common letter differ, P < 0.01. 