Boswellic Acid Blocks STAT3 Signaling, Proliferation, and Survival of Multiple Myeloma via the Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase SHP-1 Activation of signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT)-3 factors has been linked with survival, proliferation, chemoresistance and angiogenesis of tumor cells, including human multiple myeloma (MM). Thus agents that can suppress STAT3 activation have potential as cancer therapeutics. In our search for such agents, we identified acetyl-11-keto-?-boswellic acid (AKBA), originally isolated from Boswellia serrata . Our results show that AKBA inhibited constitutive STAT3 activation in human MM cells. AKBA suppressed IL-6-induced STAT3 activation, and the inhibition was reversible. The phosphorylation of both Jak 2 and Src, constituents of the STAT3 pathway, was inhibited by AKBA. Interestingly, treatment of cells with pervanadate suppressed AKBA’s effect to inhibit the phosphorylation of STAT3, thus suggesting the involvement of a protein tyrosine phosphatase. We found that AKBA induced Src homology region 2 domain-containing phosphatase 1 (SHP-1), which may account for its role in dephosphorylation of STAT3. Moreover, deletion of SHP-1 gene by SiRNA abolished the ability of AKBA to inhibit STAT3 activation. The inhibition of STAT3 activation by AKBA led to the suppression of gene products involved in proliferation (cyclin D1), survival (Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and Mcl-1), and angiogenesis (VEGF). This affect correlated with the inhibition of proliferation and apoptosis in MM cells. Consistent with these results, overexpression of constitutive active STAT3 significantly reduced the AKBA induced apoptosis. Overall, our results suggest that AKBA is a novel inhibitor of STAT3 activation and has potential in the treatment of cancer.  Introduction Numerous recent reports indicate that multi-targeted, rather than mono-targeted, anticancer agents have a better chance for success ( 1 ). Most natural products are multi-targeted “naturally” ( 2 ). Boswellia serrata, an Indian frankincense or Salai guggul, has been used in Ayurvedic systems of medicine against a number of inflammatory diseases, including osteoarthritis, chronic colitis, ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, and bronchial asthma but the mechanism is poorly understood. Acetyl-11-keto--boswellic acid (AKBA), the active principle isolated from this plant possess inhibitory activities against experimental ileitis ( 3 ), experimental colitis ( 4 ), autoimmune encephalomyelitis ( 5 ), noceception ( 6 ), inflammation and atherogenesis ( 7 ), bovine serum albumin (BSA)-induced arthritis ( 8 ) and growth of glioma in rats ( 9 ). AKBA also inhibited age-associated abnormalities in mice ( 10 ). There are also reports that this agent exhibits immunomodulatory effects ( 11 ). That this triterpenoid can suppress the growth of glioma, colon cancer, prostate and leukemic cells, has also been reported ( 12 – 17 ). In addition AKBA suppressed the basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF)-induced angiogenesis in vivo in matrigel plug assay ( 18 ). Although a number of molecular targets inhibited by AKBA such as 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX), cyclooxygenase (COX)-2, P-glycoprotein (Pgp) ( 19 ), extracellular signal regulated kinase (Erk) 1 and 2 ( 13 , 20 ), human leukocyte elastase ( 21 ), human topoisomerase 1 and 2 ( 22 ), have been reported, the exact mechanism of its anti-inflammatory and anticancer activities remains elusive. AKBA has been shown to bind directly to 5-lipooxygenase ( 23 ), human leukocyte elastase ( 21 ) and topoisomerase II ( 15 ); and inhibit their enzymatic activity. Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) is a family of transcription factors that has been associated with inflammation, survival, proliferation, metastasis, angiogenesis, and chemoresistance of tumor cells ( 24 ). One of these members, namely STAT3, is constitutively expressed in multiple myeloma (MM), leukemia, lymphoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and other solid tumors, including cancers of the prostate, breast, head and neck, and nasopharynx ( 24 ). STAT3 can also be activated by certain interleukins (eg, IL-6) and growth factors (eg, epidermal growth factor). Upon activation, STAT3 undergoes phosphorylation at serine 727 and at tyrosine 705, dimerization, nuclear translocation, and DNA binding, which in turn leads to transcription of various genes, including those for apoptosis inhibitors (Bcl-xL, Mcl-1 and survivin), cell cycle regulators (cyclin D1 and c-myc) and inducers of angiogenesis (vascular endothelial growth factor, or VEGF), and metastasis (TWIST) ( 25 ). Because these gene products are closely related to tumor development and growth, agents that can inhibit the activation of STAT3 may have great potential in the treatment of cancer and other inflammatory diseases. The phosphorylation of STAT3 is mediated through the activation of non-receptor protein tyrosine kinases, including janus-like kinase (JAK)-1, JAK2, JAK3, TYK2, and c-Src kinase. Thus, agents that disrupt this pathway would be good candidates for STAT3 inhibitors. Because AKBA (See structure in Fig. 1A ) has been used to alleviate various inflammatory diseases, we hypothesized that it would inhibit STAT3 activation. We tested this hypothesis using a multiple myeloma (MM) cell line. Our results show that AKBA inhibited both constitutive and inducible STAT3 activation, inhibited JAK and c-Src activation, induced SHP-1, and down-regulated the expression of genes STAT3-regulated gene products, thus leading to the suppression of proliferation and induction of apoptosis in MM cells.  Materials and methods A 50 mM solution of AKBA ( Fig 1A ), kindly supplied by Sabinsa Corporation, was prepared in 100% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), stored as small aliquots at ?20°C, and diluted as needed in cell culture medium. RPMI 1640, fetal bovine serum (FBS), 0.4% trypan blue vital stain, and an antibiotic –antimycotic mixture were obtained from Life Technologies (Grand Island, NY). MTT, Tris, glycine, NaCl, sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and BSA were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St.Louis, MO). Rabbit polyclonal antibodies to STAT3 and mouse monoclonal antibodies against phospho-STAT3 (Tyr-705) and Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, Mcl-1, SHP-1, procaspase-3, phospho-PTEN, and PARP were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). Goat- anti-rabbit-horse radish peroxidase (HRP) conjugate was purchased from Bio-Rad (Hercules, CA). Antibodies to phospho-specific Src (Tyr 416), Src, and JAK2 were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA). GST-JAK2 was kindly provided by Dr. ZJ Zhao (University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma). CD45 RA was obtained from BD BioSciences (USA). Goat anti-mouse HRP was purchased from Transduction Laboratories (Lexington, KY), The siRNA for SHP-1 and the scrambled control were obtained from Ambion (Austin, TX). The constitutive active STAT3 construct was kindly supplied by Dr. John DiGiovanni from The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville, Texas. Cell lines Human multiple myeloma cell lines U266, MM.1S (melphan-sensitive), SCC4 and A293 were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA). Cell line U266 (ATCC-TIB-196) is a plasmacytoma of B-cell origin is known to produce monoclonal antibodies and IL-6. The MM.1S cell line, established from the peripheral blood cells of a patient with IgA myeloma, secretes ?L chain, is negative for the presence of the EBV genome, and expresses leukocyte antigen DR, plasma cell Ag-1, and T9 and T10 antigens ( 26 ). U266 and MM.1S cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% FBS. A293 and SCC4 cells were cultured in DMEM and DMEM/F12 respectively supplemented with 10% FBS. All media were also supplemented with 100 U/mL of penicillin and 100 µg/mL of streptomycin. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay for STAT3-DNA binding STAT3-DNA binding was analyzed by EMSA using a 32P-labeled high-affinity sis-inducible element (hSIE) probe (5'-CTTCATTTCCCGT AAATCCCT AAA GCT-3' and 5'-AGCTTTAGGGATTTACGGGAAATGA-3') as previously described {Yu, 1995 #40. Briefly, nuclear extracts were prepared from AKBA treated cells and incubated with hSIE probe. The DNA-protein complex formed was separated from free oligonucleotide on 5% native polyacrylamide gels. The dried gels were visualized, and the radioactive bands quantitated with a Storm 820 and Imagequant software (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ, USA). Western blotting For detection of STAT proteins, AKBA-treated whole-cell extracts were lysed in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris (pH 7.4), 250 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.01 mg/ml aprotinin, 0.005 mg/ml leupeptin, 0.4 mM phenyl methane sulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), and 4 mM NaVO4). Lysates were then spun at 14,000 rpm for 10 min to remove insoluble material and resolved on a 10% SDS-PAGE. After electrophoresis, the proteins were electrotransferred to a nitrocellulose membrane, blocked with 5% nonfat milk, and probed with anti-STAT antibodies (1:1000) overnight at 4°C. The blot was washed, exposed to HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies for 2 h, and finally examined by chemiluminescence (ECL; Amersham). To detect STAT3-regulated proteins and caspase-3, U266 cells (1×106/ml) were treated with AKBA for the indicated times. The cells were then washed and whole cell extracts were prepared by incubating for 30 min on ice in 0.1 ml buffer containing 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 2 mM EDTA, 250 mM NaCl, 0.1% nonidet P-40 (NP-40), 2 µg/ml leupeptin, 2 µg/ml aprotinin, 1 mM phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride (PMSF), 0.5 µg/ml benzamidine, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and 1 mM sodium vanadate. The lysate was centrifuged and the supernatant was collected. Whole-cell extract protein (30 µg) was resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE, electrotransferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane, blotted with antibodies against Bcl-2, Bcl-xl, cyclin D1, VEGF, Mcl-1, or caspase-3, and then examined by chemiluminescence (ECL; Amersham). MTT assay The anti-proliferative effect of AKBA against MM cell lines was determined by the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) dye uptake method as described earlier {Kunnumakkara, 2007 #89}. Flow cytometric analysis To determine the effect of AKBA on the cell cycle, U266 cells were first synchronized by serum starvation and then exposed to AKBA for the indicated time intervals. Thereafter cells were washed, fixed with 70% ethanol, and incubated for 30 min at 37°C with 0.1% RNase A in PBS. Cells were then washed again, resuspended, and stained in PBS containing 25 µg/ml propidium iodide for 30 min at room temperature. Cell distribution across the cell cycle was analyzed with a Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) calibur flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson, Bedford, MA). JAK2 kinase assay Cells were lysed for 30 min on ice in whole-cell lysis buffer [20 mmol/L HEPES (pH 7.9), 50 mmol/L NaCl, 1% NP40, 2 mmol/L EDTA, 0.5 mmol/L EGTA, 2 µg/mL aprotinin, 2 µg/mL leupeptin, 0.5 mmol/L PMSF, and 2 mmol/L sodium orthovanadate]. Lysate containing 900 µg of proteins in lysis buffer was incubated with 1 µg/mL concentration of JAK2 antibody overnight. Immunocomplex was precipitated using protein A/G agarose beads for 2 h at 4°C. After 2 h, the beads were washed with lysis buffer and then resuspended in a kinase assay mixture containing 50 mmol/L HEPES (pH 7.4), 20 mmol/L MgCl2, 2 mmol/L DTT, 20 µCi [?32P]ATP, 10 µmol/L unlabeled ATP, and 2 µg of substrate GST-JAKs. After incubation at 30°C for 30 min, the reaction was terminated by boiling with SDS sample buffer for 5 min. Finally, the protein was resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE, the gel was dried, and the radioactive bands were visualized with a Storm820. To determine the total amounts of JAK2 in each sample, 30 µg of whole-cell proteins were resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE, electrotransferred to a nitrocellulose membrane, and then blotted with anti-JAK2 antibody. Transfection with constitutive STAT3 construct A293 cells (5 × 105 per well) were plated in six-well plates in DMEM containing 10% FBS. After 24 h, the cells were transfected with constitutive STAT3-plasmid (0.5 µg/well) by calcium phosphate method according to manufacture’s protocol (Invitrogen, USA). 24 h after transfection the cells were harvested and the transfection was confirmed by western blot. U266 cells, which express constitutively active STAT3 was used as a control for western, blot analysis. Transfection with SHP-1 siRNA Human squamous cell carcinoma (SCC4) cells were plated in six-well plates and allowed to adhere for 24 h. On the day of transfection, 12 µl HiPerFect transfection reagent (Qiagen) was added to 50 nmol/L SHP-1 siRNA in a final volume of 100 µl culture medium. After 48 h of transfection, cells were treated with AKBA for 4 h and whole-cell extracts were prepared for SHP-1, STAT3, and phospho-STAT3 analysis by Western blot. Apoptosis assay To determine apoptosis, we used a Live/Dead assay kit (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) which determines intracellular esterase activity and plasma membrane integrity. This assay uses calcein, a polyanionic, green fluorescent dye that is retained within live cells, and a red fluorescent ethidium bromide homodimer dye that can enter cells through damaged membranes and bind to nucleic acids but is excluded by the intact plasma membranes of live cells. RNA analysis and reverse transcription-PCR U266 cells were left untreated or treated with AKBA for various times, washed, and suspended in Trizol reagent. Total RNA was extracted according to the manufacturer's instructions (Invitrogen, Life Technologies). One microgram of total RNA was converted to cDNA by Superscript reverse transcriptase and then amplified by Platinum Taq polymerase using Superscript One Step reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) kit (Invitrogen). The relative expression of SHP-1 was analyzed using quantitative RT-PCR with glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) as an internal control. The RT-PCR reaction mixture contained 12.5 µL of 2× reaction buffer, 10 µL each of RNA, 0.5 µL each of forward and reverse primers, and 0.5 µL of RT-Platinum Taq in a final volume of 24 µL. The reaction was performed at 50°C for 30 min, 94°C for 2 min, 94°C for 30 cycles of 15 s each, 55°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 1 min with extension at 72°C for 10 min. PCR products were run on 2% agarose gel and then stained with ethidium bromide. Stained bands were visualized under UV light and photographed. Immunoblot analysis of PARP degradation AKBA-induced apoptosis was examined by proteolytic cleavage of PARP. Briefly, cells (1×106/ml) were treated with AKBA for indicated times at 37°C. The cells were then washed and and whole cell extracts were prepared by incubating for 30 min on ice in 0.1 ml buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 2 mM EDTA, 250 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, 2 µg/ml leupeptin, 2 µg/ml aprotinin, 1 mM PMSF, 0.5 µg/ml benzamidine, 1 mM DTT, and 1 mM sodium vanadate. The lysate was centrifuged and the supernatant was collected. Cell extract protein (30 µg) was resolved on 7.5% SDS-PAGE, electrotransferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane, blotted with anti-PARP antibody, and then detected by chemiluminescence (ECL; Amersham).  Cell lines Human multiple myeloma cell lines U266, MM.1S (melphan-sensitive), SCC4 and A293 were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA). Cell line U266 (ATCC-TIB-196) is a plasmacytoma of B-cell origin is known to produce monoclonal antibodies and IL-6. The MM.1S cell line, established from the peripheral blood cells of a patient with IgA myeloma, secretes ?L chain, is negative for the presence of the EBV genome, and expresses leukocyte antigen DR, plasma cell Ag-1, and T9 and T10 antigens ( 26 ). U266 and MM.1S cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% FBS. A293 and SCC4 cells were cultured in DMEM and DMEM/F12 respectively supplemented with 10% FBS. All media were also supplemented with 100 U/mL of penicillin and 100 µg/mL of streptomycin. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay for STAT3-DNA binding STAT3-DNA binding was analyzed by EMSA using a 32P-labeled high-affinity sis-inducible element (hSIE) probe (5'-CTTCATTTCCCGT AAATCCCT AAA GCT-3' and 5'-AGCTTTAGGGATTTACGGGAAATGA-3') as previously described {Yu, 1995 #40. Briefly, nuclear extracts were prepared from AKBA treated cells and incubated with hSIE probe. The DNA-protein complex formed was separated from free oligonucleotide on 5% native polyacrylamide gels. The dried gels were visualized, and the radioactive bands quantitated with a Storm 820 and Imagequant software (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ, USA). Western blotting For detection of STAT proteins, AKBA-treated whole-cell extracts were lysed in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris (pH 7.4), 250 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.01 mg/ml aprotinin, 0.005 mg/ml leupeptin, 0.4 mM phenyl methane sulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), and 4 mM NaVO4). Lysates were then spun at 14,000 rpm for 10 min to remove insoluble material and resolved on a 10% SDS-PAGE. After electrophoresis, the proteins were electrotransferred to a nitrocellulose membrane, blocked with 5% nonfat milk, and probed with anti-STAT antibodies (1:1000) overnight at 4°C. The blot was washed, exposed to HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies for 2 h, and finally examined by chemiluminescence (ECL; Amersham). To detect STAT3-regulated proteins and caspase-3, U266 cells (1×106/ml) were treated with AKBA for the indicated times. The cells were then washed and whole cell extracts were prepared by incubating for 30 min on ice in 0.1 ml buffer containing 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 2 mM EDTA, 250 mM NaCl, 0.1% nonidet P-40 (NP-40), 2 µg/ml leupeptin, 2 µg/ml aprotinin, 1 mM phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride (PMSF), 0.5 µg/ml benzamidine, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and 1 mM sodium vanadate. The lysate was centrifuged and the supernatant was collected. Whole-cell extract protein (30 µg) was resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE, electrotransferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane, blotted with antibodies against Bcl-2, Bcl-xl, cyclin D1, VEGF, Mcl-1, or caspase-3, and then examined by chemiluminescence (ECL; Amersham). MTT assay The anti-proliferative effect of AKBA against MM cell lines was determined by the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) dye uptake method as described earlier {Kunnumakkara, 2007 #89}. Flow cytometric analysis To determine the effect of AKBA on the cell cycle, U266 cells were first synchronized by serum starvation and then exposed to AKBA for the indicated time intervals. Thereafter cells were washed, fixed with 70% ethanol, and incubated for 30 min at 37°C with 0.1% RNase A in PBS. Cells were then washed again, resuspended, and stained in PBS containing 25 µg/ml propidium iodide for 30 min at room temperature. Cell distribution across the cell cycle was analyzed with a Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) calibur flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson, Bedford, MA).  Electrophoretic mobility shift assay for STAT3-DNA binding STAT3-DNA binding was analyzed by EMSA using a 32P-labeled high-affinity sis-inducible element (hSIE) probe (5'-CTTCATTTCCCGT AAATCCCT AAA GCT-3' and 5'-AGCTTTAGGGATTTACGGGAAATGA-3') as previously described {Yu, 1995 #40. Briefly, nuclear extracts were prepared from AKBA treated cells and incubated with hSIE probe. The DNA-protein complex formed was separated from free oligonucleotide on 5% native polyacrylamide gels. The dried gels were visualized, and the radioactive bands quantitated with a Storm 820 and Imagequant software (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ, USA).  Western blotting For detection of STAT proteins, AKBA-treated whole-cell extracts were lysed in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris (pH 7.4), 250 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.01 mg/ml aprotinin, 0.005 mg/ml leupeptin, 0.4 mM phenyl methane sulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), and 4 mM NaVO4). Lysates were then spun at 14,000 rpm for 10 min to remove insoluble material and resolved on a 10% SDS-PAGE. After electrophoresis, the proteins were electrotransferred to a nitrocellulose membrane, blocked with 5% nonfat milk, and probed with anti-STAT antibodies (1:1000) overnight at 4°C. The blot was washed, exposed to HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies for 2 h, and finally examined by chemiluminescence (ECL; Amersham). To detect STAT3-regulated proteins and caspase-3, U266 cells (1×106/ml) were treated with AKBA for the indicated times. The cells were then washed and whole cell extracts were prepared by incubating for 30 min on ice in 0.1 ml buffer containing 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 2 mM EDTA, 250 mM NaCl, 0.1% nonidet P-40 (NP-40), 2 µg/ml leupeptin, 2 µg/ml aprotinin, 1 mM phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride (PMSF), 0.5 µg/ml benzamidine, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and 1 mM sodium vanadate. The lysate was centrifuged and the supernatant was collected. Whole-cell extract protein (30 µg) was resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE, electrotransferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane, blotted with antibodies against Bcl-2, Bcl-xl, cyclin D1, VEGF, Mcl-1, or caspase-3, and then examined by chemiluminescence (ECL; Amersham).  MTT assay The anti-proliferative effect of AKBA against MM cell lines was determined by the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) dye uptake method as described earlier {Kunnumakkara, 2007 #89}.  Flow cytometric analysis To determine the effect of AKBA on the cell cycle, U266 cells were first synchronized by serum starvation and then exposed to AKBA for the indicated time intervals. Thereafter cells were washed, fixed with 70% ethanol, and incubated for 30 min at 37°C with 0.1% RNase A in PBS. Cells were then washed again, resuspended, and stained in PBS containing 25 µg/ml propidium iodide for 30 min at room temperature. Cell distribution across the cell cycle was analyzed with a Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) calibur flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson, Bedford, MA).  JAK2 kinase assay Cells were lysed for 30 min on ice in whole-cell lysis buffer [20 mmol/L HEPES (pH 7.9), 50 mmol/L NaCl, 1% NP40, 2 mmol/L EDTA, 0.5 mmol/L EGTA, 2 µg/mL aprotinin, 2 µg/mL leupeptin, 0.5 mmol/L PMSF, and 2 mmol/L sodium orthovanadate]. Lysate containing 900 µg of proteins in lysis buffer was incubated with 1 µg/mL concentration of JAK2 antibody overnight. Immunocomplex was precipitated using protein A/G agarose beads for 2 h at 4°C. After 2 h, the beads were washed with lysis buffer and then resuspended in a kinase assay mixture containing 50 mmol/L HEPES (pH 7.4), 20 mmol/L MgCl2, 2 mmol/L DTT, 20 µCi [?32P]ATP, 10 µmol/L unlabeled ATP, and 2 µg of substrate GST-JAKs. After incubation at 30°C for 30 min, the reaction was terminated by boiling with SDS sample buffer for 5 min. Finally, the protein was resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE, the gel was dried, and the radioactive bands were visualized with a Storm820. To determine the total amounts of JAK2 in each sample, 30 µg of whole-cell proteins were resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE, electrotransferred to a nitrocellulose membrane, and then blotted with anti-JAK2 antibody.  Transfection with constitutive STAT3 construct A293 cells (5 × 105 per well) were plated in six-well plates in DMEM containing 10% FBS. After 24 h, the cells were transfected with constitutive STAT3-plasmid (0.5 µg/well) by calcium phosphate method according to manufacture’s protocol (Invitrogen, USA). 24 h after transfection the cells were harvested and the transfection was confirmed by western blot. U266 cells, which express constitutively active STAT3 was used as a control for western, blot analysis.  Transfection with SHP-1 siRNA Human squamous cell carcinoma (SCC4) cells were plated in six-well plates and allowed to adhere for 24 h. On the day of transfection, 12 µl HiPerFect transfection reagent (Qiagen) was added to 50 nmol/L SHP-1 siRNA in a final volume of 100 µl culture medium. After 48 h of transfection, cells were treated with AKBA for 4 h and whole-cell extracts were prepared for SHP-1, STAT3, and phospho-STAT3 analysis by Western blot.  Apoptosis assay To determine apoptosis, we used a Live/Dead assay kit (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) which determines intracellular esterase activity and plasma membrane integrity. This assay uses calcein, a polyanionic, green fluorescent dye that is retained within live cells, and a red fluorescent ethidium bromide homodimer dye that can enter cells through damaged membranes and bind to nucleic acids but is excluded by the intact plasma membranes of live cells.  RNA analysis and reverse transcription-PCR U266 cells were left untreated or treated with AKBA for various times, washed, and suspended in Trizol reagent. Total RNA was extracted according to the manufacturer's instructions (Invitrogen, Life Technologies). One microgram of total RNA was converted to cDNA by Superscript reverse transcriptase and then amplified by Platinum Taq polymerase using Superscript One Step reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) kit (Invitrogen). The relative expression of SHP-1 was analyzed using quantitative RT-PCR with glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) as an internal control. The RT-PCR reaction mixture contained 12.5 µL of 2× reaction buffer, 10 µL each of RNA, 0.5 µL each of forward and reverse primers, and 0.5 µL of RT-Platinum Taq in a final volume of 24 µL. The reaction was performed at 50°C for 30 min, 94°C for 2 min, 94°C for 30 cycles of 15 s each, 55°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 1 min with extension at 72°C for 10 min. PCR products were run on 2% agarose gel and then stained with ethidium bromide. Stained bands were visualized under UV light and photographed. Immunoblot analysis of PARP degradation AKBA-induced apoptosis was examined by proteolytic cleavage of PARP. Briefly, cells (1×106/ml) were treated with AKBA for indicated times at 37°C. The cells were then washed and and whole cell extracts were prepared by incubating for 30 min on ice in 0.1 ml buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 2 mM EDTA, 250 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, 2 µg/ml leupeptin, 2 µg/ml aprotinin, 1 mM PMSF, 0.5 µg/ml benzamidine, 1 mM DTT, and 1 mM sodium vanadate. The lysate was centrifuged and the supernatant was collected. Cell extract protein (30 µg) was resolved on 7.5% SDS-PAGE, electrotransferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane, blotted with anti-PARP antibody, and then detected by chemiluminescence (ECL; Amersham).  Immunoblot analysis of PARP degradation AKBA-induced apoptosis was examined by proteolytic cleavage of PARP. Briefly, cells (1×106/ml) were treated with AKBA for indicated times at 37°C. The cells were then washed and and whole cell extracts were prepared by incubating for 30 min on ice in 0.1 ml buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 2 mM EDTA, 250 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, 2 µg/ml leupeptin, 2 µg/ml aprotinin, 1 mM PMSF, 0.5 µg/ml benzamidine, 1 mM DTT, and 1 mM sodium vanadate. The lysate was centrifuged and the supernatant was collected. Cell extract protein (30 µg) was resolved on 7.5% SDS-PAGE, electrotransferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane, blotted with anti-PARP antibody, and then detected by chemiluminescence (ECL; Amersham).  Results The present study was aimed at determining whether AKBA inhibits the STAT3 activation pathway in MM cells and if so through what mechanism. Both constitutive and IL-6-induced STAT3 activation were examined. Whether AKBA affects STAT3-regulated gene products involved in cellular proliferation, survival, and apoptosis was also investigated. We also examined whether AKBA can modulate the growth of MM cells. AKBA inhibits constitutive STAT3 phosphorylation Human MM, U266 cells are known to express constitutive STAT3 activation ( 27 ). Whether AKBA can suppress constitutive STAT3 activation in these MM cells was investigated. As shown in Fig. 1B , AKBA inhibited the constitutive activation of STAT3 in a dose ( left panel ) and time ( right panel ) dependent manner. This triterpene had no effect on the expression of STAT3 protein. The results showed that AKBA completely inhibited constitutive activation of STAT3 at 50 µM concentration after a 4-h exposure. Cells were fully viable under these conditions. Hence we selected this concentration for our further experiments. AKBA suppresses the nuclear translocation of STAT3 Because tyrosine phosphorylation causes dimerization of STATs and then nuclear translocation, whether AKBA inhibited nuclear translocation of STAT3 was examined in U266 cells by immunocytochemistry. Our results showed that AKBA inhibited nuclear translocation of STAT3 ( Fig. 1C ). AKBA inhibits binding of STAT3 to the DNA When STAT3 is translocated to the nucleus, it binds to the DNA, an event that in turn regulates gene transcription ( 28 ). Whether AKBA inhibits DNA binding activity of STAT3 was examined by EMSA. Nuclear extracts prepared from U266 cells showed STAT3 DNA-binding activity, and AKBA inhibited the binding in a dose- ( Fig. 1D , left panel ) and time-dependent manner ( Fig. 1D , right panel ). No loss of cell viability was noted under these conditions. AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation is reversible Whether AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation was reversible was also examined. Our results showed that AKBA inhibited STAT3 phosphorylation ( Fig. 2A , left panel) and that removal of the compound reversed its effect by 12 h ( Fig.2A , right panel ). The STAT3 protein levels remained constant under these conditions ( Fig. 2A , bottom panel ). Cells were fully viable under this condition. AKBA also inhibits IL-6-induced STAT3 phosphorylation IL-6 is a growth factor for MM cells, is over-expressed in various cancers, and as Kawano’s group showed, is a potent inducer of STAT3 ( 29 ). Hence we examined whether AKBA could inhibit IL-6-induced STAT3 phosphorylation in MM.1S cells, which lack constitutively active STAT3. IL-6 induced phosphorylation of STAT3 as early as 5 min and the pretreatment of MM1.S cells with AKBA for 4 h suppressed IL-6-induced STAT3 phosphorylation ( Fig. 2B ). AKBA suppresses IL-6 induced JAK2 kinase activity and constitutive activation of JAK2 Because STAT3 is activated by soluble tyrosine kinases of the Janus family (JAK) ( 30 ) and JAK2 is one of the main kinases involved, we examined the effects of AKBA on JAK2 phosphorylation. U266 cells were treated with different concentrations and time intervals with AKBA, and phosphorylation of JAK2 was analyzed by western blot. The results showed that AKBA inhibited constitutive phosphorylation of JAK2 in a dose- ( Fig. 3A left panel) and time-dependent manner ( Fig. 3A right panel ). The levels of total JAK2 remained unchanged under these conditions ( Fig. 3A , bottom panel). Whether AKBA can inhibit IL-6 induced activation of JAK2 kinase, was examined. For this, MM1.S cells were pretreated with different concentrations of AKBA for 4h, then treated with IL-6 for 10 min and the kinase activity was analyzed by immunoprecipitation kinase. Our results showed that IL-6 induced JAK2 kinase activity in MM1.S cells and AKBA inhibited its effect in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig.3B ). AKBA suppresses constitutive activation of c-Src Because activation of Src has also been linked with STAT3 activation ( 31 ), we examined the effect of AKBA on constitutive activation of c-Src kinase in U266 cells. We found that AKBA suppressed the constitutive phosphorylation of c-Src kinase in a dose- and time-dependent manner ( Fig. 3C ). The levels of total c-Src kinase remained unchanged under these conditions ( Fig. 3C , bottom panel). Tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor abrogates AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation Protein tyrosine phosphatases have been implicated in STAT3 activation ( 32 ). Therefore we examined whether AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 tyrosine phosphorylation could be due to activation of a protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTPase). Treatment of U266 cells with the broad-acting tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor sodium pervanadate reversed the AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation ( Fig. 3 D ). This suggests that protein tyrosine phosphatases are involved in AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation. AKBA induces the expression of SHP-1 SHP-1 is a non-transmembrane protein tyrosine phosphatase that has been linked with regulation of STAT3 activation ( 33 ). Whether inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation by AKBA is due to induction of the expression of SHP-1 was examined. As shown in Fig. 4 A , AKBA did indeed induce the expression of SHP-1 both at translational ( Fig. 4A , left panel ) and at transcriptional ( Fig. 4A , right panel ) level in a dose dependent manner. Whether AKBA modulates any other protein tyrosine phosphatsae such as CD45, was examined. We found that AKBA had no effect on the expression of CD45 (Suppl. Fig. 1). Induction of SHP-1 by AKBA is transient Because inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation by AKBA was found to be reversible by 24 h ( Fig. 2A , right panel ), we determined whether it is due to transient induction of SHP-1. Our results showed that AKBA induced SHP-1 protein maximally at 4 h and that removal of the compound downregulated its expression ( Fig. 4B ). No SHP-1 could be detected at 24 h. Thus the dephosphorylation of STAT3 correlates well with the appearance of SHP-1. Cells were fully viable under this condition. SHP-1 siRNA down-regulate the expression of SHP-1 and reverses the inhibition of STAT3 activation by AKBA We showed above that the dephosphorylation of STAT3 by AKBA correlates with the appearance of SHP-1. We further determined whether the suppression of SHP-1 expression by siRNA would abrogate the inhibitory effect of AKBA on STAT3 activation. Western blotting showed that AKBA-induced SHP-1 expression was effectively abolished in the cells treated with SHP-1 siRNA; treatment with scrambled siRNA had no effect ( Fig. 4C ). We also found that AKBA failed to suppress STAT-3 activation in cells treated with SHP-1 siRNA ( Fig. 4D ). These results further corroborate our earlier evidence for the critical role of SHP-1 in suppression of STAT-3 phosphorylation by AKBA. AKBA suppresses the expression of proliferative gene product Cyclin D1, which is required for cell proliferation and for transition from G1 to S phase of the cell cycle, is known to be regulated by STAT3 ( 34 ). We therefore examined the effect of AKBA on constitutive expression of cyclin D1 in U266 cells. Our results demonstrated that AKBA treatment suppressed the expression of cyclin D1 in a time-dependent manner ( Fig. 5A ). AKBA downregulates the expression of antiapoptotic gene products STAT3 has been shown to regulate the expression of various gene products involved in proliferation and cell survival ( 34 , 35 ), so whether downregulation of STAT3 activation by AKB leads to downregulation of these gene products was examined. The results showed that AKBA inhibited the expression of survivin, bcl-xl, bcl-2, and mcl-1 in a time-dependent manner, with maximum suppression observed at around 12–24 h ( Fig. 5A ). AKBA downregulates the expression of angiogenic gene product VEGF, a major mediator of angiogenesis, is known to be regulated by STAT3 activation. Therefore we examined the effect of AKBA on constitutive VEGF expression in U266 cells. Our results show that AKBA inhibited the expression of VEGF in U266 cells in a time dependent manner ( Fig. 5A ). AKBA inhibits the proliferation of MM cells Because AKBA suppressed the expression of STAT3-regulated cyclin D1 expression, we examined whether AKBA inhibits the proliferation of MM cells. The results shown in Fig. 5B indicate that AKBA suppressed the proliferation of U266 cells in a time- and dose-dependent manner. AKBA causes the accumulation of the cells in the sub-G1 phase of the cell cycle Because D-type cyclins are required for the progression of cells from the G1 phase of the cell cycle to S phase ( 36 ) and a rapid decline in levels of cyclin D1 was observed in AKBA treated cells, we determined the effect of AKBA on cell cycle phase distribution. We found that AKBA caused significant accumulation of G2/M and of sub G1 phase after treatment for a maximum of 24 h ( Fig. 5C ). AKBA activates caspase-3 and causes PARP cleavage Whether suppression of STAT3-regulated antapoptotic gene products survivin, bcl-xl, bcl-2, and mcl-1in U266 cells by AKBA leads to apoptosis was also examined. Cells were treated with AKBA for different times and then examined for caspase activation by Western blot using specific antibodies. We found a time-dependent activation of caspase-3 by AKBA ( Fig. 5D , left panel ) Activation of this downstream caspase led to the cleavage of a 116 kDa PARP protein into an 87 kDa fragment ( Fig. 5D , right panel ). These results clearly suggest that AKBA induces caspase-3-dependent apoptosis in U266 cells. SHP-1 siRNA reduces AKBA-induced apoptosis We showed above that SHP-1 plays a critical role in suppression of STAT-3 phosphorylation by AKBA. Whether SHP-1 siRNA also affects AKBA-induced apoptosis, was determined. We found that knockdown of SHP-1 significantly decreased the apoptotic effects of AKBA ( Fig. 6A ). Enforced expression of constitutively active STAT3 rescues cells from AKBA induced apoptosis Whether the transfection of constitutive active STAT3 can suppress AKBA-induced apoptosis, was examined. For this, cells were transfected with constitutively active STAT3 plasmid for 24h, then incubated with AKBA for 48 h and examined for apoptosis by esterase staining assay. The transfection of constitutive active STAT3 plasmid led to the expression of STAT3 protein as indicated by western blot ( Fig. 6B ). The results also show that the forced expression of STAT3 significantly reduced the AKBA induced apoptosis Fig. 6C ).  Results The present study was aimed at determining whether AKBA inhibits the STAT3 activation pathway in MM cells and if so through what mechanism. Both constitutive and IL-6-induced STAT3 activation were examined. Whether AKBA affects STAT3-regulated gene products involved in cellular proliferation, survival, and apoptosis was also investigated. We also examined whether AKBA can modulate the growth of MM cells. AKBA inhibits constitutive STAT3 phosphorylation Human MM, U266 cells are known to express constitutive STAT3 activation ( 27 ). Whether AKBA can suppress constitutive STAT3 activation in these MM cells was investigated. As shown in Fig. 1B , AKBA inhibited the constitutive activation of STAT3 in a dose ( left panel ) and time ( right panel ) dependent manner. This triterpene had no effect on the expression of STAT3 protein. The results showed that AKBA completely inhibited constitutive activation of STAT3 at 50 µM concentration after a 4-h exposure. Cells were fully viable under these conditions. Hence we selected this concentration for our further experiments. AKBA suppresses the nuclear translocation of STAT3 Because tyrosine phosphorylation causes dimerization of STATs and then nuclear translocation, whether AKBA inhibited nuclear translocation of STAT3 was examined in U266 cells by immunocytochemistry. Our results showed that AKBA inhibited nuclear translocation of STAT3 ( Fig. 1C ). AKBA inhibits binding of STAT3 to the DNA When STAT3 is translocated to the nucleus, it binds to the DNA, an event that in turn regulates gene transcription ( 28 ). Whether AKBA inhibits DNA binding activity of STAT3 was examined by EMSA. Nuclear extracts prepared from U266 cells showed STAT3 DNA-binding activity, and AKBA inhibited the binding in a dose- ( Fig. 1D , left panel ) and time-dependent manner ( Fig. 1D , right panel ). No loss of cell viability was noted under these conditions. AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation is reversible Whether AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation was reversible was also examined. Our results showed that AKBA inhibited STAT3 phosphorylation ( Fig. 2A , left panel) and that removal of the compound reversed its effect by 12 h ( Fig.2A , right panel ). The STAT3 protein levels remained constant under these conditions ( Fig. 2A , bottom panel ). Cells were fully viable under this condition. AKBA also inhibits IL-6-induced STAT3 phosphorylation IL-6 is a growth factor for MM cells, is over-expressed in various cancers, and as Kawano’s group showed, is a potent inducer of STAT3 ( 29 ). Hence we examined whether AKBA could inhibit IL-6-induced STAT3 phosphorylation in MM.1S cells, which lack constitutively active STAT3. IL-6 induced phosphorylation of STAT3 as early as 5 min and the pretreatment of MM1.S cells with AKBA for 4 h suppressed IL-6-induced STAT3 phosphorylation ( Fig. 2B ). AKBA suppresses IL-6 induced JAK2 kinase activity and constitutive activation of JAK2 Because STAT3 is activated by soluble tyrosine kinases of the Janus family (JAK) ( 30 ) and JAK2 is one of the main kinases involved, we examined the effects of AKBA on JAK2 phosphorylation. U266 cells were treated with different concentrations and time intervals with AKBA, and phosphorylation of JAK2 was analyzed by western blot. The results showed that AKBA inhibited constitutive phosphorylation of JAK2 in a dose- ( Fig. 3A left panel) and time-dependent manner ( Fig. 3A right panel ). The levels of total JAK2 remained unchanged under these conditions ( Fig. 3A , bottom panel). Whether AKBA can inhibit IL-6 induced activation of JAK2 kinase, was examined. For this, MM1.S cells were pretreated with different concentrations of AKBA for 4h, then treated with IL-6 for 10 min and the kinase activity was analyzed by immunoprecipitation kinase. Our results showed that IL-6 induced JAK2 kinase activity in MM1.S cells and AKBA inhibited its effect in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig.3B ). AKBA suppresses constitutive activation of c-Src Because activation of Src has also been linked with STAT3 activation ( 31 ), we examined the effect of AKBA on constitutive activation of c-Src kinase in U266 cells. We found that AKBA suppressed the constitutive phosphorylation of c-Src kinase in a dose- and time-dependent manner ( Fig. 3C ). The levels of total c-Src kinase remained unchanged under these conditions ( Fig. 3C , bottom panel). Tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor abrogates AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation Protein tyrosine phosphatases have been implicated in STAT3 activation ( 32 ). Therefore we examined whether AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 tyrosine phosphorylation could be due to activation of a protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTPase). Treatment of U266 cells with the broad-acting tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor sodium pervanadate reversed the AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation ( Fig. 3 D ). This suggests that protein tyrosine phosphatases are involved in AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation. AKBA induces the expression of SHP-1 SHP-1 is a non-transmembrane protein tyrosine phosphatase that has been linked with regulation of STAT3 activation ( 33 ). Whether inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation by AKBA is due to induction of the expression of SHP-1 was examined. As shown in Fig. 4 A , AKBA did indeed induce the expression of SHP-1 both at translational ( Fig. 4A , left panel ) and at transcriptional ( Fig. 4A , right panel ) level in a dose dependent manner. Whether AKBA modulates any other protein tyrosine phosphatsae such as CD45, was examined. We found that AKBA had no effect on the expression of CD45 (Suppl. Fig. 1). Induction of SHP-1 by AKBA is transient Because inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation by AKBA was found to be reversible by 24 h ( Fig. 2A , right panel ), we determined whether it is due to transient induction of SHP-1. Our results showed that AKBA induced SHP-1 protein maximally at 4 h and that removal of the compound downregulated its expression ( Fig. 4B ). No SHP-1 could be detected at 24 h. Thus the dephosphorylation of STAT3 correlates well with the appearance of SHP-1. Cells were fully viable under this condition. SHP-1 siRNA down-regulate the expression of SHP-1 and reverses the inhibition of STAT3 activation by AKBA We showed above that the dephosphorylation of STAT3 by AKBA correlates with the appearance of SHP-1. We further determined whether the suppression of SHP-1 expression by siRNA would abrogate the inhibitory effect of AKBA on STAT3 activation. Western blotting showed that AKBA-induced SHP-1 expression was effectively abolished in the cells treated with SHP-1 siRNA; treatment with scrambled siRNA had no effect ( Fig. 4C ). We also found that AKBA failed to suppress STAT-3 activation in cells treated with SHP-1 siRNA ( Fig. 4D ). These results further corroborate our earlier evidence for the critical role of SHP-1 in suppression of STAT-3 phosphorylation by AKBA. AKBA suppresses the expression of proliferative gene product Cyclin D1, which is required for cell proliferation and for transition from G1 to S phase of the cell cycle, is known to be regulated by STAT3 ( 34 ). We therefore examined the effect of AKBA on constitutive expression of cyclin D1 in U266 cells. Our results demonstrated that AKBA treatment suppressed the expression of cyclin D1 in a time-dependent manner ( Fig. 5A ). AKBA downregulates the expression of antiapoptotic gene products STAT3 has been shown to regulate the expression of various gene products involved in proliferation and cell survival ( 34 , 35 ), so whether downregulation of STAT3 activation by AKB leads to downregulation of these gene products was examined. The results showed that AKBA inhibited the expression of survivin, bcl-xl, bcl-2, and mcl-1 in a time-dependent manner, with maximum suppression observed at around 12–24 h ( Fig. 5A ). AKBA downregulates the expression of angiogenic gene product VEGF, a major mediator of angiogenesis, is known to be regulated by STAT3 activation. Therefore we examined the effect of AKBA on constitutive VEGF expression in U266 cells. Our results show that AKBA inhibited the expression of VEGF in U266 cells in a time dependent manner ( Fig. 5A ). AKBA inhibits the proliferation of MM cells Because AKBA suppressed the expression of STAT3-regulated cyclin D1 expression, we examined whether AKBA inhibits the proliferation of MM cells. The results shown in Fig. 5B indicate that AKBA suppressed the proliferation of U266 cells in a time- and dose-dependent manner. AKBA causes the accumulation of the cells in the sub-G1 phase of the cell cycle Because D-type cyclins are required for the progression of cells from the G1 phase of the cell cycle to S phase ( 36 ) and a rapid decline in levels of cyclin D1 was observed in AKBA treated cells, we determined the effect of AKBA on cell cycle phase distribution. We found that AKBA caused significant accumulation of G2/M and of sub G1 phase after treatment for a maximum of 24 h ( Fig. 5C ). AKBA activates caspase-3 and causes PARP cleavage Whether suppression of STAT3-regulated antapoptotic gene products survivin, bcl-xl, bcl-2, and mcl-1in U266 cells by AKBA leads to apoptosis was also examined. Cells were treated with AKBA for different times and then examined for caspase activation by Western blot using specific antibodies. We found a time-dependent activation of caspase-3 by AKBA ( Fig. 5D , left panel ) Activation of this downstream caspase led to the cleavage of a 116 kDa PARP protein into an 87 kDa fragment ( Fig. 5D , right panel ). These results clearly suggest that AKBA induces caspase-3-dependent apoptosis in U266 cells. SHP-1 siRNA reduces AKBA-induced apoptosis We showed above that SHP-1 plays a critical role in suppression of STAT-3 phosphorylation by AKBA. Whether SHP-1 siRNA also affects AKBA-induced apoptosis, was determined. We found that knockdown of SHP-1 significantly decreased the apoptotic effects of AKBA ( Fig. 6A ). Enforced expression of constitutively active STAT3 rescues cells from AKBA induced apoptosis Whether the transfection of constitutive active STAT3 can suppress AKBA-induced apoptosis, was examined. For this, cells were transfected with constitutively active STAT3 plasmid for 24h, then incubated with AKBA for 48 h and examined for apoptosis by esterase staining assay. The transfection of constitutive active STAT3 plasmid led to the expression of STAT3 protein as indicated by western blot ( Fig. 6B ). The results also show that the forced expression of STAT3 significantly reduced the AKBA induced apoptosis Fig. 6C ).  AKBA inhibits constitutive STAT3 phosphorylation Human MM, U266 cells are known to express constitutive STAT3 activation ( 27 ). Whether AKBA can suppress constitutive STAT3 activation in these MM cells was investigated. As shown in Fig. 1B , AKBA inhibited the constitutive activation of STAT3 in a dose ( left panel ) and time ( right panel ) dependent manner. This triterpene had no effect on the expression of STAT3 protein. The results showed that AKBA completely inhibited constitutive activation of STAT3 at 50 µM concentration after a 4-h exposure. Cells were fully viable under these conditions. Hence we selected this concentration for our further experiments.  AKBA inhibits constitutive STAT3 phosphorylation Human MM, U266 cells are known to express constitutive STAT3 activation ( 27 ). Whether AKBA can suppress constitutive STAT3 activation in these MM cells was investigated. As shown in Fig. 1B , AKBA inhibited the constitutive activation of STAT3 in a dose ( left panel ) and time ( right panel ) dependent manner. This triterpene had no effect on the expression of STAT3 protein. The results showed that AKBA completely inhibited constitutive activation of STAT3 at 50 µM concentration after a 4-h exposure. Cells were fully viable under these conditions. Hence we selected this concentration for our further experiments.  AKBA suppresses the nuclear translocation of STAT3 Because tyrosine phosphorylation causes dimerization of STATs and then nuclear translocation, whether AKBA inhibited nuclear translocation of STAT3 was examined in U266 cells by immunocytochemistry. Our results showed that AKBA inhibited nuclear translocation of STAT3 ( Fig. 1C ).  AKBA suppresses the nuclear translocation of STAT3 Because tyrosine phosphorylation causes dimerization of STATs and then nuclear translocation, whether AKBA inhibited nuclear translocation of STAT3 was examined in U266 cells by immunocytochemistry. Our results showed that AKBA inhibited nuclear translocation of STAT3 ( Fig. 1C ).  AKBA inhibits binding of STAT3 to the DNA When STAT3 is translocated to the nucleus, it binds to the DNA, an event that in turn regulates gene transcription ( 28 ). Whether AKBA inhibits DNA binding activity of STAT3 was examined by EMSA. Nuclear extracts prepared from U266 cells showed STAT3 DNA-binding activity, and AKBA inhibited the binding in a dose- ( Fig. 1D , left panel ) and time-dependent manner ( Fig. 1D , right panel ). No loss of cell viability was noted under these conditions.  AKBA inhibits binding of STAT3 to the DNA When STAT3 is translocated to the nucleus, it binds to the DNA, an event that in turn regulates gene transcription ( 28 ). Whether AKBA inhibits DNA binding activity of STAT3 was examined by EMSA. Nuclear extracts prepared from U266 cells showed STAT3 DNA-binding activity, and AKBA inhibited the binding in a dose- ( Fig. 1D , left panel ) and time-dependent manner ( Fig. 1D , right panel ). No loss of cell viability was noted under these conditions.  AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation is reversible Whether AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation was reversible was also examined. Our results showed that AKBA inhibited STAT3 phosphorylation ( Fig. 2A , left panel) and that removal of the compound reversed its effect by 12 h ( Fig.2A , right panel ). The STAT3 protein levels remained constant under these conditions ( Fig. 2A , bottom panel ). Cells were fully viable under this condition.  AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation is reversible Whether AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation was reversible was also examined. Our results showed that AKBA inhibited STAT3 phosphorylation ( Fig. 2A , left panel) and that removal of the compound reversed its effect by 12 h ( Fig.2A , right panel ). The STAT3 protein levels remained constant under these conditions ( Fig. 2A , bottom panel ). Cells were fully viable under this condition.  AKBA also inhibits IL-6-induced STAT3 phosphorylation IL-6 is a growth factor for MM cells, is over-expressed in various cancers, and as Kawano’s group showed, is a potent inducer of STAT3 ( 29 ). Hence we examined whether AKBA could inhibit IL-6-induced STAT3 phosphorylation in MM.1S cells, which lack constitutively active STAT3. IL-6 induced phosphorylation of STAT3 as early as 5 min and the pretreatment of MM1.S cells with AKBA for 4 h suppressed IL-6-induced STAT3 phosphorylation ( Fig. 2B ).  AKBA also inhibits IL-6-induced STAT3 phosphorylation IL-6 is a growth factor for MM cells, is over-expressed in various cancers, and as Kawano’s group showed, is a potent inducer of STAT3 ( 29 ). Hence we examined whether AKBA could inhibit IL-6-induced STAT3 phosphorylation in MM.1S cells, which lack constitutively active STAT3. IL-6 induced phosphorylation of STAT3 as early as 5 min and the pretreatment of MM1.S cells with AKBA for 4 h suppressed IL-6-induced STAT3 phosphorylation ( Fig. 2B ).  AKBA suppresses IL-6 induced JAK2 kinase activity and constitutive activation of JAK2 Because STAT3 is activated by soluble tyrosine kinases of the Janus family (JAK) ( 30 ) and JAK2 is one of the main kinases involved, we examined the effects of AKBA on JAK2 phosphorylation. U266 cells were treated with different concentrations and time intervals with AKBA, and phosphorylation of JAK2 was analyzed by western blot. The results showed that AKBA inhibited constitutive phosphorylation of JAK2 in a dose- ( Fig. 3A left panel) and time-dependent manner ( Fig. 3A right panel ). The levels of total JAK2 remained unchanged under these conditions ( Fig. 3A , bottom panel). Whether AKBA can inhibit IL-6 induced activation of JAK2 kinase, was examined. For this, MM1.S cells were pretreated with different concentrations of AKBA for 4h, then treated with IL-6 for 10 min and the kinase activity was analyzed by immunoprecipitation kinase. Our results showed that IL-6 induced JAK2 kinase activity in MM1.S cells and AKBA inhibited its effect in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig.3B ).  AKBA suppresses IL-6 induced JAK2 kinase activity and constitutive activation of JAK2 Because STAT3 is activated by soluble tyrosine kinases of the Janus family (JAK) ( 30 ) and JAK2 is one of the main kinases involved, we examined the effects of AKBA on JAK2 phosphorylation. U266 cells were treated with different concentrations and time intervals with AKBA, and phosphorylation of JAK2 was analyzed by western blot. The results showed that AKBA inhibited constitutive phosphorylation of JAK2 in a dose- ( Fig. 3A left panel) and time-dependent manner ( Fig. 3A right panel ). The levels of total JAK2 remained unchanged under these conditions ( Fig. 3A , bottom panel). Whether AKBA can inhibit IL-6 induced activation of JAK2 kinase, was examined. For this, MM1.S cells were pretreated with different concentrations of AKBA for 4h, then treated with IL-6 for 10 min and the kinase activity was analyzed by immunoprecipitation kinase. Our results showed that IL-6 induced JAK2 kinase activity in MM1.S cells and AKBA inhibited its effect in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig.3B ).  AKBA suppresses constitutive activation of c-Src Because activation of Src has also been linked with STAT3 activation ( 31 ), we examined the effect of AKBA on constitutive activation of c-Src kinase in U266 cells. We found that AKBA suppressed the constitutive phosphorylation of c-Src kinase in a dose- and time-dependent manner ( Fig. 3C ). The levels of total c-Src kinase remained unchanged under these conditions ( Fig. 3C , bottom panel). Tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor abrogates AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation Protein tyrosine phosphatases have been implicated in STAT3 activation ( 32 ). Therefore we examined whether AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 tyrosine phosphorylation could be due to activation of a protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTPase). Treatment of U266 cells with the broad-acting tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor sodium pervanadate reversed the AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation ( Fig. 3 D ). This suggests that protein tyrosine phosphatases are involved in AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation. AKBA induces the expression of SHP-1 SHP-1 is a non-transmembrane protein tyrosine phosphatase that has been linked with regulation of STAT3 activation ( 33 ). Whether inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation by AKBA is due to induction of the expression of SHP-1 was examined. As shown in Fig. 4 A , AKBA did indeed induce the expression of SHP-1 both at translational ( Fig. 4A , left panel ) and at transcriptional ( Fig. 4A , right panel ) level in a dose dependent manner. Whether AKBA modulates any other protein tyrosine phosphatsae such as CD45, was examined. We found that AKBA had no effect on the expression of CD45 (Suppl. Fig. 1). Induction of SHP-1 by AKBA is transient Because inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation by AKBA was found to be reversible by 24 h ( Fig. 2A , right panel ), we determined whether it is due to transient induction of SHP-1. Our results showed that AKBA induced SHP-1 protein maximally at 4 h and that removal of the compound downregulated its expression ( Fig. 4B ). No SHP-1 could be detected at 24 h. Thus the dephosphorylation of STAT3 correlates well with the appearance of SHP-1. Cells were fully viable under this condition. SHP-1 siRNA down-regulate the expression of SHP-1 and reverses the inhibition of STAT3 activation by AKBA We showed above that the dephosphorylation of STAT3 by AKBA correlates with the appearance of SHP-1. We further determined whether the suppression of SHP-1 expression by siRNA would abrogate the inhibitory effect of AKBA on STAT3 activation. Western blotting showed that AKBA-induced SHP-1 expression was effectively abolished in the cells treated with SHP-1 siRNA; treatment with scrambled siRNA had no effect ( Fig. 4C ). We also found that AKBA failed to suppress STAT-3 activation in cells treated with SHP-1 siRNA ( Fig. 4D ). These results further corroborate our earlier evidence for the critical role of SHP-1 in suppression of STAT-3 phosphorylation by AKBA.  AKBA suppresses constitutive activation of c-Src Because activation of Src has also been linked with STAT3 activation ( 31 ), we examined the effect of AKBA on constitutive activation of c-Src kinase in U266 cells. We found that AKBA suppressed the constitutive phosphorylation of c-Src kinase in a dose- and time-dependent manner ( Fig. 3C ). The levels of total c-Src kinase remained unchanged under these conditions ( Fig. 3C , bottom panel). Tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor abrogates AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation Protein tyrosine phosphatases have been implicated in STAT3 activation ( 32 ). Therefore we examined whether AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 tyrosine phosphorylation could be due to activation of a protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTPase). Treatment of U266 cells with the broad-acting tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor sodium pervanadate reversed the AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation ( Fig. 3 D ). This suggests that protein tyrosine phosphatases are involved in AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation. AKBA induces the expression of SHP-1 SHP-1 is a non-transmembrane protein tyrosine phosphatase that has been linked with regulation of STAT3 activation ( 33 ). Whether inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation by AKBA is due to induction of the expression of SHP-1 was examined. As shown in Fig. 4 A , AKBA did indeed induce the expression of SHP-1 both at translational ( Fig. 4A , left panel ) and at transcriptional ( Fig. 4A , right panel ) level in a dose dependent manner. Whether AKBA modulates any other protein tyrosine phosphatsae such as CD45, was examined. We found that AKBA had no effect on the expression of CD45 (Suppl. Fig. 1). Induction of SHP-1 by AKBA is transient Because inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation by AKBA was found to be reversible by 24 h ( Fig. 2A , right panel ), we determined whether it is due to transient induction of SHP-1. Our results showed that AKBA induced SHP-1 protein maximally at 4 h and that removal of the compound downregulated its expression ( Fig. 4B ). No SHP-1 could be detected at 24 h. Thus the dephosphorylation of STAT3 correlates well with the appearance of SHP-1. Cells were fully viable under this condition. SHP-1 siRNA down-regulate the expression of SHP-1 and reverses the inhibition of STAT3 activation by AKBA We showed above that the dephosphorylation of STAT3 by AKBA correlates with the appearance of SHP-1. We further determined whether the suppression of SHP-1 expression by siRNA would abrogate the inhibitory effect of AKBA on STAT3 activation. Western blotting showed that AKBA-induced SHP-1 expression was effectively abolished in the cells treated with SHP-1 siRNA; treatment with scrambled siRNA had no effect ( Fig. 4C ). We also found that AKBA failed to suppress STAT-3 activation in cells treated with SHP-1 siRNA ( Fig. 4D ). These results further corroborate our earlier evidence for the critical role of SHP-1 in suppression of STAT-3 phosphorylation by AKBA.  Tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor abrogates AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation Protein tyrosine phosphatases have been implicated in STAT3 activation ( 32 ). Therefore we examined whether AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 tyrosine phosphorylation could be due to activation of a protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTPase). Treatment of U266 cells with the broad-acting tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor sodium pervanadate reversed the AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation ( Fig. 3 D ). This suggests that protein tyrosine phosphatases are involved in AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation. AKBA induces the expression of SHP-1 SHP-1 is a non-transmembrane protein tyrosine phosphatase that has been linked with regulation of STAT3 activation ( 33 ). Whether inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation by AKBA is due to induction of the expression of SHP-1 was examined. As shown in Fig. 4 A , AKBA did indeed induce the expression of SHP-1 both at translational ( Fig. 4A , left panel ) and at transcriptional ( Fig. 4A , right panel ) level in a dose dependent manner. Whether AKBA modulates any other protein tyrosine phosphatsae such as CD45, was examined. We found that AKBA had no effect on the expression of CD45 (Suppl. Fig. 1). Induction of SHP-1 by AKBA is transient Because inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation by AKBA was found to be reversible by 24 h ( Fig. 2A , right panel ), we determined whether it is due to transient induction of SHP-1. Our results showed that AKBA induced SHP-1 protein maximally at 4 h and that removal of the compound downregulated its expression ( Fig. 4B ). No SHP-1 could be detected at 24 h. Thus the dephosphorylation of STAT3 correlates well with the appearance of SHP-1. Cells were fully viable under this condition. SHP-1 siRNA down-regulate the expression of SHP-1 and reverses the inhibition of STAT3 activation by AKBA We showed above that the dephosphorylation of STAT3 by AKBA correlates with the appearance of SHP-1. We further determined whether the suppression of SHP-1 expression by siRNA would abrogate the inhibitory effect of AKBA on STAT3 activation. Western blotting showed that AKBA-induced SHP-1 expression was effectively abolished in the cells treated with SHP-1 siRNA; treatment with scrambled siRNA had no effect ( Fig. 4C ). We also found that AKBA failed to suppress STAT-3 activation in cells treated with SHP-1 siRNA ( Fig. 4D ). These results further corroborate our earlier evidence for the critical role of SHP-1 in suppression of STAT-3 phosphorylation by AKBA.  Tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor abrogates AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation Protein tyrosine phosphatases have been implicated in STAT3 activation ( 32 ). Therefore we examined whether AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 tyrosine phosphorylation could be due to activation of a protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTPase). Treatment of U266 cells with the broad-acting tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor sodium pervanadate reversed the AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation ( Fig. 3 D ). This suggests that protein tyrosine phosphatases are involved in AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation. AKBA induces the expression of SHP-1 SHP-1 is a non-transmembrane protein tyrosine phosphatase that has been linked with regulation of STAT3 activation ( 33 ). Whether inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation by AKBA is due to induction of the expression of SHP-1 was examined. As shown in Fig. 4 A , AKBA did indeed induce the expression of SHP-1 both at translational ( Fig. 4A , left panel ) and at transcriptional ( Fig. 4A , right panel ) level in a dose dependent manner. Whether AKBA modulates any other protein tyrosine phosphatsae such as CD45, was examined. We found that AKBA had no effect on the expression of CD45 (Suppl. Fig. 1). Induction of SHP-1 by AKBA is transient Because inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation by AKBA was found to be reversible by 24 h ( Fig. 2A , right panel ), we determined whether it is due to transient induction of SHP-1. Our results showed that AKBA induced SHP-1 protein maximally at 4 h and that removal of the compound downregulated its expression ( Fig. 4B ). No SHP-1 could be detected at 24 h. Thus the dephosphorylation of STAT3 correlates well with the appearance of SHP-1. Cells were fully viable under this condition. SHP-1 siRNA down-regulate the expression of SHP-1 and reverses the inhibition of STAT3 activation by AKBA We showed above that the dephosphorylation of STAT3 by AKBA correlates with the appearance of SHP-1. We further determined whether the suppression of SHP-1 expression by siRNA would abrogate the inhibitory effect of AKBA on STAT3 activation. Western blotting showed that AKBA-induced SHP-1 expression was effectively abolished in the cells treated with SHP-1 siRNA; treatment with scrambled siRNA had no effect ( Fig. 4C ). We also found that AKBA failed to suppress STAT-3 activation in cells treated with SHP-1 siRNA ( Fig. 4D ). These results further corroborate our earlier evidence for the critical role of SHP-1 in suppression of STAT-3 phosphorylation by AKBA.  AKBA induces the expression of SHP-1 SHP-1 is a non-transmembrane protein tyrosine phosphatase that has been linked with regulation of STAT3 activation ( 33 ). Whether inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation by AKBA is due to induction of the expression of SHP-1 was examined. As shown in Fig. 4 A , AKBA did indeed induce the expression of SHP-1 both at translational ( Fig. 4A , left panel ) and at transcriptional ( Fig. 4A , right panel ) level in a dose dependent manner. Whether AKBA modulates any other protein tyrosine phosphatsae such as CD45, was examined. We found that AKBA had no effect on the expression of CD45 (Suppl. Fig. 1).  AKBA induces the expression of SHP-1 SHP-1 is a non-transmembrane protein tyrosine phosphatase that has been linked with regulation of STAT3 activation ( 33 ). Whether inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation by AKBA is due to induction of the expression of SHP-1 was examined. As shown in Fig. 4 A , AKBA did indeed induce the expression of SHP-1 both at translational ( Fig. 4A , left panel ) and at transcriptional ( Fig. 4A , right panel ) level in a dose dependent manner. Whether AKBA modulates any other protein tyrosine phosphatsae such as CD45, was examined. We found that AKBA had no effect on the expression of CD45 (Suppl. Fig. 1).  Induction of SHP-1 by AKBA is transient Because inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation by AKBA was found to be reversible by 24 h ( Fig. 2A , right panel ), we determined whether it is due to transient induction of SHP-1. Our results showed that AKBA induced SHP-1 protein maximally at 4 h and that removal of the compound downregulated its expression ( Fig. 4B ). No SHP-1 could be detected at 24 h. Thus the dephosphorylation of STAT3 correlates well with the appearance of SHP-1. Cells were fully viable under this condition.  Induction of SHP-1 by AKBA is transient Because inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation by AKBA was found to be reversible by 24 h ( Fig. 2A , right panel ), we determined whether it is due to transient induction of SHP-1. Our results showed that AKBA induced SHP-1 protein maximally at 4 h and that removal of the compound downregulated its expression ( Fig. 4B ). No SHP-1 could be detected at 24 h. Thus the dephosphorylation of STAT3 correlates well with the appearance of SHP-1. Cells were fully viable under this condition.  SHP-1 siRNA down-regulate the expression of SHP-1 and reverses the inhibition of STAT3 activation by AKBA We showed above that the dephosphorylation of STAT3 by AKBA correlates with the appearance of SHP-1. We further determined whether the suppression of SHP-1 expression by siRNA would abrogate the inhibitory effect of AKBA on STAT3 activation. Western blotting showed that AKBA-induced SHP-1 expression was effectively abolished in the cells treated with SHP-1 siRNA; treatment with scrambled siRNA had no effect ( Fig. 4C ). We also found that AKBA failed to suppress STAT-3 activation in cells treated with SHP-1 siRNA ( Fig. 4D ). These results further corroborate our earlier evidence for the critical role of SHP-1 in suppression of STAT-3 phosphorylation by AKBA.  SHP-1 siRNA down-regulate the expression of SHP-1 and reverses the inhibition of STAT3 activation by AKBA We showed above that the dephosphorylation of STAT3 by AKBA correlates with the appearance of SHP-1. We further determined whether the suppression of SHP-1 expression by siRNA would abrogate the inhibitory effect of AKBA on STAT3 activation. Western blotting showed that AKBA-induced SHP-1 expression was effectively abolished in the cells treated with SHP-1 siRNA; treatment with scrambled siRNA had no effect ( Fig. 4C ). We also found that AKBA failed to suppress STAT-3 activation in cells treated with SHP-1 siRNA ( Fig. 4D ). These results further corroborate our earlier evidence for the critical role of SHP-1 in suppression of STAT-3 phosphorylation by AKBA.  AKBA suppresses the expression of proliferative gene product Cyclin D1, which is required for cell proliferation and for transition from G1 to S phase of the cell cycle, is known to be regulated by STAT3 ( 34 ). We therefore examined the effect of AKBA on constitutive expression of cyclin D1 in U266 cells. Our results demonstrated that AKBA treatment suppressed the expression of cyclin D1 in a time-dependent manner ( Fig. 5A ).  AKBA suppresses the expression of proliferative gene product Cyclin D1, which is required for cell proliferation and for transition from G1 to S phase of the cell cycle, is known to be regulated by STAT3 ( 34 ). We therefore examined the effect of AKBA on constitutive expression of cyclin D1 in U266 cells. Our results demonstrated that AKBA treatment suppressed the expression of cyclin D1 in a time-dependent manner ( Fig. 5A ).  AKBA downregulates the expression of antiapoptotic gene products STAT3 has been shown to regulate the expression of various gene products involved in proliferation and cell survival ( 34 , 35 ), so whether downregulation of STAT3 activation by AKB leads to downregulation of these gene products was examined. The results showed that AKBA inhibited the expression of survivin, bcl-xl, bcl-2, and mcl-1 in a time-dependent manner, with maximum suppression observed at around 12–24 h ( Fig. 5A ).  AKBA downregulates the expression of antiapoptotic gene products STAT3 has been shown to regulate the expression of various gene products involved in proliferation and cell survival ( 34 , 35 ), so whether downregulation of STAT3 activation by AKB leads to downregulation of these gene products was examined. The results showed that AKBA inhibited the expression of survivin, bcl-xl, bcl-2, and mcl-1 in a time-dependent manner, with maximum suppression observed at around 12–24 h ( Fig. 5A ).  AKBA downregulates the expression of angiogenic gene product VEGF, a major mediator of angiogenesis, is known to be regulated by STAT3 activation. Therefore we examined the effect of AKBA on constitutive VEGF expression in U266 cells. Our results show that AKBA inhibited the expression of VEGF in U266 cells in a time dependent manner ( Fig. 5A ).  AKBA downregulates the expression of angiogenic gene product VEGF, a major mediator of angiogenesis, is known to be regulated by STAT3 activation. Therefore we examined the effect of AKBA on constitutive VEGF expression in U266 cells. Our results show that AKBA inhibited the expression of VEGF in U266 cells in a time dependent manner ( Fig. 5A ).  AKBA inhibits the proliferation of MM cells Because AKBA suppressed the expression of STAT3-regulated cyclin D1 expression, we examined whether AKBA inhibits the proliferation of MM cells. The results shown in Fig. 5B indicate that AKBA suppressed the proliferation of U266 cells in a time- and dose-dependent manner.  AKBA inhibits the proliferation of MM cells Because AKBA suppressed the expression of STAT3-regulated cyclin D1 expression, we examined whether AKBA inhibits the proliferation of MM cells. The results shown in Fig. 5B indicate that AKBA suppressed the proliferation of U266 cells in a time- and dose-dependent manner.  AKBA causes the accumulation of the cells in the sub-G1 phase of the cell cycle Because D-type cyclins are required for the progression of cells from the G1 phase of the cell cycle to S phase ( 36 ) and a rapid decline in levels of cyclin D1 was observed in AKBA treated cells, we determined the effect of AKBA on cell cycle phase distribution. We found that AKBA caused significant accumulation of G2/M and of sub G1 phase after treatment for a maximum of 24 h ( Fig. 5C ).  AKBA causes the accumulation of the cells in the sub-G1 phase of the cell cycle Because D-type cyclins are required for the progression of cells from the G1 phase of the cell cycle to S phase ( 36 ) and a rapid decline in levels of cyclin D1 was observed in AKBA treated cells, we determined the effect of AKBA on cell cycle phase distribution. We found that AKBA caused significant accumulation of G2/M and of sub G1 phase after treatment for a maximum of 24 h ( Fig. 5C ).  AKBA activates caspase-3 and causes PARP cleavage Whether suppression of STAT3-regulated antapoptotic gene products survivin, bcl-xl, bcl-2, and mcl-1in U266 cells by AKBA leads to apoptosis was also examined. Cells were treated with AKBA for different times and then examined for caspase activation by Western blot using specific antibodies. We found a time-dependent activation of caspase-3 by AKBA ( Fig. 5D , left panel ) Activation of this downstream caspase led to the cleavage of a 116 kDa PARP protein into an 87 kDa fragment ( Fig. 5D , right panel ). These results clearly suggest that AKBA induces caspase-3-dependent apoptosis in U266 cells. SHP-1 siRNA reduces AKBA-induced apoptosis We showed above that SHP-1 plays a critical role in suppression of STAT-3 phosphorylation by AKBA. Whether SHP-1 siRNA also affects AKBA-induced apoptosis, was determined. We found that knockdown of SHP-1 significantly decreased the apoptotic effects of AKBA ( Fig. 6A ). Enforced expression of constitutively active STAT3 rescues cells from AKBA induced apoptosis Whether the transfection of constitutive active STAT3 can suppress AKBA-induced apoptosis, was examined. For this, cells were transfected with constitutively active STAT3 plasmid for 24h, then incubated with AKBA for 48 h and examined for apoptosis by esterase staining assay. The transfection of constitutive active STAT3 plasmid led to the expression of STAT3 protein as indicated by western blot ( Fig. 6B ). The results also show that the forced expression of STAT3 significantly reduced the AKBA induced apoptosis Fig. 6C ).  AKBA activates caspase-3 and causes PARP cleavage Whether suppression of STAT3-regulated antapoptotic gene products survivin, bcl-xl, bcl-2, and mcl-1in U266 cells by AKBA leads to apoptosis was also examined. Cells were treated with AKBA for different times and then examined for caspase activation by Western blot using specific antibodies. We found a time-dependent activation of caspase-3 by AKBA ( Fig. 5D , left panel ) Activation of this downstream caspase led to the cleavage of a 116 kDa PARP protein into an 87 kDa fragment ( Fig. 5D , right panel ). These results clearly suggest that AKBA induces caspase-3-dependent apoptosis in U266 cells. SHP-1 siRNA reduces AKBA-induced apoptosis We showed above that SHP-1 plays a critical role in suppression of STAT-3 phosphorylation by AKBA. Whether SHP-1 siRNA also affects AKBA-induced apoptosis, was determined. We found that knockdown of SHP-1 significantly decreased the apoptotic effects of AKBA ( Fig. 6A ). Enforced expression of constitutively active STAT3 rescues cells from AKBA induced apoptosis Whether the transfection of constitutive active STAT3 can suppress AKBA-induced apoptosis, was examined. For this, cells were transfected with constitutively active STAT3 plasmid for 24h, then incubated with AKBA for 48 h and examined for apoptosis by esterase staining assay. The transfection of constitutive active STAT3 plasmid led to the expression of STAT3 protein as indicated by western blot ( Fig. 6B ). The results also show that the forced expression of STAT3 significantly reduced the AKBA induced apoptosis Fig. 6C ).  SHP-1 siRNA reduces AKBA-induced apoptosis We showed above that SHP-1 plays a critical role in suppression of STAT-3 phosphorylation by AKBA. Whether SHP-1 siRNA also affects AKBA-induced apoptosis, was determined. We found that knockdown of SHP-1 significantly decreased the apoptotic effects of AKBA ( Fig. 6A ).  SHP-1 siRNA reduces AKBA-induced apoptosis We showed above that SHP-1 plays a critical role in suppression of STAT-3 phosphorylation by AKBA. Whether SHP-1 siRNA also affects AKBA-induced apoptosis, was determined. We found that knockdown of SHP-1 significantly decreased the apoptotic effects of AKBA ( Fig. 6A ).  Enforced expression of constitutively active STAT3 rescues cells from AKBA induced apoptosis Whether the transfection of constitutive active STAT3 can suppress AKBA-induced apoptosis, was examined. For this, cells were transfected with constitutively active STAT3 plasmid for 24h, then incubated with AKBA for 48 h and examined for apoptosis by esterase staining assay. The transfection of constitutive active STAT3 plasmid led to the expression of STAT3 protein as indicated by western blot ( Fig. 6B ). The results also show that the forced expression of STAT3 significantly reduced the AKBA induced apoptosis Fig. 6C ).  Enforced expression of constitutively active STAT3 rescues cells from AKBA induced apoptosis Whether the transfection of constitutive active STAT3 can suppress AKBA-induced apoptosis, was examined. For this, cells were transfected with constitutively active STAT3 plasmid for 24h, then incubated with AKBA for 48 h and examined for apoptosis by esterase staining assay. The transfection of constitutive active STAT3 plasmid led to the expression of STAT3 protein as indicated by western blot ( Fig. 6B ). The results also show that the forced expression of STAT3 significantly reduced the AKBA induced apoptosis Fig. 6C ).  Discussion Because STAT3 has been linked with survival, proliferation, chemoresistance and angiogenesis of tumor cells, its inhibitors have potential for the treatment of cancer. In the present study, we report the identification of a novel inhibitor of STAT3. We found that AKBA inhibited both constitutive and IL-6 induced STAT3 activation in MM cells and that it involved the inhibition of activation of JAK2 and c-Src and the induction of SHP-1. This correlated with suppression of various STAT3-regulated gene products, inhibition of proliferation, and induction of apoptosis of MM cells. This is the first report to suggest that AKBA can inhibit STAT3 activation. Whether examined by STAT3 phosphorylation at tyrosine 705, by nuclear translocation, or by DNA binding, we found that this triterpene suppressed STAT3 activation. The suppression was, however, fully reversible by 12–24 h, indicating that the inhibition is transitory. We found that AKBA also suppressed STAT3 activation induced by IL-6, one of many tumor cell growth factors that activate STAT3. A previous study showed that all Src-transformed cell lines have persistently activated STAT3, and dominant negative STAT3 blocks transformation ( 37 , 38 ). How AKBA inhibits activation of STAT3 was investigated in detail. The activation of JAK2 has been closely linked with STAT3 activation, and we found that AKBA inhibited the activation of constitutively active as well as IL-6 induced JAK2 kinase activity in MM cells. Besides JAK2, c-Src has also been implicated in STAT3 activation. Again, AKBA also inhibited the c-src activation in MM cells. We also found that protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) is involved in the downregulation of STAT3 by AKBA. One of the first evidence that PTP is involved in the action of AKBA is that a broad acting PTPase inhibitor, pervanadate, inhibited the effect of AKBA on STAT3 activation. Several PTPs have been implicated in STAT3 signaling, including SHP-1 ( 39 ), SHP-2 ( 40 ), TC-PTP ( 41 ), PTEN ( 42 ), PTP-1D ( 43 ), CD45 ( 44 ) and PTP-epsilon ( 45 ). Loss of SHP-1 has been shown to enhance JAK3/STAT3 signaling in ALK–positive anaplastic large-cell lymphoma ( 32 ). Our results showed that AKBA is a potent inducer of SHP-1 protein but not CD45. Thus it is possible that induction of SHP-1 led to inhibition of STAT3 activation. We also found that the knockdown of SHP-1 reversed the inhibitory effect of AKBA on STAT3 and decreased apoptosis. Consistent with suppression of STAT3 activation, AKBA was found to downregulate the expression of STAT3-regulated genes that are involved in proliferation (cyclin D1) and survival (Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and Mcl-1) of tumor cells. It is possible that AKBA’s antiproliferative effects in glioma, colon cancer, prostate, and leukemic cells ( 12 – 17 ) are due to suppression of these gene products. In MM cells which express constitutively active STAT3, we showed that AKBA suppressed the proliferation of these cells, induces accumulation of cells in G2/M phase and induction of SubG1. In addition, this triterpene was found to activate caspases-3 and induce apoptosis in MM cells, which is consistent with previous reports ( 46 ). We also found that AKBA downregulated the expression of VEGF needed for angiogenesis of tumor cells. These results are consistent with a report that AKBA inhibits bFGF-induced angiogenesis ( 18 ) Previously others and we have reported that AKBA can inhibit NF-?B activation through inhibition of IKK activation ( 47 , 48 ). Whether inhibition of STAT3 by AKBA is connected with suppression of IKK activation is not clear. The p65 subunit of NF-?B has been shown to communicate with STAT3 ( 49 ), but activation of STAT3 and NF-?B are dependent on different cytokines and different kinases. TNF is the major activator of NF-?B, whereas IL-6 is the most potent inducer of STAT3. Interestingly, JAK2 kinase needed for STAT3 activation has been shown to be required for erythropoietin-induced NF-?B activation ( 50 ). Thus, it is possible that inhibition of JAK2 activation is the potential link for inhibition of both NF-?B and STAT3 activation by AKBA. Alternatively, TGF-beta-activated kinase 1 (TAK1) may be the link, as it is another kinase involved in both NF-?B and STAT3 activation ( 51 ). TAK1, however, is known to phosphoylate STAT3 at Ser-727 and not tyrosine 705, as was the case in the current study. Our results clearly demonstrate that AKBA inhibits IL-6 signaling quite effectively. Thus it is possible that the role of AKBA in osteoarthritis, chronic colitis, ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, bronchial asthma, experimental ileitis ( 3 ), experimental colitis ( 4 ), autoimmune encephalomyelitis( 5 ), nociception ( 6 ), inflammation and atherogenesis ( 7 ), BSA-induced arthritis ( 8 ), and immunomodulatory effects ( 11 ) are all due to suppression of IL-6 signaling as reported here. Overall, our results demonstrate that AKBA inhibits both inducible and constitutive STAT3 activation through the induction of tyrosine kinase phosphatase, which makes it a potentially effective suppressor of tumor cell survival, proliferation, and angiogenesis. Further in vivo studies may provide important leads for using AKBA as treatment of cancer and other inflammatory diseases.  Discussion Because STAT3 has been linked with survival, proliferation, chemoresistance and angiogenesis of tumor cells, its inhibitors have potential for the treatment of cancer. In the present study, we report the identification of a novel inhibitor of STAT3. We found that AKBA inhibited both constitutive and IL-6 induced STAT3 activation in MM cells and that it involved the inhibition of activation of JAK2 and c-Src and the induction of SHP-1. This correlated with suppression of various STAT3-regulated gene products, inhibition of proliferation, and induction of apoptosis of MM cells. This is the first report to suggest that AKBA can inhibit STAT3 activation. Whether examined by STAT3 phosphorylation at tyrosine 705, by nuclear translocation, or by DNA binding, we found that this triterpene suppressed STAT3 activation. The suppression was, however, fully reversible by 12–24 h, indicating that the inhibition is transitory. We found that AKBA also suppressed STAT3 activation induced by IL-6, one of many tumor cell growth factors that activate STAT3. A previous study showed that all Src-transformed cell lines have persistently activated STAT3, and dominant negative STAT3 blocks transformation ( 37 , 38 ). How AKBA inhibits activation of STAT3 was investigated in detail. The activation of JAK2 has been closely linked with STAT3 activation, and we found that AKBA inhibited the activation of constitutively active as well as IL-6 induced JAK2 kinase activity in MM cells. Besides JAK2, c-Src has also been implicated in STAT3 activation. Again, AKBA also inhibited the c-src activation in MM cells. We also found that protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) is involved in the downregulation of STAT3 by AKBA. One of the first evidence that PTP is involved in the action of AKBA is that a broad acting PTPase inhibitor, pervanadate, inhibited the effect of AKBA on STAT3 activation. Several PTPs have been implicated in STAT3 signaling, including SHP-1 ( 39 ), SHP-2 ( 40 ), TC-PTP ( 41 ), PTEN ( 42 ), PTP-1D ( 43 ), CD45 ( 44 ) and PTP-epsilon ( 45 ). Loss of SHP-1 has been shown to enhance JAK3/STAT3 signaling in ALK–positive anaplastic large-cell lymphoma ( 32 ). Our results showed that AKBA is a potent inducer of SHP-1 protein but not CD45. Thus it is possible that induction of SHP-1 led to inhibition of STAT3 activation. We also found that the knockdown of SHP-1 reversed the inhibitory effect of AKBA on STAT3 and decreased apoptosis. Consistent with suppression of STAT3 activation, AKBA was found to downregulate the expression of STAT3-regulated genes that are involved in proliferation (cyclin D1) and survival (Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and Mcl-1) of tumor cells. It is possible that AKBA’s antiproliferative effects in glioma, colon cancer, prostate, and leukemic cells ( 12 – 17 ) are due to suppression of these gene products. In MM cells which express constitutively active STAT3, we showed that AKBA suppressed the proliferation of these cells, induces accumulation of cells in G2/M phase and induction of SubG1. In addition, this triterpene was found to activate caspases-3 and induce apoptosis in MM cells, which is consistent with previous reports ( 46 ). We also found that AKBA downregulated the expression of VEGF needed for angiogenesis of tumor cells. These results are consistent with a report that AKBA inhibits bFGF-induced angiogenesis ( 18 ) Previously others and we have reported that AKBA can inhibit NF-?B activation through inhibition of IKK activation ( 47 , 48 ). Whether inhibition of STAT3 by AKBA is connected with suppression of IKK activation is not clear. The p65 subunit of NF-?B has been shown to communicate with STAT3 ( 49 ), but activation of STAT3 and NF-?B are dependent on different cytokines and different kinases. TNF is the major activator of NF-?B, whereas IL-6 is the most potent inducer of STAT3. Interestingly, JAK2 kinase needed for STAT3 activation has been shown to be required for erythropoietin-induced NF-?B activation ( 50 ). Thus, it is possible that inhibition of JAK2 activation is the potential link for inhibition of both NF-?B and STAT3 activation by AKBA. Alternatively, TGF-beta-activated kinase 1 (TAK1) may be the link, as it is another kinase involved in both NF-?B and STAT3 activation ( 51 ). TAK1, however, is known to phosphoylate STAT3 at Ser-727 and not tyrosine 705, as was the case in the current study. Our results clearly demonstrate that AKBA inhibits IL-6 signaling quite effectively. Thus it is possible that the role of AKBA in osteoarthritis, chronic colitis, ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, bronchial asthma, experimental ileitis ( 3 ), experimental colitis ( 4 ), autoimmune encephalomyelitis( 5 ), nociception ( 6 ), inflammation and atherogenesis ( 7 ), BSA-induced arthritis ( 8 ), and immunomodulatory effects ( 11 ) are all due to suppression of IL-6 signaling as reported here. Overall, our results demonstrate that AKBA inhibits both inducible and constitutive STAT3 activation through the induction of tyrosine kinase phosphatase, which makes it a potentially effective suppressor of tumor cell survival, proliferation, and angiogenesis. Further in vivo studies may provide important leads for using AKBA as treatment of cancer and other inflammatory diseases.  Figures Figure 1 A , The structure of AKBA. B , Left , AKBA inhibits constitutive STAT3 activation in U266 cells. U266 cells (1×106/ml) were treated with the indicated concentrations of AKBA for 4 h, after which whole-cell extracts were prepared, and 30 µg of protein was resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE gel, electrotransferred onto nitrocellulose membranes, and probed for phospho-STAT3. The same blots were stripped and reprobed with STAT3 antibody to verify equal protein loading. Right , AKBA suppresses phospho-STAT3 levels in a time-dependent manner. U266 cells (1×106/ml) were treated with the 50 µM AKBA for the indicated times, after which Western blotting was performed as described previously. The same blots were stripped and reprobed with STAT3 antibody to verify equal protein loading. C , AKBA suppresses STAT3 nuclear translocation. U266 cells (1×106/ml) were treated with the 50 µM AKBA for 4 h. the samples cytospinned, and immunocytochemistry performed with STAT3 antibody. D , AKBA inhibits constitutively active STAT3 in U266 cells. Left , U266 cells (2×106/ml) were treated with the indicated concentrations of AKBA for 4 h and analyzed for nuclear STAT3 levels by EMSA. Right , U266 cells (2×106/ml) were treated with 50 µM AKBA for the indicated durations and analyzed for nuclear STAT3 levels by EMSA. Figure 2 A , AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation is reversible. U266 cells (1 × 10 6cells) were treated with 50 µM AKBA for the indicated durations (left panel) or treated for 1 h and washed with PBS two times to remove AKBA before resuspension in fresh medium (right panel). Cells were removed at indicated times and lysed to prepare the whole-cell extract. 30µg of whole-cell extracts were resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE, electrotransferred to a nitrocellulose membrane, probed for the phosphorylated STAT3 (pSTAT3), and stripped and reprobed for STAT3 antibodies. B , AKBA downregulates IL-6–induced phospho-STAT3. MM1.S cells (2×106/mL) were treated with IL-6 (10 ng/ml) for indicated times, whole-cell extracts were prepared, and phosphorylated STAT3 was detected by Western blot as described in Materials and Methods . The same blots were stripped and reprobed with STAT3 antibody to verify equal protein loading. Figure 3 A , AKBA suppresses the activation of JAK2 in a dose- and time-dependent manner. U266 cells (4×106/ml) were treated with AKBA at the indicated doses ( left ) or with 50 µM AKBA for the indicated time intervals ( right ). Whole-cell extracts were immunoprecipitated with antibody against JAK2 and analyzed by western blot. The same samples were analyzed for JAK2 protein. B , AKBA suppresses the IL-6 induced JAK-2 kinase activity. MM1.S cells (4×106/ml) were pre-incubated with AKBA at the indicated doses for 4h and treated with IL-6 for 10 min. Whole cell lysate were prepared and anlaysed the JAK-2 activity by immunocomplex kinase assay. C , AKBA suppresses phospho-Src levels in a dose- and time-dependent manner. U266 cells (2×106/ml) were treated with the indicated doses of AKBA ( left ) or with 50 µM AKBA for the indicated times ( right ), after which whole-cell extracts were prepared and 30µg aliquots of those extracts resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE, electrotransferred onto nitrocellulose membranes, and probed for phospho-Src antibody. The same blots were stripped and reprobed with Src antibody to verify equal protein loading. D , Pervanadate reverses the phospho-STAT3 inhibitory effect of AKBA. U266 cells (2×10 6 /ml) were treated with the indicated concentration of pervanadate and 50 µM AKBA for 4 h, after which whole-cell extracts were prepared and 30 µg portions of those extracts were resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE gel, electrotransferred onto nitrocellulose membranes, and probed for phospho-STAT3 and STAT3. Figure 4 A , AKBA induces the expression of SHP-1 in U266 cells ( left panel ). U266 cells (2×106/ml) were treated with AKBA for 4h with different concentrations of AKBA, after which whole-cell extracts were prepared, and 30-µg portions of the extracts were resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE, electrotransferred onto nitrocellulose membranes, and probed for SHP-1 antibody. The same blots were stripped and reprobed with ?-actin antibody to verify equal protein loading. AKBA induces SHP-1 gene expression ( right panel ). U266 cells (4 × 106/ml) were treated with different concentrations of AKBA for 4h, and total RNA was extracted and examined for expression of SHP-1 by RT-PCR. GAPDH was used as an internal control to show equal RNA loading. B , AKBA-induced SHP-1 activation is transient. U266 cells (2 ×10 6cells/ml) were treated with 50 µM AKBA for 4h washed with PBS two times to remove AKBA before resuspension in fresh medium. Cells were removed at indicated times and lysed to prepare the whole-cell extract. 30µg of whole-cell extracts were resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE, electrotransferred to a nitrocellulose membrane, probed for SHP-1, and stripped and reprobed for ?-actin antibody. C , Effect of SHP-1 knockdown on AKBA-induced expression of SHP-1. SCC4 cells (1 × 105/mL) were transfected with either scrambled or SHP-1-specific siRNA (50 nmol/L). After 48 h, cells were treated with 50 µmol/L AKBA for 4 h and whole-cell extracts were subjected to Western blot analysis for SHP-1. The same blots were stripped and reprobed with ?-actin antibody to verify equal protein loading (left) and transfection with SHP-1 siRNA reverses AKBA-induced suppression of STAT3 activation. The same whole-cell extracts were subjected to phospho-STAT3 and STAT3 (right). D , Effect of SHP-1 knockdown on AKBA-induced inhibition of pSTAT3. SCC4 cells (1 × 105/mL) were transfected with either scrambled or SHP-1-specific siRNA (50 nmol/L). After 48 h, cells were treated with 50 µmol/L AKBA for 4 h and whole-cell extracts were subjected to Western blot analysis for pSTAT3. The same blots were stripped and reprobed with STAT3 antibody to verify equal protein loading. Fig. 5 A , AKBA suppresses STAT3-regulated proliferative, survival and antiangiogenic gene products. U266 cells (2×106/ml) were treated with 50 µM AKBA for indicated time intervals, after which whole-cell extracts were prepared and 30 µg portions of those extracts were resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE, the membrane sliced according to molecular weight and probed against cyclin D1, Bcl-2, Bcl-xl, Mcl-1 and VEGF antibody. The same blots were stripped and reprobed with ?-actin antibody to verify equal protein loading. B , AKBA suppresses cell proliferation in multiple myeloma. U266 and MM1.S cells were plated in triplicate, treated with 10 and 50 µM AKBA, and then subjected to MTT assay on days 0 to 3 to analyze proliferation of cells. C , AKBA causes significant accumulation of cells in the G1 phase. U266 cells (2×106/mL) were synchronized by incubation overnight in the absence of serum and then treated with 50 µM AKBA for the indicated times, after which the cells were washed, fixed, stained with PI, and analyzed for DNA content by flow cytometry. D ( left panel ), AKBA induces caspase-3 activation. U266 cells were treated with 50 µM AKBA for the indicated times, and whole-cell extracts were prepared, separated on SDS-PAGE, and subjected to Western blotting against caspase-3 antibody. The same blot were stripped and reprobed with ?-actin antibody to show equal protein loading. C ( right panel ), AKBA causes PARP cleavage. U266 cells were treated with 50 µM AKBA for the indicated times, and whole-cell extracts were prepared, separated on SDS-PAGE, and subjected to Western blot against PARP antibody. The same blots were stripped and reprobed with ?-actin antibody to show equal protein loading. The results shown are representative of three independent experiments. Figure 6 A , Knockdown of SHP-1 inhibited the apoptotic effect of AKBA. SCC4 cells (1 × 105/mL) were transfected with either scrambled or SHP-1-specific siRNA (50 nmol/L). After 48h, cells were treated with 50 µmol/L AKBA for 48 h and analaysed the percentage of apoptosis by Live/Dead assay. B , Transfection of constitutive active STAT3 induces pSTAT3. A293 cells (5 × 105/mL) were transfected with constitutive STAT3 plasmid as described in methods . The cells were harvested 24 h after transfection and the trasfection was confirmed by western blot analysis. C , Forced expression of constitutive STAT3 rescues A293 cells from AKBA induced cytotoxicity. A293 cells (5 × 105/mL) were transfected with constitutive STAT3 plasmid. 24 h after transfection the cells were treated with different concentration of AKBA for 48h and then the cytotoxicity was determined by Live/Dead assay.  Figures Figure 1 A , The structure of AKBA. B , Left , AKBA inhibits constitutive STAT3 activation in U266 cells. U266 cells (1×106/ml) were treated with the indicated concentrations of AKBA for 4 h, after which whole-cell extracts were prepared, and 30 µg of protein was resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE gel, electrotransferred onto nitrocellulose membranes, and probed for phospho-STAT3. The same blots were stripped and reprobed with STAT3 antibody to verify equal protein loading. Right , AKBA suppresses phospho-STAT3 levels in a time-dependent manner. U266 cells (1×106/ml) were treated with the 50 µM AKBA for the indicated times, after which Western blotting was performed as described previously. The same blots were stripped and reprobed with STAT3 antibody to verify equal protein loading. C , AKBA suppresses STAT3 nuclear translocation. U266 cells (1×106/ml) were treated with the 50 µM AKBA for 4 h. the samples cytospinned, and immunocytochemistry performed with STAT3 antibody. D , AKBA inhibits constitutively active STAT3 in U266 cells. Left , U266 cells (2×106/ml) were treated with the indicated concentrations of AKBA for 4 h and analyzed for nuclear STAT3 levels by EMSA. Right , U266 cells (2×106/ml) were treated with 50 µM AKBA for the indicated durations and analyzed for nuclear STAT3 levels by EMSA. Figure 2 A , AKBA-induced inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation is reversible. U266 cells (1 × 10 6cells) were treated with 50 µM AKBA for the indicated durations (left panel) or treated for 1 h and washed with PBS two times to remove AKBA before resuspension in fresh medium (right panel). Cells were removed at indicated times and lysed to prepare the whole-cell extract. 30µg of whole-cell extracts were resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE, electrotransferred to a nitrocellulose membrane, probed for the phosphorylated STAT3 (pSTAT3), and stripped and reprobed for STAT3 antibodies. B , AKBA downregulates IL-6–induced phospho-STAT3. MM1.S cells (2×106/mL) were treated with IL-6 (10 ng/ml) for indicated times, whole-cell extracts were prepared, and phosphorylated STAT3 was detected by Western blot as described in Materials and Methods . The same blots were stripped and reprobed with STAT3 antibody to verify equal protein loading. Figure 3 A , AKBA suppresses the activation of JAK2 in a dose- and time-dependent manner. U266 cells (4×106/ml) were treated with AKBA at the indicated doses ( left ) or with 50 µM AKBA for the indicated time intervals ( right ). Whole-cell extracts were immunoprecipitated with antibody against JAK2 and analyzed by western blot. The same samples were analyzed for JAK2 protein. B , AKBA suppresses the IL-6 induced JAK-2 kinase activity. MM1.S cells (4×106/ml) were pre-incubated with AKBA at the indicated doses for 4h and treated with IL-6 for 10 min. Whole cell lysate were prepared and anlaysed the JAK-2 activity by immunocomplex kinase assay. C , AKBA suppresses phospho-Src levels in a dose- and time-dependent manner. U266 cells (2×106/ml) were treated with the indicated doses of AKBA ( left ) or with 50 µM AKBA for the indicated times ( right ), after which whole-cell extracts were prepared and 30µg aliquots of those extracts resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE, electrotransferred onto nitrocellulose membranes, and probed for phospho-Src antibody. The same blots were stripped and reprobed with Src antibody to verify equal protein loading. D , Pervanadate reverses the phospho-STAT3 inhibitory effect of AKBA. U266 cells (2×10 6 /ml) were treated with the indicated concentration of pervanadate and 50 µM AKBA for 4 h, after which whole-cell extracts were prepared and 30 µg portions of those extracts were resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE gel, electrotransferred onto nitrocellulose membranes, and probed for phospho-STAT3 and STAT3. Figure 4 A , AKBA induces the expression of SHP-1 in U266 cells ( left panel ). U266 cells (2×106/ml) were treated with AKBA for 4h with different concentrations of AKBA, after which whole-cell extracts were prepared, and 30-µg portions of the extracts were resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE, electrotransferred onto nitrocellulose membranes, and probed for SHP-1 antibody. The same blots were stripped and reprobed with ?-actin antibody to verify equal protein loading. AKBA induces SHP-1 gene expression ( right panel ). U266 cells (4 × 106/ml) were treated with different concentrations of AKBA for 4h, and total RNA was extracted and examined for expression of SHP-1 by RT-PCR. GAPDH was used as an internal control to show equal RNA loading. B , AKBA-induced SHP-1 activation is transient. U266 cells (2 ×10 6cells/ml) were treated with 50 µM AKBA for 4h washed with PBS two times to remove AKBA before resuspension in fresh medium. Cells were removed at indicated times and lysed to prepare the whole-cell extract. 30µg of whole-cell extracts were resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE, electrotransferred to a nitrocellulose membrane, probed for SHP-1, and stripped and reprobed for ?-actin antibody. C , Effect of SHP-1 knockdown on AKBA-induced expression of SHP-1. SCC4 cells (1 × 105/mL) were transfected with either scrambled or SHP-1-specific siRNA (50 nmol/L). After 48 h, cells were treated with 50 µmol/L AKBA for 4 h and whole-cell extracts were subjected to Western blot analysis for SHP-1. The same blots were stripped and reprobed with ?-actin antibody to verify equal protein loading (left) and transfection with SHP-1 siRNA reverses AKBA-induced suppression of STAT3 activation. The same whole-cell extracts were subjected to phospho-STAT3 and STAT3 (right). D , Effect of SHP-1 knockdown on AKBA-induced inhibition of pSTAT3. SCC4 cells (1 × 105/mL) were transfected with either scrambled or SHP-1-specific siRNA (50 nmol/L). After 48 h, cells were treated with 50 µmol/L AKBA for 4 h and whole-cell extracts were subjected to Western blot analysis for pSTAT3. The same blots were stripped and reprobed with STAT3 antibody to verify equal protein loading. Fig. 5 A , AKBA suppresses STAT3-regulated proliferative, survival and antiangiogenic gene products. U266 cells (2×106/ml) were treated with 50 µM AKBA for indicated time intervals, after which whole-cell extracts were prepared and 30 µg portions of those extracts were resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE, the membrane sliced according to molecular weight and probed against cyclin D1, Bcl-2, Bcl-xl, Mcl-1 and VEGF antibody. The same blots were stripped and reprobed with ?-actin antibody to verify equal protein loading. B , AKBA suppresses cell proliferation in multiple myeloma. U266 and MM1.S cells were plated in triplicate, treated with 10 and 50 µM AKBA, and then subjected to MTT assay on days 0 to 3 to analyze proliferation of cells. C , AKBA causes significant accumulation of cells in the G1 phase. U266 cells (2×106/mL) were synchronized by incubation overnight in the absence of serum and then treated with 50 µM AKBA for the indicated times, after which the cells were washed, fixed, stained with PI, and analyzed for DNA content by flow cytometry. D ( left panel ), AKBA induces caspase-3 activation. U266 cells were treated with 50 µM AKBA for the indicated times, and whole-cell extracts were prepared, separated on SDS-PAGE, and subjected to Western blotting against caspase-3 antibody. The same blot were stripped and reprobed with ?-actin antibody to show equal protein loading. C ( right panel ), AKBA causes PARP cleavage. U266 cells were treated with 50 µM AKBA for the indicated times, and whole-cell extracts were prepared, separated on SDS-PAGE, and subjected to Western blot against PARP antibody. The same blots were stripped and reprobed with ?-actin antibody to show equal protein loading. The results shown are representative of three independent experiments. Figure 6 A , Knockdown of SHP-1 inhibited the apoptotic effect of AKBA. SCC4 cells (1 × 105/mL) were transfected with either scrambled or SHP-1-specific siRNA (50 nmol/L). After 48h, cells were treated with 50 µmol/L AKBA for 48 h and analaysed the percentage of apoptosis by Live/Dead assay. B , Transfection of constitutive active STAT3 induces pSTAT3. A293 cells (5 × 105/mL) were transfected with constitutive STAT3 plasmid as described in methods . The cells were harvested 24 h after transfection and the trasfection was confirmed by western blot analysis. C , Forced expression of constitutive STAT3 rescues A293 cells from AKBA induced cytotoxicity. A293 cells (5 × 105/mL) were transfected with constitutive STAT3 plasmid. 24 h after transfection the cells were treated with different concentration of AKBA for 48h and then the cytotoxicity was determined by Live/Dead assay. 