Measuring Quality of Care in Syncope: Case Definition Affects Reported Electrocardiogram Use but Does Not Bias Reporting Objectives The objective was to calculate agreement between syncope as a reason for visiting (RFV) an emergency department (ED) and as a discharge diagnosis (International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification [ICD-9]), to determine whether syncope case definition biases reported electrocardiogram (ECG) usage, a national quality measure. Methods The authors analyzed the ED portion of the National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NHAMCS), 1993–2004, for patients age ?18 years. A visit was defined as being for syncope if it received one of three RFV or ICD-9 codes. Agreement between RFV and ICD-9 codes was calculated, and the percentages of syncope patients (RFV vs. ICD-9) who had an ECG were compared using chi-square and multivariate logistic regression. Results Raw agreement between syncope as an RFV and as an ICD-9 diagnosis code was 30.1% (95% confidence interval [CI] = 32.6% to 35.5%), representing only moderate agreement beyond chance ( ? = 0.50). ECG utilization was lower among visits defined by RFV (64.1%; 95% CI = 62.0% to 66.3%) than for ICD-9 diagnosis (73.6%; 95% CI = 71.4% to 75.8%). There was no meaningful variation in adjusted ECG use by patient, visit, or hospital characteristics between case definitions. Adjusted ECG use was lower under both case definitions among female patients and discharged patients and increased with age (p < 0.05). Conclusions Despite only moderate agreement, syncope case definition should not bias reported ECG rate by patient, visit, or hospital characteristics. Among ED patients with syncope, ECG is performed less frequently in women, a potentially important disparity.  Methods The authors analyzed the ED portion of the National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NHAMCS), 1993–2004, for patients age ?18 years. A visit was defined as being for syncope if it received one of three RFV or ICD-9 codes. Agreement between RFV and ICD-9 codes was calculated, and the percentages of syncope patients (RFV vs. ICD-9) who had an ECG were compared using chi-square and multivariate logistic regression.  Results Raw agreement between syncope as an RFV and as an ICD-9 diagnosis code was 30.1% (95% confidence interval [CI] = 32.6% to 35.5%), representing only moderate agreement beyond chance ( ? = 0.50). ECG utilization was lower among visits defined by RFV (64.1%; 95% CI = 62.0% to 66.3%) than for ICD-9 diagnosis (73.6%; 95% CI = 71.4% to 75.8%). There was no meaningful variation in adjusted ECG use by patient, visit, or hospital characteristics between case definitions. Adjusted ECG use was lower under both case definitions among female patients and discharged patients and increased with age (p < 0.05).  Conclusions Despite only moderate agreement, syncope case definition should not bias reported ECG rate by patient, visit, or hospital characteristics. Among ED patients with syncope, ECG is performed less frequently in women, a potentially important disparity.  METHODS Study Design We analyzed the National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NHAMCS) ED component from 1993–2004. The NHAMCS is a multistage probability survey of U.S. ED and outpatient department visits to noninstitutional, general, and short-stay hospitals (excluding federal, military, and Veterans Affairs hospitals). NHAMCS contains data fields typically available on an ED record, including patient demographics, limited clinical information, and several provider and hospital characteristics. NHAMCS data forms include up to three patient RFVs (coded using Reason for Visit Classification for Ambulatory Care), 21 up to three discharge diagnoses (coded using the ICD-9), 22 and a check box for whether an ECG was performed. NHAMCS data forms are coded from the ED chart by trained data abstracters. The instructions for recording the RFV are “enter the patient’s complaint(s), symptom(s), or other reason(s) for visit in the patient’s own words. The most important reason should be entered first.” 23 The RFV is not merely a verbatim transcription of the patient’s chief complaint, but a synthesis of the patient’s RFV as documented by nurses and physicians. A complete description of the NHAMCS methodology is available at the National Center for Health Statistics website. 24 Our analysis was deemed exempt from review by the Yale University School of Medicine Human Investigation Committee. Study Setting and Population We report on ED visits for patients age ?18 years with syncope as an RFV or ICD-9 diagnosis. Syncope clinical guidelines 3 - 6 and the performance measure approved by the AMA-PCPI apply to all adults, 8 but the NQF executive committee later limited the measure to age ?60 years. 16 We studied all adults (age ?18 years), but also performed a subgroup analysis in patients age ?60 years. The NHAMCS study sample included records on 255,095 adult ED visits (age ?18 years), which are weighted to represent the 898 million adult ED visits in the United States from 1993–2004. Study Protocol Syncope Definition We coded patient visits as having syncope as an RFV if any of the three RFVs was “1030.0: fainting (syncope); includes blacking out, passing out, fainting spells; excludes unconsciousness.” 21 Patient visits were coded as having a syncope diagnosis if any of the three discharge diagnoses was ICD-9 780.2, “syncope and collapse.” 22 Covariate Definitions We coded patient, visit, and hospital covariates that we specified as clinically meaningful a priori. Patient covariates included gender, age, race/ethnicity (recoded as white/non-Hispanic, African American/non-Hispanic, other/non-Hispanic, Hispanic), and expected source of payment (private insurance, Medicare, Medicaid/State Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP)/worker’s compensation, other insurance, self-pay/charity). Visit covariates were urgency (emergent/urgent [Triage Level 1–2] vs. not urgent [Triage Level 3–5]), patient’s disposition from the ED (admitted/transferred/died, discharged/left without being seen/left against medical advice), and provider type seeing patient (attending physician only, resident/midlevel with supervising physician, resident/midlevel without supervising physician). The urgency variable in NHAMCS was coded based on an initial provider’s assessment of urgency. From 1993 to 1997 the variable was coded as “urgent/emergent” or “nonurgent,” and from 1997–2004 it was coded as a four-level variable by time within “which patient should be seen.” 24 For patient visits from 1997 to 2004 we dichotomized urgency as “urgent/emergent” if they were to be seen in less than 60 minutes or “nonurgent” if they could be seen in greater than 1 hour. Hospital characteristics were region (Northeast, South, Midwest, West), urban location (in metropolitan statistical area [MSA], not in MSA), and hospital ownership type (voluntary nonprofit, government nonfederal, proprietary). Finally, we included year of survey (1993 to 2004) as a covariate. Outcome Measures Our primary outcomes were: 1) agreement between syncope case definitions (RFV vs. ICD-9) and 2) rate of ECG performance in the ED by case definition (RFV vs. ICD-9), stratified by characteristics of patient, visit, and hospital to evaluate testing or reporting biases. Additionally, we evaluated the effect of alternative cardiac ICD-9 diagnoses on reported ECG use among ED patients with syncope as an RFV. Data Analysis We used bivariate measures of agreement and diagnostic accuracy to compare case definitions across groups. We computed the proportion of positive agreement 25 and agreement beyond chance with the kappa statistic 26 and used the test of equal kappa coefficients to compare agreement within groups. 27 We used Rao-Scott chi-square tests to evaluate differences in unadjusted ECG use between groups for each case definition (RFV and ICD-9). We conducted multiple variable logistic regression to estimate the independent association of patient, visit, and hospital characteristics with utilization of ECG in syncope patients by case definition. We constructed a model at each case definition of syncope (RFV and ICD-9) with the dependent variable of ECG performance (Y/N). The independent variables were the a priori covariates, which were retained after backward stepwise elimination (p < 0.5) for either case definition. We tested hospital region, urban status, and ownership type for association, but none had an effect on model fit or a significant relationship with likelihood of receiving an ECG in either model (p < 0.5) and were not included in the final model. As patient age is independently associated with insurance status, and with provider’s assessment of illness, we tested interactions between age and visit urgency, disposition, or expected payment type. Only age*visit urgency had a significant effect on model fit and was included in the final model. Both models had good fit, with c-statistics of 0.76 and 0.71 for RFV and ICD-9, respectively. We performed several stratified analyses. First, we conducted the above described analyses only in patients ?60 years of age, in accordance with the denominator of Medicare’s version of this performance measure. 10 Second, to determine whether patients presenting with syncope as an RFV who could potentially benefit from an ECG would be missed using the ICD-9 case definition, we calculated the proportion of patients with syncope as an RFV who had cardiac diagnoses with or without a concomitant syncope ICD-9 code. We evaluated cardiac diagnoses because they are the most frequent short-term adverse events among ED patients with syncope. 17 - 19 We included diagnoses of cardiac arrhythmias and ischemic or structural heart disease (ICD-9 codes listed in Data Supplement S2 , available as supporting information in the online version of this paper). We performed statistical analyses of agreement and diagnostic characteristics using individual visit data without accounting for survey weights, as these are measures of within-visit agreement. We performed all other analyses accounting for the complex sampling design of NHAMCS with survey procedures in SAS 9.1 (SAS, Cary, NC).  Study Design We analyzed the National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NHAMCS) ED component from 1993–2004. The NHAMCS is a multistage probability survey of U.S. ED and outpatient department visits to noninstitutional, general, and short-stay hospitals (excluding federal, military, and Veterans Affairs hospitals). NHAMCS contains data fields typically available on an ED record, including patient demographics, limited clinical information, and several provider and hospital characteristics. NHAMCS data forms include up to three patient RFVs (coded using Reason for Visit Classification for Ambulatory Care), 21 up to three discharge diagnoses (coded using the ICD-9), 22 and a check box for whether an ECG was performed. NHAMCS data forms are coded from the ED chart by trained data abstracters. The instructions for recording the RFV are “enter the patient’s complaint(s), symptom(s), or other reason(s) for visit in the patient’s own words. The most important reason should be entered first.” 23 The RFV is not merely a verbatim transcription of the patient’s chief complaint, but a synthesis of the patient’s RFV as documented by nurses and physicians. A complete description of the NHAMCS methodology is available at the National Center for Health Statistics website. 24 Our analysis was deemed exempt from review by the Yale University School of Medicine Human Investigation Committee.  Study Setting and Population We report on ED visits for patients age ?18 years with syncope as an RFV or ICD-9 diagnosis. Syncope clinical guidelines 3 - 6 and the performance measure approved by the AMA-PCPI apply to all adults, 8 but the NQF executive committee later limited the measure to age ?60 years. 16 We studied all adults (age ?18 years), but also performed a subgroup analysis in patients age ?60 years. The NHAMCS study sample included records on 255,095 adult ED visits (age ?18 years), which are weighted to represent the 898 million adult ED visits in the United States from 1993–2004.  Study Protocol Syncope Definition We coded patient visits as having syncope as an RFV if any of the three RFVs was “1030.0: fainting (syncope); includes blacking out, passing out, fainting spells; excludes unconsciousness.” 21 Patient visits were coded as having a syncope diagnosis if any of the three discharge diagnoses was ICD-9 780.2, “syncope and collapse.” 22 Covariate Definitions We coded patient, visit, and hospital covariates that we specified as clinically meaningful a priori. Patient covariates included gender, age, race/ethnicity (recoded as white/non-Hispanic, African American/non-Hispanic, other/non-Hispanic, Hispanic), and expected source of payment (private insurance, Medicare, Medicaid/State Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP)/worker’s compensation, other insurance, self-pay/charity). Visit covariates were urgency (emergent/urgent [Triage Level 1–2] vs. not urgent [Triage Level 3–5]), patient’s disposition from the ED (admitted/transferred/died, discharged/left without being seen/left against medical advice), and provider type seeing patient (attending physician only, resident/midlevel with supervising physician, resident/midlevel without supervising physician). The urgency variable in NHAMCS was coded based on an initial provider’s assessment of urgency. From 1993 to 1997 the variable was coded as “urgent/emergent” or “nonurgent,” and from 1997–2004 it was coded as a four-level variable by time within “which patient should be seen.” 24 For patient visits from 1997 to 2004 we dichotomized urgency as “urgent/emergent” if they were to be seen in less than 60 minutes or “nonurgent” if they could be seen in greater than 1 hour. Hospital characteristics were region (Northeast, South, Midwest, West), urban location (in metropolitan statistical area [MSA], not in MSA), and hospital ownership type (voluntary nonprofit, government nonfederal, proprietary). Finally, we included year of survey (1993 to 2004) as a covariate.  Syncope Definition We coded patient visits as having syncope as an RFV if any of the three RFVs was “1030.0: fainting (syncope); includes blacking out, passing out, fainting spells; excludes unconsciousness.” 21 Patient visits were coded as having a syncope diagnosis if any of the three discharge diagnoses was ICD-9 780.2, “syncope and collapse.” 22  Covariate Definitions We coded patient, visit, and hospital covariates that we specified as clinically meaningful a priori. Patient covariates included gender, age, race/ethnicity (recoded as white/non-Hispanic, African American/non-Hispanic, other/non-Hispanic, Hispanic), and expected source of payment (private insurance, Medicare, Medicaid/State Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP)/worker’s compensation, other insurance, self-pay/charity). Visit covariates were urgency (emergent/urgent [Triage Level 1–2] vs. not urgent [Triage Level 3–5]), patient’s disposition from the ED (admitted/transferred/died, discharged/left without being seen/left against medical advice), and provider type seeing patient (attending physician only, resident/midlevel with supervising physician, resident/midlevel without supervising physician). The urgency variable in NHAMCS was coded based on an initial provider’s assessment of urgency. From 1993 to 1997 the variable was coded as “urgent/emergent” or “nonurgent,” and from 1997–2004 it was coded as a four-level variable by time within “which patient should be seen.” 24 For patient visits from 1997 to 2004 we dichotomized urgency as “urgent/emergent” if they were to be seen in less than 60 minutes or “nonurgent” if they could be seen in greater than 1 hour. Hospital characteristics were region (Northeast, South, Midwest, West), urban location (in metropolitan statistical area [MSA], not in MSA), and hospital ownership type (voluntary nonprofit, government nonfederal, proprietary). Finally, we included year of survey (1993 to 2004) as a covariate.  Outcome Measures Our primary outcomes were: 1) agreement between syncope case definitions (RFV vs. ICD-9) and 2) rate of ECG performance in the ED by case definition (RFV vs. ICD-9), stratified by characteristics of patient, visit, and hospital to evaluate testing or reporting biases. Additionally, we evaluated the effect of alternative cardiac ICD-9 diagnoses on reported ECG use among ED patients with syncope as an RFV.  Data Analysis We used bivariate measures of agreement and diagnostic accuracy to compare case definitions across groups. We computed the proportion of positive agreement 25 and agreement beyond chance with the kappa statistic 26 and used the test of equal kappa coefficients to compare agreement within groups. 27 We used Rao-Scott chi-square tests to evaluate differences in unadjusted ECG use between groups for each case definition (RFV and ICD-9). We conducted multiple variable logistic regression to estimate the independent association of patient, visit, and hospital characteristics with utilization of ECG in syncope patients by case definition. We constructed a model at each case definition of syncope (RFV and ICD-9) with the dependent variable of ECG performance (Y/N). The independent variables were the a priori covariates, which were retained after backward stepwise elimination (p < 0.5) for either case definition. We tested hospital region, urban status, and ownership type for association, but none had an effect on model fit or a significant relationship with likelihood of receiving an ECG in either model (p < 0.5) and were not included in the final model. As patient age is independently associated with insurance status, and with provider’s assessment of illness, we tested interactions between age and visit urgency, disposition, or expected payment type. Only age*visit urgency had a significant effect on model fit and was included in the final model. Both models had good fit, with c-statistics of 0.76 and 0.71 for RFV and ICD-9, respectively. We performed several stratified analyses. First, we conducted the above described analyses only in patients ?60 years of age, in accordance with the denominator of Medicare’s version of this performance measure. 10 Second, to determine whether patients presenting with syncope as an RFV who could potentially benefit from an ECG would be missed using the ICD-9 case definition, we calculated the proportion of patients with syncope as an RFV who had cardiac diagnoses with or without a concomitant syncope ICD-9 code. We evaluated cardiac diagnoses because they are the most frequent short-term adverse events among ED patients with syncope. 17 - 19 We included diagnoses of cardiac arrhythmias and ischemic or structural heart disease (ICD-9 codes listed in Data Supplement S2 , available as supporting information in the online version of this paper). We performed statistical analyses of agreement and diagnostic characteristics using individual visit data without accounting for survey weights, as these are measures of within-visit agreement. We performed all other analyses accounting for the complex sampling design of NHAMCS with survey procedures in SAS 9.1 (SAS, Cary, NC).  RESULTS Prevalence and Agreement by Case Definitions Over the 11-year study period (1994–2004), there were 2,653 adult visits with syncope as an RFV, representing 1.04% of all U.S. ED visits (95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.00% to 1.08%). An ICD-9 diagnosis of syncope was given at 2,717 visits, representing 1.07% of ED visits (95% CI = 1.02% to 1.11%). At 1,364 visits, patients reported syncope as an RFV and received syncope as an ICD-9 diagnosis (0.53%, 95% CI = 0.50% to 0.56%). At 251,089 ED visits, syncope was neither an RFV nor an ICD-9 diagnosis. The raw agreement between syncope as an RFV and ICD-9 diagnosis code was 34.1% (95% CI = 32.6% to 35.5%), representing moderate agreement beyond chance ( ? = 0.50). When stratified by characteristics of patient, visit, and hospital, agreement beyond chance ranged from ? = 0.38 to ? = 0.55 ( Tables 1A and 1B ). Characteristics associated with unequal agreement were race/ethnicity (p = 0.003), expected source of payment (p = 0.0001), urgency of visit (p = 0.01), and disposition (p = 0.01). Patients initially assigned an RFV of syncope were ultimately assigned a diverse set of discharge diagnoses. Among such patients, the next leading diagnosis, volume depletion, accounted for 3.2% of cases. The 10 leading diagnoses assigned to patients with an RFV of syncope cumulatively accounted for 71.2% of cases with syncope as an RFV ( Data Supplement S3 , available as supporting information in the online version of this paper). Conversely, among patients ultimately assigned a discharge diagnosis of syncope, five RFV classifications could account for roughly three-quarters of syncope discharges. After “fainting (syncope),” which was assigned to 50.1% of patients with a discharge diagnosis of syncope, “vertigo/dizziness” accounted for 24.6% of cases (cumulative frequency, 65.3%), “general weakness” accounted for 9.2% (69.6%), “accident, not otherwise specified (NOS)” 8.9% (73.6%), and “unconscious on arrival” 6.9% (77.2%). ECG Utilization Overall, 64.1% (95% CI = 62.0% to 66.3%) of patients with syncope as an RFV had an ECG performed compared to 73.6% (95% CI = 71.4% to 75.8%) of those with an ICD-9 diagnosis of syncope ( Table 2 ). This discrepancy persisted independent of patient, visit, and hospital characteristics ( Table 2 ). Unadjusted ECG rates varied by patient and visit characteristics, but not by hospital characteristics ( Table 2 ). Defined by a patient’s RFV, there was variation in ECG utilization by all patient and visit characteristics (p < 0.05). Younger patients, women, Hispanics, and patients whose likely source of payment was classified as “self-pay/charity” were least likely to obtain ECGs in their respective groups. Patients whose visits were nonurgent or resulted in discharge or who saw only a midlevel provider or resident received fewer ECGs. Defined by the ICD-9 diagnosis of syncope, the pattern of variation in unadjusted ECG rates was similar to that based on RFV, except that there was a trend toward variation by race/ethnicity ( Table 2 ). Regardless of case definition, ECG use did not vary by any of the three hospital characteristics (region, urban location, ownership status), suggesting little variation by site. In multivariable analysis, three patient characteristics had a statistically significantly lower likelihood of receiving an ECG under either syncope definition: younger age, female gender, and discharge from the ED ( Table 3 ). After age 18 years, a patient’s odds of having an ECG increased with age. Women were about 25% less likely to have an ECG than comparable male patients. Patients who were discharged were about half as likely as similar admitted patients to receive an ECG. There was no variation by hospital characteristic (region, urban location, ownership status) in the multivariable models. Stratified Analyses When we limited the analyses to syncope patients 60 years or older, as the Medicare version of the performance measure does, the results changed only slightly (data not otherwise shown). In multivariable analysis, age and gender were no longer significantly related to variation in ECG performance, but disposition was. Discharged patients were less likely to receive an ECG than admitted patients (RFV odds ratio [OR] = 0.62, 95% CI = 0.40 to 0.98 vs. ICD-9 OR = 0.64, 95% CI = 0.41 to 1.0). Additionally, race/ethnicity was associated with differential ECG performance: African American non-Hispanic patients were nearly half as likely to have an ECG as white non-Hispanics under both case definitions (RFV OR = 0.51, 95% CI = 0.29 to 0.87 vs. ICD-9 OR = 0.53, 95% CI = 0.30 to 0.93). When we limited the analyses to syncope patients with a cardiac ICD-9 diagnosis, there was not significant variation between case definitions. Among adult ED patients with syncope, the proportion with concomitant cardiac diagnoses was 10.0% among those defined by RFV, compared to 9.7% among those defined by ICD-9 codes, showing moderate agreement ( ? = 0.43; Data Supplement S4 , available as supporting information in the online version of this paper). Of the 265 patients with syncope as an RFV who were assigned a cardiac diagnosis, 90.4% (95% CI = 82.4% to 98.4%) of those with a syncope ICD-9 diagnosis received an ECG, compared to 85.6% (95% CI = 78.0% to 93.3%) among those without a syncope ICD-9 (p = 0.4).  RESULTS Prevalence and Agreement by Case Definitions Over the 11-year study period (1994–2004), there were 2,653 adult visits with syncope as an RFV, representing 1.04% of all U.S. ED visits (95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.00% to 1.08%). An ICD-9 diagnosis of syncope was given at 2,717 visits, representing 1.07% of ED visits (95% CI = 1.02% to 1.11%). At 1,364 visits, patients reported syncope as an RFV and received syncope as an ICD-9 diagnosis (0.53%, 95% CI = 0.50% to 0.56%). At 251,089 ED visits, syncope was neither an RFV nor an ICD-9 diagnosis. The raw agreement between syncope as an RFV and ICD-9 diagnosis code was 34.1% (95% CI = 32.6% to 35.5%), representing moderate agreement beyond chance ( ? = 0.50). When stratified by characteristics of patient, visit, and hospital, agreement beyond chance ranged from ? = 0.38 to ? = 0.55 ( Tables 1A and 1B ). Characteristics associated with unequal agreement were race/ethnicity (p = 0.003), expected source of payment (p = 0.0001), urgency of visit (p = 0.01), and disposition (p = 0.01). Patients initially assigned an RFV of syncope were ultimately assigned a diverse set of discharge diagnoses. Among such patients, the next leading diagnosis, volume depletion, accounted for 3.2% of cases. The 10 leading diagnoses assigned to patients with an RFV of syncope cumulatively accounted for 71.2% of cases with syncope as an RFV ( Data Supplement S3 , available as supporting information in the online version of this paper). Conversely, among patients ultimately assigned a discharge diagnosis of syncope, five RFV classifications could account for roughly three-quarters of syncope discharges. After “fainting (syncope),” which was assigned to 50.1% of patients with a discharge diagnosis of syncope, “vertigo/dizziness” accounted for 24.6% of cases (cumulative frequency, 65.3%), “general weakness” accounted for 9.2% (69.6%), “accident, not otherwise specified (NOS)” 8.9% (73.6%), and “unconscious on arrival” 6.9% (77.2%). ECG Utilization Overall, 64.1% (95% CI = 62.0% to 66.3%) of patients with syncope as an RFV had an ECG performed compared to 73.6% (95% CI = 71.4% to 75.8%) of those with an ICD-9 diagnosis of syncope ( Table 2 ). This discrepancy persisted independent of patient, visit, and hospital characteristics ( Table 2 ). Unadjusted ECG rates varied by patient and visit characteristics, but not by hospital characteristics ( Table 2 ). Defined by a patient’s RFV, there was variation in ECG utilization by all patient and visit characteristics (p < 0.05). Younger patients, women, Hispanics, and patients whose likely source of payment was classified as “self-pay/charity” were least likely to obtain ECGs in their respective groups. Patients whose visits were nonurgent or resulted in discharge or who saw only a midlevel provider or resident received fewer ECGs. Defined by the ICD-9 diagnosis of syncope, the pattern of variation in unadjusted ECG rates was similar to that based on RFV, except that there was a trend toward variation by race/ethnicity ( Table 2 ). Regardless of case definition, ECG use did not vary by any of the three hospital characteristics (region, urban location, ownership status), suggesting little variation by site. In multivariable analysis, three patient characteristics had a statistically significantly lower likelihood of receiving an ECG under either syncope definition: younger age, female gender, and discharge from the ED ( Table 3 ). After age 18 years, a patient’s odds of having an ECG increased with age. Women were about 25% less likely to have an ECG than comparable male patients. Patients who were discharged were about half as likely as similar admitted patients to receive an ECG. There was no variation by hospital characteristic (region, urban location, ownership status) in the multivariable models. Stratified Analyses When we limited the analyses to syncope patients 60 years or older, as the Medicare version of the performance measure does, the results changed only slightly (data not otherwise shown). In multivariable analysis, age and gender were no longer significantly related to variation in ECG performance, but disposition was. Discharged patients were less likely to receive an ECG than admitted patients (RFV odds ratio [OR] = 0.62, 95% CI = 0.40 to 0.98 vs. ICD-9 OR = 0.64, 95% CI = 0.41 to 1.0). Additionally, race/ethnicity was associated with differential ECG performance: African American non-Hispanic patients were nearly half as likely to have an ECG as white non-Hispanics under both case definitions (RFV OR = 0.51, 95% CI = 0.29 to 0.87 vs. ICD-9 OR = 0.53, 95% CI = 0.30 to 0.93). When we limited the analyses to syncope patients with a cardiac ICD-9 diagnosis, there was not significant variation between case definitions. Among adult ED patients with syncope, the proportion with concomitant cardiac diagnoses was 10.0% among those defined by RFV, compared to 9.7% among those defined by ICD-9 codes, showing moderate agreement ( ? = 0.43; Data Supplement S4 , available as supporting information in the online version of this paper). Of the 265 patients with syncope as an RFV who were assigned a cardiac diagnosis, 90.4% (95% CI = 82.4% to 98.4%) of those with a syncope ICD-9 diagnosis received an ECG, compared to 85.6% (95% CI = 78.0% to 93.3%) among those without a syncope ICD-9 (p = 0.4).  Prevalence and Agreement by Case Definitions Over the 11-year study period (1994–2004), there were 2,653 adult visits with syncope as an RFV, representing 1.04% of all U.S. ED visits (95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.00% to 1.08%). An ICD-9 diagnosis of syncope was given at 2,717 visits, representing 1.07% of ED visits (95% CI = 1.02% to 1.11%). At 1,364 visits, patients reported syncope as an RFV and received syncope as an ICD-9 diagnosis (0.53%, 95% CI = 0.50% to 0.56%). At 251,089 ED visits, syncope was neither an RFV nor an ICD-9 diagnosis. The raw agreement between syncope as an RFV and ICD-9 diagnosis code was 34.1% (95% CI = 32.6% to 35.5%), representing moderate agreement beyond chance ( ? = 0.50). When stratified by characteristics of patient, visit, and hospital, agreement beyond chance ranged from ? = 0.38 to ? = 0.55 ( Tables 1A and 1B ). Characteristics associated with unequal agreement were race/ethnicity (p = 0.003), expected source of payment (p = 0.0001), urgency of visit (p = 0.01), and disposition (p = 0.01). Patients initially assigned an RFV of syncope were ultimately assigned a diverse set of discharge diagnoses. Among such patients, the next leading diagnosis, volume depletion, accounted for 3.2% of cases. The 10 leading diagnoses assigned to patients with an RFV of syncope cumulatively accounted for 71.2% of cases with syncope as an RFV ( Data Supplement S3 , available as supporting information in the online version of this paper). Conversely, among patients ultimately assigned a discharge diagnosis of syncope, five RFV classifications could account for roughly three-quarters of syncope discharges. After “fainting (syncope),” which was assigned to 50.1% of patients with a discharge diagnosis of syncope, “vertigo/dizziness” accounted for 24.6% of cases (cumulative frequency, 65.3%), “general weakness” accounted for 9.2% (69.6%), “accident, not otherwise specified (NOS)” 8.9% (73.6%), and “unconscious on arrival” 6.9% (77.2%).  Prevalence and Agreement by Case Definitions Over the 11-year study period (1994–2004), there were 2,653 adult visits with syncope as an RFV, representing 1.04% of all U.S. ED visits (95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.00% to 1.08%). An ICD-9 diagnosis of syncope was given at 2,717 visits, representing 1.07% of ED visits (95% CI = 1.02% to 1.11%). At 1,364 visits, patients reported syncope as an RFV and received syncope as an ICD-9 diagnosis (0.53%, 95% CI = 0.50% to 0.56%). At 251,089 ED visits, syncope was neither an RFV nor an ICD-9 diagnosis. The raw agreement between syncope as an RFV and ICD-9 diagnosis code was 34.1% (95% CI = 32.6% to 35.5%), representing moderate agreement beyond chance ( ? = 0.50). When stratified by characteristics of patient, visit, and hospital, agreement beyond chance ranged from ? = 0.38 to ? = 0.55 ( Tables 1A and 1B ). Characteristics associated with unequal agreement were race/ethnicity (p = 0.003), expected source of payment (p = 0.0001), urgency of visit (p = 0.01), and disposition (p = 0.01). Patients initially assigned an RFV of syncope were ultimately assigned a diverse set of discharge diagnoses. Among such patients, the next leading diagnosis, volume depletion, accounted for 3.2% of cases. The 10 leading diagnoses assigned to patients with an RFV of syncope cumulatively accounted for 71.2% of cases with syncope as an RFV ( Data Supplement S3 , available as supporting information in the online version of this paper). Conversely, among patients ultimately assigned a discharge diagnosis of syncope, five RFV classifications could account for roughly three-quarters of syncope discharges. After “fainting (syncope),” which was assigned to 50.1% of patients with a discharge diagnosis of syncope, “vertigo/dizziness” accounted for 24.6% of cases (cumulative frequency, 65.3%), “general weakness” accounted for 9.2% (69.6%), “accident, not otherwise specified (NOS)” 8.9% (73.6%), and “unconscious on arrival” 6.9% (77.2%).  ECG Utilization Overall, 64.1% (95% CI = 62.0% to 66.3%) of patients with syncope as an RFV had an ECG performed compared to 73.6% (95% CI = 71.4% to 75.8%) of those with an ICD-9 diagnosis of syncope ( Table 2 ). This discrepancy persisted independent of patient, visit, and hospital characteristics ( Table 2 ). Unadjusted ECG rates varied by patient and visit characteristics, but not by hospital characteristics ( Table 2 ). Defined by a patient’s RFV, there was variation in ECG utilization by all patient and visit characteristics (p < 0.05). Younger patients, women, Hispanics, and patients whose likely source of payment was classified as “self-pay/charity” were least likely to obtain ECGs in their respective groups. Patients whose visits were nonurgent or resulted in discharge or who saw only a midlevel provider or resident received fewer ECGs. Defined by the ICD-9 diagnosis of syncope, the pattern of variation in unadjusted ECG rates was similar to that based on RFV, except that there was a trend toward variation by race/ethnicity ( Table 2 ). Regardless of case definition, ECG use did not vary by any of the three hospital characteristics (region, urban location, ownership status), suggesting little variation by site. In multivariable analysis, three patient characteristics had a statistically significantly lower likelihood of receiving an ECG under either syncope definition: younger age, female gender, and discharge from the ED ( Table 3 ). After age 18 years, a patient’s odds of having an ECG increased with age. Women were about 25% less likely to have an ECG than comparable male patients. Patients who were discharged were about half as likely as similar admitted patients to receive an ECG. There was no variation by hospital characteristic (region, urban location, ownership status) in the multivariable models.  ECG Utilization Overall, 64.1% (95% CI = 62.0% to 66.3%) of patients with syncope as an RFV had an ECG performed compared to 73.6% (95% CI = 71.4% to 75.8%) of those with an ICD-9 diagnosis of syncope ( Table 2 ). This discrepancy persisted independent of patient, visit, and hospital characteristics ( Table 2 ). Unadjusted ECG rates varied by patient and visit characteristics, but not by hospital characteristics ( Table 2 ). Defined by a patient’s RFV, there was variation in ECG utilization by all patient and visit characteristics (p < 0.05). Younger patients, women, Hispanics, and patients whose likely source of payment was classified as “self-pay/charity” were least likely to obtain ECGs in their respective groups. Patients whose visits were nonurgent or resulted in discharge or who saw only a midlevel provider or resident received fewer ECGs. Defined by the ICD-9 diagnosis of syncope, the pattern of variation in unadjusted ECG rates was similar to that based on RFV, except that there was a trend toward variation by race/ethnicity ( Table 2 ). Regardless of case definition, ECG use did not vary by any of the three hospital characteristics (region, urban location, ownership status), suggesting little variation by site. In multivariable analysis, three patient characteristics had a statistically significantly lower likelihood of receiving an ECG under either syncope definition: younger age, female gender, and discharge from the ED ( Table 3 ). After age 18 years, a patient’s odds of having an ECG increased with age. Women were about 25% less likely to have an ECG than comparable male patients. Patients who were discharged were about half as likely as similar admitted patients to receive an ECG. There was no variation by hospital characteristic (region, urban location, ownership status) in the multivariable models.  Stratified Analyses When we limited the analyses to syncope patients 60 years or older, as the Medicare version of the performance measure does, the results changed only slightly (data not otherwise shown). In multivariable analysis, age and gender were no longer significantly related to variation in ECG performance, but disposition was. Discharged patients were less likely to receive an ECG than admitted patients (RFV odds ratio [OR] = 0.62, 95% CI = 0.40 to 0.98 vs. ICD-9 OR = 0.64, 95% CI = 0.41 to 1.0). Additionally, race/ethnicity was associated with differential ECG performance: African American non-Hispanic patients were nearly half as likely to have an ECG as white non-Hispanics under both case definitions (RFV OR = 0.51, 95% CI = 0.29 to 0.87 vs. ICD-9 OR = 0.53, 95% CI = 0.30 to 0.93). When we limited the analyses to syncope patients with a cardiac ICD-9 diagnosis, there was not significant variation between case definitions. Among adult ED patients with syncope, the proportion with concomitant cardiac diagnoses was 10.0% among those defined by RFV, compared to 9.7% among those defined by ICD-9 codes, showing moderate agreement ( ? = 0.43; Data Supplement S4 , available as supporting information in the online version of this paper). Of the 265 patients with syncope as an RFV who were assigned a cardiac diagnosis, 90.4% (95% CI = 82.4% to 98.4%) of those with a syncope ICD-9 diagnosis received an ECG, compared to 85.6% (95% CI = 78.0% to 93.3%) among those without a syncope ICD-9 (p = 0.4).  Stratified Analyses When we limited the analyses to syncope patients 60 years or older, as the Medicare version of the performance measure does, the results changed only slightly (data not otherwise shown). In multivariable analysis, age and gender were no longer significantly related to variation in ECG performance, but disposition was. Discharged patients were less likely to receive an ECG than admitted patients (RFV odds ratio [OR] = 0.62, 95% CI = 0.40 to 0.98 vs. ICD-9 OR = 0.64, 95% CI = 0.41 to 1.0). Additionally, race/ethnicity was associated with differential ECG performance: African American non-Hispanic patients were nearly half as likely to have an ECG as white non-Hispanics under both case definitions (RFV OR = 0.51, 95% CI = 0.29 to 0.87 vs. ICD-9 OR = 0.53, 95% CI = 0.30 to 0.93). When we limited the analyses to syncope patients with a cardiac ICD-9 diagnosis, there was not significant variation between case definitions. Among adult ED patients with syncope, the proportion with concomitant cardiac diagnoses was 10.0% among those defined by RFV, compared to 9.7% among those defined by ICD-9 codes, showing moderate agreement ( ? = 0.43; Data Supplement S4 , available as supporting information in the online version of this paper). Of the 265 patients with syncope as an RFV who were assigned a cardiac diagnosis, 90.4% (95% CI = 82.4% to 98.4%) of those with a syncope ICD-9 diagnosis received an ECG, compared to 85.6% (95% CI = 78.0% to 93.3%) among those without a syncope ICD-9 (p = 0.4).  DISCUSSION Analyzing the largest national ED data set, we sought to determine whether syncope case definition (RFV vs. ICD-9) affects ECG usage and whether disparities in ECG testing exist using either definition. We found only moderate agreement between syncope being listed as a patient’s RFV and the patient subsequently receiving syncope as an ICD-9 code. The ICD-9 diagnosis case definition results in a systematically higher raw rate of ECG performance than the RFV definition. Yet, when we adjusted for clinically meaningful covariates, we found no bias in reported ECG use by individual, visit, or hospital characteristics between case definitions. Of note, there appear to be disparities in current syncope care in U.S. EDs, as we found that women were consistently less likely than men to receive an ECG, after adjusting for potential confounding factors. We were not surprised to find only moderate agreement between syncope case definitions, as syncope is a heterogeneous syndrome that is difficult to precisely specify and for which an ED visit may provide a precise alternative diagnosis. Despite syncope and transient loss of consciousness being common causes of ED presentation 1 , 2 and hospital admission, 28 there is lack of agreement on their definition and related terminology. 11 - 13 A clarification of transient loss of consciousness terminology was incorporated into the European Society of Cardiology’s 2004 practice guideline. 4 However, a 2006 scientific statement from the American College of Cardiology Foundation and the American Heart Association confused the definition of “true syncope” with the broader concept of transient loss of consciousness, including seizure disorders. 5 , 15 Major publications have included “neurological” and “psychiatric” causes of syncope, reflecting the lack of precision. 2 , 29 Even precise terms such as “definite seizure” have poor reliability in clinical practice. 30 - 32 Further, the ICD-9 code for syncope may not be precisely applied in clinical practice, as studies of ICD-9 codes in other diseases with subjective standards show poor reliability. 33 - 38 Even with precise specification, syncope at ED presentation often leads to a more specific causative etiology after investigation and hence a primary discharge diagnosis that is not syncope. A performance measure based on ICD-9 codes that does not agree strongly with RFV is at risk of reporting biased results, which would be misleading and possibly harmful if publicly reported. If syncope coding differs by patient, visit, or hospital characteristics, it could lead to biased reporting of ECG performance among groups at risk of poor-quality care. For example, if Hispanics with syncope as an RFV are less likely than non-Hispanics to be given a discharge diagnosis of syncope due to providers’ cultural conceptions, 39 , 40 then the reported performance of ECGs will not be comparable to non-Hispanics. Finally, the performance measure may miss the true target population if they are not assigned syncope as their ICD-9 diagnosis. For example, if patients presenting with syncope are given only more specific diagnoses, such as acute myocardial infarction, then the performance measure would exclude the very patients most likely to benefit from an ECG. Yet, when applied to a nationally representative data set, the syncope performance measure does not reveal bias from case definitions. The ICD-9 diagnosis case definition reported higher ECG rates than the RFV definition across all subgroups, but when adjusted for these characteristics, the choice of case definition (RFV vs. ICD-9) did not bias reporting of ECG use. After adjustment, younger age, female gender, and ED discharge were associated with a lower likelihood of receiving an ECG among all adults, regardless of case definition. Our model accounted for patient, visit, and hospital factors and for the interaction between a patient’s age and his or her insurance type and provider assigned urgency and disposition. There is a clinical rationale for more frequent ECG use among older patients, who are more likely to have ischemic heart disease, conduction abnormalities, and other serious cardiac causes of syncope, which are the main reasons for obtaining an ECG in syncope. 41 , 42 The same is true of admitted patients, who are generally sicker and may have an ECG performed as part of standard admission orders. However, there is no clinical reason why women with syncope should be less likely than their male counterparts to receive an ECG, after adjustment for age and other predictive characteristics. As the lower ECG rate among women was seen under both case definitions after adjustment, we are concerned that it represents a disparity in care rather than bias in coding. Although we adjusted for age, such a disparity may be limited to younger women as we did not find lower ECG utilization among women in the analysis limited to those aged 60 and older. Of note, we found no significant variation by any site characteristics: hospital region, urban status, or ownership type. This is interesting, as many studies of test utilization show meaningful differences by such characteristics, and this is one of the justifications for performance measures. 43 Although the NHAMCS data do not allow for analysis by specific hospital ED, the lack of variation by hospital characteristics suggests that the identified disparities do not simply reflect random variation across providers and sites. Disparities by race, ethnicity, and gender in the U.S. healthcare system have been documented across settings and clinical conditions, particularly in cardiovascular care. 44 Prior studies have reported racial, ethnic, 45 and gender 46 disparities in ECG use among ED patients with chest pain, but not among those with syncope. Sun et al. 7 showed that increasing age and admission were associated with higher likelihood of ECG testing, but did not perform multivariable analysis and limited their analysis to ED visits defined by a patient’s RFV. Grossman et al. 47 reported that among elders presenting to the ED with syncope, men were more likely than women to be admitted to hospital, but among those admitted, women were less likely to be discharged with a defined etiology. Grossman et al. did not assess whether these differences related to the utilization of specific diagnostic testing strategies, such as ECG. We believe that our findings may identify another clinical condition in which gender disparities may be present in emergency care, although further study is needed to show this definitively and to document the importance of lower ECG rates in women below the age of 60 years.  DISCUSSION Analyzing the largest national ED data set, we sought to determine whether syncope case definition (RFV vs. ICD-9) affects ECG usage and whether disparities in ECG testing exist using either definition. We found only moderate agreement between syncope being listed as a patient’s RFV and the patient subsequently receiving syncope as an ICD-9 code. The ICD-9 diagnosis case definition results in a systematically higher raw rate of ECG performance than the RFV definition. Yet, when we adjusted for clinically meaningful covariates, we found no bias in reported ECG use by individual, visit, or hospital characteristics between case definitions. Of note, there appear to be disparities in current syncope care in U.S. EDs, as we found that women were consistently less likely than men to receive an ECG, after adjusting for potential confounding factors. We were not surprised to find only moderate agreement between syncope case definitions, as syncope is a heterogeneous syndrome that is difficult to precisely specify and for which an ED visit may provide a precise alternative diagnosis. Despite syncope and transient loss of consciousness being common causes of ED presentation 1 , 2 and hospital admission, 28 there is lack of agreement on their definition and related terminology. 11 - 13 A clarification of transient loss of consciousness terminology was incorporated into the European Society of Cardiology’s 2004 practice guideline. 4 However, a 2006 scientific statement from the American College of Cardiology Foundation and the American Heart Association confused the definition of “true syncope” with the broader concept of transient loss of consciousness, including seizure disorders. 5 , 15 Major publications have included “neurological” and “psychiatric” causes of syncope, reflecting the lack of precision. 2 , 29 Even precise terms such as “definite seizure” have poor reliability in clinical practice. 30 - 32 Further, the ICD-9 code for syncope may not be precisely applied in clinical practice, as studies of ICD-9 codes in other diseases with subjective standards show poor reliability. 33 - 38 Even with precise specification, syncope at ED presentation often leads to a more specific causative etiology after investigation and hence a primary discharge diagnosis that is not syncope. A performance measure based on ICD-9 codes that does not agree strongly with RFV is at risk of reporting biased results, which would be misleading and possibly harmful if publicly reported. If syncope coding differs by patient, visit, or hospital characteristics, it could lead to biased reporting of ECG performance among groups at risk of poor-quality care. For example, if Hispanics with syncope as an RFV are less likely than non-Hispanics to be given a discharge diagnosis of syncope due to providers’ cultural conceptions, 39 , 40 then the reported performance of ECGs will not be comparable to non-Hispanics. Finally, the performance measure may miss the true target population if they are not assigned syncope as their ICD-9 diagnosis. For example, if patients presenting with syncope are given only more specific diagnoses, such as acute myocardial infarction, then the performance measure would exclude the very patients most likely to benefit from an ECG. Yet, when applied to a nationally representative data set, the syncope performance measure does not reveal bias from case definitions. The ICD-9 diagnosis case definition reported higher ECG rates than the RFV definition across all subgroups, but when adjusted for these characteristics, the choice of case definition (RFV vs. ICD-9) did not bias reporting of ECG use. After adjustment, younger age, female gender, and ED discharge were associated with a lower likelihood of receiving an ECG among all adults, regardless of case definition. Our model accounted for patient, visit, and hospital factors and for the interaction between a patient’s age and his or her insurance type and provider assigned urgency and disposition. There is a clinical rationale for more frequent ECG use among older patients, who are more likely to have ischemic heart disease, conduction abnormalities, and other serious cardiac causes of syncope, which are the main reasons for obtaining an ECG in syncope. 41 , 42 The same is true of admitted patients, who are generally sicker and may have an ECG performed as part of standard admission orders. However, there is no clinical reason why women with syncope should be less likely than their male counterparts to receive an ECG, after adjustment for age and other predictive characteristics. As the lower ECG rate among women was seen under both case definitions after adjustment, we are concerned that it represents a disparity in care rather than bias in coding. Although we adjusted for age, such a disparity may be limited to younger women as we did not find lower ECG utilization among women in the analysis limited to those aged 60 and older. Of note, we found no significant variation by any site characteristics: hospital region, urban status, or ownership type. This is interesting, as many studies of test utilization show meaningful differences by such characteristics, and this is one of the justifications for performance measures. 43 Although the NHAMCS data do not allow for analysis by specific hospital ED, the lack of variation by hospital characteristics suggests that the identified disparities do not simply reflect random variation across providers and sites. Disparities by race, ethnicity, and gender in the U.S. healthcare system have been documented across settings and clinical conditions, particularly in cardiovascular care. 44 Prior studies have reported racial, ethnic, 45 and gender 46 disparities in ECG use among ED patients with chest pain, but not among those with syncope. Sun et al. 7 showed that increasing age and admission were associated with higher likelihood of ECG testing, but did not perform multivariable analysis and limited their analysis to ED visits defined by a patient’s RFV. Grossman et al. 47 reported that among elders presenting to the ED with syncope, men were more likely than women to be admitted to hospital, but among those admitted, women were less likely to be discharged with a defined etiology. Grossman et al. did not assess whether these differences related to the utilization of specific diagnostic testing strategies, such as ECG. We believe that our findings may identify another clinical condition in which gender disparities may be present in emergency care, although further study is needed to show this definitively and to document the importance of lower ECG rates in women below the age of 60 years.  LIMITATIONS The NHAMCS is a survey of ED charts and has limitations typical of chart reviews. 48 , 49 The National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) has conducted NHAMCS for over a decade with robust quality control, maintaining a high response rate and low hospital turnover. 24 More specifically, as RFV and ICD-9 codes are assigned retrospectively in NHAMCS, miscoding can occur if 1) the patient had an alternate complaint or diagnosis, such as a seizure, that was not apparent at the time of presentation; 2) the NHAMCS coder made an error; or 3) the triage assignment or physician ICD-9 diagnosis inaccurately classified the patient’s complaint. The first two are clinically important limitations of our study, while the third represents misclassification bias by healthcare providers. If such bias occurs along categories such as race, ethnicity, or gender, that would be an important finding to document and address. Coding errors are a real possibility for syncope, as coders may not reliably convert subtle clinical presentations, such as “falling out,” to appropriate codes for RFV and diagnosis codes. The coding for the NHAMCS is often done by nonclinical personnel, and these coders, while trained to follow a standardized coding algorithm, do not attend a training session in person at the Centers for Disease Control. Despite variation in personnel and training, RFV and diagnosis coding for syncope appears reproducible, as incidence was shown to be stable year to year (RFV 0.92% to 1.09%; ICD-9 0.92% to 1.17%) over our 11-year study period. ECG coding in NHAMCS is likely more accurate than administrative data sources, as it is coded to a specific ECG field on the chart review rather than relying on a list of procedure codes generated for billing. Second, as we were not able to compare either RFV or ICD-9 diagnosis with an established standard of physician judgment of syncope, this is an important area for further research. We do not assume that ICD-9 codes are more accurate than the patients’ stated RFV, as ICD-9 codes are often assigned after the clinical encounter by billing specialists rather than clinicians. Finally, there is some risk in drawing conclusions about a performance measure from preimplementation data. Because providers quickly become aware of publicly reported performance measure specifications, they may adjust their documentation or coding practices in response. 50 Despite this, it is important to evaluate such a measure undergoing nationwide implementation.  LIMITATIONS The NHAMCS is a survey of ED charts and has limitations typical of chart reviews. 48 , 49 The National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) has conducted NHAMCS for over a decade with robust quality control, maintaining a high response rate and low hospital turnover. 24 More specifically, as RFV and ICD-9 codes are assigned retrospectively in NHAMCS, miscoding can occur if 1) the patient had an alternate complaint or diagnosis, such as a seizure, that was not apparent at the time of presentation; 2) the NHAMCS coder made an error; or 3) the triage assignment or physician ICD-9 diagnosis inaccurately classified the patient’s complaint. The first two are clinically important limitations of our study, while the third represents misclassification bias by healthcare providers. If such bias occurs along categories such as race, ethnicity, or gender, that would be an important finding to document and address. Coding errors are a real possibility for syncope, as coders may not reliably convert subtle clinical presentations, such as “falling out,” to appropriate codes for RFV and diagnosis codes. The coding for the NHAMCS is often done by nonclinical personnel, and these coders, while trained to follow a standardized coding algorithm, do not attend a training session in person at the Centers for Disease Control. Despite variation in personnel and training, RFV and diagnosis coding for syncope appears reproducible, as incidence was shown to be stable year to year (RFV 0.92% to 1.09%; ICD-9 0.92% to 1.17%) over our 11-year study period. ECG coding in NHAMCS is likely more accurate than administrative data sources, as it is coded to a specific ECG field on the chart review rather than relying on a list of procedure codes generated for billing. Second, as we were not able to compare either RFV or ICD-9 diagnosis with an established standard of physician judgment of syncope, this is an important area for further research. We do not assume that ICD-9 codes are more accurate than the patients’ stated RFV, as ICD-9 codes are often assigned after the clinical encounter by billing specialists rather than clinicians. Finally, there is some risk in drawing conclusions about a performance measure from preimplementation data. Because providers quickly become aware of publicly reported performance measure specifications, they may adjust their documentation or coding practices in response. 50 Despite this, it is important to evaluate such a measure undergoing nationwide implementation.  CONCLUSIONS Despite only moderate agreement between a patient’s reason for visit and final ICD-9 diagnosis for syncope, we did not find biases in ECG reporting between case definitions. Our results suggest that the new performance measure will report ECG rates that are higher than those among patients who present to the ED with syncope, perhaps falsely raising impressions of performance. Our results may give pause to those who see the lack of agreement between syncope case definitions as an indictment of the performance measures’ face validity. Alternatively, despite imperfect case definitions, the lack of observed bias in comparisons by patient, visit, or hospital characteristics may reassure others that the performance measure will fairly report on institutions and providers with different patient populations. Additionally, we found that women with syncope, defined by either standard, were less likely than men to receive an ECG. This may be a potential quality disparity, which, if verified, could be the strongest justification for the syncope performance measure. The high current rate of ECG testing in the target population, the lack of observed hospital variation, and the paucity of evidence linking universal ECGs with improved patient outcomes suggest that there may be limited returns from increasing ECG testing in syncope. Whether increasing ECG performance in ED patients with syncope will improve patient outcomes deserves further investigation.  Supplementary Material Supp Data 1 Data Supplement S1 AMA-PCPI Emergency Medicine Measure #3: 12-Lead Electrocardiogram (ECG) Performed for Syncope. Supp Data 2 Data Supplement S2 Cardiac diagnosis ICD-9 codes. Supp Data 3 Data Supplement S3 Most frequent discharge diagnoses among patients with syncope as a reason for visit. Supp Data 4 Data Supplement S4 Patients with cardiac diagnoses by syncope definition (RFV vs. ICD-9). 