Vaccines and Photodynamic Therapies for Oral Microbial-Related Diseases The mouth is a favorable habitat for a great variety of bacteria. Microbial composition of dental plaque is the usual cause of various oral diseases in humans, including dental caries, periodontal disease and halitosis. In general, oral antibacterial agents such as antibiotics are commonly used to treat oral bacterial infection. Traditional periodontal surgery is painful and time-consuming. In addition, bacterial resistance and toxicity of antibiotics have become a global pandemic and unavoidable. Recently, vaccines for dental caries and periodontal disease have been developed and applied. Moreover, the use of photodynamic therapy has become an alternative to antibiotic drugs. The purpose of this article is to highlight the advantages of vaccine therapy and photodynamic therapy for oral microbial-related diseases compared to treatments with antimicrobial agents and traditional periodontal surgery.  Conclusion and Perceptive The great diversity of biological surfaces in the oral cavity provides many ecological sites for colonization by a variety of oral bacterial species [ 63 ]. Dental caries, periodontal diseases, and halitosis are oral infections caused by bacterial plaque accumulations. Infection from oral bacteria is also a potential contributing factor to a variety of clinically important systemic diseases. Here, we describe and compare the therapies for oral microbial-related diseases ( Table 1 ). Antibacterial agents, non-antibiotics or antibiotics, are commonly prescribed drugs for periodontal disease and halitosis. Although they are also easy to manipulate, risks of drug resistance and toxicity to organisms have become serious problems [ 23 ]. Moreover, only higher levels and multi-dose of the local-applied antimicrobial can achieve the effect attained with systemic administration [ 23 ]. More and more vaccines against dental caries and periodontal diseases have been developed [ 23 ]. They can be applied to kill one specific oral microbe systematically. Additionally, the findings of associations between periodontitis and other systemic diseases could provide a rationale for the development of a vaccine against many diseases [ 16 ]. Vaccination of infants may establish long-lasting immunity against an ensuing colonization attempts by Streptococcus mutans [ 38 ]. However, a preventive vaccine may not be effective in patients that already have dental caries. Furthermore, progress towards practical vaccine development requires evaluation of candidate vaccines in clinical trials. Proteomic tools hold great promise in defining the full repertoire of candidate vaccine antigens expressed by a pathogen, from which the optimal antigens for a vaccine can be rationally selected. Coupling multi-dimensional protein identification technology with recently developed quantitative proteomic methods such as those using stable isotope labeling or the label-free approach is a powerful technique for high-throughput, highly efficient identification of potential drug targets for the treatment and control of oral diseases [ 64 ]. Improvements in proteomic technology will significantly enhance our understanding of antimicrobial resistance and the complications of antibiotic treatment. Traditional mechanical surgeries are maturely established and commonly used for caries and periodontal diseases. However, many patients due to suffering from the pain and time-consuming procedure do still not accept it. Because bacteria are sensitized to light through prior treatment with chemical photosensitizers, lethal photosensitization to bacteria responsible for oral infection disease has been demonstrated. The advantages of this approach are avoiding resistance to target bacteria and damage to adjacent host tissues [ 58 ]. Moreover, because the chemical photosensitizers can be applied to the disease lesion, disruption of the normal microflora at other sites can be avoided [ 58 ]. Furthermore, the therapy can kill target organisms very rapidly, depending on the light energy dose and the power output used [ 58 ]. High concentrations of the photosensitizers, therefore, do not need to be maintained in the disease lesion for long time [ 58 ]. Overall, there are several advantages and few disadvantages to using vaccines and photodynamic therapy in place of antimicrobial agents and traditional periodontal surgery for the treatment of oral microbial-related diseases.  Table Table 1 Comparison of Therapies for Oral Microbial-Related Diseases Category Antibacterial Agent Treatment Vaccine Therapy Traditional Periodontal Surgery Photodynamic Therapy Advantages Common prescribed drugs Easy manipulation Systemic or topical delivery Long-lasting effect Systemic effect Specific target to microbes Systemic disease application Proteomic tool Mature technique Specific target to infection site No surgery Short procedure Specific target to disease lesion Avoiding damage to adjacent host tissues Avoiding resistance to target bacteria Avoiding disruption of the normal microflora at other sites No high level of photosensitizers requirement Disadvantages Multiple and high dose application Systemic toxicity and drug resistance Inefficient local treatment Side effects Lack of clinical trail Preventive vaccine but not cured vaccine Damage to adjacent host tissues Painful, anxiety, discomfort, bleeding Time-consuming More attention after surgery Long recovery time Antibacterial agent requirement to relieve post-surgical discomfort Unknown metabolism of photosensitizers Special instrument requirement 