Novel humanized mouse models for HIV research There are few models where HIV pathogenesis, particularly gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) CD4+ T cell depletion, can be studied and where potential clinical interventions against HIV disease can be evaluated. HIV cannot be studied in normal mice due to the limited species tropism of the virus. Through the pioneering efforts of many investigators, humanized mice are now routinely utilized to rapidly advance the field of HIV research. It is important to recognize that not all humanized mice models are equal and their strengths and weaknesses must be taken into consideration in order to obtain information that is most relevant to the human condition. This review distinguishes the major humanization protocols and highlights each model’s recent contributions to HIV research, including mucosal transmission, GALT pathogenesis and the evaluation of novel therapeutic and prevention approaches to potentially treat HIV disease and prevent the further spread of AIDS.  Conclusions The new generation of humanized mice described herein is rapidly opening new opportunities for pre-clinical and basic HIV research. The accessibility of these models to many investigators will certainly accelerate translational HIV/AIDS research. Humanized mice have the potential to serve as surrogate models to investigate, in vivo, the role of HIV auxiliary proteins in viral pathogenesis. Despite extensive knowledge of the in vitro activities of these proteins, it is still unclear how each of their multiple in vitro activities relates to their contribution to in vivo pathogenesis and disease progression. One example is Nef, a lentiviral protein with at least four distinct in vitro activities, none of which has been demonstrated to be central to Nef’s in vivo phenotype [ 46 ]. In vivo models of HIV pathogenesis like those outlined here will serve to test fundamental hypotheses, yielding critical information regarding the in vivo relevance of the different molecular determinants of novel antiviral targets. In addition, they will also serve to test novel antivirals as they are developed including those targeting HIV regulatory and auxiliary genes. The fact that humanized BLT mice demonstrate extensive human-like GALT reconstitution and recapitulate key aspects of HIV pathogenesis seen in the GALT of HIV infected patients will make it possible to evaluate novel therapeutic approaches aimed at GALT reconstitution. The demonstrated susceptibility of humanized Rag2?/?IL2R?c?/? and BLT mice to mucosal HIV transmission will facilitate the development and testing of topically applied or systemically administered prophylactic approaches to prevent HIV transmission. This promise has already been exploited to demonstrate the efficient protection afforded by systemic antiretrovirals to prevent HIV transmission. The recent examples noted above regarding the in vivo evaluation of novel therapeutic interventions is a clear indication of how useful these models will be in the future. Finally, one area of great interest that is likely to see further growth and development is the use of humanized mouse models for the evaluation of novel vaccine approaches to prevent HIV infection. Developing a vaccine for HIV has been extraordinarily difficult. The system most often used for pre-clinical evaluation of vaccines has been SIV infection of macaques. There is a key limitation to the SIV/macaque system. Namely, epitopes in the vaccines must be matched to the challenge virus. In other words, the immunogenicity of SIV, not HIV, epitopes is being tested [ 47 , 48 ]. If determining protective immunodominant epitopes is a goal of the vaccine effort [ 49 ], then humanized mice can aid the effort as they can be infected with HIV. Their relative accessibility and low cost will facilitate parallel analysis of immune responses and actual protection from physiologically relevant challenge. Specifically, humanized mice will facilitate the analysis of immune responses in the mucosal tissues where HIV is actually transmitted and at the same time allow for mucosal challenge experiments that will serve to determine to what extent any new vaccine approach might have a protective effect against the specific viruses that are driving the epidemic. However, if humanized mice are used in vaccine research, viral epitope processing and presentation should occur in the context of human MHC, not mouse MHC. Specifically, immunodominant epitopes displayed on mouse MHC to human TCR may not have direct relation to immunodominant epitopes displayed on human MHC to the same human TCR. Thus, for vaccine research applications it will be particularly important to fully elucidate how T cells are educated in the absence of human stroma in humanized Rag2?/?IL2R?c?/? and NOD/SCID-IL2R?c?/? mice. Human thymic stroma present in the humanized BLT model allows for the education of human thymocytes in the full context of human MHC making this system highly relevant to evaluate human-specific immune responses to potential HIV vaccines. 