Implications of Cellular Senescence in Tissue Damage Response, Tumor Suppression, and Stem Cell Biology Cellular senescence is characterized by an irreversible cell cycle arrest that, when bypassed by mutation, contributes to cellular immortalization. Activated oncogenes induce a hyperproliferative response, which might be one of the senescence cues. We have found that expression of such an oncogene, Akt , causes senescence in primary mouse hepatoblasts in vitro. Additionally, AKT-driven tumors undergo senescence in vivo following p53 reactivation and show signs of differentiation. In another in vivo system, i.e., liver fibrosis, hyperproliferative signaling through AKT might be a driving force of the senescence in activated hepatic stellate cells. Senescent cells up-regulate and secrete molecules that, on the one hand, can reinforce the arrest and, on the other hand, can signal to an innate immune system to clear the senescent cells. The mechanisms governing senescence and immortalization are overlapping with those regulating self-renewal and differentiation. These respective control mechanisms, or their disregulation, are involved in multiple pathological conditions including fibrosis, wound healing, and cancer. Understanding extracellular cues that regulate these processes may enable new therapies for these conditions.  CONCLUSIONS In summary, the processes of senescence and immortalization, and differentiation and self-renewal, share overlapping signaling mechanisms and can be viewed as two sides of the same coin. What these similarities reveal, and the extent to which they apply to different contexts, remains to be determined. On the one hand, many of the processes currently linked to “self-renewal” have long been established to influence immortalization. As one example, there is much debate about the origin of cancer stem cells and how they acquire self-renewal capabilities; however, from the discussion above, it seems likely that in many cases, this reflects the process of immortalization studied for the last 30 years. Indeed, disruption of the ARF locus, well established to facilitate cellular immortalization, is sufficient to confer “cancer stem cell” properties to virtually all lymphoid cells expressing Bcr-Abl ( Williams and Sherr 2008 ). On the other hand, these overlaps might have a deeper meaning, reflecting mechanisms that initially evolved to control cell numbers in normal tissues but were later incorporated into intrinsic tumor suppressive mechanisms to limit uncontrolled cell division. If this proves to be the case, it will be of interest to determine whether the self-renewal of stem cells is also influenced by autocrine and paracrine mechanisms that parallel those that influence differentiation. If so, such knowledge might stimulate the development of biological therapies to influence stem cell self-renewal and tissue regeneration. 