Identification of dendritic cell subsets responding to genital infection by Chlamydia muridarum Dendritic cells are central for the induction of T cell responses needed for chlamydial eradication. Here we report the activation of two dendritic cell subsets: a classical, CD11b+ (cDC) and plasmacytoid (pDC) during genital infection with C. muridarum . Genital infection induced influx of cDC and pDC into the gential tract (GT) and its draining lymph node (ILN) as well as co-localization with T cells in the ILN. Genital infection with C. muridarum also stimulated high levels of costimulatory molecules on cDC central for the activation of naïve T cells in vivo . In contrast, pDC expressed low levels of most co-stimulatory molecules in vivo and did not secrete cytokines associated with production of Th1 cells (IL-12) in vitro . However, pDC up-regulated ICOSL expression and produced IL-6 and IL-10 in response to chlamydial exposure in vitro . Our findings demonstrate that these two DC subsets likely have different functions in vivo . cDC are poised for induction of anti-chlamydial T cell responses whereas pDC have characteristics associated with the differentiation of non-Th1 cell subsets.  Introduction Chlamydia trachomatis is the most prevalent sexually transmitted bacterial pathogen worldwide ( WHO, 2001 ). Inflammation of the reproductive tract following infection with Chlamydia can result in severe sequelae which include pelvic inflammatory disease and infertility ( WHO, 2001 ). Recent examination of the clinical diagnosis and treatment of genital chlamydial infections have revealed that attenuation of infection through antimicrobial treatment increases the re-infection rate in humans and may exacerbate immunopathology within the reproductive tract ( Brunham & Rekart, 2008 ). These findings highlight the need for an effective vaccine against genital chlamydial infection. Recent efforts to design a vaccine against Chlamydia have been ineffective due, in part, to the elusiveness of chlamydial antigens and conditions which induce a long-lasting, protective response. An additional obstacle for vaccine design against Chlamydia is the implication of the immune response in the genital pathology associated with infection ( Roan & Starnbach, 2008 ). Together these findings emphasize the importance of discrimination between protective and pathological host immune responses in the design of an effective vaccine against genital infection by C. trachomatis . The culmination of work to date examining the immune response to genital infection by Chlamydia has indicated that T cells are central to the clearance of infection ( Brunham & Rey-Ladino, 2005 ). Amongst T cell subsets, an IFN?-producing CD4+ subset (Th1) has been shown to be dominant and required for clearance of genital infection. In addition to protection, T cells have also been implicated in prolonged inflammation thought to promote adverse reproductive outcomes ( Roan & Starnbach, 2008 ). This possibility, as well as the central role T cells play in the clearance of infection, emphasizes the need for a more clear delineation of the events which initiate and regulate T cell responses to chlamydial infections. The induction of effector T cell responses is controlled by dendritic cells ( Steinman & Hemmi, 2006 ). Recent examination of the potential for DC to induce protective and non-pathological T cell responses has been demonstrated in a mouse model of chlamydial infection ( Su, et al. , 1998 ). Adoptive transfer of bone marrow (BM) derived DC pulsed with inactivated C. muridarum were capable of inducing a protective Th1 response and did not induce immunopathology within the genital tract (GT) following challenge with C. muridarum . Subsequent work utilizing BM derived DC have shown that varying the chlamydial antigens used to pulse DC in vitro can affect the level of protection conferred following adoptive transfer ( Rey-Ladino, et al. , 2005 ). Despite these efforts, little has been demonstrated as to the activity of DC subsets in vivo during genital chlamydial infection. DC are comprised of a heterogeneous family of cells which exhibit an extensive plasticity of function. Dependant on the immune context, differing DC subsets have been shown to induce contrasting T cell responses ( Kapsenberg, 2003 ). Recent examination of DC subsets in a lung model of chlamydial infection demonstrated that distinct DC subsets have divergent effects on the differentiation of T cell subsets ( Bilenki, et al. , 2006 ). Therefore the existence of multiple DC subsets may account for the varying T cell responses seen during chlamydial genital infection. This study was designed to determine whether distinct DC subsets respond to chlamydial genital infection. Our efforts have focused on those DC which may account for the varying T cell responses demonstrated to be induced during genital infection, with particular focus on the potential of DC to induce or alter the protective Th1 response. To examine DC subset activity in vivo , we have examined the influx, localization, and co-stimulatory molecule expression of DC subsets in both the genital tract (GT) and its draining lymph node (iliac node, ILN).  Materials and methods <italic>C. muridarum</italic> propagation and infection C. muridarum (Nigg strain) was grown, purified, and titered in McCoy cells as previously described ( Maxion, et al. , 2004 ). Elementary bodies (EB) and reticulate bodies isolated from McCoy cells were frozen in sucrose-phosphate buffered saline (SPS) at ?80°C until use. Female BALB/c mice, aged 5–6 weeks, were treated with progesterone (Depo-Provera, 2.5 mg in 100 µl sterile PBS) one week prior to infection. Following anesthetization, mice were inoculated with 1×105 infection forming units (IFU) intra-vaginally. For determination of bacterial load, mice were swabbed vaginally every three days after infection. Swabs were placed in 200 µl SPS and frozen at ?80°C. Bacterial load was determined in McCoy cells as previously described ( Maxion, et al. , 2004 ). For all experiments mice were housed and treated in accordance with the American Association of Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care guidelines. Experimental procedures were approved by the UCLA Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Dendritic cell isolation and characterization from <italic>C. muridarum</italic> infected mice DC isolation was performed as previously described, with modifications ( Nakano, et al. , 2001 ). Briefly, tissues of interest were excised from five mice, minced, pooled, and cultured in the presence of collagenase (1mg/ml, Type I, Sigma) and DNAse (0.4 mg/ml, Sigma) in Hank’s Balanced Salt solution with Ca++ and Mg++. Spleens and ILN (iliac lymph nodes) were incubated for 20 minutes and GTs for 60 minutes at 37°C. Following incubation, single cell suspensions were obtained by mincing tissue through a 70 µm filter (Falcon) in HBS with 5mM EDTA and 0.5% BSA. Cells were washed twice and maintained in solution containing 5mM EDTA to minimize cell adhesion. Cell suspensions were applied to freshly prepared Nycodenz (Accurate Chemical) gradients (15% w/v in RPMI supplemented with 10% v/v heat inactivated FCS) and spun for 20 minutes at 450 × g. Low density cells were removed from the interface, washed, and re-suspended in the appropriate buffer. DC subset identification was performed by FACS as previously described ( Liu & Kelly, 2008 ). Briefly, low density fractions were incubated on ice in the presence of Fc-Block (BD Pharmingen) for 20 minutes, washed, and incubated with antibodies specific for surface molecules. Fluorochrome or biotin conjugated antibodies for CD11c (N418), CD45R (RA3-62B), CD11b (M1/70), CD3 (145-2C11), CD19 (MB19-1), and Ly6G/C (RB6-865) were purchased from eBioscience. The pDC specific antibodies, mPDCA-1 and 120G8, were purchased from Miltenyi Biotec or received as a gift from Schering Plough Research Institute, respectively. DC subsets were defined as low density cells which were CD11c+CD3?CD19? and expressed either CD11b or CD45R (see results for DC subset phenotyping). Co-stimulatory molecules were measured on DC subsets by staining for the surface molecules; CD40 (1C10), CD80 (16-10A1), CD86 (GL1), ICOSL (HK5.3) and were purchased from eBioscience. Antibodies to I-Ad (AMS-32.1) were purchased from BD Pharmingen. FACS acquisition was done on a FACSCaliber (Becton Dickinson) at the UCLA Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center and Center for AIDS Research Flow Cytometry Core Facility. FACS analysis was performed using FCS Express (DeNovo Software). Immunofluorescent localization of DC subsets ILN were harvested 3 days after infection, placed in Optimal Cutting Temperature freezing media (Tissue Tek), flash frozen, and stored at ?80°C. Tissue sections (5 µm) were cut by the UCLA Tissue Procurement Laboratory. Consecutive sections were stained sequentially with unconjugated CD3 (145-2C11, eBioscience), goat-anti-rat ALEXA 546 (Invitrogen), CD11c-biotin (HL3, BD Pharmingen) or BST2-biotin (conjugated in house using FluorReporter Biotin-XX, Invitrogen), streptavidin-ALEXA 488, and mounted using Prolong Gold anti-fade reagent with DAPI (Invitrogen). Sections were visualized using a Leica TCS-SP MP at the UCLA Brain Research Institute Microscopy Core Facility. Images were taken at using a 20× objective and resized for publication using Photoshop CS3 (Adobe). <italic>In vitro</italic> differentiation and stimulation of pDC pDC were differentiated from BM precursors as previously described, with modifications ( Naik, et al. , 2005 ). Briefly, the femurs and tibias were excised from 8–10 week old female BALB/c mice and BM extracted by flushing with RPMI supplemented with 10% FCS. After RBC lysis, cells were cultured in complete media (RPMI 1640 with 10 mM HEPES, 10 mM sodium pyruvate, 2 mM L-glutamine, 10 mM non-essential amino acids, 10% v/v FCS, and 100 µg/ml penicillin and streptomycin) supplemented with recombinant FLT3L (0.2 µg/ml, R&D Systems) in 100 mm bacteriological petri dishes (Becton Dickson) at 2×106 cells/ml. Half of the culture media was removed and replaced with fresh FLT3L containing complete media every three days. On day 10 of culture, non-adherent cells were removed by pipetting and enriched on a Nycodenz gradient. The BM cells were further enriched for pDC by depleting CD11b+ cells from the low density fraction using magnetic bead isolation and CD11b-biotin (M1/70, eBioscience) followed by streptavidin microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec). pDC were routinely purified to greater than 90% CD11c+CD45R+120G8+CD11b? cells. Purified pDC were stimulated in complete media (2×106 cells/ml) without penicillin and streptomycin in the presence of renograffin purified live C. muridarum EBs (multiplicity of infection of 1), CpG-C (5µg/ml, 5’- TCGTCGAACGTTCGAGATGAT -3’), or media alone for 48 hours. For CpG motifs, bold letters indicate phosphorothioate linkages. After stimulation, cell culture supernatants were collected for ELISA analysis and the remaining cell pellet re-suspended, washed, and analyzed by FACS as described above. ELISA analysis of culture supernatants were carried out using DUO-KIT sets for IFN?, IL-6, IL-10, and IL-12p70 according to the manufacturer’s protocol (R&D Systems).  <italic>C. muridarum</italic> propagation and infection C. muridarum (Nigg strain) was grown, purified, and titered in McCoy cells as previously described ( Maxion, et al. , 2004 ). Elementary bodies (EB) and reticulate bodies isolated from McCoy cells were frozen in sucrose-phosphate buffered saline (SPS) at ?80°C until use. Female BALB/c mice, aged 5–6 weeks, were treated with progesterone (Depo-Provera, 2.5 mg in 100 µl sterile PBS) one week prior to infection. Following anesthetization, mice were inoculated with 1×105 infection forming units (IFU) intra-vaginally. For determination of bacterial load, mice were swabbed vaginally every three days after infection. Swabs were placed in 200 µl SPS and frozen at ?80°C. Bacterial load was determined in McCoy cells as previously described ( Maxion, et al. , 2004 ). For all experiments mice were housed and treated in accordance with the American Association of Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care guidelines. Experimental procedures were approved by the UCLA Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.  Dendritic cell isolation and characterization from <italic>C. muridarum</italic> infected mice DC isolation was performed as previously described, with modifications ( Nakano, et al. , 2001 ). Briefly, tissues of interest were excised from five mice, minced, pooled, and cultured in the presence of collagenase (1mg/ml, Type I, Sigma) and DNAse (0.4 mg/ml, Sigma) in Hank’s Balanced Salt solution with Ca++ and Mg++. Spleens and ILN (iliac lymph nodes) were incubated for 20 minutes and GTs for 60 minutes at 37°C. Following incubation, single cell suspensions were obtained by mincing tissue through a 70 µm filter (Falcon) in HBS with 5mM EDTA and 0.5% BSA. Cells were washed twice and maintained in solution containing 5mM EDTA to minimize cell adhesion. Cell suspensions were applied to freshly prepared Nycodenz (Accurate Chemical) gradients (15% w/v in RPMI supplemented with 10% v/v heat inactivated FCS) and spun for 20 minutes at 450 × g. Low density cells were removed from the interface, washed, and re-suspended in the appropriate buffer. DC subset identification was performed by FACS as previously described ( Liu & Kelly, 2008 ). Briefly, low density fractions were incubated on ice in the presence of Fc-Block (BD Pharmingen) for 20 minutes, washed, and incubated with antibodies specific for surface molecules. Fluorochrome or biotin conjugated antibodies for CD11c (N418), CD45R (RA3-62B), CD11b (M1/70), CD3 (145-2C11), CD19 (MB19-1), and Ly6G/C (RB6-865) were purchased from eBioscience. The pDC specific antibodies, mPDCA-1 and 120G8, were purchased from Miltenyi Biotec or received as a gift from Schering Plough Research Institute, respectively. DC subsets were defined as low density cells which were CD11c+CD3?CD19? and expressed either CD11b or CD45R (see results for DC subset phenotyping). Co-stimulatory molecules were measured on DC subsets by staining for the surface molecules; CD40 (1C10), CD80 (16-10A1), CD86 (GL1), ICOSL (HK5.3) and were purchased from eBioscience. Antibodies to I-Ad (AMS-32.1) were purchased from BD Pharmingen. FACS acquisition was done on a FACSCaliber (Becton Dickinson) at the UCLA Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center and Center for AIDS Research Flow Cytometry Core Facility. FACS analysis was performed using FCS Express (DeNovo Software).  Immunofluorescent localization of DC subsets ILN were harvested 3 days after infection, placed in Optimal Cutting Temperature freezing media (Tissue Tek), flash frozen, and stored at ?80°C. Tissue sections (5 µm) were cut by the UCLA Tissue Procurement Laboratory. Consecutive sections were stained sequentially with unconjugated CD3 (145-2C11, eBioscience), goat-anti-rat ALEXA 546 (Invitrogen), CD11c-biotin (HL3, BD Pharmingen) or BST2-biotin (conjugated in house using FluorReporter Biotin-XX, Invitrogen), streptavidin-ALEXA 488, and mounted using Prolong Gold anti-fade reagent with DAPI (Invitrogen). Sections were visualized using a Leica TCS-SP MP at the UCLA Brain Research Institute Microscopy Core Facility. Images were taken at using a 20× objective and resized for publication using Photoshop CS3 (Adobe).  <italic>In vitro</italic> differentiation and stimulation of pDC pDC were differentiated from BM precursors as previously described, with modifications ( Naik, et al. , 2005 ). Briefly, the femurs and tibias were excised from 8–10 week old female BALB/c mice and BM extracted by flushing with RPMI supplemented with 10% FCS. After RBC lysis, cells were cultured in complete media (RPMI 1640 with 10 mM HEPES, 10 mM sodium pyruvate, 2 mM L-glutamine, 10 mM non-essential amino acids, 10% v/v FCS, and 100 µg/ml penicillin and streptomycin) supplemented with recombinant FLT3L (0.2 µg/ml, R&D Systems) in 100 mm bacteriological petri dishes (Becton Dickson) at 2×106 cells/ml. Half of the culture media was removed and replaced with fresh FLT3L containing complete media every three days. On day 10 of culture, non-adherent cells were removed by pipetting and enriched on a Nycodenz gradient. The BM cells were further enriched for pDC by depleting CD11b+ cells from the low density fraction using magnetic bead isolation and CD11b-biotin (M1/70, eBioscience) followed by streptavidin microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec). pDC were routinely purified to greater than 90% CD11c+CD45R+120G8+CD11b? cells. Purified pDC were stimulated in complete media (2×106 cells/ml) without penicillin and streptomycin in the presence of renograffin purified live C. muridarum EBs (multiplicity of infection of 1), CpG-C (5µg/ml, 5’- TCGTCGAACGTTCGAGATGAT -3’), or media alone for 48 hours. For CpG motifs, bold letters indicate phosphorothioate linkages. After stimulation, cell culture supernatants were collected for ELISA analysis and the remaining cell pellet re-suspended, washed, and analyzed by FACS as described above. ELISA analysis of culture supernatants were carried out using DUO-KIT sets for IFN?, IL-6, IL-10, and IL-12p70 according to the manufacturer’s protocol (R&D Systems).  Results Two distinct DC subsets dominate the response to genital <italic>C. muridarum</italic> infection To determine the DC subsets responding to genital C. muridarum infection, we examined both the genital tract (GT) and its primary draining lymph node, the iliac node (ILN). We focused our initial examination of DC subsets responding to infection on day 7 post infection (PI) when bacterial burden was high in genital tract tissues ( Figure 1A ) and the T cell response was developing in the ILN (data not shown). This time point ensured that DC subsets examined would be those most likely to interact with T cells responsible for clearance of infection. Our classification of DC subsets focused on the distinct expression of surface molecules by individual DC subsets ( Ardavin, 2003 ). All DC subsets in mice express CD11c and can be broadly divided into two subsets; classical DC (cDC) and plasmacytoid DC (pDC). cDC encompass a heterogeneous group of cells classified by surface expression of the molecules CD8 or CD11b. Expression of CD11b and CD8 on cDC in the mouse are mutually exclusive. pDC are unique amongst DC in their expression of CD45R (B220) and have been shown to express variable levels of CD8 ( O'Keeffe, et al. , 2002 ). Therefore to determine the composition of DC responding to chlamydial infection we utilized a four color FACS staining regimen which identified CD11c+, CD11b+, CD45R+ cells plus a single channel for excluding T (CD3+) and B (CD19+) cells which have been shown to express low levels of CD11c and high levels of CD45R ( Nakano, et al. , 2001 ). In the ILN and GT we found that two DC subsets dominated the response to infection. These included a CD11c+CD11b+ (cDC) and CD11c+CD45R+ (pDC) subset ( Figure 1B ). The pDC subset was further confirmed by expression of antigens found on pDC but not cDC; BST2 ( Blasius, et al. , 2006 ) and Gr-1 (Ly6C/G) ( Nakano, et al. , 2001 ) ( Figure 1C ). Expression of CD8 by DC subsets was limited to heterogeneous levels on only pDC (data not shown), indicating that the CD11c+CD8+ DC described in a lung model of C. muridarum infection does not respond to genital C. muridarum infection ( Bilenki, et al. , 2006 ). Together, these data demonstrate that two DC subsets respond to genital C. muridarum infection, a CD11b+ cDC and a pDC subset. cDC and pDC show comparable recruitment to the draining lymph node but not the site of infection during genital <italic>C. muridarum</italic> infection DC acquire antigen at sites of infection and home to the draining lymph node of infected tissues to present acquired antigen to naïve T cells ( Randolph, et al. , 2008 ). Our finding that two DC subsets respond to C. muridarum in the GT and ILN raises the possibility that both subsets could be responsible for the induction of effector T cells. Additionally, T cell responses to C. muridarum have been shown to vary during the course of genital infection ( Kelly, 2003 ) and so we sought to determine whether the variability in the distribution of DC subsets responding to infection might account for the variability in T cell responses. Since naïve T cell differentiation in the draining lymph node is essential for clearance of chlamydial infection, we first examined the distribution of DC in the ILN. As others have found in similar models ( Asselin-Paturel, et al. , 2003 ), pDC dominate the distribution of DC subsets in the naïve ILN ( Figure 2A ). Alternatively, cDC represent a small percentage of the DC present in the naïve ILN. Following infection this distribution shifts to comparable proportions of both subsets between day 7 and 10 PI. DC distribution in the ILN begins to return to the naïve state as the bacterial load in the GT decreases ( Figure 1A ) and by day 21 PI DC distribution is nearly equivalent to that of the naïve ILN ( Figure 2A ). In contrast to the ILN, the distribution of DC subsets in the GT is dominated by cDC throughout the course of infection ( Figure 2B ) and persists beyond detectable bacterial shedding on day 21 ( Figure 1A ). Together, these data indicate that both cDC and pDC respond comparably in their influx to the ILN but that cDC show a dominance in the distribution of DC in the GT throughout infection. To more precisely determine the distribution of DC in the ILN and GT during infection, we compared absolute numbers of cDC and pDC on days 7 and 10 PI. As mentioned and indicated in the data above, this is the approximate peak of both DC ( Figure 2A ) and T cells (not shown) in the ILN and GT. We found that cDC and pDC are present in comparable numbers in the ILN of infected mice ( Figure 2C ). Alternatively, there are nearly threefold greater numbers of cDC in the infected GT. These data further demonstrate that both DC subsets respond comparably to infection by their influx to the ILN whereas cDC dominate the DC population in the GT throughout the course of infection. Both cDC and pDC co-localize with T cells in the ILN during infection The disparity in DC subset numbers and distribution in the ILN and GT raises the question as to whether these DC subsets have the same potential for interaction with naïve T cells. Recent work has shown that the trafficking patterns of cDC and pDC differ. cDC accumulate in tissues and enter lymph nodes through the afferent lymphatics. In contrast, pDC primarily enter peripheral lymph nodes from the blood through high endothelial venules (HEV) ( Randolph, et al. , 2008 ). This would indicate that during genital C. muridarum infection, pDC could influx to the ILN without encountering antigen in the GT. Furthermore, pDC may adhere to HEV in the ILN without interaction with T cells ( Diacovo, et al. , 2005 ). The above data demonstrating strong pDC influx into the ILN but not the GT are consistent with this possibility. To examine whether pDC have the potential for interaction with T cells in the ILN, we histologically examined DC localization in the ILN on day 3 PI. The differential expression of CD11c on cDC and pDC allows for discrimination between these DC subsets histologically ( Asselin-Paturel, et al. , 2005 ). Upon examination of DC subsets in situ with immunofluorescence, pDC appear negative or very dim for CD11c whereas cDC appear bright. pDC express high levels of BST2 and are stained brightly when using the antibody 120G8. We therefore examined the localization of pDC and cDC in the ILN by examination of BST2 and CD11c bright cells, respectively. As shown in Figure 3 , cDC and pDC are present in the T cell zone and not the B cell zone of the ILN on day 3 PI. We found similar localization of DC through day 10 PI (not shown). Therefore the accumulation of cDC and pDC in the T cell zone of the ILN suggests that both DC subsets have the potential for interacting with naïve T cells during genital infection by C. muridarum . cDC and pDC exhibit differential expression of costimulatory molecules in the ILN The data above suggest that cDC and pDC have the potential for T cell interaction in the ILN. However, the capacity of pDC to enter inflamed lymph nodes without becoming activated in tissues suggests that pDC may enter the ILN without prior exposure to C. muridarum ( Diacovo, et al. , 2005 ). Microbial stimulus has been shown to increase the expression of both major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and costimulatory molecules on DC, and is considered essential for DC mediated activation and differentiation of naïve T cells into effector T cells such as Th1 cells ( Kapsenberg, 2003 ). To examine each subset’s activation level and thus potential for CD4+ T helper cell activation, we examined the expression of MHC2 and costimulatory markers on each DC subset in the ILN on day 7 PI. The costimulatory molecules examined were chosen for their indication of DC activation (CD80, CD86, and ICOSL) as well as their implication in T cell interaction (CD40). To control for baseline levels of MHC2 and costimulatory expression, we examined the expression of these molecules on DC isolated from pooled peripheral lymph nodes (PLN) of naïve mice (mesenteric, cervical, iliac). During infection, cDC within the ILN expressed high levels of MHC2 and the co-stimulatory molecules examined ( Figure 4A ). However, cDC in the ILN only markedly upregulated CD80 in response to chlamydial genital infection compared to basal levels of co-stimulatory molecules measure in naïve PLN ( Figure 4A ). In contrast, pDC in the ILN express lower levels of MHC2, CD40, CD80, and CD86 ( Figure 4B ) demonstrating that pDC inherently express lower levels of co-stimulatory molecules which are not up-regulated in response to C. muridarum infection. Interestingly, higher expression levels of ICOSL were found in pDC from infected ILN compared to the basal expression measured on pDC from PLN. These data indicate that cDC in the ILN are well poised for the activation of naïve T cells. Alternatively, pDC express a pattern of costimulatory molecules distinct from cDC suggesting that they do not directly induce T cell activation. <italic>C. muridarum</italic> does not activate pDC for Th1 cell activation <italic>in vitro</italic> The above findings indicate that pDC influx into and co-localize with T cells in the ILN but lack the requisite surface expression of molecules for T cell activation ( Kapsenberg, 2003 ). These data raise the question as to whether pDC can be activated following exposure to C. muridarum . To confirm the unique expression of co-stimulatory molecules on pDC and investigate cytokine production in response to Chlamydia , we utilized an in vitro model using pDC differentiated from bone marrow precursors ( Naik, et al. , 2005 ). We examined the production of cytokines central in the differentiation (IL-12) ( Szabo, et al. , 2003 ) or inhibition (IL-10) of Th1 differentiation ( Couper, et al. , 2008 ) and cytokines associated with innate functions of pDC (IFN? and IL-6) ( Liu, 2005 ). We exposed pDC to CpG as a positive control of both activation and cytokine expression by pDC ( Liu, 2005 ). Upon exposure to C. muridarum in vitro , pDC up-regulated the expression of MHC2 but at lower levels compared to stimulation with the CpG control. As seen in vivo , pDC up-regulated ICOSL in response to chlamydial exposure ( Figure 5A ). Upon examination of cytokine expression ( Figure 5B ) we found that pDC did express small amounts of IL-6 and IL-10 but not IL-12 or IFN?. These data indicate that immature pDC respond mildly to chlamydial exposure. Likewise these data indicate that pDC have only a mild innate response to C. muridarum as compared to CpG. This is consistent with previous work demonstrating that toll like receptor 9 (TLR9), the receptor for CpG which is highly expressed by pDC ( Liu, 2005 ), does not play a role in innate responses to chlamydial infection ( Rothfuchs, et al. , 2004 ). Finally the lack of expression of IL-12 but mild expression of IL-10 and upregulation of ICOSL suggest that pDC do not contribute to induction a protective Th1 response.  Results Two distinct DC subsets dominate the response to genital <italic>C. muridarum</italic> infection To determine the DC subsets responding to genital C. muridarum infection, we examined both the genital tract (GT) and its primary draining lymph node, the iliac node (ILN). We focused our initial examination of DC subsets responding to infection on day 7 post infection (PI) when bacterial burden was high in genital tract tissues ( Figure 1A ) and the T cell response was developing in the ILN (data not shown). This time point ensured that DC subsets examined would be those most likely to interact with T cells responsible for clearance of infection. Our classification of DC subsets focused on the distinct expression of surface molecules by individual DC subsets ( Ardavin, 2003 ). All DC subsets in mice express CD11c and can be broadly divided into two subsets; classical DC (cDC) and plasmacytoid DC (pDC). cDC encompass a heterogeneous group of cells classified by surface expression of the molecules CD8 or CD11b. Expression of CD11b and CD8 on cDC in the mouse are mutually exclusive. pDC are unique amongst DC in their expression of CD45R (B220) and have been shown to express variable levels of CD8 ( O'Keeffe, et al. , 2002 ). Therefore to determine the composition of DC responding to chlamydial infection we utilized a four color FACS staining regimen which identified CD11c+, CD11b+, CD45R+ cells plus a single channel for excluding T (CD3+) and B (CD19+) cells which have been shown to express low levels of CD11c and high levels of CD45R ( Nakano, et al. , 2001 ). In the ILN and GT we found that two DC subsets dominated the response to infection. These included a CD11c+CD11b+ (cDC) and CD11c+CD45R+ (pDC) subset ( Figure 1B ). The pDC subset was further confirmed by expression of antigens found on pDC but not cDC; BST2 ( Blasius, et al. , 2006 ) and Gr-1 (Ly6C/G) ( Nakano, et al. , 2001 ) ( Figure 1C ). Expression of CD8 by DC subsets was limited to heterogeneous levels on only pDC (data not shown), indicating that the CD11c+CD8+ DC described in a lung model of C. muridarum infection does not respond to genital C. muridarum infection ( Bilenki, et al. , 2006 ). Together, these data demonstrate that two DC subsets respond to genital C. muridarum infection, a CD11b+ cDC and a pDC subset. cDC and pDC show comparable recruitment to the draining lymph node but not the site of infection during genital <italic>C. muridarum</italic> infection DC acquire antigen at sites of infection and home to the draining lymph node of infected tissues to present acquired antigen to naïve T cells ( Randolph, et al. , 2008 ). Our finding that two DC subsets respond to C. muridarum in the GT and ILN raises the possibility that both subsets could be responsible for the induction of effector T cells. Additionally, T cell responses to C. muridarum have been shown to vary during the course of genital infection ( Kelly, 2003 ) and so we sought to determine whether the variability in the distribution of DC subsets responding to infection might account for the variability in T cell responses. Since naïve T cell differentiation in the draining lymph node is essential for clearance of chlamydial infection, we first examined the distribution of DC in the ILN. As others have found in similar models ( Asselin-Paturel, et al. , 2003 ), pDC dominate the distribution of DC subsets in the naïve ILN ( Figure 2A ). Alternatively, cDC represent a small percentage of the DC present in the naïve ILN. Following infection this distribution shifts to comparable proportions of both subsets between day 7 and 10 PI. DC distribution in the ILN begins to return to the naïve state as the bacterial load in the GT decreases ( Figure 1A ) and by day 21 PI DC distribution is nearly equivalent to that of the naïve ILN ( Figure 2A ). In contrast to the ILN, the distribution of DC subsets in the GT is dominated by cDC throughout the course of infection ( Figure 2B ) and persists beyond detectable bacterial shedding on day 21 ( Figure 1A ). Together, these data indicate that both cDC and pDC respond comparably in their influx to the ILN but that cDC show a dominance in the distribution of DC in the GT throughout infection. To more precisely determine the distribution of DC in the ILN and GT during infection, we compared absolute numbers of cDC and pDC on days 7 and 10 PI. As mentioned and indicated in the data above, this is the approximate peak of both DC ( Figure 2A ) and T cells (not shown) in the ILN and GT. We found that cDC and pDC are present in comparable numbers in the ILN of infected mice ( Figure 2C ). Alternatively, there are nearly threefold greater numbers of cDC in the infected GT. These data further demonstrate that both DC subsets respond comparably to infection by their influx to the ILN whereas cDC dominate the DC population in the GT throughout the course of infection. Both cDC and pDC co-localize with T cells in the ILN during infection The disparity in DC subset numbers and distribution in the ILN and GT raises the question as to whether these DC subsets have the same potential for interaction with naïve T cells. Recent work has shown that the trafficking patterns of cDC and pDC differ. cDC accumulate in tissues and enter lymph nodes through the afferent lymphatics. In contrast, pDC primarily enter peripheral lymph nodes from the blood through high endothelial venules (HEV) ( Randolph, et al. , 2008 ). This would indicate that during genital C. muridarum infection, pDC could influx to the ILN without encountering antigen in the GT. Furthermore, pDC may adhere to HEV in the ILN without interaction with T cells ( Diacovo, et al. , 2005 ). The above data demonstrating strong pDC influx into the ILN but not the GT are consistent with this possibility. To examine whether pDC have the potential for interaction with T cells in the ILN, we histologically examined DC localization in the ILN on day 3 PI. The differential expression of CD11c on cDC and pDC allows for discrimination between these DC subsets histologically ( Asselin-Paturel, et al. , 2005 ). Upon examination of DC subsets in situ with immunofluorescence, pDC appear negative or very dim for CD11c whereas cDC appear bright. pDC express high levels of BST2 and are stained brightly when using the antibody 120G8. We therefore examined the localization of pDC and cDC in the ILN by examination of BST2 and CD11c bright cells, respectively. As shown in Figure 3 , cDC and pDC are present in the T cell zone and not the B cell zone of the ILN on day 3 PI. We found similar localization of DC through day 10 PI (not shown). Therefore the accumulation of cDC and pDC in the T cell zone of the ILN suggests that both DC subsets have the potential for interacting with naïve T cells during genital infection by C. muridarum . cDC and pDC exhibit differential expression of costimulatory molecules in the ILN The data above suggest that cDC and pDC have the potential for T cell interaction in the ILN. However, the capacity of pDC to enter inflamed lymph nodes without becoming activated in tissues suggests that pDC may enter the ILN without prior exposure to C. muridarum ( Diacovo, et al. , 2005 ). Microbial stimulus has been shown to increase the expression of both major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and costimulatory molecules on DC, and is considered essential for DC mediated activation and differentiation of naïve T cells into effector T cells such as Th1 cells ( Kapsenberg, 2003 ). To examine each subset’s activation level and thus potential for CD4+ T helper cell activation, we examined the expression of MHC2 and costimulatory markers on each DC subset in the ILN on day 7 PI. The costimulatory molecules examined were chosen for their indication of DC activation (CD80, CD86, and ICOSL) as well as their implication in T cell interaction (CD40). To control for baseline levels of MHC2 and costimulatory expression, we examined the expression of these molecules on DC isolated from pooled peripheral lymph nodes (PLN) of naïve mice (mesenteric, cervical, iliac). During infection, cDC within the ILN expressed high levels of MHC2 and the co-stimulatory molecules examined ( Figure 4A ). However, cDC in the ILN only markedly upregulated CD80 in response to chlamydial genital infection compared to basal levels of co-stimulatory molecules measure in naïve PLN ( Figure 4A ). In contrast, pDC in the ILN express lower levels of MHC2, CD40, CD80, and CD86 ( Figure 4B ) demonstrating that pDC inherently express lower levels of co-stimulatory molecules which are not up-regulated in response to C. muridarum infection. Interestingly, higher expression levels of ICOSL were found in pDC from infected ILN compared to the basal expression measured on pDC from PLN. These data indicate that cDC in the ILN are well poised for the activation of naïve T cells. Alternatively, pDC express a pattern of costimulatory molecules distinct from cDC suggesting that they do not directly induce T cell activation. <italic>C. muridarum</italic> does not activate pDC for Th1 cell activation <italic>in vitro</italic> The above findings indicate that pDC influx into and co-localize with T cells in the ILN but lack the requisite surface expression of molecules for T cell activation ( Kapsenberg, 2003 ). These data raise the question as to whether pDC can be activated following exposure to C. muridarum . To confirm the unique expression of co-stimulatory molecules on pDC and investigate cytokine production in response to Chlamydia , we utilized an in vitro model using pDC differentiated from bone marrow precursors ( Naik, et al. , 2005 ). We examined the production of cytokines central in the differentiation (IL-12) ( Szabo, et al. , 2003 ) or inhibition (IL-10) of Th1 differentiation ( Couper, et al. , 2008 ) and cytokines associated with innate functions of pDC (IFN? and IL-6) ( Liu, 2005 ). We exposed pDC to CpG as a positive control of both activation and cytokine expression by pDC ( Liu, 2005 ). Upon exposure to C. muridarum in vitro , pDC up-regulated the expression of MHC2 but at lower levels compared to stimulation with the CpG control. As seen in vivo , pDC up-regulated ICOSL in response to chlamydial exposure ( Figure 5A ). Upon examination of cytokine expression ( Figure 5B ) we found that pDC did express small amounts of IL-6 and IL-10 but not IL-12 or IFN?. These data indicate that immature pDC respond mildly to chlamydial exposure. Likewise these data indicate that pDC have only a mild innate response to C. muridarum as compared to CpG. This is consistent with previous work demonstrating that toll like receptor 9 (TLR9), the receptor for CpG which is highly expressed by pDC ( Liu, 2005 ), does not play a role in innate responses to chlamydial infection ( Rothfuchs, et al. , 2004 ). Finally the lack of expression of IL-12 but mild expression of IL-10 and upregulation of ICOSL suggest that pDC do not contribute to induction a protective Th1 response.  Two distinct DC subsets dominate the response to genital <italic>C. muridarum</italic> infection To determine the DC subsets responding to genital C. muridarum infection, we examined both the genital tract (GT) and its primary draining lymph node, the iliac node (ILN). We focused our initial examination of DC subsets responding to infection on day 7 post infection (PI) when bacterial burden was high in genital tract tissues ( Figure 1A ) and the T cell response was developing in the ILN (data not shown). This time point ensured that DC subsets examined would be those most likely to interact with T cells responsible for clearance of infection. Our classification of DC subsets focused on the distinct expression of surface molecules by individual DC subsets ( Ardavin, 2003 ). All DC subsets in mice express CD11c and can be broadly divided into two subsets; classical DC (cDC) and plasmacytoid DC (pDC). cDC encompass a heterogeneous group of cells classified by surface expression of the molecules CD8 or CD11b. Expression of CD11b and CD8 on cDC in the mouse are mutually exclusive. pDC are unique amongst DC in their expression of CD45R (B220) and have been shown to express variable levels of CD8 ( O'Keeffe, et al. , 2002 ). Therefore to determine the composition of DC responding to chlamydial infection we utilized a four color FACS staining regimen which identified CD11c+, CD11b+, CD45R+ cells plus a single channel for excluding T (CD3+) and B (CD19+) cells which have been shown to express low levels of CD11c and high levels of CD45R ( Nakano, et al. , 2001 ). In the ILN and GT we found that two DC subsets dominated the response to infection. These included a CD11c+CD11b+ (cDC) and CD11c+CD45R+ (pDC) subset ( Figure 1B ). The pDC subset was further confirmed by expression of antigens found on pDC but not cDC; BST2 ( Blasius, et al. , 2006 ) and Gr-1 (Ly6C/G) ( Nakano, et al. , 2001 ) ( Figure 1C ). Expression of CD8 by DC subsets was limited to heterogeneous levels on only pDC (data not shown), indicating that the CD11c+CD8+ DC described in a lung model of C. muridarum infection does not respond to genital C. muridarum infection ( Bilenki, et al. , 2006 ). Together, these data demonstrate that two DC subsets respond to genital C. muridarum infection, a CD11b+ cDC and a pDC subset.  Two distinct DC subsets dominate the response to genital <italic>C. muridarum</italic> infection To determine the DC subsets responding to genital C. muridarum infection, we examined both the genital tract (GT) and its primary draining lymph node, the iliac node (ILN). We focused our initial examination of DC subsets responding to infection on day 7 post infection (PI) when bacterial burden was high in genital tract tissues ( Figure 1A ) and the T cell response was developing in the ILN (data not shown). This time point ensured that DC subsets examined would be those most likely to interact with T cells responsible for clearance of infection. Our classification of DC subsets focused on the distinct expression of surface molecules by individual DC subsets ( Ardavin, 2003 ). All DC subsets in mice express CD11c and can be broadly divided into two subsets; classical DC (cDC) and plasmacytoid DC (pDC). cDC encompass a heterogeneous group of cells classified by surface expression of the molecules CD8 or CD11b. Expression of CD11b and CD8 on cDC in the mouse are mutually exclusive. pDC are unique amongst DC in their expression of CD45R (B220) and have been shown to express variable levels of CD8 ( O'Keeffe, et al. , 2002 ). Therefore to determine the composition of DC responding to chlamydial infection we utilized a four color FACS staining regimen which identified CD11c+, CD11b+, CD45R+ cells plus a single channel for excluding T (CD3+) and B (CD19+) cells which have been shown to express low levels of CD11c and high levels of CD45R ( Nakano, et al. , 2001 ). In the ILN and GT we found that two DC subsets dominated the response to infection. These included a CD11c+CD11b+ (cDC) and CD11c+CD45R+ (pDC) subset ( Figure 1B ). The pDC subset was further confirmed by expression of antigens found on pDC but not cDC; BST2 ( Blasius, et al. , 2006 ) and Gr-1 (Ly6C/G) ( Nakano, et al. , 2001 ) ( Figure 1C ). Expression of CD8 by DC subsets was limited to heterogeneous levels on only pDC (data not shown), indicating that the CD11c+CD8+ DC described in a lung model of C. muridarum infection does not respond to genital C. muridarum infection ( Bilenki, et al. , 2006 ). Together, these data demonstrate that two DC subsets respond to genital C. muridarum infection, a CD11b+ cDC and a pDC subset.  cDC and pDC show comparable recruitment to the draining lymph node but not the site of infection during genital <italic>C. muridarum</italic> infection DC acquire antigen at sites of infection and home to the draining lymph node of infected tissues to present acquired antigen to naïve T cells ( Randolph, et al. , 2008 ). Our finding that two DC subsets respond to C. muridarum in the GT and ILN raises the possibility that both subsets could be responsible for the induction of effector T cells. Additionally, T cell responses to C. muridarum have been shown to vary during the course of genital infection ( Kelly, 2003 ) and so we sought to determine whether the variability in the distribution of DC subsets responding to infection might account for the variability in T cell responses. Since naïve T cell differentiation in the draining lymph node is essential for clearance of chlamydial infection, we first examined the distribution of DC in the ILN. As others have found in similar models ( Asselin-Paturel, et al. , 2003 ), pDC dominate the distribution of DC subsets in the naïve ILN ( Figure 2A ). Alternatively, cDC represent a small percentage of the DC present in the naïve ILN. Following infection this distribution shifts to comparable proportions of both subsets between day 7 and 10 PI. DC distribution in the ILN begins to return to the naïve state as the bacterial load in the GT decreases ( Figure 1A ) and by day 21 PI DC distribution is nearly equivalent to that of the naïve ILN ( Figure 2A ). In contrast to the ILN, the distribution of DC subsets in the GT is dominated by cDC throughout the course of infection ( Figure 2B ) and persists beyond detectable bacterial shedding on day 21 ( Figure 1A ). Together, these data indicate that both cDC and pDC respond comparably in their influx to the ILN but that cDC show a dominance in the distribution of DC in the GT throughout infection. To more precisely determine the distribution of DC in the ILN and GT during infection, we compared absolute numbers of cDC and pDC on days 7 and 10 PI. As mentioned and indicated in the data above, this is the approximate peak of both DC ( Figure 2A ) and T cells (not shown) in the ILN and GT. We found that cDC and pDC are present in comparable numbers in the ILN of infected mice ( Figure 2C ). Alternatively, there are nearly threefold greater numbers of cDC in the infected GT. These data further demonstrate that both DC subsets respond comparably to infection by their influx to the ILN whereas cDC dominate the DC population in the GT throughout the course of infection.  cDC and pDC show comparable recruitment to the draining lymph node but not the site of infection during genital <italic>C. muridarum</italic> infection DC acquire antigen at sites of infection and home to the draining lymph node of infected tissues to present acquired antigen to naïve T cells ( Randolph, et al. , 2008 ). Our finding that two DC subsets respond to C. muridarum in the GT and ILN raises the possibility that both subsets could be responsible for the induction of effector T cells. Additionally, T cell responses to C. muridarum have been shown to vary during the course of genital infection ( Kelly, 2003 ) and so we sought to determine whether the variability in the distribution of DC subsets responding to infection might account for the variability in T cell responses. Since naïve T cell differentiation in the draining lymph node is essential for clearance of chlamydial infection, we first examined the distribution of DC in the ILN. As others have found in similar models ( Asselin-Paturel, et al. , 2003 ), pDC dominate the distribution of DC subsets in the naïve ILN ( Figure 2A ). Alternatively, cDC represent a small percentage of the DC present in the naïve ILN. Following infection this distribution shifts to comparable proportions of both subsets between day 7 and 10 PI. DC distribution in the ILN begins to return to the naïve state as the bacterial load in the GT decreases ( Figure 1A ) and by day 21 PI DC distribution is nearly equivalent to that of the naïve ILN ( Figure 2A ). In contrast to the ILN, the distribution of DC subsets in the GT is dominated by cDC throughout the course of infection ( Figure 2B ) and persists beyond detectable bacterial shedding on day 21 ( Figure 1A ). Together, these data indicate that both cDC and pDC respond comparably in their influx to the ILN but that cDC show a dominance in the distribution of DC in the GT throughout infection. To more precisely determine the distribution of DC in the ILN and GT during infection, we compared absolute numbers of cDC and pDC on days 7 and 10 PI. As mentioned and indicated in the data above, this is the approximate peak of both DC ( Figure 2A ) and T cells (not shown) in the ILN and GT. We found that cDC and pDC are present in comparable numbers in the ILN of infected mice ( Figure 2C ). Alternatively, there are nearly threefold greater numbers of cDC in the infected GT. These data further demonstrate that both DC subsets respond comparably to infection by their influx to the ILN whereas cDC dominate the DC population in the GT throughout the course of infection.  Both cDC and pDC co-localize with T cells in the ILN during infection The disparity in DC subset numbers and distribution in the ILN and GT raises the question as to whether these DC subsets have the same potential for interaction with naïve T cells. Recent work has shown that the trafficking patterns of cDC and pDC differ. cDC accumulate in tissues and enter lymph nodes through the afferent lymphatics. In contrast, pDC primarily enter peripheral lymph nodes from the blood through high endothelial venules (HEV) ( Randolph, et al. , 2008 ). This would indicate that during genital C. muridarum infection, pDC could influx to the ILN without encountering antigen in the GT. Furthermore, pDC may adhere to HEV in the ILN without interaction with T cells ( Diacovo, et al. , 2005 ). The above data demonstrating strong pDC influx into the ILN but not the GT are consistent with this possibility. To examine whether pDC have the potential for interaction with T cells in the ILN, we histologically examined DC localization in the ILN on day 3 PI. The differential expression of CD11c on cDC and pDC allows for discrimination between these DC subsets histologically ( Asselin-Paturel, et al. , 2005 ). Upon examination of DC subsets in situ with immunofluorescence, pDC appear negative or very dim for CD11c whereas cDC appear bright. pDC express high levels of BST2 and are stained brightly when using the antibody 120G8. We therefore examined the localization of pDC and cDC in the ILN by examination of BST2 and CD11c bright cells, respectively. As shown in Figure 3 , cDC and pDC are present in the T cell zone and not the B cell zone of the ILN on day 3 PI. We found similar localization of DC through day 10 PI (not shown). Therefore the accumulation of cDC and pDC in the T cell zone of the ILN suggests that both DC subsets have the potential for interacting with naïve T cells during genital infection by C. muridarum .  Both cDC and pDC co-localize with T cells in the ILN during infection The disparity in DC subset numbers and distribution in the ILN and GT raises the question as to whether these DC subsets have the same potential for interaction with naïve T cells. Recent work has shown that the trafficking patterns of cDC and pDC differ. cDC accumulate in tissues and enter lymph nodes through the afferent lymphatics. In contrast, pDC primarily enter peripheral lymph nodes from the blood through high endothelial venules (HEV) ( Randolph, et al. , 2008 ). This would indicate that during genital C. muridarum infection, pDC could influx to the ILN without encountering antigen in the GT. Furthermore, pDC may adhere to HEV in the ILN without interaction with T cells ( Diacovo, et al. , 2005 ). The above data demonstrating strong pDC influx into the ILN but not the GT are consistent with this possibility. To examine whether pDC have the potential for interaction with T cells in the ILN, we histologically examined DC localization in the ILN on day 3 PI. The differential expression of CD11c on cDC and pDC allows for discrimination between these DC subsets histologically ( Asselin-Paturel, et al. , 2005 ). Upon examination of DC subsets in situ with immunofluorescence, pDC appear negative or very dim for CD11c whereas cDC appear bright. pDC express high levels of BST2 and are stained brightly when using the antibody 120G8. We therefore examined the localization of pDC and cDC in the ILN by examination of BST2 and CD11c bright cells, respectively. As shown in Figure 3 , cDC and pDC are present in the T cell zone and not the B cell zone of the ILN on day 3 PI. We found similar localization of DC through day 10 PI (not shown). Therefore the accumulation of cDC and pDC in the T cell zone of the ILN suggests that both DC subsets have the potential for interacting with naïve T cells during genital infection by C. muridarum .  cDC and pDC exhibit differential expression of costimulatory molecules in the ILN The data above suggest that cDC and pDC have the potential for T cell interaction in the ILN. However, the capacity of pDC to enter inflamed lymph nodes without becoming activated in tissues suggests that pDC may enter the ILN without prior exposure to C. muridarum ( Diacovo, et al. , 2005 ). Microbial stimulus has been shown to increase the expression of both major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and costimulatory molecules on DC, and is considered essential for DC mediated activation and differentiation of naïve T cells into effector T cells such as Th1 cells ( Kapsenberg, 2003 ). To examine each subset’s activation level and thus potential for CD4+ T helper cell activation, we examined the expression of MHC2 and costimulatory markers on each DC subset in the ILN on day 7 PI. The costimulatory molecules examined were chosen for their indication of DC activation (CD80, CD86, and ICOSL) as well as their implication in T cell interaction (CD40). To control for baseline levels of MHC2 and costimulatory expression, we examined the expression of these molecules on DC isolated from pooled peripheral lymph nodes (PLN) of naïve mice (mesenteric, cervical, iliac). During infection, cDC within the ILN expressed high levels of MHC2 and the co-stimulatory molecules examined ( Figure 4A ). However, cDC in the ILN only markedly upregulated CD80 in response to chlamydial genital infection compared to basal levels of co-stimulatory molecules measure in naïve PLN ( Figure 4A ). In contrast, pDC in the ILN express lower levels of MHC2, CD40, CD80, and CD86 ( Figure 4B ) demonstrating that pDC inherently express lower levels of co-stimulatory molecules which are not up-regulated in response to C. muridarum infection. Interestingly, higher expression levels of ICOSL were found in pDC from infected ILN compared to the basal expression measured on pDC from PLN. These data indicate that cDC in the ILN are well poised for the activation of naïve T cells. Alternatively, pDC express a pattern of costimulatory molecules distinct from cDC suggesting that they do not directly induce T cell activation.  cDC and pDC exhibit differential expression of costimulatory molecules in the ILN The data above suggest that cDC and pDC have the potential for T cell interaction in the ILN. However, the capacity of pDC to enter inflamed lymph nodes without becoming activated in tissues suggests that pDC may enter the ILN without prior exposure to C. muridarum ( Diacovo, et al. , 2005 ). Microbial stimulus has been shown to increase the expression of both major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and costimulatory molecules on DC, and is considered essential for DC mediated activation and differentiation of naïve T cells into effector T cells such as Th1 cells ( Kapsenberg, 2003 ). To examine each subset’s activation level and thus potential for CD4+ T helper cell activation, we examined the expression of MHC2 and costimulatory markers on each DC subset in the ILN on day 7 PI. The costimulatory molecules examined were chosen for their indication of DC activation (CD80, CD86, and ICOSL) as well as their implication in T cell interaction (CD40). To control for baseline levels of MHC2 and costimulatory expression, we examined the expression of these molecules on DC isolated from pooled peripheral lymph nodes (PLN) of naïve mice (mesenteric, cervical, iliac). During infection, cDC within the ILN expressed high levels of MHC2 and the co-stimulatory molecules examined ( Figure 4A ). However, cDC in the ILN only markedly upregulated CD80 in response to chlamydial genital infection compared to basal levels of co-stimulatory molecules measure in naïve PLN ( Figure 4A ). In contrast, pDC in the ILN express lower levels of MHC2, CD40, CD80, and CD86 ( Figure 4B ) demonstrating that pDC inherently express lower levels of co-stimulatory molecules which are not up-regulated in response to C. muridarum infection. Interestingly, higher expression levels of ICOSL were found in pDC from infected ILN compared to the basal expression measured on pDC from PLN. These data indicate that cDC in the ILN are well poised for the activation of naïve T cells. Alternatively, pDC express a pattern of costimulatory molecules distinct from cDC suggesting that they do not directly induce T cell activation.  <italic>C. muridarum</italic> does not activate pDC for Th1 cell activation <italic>in vitro</italic> The above findings indicate that pDC influx into and co-localize with T cells in the ILN but lack the requisite surface expression of molecules for T cell activation ( Kapsenberg, 2003 ). These data raise the question as to whether pDC can be activated following exposure to C. muridarum . To confirm the unique expression of co-stimulatory molecules on pDC and investigate cytokine production in response to Chlamydia , we utilized an in vitro model using pDC differentiated from bone marrow precursors ( Naik, et al. , 2005 ). We examined the production of cytokines central in the differentiation (IL-12) ( Szabo, et al. , 2003 ) or inhibition (IL-10) of Th1 differentiation ( Couper, et al. , 2008 ) and cytokines associated with innate functions of pDC (IFN? and IL-6) ( Liu, 2005 ). We exposed pDC to CpG as a positive control of both activation and cytokine expression by pDC ( Liu, 2005 ). Upon exposure to C. muridarum in vitro , pDC up-regulated the expression of MHC2 but at lower levels compared to stimulation with the CpG control. As seen in vivo , pDC up-regulated ICOSL in response to chlamydial exposure ( Figure 5A ). Upon examination of cytokine expression ( Figure 5B ) we found that pDC did express small amounts of IL-6 and IL-10 but not IL-12 or IFN?. These data indicate that immature pDC respond mildly to chlamydial exposure. Likewise these data indicate that pDC have only a mild innate response to C. muridarum as compared to CpG. This is consistent with previous work demonstrating that toll like receptor 9 (TLR9), the receptor for CpG which is highly expressed by pDC ( Liu, 2005 ), does not play a role in innate responses to chlamydial infection ( Rothfuchs, et al. , 2004 ). Finally the lack of expression of IL-12 but mild expression of IL-10 and upregulation of ICOSL suggest that pDC do not contribute to induction a protective Th1 response.  <italic>C. muridarum</italic> does not activate pDC for Th1 cell activation <italic>in vitro</italic> The above findings indicate that pDC influx into and co-localize with T cells in the ILN but lack the requisite surface expression of molecules for T cell activation ( Kapsenberg, 2003 ). These data raise the question as to whether pDC can be activated following exposure to C. muridarum . To confirm the unique expression of co-stimulatory molecules on pDC and investigate cytokine production in response to Chlamydia , we utilized an in vitro model using pDC differentiated from bone marrow precursors ( Naik, et al. , 2005 ). We examined the production of cytokines central in the differentiation (IL-12) ( Szabo, et al. , 2003 ) or inhibition (IL-10) of Th1 differentiation ( Couper, et al. , 2008 ) and cytokines associated with innate functions of pDC (IFN? and IL-6) ( Liu, 2005 ). We exposed pDC to CpG as a positive control of both activation and cytokine expression by pDC ( Liu, 2005 ). Upon exposure to C. muridarum in vitro , pDC up-regulated the expression of MHC2 but at lower levels compared to stimulation with the CpG control. As seen in vivo , pDC up-regulated ICOSL in response to chlamydial exposure ( Figure 5A ). Upon examination of cytokine expression ( Figure 5B ) we found that pDC did express small amounts of IL-6 and IL-10 but not IL-12 or IFN?. These data indicate that immature pDC respond mildly to chlamydial exposure. Likewise these data indicate that pDC have only a mild innate response to C. muridarum as compared to CpG. This is consistent with previous work demonstrating that toll like receptor 9 (TLR9), the receptor for CpG which is highly expressed by pDC ( Liu, 2005 ), does not play a role in innate responses to chlamydial infection ( Rothfuchs, et al. , 2004 ). Finally the lack of expression of IL-12 but mild expression of IL-10 and upregulation of ICOSL suggest that pDC do not contribute to induction a protective Th1 response.  Discussion The involvement of multiple DC subsets responding to microbial insult have been described in several models of infection ( Bilenki, et al. , 2006 , GeurtsvanKessel, et al. , 2008 , Hao, et al. , 2008 , Pepper, et al. , 2008 , Smit, et al. , 2008 ). The work here is the first to describe the extent of the involvement of distinct DC subsets in a model of chlamydial genital infection. The involvement of two distinct DC subsets in this model has particular significance as DC are central in the induction of T cell responses, and clearance of chlamydial infection requires T cell mediated immunity. The importance of DC in the induction of a protective, non-pathological T cell response has been shown by others through the adoptive transfer of C. muridarum exposed DC prior to genital challenge ( Su, et al. , 1998 ). This work utilized bone marrow derived DC in cultures supplemented with GM-CSF and IL-4, a method which effectively induces the differentiation of activated cDC but not pDC ( Xu, et al. , 2007 ). Our findings are consistent with this work in that we also find that a cDC subset is activated as a result of chlamydial infection. Furthermore, we demonstrate that this cDC subset is well poised for the induction of chlamydial specific T cell responses through its influx into the site of infection, increased expression of costimulatory molecules, and localization in the T cell zones of the ILN as a result of infection. Therefore, the cDC we describe in this work may be the in vivo equivalent of the DC utilized in previous studies ( Su, et al. , 1998 , Rey-Ladino, et al. , 2005 ). This indicates that the primary DC subset involved in the induction of anti-chlamydial T cell responses to genital chlamydial infection is a CD11b+ cDC. It is interesting to note that we did not detect any CD8+ cDC in either the GT or ILN during infection. In recent examination of lung model of chlamydial infection, it was shown that a CD8+ cDC subset increased in the spleen of mice infected with C. muridarum ( Bilenki, et al., 2006 ) . Our study did not examine the DC subsets in the spleens of infected mice, but rather focused on more immediate sites of T cell induction ( Randolph, et al. , 2008 ). The findings of this study and those of chlamydial infection in the lung indicate that compartmentalization of DC subsets may occur during chlamydial infection. In the lung model a splenic CD8+ cDC subset is the prominent inducer of a protective T cell response. Due to the constraints of DC numbers found in the ILN, we were unable to directly examine the T cell inducing capacity of individual DC subsets. However, our findings indicate that during genital infection a CD11b+ cDC is well poised for the induction of a protective T cell response against C. muridarum . The significance of this discrepancy between models of chlamydial infection may be indicative of both a compartmentalization of DC subsets to specific tissues as well as variability of DC subsets in their capacity to induce protective responses to Chlamydia in different tissues. Both of these factors must therefore be taken into account in future studies targeting specific DC for vaccination against chlamydial infection in specific tissues. The influx of two distinct DC subsets into both the GT and ILN during infection suggests that the T cell response to C. muridarum would be dictated by these subsets. Interestingly, our data indicate that there is a division of labor between cDC and pDC. Our work demonstrates that the cDC subset resembles DC which induce a protective Th1 cell response ( Su, et al. , 1998 , Rey-Ladino, et al. , 2005 ) while pDC seem incapable of inducing such responses. In other models of genital infection pDC play a significant role in the innate response to viral infection through the production of IFN? ( Lund, et al. , 2006 ). In contrast, we demonstrate that pDC do not respond robustly to C. muridarum in vitro ( Figure 5B ), producing no IFN? and only small amounts of IL-6 that might contribute to innate responses in the GT. This indicates that pDC are inherently not capable of a strong innate response to C. muridarum , and is consistent with the demonstration that TLR9, a key protein in pDC activation, is not involved in the innate response to Chlamydia ( Rothfuchs, et al. , 2004 ). Alternatively, the disparity between DC subsets may in part be attributed to the inability of pDC to harbor a viable chlamydial infection. Our current efforts are focused on determining this possibility. Together, our findings indicate that pDC do not contribute to the innate response in the GT during chlamydial infection. Instead, the role of pDC in the GT may be to modulate the function of other cells responding to infection ( Liu, 2005 ). The influx of pDC into the ILN during infection, yet apparent inability to directly induce a protective T cell response raises the question as to the role of pDC in the ILN. The ability of pDC to enter inflamed lymph nodes through high endothelial venules (HEV) may explain how pDC are entering the ILN despite an inability to react to C. muridarum ( Diacovo, et al. , 2005 ). To our knowledge, no data exists demonstrating that pDC acquire antigen in the periphery for presentation in the draining lymph node. Instead, it appears that pDC do not traffic through afferent lymph ( Yrlid, et al. , 2006 ). It is possible that pDC acquire chlamydial antigen in the ILN in a secondary manner, without acquisition in the GT. However the lack of costimulatory molecule expression and in particular CD40 expression ( Figure 4B ) by pDC in the ILN indicates that pDC are not functioning in an antigen specific manner ( Quezada, et al. , 2004 ). Therefore our findings and work by others would suggest that pDC in the ILN are acting in an antigen independent manner and not directly responsible for the induction of anti-chlamydial T cells. Our data indicate that pDC upregulate expression of ICOSL in response to C. muridarum in vivo ( Figure 4B ) and in vitro ( Figure 5A ). Additionally, pDC express IL-10 upon exposure to C. muridarum in vitro ( Figure 5B ). Previous work examining the role of ICOS during chlamydial infection demonstrated that ICOS acts to dampen the Th1 response to chlamydial infection through induction of IL-10 and expansion of regulatory T cells (Treg) ( Marks, et al. , 2007 ). Therefore our observations that pDC express ICOSL and IL-10 in response to C. muridarum indicate that pDC may promote the expansion of regulatory responses during chlamydial infection. This possibility is consistent with recent work demonstrating that pDC have a propensity for induction of Treg cells ( Kuwana, et al. , 2001 , Martin, et al. , 2002 , Bilsborough, et al. , 2003 ). In preliminary studies, we have found Treg to be present in the ILN and GT during the course of infection in a pattern which mimics the presence of pDC in these tissues. Therefore our current efforts are focused on determining whether pDC have a role in the regulation of the immune response to C. muridarum infection through induction of regulatory T cell subsets. In summary, we have demonstrated that two distinct DC subsets respond in a genital model of chlamydial infection. Of these subsets, a CD11b+ cDC is the most well poised for the induction of the requisite Th1 response for clearance of genital chlamydial infection. Alternatively a pDC subset also responds to infection but does not demonstrate the requisite characteristics for the induction of an anti-chlamydial effector T cell response. Although pDC have been shown to activate CD4+ T cells ( Sapoznikov, et al. , 2007 ), our findings indicate that pDC do not activate T cells during genital C. muridarum infection. Instead, pDC seem well poised for the induction of regulatory T cell responses during genital chlamydial infection. This has particular relevance in the rational design of DC-targeting vaccines indicating that cDC and not pDC should be the focus for induction of anti-chlamydial T cell responses.  Discussion The involvement of multiple DC subsets responding to microbial insult have been described in several models of infection ( Bilenki, et al. , 2006 , GeurtsvanKessel, et al. , 2008 , Hao, et al. , 2008 , Pepper, et al. , 2008 , Smit, et al. , 2008 ). The work here is the first to describe the extent of the involvement of distinct DC subsets in a model of chlamydial genital infection. The involvement of two distinct DC subsets in this model has particular significance as DC are central in the induction of T cell responses, and clearance of chlamydial infection requires T cell mediated immunity. The importance of DC in the induction of a protective, non-pathological T cell response has been shown by others through the adoptive transfer of C. muridarum exposed DC prior to genital challenge ( Su, et al. , 1998 ). This work utilized bone marrow derived DC in cultures supplemented with GM-CSF and IL-4, a method which effectively induces the differentiation of activated cDC but not pDC ( Xu, et al. , 2007 ). Our findings are consistent with this work in that we also find that a cDC subset is activated as a result of chlamydial infection. Furthermore, we demonstrate that this cDC subset is well poised for the induction of chlamydial specific T cell responses through its influx into the site of infection, increased expression of costimulatory molecules, and localization in the T cell zones of the ILN as a result of infection. Therefore, the cDC we describe in this work may be the in vivo equivalent of the DC utilized in previous studies ( Su, et al. , 1998 , Rey-Ladino, et al. , 2005 ). This indicates that the primary DC subset involved in the induction of anti-chlamydial T cell responses to genital chlamydial infection is a CD11b+ cDC. It is interesting to note that we did not detect any CD8+ cDC in either the GT or ILN during infection. In recent examination of lung model of chlamydial infection, it was shown that a CD8+ cDC subset increased in the spleen of mice infected with C. muridarum ( Bilenki, et al., 2006 ) . Our study did not examine the DC subsets in the spleens of infected mice, but rather focused on more immediate sites of T cell induction ( Randolph, et al. , 2008 ). The findings of this study and those of chlamydial infection in the lung indicate that compartmentalization of DC subsets may occur during chlamydial infection. In the lung model a splenic CD8+ cDC subset is the prominent inducer of a protective T cell response. Due to the constraints of DC numbers found in the ILN, we were unable to directly examine the T cell inducing capacity of individual DC subsets. However, our findings indicate that during genital infection a CD11b+ cDC is well poised for the induction of a protective T cell response against C. muridarum . The significance of this discrepancy between models of chlamydial infection may be indicative of both a compartmentalization of DC subsets to specific tissues as well as variability of DC subsets in their capacity to induce protective responses to Chlamydia in different tissues. Both of these factors must therefore be taken into account in future studies targeting specific DC for vaccination against chlamydial infection in specific tissues. The influx of two distinct DC subsets into both the GT and ILN during infection suggests that the T cell response to C. muridarum would be dictated by these subsets. Interestingly, our data indicate that there is a division of labor between cDC and pDC. Our work demonstrates that the cDC subset resembles DC which induce a protective Th1 cell response ( Su, et al. , 1998 , Rey-Ladino, et al. , 2005 ) while pDC seem incapable of inducing such responses. In other models of genital infection pDC play a significant role in the innate response to viral infection through the production of IFN? ( Lund, et al. , 2006 ). In contrast, we demonstrate that pDC do not respond robustly to C. muridarum in vitro ( Figure 5B ), producing no IFN? and only small amounts of IL-6 that might contribute to innate responses in the GT. This indicates that pDC are inherently not capable of a strong innate response to C. muridarum , and is consistent with the demonstration that TLR9, a key protein in pDC activation, is not involved in the innate response to Chlamydia ( Rothfuchs, et al. , 2004 ). Alternatively, the disparity between DC subsets may in part be attributed to the inability of pDC to harbor a viable chlamydial infection. Our current efforts are focused on determining this possibility. Together, our findings indicate that pDC do not contribute to the innate response in the GT during chlamydial infection. Instead, the role of pDC in the GT may be to modulate the function of other cells responding to infection ( Liu, 2005 ). The influx of pDC into the ILN during infection, yet apparent inability to directly induce a protective T cell response raises the question as to the role of pDC in the ILN. The ability of pDC to enter inflamed lymph nodes through high endothelial venules (HEV) may explain how pDC are entering the ILN despite an inability to react to C. muridarum ( Diacovo, et al. , 2005 ). To our knowledge, no data exists demonstrating that pDC acquire antigen in the periphery for presentation in the draining lymph node. Instead, it appears that pDC do not traffic through afferent lymph ( Yrlid, et al. , 2006 ). It is possible that pDC acquire chlamydial antigen in the ILN in a secondary manner, without acquisition in the GT. However the lack of costimulatory molecule expression and in particular CD40 expression ( Figure 4B ) by pDC in the ILN indicates that pDC are not functioning in an antigen specific manner ( Quezada, et al. , 2004 ). Therefore our findings and work by others would suggest that pDC in the ILN are acting in an antigen independent manner and not directly responsible for the induction of anti-chlamydial T cells. Our data indicate that pDC upregulate expression of ICOSL in response to C. muridarum in vivo ( Figure 4B ) and in vitro ( Figure 5A ). Additionally, pDC express IL-10 upon exposure to C. muridarum in vitro ( Figure 5B ). Previous work examining the role of ICOS during chlamydial infection demonstrated that ICOS acts to dampen the Th1 response to chlamydial infection through induction of IL-10 and expansion of regulatory T cells (Treg) ( Marks, et al. , 2007 ). Therefore our observations that pDC express ICOSL and IL-10 in response to C. muridarum indicate that pDC may promote the expansion of regulatory responses during chlamydial infection. This possibility is consistent with recent work demonstrating that pDC have a propensity for induction of Treg cells ( Kuwana, et al. , 2001 , Martin, et al. , 2002 , Bilsborough, et al. , 2003 ). In preliminary studies, we have found Treg to be present in the ILN and GT during the course of infection in a pattern which mimics the presence of pDC in these tissues. Therefore our current efforts are focused on determining whether pDC have a role in the regulation of the immune response to C. muridarum infection through induction of regulatory T cell subsets. In summary, we have demonstrated that two distinct DC subsets respond in a genital model of chlamydial infection. Of these subsets, a CD11b+ cDC is the most well poised for the induction of the requisite Th1 response for clearance of genital chlamydial infection. Alternatively a pDC subset also responds to infection but does not demonstrate the requisite characteristics for the induction of an anti-chlamydial effector T cell response. Although pDC have been shown to activate CD4+ T cells ( Sapoznikov, et al. , 2007 ), our findings indicate that pDC do not activate T cells during genital C. muridarum infection. Instead, pDC seem well poised for the induction of regulatory T cell responses during genital chlamydial infection. This has particular relevance in the rational design of DC-targeting vaccines indicating that cDC and not pDC should be the focus for induction of anti-chlamydial T cell responses. 