Sequence variants at the TERT- CLPTM1L locus associate with many cancer types The common sequence variants that have recently been associated with cancer risk are particular to a single, or at most two, cancer types. Following up on our genome-wide scan of basal cell carcinoma 1 , we identified rs401681(C) on chromosome 5p15.33 satisfying our threshold for genome-wide significance (OR=1.25, P=3.7×10?12). We tested rs401681 for association with sixteen additional cancer types in over 30,000 cancer cases and 45,000 controls and found association with lung cancer (OR=1.15, P=7.2×10?8) and urinary bladder, prostate and cervix cancer (ORs 1.07–1.31, all P<4×10?4). However, rs401681(C) appears to confer protection against cutaneous melanoma (OR=0.88, P=8.0×10?4). Interestingly, most of these cancer types have a strong environmental component to their risk. Investigation of the region led us to rs2736098(A), that showed stronger association with some cancer types. However, neither variant could fully account for the association of the other. Rs2736098 corresponds to A305A in the telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) protein while rs401681 is in an intron of the CLPTM1L gene.  Methods A fully referenced copy of the Methods can be found in the Supplementary Methods . Genotyping Detailed information on all case control sample sets are found in the Supplementary Methods . Whole-genome association studies have been performed on the following cancers in the Icelandic population; prostate cancer, breast cancer, lung cancer, BCC, melanoma, urinary bladder cancer and colorectal cancer 1 – 3 , 9 , 14 . All cases and controls were assayed using genotyping systems and specialized software from Illumina (Human Hap300 and HumanCNV370-duo Bead Arrays, Illumina). Furthermore, all Dutch bladder cancer cases and controls have been genotyped with the HumanCNV370-duo Bead Arrays 14 . These chips provide about 75% genomic coverage in the Utah CEPH (CEU) HapMap samples for common SNPs at r2>0.8. SNP data were discarded if the minor allele frequency in the combined case and control was <0.001 or had less than 95% yield or showed a very significant distortion from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in the controls (P<1×10?10). Any chips with a call rate below 98% of the SNPs were excluded from the genome-wide association analysis. All single SNP genotyping was carried out applying the Centaurus (Nanogen) platform. The quality of each Centaurus SNP assay was evaluated by genotyping each assay in the CEU HapMap samples and comparing the results with the HapMap publicly released data. Assays with >1.5% mismatch rate were not used and a linkage disequilibrium (LD) test was used for markers known to be in LD. Approximately 10% of the Icelandic case samples that were genotyped on the Illumina platform were also genotyped using the Centaurus assays and the observed mismatch rate was lower than 0.5%. All genotyping was carried out at deCODE Genetics. Assessment of telomere length We selected whole blood as the tissue for analyzing telomere length for its accessibility but studies have shown that the length of telomeres is very similar within different tissues of the same individual but vary significantly between individuals. Telomeres were measured utilizing a quantitative Taqman® PCR assay. RNAseP endogenous control assay (Cat.no. 4316844) (Applied Biosystems Inc.) was used to correct for DNA input. This quantitative PCR method has been shown to give consistent results as Southern blot and FISH based telomere measurments. All reactions were run on ABI7900TH real time PCR system (Applied Biosystems Inc.). All assays were done in duplicate and repeated in an independent experiment. Primers and probes used are listed in Supplementary Table 10 . The use of RNAseP is a standard procedure in gene dosage measurements with real time qRT-PCR. The main limitation of the method is that it measures relative telomere length rather than actual telomere length. However, in our study the relative telomere length is sufficient for determining if there is a difference in telomere length between individuals depending on their genotype. Regression Analysis of Telomere Length Data A total of 528 females were analyzed in two batches, each batch consisting of 3 DNA plates, batch 1 included 268 women with a mean age at blood sampling of 72.8 (SD 5.0) years, batch 2 included 260 women with a mean age at blood sampling of 57.8 (SD 4.6) years. The relationship between the SNPs showing association and telomerase length was analyzed by multiple regression. The logarithm of the ratio between telomerase and RNAseP was taken as dependent variable, and the covariates age at blood sampling and DNA plates were included in the models. SNPs showing association were analyzed using multiple linear regression. The experiments were carried out at two different points in time and were analyzed separately. hTERT minisatellite genotyping Genotyping of the five variable number tandem repeat (VNTRs) polymorphisms in the intronic regions of the hTERT gene was performed by size fractionation of PCR products by gel electrophoresis. Two polymerase chain reaction systems were used, Recombinant Taq (Fermentas Inc.) and Extensor-High Fidelity Master Mix (ABgene Inc). PCR conditions were according to the manufacturer instructions. DNA input material was 30 ng. Primers used are listed in Supplementary Table 10 . Analysis of RNA expression Samples of RNA from human adipose and whole blood were hybridized to Agilent Technologies Human 25k microarrays. Expression changes between two samples were quantified as the mean logarithm (log10) expression ratio (MLR) compared to a reference pool RNA sample. The array probes for CLPTM1L and TERT genes were in the 3? untranslated regions of the genes. Association analysis A likelihood procedure implemented in the NEMO software was used for the association analyses. An attempt was made to genotype all individuals and all SNPs reported, and for each of the SNPs, the yield was higher than 95% in every study group. We tested the association of an allele to cancer using a standard likelihood ratio statistic that, if the subjects were unrelated, would have asymptotically a ?2 distribution with one degree of freedom under the null hypothesis. Allelic frequencies rather than carrier frequencies are presented for the markers in the main text. Allele-specific ORs and associated P values were calculated assuming a multiplicative model for the two chromosomes of an individual. Results from multiple case-control groups were combined using a Mantel-Haenszel model in which the groups were allowed to have different population frequencies for alleles, haplotypes and genotypes but were assumed to have common relative risks. All P values are reported as two-sided. For the analysis of the Icelandic samples, the same set of cancer free controls used in the BCC discovery analysis was used for all other cancer types, introducing a potential bias. However, due to the lack of association with common cancers like breast and colorectal cancer and also because of the modest effect sizes for the cancers associating with rs401681(C), the frequency of the variant is not substantially different in the Icelandic cancer free controls (0.545) compared to the whole group of Icelanders (N=36,139) genotyped with the BeadChips (0.547) which includes all cancer cases. Therefore, the potential bias introduced into the estimation of the association of the sixteen cancers with rs401681(C) is small. Furthermore, this effect is confined to the Icelandic part of our study. Test of un-genotyped Hapmap markers To test for SNP that are in the CEU section of the Hapmap database, but that are absent on the Illumina chip, we use a method based on haplotypes of two markers on the chip. We computed associations with a linear combination of the different haplotypes chosen to act as surrogates to HapMap markers in the regions. In the 5p13.33 region displayed in Figure 1 (corresponding to a 200 kb interval), we tested with this method 95 markers in addition to the ones on the chip. These calculations were based on 1,025 BCC cases and 28,890 controls genotyped on chip. Of those markers, rs2736098 had the most significantly association with BCC. Genomic control and inflation factors To adjust for possible population stratification and the relatedness amongst individuals, we divided the ?2 statistics from the initial scan of basal cell carcinoma in Iceland, using the method of genomic control, i.e. the 304 thousand test statistics were divided by their means, which was 1.22. In the cases where the method of genomic control is not directly applicable (i.e. if the genome wide association results are not available for the same groups), we used the genealogy to estimate the inflation factor. Since some of the Icelandic patients and controls are related to each other, both within and between groups, the ?2 statistics have a mean >1. We estimated the inflation factor by simulating genotypes through the Icelandic genealogy, as described previously, and corrected the ?2 statistics for Icelandic OR’s accordingly. The estimated inflation factor for different analyses is presented in Supplementary table 11 . <italic>In silico</italic> genotyping of un-genotyped individuals We extended the classical SNP case-control association study design by including un-genotyped cases with genotyped relatives, using information from genotyped individuals in the Icelandic population and the genealogy of all Icelanders. For a detailed description of the calculations of the probability of genotypes see Supplementary Methods .  Genotyping Detailed information on all case control sample sets are found in the Supplementary Methods . Whole-genome association studies have been performed on the following cancers in the Icelandic population; prostate cancer, breast cancer, lung cancer, BCC, melanoma, urinary bladder cancer and colorectal cancer 1 – 3 , 9 , 14 . All cases and controls were assayed using genotyping systems and specialized software from Illumina (Human Hap300 and HumanCNV370-duo Bead Arrays, Illumina). Furthermore, all Dutch bladder cancer cases and controls have been genotyped with the HumanCNV370-duo Bead Arrays 14 . These chips provide about 75% genomic coverage in the Utah CEPH (CEU) HapMap samples for common SNPs at r2>0.8. SNP data were discarded if the minor allele frequency in the combined case and control was <0.001 or had less than 95% yield or showed a very significant distortion from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in the controls (P<1×10?10). Any chips with a call rate below 98% of the SNPs were excluded from the genome-wide association analysis. All single SNP genotyping was carried out applying the Centaurus (Nanogen) platform. The quality of each Centaurus SNP assay was evaluated by genotyping each assay in the CEU HapMap samples and comparing the results with the HapMap publicly released data. Assays with >1.5% mismatch rate were not used and a linkage disequilibrium (LD) test was used for markers known to be in LD. Approximately 10% of the Icelandic case samples that were genotyped on the Illumina platform were also genotyped using the Centaurus assays and the observed mismatch rate was lower than 0.5%. All genotyping was carried out at deCODE Genetics.  Assessment of telomere length We selected whole blood as the tissue for analyzing telomere length for its accessibility but studies have shown that the length of telomeres is very similar within different tissues of the same individual but vary significantly between individuals. Telomeres were measured utilizing a quantitative Taqman® PCR assay. RNAseP endogenous control assay (Cat.no. 4316844) (Applied Biosystems Inc.) was used to correct for DNA input. This quantitative PCR method has been shown to give consistent results as Southern blot and FISH based telomere measurments. All reactions were run on ABI7900TH real time PCR system (Applied Biosystems Inc.). All assays were done in duplicate and repeated in an independent experiment. Primers and probes used are listed in Supplementary Table 10 . The use of RNAseP is a standard procedure in gene dosage measurements with real time qRT-PCR. The main limitation of the method is that it measures relative telomere length rather than actual telomere length. However, in our study the relative telomere length is sufficient for determining if there is a difference in telomere length between individuals depending on their genotype.  Regression Analysis of Telomere Length Data A total of 528 females were analyzed in two batches, each batch consisting of 3 DNA plates, batch 1 included 268 women with a mean age at blood sampling of 72.8 (SD 5.0) years, batch 2 included 260 women with a mean age at blood sampling of 57.8 (SD 4.6) years. The relationship between the SNPs showing association and telomerase length was analyzed by multiple regression. The logarithm of the ratio between telomerase and RNAseP was taken as dependent variable, and the covariates age at blood sampling and DNA plates were included in the models. SNPs showing association were analyzed using multiple linear regression. The experiments were carried out at two different points in time and were analyzed separately.  hTERT minisatellite genotyping Genotyping of the five variable number tandem repeat (VNTRs) polymorphisms in the intronic regions of the hTERT gene was performed by size fractionation of PCR products by gel electrophoresis. Two polymerase chain reaction systems were used, Recombinant Taq (Fermentas Inc.) and Extensor-High Fidelity Master Mix (ABgene Inc). PCR conditions were according to the manufacturer instructions. DNA input material was 30 ng. Primers used are listed in Supplementary Table 10 .  Analysis of RNA expression Samples of RNA from human adipose and whole blood were hybridized to Agilent Technologies Human 25k microarrays. Expression changes between two samples were quantified as the mean logarithm (log10) expression ratio (MLR) compared to a reference pool RNA sample. The array probes for CLPTM1L and TERT genes were in the 3? untranslated regions of the genes.  Association analysis A likelihood procedure implemented in the NEMO software was used for the association analyses. An attempt was made to genotype all individuals and all SNPs reported, and for each of the SNPs, the yield was higher than 95% in every study group. We tested the association of an allele to cancer using a standard likelihood ratio statistic that, if the subjects were unrelated, would have asymptotically a ?2 distribution with one degree of freedom under the null hypothesis. Allelic frequencies rather than carrier frequencies are presented for the markers in the main text. Allele-specific ORs and associated P values were calculated assuming a multiplicative model for the two chromosomes of an individual. Results from multiple case-control groups were combined using a Mantel-Haenszel model in which the groups were allowed to have different population frequencies for alleles, haplotypes and genotypes but were assumed to have common relative risks. All P values are reported as two-sided. For the analysis of the Icelandic samples, the same set of cancer free controls used in the BCC discovery analysis was used for all other cancer types, introducing a potential bias. However, due to the lack of association with common cancers like breast and colorectal cancer and also because of the modest effect sizes for the cancers associating with rs401681(C), the frequency of the variant is not substantially different in the Icelandic cancer free controls (0.545) compared to the whole group of Icelanders (N=36,139) genotyped with the BeadChips (0.547) which includes all cancer cases. Therefore, the potential bias introduced into the estimation of the association of the sixteen cancers with rs401681(C) is small. Furthermore, this effect is confined to the Icelandic part of our study.  Test of un-genotyped Hapmap markers To test for SNP that are in the CEU section of the Hapmap database, but that are absent on the Illumina chip, we use a method based on haplotypes of two markers on the chip. We computed associations with a linear combination of the different haplotypes chosen to act as surrogates to HapMap markers in the regions. In the 5p13.33 region displayed in Figure 1 (corresponding to a 200 kb interval), we tested with this method 95 markers in addition to the ones on the chip. These calculations were based on 1,025 BCC cases and 28,890 controls genotyped on chip. Of those markers, rs2736098 had the most significantly association with BCC.  Genomic control and inflation factors To adjust for possible population stratification and the relatedness amongst individuals, we divided the ?2 statistics from the initial scan of basal cell carcinoma in Iceland, using the method of genomic control, i.e. the 304 thousand test statistics were divided by their means, which was 1.22. In the cases where the method of genomic control is not directly applicable (i.e. if the genome wide association results are not available for the same groups), we used the genealogy to estimate the inflation factor. Since some of the Icelandic patients and controls are related to each other, both within and between groups, the ?2 statistics have a mean >1. We estimated the inflation factor by simulating genotypes through the Icelandic genealogy, as described previously, and corrected the ?2 statistics for Icelandic OR’s accordingly. The estimated inflation factor for different analyses is presented in Supplementary table 11 .  <italic>In silico</italic> genotyping of un-genotyped individuals We extended the classical SNP case-control association study design by including un-genotyped cases with genotyped relatives, using information from genotyped individuals in the Icelandic population and the genealogy of all Icelanders. For a detailed description of the calculations of the probability of genotypes see Supplementary Methods .  Supplementary Material SUP-METH SUP-NOTE 