Breast Imaging Fellowships in the United States: Who, What, and Where? OBJECTIVE The purpose of this study was to determine the characteristics of fellowship programs offering breast imaging training and their success in filling positions. CONCLUSION A comprehensive list of fellowship training opportunities in breast imaging may help potential applicants identify relevant programs.  Fellowship Program Characteristics We identified 55 institutions offering any fellowship program in breast imaging, women’s imaging, or breast and body imaging. The Society of Breast Imaging Website listed 34 of these institutions (62%), 21 of which (38%) were also NCI-designated cancer centers. We identified an additional 14 of the 55 institutions (25%) by contacting the 42 NCI cancer centers not included on the Society of Breast Imaging list. An additional seven of 55 institutions (13%), not found on either the Society of Breast Imaging list or on the list of NCI-designated cancer centers, were identified through referrals made by administrators of programs contacted in the course of the study. Forty-eight institutions offered a single relevant fellowship track (breast imaging, breast and body imaging, or women’s imaging); six offered two different tracks (breast imaging in addition to either women’s imaging or breast and body imaging); and one institution offered all three tracks. In total, 63 fellowship programs in breast imaging, women’s imaging, or breast and body imaging were offered at 55 institutions. Of the 63 programs identified, 62 programs responded to our survey. Table 1 shows a complete list of the 54 participating institutions and the programs offered. The programs were distributed broadly across the United States. Categorized by U.S. census region [ 13 ], 20 of 62 programs (32%) were located in the South, followed by 19 (31%) in the Northeast, 12 (19%) in the Midwest, and 11 (18%) in the West. The Northeast offered 34 of the 110 positions (31%); the South, 33 (30%); the Midwest, 25 (23%); and the West, 18 (16%). Although postgraduate training in breast imaging has been offered in the United States for more than 20 years, the histories of the individual programs varied substantially. This information was unavailable for five programs, but among the other 57 programs, 25 (43%) had been in existence for 10 or fewer years. Eleven programs (19%) had existed for 5 or fewer years, 14 (24%) for 6–10 years, 18 (32%) for 11–15 years, 10 (18%) for 16–20 years, and four (7%) for more than 20 years. Programs varied with respect to curricula. Among the 34 breast imaging fellowship programs, 32 (94%) included a full year of postgraduate training dedicated to all techniques of breast imaging, including mammography, sonography, MRI, and breast interventional procedures. Two breast imaging programs offered 6-month positions. Women’s imaging programs offered an average of 6 months of training in breast imaging and 6 months of training in imaging techniques specific to gynecology and obstetrics. Combined breast and body imaging fellowships offered 6 months of breast imaging and a more varied curriculum for the other 6 months of training. In addition, some of the programs surveyed allowed fellows to generate a work schedule tailored to their individual professional interests and goals.  Fellowship Positions and Application Results In 60 of the 62 programs surveyed, the relevant fellowship programs were 1 year in duration; two programs had 6-month fellowships in 2007. The programs had a median of two fellows per year (range, 1–5): 27 (44%) offered one position, 24 (39%) offered two, eight (13%) offered three, two (3%) offered four, and a single program (2%) offered five positions in 2007. These programs collectively accounted for 110 fellowship positions. In 2007, 88 of the 110 fellowship positions (80%) offered in breast imaging, women’s imaging, and breast and body imaging were filled. The result of these recruitments was that 42 of the 62 surveyed programs (68%) had a complete panel of fellows. The likelihood that a program would become filled was higher for programs in the Northeast than for programs in other regions of the United States and was higher for programs in existence more than 5 years than for programs 5 years old and younger ( Table 2 ). The likelihood of a program being filled was unrelated to program size (several fellows vs one fellow) or program track (breast imaging vs women’s or breast and body imaging). Programs identified only through contact with NCI-designated cancer centers were more likely to be filled (76%) than were programs identified on the Society of Breast Imaging Website (67%). As shown in Table 2 , programs identified through both sources were most likely to have a complete panel of fellows (80%).  Materials and Methods Identification of Fellowship Programs We compiled a comprehensive list of hospital-based radiology fellowship programs offering specialty training in breast imaging in September 2007. We included in this analysis programs that identified themselves as combined breast and body imaging or women’s imaging fellowships because at least 6 months of training were dedicated to breast imaging techniques in each program. We first identified all institutions listed on the Website of the Society of Breast Imaging [ 11 ] as having a breast imaging fellowship program. We then contacted the 63 National Cancer Institute (NCI)-designated cancer centers [ 12 ] to identify additional institutions not listed on the Society of Breast Imaging Website. Finally, we contacted additional institutions named by fellowship directors or administrators of programs found through the other two methods. At each institution, we identified all relevant training programs. Different programs within the same institution (e.g., a breast imaging fellowship and a women’s imaging fellowship) were considered separate programs. Before completing this study in March 2008, we performed a second review of the Society of Breast Imaging Website and identified additional institutions that had not been listed 6 months earlier. Survey We contacted each program for a brief telephone survey. If a representative of the fellowship program was not reached by telephone, a follow-up e-mail was sent to the program director or administrator. Survey items pertained to the academic year July 2007 through June 2008 and included the number of positions available in the program; current number of fellows; length of time devoted to breast imaging; and, if available, a description of the fellowship year in terms of mammography, sonography, MRI, and other imaging techniques and procedures. Finally, we asked each representative how long their institution had offered the specific fellowship program. The questions were generally answered by administrative coordinators.  Identification of Fellowship Programs We compiled a comprehensive list of hospital-based radiology fellowship programs offering specialty training in breast imaging in September 2007. We included in this analysis programs that identified themselves as combined breast and body imaging or women’s imaging fellowships because at least 6 months of training were dedicated to breast imaging techniques in each program. We first identified all institutions listed on the Website of the Society of Breast Imaging [ 11 ] as having a breast imaging fellowship program. We then contacted the 63 National Cancer Institute (NCI)-designated cancer centers [ 12 ] to identify additional institutions not listed on the Society of Breast Imaging Website. Finally, we contacted additional institutions named by fellowship directors or administrators of programs found through the other two methods. At each institution, we identified all relevant training programs. Different programs within the same institution (e.g., a breast imaging fellowship and a women’s imaging fellowship) were considered separate programs. Before completing this study in March 2008, we performed a second review of the Society of Breast Imaging Website and identified additional institutions that had not been listed 6 months earlier.  Survey We contacted each program for a brief telephone survey. If a representative of the fellowship program was not reached by telephone, a follow-up e-mail was sent to the program director or administrator. Survey items pertained to the academic year July 2007 through June 2008 and included the number of positions available in the program; current number of fellows; length of time devoted to breast imaging; and, if available, a description of the fellowship year in terms of mammography, sonography, MRI, and other imaging techniques and procedures. Finally, we asked each representative how long their institution had offered the specific fellowship program. The questions were generally answered by administrative coordinators.  Results Fellowship Program Characteristics We identified 55 institutions offering any fellowship program in breast imaging, women’s imaging, or breast and body imaging. The Society of Breast Imaging Website listed 34 of these institutions (62%), 21 of which (38%) were also NCI-designated cancer centers. We identified an additional 14 of the 55 institutions (25%) by contacting the 42 NCI cancer centers not included on the Society of Breast Imaging list. An additional seven of 55 institutions (13%), not found on either the Society of Breast Imaging list or on the list of NCI-designated cancer centers, were identified through referrals made by administrators of programs contacted in the course of the study. Forty-eight institutions offered a single relevant fellowship track (breast imaging, breast and body imaging, or women’s imaging); six offered two different tracks (breast imaging in addition to either women’s imaging or breast and body imaging); and one institution offered all three tracks. In total, 63 fellowship programs in breast imaging, women’s imaging, or breast and body imaging were offered at 55 institutions. Of the 63 programs identified, 62 programs responded to our survey. Table 1 shows a complete list of the 54 participating institutions and the programs offered. The programs were distributed broadly across the United States. Categorized by U.S. census region [ 13 ], 20 of 62 programs (32%) were located in the South, followed by 19 (31%) in the Northeast, 12 (19%) in the Midwest, and 11 (18%) in the West. The Northeast offered 34 of the 110 positions (31%); the South, 33 (30%); the Midwest, 25 (23%); and the West, 18 (16%). Although postgraduate training in breast imaging has been offered in the United States for more than 20 years, the histories of the individual programs varied substantially. This information was unavailable for five programs, but among the other 57 programs, 25 (43%) had been in existence for 10 or fewer years. Eleven programs (19%) had existed for 5 or fewer years, 14 (24%) for 6–10 years, 18 (32%) for 11–15 years, 10 (18%) for 16–20 years, and four (7%) for more than 20 years. Programs varied with respect to curricula. Among the 34 breast imaging fellowship programs, 32 (94%) included a full year of postgraduate training dedicated to all techniques of breast imaging, including mammography, sonography, MRI, and breast interventional procedures. Two breast imaging programs offered 6-month positions. Women’s imaging programs offered an average of 6 months of training in breast imaging and 6 months of training in imaging techniques specific to gynecology and obstetrics. Combined breast and body imaging fellowships offered 6 months of breast imaging and a more varied curriculum for the other 6 months of training. In addition, some of the programs surveyed allowed fellows to generate a work schedule tailored to their individual professional interests and goals. Fellowship Positions and Application Results In 60 of the 62 programs surveyed, the relevant fellowship programs were 1 year in duration; two programs had 6-month fellowships in 2007. The programs had a median of two fellows per year (range, 1–5): 27 (44%) offered one position, 24 (39%) offered two, eight (13%) offered three, two (3%) offered four, and a single program (2%) offered five positions in 2007. These programs collectively accounted for 110 fellowship positions. In 2007, 88 of the 110 fellowship positions (80%) offered in breast imaging, women’s imaging, and breast and body imaging were filled. The result of these recruitments was that 42 of the 62 surveyed programs (68%) had a complete panel of fellows. The likelihood that a program would become filled was higher for programs in the Northeast than for programs in other regions of the United States and was higher for programs in existence more than 5 years than for programs 5 years old and younger ( Table 2 ). The likelihood of a program being filled was unrelated to program size (several fellows vs one fellow) or program track (breast imaging vs women’s or breast and body imaging). Programs identified only through contact with NCI-designated cancer centers were more likely to be filled (76%) than were programs identified on the Society of Breast Imaging Website (67%). As shown in Table 2 , programs identified through both sources were most likely to have a complete panel of fellows (80%).  Results Fellowship Program Characteristics We identified 55 institutions offering any fellowship program in breast imaging, women’s imaging, or breast and body imaging. The Society of Breast Imaging Website listed 34 of these institutions (62%), 21 of which (38%) were also NCI-designated cancer centers. We identified an additional 14 of the 55 institutions (25%) by contacting the 42 NCI cancer centers not included on the Society of Breast Imaging list. An additional seven of 55 institutions (13%), not found on either the Society of Breast Imaging list or on the list of NCI-designated cancer centers, were identified through referrals made by administrators of programs contacted in the course of the study. Forty-eight institutions offered a single relevant fellowship track (breast imaging, breast and body imaging, or women’s imaging); six offered two different tracks (breast imaging in addition to either women’s imaging or breast and body imaging); and one institution offered all three tracks. In total, 63 fellowship programs in breast imaging, women’s imaging, or breast and body imaging were offered at 55 institutions. Of the 63 programs identified, 62 programs responded to our survey. Table 1 shows a complete list of the 54 participating institutions and the programs offered. The programs were distributed broadly across the United States. Categorized by U.S. census region [ 13 ], 20 of 62 programs (32%) were located in the South, followed by 19 (31%) in the Northeast, 12 (19%) in the Midwest, and 11 (18%) in the West. The Northeast offered 34 of the 110 positions (31%); the South, 33 (30%); the Midwest, 25 (23%); and the West, 18 (16%). Although postgraduate training in breast imaging has been offered in the United States for more than 20 years, the histories of the individual programs varied substantially. This information was unavailable for five programs, but among the other 57 programs, 25 (43%) had been in existence for 10 or fewer years. Eleven programs (19%) had existed for 5 or fewer years, 14 (24%) for 6–10 years, 18 (32%) for 11–15 years, 10 (18%) for 16–20 years, and four (7%) for more than 20 years. Programs varied with respect to curricula. Among the 34 breast imaging fellowship programs, 32 (94%) included a full year of postgraduate training dedicated to all techniques of breast imaging, including mammography, sonography, MRI, and breast interventional procedures. Two breast imaging programs offered 6-month positions. Women’s imaging programs offered an average of 6 months of training in breast imaging and 6 months of training in imaging techniques specific to gynecology and obstetrics. Combined breast and body imaging fellowships offered 6 months of breast imaging and a more varied curriculum for the other 6 months of training. In addition, some of the programs surveyed allowed fellows to generate a work schedule tailored to their individual professional interests and goals. Fellowship Positions and Application Results In 60 of the 62 programs surveyed, the relevant fellowship programs were 1 year in duration; two programs had 6-month fellowships in 2007. The programs had a median of two fellows per year (range, 1–5): 27 (44%) offered one position, 24 (39%) offered two, eight (13%) offered three, two (3%) offered four, and a single program (2%) offered five positions in 2007. These programs collectively accounted for 110 fellowship positions. In 2007, 88 of the 110 fellowship positions (80%) offered in breast imaging, women’s imaging, and breast and body imaging were filled. The result of these recruitments was that 42 of the 62 surveyed programs (68%) had a complete panel of fellows. The likelihood that a program would become filled was higher for programs in the Northeast than for programs in other regions of the United States and was higher for programs in existence more than 5 years than for programs 5 years old and younger ( Table 2 ). The likelihood of a program being filled was unrelated to program size (several fellows vs one fellow) or program track (breast imaging vs women’s or breast and body imaging). Programs identified only through contact with NCI-designated cancer centers were more likely to be filled (76%) than were programs identified on the Society of Breast Imaging Website (67%). As shown in Table 2 , programs identified through both sources were most likely to have a complete panel of fellows (80%).  Discussion Breast imaging is a critical subspecialty of radiology because screening mammography saves lives [ 1 , 2 ]. Previous studies have suggested an association between the accuracy of mammographic interpretation and a radiologist’s annual volume, years of practice, and fellowship training in the field [ 14 – 16 ]. The shortage of breast imaging specialists in the United States and the potential negative effect of the shortage on access to mammography is an ongoing concern [ 6 ]. Currently, mammograms are interpreted by a combination of breast imaging specialists, other specialists, and general radiologists. In a survey of radiologists in 2003 [ 17 ], approximately 10% of all radiologists identified themselves as breast imaging specialists, and 61% of radiologists reported reading mammograms. In total, nearly one third of all mammograms are interpreted by only 10% of radiologists [ 18 ]. The trend toward specialization is not unique to breast imaging [ 19 ]. An increasing number of graduating radiology residents are pursuing subspecialty fellowships before entering the workforce [ 20 ]. Neither breast imaging nor women’s imaging has historically benefited from this trend [ 21 ]. In fact, graduating residents in a single survey [ 22 ] reported using fellowship training in another subspecialty field to negotiate a position that does not require reading mammograms. Because graduating radiologists are increasingly undertaking subspecialty training before entering the workforce, cultivating an interest in breast imaging at the resident and fellowship levels is necessary to educate a sufficient number of radiologists to be trained and willing to interpret mammograms [ 10 ]. In 2003, Bassett and colleagues [ 21 ] identified 53 programs offering breast and women’s imaging fellowship positions; 63 fellows were recruited at 46 programs. The results of our more recent survey suggest that interest in breast imaging may be growing. In 2007, 88 fellows were recruited to 45 programs, 42 of which were completely filled. An increased demand for subspecialty training in breast imaging is further supported by the identification of 11 programs introduced within the past 5 years. However, lack of approval of these fellowship programs by the American College of Graduate Medical Education has caused difficulty in tracking the numbers and in comparing the often variable curricula at individual institutions. Our study had several limitations. First, our primary information sources—the Society of Breast Imaging directory and contact with the 42 NCI-designated cancer centers—might not have captured all institutions offering postgraduate training in breast imaging. We identified seven programs through referrals alone, and other such programs may exist that we did not identify. In addition, our conversations with fellowship directors suggested that there may be fluidity among the various imaging subspecialty tracks, depending on the interest of trainees and educators in any given year. Our classification of fellowship programs reflects the definitions of these programs in 2007. Finally, information gathered from each program was limited by the knowledge of the representative who responded. If interest in breast imaging, women’s imaging, and breast and body imaging fellowships continues to grow, the need will increase for an updated, comprehensive, readily available list to assist in the application process. Our exercise of searching for institutions offering fellowship training in breast imaging revealed some of the challenges faced by residents interested in the field. Changes in the number of positions and programs available were a major obstacle in developing this list. Although we did not collect information on program applicants, anecdotal reports from program directors and administrators suggested many fellows were internal applicants remaining for an additional year after general radiology residency to specialize in breast imaging. As the number of external applicants grows, programs and residents will benefit from a directory of fellowships offering breast imaging training. Guaranteeing that a sufficient number of physicians are trained in breast imaging warrants great attention. The list we developed, which has been shared with the Society of Breast Imaging, should facilitate further research on trends in breast imaging training. We hope this list will help those seeking fellowship training in breast imaging to identify relevant programs.  Discussion Breast imaging is a critical subspecialty of radiology because screening mammography saves lives [ 1 , 2 ]. Previous studies have suggested an association between the accuracy of mammographic interpretation and a radiologist’s annual volume, years of practice, and fellowship training in the field [ 14 – 16 ]. The shortage of breast imaging specialists in the United States and the potential negative effect of the shortage on access to mammography is an ongoing concern [ 6 ]. Currently, mammograms are interpreted by a combination of breast imaging specialists, other specialists, and general radiologists. In a survey of radiologists in 2003 [ 17 ], approximately 10% of all radiologists identified themselves as breast imaging specialists, and 61% of radiologists reported reading mammograms. In total, nearly one third of all mammograms are interpreted by only 10% of radiologists [ 18 ]. The trend toward specialization is not unique to breast imaging [ 19 ]. An increasing number of graduating radiology residents are pursuing subspecialty fellowships before entering the workforce [ 20 ]. Neither breast imaging nor women’s imaging has historically benefited from this trend [ 21 ]. In fact, graduating residents in a single survey [ 22 ] reported using fellowship training in another subspecialty field to negotiate a position that does not require reading mammograms. Because graduating radiologists are increasingly undertaking subspecialty training before entering the workforce, cultivating an interest in breast imaging at the resident and fellowship levels is necessary to educate a sufficient number of radiologists to be trained and willing to interpret mammograms [ 10 ]. In 2003, Bassett and colleagues [ 21 ] identified 53 programs offering breast and women’s imaging fellowship positions; 63 fellows were recruited at 46 programs. The results of our more recent survey suggest that interest in breast imaging may be growing. In 2007, 88 fellows were recruited to 45 programs, 42 of which were completely filled. An increased demand for subspecialty training in breast imaging is further supported by the identification of 11 programs introduced within the past 5 years. However, lack of approval of these fellowship programs by the American College of Graduate Medical Education has caused difficulty in tracking the numbers and in comparing the often variable curricula at individual institutions. Our study had several limitations. First, our primary information sources—the Society of Breast Imaging directory and contact with the 42 NCI-designated cancer centers—might not have captured all institutions offering postgraduate training in breast imaging. We identified seven programs through referrals alone, and other such programs may exist that we did not identify. In addition, our conversations with fellowship directors suggested that there may be fluidity among the various imaging subspecialty tracks, depending on the interest of trainees and educators in any given year. Our classification of fellowship programs reflects the definitions of these programs in 2007. Finally, information gathered from each program was limited by the knowledge of the representative who responded. If interest in breast imaging, women’s imaging, and breast and body imaging fellowships continues to grow, the need will increase for an updated, comprehensive, readily available list to assist in the application process. Our exercise of searching for institutions offering fellowship training in breast imaging revealed some of the challenges faced by residents interested in the field. Changes in the number of positions and programs available were a major obstacle in developing this list. Although we did not collect information on program applicants, anecdotal reports from program directors and administrators suggested many fellows were internal applicants remaining for an additional year after general radiology residency to specialize in breast imaging. As the number of external applicants grows, programs and residents will benefit from a directory of fellowships offering breast imaging training. Guaranteeing that a sufficient number of physicians are trained in breast imaging warrants great attention. The list we developed, which has been shared with the Society of Breast Imaging, should facilitate further research on trends in breast imaging training. We hope this list will help those seeking fellowship training in breast imaging to identify relevant programs. 