Glutamate and Reinstatement Summary The importance of glutamate in the reinstatement of cocaine-seeking behavior has been established. New molecular and neurochemical adaptations in the glutamatergic system which drive cocaine relapse have been identified, such as the ability of CB1 receptor stimulation to reduce basal glutamate levels and the involvement of the GluR1 receptor subunit in reinstatement. Furthermore, it is apparent that similar glutamatergic neuroadaptations arise after self-administration of cocaine, heroin, nicotine and alcohol. For example, reinstatement to cocaine, nicotine and alcohol can be prevented both by stimulation of group II mGluR receptors as well as blockade of Group I mGluR receptors. The similarities in the neurochemistry behind relapse to these varied drug classes indicate that drugs that target the glutamate system could be effective at treating relapse to multiple types of drugs.  Conclusions Based on the work presented here, glutamate is involved in relapse to multiple types of addictive drugs (also see [ 52 ]). The majority of work in this field has been done with cocaine, thus providing more insight into the glutamatergic signaling mechanisms underlying cocaine relapse relative to other drugs. However, the research presented here indicates that there are commonalities between relapse to cocaine, alcohol, nicotine and heroin. Cocaine and heroin share a common circuitry of relapse, with the glutamatergic projection from the prelimbic cortex to the nucleus accumbens core being essential for reinstatement. Stimulation of mGluR2/3 receptors is effective at blocking reinstatement of cocaine, nicotine and alcohol, presumably by reducing the release of glutamate from pre-synaptic terminals and providing more evidence that it is the release of glutamate that drives relapse. Similarly, antagonizing group I mGluR receptors blocks reinstatement of cocaine-, nicotine- and alcohol-seeking. Given that different and overlapping brain structures contribute to reinstatement for different drug classes, the drug-induced glutamatergic neuroadaptations and effects of glutamate pharmacology on reinstatement that have been identified primarily in the NAC may generalize to other key structures, such as the amygdala or ventral tegmental area. Nonetheless, the last two years of research consistently points to an important role for glutamate transmission in the NAC in the reinstatement of drug-seeking, regardless of drug class, and correspondingly identifies different aspects of glutamate transmission and homeostasis as potential pharmacotherapeutic targets in treating addiction.  Table Table 1 The role of glutamate receptor subtypes in the reinstatement of cocaine-, heroin, alcohol- and nicotine-seeking. DRUG RECEPTOR ROLE IN REINSTATEMENT CITATION Cocaine AMPA Agonists promote reinstatement 9 , 20 , 21 Antagonists attenuate reinstatement 5 , 6 , 21 , 22 NMDA Antagonists in NAcc shell promote reinstatement 24 Antagonists (high dose) in NAcc core promote reinstatement 24 Antagonists (low dose) in NAcc core attenuate reinstatement 21 , 22 mGluR2/3 Agonists attenuate reinstatement 27 , 28 , 30 mGluR Indirect agonists attenuate reinstatement 12 , 13 , 17 mGluR1/5 Antagonists attenuate reinstatement 21 , 31 Heroin AMPA Antagonists attenuate reinstatement 38 mGluR2/3 Agonists attenuate reinstatement 39 mGluR Indirect agonists attenuate reinstatement 29 Alcohol mGluR2/3 Agonists attenuate reinstatement 40 mGluR1/5 Antagonists attenuate reinstatement 41 Nicotine mGluR2/3 Agonists attenuate reinstatement 47 mGluR1/5 Antagonists attenuate reinstatement 48 , 49 , 50 