From interleukin-23 to T-helper 17 cells: human T-helper cell differentiation revisited Summary Protracted inflammation leading to dysregulation of effector T-cell responses represents a common feature of a wide range of autoimmune diseases. The interleukin-12 (IL-12)/T-helper 1 (Th1) pathway was thought to be responsible for the pathogenesis of multiple chronic inflammatory diseases, including psoriasis, inflammatory bowel disease, arthritis, or multiple sclerosis, mainly through their production of interferon-? and its effects on macrophage activation and chemokine production. However, this initial concept of T-cell-mediated chronic inflammation required an adjustment with the discovery of an IL-12-related cytokine, designated IL-23. IL-23 was rapidly recognized for its involvement in the establishment of chronic inflammation and in the development of a Th cell subset producing IL-17, designated Th17, which is distinct from the previously reported Th1 and Th2 populations. This review aims to describe the characterization of IL-23 and its receptor, its biological activities, as well as its involvement in the development of human Th17 cells and autoimmunity.  Conclusion The discovery of IL-23 has led to the identification of a new Th cell subset that complements the Th1/Th2 paradigm. It is now clear that this Th17 pathway, with all its complexity, is essential for protection against infectious agents but also for the pathogenesis of inflammatory disorders. However, many questions still need to be answered. The precise role played by TGF-? during mouse and human Th17 cell development remains to be analyzed at a molecular level to get full insight in the importance of this factor. In addition, we have not discussed in this review the interaction and relationship between human Th17 and Treg cells. It is known that the regulation of FoxP3 expression is different between mice and humans ( 147 ) and that the interplay between FoxP3 and ROR?t is important for the decision of mouse Th17 versus Treg cell lineage commitment ( 148 ). In this respect it is interesting that human Treg cells seem to be able to differentiate into IL-17-producing cells when stimulated with IL-2 and IL-15 in the presence of monocytes ( 149 ). 