Surgery for cataracts in people with age-related macular degeneration Background Cataract and age-related macular degeneration (AMD) are significant causes of decreased vision in the elderly that often occur simultaneously. Although cataract surgery is an effective treatment for cataract-induced visual loss, some clinicians suspect that such an intervention may increase the risk of progression of underlying AMD and thus have deleterious effects on vision. Objectives The objective of this review was to evaluate the effectiveness and safety of cataract surgery in eyes with AMD. Search strategy We searched the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) (which contains the Cochrane Eyes and Vision Group Trials Register) ( The Cochrane Library, Issue 4, 2008), MEDLINE (January 1966 to November 2008), EMBASE (January 1980 to November 2008) and Latin American and Caribbean Literature on Health Sciences (LILACS) (January 1982 to November 2008). There were no language or date restrictions in the search for trials. The electronic databases were last searched on 4 November 2008. Selection criteria We planned to include randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and quasi-randomized trials of eyes affected by both cataract and AMD in which cataract surgery would be compared to no surgery. Data collection and analysis Two authors independently evaluated the search results against the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Discrepancies were resolved by discussion. Main results We found no RCTs, thus no analysis was conducted. Evidence was limited to non-randomized clinical trials and prospective cohort and case-control studies. Authors' conclusions At this time, it is not possible to draw reliable conclusions from the available data to determine whether cataract surgery is beneficial or harmful in people with AMD. Physicians will have to make practice decisions based on best clinical judgement until controlled trials are conducted and their findings published.  Methods Criteria for considering studies for this review Types of studies We included randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and quasi-randomized trials in which the methods of allocating people to a treatment arm were not exactly random such as date of birth or day of the week. This was in anticipation of not finding many trials on this subject. Types of participants We included trials in eyes with AMD that also had cataract and required cataract surgery. We excluded trials in which eyes required cataract surgery for angle-closure glaucoma, lens subluxation, or clear lens extraction for refractive error. Types of interventions We included trials where cataract surgery was compared to no surgery. We imposed no restrictions based on type of cataract surgery. Types of outcome measures Primary outcomes The primary outcome for this review was visual acuity in the operated eye at one year follow-up. It was to be measured as: Best-corrected visual acuity dichotomized into: 0.3 LogMar (20/40 Snellen equivalent) or better; Worse than 0.3 LogMar. Change in visual acuity categorized by: Three or more lines improvement on a logMAR chart (improvement by 0.3 logMAR units) from baseline; Within three lines of baseline visual acuity; Three or more lines loss. When continuous LogMAR data were available we planned to analyze the visual acuity and degree of change as continuous data We planned to analyze visual acuity at other follow-up times (six months, two and three years) when possible. Secondary outcomes The secondary outcomes for this review included: Progression of AMD in the operated eye as measured by: Development of geographic atrophy; Development of CNV; Increase in the number of medium or large-sized drusen (> 63 microns in size); Increase of the drusen total area; Progression of non-central geographic atrophy to central geographic atrophy. Vision-related quality of life as measured by methods applied in each trial. Vision-threatening complications from cataract surgery, including but not limited to cystoid macular edema and retinal detachment. We planned to analyze secondary outcomes at one, two, three years follow-up when possible. Search methods for identification of studies Electronic searches We searched the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) (which contains the Cochrane Eyes and Vision Group Trials Register) ( The Cochrane Library, Issue 4, 2008), MEDLINE (January 1966 to November 2008), EMBASE (January 1980 to November 2008) and Latin American and Caribbean Literature on Health Sciences (LILACS) (January 1982 to November 2008). There were no language or date restrictions in the search for trials. The electronic databases were last searched on 4 November 2008. See: Appendices for details of search strategies for CENTRAL ( Appendix 1 ), MEDLINE ( Appendix 2 ), EMBASE ( Appendix 3 ) and LILACS (Appendix 5). Searching other resources We searched the reference lists of observational studies and reviews for possible trials. Data collection and analysis Selection of studies Two review authors independently selected the studies for inclusion. The titles and abstracts of all reports identified by the electronic and manual searching were examined by two authors. The abstracts were classified as (a) definitely include, (b) unsure or (c) definitely exclude. Full-text copies of those classified as (a) definitely include and (b) unsure were obtained and re-assessed by two authors. The studies were classified as (1) include, (2) awaiting assessment or (3) exclude. For studies awaiting assessment, study authors were contacted for further clarification and the study was reassessed if further information became available. Studies excluded by both review authors are documented and the reasons for exclusion are reported in the review. The review authors were unmasked to the report authors, institutions and trial results during this assessment. Disagreements between the two review authors were resolved by a third review author. Data extraction and management There were no studies included in the review; therefore no data extraction was performed. In the future, for studies that meet the inclusion criteria for this review, two review authors will independently extract the data for the primary and secondary outcomes onto paper data extraction forms developed by the Cochrane Eyes and Vision Group. A pilot test of this form will be done using a small number of studies. Discrepancies will be resolved by discussion. After the data extraction is verified, all data will be entered into RevMan 5 ( RevMan 2008 ). Assessment of risk of bias in included studies There were no studies included in the review; therefore no assessment of methodological quality was performed. In the future, if studies meet the inclusion criteria for this review, two review authors will independently assess the included trials for bias according to the methods described in Chapter 8 of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( Higgins 2008 ). The following parameters will be assessed for bias: (a) generation of random allocation sequence and allocation concealment (selection bias); (b) masking study personnel (performance bias); (c) completeness of follow up and intent-to-treat analysis (attrition bias); (d) masking of outcome assessors (detection bias); and (e) selective outcome reporting (reporting bias). As masking of participants is uncommon in surgical trials, it will not be assessed as a measure of methodological quality. Each type of bias will be classified as low risk of bias, unclear risk of bias, or high risk of bias. Any method of allocation concealment such as sequentially numbered opaque envelopes or centralized random allocation will be considered to confer low risk of bias. If the information available in the published trial reports is inadequate to assess the method of allocation concealment, we will contact the trial authors for clarification. If they do not respond within four weeks time, we will classify the trial based on the available information. When studies do not report any concealment approach, risk of bias will be considered unclear. We will also assess the impact of any assumptions made in this regard in a sensitivity analysis. We will consider trial investigators to have conducted an intent-to-treat analysis only when all participants who were randomized, including those who were randomized but not treated, were excluded after randomization for other reasons, or were lost to follow-up were reported and accounted for in the data analysis. Measures of treatment effect We will analyze data according to the guidelines set forth in Chapter 9 of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( Deeks 2008 ). For dichotomous outcomes we will calculate a summary risk ratio with 95% confidence intervals. We will also report the risk difference and number needed to treat. We will calculate a mean difference with standard deviations for continuous outcomes. We will calculate a standardized mean difference if different scales are used to measure continuous outcomes. Unit of analysis issues The unit of analysis will be individual eyes. If both eyes from one person were included in the trial, we will extract the data and perform analyses to properly account for the non-independence of the bilateral surgery design following Chapter 9.3 of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( Deeks 2008 ). Dealing with missing data We will contact the authors of included studies for additional information when statistics, such as standard deviations, or outcome data are not clearly reported or if results are not reported for all the patients who were randomized. If additional statistical information or outcome data cannot be provided, we will use data as it is reported. If we are unable to obtain results for all the patients who were randomized, we will use the results reported by the authors as well as report the loss to follow-up for each group when available. Assessment of heterogeneity We will look for clinical heterogeneity by examination of the study details then test for statistical heterogeneity between trial results using the Chi-square test and the I-square value. A p value of the Chi-square test less than 0.1 or I-square values of more than 50% or both will be considered to suggest substantial statistical heterogeneity. We will also examine the funnel plot for statistical heterogeneity if three or more studies are included. Assessment of reporting biases Asymmetry of the funnel plot will be used to identify publication bias. Data synthesis If no substantial statistical heterogeneity is detected, and if there is no clinical heterogeneity between the trials, we will combine the results in a meta-analysis using a random-effects model. A fixed-effect model will be used if the number of trials is three or less. In case of substantial statistical or clinical heterogeneity we will not combine study results, but rather present a narrative or tabular summary of findings from individual trials. Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneity Subgroup analyses of interest include types of cataract surgery and the presence of CNV or central geographic atrophy in the unoperated eye. Sensitivity analysis Sensitivity analyses will be conducted to determine the impact of exclusion of studies with lower methodological quality, exclusion of unpublished studies and exclusion of industry-funded studies. Methods for future updates Updates of this review will be conducted every two years after initial publication.  Criteria for considering studies for this review Types of studies We included randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and quasi-randomized trials in which the methods of allocating people to a treatment arm were not exactly random such as date of birth or day of the week. This was in anticipation of not finding many trials on this subject. Types of participants We included trials in eyes with AMD that also had cataract and required cataract surgery. We excluded trials in which eyes required cataract surgery for angle-closure glaucoma, lens subluxation, or clear lens extraction for refractive error. Types of interventions We included trials where cataract surgery was compared to no surgery. We imposed no restrictions based on type of cataract surgery. Types of outcome measures Primary outcomes The primary outcome for this review was visual acuity in the operated eye at one year follow-up. It was to be measured as: Best-corrected visual acuity dichotomized into: 0.3 LogMar (20/40 Snellen equivalent) or better; Worse than 0.3 LogMar. Change in visual acuity categorized by: Three or more lines improvement on a logMAR chart (improvement by 0.3 logMAR units) from baseline; Within three lines of baseline visual acuity; Three or more lines loss. When continuous LogMAR data were available we planned to analyze the visual acuity and degree of change as continuous data We planned to analyze visual acuity at other follow-up times (six months, two and three years) when possible. Secondary outcomes The secondary outcomes for this review included: Progression of AMD in the operated eye as measured by: Development of geographic atrophy; Development of CNV; Increase in the number of medium or large-sized drusen (> 63 microns in size); Increase of the drusen total area; Progression of non-central geographic atrophy to central geographic atrophy. Vision-related quality of life as measured by methods applied in each trial. Vision-threatening complications from cataract surgery, including but not limited to cystoid macular edema and retinal detachment. We planned to analyze secondary outcomes at one, two, three years follow-up when possible.  Types of studies We included randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and quasi-randomized trials in which the methods of allocating people to a treatment arm were not exactly random such as date of birth or day of the week. This was in anticipation of not finding many trials on this subject.  Types of participants We included trials in eyes with AMD that also had cataract and required cataract surgery. We excluded trials in which eyes required cataract surgery for angle-closure glaucoma, lens subluxation, or clear lens extraction for refractive error.  Types of interventions We included trials where cataract surgery was compared to no surgery. We imposed no restrictions based on type of cataract surgery.  Types of outcome measures Primary outcomes The primary outcome for this review was visual acuity in the operated eye at one year follow-up. It was to be measured as: Best-corrected visual acuity dichotomized into: 0.3 LogMar (20/40 Snellen equivalent) or better; Worse than 0.3 LogMar. Change in visual acuity categorized by: Three or more lines improvement on a logMAR chart (improvement by 0.3 logMAR units) from baseline; Within three lines of baseline visual acuity; Three or more lines loss. When continuous LogMAR data were available we planned to analyze the visual acuity and degree of change as continuous data We planned to analyze visual acuity at other follow-up times (six months, two and three years) when possible. Secondary outcomes The secondary outcomes for this review included: Progression of AMD in the operated eye as measured by: Development of geographic atrophy; Development of CNV; Increase in the number of medium or large-sized drusen (> 63 microns in size); Increase of the drusen total area; Progression of non-central geographic atrophy to central geographic atrophy. Vision-related quality of life as measured by methods applied in each trial. Vision-threatening complications from cataract surgery, including but not limited to cystoid macular edema and retinal detachment. We planned to analyze secondary outcomes at one, two, three years follow-up when possible.  Primary outcomes The primary outcome for this review was visual acuity in the operated eye at one year follow-up. It was to be measured as: Best-corrected visual acuity dichotomized into: 0.3 LogMar (20/40 Snellen equivalent) or better; Worse than 0.3 LogMar. Change in visual acuity categorized by: Three or more lines improvement on a logMAR chart (improvement by 0.3 logMAR units) from baseline; Within three lines of baseline visual acuity; Three or more lines loss. When continuous LogMAR data were available we planned to analyze the visual acuity and degree of change as continuous data We planned to analyze visual acuity at other follow-up times (six months, two and three years) when possible.  Secondary outcomes The secondary outcomes for this review included: Progression of AMD in the operated eye as measured by: Development of geographic atrophy; Development of CNV; Increase in the number of medium or large-sized drusen (> 63 microns in size); Increase of the drusen total area; Progression of non-central geographic atrophy to central geographic atrophy. Vision-related quality of life as measured by methods applied in each trial. Vision-threatening complications from cataract surgery, including but not limited to cystoid macular edema and retinal detachment. We planned to analyze secondary outcomes at one, two, three years follow-up when possible.  Search methods for identification of studies Electronic searches We searched the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) (which contains the Cochrane Eyes and Vision Group Trials Register) ( The Cochrane Library, Issue 4, 2008), MEDLINE (January 1966 to November 2008), EMBASE (January 1980 to November 2008) and Latin American and Caribbean Literature on Health Sciences (LILACS) (January 1982 to November 2008). There were no language or date restrictions in the search for trials. The electronic databases were last searched on 4 November 2008. See: Appendices for details of search strategies for CENTRAL ( Appendix 1 ), MEDLINE ( Appendix 2 ), EMBASE ( Appendix 3 ) and LILACS (Appendix 5). Searching other resources We searched the reference lists of observational studies and reviews for possible trials.  Electronic searches We searched the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) (which contains the Cochrane Eyes and Vision Group Trials Register) ( The Cochrane Library, Issue 4, 2008), MEDLINE (January 1966 to November 2008), EMBASE (January 1980 to November 2008) and Latin American and Caribbean Literature on Health Sciences (LILACS) (January 1982 to November 2008). There were no language or date restrictions in the search for trials. The electronic databases were last searched on 4 November 2008. See: Appendices for details of search strategies for CENTRAL ( Appendix 1 ), MEDLINE ( Appendix 2 ), EMBASE ( Appendix 3 ) and LILACS (Appendix 5).  Searching other resources We searched the reference lists of observational studies and reviews for possible trials.  Data collection and analysis Selection of studies Two review authors independently selected the studies for inclusion. The titles and abstracts of all reports identified by the electronic and manual searching were examined by two authors. The abstracts were classified as (a) definitely include, (b) unsure or (c) definitely exclude. Full-text copies of those classified as (a) definitely include and (b) unsure were obtained and re-assessed by two authors. The studies were classified as (1) include, (2) awaiting assessment or (3) exclude. For studies awaiting assessment, study authors were contacted for further clarification and the study was reassessed if further information became available. Studies excluded by both review authors are documented and the reasons for exclusion are reported in the review. The review authors were unmasked to the report authors, institutions and trial results during this assessment. Disagreements between the two review authors were resolved by a third review author. Data extraction and management There were no studies included in the review; therefore no data extraction was performed. In the future, for studies that meet the inclusion criteria for this review, two review authors will independently extract the data for the primary and secondary outcomes onto paper data extraction forms developed by the Cochrane Eyes and Vision Group. A pilot test of this form will be done using a small number of studies. Discrepancies will be resolved by discussion. After the data extraction is verified, all data will be entered into RevMan 5 ( RevMan 2008 ). Assessment of risk of bias in included studies There were no studies included in the review; therefore no assessment of methodological quality was performed. In the future, if studies meet the inclusion criteria for this review, two review authors will independently assess the included trials for bias according to the methods described in Chapter 8 of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( Higgins 2008 ). The following parameters will be assessed for bias: (a) generation of random allocation sequence and allocation concealment (selection bias); (b) masking study personnel (performance bias); (c) completeness of follow up and intent-to-treat analysis (attrition bias); (d) masking of outcome assessors (detection bias); and (e) selective outcome reporting (reporting bias). As masking of participants is uncommon in surgical trials, it will not be assessed as a measure of methodological quality. Each type of bias will be classified as low risk of bias, unclear risk of bias, or high risk of bias. Any method of allocation concealment such as sequentially numbered opaque envelopes or centralized random allocation will be considered to confer low risk of bias. If the information available in the published trial reports is inadequate to assess the method of allocation concealment, we will contact the trial authors for clarification. If they do not respond within four weeks time, we will classify the trial based on the available information. When studies do not report any concealment approach, risk of bias will be considered unclear. We will also assess the impact of any assumptions made in this regard in a sensitivity analysis. We will consider trial investigators to have conducted an intent-to-treat analysis only when all participants who were randomized, including those who were randomized but not treated, were excluded after randomization for other reasons, or were lost to follow-up were reported and accounted for in the data analysis. Measures of treatment effect We will analyze data according to the guidelines set forth in Chapter 9 of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( Deeks 2008 ). For dichotomous outcomes we will calculate a summary risk ratio with 95% confidence intervals. We will also report the risk difference and number needed to treat. We will calculate a mean difference with standard deviations for continuous outcomes. We will calculate a standardized mean difference if different scales are used to measure continuous outcomes. Unit of analysis issues The unit of analysis will be individual eyes. If both eyes from one person were included in the trial, we will extract the data and perform analyses to properly account for the non-independence of the bilateral surgery design following Chapter 9.3 of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( Deeks 2008 ). Dealing with missing data We will contact the authors of included studies for additional information when statistics, such as standard deviations, or outcome data are not clearly reported or if results are not reported for all the patients who were randomized. If additional statistical information or outcome data cannot be provided, we will use data as it is reported. If we are unable to obtain results for all the patients who were randomized, we will use the results reported by the authors as well as report the loss to follow-up for each group when available. Assessment of heterogeneity We will look for clinical heterogeneity by examination of the study details then test for statistical heterogeneity between trial results using the Chi-square test and the I-square value. A p value of the Chi-square test less than 0.1 or I-square values of more than 50% or both will be considered to suggest substantial statistical heterogeneity. We will also examine the funnel plot for statistical heterogeneity if three or more studies are included. Assessment of reporting biases Asymmetry of the funnel plot will be used to identify publication bias. Data synthesis If no substantial statistical heterogeneity is detected, and if there is no clinical heterogeneity between the trials, we will combine the results in a meta-analysis using a random-effects model. A fixed-effect model will be used if the number of trials is three or less. In case of substantial statistical or clinical heterogeneity we will not combine study results, but rather present a narrative or tabular summary of findings from individual trials. Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneity Subgroup analyses of interest include types of cataract surgery and the presence of CNV or central geographic atrophy in the unoperated eye. Sensitivity analysis Sensitivity analyses will be conducted to determine the impact of exclusion of studies with lower methodological quality, exclusion of unpublished studies and exclusion of industry-funded studies. Methods for future updates Updates of this review will be conducted every two years after initial publication.  Selection of studies Two review authors independently selected the studies for inclusion. The titles and abstracts of all reports identified by the electronic and manual searching were examined by two authors. The abstracts were classified as (a) definitely include, (b) unsure or (c) definitely exclude. Full-text copies of those classified as (a) definitely include and (b) unsure were obtained and re-assessed by two authors. The studies were classified as (1) include, (2) awaiting assessment or (3) exclude. For studies awaiting assessment, study authors were contacted for further clarification and the study was reassessed if further information became available. Studies excluded by both review authors are documented and the reasons for exclusion are reported in the review. The review authors were unmasked to the report authors, institutions and trial results during this assessment. Disagreements between the two review authors were resolved by a third review author.  Data extraction and management There were no studies included in the review; therefore no data extraction was performed. In the future, for studies that meet the inclusion criteria for this review, two review authors will independently extract the data for the primary and secondary outcomes onto paper data extraction forms developed by the Cochrane Eyes and Vision Group. A pilot test of this form will be done using a small number of studies. Discrepancies will be resolved by discussion. After the data extraction is verified, all data will be entered into RevMan 5 ( RevMan 2008 ).  Assessment of risk of bias in included studies There were no studies included in the review; therefore no assessment of methodological quality was performed. In the future, if studies meet the inclusion criteria for this review, two review authors will independently assess the included trials for bias according to the methods described in Chapter 8 of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( Higgins 2008 ). The following parameters will be assessed for bias: (a) generation of random allocation sequence and allocation concealment (selection bias); (b) masking study personnel (performance bias); (c) completeness of follow up and intent-to-treat analysis (attrition bias); (d) masking of outcome assessors (detection bias); and (e) selective outcome reporting (reporting bias). As masking of participants is uncommon in surgical trials, it will not be assessed as a measure of methodological quality. Each type of bias will be classified as low risk of bias, unclear risk of bias, or high risk of bias. Any method of allocation concealment such as sequentially numbered opaque envelopes or centralized random allocation will be considered to confer low risk of bias. If the information available in the published trial reports is inadequate to assess the method of allocation concealment, we will contact the trial authors for clarification. If they do not respond within four weeks time, we will classify the trial based on the available information. When studies do not report any concealment approach, risk of bias will be considered unclear. We will also assess the impact of any assumptions made in this regard in a sensitivity analysis. We will consider trial investigators to have conducted an intent-to-treat analysis only when all participants who were randomized, including those who were randomized but not treated, were excluded after randomization for other reasons, or were lost to follow-up were reported and accounted for in the data analysis.  Measures of treatment effect We will analyze data according to the guidelines set forth in Chapter 9 of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( Deeks 2008 ). For dichotomous outcomes we will calculate a summary risk ratio with 95% confidence intervals. We will also report the risk difference and number needed to treat. We will calculate a mean difference with standard deviations for continuous outcomes. We will calculate a standardized mean difference if different scales are used to measure continuous outcomes.  Unit of analysis issues The unit of analysis will be individual eyes. If both eyes from one person were included in the trial, we will extract the data and perform analyses to properly account for the non-independence of the bilateral surgery design following Chapter 9.3 of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( Deeks 2008 ).  Dealing with missing data We will contact the authors of included studies for additional information when statistics, such as standard deviations, or outcome data are not clearly reported or if results are not reported for all the patients who were randomized. If additional statistical information or outcome data cannot be provided, we will use data as it is reported. If we are unable to obtain results for all the patients who were randomized, we will use the results reported by the authors as well as report the loss to follow-up for each group when available.  Assessment of heterogeneity We will look for clinical heterogeneity by examination of the study details then test for statistical heterogeneity between trial results using the Chi-square test and the I-square value. A p value of the Chi-square test less than 0.1 or I-square values of more than 50% or both will be considered to suggest substantial statistical heterogeneity. We will also examine the funnel plot for statistical heterogeneity if three or more studies are included.  Assessment of reporting biases Asymmetry of the funnel plot will be used to identify publication bias.  Data synthesis If no substantial statistical heterogeneity is detected, and if there is no clinical heterogeneity between the trials, we will combine the results in a meta-analysis using a random-effects model. A fixed-effect model will be used if the number of trials is three or less. In case of substantial statistical or clinical heterogeneity we will not combine study results, but rather present a narrative or tabular summary of findings from individual trials.  Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneity Subgroup analyses of interest include types of cataract surgery and the presence of CNV or central geographic atrophy in the unoperated eye.  Sensitivity analysis Sensitivity analyses will be conducted to determine the impact of exclusion of studies with lower methodological quality, exclusion of unpublished studies and exclusion of industry-funded studies. Methods for future updates Updates of this review will be conducted every two years after initial publication.  Methods for future updates Updates of this review will be conducted every two years after initial publication.  Results Description of studies See: Characteristics of excluded studies. The electronic searches revealed 1,183 distinct titles and abstracts of which 10 appeared potentially relevant but were excluded after further analysis. We did not identify any eligible trials from searching the reference lists of possibly relevant articles. We did not conduct a comprehensive search for observational studies. Non-randomized studies and observational studies known to the authors of this review were cited in the discussion, although not the purpose of the systematic search. Risk of bias in included studies There were no RCTs or quasi-randomized trials identified; therefore no assessment of risk of bias was performed. Effects of interventions There were no RCTs or quasi-randomized trials identified; therefore no effects of interventions are reported.  Results Description of studies See: Characteristics of excluded studies. The electronic searches revealed 1,183 distinct titles and abstracts of which 10 appeared potentially relevant but were excluded after further analysis. We did not identify any eligible trials from searching the reference lists of possibly relevant articles. We did not conduct a comprehensive search for observational studies. Non-randomized studies and observational studies known to the authors of this review were cited in the discussion, although not the purpose of the systematic search. Risk of bias in included studies There were no RCTs or quasi-randomized trials identified; therefore no assessment of risk of bias was performed. Effects of interventions There were no RCTs or quasi-randomized trials identified; therefore no effects of interventions are reported.  Description of studies See: Characteristics of excluded studies. The electronic searches revealed 1,183 distinct titles and abstracts of which 10 appeared potentially relevant but were excluded after further analysis. We did not identify any eligible trials from searching the reference lists of possibly relevant articles. We did not conduct a comprehensive search for observational studies. Non-randomized studies and observational studies known to the authors of this review were cited in the discussion, although not the purpose of the systematic search.  Description of studies See: Characteristics of excluded studies. The electronic searches revealed 1,183 distinct titles and abstracts of which 10 appeared potentially relevant but were excluded after further analysis. We did not identify any eligible trials from searching the reference lists of possibly relevant articles. We did not conduct a comprehensive search for observational studies. Non-randomized studies and observational studies known to the authors of this review were cited in the discussion, although not the purpose of the systematic search.  Risk of bias in included studies There were no RCTs or quasi-randomized trials identified; therefore no assessment of risk of bias was performed.  Risk of bias in included studies There were no RCTs or quasi-randomized trials identified; therefore no assessment of risk of bias was performed.  Effects of interventions There were no RCTs or quasi-randomized trials identified; therefore no effects of interventions are reported.  Effects of interventions There were no RCTs or quasi-randomized trials identified; therefore no effects of interventions are reported.  Discussion The relationship between cataract surgery and AMD has been the subject of much debate over recent years. Both conditions are quite common in the elderly and have overlapping symptoms, and deciding when to perform cataract surgery in patients with AMD can be difficult at best. Some clinicians believe that cataract surgery is beneficial in AMD patients whereas others fear that surgery could have deleterious effects and conflicting results from retrospective studies have led to further confusion regarding this issue ( Kaiserman 2007 ; Sutter 2007 ). This review aimed to analyze the available evidence from prospective randomized and quasi-randomized clinical trials regarding the effectiveness and safety of cataract surgery in eyes with AMD. Unfortunately, no such study was identified from a systematic literature search. The best available evidence from the published literature appeared to be from non-randomized clinical trials and prospective observational studies ( Bockelbrink 2008 ). Evidence from non-randomized clinical trials Armbrecht et al. performed a prospective study in which patients were grouped based on the presence or absence of AMD and cataract surgery. Three groups were comprised of (1) patients with AMD who did not have surgery, (2) patients with AMD who underwent cataract surgery, and (3) a control group of patients who underwent cataract surgery. Initial results based on five month data suggested that cataract surgery was most beneficial for patients with moderate cataract irrespective of the degree of AMD ( Armbrecht 2000 ). Further analysis of AMD patients found that visual acuity and quality of life benefits were maintained at one year ( Armbrecht 2003 ). This was in contrast to previously published reports by Pollack et al. who had detected an increased rate of CNV after unilateral cataract surgery in a non-randomized trial ( Pollack 1996 ). Evidence from prospective cohort and case-control studies Several well-designed epidemiologic studies have addressed the relationship between cataract, cataract surgery, and AMD. The Copenhagen City Eye Study, the Beaver Dam Eye Study conducted in the U.S., and the Blue Mountains Eye Study conducted in Australia were large cohort studies that have addressed this issue. The Copenhagen City Eye Study found that the presence of cataract increased the incidence of early AMD, whereas cataract surgery increased the incidence of late AMD, defined as geographic atrophy or CNV in this study ( Buch 2005 ). Although these findings confirm that the two conditions share common risk factors, it is not possible to state whether surgery itself caused increased late AMD. Patients with neovascular AMD which was not apparent to the cataract surgeon prior to surgery may have been more likely to undergo cataract surgery because of decreasing vision, before the CNV was detected. Ten-year follow-up of the Beaver Dam Eye Study cohort found that baseline cataract was associated with early ARM and progression of ARM but not with late ARM ( Klein 2002 ). Prior cataract surgery, in contrast, was associated with progression of ARM and late ARM but not with early ARM in this study. Eyes in the similarly designed Blue Mountains Eye Study had a higher 10-year risk of developing late ARM (geographic atrophy or neovascular AMD) in the presence of previous cataract surgery ( Cugati 2006 ). In addition, analysis of combined five year data from the Beaver Dam Eye Study and the Blue Mountains Eye Study detected an approximately 10-fold increased risk of late-stage ARM (geographicatrophy or neovascular AMD) in patients with a baseline history of prior cataract surgery ( Wang 2003 ). It was not possible to determine the presence of a cause-and-effect relationship between cataract surgery and progression of ARM or the presence of late ARM from a cohort study, and further study is needed to clarify this issue. A case-control study within AREDS found an increased risk of lens opacities or cataract surgery in participants with large drusen and in participants with neovascular AMD ( AREDS 2000 ). There was no association between lens opacities or previous cataract surgery and geographic atrophy in this study. A previous publication on a Chesapeake Bay waterman cohort, interestingly, had detected a higher incidence of AMD in the presence of nuclear (but not cortical) opacity ( West 1989 ).  Discussion The relationship between cataract surgery and AMD has been the subject of much debate over recent years. Both conditions are quite common in the elderly and have overlapping symptoms, and deciding when to perform cataract surgery in patients with AMD can be difficult at best. Some clinicians believe that cataract surgery is beneficial in AMD patients whereas others fear that surgery could have deleterious effects and conflicting results from retrospective studies have led to further confusion regarding this issue ( Kaiserman 2007 ; Sutter 2007 ). This review aimed to analyze the available evidence from prospective randomized and quasi-randomized clinical trials regarding the effectiveness and safety of cataract surgery in eyes with AMD. Unfortunately, no such study was identified from a systematic literature search. The best available evidence from the published literature appeared to be from non-randomized clinical trials and prospective observational studies ( Bockelbrink 2008 ). Evidence from non-randomized clinical trials Armbrecht et al. performed a prospective study in which patients were grouped based on the presence or absence of AMD and cataract surgery. Three groups were comprised of (1) patients with AMD who did not have surgery, (2) patients with AMD who underwent cataract surgery, and (3) a control group of patients who underwent cataract surgery. Initial results based on five month data suggested that cataract surgery was most beneficial for patients with moderate cataract irrespective of the degree of AMD ( Armbrecht 2000 ). Further analysis of AMD patients found that visual acuity and quality of life benefits were maintained at one year ( Armbrecht 2003 ). This was in contrast to previously published reports by Pollack et al. who had detected an increased rate of CNV after unilateral cataract surgery in a non-randomized trial ( Pollack 1996 ). Evidence from prospective cohort and case-control studies Several well-designed epidemiologic studies have addressed the relationship between cataract, cataract surgery, and AMD. The Copenhagen City Eye Study, the Beaver Dam Eye Study conducted in the U.S., and the Blue Mountains Eye Study conducted in Australia were large cohort studies that have addressed this issue. The Copenhagen City Eye Study found that the presence of cataract increased the incidence of early AMD, whereas cataract surgery increased the incidence of late AMD, defined as geographic atrophy or CNV in this study ( Buch 2005 ). Although these findings confirm that the two conditions share common risk factors, it is not possible to state whether surgery itself caused increased late AMD. Patients with neovascular AMD which was not apparent to the cataract surgeon prior to surgery may have been more likely to undergo cataract surgery because of decreasing vision, before the CNV was detected. Ten-year follow-up of the Beaver Dam Eye Study cohort found that baseline cataract was associated with early ARM and progression of ARM but not with late ARM ( Klein 2002 ). Prior cataract surgery, in contrast, was associated with progression of ARM and late ARM but not with early ARM in this study. Eyes in the similarly designed Blue Mountains Eye Study had a higher 10-year risk of developing late ARM (geographic atrophy or neovascular AMD) in the presence of previous cataract surgery ( Cugati 2006 ). In addition, analysis of combined five year data from the Beaver Dam Eye Study and the Blue Mountains Eye Study detected an approximately 10-fold increased risk of late-stage ARM (geographicatrophy or neovascular AMD) in patients with a baseline history of prior cataract surgery ( Wang 2003 ). It was not possible to determine the presence of a cause-and-effect relationship between cataract surgery and progression of ARM or the presence of late ARM from a cohort study, and further study is needed to clarify this issue. A case-control study within AREDS found an increased risk of lens opacities or cataract surgery in participants with large drusen and in participants with neovascular AMD ( AREDS 2000 ). There was no association between lens opacities or previous cataract surgery and geographic atrophy in this study. A previous publication on a Chesapeake Bay waterman cohort, interestingly, had detected a higher incidence of AMD in the presence of nuclear (but not cortical) opacity ( West 1989 ).  Evidence from non-randomized clinical trials Armbrecht et al. performed a prospective study in which patients were grouped based on the presence or absence of AMD and cataract surgery. Three groups were comprised of (1) patients with AMD who did not have surgery, (2) patients with AMD who underwent cataract surgery, and (3) a control group of patients who underwent cataract surgery. Initial results based on five month data suggested that cataract surgery was most beneficial for patients with moderate cataract irrespective of the degree of AMD ( Armbrecht 2000 ). Further analysis of AMD patients found that visual acuity and quality of life benefits were maintained at one year ( Armbrecht 2003 ). This was in contrast to previously published reports by Pollack et al. who had detected an increased rate of CNV after unilateral cataract surgery in a non-randomized trial ( Pollack 1996 ).  Evidence from non-randomized clinical trials Armbrecht et al. performed a prospective study in which patients were grouped based on the presence or absence of AMD and cataract surgery. Three groups were comprised of (1) patients with AMD who did not have surgery, (2) patients with AMD who underwent cataract surgery, and (3) a control group of patients who underwent cataract surgery. Initial results based on five month data suggested that cataract surgery was most beneficial for patients with moderate cataract irrespective of the degree of AMD ( Armbrecht 2000 ). Further analysis of AMD patients found that visual acuity and quality of life benefits were maintained at one year ( Armbrecht 2003 ). This was in contrast to previously published reports by Pollack et al. who had detected an increased rate of CNV after unilateral cataract surgery in a non-randomized trial ( Pollack 1996 ).  Evidence from prospective cohort and case-control studies Several well-designed epidemiologic studies have addressed the relationship between cataract, cataract surgery, and AMD. The Copenhagen City Eye Study, the Beaver Dam Eye Study conducted in the U.S., and the Blue Mountains Eye Study conducted in Australia were large cohort studies that have addressed this issue. The Copenhagen City Eye Study found that the presence of cataract increased the incidence of early AMD, whereas cataract surgery increased the incidence of late AMD, defined as geographic atrophy or CNV in this study ( Buch 2005 ). Although these findings confirm that the two conditions share common risk factors, it is not possible to state whether surgery itself caused increased late AMD. Patients with neovascular AMD which was not apparent to the cataract surgeon prior to surgery may have been more likely to undergo cataract surgery because of decreasing vision, before the CNV was detected. Ten-year follow-up of the Beaver Dam Eye Study cohort found that baseline cataract was associated with early ARM and progression of ARM but not with late ARM ( Klein 2002 ). Prior cataract surgery, in contrast, was associated with progression of ARM and late ARM but not with early ARM in this study. Eyes in the similarly designed Blue Mountains Eye Study had a higher 10-year risk of developing late ARM (geographic atrophy or neovascular AMD) in the presence of previous cataract surgery ( Cugati 2006 ). In addition, analysis of combined five year data from the Beaver Dam Eye Study and the Blue Mountains Eye Study detected an approximately 10-fold increased risk of late-stage ARM (geographicatrophy or neovascular AMD) in patients with a baseline history of prior cataract surgery ( Wang 2003 ). It was not possible to determine the presence of a cause-and-effect relationship between cataract surgery and progression of ARM or the presence of late ARM from a cohort study, and further study is needed to clarify this issue. A case-control study within AREDS found an increased risk of lens opacities or cataract surgery in participants with large drusen and in participants with neovascular AMD ( AREDS 2000 ). There was no association between lens opacities or previous cataract surgery and geographic atrophy in this study. A previous publication on a Chesapeake Bay waterman cohort, interestingly, had detected a higher incidence of AMD in the presence of nuclear (but not cortical) opacity ( West 1989 ).  Evidence from prospective cohort and case-control studies Several well-designed epidemiologic studies have addressed the relationship between cataract, cataract surgery, and AMD. The Copenhagen City Eye Study, the Beaver Dam Eye Study conducted in the U.S., and the Blue Mountains Eye Study conducted in Australia were large cohort studies that have addressed this issue. The Copenhagen City Eye Study found that the presence of cataract increased the incidence of early AMD, whereas cataract surgery increased the incidence of late AMD, defined as geographic atrophy or CNV in this study ( Buch 2005 ). Although these findings confirm that the two conditions share common risk factors, it is not possible to state whether surgery itself caused increased late AMD. Patients with neovascular AMD which was not apparent to the cataract surgeon prior to surgery may have been more likely to undergo cataract surgery because of decreasing vision, before the CNV was detected. Ten-year follow-up of the Beaver Dam Eye Study cohort found that baseline cataract was associated with early ARM and progression of ARM but not with late ARM ( Klein 2002 ). Prior cataract surgery, in contrast, was associated with progression of ARM and late ARM but not with early ARM in this study. Eyes in the similarly designed Blue Mountains Eye Study had a higher 10-year risk of developing late ARM (geographic atrophy or neovascular AMD) in the presence of previous cataract surgery ( Cugati 2006 ). In addition, analysis of combined five year data from the Beaver Dam Eye Study and the Blue Mountains Eye Study detected an approximately 10-fold increased risk of late-stage ARM (geographicatrophy or neovascular AMD) in patients with a baseline history of prior cataract surgery ( Wang 2003 ). It was not possible to determine the presence of a cause-and-effect relationship between cataract surgery and progression of ARM or the presence of late ARM from a cohort study, and further study is needed to clarify this issue. A case-control study within AREDS found an increased risk of lens opacities or cataract surgery in participants with large drusen and in participants with neovascular AMD ( AREDS 2000 ). There was no association between lens opacities or previous cataract surgery and geographic atrophy in this study. A previous publication on a Chesapeake Bay waterman cohort, interestingly, had detected a higher incidence of AMD in the presence of nuclear (but not cortical) opacity ( West 1989 ).  Authors' Conclusions Implications for practice At this time, it is not possible to draw reliable conclusions from the available data to determine whether cataract surgery is beneficial or harmful in people with AMD. Physicians will have to make practice decisions based on best clinical judgement until appropriate studies are conducted and reported. Implications for research It would be valuable for clinical researchers to design prospective, RCTs comparing cataract surgery to no surgery in patients with AMD to better evaluate whether cataract surgery is beneficial or harmful in this group. Utilization of pre-existing, standardized systems for grading cataract and AMD and measuring outcomes (visual acuity, change in visual acuity, progression of AMD, and quality-of-life measures) should be encouraged.  Authors' Conclusions Implications for practice At this time, it is not possible to draw reliable conclusions from the available data to determine whether cataract surgery is beneficial or harmful in people with AMD. Physicians will have to make practice decisions based on best clinical judgement until appropriate studies are conducted and reported. Implications for research It would be valuable for clinical researchers to design prospective, RCTs comparing cataract surgery to no surgery in patients with AMD to better evaluate whether cataract surgery is beneficial or harmful in this group. Utilization of pre-existing, standardized systems for grading cataract and AMD and measuring outcomes (visual acuity, change in visual acuity, progression of AMD, and quality-of-life measures) should be encouraged.  Implications for practice At this time, it is not possible to draw reliable conclusions from the available data to determine whether cataract surgery is beneficial or harmful in people with AMD. Physicians will have to make practice decisions based on best clinical judgement until appropriate studies are conducted and reported.  Implications for practice At this time, it is not possible to draw reliable conclusions from the available data to determine whether cataract surgery is beneficial or harmful in people with AMD. Physicians will have to make practice decisions based on best clinical judgement until appropriate studies are conducted and reported.  Implications for research It would be valuable for clinical researchers to design prospective, RCTs comparing cataract surgery to no surgery in patients with AMD to better evaluate whether cataract surgery is beneficial or harmful in this group. Utilization of pre-existing, standardized systems for grading cataract and AMD and measuring outcomes (visual acuity, change in visual acuity, progression of AMD, and quality-of-life measures) should be encouraged.  Implications for research It would be valuable for clinical researchers to design prospective, RCTs comparing cataract surgery to no surgery in patients with AMD to better evaluate whether cataract surgery is beneficial or harmful in this group. Utilization of pre-existing, standardized systems for grading cataract and AMD and measuring outcomes (visual acuity, change in visual acuity, progression of AMD, and quality-of-life measures) should be encouraged.  Characteristics of included studies <italic>[ordered by study ID]</italic> Armbrecht 2000 Prospective cohort study comprised of (1) patients with AMD who did not have surgery (2) patients with AMD who underwent cataract surgery, and (3) a control group of patients who underwent cataract surgery. Armbrecht 2003 Prospective cohort study comprised of (1) patients with AMD scheduled to have cataract surgery and (2) a control group of patients with AMD not having cataract surgery. Brunner 2001 RCT with two arms: Group 1 = Immediate cataract operation (only one eye per patient); Group 2 = Control group with 6-month presurgical observation and postsurgical observation 1 week after operation (likewise only one eye per patient). This study was excluded since the timing of cataract surgery was not the intervention of interest for this review. Javitt 2000 Case series of patients undergoing cataract surgery. Lamoureux 2007 RCT with two arms: early surgery versus standard surgery for patients with AMD scheduled for cataract surgery. This study was excluded since the timing of cataract surgery was not the intervention of interest for this review. Lundstrm 2002 Prospective cohort study of patients undergoing cataract surgery, with and without AMD. Pollack 1996 Observational study of eyes with AMD that had cataract surgery, compared to fellow eyes that did not have surgery. Pollack 1998 Observational study of patients with AMD after cataract surgery in 1 st eye, then 2 nd eye. Prajna 1998 Study was not limited to patients with AMD. AMD: age-related macular degeneration RCT: randomized clinical trial  Characteristics of included studies <italic>[ordered by study ID]</italic> Armbrecht 2000 Prospective cohort study comprised of (1) patients with AMD who did not have surgery (2) patients with AMD who underwent cataract surgery, and (3) a control group of patients who underwent cataract surgery. Armbrecht 2003 Prospective cohort study comprised of (1) patients with AMD scheduled to have cataract surgery and (2) a control group of patients with AMD not having cataract surgery. Brunner 2001 RCT with two arms: Group 1 = Immediate cataract operation (only one eye per patient); Group 2 = Control group with 6-month presurgical observation and postsurgical observation 1 week after operation (likewise only one eye per patient). This study was excluded since the timing of cataract surgery was not the intervention of interest for this review. Javitt 2000 Case series of patients undergoing cataract surgery. Lamoureux 2007 RCT with two arms: early surgery versus standard surgery for patients with AMD scheduled for cataract surgery. This study was excluded since the timing of cataract surgery was not the intervention of interest for this review. Lundstrm 2002 Prospective cohort study of patients undergoing cataract surgery, with and without AMD. Pollack 1996 Observational study of eyes with AMD that had cataract surgery, compared to fellow eyes that did not have surgery. Pollack 1998 Observational study of patients with AMD after cataract surgery in 1 st eye, then 2 nd eye. Prajna 1998 Study was not limited to patients with AMD. AMD: age-related macular degeneration RCT: randomized clinical trial  Cataract surgery in people with age-related macular degeneration Cataract and age-related macular degeneration (AMD) are significant causes of decreased vision in the elderly that often occur simultaneously. Although cataract surgery is an effective treatment for cataract-induced visual loss, some clinicians suspect that such an intervention may increase the risk of progression of underlying AMD and thus have deleterious effects on vision. At this time, it is not possible to draw reliable conclusions from the available data to determine whether cataract surgery is beneficial or harmful in people with AMD. Physicians will have to make practice decisions based on best clinical judgement until controlled trials are conducted and their findings published.  Cataract surgery in people with age-related macular degeneration Cataract and age-related macular degeneration (AMD) are significant causes of decreased vision in the elderly that often occur simultaneously. Although cataract surgery is an effective treatment for cataract-induced visual loss, some clinicians suspect that such an intervention may increase the risk of progression of underlying AMD and thus have deleterious effects on vision. At this time, it is not possible to draw reliable conclusions from the available data to determine whether cataract surgery is beneficial or harmful in people with AMD. Physicians will have to make practice decisions based on best clinical judgement until controlled trials are conducted and their findings published. 