Deletion of the late cornified envelope (LCE) 3B and 3C genes as a susceptibility factor for psoriasis Psoriasis is a common inflammatory skin disease with a prevalence of 2% to 3% in Caucasians 1 . In a genome-wide search for copy number variants (CNV) using a sample pooling approach we have identified a deletion comprising LCE3B and LCE3C , members of the late cornified envelope (LCE) gene cluster 2 . The absence of LCE3B and LCE3C (LCE3C-LCE3B-del) is significantly associated (p=1.38E-08) with risk of psoriasis in 2,831 samples from Spain, The Netherlands, Italy and the USA, and in a family-based study (p=5.4E-04). LCE3C-LCE3B-del is tagged by rs4112788 (r2=0.93), which is also strongly associated with psoriasis (p<6.6E-09). LCE3C-LCE3B-del shows epistatic effects with the HLA-Cw6 allele on the development of psoriasis in Dutch samples, and multiplicative effects in the other samples. LCE expression can be induced in normal epidermis by skin barrier disruption and is strongly expressed in psoriatic lesions, suggesting that compromised skin barrier function plays a role in psoriasis susceptibility.  METHODS Subjects Ethical approval by the relevant research ethics committees of each centre was obtained for all DNA samples collected, and written informed consent was obtained from all participants (Spain, The Netherlands, Italy and the USA). All subjects were of European descent. For details on diagnostic criteria and other characteristics of the patients see Supplementary Material . Identification of CNV regions To investigate the presence of CNVs associated with psoriasis we performed a DNA-pooling approach for aCGH using the Human Genome CGH Microarray Kit 244A, which contains over 244,000 probes and covers the entire genome with a 10-kb resolution between probes. Regions composed of at least three altered probes (including the entry probe) were retained for further study. Results observed in the 1q21 region for aCGH analysis was confirmed by a second technique using a qPCR analysis. For details on CNV analysis and results, and characterisation in each population sample see Supplementary Material . SNP Genotyping SNPs were genotyped using different platforms. We tested each polymorphism in the whole group to ensure consistency with Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (HWE). Because of multiple testing, we used a threshold of p=0.001. The final SNP dataset consisted of 15 SNPs ( Supplementary Table 3 ) with an overall genotype call rate of 99%. See Supplementary Material for details on SNP genotyping methods in each population sample. LCE3C_LCE3B -del and SNP association analysis Logistic regression models were used to assess the genetic effect of the LCE3C_LCE3B -del and SNPs on psoriasis risk. Inter-group comparisons of genotype frequency differences were performed by regression analysis for co-dominant and genotype–specific models. Unadjusted crude odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (95%CI) were calculated. Analysis was carried out using the SNPassoc R library, from The Comprehensive R Archive Network. For SNP association analysis the problem of multiple testing was solved using Bonferroni corrected value (accounting for multiple testing of 15 polymorphic SNPs and the genotype-specific models tested 24 ) to a threshold p-value of 0.0015. Interaction Analysis For the interaction analysis in the Spanish population we used the genotype-specific model of heritability for each SNP based on the Akaike criteria (AIC) derived from the association analysis. We derived the p values for the interaction (epistasis) using the log-likelihood ratio test comparing the full interaction model to the additive SNP model, and the multiplicative effect using the likelihood ratio test of the additive model with the likelihood of the best model using single SNPs. A p-value of 0.00054 for significance after Bonferroni correction to account for multiple comparisons was used. For the Italian and Dutch samples, interaction analysis of LCE3C_LCE3B-del or rs4112788 and HLA-Cw6 was performed. Assessment for significant epistasis and multiplicative effects was carried out as described for the Spanish population. For analysis of interaction in the Michigan family sample, the method of Cordell et al 25 was followed. Biopsies, RNA isolation and quantitative real-time PCR All psoriasis patients had plaque-type psoriasis diagnosed by a dermatologist. Biopsies of normal, psoriatic and tape-stripped skin were taken under local anaesthesia. Tape stripping of human skin is the repeated application and removal of adhesive tape, which produces a standardized injury of the epidermis by removal of the stratum corneum 26 . All controls and patients were of native European Dutch origin. Permission for these studies was obtained from the local medical ethics committee (“Commissie Mensgebonden Onderzoek Arnhem-Nijmegen”), and volunteers gave written informed consent. The study was conducted according to the Declaration of Helsinki Ethical Principles. Detailed procedures for preparation of purified epidermis, RNA isolation, and real-time quantitative PCR are given as Supplementary Material .  Subjects Ethical approval by the relevant research ethics committees of each centre was obtained for all DNA samples collected, and written informed consent was obtained from all participants (Spain, The Netherlands, Italy and the USA). All subjects were of European descent. For details on diagnostic criteria and other characteristics of the patients see Supplementary Material .  Identification of CNV regions To investigate the presence of CNVs associated with psoriasis we performed a DNA-pooling approach for aCGH using the Human Genome CGH Microarray Kit 244A, which contains over 244,000 probes and covers the entire genome with a 10-kb resolution between probes. Regions composed of at least three altered probes (including the entry probe) were retained for further study. Results observed in the 1q21 region for aCGH analysis was confirmed by a second technique using a qPCR analysis. For details on CNV analysis and results, and characterisation in each population sample see Supplementary Material .  SNP Genotyping SNPs were genotyped using different platforms. We tested each polymorphism in the whole group to ensure consistency with Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (HWE). Because of multiple testing, we used a threshold of p=0.001. The final SNP dataset consisted of 15 SNPs ( Supplementary Table 3 ) with an overall genotype call rate of 99%. See Supplementary Material for details on SNP genotyping methods in each population sample.  LCE3C_LCE3B -del and SNP association analysis Logistic regression models were used to assess the genetic effect of the LCE3C_LCE3B -del and SNPs on psoriasis risk. Inter-group comparisons of genotype frequency differences were performed by regression analysis for co-dominant and genotype–specific models. Unadjusted crude odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (95%CI) were calculated. Analysis was carried out using the SNPassoc R library, from The Comprehensive R Archive Network. For SNP association analysis the problem of multiple testing was solved using Bonferroni corrected value (accounting for multiple testing of 15 polymorphic SNPs and the genotype-specific models tested 24 ) to a threshold p-value of 0.0015.  Interaction Analysis For the interaction analysis in the Spanish population we used the genotype-specific model of heritability for each SNP based on the Akaike criteria (AIC) derived from the association analysis. We derived the p values for the interaction (epistasis) using the log-likelihood ratio test comparing the full interaction model to the additive SNP model, and the multiplicative effect using the likelihood ratio test of the additive model with the likelihood of the best model using single SNPs. A p-value of 0.00054 for significance after Bonferroni correction to account for multiple comparisons was used. For the Italian and Dutch samples, interaction analysis of LCE3C_LCE3B-del or rs4112788 and HLA-Cw6 was performed. Assessment for significant epistasis and multiplicative effects was carried out as described for the Spanish population. For analysis of interaction in the Michigan family sample, the method of Cordell et al 25 was followed.  Biopsies, RNA isolation and quantitative real-time PCR All psoriasis patients had plaque-type psoriasis diagnosed by a dermatologist. Biopsies of normal, psoriatic and tape-stripped skin were taken under local anaesthesia. Tape stripping of human skin is the repeated application and removal of adhesive tape, which produces a standardized injury of the epidermis by removal of the stratum corneum 26 . All controls and patients were of native European Dutch origin. Permission for these studies was obtained from the local medical ethics committee (“Commissie Mensgebonden Onderzoek Arnhem-Nijmegen”), and volunteers gave written informed consent. The study was conducted according to the Declaration of Helsinki Ethical Principles. Detailed procedures for preparation of purified epidermis, RNA isolation, and real-time quantitative PCR are given as Supplementary Material .  Supplementary Material Supplementary Data 1 