Combining radiation and immunotherapy for synergistic antitumor therapy The combination of radiation therapy and immunotherapy holds enticing promise as a strategy for cancer treatment. Preclinical studies have shown that radiation may act synergistically with immunotherapy to enhance or broaden antitumor immune responses, in part due to radiation-induced phenotypic alterations of tumor cells that render them more susceptible to immune-mediated killing. Clinical trials employing the combination of therapeutic vaccines with radiation have confirmed many of these findings, and clinical endpoint human studies are both ongoing and planned. This review examines a) the evidence that radiation induces immunologic death, b) the mechanisms by which radiation therapy can induce or augment antitumor immune responses, and c) translational studies demonstrating that immunotherapy can be effectively combined with radiation therapy. Finally, we review recent and current clinical trials combining radiation therapy with immunotherapy.  Conclusions Radiation from a variety of different sources can not only induce tumor-cell death in a manner consistent with antitumor immune activation, but can also phenotypically modify the cells not killed in a way that facilitates both immune recognition and immune-mediated killing. This ability of radiation to lower the threshold for immune-mediated killing lies at the heart of the synergy seen with combination therapies in preclinical models. Immune-mediated killing of tumor cells can lead to an antigen cascade (also known as epitope spreading) in which the immune system becomes activated to multiple tumor antigens that may be more relevant and more immunologically potent than those found in the vaccine. This phenomenon has been identified both in murine models and in clinical trials. Capitalizing on the immunological effects induced by radiation treatment by adding potent antitumor vaccines may lead to synergistic approaches to cancer management that offer feasible, well-tolerated therapeutic options for cancer patients. Randomized clinical endpoint studies comparing the combination of radiation plus immunotherapy with radiation alone are ongoing [ 25 ] or planned. 