Role of interleukin-1? during pain and inflammation The cytokine cascade in pain and inflammatory processes is a tremendously complex system, involving glial, immune, and neuronal cell interactions. IL-1? is a pro-inflammatory cytokine that has been implicated in pain, inflammation and autoimmune conditions. This review will focus on studies that shed light on the critical role of IL-1? in various pain states, including the role of the intracellular complex, the inflammasome, which regulates IL-1? production. Evidence will be presented demonstrating the importance of IL-1? in both the induction of pain and in the maintenance of pain in chronic states, such as after nerve injury. Additionally, the involvement of IL-1? as a key mediator in the interaction between glia and neurons in pain states will be discussed. Taken together, the evidence presented in the current review showing the importance of IL-1? in animal and human pain states, suggests that blockade of IL-1? be considered as a therapeutic opportunity.  9. Conclusions In summary, a growing number of studies show that peripheral injury activates both neuronal and non-neuronal or glial components of the peripheral and central cellular circuitry. The subsequent interactions between the injury site, neurons, and glia cells lead to increased excitability and persistent pain. Proinflammatory cytokines are also induced after injury, and may act on neurons to facilitate central sensitization and hyperalgesia. Recent findings implicate IL-1? in painful and inflammatory processes at multiple levels, both peripherally and centrally. IL-1? may explain how glial cells affect CNS neuronal activity and promote hyperalgesia. The mediation of interactions between cells at the injury site, such as glia and neurons, by IL-1? may facilitate synaptic activity and pain transmission, and contribute to the development of chronic pain. Taken together, these findings suggest that IL-1? inhibition could represent a broad-acting and efficacious method for managing pain and inflammation across a wide variety of conditions.  Figure Fig. 1 NLRP3 inflammasome: The NLRP3 protein is thought to be activated by both intracellular and extracellular signals and acts as a central component of a protein complex containing ASC, Cardinal, and Pro-Caspase1. The activation of the inflammasome leads to cleavage of the Pro-caspase 1 to its active form, which results in the production of the active mature form of IL-1?. 