Sleep disturbances and depression: risk relationships for subsequent depression and therapeutic implications The majority of individuals with depression experience sleep disturbances. Depression is also over-represented among populations with a variety of sleep disorders. Although sleep disturbances are typical features of depression, such symptoms sometimes appear prior to an episode of depression. The bidirectional associations between sleep disturbance (especially insomnia) and depression increase the difficulty of differentiating cause-and-effect relationships between them. Longitudinal studies have consistently identified insomnia as a risk factor for the development of a new-onset or recurrent depression, and this association has been identified in young, middle-aged, and older adults. Studies have also observed that the combination of insomnia and depression influences the trajectory of depression, increasing episode severity and duration as well as relapse rates. Fortunately, recent studies have demonstrated that both pharmacological and nonpharmacological interventions for insomnia may favorably reduce and possibly prevent depression. Together, these findings suggest that sleep-related symptoms that are present before, during, and/or after a depressive episode are potentially modifiable factors that may play an important role in achieving and maintaining depression remission.  Treating sleep favorably impacts the trajectory of depression Insomnia Insomnia and other sleep disturbances often go unrecognized; however, treating insomnia may lessen depression severity and hasten recovery. The strongest evidence comes from a recent placebo-controlled, double-blind study in which 545 patients meeting criteria for both MDD and insomnia received fluoxetine (a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, SSRI) in the morning and were randomly assigned to placebo or eszopiclone (a benzodiazepine receptor agonist) in the evening. Across the 8-week treatment trial, self-reported measures of sleep and depression showed significantly greater progressive improvement in those assigned to coadministration of fluoxetine and eszopiclone. Notably, by the end of the trial, there were significantly more responders (59% vs 48%) and remitters (42% vs 33%) in the fluoxetine/eszopiclone group, suggesting that improving sleep may enhance the antidepressant response. After the 8-week treatment trial, patients received 2 weeks of continued SSRI and placebo. Hypnotic discontinuation over this 2-week period was not associated with a rebound in either insomnia or depression. 48 A smaller double-blind trial of 50 patients with MDD treated with fluoxetine and either hypnotic (the benzodiazepine clonazepam) or placebo, however, failed to find sustained improvements in depression over a 3-month period in the hypnotically-treated group. 49 In another placebo-controlled trial, 50 190 depressed adult patients who had persistent insomnia in the presence of at least 2 weeks of effective treatment with SSRIs were assigned to placebo or the hypnotic zolpidem (a benzodiazepine receptor agonist). Compared with the placebo group, patients assigned to the hypnotic had improved self-reported sleep, daytime function, and well-being. Thus, pharmacotherapy for insomnia did not impair the antidepressant response in patients who had already responded to pharmacotherapy for depression. Studies in which benzodiazepines such as clonazepam, lorazepam, and lormetazepam were used as an adjunctive treatment also showed that depressed patients had improved sleep without worsening of depression. 49 , 51 , 52 Rather, each of these studies suggested that adjunctive benzodiazepines may be associated with improved response, more rapid response, greater compliance, or a greater percentage of responders. There are fewer studies investigating nonpharmacological interventions for insomnia in depression. Behavioral interventions include stimulus control instructions 53 and sleep restriction. 54 Cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I) usually includes an additional cognitive component such as correcting dysfunctional beliefs about sleep (eg, “I must get 8 hours of sleep to be able to function the following day.”). These nonpharmacological interventions have been consistently demonstrated to be effective in improving sleep in primary insomnia, 55 – 57 as well as for treating insomnia comorbid with medical or psychiatric conditions (see ref 58 for review). The effects of CBT-I have been demonstrated to last up to 2 years in primary insomnia. 59 This has particular relevance for treating insomnia in MDD, as individuals who remain in insomnia remission are more likely to remain in depression remission. 7 , 28 One randomized control trial of CBT-I in patients with MDD has been reported. 60 Individuals with comorbid insomnia and MDD (n=30) received 12 weeks of open-label SSRI (up to 20 mg of escitalopram), while concurrently receiving 5 weekly and 2 biweekly sessions of either CBT-I or a control therapy (quasi-desensitization). Compared with the control group, those assigned to SSRI and CBT-I coadministration had higher rates of both depression remission (62% to 33%) and insomnia remission (50% to 8%). Although the difference in rates of depression remission did not reach statistical significance, likely a function of the small sample size, these findings suggest that insomnia and possibly depression can be successfully improved using nonpharmacological interventions. Several studies have reported improvements in depression severity following CBT-I. One small pilot study 61 evaluated CBT-I for comorbid mild depression and insomnia, finding that all 8 participants who completed the CBT-I intervention no longer met criteria for insomnia, and all but one participant reported normal post-treatment depression scores (Beck Depression Inventory scores <9). Two other reports that examined individuals with and without depression documented equivalent improvements in sleep following CBT-I 62 or a self-help intervention that consisted of stimulus control, relaxation, and cognitive components 63 ; improvements in sleep were also associated with significant reductions in self-reported depression severity. Further controlled trials are needed to replicate these findings, to examine whether the resolution of insomnia following CBT-I and/or pharmacotherapy leads to longer periods of depression remission, and whether targeted insomnia interventions favorably impact sleep and depression in individuals whose insomnia emerges during treatment or remains a residual symptom following an adequate antidepressant trial. These initial findings, however, suggest that both hypnotics and CBT-I may lead to improvements in depression and insomnia symptoms, and therefore such interventions may lead to depression remission that is more stable. Hypersomnia and fatigue Less research has examined the impact of hypersomnia on depression and its treatment. Although the symptom of hypersomnia is reported less often in patients with MDD, daytime sleepiness and fatigue are common symptoms of depression, and are also prevalent in the prodromal and residual phases of MDD. Such symptoms can occur independently, or they may occur secondarily to sleep continuity difficulties or insomnia comorbidity, as well as short- or long-term side effects of antidepressant medications. Fatigue is the second most common residual symptom in depression. 45 Like insomnia, treating daytime sleepiness and fatigue within the context of depression may favorably impact remission. Modafinil is a novel psychostimulant approved to treat excessive daytime sleepiness in narcolepsy, sleep apnea, and shift work sleep disorder. Modafinil has several properties that make it a potential candidate to treat residual sleepiness and fatigue in MDD; it is relatively well-tolerated, and unlike classic stimulants, modafinil has less euphoric effects and is thought to have lower abuse potential. Several uncontrolled, open-label trials in depression have reported improvements in sleepiness and fatigue following modafinil (see ref 64 for review). Two placebo-controlled trials 65 , 66 of modafinil in partial responders to SSRI therapy for MDD failed to find persistent improvements in fatigue, sleepiness, or depressive symptom severity. In a retrospective analysis, 67 the data were pooled across these two studies. Only individuals with sleepiness, fatigue, and depression scores in the moderate and higher range were included (n=348, 77% of the original samples). Compared with the placebo group, the modafinil group had statistically significant improvements in overall clinical condition, depressive symptoms, and fatigue at week 1 and at the end of treatment 6 to 8 weeks later, but not during any of the intermediary time points. Although efficacy and longitudinal data are currently lacking, modafinil may provide some benefits in reducing fatigue and sleepiness in depression.  Treating sleep favorably impacts the trajectory of depression Insomnia Insomnia and other sleep disturbances often go unrecognized; however, treating insomnia may lessen depression severity and hasten recovery. The strongest evidence comes from a recent placebo-controlled, double-blind study in which 545 patients meeting criteria for both MDD and insomnia received fluoxetine (a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, SSRI) in the morning and were randomly assigned to placebo or eszopiclone (a benzodiazepine receptor agonist) in the evening. Across the 8-week treatment trial, self-reported measures of sleep and depression showed significantly greater progressive improvement in those assigned to coadministration of fluoxetine and eszopiclone. Notably, by the end of the trial, there were significantly more responders (59% vs 48%) and remitters (42% vs 33%) in the fluoxetine/eszopiclone group, suggesting that improving sleep may enhance the antidepressant response. After the 8-week treatment trial, patients received 2 weeks of continued SSRI and placebo. Hypnotic discontinuation over this 2-week period was not associated with a rebound in either insomnia or depression. 48 A smaller double-blind trial of 50 patients with MDD treated with fluoxetine and either hypnotic (the benzodiazepine clonazepam) or placebo, however, failed to find sustained improvements in depression over a 3-month period in the hypnotically-treated group. 49 In another placebo-controlled trial, 50 190 depressed adult patients who had persistent insomnia in the presence of at least 2 weeks of effective treatment with SSRIs were assigned to placebo or the hypnotic zolpidem (a benzodiazepine receptor agonist). Compared with the placebo group, patients assigned to the hypnotic had improved self-reported sleep, daytime function, and well-being. Thus, pharmacotherapy for insomnia did not impair the antidepressant response in patients who had already responded to pharmacotherapy for depression. Studies in which benzodiazepines such as clonazepam, lorazepam, and lormetazepam were used as an adjunctive treatment also showed that depressed patients had improved sleep without worsening of depression. 49 , 51 , 52 Rather, each of these studies suggested that adjunctive benzodiazepines may be associated with improved response, more rapid response, greater compliance, or a greater percentage of responders. There are fewer studies investigating nonpharmacological interventions for insomnia in depression. Behavioral interventions include stimulus control instructions 53 and sleep restriction. 54 Cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I) usually includes an additional cognitive component such as correcting dysfunctional beliefs about sleep (eg, “I must get 8 hours of sleep to be able to function the following day.”). These nonpharmacological interventions have been consistently demonstrated to be effective in improving sleep in primary insomnia, 55 – 57 as well as for treating insomnia comorbid with medical or psychiatric conditions (see ref 58 for review). The effects of CBT-I have been demonstrated to last up to 2 years in primary insomnia. 59 This has particular relevance for treating insomnia in MDD, as individuals who remain in insomnia remission are more likely to remain in depression remission. 7 , 28 One randomized control trial of CBT-I in patients with MDD has been reported. 60 Individuals with comorbid insomnia and MDD (n=30) received 12 weeks of open-label SSRI (up to 20 mg of escitalopram), while concurrently receiving 5 weekly and 2 biweekly sessions of either CBT-I or a control therapy (quasi-desensitization). Compared with the control group, those assigned to SSRI and CBT-I coadministration had higher rates of both depression remission (62% to 33%) and insomnia remission (50% to 8%). Although the difference in rates of depression remission did not reach statistical significance, likely a function of the small sample size, these findings suggest that insomnia and possibly depression can be successfully improved using nonpharmacological interventions. Several studies have reported improvements in depression severity following CBT-I. One small pilot study 61 evaluated CBT-I for comorbid mild depression and insomnia, finding that all 8 participants who completed the CBT-I intervention no longer met criteria for insomnia, and all but one participant reported normal post-treatment depression scores (Beck Depression Inventory scores <9). Two other reports that examined individuals with and without depression documented equivalent improvements in sleep following CBT-I 62 or a self-help intervention that consisted of stimulus control, relaxation, and cognitive components 63 ; improvements in sleep were also associated with significant reductions in self-reported depression severity. Further controlled trials are needed to replicate these findings, to examine whether the resolution of insomnia following CBT-I and/or pharmacotherapy leads to longer periods of depression remission, and whether targeted insomnia interventions favorably impact sleep and depression in individuals whose insomnia emerges during treatment or remains a residual symptom following an adequate antidepressant trial. These initial findings, however, suggest that both hypnotics and CBT-I may lead to improvements in depression and insomnia symptoms, and therefore such interventions may lead to depression remission that is more stable. Hypersomnia and fatigue Less research has examined the impact of hypersomnia on depression and its treatment. Although the symptom of hypersomnia is reported less often in patients with MDD, daytime sleepiness and fatigue are common symptoms of depression, and are also prevalent in the prodromal and residual phases of MDD. Such symptoms can occur independently, or they may occur secondarily to sleep continuity difficulties or insomnia comorbidity, as well as short- or long-term side effects of antidepressant medications. Fatigue is the second most common residual symptom in depression. 45 Like insomnia, treating daytime sleepiness and fatigue within the context of depression may favorably impact remission. Modafinil is a novel psychostimulant approved to treat excessive daytime sleepiness in narcolepsy, sleep apnea, and shift work sleep disorder. Modafinil has several properties that make it a potential candidate to treat residual sleepiness and fatigue in MDD; it is relatively well-tolerated, and unlike classic stimulants, modafinil has less euphoric effects and is thought to have lower abuse potential. Several uncontrolled, open-label trials in depression have reported improvements in sleepiness and fatigue following modafinil (see ref 64 for review). Two placebo-controlled trials 65 , 66 of modafinil in partial responders to SSRI therapy for MDD failed to find persistent improvements in fatigue, sleepiness, or depressive symptom severity. In a retrospective analysis, 67 the data were pooled across these two studies. Only individuals with sleepiness, fatigue, and depression scores in the moderate and higher range were included (n=348, 77% of the original samples). Compared with the placebo group, the modafinil group had statistically significant improvements in overall clinical condition, depressive symptoms, and fatigue at week 1 and at the end of treatment 6 to 8 weeks later, but not during any of the intermediary time points. Although efficacy and longitudinal data are currently lacking, modafinil may provide some benefits in reducing fatigue and sleepiness in depression.  Insomnia Insomnia and other sleep disturbances often go unrecognized; however, treating insomnia may lessen depression severity and hasten recovery. The strongest evidence comes from a recent placebo-controlled, double-blind study in which 545 patients meeting criteria for both MDD and insomnia received fluoxetine (a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, SSRI) in the morning and were randomly assigned to placebo or eszopiclone (a benzodiazepine receptor agonist) in the evening. Across the 8-week treatment trial, self-reported measures of sleep and depression showed significantly greater progressive improvement in those assigned to coadministration of fluoxetine and eszopiclone. Notably, by the end of the trial, there were significantly more responders (59% vs 48%) and remitters (42% vs 33%) in the fluoxetine/eszopiclone group, suggesting that improving sleep may enhance the antidepressant response. After the 8-week treatment trial, patients received 2 weeks of continued SSRI and placebo. Hypnotic discontinuation over this 2-week period was not associated with a rebound in either insomnia or depression. 48 A smaller double-blind trial of 50 patients with MDD treated with fluoxetine and either hypnotic (the benzodiazepine clonazepam) or placebo, however, failed to find sustained improvements in depression over a 3-month period in the hypnotically-treated group. 49 In another placebo-controlled trial, 50 190 depressed adult patients who had persistent insomnia in the presence of at least 2 weeks of effective treatment with SSRIs were assigned to placebo or the hypnotic zolpidem (a benzodiazepine receptor agonist). Compared with the placebo group, patients assigned to the hypnotic had improved self-reported sleep, daytime function, and well-being. Thus, pharmacotherapy for insomnia did not impair the antidepressant response in patients who had already responded to pharmacotherapy for depression. Studies in which benzodiazepines such as clonazepam, lorazepam, and lormetazepam were used as an adjunctive treatment also showed that depressed patients had improved sleep without worsening of depression. 49 , 51 , 52 Rather, each of these studies suggested that adjunctive benzodiazepines may be associated with improved response, more rapid response, greater compliance, or a greater percentage of responders. There are fewer studies investigating nonpharmacological interventions for insomnia in depression. Behavioral interventions include stimulus control instructions 53 and sleep restriction. 54 Cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I) usually includes an additional cognitive component such as correcting dysfunctional beliefs about sleep (eg, “I must get 8 hours of sleep to be able to function the following day.”). These nonpharmacological interventions have been consistently demonstrated to be effective in improving sleep in primary insomnia, 55 – 57 as well as for treating insomnia comorbid with medical or psychiatric conditions (see ref 58 for review). The effects of CBT-I have been demonstrated to last up to 2 years in primary insomnia. 59 This has particular relevance for treating insomnia in MDD, as individuals who remain in insomnia remission are more likely to remain in depression remission. 7 , 28 One randomized control trial of CBT-I in patients with MDD has been reported. 60 Individuals with comorbid insomnia and MDD (n=30) received 12 weeks of open-label SSRI (up to 20 mg of escitalopram), while concurrently receiving 5 weekly and 2 biweekly sessions of either CBT-I or a control therapy (quasi-desensitization). Compared with the control group, those assigned to SSRI and CBT-I coadministration had higher rates of both depression remission (62% to 33%) and insomnia remission (50% to 8%). Although the difference in rates of depression remission did not reach statistical significance, likely a function of the small sample size, these findings suggest that insomnia and possibly depression can be successfully improved using nonpharmacological interventions. Several studies have reported improvements in depression severity following CBT-I. One small pilot study 61 evaluated CBT-I for comorbid mild depression and insomnia, finding that all 8 participants who completed the CBT-I intervention no longer met criteria for insomnia, and all but one participant reported normal post-treatment depression scores (Beck Depression Inventory scores <9). Two other reports that examined individuals with and without depression documented equivalent improvements in sleep following CBT-I 62 or a self-help intervention that consisted of stimulus control, relaxation, and cognitive components 63 ; improvements in sleep were also associated with significant reductions in self-reported depression severity. Further controlled trials are needed to replicate these findings, to examine whether the resolution of insomnia following CBT-I and/or pharmacotherapy leads to longer periods of depression remission, and whether targeted insomnia interventions favorably impact sleep and depression in individuals whose insomnia emerges during treatment or remains a residual symptom following an adequate antidepressant trial. These initial findings, however, suggest that both hypnotics and CBT-I may lead to improvements in depression and insomnia symptoms, and therefore such interventions may lead to depression remission that is more stable.  Insomnia Insomnia and other sleep disturbances often go unrecognized; however, treating insomnia may lessen depression severity and hasten recovery. The strongest evidence comes from a recent placebo-controlled, double-blind study in which 545 patients meeting criteria for both MDD and insomnia received fluoxetine (a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, SSRI) in the morning and were randomly assigned to placebo or eszopiclone (a benzodiazepine receptor agonist) in the evening. Across the 8-week treatment trial, self-reported measures of sleep and depression showed significantly greater progressive improvement in those assigned to coadministration of fluoxetine and eszopiclone. Notably, by the end of the trial, there were significantly more responders (59% vs 48%) and remitters (42% vs 33%) in the fluoxetine/eszopiclone group, suggesting that improving sleep may enhance the antidepressant response. After the 8-week treatment trial, patients received 2 weeks of continued SSRI and placebo. Hypnotic discontinuation over this 2-week period was not associated with a rebound in either insomnia or depression. 48 A smaller double-blind trial of 50 patients with MDD treated with fluoxetine and either hypnotic (the benzodiazepine clonazepam) or placebo, however, failed to find sustained improvements in depression over a 3-month period in the hypnotically-treated group. 49 In another placebo-controlled trial, 50 190 depressed adult patients who had persistent insomnia in the presence of at least 2 weeks of effective treatment with SSRIs were assigned to placebo or the hypnotic zolpidem (a benzodiazepine receptor agonist). Compared with the placebo group, patients assigned to the hypnotic had improved self-reported sleep, daytime function, and well-being. Thus, pharmacotherapy for insomnia did not impair the antidepressant response in patients who had already responded to pharmacotherapy for depression. Studies in which benzodiazepines such as clonazepam, lorazepam, and lormetazepam were used as an adjunctive treatment also showed that depressed patients had improved sleep without worsening of depression. 49 , 51 , 52 Rather, each of these studies suggested that adjunctive benzodiazepines may be associated with improved response, more rapid response, greater compliance, or a greater percentage of responders. There are fewer studies investigating nonpharmacological interventions for insomnia in depression. Behavioral interventions include stimulus control instructions 53 and sleep restriction. 54 Cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I) usually includes an additional cognitive component such as correcting dysfunctional beliefs about sleep (eg, “I must get 8 hours of sleep to be able to function the following day.”). These nonpharmacological interventions have been consistently demonstrated to be effective in improving sleep in primary insomnia, 55 – 57 as well as for treating insomnia comorbid with medical or psychiatric conditions (see ref 58 for review). The effects of CBT-I have been demonstrated to last up to 2 years in primary insomnia. 59 This has particular relevance for treating insomnia in MDD, as individuals who remain in insomnia remission are more likely to remain in depression remission. 7 , 28 One randomized control trial of CBT-I in patients with MDD has been reported. 60 Individuals with comorbid insomnia and MDD (n=30) received 12 weeks of open-label SSRI (up to 20 mg of escitalopram), while concurrently receiving 5 weekly and 2 biweekly sessions of either CBT-I or a control therapy (quasi-desensitization). Compared with the control group, those assigned to SSRI and CBT-I coadministration had higher rates of both depression remission (62% to 33%) and insomnia remission (50% to 8%). Although the difference in rates of depression remission did not reach statistical significance, likely a function of the small sample size, these findings suggest that insomnia and possibly depression can be successfully improved using nonpharmacological interventions. Several studies have reported improvements in depression severity following CBT-I. One small pilot study 61 evaluated CBT-I for comorbid mild depression and insomnia, finding that all 8 participants who completed the CBT-I intervention no longer met criteria for insomnia, and all but one participant reported normal post-treatment depression scores (Beck Depression Inventory scores <9). Two other reports that examined individuals with and without depression documented equivalent improvements in sleep following CBT-I 62 or a self-help intervention that consisted of stimulus control, relaxation, and cognitive components 63 ; improvements in sleep were also associated with significant reductions in self-reported depression severity. Further controlled trials are needed to replicate these findings, to examine whether the resolution of insomnia following CBT-I and/or pharmacotherapy leads to longer periods of depression remission, and whether targeted insomnia interventions favorably impact sleep and depression in individuals whose insomnia emerges during treatment or remains a residual symptom following an adequate antidepressant trial. These initial findings, however, suggest that both hypnotics and CBT-I may lead to improvements in depression and insomnia symptoms, and therefore such interventions may lead to depression remission that is more stable.  Hypersomnia and fatigue Less research has examined the impact of hypersomnia on depression and its treatment. Although the symptom of hypersomnia is reported less often in patients with MDD, daytime sleepiness and fatigue are common symptoms of depression, and are also prevalent in the prodromal and residual phases of MDD. Such symptoms can occur independently, or they may occur secondarily to sleep continuity difficulties or insomnia comorbidity, as well as short- or long-term side effects of antidepressant medications. Fatigue is the second most common residual symptom in depression. 45 Like insomnia, treating daytime sleepiness and fatigue within the context of depression may favorably impact remission. Modafinil is a novel psychostimulant approved to treat excessive daytime sleepiness in narcolepsy, sleep apnea, and shift work sleep disorder. Modafinil has several properties that make it a potential candidate to treat residual sleepiness and fatigue in MDD; it is relatively well-tolerated, and unlike classic stimulants, modafinil has less euphoric effects and is thought to have lower abuse potential. Several uncontrolled, open-label trials in depression have reported improvements in sleepiness and fatigue following modafinil (see ref 64 for review). Two placebo-controlled trials 65 , 66 of modafinil in partial responders to SSRI therapy for MDD failed to find persistent improvements in fatigue, sleepiness, or depressive symptom severity. In a retrospective analysis, 67 the data were pooled across these two studies. Only individuals with sleepiness, fatigue, and depression scores in the moderate and higher range were included (n=348, 77% of the original samples). Compared with the placebo group, the modafinil group had statistically significant improvements in overall clinical condition, depressive symptoms, and fatigue at week 1 and at the end of treatment 6 to 8 weeks later, but not during any of the intermediary time points. Although efficacy and longitudinal data are currently lacking, modafinil may provide some benefits in reducing fatigue and sleepiness in depression.  Hypersomnia and fatigue Less research has examined the impact of hypersomnia on depression and its treatment. Although the symptom of hypersomnia is reported less often in patients with MDD, daytime sleepiness and fatigue are common symptoms of depression, and are also prevalent in the prodromal and residual phases of MDD. Such symptoms can occur independently, or they may occur secondarily to sleep continuity difficulties or insomnia comorbidity, as well as short- or long-term side effects of antidepressant medications. Fatigue is the second most common residual symptom in depression. 45 Like insomnia, treating daytime sleepiness and fatigue within the context of depression may favorably impact remission. Modafinil is a novel psychostimulant approved to treat excessive daytime sleepiness in narcolepsy, sleep apnea, and shift work sleep disorder. Modafinil has several properties that make it a potential candidate to treat residual sleepiness and fatigue in MDD; it is relatively well-tolerated, and unlike classic stimulants, modafinil has less euphoric effects and is thought to have lower abuse potential. Several uncontrolled, open-label trials in depression have reported improvements in sleepiness and fatigue following modafinil (see ref 64 for review). Two placebo-controlled trials 65 , 66 of modafinil in partial responders to SSRI therapy for MDD failed to find persistent improvements in fatigue, sleepiness, or depressive symptom severity. In a retrospective analysis, 67 the data were pooled across these two studies. Only individuals with sleepiness, fatigue, and depression scores in the moderate and higher range were included (n=348, 77% of the original samples). Compared with the placebo group, the modafinil group had statistically significant improvements in overall clinical condition, depressive symptoms, and fatigue at week 1 and at the end of treatment 6 to 8 weeks later, but not during any of the intermediary time points. Although efficacy and longitudinal data are currently lacking, modafinil may provide some benefits in reducing fatigue and sleepiness in depression.  Sleep disturbance and bipolar depression Although less studied, sleep disturbances are characteristic features in bipolar depression (BD) with decreased need for sleep symptomatic in episodes of mania, and either insomnia or hypersomnia symptomatic in episodes of depression. Sleep also appears to be significantly impaired during euthymic periods, with elevated levels of sleep disturbance and reduced daily sleep-wake rhythm stability. 68 Such sleep disturbances may also be related to the pathogenesis of depression and especially mania, with increases in sleep problems just prior to an episode that continue to worsen within an episode. According to a systematic review of prodomal symptoms among patients with BD, 69 sleep disturbance was the most common prodome for mania (reported by a median of 77% of individuals), and the sixth most common prodrome for depression (reported by a median of 24%). Targeting sleep during mania may shorten episode duration. Although these findings suggest that treating sleep disturbance may prolong remission and prevent relapse, no prospective data yet exist supporting this notion. However, treatments that target sleep/wake regularity may help reduce relapse in BD. Stabilizing social rhythms with interpersonal and social rhythm therapy is effective in reducing relapse in bipolar disorder. 70 For further information on sleep and circadian rhythm disturbances in BD, see the following recent reviews. 68 , 71 , 72  Sleep disturbance and bipolar depression Although less studied, sleep disturbances are characteristic features in bipolar depression (BD) with decreased need for sleep symptomatic in episodes of mania, and either insomnia or hypersomnia symptomatic in episodes of depression. Sleep also appears to be significantly impaired during euthymic periods, with elevated levels of sleep disturbance and reduced daily sleep-wake rhythm stability. 68 Such sleep disturbances may also be related to the pathogenesis of depression and especially mania, with increases in sleep problems just prior to an episode that continue to worsen within an episode. According to a systematic review of prodomal symptoms among patients with BD, 69 sleep disturbance was the most common prodome for mania (reported by a median of 77% of individuals), and the sixth most common prodrome for depression (reported by a median of 24%). Targeting sleep during mania may shorten episode duration. Although these findings suggest that treating sleep disturbance may prolong remission and prevent relapse, no prospective data yet exist supporting this notion. However, treatments that target sleep/wake regularity may help reduce relapse in BD. Stabilizing social rhythms with interpersonal and social rhythm therapy is effective in reducing relapse in bipolar disorder. 70 For further information on sleep and circadian rhythm disturbances in BD, see the following recent reviews. 68 , 71 , 72  Treatment implications In depressed patients with sleep complaints, referral to a sleep disorders specialist may help determine whether there is an underlying comorbid sleep disorder such as sleep apnea or restless legs syndrome that may cause or contribute to the symptoms of depression. Although insomnia is the sleep disorder with the strongest association with depression, other prevalent sleep disorders (ie, sleep apnea and restless legs syndrome) can lead to symptoms of insomnia, and they are overly represented in patients with depression and vice versa. Based on the findings reviewed above, it is important for clinicians to carefully evaluate sleep symptoms in patients with depression. The emerging view that insomnia is commonly comorbid with depression, rather than simply secondary to depression, suggests that both insomnia and depression may warrant specific treatment in many cases. Although there have been few randomized, controlled treatment trials on insomnia comorbid with depression, the available evidence suggests the efficacy of several treatment approaches. Antidepressant pharmacotherapy alone In most patients treated successfully with antidepressants, sleep symptoms improve in parallel with other depressive symptoms. This is true even with relatively “alerting” drugs such as SSRIs. However, a substantial minority of patients experience increased sleep disturbance with SSRIs and bupropion, either in the form of insomnia or restless legs symptoms. Direct comparisons confirm that more “sedating” antidepressant drugs such as nefazodone and amitriptyline improve sleep symptoms and polysomnographic findings to a greater degree than SSRIs. 7 , 73 , 74 Nefazodone also showed greater sleep improvement than depression-specific psychotherapy in one study. 75 Thus, among patients who present with significant insomnia at the time of depression, selection of a more sedating antidepressant drug, such as mirtazapine, may be reasonable. If the risks of a tricyclic antidepressant or full-dose trazodone are reasonable in a specific patient, these might also be considered. Antidepressant plus hypnotic For most patients, the favorable risk-benefit profile of SSRI and SNRI drugs warrant their use as first-line agents. Among patients with comorbid insomnia, benzodiazepine receptor agonist hypnotics can be an efficacious adjunctive treatment. For instance, the combination of eszopiclone plus fluoxetine has been shown to be associated with greater sleep improvement, and strong trends toward an increased rate of depression response, compared with treatment with fluoxetine alone. 48 , 76 Older studies also suggest that depression outcomes are not adversely impacted by the addition of a benzodiazepine to other antidepressant treatment, and that this strategy may improve compliance. 49 , 51 Antidepressant plus low-dose trazodone or doxepin Although no large randomized clinical trials have been conducted, smaller studies suggest that the addition of low-dose (50 to 100 mg) trazodone to an SSRI or monoamine oxidase inhibitor can improve insomnia comorbid with depression. 77 In one placebo-controlled study 77 of adjunctive trazodone, a good hypnotic response was observed in 67% with trazodone and only 13% with placebo. Excessive sedation is sometimes observed because of the relatively long duration of action of trazodone. In a case series of patients with insomnia associated with fluoxetine, 78 adjunctive trazodone was stopped for excessive sedation in 5 of 21 patients (24%). There is also a potential for “serotonin syndrome” 79 in patients treated with both an SSRI and low-dose trazodone, although such cases are apparently rare. One potential advantage of prescribing adjunctive medications (either a sedating antidepressant or a benzodiazepine receptor agonist), in contrast to a sedating anti-depressant alone, is that the adjunctive medication can be adjusted or discontinued if a patient’s sleep disturbance improves while the other antidepressant agent is maintained. Depression treatment plus behavioral treatment for insomnia A number of studies have suggested that sleep-focused psychotherapies and behavioral therapies are efficacious in patients with comorbid insomnia and depression, 80 although some of these studies have suggested that the response rate for cognitive-behavioral treatment of insomnia may be lower in insomnia patients with comorbid depression. However, recent results from a small controlled clinical trial of depression pharmacotherapy combined with cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia showed improved sleep and depression outcomes compared with pharmacotherapy combined with an inactive therapy control. 60  Treatment implications In depressed patients with sleep complaints, referral to a sleep disorders specialist may help determine whether there is an underlying comorbid sleep disorder such as sleep apnea or restless legs syndrome that may cause or contribute to the symptoms of depression. Although insomnia is the sleep disorder with the strongest association with depression, other prevalent sleep disorders (ie, sleep apnea and restless legs syndrome) can lead to symptoms of insomnia, and they are overly represented in patients with depression and vice versa. Based on the findings reviewed above, it is important for clinicians to carefully evaluate sleep symptoms in patients with depression. The emerging view that insomnia is commonly comorbid with depression, rather than simply secondary to depression, suggests that both insomnia and depression may warrant specific treatment in many cases. Although there have been few randomized, controlled treatment trials on insomnia comorbid with depression, the available evidence suggests the efficacy of several treatment approaches. Antidepressant pharmacotherapy alone In most patients treated successfully with antidepressants, sleep symptoms improve in parallel with other depressive symptoms. This is true even with relatively “alerting” drugs such as SSRIs. However, a substantial minority of patients experience increased sleep disturbance with SSRIs and bupropion, either in the form of insomnia or restless legs symptoms. Direct comparisons confirm that more “sedating” antidepressant drugs such as nefazodone and amitriptyline improve sleep symptoms and polysomnographic findings to a greater degree than SSRIs. 7 , 73 , 74 Nefazodone also showed greater sleep improvement than depression-specific psychotherapy in one study. 75 Thus, among patients who present with significant insomnia at the time of depression, selection of a more sedating antidepressant drug, such as mirtazapine, may be reasonable. If the risks of a tricyclic antidepressant or full-dose trazodone are reasonable in a specific patient, these might also be considered. Antidepressant plus hypnotic For most patients, the favorable risk-benefit profile of SSRI and SNRI drugs warrant their use as first-line agents. Among patients with comorbid insomnia, benzodiazepine receptor agonist hypnotics can be an efficacious adjunctive treatment. For instance, the combination of eszopiclone plus fluoxetine has been shown to be associated with greater sleep improvement, and strong trends toward an increased rate of depression response, compared with treatment with fluoxetine alone. 48 , 76 Older studies also suggest that depression outcomes are not adversely impacted by the addition of a benzodiazepine to other antidepressant treatment, and that this strategy may improve compliance. 49 , 51 Antidepressant plus low-dose trazodone or doxepin Although no large randomized clinical trials have been conducted, smaller studies suggest that the addition of low-dose (50 to 100 mg) trazodone to an SSRI or monoamine oxidase inhibitor can improve insomnia comorbid with depression. 77 In one placebo-controlled study 77 of adjunctive trazodone, a good hypnotic response was observed in 67% with trazodone and only 13% with placebo. Excessive sedation is sometimes observed because of the relatively long duration of action of trazodone. In a case series of patients with insomnia associated with fluoxetine, 78 adjunctive trazodone was stopped for excessive sedation in 5 of 21 patients (24%). There is also a potential for “serotonin syndrome” 79 in patients treated with both an SSRI and low-dose trazodone, although such cases are apparently rare. One potential advantage of prescribing adjunctive medications (either a sedating antidepressant or a benzodiazepine receptor agonist), in contrast to a sedating anti-depressant alone, is that the adjunctive medication can be adjusted or discontinued if a patient’s sleep disturbance improves while the other antidepressant agent is maintained. Depression treatment plus behavioral treatment for insomnia A number of studies have suggested that sleep-focused psychotherapies and behavioral therapies are efficacious in patients with comorbid insomnia and depression, 80 although some of these studies have suggested that the response rate for cognitive-behavioral treatment of insomnia may be lower in insomnia patients with comorbid depression. However, recent results from a small controlled clinical trial of depression pharmacotherapy combined with cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia showed improved sleep and depression outcomes compared with pharmacotherapy combined with an inactive therapy control. 60  Antidepressant pharmacotherapy alone In most patients treated successfully with antidepressants, sleep symptoms improve in parallel with other depressive symptoms. This is true even with relatively “alerting” drugs such as SSRIs. However, a substantial minority of patients experience increased sleep disturbance with SSRIs and bupropion, either in the form of insomnia or restless legs symptoms. Direct comparisons confirm that more “sedating” antidepressant drugs such as nefazodone and amitriptyline improve sleep symptoms and polysomnographic findings to a greater degree than SSRIs. 7 , 73 , 74 Nefazodone also showed greater sleep improvement than depression-specific psychotherapy in one study. 75 Thus, among patients who present with significant insomnia at the time of depression, selection of a more sedating antidepressant drug, such as mirtazapine, may be reasonable. If the risks of a tricyclic antidepressant or full-dose trazodone are reasonable in a specific patient, these might also be considered.  Antidepressant pharmacotherapy alone In most patients treated successfully with antidepressants, sleep symptoms improve in parallel with other depressive symptoms. This is true even with relatively “alerting” drugs such as SSRIs. However, a substantial minority of patients experience increased sleep disturbance with SSRIs and bupropion, either in the form of insomnia or restless legs symptoms. Direct comparisons confirm that more “sedating” antidepressant drugs such as nefazodone and amitriptyline improve sleep symptoms and polysomnographic findings to a greater degree than SSRIs. 7 , 73 , 74 Nefazodone also showed greater sleep improvement than depression-specific psychotherapy in one study. 75 Thus, among patients who present with significant insomnia at the time of depression, selection of a more sedating antidepressant drug, such as mirtazapine, may be reasonable. If the risks of a tricyclic antidepressant or full-dose trazodone are reasonable in a specific patient, these might also be considered.  Antidepressant plus hypnotic For most patients, the favorable risk-benefit profile of SSRI and SNRI drugs warrant their use as first-line agents. Among patients with comorbid insomnia, benzodiazepine receptor agonist hypnotics can be an efficacious adjunctive treatment. For instance, the combination of eszopiclone plus fluoxetine has been shown to be associated with greater sleep improvement, and strong trends toward an increased rate of depression response, compared with treatment with fluoxetine alone. 48 , 76 Older studies also suggest that depression outcomes are not adversely impacted by the addition of a benzodiazepine to other antidepressant treatment, and that this strategy may improve compliance. 49 , 51  Antidepressant plus hypnotic For most patients, the favorable risk-benefit profile of SSRI and SNRI drugs warrant their use as first-line agents. Among patients with comorbid insomnia, benzodiazepine receptor agonist hypnotics can be an efficacious adjunctive treatment. For instance, the combination of eszopiclone plus fluoxetine has been shown to be associated with greater sleep improvement, and strong trends toward an increased rate of depression response, compared with treatment with fluoxetine alone. 48 , 76 Older studies also suggest that depression outcomes are not adversely impacted by the addition of a benzodiazepine to other antidepressant treatment, and that this strategy may improve compliance. 49 , 51  Antidepressant plus low-dose trazodone or doxepin Although no large randomized clinical trials have been conducted, smaller studies suggest that the addition of low-dose (50 to 100 mg) trazodone to an SSRI or monoamine oxidase inhibitor can improve insomnia comorbid with depression. 77 In one placebo-controlled study 77 of adjunctive trazodone, a good hypnotic response was observed in 67% with trazodone and only 13% with placebo. Excessive sedation is sometimes observed because of the relatively long duration of action of trazodone. In a case series of patients with insomnia associated with fluoxetine, 78 adjunctive trazodone was stopped for excessive sedation in 5 of 21 patients (24%). There is also a potential for “serotonin syndrome” 79 in patients treated with both an SSRI and low-dose trazodone, although such cases are apparently rare. One potential advantage of prescribing adjunctive medications (either a sedating antidepressant or a benzodiazepine receptor agonist), in contrast to a sedating anti-depressant alone, is that the adjunctive medication can be adjusted or discontinued if a patient’s sleep disturbance improves while the other antidepressant agent is maintained.  Antidepressant plus low-dose trazodone or doxepin Although no large randomized clinical trials have been conducted, smaller studies suggest that the addition of low-dose (50 to 100 mg) trazodone to an SSRI or monoamine oxidase inhibitor can improve insomnia comorbid with depression. 77 In one placebo-controlled study 77 of adjunctive trazodone, a good hypnotic response was observed in 67% with trazodone and only 13% with placebo. Excessive sedation is sometimes observed because of the relatively long duration of action of trazodone. In a case series of patients with insomnia associated with fluoxetine, 78 adjunctive trazodone was stopped for excessive sedation in 5 of 21 patients (24%). There is also a potential for “serotonin syndrome” 79 in patients treated with both an SSRI and low-dose trazodone, although such cases are apparently rare. One potential advantage of prescribing adjunctive medications (either a sedating antidepressant or a benzodiazepine receptor agonist), in contrast to a sedating anti-depressant alone, is that the adjunctive medication can be adjusted or discontinued if a patient’s sleep disturbance improves while the other antidepressant agent is maintained.  Depression treatment plus behavioral treatment for insomnia A number of studies have suggested that sleep-focused psychotherapies and behavioral therapies are efficacious in patients with comorbid insomnia and depression, 80 although some of these studies have suggested that the response rate for cognitive-behavioral treatment of insomnia may be lower in insomnia patients with comorbid depression. However, recent results from a small controlled clinical trial of depression pharmacotherapy combined with cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia showed improved sleep and depression outcomes compared with pharmacotherapy combined with an inactive therapy control. 60  Depression treatment plus behavioral treatment for insomnia A number of studies have suggested that sleep-focused psychotherapies and behavioral therapies are efficacious in patients with comorbid insomnia and depression, 80 although some of these studies have suggested that the response rate for cognitive-behavioral treatment of insomnia may be lower in insomnia patients with comorbid depression. However, recent results from a small controlled clinical trial of depression pharmacotherapy combined with cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia showed improved sleep and depression outcomes compared with pharmacotherapy combined with an inactive therapy control. 60  Conclusions Symptoms of insomnia and depression share bidirectional relationships. Cross-sectional studies show a strong relationship between symptoms of depression and insomnia, and insomnia is longitudinally associated with the development of depression and poor treatment outcomes. Evidence that sleep strongly influences both the development and trajectory of depression, impacting episode frequency, severity and duration, suggests that sleep-related symptoms may be important and modifiable risk factors to prevent depression and/or achieve and maintain depression remission. Patients with mood disorders who have sleep disturbances should be carefully evaluated. Other sleep disorders, comorbidity with another medical or psychiatric disorder, and medication side effects should be considered in patients with insomnia or hypersomnia symptoms. Recent evidence suggests that interventions for insomnia, which include both behavioral and psychological treatments and pharmacotherapy, may be helpful in depression, but further controlled trials are needed. 