Impact of oral disease on quality of life in the US and Australian populations The US National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES 2003–2004) evaluated oral health quality of life for the first time using a previously untested subset of seven Oral Health Impact Profile (OHIP) questions, i.e. the NHANES-OHIP. Objectives (i) To describe the impact of dental conditions on quality of life in the US adult population; (ii) to evaluate construct validity and adequacy of the NHANES-OHIP in NHANES 2003–2004 and a comparable Australian survey. Methods In the cross-sectional NHANES 2003–2004 survey of a nationally representative sample of US adults ( n = 4907), prevalence was quantified as the proportion of adults who reported experiencing one or more impacts fairly often or very often within the past year. Construct validity was tested by comparing prevalence estimates across categories of sociodemographic, dental health and utilization characteristics known to vary in oral health. In 2002, Australian cross-sectional survey of a nationally representative sample of adults ( n = 2644), adequacy of the NHANES-OHIP questions were tested with reference to a slightly modified version of the OHIP-14 questions. Results NHANES-OHIP prevalence estimates were markedly similar in the United States (15.3%) and Australia (15.7%). In the US construct, validity was evidenced by higher NHANES-OHIP scores among groups with greater levels of tooth loss, perceived treatment need and problem-oriented visiting and with lack of private dental insurance and low income. In Australia, prevalence for the NHANES-OHIP closely resembled prevalence estimates of the modified OHIP-14. Both varied to a similar degree across levels of tooth loss, perceived treatment need, problem-oriented visiting, and private dental insurance and income, demonstrating adequacy of the NHANES-OHIP as a brief independent instrument. Conclusions There was acceptable construct validity and adequacy of the NHANES-OHIP questionnaire. In the United States, the impact of oral disease disproportionately affected disadvantaged groups, a finding that supports application of the US Healthy People 2010 major goals of improved quality of life and reduced health disparities.  Methods This study is a secondary analysis of cross-sectional survey data obtained from representative non-institutionalized civilian samples of adults in the United States and Australia. Sampling and data collection The US data are from the 2003–2004 cycle of the continuous NHANES ( 28 ) that used a multistage clustered stratified probability design to sample 12 761 individuals. Of these individuals, 10 122 (79.3%) aged 2 months or older participated in a household interview conducted face-to-face with a trained interviewer in either English or Spanish. The NHANES-OHIP questions ( Table 1 ) were asked in this interview. Subsequently, 9643 individuals aged 2 years and older (75.6%) attended a mobile examination centre (MEC) for a dental screening and other examinations. Australian data are from the 2002 National Dental Telephone Interview Survey (NDTIS) ( 18 ) that used a stratified random sampling design to select individuals aged 5 years and older. Households were sampled from national telephone listings. Landline numbers are automatically listed on public directories unless householders pay a fee to opt-out. To capture these unlisted numbers, a random integer was substituted to all sampled numbers. One randomly sampled household occupant was interviewed. The participation rate was 64.8% ( n = 7312). A self-administered questionnaire was subsequently mailed to a sample of adults 18 years of age or older that had completed the telephone interview in person ( n = 4782). Of these 3131 responded yielding a response rate of 65.5% for the Australian dataset. The questionnaire included the NHANES-OHIP items presented using the same sequence and wording as the NHANES. Those seven questions were supplemented in Australia by the remaining seven items that comprise the OHIP-14. Both national surveys recorded the number of remaining teeth, and information about the use of dental services, perceived need for dental treatment, private dental insurance status and sociodemographic characteristics. Items and scoring Only minor wording differences distinguished the seven NHANES-OHIP questions from OHIP-14 questions ( Table 1 ). Responses to questions about the perceived impact of problems with teeth, mouth or dentures over the preceding year were made on a five point ordinal scale coded 0 = never, 1 = hardly ever, 2 = occasionally, 3 = fairly often, 4 = very often. Each theoretical dimension of the OHIP was represented by an NHANES-OHIP question ( Table 1 ). Consistent with previous national surveys using the OHIP-14 ( 29 ) we computed two established summary scores for which higher values denote poorer OHQoL. Severity is the sum of all ordinal response codes. Severity scores have a potential range of 0–28 across the seven item subset and of 0–56 across 14 items. Prevalence is the percentage of people responding with ‘fairly often’ or ‘very often’ to one or more questions. While the ‘prevalence’ score evaluates only frequently occurring impacts, the ‘severity’ score, by using all response categories, overcomes limitations inherent in restricting summary scores to an arbitrary threshold. Inclusion criteria and missing items Inclusion for analysis was limited to dentate adults aged 18+ years who completed both stages of data collection. In the United States, this resulted in omission of 4502 people aged <18 years, 494 edentulous adults and 84 adults for whom a proxy interview was conducted. An additional omission was of people not classified into one, the four NHANES 2003–2004 major racial/ethnic groups composed of non-Hispanic White, non-Hispanic Black, Mexican American or Other Hispanic ( n = 135). Thus, the sample size in the United States was 4907. We omitted 424 edentulous adults and a further 63 adults who were missing OHIP data, leaving a sample in Australia of 2644. For the 0.03% of NHANES-OHIP items with missing values in the United States, the mean sample value for that item was substituted. We did likewise in Australia except where a respondent missed more than one item for the NHANESOHIP (2.0%) or more than two items for the OHIP-14 (1.8%). These individuals were omitted from analysis. These methods are consistent with those used in previous national surveys using the OHIP ( 29 , 30 ). Construct validity and adequacy Since psychometric properties of the OHIP-14 are well established, concerns about validity are limited to construct validity and adequacy. Our approach in evaluating construct validity was based on comparison of mean scores and prevalence estimates across categories of sociodemographic, dental health and utilization characteristics known to be associated with OHQoL. Known group validity assesses ‘the measure’s ability to distinguish reliably between groups of people who should score high on the trait and low on the trait’. (p.14) ( 31 ). Our rationale was that variables known to be associated with OHQoL would be significantly related with NHANES-OHIP questions in both populations. Selected population subgroups were classified by: sex (male, female); age group (18–29, 30–49, 50–69, 70+ years); race/ethnicity (non-Hispanic White; non-Hispanic Black; Hispanic, US-born; Hispanic, foreign-born) or country of birth (Australia, Other); household income (tertiles of poverty income ratio in the US dollars and pretax household income categories in Australian dollars: [<$30 000, $30 000 to <$60 000, $60 000+]); number of remaining teeth (<20, 20–24, 25–27, 28+), perceived need for a dental filling or extraction (yes/no); private dental insurance cover (yes/no); time since last dental visit (<12 months, 1–5 years, >5 years and never); and main reason for last visit (check-up, exam or clean; problem; other [United States only]). A racial comparison was not possible between nations since indigenous Australians, who comprise <3% of the population, have no meaningful representation in the United States. Instead, for descriptive purposes, we compared Australian-born adults with those born elsewhere as an indicator of ethnic and cultural variation. However, we did not draw inferences about known group validity from these comparisons. Adequacy of the NHANES-OHIP to represent the OHIP-14 was assessed by comparing scores for the two scales in the Australian survey. Adequacy was confirmed if the direction and magnitude of responses obtained by this subset replicated those obtained by the longer OHIP-14 questionnaire used in Australia. Statistical considerations We substituted the Wald test for ANOVA to derive P -values for differences between means since the latter cannot be used for complex survey data. In addition, we quantified the relative effect size between the reference category value and comparison category values as the ratio of net difference between comparisons groups divided by the reference category value. NHANES data were weighted using the 2-year MEC examination sample weight to account for differential probabilities of selection with estimates adjusted for noncoverage and nonresponse. Australian data were weighted to account for sampling probabilities and age and sex characteristics for each of the 13 sampling strata. Data were analysed in STATA 10 ( 32 ) using the survey estimation commands to adjust for the complex survey designs.  Sampling and data collection The US data are from the 2003–2004 cycle of the continuous NHANES ( 28 ) that used a multistage clustered stratified probability design to sample 12 761 individuals. Of these individuals, 10 122 (79.3%) aged 2 months or older participated in a household interview conducted face-to-face with a trained interviewer in either English or Spanish. The NHANES-OHIP questions ( Table 1 ) were asked in this interview. Subsequently, 9643 individuals aged 2 years and older (75.6%) attended a mobile examination centre (MEC) for a dental screening and other examinations. Australian data are from the 2002 National Dental Telephone Interview Survey (NDTIS) ( 18 ) that used a stratified random sampling design to select individuals aged 5 years and older. Households were sampled from national telephone listings. Landline numbers are automatically listed on public directories unless householders pay a fee to opt-out. To capture these unlisted numbers, a random integer was substituted to all sampled numbers. One randomly sampled household occupant was interviewed. The participation rate was 64.8% ( n = 7312). A self-administered questionnaire was subsequently mailed to a sample of adults 18 years of age or older that had completed the telephone interview in person ( n = 4782). Of these 3131 responded yielding a response rate of 65.5% for the Australian dataset. The questionnaire included the NHANES-OHIP items presented using the same sequence and wording as the NHANES. Those seven questions were supplemented in Australia by the remaining seven items that comprise the OHIP-14. Both national surveys recorded the number of remaining teeth, and information about the use of dental services, perceived need for dental treatment, private dental insurance status and sociodemographic characteristics.  Items and scoring Only minor wording differences distinguished the seven NHANES-OHIP questions from OHIP-14 questions ( Table 1 ). Responses to questions about the perceived impact of problems with teeth, mouth or dentures over the preceding year were made on a five point ordinal scale coded 0 = never, 1 = hardly ever, 2 = occasionally, 3 = fairly often, 4 = very often. Each theoretical dimension of the OHIP was represented by an NHANES-OHIP question ( Table 1 ). Consistent with previous national surveys using the OHIP-14 ( 29 ) we computed two established summary scores for which higher values denote poorer OHQoL. Severity is the sum of all ordinal response codes. Severity scores have a potential range of 0–28 across the seven item subset and of 0–56 across 14 items. Prevalence is the percentage of people responding with ‘fairly often’ or ‘very often’ to one or more questions. While the ‘prevalence’ score evaluates only frequently occurring impacts, the ‘severity’ score, by using all response categories, overcomes limitations inherent in restricting summary scores to an arbitrary threshold.  Inclusion criteria and missing items Inclusion for analysis was limited to dentate adults aged 18+ years who completed both stages of data collection. In the United States, this resulted in omission of 4502 people aged <18 years, 494 edentulous adults and 84 adults for whom a proxy interview was conducted. An additional omission was of people not classified into one, the four NHANES 2003–2004 major racial/ethnic groups composed of non-Hispanic White, non-Hispanic Black, Mexican American or Other Hispanic ( n = 135). Thus, the sample size in the United States was 4907. We omitted 424 edentulous adults and a further 63 adults who were missing OHIP data, leaving a sample in Australia of 2644. For the 0.03% of NHANES-OHIP items with missing values in the United States, the mean sample value for that item was substituted. We did likewise in Australia except where a respondent missed more than one item for the NHANESOHIP (2.0%) or more than two items for the OHIP-14 (1.8%). These individuals were omitted from analysis. These methods are consistent with those used in previous national surveys using the OHIP ( 29 , 30 ).  Construct validity and adequacy Since psychometric properties of the OHIP-14 are well established, concerns about validity are limited to construct validity and adequacy. Our approach in evaluating construct validity was based on comparison of mean scores and prevalence estimates across categories of sociodemographic, dental health and utilization characteristics known to be associated with OHQoL. Known group validity assesses ‘the measure’s ability to distinguish reliably between groups of people who should score high on the trait and low on the trait’. (p.14) ( 31 ). Our rationale was that variables known to be associated with OHQoL would be significantly related with NHANES-OHIP questions in both populations. Selected population subgroups were classified by: sex (male, female); age group (18–29, 30–49, 50–69, 70+ years); race/ethnicity (non-Hispanic White; non-Hispanic Black; Hispanic, US-born; Hispanic, foreign-born) or country of birth (Australia, Other); household income (tertiles of poverty income ratio in the US dollars and pretax household income categories in Australian dollars: [<$30 000, $30 000 to <$60 000, $60 000+]); number of remaining teeth (<20, 20–24, 25–27, 28+), perceived need for a dental filling or extraction (yes/no); private dental insurance cover (yes/no); time since last dental visit (<12 months, 1–5 years, >5 years and never); and main reason for last visit (check-up, exam or clean; problem; other [United States only]). A racial comparison was not possible between nations since indigenous Australians, who comprise <3% of the population, have no meaningful representation in the United States. Instead, for descriptive purposes, we compared Australian-born adults with those born elsewhere as an indicator of ethnic and cultural variation. However, we did not draw inferences about known group validity from these comparisons. Adequacy of the NHANES-OHIP to represent the OHIP-14 was assessed by comparing scores for the two scales in the Australian survey. Adequacy was confirmed if the direction and magnitude of responses obtained by this subset replicated those obtained by the longer OHIP-14 questionnaire used in Australia.  Statistical considerations We substituted the Wald test for ANOVA to derive P -values for differences between means since the latter cannot be used for complex survey data. In addition, we quantified the relative effect size between the reference category value and comparison category values as the ratio of net difference between comparisons groups divided by the reference category value. NHANES data were weighted using the 2-year MEC examination sample weight to account for differential probabilities of selection with estimates adjusted for noncoverage and nonresponse. Australian data were weighted to account for sampling probabilities and age and sex characteristics for each of the 13 sampling strata. Data were analysed in STATA 10 ( 32 ) using the survey estimation commands to adjust for the complex survey designs.  Results Comparison of national samples Samples were representative of their respective populations for demographic characteristics. The mean age of the US sample was 43 years and of the Australian was 44 years. The racial/ethnicity mix in the United States was dominated by non-Hispanic Whites (71.2%) and in Australia by Australian-born people (78.3%). The populations were alike in levels of tooth retention. Perceived need for a dental filling or tooth extraction was higher in the United States (39.1%) than in Australia (30.3%). Approximately, half the population in both countries held private dental health insurance. The samples were also similar with respect to dental attendance: about 60% had last visited a dentist within 12 months and about 57% last visited for a checkup or clean (Results not tabulated). Two items ranked among the top three in both nations ( Table 2 ): ‘Avoided particular foods’ (6.1% in the United States, 8.1% in Australia); and being ‘Self-conscious or embarrassed’ (6.4% in the United States, 6.6% in Australia). Different items were first-ranked but both dealt with pain or discomfort. The US population was approximately half as likely as the Australian to report each item ‘occasionally’ ( Table 2 ), and were more inclined to report impacts affecting them ‘hardly ever’ or ‘never’. One consequence of the greater tendency to report items ‘hardly ever’ or ‘never’ in the United States, is that mean NHANES-OHIP severity scores were lower among Americans (2.81) than Australians (4.90) ( Table 3 ). In turn, the NHANES-OHIP mean severity score (4.9) was lower than the OHIP-14 mean severity score (7.2), a difference that occurs by necessity since the former was based on the sum of seven items and the latter on the sum of 14 items. Yet, prevalence in the United States (15.3%) corresponded closely with that in Australia, regardless of whether the Australian estimate was based on the seven NHANES-OHIP items (15.3%) or all 14 OHIP items (15.7%). That the point prevalence estimate determined by the NHANES-OHIP and OHIP-14 in Australia differed by less than one percentage point, supported the congruency of the subset for assessing prevalence. Construct validity and adequacy Testing for known group validity using mean severity scores revealed expected associations that generally were of a similar magnitude between countries, as assessed using the relative effect ( Table 4 ). On average, mean severity scores were significantly higher in both populations among adults with low household income, fewer retained teeth, perceived need for treatment, among adults without private dental insurance and those seeking dental care for a problem rather than attending for a check-up. Prevalence estimates were markedly similar in both nations using the subset and the full OHIP-14 ( Table 5 ). NHANES-OHIP prevalence estimates differed by 0.4 of a percentage point between the US (15.3%) and Australian (15.7%) populations. In addition, estimates for this subset closely approximated prevalence estimates of the OHIP-14 (16.5%) supporting the adequacy of subset to evaluate that evaluated by the slightly modified OHIP-14. Prevalence did not differ on the basis of age in either population. Compared with prevalence among non-Hispanic Whites (15.1%), prevalence among foreign-born Hispanics was substantially lower (8.6%) representing an effect size of 44%. The magnitude of the relative effect of income was also remarkably similar using the three scales: prevalence was elevated among the lowest income – relative to the highest income tertile by 114%, 112% and 116% for the US and Australia NHANES-OHIP and the OHIP-14 respectively. As expected, prevalence was greater in both populations among those adults who perceived a need for dental treatments than adults with no perceived need.  Results Comparison of national samples Samples were representative of their respective populations for demographic characteristics. The mean age of the US sample was 43 years and of the Australian was 44 years. The racial/ethnicity mix in the United States was dominated by non-Hispanic Whites (71.2%) and in Australia by Australian-born people (78.3%). The populations were alike in levels of tooth retention. Perceived need for a dental filling or tooth extraction was higher in the United States (39.1%) than in Australia (30.3%). Approximately, half the population in both countries held private dental health insurance. The samples were also similar with respect to dental attendance: about 60% had last visited a dentist within 12 months and about 57% last visited for a checkup or clean (Results not tabulated). Two items ranked among the top three in both nations ( Table 2 ): ‘Avoided particular foods’ (6.1% in the United States, 8.1% in Australia); and being ‘Self-conscious or embarrassed’ (6.4% in the United States, 6.6% in Australia). Different items were first-ranked but both dealt with pain or discomfort. The US population was approximately half as likely as the Australian to report each item ‘occasionally’ ( Table 2 ), and were more inclined to report impacts affecting them ‘hardly ever’ or ‘never’. One consequence of the greater tendency to report items ‘hardly ever’ or ‘never’ in the United States, is that mean NHANES-OHIP severity scores were lower among Americans (2.81) than Australians (4.90) ( Table 3 ). In turn, the NHANES-OHIP mean severity score (4.9) was lower than the OHIP-14 mean severity score (7.2), a difference that occurs by necessity since the former was based on the sum of seven items and the latter on the sum of 14 items. Yet, prevalence in the United States (15.3%) corresponded closely with that in Australia, regardless of whether the Australian estimate was based on the seven NHANES-OHIP items (15.3%) or all 14 OHIP items (15.7%). That the point prevalence estimate determined by the NHANES-OHIP and OHIP-14 in Australia differed by less than one percentage point, supported the congruency of the subset for assessing prevalence. Construct validity and adequacy Testing for known group validity using mean severity scores revealed expected associations that generally were of a similar magnitude between countries, as assessed using the relative effect ( Table 4 ). On average, mean severity scores were significantly higher in both populations among adults with low household income, fewer retained teeth, perceived need for treatment, among adults without private dental insurance and those seeking dental care for a problem rather than attending for a check-up. Prevalence estimates were markedly similar in both nations using the subset and the full OHIP-14 ( Table 5 ). NHANES-OHIP prevalence estimates differed by 0.4 of a percentage point between the US (15.3%) and Australian (15.7%) populations. In addition, estimates for this subset closely approximated prevalence estimates of the OHIP-14 (16.5%) supporting the adequacy of subset to evaluate that evaluated by the slightly modified OHIP-14. Prevalence did not differ on the basis of age in either population. Compared with prevalence among non-Hispanic Whites (15.1%), prevalence among foreign-born Hispanics was substantially lower (8.6%) representing an effect size of 44%. The magnitude of the relative effect of income was also remarkably similar using the three scales: prevalence was elevated among the lowest income – relative to the highest income tertile by 114%, 112% and 116% for the US and Australia NHANES-OHIP and the OHIP-14 respectively. As expected, prevalence was greater in both populations among those adults who perceived a need for dental treatments than adults with no perceived need.  Comparison of national samples Samples were representative of their respective populations for demographic characteristics. The mean age of the US sample was 43 years and of the Australian was 44 years. The racial/ethnicity mix in the United States was dominated by non-Hispanic Whites (71.2%) and in Australia by Australian-born people (78.3%). The populations were alike in levels of tooth retention. Perceived need for a dental filling or tooth extraction was higher in the United States (39.1%) than in Australia (30.3%). Approximately, half the population in both countries held private dental health insurance. The samples were also similar with respect to dental attendance: about 60% had last visited a dentist within 12 months and about 57% last visited for a checkup or clean (Results not tabulated). Two items ranked among the top three in both nations ( Table 2 ): ‘Avoided particular foods’ (6.1% in the United States, 8.1% in Australia); and being ‘Self-conscious or embarrassed’ (6.4% in the United States, 6.6% in Australia). Different items were first-ranked but both dealt with pain or discomfort. The US population was approximately half as likely as the Australian to report each item ‘occasionally’ ( Table 2 ), and were more inclined to report impacts affecting them ‘hardly ever’ or ‘never’. One consequence of the greater tendency to report items ‘hardly ever’ or ‘never’ in the United States, is that mean NHANES-OHIP severity scores were lower among Americans (2.81) than Australians (4.90) ( Table 3 ). In turn, the NHANES-OHIP mean severity score (4.9) was lower than the OHIP-14 mean severity score (7.2), a difference that occurs by necessity since the former was based on the sum of seven items and the latter on the sum of 14 items. Yet, prevalence in the United States (15.3%) corresponded closely with that in Australia, regardless of whether the Australian estimate was based on the seven NHANES-OHIP items (15.3%) or all 14 OHIP items (15.7%). That the point prevalence estimate determined by the NHANES-OHIP and OHIP-14 in Australia differed by less than one percentage point, supported the congruency of the subset for assessing prevalence.  Comparison of national samples Samples were representative of their respective populations for demographic characteristics. The mean age of the US sample was 43 years and of the Australian was 44 years. The racial/ethnicity mix in the United States was dominated by non-Hispanic Whites (71.2%) and in Australia by Australian-born people (78.3%). The populations were alike in levels of tooth retention. Perceived need for a dental filling or tooth extraction was higher in the United States (39.1%) than in Australia (30.3%). Approximately, half the population in both countries held private dental health insurance. The samples were also similar with respect to dental attendance: about 60% had last visited a dentist within 12 months and about 57% last visited for a checkup or clean (Results not tabulated). Two items ranked among the top three in both nations ( Table 2 ): ‘Avoided particular foods’ (6.1% in the United States, 8.1% in Australia); and being ‘Self-conscious or embarrassed’ (6.4% in the United States, 6.6% in Australia). Different items were first-ranked but both dealt with pain or discomfort. The US population was approximately half as likely as the Australian to report each item ‘occasionally’ ( Table 2 ), and were more inclined to report impacts affecting them ‘hardly ever’ or ‘never’. One consequence of the greater tendency to report items ‘hardly ever’ or ‘never’ in the United States, is that mean NHANES-OHIP severity scores were lower among Americans (2.81) than Australians (4.90) ( Table 3 ). In turn, the NHANES-OHIP mean severity score (4.9) was lower than the OHIP-14 mean severity score (7.2), a difference that occurs by necessity since the former was based on the sum of seven items and the latter on the sum of 14 items. Yet, prevalence in the United States (15.3%) corresponded closely with that in Australia, regardless of whether the Australian estimate was based on the seven NHANES-OHIP items (15.3%) or all 14 OHIP items (15.7%). That the point prevalence estimate determined by the NHANES-OHIP and OHIP-14 in Australia differed by less than one percentage point, supported the congruency of the subset for assessing prevalence.  Construct validity and adequacy Testing for known group validity using mean severity scores revealed expected associations that generally were of a similar magnitude between countries, as assessed using the relative effect ( Table 4 ). On average, mean severity scores were significantly higher in both populations among adults with low household income, fewer retained teeth, perceived need for treatment, among adults without private dental insurance and those seeking dental care for a problem rather than attending for a check-up. Prevalence estimates were markedly similar in both nations using the subset and the full OHIP-14 ( Table 5 ). NHANES-OHIP prevalence estimates differed by 0.4 of a percentage point between the US (15.3%) and Australian (15.7%) populations. In addition, estimates for this subset closely approximated prevalence estimates of the OHIP-14 (16.5%) supporting the adequacy of subset to evaluate that evaluated by the slightly modified OHIP-14. Prevalence did not differ on the basis of age in either population. Compared with prevalence among non-Hispanic Whites (15.1%), prevalence among foreign-born Hispanics was substantially lower (8.6%) representing an effect size of 44%. The magnitude of the relative effect of income was also remarkably similar using the three scales: prevalence was elevated among the lowest income – relative to the highest income tertile by 114%, 112% and 116% for the US and Australia NHANES-OHIP and the OHIP-14 respectively. As expected, prevalence was greater in both populations among those adults who perceived a need for dental treatments than adults with no perceived need.  Construct validity and adequacy Testing for known group validity using mean severity scores revealed expected associations that generally were of a similar magnitude between countries, as assessed using the relative effect ( Table 4 ). On average, mean severity scores were significantly higher in both populations among adults with low household income, fewer retained teeth, perceived need for treatment, among adults without private dental insurance and those seeking dental care for a problem rather than attending for a check-up. Prevalence estimates were markedly similar in both nations using the subset and the full OHIP-14 ( Table 5 ). NHANES-OHIP prevalence estimates differed by 0.4 of a percentage point between the US (15.3%) and Australian (15.7%) populations. In addition, estimates for this subset closely approximated prevalence estimates of the OHIP-14 (16.5%) supporting the adequacy of subset to evaluate that evaluated by the slightly modified OHIP-14. Prevalence did not differ on the basis of age in either population. Compared with prevalence among non-Hispanic Whites (15.1%), prevalence among foreign-born Hispanics was substantially lower (8.6%) representing an effect size of 44%. The magnitude of the relative effect of income was also remarkably similar using the three scales: prevalence was elevated among the lowest income – relative to the highest income tertile by 114%, 112% and 116% for the US and Australia NHANES-OHIP and the OHIP-14 respectively. As expected, prevalence was greater in both populations among those adults who perceived a need for dental treatments than adults with no perceived need.  Discussion This study makes two important contributions. As the first analysis of OHQoL in the general US adult population, it joins a small but growing number of countries are capable of reporting OHQoL at the population level. Other countries with equivalent national data are the United Kingdom ( 16 ), Australia ( 17 , 18 ), Finland ( 19 ) and Germany ( 20 ). Malaysia ( 33 ) holds preliminary data for the adult population. The second contribution is confirmation of the adequacy of NHANES-OHIP, as a brief independent scale suitable for use in cross-national comparisons of OHQoL with other surveys using the standard set of OHIP-14 questions. The strongest evidence for known-group validity was observed using prevalence, a measure that is most likely to be reported in national surveys that often prefer to report percentages because they are widely understood. Although severity scores in the United States were lower than that in Australia, it was notable that most of the known-group comparisons yielded similar relative differences using those severity scores. Lower severity scores in the United States were attributed to a greater tendency of Americans to report impacts ‘hardly ever’ or ‘never’ compared with Australians who showed a greater tendency to report impacts ‘occasionally’. A similar phenomenon was noted in a comparison of OHIP responses in the UK and Australian national surveys, where Australians were more likely to report impacts ‘occasionally’ than were adults in the United Kingdom ( 29 ). One possible explanation for this variation is that the different modes of administration of the OHIP questionnaire elicit different responses. In Australia, the questionnaire was self-administered in a pen and paper questionnaire while in the United States and the United Kingdom, the OHIP questions were asked in a face-to-face interview. This national survey offers insights into population outcomes that may not be apparent in patient samples. For example, an unexpected finding in the United States was the substantial advantage of foreign-born people of Hispanic origin over the majority group – the non-Hispanic White population. This previously recognized relationship ( 34 – 36 ) is counter-intuitive since Latinos have higher rates of poverty, lower levels of educational attainment, greater representation in unskilled occupations and less health insurance coverage, all of which are independent risk markers for poorer health. The finding is not explained by the younger age profile of Hispanics since age was not associated with OHQoL. A second element to this paradox is that the health advantage for foreign-born Hispanic is in sharp contrast to health outcomes for non-Hispanic Blacks. These groups share a similarly poor socioeconomic profile and face similar access barriers to healthcare, yet, non-Hispanic Black has the worst health status of all racial/ethnic groups in the United States. Further research is required to investigate whether the advantage holds for all Latino groups and to establish an explanation for this apparent protective effect, before we can comment on its policy implications for this rapidly growing segment of the population. Two limitations of this study are the cross-sectional study design and the descriptive nature of the analyses. These constraints mean that caution is required in interpretation. Nevertheless, as the purpose of cross-sectional surveys is to provide prevalence estimates for the study population and to enable the generation of new hypotheses, the design and analyses are entirely appropriate in this first national survey of the impact of oral conditions on quality of life in the United States. Possibly of greater concern is that two different modes of administration to evaluate OHIP as discussed above. Recent inquiry into the effect of administration mode showed, that at least among older participants, telephone administration yielded more positive health QoL estimates than self-administered questionnaires ( 37 ). However, administration mode does not detract from the quality of the NHANES-OHIP as a scale, and does not affect estimates obtained for either country – only their comparisons with each other. We compared the NHANES-OHIP items in the United States with an identical set of questions plus the remaining seven OHIP-14 items in Australia. One caveat to our findings is that this assembled collection of 14 items closely resembled, but was not identical to, the psychometrically tested and validated OHIP-14. While use of these 14 items is defendable in this analysis, we recommend the use of standard OHIP-14 ( 21 ) when questionnaires of this length are indicated. When a shorter questionnaire is indicated because of budgetary constraints or respondent burden, the seven NHANES-OHIP items serve adequately as a measure of the adverse impact of oral conditions on well-being. Generally, the benefit arising from a reduction in the number of questionnaire items imposes a cost of reduced validity, but in the case of the NHANES-OHIP items, no loss of validity was evident. The NHANES-OHIP questions were pilot tested by the National Center for Health Statistics prior to inclusion. It may be unfortunate that OHIP-14 questions #5 and #10 measuring self-consciousness and embarrassment respectively were combined in NHANES-OHIP question QHQ.680 – especially as these represent two separate theoretical OHIP dimensions (psychological discomfort and psychological disability). Nevertheless, expert opinion ( 38 ) and empirical evidence ( 39 ) now suggest the existence of a more parsimonious set of OHIP dimensions comprising psychosocial impact, orofacial pain, oral functions and social impact. This would counter any concerns about theoretical ambiguity in question QHQ.680. At first appearance, it might be surprising that while age was a nonsignificant factor, younger age groups reported more frequent impacts of oral health on quality of life. Yet, a similar finding has been reported in other national surveys ( 30 ) where it was proposed that historical experiences of birth cohorts altered expectations about oral health, thereby accounting for the observed age-group differences. While that conclusion remains speculative, it highlights the well-known limitation that any single cross-sectional study cannot distinguish between cohort and ageing effects. Hence the current findings should not be interpreted as an indication that ageing somehow attenuates adverse impacts of oral health on quality of life. This study has implications for the public health and for future studies of OHQoL. Methodologically, the consistency of findings using the OHIP, particularly when quantified as prevalence, provides confidence that OHQoL can be compared between and within populations. The substantive finding that approximately 15% of adults have adverse impacts of oral health on quality of life supports the US Surgeon General’s report ( 14 ) that drew attention to the importance of oral health for overall health and well-being. Population-groups that are socioeconomically disadvantaged, and that have limited access to dental care, are the same groups found here to have poorer OHQoL. Consistently, those same groups are found to have more severe dental disease when they are examined in national surveys. The value of these findings is in illustrating that oral disease produces substantial suffering and ill-health, particularly for disadvantaged people, in two economically developed nations. From a policy perspective in the United States, as we look to evaluating progress towards Healthy People 2010 objectives in improving the quality of life for all Americans ( 13 ), it is critically important that OHQoL be included in national surveys of the nation’s health, such as NHANES. This study provides evidence that the NHANES-OHIP is a valid and reliable measure of OHQoL in large population surveys and should continue to be assessed in future surveys to monitor the broad objectives of Healthy People 2010. That the greatest impacts are felt by those of low socioeconomic status and those who cannot access the dental care delivery system reinforces the urgency of addressing these health disparities.  Discussion This study makes two important contributions. As the first analysis of OHQoL in the general US adult population, it joins a small but growing number of countries are capable of reporting OHQoL at the population level. Other countries with equivalent national data are the United Kingdom ( 16 ), Australia ( 17 , 18 ), Finland ( 19 ) and Germany ( 20 ). Malaysia ( 33 ) holds preliminary data for the adult population. The second contribution is confirmation of the adequacy of NHANES-OHIP, as a brief independent scale suitable for use in cross-national comparisons of OHQoL with other surveys using the standard set of OHIP-14 questions. The strongest evidence for known-group validity was observed using prevalence, a measure that is most likely to be reported in national surveys that often prefer to report percentages because they are widely understood. Although severity scores in the United States were lower than that in Australia, it was notable that most of the known-group comparisons yielded similar relative differences using those severity scores. Lower severity scores in the United States were attributed to a greater tendency of Americans to report impacts ‘hardly ever’ or ‘never’ compared with Australians who showed a greater tendency to report impacts ‘occasionally’. A similar phenomenon was noted in a comparison of OHIP responses in the UK and Australian national surveys, where Australians were more likely to report impacts ‘occasionally’ than were adults in the United Kingdom ( 29 ). One possible explanation for this variation is that the different modes of administration of the OHIP questionnaire elicit different responses. In Australia, the questionnaire was self-administered in a pen and paper questionnaire while in the United States and the United Kingdom, the OHIP questions were asked in a face-to-face interview. This national survey offers insights into population outcomes that may not be apparent in patient samples. For example, an unexpected finding in the United States was the substantial advantage of foreign-born people of Hispanic origin over the majority group – the non-Hispanic White population. This previously recognized relationship ( 34 – 36 ) is counter-intuitive since Latinos have higher rates of poverty, lower levels of educational attainment, greater representation in unskilled occupations and less health insurance coverage, all of which are independent risk markers for poorer health. The finding is not explained by the younger age profile of Hispanics since age was not associated with OHQoL. A second element to this paradox is that the health advantage for foreign-born Hispanic is in sharp contrast to health outcomes for non-Hispanic Blacks. These groups share a similarly poor socioeconomic profile and face similar access barriers to healthcare, yet, non-Hispanic Black has the worst health status of all racial/ethnic groups in the United States. Further research is required to investigate whether the advantage holds for all Latino groups and to establish an explanation for this apparent protective effect, before we can comment on its policy implications for this rapidly growing segment of the population. Two limitations of this study are the cross-sectional study design and the descriptive nature of the analyses. These constraints mean that caution is required in interpretation. Nevertheless, as the purpose of cross-sectional surveys is to provide prevalence estimates for the study population and to enable the generation of new hypotheses, the design and analyses are entirely appropriate in this first national survey of the impact of oral conditions on quality of life in the United States. Possibly of greater concern is that two different modes of administration to evaluate OHIP as discussed above. Recent inquiry into the effect of administration mode showed, that at least among older participants, telephone administration yielded more positive health QoL estimates than self-administered questionnaires ( 37 ). However, administration mode does not detract from the quality of the NHANES-OHIP as a scale, and does not affect estimates obtained for either country – only their comparisons with each other. We compared the NHANES-OHIP items in the United States with an identical set of questions plus the remaining seven OHIP-14 items in Australia. One caveat to our findings is that this assembled collection of 14 items closely resembled, but was not identical to, the psychometrically tested and validated OHIP-14. While use of these 14 items is defendable in this analysis, we recommend the use of standard OHIP-14 ( 21 ) when questionnaires of this length are indicated. When a shorter questionnaire is indicated because of budgetary constraints or respondent burden, the seven NHANES-OHIP items serve adequately as a measure of the adverse impact of oral conditions on well-being. Generally, the benefit arising from a reduction in the number of questionnaire items imposes a cost of reduced validity, but in the case of the NHANES-OHIP items, no loss of validity was evident. The NHANES-OHIP questions were pilot tested by the National Center for Health Statistics prior to inclusion. It may be unfortunate that OHIP-14 questions #5 and #10 measuring self-consciousness and embarrassment respectively were combined in NHANES-OHIP question QHQ.680 – especially as these represent two separate theoretical OHIP dimensions (psychological discomfort and psychological disability). Nevertheless, expert opinion ( 38 ) and empirical evidence ( 39 ) now suggest the existence of a more parsimonious set of OHIP dimensions comprising psychosocial impact, orofacial pain, oral functions and social impact. This would counter any concerns about theoretical ambiguity in question QHQ.680. At first appearance, it might be surprising that while age was a nonsignificant factor, younger age groups reported more frequent impacts of oral health on quality of life. Yet, a similar finding has been reported in other national surveys ( 30 ) where it was proposed that historical experiences of birth cohorts altered expectations about oral health, thereby accounting for the observed age-group differences. While that conclusion remains speculative, it highlights the well-known limitation that any single cross-sectional study cannot distinguish between cohort and ageing effects. Hence the current findings should not be interpreted as an indication that ageing somehow attenuates adverse impacts of oral health on quality of life. This study has implications for the public health and for future studies of OHQoL. Methodologically, the consistency of findings using the OHIP, particularly when quantified as prevalence, provides confidence that OHQoL can be compared between and within populations. The substantive finding that approximately 15% of adults have adverse impacts of oral health on quality of life supports the US Surgeon General’s report ( 14 ) that drew attention to the importance of oral health for overall health and well-being. Population-groups that are socioeconomically disadvantaged, and that have limited access to dental care, are the same groups found here to have poorer OHQoL. Consistently, those same groups are found to have more severe dental disease when they are examined in national surveys. The value of these findings is in illustrating that oral disease produces substantial suffering and ill-health, particularly for disadvantaged people, in two economically developed nations. From a policy perspective in the United States, as we look to evaluating progress towards Healthy People 2010 objectives in improving the quality of life for all Americans ( 13 ), it is critically important that OHQoL be included in national surveys of the nation’s health, such as NHANES. This study provides evidence that the NHANES-OHIP is a valid and reliable measure of OHQoL in large population surveys and should continue to be assessed in future surveys to monitor the broad objectives of Healthy People 2010. That the greatest impacts are felt by those of low socioeconomic status and those who cannot access the dental care delivery system reinforces the urgency of addressing these health disparities. 