Collapsing glomerulopathy: beyond serendipity in mouse genetics SUMMARY Clinical correlates suggest that collapsing glomerulopathy results from the pathogenic interaction between patients’ intractable genetic susceptibilities and environmental insults. When the environmental insults include a virus that introduces its own pathogenic genes, the interactions become more complex. Chan et al . combine reverse and forward genetic techniques in mice towards understanding this complexity with HIV and identify candidate genetic modifiers of collapsing glomerulopathy.  COMMENTARY Many parenchymal renal diseases characterized by podocyte injury result from the interaction of genetic and environmental factors ( 1 ). Collapsing glomerulopathy (CG) is no exception. Since its first clinical-pathologic descriptions almost three decades ago, two general clinical correlates suggesting causality for CG continue to be strengthened: its predilection for patients of African descent; and its occurrence in conditions - many environmentally-derived - with preceding immune activation, particularly T helper type 1 (Th1)-polarizing disorders ( 2 ). Experimental evidence that the genetic susceptibilities of the former may be unmasked by the latter is only now forthcoming. In this vein, a new study by Chan et al. ( 3 ) (this issue) makes an exciting advancement towards understanding genetic susceptibilities for CG. The success of their multi-step approach starts historically with the often serendipitous outcomes of reverse genetics in mice. In the late 1980’s, the laboratories of Malcolm Martin and Abner Notkins at the National Institutes of Health collaboratively used transgenic technology to create FVB/N strain mice bearing subgenomic HIV-1 proviral transgenes in efforts then towards a rodent model of AIDS. Although human AIDS-like immunodeficiency was not observed in the many transgenic founders produced, a few curiously and unexpectedly developed renal disease strikingly similar to CG in HIV-infected patients ( 4 ). Utilizing the FVB/N Tg26 line resulting from this early discovery ( 4 ), forward genetic techniques were employed to map genetic susceptibility loci for CG ( 5 ). Cross-breeding FVB/N Tg26 mice with several different inbred strains of mice showed a considerable strain-dependent variation in the penetrance of CG in F1 progeny. To identify genetic susceptibility loci present in one such strain, CAST, a mouse genome-wide analysis of linkage to increased severity of CG was performed on B1 progeny from backcrossing (FVB/N Tg26 X CAST) F1s with FVB/N Tg26 mice. This mapped a genetic susceptibility locus, termed HIVAN1 , to CAST mouse chromosome 3A1–A3. Now, Chan et al. again combine reverse and forward genetic techniques to provide confirmatory evidence that HIVAN1 likely contains genetic modifiers of CG ( 3 ). Starting with the B1 progeny noted above, backcrossing with FVB/N Tg26 mice was continued another nine times to retain and passage HIVAN1 from CAST mice while at the same time enriching for the FVB/N genetic background. Analysis of clinical indices of CG in the B10 progeny showed that FVB/N Tg26 mice bred congenic for HIVAN1 had significantly earlier onset and severity of CG when compared to those lacking HIVAN1. Then, using these B10 progeny for meiotic linkage to increased severity of CG, HIVAN1 was further refined to a shorter interval containing 126 candidate susceptibility genes. Of those annotated, 22 contain single nucleotide polymorphisms that differ between the FVB/N and CAST strains, already offering candidate genetic modifiers for future study. This multi-step approach of combining forward and reverse genetics towards identifying and confirming susceptibility genes was recently successful in another model of CG. Discovered serendipitously by Mary Lyon, C57BL/6 kd/kd mice are susceptible to CG due to a genetically-acquired mitochondriopathy ( 6 ). Mapping through forward genetics showed that this occurred as a missense mutation in the Pdss2 gene encoding an enzyme required for mitochondrial coenzyme Q biosynthesis, and subsequent reverse genetics to develop cell-specific conditional mutants demonstrated that loss of Pdss2 in podocytes alone determined the susceptibility for CG ( 7 ). The requirement of environmental factors to unmask this susceptibility was discovered when germ-free but not specific-pathogen free kd/kd mice were found to be fully protected from developing CG ( 8 ). Intriguingly, under germ-free conditions, commensals needed for homeostatic Th1 development are absent, resulting in default systemic Th2 skewing ( 9 ), lending credence to the clinical correlate suggesting that Th1 states, even “clinically silent” ones, may precipitate CG in susceptible patients ( 2 ). Interrogating how environmental factors and the candidate genetic modifiers of CG identified by Chan et al ( 3 ) play a pathogenic role in the setting of HIV infection, however, is likely to be more complex ( Figure 1 ). For example, infection with HIV and whether it remains latent or productive is itself markedly influenced by other environmental factors, and host genetic modifiers might alter environmentally-induced changes to the HIV life cycle. HIV gene products themselves can co-opt and hijack molecular pathways controlling proliferation, apoptosis, and inflammation ( 10 ), and host genetic modifiers my act synergistically to activate or amplify these pathways in CG. Alternatively, host genetic modifiers may act sequentially before or after any pathogenic role of HIV to help precipitate or propagate CG. Indeed, any of these and many other combinations of possibilities exists, and deciphering it all may require a more systems biology approach to host-pathogen interactions ( 11 ). In any respect, research into the genetic susceptibilities for CG is moving beyond serendipity, and the time-consuming approach by Chan et al ( 3 ) that is needed to provide answers is noteworthy and welcome.  Figure Figure 1 The interplay of forward and reverse genetics in identifying genetic disease components. Environmental factors may influence overall disease severity or progression, which may uncover additional secondary genetic factors that predispose to disease. Histopathology images adapted from Hallman et al. (used with permission). 