Cellular Fatty Acid Uptake: A Pathway Under Construction Membrane uptake of long chain fatty acids (FA) is the first step in cellular fatty acid utilization and a point of metabolic regulation. CD36 facilitates a major fraction of fatty acid uptake by key tissues. This review highlights the contribution of CD36 to pathophysiology in rodents and humans. Novel concepts regarding regulation of CD36-facilitated uptake are discussed, i.e. the role of membrane rafts/caveolae, CD36 recycling between intracellular depots and the membrane, and chemical modifications of that impact its turnover and recruitment. Importantly, CD36 membrane levels and turnover are abnormal in diabetes, resulting in dysfunctional FA utilization. Also, variants in the CD36 gene were recently shown to influence susceptibility for metabolic syndrome, greatly increasing the risk of diabetes and heart disease.  Concluding Comments Recent progress has provided insight into several novel aspects of CD36-facilitated cellular uptake of long chain FA. Uptake might require membrane lipid rafts with initial FA metabolism likely occuring in segregated raft domains or caveolae. Consistent with this, proteins that uptake or metabolize FA [ 13 , 73 , 74 ] and caveolin [ 58 ] show changes in localization after metabolic stimuli. FA uptake involves cycling of CD36 between plasma membrane and intracellular organelles, and insulin resistance correlates with persistently increased sarcolemmal CD36 [ 13 ]. Recent findings support the interpretation that CD36 sorting to the membrane may be determined by CD36 ubiquitination, a process that is regulated by FA and insulin. Among the important questions that will need to be answered in future studies are the following: Is susceptibility of CD36 to ubiquitination by FA altered in insulin resistant states possibly via other chemical modifications of the protein? How are intracellular trafficking of CD36 and FA and FA metabolism altered by CD36 ubiquitination or palmitoylation states? What are the molecular players involved in CD36 trafficking between organelles and the plasma membrane? How does CD36 localization in mitochondria, the endoplasmic reticulum and lysosomes impact FA utilization? What are the mechanisms involved in tissue specific regulation of CD36 levels or function, and how does this impact metabolic homeostasis? For example, does CD36 function in adipocytes influence ectopic fat distribution and the pathogenesis of insulin resistance in muscle and liver? What is the impact of abnormal CD36 level or trafficking on heart function, and is this linked to cardiomyopathy? Better understanding of the molecular mechanisms mediating and regulating cellular FA uptake and translation of findings from rodents to humans will be crucial to designing approaches that prevent or target abnormal FA utilization and its deleterious consequences. Finally, a more thorough evaluation of the functional impact of polymorphisms in the CD36 gene that contribute to individual variations in lipid metabolism, in susceptibility to diet-induced pathology and in responsiveness to therapeutic interventions will be clinically valuable [ 75 ].  Figures Figure 1 Predicted topography of CD36 in the plasma membrane (a) CD36 is a heavily glycosylated protein of 471 amino acids. Glysosylation accounts for the difference between the apparent (88Kd) and predicted (~53Kd) molecular weight of the protein. CD36 has a hairpin configuration in the plasma membrane. The extracellular domain has multiple N-linked glycosylation sites, a proline rich domain and a hydrophobic stretch that may associate with the membrane. The protein has two short cytoplasmic domains that are required for CD36 signaling after ligand binding. (b) Ubiquitination sites (in red) in the C-terminus and palmitoylation sites (in blue) in both the C- and N-tails are highlighted. The ubiquitination sites, which are sensitive to FA and insulin, may regulate CD36 sorting to the plasma membrane and CD36 turnover. Palmitoylation might help recruit CD36 to lipid rafts and could influence interaction with Src kinases. Regulation of CD36 palmitoylation is still unknown. Figure 2 Ubiquitination and trafficking of CD36 This figure shows a proposed model for uniquitination-mediated CD36 trafficking. Ubiquitination is enhanced by FA and diminished by insulin. (i) Ubiquitinated or non-ubiquitinated CD36 is internalized into early/sorting endosomes, where the ubiquitinated form is selected and (ii) delivered to multivesicular body (MVB) and then to (iii) lysosomes for degradation. (iv) Non-ubiquitinated CD36 in early endosomes is recycled back to the plasma membrane. Deubiquitination of CD36 may be mediated by proteosome activity and is required for trafficking from early endosomes to MVB. This model is supported by the finding that treatment with MG132, a proteosomal inhibitor, leads to the accumulation of ubiquitinated CD36 [ 70 ]. 