Mechanisms of macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF)-dependent tumor microenvironmental adaptation Since its activity was first reported in the mid-1960s, macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) has gone from a cytokine activity modulating monocyte motility to a pleiotropic regulator of a vast array of cellular and biological processes. Studies in recent years suggest that MIF contributes to malignant disease progression on several different levels. Both circulating and intracellular MIF protein levels are elevated in cancer patients and MIF expression reportedly correlates with stage, metastatic spread and disease-free survival. Additionally, MIF expression positively correlates with angiogenic growth factor expression, microvessel density and tumor-associated neovascularization. Not coincidentally, MIF has recently been shown to contribute to tumoral hypoxic adaptation by promoting hypoxia-induced HIF-1? stabilization. Intriguingly, hypoxia is a strong regulator of MIF expression and secretion, suggesting that hypoxia-induced MIF acts as an amplifying factor for both hypoxia and normoxia-associated angiogenic growth factor expression in human malignancies. Combined, these findings suggest that MIF overexpression contributes to tumoral hypoxic adaptation and, by extension, therapeutic responsiveness and disease prognosis. This review summarizes recent literature on the contributions of MIF to tumor-associated angiogenic growth factor expression, neovascularization and hypoxic adaptation. We also will review recent efforts aimed at identifying and employing small-molecule antagonists of MIF as a novel approach to cancer therapeutics.  Conclusions and Future Prospects It is becoming more and more evident that MIF influences several important biological mechanisms and processes by which tumors thrive and spread. One of the most important of these is the modulation of hypoxic adaptation within the tumor microenvironment by directly influencing hypoxia-induced HIF-1? stabilization ( Oda et al., 2008 ; Winner et al., 2007 ). Evidence of tumor microenvironmental modulation by MIF is found in numerous human and rodent studies demonstrating a clear and pronounced role for MIF in modulating tumor-associated neoangiogenesis. MIF influences both hypoxic and normoxic neovascular processes within a tumor’s microenvironment. We envision MIF transcription and secretion being induced in hypoxic areas of tumors where increased MIF then acts to further amplify HIF-1? expression and activity ( Figure 1 ). Hypoxia-induced MIF can diffuse into normoxic regions of a tumor to further enhance VEGF and IL-8 angiogenic growth factor expression leading to neovascularization ( Figure 1 ). The success of angiogenesis inhibitors such as Avastin ( Omuro and Delattre, 2008 ; Sachdev and Jahanzeb, 2008 ), and the recent discovery of potent small molecule MIF antagonists, suggest that MIF targeting may represent a novel cancer chemotherapeutic strategy.  Figure Figure 1 Scheme demonstrating hypoxic/normoxic contributions to tumor microenvironmental adaptation by macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF). Hypoxia induces HIF-1?-dependent MIF transcription and secretion in human cancers. When over-expressed, MIF functionally enhances hypoxia-induced HIF-1? stabilization ( Winner et al., 2007 ) and subsequent hypoxic adaptive responses thus contributing to angiogenic, metabolic, cell cycle and metastatic responses to low oxygen tension. Hypoxia-induced MIF diffuses into normoxic regions of the tumor where it can additionally modulate angiogenic growth factor expression, cell cycle progression and migration/invasion of normoxic malignant cells ( Coleman et. al., 2008 ; Rendon et al., 2007 ). 